Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Duncan and Peggy: a Scottish tale
DUNCAN and PEGGY: A SCOTTISH TALE.
???-??*«'
? H A P. I, -* Tliis is (quod he) the richt rcpoit Of all that I did hear and knaw, Thocht my difcourfe be fumthing fchort, ??? this to h«? a riebt mthe faw ; Contraine God and the King's law, Thair was fpilt mekle Chriílian blude, This is the (unì, fae I conclude.** Old Sv. oì 11«·, ? lallajj. İVEN ye the news of Culioden Field ?" faid an old mutilated foldier, rifing haftily from a bench at the Vol. í. B door
c]oor of a fhvJl public-houfc, about eighty mues from the feat of adion ; ajid addreffing a courier, who had flopped to have his horfe's flioe faft¬ ened at the adjoining flied, the day after the battle. " Brave news !" replied the mef¬ fenger; " Prince William has cruflied rebellion : Co if you arc loyal, rejoice !** As he fpoke he threw himfelf on his horfe, and was preparing to depart ; but the veteran catching hold of the bridle, exclaimed, * c For the love of Heaven, one word ; ken ye if the brave Colonel Campbell and his bon¬ ny fon be fafe ? If yc can add thcfc gude tidings to your other brae ones, fare fa' yc, and make ye as happy as ye'll nuke Sandy Mac Intoili !" « My
u My departure was too fpeedy to gain much information/' replied the meffenger ; " but this morning, at break of day, I paffed a gentleman of that name, who I heard was coming to this village." The foldier gave a loud huzza, and loofed the bridle ; the courier fpurred his horfe, and was out of fight in an inftant. rt Now the muckle ele'cl el------ that French bullet that forced an high- landman to iic a fubftitute for a bonny ftrong leg," ftamping a wooden one, and dafliing his mull againft the ground— tí aivi obliged Sanely to tarry at hamc, vvhile others are gaining glory in the wars! —But 'tis ??? time for wailing ; huik'ye (calling into the ? 2 houfe)
pipes, others Anging in ruftic notes the prowefs of his anceftors ; vvhile the maidens danced before to tiie warlike tune, or, joining in the fong, with their voices foftened the rude but heartfelt melody. Colonel Campbell was mounted on a once black ftecd, that had often borne him in the fervice of his coun- rry ; like his mafter be had gained grey hairs in the glorious employ, yet would he ftill neigh at the beating of a drum, and rufli indignant from the -tightened hand at the found óf arms. .The Colonel advanced towards his vaflals—; traits of forrow overcame the _ natural benignity of his countenance ; . their eyes were .{trained beyond the objeft before them with the eagernefs
of expedation— <c Let your eyes reft here, my friends !'* faid the Colonel, pulling his hat lower on his brows.— <{ But our young laird," replied an old man, " is he ??? returned to blefs us?** " You, and I, my friend," re¬ plied the Colonel, " fliall foon meet him; more worthy than tliee or me he has reached the fummit before us :" his hand thrice croffed his eyes. " Yes, he is gone !—covered vvith wounds, he has bravely fallen in the fervice of his country/'------The bag¬ pipes for a moment gave a melan- lancholy drone, and then were filent : the fongfters, in the height ofthe fong of vidory, gave a cry of defpondency, and funk at once into a double heav- « cd figh ; the maidens' feet, long ufed ? 5 to
to beat the joyful meafure, flood mo¬ tionlefs and inadive- The Colonel paufed & moment—** My friends, Campbell's battles are over; I return to draw my laft breath among ye, no more will I quit yc : had James re¬ turned, your joy might have been more complete; but let this reflec¬ tion confble you, tbat he died for hîs country.—Our loyal Scots faw dieir leader fidi, and for a moment felt as ye do; then with one voice they cried, ** Grief to-moFrow, revenge to-day ! Then let us too bear our forrows with fortitude; you have indeed loft a friend, but I have loft a fon, the fim- port of my age." The wind raifed a cloud of duft— the veteran feized the pretence to wipe his eyes—* if Ah me ? ???
??? mair return ?" replied Sandy ; u ??? mair cheer the auld, nor fport with the youihfu* ? Alas ! where (hall we find comfort when our brae laird, tbat bonny lad James Campbell's dead ? Who hereafter fliall lead our Scots to face the fie, when Campbell's line's extind r** íC I entreat you/' returned the Coionel, " to ceafe your grief, it increafes mine : our line is not ex¬ tind, my nephew will İ hope be wor¬ thy the name he bears ; he is yet an infant, hereafter lie muft be your chief, and, I doubt not, will be brave, and merit your affedion/* **** Nae doubt he may," replied Sandy fobbing, the big tears chafing each other down his rough and weather-beaten cheeks; " for the blood of diftionour or cow- ? 6 ardke.
ard Ice never yet difgraccd the veins of a Campbell ; but can we forget the bonny Captain—he who had ever an arm ready to defend the weak, and a tear to fhed with the mournfu* ? Surely nay, thefe aged een fhall never look on his felbw—How often have I curft this ttump that hindered me fighting under fie ? commander ?—but ??? niat* e r, I fliall n ?? hae long to mourn him j and as there are ??? cripples in the ither warld, the bonny James Campbell fliall ??? want an honeft fold kr." They now proceeded in heavy de¬ jedion towards their village, where thofe that were too okl, or too young, to attempt meeting the veteran at a greater diftance, flocked from their houfes,
houfes, and, eager to gaze, intercepted his paffige. But the dire news fpread among them, curiofiry had lou its objeeft, their youthful favourite vas no more ; and though they caft up their bonnets, and cried, as ufual, Long live Colonel Campbell ! yet the rude unbidden tear would force its way down cheeks tø which it ceas before a ftranger i for James Campbell, tlie bonny brae James, as ihey termed him, was their darling, bora among diem, and un i ver fally belo Ve d. The defire of their much efteemed chief at length made them endeavour to appear compofed, though their hearts vvere funk vvith forrow. Thu* the cavalcade in gloomy filence reach¬ ed the feat of Colonel Campbell ; it was
was an old caftle fituated on a hill, and had withftood the united efforts of war and time : fome of the ftones that compofed the fabric had beea fhattered by balli but the friendly ivy, which almoft covered the ftrudure, hid thofe eiefeds, Around was a fpa-- cious park, in which nature had been lav i İh of her beauties ; the boundaries on the north fide being marked by a ridge of hills, and the bottom watered by numberlefs ferpentine rivulets that fell down the rocky flopes in natural cafcades ; the fcarlet ftrawberry cloth¬ ing the humble glen, and the towering fir the mountain top : and though the caftle was on one fide rather expofed to the eaftern blaft, yet did its chill in¬ fluence never perforate the Colonel's hall;
hall ; hofpitality and univerfal philan¬ thropy keeping the manfion as warm as the bofom of its maftcrv The Colonel, on reaching his dwell¬ ing, defired his vaffds to retire* a requeft they inftantly obeyed, praying Heaven to reftore his heart to tran¬ quillity.
CHAP,
CHAP. III. ** Some nobh** fpirits, judging by themfelves» May yet con jeci ure what I mighthave provM, And think hte only wanting to my fame.*'' Home. 1 HE Colonel now fecluded himfelf from rJl company, but that of Mr. Sommer?, before whom he frequently gave bee vent to his grief. That gentleman had educated his fon, was moft tenderly attached to him, and never failed, vvhen the Colonel's for¬ row authorifed his, to number tear for tear vvith hhn ; at other times he ftruggled to conceal his grief within his
his own bofom, feai ful of increafing that of his patron. James Campbell had received his death from ? mufket fliot, which he furvived but tvvo hours, fpeechlefs the whole time, and expired in his father's arms. ** Alas, Som¬ mers !" faid the veteran, '·■ never fliall I lofe the remembrance of James's ex¬ preffive eye^—his ftruggle to fpeak ; but, unfortunate father that I am ! I was denied the confolation of hearing his voice :—vvould to Heaven I had received the ftroke, and my fon had been fpared !*' " Would to God, rather,** replied Mr. Sommers, < c that you never had gone to this battle !"—« Peace î had I an hundred fons they fhould fight for their country. Alas! I had but ??? ?
one, and he has nobly paid his debt. and done his duty." Here the feelings of the hero ane" father ftruggled for pre-eminence ; but nature proclaimed her triumph by the tears that ftreamed down the furrowed cheeks of the veteran. About fix weeks after the return of the Colonel, Mr. Sommers entreateel permiffion to leave him for a month or two, as he had fome bufinefs of tbe utmoft importance to tranfad. The Colonel, though never before in fuch need of a friendly companion, readily confented, ever confidering his own eafe and gratification as neceffary to be given up to the welfare of others. Mr. Sommers remained abfent near two months, liis melancholy appearing rather
rather increafed than leflened by tra¬ velling; nay, his temper feemed to have cont rad ed ? degree of acrimony totally unufual to it. Some time after his return, he propofed to the Colonel a tour and paying a vifit to his bro¬ ther, Mr. Campbell ; which however the Colonel declined for the prefent, but promifed to think of hereafter. Mr. Campbell lived at the family- fear, near an hundred miles diftant from the Colonel, This gentleman had only one furviving child, which was a daughter of the age of thirty, who had been many years married to an Engli!b nobleman of the name of Beugle; but ? fon, whom he had loft about tin ?? years before, had left him a grandfon, now beir to himfelf and thç
the Colonel. This child was an or¬ phan, his mother dying at his birth, and now in his fifth year, Mr. Som¬ mers fpoke in the warmeft terms to the Colonel, of his youthful nephew, whom they had both feen fonie time previous to his fon*s death, recom¬ mending it to him to educate him under his own infpedion, as he was heir to his large fortune. Indeed Mr. Sommers's real intention was to divert the grief of his worthy patron, by the cares that would naturally attend foch a pro) ed. Time at length, in fome meafure, blunted the acutenefs of the Colonel's forrow ; and though he ftill dropped a tear of tendernefs to the memory of his fon, the caufe in which he fell fvveetened
fvveetened its bitternefs ; he felt as a father, but remembered he was a. foldier. About a year after this lamented lofs, the Colonel, accompanied by Mr. Sommers, paid his brother ? vifit, when ? propofal of his giving up his grand- fon to live vvith him was made. His fon une was too large, and the child's prefent expedancy too great for him to meet ? denial ; the oñer was there¬ fore accepted with pleafure, as it was regarded but as the preliminary ftep to declaring him fole heir, t:ough with this rcftridion from grandmamma, that as Duncan (for ίο was the youth named) was but hx years old, he Ihould remain ? year or two longer with her, as flie wiflicd to corred him of
of fome meannefles he had imbibed, and, if poflible, inftil into his mind a behaviour worthy his birth; though, as flie wifely obferved, flie feared his extreme youth would in great meafure render her counfels on that fcore fruit¬ lefs. High birth was the lady's foible ; and though Mr. Campbell had married her without a portion, fhe ever con¬ fidered him as peculiarly honoured by her alliance. It was a weaknefs the Colonel fmiled at ; but in this inftance determined him to haften the time of his nephew's removal, left he fliould imbibe ? haughtinefs whicli might hereafter render him difagree¬ able to his inferiors, and rather feared and defpifed, than refpeded. The brothers, though ever united in
in the ftrideft bonds of friendfliip, were of very different tempers. Mr. Campbell was an inoffenfive charader, clofe and parfimonious ;—the Colonel, on the contrary, was open and ge¬ nerous; his heart, though a brave one, alive to every humanifed tender feel¬ ing: he had been educated by his uncle, an officer of diftinguifhed ho¬ nour, and particularly attached to King William; from this relation he im¬ bibed the utmoft deteftation for the very name of King James, freely ex¬ pending his fortune as well as ven¬ turing his life to defend and preferve the crown to the Proteftant fucceffion. The brothers both married ladies of their own country, and had been pa¬ rents to a numerous offspring, none of which
which on the fide of Mr. Campbell furvived but Lady Beugle, as before obferved. The Colonel had been bleft with three fons, tvvo of whom died in their infancy, and the third, our much lamented James, who had fallen in the fervice of his country. The Colonel loft his Lady fome years previous to this mournful event, and had fincerely lamented her. Mr. Som¬ mers and himfelf educated the youth : the former had made him a man of underftanding, and an accompliihed •p-entleman ; the latter had made him ? foldier, and taught him to hold his life only of value as it could ferve his king and country. In his tvventy- firft year he attended the Duke of Cumberland at Tournay, and after- ï wards
wards to the battle of Culloden, where he loft his life. The preliminaries fettled for Dun¬ can's living with his uncle, the Colonel in a few days took his leave ; Mr. Campbell promifing to bring the youth to the caftle at the appointed time.
VO-..I. ? CHAP.
CHAP. IV. ** His haïr was like the threds of gold, Drawn from Minerva's loom e : His lips Hke rofee drapping dew, Hie breath was a perfume. Mi His brow was like the mountain fna r Gilt by the morning beam ; Hie cheeks like livtog rofee glow î Hie een like azurelheatr·." Old Scottish Ballad. Vv E fliall pafs over the twelve months that brought Duncan to his uncle's, fomething turned of feven years old ; ftrong, bold, light, adi ve, and cheerful as health and good humour could make him. IC Behold, brother/' faid
■faid Mis Campbell, ".Dur iaft remaining male ! he isyours^—maybe poffefs Cof- ficìent merit to blunt the acutenefs of your feelings for James !" " What fay you, Duncan ?*' returned the Colonel ; " will you live with me ?* " Will you teach mc to be a foldier, uncle .*" gc By my honour will I !" replied the Colonel embracing him ¿ " and may*it thou be more fortunate than thy kinf- * ·** man ! Mr. Campbell chid his grandfon ftr advancing fo painful a fubjed, faying, *·' Indeed, brother, this boy is too warm; í could wifli you to curb him before the habit is too deeply rooted."—" 'Tis a matter in which vve fliall never difagree," anlwered the Colonel, (t provided Yis C ι ever
ever honourably employed ; I wifli not the moderation of age on the fhoulders of youth—But mark me, Duncan, to gain my favour ; with the poor, the op¬ preffed, and the meek, you muil be gentle j vvith the rich, the oppreflor, or the proud, acl as your nature fhali direa." " I am heartily glad, uncle," return¬ ed Duncan, " that you give me leave to talk to poor folks ,* for though I love my grandmamma very dearly, and flie has forbid me doing it an hundred lines, yet I could never help it when I faw a ragged boy ·> and I proteit, though flie has told me fo much of the differ¬ ence of blood, yet when Davy Forbes and I fell out ofthe nut-tree, and made 3 both
both our nofes bleed, for ihe life of me I could fee no difference." Mr. Campbell chid his granc-f-n; but the fmile that involuntarily crofted the face of the Colone], rc allured rhe youth, who in a fortn : gl.t became fo' attached to his uncle, thit, on the de¬ parture of his grandfather, he was in the utmoft terror left be fhcvlvl be obiiged to accompany him, Mr, Sommers undertook the educa¬ tion of Duncan vvith pleafure, whofe vivacity and good humour brought back to his memory the youth of his former pupil : as for the Colonel, he be¬ came daily more attached to his ne¬ phew ; and fportive itiirth and jocund dance again began to refound through the vaulted roofs of the Caftle, on birth- C 3 days,
days, anniverfarics of victories, kc.Scc. on u hich rimes the Colonel never failed to give an entertainment to his vaflaL. As Duncan's temper was fimilar to «Ί the Coíonelb lamented fon's, and his education the fame, he foon became üb gieat ? favourite among the depen¬ dants:— tella tale of woe, he had a heart as vveak as a girl ; relate one of oppref- fion, and the heated blood flione in his cheeks and fparkled in his eyes.·— Once every year he vifited his grandfa¬ ther (as the diftance was too confîdera¬ ble to make thofe vifits more frequent), but ever returned vvith double pleafure to the Colonel—not that he was wanting in affedion or duty to Mis Campbell, but he looked up to the Colonel as a model of peifcdion which it was his higheft
higheft ambition to imitate. Seated under the majeftic firs in the Coionels pai ?, often did Duncan oblige his un¬ cle to renew his battles, from that of Blangiies to that of Dettingen :—even Sandy Mac Intofh vvas often a party in thefe converfations ; he had attended the Colonel through all, and loft his leg in the laft mentioned. Thus glided months and years until Duncan attain¬ ed the age of fifteen ; poliihed by na¬ ture, cultivated by the care of Mr. Sommers, tall without awkwardnefs, handfome vvithout effeminacy : lie could run, dance, wreftle, or climb to the craggy mountain's top, as tliough, un- ufed to the Coionels foft indulgence, he had been bred on its fum mic, and ? 4 accuftomed
accuftomed to plunge barefoot among its frozen fnows. One morning Duncan was not to be found at bieakfaft time ; after vvhich the Colonel and Mr. Sommers walked towards the village 4 , half anxious for tlieir favourite. At length they per¬ ceived him advancing towards them, but were much furprifed, as the youtli drew near, to fee his clothes tom, and his face fwelled and disfiguied. " Where haft been, my dear boy ?" faid the Colonel, iC and how came your face fo bruifed ?" " In ? caufe for vvhich, my dear Sir, I'm fure you will not blame me. It is doubtlefs by your order that milk is every morning given to the poor ; it has ever pleafed me to contemplate
contemplate the appai ent fatisfaction vvith which they receive it. One little lafs, whom I never faw till lately, ufu¬ ally came after the otiier girh and bo)S, and generally met with a reprimand from the dairy maid . this morning, not content with fending her away vvith ail empty pitcher, flie fpoke fo harfhly to her as fent her back in tears. 1 heard the whole difcourfe, and followed, de¬ termined to make her return, and oblige Mary to fill the pitcher. She had reached the little park-gate, before I overtook her, where tvvo great loons *** e_/ had ftopped the paflage on purpofe to teafe her ; one of whom I heard fay, ff You are weel ferved, dorty pet—gae next time with the ither lads and laftes." The little maid fobbed as ? 5 though
though her heart would bieak, and again attempted to pafs them; but tlicy pi evented her, adding more injurious language; which however I did not liften to, for vvith a blow vvhich I gave the moft infolent, he cleaied the vvay, and mcafuied his length on the ground. On his rifing, we fought it out; indeed he had foon enough, and I was at¬ tempting to comfort the little lafs, vv ho had ftood fcreaming the whole time, vvhen the other faid " it vvas unka hud that I fliould take the part of iic ? vou n" limmer." ? was exafperated, and afked how he dared give that appellation \o one I chofe to pi oted ? His anfwer in¬ creafed my rage, and we fell to again, but at laft I made him fubmit. This ib -»he whole, uncle, except that I have fince
fince been home with Peggy, vvhofe grandmother bathed my face with fome water from the brook." if Truly, Duncan, I do not blame you. I vvould ever have you help the weak and unproteded · but who is this young damfel who has occafioned you to give the fiift proofs of your valour ?" ** í pioteft I know no more of her than that her name is Peggy, and that ftie lives with her grandmother by the burn-fide at the farther end of the village, and is altogether the prettieft little girl I ever faw." " I hope, Duncan,*' replied the Colo¬ nel with gieat gravity, " that your hu¬ manity vvould have been equally alive had ihe been as ugly as you fay flie is ? 6 the
the conti ary/' " I certainly ihould have behaved in the fame manner had ihe been frightful, but I felt the infult double as I ever noticed her from the reft ; befides, had you feen her tears, I am fure, uncle, you would have been as angry at the occafion as I felt myfelf." Mr. Sommers mingled but little in the foregoing converfation : 'tis cer¬ tain he had not appeared for fome years to hold the ladies in the higheft eftimation, ever painting them to his pupils as fyrens ; but Sommers was ar¬ rived at the age of fifty-fix, and (till a bachelor, which may perhaps account for his ill humour to the fex. As foon as the Colonel reached home, he
he ordered fome application to Dun¬ can's face, which removed the fwelling but not a large circular black mark vvhich he bore round his eye from the late rencounter.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. *' A maid of beauty rare ; Even Marg'ret on the Scottifh throne Was never half fo fair.** Old Scottish Ballad. IT was the Colonel's cuftom to walk every evening, accompanied by his ne¬ phew : the day after the fight, Duncan pointed out a cottage at the extremity ofthe village—" There Jives Peggy!" faid he; * £ I would vve might meet her, for I wifh you much to fee her." " You are no ftranger at their cot¬ tage, 1 fuppofe, Duncan j you fhall in¬ troduce me." " Indeed, Sir, I was never tliere until yefterday, Peggy I have
have often feen coming for milk, but the old woman never before; poor creature, ihe was in a terrible frighc about my face, though í repeatedly affbred her that I felt no inconvem- ence from it. I could fcarcely hinder her from fcolcitng poor Peggy ; fhe laid you vvould never forgive my be¬ ing hurt ; and, were fhe to fee you now, I truly believe vvould be half dead vvith the frvht." " Weil, then, Duncan, go in firft ; tell them I am not angry, but only curious to fee the lafs of whom you have ftepped forth the declared champion." Duncan obeyed, and, quickening his pace, enteredthe cottage. The olel woman and Peggy vvere fpi tining, the latter
latter finging an old ballad in a voice of fuch mournful melody, as ftruck at once upon the heart, and forced a tear to the remembrance of heroes long moul¬ dered in the duft. At the fight of Dun¬ can ftie inftantly ceafed, and jumped up to meet him ; but drawing back exclaimed, " Ey I Lord ! I wad I had been fick at hame before you had gotten fie an ene on my account."— *' Huili, Peggy !" interrupted Duncan; Ci my uncle is coming. Do not be alarmed, Jannet," addreffing the old woman ; u he is much pleafed 1 took your Peggy's part."—He had time to add no more, for the Colonel entered. In fpite of Duncan's aílurances, Jannet could not believe but the Colonel came to chide he., and, falling on her knees,
knees, entreated his pardon for what had happened. The Colonel infifted on her rifing, afluring her that he was not difpleafed, whh an air and fmife tliat might have banifhed fear even in the hour of danger ; the goodnefs of his heart was always confpicuous on his features, but flione with double refplcndence when he fmiled.—He obferved Peggy :—beauty is prepof- feffing ; no wonder then he found himfelf pleafed with her, who might vvith juftice have been called the fa¬ vourite work of nature. Though ftie had not reached her eleventh year, flie might eafily have paffed for fourteen : her compledion was fair to admiration; her nofe aquiline ·, her eyes, though blue,
blue, fparkling and commanding ; her cheeks, which were ufually of the lighteft tints of the rofe, had now a deeper glow, occafioned by ftanding in the prefence of a ftranger, while a number of dimples difplayed them¬ felves whenever íhe opened her ver¬ milion lips; bright auburn locks in wanton luxuriant ringlets hung to the bottom of her fine formed waift, which was inclofed in a white cotton jacket, that plainly ihewed the advantage of nature and eafe againft cuftom and French ftays ; a fliort tartan plaid pet¬ ticoat completed her humble accou¬ trements ; and thougli thus equipped, flie was a figure that nature might have owned with triumph, and labo¬ rious
rious fafliion have ftriven in vain to imitate. «* What is your name, fair maiden?" faid the Colonel gazing intently on her. " Peggy-Grant, fas pleafe ye," replied flie. " Well, Peggy, and vvhat is the reafon you do not come with the other girls for milk r" Peggy bluflied yet more deeply than before, and remained filent. <t í never fent the bairn," replied Jannet, < c till lately, I ha* been unka fick, or ufed to go myfell ; for, the bleffing of Heaven light on ye ! the milk we receive from your.bounty is the greateft part of our food, and had flie ??? fetched it we could ??? have exifted ; the dear lafs does naego out to play, which makes the
the lads and laffes jeei her, and ca' her a dotty pet; b ¡t ??? wonder—auld wives and unproteded laffes are always flouted at by knives and fools." fie Av }e ofthe highlands:" faid the Colonel with a fmile. <f No !" anfwered Jannet. " I for¬ mei ly kept houfe within tin ?? miles of Edinburgh; but I loft my brae lad, my only Son Allan, near eight years fmce, and I could nae manage with¬ out him, and muft furely ha* funken under my fonow, had I not ftriven againft it for the fake of Peggy : Ah ! Heaven fent her foi my comfort—My mercilefs creditors took a', and I de¬ termined to come hither as this wee houfe was my ain, left me by my gued- man,
man, \Hiofe father was a fervant to your honour's uncle Kenneth, and ferved under him in the wars. " 'Tis now feven years fince we tra¬ velled all the way hither from Edin¬ burgh on foot : ey, it was a lang and wearifome journey ; but God gave us ftrength, fae we did ??? repine." Cf Is Peggy's mother likewife dead?" demanded the Colonel. " Ah me ! ftie faw but the light of ane morn after bringing Peggy into the warld." ic Well, Jannet/' faid the Colonel, <c you have ? ftrong claim on my affift¬ ance, as your father was an old fervant of my uncle Kenneth's: I am fon ? I did not know your fituation before ; but make yourfelf eafy for your future wants—I will think of fending your grand-
grand-daughter to fchool, fhe is a great girl, 'tis pity flie Ihoold be unedu¬ cated ; let her come every day to my houfekeeper Mrs. Donald, whom I will defire to inftrud her/' " I ha* taught the bairn/' replied Jannet, u till flie can read e'en better than myfell ; and I truly believe that there is ne*er a lafs in all the Highlands that kens fae many ancient ballads, and troth flic can fing them too." " 1 am glad to hear that," returned the Colonel, «* Come to the caftle to-morrow, Peggy, and give us a proof of thy íkiil." At the conciufion of this difcourfe, amidft many curtfies from Peggy, and ftill more bleffings from Jannet, the Colonel and his nephew departed.-■·— « Indeed, Duncan," faid he, ** I think 3 Pt ggy
Peggy one of the fineft girls I ever faw, but I fancy that face of innocence and timidity covers a proud little heart ; however, we will try to have her in- ftiuded, that fhe may earn a liveli¬ hood in fome decent way hereafter/' * Such difcourfe brought the uncle and nephew home, the latter de¬ lighted at having obtained the protec¬ tion of the Colonel for Peggy, and the former pleafed at the fatisfadion his nephew exprefled for his kind¬ nefs,
??? P.
CHAP. VI. *' May he who gives the rain to pour, And w ings the blaft to blaw, Proteci thee fia' the driving ihowV, The hitter froA. and fnavv l'' Robtrt IjVRVS. JlEGGY, according to tbc Coionels defne, came every day to the caftle; he ? is! e red her to be taught to write, and improved in reading :—indeed the tafk was not difficult; for, joined to ? comprchenlive genius, flie had the moft eager dcfiie to learn, nor was her friend Duncan back wai d in gain¬ ing for her all the advantages in his power.
power. She had an excellent voice : Mr. Sommers was a proficient in mufic, and had taught his pupil, who in his turn became mafter to Peggy. Mr. Sommers remonftrated, but in vain : the Colonel confidered the beha¬ vior of Duncan only as laudable ; for as humanity was one of his moft mark¬ ing charaderiftics, he could not blame it in his nephew, whofe kindnefs to the youthful Peggy he could confider in no other point of view. Her enchanting fimplicity and inno¬ cence at length conquered the affumed harfhnefs of Mr. Sommers, for it was really not natural to him ; he gave her fome leffons on the harpfichord, and was fo delighted with her rapid im¬ provement, that he determined to cor- Vol. I. D red
red the rudenefs of her education· The Colonel had at firft intended to fend her to fchool to Glafgow, but her fpeedy improvement foon made him think it needlefs. Mr. Sommers had fo well fucceeded in his firft intention, that he determined to try her with the polite languages, and, to his complete fatisfadion, found her mind like a rich foil capable of bringing to perfedioii whatever was implanted therein· As thefe multiplied ftudies took up nearly the whole of her time, flie by infenfible degrees became an almoft conftant refident at the Caftle, the Colonel ordering her an apartment adjoining Mrs. Donald's, where flie far more frequently flept than at her Grandmother's, whofe fituation by the kindnefs
kindnefs of the Colonel was now as comfortable as poffible. Four years paffed infenfibly, dur¬ ing which period Peggy had been ia- defatigable in her endeavours for im¬ provement. Behold her then, at near fixteen, not a modern fine lady, but an elegant inftruded girl, who gave the promife of an accompli flied wo¬ man : her manners were now grace¬ ful, her language pure ; hei fimplicity, fincerity, and innocence of heart alone remaining. Peggy's education was cer¬ tainly a very uncommon one : in early life accuftomed only to the company of an old woman, whom unafluming virtue prompted to ad well, vvithout knowing it praifeworthy : in a more advanced period left entirely to the in- D 2 ftrudion
ftrudion of men of underftanding and humanity, but who knew little or no¬ thing of female pundilios : From her grandmother flie had learned to fpin, and from Mrs. Donald to few; but neither the one nor the other knew any thing of modern refinement : thus, as franknefs was one of her particular charaderiftics, what her heart thought, her tongue as freely declared : pof¬ feffed oí a perfon that at once united the utmoft degree of feminine delicacy, and the glow of health, fhe was neither vapourifh, nervous, nor hyfterical. As ihe became accuftomed to the Colonel, her timidity intirely wore off : he was often troubled with the gout, and her voice employed in finging or reading beguiled his pains; no one could
could place his foot fo eafily on the cufhion, and her ear was ever fiift to catch his commands. On every little holiday, Duncan and Peggy led the dance, to the great diflike of the vil- , lage lads and laffes; for though the boys fome /our years before had joined the girls in jeering her pride' as they termed it, yet the cafe was now quite altered ; her beamy improved by age, drefs, and education, fpoke fo powerfullyto their hearts, that they all envied Duncan's happinefs in fo charming a partner. The fcandal of the girls had however loft none of its former poignancy, but appeared to ftrengthen with Peggy's charms ; often declaring to each other that they won¬ dered what fuch a bonny lad as the D 3 young
54 DUNCAN AND PEGGY ; young laird could fee in fuch a^ maukifì, w ¡?? every one muft allow was much too tall 5 and though flie had a tolerable fine ihape, yet they had no doubt that befóte long it would lofe its taper piopoition. Though thefe ideas weie circulated in pai ties of fe¬ male friends, yet did the whifper never reach the caftle ; for they dreaded the anger of the Colonel, who, had ha heard a tale of fcandal, would have caufed it to be traced to its author* whom he would have puniíhed with his difpleafure.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. «» *** His tow İr that us'd with torches ??1???, To ili) ne fac fir at nicht, Scemd now ?? black as mo* ? ning v\cid, f Nas inai vvl ftiiv he fie lul." Okù Scontul δ ????· 1 HUS all was peace and harmony at the caftle, until the genetal happi¬ nefs was broken by the Colonel being feized with a violent fever of the moft dangerous kind; Duncan was incon¬ folable, and Peggy fixed by the bed of ficknefs, regardlefs of fatigue or re¬ peated nightly watchings. Duncan's entreaties, wdio never quitted his uncle's apartment, were vain : ihe pe. D 4 remptorily
remptorily refufed to leave him. " 'Tis true," faid flie, " I cannot boaft of the right you have to attend him, but if love could conftitute relation- fliip, who fo near ? -kin as Peggy ?" For a fortnight the fever raged with tlie utmoft violence, about the expi¬ ration of which it rather abated, and gave fome feeble hope to the phyficians. Mr. Sommers, who had likewife conftantly attended the Colo¬ nel, now found himfelf overpowered with fatigue, and was obiiged to re¬ tire. Duncan had before entreated, he now infifted on Peggy leaving him; her pallid looks plainly pourtraying, that, though her inclination might con¬ tinue, her ftrength would foon fail: with fonie difficulty he at length pre¬ vailed
vailed, by giving a promife, that on her return he would retire to reft. Some time after Peggy quitted the apartment, the Colonel, who had been many days totally deprived of his un¬ derftanding, gave figns of returning fenfe ; he at length obferved Duncan fitting filent and fad by his fide- u My dear boy," faid he, " the laft ob- jed I remember was yourfelf fitting in that fame attitude and fame fpot, how long have you continued there ?" " Not long, fir," replied he ; though to fay the truth he had known no other apartment fince the danger of his uncle. '* Your eyes look heavy, my child," faid the Colonel; " and I find myfelf much better. I pray you this night retire to reft—no reply, Duncan, D j I infi
I infift on being obeyed." Duncan with reludance left his uncle and re¬ tired to his chamber, and the Colonel, after taking fome refreíhment, com¬ pofed himfelf to fleep. The morn had fcarce begun to break, when he awakened with recruited fpirits. As well as his weaknefs would permit he raifed himfelf in bed : two attendants, weary with watching, had involunta¬ rily fallen afleep : the good man viewed them with a fmile of benignity, <*· Poor creatures," faid he, cc fleep on ; no doubt but I have fatigued you greatly." Thus faying, he compofed himfelf, returning thanks to heaven for the change he had experienced. The gentle turning the lock of his chamber door difturbed his devotion ; he
he was furprifed to find fo eariy a vifi- tant was Peggy, who with cautious ftep ftole into the apartment, which was oniy enlightened by the glimmer ofa lamp. She looked at the fleeping fervants, and foftly ejaculated " Hovv can they fleep !" approaching the place wdiere Duncan ufually fat, fhe next miffed him, whicli occafioned frefli matter cf wonder ; for Duncan had ordered that Peggy fliould not be difturbed even with the joyful tidings ofthe favourable turn of his uncle's diforder, well knowing that her firft care would be to vifit him vvhen flie awoke. She approached the bed, the Coio¬ nels eyes were hilf clofed, ftie had no idea that his delirium had left him, D 6 and
and taking his hand which lay on the outfide of the bed ihe bathed it with her tears, then prefling it to her lips flie gently raifed the clothes and co¬ vered it· It was with the utmoft difficulty that the Colonel conftrained himfelf not to fpeak during this fcene ; for Peggy had no fooner covered his hand, than, again cautioufly looking to fee if the fervants flept, which the hardnefs of their breathing convinced her they did, flie knelt down, and by her raifed eye convinced the Colonel fhe was making application to that Power whofe ear is ever open to the call of innocence. At length íhe rofe and was advancing to wake the fervants, when the Colonel prevented
prevented her by faying, u Your prayers are heard, Peggy ; I am much better, and truft I fliall live to requite; your virtue and gratitude." She turned haftily with a look of mingled aftonifhment and pleafure, feeming to doubt the reality of what fhe heard ; but the good Colonel's re¬ peated affurances convinced her of his return to reafon, and gave the flatter¬ ing hope of his recovery. Her heart was too full to fuffer her to be elo¬ quent, and, haftily waking the fervants, flie retired to another apartment, where with heart-felt gratitude ihe offered a tribute of thankful nefs to the father of mercy which is ever acceptable—· the unadorned facrifice of a virtuous heart· CHAP·
CHAP. VIIL *' Laft night I met him on a bavvk, Where yellow coni was growing, There mony a kindly woul he fpake That fet my heart a-glowing. Allan Ramsay. PeGGY's happinefs was of fhort du¬ ration ; for, though the Coionels health daily increafed, her friend Duncan had caught the fever, which made the havoc ufual in ftrong conftitutions. As foon as the Colonel could quit his own chamber, he was ieldoni from his nephew's, with whom he was ever fure to find Mr. Sommers and Peggy. The Colonel remonftuu-d that he much
much feared fhe would next catch the infedion, and gently advifed her not to come into the apartment, ■*■*■ Ah do not order me not to come !" faid flie, burfting into tears ; a indeed it would break my heart. Could I harbour a felfiih idea, vvhen either of you are in danger, I were not fit to live ; befide, he is pleafed with my attendance, for laft night he would not take his medicines, until I en¬ treated him, and he faid he would always take them from me." The Coionels heart, as well as that of Pe ggy> was tbe feat of innocence: " Give him then his medicines, cİiild, " faid he; « and Heaven pre¬ ferve thee from the contagion." The Colonel, who poffeffed univerfal phi- ianthropy a
ianthropy, was not awaie there arc more dangerous contagions than fe¬ vers ; and had Duncan faid, " Give me ?? medicines becaufe I love thee," fhe would as certainly, in the innocence of her heart, have repeated it, and the Colonel, judging by the goodnefs of his own, would as certainly have be¬ lieved it and never thought of con¬ fequences. The ftrength of Duncan's conftitu¬ tion at length got the better of the fever, and the Colonel's illnefs gave way to a fmart fit of the gout. The be¬ haviour of Peggy had more than ever attached the Colonel to her, fhe was now perpetually at the caftle, break¬ faft ed and dined with her benefador* the lively unaffeded innocence of her manner
manner amufed him, he was fond of finging, and the beautiful Scottiih airs loft no mufic by her voice. Peace and health reftored at the caftle, Peggy every evening vifited her grandmother; for neither the charms of her fituation, nor the gen¬ tility of her drefs, could make her regardlefs of the duty fhe owed her, ever finding an hundred littie do¬ meftic cares to employ her, when flie went to the cottage, though the bounty of the Colonel had fupplied the lofs of Peggy to Jannet by en¬ abling her to keep a giil of the fame age to attend on her. One night being later than ufual, Duncan formed fome excufe to his uncle, who was confined by the gout, and
and went to meet her ; about the mid¬ way from the caftle, he met the ob¬ jed of his fearch, and mutually pleafed with the rencounter they proceeded homewards. On paffmg the little gate where Duncan fought for her, fhe faid, ςζ I never pafs this gate without ? palpitation of heart, a kind of mix¬ ture of pleafure and pain. What obli¬ gations do 1 owe you ! but for you, I had been untaught, and never known the bleffings of education, or experienced the benevolence of the Colonel." <e It was a morning I fliall ever think of with pleafure" returned he. " May I be thy protedor through life, Peggy ! it would be a poft of de¬ light, and executed with rapture." Duncan had awakened a thought in Peggy's
Peggy's bofom that never found place diere before ; " Tlirough life !" re¬ peated flie : c < Alas ! Heaven knows Siow it may difpofe of me, fhould tbe Almighty take the Colonel, and you be married to fome fine lady, that would not accept the fervices of poor Peggy." cr Heaven will for both our lakes, I hope, long fpare my uncle," faid Duncan, taking Peggy's hand : (t but for the fine lady, if ever I marry, be affured, Peggy, it will be one that will require thy fervices/* Peggy fighed involuntarily.-— " Why that figh ?" " Did I figh ?"—«how different ît will be ;—you mult not come to meet me then (another figh) ; though, if 1 live, I will love her for your fake." 6 « So
* " So thou fhalt Peggy, and I will love her for thine/' The converfation had certainly not concluded here, had they not per¬ ceived a chaife and four at the gate of the caftle, which Duncan, though at fome diftance, knew to be his grandfather's ; they therefore haftened home, Duncan with a declaration between his lips, and Peggy with a confufed idea of time to come, the Colonel, Duncan, matrimony, &c. &c. which not knowing how to account for, fhe told Mrs. Donald ftie felt herfelf but indifferent, and immediate¬ ly retired to reft. Peggy had been in bed fome time, when Mrs. Donald called in to afk whether fhe found herfelf better. " ï really
really know not what ails me" re¬ plied Peggy, " but I cannot fleep, yet I have no particular pain. If I chance to dofe, the Colonel and Mr. Duncan fwim before me : firft I dreamed they chid me, and waked with weeping ; hardly was I com¬ pofed to fleep again, when I thought they were uncommonly kind; and, Duncan taking my hand to lead me to his uncle, I awoke vvith plea¬ fure." Mrs. Donald changed the difcourfe, by informing her that Mr. and Mrs. Campbell vvere come to ftay for fome days at the caftle. Peggy, who had never fern that lady, aiked fome queftions concerning her : " Why flie is one of the proudeft women in all Scotland,"
Scotland," replied Mrs. Donald ; ** va¬ luing herfelf very highly on her fa¬ mily, which íhe traces to our ancient kings* I am fure our good mafter is not fond of her, which makes them vifit fo feldom." After this difcourfe Mrs. Donald bade Peggy good night ; whofe fpirits being before exhaufted, flie foon fell afleep.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX· « Scorn ii more grievous than the pains of death.'* H0M«r İN the morning, Peggy, who was ufually firft in the breakfaft parlour, remained with Mrs. Donald; fhe did not like the account of Mrs. Camp¬ bell, and determined not to take the ufual liberty, unlefs the Colonel fent for her. Indeed that gentleman was no fooner feated at table, than he or¬ dered the attendant to tell Peggy breakfaft was ready· Mrs, Campbell gave an inquifitive ftare at her huf- band Ä : but he, knowing as little of the matter
matter as herfelf, could only refolve her by afking, ** Who is Peggy, bro¬ ther ?" c< A young woman for whom I have a particular efteem," returned the Colonel, ** though only the daughter of a cottager; but as her manners and perfon might honour any rank, I have not apologifed for in¬ troducing her, as I am certain you muft be pleafed with her." As i did not fuit the policy of Mrs. Camp¬ bell to diffent from her brother-in- law, fhe ftifled her pride at this ex¬ planation, and an aukward filence took place, which however was foon broken by the entrance of Peggy, who, after a timid but graceful curt- fey, feated herfelf by the Colonel's defire, and made tea. To paint the aftoniftiment
aftonifhment of Mrs. Campbell, is impoffible; the manners and perfon of Peggy had abfolutely ftruck her dumb : but breakfaft was no fooner over, than flightly apologifing to the Colonel, flie propofed a walk to her huiband and grandfon. They had no fooner reached the door, than the ftorm found way, " Well, well ! furely I am the firft of my familv that was ever fo infulted ! for you, de¬ generate boy, who couid for a length of time fit at table with a beggar, you partake not of my blood ; but prepare to return home immedi ateh', or I renounce you for ever." Mr. Campbell was no more pleaftd with Peggy, than his wife, not thai he feared fo greatly difgracing his Vol. I, E blood ;
blood; he rather trembled for his pocket ; the Colonel was poffeffed of a prodigious fum of ready money, left by his Uncle Kenneth, which he might bequeath to whom he pleafed, and fliould Duncan be taken away, might be fo offended as to beftow it on fome one elfe. Mr. Campbell therefore attempted to footh his lady, but in vain, until at length weary with the difpute, he cried pecvithly, *■* Well, let us take Duncan home, my brother has fixty lhoufand pounds, which he may bellow on this girl, and that will ennoble her more than all the blood of the Malcolms."— tt 'Tis falle, degenerate man !" ex¬ claimed flic, Ci money is but drofs compared toy the blood that fills my veins;
veins ; your family by frequently mix¬ ing with lowland, nay fometimes Eng- lifh puddle, is greatly contaminated, or your brother had not feated me by a vagabond 'wench, nor your grand- fon, with the air of an humble depen¬ dant, affifted, or rather waited on, her at the tea-table." Duncan, during the whole of this difcourfe had remai n evl filent, for though he wouki not have feared the arm of any defcendant of Malcolm, he had ? particular averfion to the tongue; nay, fo much did he de¬ rogate from that noble ftock, that he ' would willingly have foregone all advantage of royal blood, to have feen his grandmother gentle, hu¬ mane, and companionate as Peggy. E 2 The
The fight of the Colonel at fomc little diftance advancing towards them, put a ftop to Mrs. Campbell's tongue, for . though fhe pretended to hold riches in the higheft contempt, yet flic well knew the efficacy of gold, and inwardly paid all due de¬ ference to that bewitching metal, well acquainted that the world in general wouid never have the affu¬ rance to queftion ? man worth fixty thoufand pounds conceirning the rank or name of his anceftors,
CHAP.
CHAP. X. «-* „ the old man would /hake His years ?\\??, and act his young* encounters : Then, having ihewM hi** wounds, he'd fit hini down, And all the live-long day difcomfe of war." Home. vyN our company's return from their Walk, Mr. Campbell took an opportu¬ nity to fpeak to his lady alone, in which difcourfe he clearly pointed out the folly ©f quarrelling with the Colo- - nel, who, he affured her, would neither heed her family or anger, but doubly proted the objed of her fcorn, fliould flie fuffer that paflion to be E 3 d i feem-
cHlcernable; he therefore advifed her to think of fome other means of de¬ taching him from Peggy, as offering to place her with her daughter Lady Beugle, as a more reputable fituation for a young, woman than the caftle, where the fociety vvas intirely com¬ pofed cf men. Though the lady had no inclination to adopt this fcheme, yet ilie thought it for her own intereft; preferrable to Peggy's prefent fituation. Peggy was young arid handfome/ Duncan young and fufceptible, and flie conceived the horrid idea that, in fome hour of folly, Duncan might be in love, his uncle compaílionate, and flie find herfelf grandmother to .one flie defpifed, and her noble biood con- taaiinated beyond redrefs. After
After dinner, Peggy being with¬ drawn, the lady prefaced her difcourfe by obferving, that flie expeded a vifit from Lady Beugle's daughters, " and Lhave been thinking," continued flie, " if you approve, to ácñic Lady Beugle 4 to take on her the protedion of the young woman you have here, for as her perfon is pretty, in fuch a fituation ihe may gain an advantage¬ ous match ; and, pardon me brother, lei dweiling İn }our houfe vvithout the countenance of a lady, as you make her your companion, is ? very aukward one for a modeft young woman," '* Truly," replied die Colonel fmil¬ ing, <£ I dare fwear Peggy is too really modeft ever to have found it fo, and, E 4 as
as to huíband-lumting, í mean to put her above a legal p rod 11 ut i on. My will vvas made before I knew her, by neoled it has not been altered—but fliould 1 die, iemember, .Duncan, Peggy, muft be put above being in- fuked by pride, or wounded by pity." Mr. Campbell bit his lip with an¬ ger : contention with his brother he weil knew was ufelefs, and theiefore remained filent, while his lady did the fame, though almoft burfting with reftrained pride and vexation. But Duncan, vvith an emotion which he couid not reprefs, caught hold of his uncle's hand, exclaiming, " 'Tis you, fir, muft place the amiable girl above both ; the favour from yourfelf would double the obligation. Delay not then,
then, my dear uncle ; your fortune and even your affedion, I am content to fliare with Peggy !" The energy of fpeech, the involun¬ tary emotion, fui pri fed even the Co¬ lonel. Duncan felt it, was vexed at his own warmth, gave a hem, and tried to fpeak agam —fluttered -gave another hem—played vvith the feals of hts watch, and remained fikiit. " By no means," faid the Colonel, finding Duncan did not fpeik, " do I mean to make Peggy equal vvith you j five thoufand pounds will keep her happy in ? fingle ftate, or fet her on an equality with the man to whom ihe may give her hand. As by my means flie has received an educarion, it is a duty incumbent on me to pro- E 5 vide
vide for her, or the inftrudion, inftead of a bleffing, would be a curfe ; it would only have been cultivating her underftanding to make her the more keenly fenfible of the ftings of poverty and dependance. I certainly once meant only to have given her about a fourth of the fum before-mentioned, but her behaviour during ηογ illnefs, and in¬ deed her general condud, have gained her fo warm an intereft in my heart, that I am determined to give her a decent competency." The blood of the Malcolms had, during the above dialogue,- rufhed with double velocity through the veins of the lady, who, unable to bear more in filence, haftily rofe and quitted the apartment. Whether
Whether the Colonel fa*v the dif¬ order of his fifter-in-lavV we know not, but changing the difcourfe, he faid, " I have for fome time, brother, vvilh- ed to have your opinion refped ing Duncan ; he is now in his twentieth year, the nation involved in war, and fhall the youthful arm of a Campbell hang idle ? I read your looks brother, you fear for your now only fon ; is he not alfo mine ? as tenderly beloved "as James ?" ζ< Pardon me," returned Mr. Camp¬ bell, ít you know we were ever of different opinions in thefe refpeds ; your fortune is more than fufficient, and I fee no occafion to feek u that bubble reputation in the cannon's mouth." E 6 « And
** And your opinion, Duncan," re¬ plied the Colonel, * f accords it with your grandfather's ?" " No, on my foul, fir, let me lerve my country; let me live or let me die vvith ho¬ nour !" " My fon, my fon !" exclaimed the Colonel, falling on his neck, ci me¬ thinks I again fee my James ! would to God I could accompany thee, then would we have been gone long fince. But fie on thefe gouty limbs : yet once this hand," clapping it, though enveloped with flannel, on his hanger, tc ves, this hand, Duncan, tore down the ftandard of rebellion even in the mid't of its adhetents, and ereded that of icligbn and hberty ! Then fliall thefe walls hereafter know a mafter 5 nurfed
A SCOTTISH TAL«. 8^ nurfed in floth ? no, thou art indeed my fon, and worthy the name thou beareft/' *' You know, brother," returned Mr. Campbell, *< that we have now no other male, which makes me appre¬ henfive for Duncan," " Better then we fink at once, ihan our Highlanders hereafter point and fay, See the laft of Campbell's line, who never bled to ferve his country, nor heard a cannon roar." " Never fhall that be faid of me/' interrupted Duncan, the bbod mantling in his cheek, " haften my eleparture, my dear fir, and your ne¬ phew will not return vvith fullied ho¬ nour l' "I dare be fvvorn thou wilt not ; thy valour, Duncan, will grace my old age, and give to my frigid veins
veins the fire of youth, while unmind¬ ful of the îapfe of time, I fliall glide fmoothly to the grave, bleffing Hea¬ ven for fuch a fucceffor.** Mr. Campbell, finding he could bring neither brother nor grandfon into his prudential ideas, wifely gave up the difpute, and retired to feek his lady, leaving the warriors to fettle their future plan of operations.
CHAP.
CHAP. XL €< My country's foes muil witnefs who I am,"* Home. VvHILE the Colonel and his ne*- phew were employed as we have feen in the foregoing chapter, Peggy had been to Jannets cottage, where ftie found a ftranger in company with her grandmother, (t My dear bairn," faid the old woman, <fi I hae juft received the fad news that my filler, who lives in the Ifle of Sky, has been long fick, and has a muckle defire to fee me ance mair, and as thou art at the gude Colonel's
íonels, I e'en thvk I'll gang. This lad whom th n fee'll is my fifter's fon, and will take care of me, fo thou wilt be fure of m v a*ety." Peggv was rather unwilling for her grandmother to.go, as fh · was much in yeais ; but the O'd -oman appealed fo defirous, that at length fhe fore boi e to diffuade, only d¡ awing her afide from the ftranger, flie kiffed her tenderly, en¬ treated her to take care of her health, and infifted on her having her purfe,. which the Colonel had rephmlhed two days before. The old woman ftre¬ nuoufly refufed, affirming that fhe had faved enough from the Colonel's boun¬ ty to make any fuch fupply needlefs. Peggy entreated, but in vain, when turning
?
turning her head, in the height of the aigument, fhe perceived her friend Duncan, who had entered the cottage. Peggy complained of her grandmo¬ ther's obftinacy, and appealed for Duncan's opinion, who taking the old woman's hand, faid, <c Jannet, I am going abroad, and perhaps it may be fome time befoie vve meet again, I muft therefore enti eat you to keep this purfe for my fake," taking one from his pocket, and prefenting it to Jannet. The old woman took the purfe with a bleffing on him, and, emptying ir, would fain have rctuined the gold, but Duncan fo peremptorily infifted on her keeping it, that at length flie was obliged to acquiefce, Jannet
Jannet now bid them farewel, pro- miting to return fpeedily, and Duncan and Peggy bent theii fteps homeward. " What did you mean," faid the latter, " when you told my grandmother that you were going abroad ?" ft I meant, my dear girl !" replied he, « that my belt friend, the Colonel, will procure me a commiffion, and 1 fhall foon go to Germany." <t Gex>d Heaven ! furely not to the war ?"—-" Yes, to the war, Peggy! my uncle loves me too well to wifli me to lead an inadivc life/* ·*·* 1 am fure/' replied Peggy, with great in¬ nocence raifing her fine eyes, a tear trembling in each, to Duncan's face, " if he loved you half as well as 1 do, he
he would not let you go.**—Shocking as it may appear to the prudifh part of tlie fix, I muft truly affirm flie made this bold declaration without blufhing; nay more, juft at that in¬ ftant flie perhaps forgot the difference fortune had placed between them, and only thought of Duncan as ofa fondly beloved brother, for whofe fafety íbe could have facrificed her life. Whether Duncan's affeeftion was quite brotherly, vve Ihall not deter¬ mine; but certain it is, the words and raifed eye of Peggy had thrown him off his guard, for prefling her iti his arms, he exclaimed, " May my arm fail me in the hour of danger, if ever I forget thy worth and beauty !" Though Peggy's heart vvas as inno¬ cent
cent as that of our fiift mother before flic met the ferpent, yet the warmth of Duncan's embrace alarmed her; it was too much for friendfliip to allow, and deep blufhes covering her face and neck, flie burft into tears. ct Ah Peg¬ gy !" faid Duncan, cc why thofe tears ? did not you own that you loved me ? and fliall [ not'return the charming obligation ?" u 'Tis true/' replied Peggy, her eyes fixed on the ground, * f that I did fay fo, and only fpoke as my heart prompted ; for how can I help it, when I owe you every thing ?" *' Liften then, my fweet timid girl, my heart aflures me I ihall return from Germany with honour. The Colonel loves you, and will not then refufe his fandion to make me happy, which 1 can
I can never be unlefs I can call you mine for ever ! you, furely Peggy, will not be unkind enough to refufe the companion of your youth ?" " Good God ! refufe you ! If the Colonel—but what do I fay ?—alas ! you forget I am a poor girl."-— cc The riches of the world equals not your worth, and, unlefs you İbare them, I care not who has my part." This difcourfe brought them home : Duncan in love with all the fervor of twenty; a/id Peggy, pale, trembling, and afhamed. On their arrival, Peggy retired to her own apartment, and Duncan joined the company in the parlour; the greater part of whom had α half guefs where he had been, or at leaft how accompanied, and beftowed no
no very favourable glances on him. The difcourfe of the morning was re¬ newed, when Mrs. Campbell, con¬ trary to expedation, approved of Dun¬ can's departure ; faying, that flie was glad the Colonel had thought of it, as it was better he ihould fall than dif¬ grace his family, The Colonel ap¬ plauded her heroifm, as he believed it; but a crimfon blufli, which fwiftly paffed over Duncan's cheek, might have difcovered, to a difcerning eye, that he underftood her meaning dif¬ ferently. The entrance of fupper prevented more ; Peggy as ufual atteflded. Mn. Campbell was uncommonly conde- fcending; talking to Peggy, whom ilie had not befoie fpoken to, inform- 11) ar ■*· Sp
ing her of her gracious intention of recommending her to Lady Beugle. Peggy ftole a look at the Colonel; i ε was a look of forrow, a look of entreaty, and fpoke at once to the heart of the perfon to whom it was direded. 6t My dear girl," faid he, " this is by no means a fettled matter, nor ever will take place, unltfs Ì think it for your advantage : your company would beguile the abfence of Duman; vvhich, I muft truly confefs, I lb ill heavily feel, as will alfo mv fnend Sommei s. A game of chefs, and one of thy gran 'mother's mournful ditties, will now be our only winter evenings amufements." Mr. Sommers had often endeavour¬ ed to diiluade the Colonel from fend- ing
ing his nephew to join the army ; but as all fuch perfuafions were vain, he had entirely given up the attempt. The difcourfe now turned on the pre¬ parations for Duncan's departure, and Peggy's own forrows were all loft in her apprehenfions for his fafety. The Colonel wrote that very evening con¬ cerning a commiffion for his nephew ; which he had no doubt of fpeedily obtaining, as he had powerful friends. Duncan was to make fome trifling ftay in London, and then proceed to the feat of war. In eight days after the foregoing fettlement, Mr, and Mrs. Campbell left the caftle, though not without a long ledure to Duncan, about dif- gracing of families, noble blood, up- ftart
ftart beggars, &c. &c. &c—to all of which Duncan anfwered with mono· fyllables; being predetermined, with the obftinacy of the noble blood he poffeffed, to ad as his heart direded, as foon as he could find occafion.
Voi. I. F ? H A P.
? Η ? ?. Xïl. *·* The golden laws oflove fhall bé UpOO thfcp31*ir hqng, A fimple heart, a fingle ??, A true and conftant tongue.'* Marojçjís of Montrose. Jl EGGY had vainly imagined that fhe ihould regain her tranquillity on the departure of Mr. and Mrs. Camp¬ bell ; attributing the confcious con¬ fufion and uneafinefs flie found ¡n her¬ felf to the difagreeable hauteur of that lady : but the idea was vain, ihe was ftill dull and inattentive; and if by chance her hand touched that of Dun¬ can, her face*.was covered with bluihes. Sonie
Some days after the departure of ,Mis and Mrs. Campbell, Duncan found an opportunity to meet her alone in tlie drawing-room : " What have I done, my dear Teggy ?*' faid he : ζζ you no longer trest me vvith that charming free¬ dom you were accuftomed to ; in what have I offended you ? The propofal I made the other evening perhaps meets your difapprobation, and you wiih me to ceafe to love you; elfe why draw back your hand? why endeavour to fliun me? unkind, cruel Peggy V 3 *·" Ah ! do not chide me !" {?? (lie, burfting into tears ; " 'tis you who are cruel to upbraid me, when you know I could not live under your difplea¬ fure ; bur, alas ! vvhen I think of your fituation, on the point of joining the F 2 army,
army, to be perhaps depi ived of you for ever ; and when I revolve on my own, can 'I be otherwife than forrow¬ ful ?" « 1 fliall return fafe, I doubt not, my dear giri ! and will tben claim the only reward precious to my heart; in the mean time do not forget me, Peggy ! For here I fwear, no time or chance fliall ever make you 'lefs dear to me than at this moment !" As he uttered thefe words, the Co¬ lonel enteied haftily with a letter in his hand. He had juft received the commiffion for his nephew, and was coming to impart the welcome news ; but entering precipitately, he heard the latter part of Duncan's promife, Urrfufpicious as he naturally was, this was too plain to be miftaken ; efpecially 7 as
;is Duncan's arm was round Peggy's waifl, flie in tears, and both in con¬ fufion. After a moment's paufe—" Go to your own apartment, Peggy !" faid the Colonel with great gravity. " For you, Duncan, I have bufinefs."— Peggy did not wait for a fecond com·* ma»d, but inftantly withdrew. The Colonel remained for fonie mo·· ments filent ; but Duncan not at¬ tempting to fpeak, at length he faid, " This is the firft time, Duncan, that 1 was ever ferioufly difpleafed with you : myfelf though am blameable,. I ihould have confidered you were young, and Peggy handfome ; but I thought you had too much honour to F 3 wiih.
wiíh to feduce a girl that enjoyed my protedion—or rather, fuch an idea never entered my mind." "Good Heaven! tmy dear uncle! 1 wifh to feduce Peggy ? Do not think me fuch a villain :—I have too much honour to conceal my fault, if it be one, with a falfehood ; therefore candidly confefs I love her dearer than life, but never harboured a thought inconfiftent with her virtue." " You love Peggy ! Well, Sir, the freedom of that confeffion muft force me to believe you fpeak truth, when you aver yon have no views on her virtue.—But how can you anfwer to your honour telling a girl in her humble fituation you love ber; one that
that owes the little (lie poffeflts to your family ; η -ry, to youi felf ?—Fie ! fie î you put too dangerous a tax on her gratitude, and into vHiat errors may it not lead both !~--Bur, Sir, this boyifh folly muft be forgot ; your commiffion is come : in a week you muft quit us. I have myfeif experi¬ enced that war and glory enable us to conquer enervating paffions." " Be affured, my dear Sir, that ???* nephew will not difgrace you ; but I feel that I never can ceafe to love ■Peggy·"—*' Peace, Duncan ! you intrude too much on my partiality; know that I have loved almoft tQ adoration, yet at little more than your age had fortitude fufficient to refufe the hand of the woman fo beloved, F 4 and
and to give her up forever."—Though fixty* fix winters had paffed over tlie Colonel's head, he heaved a figh on the recolledion; and giving Duncan ihe commiffion, bade him remember the duty of a foldier, and quitted the apartment. The Colonel immediately went to liis library, where he fent for Mr. Sommers ; but that gentleman happen¬ ing not to be at home, he ordered the fervant to defue Peggy to come to him. The fentence of death could hardly have been more feverely felt than was this command, though it was inftantly obeyed. Her face was fwell- ed with weeping, and fuch apparent dejedion in every feature, that had the Colonel been in a fevere frame of temper^
lemper, whrh was far from being the cafe, her appearance would have melt¬ ed his humane heart to pity* " Peggy ! faid he with great gentlenefs, " do not make yourfelf unhappy i I am not angry, only in future you muft not liften to Duncan's folicitations : you are too young to hear proteftations of love and nonfenfe. Men, Peggy, I am forry to fay, do not always hold» facred their promifes to women ; but it is my fault, I have unwittingly ex¬ pofed you; t Duncan however lhouid hive had more honour than to profit by my credulity." " Indeed, indeed, Sir/* returned Peggy, the reftiained tears burfting forth, tc he is not half fo blameable as I am, fo pray do not be angry vvith hini : he would never F 5 hav
have faid any thing to me had it not been my own fault, though I am fure I meant no harm," ** Why, what did you do or fay, Peggy, that could fubjed you to a difcourfe of love?"— « I faid— ? pardon me, Sir !—I fiiid, if you loved him half fo well as I did, you would not fend him to the army, and indeed I only fpoke as I thought; but I would never have faid it, had I imagined it would caufe fo much confufion/' Spite of the Colonel's gravity he could not fupprefs a fmile. cc Why, Peggy,** returned he, " you furely know it is very imprudent for young women to tell men they love them ?" u I know itis, Sir, ftrange men; but you and Mr. Duncan have ever been a fo
fo good to me, that how could I do otherwife than love you ? But, pardon me, though I cannot love either of you lefs, I will keep my affedion to myfelf/' " Well, be a good girl, thy inno¬ cence excufes thy fault; but here¬ after remember to t indu re it with prudence." The Colond now bade her dry her tears, and prepare to attend him at dinner, kindly re-afluring her of his friendfhip, if flit* aded according to his defires. The Colonel, on his return to his apartment, met his friend Sommers, to whom lie difclofed the whole of what had paffed, entreating his advice how to aft. *' Indeed,*' replied Mr. F 6 Sommers,
Sommers, " this is what I have all along feared vvould happen ; it is al¬ moft impoffible for a young man to be conftantly with fo fine a girl, with¬ out being charmed with her." u True-, Sommers," interrupted the Colonel ; *' but the diftânce fortune has placed between them, and his having con¬ ferred the fituation fhe enjoys, ftifled all thoughts of a diihonourablfe nature in my bofom ; for I did not furmife any man would dare infult fo innocent a creature, and you know Duncan'* addreíles can be confidered in no other point of view/* u He may intend, and flie believe them otherwife," re¬ plied- Mr. Sommers. " I have often obferved her behaviour to Duncan, which, direded only by nature, plain-
ly fhews her heart : on the moft trivial accident happening to him, flie trembles and turns pale ; while, on the con¬ trary, if yau chance to applaud him* or any praife-worthy adiçn** of his meets her knowledge, fhe,> dwells upon it with enthufiafm. Time and abfence may certainly do much in fuch young minds ; but I fear you will find this affiiir rather a difficult one. Duncan was even at an eariy age ftruck with her perfon i a charra which is now riveted by manners and accomplifh¬ ments, and her flattering diftindion of ever regarding him as the model of all perfcdion. What I would advife is, to adopt Mrs. Campbells j?lan oÇ fending her for fome time to London ; the gaiety that predominates at Lady Beugle's
Beugles may perhaps effed a change in her heart : as for Duncan I know not what to fay, nor what charm can prove ftrong enough to obliterate the imagé of fuch a woman from a fuf¬ ceptible mind. For many years I have almoft hated women ; but I know not how, the little fafcinating fyren has gained even an intereft Ín my frigid bofom ; fo that I truly declare to you, if I had a fon, and might pick a wife for him a'mong the greateft and faireft of the realm, I vvould feek no further, but fix my choice on Peggy/' " Were I not in fome meafure the flave of fallacious prejudices," replied the Co¬ lonel, " I might perhaps do the fame ; but as it is neceffary to regard the world's opinion, I will certainly break the
the connedion if poffible, and there¬ fore adopt your idea of fending her for fome months to Lady Beugle's/* The entrance of Duncan put an end to the difcourfe ; he appeared over¬ whelmed with melancholy. ** Why, Duncan," faid the Colonel, " I fear I have always miftaken your charaderi the arrival of the commiffion feems to have infeded you with forrow." * f No, on my word, Sir; were it not for the fatisfadion that it gives me, I fhould fink under your anger, and the idea of having drawn your dif¬ pleafure on Peggy." " If the idea of my difpleafure on Peggy affeds you, be perfedly at eafe ; íhe has only erred through innocence. I fear, Duncan, I cannot make the fame exçuíè for you:
you : however, let it pafs : I will this evening relate to you the violence 1 once did my feelings, nor do I cxped a lefs exertion on your part ; for the prefent, do not increafe the poor girls" agitation by your behaviour. 1 have given her my advice, and flie is com* ing down to dinner. ,J The entrance of the dinner, and ap¬ pearance of Peggy, pi evented more. Duncan was melancholy, and Peggy fo confufed, that the natural good hu¬ mour of the Colonel obliged hini to pafs over what had happened, more lightly than he intended. " Peggy/' faid he after dinner, " I think you, have entirely forgot your Scots fongs : fome time back you ufed to fing a number of old ditties, and fome of them
them pleafing : pr*ythee try if thou canft give us one. 1 prefer them xo all the ridiculous love fongs of the prefent time." Peggy, though her heart was heavy, prepared to obey him ; indeed her fpirits were better fitted to melancholy ditties than any other. « What fliall I fing, Sir ?" replied fhe. " I believe I remembei: all the fongs I learned from my grand¬ mother: I know Hardy knute, Ken¬ neth, Edom O'Gordon, the Braes of Yarrow, the Laird of Ochiltrie, and Duncan," faid fhe, hefitating, " and" — <t Stop, Peggy ! I think I never heard you fing Duncan ; yet I remem¬ ber tive fong when I was a boy, ib let us have that." The Colonel could not have touched a more.tendf r firing, the
the very nam e rev i brat ed on her heart; yct as fhe had unluckily mentioned it, fhe could not avoid finging it; and therefore began thus ι Saw y the thane o* meikle pride, Red anger in his ?? ? I faw him not, nor care, he cryM : Red anger frights na me. For I have ft ude whar honour bad, Though death trod on his heel · 9 Mean is tlie creft tliat ftoops to fear, Nae fiç may Duncan feel. Hark ! hark ! or was It but the wind, That through the ha' did fing ? Hark ! hark ! agen, a warlike found, The black woods round do ring. *Tis na for naught, bauld Duncan cry'd, Sic ihoutings on the wind. Syne up he ftarted frae his feat, A thrang of fpears behind.
Halte,
Haile, hafte, my valiant hearts, he faid, Anes mair to follow me ; We'll meet yon fhouters by the burn, I guefs wha they may be. Out wha is }ie that fpeids fae faft, Frae the flaw marching thrang ? Sae frae the mirk cloud flioots a beam, The iky's blue face alang. Some meffenger it is, mayhap, Then not at peace I trow. My mafter, Duncan, bade me rîn, And fay thefe words to you : Reftore again that blooming rofe Your rude hand pluckt awa' ·, Reftore again liis Mary fair, Or you fhall rue his fa'. Three ftrides the gallant Duncan tuik, He ftruck his forward fpear : Gae tell thy mafter, beardlefs youth, We are na wont to fear.
Ile comes na on a waíiail rout ?* revel, fport, and play ; Our fwords gart Fame proclaim us ???, Lang ere this rucfu' day. The rofe I pluckt o* right ís mine, Our hearts together grew % Like twa fweet rofes oa ae ftak, - .......... Here Duncan could not avoid fteaJU ing a look at Peggy, fo very expreffive, lhat a heart lefs interefted than hers muft have felt its full force. She was confufed, her lips refufed utterance to her words. " What is the matter, Peggy ?" faid the Colonel; " are you ill?" " No, Sir,—but—but on a fudden 1 forgot the remainder of the fong ; I fliall however recoiled it in an inftant—Oh ! I remember now !
■Like
------Like twa fweet rofes on ae ftak, Frae hate to love flie iiew. Swift as a winged fhaft he fped. Baiild Duncan faid, in jeer : Gae tell thy mailer, heardlefs youth, We are ??? wont to fear. He comes na on a vvaflail rooit ?* revels, fport, and play ; Our fwords garL Fame proclaim us men, Lang ere this ruefu* day. The rofe I pluckt o' right is mine, Our hearts together grew ; Like tvva fweet rofes on ae ftak, Frae hate to love they iiew. He ftampt his foot upo 1 the ground, And thus in wrath did fay : God ftrike ray faul ! if frae this field We baith in life fhall gae ! He wavM his hand : the pipers play'd *♦ The targets elatter-d round; And now between the meeting faes Was little fpace of ground.
But wha is ihe that rins ht faft *? Her feet ??? flap they find ; Sae fwiftly rides the milky cloud Upo' the fimmer's wind. Her face a mantle fcreen'd afore, She fhow'd of lily hue ; Sae frae the grey mift breaks the fun, To drink the morning dew. Alack, my friends, what fight is this ? O, flap your rage ! flie cry'd, Whar love with honey'd lips fliould be. ??? not a breach h wide. Can then my uncle draw his fword, My hufhaud's breaft to bleed ? Or can my fweet lord do to him Sic foul and ruthlefs deed ? Bethink you, uncle, of the time My grey-hair'd father died, Frae whar your fhrill horn ftruck the wood, He fent for you with fpeed.
My
My brother, guard my bairn, he fald, She'll hae ??? father foon, Regard her, Donald, as your ain, I'll aík ??? uther boon. Would then my uncle force my love, Whar love it coud'na be ? Or wed me to the man I hate ? Was this his care of me ? Can thefe brave men, who but of late, Together chas'd the deer, Againft their comrades bend their bows, In bluidy hunting here ? She fpake, while trickling ran the tear Her blufhing cheek alang; And filence, like a heavy cloud, O'er a' the warriors hang. Syne ftapt the ted-hair'd Malcolm furth, Three-fcore his years and three ; Yet a' the firength of itrongeft youth In fie an eild had he.
Nae pity was tliere In his breaft, For war alane he loo'd ; His grey een fparkled at the fight Of plunder, death, andbluid. What ! fiiall our hearts of fteel, he faid, Bend to a woman's fang ? Or can her words our honour quit, For fie difhoneft wrang ? For this did a* thefe warriors come, To hear an idle tale ? And ?"*?? our death-accuftomed arms Shall filly tears prevail ? They gled a fhout, their bows they tuik, They cfafh'd their fteely fwords ; Like the loud waves of Barra's fhore, There was ??? room for words. A cry the weeping Mary gied, ? uncle, hear my prayer î Heid na that man of bluidy look—« She had na time for mair :
For in the midft anon there came, A blind unweeting dart, That glanc'd frae aff her Duncan's targe, And ftrack her to the heart. Awhile fhe ftaggerM, fyne fhe fell, And Duncan fee'd her fa* ; Aftound he llood, for in his limbs There was ??? power at a\ The fpear he meant at faes to flingt Stood fix'd within his hand ; liis lips halfopen, couMna fpeak, I ?? life was at a ftand. Sae Mie black ftump of fome auld all, With arms in triumph dight, Seems to the ti aveller like a man, " This ballad is imperfect, i\r y the conciufion is wanting; this is all my grand mot lier knew, and I believe all that is preferved of it/' *' Truly Vol. I, G 1 would
I would it vvere complete," íeplied the Colonel, t( for I think it particu- hrly pleafing, and well fung too, Peggy." " Had flie not unluckily forgotten herfelf in that verfe," faid Mr. Sommers, " it had been better; in future, Peggy, fing fongs that in¬ tereft you lefs." " Indeed, fir," faid Peggy very innocently, " I menti¬ oned it without thinking, or I never like to fing it." " Yet fome parts of it," faid Mr. Sommers, " are very beautiful; as, Mary running to join the warriors— Sae fwiftly rides the milky cloudy upo' the fimmer's wird. Nor is the verfe thatfollows lefs foi and again, in the twenty-fifth, the fimile is particulailyhappy, And fi - ??? like a heavy cloud, o'er a' the war¬ riors
riors hang. " Whatmterefts me the moft," replied Peggy, " is the defcrip¬ tion of Duncan, on feeing Mary fall ; the pidure of his aftonifhment and horror is one of the itrongeft, I think, I have met with in my narrow read** ing.'* < c The veteran, deftitute of every fentiment but war and violence, is alfo well defcribed,'* faid the Co¬ lonel, * e as is the courage of the youthful warrior in his |anfwer to her uncle." " And his love alfo/* faid Duncan, " in the eleventh verfe, I think inimitably given; and indeed upon the whole, long as it is, I can¬ not help lamentingthat any part of it is wanting." " lt is truly a pity/* replied [the Colonel; « but I think, Duncan, I G ζ promifed
promifed you a plain unvarniflied tale this afternoon ; and though I åo not much approve being the hero of my own difcourfe, yet in this cafe it muft be fo/*— Peggy immediately rofe, and was about to retire ; but the Colonel vvith great affability defiling her to return, * flie obeyed, and he began, as will be found in the next chapter.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIIL ** Alas ! an ancient feud, Hereditary evil, was the fource Of my misfortunes. ■■ ■ " '* Home, IN the year one thoufand feven hun¬ dred and fourteen I reached my twentieth year ; my brother is twelve months younger : at this early age I found myfelf a free agent, and mafter of a con fid érable fortune. Our parents were both dead, and alfo my uncle Kenneth, who bequeathed me his large property. I therefore en¬ tirely relinquiflied all right to my paternal eftate, that of my uncle be¬ ing fufficient to fatibfy one more G β avaricious
avaricious than myfelf. Some time before his death, he laboured under a complaint, for which the phyficians preferibed travelling, and a milder air : by fhort ftages we journeyed to London, intending to go to the fouth¬ ern part of France ; but, alas ! that city was the extent of my uncle's travels ! he expired two days after his arrival there. I fincerely lament¬ ed him : he was the friend of my youth, my leader in the paths of ho¬ nour. In the year one thoufand feven hundred and eight, though but juft fourteen, I attended him againft the French at Oudenard, and after¬ wards ia the woods at Blangiies, and through the fubfequent part of the war. Peace being proclaimed in one thoufand
thoufand feven hundred and thirteen** we returned to our native country ; but fome wounds which my uncle had received, and that had been im¬ properly healed, affeded his health, and finally put an end to a well-fpent honourable life, in fomewhat more than a year after our return to Bri¬ tain. About this time all was re- joidng in London on the acceffion of George the firft ; but a fcene of gaiety not according with my then difpofition, 1 determined to return to Scotland· The few domeftics who had attended us I fent home by fea, except Sandy Mac Intofli, who accompanied me on horfeback,—Sandy was fomething older than myfelf, had been a par¬ ticular favourite of my uncle's, and G 4 appeared
appeared fii deeply diftreffed at his death, theit I have confidered him ever fince as having ? claim on me beyond the common ties of fervitude«. The roads at this time were intolera¬ bly bad, and vve travelled but flowly« One evening that wc had made but a fliort day's journey, we continued our way till late. On crofling a moor near Carlifle, vve were ftruck with the report of piftols at fome fmall diftauce before us. I inftantly fet fpurs to my horfe, nor did honeft Sandy need any command to follow, for he reached the fpot from whence the found proceeded as foon as myfeif. Three villains had attacked a chaife that contained an elderly gentleman and his daughter : two fer¬ vants who attended had endeavoured to
to defend them, on whom the ruffians fired, but luckily without effcd : i was fortunate enough to wound one pretty feverely ; upon wliich the others fled, but were puifued and taken by Sandy and one of the fer¬ vants. The robbers fecured, tied on their horfes, and guarded by the do¬ meftics, vve continued our vvay in a body to an inn at the firft town vve came to. Here I received the re.- peated thanks of Mr. Frafer and his daughter, who were the perfons vve had affifted: they entreated me to fup wich them, and to let us join company for the remainder of the way—a requeft I felt no inclination to deny. Mv mind was enervated by fonow, and Mary Frafer was formed G s in
in Nature's faireft mould.—In ftiort, the lazy eafe of peace, and the relaxed ftate of my heart, inclined me to fall in love.—Mr. Frafer preffed me warmly to accompany him home ; and Mary's eyes, methought, told me I fhould not be an unwelcome gueft: I therefore willingly accepted the pleaf¬ ing invitation. The time paffed fwiftly at Frafer's houfe : the old gentleman was healthy and cheerful : Mary, on the contrary, was often melancholy ; but, whether grave or gay, flie was equally inte¬ refting :—to be brief, I became fo deeply enamoured of her, that I feemed only to exift in her prefonce ; nor did I think myfelf indifferent to her : I confefs to you, that love had fuch influence
influence over my heart, as to make me think of marrying a woman of a religion I had ever been taught to abhor, for Mary was a Roman Catho¬ lic : however, I muft truly declare, that the difference of our faith often prefented itfelf to my mind; but all doubts vaniihed when I confidered her angelic temper, unafluming vir¬ tue, and foft humanity ; nor could I wifli her otherwife than flie was, for no change could have rendered her more perfecSt. Befide, though my uncle Kenneth was very rigid in his ideas of religion, I had never be n able to imbibe them f ? thoroughly as to think the man my foe, whom education alone had taught to ferve God differently from myfelf. One G 6 dav
Φ /ay that her father was abfent, I took the bbeity to offer her my hand and heart, entreating her to confider that niy hapt incfs entirely depended on hvr anfwer. What v\as my furprife, to fee her burft into tears, and re¬ main filent í <c Ah, I was miftaken, and vainly flattered my felf 1 poffeffed fome fmall intereft in your heart," faid I ; u but pardon my prefump- tion, 1 will endeavour to bear my difappointment, feverely as I muft feel it ; and may you be bleft witli the man vou h) ve 1" <t Alas !" replied flie ít ; ll weeping, « you cir widely, there is no nun dearer to me th m— -------" " Whom, my deareft Mary ?" i£ Youi felf—except my father: I am
am not íkilled in the language of dif- fiinulation ; but hold not my heart lefs valuable for being yielded thus« freely—Yet, alas! I fear—" <f W. at can you fear, my Mary ?** exclaimed 1 in rapture. " My father/' " Your father !" repeated I vvith aftoniftiment. " I flatter myfeif he efteems me ; my fortune is large—he will not, my love, refufe to fandion my wiflies/ 1 " Alas l* replied flie, "lie may require vvhat )our honour cannot grant/' *■*■ He will aík notliing derog itory to my honour, Maiy; and every othv point is rr fling compared to the ^poflVuion of >ou! But tell me, 1 conjure
I Gonjure you, what frightful ideas» you encourage ?" She paufed a moment. " Swear to me, then, on your honour, tliat you will never difclofe, to the injury of my father, what I now re¬ veal to you." I fwore— ** Then—then—my father favours that unfortunate exile, Prince James."— Amazement for fome moments ftopped my utterance. At length— « Great God ! do I underftand aright ? Favours the Pretender ! that enemy to religion and liberty ! Then, Mary, are we indeed implacable foes." She anfwered only with tears. c * Yet, thou art no rebel ; then let thy
thy father's fortune go to fupport re¬ bels; my fortune ihall be thy for¬ tune, my friends thy friends, and my king ihall be thy king/" « Never," replied ihe, " will I abandon my father. I do net blufli, Campbell, to confefs that I wiíh the fame ideas influenced you both ; or rather, that born in humble life, re- gardlefs of the difputes of princes, I might have borne the envied appella¬ tion of your wife. But never, dear as that title might be to my heart, would I procure it by an adion which muft make me defpife myfelf : could I leave my father, I were unworthy you, for a bad daughter is ever a worfe wife,—He has difcovered your attachment to me, and queftioncd me on
on the ftate of my own heart; I re¬ vealed it as openly as I have done to you ; on which his only reply waSj, that would you join the Prince, my¬ felf and his fortunes vvere yours." ζζ If ever I join the Pretender, may I be curfed of God and man ! and may the dhk of the firft peafant I meet be plunged in my treacherous heart !" te Peace, Campbell ! I but tell you what my father demands ; it is fitting I ihould alfo inform you that I would not accept you on thofe terms, which muft infallibly fully your honour; for were you even convinced of the juftice of the new caufe in which you vvere engaged, yet the vvorld would not tail to call you an apoftate, and
and attribute the change to your being under the dominion of a paf¬ fion, which you could not conquer» Believe me, Campbell, I efteem you too much to accept fuch a facrifice, which if you were weak enough to grant, I would not only refufe you my hand, but, if poffible, erafe your image from my heart. We will both ad confidently with our fitu- ations, and the opinions in which we were bred ; by which means, though unhappy, vve fhall not ceafe to efteem each other, though perhaps doomed to be feparated for ever." ίζ And can you, Mary, give me up to defpair, and in fuch a caufe ? Think a moment ; is it impoffible to obtain thee, and preferve my ho¬ nour Γ'
nour ?"—" I fear it is ; yet try my father, he perhaps will not fo openly avowhis fentiments to you." In fliort, I feized an opportunity of offering myfelf as fon-in-law to Mr. Frafer; though I muft truly own, much as I loved Mary, I did violence to my feelings to afk a fa¬ vour of her father, whom I could no longer regard with cordiality. He complimented me by faying, that he had fo high an opinion of my ho¬ nour, that he knew no man to whom he would ίο foon give his daughter,. did we not unhappily differ in fome, political fubjeds. Then, rather in couched terms, he made the px^opofal Mifs Frafer had mentioned.—I re¬ fufed it with great heat ; he was not cool ;
cool : we therefore parted ín mutual difguft. Half diftraded, I took a hafty leave of Mary, whom I in vain entreated to put herfelf under my protedion : flie peremptorily refufed ; and the utmoft I could obtain, was a promife, that fhould ihe ever be miftrefs of herfelf, and my heart re· main as it then was, íhe would not fcruple to accept my offered hand.
CHAP*,*
CHAP. XIV. ** And if we fa', my gallant friends, We flail na fa' alane ; Some honed hand fliall write our deed$ Upon the talleri ftane." Old Scottish Balla* 1 TOOK the road homeward with a heavy heart, vvhich the joy that my vaflals fliewed for my return only ferved to inc,rea r e : Alas ! I thought, could I have given thefe honeft folks fuch a foft protedrefs, myfelf fuch a companion, had been the hap¬ pieft of men ; without her, the world is to me ? void, and its riches all fu- perfiuous. In this ftare of mind I had remained fome months at Kenneth Caftle, with a heart ioftened by difao-
difappointment, and a fincere wifli for war, when I heard a rumour that the Earl of Mar had affembled an army, and proclaimed the Pretender at Aboyne. On enquiry, I found this report true ; and affembling about three hundred loyal highlanders, I joined the Duke of Argyle at Sheriff Muir, where we had a battle vvúh the Earl of Mar, in wliich the left wing of fcach army was beaten. On the firft onfet Mr. Frafer, who had joined the rebels, was wounded, and had loft his life, had I not refcued him ; for though I law him with the antipathy of an enemy, I could not forget he was the father of my beloved Mary. The rebels being defeated in Lancashire,
Lancafliire, they difperfed ; and the Chevalier, who had landed at Peter¬ head, thought fit to re-embark with the Earl of Mar and feveral others concerned in the fame caufe ; among whom was Mr. Frafer, whofe daugh¬ ter accompanied him in his exile. Some few days before the battle at Sheriff Muir, I accidentally renewed my acquaintance with an old officer named Rofs, whom I had formerly known in Germany ; his fon was now with him, a youth of nineteen ; the lad fought during the battle, with great bravery, ?? the fide of his father, who unfortunately being wounded, intrepid youth attempted to bear him from the fcene of adion. But, alas ! the broad fword of a rebel ftruck his right
right arm in the pious office, and nearly fevered it, and the father and fon funk together on the v-arth. I was lucky enough to come up juft at the moment, or the unfortunate pair had been trampled to death % and inftant¬ ly gave charge of them to fome of my men, who bore them from the field. On the clofe of day I went to vifit the wounded pair ; my men had carried them to a little hut, about a quarter of a mile from the field of battle : I was fliocked to find them fo miferably accommodated, both being in one apartment, and without the neceffary requifites in their melan¬ choly fituation. I foon procured them better bedding and affiftance; the old man commanded my venera- tion^
tion, and the bravery of the young one demanded my friendfliip; and I already determined in my own bu¬ foni, that fliould they furvive, as they were both difabled, to fpare no pains to perfuade them to make Kenneth Caftle their future dwelling. The fon was perpetually thanking me for the care of his father, while the parent's lips opened but to blefs me for my attention to the fon, each appearing to forget his own fufferings in his fear for the otheis For about a week their wounds were in a ftate of uncertainty, but at that period grew alarmingly worfe. One morn¬ ing, when I paid my ufual vifit, the furgeon had juft informed the lieu¬ tenant of his danger. " I feel not 5 for
for myfelf," faid the veteran ; " í could not die in ? nobler caufe—How much to be preferred my fate, to that of lingering whole months in agony and difeafe!—-Had it pleafed Heaven to have fpared my fon, to proted my friendlefs girl—but I fubmit—the will of God be done !"—Tears of paternal care gufhed from his eyes ; tliough a foldier, Duncan, I do not blufli to fay, mine flowed equally faft,------« << Lieutenant/' faid I, " is there any thing in my power ? If there is, com¬ mand me freely."-*-He looked at me a moment in filence, a fmile enliven¬ ing his pallid features— t< Though you are young, 1 know you honour¬ able-—dare I afk—will you protect my Jemima ?" " By my foul I will l' Vol. I. H returned
returned I ; « your daughter fliall be my fifter, and her honour dear as my own." « Alas !*' continued he, * fi ihe is poor and friendlefs, I have no fortune to bequeath, virtue is her only dower." " The fifter of James Campbell," returned I, " needs no other; I have promifed to hold her as fuch, and Heaven profper me as 1 keep my word!**—" Enough," re¬ plied the veteran, " I doubt you not ; you have fpoken comfort to my al¬ moft parting fpirit, I fliall no longer look forward to the hour of my dif- folution with forrow ; my foul will now joyfully throw off this mortal coil, and join the faint-like compa¬ nion which Heaven granted me on tarth—My boy too, who bled and fell
fell to fave his father ! together fliall we reap the reward of our labours, in that country where honour and preferment come Dot by intereft—* The bleffing of an old foldier Tight oa you ! fo may I truly name myfelf, for out of fixty years, forty-five have I fpent in the fervice of my country, though I die a lieutenant."-—I en¬ treated him not to exhauft his fpi¬ rits : he interrupted me, faying, "I feel your care, my friend ; but, whe¬ ther my hour come to-day, to-mor¬ row, or the next, is now immate¬ rial; have you not promifed to pro¬ ted my child, to hold her as your fifter? Ah, Campbell! the pang of deatli is nothing, the daughter of my beloved angel is fecure, fafe by the H ? honour
honour of a name that knows no blemifh."—I fhould tell you that, during this difcourfe, young Rofs had extended 'his only hand from the Bed, and caught mine ; he opened not his lips, but the fparkle of his before languid eyes, and the preffure from his hand, fpoke ftronger to my heart than was in the power of words. I foon after took leave of my wounded friends, and remained ab¬ fent fome time. On my return, I found the Lieutenant fupported by two foldiers who waited on them : he had entreated them to procure him pen, ink and paper, and was exerting his utmoft efforts to write to his daughter ; but the letter is in my ef- critoire ; therefore take my keys, Duncan,
Duncan, you will find a bundle tied together, bring it." Duncan obeyed, and foon returneel with a parcel of letters, out of which the Colonel feleded one, and defired his nephew to read it aloud. *« My dear child !" ** Thou knoweft that even from thy infancy I have been frequently abfent, therefore thou fhouldfl: the lefs fenfibly feel a feparation which Heaven itfelf appoints, a command we muft all obey : the longeft: mortal life is fhort, and thy father's grey hairs have long been monitors that the hour was haftening forward, when he muft mingle with his native duft. Think of the mercy of the Power that fpared me from a lingering bed of H 3 ficknefs,
ficknefs, in whicb every faculty of the foul would have expired before the vital flame had been extinguiftied ; when thou wouldft have wept over the fhadow of a parent, whofe features alone proclaimed him fuch. Neither, my love, doft thou lofe him by a fudden death ; the God of Mercy has given time for all. I leave thee not friendlefs; the brave Captain Camp¬ bell, whofe word I doubt not, will proted thee, will be to thee a rather, % friend, and brother : yes, a brother, Jemima, an only brother; for thy Cbarles, the kind affezionate com¬ panion of thy youth, and the dutiful fupport of my age, is haftening be¬ fore me ; when thou learn'ft by vvhat means, diy thy tears, and blefs Hea¬ ven
ven that gave thee fuch a brother, though for a fhort time the bleffing was fpared, " To conform with the cuftoms ofthe world, I might have wiflied an older guardian, but I know no man on whoie honour I could fo fafely ielys Remember, Jemima, virtue is thy only dower ; and as thou art endowed with fome fhare of beauty, thou muft take double heed to thy adion s : for though the daughter of a poor Lieu¬ tenant, a breath ftiouîd not fully the- fifter of fuch a brother ; wounded, mu¬ tilated, as he lays before me, how I glory that Heaven gave me fuch a fon !—My hand is feeble, my child, or I have much to fay; fain would tendernefs fteal in and deftroy the in- H 4 tentici^
tention of my writing, I would infpire thee with fortitude, but the foldier is loft in the father,—The bleffing of a dying parent be on thee; walk fteadfaiV in the paths of honour, fo ihalt thou procure happinefs for thyfelf in this world, and blifs in that to come; where I truft, my beloved child, we fliall meet to part no more.—Fare¬ well!-—blefs thee!—blefs thee!—fare¬ well !" Henry Ross/* Duncan concluded, and the Colonel refumed his narrative* " The brave Lieutenant lived but three days after writing to his daugh¬ ter ; the letter he gave to me to de¬ liver. May my end be like his ! it was the death of a chriftian, of a mau wbofo
whofe life has left no fting behind· " I die, my friend I" faid he with firm- Defs. " No fears or myfteries cloud my paflage -, the power of God fpeaks in all his works, and I doubt not his mercy to me. In my life if I have erred, it has been through ignorance i and he punifhes not weaknefs, but guilt, from which I truft my heart is clear.—I therefore look forward to death but as the prefage of a joyfuL eternity, a painful dream that will be difperfed and forgot in inexpreflible felicity.—My fon, droop not in fight of vidory ; what earthly reward could equal that we are on the point of reap¬ ing? May thy paflage be fmooth as mine ! I fcarcely feel a pang/* Such H ; was
was the Lieutenant's difcourfe the morn before his death ; after which he flept fo compofedly, for fome hours, that I could not but flatter myfelf he had experienced a change that might reftore him to my wiihes : but, alas I towards evening, I too clearly faw his honeft brave fpirit was haftening to its aïmigliiy donor. " Dodor," faid he faintly, " 'tis too late to flatter ; how long, think you, may my fon have to live } —fear not, fpeak !*' The fur¬ geon replied, that unlefs a favourable crifis, he much doubted the enfign's life longer than four days ; but it was impoffible to fpeak decidedly, as youth and conftitution might yet enable him to overcome his malady. To this he made
made no reply ; but after fome mi¬ nutes defired to be raifed in bed, which being immediately done, in a voice more and more broken, he repeatedly bleffed his boy ; then turning his already funken eyes towards me, " Camp¬ bell/* faid he, " accept the dying thanks of an old grateful heart. I need not again recommend my Je¬ mima to thy care—thou haft pro¬ mifed/' " I have fvvorn, Lieutenant," interrupted I, repeating my oath.* <c Enough, enough! 1 am fatisfied! ami happy !" cried he in a voice hardly ?? ticulate, and, bending his htld upon my flioulder, expired İn my arms. To defcribe to you the forrow of young Rofs at the lofs of his father, or indeed my own, would be a difficult H 6 tafk.
taik. The death of the brave Lieu¬ tenant had awakened every pang anew for my uncle Kenneth. How happy couid I have been, to fnatch fo much honeft merit from the rude gripe of poverty, and to have fmoothed his paffage to the grave, by íharing the cares of a fon ! Now all in my power was to perform the laft melancholy duties, and fulfil his dying requeft. Young Rofs grew vifibly worfe after the death of his father, and, in fhort, furvived him but two days. As I was fitting by him the evening he ex¬ pired, u I would," faid he, «* that I had fome valuable memento to leave you in token of my gratitude; but, as that is not in my power, I pray you accept our fwords· They have done 2 good.
good fervice, for that I wore formerly belonged to my father; and, I pray Heaven, if ever you unfheath either in anger, your enemy may find the temper of Rofs*s fword, when direded by Campbell's arm." In fine, Duncan, not to prolong a melancholy ftory, the brave lad yielded his breath, as his father had done, in my arms. u I beg pardon, fir," faid Duncan, interrupting his uncle ; " but are thefe the fwords that now hang in your bed¬ chamber ?" " They are ; and as they will probably defcend to you, preferve them as carefully as I have done."— ie By my honour will I !" replied Dun¬ can, catching hold of the Coionels hand.*
hand,, and fixing his eyes on him. «* But, may I, fir?"------ " What wouldft thou fay, child ?" replied the Colonel ; *« what wouldft thou aík ? fpeak freely !" Ct Dare I afk you to give me young Rofs's fword ?" <c Take it, and ufe it nobly, its honeft pvinnefs only fuits a foldier's thigh j for I warn thee, Duncan, it will not fuit the prefent fafliion ; for the officers now-a-days fo befpangle their fword hilts, that truly, when I firft faw them, methought they had hung their miftrefs's necklaces to them. Na}', would you believe that I have feen a ftrapping fellow who bore his Majefty*s commiffion wear perfumes, and,
and, to avoid a ftiower of rain*, get into a conveyance called a fedan chair, and be carried by two of his fellow- creatures ?" " Upon my word, I ihould be ftrongly tempted to overfet the-vehi¬ cle, fliould I meet with one fo' in¬ cumbered ; but, my dear fir, will you lavour us to continue your narrative ?** " My prefence being no longer ne¬ ceffary, I left the bodies of the worthy pair to the care of Sandy, to be con¬ veyed and placed in our burial vault, by the fide of my uncle Kenneth, and with a heavy heart took the vvay to Inverefk, a fmall village about eight miles from Edinburgh, where the Lieutenant's daughter lived, and whom
whom I reached in four days after their death." Here the bell announcing the hour of fupper, our company adjourned to the uloon, deferring the remainder of the Coionels recital untii next day.
CHAP.
CHAP. ??. «■ Let women view yon monument of woe, Then boaft of beauty, who fo fair as fhe ?'** Home. AFTER fopp». Peggy retired to bed, but not to fleep. The occur¬ rences of the day were too ftrongly imprinted on her memory to permit oblivion to fteal on her fenfes ; every ad of paft life was ruminated upon : the recolledion was not pleafing, for the firft time her poverty was lament¬ ed—" Ah I" faid fhe, « was I rich, I might love Duncan without offence ; yct, poor as I am, 1 cannot help it, he is fo good and amiable. I think the Colonel told me, that men did not always
always mind what they promifed wo· men, but he muft know his nephew is a ft ri d obferver of truth. Ah ! I never knew him tell a falfehood in my life !— yet the Colonel is kind, he knows fhe world, Duncan may perhaps forget fuch a poor girl as me, when he goes to the army ; or, God forbid I perhaps he may be killed.—Poor young Rofs í may his fvvord be more fortunate to its next pofieflor I-*·Ah*, Duncan t Duncan ! would my bafom was thy breaft-plate in die hour of danger* haw mucb lefs fhould I feel ? wound given to tnyfdf, than one to you ! Yet î muft not, will not, again tell yoi* I love you ; though Heaven knows- lf ever fliall· until· ifty heart ceafes to beat.—Heigh-ho)! I could fometihies almoft
?1??? wifh I had never left my grand¬ mother ; for though I loved her very fincerely, 1 was not uneafy, and could fleep found, though the bed was home¬ ly and the flieets coarfe/'—With fuch thoughts Peggy paffed the greater part of the night, rifing in the morning with inflamed eyes and wearied fpirits; and though Duncan watched an op¬ portunity the whole day* with the greateft aflid u ity, to fpeak to her alone» he found it impoffible. Towards evening the Colonel, at his nephew's requeft, continued his? narrative. ** The fecond day after young Rofs's death, I took the road to Inverefk, my mind overwhelmed with melancholy, and at a lofs in what manner to break. my
my forrowful tale to the Lieutenant's unhappy Jemima, fliould flie yet be uninformed of her double lofs. I was however fpared that care, rumour had fpread the tale : no friendly voice had foftened the dire, events as they ftruck cm the ear—*iay, on the heart of an agonized daughter. She had heard of a wounded father, a mutilated bro¬ ther, with every aggravating circum¬ ftance. On my reaching the houie, an old attendant informed me that the unhappy girl was in a ftate little fliort of infanity, not having flept for two nights, which was the time fince fhe learned the news. I had flattered myfelf that at leaft I ihould have been able to conceal the particulars of the death from her knowledge,
knowledge, until time might have blunted the firft acutenefs of her for¬ row ; but, difappointed in that hope, I defired the fervant to tell her mif¬ trefs, a friend of her father's, and who had been honoured with his Iaft com¬ mands, entreated to wait on her. She inftantly admitted me, meeting me with an eagernefs that at once evinced the diforder of her mind. " You came from my father, fir ?" faid fhe ; " I know he is dead, I wept for him, for I loved him ; but fince I learned my brother's deatli, my heart is hard¬ ened, and I cannot weep—yet I loved him too. I pray you fpeak of him : in this room I received my father's and my brother's laft embrace;—in this arm chair my father ufed to fit—on that
that flute my brother ufed to play," fliewing me one that Jay on the table before her. ?? No more fhall his breath give thee mufic : Alas ! his lips are cold, his joints are ftiff. Bar¬ barians ! Monfters J" fcreamed ihe, * c why did you ftrike his arm ?" The forrow of this unhappy girl diftreflèd me beyond meafure ¿ nor could I help turning from the fight, exclaiming, " Alas ! Lieutenant ! hovv painful is my promife !" " You fpeak of my father," interrupted íbe—" he had grey hairs, furely they might have fpared him ; I thougiit ail the vvorld reverenced grey hairs." I entreated her to endeavour to com¬ pofe her fpirits, as vvhen I found her (better I bad much to fay, but that in her
her prefent ftate of mind it was im¬ poffible ; that all I could now inform her, was, her father had defired her to confider me as his and her bro¬ ther's reprefeiitative ; that I had fwom to regard her as my fifter, and protect her through life as fuch."—*' And fa I will !" exclaimed flie, ci if my father commanded it ; but did he not blefs me l' Moft fervently," replied I ; "Oh ! repeat it ! repeat it !" inter-r rupted fhe, " repeat his bleffing, it will eafe my burfting heart ; perhaps it will make me weep, for I wept for my mother until my father and brother kiffed off ipy tears, though their own flowed the while/* To increafe ttie diftrefs of Jemima, appeared hnpoifi-*- 6 ble;
ble ; I therefore thought the letter of the Lieutenaat might have a falutary effed, and drawing it from my pocket, prefented it to her ; firft making her promife that when íhe had perufed it, fhe would retire to reft. * This fcene was fo painful that I left it as foon as poflible, and retired to an inn ; firft fending the beft medi¬ cal affiftance I could procure to my unhappy charge. The agitation and diftrefs her deli¬ cate frame had fuftained was fo ex¬ treme, that the next day I found her in a violent fever, which in fpite of every aid threatened her life for more than a month, during which I vifited her daily, endeavouring, by every ι means
means in my power, to leffen the acutenefs of her grief, which was how¬ ever fucceeded by a melancholic lan¬ guor, that made me for fome months apprehenfive for her life. As foon as the fever fubfided, as I thought change of fituation materi¬ ally neceffary towards eftablHhing her health, I wrote to a iady at Car¬ ry bru gh, the widow of my uncle Ken¬ neth's chaplain, entreating her to take Jemima to board with her.. I foon received an anfwer according to my defires, and immediately fct out with my charge. 1 knew no other eligible pei fon but the widow, or could have wiflied to have placed her nearer Ken¬ neth Caftle : hovv often did I wifh Mary Frafer prefided there ; that, in Vol. I. I die
the bofom of fympathifing friendfliip, the gentle Jemima might forget her forrows ! The fale of the Lieutenant's goods, and, in fliort, all he poffeffed, did not amount to quite four hundred pounds. Determined to place my charge above dependence, I converted the hundreds to thoufands, and totally in her own power. I fliall not repeat to you the difficulty I had to perfuade Jemima to accept this little proof of friendfliip ; fuffice it, I at length fuc¬ ceeded in making her promife to ex¬ pend the intereft yearly, tliough flie firmly declared flie would ever regard the principal as mine. This bufinefs fettled, I left her vvith the widow Ramfay, and returned to Kenneth Caftle. The fcene I had lately
lately been engaged in, had fo totally employed me, that 1 had fcarcely time to think, of myfelf ; but no fooner did I meet eafe and idlenefs at home, than the affedion I bore Mifs Frafer raged with redoubled fury in my bofom. So' true it is, Duncan, that in inadivity alone we have leifure for enervating parlions, or at leaft to carry them to excefs; for although in every fituation, whether fighting for my country, or employed in the offices of humanity, Mary Frafer was equally dear ; yet, it was not the foft effeminate paffion that now poffeffed me : in fliort, fo great was its influence, that I deter¬ mined to go privately to Paris, and once more endeavour to perfuade Mifs Frafer to accept me as her huiband. It I fre-
î frequently heard from Jemima, and, being totally unemployed, İn fix months had been thrice to fee her, remaining each time three or four days at Car¬ rybrugh. Some time after my laft vifit there, 1 happened to be at a pub¬ lic dinner near it, where, among others, was a nephew of Mr. Frafer's, whom I never faw cordially, as I knew he wiflied to efpoufe my beloved Mary; but as we had ever met on terms of civility, it continued the fame. Afer dinner, this villain, for even now I can cali him by no other name, gave for ? toaft Jemima Rofs, at the fame time winking fignificantly at the com¬ pany, 1 took no time for refiedion, but, inftantly ftarting up, infified on fatisfadion for the manner in which he had
had dared to mention her; but the company intei ferİng, I at length agreed to defer it until the morning; at which time, however, Alexander Frafer pre¬ tended to have been intoxicated, and to have forgot what had pailed, offer¬ ing to apologize ior his behaviour. I was exafperated at his pufillanimity, and yet more at his villany; for after his departure from the company in the evening, a gentleman prefent inform¬ ed me, that he had frequently heard Alexander Frafer niention Jemima Rofs, as a girl whom I entertained, but kept at a diftance, and vifited pri¬ vately, as I was attached to his coufin Mary : thus then you may well fup¬ pofe no apology vvould fuffice, as it I 3 inftantly
inftantly ftiuck me, the villanous ru¬ mour was invented to injure mc with Mifs Frafer. I fhouhl have told you, Duncan, ihat the morning after the infult of¬ fered to the charader of Mifs Rofs, I had fent ? gentleman, wlio was pre¬ fent, with ? note to Alexander ; it was nearly in thefe words, vvhich I fliall repeat to you, as the poltroon ufed them for the moft infernal purpofe :«— *' You have vilified the charader of Mifs Rofs, whofe honour is dear as my own, and which I will defend with my life ; you have alfo invented vHe feilfehoods of me, for which you are a villain. To fave yourfelf from the ftigma of cowardice, name your time and
ahd place to the bearer/'—To the gentleman who carried this note, he made every defpicable fubmiffion : however, on hh informine" him that no ' ■*** apology would he accepted, he returned me this anfwer :—— „. " Ic is impoflible I fliould meet you to-day, as my affairs are in the utmoil diforder i fome particular bufinefs of my uncle Frafer's alfo, 'tis neceffaiy 1 fliould fettle; muft therefore entreat you to defer the meeting until to¬ morrow evening feven o'clock, at which hour I will call for you, and we can retire to a convenient fpot/' 111 as my anger could brook delay, I confented to this, as I well knew tliere was fome truth in what he had advanced, to excufe his immediate at- I 4 tendance :
tendance : in fliort, I kept walking about the whole day, and beft part of the next, counting the hours until I (hould revenge Jemima to my com¬ plete fatisfaction. I had fworn to pro- red her as my fifter, and felt tho¬ roughly inclined to keep my word : perhaps my wrath was heightened, as the offending party had been, nay perhaps yet was, a pretender to Maty Frafer. The wifhed-for hour of feven at length arrived, without the promifed vifit from Alexander. I called for my horfe, flew to his houfe, infilled on feeing him, but in vain—the fervant affured me he was not at home. Half frantic, I ruihed into the houfe, ran through the apartments t calling lum in the moft opprobrious terms ; but my
my fearch being vain, I turned to the fervant, who at length, by the dint of threats, confeffed that his mafter de¬ parted in three hours after he received the challenge, but folemnly fwore he knew not whither. Never, Duncan, did I fuffer fo much from paffion : I reprobated my own folly, vowing to purfue the villain through the vvorld. I made the moft minute inquiries about the country for near a month, but with¬ out effecft : at length I learned that Frafer had, four da) s after 1 wrote ta him, embarked on board a veffel in Leith harbour, bound for Cork. I loft no time, but writing a hafty adieu to Jemima, whom I had not feen fince the quarrel with Fraier, iet off in pur¬ fuit of him. I reached Cork in íaí« ty, I 5 bui
but to my great difappointment, found my defpicable enemy had, almoft im¬ mediately on his arrival tliere, taken his paflage on board another veffel bound for Dunkirk. I had now no cioubt but he was with his uncle and coufin then at Paris ; ? thought that increafed my rege beyond all bounds, and which,. vided to the fatigue I had undergone, threw me into a delirious fever that detained me two months ; and from vvhich that I efcaped vvith life, I be¬ lieve entirely Owing to the indefatiga¬ ble cares of Sandy. Illnefs had not however fubdued my ra/e ; for immediately on my ïecovery I jcncwcd the purfuit, taking my paf¬ fage to Dunkiik, and from thence ] a lening to Paris without delay.—· Alas!
Alas ! my fpeed was of no avail : I was too late to prevent the facrifice of Mary Frafer; for the firft news I heard on inquiry was, that Mary, my beloved Mary, had been married a month to her villanous coufin. I rather flew than walked to their hotel. As I was* not known to their fei vants, I had no apprehenfion of his being denied. I was however informed, that both the Mr. Frafcrs had been gone for two -days into the country, on a hunting party ; but that Mary, for 1 can call her by no other name, was at hove, 1 defircel the fervant to inform her that a gentleman fiom Scoehnd requeued to fee her; and was inftantly admitted. She iofe on my entrance; but no fooner had our eyes met, than flie 1 ó gave
gave a fearful íhriek, and funk fenfc¬ lefs on the carpet. I forgot reproaches —I forgot her father was a rebel : I take ihame to myfelf—I forgot íhe was a wife—I clafped her in my arms— I preffed her to my heart : but recall¬ ing her fcattered fenfes, flic withdrew herfelf from my embrace; faying, with an air of wounded dignity, " Is this well done, Campbell ? The forfeiture of your vows was little to this infult/' This accufation roufed me from mv delirium. <s And is it poffible, Mary," exclaimed I, <c that you are married, and to that villain Frafer ? Can you have configned your faithful Campbell to everlafting mifery ?*' " Faithful !" repeated flie, " add not meannefs to falfehood, nor think by criminating mc. .
me, to exculpate yourfelf: furely the charms of Mifs Rofs have not loft their influence : you will not, fure, forfeit your vows to her ?" " I will not call you unkind, Mary—I will fuppofe you deceived, infatuated, and weak enough to believe the bafe affé ve ration s of a lying coward ; for never could you blame me for proteding an innocent friendlefs girl ; vvhofe father and bro¬ ther fell at Sheriff Muir, and who, if I had not placed in her fafety, muft have been thrown an helplefs orphan into an unfeeling world. Ah Mary ! if you knew her, you would fpeak comfort to her broken fpirit in the fofteft voice of friendfliip ; you would fay, Thou haft loft a fattier and a bro¬ thers
ther, Jemima, but haft found a fifter. 1 have done no more. I fwore to her expiring parent to proted her, and hold her honour facred as my own ; and by my foul I will." " I would aík a queftion," replied Mary, " yet dread an anfwer: tell me, Are you not married, or at Jeaft under an obliga¬ tion of efpoufing Mifs Rofs ?" " No, on my life, nor ever entertained the moft diftant idea of the kind. I fhould have been in France fome weeks ago, had I not ftaid to iearch that villain Frafer, who fled me, and I muft think has poured his poifon into thy ear ; for it is death to think thee deliberately falfe, Hovv weak my heart ! it feeks excufes for thy inconftancy : yet thou art
art married—loft to me for ever !-*- Why, why, have you done this? or hovv have I deferved it, Mary ?" ** Spare your reproaches, Camp¬ bell : if you are not guilty, my own heart will fufficiently revenge you ; but if you profefs only friendfliip for Mifs Rofs, why did you challenge Frafer ?" I related every circumftance ; which before I had concluded, flie exclaim¬ ed, t( Enough, Campbell ! I have been weak, and am puniíhed. Alas l' con¬ tinued flie weeping, ít I ought to blufli, when 1 confider my prefent fituation, to confefs 'how dear yau have been to my heart j yet that attachment was once my pi ide, and to bear the title of your vvife my higheft ambition. I was
I was unworthy of it, Campbell* for¬ get me, yet let me not fuffer too greatly in your opinion. I was cruelly de¬ ceived ; I was taught to believe Mifs Rofs either your miftrefs or wife; which however I fliould never have given credit to, had not the challenge you fent Alexander confirmed the idea, though the caufe of it was reprefented very differently. Alexander affirmed, he waited for you two days ; but, as he heard no more on the fubjed, fup¬ pofed you had clianged your mind, and therefore fet off for Paris. Thus much, Campbell, I have informed you, in fome meafure to palliate my falfehood ■*, or, to give it a truer name, my weaknefs. My father prefled me to marry Frafer, indifferent of what- 5 tve r
ever might befall me : I alone wifhed to be revenged on you ·, alas ! I meant the blow foi your heart, it has recoiled upon my own : yet forgive me, Campbell ; and if ever you loved me, or value my life, feek no farther revenge ; leave that to me—I will re¬ venge you both on myfelf and Alex¬ ander." " Seek no revenge, Mary ! by Hea¬ ven I'll have fatisfadion, though I were fure of inftant death ; nay, though thy life, whkh is a thoufand times dearer than my own, vvere the forfeit/*·—In vain Mary pleaded, I was only the more exafperated. I thought fhe was fearful for the life of Alexander r¿ nay, perhaps, that fhe loved him—an idea that redoubled my fury. In
In ili ort, I left her in a ftate of mind not to be defcribed, expecting the re¬ turn of Alexander vvith impatience. The fervant, on my firft inquiry, faid his.mafter was expected in the evening· Rage would not permit me to wait at my inn \ I therefore kept walking haitii y up and down the ftreet where Frafer's hotel ftood ; towards night, Alexander returned on foot and alone· I took no time for recollection : I gave him none-, but feizing him by the collar, <( Villain ! lyar ! coward !'*" exclaimed I, " at length we are met» and by Heaven I will not quit thee until I have fatisfaction for thy repeat¬ ed ûlfehoods." For a moment he was greatly confufed ·, but recovering his aftoxHÍhnientj. he attempted to pre¬ varicate,.
valicate, but I would liften to no ex¬ cufes. He demanded time to engage a fecond, and prepare piftols : for the firft requeft, as I had none, neither had he any right ; and for the laft, as I fufpeded his daftardly evafions, I was prepared, having two pair, which I .declared he might choofe. Thus, no alternative left, he was obliged to ac- *! company me, or to have ufed means that muft for ever have branded him publicly as a defpicable poltroon· We walked haftily through tbe ftreet and fuburbs until vve reached a fpot proper for our purpofe. I produced my piftols, gave Alexander his choice, and we fired together. Frafer imme¬ diately fell, as I thought mortally wounded % I raifed and feated him againft
againft α trec, and, having received no hurt myfelf, ivitencel away. At ? fmall diftance from the fpot I met two men, who appeared labourers, and telling them 1 had left ? wounded man in the wood, dell,eel them to go to his afliftiince, enforcing this requeft with a prefent. I readied my hete!, mounted my horfe, which was very fleet, and was at a good diftance from Paris before the news of the duel could be known: in fliort, I fpared no fpeed in reaching Flanders, where I was foon after joined by Sand)', whom I had left behind to learn the event of our meeting. Fra¬ fer's wounds, he told me, were very dangerous, but not thought mortal ; and my beloved Mary had retired into a con-
a convent, very much to the diflike of her father. From Bruffels I wrote to Jemima, whom I informed, in as flight a manner as I could, of what had happened, fending Sandy with the letter, alfo on other bufinefs ; and foon received the following anfwer, for he returned as fpeedily as poffible : " My dear friend, ** Why wculd you rend the already too deeply wounded heart of your de¬ pendent Jemima, by venturing a life fo precious? Accuilomcs! fron my ten- deleft yeais to the flu :d of honour, my heart vdcd to f -? el! with enthufnfni at the name : now, how clianged ! the lofty fafcinating ideas that accompa¬ nied it are cold, and honour never finkes my thoughts unaccompanied by blood,
blood. Alas! how bitter a requital have you met for your kindnefs to an unfortunate orphan ! Through her you have wandered from your country ; loft the woman of your heart ; ventured your life on equal ftake with a villain's, I cannot bear the retrofpedion : yet where can 1 fly to lofe the idea ? where íly the inquifitive eye or finger of fcorn¬ ful derifion, that point -? to ? vilifying world the deftroyer of Mifs Frafer's happinefs, and the reputed miftrefs of Colonel Campbell ? Yes, noble repre¬ fentative of my father and brother, that is the name whifpered by the unfeeling multitude ; and your generous friend¬ fliip has robbed the wretched Jemima of the only bequeft left by her unfor¬ tunate parent. Forgive me, my much- honoured
honoured friend, if hereafter I decline your benevolence ·, yourfelf muft own the neceffity : permit me to flievv the world they were miftaken, and that Jemima can ftjop to every thing but the name of diftionour. Write to^ne, advife me ; my fathei's laft commands have rendered your advice facred,— Farewell, my brother and fi iend ! Ah ï be careful of your fafety. '«.' My health is greatly impaired : either my feelings deceive me—or foon, very foon, all will be peace, and fate no more be-» wilder the unfortunate J ε μ ι tø a Ross." I fopnd by this letter, that Sandy had entered more into explanations vvith Jemima than I could have wifh¬ ed, I therefore determined to depart to
to Scotland, and if poffible fct the wounded heart of Mifs Rofs at peace, \mdeceive the world, then return, and again meet Alexander Frafer. My rage knew no bounds : his life, me¬ thought, could alone expiate his crimes. My»own innocence I wiflied to afcer- tain to Mary alone : her opinion was my worid, the reft was immaterial : but Jemima's honour I had vowed to proted ; *I had fworn to guard her as the fifter of a Campbell : that name could not bear difhonour, and blood alone could vvafh the ftain from lemi- ma*s name. ------Before I departed for Scotland, I cnclofed Mifs Rofs*s letter to Mary Frafer, fending Sandy exprefs to France, ordering him to inquire ©r-inutely into every particular-, then « return,
return and meet me in London. In¬ fenfible that I was, I wounded a heart already too deeply ftrucken. I wiflied to fhew Mary all Alexander's deceit, but did not recoiled that exculpat¬ ing myfelf was refleding on her too cafy belief ; in fliort, I reached Lon- elon in fafety ; and during my ftay there, received feveral letters from Scot¬ land, and among others, one from the widow Ramfay, which informed me, that the affair between Frafer and my¬ felf being publicly known, had eonfe¬ quently reached the ears of Mifs Rofs, whofe gentle fpirit had fuffered fo greatly that flie dreaded the confe¬ quence. Soon after tbe receipt of this 1 was joined by Sandy, who informed me, that he bad delivered my letter to Vol. Ι. ? Mary,
Mary, and brought me the following anfwer, which is alfo preferved in the colledion : u I know the prudential part of the world would ftart at my writing to ? man, the declared enemy of my father and hufband; but an unhappy differ¬ ence of opinion has alone made him the firft, and Mary Frafer's credu¬ lity the laft : then, Campbell, I will think of you as a brother, eftranged by that difference only, from fliaring the fame paternal bofom. Ah ! why vvere vve born in a fphere that entitled us to take part in the interefts of princes? My temper, though warm, is humble ; and Mary, miftrefs of a cot by a brook-fide, had felt more real happinefs than the flattered Mifs Fra- 8 fer
fcr in all the pride of wealth. Natu¬ rally timid, I have ever ihrunk from public life : why will you call forth my name fronbthe òbfcurity in vvhich I wifti to conceal it ? If ever I was dear to you, or if my entreaties can have the leaft weight, puifue Alex¬ ander no farther ; if not for his fake, for my lionour fpare him. The world will make me ? fliarer in eveiy adion, and, though buried in a convent, will not fcruplc to fay that Mary took part in all. Then ï conjure you, if you value my life, five me from the tongue of calumny, and feek no farther re¬ venge, vvhich if jou determine to pei fill v, I here vow by all I hold moft facred, to ι enounce the u orld for ever; on the contrary, if vou rtlin- K 2 qui ih
quiíh your fanguinary intentions, al¬ though I mean to remain here, yet it is not my inclination to take the veil. Turn your eyes from deceit and Alex¬ ander—from falfehood and Mary : turn them on the innocent vidim, the fuffering Jemima : fet her above an unfeeling world, proclaim aloud her virtue, and fhield her honour with Campbell's name. Grofsly is fhe ca¬ lumniated, and yourfelf alone can clear her fame from the opprobrium that furrounds it ; even your own honour, Campbell, demands that you make Mifs Rofs your wife : you fwore to proted her, and no other method is left. Pardon me for entering fo warmly into your affairs, but to whom is your happinefs dearer ?—Farewell, my
my friend; you preferved the life of my father at Sheriff Muir, and furely the man to whom I owe my parent muft merit that appellation from Mary Fraser/* Sandy informed me, that Alexander Frafer ftill continued confined from his wound, which the phyficians thought would materially injure his health, was he even fortunate enough to furvive it % and that Mary had peremptorily re¬ fufed to leave the convent, though her father ufed every means to perfuade her to quit it. Her letter rather flat¬ tered than fmothered my paffion ; and though a redrefs was abfolutely necef¬ fary to Jemima's fame, yet my love to Mary precluded every thought of K j making
making the repu ation fhe mentioned. It is true flic wns y eu ng, gentle, and pleaf¬ ing ; nay, to α difengaged heart, per¬ haps charming. I loved her as ? filler, but my heart was calm ; with Mary Frafer, how different ! it was adora¬ tion, and the phrenfy of paffion : and though her marriage with Alexander ought totally to have deftroyed my hopes, yet ? thoufand abfurd chimeras nourifhed flattering ideas, and made me flow when I ought to have flown to the injured Jemima : her mild fpirit claimed every affiftance to fup¬ port itfelf againft the fliock it had re¬ ceived. Mary's temper, on the con¬ trary, thougli poffefled of every female charm, depended more on itfelf, and would
would have fhrunk humiliated from ofiered fervice : flie WOuld have pined in fecret, yet bluflied to own that thofe flie defpifed had power to grieve her. But it grows late, Duncan, there¬ fore you muft excufe rhe remainder of my narrative untii to-morrow.
K*+ CHAP. « ν
CHAP. XVI. " O happinefs İ where art thou to be found ? I fee thou dwellell not with birth and beauty, m " "■"■ ■■ l ' J' '' ■ *P u u ??— . . .ι ?? Nor doll thou, it would feem, with virtue dwell; Elfc had this gentle ?? mifs'd thee not." ????, 1 ?? next day the Colonel conti¬ nued his narrative thus : " Honour and humanity both calling me to Scotland, I fet out, reached it in a few days, vifiting Carrybrugh before Kenneth Caftle. To my grief and vexation, I found Jemima to all ap¬ pearance in the laft ftage of ? con- fumption. Her gentle foul had funk under the rude breath of calumny, and appeared
appeared haftening to quit its mortal tenement. Ever ftranger to form, I entered too abruptly into her prefence: her altered pallid vifage ftruck me—I ftarted— íhe half rofe from her chair, but furprife deprived her of the little ftrength flie had remaining, and ihe again funk into her feat, exclaiming, <c My preferver, my brother ! My prayers are heard ! I fee you once more, I can die in peace!" I flew to her—I preffed her to my bofom—I kiffed her pale cheek ; it was a kifs of brotherly affedion, efteem in which the delirium of love had no fliare. " My Jemima! my fifter!" faid I, " in what a ftate do 1 find you 1 but cheer your fpirits, I will clear your fame, or perifh in tbe attempt," ** Ah ! you miftake ? 5 greatly-
greatly ; the danger of Colonel Camp¬ bell can never cheer my defpond ing fpirits : rather a promife no more to venture a life fo precious, would be to me preferable. Indeed, the generous Mifs Frafer/' cried flie, bui fting into tears, " has rendered every other need¬ lefs."—^ Mifs Frafer !" repeated I with furprife. a Yes, Mifs Frafer 1 read there," replied flie, giving me a letter, tí and judge, whether flic ought not to be as dear to Jemima as to youi felf." It is among the colledion, read it, Duncan. " From the many informations I have received of Mifs Rofs's amiable difpofit'on, I flatter myfelf flie will not rejed my offered friendfliip. Wouid to Heaven that the unhappy caufe which
which drove me from Scotland, did not prevent rr.y offering it in perfon ; but as that is at prefent impoffible, the friend of my chikihooJ, and kind monitrefs of my once happier days, will do herfelf the pleafure of prefent¬ ing this. Congenial minds are foon acquainted ; anel Lady Jane Mont¬ gomery and Mib Rofs are formed to love each otheis Perhaps, dear as flie is to me, I fhali never fee her more ; then muft you fupply the lofs of Mary Frafer, and flie take on her the facred truft repofed in Colonel Campbell ; who though ftridly virtuous, yet his youth, perfon, and profeflion, render him in the eye of the vvorld a dan¬ gerous guardian—however diftant fuch ideas are from the minds of thofe tho- K 6 rough
roughly acquainted with him : but how often are we obliged to facrifice real advantages to cuftom and eftabliihed rules ! I know not how to apologi fe for this liberty ; but believe me when I affure you that the intereft my heart takes in your happinefs occafions it : though our fathers were of different opinions, do not confider me as your enemy. Had Mary Frafer been the daughter of Lieutenant Rofs, flie would have confidered Prince James as you do; Ci* Jemima, the daughter of Charles Fra¬ fer, had felt like the poor wanderer who now writes toher. Perhaps, Mifs Rofs, fome fortunate hour may attend us, when we may meet and reciprocally Weep our griefs in each other's bofom : then will Mary Fraier give you figh for
figh, and tear for tear: even now com¬ pare our forrows, and you muft con¬ fefs that mine are equally great as your own. You have loft a parent nobly defending the caufe which his heart prompted him was juft ; and a brothe» whofe memory can never die, but muft to after ages be pointed out as a mirror of bravery and duty. Reverfe the feerie, and view Mary Frafer, the flattered heirefs of ? powerful clan ; behold her driven from her country, Awing the ftigma of her. grey-haired parent loudly proclaimed a traitor, and his life declared forfeit ; confider her meanly intrapped to become the wife of a man, whom ftie in fpite of every endeavour mufi defpife, and now feeking in the gloom of a cloy- fter,
fter, her only afylum, that peace the world denies her. Hear her fighs re¬ echo through the cold damp vaulted roof, and fee her ftretched on the grave of fome unhappy wretch, who living felt perhaps as deeply as herfelf; or proftrate at the altar's foot, imploring happinefs for a parent ! for Jemima ! for Campbell ! and pardon for her own recreant heart, which rebels againft its duty. Behold me thus, Jemima, and defraud the happy dead of one tear to beftow on the living forrows of Mary Fraser." Guefs my aftoniftiment on the per- ufal of this letter—my beloved Mary's intentions were eafily difcovered. She wiihed, by giving the gentle Jemima the countenance of a lady of the moil diftin-
diftinguifhed charader, to fhew the falfehood of the -malicious report fpread by Alexander. In effed, Je¬ mima informed me Lady Jane Mont¬ gomery had waited on her fome days before my arrival, entreated her friend¬ fliip, and infifted that as foon as ftie could be moved with fafety, fhe fliould take up her abode with her. The en¬ trance of two phyficians put an end to our difcourfe ; I retired with them, begging their candid opinion of the health of my charge. They affured me the extreme depreflion of her fpi¬ rits was alone the caufe of her illnefs, and that could the firft be removed, the latter would foon regain its proper tone. Mary
Mary Frafers ktter to Jemima was yet in my hand—I preffed it to my lips—I again read it; traces of tears were vifible in many places. ** What!" exclaimed I with enthufiafm, " fliall Mary Frafer do more to proted the fame of Jemima than I, who fwore to her dying father and brother to de¬ fend it ? Honour indeed demands the reparation Mary mentioned ; but how give my hand, when my heart is de¬ voted ? Ah, Jemima ! thou meriteft one undivided—and, alas \ that is not mine to offer." I returned to Mift Rofs ; in the evening flie alfo received a vifit from Lady Jane Montgomery, who lived about fix miles from Car- jrybrugh ; ihe defired my company for a few
a fe-v elays at her houfe, faying, as flie vifited Mifs Rofs every two or three days, I could accompany her. I ac¬ cepted this invitation with pleafure— flie was the beloved friend of Mary, had indeed been in lieu of parent tq her. Mrs. Frafer dying when fhe was very young, Lady Jane had under* taken the charge, and performed it with the peculiar tendernefs that mark¬ ed her charader. When we bade Je¬ mima farewell, though for fo fhort a time, it was eafily difcovered that her heart was oppreffed j tears trembled in her eyes ; and her gentle entreaty to remember our promifed vifit, was given with an energy I thought hei incapable of. I had
I had feen Lady Jane during my Vifit two years before at Mr. Frafer's ·> our acquaintance was therefore eafily re¬ newed. She ihewed me a letter which íhe had received from Mary ; it con¬ tained a copy of the one I had fent to the convent from Jemima ; in it flic begged Lady Jane to afford Mifs Rofs her particular friendfhip, as her delicacy and honour were fo firmly ftamped, that they would not fail difpelling the cloud that hung on her fame. " In¬ deed," faid Lady Jane, « I never ex¬ ecuted a commiffion more willingly, for I was charmed whh her at once ; but give me leave, my dear fir, to de¬ clare my fentiments freely : fate has placed an everlafting bar between your¬ felf and Mary Frafer, her hufband's death
death by your hand could alone render her fituation more terrible : in that cafe flie has made a folemn vow, from which no earthly power can diffuade her, to take the veil. Might I advife you to adopt her plan, Mifs Rofs is amiable, of your own perfuafion; and to convince you I think you a man of lionour, I will tell you a difcovery I have made: either I am greatly deceived, or Mif» tLofs loves you ; flie had a fever and de¬ lirium about a week before your arri¬ val, during which I was much vvith her; and though I am certain flie is innocent as an angel, it was not only the ca¬ lumny of the vvorld that then floated on her difordered imagination, it was more the danger of Colonel Campbell, on vvhich flie perpetually raved : thus, if my
my conjedure is right, your own heart can alone point out a proper remedy/' I know not how I expreffed myaftoniih- ment at Lady Jane*s information, for it really amazed me beyond nieafure ; a confufion of recolledions rufhed on my mind at once, and ratlier confirmed than difproved the furmife. I retired to my own apartment, but not to fleep i I threw myfeif on the bed without un- dreffing, giving way to a train of dif- trading ideas. Mary I believed ftill loved me, but ihe was the wife of ano¬ ther; yet her hufband was not immor¬ tal ; and though my hand could not take the defired vengeance without lofing Mary for ever, yet a common malady might attack him, and flie be left mif¬ trefs of herfelf, in which cafe, flattering hope
hope whifpered flie would not refufe me. Full of this idea, I determined to live for her alone ; but then the fuffer¬ ing Jemima, how difpofe of her, how reftore her mind to its wonted cajm ? My honour was given to proted, and that protedion had heaped accumulat¬ ing forrows on her—She was poor, flie loved me, grief had impaired her health and whether occafioned by calumny on my account, or an afledion which I could not return, all pleaded in her be¬ half, and prompted the only remedy. Thus divided between love and honour, I pafled a reftlefs night, and in the morning rofe melancholy and undeter¬ mined. Lady Jane accompanied me in the promifed vifit to Jemima, whom we found much worfe than the preced¬ ing
ing day, her fever and delirium having returned during the night with re¬ doubled violence. Shocked with this intelligence, we haftened to her cham¬ ber, where flic was confined to her bed. Guefs bow my concern was increafed, when I found her, on our entrance, rav¬ ing with the utmoft vehemence; fome¬ times on Mary Frafer, then on myfelf. Itwas in vain that Lady Jane endea¬ voured to footh her, her fenfes were too much deranged to rccognife any one ; her conftitution naturally delicate, and ren¬ dered ftill more fo bv repeated troubles, could ill fuftain fuch violent efforts; and towards evcnino; flie funk into ? heavy but convulfive fleep, which every one predided tlv fore-runner of death. Unabie to fuftain tiie fight, í rc tii ed to the
the parlour, where I determined to wait the event ; Lady Jane forming thefame refolution. Never were my fufferings equal to thofe of that night. Lady Jane's furmifes vvere now confirmed; my own ears had witneffed from Je¬ mima's ravings, that I was dearer to her than I either expeded or wiflied. Lady June's words were friendly and confola- tcry; but hov could they appear fo to me, when the advifed me, fliould, which was very improbable, Jemima have again an interval from the violence of her diforder, to offer her my hand ? To give up Mary for ever * diftradion was in the tliought ·, I aded a thoufand extravagancies, venting an unconneded firing of incoherent curfes on Alexan¬ der Frafer, whom I regarded as the caufe
caufe of all. My rageât laft exhaufted, I was obliged to leave Lady Jane to conceal the tears vvhich I could not re¬ ftrain ; by Heaven ! at that moment I would have given my whole fortune with pleafure to have met with the villain Alexander, that I might have wreaked my vengeance on him. Lady Jane at length came to me, defiring me to accompany her to Jemi¬ ma, who was awake, and, though very low, perfedly fenfible : never was 1 fo enervated, I trembled like a culprit. When I entered the apartment her eyes were funken, the flu ih occafioned by delirium had forfaken her features, and was replaced by a pallid death-like languor. As I approached flie ftretched out her hand. " My beft friend/' laid flie
flie faintly, " I grieve at the trouble I occafion you ; foon fliall í be at reft, and you releafcd from a promife which has given you fo much imhappinefs." <c My dear Jemima/* I replied, *'I do not wifli to be icleafed from my promife, I rathei defire te confirm it; your, health and happinefs are reemifite to my peace; then euert your fpirit?, and Campbell will not prove unworthy the facred truft re- pofed in him/' Jemima, exhaufted by weaknefs, could not continue ? difcourfe vvhich was equally painful to nie. Lady Jane therefore, taking my arm, faid wc vvould retire for a few hours, firft re¬ commending the utmoft care to the at¬ tendants. As we returned to Lady Jane's feat, fhe did not once break filence, nor was I tempted to be more Vol, I. L commu«.
communicative until our arrival at Montgomery Houfe, where ihe defired me to retire to reft,— « To reft l* re¬ plied I, «« would to God I could reft for ever ] but I am ready to do what you pleafe." Lady Jane made little anfwer to my difcourfe, but rang tbe bdl for my fervant, who lighted mc to my apartment» Whether forrow or fatigue, 1 know noi, had impaired ?>, no fooner was my head'on tbe piIlow # than J føj] afleerj; but far from relieving my dejee* tion, it increafed it—a thoufajwl diftracb ing imagei wantoned in my imagination* Lieutenant Roft and hi* fon agm up« peared to mforce their reemeíb Alexan¬ der Frafer 9 ! infornai treachery «igein de* privedmeöf Maryland again we fought j .ti ihort, my miad had been too bufy while
while awake, not to furnifh matter to render fleep equally diftreffing^ In the morning, I rofe witjL a heart not. re¬ lieved, but tëfiftorn with rage ; füllen melancholy had taken its place, and -fixed my determina-tíon to marry Je¬ mima if flie recovered^ and vvould ac- ■· cept me." The lupper- bell here broke upon the Coionels narrative—the tears Peggy had flied fbr Jemima had nót efcaped his notice ; nay, they had more than once diverted the attention of Duncan, who longed to kifs them off. (S P^ggy> M íaid the Colonel, " I thank you for the forrow you have expreffed for Jemima; fhe truly was the moft gentle and beft of women."—" Alas !" replied Peggy, <c ftie was the very child of forrow : deprived of every ftay, and JL t hes.
her poor lieart fixed on one that could ïîot return her aflè&ion, furely death was her only refuge."—" No, Peggy," returned the Colonel, (< (lie lived to fee the hour vvhen I bleffed Heaven that gave me fuch a wife : it is certain I never loved her vvith the paflionwvith which I did Mifs Frafer; but united to her, her tendernefs and complacency ftole by imperceptible degrees on my heait, and rendered her indifpenfably neceffary to my happinefs : her mild- nefs foftened the natural warmth of my temper, and a fear of alarming her has often withheld me when every other confideration was fruitlefs." The en¬ trance rf fupper prevented more dif¬ eourfe this evening ; but the next night the Colonel continued his narrative. CHAP·
CHAP. XVII. ■* ι Tho* dead to love, I was compell'd to wed, ———·——. My fon 1 my fon ! My beautiful í my brave í hovv proud was I Orthee, and of thy valour !" Home. I HAVE already told you that I was determined to marry Jenaima, if (he would accept me ; the lofs of Mary had difgufted me with life, and it appeared immaterial how 1 difpofed of the re¬ mainder of mine. Lady Jane and myfelf vifited Jemi¬ ma the next day, who though ex¬ tremely enfeebled was better, having no return of her fever. In fliort, we faw her daily for near a month, when L 3 fhe
flie was fo far recovered as to quit tlie houfe where flie boarded, and take up her refidence entirely with Lady Jane, who on her removal hinted my defire of uniting my fate wkh hers. In fliort, not to enter into particulars, Jemima in two months more accepted me as her huf¬ band ; for though at firft flie refufed me, well knowing my attachment to Mary, yet Lady Jane fo powerfully pleaded my caufe, added to the partiality ftie cer¬ tainly had for me, that flie confented to become my wife. I will own to you, tfeat on the day of my marriage I main¬ tained an appearanceof compofure with the greateft difficulty ; nor had I fo well preferved İt, had not a tear which now and then ftole down the cheek of Je¬ mima, but which fhe turned afide and privately
privately wiped off, recalled me to the duty and affedion I had vowed her. Lady Jane accompanied us to Kenneth Caftle; her countenance and our mar* riage entirely removed the cloud that bad hung on Jemima; the moft haughty now ftooped to make advances to her ; for though ihe had no fortune, yet fhe might boaft the antiquity of her family with moft in Scotland. Jemima's health was ftill in a very precarious ftate 5 and though 1 beftowed every attention ön her î could poffibly devife, yet I take ihame to myfelf, in avowing Mary Frafer was equally dear to my heart as ever. 3 Some time previous to my marriage, Lady Jane in the mildeft terms, and in Mary's name, aiked for a pidure which L 4 íhe
fhe had given me on our firft fepawi- tion. The ftroke of deatli could not have been more fevere îlian was this requeft, which flie affured me usas made more for my own peace·, than any other mo¬ tive.—** That you have poflefled it," faid (lie, " will inhance its worth to Mary : confider, ihould the gentle un¬ afluming Mifs Rofs by any means know that you bave, and highly value, fuch a portrait, how greatly it muft dif¬ trefs her ! nay, it can only nourifh a pafi- ?ιοη that now muft be a double crime : reftore it therefore, my dear fir, aod nobly throw off a weaknefs, that cannot fail if purfued to difhonour you, M-ary Frafer's virtues and worth are written on your heart, and require no weak em¬ blem to preferve them there ; grant her entreaty
entreaty then, nay, her command, and fend back what flie is convinced can only give you pain." The anger I felt at this requeft, which piqued my pride, gave me a momentary careleflnefs ? which I ought to be aíhamed to own I have frequently repented; and fnatch¬ ing the pidure from my bofom, I ex¬ claimed, " There, madam, take it : I will endeavour to erafe the original, who can demand fo eafily what fhe hef- felf beftowed: but perhaps fhe wants it for Alexander ; let hini preferve it, keep it as I have done—"—« You wrong her," interrupted Lady Jane, taking the pidure : " the requeft was made by my advice, as I was convinced it only ferved to nourifh an unavailing paffion. Did I not furprife you twice, L 5 Colonel
Colonel Campbell, with it preffed to your lips? I am fure it was Mary's portrait ; and contraded as you are to the heft and moft unoffending of wo¬ men, am I not ading the part of a friend to deprive you of what can only give rife to painful ideas?" Informed that the requeft was not originally from Mary, I reprobated my own folly in fo haftily giving up the pidure, and en¬ treated Lady Jane to reftore it, at leaft until my marriage ; but íhe peremp¬ torily refufed, faying, it was not the way to cure a wound to have the objed that occafioned it ever before our eyes. Thus deprived of a portrait which I va¬ lued more than my exiftence, by a mo¬ mentary fit of paflion, but that entrea- ¿es could not regain, I had no refource but
but to bear my lofs in filence, though in my heart curfing a thoufand times a day my hafty folly in parting with it. Mary Frafer wrote to congratulate Jemima on her marriage, and alio fre¬ quently to Lady Jane, who ufually fliewed her letters to my wife. About a year after our marriage, Je¬ mima prefented me with a fon ; no per¬ fuafion could prevent her nurfing the child ; and though her health was na¬ turally delicate, it appeared to have the happieft effed on her conftitution : my own heart alfo began to be more at eafe ; the perfevering gentlenefs of my partner, and the innocent careffes of my infant, made me think lefs of Maiy Frafer ; nor can I fay that in the many years I had the happinefs of paffing with L ? Jemima-
Jemima I ever once repented the ftep I had taken. Mary Frafer remained feven years in the convent ; about the expiration of which period flie informed Lady Jane, that her father had lately been in a very precarious ftate of health, ex¬ preffing her fears that ihe fliould be obliged to leave the convent to attend him; a circumftance that would give her real concern, as ftie was well and hap¬ py : in fliort, fome time after fhe was neceflitated at his exprefs command to comply. Mary had been at home with her fa¬ ther near a year, when I learned from a gentleman lately come from France, that the fenior Mr, Frafer was dead, after a very long and painful illnefs, during which
which his daughter Mary had attended him with the utmoft duty and affedion ; in requital of which, he had taken ad¬ vantage of her feelings and grief, telling her he could not die in peace, unlefs fhe promifed him to forgive, and receive Alexander as her huiband. Mary was long inexorable, but on his entreating it juft before his death, flie confented. Mr. Frafer*s eftate was confifcated ; he therefore, I apprehend, wifhed her to live with Alexander, as his fortune was large, and could fupport her in the ftate ihe had ever been accuftomed to ; for the defpicable poltroon, though in his heart a rebel, had not courage openly to fup¬ port the caufe he fecretly favoured» I cannot fay this information awoke my love, but it recalled ail the villany of
of Frafer to my mind with redoubled rancour; I execrated Mary for her weaknefs, when, alas ! I ought only to have pitied her. Lady Jane Montgomery frequently received letters from Mary as ufual, but did not always communicate them even to Jemima, to whom fhe was exceedingly attached, and who in return refpeded 'heras a parent, lamenting her death fincerely ; for we had the misfortune to lofe the good old lady foon after 1 re¬ ceived the news of Mr. Frafer's deceafe. Lady Jane bequeathed her jewels, of which ftie had a prodigious quantity, between my wife and Mary Frafer; but the whole of her ready money to the latter, which was all fhe had to leave, her eftate being entailed. The painful talk
tafk of fettling her papers fell' on Je¬ mima, who among others found the following : read it : " My dear friend,. " I formerly flattered myfelf that I fliould once more fee you, but, alas ! the facred command of a dying parent has decreed it otherwife, and the unfor- tunate Mary Frafer muft never more tread her native land. Could I have been permitted to pafs the remainder of my life in the tranquillity ofa cloifter, methinks I fliould not have breathed ? complaint : but, alas ! ill-formed to the ftate in which fatal neceffity has placed me,, my foul fhrinks, my ftrength de¬ cays, and foon, foon íhall my retrograde heart ceafe to beat. Self-love whifpers, " Bear
Ct Bear up, Mary ! thou haft been a duti¬ ful child, let not the charader of wife fall lower than that of daughter." But in vain : the enthufiafm that bore me through the fcene of duty is fled ; and left a weak defpairing woman, whofe only refuge is tears, my fate is irrevo¬ cably fixed, and this is the laft time the vidim of duty fliall dare to complain : but my fwohi heart is full, and feeks re¬ lief by thus unburthening itfelf to you, **■ Who intereft themfelves fo much for me as the Colonel and yourfelf ? He I doubt not has already pronounced me irrefolute and weak ; but even his forti¬ tude could not have borne uníhocked the ftioke which I received ; a dying pa¬ rent's entreaty, whofe breath appeared to linger only until he obtained the 4 cruel
cruel promife. Great God ! methinks 1 ftill feel the ftagnation I experienced when I firft attempted to pronounce it : my heart felt cold within my bofom, my lips refufed to move, and pain and horror vvere for fome time happily loft in iníèn- fibility. Ah, would to heaven my eyes had clofed for ever !—Fatal attentions, alas, too foon awoke me again to mi¬ fery!—*·* Mary, my beloved Mary l' faid my father, his voice faltering be¬ tween each word, " what has Frafer done, that was not occafioned by his af¬ fedion to yourfelf ?*-* Alexander threw himfelf at my feet 5 a convulfion feized my father which for fome time deprived him of utterance : at length, recover¬ ing from that ftate, though death was ftrongly imprinted in every feature, he took
took my hand, and fixing his eyes on Alexander, then on me with a look of entreaty which İ cannot deferí be,- « Mary/* faid he, " I diel Blefs thee f though thou wouldft not make me hap¬ py, blefs thee!" His voice faltered, he was again convulfed. ít Oh my fadier !'" I exclaimed, " I am yours : fhail your child diftrefs you* at this moment ? No, forgive me, I am ready to obey !"— His efforts to fpeak for fome moments were fruitlefs ; at length drawing my hand, which wai endofed in hk, ftill nearer to him, he attempted to give it Alexander, feebly articulating the word promife. I know not what enthufiafm fupported me at that moment, but I re¬ plied with firmnefs, " I do, my father ! -your daughter will fulfil your com¬ mand/*
mand/* He again attempted to fpeak, but the word that enforced hU requeft was his laft ; he gave me a look of com¬ placency, bent himfdf towards me, and expired in my ,arms,—I did well, my heart applauds me, and fate has irre¬ vocably fixed me Alexanders ; I am his wife, and, though meanly intrapped to be fuch, will remember the dignity of that charader. Yet to you, my friend, let my heart be open : I have entreated to remain in France—might not my prefence in Scotland difturb the peace of Mrs. Campbell ? She too well knows that her hufband has loved me ; alas ! it has been alfo too plain, that he was not indifferent to me. To live in one country with him, fometimes perhaps to meet ! forgive me, Lady Jane, the trial
trial vvould coft me too dear : yet, my friend, among the few cheering ideas that relieve my gloomy imagination, the happinefs of the deferving pair is one of the moft pleafing 5 frequently do I draw pidures in my fancy of their domeftic felicity, the focial fire-fide, the company of yourfelf, their children lifp- ing endearing words, the gentle voice of the mother, the manly accent of the father foftened, and uttering words of tendernefs,—Thefe ideas at once de« Jight and opprefs me ; I blefs Heaven for their happinefs, and drop a tear on my own fate. Farewell, my friend ! in my next I fliall be more myfelf. Adieu. Mary Fraser."
Doubtlefs
Doubtlefs Lady Jane never meant this letter for our infpedion ; but nei¬ ther Jemima nor myfelf could deter¬ mine to deftroy it. I fliould have told * you, that during thefe years my wife had borne me three fons; the youngeft of which was my beloved James, who loft his life at Culloden Field. A few months after Lady Jane's death, we heard that Mary was far advanced in her pregnancy, though her health had been vifibly declining ever fince the death of her father. I did not hear this news without an emotion, which I found it difficult to conceal«. I there¬ fore haftened from the company who gave the information, and retired to my own apartment. " What 1" ex¬ claimed I, " ihall Mary become a mother,
toother, to preferve a line of villains ? fball that bofom nurfe cowards, de- fpicable liars? But I thank he*, my heart is now my own—or rather it is now wholly Jemima's. Mary is wor¬ thy her fate, and I will never more think of her." The entrance of my wife, with Httle James at her bofom, difturbed me ; the fight made me blufh for my folly—I clafped her in my arms, and inwardly ejaculated a prayer to Heaven, that Mary might be erafed from my heart, that I might fulñl my duty to the beft, the moft deferving of womeru I hope, nay I think I ihould have kept this refolution ; but about two months after, I learned the melancholy news, that the dear unfor¬ tunate vidim of a relentiefs father was no
•?? more í fhe had given birth to a daughter, and expired. I hardly knew how much I Joved Mary until this event 1 a thoufand imprecations did I beftow both on her father and huiband ; my gentle partner foodied and wept with me by turns, till reafon, duty, love, honour, all ftruck on my hearr, and upbraided a forrow that could not but give pain to the tender fufceptible bofom of my wife -? I therefore ftudied to appear calm, till I became in reality fo. About a year after this, 1 hadthe misfortune to lofe my two eldeft fom, within a fliort fpace of each other, and forgot every former forrow in my en¬ deavours to footh and comfort my Je¬ mima. James was now our only care, and domeftic felicity for fome years rendered
rendered the caftle delightful. I heard from France that Alexander Frafer bore the lofs of the facrificed Mary with the utmoft calmnefs ; that he had placed his infant daughter in a con¬ vent, alleging for his reafon, that his wife was remits in the duties of her religion, and favourable to the Pro- teftants \ a fault he wiflied to obviate ¡n his daughter, whom he defigned for a religious life. I have fince learned he had another motive; for during the •retirement of Mary he had formed a connedion with a woman of infamous charader, that lira borne him ? fon whom he wiflied to legitimate. Nothing happened to fhock our hap¬ pinefs until the year one thoufand feven hundred and forty-two, when 1 had the misfortune
niibfbrtune to lofe my beloved friend and companion, the gentle Jemima. James was now in his feventeenth year; my arm had long hung idle ; the death of my wife was the moft weighty for¬ row I had yet felt ; flie was neceffary to my happinefs; the caftle became hateful to me; every thing brought back her virtues to my remembrance ; the nation was involved in war : there¬ fore taking James with me we travelled to London, joined the Monarch, and attended him at the battle of Dettin¬ gen, April the fixteenth, one thoufand feven hundred and forty-three. Here î vvas firft attacked by the gout, which after fome time obliged mc to return -home. James, however, my valiant fon, attended the Duke of Cumberland Vol, Ι, M at
at Tournay ; four months after vvhich he returned to Scotland, on the news of the rebellion breaking out there. I was tolerably recovered from my fit of the gout, and determined to accom¬ pany James in the next expedition— which, alas! was Culloden. My fon, my darling, the fupport of my age, received a muiket ihot in his breaft, which ended an honourable life at the age of twenty years and eleven months." Tears, which flowed faft down the cheek ofthe veteran, obliged him for a while to delay his ftory, Duncan, unwilling to fhew the fame evident maiks of feeling, walked towards the window; vvhile Peggy, ftranger to difguife, and from whom the kindnefs of the Colonel had long baniflied
banifhed diftant refped, forgot timi¬ dity, caught his hands, and alternately kiffing them and bathing them with her tears, funk before him, hiding her face on his knees ; where, after giving vvay to the forrow that oppreffed hets fhe exclaimed, u Great God ! my heart ever recoils at the very name of that defti udive rage—war !—Alas ! who that enters it is fecure ? Heaven pro¬ ted'* ------fobs choked her utterance, but the dircdion of her eye plainly evinced for whom the entreaty was made. " For fhame, Peggy!" replied the Colonel, turning afide to wipe the tears that hung on his cheek, " for fliame ! thou art a iittle enervating coward ; wouldft thou have our boys ftay pufillanimouily at home, and trem- M 2 ble
ble at the approach of danger ?" c< My dear Sir," replied Peggy, " I do not pretend to underftand thofe things, and doubtlefs think and fpeak like a filly girl, for great men and vvife ones of all ages have encouraged war ; but my un¬ afluming heart ever whifpers that ambi¬ tion oftener than reditude is the caufe. Surely kings being placed above other men ought to iet them examples of moderation and virtue ; and yet, good God ! I fhudder to think how many unprepared fouls do their quarrels force to rufli into the prefence of their Crea¬ tor. Should he demand why they have done this, will a piece of land, or a falute at fea omitted, excufe the lives of the thoufands they have plunged into an untimely grave? Will not the cry of
ofthe orphan and the widow ftand againft them? Alas! 1 grieve that time im¬ memorial has given fandion to fuch a barbarous cuftom ; vvould to Heaven mankind loved each other like bro¬ thers, and the infernal inftruments ot war had never been invented!" The energy wkh which flie fpoke furprifed the uncle and nephew ; they were both filent ; and Peggy, finding her hear*: had difclofed itfelf Co openly, was a moment confufed, her face glowing with crimfon : " Forgive me, my dear Sir; but—but——'* cc Do not apo- logife, Peggy," faid the Colonel ; " 1 am pleafed thou fhouldfl: give thy opi¬ nion—thou thin keft right as a woman, for gentlenefs and timidity make them infinitely amiable ; but a man without M 3 bravery
bravery is the moft defpicable of be¬ ings. I honour, I revere, a brave fel¬ low, however low fortune may have placed him. Duncan, I command thee on my bleffing, fight whenever thy heart fliall didate in the caufe of honour or virtue : but never let paf¬ fion fo far predominate as to raife thy arm in defence of folly or vice. Re- claim them by counfel if thou canft, but hazard not thy life in a caufe fpr which thy friends would blufli to have thee fall.—But away vvith ferious fub¬ jeds ; fing an old fong, Peggy, and then we vviU retire to reft." Peggy immediately obeyed. The next morning the weather being indifferent, and preventing the Colo- lonels ufual walk, he concluded his narrative,
narrative. " The battle of Culloden was fought on the fixteenth of April, one thoufand feven hundred and forty- fix. My dear fon, as 1 before informed you, received a mufket-fliot on almoft the firft attack. I was told he was wounded but flightly, and that he had inftantly been borne away by his men. The rage ofthe battle, the profped of vidory, all ccnfpired to banifh fear. My men, whofe univeifal favourite he was, fought with redoubled rancour- exclaiming to each other, Revenge I revenge I—The vidory decifive, my heart elate with joy and pride, I flew inftantly to my boy, who was carried a little afide, and under the flieker of a tent. ** Vidory, my fon !" exclaimed I as I entered ; tc but, oh ! Duncan ! M 4 how
how can I paint the dreadful change I in a moment experienced ? James, who I had flattered myfelf wasflight- ly wounded, was covered with the cold damp of death : life appeared only to have lingered untii he again faw his father. He had iwt fpoken fince he re¬ ceived the wound, but a fmile at fight of me for a moment painted new life on his funken and death-like features : he attempted to fpeak, but all efforts were fruitlefs. I threw myfelf by his fide, in a ftate little fliort of diftradion, reprobating the ill-direded ball that ftruck the youthful bofom of the fon, inftead of the aged one of the pa¬ rent. My hand was locked in his ; again he attempted to fpeak, again the ftruggle was fruitlefs. He fixed his eyes
eyes on me with the moft expreffive anxiety, raifed my hand to his lips, preflecl it clofe to his heart, and ex¬ pired.—I blufli, Duncan, to give thefe evident proofs of weaknefs/* faid the Colonel, wiping the tears diat ran in torrents down his aged cheek— " but remember I am enervated by age, and weep at what ought to be my greateft glory. Thou Duncan, I feel, wilt come home vidorious, and deck my grey hairs with frefh laurels—for thy honours are mine, fon of my heart, whom Heaven fent in lieu of James." " My more than father," replied Dun- can, felling on his neck, fC your pupil; fhall not difgrace you/*' Peggy fobbed aloud; and the Colonel, forry to fee both grieved, affumed a cheerful voice* M 5 called;
called for a glafs of wine, and conti¬ nued his narrative.— u My dear ne¬ phew, I fbull draw a veil over my firft diftradion on the lofs of my fon. Reftored to miferable recolledion, I immediately fent to the Duke of Cum¬ berland for leave of abfence; it was inftantly granted, and the very night after the vidory I began my melan*- choly travel homeward. The event of the battle reached our village but a few hours before me. What offi¬ cers had fallen was not yet known, and James's deadi was firft publifhed to my mourning tenants by myfelís Grief for a long time embittered every recolledion; but time, and the care of you, Duncan, have infenfibly leffen- ed it, and my utmoft wifli is now to leave
leave to the world a noble and brave reprefentative;" ------ The Colonel here ceafed, and received the thanks of his auditors,.
Mi CHAP.
CHAP. XVIII. « .. . ,,. , Prepare the feaft. Free is hie heart who for his country fights t He in the eve of battle may refign Himfelf to focial pleafure : fweeteft then, When danger to a foldier's foul endears The human joy that never may return.''' Home, AS Duncan was to depart in a few days, in order to join his regiment, pre¬ parations employed the intervening time ; feveral youths ofthe village came to the caftle, infifting on permiffion to attend the Captain, as they termed him,, Whenever he went out, he was in¬ ftantly furrounded, the old men wifh¬ ing him fuccefs, the old women the fame, though blaming the Colonel for fending
*> fending him at fo early an age, recall¬ ing to each others memory, and fhed-*- ding a tear of grateful remembrance to the manes of James Campbell. " Hea¬ ven fpeed ye !*' exclaimed they ; ee fie was juft fie another bonny lad when he went to the battle of Culloden, his heart as warm, and his hand as open—* God fhield ye, and guide ye fafe back !" The young laffes, though filent, were by no means fatisfied with his departure ; for though they fttpngly fufpeded his partiality to Peggy, yet the gracefulnefs of his perfon, and good-humoured eaft of his behaviour, made him fo great a favourite among tliem, that he might at an hour's notice ha,ve raifed a regiment of highland tøfles. « I think, Duncan," faid th*e Colonel,
Colonel*, " that before your depaiture you fhould give thefe honeft folks a» entertainment, what fay you ?" Duncan feized on the idea with tranfport, as he thought by that means he might find an opportunity of entertaining Peggy for a fhort time, which he had in vain attempted for fome days paft;, the offer was therefore- inftantly accepted, and the time of rejoicing fixed for the evening before Duncan's departure* Peggy in the mean time in vain en» faeavoured t© conceal the grief that preyed upon her; it difcovered itfelf in every adton : her mind therefore unat- tuned' to mirth, heard of the purpofed entertainment with indifference, or ra¬ ther with difguft ; and on the evening of its celebration, appeared fo pale and fpiritlefs>
fpiritlefs, that the Colonel and Mr v Sommers both mentioned it to her, inquiring if fhe was ill— <c No indeed, fir," replied fhe with her ufual frank¬ nefs ; " but is it poffible I can rejoice for the departure of Mr. Campbell? Could I do fo, I were the moft ungrate-- ful of wretches. Alas 1 were it for his return, who fo· cheerful as myfelf?" The entertainment confifted of a dinner, to which all the Colonel's vaflals were invited, the veteran and his nephew prefiding, after which was a ball and fupper» Duncan, ac¬ cording to his ufual cuftom, led out Peggy, and afterwards danced with* fe¬ veral of the village maidens ; a piece of etiquette the Colonel was obliged how¬ ever to, remind him of, for Peggy's, hand
hand clafped in his, her fine eyes fixed on him, he would willingly have for¬ gotten there was another female in the whole creation. The Colonel, in order to confer all poffible honour on his de¬ pendants, prefided at the fupper table, as he had before done at dinner ; but Duncan, who was warm with dancing, pleaded ? as an excufe for his attend¬ ance. To confefs the truth, he had heard Peggy decline fitting down, and was determined to profit of this opportu¬ nity to fpeak to lier. She had retired to the adjoining apartment, where with her elbow leaned on the table, and her cheek refted on her hand, flie was giv¬ ing way to a thoufand melancholy thoughts, which however were broken upon by the entrance of Duncan.—
u ^ e go)'i ? ? fove," faid he, " why this gloom? It has diftraded me for fome days paft: tell me, has my uncle or Mr. Sommers faid any thing to occafion it ? Have they, my fvveet girl, chid you on account ofthe difcovery my uncle made the otlier day ?"— fC Alas !" faid Peggy, " you wrong them greatly ; they are too good, too condefceading to one whom they have raifed fo high, that fhe weakly forgets herfelf. Retire, fir, I conjure you leave me, I am fenfible of my paft error, the Colonel fhall hencefor¬ ward have no caufe to complain of me/* — c< Leave you, Peggy ! Is this cold¬ nefs the effed of their prudent coun¬ fel ? for furely it does not proceed from thy heart. If it does, I fliall quit Ken¬ neth Caftle vvitli pleafure. Say, Peggy, am
am I become hateful to you ? do you wifli me gone ? If fo, fpeak ί I will leave you ; yet think before you utter it, pet haps we may never meet again." — cc Perhaps not," faid flie, burfting into tears, and looking on him with earneftnefs; " but then I foon fhall follow you."^—" My deareft girl, for Heaven's fake, for mine, for your own, liften a moment to what I have to fay I My uncle you well know loves you .· were you once my wife, he would be the firft to applaud the ftep that made you fuch ; for at the prefent mo¬ ment the prejudices of high birth are alone your enemy." Peggy attempted to fpeak,, but Duncan prevented her. " A few words more, and I have done* the minifter of an adjacent village is my
my friend, I made him fuch yefterday ; he is ready at any time, and will make thee mine for ever. Then, Peggy, do not hefitate, but. early to-morrow morning give thyfelf to thy faithful Duncan, who under fuch a circumftance will ad as thou thinkeft fit ; that is, proclaim our union to the world, or keep it fecret until my return. Speak, my love, can you refufe me?" " Yes, furely," replied flie : " were I guilty of fuch a vile piece of ungrateful treachery, í were unworthy you, Dun¬ can, No, never wdl I ad fo contrary to the commands ofmy more than parent î What ! betray his confidence ? repay his benefits vvith deceit ? 1 may fuffer, but cannot be fo unworthy." " You condemn me then, Peggy, to mifery >
mifery, to relinquifh you perhaps for ever. Think, my love, how many vexa¬ tious occurrences may happen ; then, for Heaven's fake, let us profit of an opportunity vvhich never may return ; be mine, lawfully mine; far from con¬ demning, the whole world muft applaud me for appropriating to myfelf a jewel that would grace a diadem/' Ci It is in vain," replied Peggy ; " I cannot, muft not liften to you ; fuffer me to leave you ; I have promifed the Colonel—how can you urge me to a ftep, that muft make us both guilty of the blackeft ingratitude?"—'* Cruel girl î promife me then to remember my affection, and accept my proffered hand on my return." 4i Indeed, í cannot promife the latter part
part of your requeft, for I will never, never marry; but for the former, is it poffible I can forget? No, Duncan, my heart I hope is not an ungrateful one, and you muft be its firft, ks deareft objed." Duncan caught her in his arms with tranfport, and rapturoufly kiffed off the tear that hung on her cheek. " Why/* continued flie, " will you force me to falfify what the Colonel requefted, and what I promifed myfelf? Heaven fend you fafe back, and difpofe of me according to its good pleafure ! In the hour of danger, if you love me, be careful of your life, for the fword that wounds you muft bring death to me." With thefe words, Peggy haf¬ tily difengaged herfelf from Duncan's embrace, and, fearful of trufting her¬ felf
í elf further, inftantly left the apart¬ ment. Duncan, after fome fhort time, re¬ turned to the faloon, where he thought to have found Peggy; but ihe, under pretence of wcarinefs, had retired to her chamber* The next morning prefented nothing but buftle, and preparations for Dun¬ can's journey : even the Colonel, in fpite of his partiality to a military life, felt uneafy at his departure. Mr. Som¬ mers vvas thoughtful, and Peggy fo vi¬ fibly diftreflèd, that «both the gentlemen endeavoured to comfort her, Duncan was filent; but his eyes, ftrongly expref. five, fpoke but the more intereftingiy to her heart. At length the dreaded mo¬ ment arrived; the young men who had infifted
infifted on attending the Captain, wait¬ ed his joining them to depart ; the pi¬ pers played <*" Over the hills and far away ;" the vafials and fervants were all affembled before the caftle, to take a farewell of their youthful favourite. Duncan lingered to bid the final adieu, until roufed by the Colonel embracing ?? —** Be valiant and profperous, my fon," cried he ; u remember the honour of our houfe now alone depends on thy arm : fprung from a race of heroes, be worthy thy name, and fhew the foe how bravely a Scot can defend his country ! Farewell ! Thy fucceffes will give me back my youth, for I have no doubt to fee thee return with honour/' The Co¬ lonel vvith thefe words loofed his ne¬ phew
phew from his embrace ; Mr. Sommers' arms were open to receive him.—" My dear youth," faid the good man, " va¬ lour does not confift in rufliing into needlefs danger ; the heat of youtli is often apt to carry us farther than wif¬ dom or prudence direds ; be careful, and recoiled that your uncle and my¬ felf cannot, at our time oflife, fpare the perfon we have with fuch trouble reared to comfort our age ; farewell ! God pro¬ ted and guide you 1" Duncan now turned to Peggy, who, pale and motionlefs, fat fixed in her chair unable to articulate a fyllable, or ibed a tear.-^—" Peggy,** faid he, be¬ coming almoft as pale as herfelf, and taking her trembling hand between both 4
boih his, t€ Peggy, farewell ! we fhail meet again," So faying, he attempted to falute her ; but her fpirits, unable longer to bear the conflid labouring in her breaft, fuddeniy failed, and fhe funk fenfelefs in his arms. As Peggy was naturally healthy, and never trou¬ bled with any real or imaginary nervous attacks, her fwooning greatly alarmed her patrons, who immediately called for affiftance ; Duncan in the mean time preffmg her in his arms, every other idea loft in her fituation, and ut¬ tering an hundred expreffions of tender¬ nefs. Peggy at length began to revive ; the Colonel gravely reminded his ne¬ phew that his companions were ex. peding him, Mr. Sommers fupported, and fpoke in mild accents to Peggy. Vol. I. N Thus
#- ? ι. Thus haftened to depart, he ptreffed hei: once more in his arms¿ både* a general adieu, ruftied but off the apartment,, and Joined his companions.
*
CHAP.
CHAP. XIX. " ??? orifone to him that faift Our fauls upon the roode j Syne braifly fchaw zour veins áre filld With Caledonian blude. " Old Scqttish Ballas*. x EGGY remained for fome minutes after Duncan's departure, in ari attitude of eager attention, her eyes fixed on the door, and her head bent forward*, as to catch the iaft found of his fteps which echoed on the ftone pavement -of the hall ; but that infenfibiy decreafed, and the loud and repeated huzzas pro¬ claimed the youthful Captain had join¬ ed his companions, to whom the Co¬ lonel prefented him, faying, €ζ I give you my laft hope i be brave, my friends, N 2 and
and may honour and vidory fit on your fwords !" With thefe words the veteran touched his hat, a compliment vvhich was returned amidft repeated acclama¬ tions, feparating at length vvith c< Long live Colonel Campbell, the friend of his country, and father of the poor I"—. Mr. Sommers, we have before obferv¬ ed, was employed in fupporting and fpeaking comfort to Peggy ; an office that prevented him accompanying his pupil to the inftant of his departure, whicli, however, was fufficiently marked by a final huzza, and the pipers playing the Highland March. Peggy fixed her eyes for a moment on Mr. Sommers with the moft ener¬ getic expreffion; then concealing her face on his flioulder, gave way to a vio¬ lent
lent agony of forrow. The good man, who feared her again relapfing intoa ftate of infenfibiiity, entreated Mrs. Donald to affift him to convey her to her apartment, where, after entreating her to compofe her fpirits, he left her, and joined the Colonel. A very ferious converfation now took place between the gentlemen; the Colonel expreffing his forrow, that Peggy had not been educated at fchool, rather than at the caftle, where Duncan had found fo many opportunities of gaining her affedion ; he now declared his fixed intention of fending her for fome months to Lady Beugle's, in order to try whether the gaieties of the great world would not effed a change, «« I ^N 3 proteft,
proteft, Sommets/* faid he, " 1 am ab ttiòft angry with myfeif for being fo much the flave of cuftom ¿ nothing but fhe òbfcurity of her birth coukl make me hefitate a moment ; but to unite the heir of the Campbell vvith a cottager, impoflible !"— <e It vvould merely be the wonder of a month," replied Som¬ mers : " however, fend her to Lonelon : if the gaiety and admiration fhe meetî there effed a change on herheart, flie h doubly unworthy your nephew : if otherwife, I know nor what to advife; ï confefs I am partial to her, and, per¬ haps, might give an opinion contrary to your wiflies." " P e ggy remained in her apartment the vtdiole day ; indeed her fpirits and healtli* were fa deranged, by what hat) pafled in
in the morning, that flie was incapable of quitting it. Mr. Sommers in the evening paid her a vific ; during which, though with great delicacy and friendfliip, he point¬ ed out the impropriety of her giving way to a childifh paflion that muft ine¬ vitably imbitter her future life. Tears were for fome time her only reply ; at length, her heart being fomewhat re- lieveti, flie anfwered, " It is impof¬ fible, fir, )ou fliould think me half fo imprudent as I feel myfelf, but my be-* haviour was involuntary; the ftioke which deprive-*, n.e ol life, cannot be fo fevcre as »vas the fight of Duncan's de¬ parture ; pei h ins it was the laft look : remember my obligauons to him, his goodnefs, his humanity, his condefcen· N 4 fion y
fion ; can 1 know all thefe, yet not love him ? Surely no : however, 1 will never be unworthy the Colonel's kindnefs, nor ever ad, or, if poffible, fpeak con¬ trary to his defires."—" The Colonel/* replied Mr. Sommers, α has fome thoughts, Peggy, of fending you for a fliort time to Lady Beugle's; not from anger, but he thinks it will give you an opportunity of improvement, and alfo be the means of weaning you of this folly, whicli gives liim ferious concern." «—" I deferve his anger," faid flie, burft¬ ing into tears, <e I merit to be baniflied his prefence, and will obey ; but muft 1 go, never to fee him or you more ? Alas, my puniíh ment is too fevere !" ** No fuch thing, child/*replied Mr, Sommers : tt he has no intention of fending
fending vou for more than three, or at moft four months, during wliich, my good girl, you will refled on the con¬ fequences ofa paffion, which gives even yourfelf fo much pain : you will write to us frequently, and may be affured you have a firm fi iend in me, and one equally fo in the Colonel : in the mean time, cheer your fpirits, and attend him at breakfaft to-morrow morning ; fuch an effort will give him pleafure, and fhew you endeavour to overcome } our weaknefs." Peggy promifed, and was as good as her word, being firft in the breakfiift parlour the next morning : the Colonel fpoke to her with kindnefs, and alfo Mr, Sommers ¿ but unavailing was even the voice of friendfliip to reftore her wfual fpirits; fhe indeed endeavoured to N 5 appear
appear cheerful, but the ftarting tear and frequent figh plainly falfified alî her efforts : Ín fliort, not only her fpi· rits but her health appeared to have re¬ ceived a (hock they would not eafily overcome, an effed that a fortnight confiderably increafed, and began to "give the Colonel and Mr. Sommers tend concern. In this ftate were the parties at Ken- meth Caftle, when the poft one morn¬ ing brought the Colonel two letters, 'Obe from Duncan, in high fpirit<, in¬ forming his uncle his regiment was or¬ dered into immediate fervice,and vvould leave England in fifteen days at far- theft ; nor did he fail to mention Peggy in terms that by no means flattered the Colonel with his eafily forgetting her. The
The fecond letter was from Mrs. Camp¬ bell, who informed her brother-in law, Sie had received the news, that her daughter Lady Beugle was at Bath, and eonfequently was apprehenfive left ihe fhould not be in town on Duncan*s- arrival there; concluding the whole with telling him, that he might exped * vifit from his nieces, Eleanor and Sophia* Wilmot, the daughters of Lady Beugle^ in about three months. " This letter r Sonimers," faid the Colonel, **- is rather facisfadory, as it particularly enables me to fulfil a plan I had before formed ; what fay you ? can I have a better op¬ portunity of placing Peggy with Lady , Beugle ? Her health I am grieved to fee daily decline ; change of objeds, air and exercife, may do much towards*· N ó reftoring
reftoring both ; and as Eleanor and So¬ phia mean to vifit Scotland fpeedily, Peggy can then return with them, either for a time or otherwife, as vve may find neceffary. Donald ihall go with her to Bath, and leave her in fafety with my niece, who, though I have not íêen her for many years, and indeed know little about, will doubtlefs behave in a manner fuitable to my defires." Mr. Sommers thought with the Colo¬ nel, that the change might effecft an al¬ teration for the better, and therefore approved of the fcheme, efpecially as íhe was to return fo fpeedily ; " for in¬ deed," faid the good man, c6 1 fliould be gricYed to lofe her ; flie has now been fo long with us, that her prefence j* become neceflkry to me/'—" It is equally
equally fo to myfelf," replied the Co* lonel. " Nay, Sommers, fome day I may, perhaps, give you a reafon, why her firft appearance fo ftrongly inter·· cfted me in her favour, an intereft that a knowledge of her good difpofition has increafed/' The entrance of Peggy here broke off the difcourfe, and the Colonel in the kindeft terms informed her of his intention.— <c You are toa good to me, my dear fir," faid ihe, kiff- ing his hand,, and bathing it with tears«·, " I am ready to do whatever you eom~ mand ; but my grandmother is now ab¬ fent at the Ifle of Sky, and may, per* haps, remain there fome weeks longer» as fhe herfelf expreffed when 1 heard from her."—" I have no doubt of her approbation," replied the Colonel, " as. your
yourftay is to fee fo fliort ; therefore we will not delay the time to wait her an¬ fwer, as I really think, your health re¬ quires an. immediate change ; be cheer¬ ful, mý good girl, and be affured I am, and ever wül be your friend." — €i My snore than father/*exclaimed fhe, fink¬ ing at his feet·—" Ah! forgive the boldnefs ofthe beggar you have raifed,: for giving you that appellation, but the overflowing of my heart will fometimes force my lips to utter vvhat I wifli re¬ tained in my own bofom? j.'but never/ never ihall the child of your bounty be* unworthy : permit me then fpeedily to* return, if not to the caftle, to my grand¬ mother ; I íhall' then breathe the fame air with you, know every occurrence refpeding thofe 1 love better than my¬ felf,
felf, and muft be happy." The Co¬ lonel affured her, that he did not mean to deprive himfelf of her company for more than the period mentioned by Mr. * « Sommers. His word fhe well knew the value of, and the dependance that might be placed upon it; therefore foothed by the icfiedion that her banifliment would be fhort, fhe became more cora- pofed, and it was at length fixed, that fhe fliould depart in a fortnight for Bath -, the Colony in the intervening time, writing to apprife Lady Beugle of her intended vifitor.
CHAP.
CHAP. XX· • ι _—— Ibutonlyjeíl Wi' gentry'» apes ; for ftill amangft the beft Oude manners gi'e integrity a bleez, Whçn native virtues join the arts to pleafe.·" Allan Ramsat. X HE appointed morn at length ar¬ rived; Peggy more dead than alive •attended at breakfaft, after which, fhe was to take leave of her patrons, a-nd depart with Mrs. Donald, who, how¬ ever, was to remain no longer at Lady Beugle's than to reft from her fatigues, as her prefence was materially necefl'ary in the management ofthe houfehold, " Peggy," faid the Colonel, " do not be aihamed to write for what fup- plies
plies may be neceffary % I well know that women in gay towns muft be at more expence, than in fuch a retire¬ ment as this : befides, I would wifh you rather to credit than dilgrace Lady Beugle's houfe ; for the prefent take this purfe, it contains a hundred pounds ; expend it, and be fure to afk for more if you find it neceffary : be cheerful, rny good girl, our feparation will be fliort." So faying, the Colonel faluted her; but Peggy, unable to conftrain her feelings, threw her arms around his neck, weeping aloud, and unable to articulate a word for fome moments * 9 nor was íhe much lefs affeded en bid¬ ding Mr. Sommers farewell. At length, however, being fomewhat relieved by tears, ftie afllimed courage fufficient to turn
tHrn her back to the happy fpot, fo de¬ fer vingl y deai to her, leaving both the Colonel and his companion much af¬ fected at her departure. " By Heaven !" faid the Colonel, (i I cannot account for it, but that girl has almoft as dear < an intereft in my heart as Duncan ; I hardly felt more in parting with him." Mr, Sommers expreffed his concern alfo for her abfence ·, and both gentle·* men finding the want of a companion they were fo accuftomed to, determined to take a walk round the village, and banifh the idea. *- Mrs. Donald and Peggy feated in the chaife, both remained for fome time filent; Peggy, fiom diftrefs at leaving * the caftie ; and Mrs. Donald, becaufe lhe feared advancing any fubjed that might
might increafe her uneafinefs. At • length, however, the rude uncultivated beauties of nature, vvith which the Highlands particularly abound, ftole her imperceptibly from herfelf. She had never travelled farther than fix miles from Kenneth Caftle fince flie enjoyed the Colonel's protedion ; and her jour¬ ney, fome years previous to that eventj was at too early a period oflife to make, any impreffion on the memory, ?? therefore wás fafcinating and delightful*; —the barren rock, the cultivated valley* the fcattered huts, the rofy yellow-haired children of the peafants, flipping or* the hills, regardltfs of fun or froft, and*. agile as the mountain goat—- Thefe feenes would certainly neve$ bave engaged the atteution of a modern*· finee
*v ñne lady; but Peggy, as vve have before obferved, had no claim to that title : befide, ihe had in fome meafure been accuftomed to fuch views, although the country round Kenneth Caftle was better cultivated than the landfcape that now attraded her attention. Her thoughts thus in fome degree diverted from the painful fubjeds that oppreffed them, fhe became more placid, main¬ taining at leaft an appearance of ferenity during the whole journey > although the ftarting tear was often privately wiped off, and the repeated figh announced, that, although outwardly calm, all was not eafy within. Our travellers proceeded by eafy ftages untii they reached Bath, which, to tlieir difappointment, they found Lady
Lady Beugle had left above three weeks before, having received a letter from her mother previous to that from the Colonel, which informed her of Cap¬ tain Campbells arrival in town. At¬ tended by her family, the lady had in confequence immediately departed for London, where they were favoured with the company of their coufin Duncan for near a fortnight; at the expiration of vvhich time, he had embarked with the troops deftined for Germany. After repofing one night, Mrs. Do¬ nald and Peggy renewed their journey, - reaching London in two clays. On their arrival at Lord Beugle's, Peggy's fpirits almoft failed her: however, fummoning her courage, accompanied by Mrs. Donald, flic followed the fer- van
vant who announced her, to Lady Beiv gle's dreffing room, whom flie found attended by her daughters Eleanor and Sophia Wilmot. Fler ladyfliip received our blufhing highland lafs with cold civi¬ lity, viewing her wirb the fteadfaft ftare of tonifh breeding, in vvhich flie was imitat¬ ed by Lady Eleanor, who had even laid down her tambour needle for the fame purpofe, fixing her eyes fo ftrongly, fhat poor Peggy, unable to bear fuch a ferutiny, felt ready to fink with confu¬ fion, until relieved by Lady Sophia's tayirrg, €t You are welcome to London, Mifs Grant : my uncle Campbell has particularly obliged my fifter and fe\f¡ tyy fending us fo amiable a* young friend." With tliefe woids flie took her hand and placed her on a fop h a* , . Lady
Lady Beugle alfo condei cended to de l fiie Mrs. Donald to fit, foi flie well knew that the Colonel had a particular efteem fo^ his houfe-keeper, as (lie had been a favourite domeftic of his wife's. Jrier ladyfliip now enquired after the Colonel's health, expreffing her amaze¬ ment, that ta man of his family and for·* June ihould .bury* h jjtiifelf in the high-** lands.' Mis. Donald having anfwerv ed her queftion, in her turn enquired after Captain Campbells. Lady Beu¬ gle replied that he was in perfect ¿lealthand tolerable fpirits; " Indeed, *·* continued fhe, €( Duncan, I think, i} exadly my uncle Campbells counter-r part ; the fame purfuits, the fame inchV nations appear to aduate both : in thf 4iiany years I have left Scotland, neve? ■ 3 could
could 1 prevail on him to favour me with even ? fliort vifit, he ever affirming that he hates large towns : neither does Duncan feem pleafed vvith public lÍfe A ias 1 affure you he appeared to regret Kenneth Caftle : however, he is a fine young fellow, and no etaubt, when he has feen a little of the world, will be pleafed to take an adive part in it, evd not fequefter himfelf in fuch a barbarous dreary fpot for life/* During this con¬ verfation, and more which followed, Peggy had an opportunity of obferving her new acquaintance. Lady Beugle, though near foity-fix, ftill retained a good perfon, of which flie was not a Ht¬ tle vain, her ear being ever open to flat. tery, and afluming an air of youth both in her mar ner and drefs : Ín her difpr* 5 fittou
fition fhe was haughty, poffeffing her mother's family pride to the utmoil extreme: flave to etiquette and fa-i fhion, every other confideration gave way to them; for though íhe had left Scotland now near twenty-feven years, in the whole courfe of that time, her fafliionable engagements had never given her leifure to revifit it but once. Lady Eleanor was about nineteen ; her form and features regularly beau¬ tiful, but fpoiled by the affeeftation which directed both. The cofmetics with which her face was perpetually daubed, had deprived her cheeks of the rofes that naturally dwelt .there» and in their place had left a deadly palenefs. Lady Eleanor fupplied this Vol. I. ? lofs
lofs with rouge, vvhich flie declared was a thoufand times preferable to the rude fixed colour of health, which was ever the fame ; while charming rouge could be ufed in fliades at pleafure, giving the features a greater or lefs degree of animation as the wearer chofe. Lady Sophia was about a year younger than her fifter, tall, and finely formed ; her eyes and hair dark : her face, though not critically handfome, was perhaps more interefting than beauty could have made it ; the ani¬ mating glow of health, innocence, and good humour enlivening the whole, and diffufing the moft bewitching charm on every feature.—Sophia, according to the opinion of her mother and finer, was
was a vulgar robuft creature, oa whom example and precept had no power ; all Lady Beugle's endeavours having been vain to make her a fine lady ; for though fhe ever liftened to her advice with the utmoft attention, to her fifter flie was not fo complaifant, often de¬ claring cold water gave the complexion a finer glow than rouge, and that natural ringlets were more becoming than the curls of the moft ikilful hair- drefler. Though Peggy could only judge from outward appearances, having no> knowledge of the real charaders or tempers of the ladies ; yet there was fomething in both Lady Beugle and Eleanor that difgufted her ; while, on the contrary, her heart feemed attråd*» ? 2 ed
cd towards Sophia, who appealed an Angel. Siie had never before feen fo amiable a young woman; her circle of acquaintance being entirely confined to the caftle, where every female, be¬ fide herfelf, was grey-haired. Lady Beugie's pride was certainly much hurt at being obliged to confider Peggy as a companion, for the Colonel men¬ tioned her as fuch ; which however only confirmed what lier mother had given her to expeeft, and indeed defired her to comply with, as that politic lady had no lefs a fcheme in agitation than efpoufing Duncan to his coufin Elea¬ nor. It was therefore neceffary to oblige the Colonel ; and, if poffible, provide Peggy with a hufband—or at leaft by fome means detach him from her ;
her; for Mrs. Campbell had not failed to acquaint her daughter with her fur¬ mifes of Duncan's attachment, which was the more alarming as the objed of it was fo great a favourite vvith his uncle. Lady Beugle, thus informed, behaved tolerably polite to her vifitor through policy; but Lady Eleanor, though flie certainly expeded from the defcription of her grandmother to fee a good-looking Scots laffie, had how¬ ever formed no idea of fo formidable a rival ; fhe therefore could hardly conceal her vexation and difappoint¬ ment. Sophia,, on the contrary, had thought little about her, and found herfelf at once prepoffeffed in her favour ; inwardly determining, if íhe was in reality as amiable as her appear-
appearance feemed to promife, to ufe every means to foften what might be difagreeable in her fituation. As the travellers were both fatigued, they defired permiffion to retire ; a re¬ queft that was very readily granted, as alfo one which Peggy made to dine with Mrs. Donald while flie remain¬ ed in town; Lady Beugle conde- fcending to order them a particular table. Their privacy wás feldom broken upon by any of the ladies except So¬ phia, who pafled with them all the time fhe could poffibly fpare, every meeting rendering Peggy and herfelf more attached to each other ; and though the former felt greatly diftreff¬ ed at the departure of Mrs. Donald— yet
yet ibe in fome meafure compofed hec fpirits with the refiedion, that the ap¬ pointed rime would foon elapfe, and the good humour of Sophia enable lier to bear the interval with patience.
KN» OF THE FIRST VOLUM fi.
