Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The farmer of Inglewood Forest: a novel
THE İl ii JCV jwVJL Xli д\. o F INGLEWOOD FOREST. С H А Р. L UNDER an aged oak, that grew on a pleaian: but lonely part of Inglewot.d Foreft, one fine fummer's evening, fut the venerable Farmer Godwin, reading to his famiiv, with a dignity that might have graced a more diflinguifhed rank, but it was a fub¬ jed that ever raifed his heart to the Moll High, and made him feel that, however vol. ι. В humble
humble the ftate of probation, a life fpent in innocence and integrity, would one day entitle him to a place where virtue alone claims pre-eminence. On his knee lay the, Bible ; on his right- hand fat his Avife, who, tho' grey hairs İhaded her temple?, the beam of youthful afľedion Avas not extinguiflied in her eye; on his left fat his fons, William and Edwin, and at her mother's feet was placed their filler Emma, trimming a ftraw hat Avith pink ribbons for the enfuing fair. The ledine concluded, they adjourned to their humble manfion, Avhich, though ap¬ pertaining to fome rich and highly culti¬ vated land, Avas nothing more than a ipacious, convenient farm-houfe ; yet, to thofe to whom cleanlinefs and comfort conftitute luxury, this dwelling poffeffed every attribute. The frugal meal was foon prepared, and fea- foned with innocent mirth, and the happy cheerfulnefs of hearts unconfeious of guile, 3 might
might have outbalanced in pleafure far more fumptuous entertainments, for labour had gÍA r en health, and health appetite, and for the corroding paflions of envy, jealoufy, pride, or malice, that fo frequently embitter the feafts of the great, their hearts Avere too humble to entertain fuchoverbearingintruders. The fupper removed, and the Farmer's pipe, with a pitcher of ale, being placed on t'ie tabic, " I wonder," faid William, with a half figh, ll whetiier Fanny Bernard is yet returned home ?" " Suppofe we ftep down the lane and inquire ?" replied Edwin, " it is a fine night, and Emma can go with us ; we fliall be back before my father has fmoked his pipe." This motion Avas immediately adopted, as Farmer Bernard's was only about a quarter of a mile down a green lane that was feparated from the Foreft by the high road crofling its entrance. ß 2 It
It would hardly be poffible to paint three more interefting figures than the brothers and fitter tripping by theclear moon- light over the Green. William had juft attained his tvventy- fecond year, his face and perfon forming a model from which a ftatuary might have envied to copy an Apollo, yet with a caft of rcfledion over hib animated features, which to a common obferver made them lefs ftriking than thofe of his brother Edwin, who was a, year younger, and whofe perfon, though lefs elegantly formed, Avas yet more fafcinating from the continual fprightlinefs that enlivened his features. Emma, innocent as the ¿ove y playful as the lamb, and fair as Miiton's Eve holding ofeach a hand, and chatting a hundred little minutias to themfelves only interefting. On reaching Bernard's Farm, they entered without ceremony, the lifting of the latch alone announcing vifitors, " Welcome, my lads," faid the old man, tf what, and my lit¬ tle girl too ! are you there ? Hark ye, Agnes, (addreffing hisdaughtcr) replenifli the pitcher, and look what haft got in the cupboard." "We
" We have flipped," replied William, looking anxioufly round the room, " Fanny I fee is not yet returned." " No—Agnes and I have been wifliing for her, flie will be back in a day or two I fuppofe ; but, pies on't, I wondered Avhat brought you here to night, noAv the murder's out ; however, forrow's dry, here's to you, my boys, and may Fanny and Agnes make as good Avives as their mother. Why, Agnes, I fay, there's no ale in the pitcher, pr'ythee draw fome, and court afterwards ; I think Edwin and you can't have much to whifper, for you had a plaguy long goffip to-day Avhen you carried the meat to the reapers." " Lord, father ! you are fo odd," anfwered Agnes, blufliing ; " indeed the bafket Avas very heavy, and Edwin carried İt for me, for I Avas quite tired." " Yes, yes," replied the old man, u I fup¬ pofe fo, for Avhen I came up you Avere fitting B j on
on the İtile to reft. Never blufli, girl, many a rime thy mother has detained me, Heaven reft her, and thou art but a chip of the old block." Agnes broke off the difcourfe by haftening to draw the ale ; during her ab¬ fence.— if Indeed," faid Emma, t: as Fanny and Agnes are to be my fifters, I think the fooner the better. AVhy, Fanny's almofl nineteen, and Agnes is two months older than me, and I was feventeen at Midfummcr." " I care not how foon," replied Bernard ; " but where fhall we find a hufband for thee, Emma ? Why, William," fhaking him hear¬ tily by the hand, " what art dull for man ? I dare be fworn Fanny is as anxious to fee thee as thou be'ft to fee her, fo drink about." The old clock, which flood in the corner of the kitchen, and on whofe tall cafe was depided the loves of Henry the Second* together with the death of Fair Rofamond, at that moment ftriking ten the vifitors rofe to depart*
depart, Agnes accompanying them to the gate.—" Good night," faid William, fhaking hands with her,—" Good night," repeaced Emma, faluting her, " and Heaven bleis thee," concluded Edwin, kiffing her ruby lips, " I foall fee you before breakfaft, as I go a field." Such was the behaviour of thefe uncorrupted children of innocence, who aded as their pure minds didated, being ftrangers to the refinement with Avhich arc and good breeding conceal the emotions of the heart. They had juft reached the end of che lane, when feveral voices ftruck them from rhe high road ; fear they were ftrangers to, it could only, they thought, be people returning from the market town to a village abou с three miles farther, or it might be, as Wil¬ liam's heart, prompted, Fanny under the care of a party of friends. With fuch ideas they advanced, but inftead of country men riding cheerfully homewards, they found two do¬ meftics, and a poft-boy endeavouring to raife a chaife that had been overturned, and whofe owners, a Gentleman and Lady, fat by die В 4 road
road fide, the firft in great pain from a broken ^tfrm he had received in the fall, and the latter heavily lamenting the accident. " Thank HeaA'en İt is not Fanny !" faid William, with a figh. " But it is people in diftrefs," replied Edwin, quickening his pace j " what can avc do for them r" " Aflift them to the utmoft of our abili¬ ties," returned William, in a tone yet more animated than his brother's, at the fame rime haftening forward to execute his purpofe. On their reaching the chaife they found one of the wheels broken, fo that to proceed was impoffible, therefore, while William and Emma were aiding the ftrangers, Edwin ran home to inform his father of the accident, and to entreat him, as there was no houfe of entertainment within four miles, to offer the ftranger
ftranger with the broken arm their fpare bed till he could be moved farther with íSfety. The virtues that warmed the heart of Farmer Godwin would have dignified the bofom of a Prince ; from his humble roof the Avanderer ever departed fatisfied, wifliing that his means were as extenfive as the cha¬ rity of his heart : Edwin's requeft was there¬ fore inftantly granted, the good man himfelf accompanying his fon to make the offer, while his Dame, аз he frequently called her, with the affiflance of her maid Margery, prepared the fpare bed, in cafe the ftranger fliould accept her hufband's offer. On Godwin's reaching the fpot where the difafter happened, he immediately Avent up to the fufferer, whofc arm was now fupported by the trembling Emma, William and the reft being ftill employed about the chaife, at the entreaty of the owner, who anxioufly wifhed to proceed. " My good Sir," faid Godwin, ^" in your fituation the diftance to В 5 the
the village is too far, therefore, if you will accept the offer of an apartment in a farm- houfe, where we will endeavour to render you alt the fervice in our power, we will lead you there inftantly, while one of my fons fhall ride to the next market town for a furgeon ; the Lady we can alfo accommo¬ date, and for your domeftics, after forne re- íŕefhment, thofe you have no fervice for, can proceed to get your carriage repaired, which in the mean time will be perfedly fafc here." The ftranger immediately accepted the Farmer's offer, for which the Lady alfo ex¬ preffing her thanks, they proceeded towards Godwin's dwelling ; the Lady, who had not yet recovered her fright, leaning on Ed¬ win's arm, and the Gentleman aflifled by Godwin and his fon William. On their reaching the farm, their arrival was announced by the furious barking of the great dog, whofc noife was however foon filenced
filenced by the mufıcaî voice of Emma, and the more commanding tone of his mafter. The ftranger being immediately put to bed, and Edwin difpatched on horfeback for the neareft furgeon, the Lady organ to re¬ cover her fright, Mrs, Godwin having pre¬ vailed on her to take a giafs of currant wine, and conduded her to a parlour, Avhich, tho' its furniture was as fimple as the minds of its owners, yet alio like them poffeffed that real utility that ftrongly contrafted rhe folly of gaudy grandeur, which, while it bewitches the eye, is deficient in that general comfort which unadorned convenience ever beftow f s. Flere was no fear of foiling the coftly colours of the Perfian carpet, though the white fcowered floor far more plainly fhewed the mark of dirty footfteps ; no gilding to be injured by the touch, the chairs, tables, and even glafs frame, being of walnut-tree, which vied Avith the mirror in brightnefs ; no pic¬ tures graced the walls, but in their ftead numberlefs odoriferous bouquets in white В 6 earthen
earthen jars, placed on foelves around the apartment ; and, to complete the whole, the glittering fleei ftove, with brali» knobs, filled with large branches of the hawthorn and wild briar in bloffom. Wearied with travelling, and the fubiequent fright, Mrs. Delmer (for fo was the Lady called) looked round wkh a complacency and íàtisfaction, which fpkndid drawing-rooms had not always been able to infpire. " It is Fairy Land," thought fhe, tt and the ideas of my fifteenth year зге realized in the inhabitants of this manfion." Mrs. Delmer was a widow, about thç age of twenty-eight, and poflefled of a large in¬ dependency by the death of a hufband foe hated. She was uoav haftening to the capital with ht r brother, in order to enjoy thofe pleafures foe had been debarred during the laft ten years, the greater part of which time foe had been confined to the country with her fpoufe, whofe greateft pleafure had toiififted in hunting and drinking. On her firft entrance into public life htr ñne perfon had
had procured her the affluence foe enjoyed, and foe had now no doubt it would fecuie her a hufband, calculated to make her happy, and repay her for the difguft fhe had enter¬ tained for his predeceffor. Wealth had been her firft incentive, but flie had found its in- efficacy of giving happi ne &, and therefore determined to make love alone the motive of a fécond union. Her brother, Mr. Whit¬ more, was about twenty-fix, and had been fome. гзте married, but experienced little happinefs in that ftate, having, like his fifter, confulted convenience more than affection, or even efteem, in the diipofal of his hand» His Lady was young, handfome, lively, and too falhionabiy educated not to return thecold- nefs with which he treated ber ; and as aH the gay world admired her, thought the affedion of a hufband a mite in the great fcale, and eafily difpenfed with. Her fortune being large, her fettlement was alfo liberal, and fufficiently enabled hrr to purfue her incli¬ nations without controul, for Mr. Wnit- more was too well bred to interfere with her
her pleafures while flie was polite enough to be blind to his; ever engaged in different purfuits, they feldom met above once or twice a week at dinner, and then ufually fur- rounded with company, a matrimonial téti à- tété being by both declared the moft weari- fome thing in the univerfe. Mr. Whitmore had been on a vifit to his fifler, who had pafľed the firft fix months of her widoAvhood at her country feat in Cumberland, and was returning with her to his own villa near London (where he had left his Lady) Avhen the accident happened. Whitmore was only fon to a banker, who at his death had left him what he thought a fuffkiency to decline bufinefs. In his perfon he was handfome and graceful, in his difpofition generous and brave ; but born to affluence, and accuftomed from his childhood to command his Avifhes without controul, his paflîons knew no curb, his inclinations no law, but gratification ;— Highly accomplifhed and infinuating in his addrefs, he had been uncommonly fuccefsful in his amours, addrefling indifcriminately both
both married and fingle that chanced to pleafe him, or where he could flatter himfelf with fuccefs, frequently declaring that both fexes were free agents, and thofe only ful¬ filled the end of their creation who made the moft of life, and enjoyed it to the utmoft of their power, fo they injured no man's purfe or his property, women, in his opinion, not coming under that denomination, being t a kind of fair game, and their perfonstranl- ferable as their affedions to him that pleafed them moft. Such Avere the new inmates at Godwin- Farm, where every individual was bufy in preparing for their eafe and convenience until the return of Edwin with a furgeon, Avho having let Mr. Whitmorc'.ţ arm, and allured them there was not the leaft danger, being only a fimple fradure, the females retired to take a fliort repofe, William and Edwin to their morning occupations, day being already broke, and the venerable Godwin to watch by the fide of Whitmore. CHAP*
CHAP. IL
WHITMORE, after a flight repofe, which was difturbed by the pain he experienced from his arm, entered into converfation with his hoft, expreffing his thanks in the warmeft terms, which fubjed however finding diftrefimg to the Farmer, who thought he had done nothing more than Avhat, in the fame circumflances, almofl every man would have done for him, he changed the difcourfe, and began to inquire about the vicinity,— ťc The paridi church," faid Godwin, " is not more than two miles off,
off, and almofl clofe to it is a good hcufe, and extenfive grounds, belonging to the Lady who inherits great part of the land around; as yet ihe is a perfed ftranger to us, having always lived Avith an uncle near the capital, who has left her heir to his whole eflate. — The neareft market tOAvn is about four miles from hence, fo that I regard the chance that threw my fons in your way as fortunate, for fuch a diftance in your fituation muft have been dreadful" Whitmore now again attempted to repeat his thanks. — " My good Sir," interrupted the Farmer, " you fee fo trifling a fenice in too ftrong a light; in fuch a misfortune would not yeu have aded the fame by me ?" <f Indeed I would," anfwered W 7 hitmore, after a momentary paufe, and then remained filent. —To confer the truth, though he had anfwered Godwin's queftion in the affirma¬ tive, yet there Avas a moniter within his own breaft, which, by knowing mankind better, Avas
was not fo eafily fatisfied ; he therefore laid no more, but remaining quiet could not avoid repeating to his own heart the qut fiion of the Farmer—" Would you not have done the fame by me ;" " î fliould, perhaps," replied he, tr.cntufy, " have left him in charge with my footman, and ordered him a furgeon, or, if the acci¬ dent had happened in town, piven him a guinea, had he wanted it, a;\l fent him to the hofpital ; but to make him a bed in my own houfe, nay, to wait by his fide, while all my family were employed in his fervice, I fhould never have done it." This idea gave a tranfitory awkwardnefs to the feelings of Whitmore ; but the pride of birth, and the complacency wiiich fuperior wealth ufually bellows on its poffeflbrs foondifperíèd the cloud, Avhen they prefented to his mind the diffl rence of hib fituation in life from that of Godwin's, the one a fimple Farmer, the other poffeffed of three thoufand a year, a place in the fenate, and univerfally courted and
¿ud admired. This conikkrcrd, r!icrc vùìì no comparifon in the cafe, for though he ft Is that the bones of а Gentleman were as brittle as thoie of a peafant, zv.d thr.t he was ль vulnerable to pain, yet he couid notd".\eít himfelf of the idea, that fuperior rank and fortune demanded parac^ar carv-, even fiom thofe perlons whom he would h.iAC bhilied to attend in the fame fituution. Mr. Whit¬ more's valet now entered, he had been employed in moving the baggage out of the chaife, which was refitted in fuch a manner as to be removed to the next town to be thoroughly repaired. Godwin thus relieved, adjourned to his kkchen, where he found his wife Emma and the maid affembled, all inquiring how the itranger had relied. Mrs. Godwin then ordered Margery to pick out the beft baked cakes, while herfelf made the tea, and pouring out two breakfaft cups fent one to Mrs. Delmer, who was not yet rifen, and took the other herfelf to Whitmore, entreating him to make free, and
and command whatever their houfe afforded, with that charaderiftic goodnefs of heart which peculiarly diftinguiihed her, and that had made her doubly amiable in youth, and refpedable in age. Whitmore, after a proper return to her civility, faid, " May I not be permitted fome time today, my dear Madam, to fee and thank my young friends for the fervices of laft night ?" Mrs. Godwin affured him her fons would not fail to wait on him on their return from their morning avocation, then wifhing him fpeedily better ihe returned to breakfaft, where the party Avas foon augmented by William and Edwin, who, after a hafty meal, retired to pay their compliments to Whit¬ more, while Emma repaired to Mrs, Delmer, whom lhe aífifted to drefs. Mrs. Delmer in her manner poffeffed much of her brother's affability, and by her good humour
humour gained an almofl immediate intereft in the heart of Emma, Avho declared, when ihe afterwards joined her brothers, that íhe had never before feen fo beautiful and engaging a woman. To this, however, both brothers diflented, the elder declaring íhe was not near ΐο handfome as Fanny Bernard, and the younger, diat was Agnes dreficd the fame, there would be no comparifon between them. ic As to drttV leturned William, t£ Fanny is always fo exad and neat that any altera¬ tion mufl be for the worfe ; and I proteft I fhould think her fine hair disfigured by pow¬ der and gieafe : Then that hateful hat, Avith a great cockade and feather, gives an air of haríhnefs and boklnefs, which I cannot endure ; Fanny's ftraw bonnet, with the bkie ribbon, is a thoufand times more becoming." α No fuch thing, William," replied Emma, " for 1 tried it on, and looked quite a diffe¬ rent creature ¿ the feathers made me fo tall, and
and look fo well, that I am fure I never liked myfelf fo much before : Then her flioes, why, I thought her feet were as little again as mine, yet it was only their make, and the fmart heels, for they are larger; but the ihoemakcrs about here are fo awkward that they make one's feet quite clumfy ; I declare I fliall now have no patience with them." " Yet your mother," faid W illiam, gravely, " who Avas reckoned one of the finefl girls in the whole country, Avas always fatisfied with them," " All that is very true," interrupted Ed¬ win ; " yet you cannot perfuade me but Mr. Whitmore's clothes are more becoming than ours, even though we faw him under fuch a difadvantage as his accident muft occafion, and though I am perfedly fatisfied with my fituation in life, yet was,fortune, by any un- forefeen event, to favour me, I fliould cer¬ tainly think it no error to adopt my drefs to the fafhion." " Certainly
« Certainly not," replied Emma;" but William is fo grave, that I am fore had my grandfather (the Redor) lived, he might have made him a parfon ; nay, you knoAv my father fays he is the very image of him." " I accept your compliment," anfwered William, with a fmile; "forfurely it is one to be told I refemble a man who was a blcifing to his neighbours, and an honour to his profeflion ; and in return, Emma, I with thy temper may refemb> rhy mauler's as much as thy perfon." " Thank you, my dear William," giving him an affectionate kifs on the cheek ; " bi.t indeed I fear I ihall never be fo handfome." " I rather fear you will never be fo im- confcious of it," replied William ; " for ls to beauty you have as great a fliare as I think you can be fafely trufted vrith."
" Oh !
<f Oh ! how ill-natured," exclaimed Emma j cc I proteft you grow worfe and worfe, I will flay no longer ; I promifed to walk with Mrs. Delmer, and muft go this inftant." — With thefe words away flew the fprightly girl to perform her promife, while her bro¬ thers returned to their ufual occupation in the field, overlooking and occafionally aififting the labourers ; Calling, however, at Ber¬ nard's, where William had the vexation to learn, that Fanny had written to inform her father that ihe fliould for fome time prolong her flay, as her aunt, whom ihe was vifiring, flill continued ill, and entreated her prefence, concluding with a modeft, but tender remem¬ brance to her lover. William perufed the letter with a figli, and informing the Farmer of the particulars of the laft night's adventure, the brothers 1 foon after took their leave. Emma had joined Mrs. Delmer, who, however, previous to her walk, called in her brother's
brothers apartment, where foe had pafľed the morning, and finding him perfedly cheer¬ ful, and without fever, eafily acquiefced in his delire of not fending for more affiflance* which fhe had at firft ftrongly preffed. In this vifit foe Avas accompanied by Emma, whom Whitmore, in fpite of his pain, thp night before had thought the moil lovely creature he ever beheld, and whom now divefted of the pallid hue and tremor ocea¬ fioned by his accident, appeared a thoufand times more charming. " My dear brother," faid Mrs. Delmer, " as you feem tolerably eafy, and I do but difturb you, my young friend and myfelf are going to take a walk·" " Indeed," replied Whitmore, " though I prefer your recreation before my own> yet in this cafe I muft truly confefs, I fhould be more eafy, and lefs difturbed, by your company, than left to my own thoughts ;— however, I wiih you a pleafant walk, and vol. i, С regret
regret that I cannot accompany you, yet before you go give me leaA'e to thank Mifs Godwin for the trouble 1 gave her laft night in fupporting my arm ; a trouble," continued he, with great foftnefs, " that made even fuch a fituation enviable." " Indeed, Sir," anfwered Emma, " I trembled fo much that I could not hold it as fteadily as William defired me, and, tho' you did not complain, I am fure I muft hurt you." tc Good Heaven ! hurt me ! fuch fuppcrt could alone enable me to bear the pain with becoming patience 5 but I detain you, yet might I entreat a favour it fliould be for half an hour of your company on your return. Charity, my dear fifter, you know is ftrongly recommended to us, and can you fliew your's more effedually than on fuch a miferable invalid ?"
« Well,
" Well, we will endeavour to exert it," replied Mrs. Delmer ; " but for the prefent adieu." Emma then conduded Mrs. Delmer, by her owndefire, to their harveft field, where the firft objeds that prefented were William and Edwin, diverted of their coats, in flints Avhite as fnow, foremoft among the reapers ; William refped fully moving his hat conti¬ nued his labour, but Edwin, a deep blufli covering his face, to be thus caught, haflily put on his coat, and joined Mrs. Delmer and Emma. " What a delightful fcene !" faid the Lady, before he reached them : " I know not how it happens, my dear girl, but in one little day you have almofl delighted me Avith rural fife, Avhich I ever before held in abhor¬ rence ; but the reafon is obvious, your family are fo totally different from all I ever faw that re fide conftantly in the country, that the contrail became doubly ftriking."
С*
"If
" If there is any difference," replied Emma, " we derive it from my father, who has had a very good education, being fon to the Redor of the parifo, who, how¬ ever, as my father declined purfuing his for¬ tune in the church, had it only in his power to fettle him on this farm, purchafmg the houfe, and about fourteen acres of the ad¬ joining land ; the remainder we hold on leafe for a long term, and at an eafy rent." Edwin at that moment joined them, and was received by Mrs. Delmer with a fmile. After fome cheerful converfation foe walked up to the reapers, and gave them a guinea to drink ; then turning to Edwin fhe faid, ~~ « W 7 e fhould intrude too much on your time to afk your company home, but we fhall fee you in the evening in my brothers apartment, who has made us promife to pafs an hour with him,"—Edwin bowed, and Mrs, Delmer and Emma bidding him fare¬ well returned home. In
In this manner pafľed the firft day, and leverai fucceeding ones, until Whitmore's arm began to unite, and he was able to fit up ; the pillow whicii fupported the fradure would indeed be frequently uneafy, and feldom could be rendered otherwife but by Emma, Avhom hç affirmed ever placed it fmoother than any one elfe, thanking her, with a glance from his expreflive dark eyes, in a language A\hich, though new, was foon intelligible to her unexperienced heart.—Twice as ihe placed his arm he had ventured to kifs her hand ; but the confufion this had oceafioned, and the tremor with which fhe afterwards ap¬ proached him, determined him to defift ra¬ ther than give an alarm that might prove detrimental to his paffion.
С J
CHAP
CHAP. IIL
WFIITMORE gained ftrength daily, and at length, with his arm in a fling, came down flairs, though the furgeon affirmed he muft not yet venture the foaking of a carriage. On the iecond day, after he had left his chamber, finding himfelf alone with Godwin, after fome converfation, in which he ex preflèd his warmeft thanks for the fa¬ vours he had received, he took his hand, and with the natural eafe of good breeding that particularly diflinguifhed him, entreated his acceptance of a bank note of a hundred pounds,
pounds, as a finali retribution toAvards the obligations he had received. " My good Sir," faid the Farmer, re¬ turning the note, (t you are heartily welcome to the afyium your unhappy fituation ren¬ dered neceflary ; to me it has been no incon¬ venience, but rather a gratification, as it has enabled me to fulfil one of the greateft duties commanded us : c Do unto others as you would they inould do unto you.' Your own fervant has taken the fatigue on himfelf, and ihall you then pay for your mere iheker, and a little food, in fuch a calamity ? Heaven forbid ! If any debt, not to me is it due, but to thofe in fimilar circumflances, and to whom, î doubt not, your own heart will lead you to pay it," Whitmore Avas abafhed; he felt all the dignity and force of virtue ; he remembered Emma, and his heart fmote him ; but re¬ covering his confufion, and refleding for a few moments, he replied, " My dear Sir, С 4 at
at leaft give me fome way to fhew my gra¬ titude ; you have two ions, informed, fenfible young men, permit me to take on myfelf the charge of one of them : From my fitu¬ ation in life I flatter myfelf I can introduce him to the world with fuccefs, having it in my power to place a perfon immediately as clerk in one of the public offices, which fituation, till we can procure a better, will at leaft afford a genteel competency." Godwin returned his thanks for this offer, anfwei ing " that in a matter in which them¬ felves were fo materially concerned, he would certainly inform them of Mr. Whitmore's generofity ; but for my own part," continued he, "were I to confult only my wiflies, I fliould rather they would fettle in the fpot where they firft faw the light. Great towns I have heard and read are full of danger, and though I depend much on the virtuous education I have given my fons, yet I fliould tremble to expofe them to temptations which youth and conftitution could ill withftand." The
The entrance of Mrs. Godwin with her fons here broke off the difcourfe, which, tiQAV- ever, was foon renewed by the Farmer's informing them of what had pafľed. The anxious mother, trembling with dread at the bare idea of being feparated from her children, was at the fame moment elated with their probable fuccefs, and their future elevation in life ; fhe therefore remained filent, tears gliftening in her eyes, which fixed on the loved companion of her youth, appeared to wiih to read his fentiments on the occafion; but he fimply repeated Mr. Whitmore's offer, without expreffing, even in the moll diflant manner, his own thoughts on the occafion. He had hardly concluded when William, addrefling Mr. Whitmore, replied, rt I know no terms, Sir, in the plain untutored language I have been accuftomed to, that appear ft rong enough to exprefs my thanks for your generofity, but for myfelf muft beg leave to decline it. My father's increafing years demand the affitta nee of a fon, both as a comfort to his as;e, and to С 5 take
take from his hand the weight of bufinefs trivial to youth, but fatiguing in advanced life* I am alfo affianced to a young Avoman, who, like myfelf, would, I am fure, prefer this cottage, labour, content and peace, to all the bufile that grandeur or wealth could beftow ; and laflly, unfit, from difpofition, for public life, I can but again exprefs my thanks for your kindnefs, of which I fhall ever retain the moil grateful remembrance." — Here William ceafed. His father fmiled fatisfadion, which fentiment was as inftantly conveyed to the features of his mother, whofe heart, however, flill hung doubtful of the anfwer of her younger fon. Edwin was filent, and appeared loft in thought; the ftruggle was hard, and for fome moments forbade utterance. Greatnefs and wealth for the firft time appeared within his grafp ; but then to leave Agnes, though even for a fhort time, was diflradion ; yet, pci haps, foon to leturn, and bear her in tri¬ umph to fceneb ihe was fitted to adorn, was enchanting,
enchanting, and after a moment's paufe maf- tered the firft confideration. ct I will be guided bv my father, Sir," at length hefiu.tai Edvwn ; ťt he is the beft judge of what ih fitting for my welfare, and whatever is his determination I fhall fubmit to without repugnance," " My dear boy," replied Gothvin, " by the agreement with Bernard, yourfelf and your brother will equally fhare what wc pof- fefs, except the trifle I have faved being transferred at your mother's death to Emma ; you mufl therefore, in the prefent cafe, judge for youifelf, atid anfwer accoidingly·" Edwin again, after a paufe, replied, " that as he knew his father Avoukl not feel his lofs from the attention of W ¿liam, with his pei- miflion he would think of it till the morrow, and then give a definitive anfwer." Whit- more approved this lefolution, as did alfo Godwin, and being foon afur joined by Mis. C ó Delmer
Delmer and Emma, the converfation ceafed, William and his brother quitting them to go to Farmer Bernard's. In their way thither William remained filent until Edwin re-affumed the difcourfe refpeding Mr. Whitmore's offer, which he fpoke of with all the warmth and energy natural to youth.—" I am young," faid he, " and perhaps may be fuccefsful enough to acquire fufficient wealth to fix my Agnes in a ftate equal to my wifhes ; to aífift my pa¬ rents and Emma, and place my beloved brother above labour.—What happinefs !" " I can know no greater," returned Wil¬ liam, calmly, though with great affedion> 4< than the profped before me appears to promife. 1 am young, and able to labour ; Fanny Bernard will be my companion, and fliare with methe pleafing employ of foothing the declining years of our parents ; with fuch a wife, and fuch relations, what can I wifh for more ? The farm has ever been fufficient to gratify
gratify all our wants and Aviihes, what then fliould we feek for, my dear brother ? Under the fpecious covering of wealth and grandeur frequently lurks care, and though I would not advife, yet I muft confefs, I had hoped, that as our youth had pafľed together, our age might do the fame. Virtue, juilice, and all the claims that diftinguifh manhood, unite you to Agnes, whom, if you forfake, fafci¬ nated by the delirium of grandeur, you are unworthy to live.* " Forfake Agnes !" replied Edwin, recoil¬ ing with horror at the idea, " abandon Agnes ! No, William, do not think fo ill of me ; with her I would rather encounter all the calamities that fortune could inflid than accept a throne without her." This difcourfe brought them to Bernard's door, where they Avere met by Agnes. — " What is the matter, Edwin," faid fhe, fixing her eyes on him with inquiring ten¬ dernefs,
dernefs, " you look unhappy, nay and Wil¬ liam too, tell me, are ali well at home ?" W 7 illiam replied in the affirmative ; then afking for her father, haflily paffed into the houfe, leaving her alone with Edwin, " Agnes," faid Edwin, hefitating, "will you walk with me into the orchard ? I have much to confult you upon." Agnes gave him her hand in filence, which he felt tremble within his own : " Why this alarm, my love ?" faid he, putting his arai round her waift : " W r hat do you fear ?" " Alas ! I know not what," replied foe ; " but your features firft ga\-e me a foock that I cannot account for, and which was increafed by William's looks and behaviour. Well do I know his temper, Edwin ; he is never moved by trifles ; fomething very material muff have happened to change him thus." " Nothing
« Nothing material, my love, only Mr. Whitmore has been offering my father to take charge of either my brother or myfelf, and to fettle us in fome fituation that may lead us to make our fortune. William firft replied, and------." " Declined it !" fcarcely articulated Agnes. " Yes, my dear girl, nor have I accepted it. I Avifoed to confult you, and foall abide by your determination : If you approve, and think it may be the means of our future welfare, hy placing me above fliaring our parent's propeity with William, I foall ac¬ cept it with pleafure ; if otherwife, relinquiih it ; for you weli know, my Agnes," continued he, killing off a tear that had fallen on hef cheek, " that my greateft happinefs conflits in giving you pleafure. In a few months, perhaps, I might be fettled to my fatisfadion, and able to return to Inglewood, and fetch my betrothed wife. Would to Heaven you had already borne that name, for as it is I fear
fear both our parents will objed to our union until they find how I am placed. Oh ! Agnes, they fay we are too young to marry ; how falie that notion, when we are old enough to love." Edwin might have continued for a much longer time uninterrupted, for the heart of Agnes was too full for utterance, and with her face reclined on his fhoulder fhe gave vent to the anguiih that overwhelmed her. " I will not go then," continued Edwin i £í 1 cannot fee you ; thus, I will with thanks decline Mr. Whitmore'3 offer ; yet, Agnes,'* added he, preifing her to his bofom, " to have placed thee in a ftate I fliould glory to view thee in, what would I not endure I Heaven witnefs that was my ftrongeft in¬ centive ; but it is paft, I renounce it ; it gives thee pain, Agnes, and I will remain through life in the humble fituation to which I was born," "Not
u Not on my account, Edwin," fobbed Agnes, endeavouring to mafter her tears :— " Go where your wiíhes lead you, I have no defire for grandeur; Inglewood, with your company, contained all I ever wifoed to poffefs : But go—go to that hateful city, whofe vices I have trembled to hear re¬ peated ; where men feoff at the ruin of in¬ nocent maids, and vile women walk the ftreets at noon»day with unblufoing cheeks $ where power overcomes right, and where affedion is bought and fold ! Go there, Edwin, and forfake the ruftics of Inglewood; but remember, t that bofoms, covered with filk and embroidery, do not always contain hearts fo true as mine." " Cruel, ungenerous Agnes! what are their hearts to me ? Am I not thine ? Have we not mutually promifed ? And can you think I will ever faififythat vow, even though we foould be feparated ? No, I repeat it, foould I become that villain, may I be aban¬ doned of God and man ; may the wealth I feek
feek become my bane ; curfed by my parents, defpifed by my brother, and by thee, Agnes " Forgiven ľ* interrupted flie, laying her hand on his lips. " No, Agnes, I would have faid hated, but cannot bear the thought ! Hated by thee, impoffible! that curfe alone would drive me to defpair ! To-morrow 1 will decline Mr. Whitmore's offer ; fmile then, my love, and let it be forgotten." " Not from my perfuafion fliall you re¬ linquiih it," faid Agnes; " for as I am fore your inclination prompts you to accept his propofal, might you not hereafter refled on yourfelf for having let an advantage pafs that you could never regain ? Confult therefore with your father and mother, and be fure I will acquiefce in whatever they determine, convinced they are the beft judges how you íhould ad."—With fuch difcourfe Edwin and Agnes paffed the time in the firft têtê-ã~ tête
tête they had ever found painful, however his repeated vows and tendernefs, in fome mea¬ fure, contributed to footh her, and, pulling her bonnet lower over her eyes, they returned to the farm, where a fcene of a very different nature had taken place in their abfence. — They were hardly out of fight, and William had juft time to have informed Bernard of Mr. Whitmore's offer, which the honeft Farmer did not feem to difapprove, when the trampling of horfes was heard in the lane. William Mened a moment, " It is perhaps Fanny!" exclaimed he, regardlefs of what Bernard was faying, and haftening to the gate with the utmoft eagernefs, his eyes fparkling with joy and expedation, when a moment preíènted her to his fight, with a young coufin, who had efcorted her home. William ruflied to meet them, while Fanny feeing his ap¬ proach, threw the bridle on the neck of the old mare, and was caught in his arms in an inftant, each only articulating the name of the other ; the young Farmer hallooing his greetings, and the old mare continuing her fober
fober pace till ihe reached the well known ftable door, apparently as pleafed as any of the party. Bernard by this time was at the gate, where he received his daughter from William, and giving her a kifs, fhook his relation heartily by the hand, exclaiming, " By my truly I am glad ye be come, for i'faith I believe if you had ftaid a week longer we fhould have had a burying. Take care how you fail in love, coufin, for look at William there, he ufed to be as likely a fellow as you would fee on a fummer's day," continued he, pointing to him : Ci Why, pies on the felknv, what a change has taken place ; a quarter of an hour ago his face was as long as my leg, and his eyes as dead as fiale mackareľs, now I proteft they look quite bright, and his cheeks plump ; why, thou muft be a plaguy good dodor, Fanny, to make fuch a fpeedy cure !" " She is the only one I ever intend to em¬ ploy, if íhe will undertake the taik," replied William ; " but your coufin muft be fatigued, and need refreftiment." « Good
Cc Good troth, you may as well fay my coufin at once, for that will be the next thing I fuppofe i However, come in, my lads, you fhall have the beft the cupboard and cellar afford." With thefe words he led the way into the houfe, where they were foon joined by Edwin and Agnes.—" Pies on't," cried the old man, " here comes another pair of turtles, Heaven help the poor fellow 1 ' that has likely daughters, figh here, kifs there, and then my poor apple-trees, what with true lovers knots, F. B, and A. B. if the girls don't get married foon they won't be worth ä farthing." William fmiled at the Farmer's humour, his coufin applauded it with a hearty laugh ; but Edwin, diftraded between the contending paflions of love and amoition, hardly knew what parted, while Fanny, ever gentle and obfervant, caught the gloom that hung on her beloved filler's feature*, by whom ihe was feated, her eyes tenderly fixed on her face, and anxioufly inquiring after her health. CHAP»
CHAP. IV.
WHILE William and Edwin were engaged ac Bernard's, Mrs. Delmer, her brother and Emma, had taken their evening walk, during Avhich he had informed them of the wifli he entertained of Edwin's accompanying them to town. Mrs. Delmer exprelfed the higheft fatisfadion at this intel¬ ligence, faying that flie had no doubt but thac, with the natural gracefulnefs of Edwin, his fine perfon, and a proper introdudion, he would foon make his fortune. Emma alfo teftified her pleafure, though ac the fame time her face was a perfed index of an April day,
day, alternately exhibiting tears and dimpled fmiles.^—" Why thefe tears, lovely Emma ?" faid Whitmore, " your brother's preferment and happinefs fliall be my peculiar care ; think you not," added he, in a loAver voice, u but he muft be dear to me ?" <c I am fnfficiently convinced of your goodnefs," replied Emma ; but we have never yet been feparated for a day, a circumftance whicii muft plead an excufe for the weaknefs I now fliew. Then Agnes too, Avhom he fincerely loves, will be quite overcome by his abfence, for though both my father and Farmer Bernard objed to their marriage for a twelvemonth on account of their youth, yet they have promifed to confent at that time."—Emma was too intent on the fubjed, and Whitmoie too intent on Emma, to pay much attention to the countenance of Mis. Delmer, which on this intelligence was over- fpread with a deep crimfon, and interrupting Emma : " It is to be hoped," faid flie, "that the different fituation in which he will be placed
placed will infpire him with ideas more ad¬ vantageous to his future fortune." " As to that, Madam," replied Emma, " Fanny and Agnes are perfedly worthy the affedion of my brothers, for, excluflve of fliaring all their father poffeffes at his death, they are reckoned among the beft, as well as handfomeft, girls in the country." " Perhaps fo," returned Mrs. Delmer, petulantly ; " at a country fair a finali flock of beauty will go a great Avay." " You will not fay fo when you fee them ι but at once allow my brother's affedions well placed," replied Emma.—" Indeed I don't know how it could be otherwife ; they ere our neareft neighbours, and their mother dying when they were very young, they have been as much brought up at our houfe as their own." Wtiitrnore here interrupted the difcourfe by faying, iC Should your brother, Mifs 2 Emma,
Emma accept my offer, which I confefs I greatly wifo, could not the dread you appear to feel ac the idea of parting Avith him be greatly leffened by returning my fitter's vifit for a fliort time in London, where we would endeavour to foew you the kindnefs we re¬ ceived at Inglewood was not lavifoed on infenfibles."—Emma for a moment made no reply, for though fuch a projed had never entered her thoughts, it was too con¬ genial to her inclinations to fuffer her to en¬ tirely decline it, and to acquiefce without the confent of her parents Avas impoffible. " You do not fpeak, Mifs Godwin," faid Whitmore. " My dear fifler, will you not affili me in perfuading your young friend to favour us fo greatly ?" Mrs. Delmer, who, though flie liked Emma very well for a councry companion, had no intention of car¬ rying the acquaintance farther, yet in a man¬ ner thus prefled to make an offer replied.— " As foon as I have fixed on a houfe I ihall vol. 1. D be
be happy to be favored with Mifs Godwin*! company, if her friends will confent." Mr, Whitmore> who clearly faw that his fifter was far more warm in the intereft of a handfome young man than of a beautiful woman, repliedi " True, my dear Madam, we both fpeak provifionally of what we wiih, for Edwin, influenced by his paífion, may perhaps decline my offer, and my own heart is too fenfible how much fuch a facrifice muft coft him to prefs it flrenuoufly, though for his future welfare." " Ridiculous," cried Mrs. Delmer, " and fo fuffer an elegant young man to throw away his life in obfcurity, at moil the mailer of a farm."—A blufli, partly of anger, but more of lhame, died the cheeks of Emma ; and for the firft time in her life ihe felt it derogatory to be the daughter of a Farmer. cf Though I think he might be very happy in that ftate," faid Emma, " yet I cannot but
but wiih he may be fenfible of the favour you defign him i for though I fhall be fin- cerely grieved at his departure, yet, Avhen I confider it is for his future benefit, that idea will confole me, as I hope it will Agnes." cc And to my filter's requefi you fay no* thing," replied Whitmore." w Yes> Sir, I am truly fenfible of your condefcenfion, and if my parents would per¬ mit, íhould be very happy to accept it for a ihort time."—Mrs. Delmer replied in a man¬ ner that fully fatisfied the unfufpeciing Emma, Whitmore, by a glance, only expreíľed his thanks; but that glance, more expre flì ve than Avords, declared unutterable things, and funk at once into the heart againil which it was directed.—On their return to the farm they found Mr. and Mrs. Godwin waiting fupper, during which Mr. Whitmore's fervant entered with a letter, which he had brought from the poft-hcufe at the market town. A mo¬ mentary fuffufion crofled his cheek as he- D α received
received к, and he was on the point of putting it in his pocket, had not Mrs. Delmer fid, " From Mrs. Whitmore, I prefume, brother." " I know not," · replied he, after a moment's hefitation, " but will perufe it after fupper. My laft letters fay, ail our friends in town are well" Mr. Godwin, who had no idea that any one could be fo carelefs about thofe he denominated his friend?, en¬ treated that politenefs might not deprive him of the fatisfadion of reading his letter. — Mr, Whitmore boAved his thanks, but again declined it, when Mrs. Delmer, as if actu¬ ated by a fpirit of contradidlon, feconded Mr. Godwin, by faying, " Do, my dear brother, oblige me, I long to hear what company you have at TAvickenham." · ----- Mr. Whitmore, who now found that oppofi- tion would only make the affair worfe, and at the fame time as effedually difclofe v> hat he had wiflied to conceal, made a virtue of neceffity, and breaking the feal glanced his eyes carelefsly over the contents, then reached it
it to his fitter, at that moment heartily wifli¬ ing her, in his own mind, in the bofom of her departed fpoufe. While ihe was reading, Whitmore fixed his eyes on Emma, and faw, with fecret fatisfadion, an air of anxiety overfpread her fine features, but finding flie obferved him, immediately withdrew them. " There, take back your letter," faid Mrs. Delmer: " Mrs. Whitmore I find is as gay and volatile as ever. This I think is the fécond you have been favoured with fince your accident." " Had ihe now," replied Whitmore, peevifhly, " faved herièlf the trouble of re¬ minding me of my misfortunes, I had been infinitely more obliged to her."—With theíe words he arofe, and left the room in evident dffcompofure, though at the fame time fo apparently overwhelmed with melancholy, that the honeft Farmer and his wife were D 3 deeply
deeply concerned for him. Emma, during this difcourfe, had endeavoured to appear, nay, to perfuade herfelf that íhe was not interefted in it; but her heart beat, her hands trembled, and an involuntary figh efcaped her. " Blefs me !" cried Mrs. Godwin, with much furprife, " I never entertained the moft diílant idea that Mr. Whitmore Avas married. I pre fume his Lady was not acquainted with his misfortune till he was almcíl able to return home." « Oh I yes," replied Mrs. Delmer, " one of the fer vants who attended us went off the day following j but ihe is too gay to be eafily alarmed 5 indeed I never faw my brother fo afFcded at her indifference before." " My good Dame," replied the Farmer* *' thinks every one íhould poíľefs a heart as fufceptible as her own. Had I broken my arm I fliould have experienced more anxiety
anxiety from her tendernefs than from the pain, and been in continual apprehenfion of feeing her fink under the fatigue of attending me."—William and Edwin at that moment entered, and apparently feemed to have changed charadcrs, the firft being all gaiety, the latter depreíľed and loft in thought. f< I think I might venture a good wager," faid Mr. Godwin, " that Fanny Bernard is returned 5 is it not fo, William ?" " Yes, Sir, íhe will call to fee you in the morning: She would have come to night but I prevented her, as ihe muft be fatigued." " She will be welcome as thyfelf, my fon, and Agnes too ; we ihall now fee her more frequently, as Fanny is returned to fliare the domeftic cares." Mrs. Delmer changed the difcourfe, by addreffing Edwin refpeding his going to town ; « I hope," faid íhe, « you will not D 4 give
give my brother the vexation of refufing his offer, as I am convinced he will exert his utmoft intereft for your promotion ; nay, to his foall be added mine, and as the late Mr. Delmer had powerful friends, I can entertain no doubt of your fuccefs." Edwin bowed his thanks, after Avhich Mrs. Delmer wiflied them a good night, and re¬ tired with Emma. The Farmer thus left alone with his Avife and fons, Edwin's affairs were the fole topic. " I can neither perfuade you to accept, or decline it, my child," faid the good man ; " you alone muft judge what you think con¬ ducive to your happinefs. Equal poffeffor with your brother, both of my affedion and property, there is no need to feek a greater fortune, if you can be content in the ftate in which Heaven has ever been pleafed to keep me, without a defire to change it ; but if your wiíhes lead you to endeavour to gain Avealth, make the attempt, and if you fail, my
my fon, return, under this humble roof you ihall find welcome, and a parenťs arms open to receive you : yet my Edwin^ if you de¬ termine in favour of the turmoils of the great world, beware of the intoxication of pride and pleafure, which inevitably deflroy the feeds of virtue ; beware of being too fuddenly elated, or too foon depreíľed, the firft fhews a weak head, the fécond a pu- filanimous heart : Seek reputation and honour openly and boldly ^ but flatter no man's vices or foibles to gain them : Let truth be the invariable guide of all your adions : Give no promife without deliberation, but Avhen once given, hold İt facred ; and finally, re¬ member God, and in the hour of need he Avili not forget you." " Oh, my father !" cried Edwin, finking on his knee; " but Agnes, my beloved Agnes ------!" " Is your betrothed wife, a tio facred, my fon, in the fight of that Power who records D 5 dl
all our vows and adions ? I have wifoed to delay your marriage on account of your youth ; but if you determine for a country life, am willing to retrad my opinion, and prefs Bernard to join your hands at the fame time that Fanny and William are united ; but if you refolve on a journey to London, fuch a ftep would be the height of impru¬ dence, as the care of a young, handfome, and unexperienced female, in a great city, muft naturally take up more of your time, in your firft purfuits, than you could pru¬ dently fpare ; in that cafe it is my opinion, that you leave her with her father until you are properly fettled, for, if you love her, you cannot wiih her to partake thofe difficulties you may neceffarily meet on your intro¬ dudion." The offer of an immediate union with Agnes for fome moments appeared to pre¬ ponderate the fcale in the mind of Edwin, and determine him in favour of a country life; yet, Aivhen re fiedion prefented the refigning
fefigning almoft certain wealth to live for ever in obfcurity, nay, to condemn Agnes to fuch a ftate when he might raiíè her to affluence, he paufed, and determined to ftrug¬ gle with his paffion, and rather relinquiih for a few months the rapture of calling her his, than do both himfelf and her fo material an injury. ,f My dear father," fard he, after fome hefitation, " I chink, that is, if you approve, I will at leaft try my fuccefs ; chance appears to have thrown this opportunity in my way, which it might be folly to negled: Blefs me then, my refpeded parents, I feel I fliall be fuccefsful, and foon, very foon, truft to return and claim my Agnes," " May'ft thou be blefied, my fon, yet let me conjure thee to be not too fanguine ; hope frequently leads us to flatter our¬ felves with fallacious expedations, which redouble the pangs of difappointment. — Nothing is certain in this tranfitory ftate; D 6 eA'en
even Ϊ, who have been blefľed above the com¬ mon iot of mortals, far from the bufile of the world, happy in a partner to fliare my joys, and cares, and children, whole duty can only be equalled by their afľedion, yet even I have met with forrow ; think then on the turbulent fea of public life how much greater mufl be thy trials : I mean not to deprefs, but prepare thee, my fon ; but the night is far fpent, let us retire, and Heaven refolve thee for the beft." Mrs. Godwin had not fpoken during this difcourfe, but at the conclufion would alfo have blefľed him; but emotion aiifing from maternal tendernefs rendered her voice in¬ articulate, and prefiing him in her arms, fhe followed her hufhand to his chamber." William remained filent while they were preparing to go to reft. The condud of Edwin had aitoni íhed him, for he had not the moil diflant idea, but what every, fcheme would have been relinquished for an imme¬ diate
diate union with Agnes : What then was his difappointment when he heard him refign İt? He could fcarcely credit tht evidence of his fenfes, nor could he even yet arrange his thoughts; but bidding his brother a good night, in apparent uneafinefs, ejaculated, — " Unhappy Agnes ! Ah, Edwin ! thou haft- cither lefs love, or more philofophy than , me.
С Η Α Ρ. V.
ППНЕ next morning Farmer Bernard, on ·*· William and Edwin's calling there, re¬ newed the difcourfe of the preceding evening. His heart was equally honeft as that of Godwin, but his underftanding being inferior he
he was more fafcinated by the offers mader to Edwin, Avhom he warmly preflcd to accept them, priding himfelf in the idea that he fliould heteafixr look up to a fon-indaw, who would not only conftitute the happinefs of his beloved daughter, but alfo be the wealthieft man in either family. Under this perfuafion he rallied his daughters on their difiiké to his departure ; for Fanny more openly expreíľed her difapprobation than Agnes, who declared, though tears falfified her words, that ihe was perfedly content to acquiefce in whatever Edwin might think would conduce to his advantage. Edwin,, though wounded by Agnes's tears, was,, not¬ withftanding fo ftrongly borne away by the infatuation of acquiring wealth, that it maf- tered every other confideration, and rein¬ forced in this opinion by Bernard, after ten¬ derly repeating his vows to Agnes, it was determined he fliould declare his acceptance of Whitmore's proffer in the afternoon. — This bufinefs fettled, Fanny, who had not feen
feen the elder Godwin, propofed a walk thither to Agnes, who readily agreed to accompany her. If Agnes had pnffed a difagreeable nights that of Emma had not been more plrafant* íhe could not forget, even for a moment, that Whitmore was married : " yet what is it to me ?" faid íhe, " I fnall never fee him more without my parents give me leave to vifit Mrs. Delmer, and indeed I havefcarcely any wiih they fhouîd ; yet to be fure Mr. Whitmore's being married is no reafon to prevent me. Poor man he appears very unhappy; he feems defer ving of being beloved* fo fenfible, good-tempered, and handiome> his wife muft be a ftrange character not to endeavour to conciliate his affections ; nay,. her neglect of him, when ihe knew his arm was broken, fhews ihe mufl have an un¬ feeling heart j for had he been my hufhand," concluded Emma, " I would even have walked twice the diftance that feparated them, looner
fooner than any other foould have taken thofe cares that properly belonged to me." In the morning Whitmore was the fiift in the parlour, where he was foon joined by Mr. and Mrs. Godwin : " My friends," fàd he, " 1 know not how to apologize for my behaviour of laft night ; yet, if you knew my unhappinefs, I think I fliould ftand ex¬ cufed, though in truth my misfortunes have no right, even for a moment, to caft a gloom on your happinefs ; yet 3 when I contemplate the blifs poffible to be enjoyed in the mar¬ riage ftate, and compare it with my own mifery, I cannot forbear accufing fortune of unkindnefs." " My dear Sir," interrupted Godwin, " I entreat you not to mention it, and am ex¬ tremely forry you do not enjoy that happineis you appear fo well to merit." Whitmore replied only by a figh ; he thought the pique he could not avoid ihe wing
fheAving the night before required fome apology, and therefore had determined to perfuade the good Farmer that his matri¬ monial difcontents totally originated in his Lady ; a circumfhnce which he thought would excufe his conduci: to the family, and perhaps infpire the gentle breaft of Emma, to whom he judged it would be repeated, with pity, a fentiment he had no doubt fome time to improve into one more congenial to his wiíhes. The entrance of Mrs. Delmer and Emma prevented more converfation on Mr. Whit- more's family difcontents s but he faw with fecret exultation that the lively features of Emma were overfpread with an uncommon caft of ferioufnefs, a circumfhnce that not a little flattered him with fuccefs in the plan he meditated in recompenfe for the hofpi- tality he had received : Indeed, in this cafe he conceived that no injury could accrue, for could he gain Emma's heart, the obligation would be mutual, ihe íhould (hare his for- шпе ж
tunc, and, from the prejudices of a country life and narrow education, be raifed at once to be the envy of the women, and the define of the men. Had her brothers been affluent, they might have been expeded to refent fuch an iniult ; but Whitmore feared no man, his fword was ever ready to defend the vices w of its owner, and in this cafe the anger of two fimple youths, the curfes of an aged father, or the anguiih of his innocent partner, never intruded on his imagination. Slave to his paflions, they bore him like a rapid tor¬ rent againft all impediment, redoubling by obftrudion and difficulty, fo that when once refolved on any purpofe, the vivacity of his temper, and errors of his education, repre¬ fented the purfuit he was engaged in as dependent on his honour to be accomplifoed. Breakfaft was hardly over before William and Edwin entered, accompanied by Fanny and Agnes, unconfeious of beauty, tho' fair *' As opening flow*« untainted yet with wind."
Fanny,
Fanny, with a franknefs that peculiarly diftinguifhcd her, regardlefs of the ftrangers, flew to falute Mrs. Godwin, then threw her arms round the venerable father of her lover : " Blefs thee, my child," exclaimed the good man, kifling her with the afľedion of a parent, " may Heaven hereafter reward thy duty and innocence with children faultíeft in mind and form as thyfelf." " Amen," involuntarily articulated Wil¬ liam, viewing his father and intended wife Avith a rapture that gave redoubled anima-* tion to his fine dark eyes. A momentary blufli fufľufed the face of Fanny ; but fiiently thanking Mr. Godwin with a kifs, íhe haf* tened to teftify her affedion to Emma, while Agnes, equally lovely, but more timid, re¬ placed her in the arms of the relpedable pair. cc What a fcene !" faid Whitmore, in alow voice to his ßfter, who had withdrawn towards the window, " what enchanting women !" «« Panable A "
" Pafľable," replied Mrs. Delmer, care¬ lefsly viewing Agnes with fcrutinizing atten¬ tion, in vain endeavouring to difcovcr defeds in a face and form that envy itfelf muft have pronounced fauldefs. The family congratu¬ lations over, Whitmore advanced, with his natural еа*е and good-breeding, and joined in the converfation. Emma, an hour before he had thought a finifhed model of innocent beauty, but now, though he could not allow her eclipfed, he faw her at leaft equalled, and had there been the fmalleft room for hope of gaining an intereft in the bofom of the fair fifters, his heart would have cheriflied paffion ; but as it was, each fortified by ăn affedion that precluded his flattering himfelf with fuccefs, he contemplated only Emma as equally lovely, and doubly defirable, as her heart was not prepoffeffed, or, if other- wife, only partial to himfelf. Mrs. Delmer, who, İn fpite of pride or wealth, found a ftrong inclination to love Edwin, was not quite lb fecure. In Agnes flie
foe beheld a beloved and much to be dreaded rival, and though foe could boaft affluence, accomplifliments, and a perfon generally al¬ lowed handfome, flie was by no means certain whether the weak prejudices of Edwin might not lead him to prefer the humble village maid, unadorned but by nature, and rich only in worth and innocence : She indeed flattered herfelf, that the partiality foe felt for the handfome ruftic was merely the effed cf being immured in the country, where no moie pleafing objed had prefented ; yet a number of circumflances might have proved to a curious obfeiver, that Edwin, however unintentionally, had a firmer hold on her affedions ; flie had been fatisfied, nay appa¬ rently happy while at Inglewood, though deprived of all thofe faíhionable amufements and gratifications, that flie had eonfidered dining the life of her hufhand fo efľential to her felicity, and which foe had been in hafte to pai take as foon as cliquette would permit» The idea once ftaited of Edwin's going with them to town, flie warmly efpoufed it, and anxioufly
anxioufly wiflied to fee him placed İn & manner foe eonfidered more refpedable, without examining her own heart for the real motive. Whitmore was not blind to this partiality, though it was far from being fulpeded by any one elfe ; now and then it gave him awkward fenfations, but which were quickly vanquifoed by his favourite tenets, that all Avere free agents, and paflions given to be gratified, and fo his fitter preferved the refped of the world, and her rank in fociety, for he had not the moil diftant idea of her finking it in an ill-foited marriage, he cared little about a tranfitory amour, though, had any one refleded on his filler's chaftity, he would have defended it with his life; yet neither from affedion of her perfon or vir¬ tue, but merely becaufe cuftom demanded fuch condud in a man of honour ; in fliort, affluence, and the concomitant evils of having it in his power to gratify all his foibles and vices, had perverted a foul, naturally noble and brave, to render him merely a modern man of fafoion. 2 After
After a flay of two hours Fanny and Agnes took leave of the family, and re¬ turned, accompanied by their lovers. Mr. Godwin withdrew to his fields, his wife to fuperintend her dairy, Mr. Whitmore to his apartment, and foon after Mrs. Delmer to her's, complaining of a flight indifpofkion, though in reality her only ficknefs was the beauty of Agnes, and the fear of fuppîanting fo dangerous a rival Emma thus left alone, for fome time indulged a thoufand melan¬ choly thoughts ihe had formerly been, a ft range r to, and all which had only exiftence fince the introduction of Whitmore at the Foreft. At length, weary with unprofitably thinking, and in no humour to refume the little domefiic cares that ufed to amufe her, fhe carelefsly took up a book that Mrs. Delmer had accidentally left on the table.— It was an elegantly written fiftion, in Avhich the hero, unable to combat his paffion for a married woman, had terminated his exiftence. Emma's heart was not formed of unfeeling materials, and the cataftrophe coft h^: many tears·
tears. The heroine was reprefented virtuous* yet flie apparently loved the fuicide ; circum- flances that Emma had thought incompa¬ tible, for how, had ever before whifpered her innocent heart, can a good woman love any man but her hufband ? The haplefs lover too was mentioned with pity and ten- dernefs, fentiments in which the humanity cf Emma coincided ; but no one deplored what ihe had ever been taught to believe, that fuicide was everlafting perdition ; nor was ihe difpleafed at the omiffion of this circumftance, the tendernefs of her difpofi- tion leading her to iympathize with the fuf- ferer, and pity thofe errors her education had taught her to abhor. Thus did the dangerous elegance of a pathetic tale at once undermine ic all that the prieft and nurie had taught," and which lier father had never contradided, kaving thofe ideas implante* on the mind whicii he thought might tend to the general good, or otherwife trufling to time and reafon to
to develop in the breafts of his children, fentiments which he found inexplicable, con- fonant with the philanthropy that aduated all his thoughts and adions, for his heart, like uncle Toby's, would not have damned the devil himfelf to all eternity, much lefs the errors of fallible mortality ; weaknels and folly he eonfidered with pity, and Avhen in his power endeavoured to reclaim ; but vice and cruelty he faw with an abhorrence that made its perpetrators ever fliunned by him. Whitmore, Avho had loitered from his apartment to the garden, parted the window, and perceiving Emma alone, pufhed by the Avood-bines that almofl obfeured it, and entered into converfation with her.—»" Good Heaven !" cried he, with infinuating tender¬ nefs, cc you have been Aveeping, my lovely friend ; pardon my intrufion, but furely, after the kindnefs I have experienced, I may be allowed to feel an intereft in the forrows of vol. ι. E one,
one, whom numberlcfs circumflances have contributed to render dear to me." <c Indeed," replied Emma, ** I believe few people have lefs real caufe for forrow than myfelf, bleft as I am with kind and aíľedionate relatives ; but to confefs the truth, this book of Mrs. Deimer's has afľeded me greatly, tliough I fuppofe it is not true ; nay, I hope not, for the idea is dreadful, and though our curate fays there is no pardon for fuicide, I truft he is miftaken." " Can you doubt it ?" replied Whitmore. * £ God is too merciful to punifh errors which fatal necefiity obliges us to commit : Priefts, indeed, of all ages, have promulgated doc¬ trines to keep weak minds in awe j but can you, gentle Emma, for a moment fuppofe, that fentiments, which are the refult ofre- fiedion and reafon, can be culpable, furely not. The unhpppy fuicide there reprefented loved it is tiue a married woman, but one • whom a number of untoward circumflances had
had made fuch without her heart being con- ihlted, and in which fituation fhe might per¬ haps have remained paflably content during life, had not that impercepıİDİe attradion which unites fome hearts convinced her of her miflake, 3nd her lover of his mifery, for nothing to hope," added he, widi a figh, " an infuperable bar being placed between him and the objed of his deareft wifhes, who can condemn him for throwing off a load which he found infupportable. Believe me there are fituations which demand more fortitude to fuftain than falls to the fliare of weak mortality. You, my fair friend, who are made to be only once ken and for ever idolized, can form no idea of the torments of defpairing affedion." The entrance of the old fervant to lay the cloth here broke off the difcourfe, a i Whitmore withdrew from the window to join the hofpitable party at dinner. The cloth was no fooner removed than Whitmore, who could not poffibly frame E 2 any
any excufe for a longer fhy, mentioned his* intention of quitting Inglewood in two days, exprefììng his wifhes that Edwin would ac¬ company him. The young man accepted his offer widi modert thanks, faying, u as he had his father's permiflion he would attend him, and endeavour to merit his kindnefs." Mrs. Delmer's eyes at this reply fparkled with pleafbre, while Whitmore expreíľed his fatisfačlion in the warmeft terms, declaring» « that however fuccefsful he might be in his attempts to ferve Edwin, yet the obligation muil ever remain on his fide,"
CHAP.
пмммМНЯими!
CHAP. VI.
NOTHING material pafľed the day intervening Whitmore's departure, the whole family being much difpirited, even Edwin, though at times elate with the flat¬ tering profped before him, could not, un¬ moved, think on a feparation from parents fo beloved, and the woman, whofe happinefs had heretofore been his firft and deareft confideration. The evening, previous to his departure, in prefence of William and Fanny, he re¬ newed his vows to Agnes, who could only E 3 anfwer
anfwer with her tea^s, concealing her face in the bofom of her fifler, while he articulated an adieu fcarcely audible, then forced himfelf away, goaded on by ambition, though at the fame moment he was more than half in¬ clined to relinquiih all for love. In the morning, after repeated farewells, the traveilers took their way towards the metropolis, leaving the anxious Farmer and his wife, with Emma, watching the carriage while it remained in fight j the aged pair in filent prayers for the fafety of their fon, and Emma, though her eyes overflowed with tears, exulting in the futuie profpect, that Edwin would leturn, poflefled ofthat wealth her heart had lately thought fo efľential to human happinefs. William had rifen at the carlieft dawn of day, and taken an affectionate, though me¬ lancholy adieu of his brother, whom he entreated not to be difpleafed that he did not flay to fee him depart, as he thought his
his prefence at Bernard's might, ín fome meafure, alleviate the forrow Avith which the gentle fillers appeared overwhelmed. Edvwn, having acquiefced in the propriety of this meafure, William immediately re¬ paired to Bernards, where he found them already 'rifen, their fwollen eyes fufficiently bearing teftimony of their having paifed a reíliefb nisht. William exerted all his en- deavours to footh the mind of Agnes, re- prefenting the abfence of Edwin as trivia!, and Avhich would be greatly alleviated by the weekly receipt of letters ; he alio urged his flattering profpects, and finally, what appeared to have itili more weight, that he had no doubt but that in a few months Ed¬ win would return, and claim her promifed hand. True friendfliip feldom fails of its efFect, efpecially Avhen aflifled by fuch wel¬ come arguments. By degrees Agnes became more reconciled to the feparation, and tho' nič flill continued to figh, her grief was neither fo agonizing to herfel£ or fo painful E 4 to
to others. On her quitting the room,— ** Generous William !" faid Fanny, " will you ever thus kindly fliare my forrows, for in alleviating thofe of Agnes, how have you calmed mine ? But why do I afk, when I know you will ? All I fear is, that my ut¬ moft efforts will never be fufficient to fliew my gratitude." While the tears flill flowed for Edwin's departure, Mr. Whitmore, with his fifter and protegee, by eafy flages arrived at his elegant villa, where he was received by Mrs. Whitmore, not with the inquiring tendernefs of a wife, but with the refined politenefs of an accomplifhed but common acquaintance. Whitmore having coldly faluted her, firft prefented his fitter, then Edwin ; the former flie received wkh a genteel compliment, but the latter only excited a flare of aftoniih¬ ment 5 for though Edwin might have been elaffed among the moft finiflied of nature's works, he ftill wanted numberlefs appen¬ dages to make him a fine Gentleman, fuch as a
a faíhionable taylor and hair-drefľer, an un- blufhing confidence, together with a long train of etceteras : Thefe faíhionable intro- dudones being wanting, Mr. Whitmore was obliged to find a fubftitute. — " To this young man's father," faid he, " I am under the greateft obligations, and have therefore taken the care of his fortune on myfelf, his mauvaife honte will evaporate daily ; I have no doubt in a fingle year to fee him fo metamorphofed that his neareft friends will- not know him." Mrs. Whitmore coldly bid him wel¬ come, and retired with her fifler- to drefsj. where fhe more particularly inquired con¬ cerning him : " What a ruftic !" exclaimed ihe 5 " furely, when Mr. Whitmore had paid for the trouble he had given, it was unnecef- fary to encumber himfelf with this lad, for what can he poffibly do with him ? it is plain he don't intend him for a domeftic by his introdudion, and with his curled locks and rofy cheeks he is fit for nothing elfe." E 5 «I
" I cannot agree with you," replied Mrs· Delmer : " I think his perfon, Avhen rendered a little more faíhionable, might grace any fituation ; betides, my brother had no other way of fhewing his gratitude to the family, as they refufed all pecuniary recompence, for, though farmers, their fituation is per¬ fectly eafy ; for the young man, he has really had a good education, and 1 think has the finefl hair, eyes and teeth, I ever faw." " My dear filler," returned Mrs. Whit¬ more, laughing, " your long refidence in the country with your late fpoufe may have given you a tafle for the uncultivated beauties of nature 5 but for me, who have been bred and wedded in the higheft degree of falhion, I mufl confefs 1 prefer the exotic fweets of the orange flowerto the uncultivated fragrance of the woodbine : Befides, he is a mere no¬ body, a ptafant, a farmeris fon, and did all the graces that ever poets feigned center in this Corydon, what would it avail,, when he knows not how to ufe them ? Why, he can neither
neither walk, dance, or talk, like a man of the world ; ho\vevcr, I confefs he has an able mailer, and in a ihort time we İhall be able to judge of his genius." Mrs. Delmer, glad to change the fubjed, began a number of inquiries, which her fitter was neceffarily obliged to anfwer, and that foon drove the ruftic Edwin from her thoughts. The behaviour of Mrs. Whitmore to Edwin in future Avas polite, but diflant, as if fearful, that fliould ihe be more conde - fcending, he might forget the diftance fortune had placed betAveen them ; that of Mr. Whit¬ more and Mrs. Delmer, on che contrary, was friendly and warm ; but as no mention Avas for fome time made of the fituation defigned for him, it gave him uneafinefs, as he was too clear-iighted not to view the behaviour of Mrs. Whitmore in its proper light, In hiò letters to his fathér and Agnes he expreíľed himfelf perfedly fatisfied ; bbt Eo in
in one to his brother William he was more explicit. " My dear brother, " Although I have to my father and Agnes declared myfelf content, yet to you I will notdifguife that I almoft repent leaving Inglewood. The manners of rhe people here are fo totally different from ours, that they both difguft and diftrefs me ! I am frequently laughed at for blufliing ; and can¬ dour, which we ha\ r e been taught to prize fo highly, is banifhed from among them, while Religion is treated as a jeft, and fcarcely ever mentioned but with ridicule ! All this, my dear brother, is very difagreeable to me ; yet the hopes of that advantage whicii influ¬ enced me to leave thofe fo dear, muft enable me to bear İt. How often, William, do I wifli my temper was more fimilar to your's, the arrows then that might be thrown at my country, education and manners, would fall harmlefs; for you would difregard and de- fpife
fpife them, while, on the contrary, I am humiliated by ridicule, and almoft aíhamed of being a Farmer's fon. I blufo to relate this even to you, though in your bofom I knoAv my weaknefs is fafe. We are yet at Mr. Whitmore's country-houfe, where we have much company : His Lady is alfo here ; foe is very handfome and accomplifoed, but her infufferable pride, to me makes her to¬ tally difagreeable. He is equally kind as when at the Foreft, and I have no doubt will ftridly keep his word in refped to me; therefore hide my difcontents from my affec¬ tionate parents and my beloved Agnes, a feparation from whom hangs heavy on my heart. Adieu, and believe me ever your's, E. GODAA T IN," The happinefs of his worthy parents, and that of the gentle Agnes, was too near the heart of William for him to foew the fore¬ going 2
going letter, not even Fanny being trufted with the contents, while in his own bofom he execrated the hour that Edwin left the Foreft ; nor did he fail to write fpeedily, and entreat his return ; or, if he determined to flay, conjured him to pre ferve his morals unimpaired, to beware of ill examples, nor fuŕľer himfelf to be too foon elated, or yet weakly depreíľed. u A noble mind, Edwin," faid he, in the conclufion of his letter, tf is not degraded by the fcorn of the unworthy. Art thou not an honeft man, a name fuperior to the vain diftindions of wealth ? Believe me, I would not exchange it for any unmeaning found that fortune could beftow, even though pride fhould add the choice of all the monfters that heraldry ever created. Edwin, we are the fons of a virtuous and honeft Farmer, a man refpeded by his neighbours, and be¬ loved by the poor ; for the labour of no execrating flave enriches him, but whole- fome induftry and independence, hand in hand,
hand, accompany him through life. Sacred then is the truft repofed in us ; let it be our glory to preferve his name unfullied, and tranlmit it untarniflied to our defendants.—- Return then, Edwin, the Farmer's fon, though fcorned in polite circles, is here beloved, and his abfence hourly lamented ; no de¬ grading conceifions will be expeded ; on your return all will be jcy and harmony, the only contention who fliall carefs you moil." Before Edwin received this letter he was, however, more reconciled to his fituation, the kindnefs of Mrs. Delmer and her brother in fome meafure compenfatmg for the hauteur of Mrs. Whitmore, he therefoie wrote an immediate reply to William, afl\ dionately thanking him, but declining to return, as Mr. Whitmore was foon to remove to Lon¬ don, where he hoped to be placed in the promifed independence.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIL
THE information Edwin had given his brother Avas verified in a few days after, for Mr. Whitmore, already weary of the country, and his Lady no lefs fo, determined to haften to town. Indeed he had never borne the country with any degree of pa¬ tience until he faw Inglewood, and there the charms of Emma alone had rendered it pleafing ; indeed the innocent Emma had at once given and received an impreffion not eafily effaced. Whitmore could not avoid contrafting her in idea with the modifh belles he
he daily beheld ; her foft bine eyes fparkling through their dark lafhes, her luxurient ring¬ lets wantonly agitated by every wind waving over her lovely forehead, and falling in un¬ taught elegance to the finali of her fine turned vvaift; the gloAving blufli of her cheeks, the fweet dimple and enchanting fmile which played round her lovely mouth, ail returned with redoubled ardour on his А -varm imagi¬ nation, and incrcafed his delire to again gaze on them, and if poffible obtain them. — Edwin's promotion he thought the moft probable means, for he then fliould be re¬ garded as the diflinguifhed friend of the family, and gratitude would give additional foftnefs to the fufceptible heart of Emma, in whofe bofom he ftrongly fufpeded he had already an advocate ; to combat her preju¬ dices he knew would be difficult, but thefe difficulties, if he fucceeded, would enhance his vidory. With fuch an incentive the adive mind of Whitmore could enjoy but little reft until he commenced his plan of operations, the removal to town Avas there¬ fore
fore the firft ftep, and immediately put In execution, In the mean time the famiiv at hide wood were alfo forming their future plan of hap¬ pinefs ; the good Farmers had confented to the union of William and Fanny as foon as the bands could be publiihed, all therefore was preparation and impatience until the event took place, for never before did Wil¬ liam experience three fuch tedious weeks. Fanny had declined going to church the two firft Sundays, but on the third her father infilled on her accompanying him, as the new Lady of the Manor had arrived in the country tW'O days before, and was expeded at church ; it was in vain foe attempted to excufe herfelf, the old man was peremptory. " What a prize, girl, art thou aíhamed of?" faid he. " If thou art aíhamed of William, turn him off, it is not too late ; all the tenants will be at church in the morning in compli¬ ment to the new Lady, and why foould'ft thou
thou wifli to be particular ? I fliall have no right to command thee after Monday, fo pr'y thee give me this proof of thy obedience." cc My dear father," replied Fanny, " you fhall be obeyed ; but why will you fay that you fhall have no right to command me hereafter ; have I ever fliewn by my adions that I thought your commands painful ?" Cf No, thou wert always good and con- fiderate ¿ but thou knoweil, Fanny, that my leafe is nearly expired, and I fhould be forry to appear wanting in refped."—Fanny thus preíľed determined to obey her father, and accordingly, on Sunday, accompanied by Agnes, Emma, William, and their refped able parents, attended the paiiih church, where they Avere fcarcely feated when (their new Lady of the Manor) Mrs. Palmer entered. All eyes Aveie turned on their new comer, until the curate, in an audible voice, de¬ manded, for the laft time, " whether theie was any lawful impediment againil the union of
of William Godwin and Frances Bernard ?" This at once changed the objed of curiofity, all eyes fixing on the intended Bride and Bridegroom; nor did Mrs. Palmer need any one to point out the parties, the downcaft looks and blufliing cheeks of Fanny, the eyes of William, " with love illumined high," fixed with rapturous, yet chaftened expreffion on his future wife, proclaimed ac once the happy pair. Never before had honeft Bernard im- pofed fo painful a taik on his daughter, as that of attending him to church in fo critical a fituation, and was fincerely rejoiced when foe reached Mr. Godwins, where, with her father and fifter, foe had promifed to pafs the afternoon : In foort, feated by her beloved William, and furrounded by ap· proving friends, foe had almoft forgotten the difagreeable fenfations of the morning, when Bernard, Avho was neareft the window, fud¬ denly exclaimed, " Why, as I live, here comes our new Lady, what can poffibly bring:
bring her?" Before any conjedure could be made on the reafon of this vifit, the Lady had approached fo near the gate, that politenefs required Mr. Godwin Íhould advance to meet her.—" You are welcome, Madam," faid the good man ; " will you add to your condefcenfion by accepting a feat after your walk ? The Lady having ac¬ quiefced, followed him into the parlour, where the Avhole party inftantly rofe to re¬ ceive her. " I pray you be feated," faid flie, taking her place ; " you will give me pain if you treat me with fo much ceremony ; for, tho' not perfonally acquainted, Mr. Godwin is well known to me by the means of Mr. Burton, my late uncle's fteward."—GodAvin bowed, then introduced his family, not forgetting Bernard and his daughter : all were received in a manner that marked true great¬ nefs undifguifed by affedation, for foe loved to confer happinefs, and pride had never yet prevented her from gratifying fo praife-wonhy an
an inclination.—" My good friends," faid íhe, with a fmile, " though in this firft vifit I come an uninvited gueft, I truft hereafter I may not prove an unwelcome one. As your daughter's marriage is the firft after my arrival in the country, I entreat it may be celebrated at the Hall" " I fcaicely know how to exprefs my gra¬ titude for your condefcenfion, Madam," re¬ plied the Farmer ; " but my future daughter is anxious to have her marriage as private as poffible, and as it is to take place to-morrow, we fliould but be giving your family a world of unnecefliiry trouble." '* It will be none," replied Mrs. Palmer ; <c my table needs but little preparation, there¬ fore, my good ¿ill," continued flie, taking the hand of the uembling Fanny, "ihailit not be as I fay ; My own family, and any guefts you choofe, fliall conftitute the whole company." Fanny
Fanny fiole a look at her father, for tho* flie would willingly have been excufed, foe well knew his temper, and remembered his anxiety for a renewal of his leafe. " My father and Mr. Godwin fliall decide for me, Madam," replied Fanny, modeftly courtefing. " Nay," haflily interrupted Bernard, " if my opinion is afked, I think it will be the height of ingratitude to refufc Madam's offer, and as to the wedding being private, had I my own way, I íhould have invited half the country. I think a good adion can¬ not have too many vvitneffes ; but Fanny is fo íheepiíh and bafliful, that flie cannot bear one to mention it to any one, though flie loves William ns her own life, and is never happy but when he is tied to her apron firing/* " Well, Madam," interrupted Godwin, * c as our good girl has refei red herfelf to us > and I fee İt will gratify her father, with your
your leave we will avail ourfelves of the honour you intend to confer on us, and our young folks will hereafter, I hope, fhew they do not difgrace your kindnefs. Mrs. Palmer expreíľed the utmoft fatis¬ fadion at this determination, and after fome general difcourfe bid them farewell, haAİng firft defired them to breakfaft at the Hall previous to their going to church, where flie meant to accompany them. Mrs. Palmer was fcarcely out of fight before Bernard gave way to the tianfpoit that almofl overpowered him. — "There, girl," faid he, " this comes of my advice ; I have no fear of my leafe now, and that will be fo much the better for thee. Well, well, thee be'eft a lucky girl, Fanny, and fo will my Agnes too, neA'er fear. The next thing will be, I fuppofe, our having news that Edwin is quite a Gentleman, and coming down to fetch her."—William fighed involuntarily, while Agnes fiiently dropped a
a tear. Ambition foe had none, and would willingly have relinquifoed all the flattering profpeds of future grandeur to have been feated by Edwin's fide in fimilar circum¬ flances with her fifler Fanny. All parties were loud in the praife of Mrs. Palmer ; her perfon and affability fur¬ nifoed difcourfe for the whole afternoon, except when the fubjed gave way to the pity excited by her uneafinefs ; for fhe had lately buried an uncle, Avhofe fortune foe inherited, and to Avhofe memory foe was faid to be molt tenderly attached. At an early hour they feparated, William attending Bernard and his daughter home, w here he lingered fome time before he could bid them farewell, though only for the night. Ac lengch, tenderly faluting his deftined wife, he whifpered in her ear, " Thank God ! my beloved Fanny, this is the laft night we have to feparate ¿" then, without vol. 1, F venturing
venturing another look, he ran from the houfe and battened home. William arofe wkh the fun the next morn¬ ing, exceffive happineis had kept him a va ake the whole night, he counted the hours with impatience, and beheld with rapture the ftars give place to the dawn of day. — He was foon equipped, a plain iuperfme drab fuit coníiituing his whole bridal finery. His father was not yet rifen. " He has furely ovcrflept himfelf," faid William. The clock ftruck. t£ Piih !" continued he, " that clock has flood during the night; yec, if it has not, I fhould be forry to diftub my fathet." With fuch ideas he defcended the flaii cafe, though far lefs cauti^ufly than ufual, nay, when he had reached the bottom, he Avas feiztd with a cough* which being heard by the Farmer, he called aloud from his bed: — " W hat aie yru ftin mg already, my fon ? It is much too early to go to Benuid's." William иль of a different opinion, and after having anfiscied Ыь fathtr that he íhould take
take a walk, haftened thither, predetermined, however, not to difturb his Fanny. This determination was, however, unnecefiary, for in a foort time flie appeared at the window, and prefently after with Agnes joined him at the gate. After converfing for two hours, the party was augmented by the arrival of fome rela¬ tions, and foon after came the venerable Godwin, his wife and daughter, accompanied by the guefts who were invited to witnefs the ceremony. Mutual congratulations having taken place, the company repaired to Mrs. Palmer's, where they found every thing prepared for their reception, the Lady prefiding at the breakfaft table in a manner that delighted her guefts. At length the moment arrived that called them to church ; Mrs. Palmer, with Mrs. Godwin and Bernard, ín honeft exultation, led the van ; next followed Fanny, F 2 efcorted
cfcorted by her future father-in-law and huiband, whofe " Speaking eye Exprefs'd the ûcred triumph of his foul, Wuh confeious vii tue, gratitude antl love, Above the vulgar joy divinely raifed/* Then came the bride-maids, Agnes and Emma, and laflly, in pairs, the different relatives of ooth families. On entering the church the fenice immediately began, and Bernard prefenting his daughter to William, a few minutes fixed her irrecoverably his,— " Fanny," faid he, faluting her when the ceremony concluded, " thou art mine, for ever, ever mine, and the ftudy of my life İhall be to deferve thee." « And mine," whifpered Fanny, " to repay your affedion, William." He then advanced with her towards their father's.— " Even here, oh ! my parents," exclaimed he, " blefs us, here at the altar ¿ fo İhall your
your bleífing be regiftcred with our mutual vows, and doubly fandify our union." Bernard, moved even to tears, could only fob his bleflmg as he faluted his children ; but Godwin, firm and colleded, advancing, faid, " May the benedidion of your Father, which is in Heaven, be added to that of a weak old man. Blefied may you be. May every morn bring to yc joy like this. — May ye live in honour and happinefs, and die furrounded by your childrens children, whom I cannot wifh worthier than being juft reprefentatives of their parents." Mrs. Palmer now congratulated the new married pair, as did alfo the reft of the party ; they then returned to the hall, where an excellent but plain dinner was provided, after which the day was pafľed in innocent mirth and feftivity, and the evening concluded with a ball, after which all parties retired to their retpedive homes. Mrs. Palmer, at their departure, prefenting Fanny with a ring in token of her future friendfliip. F 3 CHAP.
С II Λ P. VIII.
MRS. PALMER was about thirty-fix, her fortune large, and entirely at her own command, being bequeathed her by her lately deceafed uncle, whofe death had fpread a gloom over her natural cheerfulnefs ; but nothing could obfcure the philanthropy of her difpofition ; fhe had felt misfortune, therefore knew how to companionate it in others, while to diffufe happinefs was her higheft relaxa¬ tion. — " Ah !" exclaimed flie, when her guefts departed, " how have thefe honeft folks beguiled me from myfelf! What a refpedable
xefpedable charader is Godwin ! How for¬ cibly does he bring my uncle to my memory ! It is not in the buftie of public life my mind can regain its wonted compofure, it is in the calm exercite of domeftic duties, in the fociety of a chofen few, in ads of beneficence, which my fortune demands, and my heart applauds." As fuch was the difpofition of Mrs. Pal¬ mer, it may eafily be fuppofed that her par¬ tiality for the Godwins increafed daily, for joined to uncorrupted bonefty, they poffeffed a degree of underftanding that made them agreeable and convertible companions. — Her fuperior rank had at firft caufed fome little reflraint, but her confiant affability foon baniflied all referve, and though thev con¬ tinued to look up to her with refped, it v/as fo foftened by affedion and efteem, that her prefence ever increafed their cheerful nefs, and redoubled their enjoyments,
F 4 William
William had immediately on his marriage written to acquaint his brother, who had re¬ turned his congratulations. Edwin was now in London, but the fituation Mr. Whitmore mentioned had been difpofed of previous to his application, he therefore was as yet un- fcttled, a circumftance that Mr. Whitmore treated fo lightly, faying " the lofs would be foon fupplled, that it greatly contributed to alleviate the vexation which Edwin would otherwife have experienced." Mrs. Delmer, on her arrival in London, had immediately taken a houfe, and Mrs. Whitmore's perpe¬ tual engagements left Edwin under the entire guidance of her huiband, who introduced him every where as his protegee. This condefcenfion did not fail of its effed; Edwin looked up to Mr. W r hitmore as a mafter- picce of perfedion, for his fine perfon and vivacity made him univerfally admired ; and as for the fpots of libertinifm that İhaded his charade r , they fat fo eafy, and appeared fo little regarded by the gay part of the world, that Edwin began to think fuch errors not fo тегу
very heinous as he had once imagined, a dodrine which Whitmore never failed to in¬ culcate as often as occafion prefented. This fophiftry was proportionably dangerous as it was pleafant ; the curb of education and re¬ ligion had hitherto kept the paffions of Edwin (which were naturally ftrong) in fubjedion ; but he was now become a pupil to a declared votary of pleaiure, who dif- dained to be with-held by the contraded bounds of reafon : Thus Edwin's morals iníênfibly gave way, for though his heart ftill revered virtue, yet he began to regard the pradice as more difficult than he had ever before experienced. One evening, after having dined with Whitmore at a taA'ern, among a mixed com¬ pany (where the glafs was freely circulated, and Edwin alhamed by the ridicule of his friend, had forgotten his ufual temperance) as they adjourned homeward, W r hitmore fud¬ denly feeming to recoiled himfelf, faid, with a half fmile, " Apropos, I had forgot an F 5 indifpenfible
indifpenfible engagement which I made for to night ; you muft accompany me." They then entered a hired vehicle, and foon reached an elegant houfe, where Whitmore appeared perfedly acquainted, introducing Edwin to an elderly Lady and three young ones as his friend, at the fame time defiring him to cul¬ tivate the acquaintance of his coufins. Edwin bowed, and blufliing, replied, " he was too much honoured by the condefcenfion of Mr. Whitmore to negled fhewing his refped to any of his relatives." The Ladies firmed archly at Whitmore, and feemed to demand an explanation, Avhen, taking the youngeft by the hand (a beautiful girl of eighteen) he piefented her to Edwin, faying, <c Here, Sophy, take charge of this young man, he is as balhful as you were a twelve¬ month fince, and bluihes as frequently ; cannot you give him fome advice how to get rid of fuch trcublefome appendages ?"
«I
" I do not know," anfwered foe, in a lively accent, at the fame time fixing her eyes on his face, and taking his hand, — " let me firft confider his features ; Avhy, yes, I believe he will do in time. What fay you, Sir, will you be my fcholar ?" — Edwin was confufed, he knew not what to reply ; he trembled, his cheeks were dyed Avith crirnfon, even unacquainted as he was with the Avorld, he could make no doubt, from the manner of ihe Ladies, that they Avere of the number his education badtaughc him to abhor; yet, fearful of diíDíeaíiníiľ his friend Whitmore, and aíhamed of avow¬ ing his fentiments, he remained filenr, his hand locked in that of the youthful Circe, who appeared in no haite to rcugn İr. During the evening miith even to licentioufnef» pre¬ vailed o\ x er the whole pai ty, except F.Jvrin : He, preffed by the careffes of his feleded companion, ami ith-held by the recollec¬ tion of Agnes, knew not how to ad, лпЛ alternately underwent p loxifms of both feVv r and ague. At length an ck-gant fupper wvs F 6 krved
ferved up, the wine went briikly round, the moft lafcivious fongs were fung, Whitmore and the Ladies repeatedly preifing Edwin to drink, until bis natural timidity began to give way, Whitmore then pretending firft to recoiled the hour, exclaimed, " It is pail two, we fliall but difturb my family; can we intrude on you, Ladies, for this night ?" The elder anfwered in the affirmative, defiring two of her daughters (as ihe ftiled them) to flie w the Gentlemen to their rc- fpedive apartments. Edwin hefitated, but his head giddy with wine, and his heart intoxicated with a vicious inclination, his wanton companion foon gained the afcendancy, and led him on to his cham¬ ber, where Inglewood, Agnes and virtue, were foon forgotten !
CHAP.
CHAP. IX.
AS opium can for a while deaden the anguiih of the body, fo may vice for a ihort time itine the pmgs of confcience $ but, as in ihe firft inftancc, when the effed ceafes, the pain returns, fo in the latter, reafon no íooner regains her empire than the delufion v;unifies, and we view cur deeds fimply as they are. Thus was it with Ed¬ win, with the morning came difguft, and calm rcfkdion : in the bitternefs of his regret, he curfed Whitmore, detefled his companion, and defpifed himfelf, refolved to haften back
back to Inglewood, and endeavour to repair the error he had been unwaribly drawn into, by the future prudence of his condud. On his meeting with Whitmore he was ferious and referved, being fully determined to in¬ form him, on the firft opportunity, of his intentions. Whitmore, on the contrary, was even m^vc than commonly cheerful exerting his ntmoit vivacity to entertain Edwin, but in vain, and he had undoubtedly declared his refolution, bad they not been joined imme¬ diately on their quitting the houfe by a friend of W T hitmore's, who accompanied them home, Edwin, on his arrival, immediately retired to his ipartment, where he for fome time had given way to the vexation that over¬ powered him, when he was interrupted by the entrance of a fervant widi a packet that had been left during his abfence. <( it is from my brother," faid he, as the man quitted the room, without regarding the addrefs, « and contains others from my father, from A<mes, and to whom, to a tlunkard, a de- bauchee, a perjured, execrable villain, whofe contaminated
contaminated foul ought for ever to be de¬ prived of fuch bleffings. — Ah, Agnes ! accurfed be the hour I left thee, and doubly accurfed that in which I was proof againft thy tears ! I dare not open the letters, they Avili contain nothing but expreflions of kind¬ nefs, and fooner at this moment could I face death." As he fpoke he pufhed the packet from him, but his eye involuntarily glancing over the dkedion, he perceived it was neither William's nor his fathei's hand ; as he had no other cotretpondents, a thoufand fears at once agitated him, and curiofity mattering every other fenfation, he haflily broke it open, and, to his infinite ftirprifc, inftead of letters, found a commiflion for an enfigncy, filled up in his own name, and a bank note for a hundred pounds, but no line to infer from whence the prefent came. Amazement kept him for fome moments filent ; he could fcarcely believe his eyes, and every other idea being banifhed by the prefent occurrence, he ftarted up, and haftened to Mr. Whit¬ more, whom he had no doubt had chofen 4 this
this method to fuiprife him. Whitmore was alone, and if the aftoniihment of Edwin had been great, his, if poffible, was yet fuperior. The army he had never thought of, nor had the moft diílant idea of fuch a meafure ever taken place in the mind of Edwin, though to Mr. Whitmore he was convinced he owed it, for unknown to any one in London, to whom elfe could he fuppofe himfelf indebted ? Mr. Whitmore at firft ftrongly denied it, but a few moments recolledion made him change his manner into fimple congratulations on the event, neither abfolutely denying, nor yet pcfitiveiy acknowledging it ; then, after fome flight difcourfe, taking his hat, left the houfe. Edwin remained alone fome time bewildered in a multiplicity of different ideas, the errors of the preceding night only lightly intruding on his mind j the return to Ingle· wood was alfo forgotten, or at leaft delayed, until he fhould go to claim Agnes as 'his bride, which he had now no doubt of being foon able to perform, for imagination hid already
already raifed him from an enfign to a colonel at leaft. In the mean time Whitmore haftened to his fifler, on whom his fufpirions immedi¬ ately glanced, nor did he hefitate to difclofe them. Mrs. Delmer at firft firmly denied any knowledge of the bufinefs, but Whit¬ more's eyes and interrogatories were too penetrating for him to be long deceived. — At length, faid he, " you well know my fen¬ timents in general; yet I hold the good opinion of the world of fome moment, par¬ ticularly when relative to women, and more efpecially when they are young and hand¬ fome j confider then how this bufinefs, fliould it ever be known, would be canvaffed by the old and envious. I have indeed myfelf for lome time fufpeded you had a partiality for Edwin, but hope your pride will always prevent an improper ftep." " I need not tell you, Whitmore," faid foe, laughing at his unuiualgravuy, " that I am
am twenty-feven, a widow, pofľefľed of an affluent fortune, and independent fpirit, have well eonfidered all thofe matters, and am predetermined to ari according to my own inclination ; as for the commiflion, if you will father that brat for me, 1 fhall be much obliged to you, as I would not wiih to en¬ counter Mrs. Whitmore's raillery on the occafion, therefore, my friend, I am willing to refign to you all the merit of doing a generous adion without the expence. In the army the meannefs of Edwin's origin will bethemoftenc&ually concealed, as I have no doubt he may fpeedily gain rank ; now, as to my having entertained a partiality for the young man, admitting the fuppofition, who has a right to reftram me ? Have I not fortune enough for both ?" Whitmore not being able to combat the force of fuch trreftfltbk arguments, thought- it the beil policy to take the commiflion on himfelf, leaving her in other refpecis to act without controlli, as he well knew that con¬ tradiction
tradidion would rather ftrengthen than ex¬ tingui ih her prediledioti ; befides, were fhe as partial to EdAvin as he fufpeded, yet he Avas unacquainted with her weaknefs, and ftrongly attached to Agnes· Whitmore, on his return home, though he ftill denied fending the commiflion, gave Edwin every reafon, from his vague anfwers, to fuppofe at leaft that it came with his privity. Edwin would have fain returned the note, but this W 7 hitmore flrenuoufly refufed, faying, " that he would want that fum at leaft to equip him for his new em¬ ploy, for Avhich purpofe a capital army taylor was immediately fent for to decorate his outfide with the ufual enfignia of valour. — While thefe exterior marks of a foldier were in preparation, Whitmore did not fail procuring other neceflary appendages, viz. a fencing mafter, and a ikilful teacher of military tadics.
The
The occurrences of this bufy, and, to Edwin, pleafing day, were no fooner over, than he fat down to write to the family at Inglewood, acquainting them, " that Mr. Whitmore had procured him a commiflion, and likewife had, with unparalleled delicacy and generofity, prefented him with a fuffi- cient fum to equip him in a manner that íhould not difgrace it," He likewife wrote to Agnes ; as ufual he lamented the fepara¬ tion from her, and vowed to fee her as foon as poffible ; but, alas ! in the exultation of the moment, even love appeared to hold only a fécond place in his heart, ambition, like an impetuous torrent, bearing all before it·
CHAP.
яштттвшЕштш^т
CHAP, X,
EDWIN's letter reached the family at Inglewood, as they were feated in high glee in Godwin's parlour. — Bernard had fome days before ventured to the hail, and mentioned his wiih of renewing his leafe, in which Mrs. Palmer had immediately acqui¬ efced, granting him a long term at his ufual rent ; a circumftance that exceeded Bernard's mofl fanguine expedations, who, amidft a profufion of thanks, concluded with faying, * c I have one more favour to beg, Madam, which is, that the kale may be drawn in my fon-
fon-in- law's name ; but he fliall know nothing about it until it is figned, for he is fuch an obflinate fellow I fliould never get him to confent." Mrs. Palmer, pleafed with the blunt inte¬ grity of the Farmer, difin ifled him, faying s " ihe left the whole bufinefs to himfelf, and w ou d í gn it whenever he was prepared," Three days after, all being in readinefs, Bemard called on his fon-in-law, defiring he would accompany him to witnefs the com¬ pletion of ihe leafe, a fummons he imme¬ diately obeyed. Mrs. Palmer, having ordered her íle ward to be fum moned, the parchments were produced, and λ\ illiam direded where to fet hl* .ume, on the ftppofirion of wit- ncff.igthe cecd. The other parties having likewife affixed their names, and the whole concluded, Bernard could no longer conceal h.s exultation ; but bowing to Mis. Palmer, flid, " I thank you, Madam, William, I truft,
truft, will foew himfelf a Avorthy tenant to fo kind a Lady." " I do not doubt it," replied foe, " and had I changed you for any other I foould have felt diffatisfied ; but as it is I am rather inclined to congratulate you, as the bufinefs Avill now fall on one more able to fupport it." William, after a moment's recollection, com¬ prehended the whole affair ; but aa ell kn iwing that all remonftrance would be vain he fimply returned his thanks to both parties, concluding by faring to Bernard, " Though you have in this bufinefs adui in a manner cuntí ary to my wiíhes, I fliall ftiil regaid the farm cs your's during your life ; and fliould I lurvive you, as held in truft for my filler Agnes—a dependance on my father I by no means AAÜh to íhake on) nor ck es my Fanny find it painful ; why then, my dear Sir, would you wifli us to change ?" " You are too proud, William," replied the eld man, with emotion, " you do noc üke
like to be obliged to me, though I love you as well as your own father." " And do I not revere you equally ?" anfwered William.—" He gave me life, and with the moil tender care watched over my childhood; but you, in giving me Fanny, beftowed a treafure far fuperior to the whole world without her." The Farmer's reply was a hearty íhake by the hand, faying, — "A good lad, a brave fellow, I can never do enough for thee ;" then making his obeifance to Mrs. Palmer, again repeated his thanks, and with his fon- in-law returned to Godwin. As they walked the old man's heart feemed full. At length " William," faid he, " Agnes and I lead but a dull life fince thou haft taken Fanny from us ; the foolifli girl does nothing but figh, and her eyes are for ever red with crying after Edwin, though flie knows, and I am for ever telling her, it is all for his good ; now,
uow, if thou and Fanny were with us, we fliould be as happy as the day was long." William replied, " it Avas a cafe in Avhich he fliould be entirely guided by the joint agreement of himfelf and Mr. Godwin ; that he truly confeffed he fliould be much grieved to leave his father, and equally fo to refufe the parent of his wife what would give him fuch apparent fatisfadion." This converfation brought them home, where neither Bernard nor William appeared in hafte to difclofe the manoeuvre at the Flail, until Bernard after dinner ventured to inform them what he had done, and which, to his greac vexation, he found all difap- proved, except Agnes. Godwin indeed con¬ fented that William fliould refide with Ber¬ nard ; buc the gloom which overfpread his venerable features, on the idea of his fon forfaking his paternal roof, plainly foeAved how reludantly the permiffion was given.— Emma had fat for fome time a filent ob- voL* u G ferver -,
ferver ; Avhen at length ftarting up with great li velinefs, foe cried, " Though no one has aiked my opinion I fliall give it notwith¬ ftanding : 1 hate this diviiion of families ; Ave all love one another, why then cannot we live together ? Our houfe is far larger than Mr. Bernard's, and here is plenty of room for us all." Bernard made no reply, but fixing his eyes on Mr. Godvsin, appeared to wait his opinion vidi anxiety. " Indeed, Emma," replied Godwin, " I know but few things that would give me greater fatisfadion than the confiant company of my friend Bernard, if ------ ·." " If what?" interrupted the Farmer. — " W hy, if you and your good Dame like ont, it's a bargain, for I lead but a moping life yonder. With you î foall be as happy as a Prince; we can fmoke a pipe, and drink a jug of ale, and envy no one under the fun. Old age will ileal on me unperceived,
iínperceived, and I fhall die furroundcd by diofe I love beft." Among a party fo determined to ad in uni fon, an agreement was fcon made, and Emma embraced and careíľcd as the author of the prefent happinefs ; for though it was apparent from the condud of ail how much fatisfadion the propofal had given, yet, had not her vivacity ftarted it, in all probability it had never taken place. " Nay, nay, Fanny," exclaimed Emma, " don't kifs me, you only do it to conceal your tears. Here, William, pray comfoic her, I have other bufinefs to mind," throwing her arms round Bernard's neck, and fainting him with the afľedion of a daughter ; " You are a good-natured man, and I love you dearly." Here the íbund of the poft-man's horn at the gate broke off their mutual greetings, and William haftening out, foon leturned with a letter addrefled to his father. All equally eager to hear from Edwin, G 2 Godwin
Godwin began to read the contents aloud ; but had no fooner communicated the intel¬ ligence of Edwin's gaining a commiflion than Agnes fell from her feat deprived of fcnfe or motion. Every other idea was now loft in her fituation, until at length flowly reviving fhe was led to Emma's chamber, and laid on her bed, Avhere, after fome time, fhe entreated to be left alone, which being complied with, and the party again affem- bled, Godwin concluded the letter, and each gave their refpedive opinions.—Bernard was in raptures, Edwin was already a Gentleman, for his part he had no patience with Agnes, who could fuffer herfelf to be depreíľed by what ought to give her the higheft pleafure. u Yet, when you confider, my dear father," interrupted Fanny, " that Edwin by this ftep, and in all probability Agnes will be for ever eft ranged, and diflant from us, yourfelf will furely not fee it in fo flattering a point of view; fhould we not have been happier, think you, all together in our original defti* nation ?" " True,
<r True, true, girl, I can't fay but it would have been very comfortable ; but then only think, when he comes to fetch Agnes, how the whole country will flare—how I fliall enjoy it ! befides, every man has not the fame luck, and many men, many minds, Edwin was born for a Gentleman, and Wil¬ liam for a Farmer." " So truly do I feel what you advance," anfwered William, " and fo thoroughly fen¬ fible am I of the bleffings I enjoy, that were it in my power to choofe my fituation I Avould rej ed a change. Nature, in giving me a conftitution able, and a heart willing to labour, has done her part, and never in my perfon lhall the adive Farmer degenerate into the ufelefs Gentleman. Edwin has cholèn a more diftinguiihed part in the bufi¬ nefs of life, a defender of his country's rights, and a minifter of its vengeance. Oh ! may equity guide him* and fuccefs and honour attend him : For me no alpiring thoughts find place in my bofom; let Kings defend G 3 their
their pofľeíľions and treafure, fufHcient to me is the defence of mine, to fhield thole I love from care, to cultivate my lands, to guard my flocks, and to flicker them from the wintry blati. Thus let me live and, die, too humble to excite envy, and too happy to envy any one. Can riches give more j or rather, can they give fo much ? My heart fays No, I feel peculiarly biefi, and can look down Avith pity on Kings, and the painful, uncertain ipkndour that furrounds them." " Ah! would to Heaven," exclaimed Mrs. Godwin, weeping, " that my beloved boy had never kit us, to fall perhaps in a foreign land i no careful mother to footh his dying hours, no tender father to fee him laid in the earth ! Miferable woman that I am, Avhy did I confent to his departure?" u Be comforted, dear friend of my youth, faid the venerable Godwin, taking his wife by the hand, " never can my heart know peace while thou arc fad, neither can it ever be
be completely overwhelmed Avhile thou arr fpared to blefs me. З^оок," continued he, affedİonately viewing his family, " confider the bleffings that furround thee, and canft thou repine ? Like thy íl If, I could have wiflied Edwin's defti nation otherwife ; but as¬ it is, Heaven fpeed him in the juft caufe, and God's Avili be done," "My dear mother," faid Emma, drying her tears, " our Edwin will, I hope, be kur from danger, and an honour to us. I r iin к I already fee him fo elegant and handfome in his fine fcarlet cloaths, his hair powdered, and his fword by his fide ; oh ! I am fure I foall love him a thoufand times better than ever." " I pray ye, Fanny," faid William, folding, and wirhing to enliven the difcourfe, " if the old taylor foould call when I am abfenr, be- fpeak me a fcarlet coat, and when you go into the cheefe chamber bring down the tufty cutlafs, it fliall no longer De employed G 4 againft
againft the rats, but hung to my fide, for I am determined that Emma fhall love me a thoufand times more than ever, fince her afľedion is fo eafily obtained." " You may fay what you pleafe," replied Emma, " but he will look delightfully : Oh ! how pleafed I fhall be when he comes back % the very firft Sunday he fhall go with Agnes and me to church. Lord 1 not one of the girls, Píl be bound, will know the text." " I fear," anfwered Godwin, u that you judge of others by yourfelf, Emma ; but for the prefent drop the fubjed, and go to Agnes, whofe unafiuming heart, like my own, I fancy, would prefer a ruflet frock to a fcarlet coat and cockade."—Emma obeyed, and during her abfence it was agreed, that, as the fubjed apparently gave fo much un- eafinefs to Agnes, it fhould be touched upon as little as poffible, and that the whole party fhould appear to view the change in Edwin*s affairs in a promifing light. The
The next day Godwin took the opportu¬ nity of being alone to write to hib fon ; never before had he found the taík fo uainful. He wiflied not to leflen the pleaiure Edwin appeared to experience from his fuccefs, yet how could he congratulate him on a fubjed that overwhelmed his heart with forrow. — Merciful Creator!" exclaimed he, laying Jown the pen, " what words can 1 ufe ? My fon a foldier ; a man licenfed r< íhed blood i the blood of thofe who never wronged him ; nay, perhaps, to lofe his own in quarrels in which his heart has no foare-—a heart fo ten¬ der, kind and dutiful, to become at once fo hardened, as to triumph in the deftrudion of his fellow creatures ! Congratulate him. ah ! No, it is impoffible ; I will fimply tell him that I am glad he is fatisfied ; but that for myfelf I fliould have preferred any other fituation ; Fafcinated as he appears I will not openly foew my difguft, but by lenient methods endeavour to awaken his real difpofition, which for fome time has appeared cloud¬ ed by ambition, or he had never left his G 5 family
family and betrothed bride to follow a vain and empty fliadow." Godwin's letter was, as he expreíľed, mild, yet energetic. He did not command his fon's return, but introduced fubjeds which he thought might encourage it, <\ъ the happi¬ nefs of William, the kindnefs of Mrs. Pah nier, rhe uneafinefs of Agnes, the new arrangement between the families, and finally, if he did not finii a very particular attach¬ ment to the new profeflion he was engaged in, Bernard's farm was entirely ct his com¬ mand, as William only held it in truft for Agnes, and would rejoice to rdinquiih it,— - The letter concluded, he fhewed it to no one, that, in cafe he was difappointed, they might not judge of his vexation, nor yet too harfhly of Edwin ; he then joined Ber¬ nai d, who was feated with his jug of ale "before him. Filling a bumper he drank to Edwin's health, concluding with a wifh, that " he might live to be a General" "Heaven
" Heaven forbid ! " involuntarily ejaculated Godwin, " for how much carnage muft he wade through before he could arrive at that height ?"
С H A P. XL
EDWIN's letter had reached the family at Inglewood, as they were in the midl! of innocent joy and friendfliip. Godwin's anfwer was alio received by Edwin in a moment of exultation, for he had entered upon, and aflumed the drefs of his new proft flion, gaudy diilinguifliing fcarlet : — S:range that die Minifters of a bufine!"*, fo> rcjiete with horror as that of war, fliould wear fo triumphant and gay a habit, Avhile thofe of religion arc clothed in mournful G 6 blickt
black, which appears to denote their profef- fion gloom), myfterious, and fad.—Hateful prevarication ; true Religion is fimple, clear, and open as truth, and needs no habit of affumed gravity to implant к on the human heart. «* Smcc God is ever prefcnt, evtr felt, In the \'oul waits as in the city full, And where He vital fpreads there muft be joy/'* Whitmore had introduced Edwin in his new decoration to his Lady, faying, " There, Madam, what think you now of my pupil r I don't believe there is a handfomer fellow in the regiment." — To confefs the truth, Edwin's natural good perfon fliewed to ad¬ vantage in his military accoutrements, and which may be eafily fur miied by the anfwer of the Lady, who, viewing him from head io foot with more than ufual kindnefs, coin¬ cided in her hufband's opinion, as did alfo Mrs. Delmer, avIio foon after joined the party, Thus treated with uncommon kini¬ ncis
nefs by Mrs. Whitmore, and encouraged by general approbation, Edwin felt a lelf- fatis¬ fačtion that he had never before experienced, and afterwards, when alone, as he paffed the large glafs in the draAving-room, could not avoid Healing a glance at his own figure, which appeared both new and delightful to him.—At this moment his fathei's letter was prefented him ; its contents ac once gave both pleafure and pain; he rejoiced at their happinefs and fuccefs, but grieved at the uneafinefs of Agnes, tendernefs and gratitude for a moment obliterating ambition. " I will leave all," faid he, " to fliew my affedion; I will re- linqiiilh my afpiring hopes, and once more fink into a plain and humble Farmer."—As he fpoke he raifed his eyes from the letter to the mirror, and vanity again refumed her fway. " Fool thac I was to leave the coun¬ try, unlefs I had courage to purfue my for¬ tune, it is but to tafte of the cup of prof- perity, and then to dafo it from my lips : With wnat pleafure could I refume my la¬ bour, Avhen 1 recolkded how dear ic had coft
coft me, to drudge through the day in a coarfo clumfy habit, and at night to return to a mere cottage, compared to the elegant maniions 1 am now accuftomed to : Agnes cannot require fuch a facrifice, it would involve herfelf in the confequences of my folly. — No, rather let me redouble my efforts for advancement, which, once obtained, I will fly to claim her, make her partaker of my happinefs, and force her to confefs that I took the moil effedual means to fhew my affection." With fuch a refolution it may eafily be conjedurcd what anfwer he returned to his father ; ic was affedionate and grateful, bui at the fame time expreíľed, in the waimefl terms, his fatisfadion at his change of for¬ tune, his fanguine hopes of pieferment, and finally, entreating him to confole his beloved Agnes, and aflure her of his unilterable fidelity. For the farm he denied all prelent or future claim to it, adding, " he hoped to gain b^th honour and fortune Avithout in¬ truding
truding on the little property fo juftly his brother's." Such was the purport of Ed- Avin's anfwer, after which he joined the family at dinner : Whitmore was that evening parcicularly engaged immediately after, and confequently the young enfign left with his Lady andMrs.Delmer. The behaviour of the former was ftriking, the utmoft diftance and hauteur were now changed into polite and attentive kindnefs, and being that evening engaged to accompany Mrs Delmer to the play, after the removal of coffee, foe laid, " \\ hat Jay you, fifter, fliall we take this young foldier with us ?" Mrs. Delmer acquiefced with pleafure, and P-dwin, at once aitoni foed and delighted ac foc h uncommon conď .enfion, which he could only account for by attributing it to the favourable altciatien his perfon had un¬ dergone, bowed hi¿> thanks and accompanied them with the higheft pleafure. Mis. Whitmore was too much the ton for her party to pafs unnoticed; her new 6 deifico
cicißeo ntfraded univerfal attention ; nor was his vanity a little gratified by forne whifpers he heard addreflfed to the Ladies refpeding his fine perfon : The queftion of " Who is her" was by no means fo flattering, and gave him great embarraflment, until he heard Mrs. Whitmore reply, α A young Gentle¬ man, whofe friends refiding ccnftantly in the country, have intrufted his introdudion into life to Mr. Whitmore." After the play they adjourned to Mrs. Deimer's, where they flipped, and foon after Mrs. Whitmore and Edwin returned home. W 7 hitmorc was yet abfent, and his Lady ap¬ parently in no hafte to retire, propofed a game at piquet, Edwin was overwhelmed with íhame ; he fimply knew it was a game at cards, but was totally unacquainted with that as any other, fave a little of whift, and that he had fo meti mes humoured Farmer Bernard by fufľering him to beat him at cribbage or all-fours. Mortifying as it was, he was forced to confefs his ignorance, at ζ which
which Mrs. W T hitmore laughing heartily, faid, " Well, I muft teach you then ; but hoAV, in the name of wonder, did you contrive to ftupify your evenings in the country ? Oh ! now I remember Mr. Whitmore told me you had a true love, fo I fuppofe you fpent them with her, vowing eternal conftancy, fetting old age and uglinefs at defiance ; then grudging home at nine o'clock, you drank a glafs of ale, afked your mother's bkffing, and adieu till five next morning ! Nay, never blufh, Edwin, I am fore I have gueffed right; but times are changed, what might do very well for Edwin Godwin, farmer, would be highly improper for a young officer, whofe fortune depends on his perfon and his fword ; but enough, take your cards, we will play for nothing to night ; next time I ihall not let you off fo eafily." Edwin was too much confufed to reply, but the filence was ihort, for Mrs. Whitmore was too lively to fuffer her companion to be thoughtful, and the time îîcav pleafantly till the
the clock ftruck two, when Edwin apologized for breaking fo long on her icfl, and foon after retired, Mrs. Whitmore lavino-, as he left her, " You have hitherto not confide ml me as your friend, dream to ni^ht that I am truly fuch, and pcxhaps you may find your dreams realized." Edwin retired too well fatisfied to fall im¬ mediately afleep, and when he did, it was but to retrace the objeds that during the day had afforded him fuch exquifite pleafure.·— At an early hour Whitmore entered Edwin's apartment, and haflily awakened him: He had been up all night, and his drefs in con¬ fequence was difordered, but the animation of his features was redoubled. " Edwin," faid he, " I could not retire without inform¬ ing you of my fuccefs ; I have all night been engaged at hazard, and have brought off two thoufand pounds in notes and cafo, and foall to-morrow receive four hundred pounds more, which makes the whole of my win¬ nings two dioufand four hundred. You foall
fliall accompany me when I go again, and try your fortune,"—Edwin congratulated his patron on his fuccefs, who foon after retired to reft, leaving Edwin poffeffed Avith an idea that, could he but be lucky enough t^ learn this charming fcience, his fortune Avas indu¬ bitably made. Whitmore Avas true to his promife; he introduced Edwin the following evening, in¬ filting that for that night they fliould be partners in their fuccefs. Edwin would have declined it, but Whitmore was peremptory, for avarice was not among his vices, and for¬ tune again favouring him, he, the next morn-» ing, prefented Edwin with two hundred guineas, the moiety of what he had won the evening before. Fdwin now eonfidered gaming as a never-failing refource, and be¬ came indefatigable in learning its arts and myfteries, now playing on his own fund with various fuccefs, but for the general part fuccefsfull)'. Whenever he was difengaged from Whitmore, he was a confiant attendant on
on his Lady, or Mrs. Delmer, flattered by their attention, and through their introduc¬ tion univerfally well received. Mrs. Delmer he had ever regarded with gratitude and efteem, as her behaviour had been uniformly kind ; but his fentiments for Mrs. Whitmore were of a different nature, he owed her no gratitude, nor could he in his heart efteem her ; yet fuch was the beauty of her perfon, and the fafcination of her manners, that he frequently could not avoid envying Whit¬ more the pofieíľion of fo charming a woman; nay, initiated as he now became daily into life, he perhaps would not have fcrupled to tell her fo, had flie appertained to any other man ; but his heart was not yet fufficiently vitiated to attempt to debauch his friend's wife, though the Lady by no means appeared inclined to cruelty, and Edwin was frequently obliged to fly a temptation fo hard to be reflfted. Whitmore, in the mean time, was perpe¬ tually devifing methods to get Emma into his
his power, for though the ardour of his paf¬ fion was fomewhat abated by the length of time he had been abfent from her, yet her charms were not obliterated from his me¬ mory ; he had endeavoured to perfuade Mrs. Delmer, and alfo Mrs. Whitmore, to invite her for a fliort fpace to town; but both Ladies had received the propofal fo coldly, that of neceffity he had been obliged to relinquifli it.—Ten months had pafľed fince Edwin left Inglewood, and in that ihort fpace he had fo far improved, that little was want¬ ing to conftitute him a complete c Man of the World.' A few glaffes of wine no longer difcompofed his head ; he could fwear, and retire occafionally with a kind fair one, with¬ out feeling fuch acute remorfe as he had at firft experienced ; though, to confefs the truth, thefe errors even yet gave him fome compundion, and were as conftantly for- fworn as committed ; but the barrier of pro» bity and truth once broken, the violation of an oath was a trifle, and therefore in this cafe frequently forfeited. He ftill maintained an
an uninterrupted corre fpondence with the family at Inglewood, and determined to vifis them in a ihort time, preparing prefents, which he thought might be acceptable, that for Agnes being a miniature of himfelf in his uniform. One evening, having repaired to the gaming houle as uiual, fortune was peculiarly unkind, he lofi, doubled his bets, lofi again, redoubled them, but in vain every effort, he was ilripped of all Lis ready- monty, and before he left off found himfelf confiderably in debt. Whitmore had alfo been unfuccefsful lately, therefore he could not think of applying to him, though the itranger requefted cither the payment or an acknowledgment for the debt, which Edwin was neceffitated to give, though he knew not Iioav to difcharge it, Diítreíľed what to do with himfelf, for it was not yet his hour to retire, and well knowing Whitmore and his Lady Avere both abroad, he called at Mrs. Delmcr's, whom he found at home and alone. Siie received him
him with her ufual kindnefs; but gently upbraided him for fo feldom vîfiting her, expreffing her fears that he was not more properly engaged. Edwin defended himfelf with great gallantry for fo young a beginner, promifing that hereafter flie íhould have no reafon to complain, except it was of his too frequently troubling her." " You Avill do well," replied the Lady, " it is time to know your friends; I have been indefatigable for your promotion, while you have hardly beftowed a thought on me ; nay, I can with ccitainty aflure you, that you will be raifed on the firft vacancy thac happens in your regiment, which I have great reafon to believe will not belong," " Generoib Mr. Whitmore !" exclaimed Edwin, " how fliall I ever repay fuch un¬ bounded obligations ? But, my dear Madam, when did he inform you of this, for he never mentioned it to me ?" "Ic
" It would be very ftrange if he fliould," replied the Lady, as he is totally unacquainted with it himfelf! In fliort, Edwin, not to keep you in fufpenfe, your entrance into the army was my device, as I thought it the moil fpeedy means of railing you to notice ; my fhft defign was never to let you know to whom you were obliged ; but when I hear you are conftantly engaged at the gaming¬ table, or elíe with other loofe company, I think it but friendly to warn you of your danger, and to tell you I do not approve your condud." Edwin was too much afloniihed to reply for fome moments, but threw himfelf at Mrs. Deimer's feer, where, as foon as he could articulate his thanks, he was profufe in his promifes to ad in a manner as fhould hereafter deferve her favour. As we eafily believe what we wifh, Mrs. Delmer was not inexecrable, Edwin vowed his everlafting gra¬ titude ; Mrs. Delmer in return promifing her friendihip and protedion : In fine, the con¬ verfation
venation became almoft critical before they pai ted for the night, Edwin piomifing to bieaktaft with her the next moining. On а rcAievv of what had paffed, he was not now fuch a novice but to difcover thac he might at once ftep into an independent fortune without further trouble ; the only incumbrance a Avife, and that too a handle mr, amiable woman ; but then Agnes, thcegh abfence and diifipation had weakened hL· afľedion for her, yet his promife, as Aullas inclination, bound him. What would ¡m father fay ? William, every one, they vvouki reprobate, curfe and defpife him, while Agnes herfelf might perhaps die with grief. On tlie other fide, what did gratitude demand ? 1 ïe now law Mrs, Delmer as his beft friend ; through her he could difcharge all his obli¬ gations, and realize his moil flattering prof¬ peds. Such w r as the conflid in Edwin's bofom when he went to reft, ftill honeft enough to feel the pang of ading Avrong ; a ol. j. FI yet
yet too weak to relinquiih grandeur, though at the expence of probity, juilice, and per¬ haps happinefs.
CHAP. XII.
EDWIN waited on Mrs. Delmer at an early hour, and found her already pre¬ pared to receive him. After breakfaft the difcourfe of the preceding evening was re¬ newed, as before it became unavoidably interefting, and Edwin, urged by ambition before he was aware, had proftituted vows of love at Mrs. Delmcr's fett. The Lady's partiality was too obvious to fuffer her to reject them; in ihort, her affedion made her
her as regardlefs of what was due to herfelf, as ambition had made him of every facred and moral tie, and a mutual promife was exchanged to be married the firft opportu¬ nity, the Lady ftipulating that the marriage fhould be kept fecret until his promotion took place. This refolution was too agree¬ able for Edwin to contend it ; he reneAved his vows, and by agreement it was at length. refolved, that he fliould, even that very day, apply for a licence, and that their hands íhould be joined on the morrow. Wiiitmore was by no means to be apprifed of this ma¬ nœuvre, as he might endeavour to prevent it, which, though not in his power, might give them trouble. A momentary thought ftruck Edwin, that this concealment bore the appearance of ingratitude ; but his confcience had become daily more accommodating, and when he refleded that he fliould foon have к in his power to repay all pecuniary obli¬ gations, he prefently ftifled the idea. The family at Inglewood gave him yet more pain : " I will fee them once more," laid H 2 he,
he, " before my marriage is announced, after whicn í will hailen abroad until they are reconciled to the ftep I have taken, and Agnes is perhaps married.— D ------ n is in that thought, why did it interfere ? I Avould fooner fee her dead than in the arms of an¬ other." Every thing being prepared, on the appointed morning Mrs. Delmer ordered her carriage to the Green Park, where flie difmiflèd it with the fcrvants, ordering them to return in a couple of hours. Here foe, as appointed, met Edwin, who led her to a. hackney coach, in wiiich they foon reached the church, where fhe plighted him her true f ith, for which he returned her a counterfeit, the real not being in his power to give. Ί he ceiemony over they feparated, and the returned to her coach, which fhe ordered immediately home, where fhe found Edwin already waiting for her The morning was pafled ki forming plans for the future. Mrs. Drimer was half inclined, in defiance of her fnlt ufolution, to declare her marriage im¬ mediately,
mediately, that foe might no more be fepa¬ rated from a man flie tenderly loved; but Edwin was by no means agreeable to this alteration, for, though it would have gratified his pride to have proclaimed his alliance without delay to the world in general, y et he wifoed to protrad the difcovery for foie time from Inglewood; therefore calling hy¬ pocrify to his aid, ;he declared that, though to be perpetually with her was the firft of his wifhes, yet, for her honour, which was dearer than his own happinefs, he determined to relinquiih it until his promotion took place, which would render her condefcenfion the lefs confpicuous ¿ that in the mean time he fliould fee her daily, and pafs every hour with her he could ileal from her brother. - " But will not your confiant vi fib," re¬ plied fhe, " give more difagreeable room far conjedure than even a public avowal ? Ttjere is indeed one Avay, if your father would permit your fifter Emma to pafs fome time with me, the vifits then might be attributed FI 3 to
to her : Suppofe you write, and requeft it, informing your father of our marriage, and our reafon for concealing it fome ihort time ?" " My father," replied EdAvin, " is fo great an enemy to all concealment, that he Avould never confent to keep our fecret ; but im¬ mediately accufe me of deceit to Mr. Whitmore, and difclofe it to him. As to* Emma," continued he, " if you condefcend to receive her, the beft way will be for me to fetch her, as I am certain he will not otherwife fuffer her to come." This plamwas by no means agreeable to Mrs. Delmer j foe knew foe had a beloved rival at Inglewood, and though Edwin had given her a proof that Agnes had loft h$r power over his heart, yet foe feared, though he was irrevocably her own, to throw him into the way of fo dangerous an objed; foe therefore diffented from this propofal; but Edwin, who ardently wifoed to fee his friends
friends once more while he could appear before them with the femblance of probity, preflfed the bufinefsfo flrenuoufly, and declared himfelf fo totally devoted to her, that at length he obtained her hard-wrung permif- fion, provided he remained at the Foreft no longer than two flays, t . Whitmore was at that moment announced. cf Where the devil, Edwin," faid he, " did you hide yourfelf all day yefterday ? I fought you half over the town." Edwin, who was now become an adept 'm falíhood, replied, " that he had been engaged the day before with the army agent, and likewife that morning, and calling on his return on Mrs. Delmer, ilie had detained him by a kind propofal of fending for Emma to pafs a few months with her." Few fubjects could have given W r hitmore fo much fatisfačtion ; he applauded his fifler, and was on the point of offering to accom- Η 4 Р ап У
рапу Edwin ; but prudence foon pointed out the tolly of fuch a flep, as it w onki only tend ro awaken fufpicion; he ihetefoie fim* ply congratulated him on the a t proaciung ir.ectirg with ins fricos, ncciirg, Avith а íigiiihcaiic glante ас Iwò >ík$ei , "Apropos, you may, I chink, as witfAved Agnc\., and bi ing h\:r to town with you j thac is no doubt but you will foon gain promotion, and I have no patience to fee you at liberty while I am fettered." " Surely," replied EdAvin, colouring deeply, " it would be highly imprudent for me to marry,——I——I have no fuch intention." " Well faid prudence," returned Whit¬ more, laughing, " and to confefs the truth, though the girl is devilifo handfome, foe has fuch an air of melancholy, that it is enough to give one the ague."
4 < A
A figh involuntarily efcaped Edwin : — " Agnes," faid he, " ufed to be leckonci a very cheerful girl." " Perhaps fo," replied Whitmore ; " but when I faw her you know flie was on the point of being feparated from her lover. — Fanny now is more to my tafle, though per¬ haps not fo critically beautiful ; but your fifter Emma is certainly much handfomer than either." " Impoffible that you fliould think fof* interrupted Edwin ; " Agnes, pail all dif- pute, is------." " Not fo handfome as Emma," exclaimed Mrs. Delmer, haflily ; " there is no compa¬ rifon between them." Edwin inftantly faw his miflake, and pul¬ ping a provoking figh that had nearly ticapni him, he faid, " We feldom can judge io per- H 5 fidi/
fedly of our relatives, as thofe who have not been fo accuftomed to their features." Whitmore now propofed todepart, Edwîn> as he left the apartment, following him ; but pretending to have left his glove he returned, whifpered a foft adieu to his bride, and pro¬ mifed to fee her again as foon as he could get rid of Whitmore. During the whole day Edwin was thought^ ful and abfent. Wrhitmore obferved it, and inquired the caufe. He complained of the head-ach, making it a pretence for retiring early, leaving Whitmore engaged at play,. while himfelf kept his appointment with. Mrs. Delmer. At this meeting the fubjed of his intended journey to Inglewood was renewed, and was fixed to take place in two days, Mrs. Del¬ mer gently whifpered her fears that his at¬ tachment to Agnes was not totally effaced· He vowed to the contrary on her lips; in 5 fliort.
fhort, he ftrove to deceive, and íhe loved him too well not to believe an afíeveration fo congenial to her wiflies. He left her early that no furmifes might take place ; but before his departure fhe prefented him with a pocket-book, defi- ring him to perufe it at his leifure. On his return he retired immediately to his apartment to examine the contents, and on the firft leaf found the following words : — " By the will of the late Mr. Delmer I cannot alienate any part of my jointure, which at my death returns to his family. — The ready money I poíľefs is near fixteen thoufand pounds in the funds, and may at pleaiure be transferred. Enclofed are bills for one thoufand, Avith which my Edwin difcharge any obligations you may have con- traded -, all I afk in return is an undivided hearts and an afľedion as fincere as my own." Edwin was tranfported ; for fome moments fee thought himfelf perfedly happy, n nt < FI 6 * " büív-
" bufy-meddling memory" prefented the dif- clofure of his marriage at Inglewood. T hib idea put all his happinefs to flight, and re¬ placing the notes with a figh he retired to bed. He was fo totally engaged the next day with Whitmore, that he found it difficult to fee his bride until evening, when he framed an excufe, that as he meant to let off early, he would fleep at an inn that he might not difturb the family : He accordingly bid Mr. Whitmore adieu about nine o'clock, bearing; with him a thoufand remembrances to his parents, and receiving a Arid charge to re¬ turn in the courfe of the enfuing week. From Whitmore he haftened to Mrs. Del¬ mer, who received him with unfeigned fatis- fad'on : With' her he pafľed the lemainder of the evening, then retired, not to reft as he told her, but to a chaife which he had in Availing, and in which he immediately fat out on hib journey,
CHAP,
CHAP. XIII.
EDWIN was too impatient to reach the Foreft to fpare either money or horfes, and accordingly arrived on the third evening after his leaving London. As his friends were unacquainted with his journey, he pro¬ mifed himfelf great pleafure in taking them by furprife, and therefore leaving the chaife at fome diftance walked up to the houfe. — Edwin's courage and fpirits, as he approached, appeared to forfake him, his legs could fcarcely fupport his weight. " I feel," cried he, with anguiih, " that I am a villain, a mean perjured villain, and fliall but contami- 4 nate
nate by my prefence this feat of innocence and virtue ; yet they know it not, they think me honeft as themfelves, let me then once more enjoy the pleafure of their arriéis* carefľesľ' He had reached the kkchen window, and looking over the fliutter faw the family fitting round the table, fupper having juft been removed, and replaced by a jug of ale. — Agnes fat oppofite lo Avhere he flood. He contemplated her with keen ielf-reproach— her pale and altered features. He heard Bernard drink his health, and faw the foft but expreffive blue eyes of his daughter railed. m filence, as if entreating the fame of Hea¬ ven. He could bear no more ; he forgot all but the prefent fctne before him, and ruih- ine: into the houfe flood before them. ЬЪг a moment all gazed in filent wonder, but the next all was rapture and confufion ; the mugs and giafles were overfet, the chairs thrown down, and furrounded on all fides ; tears, congratulations and embraces, befpoke his<
his welcome. Agnes alone fixed in her chair, appeared unable either to fpeak or Aveep.—Tearing himfelf from the circling embraces of William and Fanny, he flew to her, and preffmg her to his bofom, forgot every other objed in the creation : " Speak, my beloved Agnes," exclaimed he, " fpeak,, and bleis me Avith thy voice ; I am but half welcome till I hear it from thee," " Ay do, my girl," cried Bernard, " bid the good lad welcome ; I'll wager he*s come to claim thee for his own." This fimple fpeech affeded the guilty Edwin like a ftroke of lightning, and at once awoke him from his tranfport; his ftrength forfook him, and unable to fupport the almoft fainting Agnes, he was obliged to refeat her in her chair, for fome moments remaining too much confufed to reply. — The general joy was, however, fo great, that his diforder palled unnoticed. Agnes alfo began to recover her furprife, and at length
length tranquillity refumed her place in the manfion. Behold him now feated at his paternal board between his venerable mother and Agnes, holding a hand of each, and alternately preffmg them to his lips, Emma leaning over his chair, with one arm encir¬ cling his neck, while Godwin, Bernard, Wil¬ liam and Fanny, fat round contemplating the change a few months had made in his perfon. " Zooks!" exclaimed Bernard, "how the boy is altered, Avhy I fcarce knew him when he came in ! If I did not wonder what fine Gentleman avc had got; I thought to be fore he came from the Flail, but egad find me a likelier, come from where he will : What fay you, Fanny ? To be iure he is rather pale, but that don't fignify." " I think," replied Fanny, "that Edwin looks very well, though not better than I have feen him ; if ever in my eyes he looked particularly fo it Avas on Whitiuntide twelve¬ month,
month, on the day our parents gave their confent he íhould addrefs Agnes, and pro * miied in a year or two to unite them. —- Never fliall I forget his appearance Avhen he cime to tell her i we were feated under the great walnut-tree i he leaped the gate, flew to her, the uttvmft animation enlivening his features, his hair in diforder, curling round his face i he caught her in his arms, breath- lefs with hafte, while his eyes told his fuccefs before his fpeech returned." cc Píhaw," cried the old man, c< thou wert always a fool, Fanny ; as to his curls, when did you ever fee a Gentleman wear na¬ tural curls, except here and there a parfon ? Why, his head's powdered now and pinched, and as to his eyes, for ought I fee, they are İ ufi the fame as ever ; eyes may do very well for girls to underftand, but plain Englifli for me : But, Agnes, what fay'fl thou, doit not like him better than before ?"
" No,
cc No, Sir," anfwered Agnes, timidly, — " Edwin, as a Farmer, or a Prince, will be equally dear to me ; drefs can make no dif¬ ference, I love him for himfelf, not for his clothes." " Did ever man fee fuch foolifli jades ! — Why, the wenches have no more pride than my grandmother's cat ; but pr'ythee, Emma, what think you ?" " Think !" repeated ihe, « why I think what I told you before, that I love him a thouíànd times better than ever, though he has not got his red coat on ; I declare it was very ill-natured not to come in it." Edwin now produced the pidure he had brought for Agnes, who received it with a pleafure that found vent in tears ; ail admired it, even Godwin applauding the gallantry of his fon."
« Why,
" Why, to be fure," faid Bernard, «« it is very pretty, and very like 5 but I'll lay you five ihillings to five pence that Fanny will fliew you one, ten times more natural of William in the courfe of a month or two." Fanny's bluihes immediately difcovered the fecret to Edwin. " I thought brother," faid Godwin, with a fmile, " you had pro¬ mifed me never to mention that fubjed." ic Why, no more I ever will among ftrangers, nor among friends neither, if it vexes her.—God blefs it, boy or girl, how I long to fee it ; egad I fhall think I am grown a young man again as I dandle it in my arms." Godwin, to put a flop to the difcourfe, began to queftion his fon refpeding his fituation and future expedances. Edwia painted them in the moil advantageous light, reprefenting his promotion as certain in a ihort time. Mrs. Delmer he fpoke of with the
the higheft refped, faying, " that her intereft had been employed equally with her bro¬ ther's, and that his prefent journey was prin¬ cipally at her inftigation, to entreat that Emma might be permitted to pafs a fhort time with her in London ; that himfelf would fee her daily, and accompany her into the country on her return, which he meant to do as foon as his promotion took place." " Ah, that's right, my lad," replied Bernard ; u kill two birds with one ftone, bring down Emma, and take back Agnes ; is it not fo, Edwin ?" Sf Agnes is dearer to me than life," ex¬ claimed Edwin, " and I can never know happinefs without her ; but fay, my dear Sir, do you grant Mrs. Deimer's requeft in re¬ fped to Emma ?" " I cannot fpare her, indec *. cannot," cried Mrs. Godwin, iC to part а\ш1 any more of my children would kill me." Emma
Emma could not ìeftrain her tears; flie had long fince given up all hopes of Mrs. Deimer's piomiled invitation, and indeed had almofl forgotten it ; but now to find fhe remembered her, and that it only depended on her parenťs confent, flie knew not Iioav to bear the diíàppointment, particularly when flie contemplated the improvement that (in her eyes) had taken place in Edwin, and had no doubt but her own might be equal: y fuccefsful William looked At her reproachfully, and apparently was on the point of exprtfing his thoughts on the occafion, h?A not a be- f-'cching look from Finny at once chetked his defign, and feftened hi¿ fiutuies into a fmile. <c Emma," faid her father, fi do you giievc becaufe your metí. er hvtbAOUtco Avell to pait with you ? L· that a requital f я her undei neb ? * " No,
" No, Sir," replied ihe, weeping ; "Hove my mother and yourfelf beyond the whole world; but my affedion for Edwin for a moment overcame every other confideration, and made me wifh to accompany him." This conciliating fpeech reconciled all parties, and they continued converfing far beyond the ufual hour. Edwin was already too deeply plunged in guilt to extricate him- felf, he therefore determined to enjoy the prefent hour at all events, though it was not to be done without additional hypocrify and falfehood ; he had therefore recour fc to both, and when his father, who obferved he had given no dired anfwer in regard to Agnes, again preflêd the fubjed, he replied, with aflumed bold neis : " On my promotion I will return, and make her all my own." In the morning William, who was obliged to go out on bufinefs, aiked Edwin to ac¬ company him. If poffible he Avould have excufed himfelf^ for he dreaded both the penetration
penetration and affedion of his brother : He could not, however, deny, and therefore determined to be doubly on his guard. — " Edwin," faid William, " I cannot exprefs the pain I have felt on your account ; my father too, ï am fure, has been equally un¬ happy, though I carefully concealed whatever I thought avo uld increafe it. Your entrance into the army Avas, I am convinced, totally repugnant both to his feelings and princi¬ ples,—I had once hopes, my brother, that you would have been fickened of grandeur and folly, and returned to the bofom of your family, for you appeared difíàtisfied ; whence then this alteration, are your new friends changed, or are you fo ?" " Whatever change may have taken place," replied Edwin, " at leaft my affec¬ tion for my family has undergone no varia¬ tion. When I firft went, unaccuftomed to the world, I perhapsjudged too harfhly ; at prefent I view things through a different medium ; to live Avith the world it is, in fome
fome meafure, neccffary to give into its manners." <c It may be neceflary," returned William ; " bur, believe me, I Avould prefer the meaneit fituation, with liberty of word and adion, to affluent fla very, however dignified, I once thought your opinions the fame ; but fay, lûhvin, in adopting their manners, is it not sifo frequently neceflary to adopt their vices, or at leaft countenance them :" te We certainly are not obliged to adopt them. People, William, accuftomed to the' gľtat vvoiki, havç undoubtedly fewer preju¬ dices than thofe who live included from it, yet may poffefs buh probsty and honour." lt But from a Ions; continuation of mving into mani.ers we infenfibly imbibe them, and if thofe manners are not pure, may I not tiemble for my brothel's morais ? Sacred to me are even the prejudices diat tend to the general good. You, perhaps, Edwin, are di ve fled
divefted of your former prejudices, but are you the happier, or more virtuous ?" Edwin could not reprefs a figh* " As Ave are alone," continued William, * r< I frankly fpeak my fears and wiflies, tho', except to yourfelf, they fhall ever be buried in my own bofom. Nothing is wanting to complete my felicity but your company ; yet not for myfelf alone, but for your fake do I wifli you could relinquiih thefe hateful hopes of wealth that have lately poffeffed you. — Oh ! Edwin, you know not the blifs of pof- feifing a tender, gentle companion, in whofe bofom you can repofe all your joys and for¬ rows, or you would not hefitate to give up all, take Agnes to your arms, and ñx your future home at Inglewood, where, furrounded by your family in your youth, and in your age by your children, you would live re¬ fpeded, and die beloved, after experiencing as much happinefs as falls to the lot of mor« vol. i. I tals*
tals. Do not, my dear brother, decline ic, it may hereafter be impoffible." " It is impoffible!" exclaimed Edwin, involuntarily. " Impoffible !" repeated William, ftarting, u impoffible, Edwin !" " Yes, impoffible !" replied Edwin, re¬ covering himfelf. " W r ould you have mc return Mr. Whitmore's favours with in¬ gratitude, and when I have almoft fucceeded to the height of my wiflies,relinquiih them? No, William, it is indeed impoffible. Had I, perhaps, never left the country it had been as well ; but as it is, I am determined to purfue my fortune." William fighed, and withdrew his fuit, walking fome fliort way in filence, until they were joined by Mr. Godwin, when Edwin's taik was renewed by the parental admoni¬ tions of his father. Thus more and more, in
in need of hypocrify, he plunged yec deeper in falfehood, and though his heart flung him as he proceeded, his face was become fo accommodating as not to have difgraced an adept. While the male part of the family Avas abfent. Emma AAas endeavouring; to influence Agnes to fécond her views in per- fuading her mother to permit her to accom¬ pany Edwin to tOAvn ; nor was the propofal at all ungrateful to Agnes ; lhe loved Emma, and would have done any thing to give her pleafure,—In this cafe flie had alfo another incentive, her beloved Edwin would have an affedionate filler near him, and herfelf a friend, ever mindful of their mutual interefts. Agnes propofed confuking Fanny, who was the darling of her mother-in-law, but Emma declined it :—« No," faid flie, " William I know is againft it, and flie has no will buc his. I faw him froAvn laft night ; he was never like other young people, and therefore can be no judge of their feelings."
n
" Nay,
" Nay, now you fpeak too petulantly," replied Agnes. " William, I am convinced, poffeffes a moil fufceptible heart, and, tho* I love all our family equally, yet I look up to him with an efteem and reverence I know not how to exprefs, and which I feel for no one elfe, except your father." Mrs. Godwin at that moment entered, and, after fome little converfation, Agnes, to oblige her friend, faid, " Indeed, my dear Madam, I could have Avifoed that oui- Emma had obtained your permiflion to have accompanied Edwin to town: He muft, I am fure, pafs many heavy hours, which Emma's company would help to beguile him of. He will doubtlefs come when Fanny gives ns a little one, and flie could then have returned with him ; in the mean time I would have been doubly affiduous that you mi^ht not mifs her. Befides, Edwin looked as if it would have greatly obliged him ; perhaps he fears Mrs. Delmer may think us ungrateful" " My
" My good girl," replied Mrs. Godwin, Emma well knows it pains me to rcfufe any thing that gives her fatisfadion. Edwin's abfence has caufed me confiant uneafinefs ; yet, as flie is fo carneft, I know not ; I will ' confider; I will coni uk her father." " Thanks, thanks, my dear mother," cried Emma, in a tranfport ; " I only alk until Edwin returns." " Your thanks are too warm on this fub¬ jed to be pleafing, Emma," replied Mrs. Godwin, gravely ; " I flatter myfelf neither Fanny nor Agnes would exprefs fo much joy on the thoughts of leaving me." With thefe Avords Mrs. Godwin quitted the apart¬ ment before either her daughter or Agnes could reply, " How cruel !" cried Emma; " I proteft I dont think lil go now, though even fhe fliould give me leave." I3 "I
" I cannot advife you," replied Agnes ; " it difticffes me to fee her uneafy, and were flie my mother I would not go to London on fuch conditions, though my heart was difengaged, and I was fure to be made a Queen when I arrived theie." " Oh, Fleaven, Avhatan idea !" exclaimed Emma, the ferioufnefs vaniihing from her features in an inftant : " Confider m fuch a caie how loon you could make her amends, power, grandeur, wealth." " They would not all compenfate/' faid Agnes, " for my breach of duty, nor yet call back rhe tears fhe had foed for my ab¬ fence." Fanny here joined them, and the converfation ceafed. At dinner Edwin informed them how ex¬ tremely he was limitted in point of time, promifing, however, to return at the period Agnes had before mentioned, and again re¬ newing his entreaty concerning Emma. In the
the afternoon he found himfelf alone with Agnes, and, though it was what he ardently willed, yet, when obtained, confcious dupli¬ city for fome moments rendered him unable to articulate a fyllable. At length, regard- kfs of all but the prefent, he renewed his vows of everlafting truth, forgetting, as he fealed them on her lips, that he had already proihtuted them at the altar. The guilelefs Jamb is but ill prepared to withftand the fubtilty of the ferpent. Agnes's Avords were the pure dictates of uncorrupted innocence : flie avowed her afľedion, and promifed to follow the unworthy objed, in wealth or poverty, throughout the world. His expeded promotion, and the advice of Mr. Whitmore, were the excufes fabricated to delay his mar¬ riage. He afľeded to deplore them ; nay, at that moment he perhaps did deplore the, fatal bar his pride and avarice had everlaft- ingly placed between himfelf and Agnes, as he contemplated her beauty and innocence, and refleded that he might with honour have 14 pofìèfled
pofľefľed them, refpeded by his friends, and applauded by his own heart. In the mean while Mrs, Godwin had con¬ futed with her hufhand refpeding Emma. He by no means approved of her going to London ; but the fubjcd had been fo warmly preíľed by Edwin, and fo earnefliy defired by Emma, that at length he gave his con¬ fent, on condition flie fliould return at the appointed time. The following morning Edwin and Emma prepared to depart, the good Farmer firii drawing his fon afide, and ílrongly recom¬ mending him to be careful of Ыь fifler : He then drew out his pocket-book, and pre- fenting him with fome notes, faid, (t My dear boy, your obligations to Mr. Whitmore are great, as he has afliduoufly endeavoured to ferve you according to your own ideas of happinefs ; your pecunia! у obligation mufl, however, be painful; he advanced you a hundred pounds, with mele repay it; the money
money I can well fpare, I have relerved it for this purpofe, therefore no words, receive it as freely as I give it." Edwin would fain have declined this pre¬ fent, but could by no means without de- claiing the truth, he therefore was n e ceffi tated to put it in his pocket, though with no very pkafurable fenfations, every freih in- ftance of afľedion he received from his deluded family adding a pang to his bofom : " Accurfed wealth !" exclaimed he, as his father left him, " that firft induced me to forfake the paths of reditude ; and doubly accurfed pride, that tempted me to facrifice both probity and happinefs ! —Ah, Agnes ! thou wilt be fumciently revenged, mifery mufl be my portion if I lofe thee, and yet how to obtain thee without plunging flill further in deceit and villany." William at that moment entered. Among a thoufand kind wifhes he recommended him to watch carefully over his fifler Emma : — is ľ I
" I fear for her," faid he, " becaufe her heart is difengaged, and her natural thought- leffnefs may lead her to пк it on fome un¬ worthy objed." All was now prepared, and the travellers departed, bearing with them the ardent Avifhes of their friends for their fpeedy return.
С FI A P. XIV.
EMMA foon dried the tears íhe had íhed at parting from her parents, and would have entered into converfation with her bro¬ ther ; but he, loft in thought, was not fufS- ciendy colleded to amufe or yet be arnufed. He had planted the feeds of difcontent and remorfe in his own bofom, and they every moment
moment gained frefh ftrength > the fight of Agnes had revived his half-extinguiflied paf¬ fion, and made him determine to poffefs her, though at the lofs of that Avealth, for which he had facrificed all thofe, ties Avhich render life defirable. His marriage he well knew could not be long concealed, it was therefore neceflary that on Avhatever he de¬ termined he fliould be tpeedv, as that once declared he, in all probability, muft take an eternal farewell of his native home. Fearful that Emma might divulge any, thing relative to his promife of returning to Inglewood to efpoufe Agnes, he entreated her to be filent on the fubjed, as it muft at leaft be kept fecret fome time, both Mr. Whitmore and his fifter having difluaded him from fuch a ftep, though he had foi borne to mention it, fearful of giving Agnes uneafinefs· On the third day they reached Barnet, where, to their great furprife, they found Mr. Whitmore and his fifter waiting for 16 them*
them. Flow flattering this compliment to die unexperienced heart of Emma ! Whit¬ more could not conceal his pleafure, it was expreíľed in every word and adion, and fparkled in his eyes. Mrs. Deimer's fatis¬ fadion was fcarcely inferior, though obliged to diflëmbîe her tendernefs, foe, however,, endeavoured to make herfelf amends by re¬ prefenting to herfelf the pleafure Edwin would doubtlefs experience ac this proof of her affedion and attention ; but foe in vain,, fought to find it expreíľed either in his eyes or words ; the firft were averted from her, the latter cold, diftant, and merely complimen¬ tary ; love had ftifled gratitude in his bofom, and he could now only regard her as one who had deprived him forever of his deareft hopes. The party reached town in Mr. Whit¬ more's carriage, and were fat down at Mrs* Deimer's,. where an excellent fupper was pfovided. Emma had never before fccn any thing fo completely elegant, for though, fince
fince Mrs. Palmer had fixed her refidence among them, Emma, with her parents, had frequently dined there -, yet her table, though plentiful, was remarkably fimple, and, though ferved Avith peculiar neatnefs, was totally devoid of fhew and parade ; the repofitory of her filver was not the fideboard, but the pockets of the poor; the former therefore was but thinly furnifoed, while the latter were fiequently replenished fufficiently to pre cure all the neceffaries of life» Emma, naturally volatile, was charmed with all around her ; no cloud, fave on?, obfeured her fatisfadion. — Whitmore was married ; that indeed coft her a figh, and foe dreaded, flie knew not why, the fight of his wife. Edwin alfo became more cheerful ; he eontemplated all around as his own when he íhould pleafe to acknowledge his right, and ambition once more began to refume her feat in his bofom ; in fliort, before the evening clofed all parties appeared perfedly fatisfied. Mrs.
Mrs. Deimer's view in fending for Emma to town, was to infore to herfelf, without fcandal, the company of her beloved Edwin ; but, although it gratified her in that point, it by no means anfwered her expedation, as Whitmore ever accompanied him ; at home was of the party, and abroad their confiant efcort, ever ready by the fide of Emma to render thofe namelefs attentions which infenfibly ileal on the Iemale heart. Emma, though foe had at the Foreft been always accuftomed to be perfedly neat and well dreffed, yet had never poffeffed any of thofe ufelefs appendages that diftinguifli well- dreffed women in greac towns ; but with all of which Mrs. Delmer foon fupplied her, for as foe now, in fome meafure, eonfidered her as a fifter, flie would have been gratified to fee her eligibly married, and A\as therefore anxious to make her appearance as refpeda¬ ble as poifible. Emma had always been partial to Mrs. Delmer; buc this kindnefs redoubled that fenfation, and in a letter, which flic
flie wrote to Agnes, and fent enclofed in one of Edwin's, íhe faid, after expreffing the higheft fatisfadion at her fituation, " Indeed, my dear girl, it is impoffible to defcribe to you the kindnefs of Mrs. Delmer; I am equally well dreffed as herfelf, and accom¬ pany her to every public place, where I cannot frequently avoid hearing compliments on my perfon, enough to make me vain. <f Laft night I heard a Gentleman at the Opera fay to his companion, that my com¬ plexion was too glowing for a blonde, and too fair for a brunette, but a happy mixture of both. You may be fure I did not rightly comprehend this until Mrs. Delmer, who likewife overheard it, explained it to me. I am convinced myfelf that I look much better, for drefs, Agnes, makes a great al¬ teration ; my feet in filk ihoes are not like the fame, they appear altnoft too fmaU to bear me ι and my arms feem quite a different fhape from the addition of a beautiful pair of bracelets, which Mr. W r hitmore prefented me. ι
me. Edwin is equally favoured as myíèlf, and I can aflure you, when in his regimentals, I think I fcarcely ever faw fo handfome a man ! I have been introduced to Mrs. Whitmore, but indeed, Agnes, I cannot love her ; flie is very handfome, but fo hatefully proud, that I am uncomfortable whenever Ave meet, for fhe flares at me with fuch a contemptuous expreffion on her countenance, that I am ready to fink. Oh, Agnes ! how I pity Mr. Whitmore ; how happy might his wife be were flie fo inclined, for he is really one of the moft amiable men I ever faw ; but he is fo unhappy at home, that he is almofl: perpetually with his fifter. " Not a word of this, my dear Agnes, to any one, not even to your fifter Fanny ; you know my parents and William would fay I fliould be ruined with pride, and hateful vanity, and perhaps fend for me immediately home, and that, before the promifed time, would break the heart of your EMMA GODAVIN." Emma
Emma had, on her firft arrrival, as flie informed Agnes, been introduced to Mrs. Whitmore; but that Lady had treated her with the moil forbidding diftance ; nay, eA^en Edwin appeared lately to have loft the ground he had formerly gained in her good graces ; to confefs the truth, the Lady had felt her¬ felf piqued at the particular attention he had lately paid Mrs. Delmer, and had been at fome pains to learn how frequent his vifits weie, and that he often ftaid until a very late hour ; not, however, of a temper for fuch trifles to give her uneafinefs, fhe imme¬ diately transferred the tranfient fpark of in¬ clination fhe had felt for Edwin to a captain in the guards, called D arte ville. Notwithftanding the charge Edwin had received, both from his father and William, to be careful of Emma, he was too much employed in his own purfuits, and deviling means to get Agnes into his power ; to pay her any particular attention, to the gallantry of Whitmore, he was too much accuftomed ta
to think it any thing particular, and as long as his lifter was under the protedion of Mrs. Delmer, he had not the moil diftant idea of danger. One evening Whitmore joined them in apparent diforder ; his wife, regardlefs as he was of her, had forced him to notice her condud, as it becaaie public enough to be cenfured in a paragraph in the news-paper. Mrs. Delmer endeavoured to palliate it, while Emma in her heart reprobated her condud, and dropped a tear on the vexation Whit¬ more experienced from being fo unhappily married. At that inftant Mrs. Deimer's lawyer was announced : He came on bufinefs relative to a foit foe had lately gained, and to pay into her hands a confiderable fum. " For Heaven's fake !" cried Whitmore, « do not bring him here, I cannoc at prefent bear the loquacity of the law ; befides, it is the
the old rafcal that drew my infernal marriage articles; pr'ythee, my dear filter, fee him below." Mrs. Delmer readily acquiefced, and lea- Aİng her brother with Emma, attended her lawyer. Both remained for fome time filent ; at length Whitmore faid, " You pity me, en¬ chanting Emma 5 you feel for your unhappy friend; ah! why did we not meet when I might with honour have offered you my hand and fortune ; па>% turn not from me, I cannot bear your difpleafure, tied as I am to one whom my foul juftly abhors, and doomed to love where I can never hope a return ; yet you wept for me, Emma," — continued he, finking at her fceti " you do not hate me, you will 1 know pardon even the frenzy of this moment." " For Heaven's fake, Sir, rife—nay, Mr. Whitmore, I entreat—confider, fliould Mrs. Delmer
Delmer, or my brother, furprife you in this pofture ------ ?" " What if they foould," replied he, warmly, " they will not hear me difavow my love : No, they foall hear me proclaim it—glory in it. Mrs. Whitmore's condud will entitle me to a divorce ; then fay, Emma, you will not refufc me, when in my power, to lay my fortune at your feet ?" " I cannot bear this," replied Emma, weeping ; " I will return immediately to Inglewood." " Go, then," faid he, " leave me to de¬ fpair ; yet, Emma, you may hereafter repent not having fpoken comfort to a man who idolizes you !" " Alas !" replied Emma, " what comfort can I fpeak ? If my good wifhes could make you happy, you would have no reafon to complain." " Charming
** Charming angel !" exclaimed he, rifing, and kifling her hand, " I will no more alarm you, but conceal my fufferings in myown breaft ; time and fortune may perhaps relieve them." " For Heaven's fake then drop the dif¬ courfe j your emotion diftreffes me." " Your defires foall ever be commands," replied he, refuming his ufual ferenity. — " Pardon my behaviour this night, and I will offend no more." W T hitmore Avas true to his word, or at leaft for that time ; he was fearful of alarming Emma, foould he prefs the fubjed farther, and, fully fatisfied with having broken the ice, determined to leave the reft to time, and continued affiduities. When Mrs. Delmer returned both parties were tolerably compofed, and Edwin joining them foon after, they all adjourned to the play.
play. Tavo months had thus paffed with Emma in a continual fucceffion of amufe- ments, Avhen Edwin received a letter from William, informing him, that his beloved Fanny had made him the happy father of a lovely boy, concluding with preffmg his return with Emma to be prefent at the chriilening. Neither Whitmore nor Mrs. Delmer ap¬ peared greatly to approve this invitation, the former looking at Emma with fupplicating tendernefs, faid, " Do, Edwin, deviíe fome means to excufe your return ; furely a few months might be alloAvecl your fifter ; I was in no fuch hafte to quit Inglewood." " Indeed," replied Mrs. Delmer, " I think the requeft very ill-timed; Edwin cannot get leave of abfence for more than a few days, and furely it is not worth while taking fuch a journey for that period." " I have obtained a fortnight," returned Edwin, with a pleafure he could not entirely fupprefs, " I expeded this event, and was prepared
prepared for it, for my father Avould hold it unpardonable were I not to attend." Mrs. Delmer appeared fo highly diffatis- fied at this information, that Edwin, after having accompanied Whitmore home, again íctumťd. Mrs. Delmer was ftill up, but Emma had retired to her apartment. He now exerted all his influence to perfuade her of the neceffity of his paying this one vifit to IngleAvood, and which he firmly declared fliould be the laft, unlefs accompanied by herfelf; that, though he knew his father would be highly difpleafed, he Avould venture to leave Erama, hoping that, in a fliort time, he fhould gain promotion, and all reflraint be naturally removed. This difcourfe was mingled with fo many careffes and proteftations, that at length Mrs. Delmer confented, though againft her real inclination. She had no wifh that he íhould think jealoufy prompted her refufal, though inwardly determined to declare her marriage in
in a ihort time, whether he gained preferment or otherwife. The permiflion granted he left her, and returned home, determined to ftt out on his journey the firft moment he decently could. He ardently wifhed to be at the Foreft, and as this was in all probability his laft oppor¬ tunity to ftrike fome bold ftroke that might give him pofľeífion of Agnes : " I know," faid he, as he refleded on the fubjed, " her heart is entirely mine, and in fome happy, unguarded moment, could I but gain pof- ft fiion of her perfon, I might afterward be able to divert her of her prejudices, and per¬ fuade her to fliare my fortune. My pay, if I gain preferment, will amply iupply us, and for Mrs. Deimer's wealth, kt her keep it, and accurfed be the hour in which I was infatuated enough to barter happinefs for gold." The next morning Emma was confulted refpeding her continuance in town, and very readily
readily gave into a concerted falfehood, that Edwin íhould excufe her abfence under a pretence of Mrs. Deimer's ill health, and that fhe particularly entreated her company fome time longer. Whitmore came in during this difcourfe ; he expreíľed the utmott pleafure that Emma was not yet to leave them ; he had the whole night been revolving on fome means to prevent it, and Avas de¬ lighted to find the bufinefs fettled to his hand. Edwin's departure was die n fixed to take place in three days, the intervening time being dedicated to pleafure and diifipation. Emma's condud Avas weak, Avithout being intentionally Avicked. She rather fuffered than approved the behaviour of Whitmore ţ flie pitied him on account of his wife, and that lentiment, ftrengthened by the affedion ihe undoubtedly fek for him, induced her not to rcpulfe him as ihe ought properly tó¬ füve done. Mrs, Delmer could not at times avoid obferving the attention which Whit¬ more paid to Emma, but totally employed vol. u К bv
by her own paffion for Edwin, and naturally unfofpicious, the idea of fedudion never entered her imagination ; attributing his be¬ haviour therefore merely to his ufual gallan¬ try, foe thought it not neceffary to be noticed,for, as Emma was perfedly apprifed of his fituation, foe could not think her in danger, and to mention the fubjed to Edwin would be only awakening fufpicions that had, perhaps, no real foundation, and the caufe of which would naturally ceafe as foon as Emma was removed, Edwin ac the appointed time fat off for Inglewood, and on his arrival there, Avas received with the utmoft pleafure by the whole family, William prefenting him his infant fon with as much exultation as if he had been heir to a diadem. The abfence of Emma at firft greatly difpleafed her parents; but Edwin's excufes of Mrs. Deimer's ill health were fo adroitly fabricated, that they could not fail being admitted. The venera¬ ble Mrs. Godwin at length obferving that, though
though it would have increafed her fatisfač¬ tion for Emma to have been prefent on fo joyful an occafion j yet flie íhould have been forry for her to have quitted Mrs. Delmer under fuch circumflances. Thus fituated were the innocent family at Inglewood, feated round the focial board, recounting old tales of paft pleafures, and looking forward in happy expedancy of new* ones. Edwin was alone an exception, he looked back with difguft, and forward with horror ; but he had gone too far to recede, and therefore boldly determined not to be halfa villain. " I think," faid Godwin, looking round him, " that I want nothing but the prefence of Emma to call myfelf perfedly happy ; we fliall mifs her cheerful humour at our chriilening : Mrs. Palmer being abíènt too is another misfortune; however, many arc the bleffings we enjoy, and to repine.at what' К 2 Ave
we have not is to be unwoithy thofe we poffefs." j The difcourfe then turned on Mrs. Palmer, who had for fome time pail been at Briftol on bufinefs relative to her late uncle ; all joined in her praife, wifliing they had been favoured with her prefence, as flie was by her own defire to be godmother to the young ftranger. Three days after began the preparations for the ceremony, the relations and .friends were invited, and as fome lived too far dif¬ tant to return the fame evening, Bernard's houfe was aired, and the beds prepared for their reception. Geeft, fowls, turkies, and pigs, were flaughtereÒ, pies and plumb-- puddings prepared, the ale and made wines tapped, and, in fliort, all that could contri¬ bute to the feftivity of the day, which was fixed for the Sunday following, the month of Fanny's laying-in being then complete,. and
and herfelf thought able to accompany them to church.
CHAP. XV.
WHILE all parties at IngleAvood were bufy in preparing for the chriilening, Whitmore's mind was equally, though lefs innocently, employed ; he had noAv an op¬ portunity, fuch as in all probability he might never again obtain to addrefs Emma ; her brother was abfent, and Mrs. Delmer, for. fome reafon which he did not gi\ v e himfelf ' the trouble to endeavour to develop, Avas frequently engaged, for leverai hours. At another time it might have excited his cu- riofity, as flie had, to his knowledge, fold out a confiderable fom, whicii flie had in K3 the
the funs, the very day after Edwin's de¬ parture ; but his mind was too much occu¬ pied about Emma for any other fubjed to engage him. Mrs. Whitmore's condud too became daily more glaringly abandoned, and he was endeavouring to procure a legal fepa¬ ration ; for as to a divorce, Avhatever he faid to Emma, he had no wiih for it, could he avoid it with honour, as her fortune was large, and would greatly (heighten his finances to repay ; befides, it certainly was in the Lady's power to recriminate, in which cafe all his attempts would prove fr«itlefs. Ih the mean time he profltted by the op¬ portunities his filter's abfence gave him with Emma ; he was for ever offending, and as frequently begging pardon; yet conftantly ending with vowing to be only her's ; that the condud of his wife had broken every tie between them, that the law Avouki foon pronounce it void, and he fliould be the happieft of men.
The
The unthinking Emma had fuffered this tale to be fo frequently repeated, that it in¬ fenfibly became lefs offenfive to her ear, and as íhe really loved Whitmore, could not avoid wiihing the event, he appeared to de- fire fo ardently, might fpeedily take place. One afternoon, after Whitmore had pafľed the whole morning with Emma, Mrs. Delmer came home in particular high ipirits, and after dinner fat down and wrote a letter, which was addrefled, to Emma's great amazement, to her brother Edwin at Inglewood. Emma was at that moment alone with Mrs. Delmer, who, perceiving marks of curiofky on her features, faid, " I have been writing to your brother, Emma, on a fubjed that at prefent I cannot difclofe ; but which, I am convinced, Avili give you plea¬ fure, I fhall fen J my letter by this night's poft, and on his anfwer, which by the way I exped he will bring himfelf, fliall be able to treat you with a fuiprife." К 4 Without
Without farther explanation flie rang for a fervant, delivered the letter to be put in the poft, and ordered tea. Whitmore had left them foon after Mrs. Deimer's re¬ turn, with a promife to join them early in the evening ; it was now, hoAvever, far be¬ yond his ufual time, but Mrs. Delmer was too much accuftomed to fuch difappoint- ments for them to give her any great fur¬ prife. Emma, on the contrary, felt uneafy, though fhe endeavoured to conceal it. — Whitmoie had that morning, when alone Avith her, propofed to pafs the whole evening there, antl in fuch promifes he had ever before been ftridly punctual îr Avas near. ele ven before he joined them, and then apparently difcompofed. He pref- fed Emma's hand between his, and turning fuddenly to Mrs. Delmer, iáid, "Is it tiue, Madam, that }ou aie married to Edwin ?" For an inftant the Lady was too confufed to reply. At length flic anfwered : " Sup¬ pofe
pofe it fo, Sir, who has a right to controul ine r" " Not I, by my foul," replied he, " nor would I if I could ; but furely I might have been trufted ; ithad better have been difclofed by you than by my wife's gallant Dade v ille ir. a public coffee-houfe." " Merciful God ! my brodier Edwin married !" exclaimed Emma. Ci I have neither acted by Edwin or you, Madam," faid Whitmore, " in a manner to make fecrecy needful You are the un¬ doubted m iit refs of yourfelf and fortune ; but Edwin methinks fhould have coniulted hib friends." " Agnes will die with grief," fobbed Emma ; "he has treated her cruelly." tť At leaft, Emma," interrupted Mis; Drimcr, u I expeded your appiobation. -~ К 5 Do
Ώο you think your brother could have married better ? I firft procured him the commilfion, and have by purchafe now goC him promoted ; that has been the bufinefs which lately has fo totally employed me, and that will be completed to-morrow. We agreed to keep our marriage fecret till that event took place, and I have this night writ¬ ten' to inform him thac all reflraint is re¬ moved," " You cannot but be fenfible !" replied Emma, " that I rejoice in my brother's good fortune, and muft indeed myfelf be unworthy your kindnefs, did I not feel both affedion and gratitude for you ; yet, Avhen 1 refled on the confufion this will occafion at Ingkwood, I proteft it frightens me; I fear they will think I was in the fecret." " Suppofe you were," anfwered Mrs. Delmer. " Your father will furely be fatis¬ fied with the prudence of his fon's choice ?" "My
f< My father, you well know, Madam, is extremely partial to Bernard's daughters, and though he will undoubtedly be fenfible of the honour you have done us, will refent the iniult offered to Agnes," " Farmers are plenty enough in your country," replied Mrs. Delmer, " ihe will foon fupply her lofs. For the prefent, how¬ ever, let the bufinefs reft, I am perfedly fatisfied with what I have done, and truft Edwin is the fame." Vexed as Whitmore really felt, he was too politic to quarrel with his fifter, at a mo¬ ment he regarded fo critical in his fuccefs Avith Emma; he therefore only replied,— " You fay well, let it reft : I again repeat, I do not blame you, except for your want of confidence in me; hoAvever, let even thac pafs, I will lay the fault to love, and excufe ir ; for, perhaps, in that fame cafe I might have been equally blameable." K d Mrs».
Mrs. Dtlmcr was afloniihed at her bro¬ ther's moderation, while Emma was charmed Avith his goodnefs in thus calmly bearing i'o unequal a marriage in refped to fortune,. and though in her h -art flie could not avoid lamenting the falíhood of Edwin to Agne«, yet her pride was gratified to find heiftif ίο greatly allied. Edwin's behaviour, when laft at Inglewood, confounded her, that he was married at that time fhe could hardly believe, yet flie had been almofl conftantly with Mis. Delmer fince fhe returned to town with him, and had no reafon to imagine their union had taken place fince ihat period ; İn Ihort, the more fhe thought on the fubjed the more fhe was bewildered, and foon after Whitmcre retired, withdrew to her apartment. Mrs. Delmer was engaged early the next morning, to conclude tlie bufinefs íhe liad * before mentioned, therefore, after taking a hafty breakfaft with Ernm?> during Avhich little difcourfe pafľed, flie left her. Edwin's
Edwin's maniage now entirely employed Emma's thoughts; his reafon for dtrfiring her, not to mention to Mrs. Delmer Avhat had been propofed at the Foreft was now accounted for -, her heart revolted at his duplicity, Avhile flie pitied and wept for Agnes j u yet, after all," faid fhe, mentally, (c the temptation was indeed hard to refill, grandeur, wealth and pleafurej htigho, I myftif once thought Inglewood the finefl place in the world ·, at prefent how different, I know it to be only a mean inconfidtrable fpot, with a few fcattered houfes, for the moil part covered with thatch, andamalmoft aíhamed to fay I was born there ! I am fure I fliall never be able to endure it now, there¬ fore how can I fo much Avonder at Edwin, poor fellow, he is at олее ίυ Ьс condemned and pkieü !" Tlıefe deliberations were broken upon by the fudden entrance of Whitmore, whole whole appearance announced that fome ex¬ traordinary event had taken place. He threw himfelf
himfelf in a chair, and after fome moments filence, his eyes fixed on the afloniihed Emma, he faid, taking her hand, " I have fometimes flattered myfelf that you regarded me with kindnefs Emma, now is the time to prove it. I have this morning fought with Darleville, who, not content with the injury done me with that infamous woman that bears my name, but whom I defpife too much to feek revenge, he laft night dared to fpeak difrefpedfully of my fifter and yourfelf, but his life will repay that infuît : I have left him pail hope. The friend who accompa¬ nied me already thinks me on my way to Calais, where he wiflies me to ftay till I learn the event ; but I cannot go, I will fooner await the worft than leave you." " Great God !" exclaimed Emma, trem¬ bling, " let me conjure you to fly this inftant, every moment increafes your danger. Would to Heaven you had never known us. My brother's, imprudence has, I fear, involved you in this trouble," "My
« c My proofs are, I have no fear, ftrong enough to procure a divorce ; pardon, then, Emma, a propofal which nothing but the neceffity of the moment íhould force me to make. Would you," continued he, throwing himfelf at her feet, " nobly flie w youďelf above vulgar prejudices, and condefcend to accompany me, I will go when and where you pleafe, and the firft moment in my power make you mine for ever ; but I can¬ not, will not, quit you though death itfelf fliould be the confequence. I afk no return to my affedion, but what modefty may grant until I have a legal right ; oh ! then, my beloved girl, for once ftep over thofe nar¬ row bounds of cold prudence, and lhew your friendfliip ; your brother is already the huf¬ band of my fifter, and you are the choien of my heart ; fpeak, then, my love, fliall I owe my fife to your kindnefs, or will you fuffer me to be taken at your feet ?"
6
«Ohľ
" Oh ! Mr. Whitmore, what do you alk ?" replied Emma, weeping; "confider my pa¬ rents, my brother." " Your brother Edwin, however, cannot blame you ; it is in his quarrel, unkindly as he has treated me, that 1 have incurred this misfortune, and for your parents, when I prefent myfelf as their ion, all animofities will ceafe ; refolve then, my Emma, and lee me owe a debt to love, which cold duty alone never yet formed an idea of." At that moment a loud knock at the door alarmed Emma. — "Oh ! haften — haften," foe cried, " perhaps you may be fought for even here, fly, or my apprehenflons for you will kill me." The caufe of Emma's alarm was Whit¬ more's Adalet. Fíe came to prefs his mailer's departure ; he faid he had a chaife in waiting, and had juft heard that Darleville could not furvive the day. " Begone,"
" Begone," replied Whitmore, " I care not, I am not ready, I am prepared to meet the worft." The man appealed furprifed, and would have ventured to expoftulate ; but Whitmoie interrupting him, again commanded his ab¬ fence in a voice that demanded obedience. Whitmore ftill perfifted in preifing the alarmed and half-wavei ing Emma to accom¬ pany him. For fome time foe only an¬ fwered with her tears : At length foe faid, " Let us confult Mrs. Delmer, I will be guided by her." Whitmore, Avho dreaded nothing more than the return of Mrs. Delmer, however icplied, taking out his watch, " Well, be it fo ; but what time do you exped her ?" " Oh !—no— rio," exclaimed Emma, " it is impoffible, foe will not icturn uil near dinner
dinner time, and your fafety demands that you depart this inftant." " My íàfety, or even my life, is to me of no value ; independent of you, Emma, there¬ fore, I AVİİ1 wait the return of my fifter; yet has flie not fhewn, by her choice of your brother, that ihe thinks a imall fhare of the world's opinion is worth facrificing to obtain happinefs ?" " Ah !" fighed Emma, « but íhe is mar¬ ried." " Well, my love, and fhall we not alfo be married as foon as poffible ; even with all the bigotry that country education has implanted on your mind, you muft allow that a woman, who has aded fo íharnefully as Mrs. Whitmore, is no longer in the eye cf Heaven, or the world, my wife ; my mar¬ riage with her was merely a joining of hands; ours, Emma, will be an union of hearts. To eafe your delicate fcruples, am I not content to
ro wait for all the formalities of law, and the jargon of prieftcraftj though neither Emma can make me more fecurely your's, let me only, my love, have to boaft hereafter, that you nobly fhewed your affedion in the hour of my danger, and accompanied in his exile, a man who would glory to place you on a throne." Emma, weak and irrefolute, knew not hoAV to confent, yet feared to deny; flie loved Whitmore too well for his fafety not to be dear to her ; duty for a while indeed ftruggled with paífion, but Emma's mind was too feeble to bear the conflid. Whitmore faw his advantage, and preifing his fuit with redoubled ardour, prevailed, in an unhappy moment, on the infatuated Emma, to demoliíh the fair ftrudure of virtue her parents had fo many years been endeavouring to rear in her heart, by weakly yielding to accompany him. ------ Delighted with his luccefs, he hurried her inftantly
inflo ntly to the chaife which he had in wait¬ ing, ordering the poft-boy to ufe the utmoft fpecâ. Had Wrhitmore given Emma time to re¬ fled, it is probable flie might have efcaped the deftrudion that awaited her ; but her fen- fibilhy awakened for the fafety of the man fhe loved ; no friend near to advife, or fnatch her from the impeding ruin, flie forgot all but his danger, legardlefs of the dagger foe Avas ftriking into the bofom of her parents, or the never-dying anguiih fhe was implanting in her own. They had hardly reached the end of the firft flage, Avhen, even though fupported by the encircling arm of Whitmore, his vows ftill founding in her ear, that filent but never- failing monitor, confcience awoke, and at once prefented the reverfe of the fafcinating pidure that for a while had intoxicated her fenfes, "Oh!
" Oh ! my dear parents," exclaimed foe, in an agony of grief, " muft I then never fee you more ? the loft, the abandoned Emma has forfaken all, and for whom ? — Great God ! a married man ! Oh ! Mr, Whitmore, if you really love me let me return, it will be the ftrongeft proof of your affedion, and never fhall it be forgotten." " Well, then," replied he, reproachfully, " let us return, for I cannot fee you thus; I will refign myfelf, and wait the event of Darleville's wounds ; at leaft you foall not accufe trn y Emma, of want of affedion." " Ah ! no," returned Emma, weeping, " let me return alone ; have I not fhewn how dear I hold your fafety ?" " And after fuch a proof think you it is poffible to rear myfelf from you ? No, Emma, any thing elfe I may be able to accompli fli ; but by all my hopes of happinfs we will not part ;
part ; if you infift I will accompany you home, lee life or death be the confequence." Emma again became irrefolute ; again for a Avhile love overcame reafon. In the mean time the chaife proceeded fwiftly, and mo* mentarily made her return lefs poifible; — Whitmore alarming her feelings, and foothing her by turns, until at length they reached Dover, where the wind proving fair a packet was immediately procured, and all return entirely cut off for the loft Emma. To divert her thoughts from dwelling on fubjeds he wiflied her to forget, Whitmore related the caufe of his quarrel with Darle¬ ville: He had in the public coffee-room declared, that if Mrs. Delmer was not mar¬ ried to Enfign Godwin, they had a perfed good underftanding, as he was frequently Avith her at very unfeafonable hours (infor¬ mation he had received from Mrs. Whitmore) as was alfq Mr. Whitmore têté-à-têtê with Emma. JWhitmore on his entrance had been
been jelled with on the bufinefs, and con- gtatulatedon his good fortune with the fair ruftic ; but not being naturally of a temper to hear the charader of any one he profeffed to efteem treated lightly, he immediately took fire, and infitteci on the author of the fcandal being declared, which proving to be Darlevuie, he determined to quarrel, and walking up to him with affumed coldnefs, he faid, " I hear, Sir, you have taken the liberty to fpeak very freely this evening of my filler and Mifs Godwin ; I muft therefore advife you in future to be more cautious, or your want of prudence may put your valour to rhe hazard, a circumftance that will, per¬ haps, prove inconvenient, as the reality of courage, as well as the reputation of gallantry, is neceflary for a foldier." This affront, given in a public coffee-room, was too grofs to pafs unnoticed, an appointment was there¬ fore inftantly made, after which Whitmore fupped at Mrs. Deimer's, when he queftioned her on her marriage, though he avoided par¬ ticulars. The
The next morning he met his opponent, whom on the firft fire he foot in the fide, and left with his friend, who had aded as fécond, .while himfelf haftened to Emma, determined, as he had fuch a favourable pre¬ tence to make a bold effay to get her into his ро'лег, and in which he unhappily fuc¬ ceeded. Such was the real ftate of the quar¬ rel, and its fubfequent confequences, buc which were alternately heightened or foftened in Whitmore's relation to Emma, as might beft fuit his purpofe. So greac had been Emma's conforms, thac flie had not even thought of clothes ; but Whitmore, on their arrival at Calais, foon removed that inconvenience, and they con¬ tinued their route to Parib, where h: fupplied her with a profufion and elegance that marked the power he fuppofed foow to have over the female heart. Emma unfor¬ tunately was not infenfible to it; in contem¬ plating the fplendour that furrounded hV^ her forrow gradually decreafed, and he: gratitude for 2
for the donor augmented, until at length, in an hour of unguarded folly, flie bartered her honour for the gaudy and ufelefs trappings of pride and vice. Mrs. Delmer, on her return home on the day of the duel, wondered at Emma's ab¬ fence, or for wha: purpofe fhe could have accompanied her brother, yet had no idea until late in the evening of the real truth. — She feared Edwin would blame her, and knew not what meafures to purfue ; but determined to give him immediate intelligence, and ac¬ cordingly Avrote that night, expreffing her vexation at what had happened, and entreating his immediate return·
VOL. 1»
СИЛ! 3 .
CHA P. XVI.
WHILE the unthinking Emma Avas flying from her friends, and fieri ñcing her honour to gratify the licentious wifhes of her betrayer, all was joy and feflivity at Inglewood. The young itranger was bap¬ tized by the name of Reuben, after his grandfather, and the fubfequent entertain¬ ment having lailed until late on the fécond day, the guefls had taken leave, and retui ned home. Had ir not been for the tormenting pangs of confcience lumin would have felt himfelf perfedly happy, for though he could fometimc«·
fometimes forget every thing but love and Agnes, yet refledion Avas fore to return Avith redoubled violence. Fie Avas a confiant avíc- nvií to the happinefs of William and Fanny, and like a fiend of darkneis their innocent pk\.fures increafed his torments, for in them he contemplated whac himfelf might have poffeffed. The venerable Godwin fometimes fufpeded thit his fon Avas not happy; but attributed it to his being neceflitaced to quit Agnes, and therefore wifoed their union to take place as foon as poffible ; it indeed gave him fome furprife that Edwin himfelf did not prefs it more Avarmly ; but waiting for the expeded promotion was the reafon given, and readily believed by Godwin, for his heart was too guilelefs for him to fuppofe his fon a villain. After the departure of the guefts,' as the family were fitting in cheerful converfation, the poft- Doy 's horn gave notice he brought letters, and a momem after Margery entered, L 2 and
and delivered one to Edwin, whofe eye had, however, no fooner glanced over the direc¬ tion (which was Mrs. Delmcr's) than the blood for a moment forfook his cheeks, but as inflan tane oufly again returned, and fufľufed them with crirnfon. Without knowing what he was about, he was inflindively going to put it in his pocket, had not his eyes met thofe of his brother W iham, in whofe face he faw, in legible traits, the ftrongeft marks of furprife. This difcovery at once recalled him to iccolledion, he endeavoured to conceal his eonfufion, and opened the letter ; but had fcarcely read two lines, when it again vifibly increafed, for it was Mrs. Deimer's firft letter in which flie began, by informing him that all reflraint was now removed, and that tht ir maniage night be declared, as fhe had ob¬ tained tise wiihed promotion for him. The joy Edwin experienced at this news, in fomc meafure, over-balanced his confufion. "I
" I nm preferred," exclaimed he, in a rap¬ irne, " and have a profped of yet further advancement." He then continued reading the remainder of his letter, which he had no fooner concluded than he put it in his pocket, fimply relating what he thought neceffary of tiie contents to his friends. " And from whence comes it, Edwin ?" faid William, looking on him fixecjl?. " Comes—why—why, from Mr. Whit¬ more to be fure," replied Edwin, hefitating, and his downcaft eye avoiding the fcrutinizing gaze of his brother ; " you know I long expeded this event, yet it came fo fuddenly that it quite overcame me." William, unwilling to make a reply that might awaken fufpicions againft his brother, and VNhich, perhaps, in π uth might be ground· kf>, lemained fiient, while Fdwin received the congratulations of the family, but parti¬ culari) 7 (»f Bernard, wha now thought his Lj; hopes
hopes of Edwin's becoming a general half verified. When Edwin had recovered his firft fur¬ prife, he informed them he fhould be obliged to leave them almoft immediately, as the bufinefs required his immediate prefence." cç Pies on that luck," interrupted Bernard, u I thought you would have ftaid to take Agnes with you, and though 1 fhould be forry to lofe her, yet, as you feem never happy apart, I am willing to confent when you pleafe, on condition, however, that you let me have my girl with me two or three months every fummer." ** Alas !" faid Edwin, with an hypocritical figh, " I would to Heaven I could now ftay, €>r that I had known my advancement was fo near; but it is in vain to wifo, for I muit inevitably depare cither to-morrow night, or the mowiing following ; yet there is one way, a though
though I fear to propofe it; if my beloved Agnes and our parents would confent." " Confent! why to be ime we will," anfwered Bernard. " It is," replied Edwin, hefitating : " If I might be permitted to take Agnes to town with mc, we mmht there be married Avithout delay. I have made Mr. Whitmore a fort of promife that he fliould be prefent at the ceremony, antl as Emma is already there, flie would have a female friend to accom¬ pany her." It may be eafily furmifed that Edwin had no defign to condud Agnes to his fifter, he fimply wifhed to get her from her parents, as he had then no doubt but he fhould be able to deceive one fo innocent of guile, and in a ihort time bring her to his wiíhes." " My brother Godwin fliall determine the bufinefs," returned Bernard. « Then
tf Then I by no means approve it," faid Godwin : " Had Emma been here to ac¬ company her the objection might have been lei's, but even then the flep would have been imprudenti what fay you, William ?" " I am afloniihed that Edwin could afk it," replied William ; " he furely did not confider the impropriety of Agnes's leaving the country with him unmarried. 1 think Fanny is, and ever was, as dear to me as her filler can be to Edwin, yet paffion fhould never tranfport me fo far as to fuŕľer her to take a flep that might fubject her even to a temporary humiliation. Edwin can furely again get a ihort leave of abfence, and if Mr. Whitmore wifhes to be prefent at the ceremony, he has nothing to detain him." " I did not requeil your permiflion, nor yet your advice, William," faid Edwin; with an emotion of anger which he could not conceal. Th«
Tîıe permiflion is alone in her father's power to grant," replied William ; " for my opinion my father aikcd it, and as it coincided with lis own I freely gave it ; nay, had it not, in this cafe í fhould not have fcrupled to differ from him. Agnes has no brother but myfclf, and I hokl her fame too dear to fu fľer it to be fullied, however unmeritedly." Ct It is enough," cried Edwin ; " if fruf- trating my happinefs gives you pleafure, you have accomplifhed your end." " Nay, nay," interrupted Bernard, " do not fpeak fo harfhly, William is a good lad, whatever he fays is for the beft : I do not knoAv how it is, but he always brings me over to his opinion, and it is generally right." " I am forry, in this infiance, that he has fuch power with you," replied Edwin, fulkily. " And why fo, my brother r" faid W r iU liam, "on calm reflection your own reafon will
will applaud mc ; and now, to prove how dear I hold your happinefs, I have a medium to propofe ; if you fliould find it inconve¬ nient to return, prepare ail for Agnes's re¬ ception, and Mr. Bernard and myfelf will accompany her to town. I think he would rake fuch a journey to oblige you, and I can affbie you I would, though I fliould leave my heart at Inglewood with this witch and little forcerer," patting his young fon on the check as he lay at his mother's breaft, " There—there, now !" exclaimed Ber¬ nard, exultingly, " I told you he would bring you round ; his is the beft plan after all, though I do not much like your long journies; however, for once 1 do not care: Come, then, do not look fo glum, all is fettled, you know, if the mountain cannot come to us, why we mufl go to the mountain, as the folks fay." " I hope to fpare you that trouble," re¬ plied Edwin, after a ihort paufe, during Avhuii
which he endeavoured to collect himfelf ; " I truft I fliall be able to return. I certainly did not wifo to be again feparated from Agnes, but I muft fubmit." Mr, and Mrs. Godwin now declared them¬ felves of William's opinion, as did alfo Fanny, who added, " Though, like my father, I do not approve of long journies, yet, in fuch a cafe as this, I fliall willingly fpare you." The converfation now took a livelier turn with all but Edwin ; his fcheme fruftrated of getting Agnes in his power, he knew not what meaiures to purfue ; the intelligence of his promotion had been unexpeded, and when the conditions annexed were refleded on unwelcome, for to declare his marriage was to lofe Agnes for ever. His uneafinefs was too vifible to be overlooked, all tried to enliven him, and particularly Agnes, by a thoufand little artlefs careffes, endeavoured to
to make him forget his vexation ; but in vain, the foothing of Agnes, like oil on a flame, ferved but to increafe the diflradion that overwhelmed him. — At length the family retired to their apartments for the night, and, undifturbed by guilt or forrow, the greater part foon feil afleep. Edwin, however, felt he could not reft, the attempt he knew would be fruidefs, and for fome time he fat in all the gloom of de- fpair. —- " Is it not poffible to ice Agnes again this night ?" exclaimed he ; " at leaft I fliall take her unprepared; it is my lafl refource, and if I fucceed, William and vir¬ tue I laugh at ye, I can hereafter make my OAvn conditions ; if otherwife, at all events, it can but haften my departure a few hours from the Foreft, of which I muft take an everlafting farewell." This refolution once formed, he determined to endeavour to accompliih it ; and leaving his
his own room, advanced towards that of Agnes with the cautious and foft ftep of a midnight robber. At the door he paufcd, a momentary pang of remorfe feized him : " Moniler !" faid he, mentally, " what vil¬ lany art thou about to perpetrate ? Art thou not already fufficienriy guilty ? Thou wilt next be capable of murdering the innocent as they fleep, that neither their power or per¬ fuafion fhould defeat thy purpofe." As he fpoke his feet involuntarily turned from the door : " And can I," refumed he, " give her up fo: ever ? Have I not it in my power to make her amends for this one de¬ viation from reditude ? My fortune—my life—all—all—are her's ; then let me not weakly abandon an opportunity which can never be recalled." With thefe ideas he determined to pro¬ ceed in his purpofe, and gently opening the door of her apartment, fearful of alarming vol. ι. M her,
