Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The farmer of Inglewood Forest: a novel
THE FARMER O F INGLEWOOD FOREST.
С H A Ρ, I, " TNFERNAL remembrancer, what doft JL thou here ?" at length exclaimed Fitz¬ morris. <c Not all the malice of hell could have conjured up fuch another petrifying, though filent monitor. Is it not fufficient that my whole life has been embitteted by my weak contrition, but that I muft alfo be moved thus by the fight of a paltry ring ? vol. iv, В May
May not two be alike ? Doubtlefs they may, and though alone I am afhamed to give way to fo womanifh a folly." Writh thefe words he again, yet, with the utmoft agitation, railed her hand, and drew off the ring that caufed his alarm, Anna at the fame moment uttering a deep and piercing groan, which added frefh terror to his guilt- ftruck heart ; but foon recovering, he haftily approached the candle to examine the trinket more minutely ; but, far from deriving the fatisfačtion he expected, found, to his yet greater difmay, it was the very identical one he dreaded, and particularly identified by the initials on the reverfe. His firft furprife had, in great meafure, overpowered the fumes of wine, and contributed not a little to recall fome painful and long bani ihed remembrances; fearing himfelf by the table, loft in thought, he fixed his eyes on Anna with a curiofity thai totally overcame every other confidera¬ tion ; this, however, foon gave place to alarm, for
n
for he now perceived her fb violently difor¬ dered oy the potion ihe had fwahowed, that her whole frame appeared univerfally con- vulfed. Fear was now his predominant paffion, for ihould flie die thus fuddenly it might have ferious confequences. Mrs. Palmer would be immediately apprifed, and might caufe her to be opened, in which cafe, perhaps, the whole villany would be difcovered : In ihort, his fenfations were of that kind, that fuch men alone could only defcrve, or ever experience. He now hung over her, not with paffion, that was vani íhed, bnt with the moft acute anguifh,dreading, as the convulfions increafed, that he ihould fee her expire. At length, though ftill fenfeiefs, ihe began fo feream, and that fo loud, that he was convinced it muft echo through the houfe, and perhaps awaken Editha or Julia (for he did not much fear the houfekeeper) whom he had no doubt would В 2 immediately
immediately haften to the Ipot. This fup¬ pofition made him at fiift determine to leave the room ; but Anna becoming fuddenly more quiet, tho' evidently flniggling for life, he lif- tened, and the houfe appearing perfectly ftill, ventured to remain and fprinkle her face with water ; at the fame time vowing, that if me efcaped with Hfe he would never more have recourfe to fuch defprratc means ; even ihe horror and amazement eccaficned by the ring vaniíhing on the contemplation of her agonies. While thus employed he was fuddenly alarmed by the hafty opening of the door, and turning round, to his ftill further difmay and vexation, perceived Julia at his elbow, who, awakened by the fcreams, had only ftaid m put on a petticoat before íhe ran to the fpot fiom whence ihe conjectured they pro¬ ceeded. Though Julia ftarted at the fight of Fitz¬ morris thus tmpioyed, and at fuch an hour, yet
yet hts confufion more than doubled hei *s ; hırt paffion, aififtcd by his natural arrog4rtce, after a moment overcame every other İeeüng* he bade herbe gone,demanding what buüneís flic had there. ' c Bufine fs !" repeated Julia, c * Buünfaî^ more proper me aflc what bufinefs you here ? No, you flave, now mafia. Mc dream hor¬ rid dream—hear poor Miffy cry out— ib rua fee what matter." " And fo did I alio," replied Fitzmorris, recovering his ufual cunning, and fmoothing his ruffled brow : " 1 heard Mifs Palmer feream, and not being gone to bed, haftcoed hither, and found her as you fee, I fear in the agonies of death ! You obferved, Julia, that I was í prinkling her face with water when you entered/* " Oh ! yes, me fee dat fure enough ; but, maflfj, why you no call ? Poor foul," conti- В j nued
nticd lhe, hanging pirbufiy over Anna^ " fhe ék. Oh ! fbc iirrcr wake more ; den her moder die too. Oh ! wifh «ever come here/* €f Wiib you had never come here i'* an¬ fwered Fitzrnonib, in a rage, which he conia not immediately nords: "What do vou mean by that, yeu black devil ? Do you tnbk any body has killed her ?" But inttmtìy recollecting the folly of exaíper&ting her, he added, '* I am much grieved for her j can yoo judge tataik her?" ** No, blefs heart !" anfwered Julia, gazing cm her, " Never fee nobody fo but once— ffee uk ! Poor mulatto, you remember pretty Jenny, ггшТа :" ** Damn ycu !" exclaimed Fİtzmoris, rage again overpowering cunning : " Name her agam, and you íhall have caufe to repent it."
u Rcrtnt. 4
es Repent, mafi%! for what—for fp**?k truth ? Dat no kum fure in free country ?—- Ne Have here— во whipping poft." tc But there are piftols, infernal torment !" rep4»"J Firzmorris ** ^rìd if you do not hold yr»ur tongue thofe, or fomething v^ife, ШЛ1 be your pittiun/' Anna at that moment began to ftruggle afreih, and to feream more violently than before, the difpute was therefore forgotten ш ber danger, Fitxmorris and Julia both alM- ing ht r to the utmoft of their power. In this manner paffed the whole night, Fitzmorris, with feeming concern, towards morning, calling the houfekeeper and Editha, informing them that he had been firft alarmed by hearing Anna's fcreams, and fearing fome ill had befallen her, had repaired to her apartment, and found her as they now beheld her. В 4 Editha,
Editha, half diftracied at the fituation of her friend, was the firft that mentioned me¬ dical aíľ.ftance ; nor had the frowns of her father, which ufed to filence her in a moment, the leaft cfľecft : " Alas !" cried ihe, " what was night, or the diftance from Hcunflow ? I would myfelf have almoft flown in fuch a cafe for any human creature, and much more for my beloved Anna." Fitzmorris, thus preíľed, ordered his old houfekeeper to go to the town and procure help, as he well knew ihe would be abfent the longeft time, judging that, İf Anna fur- vived, the efľečis of the potion muft, by her return, be exhaufted, and beyond the power of being difcovered by the perfon fhe brought with her. Fitzmorris judged rightly, the ftrength cf his infernal dofe being evaporated, but not fo itsefľecTs. Anna foon after, with heavy and repeated groans, opened lier eyes, and cafring
Gãfàng them mournfully around they refted on Editha, who, enraptured to fee her a moment free from the dreadful convulfions in which fhe had fo long ft niggled, threw herfelf by her fide, and watered her face with her tears. Anna in a few minutes began to appear fenfible of her attentions, and throwing her arms around her neck, exclaimed faintly, " Oh ! the wine 1 the wine !" Had the fentence of death that moment: been pronounced againft Fitzmorris, it could not have produced a more ftriking effect : He trembled from head tcfafcot; his face turned of a ghaftly pale, and his teeth chat¬ tered as if in the pa roxi fm of an ague. — « She—fhe—is delirious !"—at length hefi- tated he, " fhe drank no wine but a glafs with yoiij Editha, that you know could not hurt her? Her head is affected, and fhe merely fays what firft ftrikes her imagina¬ tion Г
Β ζ: Kitzmorris'š-
Fitzmorris's agitation was not loft on either Eo'itha or Julia, but caufed different furmifes in each bofom ·, the former fimply wondered at his confufion, while the latter found her fufpicions corroborated by his behaviour, and furmifed the truth, for flie knew her former tyrant capable of fimilar villany. A: length the old houfekeeper returned,. accompanied by a furgeon,. who, examining the ftate of Anna, declared her in a high fever. Fitzmorris immediately caught at this report, and affirmed that flie was deli¬ rious, as a fieíh proof to ftrengtlien the de- ci fiori, rejoicing to find himfelf fo apparently hfe from detection, he now collected his fcattered fpirits, and became as boldly calm in guilt, as others are in confeious inno¬ cence. Fitzmorris's affcrtion that Anna was deli¬ rious was not, how r ever, entitely without foundation, for though ihe had intervals of recollection.
recollection, yet her head was greatly de¬ ranged. At length fiie began to appear more com¬ pofed, and Fitzmorris left the apartment, ordering the reluctant Editha to attend him, and make break fail. The difcourfe turned entirely on Anna, concerning whom Fitzmorris, more patticu- latly than befoie, queftioned his daughter, who, however, without falfhood, gave fimply fuch anfwers as fiie conceived would raife her in his eftimation, being well aw*are of tiie deference he paid to fortune, fhewing him alio the pearl bracelets which fhe had the evening before prefented her, and afking timidly, in her turn, " if he did not think it neceíľary Mrs. Palmer ihould be imme¬ diately acquainted with her ilinefs/' " By no means/' replied he, peremptorily, " a few days will, 1 hope, render ix necdlclš; В 6 it
it would therefore be only alarming her to no purpofe." Fitzmorris would fain have introduced the fubječt of the ring, but guilt made him cautious ; he dreaded left Anna might here- afier recollect fbe went to bed with it on, and alfo had no expectation that his daugh¬ ter knew any thing refpecting it. " Do you not think it very extraordinary, Sir," faid Editha, " that Anna's mind fhould dwell on the wine fne drank laft night at ft pper ; I recollect too, that even before fhe went to bed, (he faid the wine had difordered her, and that İt was very difagreeabîe when lhe drank it з had not that circumftance bet¬ ter be mentioned to die doctor when he comes again ?" Fitzmorris muttered an oath between his t. j eth unnoticed by his daughter, to whom he replied, ·· No* fool, if the wine had been injurious»
injurious, would it not alfo have affected you Г " I ihould fuppofe fo, Sir," anfwered Editha,. mildly, " yet fhe, it is plain, attributes her ilinefs to that caufe ; and I have heard my aunt fay, that wine is frequently adulterated with unwholefome drugs to render it intoxi¬ cating." " Dolt ! idiot !" exclaimed Fitzmorris, ftamping on the ground with rage, " be gone, leave the room : No, now I reflect," continued he, calling her back, " the fever may be communicative ; do not therefore go into Mifs Palmer's apartment,- you will only humour her whimfies, and, without being of fervice, catch the malady." " Not go into Mifs Palmer's chamber, Sir !" faid Editha, burfting into tears : "Oh! do not keep me from Anna, fhe loves me, as X do her dearly, and no one*s attentions will be
be fo well received as mine. Indeed, î meant no offence — I fimply thought the win:—" fi Curfe the wine, a^ain am I to be tor¬ mented with the fubječt. Fool, would you infer thar, as I ferved her with ir, í'ľc v/as poifoned r" <·' Poifoned, Sir.," repeated Editha, fhud- denr.g : u Oh, my father 1 how can you thus cruelly trea: your poor child ?" " Re i^one then to vour own apr.rtment" faid he, " I will think—confider— and 1er you know my refolution in half an hour." Editha immediately obeyed and retired, fhocked at tiie behaviour of her father, and deeply i rnpreffed with forrow ac the fituation of Anna. Fitzmorris, on being left alone for fome time, walked up 2nd down the apartment in great
great diforder, he faw with horror that the allufion Anna made to the wine had impreíTed itfelf on the mind of his daughter, and trem¬ bled for the confequence. At length he, however, refolved to remove Editha, under pretence that the fever was communicative, to call in more affiftance, if neceíľary, to Anna, and at all events, if there was no change for the better in two days, to í:nâ off an exprefs to Bath to Mrs. Palmer. Editha, on leaving her rather, had retired to her own room, and lat weeping alone when Julia entered, fhe having left Anna for a few minutes under the care of the houfekeeper. " Ah, Julia !" faid Editha, *' what fhail I do, my father has forbidden me to come into Anna's chamber, left I Iliould catch the fever." " You no catch fever,. Miffey," replied Julia; " fhe fay only wine make fick. Ah l Miffey, me fee all night long, when maffa no
Julia's ftory, filch as the affection and pity h.r mother always exprefled for the young mulares and the difiiké lier father had to hear her named. Sne alfo remembered that on the tv« nina before he had hcriied rhtir wine from the fi V;>c ard, though there unsa bottle on the table, a trifle whkh P. r ¿t that ri их thought immaterial, but now αίΠ/αΙ to firengtheu her fear*. Editha knew not what meafures to purfue; fhe whhed to fave her father's honour, but determined alfj, though fhe ihcuid never fee Anna more, to refcuc her from the danger Julia had irrprinicd on her mind ', fhe there¬ fore refolved, Ihould her father infill on Je pararan g her from Anna, ш write to Mrs. Palmer, though without a fignature, and in¬ form her Anna's health wa* in a very pre- carioub ftate. Fitzmoiris at that moment fent for her down tbwis, and on her entrance informed her
her, with more than ufual kindnefs, that the furgeon had again feen Anna, and declared the fever yet higher than in the morning, t:ieri*iore he could not nfk her life by con¬ tinuing her in fuch а fituation, but would forthwith take her to a fchool in Hounflow unni the danger was over. He alfo told her his vakt was juft arrivent and that Mrs. Fitzmorris was much as tue day before. Editha courtefied acquiefcence, though never had her heart felt fo cold to the com¬ mands of her father, never before had ihe contemplated him with fo little reverence ; but the forrows of her mother, the death of the mulatto, and the fituation of Anna at that moment, obliterated every other idea. It may eafily be furmifed, it was not the fever Fitzmorris was fearful of; he dreaded even the eye or his own child, and fhud- dc'.ed left her belief fhould ftrengthen the after don of Anna refpecting the wine. Editha
Editha had no fooner returned to her apart¬ ment, for the old houfekeeper remaining with Anna íhe did not dare to enter that, left her father fhould hear of it, than (he fat down and wrote a letter to Mrs. Palm, r, but without fignature, and fimply containing chele iines : " Madam, Your dear daughter has been taken fud¬ denly ill ; I wifh you could come to her : I hope, however, flie is İn no immt diate dan¬ ger ; ihew this to no one, From your friend." W ľ hen Editha had concluded and L Id ed hrr letter, it firft ftruck her that ihe did not know Mrs, Palcner's addrefs at Bath, not being aware that the refidence of all new comers in that city are eafily difcovered : — For fume time ihe was puzzled how to у it, but
but at length determined to fend if at alî events, and alfo to write, in caie that ihould mifcarry, one to Godwin, whole addrefs íhe well knew, having cften f<¿t:n Anna dhečl letters to her mother and the family· bitr letter to Godwin contained nearlv the fame words, with the addition of a poft- fcript, fignifying where Anna then was. —■ Editha** invention was now put to the rack, to devife means how to fend her well-meant epiftles. At laft fne recollected trur, as the poil· man evtiy evening when he paíièd the houfe blew his hum, they might eafily be conveyed to him by Julia, whom ihe well knew would readily obey her. Julia fome time after calling in to inform her \ hat Anna was more compoicd, ihe told her of the ítep ihe had taken, and entreated that no perfe¬ ction, nor menaces, might force her, who was now Mrs. Palmer's tervant, from her young miftrefs.
Julia
J' 'da faithfully promifed to watch over Anna with the utmoft care, as alio to give the letters the following evening to the poll- man, and Fitzmorris lending foon after to inform his daughter that his chaiiè was at the doos Editha ацип warmly recommended 'C?» Лппа to the eat e of Julia, and, with a heavy heart and overflowing tyes, attended him to tue fchool, where he propofed to place her.
CHAP.
C H А P. II.
FITZMORRIS, though he haddcfigned to have no confidant, nor accomplice, in his plot againft Anna, yet found himfelf fo tortured wich the pangs of confcience, or fomething like remorfe, that he, on the following evening, determined to reveal the whole of what hdd paffed to his old friend and counfellor, the valet before-mentioned, who had giown grey-haired in the fervice of iniquity, and well knew every occurrence of his paft life.
Anna
Anna being in fome meafure more cortv pofed, his anxiety became confidently re¬ lieved on that head i but cuiiufity and mingled angui Πι, occafioned by the ring, again diituroed his imagination, and while he v/as und re fling prompted him to confult his ftaunch emiiiuy. 1 he fellow, however, pre fumed to ceni ure hb mailer on the fub¬ ica of the dofc that had been adminiitered to her. " 1 wonder, Sir," faid he, " you would venture it, when you had already wunefiird its effects. I'o be fure it was only a mu¬ latto wench, and her death of little con:e- que» ce i but in the pieient cafe it might caufe- inquiries that wouid produce lerious conicquences. Ль for the nng, I am amazed that can give you the leaft uneufinefs, for what, except money, is more commonly tratibterred than rings ? It may have apper¬ tained to a eh zen owners fince it was in your pofíèílion, for i: ib not probable that it ihould
íhould have been preferved as a pledge of - —" ** My perdition," exclaimed Fitzmorris : <f But to appear at fuch a time and place, ftrikes me with horror and amazement, and might almoft furpafs belief, to rife as it were from the bowels of the earth, where í thought it depofited, to fnatch the victim who was incapable of refiftance from my eager embrace. By hell I could almoft think the interference fupernatural. The fight in a moment petrified me, even yet my blocd chills at the recollection 1" Much more paffed on the fubječt, but before the conclufion of their difcourfe the valet had, iu fome meafure, calmed his mafter's emotion, by perfuading him that chance alone had moft probably placed it in the hands of its prefent owner. He alfo perfuaded his patron from any more attempts on the innocent Anna, as her birth and for¬ tune might make it dangerous. vol. iv. С Fitzmorris
Fitzmorris was too much alarmed by what had paffed not to refolve to take this advice, as far as it regarded the infernal arts he before had recourfe to, yet could not detet mine wholly to give her up.— u I wiil," faid he, when alone, " if poffible, perfuade her by fair means to love me after my own method, and fiy with her to the Continent : If this fails I will fooner marry than lofe her; her fortune will no doubt be large, and, hateful as matrimony is to me, I fhail at once gra¬ tify my love and intereft." Thus refolved, Fitzmorris retired more compofed in his mind, the moft diftan: idea of a refufai never obtruding on his imagina¬ tion. On the following morning Anna was ibme- what better, her fever being confiderà! ly lower; fhe particularly inquired for Editha, and being informed flie was removed ap¬ peared greatly depreffed.—" Alas Γ faid fne, weeping,
weeping, " how unhappy am I ! Had I been ill at home, I fliould at leaft have had the fatisfačtion of being furrounded by my friends, now I appear alone, and fhail die without being bleíľed with feeing them." « No—no—Mificy," replied Julia, who was alone with her, iX fee all foon, a:;d no die me hope.—Julia nurfe day and nighr, and make well to ihew good moder íhe no buy Julia for nothing." Anna felt foothed by the unaffected kind¬ nefs of Julia, who informed her, though without hinting her fufpicions of Fitzmorris, that Editha had written privately to Mrs. Palmer, and alio tojier father, as ihe thought the prefence of either would be confolatory in her preient fituation. This intelligence was a powerful reftora- tivc to the fpirits of Anna, who fiattered herfelf that in a ihort time fne fliould fee С 2 fome
fome of her friends. She then inquired after Fitzmorris, whom Julia told her was yet in the houfe, to which Anna replied, íC I am grieved to give him fuch trouble ; he is very kind to me, and I know not what makes me fo ungrateful ; but I hope he will not come to fee me." In two days the youth, and natural good conftitution of Anna, affiled by the inde¬ fatigable cares of Julia, began to overcome the fhock it had fuftained, but ihe was even yet incapable of leaving her bed. Fitzmorris had not prefumed to vifit her, but contented himfelf with fending into her apartment fre¬ quently to inquire after her health.
CHAP.
CHAP. III.
WHILE the innocent Anna was thus in the power of a wretch whofe paf- fions knew no controul, the family at Ingle¬ wood were performing the laft duties to Emma, whofe requeft refpecting the manu¬ fcript had been ftriČtly obeyed. William and Fanny, truly judging it could contain nothing but what would tend towards giving additional pain to their aged parent, determined to have no auditors whatever to the perufal, willing to draw a veil over the errors of Emma, even to their own children. С 3 Accordingly
v Accordingly one night, when the whole fimily were retired to reft, they, in their own chamber, prepared to begin the narrative, William taking up the manufcript, which in many places was icarcely legible from tears, Fanny, her head reclined on her hand, liften- ing with attention, forrow, and mingled dread, to the recital of vices that filled her with horror, while William began as follows: u Confefs your fins to God, and recapi¬ tulate them to your own heart ; were the words of the venerable man, to whom I owe my being, and who yet, in ipite of my manifold transgreffions, has poured balm inta my foul, by not fpurning my unfeigned, tho' late, contrition. I dare not, however, prefix his honoured name to this black recital, for a proftitute has no claim to that of a worthy family ; to fuch íhe is civilly dead, and like a rotten branch cut off from the parent ftock : Emma alone will I then call myfelf, and may the name be forgotten and oblite¬ rated
rated with me ; for I have overwhelmed a father with forrow, and raifed the burning blulh of ikame on the cheeks of a mother! With a bleeding heart I will trulv retrace my crimes : Ah \ would to Heaven that either tears or prayers could obliterate them, but they are too heinous ; and though they have rendered life hateful, yet my guilty foul finks at the thoughts of death, for the fafci- nating tenets that firft beguiled me are vanifhed : Horror alone now ftrikes my guilty mind, and loudly proclaims, that even the grave affords no peace for fuch as have wilfully incurred fuch a weight of ñn and ihame. Oh ! painful remembrance of forfeit hap¬ pinefs, and the pleafurable days of innocence ! would I could recall ye ; but ye are fled for ever, and nothing is now left of the once gay and happy Emma but an emaciated, pol¬ luted íhadow— fad monument of the effects С 4 of
of vice !—Ah ! would to Heaven I could perfuade one mifguided daughter of folly to daih from her lips the gilded cup which holds the empoifoued draught of flattery, or fnatch back one v.dtiin from the paths of deftruč¬ tion ; but as I have lived, fo íhall I die in vain i When you read this, my beloved friends, I truft I fliall be configned to the filent grave, infenfible of the fhame that muft otherwife overwhelm me on having my crimes thus laid open. Oh, William ! on you, at this awful moment, I particularly call, when my guilty foul is ihuddering before its Creator ! Hear my requeft—hate me not, my brother : Alas ! I repent, and my fin is ever before me ! Remember our days of happy infancy, when hand in hand we walked together. At а more advanced age you faved my life from the fury of an enraged bull. Oh, W T ilIiam ! had I died then how happy, what guilt had I been ipared, what
what anguiíh would you have efcaped ? Oh! remember your joy as you bore me home unhurt to my parents ι how fondly you kiíTed my cheek as you gave me to my mother's arms : Remember all this, my brother, and do not curie my memory. I will now begin the narrative of fiiamé i but, alas ! my hand trembles, and my eyes aie dim with tears ! Unavailing forrow ! — thou art now too late ; in the days of my delufion my hand was fteady, and my eyes fparkled with the intoxication of vanity ! You know all previous to my going abroad, I will therefore fpeak from that period % yet no, it is not fuíHcíent, I will probe roy guilty heart with the recapitulation of the infenfi- bility I fhewed to my mother's grief at my departure, and the little refpecl í paid to my father's admonitions. I tore myielffrom their encircling arms, pleafure appeared al¬ morí to give me wings to reach London. —» C j You
You, William, feemed hurt at my unfeeling conduct, and bade me farewell in a voice lefs tender than ufual ; but I was deaf to all, and leaping into the chaife foon wiped ofF the tears that had involuntarily efcaped me. Edwin was uncommonly thoughtful during the whole journey, and I recollect, told me not to mention to Mrs. Delmer on my ar¬ rival how much he was attached to Agnes, as, he faid, ihe had difluaded him from the match, and it might, improperly divulged, injure his future profpečts. On my arrival in town all contributed to¬ wards my undoing : Drefs, pleafure, flattery, at once affailed my weak mind. Whitmore had the art to perfuade me he fliould obtain a divorce from his wife, and would marry me. I alfo, by degrees, imbibed his tenets, and became a profeflèd free-thinker, for he ufed to engage me in controverfies that I was not able to defend ; and to bear down my
my reafon by his volubility, and erroneous maxims dreffed in flowery language, until I was forced to yield the point, though at the fame time my heart bore teftimony of their fallacy. The difcovery of Edwin's marriage was firft revealed to me by Whitmore, who had heard it from his wife's gallant, and who doubtlefs gained the intelligence fiom that Lady's having caufed Edwin to be watched. Alarmed ata quarrel he had in confequence wkh Darleviliei in an evil hour, forfaken of God, I confented to accompany him, firmly perfuaded that in a fhort time I fliould be his wife. But in France, fafcinated by plea¬ fure and drefs, I became his miftrefs, and by a natural degradation was foon peifečtly ra¬ tified with my fituation, having furhriently imbibed his ideas to pi He myfelf in feeing how much he was devoted to me, uncom- pelled by religion or law ; fo thar, when he afterwards informed me how greatly a divorce muft injure his fot tune, I readily gave up the С 6 thought.
thought. In ihort, my only ambition was to reign in his heart ; I knew no happinefs but his affection, no wifh beyond giving him pleafure. All, however, was not calm within, my heart frequently reproached me, and I ftifled reflection as much as poflible : I fome- times wept at the remembrance of my friends, whom I regarded as given up for ever ; for 1 could not bear the moft diftant idea of a meeting with thofe, whofe tendernefs I hael fo ungtatefully repaid. W T e ftaid fome fhort time at Paris, and from thence travelled to Montpelier, then returned again to Paris, and from thence to Bruflcls, where the unhappy Whitmore loft hb life in the prime of his days, and in the height of his fins. Oh, merciful Father ! have pity on him. Nurfed in the fchool of vanity, he imbibed vices and deílručtive tenets from thofe improperly placed around him; had his edeication been viituous, he, perhaps, had been fo to. How much greater 5 Ш У
my crime, born and reared with beings fauk- lefs as Heaven ever created man, I rufhed into guilt, and erred againft my own heart. The death of Whitmore was to me a fevere blow, though it did not awake me to repentance, my whole animcfity refting againft Edwin. Heaven, alas 1 fuffered him to be the fcourge of my offences, and, Great God ! to be alfo the terminator of them. Perhaps, at the time of Whitmore's death, the voice of gentlenefs might have recalled me to the paths of rectitude, but Edwin's was harfh and hateful to me ; for how could a man, who hud violated the moft facred duties, who lived himfelf in open adultery, and whom I confidered as the murderer of Whitmore, have influence to perfuade me to abjure vices he was equally guilty of. To return home was horror, my mother dead, and I the guilty caufe, what reception could I hope ? Let me alfo confer, the thoughts
thoughts of 1 giving up the grandeur and luxury in which I had lately lived had its weight with me. A Gentleman, of the name of Hartford, who attended Whitmore at the meeting with Edwin, endeavoured all in his power to ferve me, or rather to gratify himfelf, by plunging me yet deeper in error; he had, however, ait enough to affume merely the appearance of friendfhip to beguile me, a tiap that my youth and inexperience readily gave into, and to avoid my brother Edwin I readily agreed to accompany him to Holland, from thence I was to embark for England. Natu¬ rally volatile travelling foon overcame the bitternefs of my forrow, Hartford was pro- fufe in his attentions and prefents, and plainly be^an to fhew his views. My heart was cold to love, but not to pride : 1 deliberated, and the confequence was, thai, oh ihan.e ! I thought his protection preferable to hu¬ miliating myfelf before my family ; in ihort, in
in five months after Whitmore's death I became his miftrefs. AU thoughts of England were now given up ; I ftrove to banifh reflection, and, firm to the doctrines implanted by Whitmore, regarded the life I led as nothing more than acting according to reafon and nature. The temper of Hartford was not diffmiilar to that of Whitmore; he loved ih o w and pleafure, and fpared no expence to gratify my tafte for drefs ; but he played deep, and without fkill, and was frequently duped. When I had been with him fomewhat more than a twelvemonth, we agreed to pafs a winter at Paris, and foon reached that city. I was now quite inured to my fituation : —. My appearance ufually procured me admi¬ ration, and I fought no farther. Character I regarded as a trifle below the confideration of a woman of underftanding and ipirit : I muft, however, confefs that I dreaded to be alone,
alone, as a thoufand unpleafant ideas were fure to intrude, and even in dreams, refpec¬ ting my family, have I frequently awakened myfelf with violent paroxifms of grief. One evening that Hartford had been in company with fome Englİfhmen, where the play was more than commonly deep, he loft confiderably, doubled and trebled his bets, but was ftill unfuccefbful ; at length, in a fit of defperation, he made a final throw for the mattered remains of his fortune, which was before this confiderably impaired. The caft was decifive, and Hartford found himfelf in a moment deprived of all, his opponents re¬ ceiving draughts and fecurities for the whole he poffefted. On his return home his appearance alarmed and fhocked me. He threw himfelf on a chair, uttering an unconnected firing of curfes, and I believe, had not my fcreams alarmed the domeftics, he would have terminated his life
life even in my prefence. When he was rather more calm I learned the extent of his lofs> and was not a little grieved to find it fo heavy both on his account and my own, for, though I could not love him, his kindnefs and generoiity had attached me to him. " Emma," faid he, " you are univerfally admired in Paris, and I cannot be fo greatly your enemy as to wifh you to fuffer for my mifcondučt ; I would therefore advife, and indeed wifh you, to accept the protection of fome man of fortune, who might be able to more than repay you for the lofs of me : — For my own part I have no refource but returning to England, where I believe I can make fufHcient intereft to procure a com- miffion ; but was I even to obtain that, muft be obliged to my uncle, who has very rigid notions ; I dare not take a female compa* nion with me. I have about fifty pounds in my efcrutoir, which we will divide; half that fum will carry me thither, and, perhaps, with the remainder, and by the ' fale
fale of fome of your fuperfluous appen¬ dages, you may be able to make yourfelf tolerably eafy until iome fortunate circum¬ ftance occurs." Proftitution was not become fo habitual to me, but my foul funk with horror at the idea of another change, and I know not what refolution I might have formed, had not temptation, which my accurfed vanity could not withftand, again fallen in my way. I wifhed to affift Hartford, for I could not bear the idea that he ihould go to England fo ftenderly provided ; I therefore, two days before his intended departure, went in the hired carriage, which we had not yet dif¬ charged, to a jeweller's, and informed him that, having a new necklace and ear-rings fetting, I wiíhed to part with thofe I fhewed him. While we were bargaining a carriage flopped, and an elderly Gentleman ftepped out to give fome orders. He viewed me attentively, and I foon recollected him for a
a financier, whom I had frequently feen at different public places, and whofe name was De Forlaix. As I did not choofe to continue my bufinefs before a third perfon, I left the jewels, and defired the man to let me hear his determination on the day following, the financier very politely leading me to my carriage. Hartford's lofs was fo confiderable that it had been much talked of, and in confequence reached the ears of De Forlaix, who, on the jeweller's informing him of my bufinefs, readily furmiied the truth, and took his mca- fures accordingly. The jeweller called on me in the evening, and having agreed for the jewels he refpečt- fully took his leave, hoping, as he expreffed himfelf, that they were not going to lofe the fineft woman in Paris. Compliments, how¬ ever grofs, were always pleafing to my de¬ praved heart ; I therefore complaifandy replied, that
that I íhould, at leaft, remain fome time longer in that city. Having forced Hartford to take about feventy pounds we feparated with concern on both fides, but without anguifh, for, as I had never loved him, my greater! affliction was how I fhould after¬ wards difpofe of myfelf. — Sometimes I thought of parting with all my fuperfluities, of returning to England, and learning fome bufinefs, by which I might obtain a liveli¬ hood; but I had been too long accuftomed to idlenefs and diffiparion to form a deter¬ mined refolution on the fubječt, though I muft do myfelf the juftiee to fay, that I believe I ihould have adopted it, had not, as I before faid, temptation again beguiled me, as I regarded fuch a ftep as a kind of pre¬ liminary to a reconciliation with my friends· On the morning after Hartford's departure, my fervant informed me a Gentleman re- quefted to fpeak with me on bufinefs. Having admitted him, I was not a litde furprifed to find
find it De Forlaix. « Madam/' faid he, « I have done myfelf the honour of waiting on you with the new jewels that you expected fome days fince ; I hope they will meet your approbation, if not, any alteration íhall be made that you can wiíh." fC New jewels!" replied I, with aftoniíh- ment, u I expected none -, nor can fi judge from whence fuch a miftake proceeded." c< Pardon me, Madam, it is no miftake. Did you not fay fome days paft to the jew¬ eller, where ï had the honour of feeing you, that you had a new necklace and ear-rings fetting ?" " It is true, I faid fo," anfwered I, fome- what confufed at my duplicity being difco- vered i " but thofe are not what I expected/* u Indeed but they are," replied he -, €ζ for I have the jeweller's receipt in your own name
name for them, and you would hardly have paid four hundred Louis for what you did not approve." He then placed the jewels and receipt, which was in the name of Flartford, before me, adding, " He has alio commiflioned me to return your own jewels as they do not fuit him ; and there is Iikewife an acknowledg¬ ment for the two hundred which he advanced for them, and which you cannot deny to have repaid, as I know to the contrary, being your agent in the bufinefs : I have only to add, that if you have any more commiflions to execute, you fee before you the moft at¬ tentive of your fervants," De Forlaix's intentions were too manifeft to be miftaken ; I, however, for the prefent declined accepting his jewels, but he was too profufe and affiduous to be long denied by a woman fo naturally depraved; in fine, a ihort month beheld me transferred to a third keeper ! De
De Forlaix knew no bounds, either in his affection or generofity towards me« Fie had a wife, but that circumftance I was too vile to make an objection, and as I had an ample allowance, and was inferior to no kept wo* man in Paris for fplendor, gave myfelf no concern on any other fubječt. I had lived in this ftate for near fix years, when one evening, in the public walks, I contracted an acquaintance with an Englifli adventurer, of the name of Davis : He was about my own age, handfome and accom- pliihed, but diffipated and thoughtlefs, having, in the preceding kven years, expended a refpecbble property. For this man I con¬ ceived a moft violent affection, and regard¬ lefs of the kindnefs of De Forlaix, profti- tutedmy perfon without any former incentives, for I had no wifli for grandeur, or drefs un¬ fatisfied ; it was therefore depravity, and the fatisfačtion of unbridled paffion, that alone led me to this frefh vice. j Some
Some fhort time, previous to my forming an acquaintance with Davis, I became preg- ' nant, a circumftance that gave the utmoft pleafure to De Forlaix, who had no children, but was not powerful enough to reftrain me from forming a detefted intimacy with a ftranger. About two months after this new connexion Madam De Forlaix died fuddenly, and fome time after my fituation being then vifible, M. De Forlaix, as nearly as I can recollect, thus addreffed me : " Your con¬ duct, my dear Emma, during an intimacy of more than fix years, has been all I could wifh, and your prefent fituation adds to my affection ; I therefore propofe, when a decent time has elapfed, to make you my wife ; I am rich enough to defy cenfure; we will retire to one of my country feats, where I truft you will make me a happy father." The generofity of this offer overcame me, and confeious unworthinefs made me unable for fome moments to reply ; but De Forlaix refuming
refuming the converfation, faid, <f You do not anfwer me, Emma, you change colour, furely my propofal does not meet your dif- pleafure ?" Ci Difpleafure !" cried Ï, at length, "alas! how is that pollible ? but you do not confider whatyoufay; my former life, before I became acquainted with you, I have openly revealed, and can you be generous enough to make fuch a woman your wife ?" cc I can," replied he, fc for a woman, who has behaved as you have done for fix years, I can venture to truft through life, befides, our marriage will legitimate my child, who will by that means become heir to my fortune. — Your former niifconducT: íhall be entirely forgotten. I regard your firft deviation as an error of youth, the fécond к occafioned by neceffity, and but the effect of the firil, in which point of view I alfo con¬ fider your complying with my propofals at vol. iv· D the
the beginning of our acquaintance. You have frequently lamented being eftranged from your family, this ftep, I flatter myfelf, may conciliate them ; we will fend them a cei tificate of our mai riage, and fome months hence, perhaps, I may take you to England, for they will hardly refufe you their forgi ve¬ nefs when they find you fo advantageoufiy married." The compunction for my falfhood to fo generous a man was too powerful to fuffer me to thank him as I ought ; but he was too partial to me to attribute my emotion to the right caufe, and repeating his determined re¬ folution he left me. I was no fooner alone than I began to reflect on what had paffed, the advantages I muft unavoidably reap from a marriage with De Forlaix I was by no means blind to, it would at once give me refpečtdblhty with the world ; at leaft, where my former life was unknown, I ihould be fecure of a competency, my child of a good fortune,
fortune, and what had alio its weight with me, perhaps in time I might prefume to hope for a reconciliation with my friends. My affection for Davirwas iome impediment to this fcheme, but not violent enough to in¬ fluence me to decline it, for De Forlaix was moft indubitably the father of my child, as I was pregnant two months before I became acquainted with Davis; I therefore determined to inform him of De Forlaix's generous offer, and in future decline ail acquaintance with him ; for, abandoned ás I was, I could not endure the thought of fo grofsly abufing his kindnefs, and bitterly reproached myfelf with my former mifcondučt. Thus deter¬ mined I wrote to Davis, declaring my reib- lution, and entreating him to give up all future thoughts of me, expreffing, however, the pain this eftoit coft me. Davis was ofa difpofirion not eafily to be repulfed ; he re¬ plied, that if I was determined he muft per¬ force fubmit ; but that he was refolved to fee me at all events once more, and therefore D z warmly
warmly preffed me to meet him at his own lodgings, where, fhame to fay, I had fre- quently been before. > Had my intentions been really virtuous, I fliould have anfwered this letter with a pofi- rive denial, confcffed my unworthincfs to De Forlaix, and have thrown myfelf and ex¬ pected infant on his mercy ; but not fo did I act, the meafuie of my iniquities was not compleat, and the fword of vengeance trem¬ bled over my guilty head ! For fome time I wavered, but at length concluded that one more meeting could make little difference, as I wifhed to part amicably with a man whom I perfuaded myfelf 1 loved: I there¬ fore returned him an anfwer by my own fervant, wiio well knew letters frequently had paffed between us, and agi eed to í ее himon the following evening, provided he would promife to K-quire no future interview. To this he acquidocci, and in an hour fated for the commencement of my earthly punilh- ment
ment I repaired alone to his lodgings, little aware that the treachery of my maid had that very day revealed the whole correfpon- dence to De Forlaix. My own conduct had taught her diffìmulation and ingratitude, could I then wonder that fhe followed my example ? Davis lived at about the diftance of a mile from Paris, in a houfe fftuated in a garelen belonging to a widow woman, who, with his fervant, compofed the whole family. The fatal night of this meeting Davis had fent his man out on bufinefs, fo that the woman alone remained below. I had fcarcely been there five minutes before a loud knock¬ ing Was heard at the door, and the moment after, to my inexprefiible confufion, the voice of De Forlaix, who exclaimed in anfwer, as I fuppofe, to the woman who had denied my being there, "It is falfe, I faw her enter, deny her at your peril." Thefe words were fcarcely articulated vvhen we heard his fteps on the ftairs, and a moment brought him to D 3 the
the door, whicii wa? only fccured by a flight and craľ.y lock. Theie was no time foi re¬ flection, nor was I capable of any, for, over¬ powered with fiiame and confufirn, I had lunk into a chair, and concealed my face with my hands. Davis, in the mean time, had matched up а piftol, the report of which, and the forcing the door, were both inftanta- neous, and filled me with defpair and horror i for fLming from my feat the firft object that prefented itfelf was De Foil.iix on the ground weltering in blood : ÍC Ungí ate ful woman !" exclaimed he, in a faint voice, " is this the return for my patriality and unbounded af¬ fection ? Was it neceíľary to add murder to ingratitude ? Weak deluded wretch that I was, 1 could not believe the evidence of your confidential fervant : Alas ! conviction has coil me dear, the hand of death is on me Г Exhaufted by the lofs of blood he fainted аз he uttered the laft word, when, thinking he
he had expired, I entirely loft all knowledge, and feil on the ground, in which fituation Davis took me in his arms, and bore me into the next apartment j — featir.g me on a chair he returned to the chamber where De Forlaix frill remained on the ground, and the woman of the houfe weeping and wring¬ ing her hands over him, exclaiming fhe was ruined for ever, and fhould be punifhed as a principal in tne murder. Davis, as he afterwards informed me, laid De Forlaix on the be·*, bound up the wound which was in the ihoulcer, and when he came to himlêlf allured him he ihould have im¬ mediate affiftance, then left him alone with the woman, fecuring both by bolting the door of а pafiage that feparated that apart¬ ment frc " the reft -, he then returned to mr, who was juft recovered fiom my fwoon. £t Emma/' faid he, in great agitation,. we have no time to lofe, De Forlaix, I fear, D 4 is
is dying; I have fecured him and the woman, at leaft for fome time, for the houfe is too diftant from the public road for them to give a fpeedy alarm ; the prefent moment is there¬ fore ours, and perhaps all that is left us 10 efcape, for certain death awaits us if we remain ; let us fly then, my fervant will re¬ turn in an hour at fartheft, and procure af¬ fiftance, if Dé Forlaix ftill furvives ; nay, do not hefitate, we may now efcape, but the kaft delay will render it impoflible." " I will not go," replied I : " Unhappy wretch that I am, I am ftill no murderer." " In this cafe," anfwered he, u you will be equally involved ; I therefore again en¬ treat you to fly ; fay, can you calmly refolve to ftay and bear the torture ?" " Oh, Pleavens !" exclaimed I, "I dare not, 1 will indeed fly ; but whither, without friends or money where can I go ?" « To
« To Flanders," replied he i "I myfelf am but indifferently provided ; however, at all events, life is worth preferving. More converfation paffed, but the diftračtion of the moment prevents my recalling it to memory; I only recollect that I obliged Davis before I would leave the houfe to go again to De Forlaix, whom he found much in the fame ftate he had left him, except that his binding the wound had flopped the blood. He then again fecured him with the woman, and taking my trembling hand we left the houfe together, our whole property eonfifting in about fifty Louis-d'ors, which we had in our feparate pockets." When William reached thus far in die manufcript he paufed, and for a moment laying it down, thus addreíľed his wife : " I wonder not, my beloved, that you cover your fiice, iuch recitals, I thank Heaven, we are not accuftomed to; even my blood appears to chill in my veins, on the rerlec- D 5 tion
tion that fuch a woman ever called me bro¬ ther." <c Her crimes, I truft, are expiated," re¬ plied Fanny ; " and, thank Heaven, we alone íhall be acquainted with the extent of them ; for not for the wealth of India would I ever have our dear parent fhocked with the recital: But proceed, my love, we will not break on the peace of another evening, if poffible^, with even the remembrance of what we hear to night."
CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
WILLIAM again took up the manu¬ fcript, which for nearly a page was almoft unintelligible, the letters being in feveral places effaced by tears, but which appeared to contain bitter felf-accufarions and expreffions of defpair ; he therefore paffed it over, and began as follows ; " W r e travelled night and day until we pafied the frontiers, and even then only ftaid until we could get fàídy to England, where we arrived almoft without clothes or money. D 6 İt.
It was now that Davis began to fhew himfelf in his true colours, too indolent to exert himfelf for his own fupport or mine, he urged me to proftitute myfelf for both. I had, however, fufficient fpirit to refent this pro¬ pofal in the higheft terms; but it compleated the difguft I had for fome time entertained for the пъп whom I regarded as the author of all my misfortunes. The benefits of De Forlaix now returned with double force ta my memory, being deprived of them enhanced their value. I faw myfelf alfo on the point of becoming a mother to an infant who would be bound to curfe m^, as its birth muft now be infa¬ mous, whereas, but for my vice and folly, its mothc- s fiiame would ha^e been concealed under Lie name of a refpecbble father, and itfelf heir to a confiderable fortune, while now, on the contrary, I dreaded its birth, left it ihould ihare, or perhaps increafe, my own miferies, Davis
4
Davis finding his endeavours ineffectual to reduce me to his infamous intentions, even treated me with brutality, and one evening fo far forgot himfelf as to give me repeated blows. Stung to madnefs by this infult, my ra«e knew no bounds; I curfed him and myfelf, and calling him by every epithet that paffion could dictate, ruihed out of the forry apartment where we lodged, leaving him doubtlefs very glad to be rid of me. Behold me now a wafderer in the ftreets of London, without money, or even a place to reft my head ! Suicide was my refolve, and inquiring the road to a village I had heard named, had no doubt but in the way thither I fliould meet with fome piece of water, where I at leaft might terminate my earthly woes, for the reflečlion ofwhat might happen hereafter never obtruded on my imagination ! Heaven, however, faved me from that crime j I wandered through the fields in vain, and
and found only ditches or ftagnate pools toe? fhallow for my purpofe. At length, exhaufted by fatigue, I funk under a hay flack in a paroxifm of defpair, where I fought my pockets for fome inftrument of death, but found neither knife nor fciffars. Tears were now my only refuge, I wept until, like a wearied child, I fell afleep, my late pam¬ pered body expofed to the night wind, and my only canopy the fpacious bleffed firma¬ ment. I awoke at day-break, my fpirits not only recruited by reft, but alfo the idea of filicide much weakened : I fat for fome time paufing what method I fliould purfue, but could fix on none determinedly, for poor, fnendlefs, and pregnant, the profpečt was cold and drear before me ; all application to my friends, however, I was now more firmly than ever determined againft, both on account of my poverty and fituation. " I will walk," faid I, " through this great and bufy city to day, and revolve on future profpečts ¿
profpečts ; fome lucky thought may, perhaps, occur, if not, I can but again reft here,, or adopt the determination of yefterday. Oh, Inglewood 1 Inglewood 1 happy refidence, why did I ever leave thee ? thou hadft no grandeur to beftow, but thou hadft content ; no riches, but peace and an unblemifhed confcience j no pleafures that leave a fling behind—no pangs of remorfe fuch as I now ùell' The rifing of the fun, and the cheerful matins of the lark, I had long been a ftranger to. " Ah !" cried I, " I once celebrated the return of morn as cheerfully аъ ye do, but, dead to happinefs, the glorious fun has. now no charms for me!" I advanced to¬ wards London, ruminating on my melan¬ choly fituation i for the clothes I had on, and a few halfpence, were ail I poffefied. I had fome few articles of raiment ac Davis's lodg¬ ing, but thofe I determined never to claim, as it could not be done without a^ain feeing the man whom I now detefted, 5 After
After I had wandered fome hours I began to experience the cravings of hunger, and again the idea of felf-deftručlion came ftrong into my fancy, when paftìng a ihop, contain¬ ing a variety of articles, ï was ftruck with thefe words on the window : <c Money lent on pledges." This immediately gave rife to a thought that ï before had no idea of. I had in my pocket-book a miniature of Whit¬ more, fet with brilliants, that I had for fome vears always carried about me, and this for two reafons, the firft of which was, that he was particularly dear to me, and the fécond, that the picture being once iten by De For- laix, he had appeared diíTatisfied that I pre- ferved fo carefully the remembrance of another man. From this period I had conftantly kept it concealed, nor had Davis ever ken it, or he had doubtlefs deprived me of it, as he had before done of my watch : Draw¬ ing it therefore from my pocket-book with a heavy heart and tottering frame, I entered the íhop, and prefeming it to the man be¬ hind
hind the counter, requefted him to favour me with the utmoft fum he could advance on it. The fellow having viewed me with an impudent flare, doubtlefs taking me for a woman of the town, replied, " A devilliilx handfome fellow, egad ; you have been crying I fee.—one of your old favourites I fuppofe— well never mind—he will be perfectly ùfe here—worfe luck now, better another time— drink a glafs, and keep up your fpirits ; you are too fine a woman not to have plenty of bufinefs. " Humiliated as I was, I however replied tartly to this infult, and the man, after a number of preliminaries, lent me the fum of ten pounds, declaring he could not advance a fhilling more. — With this I departed comparatively happy to what I was before, determined to provide fome food immediately, and a lodging before night. Flaving fatisfied my
my appetitt I walked in purfuit of an apair- ment, and foon found one fuited to my cir¬ cumilances, being only three fhiľ.ings per week, and in the houfe of a widow who kept a fnop. I hei e puichaíed a change of raiment, and like wife iome of the cheapeft things I could proctite for my expected child, for every trifle I expended made me tremble for the fntuie. One day that I had been out to buy а loaf, tinning hallily round the corner of a ftreet, to my great fui pi rie I encountered Haitford in re cimentata. He exprdìed at once pleafute and pain to fee me, the diftrefs I had undeigone being viiible both in my perfon and habiliments. Pie in¬ formed me that hb uncle, with fome diffi¬ culty, had procured him а comnuffion on his arrival in England, which was all he had now to truft to, and that he was, in the courfe of a few days, to embark for the Weft-Indies, where his regiment was ordered, defired to know my addrefs, and promifed to call on me the enfuing morning. Hartford
Hartford was true to his appointment, and I related all that had befallen me without equivocation. He expreffed much concern for my misfortunes, as alio at hib inability to affift me аь he wiíhed; but befoie he lock his leave, being to depart on the morrow, prefented me with a bank note for tv\enty pounds. In about a month after this I was feized with thepangbof labour, and delivered ofa lovely girl. Oh, God ! the ciuel lemembtance yet wrings my heart ; with what anguiih did I weep over her—with what bitteinefs did I accufe myfelf, depiecating my folly and vice, that had mined her even before fne faw the light ! She was now all the wot Id to me, and nurfing her at my bofom I appeared to live for her alone. By the fti ičteft economy my money lafted feven months, at which time my babe was uncommonly ftrong for her age ; it was now
now that poverty appeared to me with re¬ doubled horror, as the fiender diet I could obtain Iikewife deprived her of her proper nutriment. I can truly affirm, that I had no intention to return to a life of proftitution, but rather thought of gaining a livelihood, if poffible, by induftry, and therefore inquired of my landlady repeatedly whether fhe could not procure me any needle-work. Her endeavours had been, until the period before mentioned, unavailing, when one morning flie informed me, that fome Ladies, who lived fronting us, had inquired for a fempftrefs, and defired me to apply. Taking my infant in my arms I went immediately, and was introduced to an old Lady and two young ones, who received me vety politely ; but I was not fuch а novice but I could immediately difcover that they were women of loofe character. They admiied my child, and paid me many compliments on my own perfon, the old woman particularly inquiring my
my age ; and on my anfwering I was in my thirtieth year appeared not to credit me, faying, that I did not appear more than twenty-two ; in fhort, they kept me all day, and before we parted the old woman had propofed to take me into her fociety, and furnifh me with whatever was neceffary. I gave no immediate reply to this offer, being determined to try what I could earn by my work ; but at a week's end found it fo little that I began to deliberate on the fubječt, and going home the fame evening with what I had been intrufted, found the old woman in carnei! converfation v ith a man elegantly dicíľed, but who boi e the appearance of an emaciated debauchee. He gieatly adrr/red my infant, paid me many extiavagunt compliments, and finally, pre¬ fented me with а nore for fifty pounds, а temptation which my poverty could not reuft, and I pirr.iifed to fup there the fol¬ lowing; evening. Accurfcd
Accui fed promife, would I had periilied before I pronounced it, or would to God my infant had been nouriihed with my blood before I confenced to fupport her at fuch a price !—Oh! cruel — deadly—horrid—my brain burns, and I muft lay down my pen. I will go and pray ; but will Heaven hear the contrition of fuch a wretch as the aban¬ doned Emma ?"
tc I refume my pen : I will probe this guilty heart by the recapitulation ; I will re¬ late how I murdered my infant—the fmiling angel, to whom I, infernal proftitute ! ad¬ miniftered poifon in the falutary form of milk ! Enabled by the prefent I had received, I dreffed myfelf with more care than I had done for many months, and repaired to the old woman, where I found the wretch I had feen the day before, and who received me with peculiar pleafure ; in ihort, temptation again fell in my way, and I purchafed a hun¬ dred pounds at the expence of what was a thoufand
thoufand times dearer to me than the vital blood that warmed my heart. The old woman could not now bear me to leave her ; my child alfo was the darling of the whole fet, and all was riot, which they called plea¬ fure, for three days, when I began to find my health uncommonly difordered, as well as that of my child, and foon difcovered, do I live to relate it ? that her pure blood was contaminated as well as my own, in confequence of the acquaintance I had fo lately formed. I cannot proceed, I have in vain tried to defcribe the agonies my cherub fuffered, until her once clear and tranfpa- rent complexion was changed to the deadly hue of faffron ; fuffice it, fhe diesi, and left me the moft unhappy— moft curfed ! Oh î —■ my head — m ; ueart — pardon me — the recollection—-even yet diforders rny brain ï
I was mad for fix months after her death, in which ftate medicines were forced down my throat that reftorcd my bodily health j but
but my fenfes were long imperfect, during which period I can only remember I was frequently ciuelly, and even brutally, treated. W T hen I regained my underftanding, for the firft time in my life, I ftifled reflection by the ufe of fpİrituous liquors, for the old w ι etch had made me confiderably her debtor, and now commanded my obedience to ail her infamous demands ; in fhort, I became re¬ gardlefs, and hardened to whatever befel me. I had been in this fituation about four years, v. hen one evening at the play, calling my eyes around, I difcovered my brother William, who was fo little changed that I inftant 1 y recollected him ; and feeing that he alio appai ently knew me, determined to fly him, for, degraded as I was, how could ï bear his pi efence ? My father too, I had no doubt, muft be dead, and reproaches and hate were all I could expect. Had I at that period been fortunate enough to be apprifed of his kind intentions, oh! how
how joyfully could I have fubmitted to be the moil menial of his fervants ! but I was deftined to fuffer more miferies, and feel how far guilt and fin may lead their votaries. For fix weeks after I faw my brother I never left the houfe, fo fearful was I of meeting him, nay, I believe I could have preferred inftant death to ftanding in his prefence, fo truly fenfible was I of my own ihame and unworthinefs. At length driven by the repeated threats of the old woman, whofe flave I completely was, í again ven¬ tured abroad, and in St. James's Park by chance met with the fervant, whom Davis in his flight left at Paris. We recollected each other inibntly, nor was I difpleaíêd at this rencontre, as I had ever ardently wifhed to learn the termination of a bufinefb to which I owed my final ruin ; I therefore entreated him, after common in¬ quiries had paffed, to gratify my curiofity on the fubječt. vol. iv. E fC You
c< You may fuppofe," anfwered the man, * c that I was greatly furprifed, en my return home, to find the doors fail, and to learn what had happened from the window where the woman of the houfe ftood watching for me, requefting me to climb to one of the lower cafe ments and releafe her. I imme¬ diately did fo, and next fetched affiftance to De Forlaix, whofe wound, though fevere, was not found dangerous, for in fix weeks it was completely healed." a Bleffings attend you for that intelligence," exclaimed I, interrupting him in a tranfport of pleafure, " you have removed one moun¬ tain of guilt from my furcharged bofom ; but proceed, I am all attention." On his recovery he caufed diligent fearch to be made after you, and foon learned your deftination, and how you was accompanied. This intelligence appeared to grieve him, and he retiied to his feat in Picardy, where he
he died about five months fince ; but before I proceed, tell me, Madam, whether the infant you was pregnant with be living ?" " No," replied I, with aftonifhment at the queftion ; it is dead, and with it all that could make life bearable to me/* " I am forry for it," refumed the man ; " you doubtlefs are unacquainted that M. De Forlaix had left it, on being properly authenticated, a handfome fortune, whether boy or girl, and to the guardianihip of his brother ?" " Generous, noble De Forlaix, what a viper didft thou fofter in my bofom! but proceed, Sir," continued I, in defpair : " í poifoned my child, the darling of my heart ! But go on, let me hear all." The man looked íhocked ; he doubtlefs thought me diftracied.— u I have nothing E 2 more
more to add," returned he, cf nor ihould I have known fo much, but that I, having no money to bring me to England, procured a fervicc in Paris, where I have remained till lately, for Mr. Davis owed me a year's wages when you went away, and his clothes were ftopped for arrears by the landlady." This intelligence difordered me too much to hold more converfation, I therefore foon after bade the man farewell. On my return home I gave way to the anguiíh of my heart, and from that time funk into a gloom that nothing could overcome; threats of being thrown into prifon I difregarded, and grew daily more callous to ill ufage, which the old woman was by no means wanting of; liquor alone now reduced me to her purpofes, and this was not fpared, for, though no longer young, I was a favourite in the houfe, my underftanding being rather more cultivated than that of my companions, and Iikewife from fome acquirements I had obtained. One
One night, about eight months fince, fhe preffed me fo earneftly, that I confented to go to a mafquerade with two unhappy girls that were lately become inmates of our houfe j during the amufement I fat wrapped in my ufual gloom, and at an early hour returned home, leaving my companions engaged in riotous parties. I expected to be reproved for my hafte, but, on the contrary, the old wretch expref¬ fed her fatisfačtion, informing me that a Gentleman, who frequented the houfe, had been there that evening, and introduced one of his friends, a man of confiderable fortune, but who was fo much in liquor that he was obliged to be put to bed, concluding by defiring me to take my place by his fide. — I had drank a great deal of wine at the mafquerade, and made no objection, but prepared to act as íhe defired, by taking a candle and going to the apartment.
Έ.3
The
The ftranger, by his breathing, appeared completely intoxicated, and to fleep uneafily, í therefore determined to undiels myfelf as quietly as pofilble, for I wifhed him not to awake; for, chough vice was become habi¬ tual, yet it was hateful to me fince the death of my child. An uncommon heavinefs and dread alfo hung on my fpirits, and the feenes of my youth dwelled ftrongly on my imagination. Determined to banifh remembrance, I wenttomyclofet, and drank aglafs of fpirits,whenawhim feizedmetolook at my companion : í therefore took the candle, and opened the curtains ; his arm was thrown over his face, fo that little of it was difcerni- ble ; but the light caufing him to move, I baftily fnatched it back, until perceiving he was again perfectly ftill, 1 fcated myfelf on a fofa at the farther end of the apartment. I had accuftomed my felf to give way as little as poflible to lefkčtion, but this night it in¬ voluntarily
voluntarily itole upon me ; " Ah !" fighed ï mentally, " accurfed be the hour that firft I faw the light; born ro plunge my patents in difhonour, and an untimely grave, to deftroy my beauteous fmiling infant, yet to Hve myfelf, though daily involved in frefh crimes, abhorred by the virtuous, fcorned even by my partners in vice, hateful to my¬ felf, and abandoned of God ! i ¡orrid retro- Ipečtion ! when wdi this fcene of depravity end ì When will my eyes clofe in everlafting forge t fui n с is ?" A dread of futurity at that moment fud- denh flaihed on my fancy, and made me íhuddu-; but dtteirrined t<* fh ake it off, I ftarteti up, and had recourfe to a fécond gi ifs of fpiiits to deaden the pang of comcitnce. Powetfui as was this foporific it did not im¬ mediately take effect: ; 1 refeated myfelf on the fofa, and for fome time remained lofi in thought until the liquor I had drank < ver- came me, and I dropped afletp, my head E 4 refting
refting on the back of the couch. My eyes w;e;e no fooner clofed than either the thoughts that had emplcycd n e vaking, or the in;mediate Pi evidence of Heaven in- teipofed to fuatch me from deft ruction, to fave me from a crime againft which nature revolts, and that muft have plunged me in yet tenfold guilt* In my fleep, which was uncommonly heavy, I dreamed that Whitmore, Hartford, De Forlaix, Davis, and feveral other men, were purfuing and driving me with fwords and different inftruments of torture, through a narrow and thorny road, until I reached the top ofa-prodigious mountain, w here thereftood a moniter, fo horrible, that in fpite of all their weapons I ftarted back ; but the beaft ad¬ vancing towards me, and finding no refource, methought I leaped the tremendous fteep, where I muft have been infallibly dallied to pieces, had not my mother caught me in her arms, faying, " Miferable w re uh, is it r >t enough
enough that you have plunged me into the grave ? But'you muft recall me again to earth to fnatch you from deftručtion." The alarm occafioned by this dream made me cry out aloud in my fleep, which difturbed the ftranger, who jumped out of bed, afking what was the matter ? This totally awakened me, though I could not for fome moments reply ; but fitting up 1 endeavoured to recover from my terror, relieving my overcharged heart by a flood ot tears, and at length exclaiming, " Ah 1 no, it İs indeed too late ; fliouidft thou even, oh, bleffed fpirit ! be permitted to return to earth, thou couldft not now fnatch the devoted Kmma from deftručtion ; the doom is pafied, and my torments here are but preludes of thofe to come." The ftranger replied by a loud and tre¬ mendous oath, and thatching up the light which was burning on the table, prefented E 5 it
it full in my face, he at once difcovering the wretched Emma------and I the abandoned— Eelwinl ********** -------At this pafiage the manufcript fell rrom the hands of William, who, itruck witn horror, fixed his eyes in filence 0:1 the pale cheek of his trembling wife. • i( My beloved friend," at length cried Fanny, preffing him afR-clionatcly to her bofom, " be not thus moved, the mercy of Heaven providentially faved them." Γί Saved them 1" repeated William : —· α Oh, God ! is it poflible that fuch ihould be the children c ť our virtuous father and fainted mother ?" " Alas !" anfwered Fanny, " virtue is not hereditary ; but for Emma all our fears are now calm ; flie refis, I null, in the bofom cf peace; her errors were indeed gieat, but their expiation was jpernble. Ah, William î the filiation of Edwin is far ui\>re dreadful, perl taps
perhaps even yet revelling in vice until, liks a blaft cf lightning, it fliall ftrike him with¬ out time or preparation : But proceed, my love, you have, I doubt not, heard the laft of Emma's errors/* — This warning was. furely decifive. William again took up the manufcript,. and continued.— iC Oh, God i what were my lenfations at that moment ? Edwin, as well as myfelf, was unable to articulate a word, but remained for fome time with his eyes fixed on me with an expre fiion of horror, for aftonitliment had overcome the fumes of wine. Like myfelf, I truft, he felt the hand of Heaven upon us, and refolved to tempt deftručtion no farther; but, alas! if he felt contrition, his expre fiion of that fentiment was very different from what I experienced ; for being in fome meaíure recoveied from his firft furpnfe his rage knew no bounds.— Never, depraved as were the company I was accuftomed to, did I ever before hear fuch E 6 dreadful
dreadful and tremendous execrations, juiliy, however, upbraiding me with my infamy, ani finally, dreffmg himfelf, he haftily rufhtd from the houfe, before the angui fin and horror, occafioned by the foregoing fcene, had left me fufficienriy able to reply by aught but tears. Midnight brawls were too common in this dete fiable houfe for this to be noticed I pafied the remainder of the night alone, and, for the firft time for m*.ny years, threw myfelf on my knees, thanking my Creator tlu.t he had, amidit η ί y numberiefs rranlgrefiìons, at leali faved me from fo deadly afin as that, whole very name chilled my blood widi horror. I remained in this pofture until day, and during the time formed the determined refolution to brave the worft that could befall me, rather than have recouríe to my ufual way
way of life : My fpirits were, however, over¬ powered with the ihock they had received ; I found my head gkldy, my throat parched with drought, and by noon was in a burning fever, which for near a month bairled the power of medicine, and which, when even vanqui Hied, left me in a ftate of melanchcl/ that fiequently impaired my fenfes. I had never failed, in my lucid intervals, informing my abandoned hoft eis of my refo¬ lution of embracing death rather than re¬ turning to my former vices ; but fiie regarded this merely as the effect of fick ne is, and doubliez thought flic could, as íhe had befoie done, feduce me to her wifhes ; her rage was therefore unbounded when íhe found me determined, and equally regardlefs of threats as promifes, and above all, ftiictly refolved to drink nothing but water. One day, that fhe particularly preffed me to renew my former infamous courfe, I haftily
haftily fnatched up a pair of fciflars and clipped off my hair, faying, u There is one of my fiattered adornments deftroyed, and know, that if nothing elfe could ft ve me, I would make myfelf a ípečtacle of horror and difguft fooner than I would again fub¬ mit ; but that is not neceffary, I am a free woman ; if your confcience will permit you to fwear I am indebted to you, do fo j I am willing to go to prifon ; it will be Heaven t& this polluted houfe." ec Then go you fliall," replied fhe, with an oath, leaving the apartment, and the next morning was true to her word, for I w r as arrtited, and thrown into the Fleet prifon. I bore this calamity with thankfulnefs, as. it removed me from fuch a fcene of guilt. Money or valuables I had none, for the old wretch had ftopped all, and I muft have periihed but for the humanity of my fellow prifonersj the virtuous parts of whom, how¬ ever.
ever, treated me diftantly, when it was known from what houfe I came. I had been in this place about four months, when one night I again dreamed of my mo¬ ther, who I thought ftill looked with great feverity, but prefented me with a Bible, and giving it into my hand vani fhed. 1 imme¬ diately awoke, and determined, as ilon as ic Ihould be light, to afk all over the prifon until 1 had borrowed a Bible, and аса rd- îngly in the morning applied to leverai of the pri foners before I could procure one s and which I at length obtained from a poor widow, who was confined for the funeral expenccs of her hulband. From the time I left Inglewood to the prefent moment I had never opened that Sacred Volume, whofe doctrine 1 had learned to contemn, and whofe precepts I had de¬ rided : I now feized it with avidity, and ran to my own apartment, where, having fcated m y fel ζ
myfelf, I cafually opened it at the fifteenth chapter of St. Luke, where thefe immediate words iti иск me:—" 1 will arife and go to m> Father, and will fay unto him, Father, I Lave rin-:e.d againft Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy fon." For a moment the book dropped from my hand, but fnatching it up again in а tranfport, 1 preffed it to my lips, and vowed, if ever in my power, though I fhould beg my way home, to obey what I regarded as a facreei injunction. About a month after this, as I was read¬ ing, one of the unhappy girls, who refided with my wicked creditor, called to inform me that their houfe by fome neglect had taken fire in the night, and that its vile miftrefs had been fo fevere ly burnt that her life was eiefpaired of, in confequence of which fhe had ftnt to entreat the prefence of a fifter,
fifter, with whom, for many years before, ihe had held no communication, being as refpecbble a character as my creditor was the re verfe. This relation, however, obeyed the fum- mons, as the girl informed me» bidding me hope the beft, as ihe was certain I ihould not long remain a prifoner, a prediction that was verified that very day week, when 1 was informed an elderly Lady inquired for me, and who, on my attending her, announced herfelf the fifter of my creditor.— u You are free," fiid ihe, viewing me with a look of pity ; " I have difcharged your pri fon dues, and you are at liberty to go wdiere you pleafe ; the unhappy woman, at whole fuie you were confined, is dead, and has kit me heir to what ill-gotten wealth ihe pofifefied, but never íhall my children be enriched by the fpoils of proftitution ; it iliali be ex¬ pended in tiie relief of thofe wretched women towards whofe mifery ihe has lb largely con¬ tributed
tiibuted. í have heard your unhappy ftory, and to you, as a proper claimant, 1 prefcnt the firft offering, entreating you to pray that Heaven may grant her that mercy fhe denied to you," As ihe fpoke lhe gave me a paper con¬ taining twenty guineas, adding, rc You are, I hope, fixed in the refolution that caufed your removal hither ? and íhould you want а friend apply to me ; you íhall meet every affiftance in my power." I threw myfelf at the feet of this generous wo ıran, thanking her as well as my emotion would permit, and when fomewhat calmer recapitulated my intention refpečling my journey home, and alfo the previous events of mv life. Г She did not fiilen to them unmoved, and when I concluded, replied :—" By the com¬ mon courfe of nature your father is dead : I»
I, however, applaud your motives ; but fliould you find it as I predict, and circum¬ ilances render home inconvenienr, return to me ; I am not rich, but can, widi the exer¬ tion of your own induftry, fecure you írom want or fhame/' She foon after left me, giving me her aeidrefis and this woman, fo generous, difin- terefted, and humane, was fimply the wife of a linen-draper, but whofe humble virtues might have dignified a coronet. On her departure, after returning my un¬ feigned thanks to the Power whofe hand had led me through this afflici ion, I prepared to depart, calling firft on the widow of whom I had borrowed the Bible, and infilling on íharing my purfe with her, an offer nie would fain have declined, but in which I was fo peremptory that fhe at length ac- quiefced, and I had the pleafure to fee her compound the debt with her creditor, and regain
regain her liberty at the fame time with my¬ felf. As few objects, in refpečt of raiment, could be more wretched than myfelf, my firft caie was to purchafe a change of linen, and the gown I wore on my return to Ingle¬ wood, in which I went to bid adieu to my benefačtrefs, who received me kindly, and would willingly have advanced me more money ; but I declined it, affuring her I had a fufficiency to carry me home. From her I went to procure a place in one of the Carlifle coaches, but all were full, and it was two days before any were to fet off again. Difitppointed at this intelli¬ gence, I rook a place in one that was on the point of departing for Grantham, as that would at leaft advance me above a hundred miles on my way. The money paid, I en¬ tered the vehicle, my whole baggage con¬ tained in a pocket handkerchief. I had but one fellow traveller, a woman, and remained loft in thought, revolving on
on the reception 1 might expect to meet at Inglewood, when a few miles beyond Barnet I was alarmed by the cty of ftop, and a moment after a horfeman made up to the carriage, prefented a piftol, and demanded our money. The moon fhone bright, and reflected full on the face of the highwayman, whom, to my ineypreffible terror, I recog¬ nized for Davis ; an involuntary feream efcaped me, but he lepeating his demand with execrations, and my companion having given her purfe, I alio prefented my little all, which he fnatched from my hand, and gallopped off full fpeed. Though deprived of the means by which I meant to reach home, I, however, could not avoid looking back with thankfulnefs to the Power who had awakened me to a fenfe of my errors, and retraced with agony the efiečts of debauchery and fin, my heart blefiing God in filent adoration for having feparated me from fo infamous a companion, and
and Iikewife that I was unknown to him, as I fat in a corner of the coach with my face totally concealed by my bonnet. At length we arrived at Grantham, where I had not even the means to procure a break¬ faft, and with a heavy heart leaving the coach, my little bundle in my hand, I pur¬ fuing my way on foot contemplated how my exhaufted frame could ever reach the end of my journey, which was yet a hundred and feventy miles. Determined, however, to perfevere, I walked until evening, when, being almoft frozen with cold, I entered a cottage, and entieated affiftance, offering the contents of my bundle for a quarter the money it had coft me. The woman of the houfe refufed my offer, but bidding me draw near ftirred up the fire, and foon fat meat before me, telling me that I was welcome, and that, poor as flie was, ihe would fooner give than take from me; in ihort, this good creature kept me all night, and in the morn- 5 in &
\ng, before my departure, gave me a fmall loaf, a piece of bacon, and a flice of cheefe, bidding me farewell in a manner that called forth my warmeft gratitude. The weather was uncommonly fevere, and during the reft of the journey, which I was a fortnight in performing, I met with no fimilar inttänee of humanity, fo that, though I fold my few trifles, I was almoft periihed with hunger, as well as overcome with cold and fatigue ; at length I reached the entrance of the Foreft, and began to reti ace the happy haunts of my youth and .nnocence ; but my heart funk with confeious guilr,and I dreaded to ftand in the prefence of any of my family. My father í reprefented to myfelf as i ead, and feared the reproaches of my brother. I had eat nothing all day, and it was night when I reached the neighbourhood of my nativity ; the fnow too began to fall in fuch quantities that the face of the earth was co¬ vered, and it was with much difficulty, as I paffed
paffed the church, that I could find the ipot where our family are buried, nor fhould I but for the old yew tree that diftinguiihed it. Concluding that the grave of my mother was not far diflant, I knelt and prayed aloud, regardlefs of the time or the weather that had dienched my garments, until I was almoft unable to rife. At length the church clock ftruck ten, and again entreating the protec¬ tion and fupport of Heaven in the arduous fcene I had to undergo, I refumed my way; but exhaufted with fatigue, and cramped with cold, my limbs refufed their office, and I fell feveral times in my road from the church home. When I reached the gate how can I de¬ fcribe my fenfations ! In fpite of the cold, that had nearly frozen my blood, а genial warmth for a moment feemed to revive my heart, and I can truly declare I entered it with more pleafure than I had before aban¬ doned it : But foon again my fpirits forfook mej
me ; I contemplated the dire effects of my crimes, and my heart failed. The houfe was all dark and filent, nor for worlds could I have affumed the courage to knock. I ftood trembling with dread and irrefolution until my wearied limbs would no longer fup- port me ; when making a laft effort I deter¬ mined to crawl to the wood-houfe, and there faid, if I die before morning, I fhail at leaft have the fatisfačtion of refigning my f pi rit near the happy dwelling where I received it· Thus determined I reached the íhed, but there foon loft all remembrance; a heavy fleepinefs appeared to opprcfs me, but I felt no pain, nor knew any thing more, until, bleffed moment, I found myfelf once again in my fathers houfe, with an affectionate and merciful brother hanging over me.
Oh, William ! may this act of tendernefs and humanity be rewarded ! May thy chil- vol, iv. F dren
dren be the glory of thy prefent day, and the bleffing of thy old age ! May they never caufe a frown on thy brow, nor a blufh on their mother's cheek ! May they grow up examples of virtue and innocence, worihy to live, and not afraid to die ï May thy un¬ happy fifter be the laft, as fhe is the firft, difgrace to her family ; and with her death may both her errors and her forrows be for¬ gotten !
Oh, my beloved friends ! I have but little more to add ¿ I feel the hand of death is on me, and my ihort day of vanity is termina¬ ting with a long and gloomy night !—Oh î pray for me, my brother ; my fifter pray for me ; let your pure fouls intercede for the wretched Emma ; Heaven is never deaf to the prayers of the virtuous, and will hearken to you, though its gates of mercy fhould be barred againft my petitions ; pray too for the left—unhappy—abandoned—Edwin !
Oh,
Oh, my father ! I cannot clofe without imploring a bleffing on your venerable head 4 though it paffes my polluted lips, Oh ! kt it be heard at the Throne of Mercy ; and may the tears you have fhed for your un¬ happy child be the laft that ever wet your cheek. May bleffings multiply around you until the hour you ihali be called to a happy eternity ; but, oh ! there, my beloved parent* muft the wretched Emma be for ever ffiut out ? Oh, mercy !—*mercy î methinks a tre¬ mendous voice founds in my ears, " Go thou accurfed !"—Ah î no my father* you laid it was iinful to defpair, I will go pray, and endeavour to hope.
Another day do I behold the glorious Sun* another day is given me for repentance ; — Merciful God 1 I thank thee. Something whifpers me that I have but few more remain¬ ing. Oh ! that I haçl profited of the many I have thrown away* Alas ! my eyes grow F 2 dim,
dim, and weaknefs pervades my whole frame! , Perhaps it is the laft time I may be able to hold the pen ; if fo, Heaven have mercy on me, and bkfs my dear friends/'
Thus ended the narrative of the unhappy Emma, which Fanny and William bedewed with their tears j at length retiring to reft, ihocked at what they had read, and deter¬ mined, at all events, to conceal it from their parents.
CHAP.
С Η Α Ρ. V,
ON the following morning, when the family met at breakfaft, the maternal eye of Fanny fixing on her eldeft fon, read an uncommon anxiety in his features, and immediately inquired the caufe, which, how¬ ever, Reuben paffed off as a trifling indif- pofition, and foon after accompanied his father to a neighbouring village, where fome bufinefs called him. u What is the matter, my fon ?" faid William, in his way thither ; " I fee with concern that your health declines, your ufual F 3 fpirits
fpirits are fled, and fome concealed lineatine & appears to prey on your mind. I had flat¬ tered myfelf that in a family fo affectionate as ours, that one would not have had a thought neceffary to conceal from the whole." u Nor have I, my dear father," replied Reuben : " I am uneafy almoft without knowing why, and frequently, even myfelf, endeavour to account for the melancholy that overpowers me. I can truly fay, that was the whole world laid before me, and I had tht choice of my ftate, I would not change rny prefent one ι it is true, I wifli that Anna was not in that hateful London, Do not you think it ftrange, my dear father, that the* poft brought us no letters laft night Γ' <ť Rather fo, but we can have no fears for her fafety ; next poft we fhail doubtlefs hear of her ·, Mr». Palmer is, perhaps, re¬ turned to London, and they may be qn the point of fetting out fur Inglewood/' " May
" May they never again leave it," replied Keuben, warmly. *— " Surrounded by my' family, I feel myfelf the moft bleffed of human beings ; not an individual in it but what feems neceffary to my happinefs; but deprive me of one, and my heart is cold* and though I accufe mylelf continually with ingratitude to the reft, yet were my life at flake I cannot banifh it«" More converfation of the fame fort paffed between the father and fon, but all of which tended towards confirming the former, that the latter had conceived an aflečtion for Anna, which, however it might be reftrained within the bounds of reafon, would never- theleis embitter the peace of his future life. On their return home, William finding no one prefent but Godwin, Bernard and Fanny, began a converfation on the fubječt, giving his opinion refpecting the uneafinefs of his fon, and afking their joint advice· F 4 " Were
cť Were it not," faid he, " for the unhappy examples we have had in our own family of the effects of trufting youth in large towns, I fhould think of placing Reuben where he might ftudy forne profeflion which might divert his mind from this unhappy inclination, as law, phyfic, or divinity." <( Nay," interrupted Bernard, " for his foul's fake, never make the boy a lawyer ; it would be a Wicked action, and you would huve it hereafter to anfwer for." (t Why, furely, my dear father," replied William, with a fmile, * c you would not infer that all lawyers are wicked j doubtlefs there are many virtuous/' " Like enough," anfwered Bernard j " but they never came within the fcope of my knowledge."
« Indeed,
" Indeed, my dear father," returned Wil¬ liam, " you are wrong to condemn a whole body of men for the errors of a part : Be¬ lieve me there are many worthy pillars of the law, whofe merits exceed all praife, and that written in the hearts of their countrymen will be tranfmitted from generation to gene¬ ration, though writing fliould be prohibited, and printing deftroyed." rf I knock under," cried Bernard. <c Here is the health of all fuch in a bumper, and in their journey through life may they never meet a man that reveres and honours them lefs than I do. Let the boy be a lawyer then ; for as for a parfon his face has not the right cut, and would never do for a pulpit." tf And why/' inquired old Gedwin, —■ " fliould you think fo ?" i( Why—why becaufe he looks too merry, the dog too has a fly look ; a parfon's face F 5 íhouid
fliould be like a ftanding pool, unruffled with* any breeze, except when it «creams and' mantles/ with the profpečt ofa good fat living j befides, î do not think the boy would like to be a parfon." Cť Perhaps not," anfwered William : " But what fay you to phyfic, or rather furgery ?" " Why thofe will never do," returned Bernai d. "Afine furgeon truly! why he cannot kill an old hen. Oh ! he would cut zjorry figure for a furgeon. Then for your phyfic, it would furely be a fin and a fhame for fuch a ftrong handfome fellow as Reuben to wafte his time in liftening to the complaints of old women (for who the pies would be fool enough to truft him. with the young ones) fpreading of plaifters, rolling up pills, or making drenches that would poifon a horfe 5 befides, he would have no bufinefs in the country; he muft go to London, and there we ihould lofe him for good." « If
* c If he muft be a profeffîon," faid the elder Godwin, " I muft confeis I fee none equal to the church ; for what man fo truly refpeilable as the worthy minifter of his Creator ?—the comforter of the afflicted— the reprover of the wicked—the protector of the widow.—the father of the orphan·*—and the friend of all mankind." " But where will you find him ?" anfweredi Bernard, drily. " I never heard much of our parfons comforting the affli&ed; then for reproving the wicked, I fuppofe ic is for' that purpofe he gets drunk four times a week with 'fquire Joice; and as to protecting widows, and being a father to orphans, who helped the poor old widow and her children at the milí ? Not the parfon I trow. Nay, never frown, I have let the cat out of the bag undefignedly ; but the widows prayers, and the childrens blefíings —-—»"
F6
« We
" We will change the difcourfe if you pleafe," interrupted Godwin, gravely. " Ay, ay," anfwered Bernard, <c you may hide your light under a buíhel, but it will burn through and blaze outi however, I mean no offence, fo let us, as you fay, change the fubječt : I vote for the law." " Nay," anfwered William, " if we find it abfolutely neceíľary, Reuben muft deter¬ mine for himfelf s were it not for this un¬ happy prepolľeffion the avocation of his father is what I ihould have chofen for him. The profefiion of man, in the unvitiated ftate of nature, who reaps what he lows, and feels the power of his Creator in every wind that blows, and his Providence in the glo¬ rious fun-ftiine : But why are you filent, my love ?" continued William, addreflìng his wife ; your counfels ever better my opinion, and are defirable to us all."
" My
" My advice then," replied Fanny, "is that you think no more of a change of fitu¬ ation for Reuben ; we know him nowftridtly virtuous, and all our hearts can wifh ; but who could anfwer for his ftability at ίο early an age, were he thrown into alluring and dangerous fituations ? Let him then remain at home a Farmer like his father, time may, perhaps, remove this partiality for Anna, if it is fo; but ihould it not, and we find it mutual, we are not without refource." " Name it," returned William. " Bid defiance to cenfure which can never injure us, declare the truth, and unite them," replied Fanny. — " Think you not, that could my beloved fifter look from her feat of bleffednefb, fhe would fay as I do ; for can you fuppofe fhe would doom the ion of my bofom, and the child who has coft her fo dear, to mifery ? Surely not ¡ my Agnes had a foul fuperior, fhe would have ftepped over fuch narrow bound^joined their hands, and, for their happinefs, have been
been regardlefs of the finger of calumny, if any fuch could point at fo gentle, and I will add, fo innocent a victim." " Firft of women !" exclaimed William, " how truly might I fay thy counfels ever bettered my opinion; the difgrace wouid indeed fall where it is mon due, on my unhappy brother, whom, in all probability, it would never reach; but what fay our parents ? their advice íhall determine us." " My brother Bernard's opinion mail be mine/' replied Godwin ; " as the moft in¬ jured perfon he will beft decide." « -ууеи* then/' faid Bernard, " I coincide with Fanny ; for what could give us more pleafure than joining the hands of that good boy and dear girl ; I am fure it would leave me nothing to wifh for on earth, and could my poor loft child rife from her grave, I am convinced fhe would applaud it," " And
" And for me," added Gpdwin, " I truly confefs I know no event that could confer equal fatisfačtion on me, as that of feeing the child of our dear and lamented Agnes united ^or life to our worthy Reuben. ·— Notwithftanding all die precautions we have taken I have frequendy dreaded, left iome imforefeen accident ihould difcover her birth to her unworthy father, if he yet furvives, and that he Ihould claim her from us. By this ftep ihe would be fecure for life, and fafe in the bofom of truth and affection ; — but, my children, the concurrence of Mrs» Palmer is alfo neceffary, and íhould guide us all ; ihe has in our calamities been a true- friend, and Anna is peculiarly her's." * c Nor would I advance a fingle ftep without her advice," replied William. " On her reiurn we will refume the bufinefs, and endeavour to difcover whether Anna's af- feČtions are in unifon w trh Ileuben'sTifthey are, with our good friend's approbation, we will
will then bid defiance to all but their hap¬ pinefs." Reuben and Edward at that moment en¬ tering, the converfation gave way to more general fubječts. « The day following was the return of the poft. William had his eyes on his fon, who could not fettle to any bufinefs, but ten times ia each hour walked to the gate liftening to every noife ; at length the found of the horn ftruck his ear, and, with the fpeed of light¬ ning, he rufhed to meet the welcome pull¬ man, who prefented a letter, directed in an unknown hand, to<?#is father. An unufual trepidation ièized his whole frame ; for a moment his heart ceafed to beat, but the next its motion returned witii redoubled violence. Hafkning to his father, he pre¬ fented the letter in filence, fixing his eyes on his face, as though he would read the con¬ tents there ; but though thefe were not dif- cernible,
cernible, the effect: they produced plainly evinced fomething more than common, for the fiufli of health gave place to a fudden paienefs, an unufual giavity at the fame time overfpreading his whole countenance. —· tf For Heaven's lake ! my dear father," ex- chimed Reuben, "fpeak. Pardon my im¬ patience; you have furely received fome difaftrous news ; fay what of Anna ; I am fure it concerns her." u Anna İs not in perfect health/' replied William, with as much compofure as he could affume. " We will go to London, and bring her home with us." Reuben for a moment made no reply, but at length exclaimed : « Oh î my beloved Anna, my heart funk at thy departure, and too truly foreboded that I íhould never fee thee morei" " It would better become us as men, Reuben/' replied his father, « to confider how
how we may foften this news to your mother and our aged parents, than give way to anguiíh that merely interefts ourfelves ; but prepare, we will depart this night, for the manner of the intelligence yet more alarm* me than her ficknefs." He then gave his fon the letter, whofe anxiety was redoubled by the perufal. —* While he was expreffing his furprife at the contents Edwaid entered, and was· immedi¬ ately informed of the intelligence his father had received. Anna's fituation he lamented with truly fraternal affect ion ; he, however, had no fooner looked at tiie letter than a loud exclamation efcaped him : " Ic is—it is Mifs Fitzmorris's hand !" faid he. " The gentle Editha is alarmed for our fifter, and this information eornes from her." u From what reafon fhould you luppofe fo ?" replied William. u How is it poffible you íhould be able to afcertain the young Lady's hand Г " Nothing
u Nothing more eafy," replied he, pro¬ ducing his pocket-book, and drawing forth a letter. «< See, there is what fhe wrote con¬ cerning the flaves, compare them, you will find the characters agree." William did fo, and w r as entirely of his fon's opinion ; then informing him of their intended journey, was putting up both letters : 4C You—you have not returned my letter, father," hefitated Edward, " and may, per¬ haps, lofe it out of your pocket." William thus reminded, gave it back to his fon, whole face at the moment was co¬ vered with a burning crimfon : " And may not I alfo accompany you, my dear father ?" faid he. " My heart is anxious for my fifter, and I may be of fome fervice." " You will be moft fo, my fon, by uffng every means in your power during my ab¬ fence to fupport the fpirits of our aged parents,
parents, and your dear mother, to whom I am going to difclofe this difagreeabîe bufi¬ nefs, I fhail then depart without delay/' Edward made no anfwer, but by a dtep figh, and immediately followed his father to join the family. The intelligence, though communicated with every caution that tendernefs could fug- geft, fell heavy on all ; even Fanny's uliial prefence of mind forfook her, and ihe la¬ mented with anguiih the fituation of Anna, fl Oh ! fly, my beloved huiband," cried fhe, c( fly to the darling of my heart^oh, gracious Heaven I fpare all that is left me of my dear ------ reftore her to my maternal arms, or never—never will my foul know peace ! — Where, at this difaftrous mo¬ ment, is our beft friend — where is Mrs, Palmer ?"
"By
" By this time ihe is doubtlefs with her/* replied William. " Cheer, my love, or in¬ deed I cannot leave you. The next poft will, I truft, bring you good news." Every thing being ready, William and his fon foon after departed on their own horfes for the firft ftage, and on hired ones the remainder of the journey.
CHAP.
CHAP. VI.
THOUGH the letter, which Editha had written to William Godwin, had reached him, yet that defigned for Mrs.Paimcr had failed ; as it was addreffed to her at Bath, and that Lady was removed to Briftol, her father being difgufted with the former place after a week's refidence, had infilled on re¬ pairing to the latter, which he reached in fo weak and exhaufted a ftate, as to make it apprehended that he would have expired on the road. On his arrival he found himfelf fo much worfe, that, un willing as he was to acknowledge 2 it,
it, he declared it was fruitlefo to attempt any longer to fly from death, and accordingly began to buftle about the mighty work of repentance, being determiàied to rub out the accumulating fins of fourfcore and fcven years, between the rifing and going down of the fun, for he furvived but little more than that time after his arrival ! Mrs. Palmer left no duty unperformed while he was living, nor yet after his deceafe ; for finding by his will that he defired fhe would fee him laid in the vault of his anceftors, fhe determined to obey him. To his wife he had left five hundred pounds a year, and the bulk of his fortune to his daughter, to whom this acquifition was, until lately, to¬ tally unexpected. The fécond day after his death Mrs. PaL mer had written to Anna, fignifying the event that had taken place, alfo her intention of accompanying the body to Derbyfhirc, de- firing
firing her not to write as fhe ihould have left Briftol, and that immediately after the funeral fhe fhould return to town poft; ex- preffed the forrow fhe felt at Mrs. Fitz¬ morris's ilinefs (Anna's letter refpecting her having reached Mrs. Palmer the day before ihe left Bath) declared her obligations fo Mr. Fitzmorris, hoping that Gentleman would permit his daughter to accompany them the enfuing iummer ; defired her not to inform her parents of Mrs. Fitzmorris's ilinefs, as it would give them unneceffary uneafinefs; and finally, fhe concluded the whole by faying, (he expected to embrace her in a fortnight at fartheft. This letter reached Anna, but not until after it had been perufed by Fitzmorris, who had the fatisfačtion to find that, in all probability, the Lady was fafe for a fortnight, during which time, if he determined to give up Anna, her health would be entirely re-cftabliihed ; or if on the
the contrary, he adopted other meafures, he would have time to execute any thing he might refolve on. This letter arrived on the fixth day after Editha's removal, and when Anna was furri·* ciently recovered to leave her bed. Previous to this event Fitzmorris had not intruded his prefence on Anna; but now fecure of Mrs. Palmer, and apprifed that her health was almoft reftored, his ufual fpi¬ rits returned, and he determined to lofe no time, but to prefs his fuit with all the ear- neftnefs he was mailer of, and accordingly fent his compliments, and entreated the favour of perfonally inquiring after her health. Anna, who felt a repugnance ihe accufed her¬ felf with for Fitzmorris, returned to this meffage an oblmin» anfwer, determined, as her health was fo much reftored, to entreat flie might be permitted to go to Editha, whom flie longed to queftion refpecting her writing to her parents, and Mrs. Palmer, as vol. iv· G ihe
ihe could not conce've why it had been done privately, truly fuimifing, by the removal of the lall mentioned, that the letter to her had fuled. On Fitzmorris's entrance he was fli иск with the akei.uion his diabolical atts had made 'm hei beautiful face; but, neverchcícís, complimented lieron her iecovei}\cxprem*ng the alarm it ac íiiíl bad occafioned him, when he ι ufi.ed, ui mt ut ceieinony, into hu abut¬ ment, àvxl aildnrţ, with weil ('iiùmMÎLg curioíity, if tíiib wab à rul attack, οι whether Ле w.iö iu^iecl to rita ? « Never," icpľicd Anna, "and ï trial I ne\ei ihasi a¿i.n. The win^ I ылп!^ at fupper v.as p.utitulaily diíagneiuie to me, and to that I attı toute my îllnd .' Fi 7;mnii>, vexed to find that fiic full per- leve rec 1 in the leal caufe, endeavoured all he could to divert that, opinion, which Anna's timidity
timidity did not fufter her to periift in i but turning the difcouife to PJ.ditha and her aunt, deiired to be informed rcfpecling the health of the Etter, and whethei /lie might not now be permitted to fee her friend. <c My пТгеГь health is Ail] very precarious," replied Firzinonis; u and for my daughter in а few da)b î ftiall be happy to pieient her to you, for then ali danger will be ovei." Anna fighed.—" I thought, Sir," replied fiie,'' with great gentlenefc, €i that fits were nevei Communicative." ct But, my dear Mils Falmer, yours were accompanied by а degree of fever that ren- dui.d the m alarming. 1 fear you received iome infection from my lifter previous to your coming hither ; But why does that melan¬ choly oveifpread your lovely face ? Is Editha the only one in the family for whom you have the lea ft elltem ? Command here, you are G 2 mifheíš,
miilrefs, and myfelf the moil devoted of your fervants." Such a fpeech, from the gloomy harfli I-Mtzmorris, at once rWprifed and overpowered Anna witii confufion.— <c 1 fhould be very ungrateful, Sir," replied fcc, i( not to refpect the whole family, to whom I have been fo highly obliged," <c Refpecl, charming Anna, is too cold a return for the »dİlction my heart acknow¬ ledges for you j io gentle a mind cannot furely be cruel enough to doom me to de- fpair, when ï lay myfelf and fortune at your fttù" " Good Heaven! Sir, you mock me. — Editha'. 1 . fuller í indeed you diftrels me be¬ yond meafure I" ťC I low for" replied Fitziv.orris : if ís rny afileri- u then fo dicadful ? and is Editha to
to monopolize all your love r" — As he fpoke he attempted to take her handi but Anna fhrunk back, and appeared ready to faint. " Nay," faid he, " why that averted look ? Say, lovely girl, will you give me leave to apply to Mrs, Palmer ì I flatter myfelf my fortune ——" u Will have no effect on her," replied Anna, recovering her confufion, — " She loves me too well not to leave me, in a caufe of fo much confequence, to my own choice, and that is never to quit her : I have there¬ fore only to entreat, that while I intrude on your hofpitality, you will ceafe a converfation that gives me fo much pain." " By Heaven it is impoifibie," exclaimed he, attempting to embrace her ; ťí 1 muft be more or lefs than man not to refolve to con¬ quer this foft timidity—this childifh declara¬ tion." G 3 Anna
Anna ícreamed aloud, and in a moment Julia rufhed into the room : ic What the matter i" cried ihe, " you flight away my fenfe ; fure you not drink wine again r" " Be gone," exclaimed Fitzmorris, cc W T hy this infoknt intrufion ? You were not called." {( Me was," repíted Julia. — if Young Miiľey no feream widouc want me,—^Julia know duty, and more fumi bve den fcar/' ff I charge you ftay/' faid Anna, ci I have bufinefs for you." " I then may take my leave," rejoined Fitzmorris, malignantly. " You will con¬ fider of what I have faid, and 1 truft will anfwer me more kindly in the evening," Anna made no reply, and Fitzmorris im¬ mediately after withdrew.-—" What íhall we do, Julia ?" cried ihe, c< that odious man has fii iţh tene d
frightened me to death ! Oh î that I had never entered his houfe. Mrs. Palmer, from her removal, I fear, has never received Editha's letter." cc But de oder, Miffey.—Friends get dar* no doubt—foon be here." <c That thought alone, Julia, enables me to keep up my fpirits ; for the bare idea of pafiing a fortnight here would kill me ; but· have you heard where Editha is placed r" " No, I afk footman, for more fervants be come now, Miffey ; but no tell me, only laugh my face." " I will go," faid Anna : "I can hire a poft-chaife to take us home ; there is lefs danger on the high road than under the roof of this odious man." Julia advifed her againft this ftep, as by that means fhe would probably mifs of her G 4 friends,
friends, whom fhe might foon expedí, adding, u No fear dat little time, Miffey ; me take care me warrant—befide me rink maffa no let us fío." <c Not let me go, Julia ?" repeated Anna, " you aftonifti me ; he will not furely dare to detain me !" « Dare !" repeated Julia, " Ah, Miffey ! you no know what he dare—he fear noting." Anna fhuddered at this account, but, neverthelefsj determined to mention her in¬ tention when next he fhould vifit her· Fitzmorris retired to drefs in the mean time, and to his trufty confidant declared what had paffed, vowing that Anna fhould not efcape him, for that he was determined, if all other means failed, to carry her out of the kingdom, and fecrete her until íhe con¬ ferred to his terms; adding, that the death of
of old Sommerton (whom he fuppofed her grandfather) would make a fine addition to her foi tune, and concluded with faying : — <( Between ourfèîves, fuch а recruit mav not prove amik, tor i have loll confiderably fmce I came to England ; had the old woman died, her ten thou.imd, indeed, might Lave made up tiie deficiency, but í luve fcaicely any hopes of that nov., for fhei;>mu,:n better." Fitzmorris, to his great vexation, was pre¬ vented repealing Lib per.ecution io Anna that day by the unwell nie v dit oí three of hiá London согпр1гмкъ, w ho knuv. ing he ¡гла a houfe on t;:e ile.uii c.dkd to take a dinner, and fat drinking w idi him undi ihe night was far advanced, leaving him in a ilåte cf al- moft brutal intoxication ; in which fituation, taking up a candle, he declared he would go to Anna's apartment ; but his truily valet, who faw he was in no fituation to re ceni me n 1 himfelf to a Lady, prevented him, by afluring him ihe had long fince been retired to i e t, G 5 an 1
and foon after perfuaded him to do the fame» While Fitzmorris and his domeftics had been employed in the entertainment of the guefts, Anna had written to Inglewood, without, however, mentioning the extent of her uneafi¬ nefs, but entreating to be fetched home without delay, Julia conveying the letter to the poft- man, as flie had done thofe of Editha.
CHAP.
CHAP VIL
FITZMORRIS rofe earlier than ufual, his head aching from the laft nignťs debauch, his blood fevered with what he called love, and his confcience agonized with all the torments that vice cive rife to.
O'
In order to reduce his fpirits to fome de¬ gree of calmnefs he walked out into his gar¬ den, and was apparently loft in thought when Anna, leaning on Julia, croffing the path beiore htm, and for a time banifhed his un¬ pleafant reverie :— ft Abroad fo early !" faid G б he ;,
he ; <c I am fortunate this morning 1" at the fame time offering to place ber arm under Lis. íf May I flatter myfelf you will break- faft wich me ?" <c I came merely to try my ftrength, Sir/* returned Anna, withdrawing her hand, " as I propofc going to town to fee Mrs. Fitzmoiris to-day/' " Ycu jt ft furely !" anfwered he; "you cannot think of putting your health to fo dangerous a hazard, or that I am fo little fenfible of die value of my charge as to per¬ mit fo impioper a ftep." (< I was intrufted, Sir," replied Anna, tf to Mrs. Fitzmorris*;» care; I am not afraid of fevers, and as Mifs Editha is not here." " I will, on my honour, fetch her in two day*·," interrupted he ; but favour me, charm¬ ing Anna, by diímiíllng your fervant ; 1 have fornedring
íomething to communicate which requires your private ear." " I hear no fubječt, Sir," replied Anna, (< that needs concealment, and for myfelf would only entreat that you will permit one of your domeftics to fetch me a chaife from Hounflow/' f< And will you favour me with no anfwer to what I requefted yefterday," faid he, angrily, " fince I muft fpeak before this black devil r" " You call devil, black maffa ?" interrupted Julia. <£ Negro call devil white ; me believe no colour, only bad heart make devil—wicked confcience hell." <í D-—-n you," exclaimed Fitzmorris, lofing his temper ; " I merit this for per¬ mitting you to toi ment me after what pafied in Jamaica/' « Ah !
" Ah ! much pafs dere, mafia ; if you forget, your memory no io good as Julia's." Fitzmorris raifed his hand, and was only prevented from ftr king her by the prefence of Anna.—" I fee," faid he, f( I have no¬ thing to expecl, and fliall act according! ν * yet n ui ft inform you, Madam, that to Ь Palmer only will l vtñgn you, ihe, perha^. may be more fenfible of my attention than you are/' With thefe words he turned away in a rage, and fcon regained the houfe, leaving Anna aftoniilied at his brutality, and fhocked to find herfelf in the power of fo bad a man. Fitzmorris faw Anna in the afternoon in her own apartment; he attempted as before to fend away Juha, but in vain, liberty had made her bold, and fhe now openly dcfpifed the tyrant, whofe frown had heretofore made her tiemble. From
From Anna he was convinced he had no favour to expect j he faw he was detefted, and anger, as much as love, ftimulated him to revenge the affront. He had been parti¬ cularly favoured by the Ladies, and was en¬ raged to find her blind to thofe attractions that had fubdued fo many, never confidering that her heart might be pre-engaged, or that he was no longer fo young, or pofiefied of fo attractive a perfon as formerly, though, to confefs the truth, his diffipated life, more than age, had caufed the alteration. <f I have no rime to lofe," faid he to his colleague in vice 5 and " it is but labour loft to try gentle means j force and fear can alone conquer fo obftinate a fpiritj fhe filili find I am not to be trifled with : S'death have I lived until now to be vanquilhed by a girl ! befide, ihould I let her efcape, lhe would but relate what has pafied, ;.;id make me ridicu¬ lous. By Heaven I will bear her to France, and chere, wife or miftrcis, her ciioice finali determine.
determine. I have nothing to fear in this caie but the tongt e of hei mother, and that, until I can make aii lecuit, 1 unì keep at a diftance. bhe hab ro heroic hroihuo, but if ilie had I care not; my arm never yet failed me, nor do I rc«r ic now." " I muft confefo," replied the valet, ff I am not quite ib fangline in this bufinefs as I have been in fome, v\here Τ have had the honour to ili ve you. Mrs Palmer is rich, and will doubtiefs fpare n-> pains or expence to difcover her Uaughter." t( True, nor no expence to heal her re¬ putation i for who will believe ihe was nat con lenti p g to the elopement ? Befides, the young vixen herfelf will foon be glad to f d ve ίο deíperate а cafe with the old remedy — matrimony. But enough of this; prepare me poft-horfes to-morrow night by nine o'clock ; 1 iliali fettle all my bufineis in the day. You muft ride forward and obtain relays^
relays, and give ouc, in cafe of qi.eflior, that I am conveying an imprudent daughtu to France. We fhail reach Dover early in die morning, and will go diiecily on íliip buirá to prevent ail alarm." íť But what, Sir, do you mean to do with Julia ?" « D ---*--- p h cr> jf ît V<?ÍÍS n0 ţ; f or }j er j n ^ fernal yells on the road í would take her too, if it was only for the pleafure of puíhing her overboard into the fea. As it is, we will lock her up, and leave her under the charge of your filler, whom you muft com¬ mand, as fhe values her place, not to rcleafe her until the next day," " But Mifs Editha, Sir, and your fon." " Piíli, if my fifter gets well, the girl will naturally return to her, and I may make a merit hereafter of fending for her aboard.— As
As for the boy he cannot be better than at fchool, therefore no more queilions, but prépaie to obey me." if After fo many proofs of my attachment, Sir," replied ilv man, u I íhall not now for¬ feit your friendfti İ p." " After fo many proofs of my gratitude, í hope you will not," anfwered ihQ mailer. With thefe words the worthy pair feparated for the night.
CHAP,
IMMMiMAI
С II A P. VIIL
IN the morning all was preparation for the intended expedition. Fitzmorris wrote to his fifter, who was yet in a very precarious ftate of health, that immediate bufinefs de¬ manded his prefence in a diftant part of the kingdom, and entreated that, when it fliould be convenient, flie would again take the care of Editha. To his fon's preceptor he like- wife fent, fignifying his intention that he fliould remain at fchool until they heard farther from him. He alio fettled his domeftic economy for the country with his houfekeeper, who was
was the valet's fifter, and remitted an order to his attorney to difcharge his houfe in town, together with the domeftics. Thus all was prepared, and Fitzmorris looked on his fuc- cefs as certain. Julia, whofe eyes and ears were attentive to all that paffed, was not unmindful of the more than ufual bufinefs that feemed in agi¬ tation, but which, perhaps, had made no material impreffion, had fhe not heard the valet and houfekeeper in clofe converfation, the former with a bitter imprecation curfing the new foliy that actuated his mafter, decla¬ ring it was the laft he would be engaged in, concluding with faying, " The pitcher goes often to the well, but at laft comes home broken. Never had man fuch devilliilx warnings and hair-breadth efcapes ·, but it is all in vain, they only, I think, make him more daring, and for this attempt on Mifs Palmer------"
Flis
His eye at that infiant met the figure of Julia, who was ftanding in the door-way ; but uncertain whether flie had heard, and concluding that if fhe had, flie could mrke nothing of it, he turned the difcourfe to common occurrences until her departure. Julia had but juft related to Anna what fhe had heard when Fitzmorris fcnt his com¬ pliments, and defired to be admitted. It w ıs now afternoon, and he had been endeavouring to drown thought in wine, he thefore behaved with lefs caution than formerly, urging bis fuit with much vehemence, until at length, feeing the trembling Anna terrified, and almoft ready to faint, he defifted, and Ivíc her alone with Julia, " Oh, my God, protect me !" cried Anna, <£ What can 1 do? Surely, if you love mc, you will not deny my requeft. The attempt you heard them mention, and his behaviour, all confpiieto flie w I have no time to Jofe ; let
let us then this very night privately leave the houfe ; I am ftrong, and can walk a great way; neither am I without money ; PIcuven will, I am fure, protect us, and we íhall reach home in fafety." <c Wid all my art," replied Julia,—" Ah I me hope iome friend come before now 7 ." " it is impoifibie they could reach here, had they even come port, before to-morrow or the next day ; and oh ! Julia, what may not happen in that interval ? No, I will brave the worft fooner than remain longer under this hated roof." They then determined, as foon as the houfe fliould be fettled for the night, to endeavour toefcape, and reach Hounflow on foot : — " From whence," faid Anna, ťí we wiil, my faithful juha, procure a chaife, and travel all the way poft ; by morning we fliall be fafe fiom purfuit, ihould we even be followed, but
but that I think improbable, as Fitzmorris will be uncertain of our route." This refolution fupported the fpirits of Anna during the evening, in the courfe of which Julia made upa little bundle cf ne- ceffary apparel, which fhe propofed to take with them. At length the clock ftruck nine, and an inftant after а chaife diove into the court.— Anna icarcely breathed, though me thought it imponible it iliould bring any one from Inglewood ; but all her hopt о vanifhed, v* hen a moment after Fitzmorris de fi red to be ad¬ mitted. <£ 1 am furry, charmini!; Anna " faid he, <( to be the meifenacr of bad tidìiv« ; but Mrs. Palmer is taken ill at Derby, and каь lint to ¡cernire your immcd.ute at- teiidance." <c Ρ re ferve her, merciful Heaven V T ex¬ claimed Anna, " 1 will fly to her j the fatigue ihe
fhe has undergone has killed her, and I fliall be deprived of my deareft friend." tc I received the intelligence near an hour lince," returned Fitzmorris, but could not affume courage to declare it to you : I, how¬ ever, immediately 01 dered а chaife for your conveyance, and, with your permiffion, will accompany and deliver you fafe to her." fi Julia will be fufticienr," replied fhe, recoiling at his offer ; " 1 have no fear but for my beloved mamma." tc Excufe me, I will not truft you alone to the dangers of the night, for í prei v me you will depart immediately. Julia can fol¬ low in the morning by the ftage. Come, you lofe time, all is prepared/' concluded he, prefenting his hand. Anna drew back, and paufed for a mo¬ ment, while Julia replied : — "No leave, Miiľey,
Miffey, me run after coach fooner den be leave here behind.'* €< Has my dear mamma fent no letter, nor yet her fervant to accompany me," demanded Anna, fixing her foft but inquiring eyes on Fitzmorris. ' c No," replied he ; " a horíêman brought the meffage, and departed immediately for London. u It is ftrange/' anfwered Anna, paufing, cc I fhould have thought that ——■ But come, Julia, we will go, and I can but thank Mr· Fitzmorris for all his kindnefs." " On my life/* interrupted he, impatiently, ct you íhall not go unprotected/* " Heaven will protect me;" replied Anna, raifing her eyes : " No action of my paft life has, I truft; made me forfeit that bleffing.** vol. iv, H « Doubtlefs
" Doubtlefs not/* anfwered Fitzmorris^ with a fneer ι " but in this cafe it delegates its power to me. Come—come—on my homur I will guide you in fafety." cc Slender barrier !" faid Anna, afide. — The difcourfe which Julia had overheard recurring freíh to her memory, then turning to Fitzmorris, with as much firmnefs as fhe could aíľume, İhe added : u Pardon me, Sir, for declining your offer j but, indeed, I will ,not go without Julia." " By my foul but you fhail," returned he, iofing his patience, and ftamping with rage: * c I wifhed to woo you to love and happinefs, but will not be trifled with ; and therefore now throw off the maik, and boldly tell you, that I am determined, all refiftance is vain, you muft, and thai! accompany me." « Oh, God ! protect me/' cried Anna, trembling j " then, perhaps, my dear—dear friend is not ill/' « I
*«· ï neither know nor care," exclaimed he, rudely feizing her hand : " She is an old woman, and fit only for worms meat, while you glowing with youth and beauty- -----" α Unhand me, monfter! 0 fcreamed Anna, -at the fame time releafing herfelf and flying to Julia, who clenched her fifts, and grinning horribly, placed herfelf before her, bearing no indifferent refemblance of afury defending an angel " No, go widout like/* fputtered Julia, almoft inarticulate with paffion : " Bad white man^—wicked Chriftian—me die before let take away Miffey/' " Die then and be d·*----- d," exclaimed he, at the fame time with unmanly brutality ftriking her over the face (which was in¬ ftantly covered with blood) with fuch force as caufed her to recoil feveral paces, and but for the timely fuccour of Anna íhe muft have fallen to the ground." Ha « Monfter!
" Monfter! villain!" fcreamed Anna, rending the air with her cries : " Murder us together, for we will never feparate." <£ I have bufinefs for you living," replied he, tauntingly ; " refiftance is uielefs." —- With thefe words, like a fell kite feizing a âovç, he fnatched up his prey, and in fpite of her cries and refiftance, bore her down the flight of flairs into the hall, covered as fhe was with the blood of Julia, who, from the blow, lay fenfeiefs on the ground. u For Heaven's fake, Sir!" exclaimed the valer, who was wailing in the hall, — " cover her with a cloak, it will not delay a moment. See, fhe has fainted."—And, indeed, Anna, exhaufted with the exertion íhe had made, had fuddenly became inani¬ mate, and now lay motionlefs in Fitzmorris's arms. The door of the hall had been opened in readinefs, as Fitzmorris defended the ftair- cafe.
cafe. At that inftant William Godwin and Reuben arrived, and ruihed in, having heard the fcreams as they alighted from their horfes at the gate, there being no one to oppofe their paffage, the poftillion alone being on the outfide. The firft object that prefented was Anna covered with blood, and appa¬ rently dead in Fitzmorris's arms. Reuben, his eyes fparkling with rage, flew to him, and in a moment, with the vigorous arm of undebauched youth, fnatched, in fpite of refinance, the fen ft lek Anna from his grafp, while his father feconded his efforts by knock¬ ing down the valet and feizing another villain, who came to the affiftance of their infamous mailer. Fitzmorris, whofe fury knew no bounds finding himfelf deprived of Anna, haftily drew а piftol from his pocket, and levelled it at William.—At that inftant their eyes met—they became fixed as flatues, the guilty Fitzmorris recoiling a few fteps, and dropping the piftol from his enervated hand. H 3 «* Is
« Is it poffible/' at length exclaimed William, u that my eyes do not deceive me £ Doth the earth yet ihudder with thy impious weight? Degenerate monfter ! guilty of every crime that difgraces human nature ! The death of thy own daughter was alone wanting to complete the number ! Oh, murdered/ child of the fweet Agnes 1 I here devote myfelf to revenge ; the ties of blood I tear from my heait, and even here on earth fhail thy detefted father pay the dues of offended juftiee." Daring as Fitzmorris, or rather Edwin,, was in vice, he appeared petrified with hor¬ ror, rolling his haggard eyes around, and. gnafhing his teeth with anguifh. « She is noi dead, my father İ — ihe breathes, and will yet live to blefs us," ex¬ claimed Reuben, in a tranfport. « For that Heaven be praifed ; but fay/*' demanded William, turning indignantly to* wardst
wards his brother, " what does this mean ? You cannot furely have been fo abandoned oí God as-to have injured this innocent ľ* " She at leaft has not been abandoned of God," replied Edwin·; u her perfon' is as uncontaminate&asit is beautiful : But fpeak, for I have but little time to lofe. Did notr you fày fhe was the child of Agnes ?" ·< I did," returned William· " In the horror of the moment prudence was loft,, and I now will conceal the truth no longer ; íhe is your own daughter, but build not upon that, for no human power íhall fnatch her from my protection ; therefore attempt it not, I warn you, it will be in vain. — As foon as fhe recovers we will be gone. You have my pity, and Heaven forgive you. Oh ! will no warning move that obdurate heart ? Surely the meeting with Emma would have deterred any other but yourfelf from vice for ever, and made them penitent as- íhe was." H 4 «Well—
" Well—well—well—you know that too ι but enough. Anfwer me a few queftions, and i will fwear never to attempt removing the child of—my Agnes from you." «« I afk no oath," replied William: "But propofe your queftions, Anna recovers, and I am in hafte." " And fo am I," returned Edwin, franti¬ cally, « If Anna is the child of Agnes* whofe infant did I fee dead on her bofom ?" " Mine," anfwered his brother, " an un¬ happy innocent, who even in the womb fell a fací ¡fice to your offences, by the anguiih diey caufed its modier/* " Enough," cried he, ftriking his fore¬ head. " Оле more queftion, and then £: re¬ weli for ever : Who is Mrs Palmer ? Oh ï that fubteriuge deftroyed me I"
«The
" The prefent owner o* the efiate upon the Foreft, and a more than parent to Anna, whom ihe received from her dying mother." cc The myftery of the ring is then ex¬ plained," faid Edwin, without regai dug his brother. — " No warning could, indeed, awaken me 1"—Then turning towards Anna, who was almoft recovered, but in filent terror clafping Reuben's neck, he viewed her with attention for fome minutes; then, with a look of defpair, rufhed out of the room. William now caught Anna to his bofom, fpeaking comfort, and tendei ly inquiring if ihe was able to accompany them, for ihat he was determined to be gone as fpeedily as pof¬ fible, fC О let us haften," at length replied Anna; " but where is my poor Juh.» ? this blood is her'h, and was fpilled in my deferire." —- Willum then aiked where ihe had left her,: nd II5 being
being informed, without further queftion; afcended the ftaircafc, and found Julia reco¬ vered from infenfibility, but fo much hurty that ihe could not leave the apartment with¬ out his affiftance· Having led her to Anna, and bound up her head, they were about to depart in the chaife, which had been prepared for other purpofes, when the report ofa piftol alarmed them. — William prepoíľeíTed with the horrid truth, left Anna and Julia withReuben> and rulhed forward into the houfè to demand the caufe, which was foon difcovered, for on the floor of the^ parlour lay extended, in . the agonies of death, the guilty Edwin, who had placed a piftol to his ear, and thus, un¬ called, ruft', d/ with all his vices on his head, into the prefence of an offended Creator ! Life, however, had not quite forfàken him ; he fixed his eyes on his brother, and, after
after various efforts to fpeak, all of which were unavailing, pointed to the table ; then grafping riie hand of William, who had for¬ gotten the vices of the man in the fituation of the brother, with an agonizing pang, ex¬ pired ! Depraved as Edwin had' been for years r William was íhocked at his death, particu¬ larly as it precluded all repentance, and appeared a complete feal to his numerous offences. For fome time he remained in ipeechlefs anguifh, bending over the disfi¬ gured body ; at length he recollected Edwin*s pointing to the table, and on approaching it found a paper, wherein· was written : " I appoint my daughter Anna Godwin, my fon William Fitzmorris, and his fifter Editha, joint heirs and inheritors of ail I diepoffeffed of,and I leave them in the caie, and unuer the fole guardianfilip, of William Godwin, whom I once called brother. EDWIN GODWIN FITZMORRiS/* H S This
This had apparently been written but a few moments previous to the raftı ačt 3 and plainly' evinced that, however deftitute he was of virtue himfelf, he revered it in his brother, by wifhing him to take charge of his chil¬ dren. Oppreffed with the fcene before him, to¬ gether with the fatigue of a long journey, performed with fcarcely an interval of reft, William for fome time was almoft over¬ powered with the fhock ; but, ftruggling with his feelings, he at length turned to the domefticks, who ftood round in ftupid amaze¬ ment, and gave the neceffary orders, which they immediately fhewed a difpofitìon to obey, as the valet, who, as may be furmifed, was no other than Harris, informed them he was their late mafter's brother, William then returned to the hall, defiling Reuben and Anna to depart immediately lo an inn at Hounflow, w hei e he would join them
them in half an hour. Reuben, notwith¬ ftanding the fituation of Anna, had heard part of the difcourfe that paffed between his father and Fitzmorris, and by that had learned he was no other than his uncle Edwin, and, to his utter amazement, the father of Anna, and now readily furmifed the fatal event whicb had taken place. As for Anna her alarm and fainting had rendered her infenfible to every thing, until Fitzmorris rufhed out of the hall ; ihe now would fain have queftioned Godwin refpecting the caufe of the frefh confufion ; but he only replied by giving her in charge to Reuben, who pi iced her with Julia in the chaife, and accompanied them to Iloun- flow : Reuben, however, previous to his entering the vehicle, ftepping back to his father, faid '* When Γ have feen Anna in fafety, may I not return r My heart recoils at leaving you even for a moment, in fuch d iftrefb as your features too legibly difplay.'*'
si No
« No, my fon/* replied William, rt I will foon join you. Alas î the unhappy man is dead by his own hand, and, though nature abhors the deed as well as many other of his actions, yet he was my brother/* " William now re-entered the houfe, and calling for Fitzmorris's confidential fervant,. demanded where the children of his unhappy brother were placed ? To which Harris re¬ plied, that tht boy was at Winchefter, and Editha at a fchool not more than two miles from Hounflow. William then ordered the domeftics to attend him, and walking through the houfe he placed his leal on the efcrutoires in behalf of the children, and foon after left the houfe for the night. Reuben, in the mean time with his charge, had reached an inn at Hounflow, where Anna began to look around her without fear, anxious only for the return of him whom fhe calkd her father,, and whofe conduct truly entitled'
entitled him to that appellation. At length Godwin entered, and Anna flew to embrace him, inquiring what had detained him, at whom the piftol had been fired, and finally, what uneafinefs oppreffed him ? " Afk me no queftions to night, my love/* anfwered Godwin ; " to-morrow I have much Ш difclofe to you ; but at prefent let us retire to reft, the events of the day have nearly overcome mc." They foon after withdrew, and Godwin's horror for his brother's death was for fome hours loft in fleep, the extremity of fatigue mattering every other feniàtiom In the morning all met with recruited fpirits, Godwin only appeared depreffed and unhappy, and being with Reuben and Anna alone, after breakfaft, addrefled the latter thus : " My dear Anna, a number of unhappy cir- cumftances that preceded, and iikewife foU lowed
lowed your birth, rendered it neceffary that I fliould adopt and pafs you to the world as my child, and I can truly fay I have loved you as fuch ; but, my Anna, the deception, for many reafons, muft now ceafe ; but not my affection, that muft remain fttong as ever, beyond the power of time or chance to aker." " Am I not then your daughter?" cried Anna, turning pale, and trembling.— "Oh 1 my dear father, do not difclaim your child." (f Difclaim thee !" repeated he, folding her in his arms : " Never—never—Anna- family reafons now require the fecret to be divulged to the world ; but for thyfelf think me thy parent as thou didit before." « Alas !" faid Anna, " if it muft be fo— But have I а father—a mother—Ah ! my heart will lead me to her.—It is—it muft be Mrs. Palmer/' " Not *
" Not fo," returned Godwin : " Your mother died foon after your birth ; fhe was the beloved fifter of my wife, and called Agnes; her lofs you have often heard us deplore/' " But my father, is he too dead?" rc Alas ! I tremble to name him, for I fear he has made thee fuffer much ; but re¬ member he knew thee not, and has paid his follies with his life, let therefore pity draw a veil over the errors of thy father and my brother." €t Good Heavens !" cited Anna, fcarcdy articulate, " fure^ I dream ; you cannot mean Fitzmorris ?" " I do, indeed," anfwered Godwin. u By what means, or for what reafon, he was called fo, I know not, for we have been many years eftranged; fome future time you fliall know alk" «Oh!
"Oh ! I know too much/* cried Anna* * Heaven pardon me, I hated him. I called him names ; — but— but— alas ! that fatal piftol is explained ! Did you not fay he was dead too ľ Oh î I can never be forgiven." " You are, indeed," returned Godwin y ** for fee the paper he has left ; does he not mention you with his other children ?" M Oh I I want it not—I do not deferve it/' laid fhe, weeping ; " let me ftill be your child — I have no wifh for his wealth ; — but is roy beloved Editha, indeed, my fifter?'* " She is, I am now going to her/' re¬ plied Godwin, Reuben will remain here in my abfence ; I íhall return to dinner/' Godwin then departed, leaving Anna and' Reuben, the former of whom, loft in thought remained for fome time filent, until the latter taking her hand, and tencjerly preffing it, faid;
feids " Oh ! my Anna, is it poffible ! and are you, indeed, not my fifter ?" cc Your father hath faid fo," anfwered Anna, weeping. " Bur, good Heaven ! how dread¬ ful, he is no longer my father ! V have now loft all thofe ties fo dear and neceffary to my happinefs,, for you are not now my brother 1" *« Happy thought ľ' exclaimed Reuben^ " Happy, Reuben ;" repeated Anna : —. " And can you be fo cruel as to fay fo — you whom I loved fo dearly ?" " And do I not bve you equally, Anna ?" returned Reuben. " Heaven is my witnefs* that in your abfence I have been the moft miferable of mankind!" " I will never leave Inglewood' more," laid Anna j " but endeavour to forget aH the troubles I have fuffered, and regard thofe difagreeabîe
difagreeabîe fubjecb as a painful dream ; but Mr. Fitzmorris's death, for I cannot indeed call him father, will ever hang heavy on my fpirits, yet í hope ï was not the caufe. 1 ' Reuben faid all he could to comfort her, and they foon after vifned Julia i flic was much better, but the furgeon had ordered her to be kept quiet for a day or two," Godwin rode directly to the houfe of h ís late broti er, and gave Harris the neceíľary orders rcfpecling the funeral, and other bufi- nefb, particularly inquiring after Mrs. Fitz- monis, and being told fhe was better, wrote a kw lines, to inform her of the melancholy event that had taken place. <c And now," faid Godwin, coldly addref- fing Harris, " how long have you lived with my brother, and how came you fo readily to know me ?"
«I
c< I have been his fervant near eighteen years," replied Harris; " and as for knowing you, Sir, I had feen you fome years back, and you are but litde changed." > • c ï do not recollect ît," anfwered William. *' Mention tiie time and place," <c At your mother's funeral," replied Harris, " 1 brought a letter from my mafter." €C And gave it by miftake to my wife; was it not fo ?" returned Godwin, a momentary flufh of anger crofling his cheek. " It was, Sir, and I beg pardon ; I but obeyed the commands of my mafter." Godwin fighed : " And how," faid he, came my brother to be called Fitzmorris ?" " By his marriage, Sir," replied Harris, " an Act of Parliament was obtained ior that purpofe ; but, if you will permit me, I will relate all the material events that happened to him after his leaving England."
ï66~ THE FARMER О? íf Sometime hence I will trouble you,'" 4 replied Godwin ; " at prefent you will more oblige me by executing thofe orders I have given." Harris bowed, and William walked into the apartment w hei e the remains of Edwin were depofited i he remained for fome time alone, when he retired, his features plainly pourtraying how much he was affected, being fwolien and inflamed with tears. Previous to his vifiting Editha, he returned to the inn, and finding Anna more calm, pro¬ pofed fhe ihould accompany him in a poft- chaife, in which" they foon reached the fchool where Editha was boarded. Godwin was at once ftruck with her appearance, while Anna throwing her arms around her in broken fen- tences called her—her beloved—her dear— dear fifter—Editha, with the moft lively af* ¿ečlion, returning her careíľes.
When
W T hen they became compofed William aftonithed Editha by informing her he was her uncle, the relationíhip íhe held to Anna, and at length in as gentle a manner as poifi- ble, that her father had died Juddenly j hoping that in future íhe would regard him as an affectionate reprefentative of the pa¬ rent ihe had loft. Har ih as Fitzmorris had ever been to his daughter, ihe bewailed him with unfeigned forrow > though it was fomewhat mitigated by the foothings of Anna, and the tendernefs of her uncle. — " And íhall I, indeed, live with Anna," faid íhe, raifing her fine dark eyes (parkling through tears to his face, — €Z and will you let me be one of your chil¬ dren, and may I be permitted to love as well as honour you ?" u You íhall, my Editha, my child," — replied he, tenderly faluting her 5 " we will ail love you." « Ah \
" Ah ! then you will fpoİl me, for, alas !" faid fhe : "I have not been ufed to be loved except by Anna here, and my poor brother." " You deierve to be beloved by all the world," cried Anna í <( at Inglewood every one will be fenfible of your merit/' fC And fhail I accompany you thither ?" faid Editha : " But my poor aunt, flie is not yet recovered, and I cannot leave her, for flie has been very kind to me." " We will," replied Godwin, ct per iliade her to vifit Mrs, Palmer in the furnmer, for my habitation is merely a farm, and not fit for the reception of great Ladies." " Perhaps fo," returned Editha, ' 4 but it will pleafe me; for fine houfes, nor fine clothes, have never yet afforded me much fatisfačtion."
" Godwin
Godwin and Anna foon after took leave of Editha, piomifing о fee 1er the next day, and to take lier into the countty with them, if Mrs. FitLmorris confented. Godwin, on his return to the inn, wrote to his wife, informing her that Anna was perfectly recovered, and with him ; but aï Mrs. Palmer wouid be in town in the com fe of α il w days, he did nut think of 1 jturmvg until ho had ken her. cť í wľi not," faid he to Reuben and Anna, a ihock your beloved mother wit'i an account of the difafters that have hap¬ pened until we are on the fpot to öfter her comfort; nor will I, if poíWe, ever к с obi aged parents be infoi med of the κ Л death of my unhappy brother ; nature, at my fathei's age, could not bear fo levere a blow : I ili a ì 1 fimply theiefore ùy that vol. iv. I he
lic died fuddenly, and expecl you both to be equally cautious, not only at home, but nlfo to Editha and her brother, fiom whom, if poffible, I mean to conceal the unhappy cataftrophe."
CHAP.
CHAP. IX,
ON the Lllwwing morning Godwin and Reuben accompanied Anna to her fıfter'ö, where they left her for the day, Godwin having determined to go to London, and inquiie rcfpecling Mrs, Palmer, and alio to make arrangements for the future with Mrs. Fitzmorris. He fourni that Lady fomewhat recovered, but ftill very weak írom her ilinefs. She received Godwin and his fon coldly, but expveffed her concern at the death of her brother-in-law, and inquired particularly whether he had left any will. 12 "I
" I bve not, Madam," replied he; <f for as yet í have been unable to make any fearch ; but I fliould rather fuppofe he had not made any regular one, as this paper was on his table." Godwin then prefented it to Mrs. Fitz¬ moiris, who confide; ed it feme time iu filen.". At length fJd fb, "I have ire- quern ly found your brother guilty of dupli¬ city, but never fufpečled it could extend fo far. Li the ili it place he pafied himfelf on my father as the enh fm of a Scotch Gen- tleman, who had left him а fortune of ten thoufand pounds. This fum he undoubtedly pofiefied, but ftill hb birth was a falíheod. He Iikewife, for I know not what reafon, concealed hb name, anel married my filler by that of Edwin, which now appears to be only his baptifinal one ; die marriage I therefore conceive not valid, confequently the children muft be illegitimate; now, though
thouah I íhould not be inclined to notice this, yet vou may be afìurcd my fifter will- She married without the confent of my father, who was never reconciled to her, and having а lai ge family, wiîi hardly lofe this ορροί tunity of gaining her íha. e of the pio- pe ï ty ¿ yu-u may iheiefore, Sir, expečl α law i ait." " Indeed I fidali not," replied Godwin > "for I will readily, in behalf of the children, relinquifh it, if not indubitably their right -, neverthelefs, if on inquiry I find juftiee on their fide, I will defend them to the extent of all I pofifefs : They are a legacy left me by an unhappy brother, and are welcome claimants both on my love and protection." " May I afk, Sir," faid Mrs. Fitzmorris, whether the ten thoufand pounds your brother poileflcd was his paternal fortune V
4
«It
" ït was not, Madam," returned Godwin ; 4f it was left him by his firft wife; his pater¬ nal fortune would have been, fimply, the reverfion of a farm, much integrity, and un- blemifhed honefty. Alas î had he never kit u?, he had poffeffed them/" " You do not fure mean to infer, that you зге nt this time a Farmer, Sir r" " I am, indeedj Madam/ 1 Mr?. Fitzmorris paufed for a moment, then faid: " And pray who is this Anna Godwin, v.horn he has Ib liberally made a fharer in my fifter's fortune r" <ť His daughter, Madam: Had fiie not the honour to be for fome time under your protection ?" <c You cannot furely mean Mifs Palmer ? Tiie Lady who introduced her to me is a woman
woman of family and fortune, a;ui would >corn fuch a déception." Godwin explained how he furmiftd îh*; miitake had ariifen, and though Mrs. Iriiz- moni.s in r!ie continuation of the difcourfe, behaved u idi inert afeu cooîne^, ftill he pre- ferv.-d the equaiity of his temper ; but finding hib viiìc neither likely io pr^ve íatis- Xadmry to hhnfelf, iv;r iidv.ur.igeous Lo his brother's children, he ас length cool; leave, having fignificd that he ihould cor. ful c his fi tends on what fhe had advanced, and let her know the refuk after the limerai» Godwin then called at the houfe that Mr?. Palmer had occupied in town, and kfc a let¬ ter for that Lady ihould lhe return, then with his fon rode back to Hounilow, and leaving Keuben to take care of Anna, went on alone to the houfe of his brother on the Heath, as he wiíhed to obtain what intelligence he 14 t could*
could, that he might be able either to defend in cafe of necefiitv, the claims of the t hil- dren, or, if he found the bufinefs hopcleib, xo M\\'t it U"> w ithout further trouble. 1 Ian is he apprehended was thv roughly acquainted with the whole, and thuefore fending for h'm into a priv-ie apartment he aeldicfled him Lîius : <f You will oblige me by relating all you know refpecting my brother from the time he left England; circumilances have arifen that render it neceffary I iliould hear that which I would ctherwife be excufed from ; nor will I be unmindful of tiie trouble I give you/' " Ah, Sir I" replied Harris, ci before I begin 1 muft entreat you to fummon all your fortitude, and alfo that you would remember that, though I have not behaved mth the ftricteft rectitude, ftill I was only a fervant, and
and acted under the influence, and by the commands of a mailer." Cf Renounce your errors, and hereafter you fiiall not want encouragement to aft uprightly," replied Godwin. Harris bowed, and, after a paufe, began his recital.
15
CHAP*
CHAP. X,
u Ji ñ Y mafter, Sir," Ш Παπί?, " nevei.
1 fct lieve, lightly íecovercd the íkaih of the Lady who died in child-bed, for ever after that (vent he grve into а habi: of drinking, and, I truly beheve, rulhed into t\ery othei íj. ecies of dillipation meiely to ill fie reflection. On his repurchafmg into the army, the regiment was on the point of embarking for the Weft-indies, but a ilorm overtaking us a* we left the Channel wc beat about fome time,
time, and at length, wkh much ď.íľiculty, hmîîc Jei fey, v. nere wc fiate! to refit. In the fame regiment was a Mr. Darleville, who fome time befoie hid foucrht with Mr. Whitmoie, heknew n.y m liter paifecHy wt il, and for iome fpite he bore htm (1 foip-wCt on the iccount of ?\Tts. \\ hin:i(>re) v. a s con- tinuallv endeavo-uring to degrade him to the* reit of the ofi'cers, lefiecling on his Liith, or ciicumilances of the hke nature. My mailer, prdon me, Si", had gie.it pi ide, and leKnted this io heniouflv ::ια: he chal¬ lenged Darlevf.le, who not only i^uwd л íljht wound, but was alio obW ed to aii; his pardon.. Thus bufuufs, ho\\i\cr, < .1 4.iled my mailer totally wstíi tne àii^v, ¿nd b 'ote ť eiegurent lit Je» ley eieteiiiiir.fd hm to ivlinquuh it airogetiier, w hien ас kn^rii he eiid v.iih iome lois. Soon а it e r the íl d p failed, and α r e\v c\ 4 vs aUer we embai ked for So*.uiampum, v,.h"j lo we
we liad been but a fhort time when my maf¬ ter unluckily had a quartel with a Gentleman at the hazard table, h içh words enfuinp· they withdrew together, and in the heat of paffion fettled their difference by the fworel, witiiOut féconds or witnefs. The confequence of this duel was the im¬ mediate death of my mafter's opponent, and he had no refource to avoid the hand of juftiee but flight, without lofi» of time there¬ fore wc fet off for Portfmouth, where we arrived in a few hour*. On inquiry we found a Weft-India ftiip, bound to a diflerent part from that where my matter's late regiment was deftined. As they only waited for a wind, my mafter immediately adopted the plan of going with them, taking his paffage by the name of Thomas Edwin, Efq; to prevent all fufpicion. On board the fame veifel were Mr. Fitz¬ morris and two daughters, who had been fome time
time in England for the benefit of that Gen¬ tleman's health; but were now returning to their eftate, which lay fome diftance from КтцЛоп in Jamaica. The elder t)f the Ladies was Mrs. Fitzmorris, now living, and the other MifsEelitha, afterwards my mafter's wife. To this familv he paifed himfelf as the only fon ofa Scots Gentleman lately dead, and added, that he propofed, provided he liked the Weft-Indies, to purchafe an eftate there, as his fortune was too fmall to fupport him as he wifhed in Europe. Few men were more calculated to pleafe than my mailer at that perioei, and not only Mifs Editha, but her father alfo was greatly taken with him, fo that before the end of the voyage the old Gentleman, whofe favourite daughter fhe was, had told him, that he wouid willingly give her to him wich fifteen thoufand pounds on their arrival, Mr, Fitzmorris was a man of ftričt morals, and would as foon have married his daughter 6 to
to α robber as to a ducllift, my mafter there¬ foie did not dure reveal to him the leal reafon of bis leaving Fn^bnci, nor yet his change of ivime, neither was it poffible with his own fafety, as thx man v.as dead. One eve'ri-g, being alone with him in his cairn, after fonje piev»oib difcourfe, he ad- di «-fled me thus : "Harris, 1 have fuch an opinion of your fidelity, that I fliall noticru- pie to declare my real defigiv, to confefs tuilv, my he^rt never loved but once, nor cm it ever mote; but MiK Fiľzmoiv/s for¬ tune is too great an (»fier to be flighted ; her pet fin too ís amiable, and I think I canne: do tetter than marry her, as fne h α con¬ nexion will at once ina cafe my foitunt, and pwe me rtfpečtabni y in the countiv. Mr. Fitzmorris has а Ιρή* portion of fan. dy piiJe, ihould 1 rhttefore enfilo e ã)y real ongin he would c.ifcud me i.i an mitant, J will for that icuibn ftill retain fhe appelLtion ^e is acquainted with, which will be ρρκ'χν,ΐ both on
orr that account and in regard fo my own üftty. My own family, I am convinced, defpife and hate me, and I am determined to endeavour to forget them ; Mr. Fitz- moiTb too hinted the other day, that, as he had no fon, he cuuld wifli his d uighter's huiband to affume his name, for which pur¬ pofe an Act of Parliament could be erfily obtained; that circumftance too will alfo affift in concealing me, for the name of Godwin would immediately rend to a dif- coveiy, whereas in that of Fitzmorris all will be forgotten. On our arrival in Jamaica the marriage took place, and my mafter, for the firil fix months kept fo ftučt a guard on himfelf, that he ftood highly in Mr. Fitzmonis's opinion. At that period the old Gentleman died, and left ten thoufand pounds to his ekk it daughter, and the teiidue oí the aikitc to your brother, provided that, willim the courfe of one year, he affumed the name and arms- of
of F : tzmorris ; his other daughter he did not mention, as flie had married fome time before without his confent. This event was highly gratifying to my mailer, who immediately took the neceffary fteps. Mr. Fitzmorris's old agent in London was employed, and the bufinefs effectually fettled within the fpecified time. I will not fcruple to fay, that I believe he confidered himfelf greatly in my power,. for he behaved with more kindnefs to me than to any other of his domeftics^ and was Iikewife particularly generous to me ; in fnort, Sir, it was no wonder I was attached to him. Mrs, Fitzmorris, who was both a charming woman, and poffefied of an excellent temper^ he never loved, tho' he always endeavoured, when iober, to behave with politenefs to her ; but any one might plainly iee his con¬ duci
dučt preyed on her fpirits, and undermined her health. In ten months after the mar¬ riage Mifs Editha was born, and the year following a fon, v* ho was chriftened William after his rrandfather Fitzmorris ; but even thefe events g^vc my mafter no apparent pleafure, his temper became daily more ovei bearing ond iniufferable to his dependants, fo that llaves alene, who had no refource, would bear with it. In his fits of intoxica* tion, his pallions, however excited, knew no bounds, and in thofe moments he has even been known to correct the female flaves with his own hand, that perhaps the da) before he had taken to his embraces: But you ihud¬ der, Sir; lhall I fetch you aglafs of wine r" cf A glafs of water," returned Godwin, Cf and afterward?, if you pleafe, abridge your narrative as much as poffible." Harris, having prefented the water, con¬ tinued thus ; — " My mafter had engaged,» almoft
airnoíl immediately auer his father-in-law's death, а furgeon to attend the cítate; this young nun 'm time became his favourite companion, and I believe was the inftigator of much of the mifchiefthat was perpetrated j for, previous to iivmg in Jamaica, he had been furgeon to a Guinea u ader, and head tht hfe of а ilave only at the exact puce it would bring, the infii m and a;-td thtreh ie experience. i but little me:cy fio ,v * him, and 1 fincerely beheve, that many on our citate perilned fiom want of care, when they began to be pail their labour. My miftrefs, how¬ ever, 1 muft fay, to the extent of her power, afiifted them when fhe knew of their ficknefs, or other calamities. When my mailer had been married about eleven years, a number of negroes were to be difpofed of at an adjoining plantation : — At the fale he purchaied two, a mulatto boy and girl, the fit ft about eighteen, the latter two years younger, and* remai kably hand- fome^
fome, notwithftanding her complexion. She unhappily pleafed my mailer, and I believe he fpared no pains to feduce her ; but in vain, as ilie became particularly attached to my miftrefs, which poifibly might а fiift to render his attempts fiuitlcfs, though I am wellawaie that both promifes and threats were em¬ ployed. One evening that 1 happened to сапу fome wine to my mailer and the furgeon in the parlour, I heard the latter fay, e< You are too fcrupulous, I will give you fome- thing to-morrow, which adminiftered in a glafs of wine, or punch, will filence all ob¬ jections. I heard no more, nor indeed did I think about it until two days after, when I was informed that the hand iome mulatto was dying, and had d celai ed to Julia that it was occafioned by fomething admi¬ niftered in punch ! It then ftruck me that the difcourfe 1 had heard was relative to k, and in this fuppofition I was confirmed by
by the behaviour of my mailer, who during the âàv appeared peculiai ly unhappy, or lather half frenzieel, and, though doubtlefs eveiy piecaution was ufed, the giti at length died, though not before fre had told Julia that your brother had taken advantage of the ft upor in which Ше at firft lay. Julii», who was a great favourite with my miilrefs, did not fail to inform her of this, and whether her health declined from that time, or fiom any natur?! caufe, or that grief by degrees undermined her conftitution, I know not ; but fhe never, I believe, fmiled afterwards, and in lefs than a year died appa¬ rently ofa confumption ; but I believe never complained to any one, not even to her fifter, who lived on a fmall eft ate adjoining us. . About fix weeks previous to this event, as my mailer was returning home on horfeback from a vifit, on päffing a fmall wood, he received
received a piftol fhot in his moulder, and had doubtlefs falhn, as the Mie was repeated, but for the fleetnefs of his horfe, fortunately, however, he efcaped with only one wound, ^hich did not prove dangerous. At fiift we could not bv any means furmife who was the author of thL· attempt; but we were not long in fufpenfe, for tht following even¬ ing the fuigeon was mortally wounded, in eroding a plantation, by the mulatto lad who was puah Jed widi the girl, and was laid to be l^r lover ; though the furgeon was fcnfelefs when firft difcovered he fui- vived iome hours, and recovei ed fuffici- enriy to difclofe who had wounded him; but notwithftanding all poffible Ĺ-arch was made it was without affedt; the man was never taken, having doubtlefs either made away with himfelf, or efcaped to the moun¬ tains, and joined the rebellious negroes. Thefe events all confpired to render Ja¬ maica hateful to my mailer, and he talked of
of returning to Europe, and fettling in France, ns he might live there in ùfety ; however, after much deliberation, he came to the refolution to knd me firft to England, to inquire into every thing that might con¬ cern his return thither, for, faid he, " Tho* J believe í am much altered, yet poifibly not enough fo to prevent my being known by any of my former acquaintance, and then tue fubterfuge of my name, and that ac- curfcd duel will be remembered. — During my thirteen years refidence here ï have never fctn but one perfon that I was acouainted with in England, and he knew nocl.irg of the rencontre at Southampton, nor that I had ever changed my name to any other th?n Fitzmorrisi and that man, I was informed by the news-paper, lived but a flioit time after he reached England, I have therefore little to apprehend from him."
« Yet
x < Yet in all piob.-o.iity it was fiom him the agent heard it," faid Godwin, if for he informed me, on my inquiry, that my bro¬ ther was advantageoufiy mai ried, but he knew nothing farther." ťC Well then," re fumed Harri?, my mailer continued, tc you ih ail go to England, make particular inquiry after the few people I was known to, eloeciaiiv Mrs. Vvhicrnoie and Darleville ; for if either of thofe ne m England í will not return, but if they fnou-d be either dcd¿, or gone f -от thence, I fhail not he fita te, as í had very few cafual ac¬ quaintance, and fhould be ilaiccly recognized after fuch an abfence, particularly under an¬ other name." This refolution was not fufiered to cool ; 1 departed in the ruft veifel, and reached England in fafety, where, on inquiry, I found Mrs. Whitmore had been dead two years; that Darleville had made intereft, and was fettled
fettled at M ad rafs in a lucrative fituation, and finally, what I knew would give my mafter great fatisfačtion, the man who kept the hazard-table at Southampton, and was the only witnefs of the quarrel, though not of the duel, was daa ; fo that I foon wrote back word that I believed he had nothing to ft^áVj but might venture to return when he pleaied. Soon after he came to England, and deter¬ mined to return to the Weft- Indies no more, therefore put up the eftate and negroes for faie. You know the reft, Sir, and I have only to add, that he now drank harder than ever, gave more way to paffion, and feldom tlepc at home. From one of thofe nocturnal revels he returned 'me morning before break of day, in a ftate of abfolute diftračtion, beating his head againft the wainfcot, and acting a thoufand extravagances, the caufe of which I
î could never truly learn ; but he once hinted' that he had by fome chance met a relation." Godwin fighed, and judged it to be Emma. ct Enough," faid he, f£ I have but one more queftion : " Had we not come at that fortunate moment to Anna's refcue, where was fiie to have been conveyed ? And fay, has fhe fuffered groffer infults than I was witnefs to ?" Harris hefitated ; but a ftern look from Godwin urged him to proceed : — Cf My mafter, Sir," refumed he, " meant to carry her to France ; he was charmed with her at firft fight, and would have married her."' <c I had," replied Godwin, rt this morning 1 a few minutes converfation alone with the negro woman, whom you call Julia, and was inquiring of her refpecting Anna's ilinefs, — She faid fomething that at once arrefted my attention, and almoft petrified me with hor- voL. iv. К ror¿
ror; when Anna opened the door, and fhe prudently dropped the difcourfe, and I my que fiions ; but her aniwers feemed to imply that my brother was the caufe of her ilinefs ; fay, was it fo, you doubtlefs are acquainted ?" Harris finding by this that all would doubtlefs be difcovered, replied. ťt I call God to witnefs, that in this I at leaft was innocent, for my mafter had fent me that evening to London with orders to ftay until the morning, and bring back werd of Mrs. Fitzmorris's health ; nor did I know any thing of the bufinefs in agitation, until his alarm at the danger of Mifs Anna pro¬ claimed it." " I have not queftioned her," replied Godwin, " becaufe I would not fiiock her with the remembrance, but fliall require the truth of Julia."
"Alas-!
" Alas ! Sir, Mifs Anna knows nothing, and Julia only from furmife ; for ihe, as I have informed you, had attended the mu¬ latto." " Great God Î" interrupted Godwin, — u you furely cannot mean it. Edwin could not be fuch a ------ " villain he would have laid ; but the word died on hib lips as he recollected the expiation, " My mailer undoubtedly," refumed Harris ; " for lie confefled it to me in his fright, had adminiftered a dole of the fame kind that he gave that unhappy girl ; but a moft miraculous circumftance prevented it being favourable to his willies/' (< Be quick," interrupted Godwin, " and relieve my fufpenfe." " My mailer, when he thought fhe was afleep, entered the apartment, where he К 2 found
found her completely dreflèd; but on ap¬ proaching to gaze on her, a fight inftantly ftruck him, that at once removed all the ideas with which he entered the chamber ; for on her hand, which lay croffed over her bofom, was the identical ring that he had made the pledge of his faith to his firft love, and which he afterwards faw on her finger when in the coffin. This fight had fo violent an eftecì, as he informed me, that he funk into a chair by the bed-fide; the words of your fifler* in¬ law, whenever fhe looked at the ring during her infinity, and which your old fer¬ vam had informed him cf, feemed to iound in his eat ĺ — íc I am Fdwin's wife." lie like- wife told mc, that, in the frenzied anguiíh of the moment, he looked round, expecting to fee her ftand befide Jiini. After he was a little recovered he withdrew the ring fiom her hand, hoping to find he had
had miftaken; but the initials of his own name, that were engraven on the reverfe, confirmed his terror and amazement j in addition to which, at that inftant Mifs Anna was feized with fits, her fcreams alarmed Julia, who immediately came to her, and remained during the night. I muft confeis I perfuaded my mafter that the ring had merely come into her poffeffion by chance, and he eager to quiet his own uneafinefs, endeavoured to believe it was fo ; but I am convinced it caufed him great alarm, as well as incieafed unhappinefs." Godwin now arofe from his chair, and foon after withdrew without vifiting the apart¬ ment where his brodier 's body was depofited.
КЗ
CHAP.
CHAP. XL
GODWIN returned to the inn in a ftate of mind that fhunned all obfervance, and retired for fome hours to his chamber before he could affume fufficient compofure to join Anna and Reuben, the former of whom he could not look upon without exe¬ crating the villany which could plot the de¬ ftručtion of fuch innocence. Two days after, at a very early hour, the remains of Edwin were privately interred in the neareft burial place, and, to the great relief
relief and fatisfačtion of all, the evening fol¬ lowing brought their beloved Mrs. Palmer. In embraces, queilions and tears, the hours were puffed until the night was far advanced, all at length retiring to reft with minds much relieved by the foothing interference of true friendfliip. Onthe morning following, Godwin drawing Mrs. Palmer afide, requefted her opinion re¬ jecting his brother's children, at the fame time acquainting her with all that had paifed. a My heart," faid he, " prompts me to relinquifh fuch ill-gotten wealth even for them ; but if you think it my duty to en¬ deavour to defend it, I will do violence to my inclination and attempt it; but never íhall Anna ihare money thus procured." íť My advice then, my good friend," re¬ plied ihe, " will, I fancy, be conformable to your wifhes. A law fuit would but reveal К 4 the
the actions of your unhappy brother, and, perhaps, be productive of no real advantage, fome way may be found/'continued ihe, with a fmile, <c to recompenfe them for their lofs, if they are virtuous, for you know not how rich I am become fince we parted." The entrance here of the waiter with a letter put a ftop to the difcourfe ; it was from Mrs. Fitzmorris, and contained thefe words : S J R, <f Since I faw you I have heard from my fifter, with whom, though I have had no communication for feveral years, yet I thought juftiee required I ihould inform her of the bufinefs in queftion ; and the refult is, that if you do not relinquim İt, we fhail jointly fue for the purchafe money received for theeftate, and iikewife what property.your brother died poíľeíľed of, to make up the deñciency. As you were candid enough to mention
mention your real circumilances when you called on me, I by no means mui to in¬ cumber you with the expence that muft na¬ turally attend the care of William and Editha, who, though the children of my filler, I muft Iiereafter bluíh to produce to the world as fuch. My lifter and felf íhall not proceed until we have your anfwer. I remain^ Sir, Your humble fer vant, h. FITZMORRIS." Godwin prefented the letter with a fmile to Mrs. Palmer, who having read it, anfwered : " Poor narrow-minded woman ! 1 iliould fincerely pity the children were they to be dependent on her, I have aheady given you my opinion, and while you reply to her letter, fhail take Reuben and Anna with me to vifit Editha." К 5 Godwin,
Godwin, being left alone, immediately anfwered Mrs. Fitzmorris's letter as follows : Madam, " Before the receipt of yours my deter¬ mination was taken ; I have neither time nor inclination for a law fuit, and truft I fliall be able to provide for my brother's children without having recourfe to fuch difagree¬ abîe means, though I am of opinion that juftiee would give a verdict in their favour, their right being obvious : — But to hâve done with this fubječt, I could wifli you to fend fome one, or be prefent y oui felf, at the opening of my brother's efcrutoir, which I lealed up. His papers, of no value, I íhall undoubtedly claim; but will give up every other property, there or elfew here, to whom you íhall appoint. Your offer, re· ípečting the children, I muft beg leave to decline; the expence of them I fliall not feel, and, as you candidly own, you, who are the
the fifter of their unoffending mother, ihat you íhould bluíh hereafter to produce them to the world, what reception may they not expect from ftrangers ? — I, however, wifh to fpaie both them and you fuch mortification, as my feelings are fortunately not fo acute, nor my friends of that clafs, who will blame them for the errors of their unhappy father. I have nothing more to add, but to requerí you would let all bufinefs be fettled between us as fpeedily as poíľible, as ï íhall fend for my nephew from fchool immedi¬ ately, intending to take him home with me. I am, Madam, Your humble fervant, W. GODWIN." Mis. Palmer, who foon after· returned with Anna and Editha, whom ihe had taken from fchool, approved the letter, which was fent off immediately. Кб On
On the day following Mrs. Palmer went to London alone, and though ihe had not mentioned it to Godwin before her departure, called on Mrs. Fitzmorris. That Lady re¬ ceived her with moie coolnefs than ufual, and appeared violently piqued at Godwin's reply to her letter. <c I came, Madam," faid Mrs. Palmer, to thank you for your kindneíš to my Anna, and alfo to congratulate you on your reco¬ very from fo fevere an inuiipoiit'on.** Mrs. Fitzmorris bowed.— <f í underftood, Madam," replied ihe, fi that the young perfon you left with me was your daughter, or I cannot fay I ihould fo readily have accepted the charge." " Indeed I am fo accuflomed to call Anna íny child, and to treat her as fuch," faid Mrs. Palmer, " that I do not wonder aç your miftake j but I hope flic has not dif- graced your kindnefs ?" « She 4
t( She is I underftand," replied Mrs. Fitz¬ morris, haughtily, <r a natural daughter to that man whom I was unfortunate enough for many years to call my bi other, and who had the affurance, as I fuppofe you know, not only to bequeath her a ihare of the fortune he had no right to, but alfo to leave my filler's children to the care of hib brother, a Farmer/' c< I am indeed informed of it," replied Mrs. Palmer ; " but you i fancy mifconccive the real fituation in life of Mr. Godwin, or you would not finti him inferior to a planter; it is true he is a Farmer, but his Farm, which is confiderable, is his own, and I can give you my word that hb children will have very icfpeČtable fortunes. "As for the fuher of Anna I never faw him but twice, and that was here when I cal¬ led for her, and as he then knew not her perfon,
perfon, neither did he when he wrote that paper know her connexions and expectan¬ ces, which I affure you are confiderable enough to make her look down on any be- queft he might leave her, and transfer it to her brother and fifter." This was fpoken intentionally to punifh Mrs. Fitzmorris's pride ; it did fo, and the Lady became more condefcending, pro¬ mifing to attend perfonally the day following at Hounflow, Mrs. Palmer replying, that fhe would do herfelf the honour to accom¬ pany her to the Heath. The following morning Mrs. Fitzmorris was true to her appointment, and with her attorney, Mrs. Palmer and Godwin, went to the houfe that was late Edwin's. The efcru- toir and drawers were opened in her pre¬ fence, and fecurities found to the amount of thirty thoufand pounds, all of which Mr. Godwin furrendcred to Mrs. Fitzmorris, ι on
on receiving an acquittal from her and her fifter 5 after which they feparated good friends, Mrs. F.tzmorris propofing to fee them again in two days, their intention being to depart for Inglewood on the third. On the morning before Godwin had fent Reuben, accompanied by Mrs. Palmeris fervant, to fetch his nephew William from Winchefter, and with whom they arrived the fécond day after. If Mrs. Palmer and Godwin were pleafed with Editha, they were not lefs fo with her brother, who was equally aulefs and «ffec- tionate, and as much flutered by bein« beloved. Reuben with tendernefs had in¬ formed him of his fathei's death, though о not of the means, before they began the journey, and though his grief had at firft been bitter, yet the many cLims that feemed to replace the lofs of aparent, who had never treated him with kindnefs, foon calmed his affliction. The
The following morning brought Mrs. Fitzmorris, who in reality appeared hurt to part with Editha ; at the repeated entreaty of Mrs. Palmer ihe at length condefcended to promife to vifit her the enfuing fummcr, and at her departure prefented her nephew and niece witn a fifty pound note each for pocket money. Godwin then fent for Harris, and taking him apart, inquired how in future he meant to ďiípofe of himfelf? « I have wifhed, Sir," replied Harris, "to retire to my own country, which is Sorner- fetfhire, and for that purpofe have for fome years been endeavouring to realize a fum fufficient to purchafe an annuity for my life, that-might enable me to live decently. ,> " And have you obtained the means ?'* demanded Godwin»
«I
fC I have about five hundred pounds," — replied Harris; tc but the purchafe I am told will take another hundred." " On my return home I will remit what will make up the deficiency," faid Godwin; * c and I hope the remainder of your life wiU make amends for the impropriety of the earlier part of it." Harris expreffed his thanks, then added : " Mrs. Fitzmorris, Sir ordered me this morning to bring my mafter's watch to you, and receive your orders concerning his clothes." <ť Give the watch to William," anfwered Godwin ; — " for the clothes they are yours." He then pulled the bell, and defired the waiter to fend up his nephew, who obeying the command, Harris prefented him with the watch,
watch, which the youth received with a moiftened eye, and an expiefiive look at his uncle, then at Harris· " If I underftand that glance aright, Wil¬ liam/* faid Godwin, <f it requires this anfwer ; your intention İs praife worthy, act as your heart direcìs." William wanted no fécond permiffion, but prefented the note, given him by Mrs. Fitz¬ morris, to his father's fervant ; Harris having repeated his thanks, Godwin bade him adieu, and with his nephew joined his friends, who waited his pre fence to fupper.
CHAP.
С FI A P. XIL
AT five the next morning the party journied homeward, Mrs. Palmer, Anna, Editha, William and Julia, in a poft coach, and Godwin his fon on horfeback. On the ñfth evening they arrived within fight of home, Godwin at once elated with the thoughts of embracing his family, and depreffed how to break the death of Edwin to his father, for every occurrence was unknown to them, as he had only fpecifieel in his let ;er that Anna was with him and well, and that he waited for Mrs* Palmer to return. The noife of the carriage announced
announced them, and in a moment the whofe family were at the gate. Pleafure for fome time overcame the curiofity, that the appear¬ ance of ftrangers would otherwife have ex¬ cited, Edward alone being acquainted with Editha, and flying to her with a rapture too great to fuffer his welcome to be eloquent,— A little recovered, they entered the houfe, wheie Godwin taking his nephew and niece by the hand, led them towards his father, faying, as they knelt to the venerable old man : f< The bleffmgs of Heaven, my be¬ loved parent, multiply upon us ! 'Receive thofe innocents, their claim upon you is great, they are the children of my brother." The elder Godwin was for fome time too much amazed to reply ; at length burfting into a flood of tears, he threw his feeble arms around their necks and bleffed them. 1 William Godwin, fearing the furprife íhould be too much for him, defired the young
young people to withdraw for a few minutes, a command that was inftantly obeyed, and he was left with his father Bernard, Mrs. Palmei, and his wife. " Oh! fpeak, my fon," cried Godwin, t£ what means this ? Say, have my prayers been heard ? Is Edwin repentant, for you have doubtlefs ften him ? Shall I be io bleffed before I die r" <f Alas ! my father," replied he, " Edwin is no more ! His laft requeft was my pro¬ tection of his children." Cf May his errors be obliterated, and may he ieftin peace !" ejaculated Godwin : "But lay, my ion, have not theie chtldien a mother ?" William then, in as careful a manner as poffible, informed his father of his brother's change of name, his marriage in Jamaica, and
and its fubfequent confequences furprefting every thing he poffibly could that would give pain, and foftenİng what he could not abfolutely conceal, finally concluding, by informing him that Edwin's death was fud- den, and almoft immediately after their meeting. S " God forgive him," replied Bernard ;— wiping off a tear that hung on his cheek, tť I once loved him as my own fon, and I dare fay he was forry after all. As fure as can be it was the furprife of feeing William that overcame him, for I remember when I was young, and any thing gave me parti¬ cular pleafure, I ufed to feel as if at once all the blood in my body ruihcd to my head and heart." " The effects of furprife are frequently fatal," replied Mrs. Palmer. Whether Godwin was of the fame opinion is uncertain; but he made no obfervation H refpecting
refpecting his fon's death, bur rather appeared to decline the fubječt, and turning to William faid, cc Thy family is increafed, my fon, I truft thy bkffings will do the fame," " I doubt it not, my father," returned he; " if they admit of increafe, which I think on earth is almoft impoffible." The young people were now called in, and the venerable Godwin faluting them round, retired, faying, " I will leave you this night, to-morrow my fpirits will be more ccmpofed, the ways of Providence are ever juft, but the weaknefs of man doth not always fubmit with becoming refigna- tion." After fome trivial refrefhment Mrs, Pal¬ mer propofed to go to her own houfe ; but the whole party had fo many queilions to afk, and fo much information to receive, that the x night was far advanced before they feparated,
feparated, Editha accompanying Mrs. Pal¬ mer and Anna, attended by Julia. William Godwin being left alone with Fanny, related to her the whole that had paffed refpecting his brother, and alio his refigning the fortune that appertained to the children :— <c A ftep," concluded he, " that I did not at firil propofe ; but when I had heard Harris's account of my brother, I muft con¬ fefs I thought itat once juft and prudent, as· Edwin certainly became intitled to it by dif- honourable means, which I would rather die than have laid open to the world. His children will, I truft, be of the fame opinion, and we muft endeavour, my love, to make up to them in affection what they have loft in fortune." Fanny, who feldom had a feparate opinion from her huiband, immediately acquiefced, adding— " If I miftake not, Editha may fome time hence become yet nearer related to
to us, for Edward has fcarcely talked of any one elfe fince your departure, and, however highly he has fpoken of her, I cannot fay I think he has flattered her, for (he appears to merit all his encomiums.
tol. iv. t, CHAP*
CHAP. XIII.
THOUGH a cloud for fome time ap¬ peared to hang over the fpirits of the family at Inglewood, at length it began to difperfe, and cheerfulnefs to refume its place among them. The fprighdy good humour of Editha made her univerfally beloved, and the pains ihe took to amufe her grandfather whenever íhe read a trait of melancholy on his face, even on a lefs fufceptible heart could not have failed of its eifect : "Go along, Anna, would (he lay, if ihe faw her attending Godwin, you have had a grand¬ father
father all your üre, and have had your ihare of careíľes, and he can fpare no more until he has paid me the fifteen years arrears he Hands indebted to mej you have another advantage over me too, you call Mr. and Mrs. Godwin father and mother, while I fay uncle and aunt, which is a very provoking circumftance, and what I íhall not allow, for you íhall either fink to my level, or I will rife to yours ; nay, I will put it to the vote, my grandfather and Mr, Bernard will I know be for me»" iC You have ufed bribery there/* replied Fanny, laughing, " for you are for ever courting my father»" <c And are you proof againft it ?" anfwered Editha, throwing her arms about her neck : " Can you refufe me ?" " Not I, indeed" returned Fanny, preffing her to her bofom, ' ς Call me henceforward what beft pleafes thy affectionate heart/* La « My
" My mother, then," anfwered ihe, bend¬ ing her knees before her, then turning to William Godwin as he embraced her, ihe added : " Ah ! how happy am I to have a father, who fuffers me to love him, and boldly tell him fo/' The laft fentence brought an uneafy re¬ membrance on all, even Editha's own eyes filled with tears ; but haftily wiping them off ihe added : " See, I believe they are all jea¬ lous, not one congratulates me, truly I be-· lieve they all expect to be bribed." " Fee them then," returned William God¬ win, " and you are fure of their fuffrages." " And fo I will," kiffing the old men, and then Reuben ; but advancing to Edward, ihe hefitated a moment, but at length pre¬ fented her glowing cheek, faying, archly, as ihe replaced herfelf by the fide of Fanny : " I am glad it is over, for Edward looked 6 as
as if he would have demanded a double fee/* Some days after this conversion Reuben found courage to addrefs his father on the fubječt neareft his heart, namely, an union with Anna, his father promifing to confult Mrs. Palmer, and to let him know the refuk in a ihort tíme. A council of the elders of the family were a few days after furnmoned to mrct ac Mrs. Palmer's, where it was fettled, that the fenior Godwin, accompanied by that Lady, fhould declare, on the enfuing Sunday ac church ? that Anna was the daughter of his youngeft fon Edwin,, lately dead, but from prudential motives had been paifed as the child of the elder until the preient time, a truth which Mrs« Palmer would confirm. It was alfo refolved, that Reuben fhould have permiflion to addrefs Annas but that their marriage fliould not take place until he had attained L 3 the
the nge of twenty-one, which was yet two years diflant, and that, finally, when it did the new man ied pair íhould entirely refide with Mrs. Palmer, " as," added that Lady, i( in my life I have loved them, neither at my death fhail they find themfelves for¬ gotten/* Thofe refolves were communicated to Reuben by hb father, who approved nil but the kn<nh of time, for wLch, howewr, he had no remedy but patence. The declaration was accordingly made the enfuing Sunday after fervice, and though at firft it occafioned great furprife, and many whifpeis, yet Godwin was too greatly re- fpccbd, and Mrs Palmer too much honoured, for it to have difagreeabîe confequences, the ^ld folks only recalling the piteous ftory of , us to tiieir remembiance, who they viouo: d not was the mother, and » Jadng it to rhcir ehildi en, the g"<ris dropping а tear at
at her fare, and the boys declaring that falf¬ hood would have been impoifibie, had ihe been as handfome as Anna. About fix months after this event an ex¬ prefs arrived at Mrs. Palmer's from Mrs. Fitzmorris, defiling that Lady to requeft Mr. Godwin would permit her nephew and niece to come immediately to town, as her health, which liad never been completely re-efta- bjirhed, declined daily. Godwin immedi¬ ately contented, and Mrs. Palmer, with her ufual kindnefs, propofed to accompany them, an event that had much weight with Mrs. Fitzmorris, who not only expreffed great pleafure on their arrival, but alio at the account Editha had frequently given her by letter of her fituation» Mrs. Fitzmorris was apparently in the laft ftage of а decline on their arrival, which flic furvived barely fix weeks, leaving Mrs. Pal¬ mer, whom, in fpite of her former preju- L 4 dices,
dices me was become attached to, her execu« trix, and William and his fifter joint heirs to fifteen thoufand pounds ihe poíľcíľed from the death of Edwin, together with her own paternal fortune of ten thoufand. Her funeral over, and the bufinefs fettled, all impatiently longed to return to Inglewood, where they were received with equal plea¬ fure, William Godwin rejoicing that his brother's children had now their right, with¬ out the perplexities of law> or expofing the errors of a parent*
CHAP.
CHAP. XIV.
TWO years had paffed in the calm of innocent delights, when Reuben claim¬ ed the promife of uniting him to Anna, and all was prepared accordingly, the marriage being, to the great fatisfačtion of Bernard, a public one, all the neighbours and tenantry were invited, Mrs. Palmer behaving in every circumftance as if it had been her own daughter. At the altar, Bernard, who acìed as father, prefented the trembling hand of Anna to the
the enraptured Reuben, the venerable God¬ win Handing on the right fide of the happy pair. On the ceremony being concluded,. his emotion was too great to be fuppreffed, and, dropping on his knees, he foftly ejacu¬ lated : li Spirits of peace ! fainted form of my beloved wife, and the gentle Agnes ! for a moment may ye be permitted to witnefs this union /* then, after remaining in filent devotion for a ihort time, he arofe, faluted, and bleíľed chenu During fome days all was rejoicing, and Edward, emboldened by the happy fcenc around him, pleaded his caufe fo fuccefsfully to Editha, who at her filler's marriage was in her eighteenth year, that fhe gave him a fort of half permiffion to make fome pro¬ pofals to his father refpecting a fimilar event. " Indeed, Edward," replied Godwin, " I know not what to hy in this cafe ·, Editha will
will have a confiderable fortune : Flowever, fliould it even take place, I muft infill on your waiting the fame time as your brother Reuben ; but before we fpeak decidedly your mother fliall talk to Editha. Mrs, Palmer being confuited on this fub¬ ječt, gave it in favour of Edward.—" Reu¬ ben," laid flie, " I now regard as mine, and Mr. Godwin's property, in common juftiee, ought to revert to his fécond fon ; therefore, if even you think on pecuniary matters, I cannot fee a reafonablc objection." Editha was then called, and Fanny gently reprefented to her, that with her property ihe might marry far more advantageoufiy than her coufin Edward, and defired her to think ferioufly on the fubječt before ihe finally determined." «í I know not, my dear mother," replied Editha, ff how you might like to part with me; but
but for myfelf, I can but anfwer you in die words of Ruth : " I will never leave thee, but live where thou liveft, and die where thou dieft, and there alfo will I be buried. As to Edward/* continued íhe, with more vivacity> " I would not have you think I care fo much for him, not but that I like him better than* any young man I ever faw, or in all likeli¬ hood I ever fliall/' With thefe words away fhe ran, and met the family no more until fupper time. Suffice it, the venerable old men, Godwin and Bernard, lived to witnefs this union, before which event took place, their aged arms had nurfed a Great Grandfon, and they were looking forward to yet another alliance in the family, namely, William and the youth¬ ful Agnes, for whom a houfe was erected adjoining Godwin's. The confolations of an upright mind attended both William Godwin and his Fanny ; the former had truly fpoken, their bleffmgs could hardly admit an increafe, for
for their children were virtuous, and they poffeffed not only the comforts of plenty, but hearts to difpenfe it around them. The faithful Margery lived to behold the Great Grandchildren of her refpečted mailer* and beloved by all in the weaknefs of age, met a grateful return for her former cares ; every branch of the family endeavouring to fmooth her paffage to the grave. Felix was ftill living, and, though ener¬ vated with age, made ihift, almoft daily, to walk to the Farm, fmoak a pipe, and drink a glafs of ale with the feniors, enjoying life while it was granted him, and not fearful of leaving it. Julia, happy in the protection of Mrs. Palmer, had not a wifh unfatisfied, and, be¬ ing particularly fond of children, claimed the office of nurfe to the little one, whom ihe declared almoft comforted her for the lofs of Scipio. The
The young people, bleffed in each other, regarded Mrs. Palmer as their general parent, and the immediate infiniment, in the hand of Heaven, of all their happinefs ; while fiie, looking around with fatisfačtion on her own deeds, was infenfible of the advances of age, which itole on her like a mild autumn, enriched with the fruits of fum mer.
FINIS.
