Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
St. Margaret's cave: or, The nun's story: an ancient legends
St. Margaret's cave : OK, THE NUN's STORY.
CHAP. L Three miles from the sea-coast, in the county of Northumberland, on a hold eminence, and surrounded by a rich valley, stood the ancient castle of Fitzwalter, The western side of the ex¬ tensive domain was open to a view of the country, the north and south bounded by rising w r oods, and the east by the sea, which was prevented from overflowing the shore, by the lofty and tremendous rocks which formed an im- B 2 penetrable
penetrable barrier to the coast. The fertile parts of the valley were inter¬ spersed with cottages appertaining to the vassals of the baron Fii ¿waiter; but, on the side towards the mountains, all was dreary, wild, and desolate, the only inhabitants being the birds of prey that had, undisturbed, built their nests, and fixed their kingdom there for ages immemorial. On the land side of one of the hills was a deep and spacious cavern, hollowed by the hand of the great architect, Nature, closed at the opening by mountain and forest shrubs, and gloomily enlightened by an aper¬ ture in the rock, at least two hundred feet from fhe surface. This recess was called St. Margaret's Cave ; but from what cause had long since been for¬ gotten, but was conjectured to have taken
taken rise from its being nearly adjoin¬ ing to the ruins of an ancient chapel, dedicated to that saint ; though the pea¬ santry of the surrounding country had a tradition among them, that the chapel had taken its name from the cave, as a lady had there found the murdered body of her lover, and erected the chapel to celebrate constant masses for the repose of his soul. This building had probably suffered at the same time as the monastery at Landisfern, or Holy Island, by the sa¬ crilegious ravages of the Danes, and other barbarous nations, from wdiich period it had apparently been aban¬ doned. Such had been the solidity of its original structure, that, though so many centuries had passed since its first desolation, yet time had since done ? 3 but
but little toward its fined destruction. Tlie nave, the sacristy, the altar, seve¬ ral tombs, and the surrounding cloisters, were yet in a state of preservation, though the accumulated dust of ages, together wkh fragments of broken and mouldering stone, in a great measure de¬ faced them. Pious pilgrims and holy friars of difierent orders, who travelled ihrough the country, seidoin passed within a short distance, without turning aside, to offer up their prayers at the ancient chapel ; but as to the country people around, though thcy held the spot in the utmost veneration, yet tbeir respect was mingled with a dread, which made them rather shun than seek it ; and, if any dire necessity, as stray cattle, or other cause, obliged them, ?? ¡an evening, to pass by, tbe roaring
roaring and shrill winds that re-echoed from the hollows of the surrounding mountains, seemed to their scared fan¬ cies mingled with the shrieks of wan¬ dering spirits, whose souls were doomed to suffer, till th«*v were cleansed trom the errors of their mortal life. With minds thus alarmed, even the stone columns that supported the cloisters, frequently, to their bewildered sight appeared to assume human shapes,, and to advance toward them; when, re¬ gardless of all but supernatural objects, their losses were instantly forgotten, and they wonld fly with the speed of greyhounds, nor once look back till home appeared in view. Tiiere, the good wife, with mute amazement, would listen to the dreadful relation, and the children crowding round would ? 4 he
be thrice bidden, before they would dare venture to reach the homely sup¬ per; and, when, at length, dismissed to rest, were sure to repeat an addi¬ tional Ave Maria, till wearied nature was overcome, and their fears were lost in sleep. The baron Fitzwalter, lord of the domain and owner of the castle, was advanced in years. He had retired from public life during the reign of Edward the Fourth. His iamilv con- sisted only of his lady and son, but his dependents were numerous ; for he w r as not of a disposition to retrench in ought from the ancient splendour of his ancestors, though, at his inheriting the estate, he found it heavily incum¬ bered, William Fitzwalter, the only son of the
the baron, w T as generous, noble, va¬ liant, and humane: he had received his education from the best masters, and, at the age of eighteen, had so strongly pressed the baron his father, that he, at length, consented to suffer him to extend his knowledge, by vi¬ sitili cr foreign countries. Before he attained the age of twenty, he had travelled over part of France and Ger¬ many, these countries being then at peace with England. In Germany, he had formed a friendship with a young nobleman, called De Hoffman, eldest son òf the count of that name, and who had been his travelling companion during the whole tour. De Hoffman was eight years older than Fitzwalter, and to the knowledge and perseverance of the German, added ? 5 the
the fascinating sprigbtliness ofa French¬ man; a character which, though to¬ tally dissimilar from that of Fitzwalter, who w r as reflective and serious, did not prevent them from being warmly attached to each other. The most common topic of discourse at this period (1485) was the death of the young princes, Edw r ard the Fourth's children, and the usurpation oi iheir uncle, the duke of Gloucester, now Richard the Third. Tliough the man¬ ner of their death was then unknown, yet there was room for the most foul suspicion, and all good men did not fail tojóin in one wish, that ample re¬ tribution midit fall on the head of tlie tv rant. De Hoffman and Fitzwalter had en¬ tered into these sentiments, with all the 5 w armth
warmth and energy of noble and ge¬ nerous minds ; it is, therefore, not to be wondered at, thaf, in passing through Normandy? where they became ac¬ quainted with the earl of Richmond, they should readilv offer themselves as volunteers in his cause. They, in con¬ sequence, embarked with him from Ilarñeur for England. Supported by a good conscience, br™e men. resolved to conquer or die, seldom fail of success; an observation which was verified in the battle of Bosworth field, where the blood of the tyrant was shed; a poor but just oblation for the murder of his brother's children. In the contest of that memorable day, De Hoffman and Fitzwalter had shewn themselves among the most con- B 6 spicuous,
spicuous, and, fearless of danger, had rushed into the thickest of the fight; so that, the battle being ended, as the earl of Richmond, then loudly pro¬ claimed Henry the Seventh, tendered his thanks to all, he particularly noticed them. " My noble volunteers," said he, " I joy to acknowledge thus publicly the obligations I owe you. — Tliis brave youth," continued he, laying his hand on Fitzwalter's shoulder, " once this day, at his own imminent hazard, repossessed me with a weapon, when mine was struck down; and in the rage of the battle, did the swords of both frequently rush between me and danger." " My lord," answered Fitzwalter modestly
modestly, - you overrate, our services; the cause of this day woidd make even cowards brave." ti The courage and conduct of both yourself and friend, if I may judge from what I have witnessed," replied Henry, tC reflect the highest honor upon the noble houses from whence you sprung, and much do I hope you will both continue with me, until I can better testify my thanks, than it is pos* sible to express in the tumult of this bloody field." " My gracious lord," answered De Hoffman, cc though a German born, yet I can sincerely say that you have no subject present, who more truly rejoices at your success than myself. I am grieved to decline your grace's kind¬ ness;
ness : but I am a truant ; no paternal consent sanctioned mj coming, and even yesternight, by a private hand did I learn my father's uneasiness respecting my safety. I depart, therefore, my lord,, with to-morrow's dawn, to fulfil my first duty ; but be assured, should you hereafter need the weak arm of De Hoffman, you shall find it as ready as heretofore." " Bui your young friends" answered Henry, pointing to Fitzwalter, " he, I trust, has no duty to fulfil, and can therefore accompany us." ££ My noble lord," replied Fitz¬ walter, " it is now more than two years since I left my paternal home. The Baron, my father, is much advanced in years. Rumour will, doubtless, bear to him the tidings of my return. I will, therefore,
therefore, first hasten 4® him, to m* move any fears he may have on my ac¬ count ; and, afterwards, wkh pleasure fulfil those claims my king and country may have upon me." " Fare ye well then both," said Henry. " If ought in my power can serve you, demand it freely—I would I had some memorial to give you of my friendship- ------But take tbe sword you so bravely put into my hands, it shall be tlie hostage of Henry tbe Seventh for the debts of the Earl of Rich¬ mond." So saying, he presented them his sword. No jewel decorated the weapon, but tbe gift was precious, as it came from a king and a conqueror. With these words be left them, and the young friends, after taking an aífection ate
affectionate farewell of each other, se¬ parated ; De Hoffman for the nearest port to embark for Germany, and Fitzwalter for his father's castle in Northumberland.
CHAP.
CHAP. II. During Fitzwalter's absence, many arrangements had taken place at the castle. The good old baron, whose generosity had greatly increased his difficulties, had been necessitated to have recourse to a rich knight, named Mountford, who, in consideration of receiving a mortgage on nearly half the baron's domain, had advanced a sum necessary to liquidate his debts. Mount- ford's w r hole life had been a continued scene of scraping together, and the produce was now designed at once to enrich and ennoble his daughter Edith, who was his only child. With this view% he cultivated the baron's friend¬ ship
shio with the utmost care. The fa- mily of Fitzwalter w r as as great as his utmost ambition could wish, and fame spoke highly of its future heir ; he therefore, conceived that, could he succeed in forming an union between the yoang people, all his views re¬ infecting Edith would be gratified, and he should be also conferring a favour on Fitzwalter, .by not only .clearing his estate, but also rendering him one of the richest barons in the kingdom. As men plant trees which they never live to see flourish, and architects plan buikfiiigs which they never live to exe¬ cute, so did death snatch Mountford from seeing his favourite scheme com¬ pleted. Tliree months had scarcely elapsed, jsince he had taken the mort¬ gage, aod, in exujtkig fancy^had consi¬ dered
dered his daughter as the future baroness of Fitzwalter, vvhen he was seized with a mortal sickness, which, in a few days, terminated his existence. Firm to his purpoae, he, in his will, re¬ quested the Baron Fitzwalter to be¬ come the guardian of his daughter, w hom he constituted his joint heiress with William Fitzwalter, on consider¬ ation that tlie youth should espouse her, before he attained the ase of twenty-five years* previous to which, if he married any other, or, at that period, declined her hand, he forfeited all right to the bequest, and the mortgage on the baron's estate re¬ mained in full force. ?? Mouatford's family, though com¬ parati veiy obscure to that of the baron* brought ?? disgrace with it, Lord Fhzn waiter
Walter was not displeased wdth the idea of being so easily quit of a debt that must effectually have impoverished his successor. Edith was in consequence removed to the castle, ancl placed under the care of the baroness, till such time as Fitzwalter should come home, and learn the good fortune that awaited him. Fitzwalter, when he returned from the battle of Bosworth-field, had just attained his twentieth year. In person and mind, he was all the fondest parents could desire, nor did the fame of his courage, which had already reached them, fail to enhance his father's plea¬ sure, as he embraced him. After some few days given to re¬ joicing, the baron informed his son of the arrangement Mountford had made in
in his favour, concluding his discourse by adding, that he trusted no untoward ciicumstance would frustrate the hopes he had conceived to see it completed. Fitzwalter listened to the baron with a respectful silence ; then replied : " 1 must confess, my lord, that you have astonished me. To the fortune of Mountford I have no claim, nor do I wish to inherit it ; and, on my own account, should not hesitate a mo¬ ment to decline it------But," continued he, smiling, " as hc was kind enough to allow me a probation of five years, and you, my good father, so earnestly appear to wish it, I will take time to consider more fully on the subject." With.this reply the baron was ob¬ liged to be satisfied ; and, as Fdith was not yet seventeen, he agreed with the
the baroness, that it would be most prudent to leave the event to time, hoping that the partiality which young people frequently contract by being constant companions, might take place between them. Whether the baron's hopes might have been realized is impossible to conjecture ; but an event happened at this period, which ren¬ dered it very improbable, if not im¬ possible, that an union between Fitz¬ walter and Edith should ever take place. Sir John Stanley, a poor, but nobfc knight, and an old friend of the baron's, before his death wrote a pathetic letter to lord Fitzwalter, requesting him, for the sake of the Blessed Virgin, to take upon him the protection of his orphan daughter. This request, so solemnly
solemnly made, was not to be rew fused; and, two months after Fitz¬ walter's return, the sorrowdng Blanch Stanley became an inmate of the castle. Tliis young woman, though poor in worldly estimation, was infinitely richer than the wealthy Edith, in all the es¬ timable qualities of fhe mind. Young Fitzwalter had felt no predilection for his intended wife ; but the mild unassuming Blanch was no sooner seen- than beloved; and, as art formed no part of his character, this passion was speedily visible to the whole family. This event perplexed and distressed the baron beyond measure ; and, after various resolves on the subject, he de¬ terminou to throw himself on tbe duty and atfictfon of his son. He represented
represented to him, in the most lively terms, the ruin that must ensue, should he persist in his inclination for Blanch, as Edith Mountford, once of age, would not fail to claim, in case of his non-oerformance of her father's wiil, the payment of the sums ad¬ vanced, in default of which, the half of his fortune w r ould be inevitably lost. Fitzwalter listened v/ith the utmost attention, and though, on his own ac¬ count, he would have disregarded a decrease of fortune, yet when he con¬ sidered the attachment his father bore to the ancient splendour of his house, he shuddered' to take a step, which he feared might have the most fatal con¬ sequences. " If I understood you aright, my lord,"
brd," said he, " when we before conversed on this subject, tl j time appointed was on my attaining my twenty-fifth year, at which period I will give my answer. Time may, fortunately, make Moun t ford's daughter not so passive in an event that so nearly concerns her happiness, and it may become our mutual interest to break those bonds, which even paternal powei had no ri dit to forge." - This reply the baron related to the ¡:\A\ Uu ¿?\? Iter, requesting her to say to i jih. vvho had not failed to remark Fit/vv altera partiality to Blanch, that hi* 4),i, by no means, declined the honour of her hand, but from unavoid¬ able causes, must delay to request it till the time appointed by her father. Edith was not of a disposition tò ? «tn Ay» ι*
suffer, what she considered an insult, calmly ; but as, in this case, she had no appeal, she put on the outward semblance of satisfaction, though she, in truth, felt the highest indignation, at the disregard shewn at once to her person and fortune. By a thousand mortifications, she, however, contrived to revenge herself on Blanch, who had also much to endure from the baron and his lady, who regarded her as the onlv obstacle to their son's future fortune, and would not have failed to have discarded her, had they not feared that, by such a step, Fitz¬ walter would have thought himself bound in honour to take her into his own protection. Though this consi¬ deration was powerful enough to ob¬ lige them to retain Blanch at the castle,
castle, yet the humiliation she daily underwent were not lost on Fitzwalter, who, with all the eloquence of love, long pleaded in vain for her to leave a mansion, where she was so inhos¬ pitably treated.------He at length suc¬ ceeded, and they eloped, their only companions being a respectable wo¬ man, named Alice, who had · been nurse to Blanch, and a favourite do¬ mestic of Fitzw r aiter's, called David. These events had filled a space of two years since Fitzwalter's return home, and so powerful had been the attachment he felt for Blanch, even from her first arrival at tlie castle, that he had never, during that period, even availed himself of the request made him \ by the king ; nor yet had he visited his much esteemed friend, De Hoffman, ? 2 though
though repeatedly pressed by that young nobleman, who, by his father's death, now inherited his estates, and had been married nearly tvvo years, and a father one.
.????.
CHAP. III. The baron's vexation at the elope¬ ment of his son, is better imagined than dcscribecl. He had no doubt but he was married to Blanch, and caused the most exact inquiries to be made in all pos¬ sible quarters; but in vain, no news of the kind he so much dreaded transpired, and his fears somewhat subsided, as the. ruin of his friend's daughter appeared to him, of the two, a less evil, than the destruction of the splendor of his an* cient house. At length he received a letter from Fitzwalter. It came from Germanv, where he now learned, for the first ? 3 time,
time, the runaways had taken refuge. The letter was to this purport : u Health and peace attend the lord and lady Fitzwalter, if that wdsh may be received from a truant son, whose only excuse is, that fatal necessity urged him to take a step, against which his heart recoils : as it not onlv involves the beloved of his soul in disgrace, but has made a breach between him and his ever-honoured parents. tt To the deceased Edward Mount¬ ford, as also to his daughter Edith, Fitzwalter confesses he owes much obligation ; but paternal authority was too far extended, when it imposed, as a duty on his daughter, a contract which ought to be free. If Edith, therefore, has any incentive that may lead
OR, TUE lead her to wish to break those bonds that bind her to Firzwalter, she may rest assured, that, at the appointed time, Fitzwalter will fulfil every obligation, that Edward Mountford has a right to demand of him. u William Fitzwalter." Tliis letter afforded but little satis¬ faction to the baron, who, however, in¬ formed Edith, that she must regard the conduct of Fitzwalter as merely a slip of youth, as in his letter he had tes¬ tified his intention of returning, at the end of the appointed three years, to fulfil her father's will. Edith possessed too much art to dis¬ cover her displeasure openly. She had felt a strong partiality for Fitzwalter, and a no less powerful one for the rank ? 4 and
and title of baroness ; and was firm h resolved, when opportunity offered, if not to gratify her love, at least to satiate her vengeance. The baron, who had still his fears that Fitzwalter had privately married Blanch, no sooner learned that they were in Germany, than he dispatched a friar, to make all possible inquiries : biit these were as fruitless as those be¬ fore made in England ; the only neus be returned with being, that Fitzwalter and Blanch lived in a small house on De Hoffman's estate, in a very retired manner. As no further information could be procured, the lord Fitzwalter was obliged to rest satisfied, though he did not fail to write to his son, whom he reproached, in the most bitter terms, for his disgraceful flight, and the shame he
he had brought, not only on the name of Stanlev, but on that of Fitzwalter. Blanch, in the mean time, felt all the pangs that a susceptible mind en¬ dures, under the imputation of guiïr r and though she loved Fitzwalter with the sincerest affection, drooped with grief, vvhen she reflected on the op- probium that hung over her. An event which, in other circumstances, would have given her the highest satisfaction, also contributed to increase her unea¬ siness ; she found herself in a state to become a mother, and shuddered with horror, that imputed shame should fall upon her innocent offspring. Fitzwalter, who knew no happiness equal to her peace and satisfaction, would have braved every consequence on this occasion ; but, with a firmness c o ttøt
that w r as not to be conquered by per¬ suasion, she refused to make any change in the arrangement they had first formed, saying, " It shall not be ; the time may yet arrive, when the world shall own that Blanch Stanley did not mistake, when she confided in William Fitz¬ walter's honour." As strong impressions, during our waking hours, never fail to influence our nightly dreams, Blanch's thoughts w r ere still active, though her body slept. In one of these midnight vi¬ sions, she thought her father, in the pale livery of the grave, stood before her, and looking upon her with a frowTiing aspect, said, " The name of Stanley should be without reproach; this stain must be done away." — " Ah father 1" she thought she replied, " how
" how can it be obliterated, without involving my beloved lord, and his noble father, in min ?" *' By death," answered he, and va¬ nished. The anguish caused by this dream awoke all the fears, of Fitzw 7 alter, and again he conjured her, in the most ten¬ der and solemn manner, to permit him to take the only step, necessary to re¬ store her to that estimation and re¬ spect she so well merited, and was en¬ titled to. This offer was again rejected with· the greatest obstinacy. t( No," said she, as she conversed on the subject wdth her favourite Alice, " ??\ ? ?? will I consent to be the ruin of the man I love :—never shall the baron curse the ? 6 unhappy
unhappy Blanch, and her unoffending child,—Time alone, my dear Alice, can smooth all obstacles.—Should Heaven, of its mercy, take the baron to itseif, which the Holy Virgin forefend that I should wkh," continued she, crossing herself, " my Fitzwalter would, I know, disregard the loss of half his fortune. In that case we must learn to be pro¬ vident.—You, Alice, would teach me houscvvdfery, and for my child, should it be a son, if with his good sword he could not carve his fortune, by my life I would sw r ear, he neither partook of the blood of Stanley nor Fitzwalter." u I wish from my soul," answered Alice, if that wibh can be expressed without sin, that the infant may be a boy, though, to confess the truth, I on my
mv own account should feel more at¬ tachment to a girl, as it would remind me of your infancy." tc Oh Alice î I shudder at the bare idea of a daughter; a girl, perhaps, with all her mothets weakness—with all her mother's----------" " Rectitude and forbearance," in¬ terrupted Alice,—-" with that honour that can unshaken bear----------" The entrance of Fitzwalter, at that moment 3 prevented more discourse, and Blanch, wdio well knew that he watched her every look and action, affected a cheerfulness her heart was far from feeling. Time, and the unwearied attention of Alice, the affection of Fitzwalter, and the kindness of the count De Hoff¬ man and his family, had begun, in some measure
measure, to divert the thoughts of Blanch from the dream that had caused her so much alarm, when a second, equally forcible, made an impression that nothing could remove. She thought herself in the baron's castle in Nor¬ thumberland, Fitzwalter seated by her side, and on her bosom a smiling in¬ fant. On a sudden Edith Mountford rushed in, her eyes glaring fire, and her hand armed with a dancer, which in a moment she plunged into the heart of Fitzwalter, from whence drawing ii, reeking with his biood, she a im« ?! ir at the infant. With more than mortal soeed, Blanch th»4i':ht she flew over hills and valleys to save her child, but vain would have been her endea¬ vours to ? ca; e, for her L> placable enemv followed close at ne; heels, had not
noi a radiant female rushed between them, and widi a wand she held, ren¬ dering the furious Mountford motionless, spoke thus:— tt As the gossamer Hies before the wind, so doth the power of man before the Most High.—Thus far mayest thou go, but no further.—That mfant will I protect from thy malice ; in tlie cave of St. Margaret shall it find safety, and under its rude arched roof, make thy proud heart shrink, even in the lofty castle of Fitzwalter." The strong emotion of Blanch, even in her sleep, awoke Fitzwalter, who truly judged that İt was again some vision that disturbed her. <t Blanch, my love," cried he, " awake, no one shall injure thee, Fitzwaltev is thy guard ; dreams, thou knowed, are but chimeras,
chimeras, arising from a distuibed ima¬ gination." Blandi, thus tenderly awakened, and convinced of his safe tv, collected her scattered spirits, but in the morning re¬ lated eveiy circumstance, with a so¬ lemnity which implied, that the dream had made a strong impression. Fitz¬ walter listened with a smile.^—" My beloved," said he, Cf hovv long have I been so greatly fallen in thy opinion, that thou shouldest, even for a moment, fear that I am doomed to die inglori- ously by a woman's hand.—Thy infant too, the child of Fitzwalter, with all due deference to St. Margaret, shall never be reduced to seek a sanctuary in her cell."—·" My gracious master, interrupted Alice, " I pray your par¬ don,
don, but you speak irreligiously; the great, as well as the poor, are subject to the vicissitudes of this life—not that I think belief is always to be placed upon dreams, and St. Mary forefend that this should come true ; but stabs are sometimes given without daggers, and infanb pursued by enemies, who, though they dare not strike at life, may be equally dangerous.—What I would ad\ ise is, to be upon \ our guard ; it is always good to be wary. Who knows, but the sainted spirit of the old chapel, for wise purposes, might give this warning." " My good mother," said Fitzwalter, ci thou ppeakest like an oracle. If my Blanch should give me an angel like herself, we will choose St. Margaret for
for her tutelary saint ; but if a boy, cast in the rude mould of his father, 1 must be pardoned, if I prefer St. George for his patron."
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. Three days afier the dream that had caused Blanch so mueh terror, she was seized with the pangs of child¬ birth. Her labour was long and severe, ancl filled all around her with the most serious fears for her safety. Resigna¬ tion and patience were only to be seen on the features of the sufferer, wdio, on the second evening, gave birth to a daughter. For many hours the ex¬ hausted Blanch lav with scarcelv a symptom of life, during which Fitz¬ walter did not, for a moment, leave her side, alternately regarding her and tlie infant, with that speechless anguish which real sorrow can alone feel. At length
length somewhat collected, she called for Fitzwalter and Alice, vvho instantly coming forward, in a faint voice she addressed them thus :—" My beloved ancl dearest friends, I feel with unde¬ niable certainty, that my fife draws near its close, and while strength and understanding are left me, I would fain fulfil some few duties, which, by the mercy of Heaven, may help to obli¬ terate the sins of mv mortal life."— **OhBbnch!" intenupted Fitzwalter, his voice choaked with anguish, " ihou hast no sins, thou spotless innocence.— The cursed affection of the wretched Fitzwalter, plunges thec into an un¬ timely giave." "Call not thy affection cursed, Fitz¬ walter," answered she, her eyes turn¬ ing quick from him to the infant which lay
lay by her side, cc I trust it will be blessed.—Thy love was my pride, my glory—and if in heaven spirits think, I will remember thy truth and honour. Thou" continued she, cc wrill remember me, when thou cherishest thy babe." Fitzwalter groaned, but could not speak.·—-Blanch, through weakness, made a long pause, until at length re¬ covering herself, she continued—·" Call me, I pray you, a priest : good father John will willingly attend me. Let him take my confession, and baptize my child ; that sight will give mc plea¬ sure. ------. Let her be called Mar¬ garet." Λ servant was dispatched to the abbev of St. Francis, to summon the ♦ father, whiie another hastened to the count De Hoffman's castle, to inform him
him of tbe danger of Blanch, lhe count and his lady immediately fol¬ lowed the messenger to Fitzwalter's dwelling. On their arrival the priest was with his penitent, who having made her confession, desired that De Hoffman and the countess might enter. It was no time for congratulations ; the lady, with a look that expressed far more than words, took her place by the side of the dying Blanch, and press¬ ing her hand between both hers, at length said : " You wish your infant to receive the sacrament of baptism ; the count and myself are come to en¬ treat to be sponsors, if you will ac¬ cept us." Blanch looked fixedly at the countess, raised her hand to her lips, and bec¬ koning the priest forward, in an almost 1 exhausted
or, the nun's story. exhausted voice requested him to name her child. The priest opened his book. The w r ater, the salt, the oil, and tapers, were prepared, when the father asked, as it was a daughter, who was the second sponsor ; for in the confusion of the moment it had been forgotten, that two females were necessary. " There is a respectable woman who, by her tears on this occasion, will, I should judge, worthily fulfil that trust," said the countess, pointing to Alice, who stood weeping at a respectful dis¬ tance. " My good, my second mo¬ ther," said Blanch, addressing Alice, " you hear the countess, will you not, at this solemn moment, answer for my child?"·—" Alas!" answered Alice, powerless as I am, I will answer for her
her with my life, and die to protect her ; but I am not worthy to be spon¬ sor to my lord's child, nor yet to stand by the side of the count and countess De Hoffman." The countess stepped forward, took Alice by the hand, and said, " If, my good friend, it is true what we are taught, and of the truth of wdiich I have no doubt, that there are no dis¬ tinctions in heaven, how pitiful must that mind be, who can make any on this occasion." This point arranged, the priest per¬ formed the ceremony, and named the infant Margaret. Blanch's spirits ap¬ peared recruited by the sight ; she thanked the count and his lady, and entreated them to comfort Fitzwalter ; then turning to the priest she said, " Mv
" My good father, as you have written down my confession, I pray you take a copy : the original keep in your own hands, and give the other to Fitz* waiter" Blanch appeared exhausted. The good father withdrew to obey her commands; and in less than an hour had transcribed it. Blanch signed first, and the count, his lady, Alice, and the priest, wit¬ nessed the signature, after which they took their leave. Blanch, fot seme hours, was so pla- - cid, that Fitzwalter gave way to the rap¬ turous idea that she would yet recover \ but this hope only served to increase the weight of sorrow that Was to fol¬ low, for on awaking from what both himself and Alice thought a refreshing vol. i. d sleep,
sleep, they saw with anguish, that the pangs of death were upon her. " Ye 4 t£ little while," said she, " and this fragile body shall return to its na¬ tive clay, and this warm heart forget ks earthly attachments.—Listen then, Fitzwalter,. to my voice—Paternal dis¬ obedience is a grievous sin ; who knows but it has drawn down this heavy pu¬ nishment upon us.—With my dying breath let me request you to be recon¬ ciled to your father." Fitzwalter attempted to speak, but waving her hand, she continued — ct Interrupt me not, I conjure you, my time is nearly expired, my last thoughts and prayers are for your happiness.— Oh Alice ! be a mother to my child. —Fkzwaker, to you I need not recom¬ mend
mend her.—Secrecy and mystery may be the best safeguards of her infancy.— I pray you request the sisters of the convent of St. Mary to admit my body into their holy ground.—I entreat you pray for me---------" A convulsive spasm for a few minutes stopped her utterance ; Alice dropped on her knees, whilst Fitzwalter, with almost frantic energy, threw himself by her side, and supported her in his arms. " Oh Fitzwalter !" said the expiring Blanch, collecting her small remains of strength to articulate, " Conquer this unavailing grief—we shall, thou knowest, meet again.—The pangs of death arc not so hard to bear as parting with thee." As she spoke, she rested her cold cheek on his, and paused a moment for breath ; then continued— n 2 " In
u In thy arms, where I could have lived most happy, let me die, my friend—my love—my lord—my ---------" As she spoke, she drew her breath hard be¬ tween each word, and bowing her head, expired on the bosom of Fitz¬ walter. Fitzwalter's grief for this loss, found vent in neither words nor tears ; it was that silent sorrow that preys upon the heart, and, like a secret and unsuspected enemy, undermines the foundation of life, before it is conjectured to have in¬ jured it. Tlie friendship of the family of De Hoffman, in this distress, was of the utmost service. The count, to a strong understanding, joined an active and generous mind; and whatever faults might fall to his share, at least a manly and disinterested friendship, with a w 7 arm
warm and benevolent heart, was not among the number. The character of the countess was less livelv than that of her husband. To the most exquisite feminine beauty, she added a mind so noble, reflective, pious, and chaste, that could every thought of her bosom have been visible, not one would have raised any emotion but respect, love, and admiration. De Hoffman endeavoured to divert his friend's melancholy, by alternately exerting his understanding and his liveliness. The countess's consolations flowed all from piety, and those deli¬ vered in a voice so soft and persuasive, that Fitzwalter's grief was frequently* charmed to peace, and his mind raised from earthly to heavenly objects. A year had passed since the death of n 3 Blanch,
Blanch, when an express from England arrived at De Hoffman's castle ; it was from the baron Fitzwalter, requesting his son's attendance, as his health w r as in the most imminent danger. Fitz¬ walter immediately " procured a small vessel, and, accompanied by Alîce and his child, left Germany. The countess would fain have persuaded him to leave them in he r care, but the young Mar¬ garet had already made herself so warm an interest in her father's heart, thai he could not, without pain, resolve to quit her. On reaching England, he placed Alice and her young charge in the cottage of David's wife, as he could rely on her fidelity, and proceeded to the dwelling of the baron. He found his father's health greatly impaired.
impaired. Added to the infirmities of age, he had, in his mind also, suffered severely, from being reduced to make retrenchments in his usual hospitable mode of living ; for even his former difficulties had not yet taught him pru¬ dence. The baron, his lady, and Edith Mountford, received Fitzwalter with distinguished kindness, as in all proba¬ bility they had concerted before his arrival ; for, strange and repugnant äs such a step must appear to a feeling or delicate mind, Edith's first wdsh was, even yet, to become the wife of Fit^ waiter. The baron's health still continued in an uncertain and declining «tate, and Fitzw r alter had not been at home more than three months, when he lost his mother, Before her death, with all d 4 the
the energy of a dying parent, she con¬ jured him to take the only step that could save himself and his father from ruin, and by a marriage with Edith t preserve to hts noble house its ancient t possessions. Fitzwalter replied with duty and filial tenderness 5 his affections, he said, were buried ? the grave of Blanch, and though he would sacrifice his life to extricate his father from pecuniary difficulties, yet he could, not resolve to pass his life v/ith a woman totally in¬ different to him, nor yet to deceive her with promises of affection, which he ne ver. more could feel. Firm in this resolution, the baroness died without the satisfaction she required. Fitzwalter's utmost wis,h was to keep his father from experiencing a materied change
change of fortune during his life ; and if he survived him, he resolved to yield to the creditors the full amount of their demands, bestow on his Margaret the remainder, and for himself, in the ser¬ vice of his country to seek a new for¬ tune, or to t find a glorious death.
? 5 CHAP.
CHAP. V. ' In spite of Fitzwalter's resolution, his plan proved abortive. In less than three months after his mother's death,. he saw his father surrounded with diffi¬ culties, that nothing but wealth could remove. Long did he struggle vvith his repugnance, which at length gave way to his father's tears, and with a beating heart and faultering voice, he consented, that the baron should pro¬ pose him as a husband to Edith, at the end of the ensuing six months. Little flattering as was this proposal, Edith accepted it. Fitzwalter, as may be readily surmised, was no warm Wooer; he, however, reated her with respectful attention^ and having passed two of tbe
the six requested months at the castle, declared that he had a strong inclina¬ tion to visit the capital for the remain¬ ing period, before the close of which he would return and fulfil his engage¬ ment. This plan was, by no means, agree¬ able to either the b iron or Edith, yet neither doubted his honour, aad diere- fore, with the better grace, yielded to his inclination. * # * * « Fitzwalter was not expected to re¬ turn, till near the time appointed for the marriage ; but, to the surprise of not only the baron, but Edith, he reached Northumberland a fiül month before the period agreed upon. What yet more astonished them, than even his appearance, wa;, the strange man- D 6 ner
ner İn which he was accompanied. At his departure he was attended by only his servant David, who now, on his return, rode in the same line as his master, and assisted in securing a third person, who, tied upon a horse, rode between them. The prisoner was a young man of a handsome and com¬ manding appearance, but the wildness of his eyes, and the distraction of his features, plainly shewed his mind was at variance wdth itself, and that he la¬ boured under that most dreadful of all human maladies, madness. On reaching the castle of the baron, Fitzwalter intreated his father's per¬ mission to confine the stranger in one of the remote apartments, saying he was his dear friend, and constant com¬ panion, some years before, when he studied
studied the languages under a bene¬ dictine at York ; that he was a valiant and noble gentleman, but unfortunately had no relative living, who would, in this distressful state, take the charge upon them. It has been before ob¬ served, that the baron wanted neither hospitality nor generosity, he therefore immediately acquiesced, calling some of his dependents to take upon them the charge of the stranger. This kind¬ ness Fitzwalter declined, saying, his own servant, David, was accustomed to his friend Austin, and he alone was most proper to attend him, as questions or company increased his distraction. Fitzwalter then taking the stranger by the arm, led him to the apartment al¬ lotted ; nor did he leave him, till he saw a blazing fire kindled, and proper food
food set before him : when, giving him to the care of David, he rejoined his father and Edith. To the questions of the baron to Fitzwalter, respecting his journey, he replied, that long as his absence had been, he had passed no time in London ; for having, by chance, heard of his friend's distressful state, he had devoted all his cares to his recover}, and for the whole of the last month had been con¬ fined in Norfolk, where the paroxysms of msamty had been far more violent than at the present time As tl.e period appointed for the nuptials approached, tlu baron was at ihe height of his wbhes : Edith also exulted in her own heart. Fitzwalter, alone, was stiil sorrow ul - y and liis cares, far from being devoted to bis bride, Λν ere
were bestowed on the crazy stranger, who, after a month's constant attention, became more manageable, though he held converse with no one but Fitz¬ walter and David. The contract of marriage was then drawn, Fitzwalter declining all power on Mountford's fortune, as left in case of his maniage with Edith, settling it wholly on herself and her heirs, claim¬ ing only tlie relea.se of his father's lands. In requital for this resignation, he required the privilege of educating in his own house, and under his imme¬ diate inspection, his daughter Mar¬ garet, and that no one shonld, either at the present, or at any future period, have a right to discharge from her ser¬ vice the faithful Alice, either durin«· tus life, or in case of his eleath. These
Illese arrangements being agreed upon and ratified, the marriage took place. Margaret, at this period, w r as two years old, and if ever Fitzwalter knew a mitigation to the deep and gloomy melancholy that preyed upon him, it was when caressing his infant daugh¬ ter. According to agreement, she was brought to the castle, an apartment assigned to her and Alice ; and though Fitzwalter's bride did not take upon her those maternal cares which could not have failed to render her estimable in the eyes of her husband, yet, at casual meetings, she behaved in a man¬ ner that could not give occasion of complaint. In the mean time Fitz¬ walter did not neglect the disordered stranger ; many hours did he daily pass in
in his apartment, and spared no pains, tenderness, nor expense, to restore him to sanity. His cares were at length crowned with success. Austin grew more calm, and his fits of frenzy gave way to a settled melancholy, strongly tinctured with that religious zeal, which the mind İs prone to give into, when it has been suddenly torn from all earthly objects, and thinks only of a future state. The cares of Fitwaltcr did not, however, relax : he gave him more liberty, and fiequently walked or rode with him ; but all his attempts were vain to persuade him to mix or hold converse with the family, little Mar¬ garet alone excepted, whom Alice, by order of Fitzwalter, would frequently bring into the apartment, as he ob·* served
served the caresses of the innocent babe usually forced Austin to shed tears, and by that means cased his overcharged heart. David, who constantly slept in the room with Austin, one morning, to his great and dreadful alarm, found he had risen in the niglit, and escaped by the wdndovv. Fle instantly hastened to Fitzwalter's apartment, and awaken¬ ing him, he arose, and sending his domestics different ways, joined also himself in the pursuit of the runaway. The search was, however, fruitless ; all returned, without the smallest trace that could direct them which way to seek him. In this dilemma, David re r collected that he had seen his charge busily writing the day before, and searching his desk, soon found a letter directed
directed to Fitzwalter. lie immedi¬ ately hastened with it to his master, who impatiently tearing it open, found as follows: " The wretched lost maniac, Austin, hath not forgotten the promise that the friendship of Fitzwalter extorted from him ; he will neither leave the king¬ dom, nor attempt ought against his own worthless life ; and therefore prays, that Fitzwalter will make no search after him, but leave him in peace to the life he has resolved upon. So may Heaven preserve his most generous, but cruel friend, and pardon the most heinous of all sinners, (i Prays the contrite " Austin." This letter bestow r ed a gleam of comfort
comfort on Fitzwalter; but he w T as soon destined to suffer in another point. The baron, who had long been de¬ clining, died, when his death could not relieve his son from a vow which appeared rather to harve increased than lessened his melancholy, and which he, had taken with no other view, than to secure his aged parent from sorrow. Rank was what Edith particularly aspired to, she w r as therefore now at the height of her wishes ; and as she expected that, in the person of the lady Fitzwalter, every one would for¬ get the daughter of the usurious Mount¬ ford, so did she apparently forget it herseif. ,
CI UP.
CHAP. VI. Ten months after the baron Fitz¬ walter's marriage, his lady was deli¬ vered of a daughter 5 but the child vvas so sickly, that small hopes were enter¬ tained of its life, until the baron, who had a high opinion of Alice's skill, desired she might be consulted in its management. Nothing but the dan¬ ger of the infant could have obliged the baroness to consent to this request; but her, fears for its life made her pre¬ judices give way, and Alice, who pos¬ sessed too good a disposition, and too much rectitude to be displeased with the babe for the contemptuous conduct of its mother, immediately undertook the
the task, requiring only that the child and its nurse might have an apartment adjoining that of Margaret, as in that case she should be always at hand, to pay it the attention necessary for its well doing. Margaret, now three years old, was the delight of her father ; she played by his side, and in many of his walks was his constant companion. In these, young as she was, he would talk to her of her mother, teach her to repeat her name, and in his gayer moments, (if any could be called such) he would sing to her, little madrigals that her mother was accustomed to sing, and whose voice used to add melody to the simplicity of the words. The affection of Alice for the little Margaret was, to express it as it truly deserved,
deserved, not inferior to that of the lord Fitzwalter. She had, in her youth, been left a childless widow, and by necessity forced to seek a maintenance, had been appointed to the care of Blanch, whose youth and innocence, by degrees, w T eaning her from her sor¬ rows, had imperceptibly supplied the vacuum left in her heart. That arrec- tion was now transferred to Margaret, who she not only regarded as a sacred trust left her by her beloved Blanch, but also as an infant, at whose baptism she had taken a sacrament, to sustain and instruct in the best manner she was able. Alice was naturally so mild, un¬ assuming, and pious, that all good peo¬ ple approved her, and even evil ones could not find room to accuse her, She had received what, at that pcrio#, was
was accounted a good education,'and as soon as Margaret could speak, began teaching her to read and to pray, tak¬ ing her daily to the chapel of the castle, where, at the foot of the altar, she taught her an ave*Maria for the repose of her mother's soul. Sometimes she would stray as far as the mountains that sheltered the coast, and peeping into the dreary cave of St. Margaret, for she did not dare explore it, they would pro¬ ceed to the old chapel, where Alice would enter boldly ; for in so sacred a dwelling, she had no idea that evil could reach her. Here would she again teach the young Margaret to kneel be¬ fore the broken altar, and lift her to see 'the ancient monuments, that the ravages of time and sacrilege had spared. IHvo, particularly, in the middle of the choir.
choir, were most perfect ; the one of a warrior, by the surrounding ornaments, the se, ond ofa lady placed close by his side, and at her feet a dog, holding in his mouth a human hand. One evening that Alice, with her young charge, extended her walk to the chapel, on passing through the gloomy cloisters that surrounded the building, the quick eyes of Margaret suddenly discovered some object among the pillars, that caused her to exclaim in her infantile accent, " Look, dame, who is there?" As she spoke, she pointed her finger, and instantly direct¬ ed the sight of Alice to a corner, where she could plainly discover a human figure behind the columns that sup¬ ported the roof. A sentiment of fear, for the first time, in so holy a place, vol, ι, e seized
seized on the mind of Alice, and snatching up the child, she with trem¬ bling steps hastened forward, with evi¬ dent marks of perturbation. This alarm was so apparent, that it did not escape the person who caused it ; for a voice, in gentle accents, immediately hailed them, saying, " Fear nothing, sister, those wdio trust in God have no cause for fear : the blessed Virgin protect and guide you—depart in peace." " The blessing return upon you, whosoever you be," answered Alice, emboldened by this gentle salutation. <£ If you come into this sacred place to pray, as I deem you do, Heaven grant your request.—Good even ------" The concealed person only replied by a heavy sigh, and Alice proceeded on her way. ff When
When the baron called in Margaret's apartment, as was his usual custom be¬ fore he w r cnt to supper, Alice in¬ formed him of the surprise they had met with. He listened with attention. <c My good dame," said hc, wdien she concluded, " your adventure has given rise to a supposition, that I shall not be at ease till I can satisfy, though to¬ night it is impossible." Without entering into further expla¬ nation, he kissed the sleeping Marga¬ ret, and also the young Isabel; for though Fitzwalter was, undoubtedly, not attached to the baroness, as he had formerly been to Blanch, yet he was too good a man, not to be a tender and affectionate father to all his offspring.
e w
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. Fitzwalter rose at the break of day, and hastened to the chapel. He was wrapped in his long cloak, and under his arm he used the pre¬ caution to carry his broad-sword, not that he apprehended danger, but that he wished to be provided against it. Thus accoutered, and unattended, he entered and explored it in every part ; but all was silent and deserted, as the inhabitants of the graves around him. Wearied with a fruitless search, he left the chapel, and pursued his way to St. Margaret's Cave, which he examin¬ ed as accurately as he had before done the chapel, and not entirely with as little
little success ; for in one corner of the cave he found some shell fish, which had been freshly taken from the shore ; in another, a bed constructed of rushes, the head of which was only raised from the rest by a stone ; in a third apper- ture were some wood embers, yet warm ; and in a fourth, a wooden cru¬ cifix, rudely carved, a skull, an hour¬ glass, and two devotional books. These different objects strengthened the suspicion lord Fitzwalter had form¬ ed, and resolved to be satisfied, he seat¬ ed himself upon a projection of the rock, where he remained in painful ex¬ pectation, wearied with watching, yet fully resolved to persevere. A rustling among the bushes at length gave him hopes, that the object he expected ap¬ proached. He was not deceived ; the e 3 resident
resident of the cave entered, and some¬ what disappointed Fitzwalter, by pre¬ senting to his sight a Franciscan friar, cloathed in all the severity ofhis order. The figure of Fitzwalter, who sat more advanced in the cave, was not ?? dis¬ cernable to the friar, though he could clearly discover an intruder. <v Who¬ soever ye be," said he, still advancing/ " that thus unexpectedly I meet in this dwelling, ye come not, I truly deem, for riches; if to seek an asylum for poverty, ye are welcome to such food as this cave affords, and when refresh · ed, depart in peace ;—or if ye seek a recess where the repentant soul may weep and pray for the foul crimes of youth, haste to take upon ye the habit I have chosen, then will I give ye tear for tear, sigh for sigh, and prayer for prayer."
prayer,"—" None of these causes brought me hither," exclaimed Fitz¬ walter, throwing himself forward, and snatching hold of the friar's garment, " I came to meet a dear and beloved friend, and praise be to heaven I have found him—" " Fitzwalter," said the friar, rc dear¬ est, best of men, why will your un¬ wearied kindness seek a monster, whose life, but for you, had been justly for¬ feited to the violated laws of God, na¬ ture, and his country.—Leave me,— leave me I conjure you ; it befits not the habit I have chosen, nor the life jof mortification I have adopted, to hold converse with one who, in spite of ali my crimes, I still see with pleasure." " Austin," answered Fitzwalter, hold¬ ing his garment, " accompany me, I e 4 conjure
conjure you, to the castle; I grieve to use violence, but I will not leave you. Time, I trust, will heal those paroxysms of anguish, that at intervals disturb your reason.—Need 1 say my house,— my fortune,—my life, are at your com¬ mand r" The friar fell on Fitzwalter's neck, and wept aloud,— f< Oh, my friend, at length," said he, tC madneas no longer bewilders my bursting brain, but an¬ guish, remorse, and repentance, swell my heart even to agony.------ No, I w ill convince you my reason is perfect, and then you will not prevent my adopting the only life that can, in any manner, make expiation for my crimes. The solemn oath you required of me, before you gave me any liberty, I remember, snd am resolved to keep.*—My soul is already
already too much charged with guilt, to add suicide to the number of my crimes.—No, this pampered lascivious body shall suffer, and if it be possible, even in this world expiate some of. its numberless transgressions.—Walk¬ ing with you I first saw this cave, and the adjoining chapel, and my resolution was immediately fixed.—Methought an internal monitor whispered to my lacerated conscience, here, Austin, is a dwelling befitting deeds like thine I ï 1ère the sinful soul may, cleanse itself, by fasting, suffering, penitence, and prayer, fiom the foul crimes that must otherwise plunge it in everlasting per¬ dition." " I perfectly recollect," answered Fitzwalter, tk that we held some con¬ versation on religious retirement, as we e 5 sat
sat one afternoon, during the heat, in the cave ; but I was far from suspect¬ ing you could conceive such a plan, and never thought more of it, until Alice informing me she met with some person in the cloisters, which by the country people are, I know, shunned. The supposition at once struck me, and I resolved to be satisfied." " The inspiration, Fitzwalter, was not to be resisted," said he, " nor did I attempt it ; I resolved to escape from your kind care, and having effected my purpose, hastened to the monastery of Franciscans at Berwick. To the good fathers I related all my sins, and all my sufferings finally informing them of the »e olatbn I had formed, and re¬ questing to be admitted into their or¬ der. The friars listened to me with pity
pity and kindness, and urged me to persevere in my intention ; but before they would admit me into my novici¬ ate, requested me to consult a learned and holy man, called Stephen Baron *, provincial of his order in England, and atLthat time passing some short space with the grey friars at Scarborough. To this holy father I then hastened, who, after having consulted with his brethren, and questioned me on various religious subjects, ν hich, shame to say, I was ignorant of, allowed me to enter on my noviciate, with this especial li¬ cence, that as the inspiration first took
e 6 place
place in St. Margaret's Cave, I should be permitted to make it my dwelling, contrary to the custom of Franciscans, who, I need not tell you, usually lead a more wandering life, spreading the light of truth in divers places. These points arranged, they gave me the habiliments I wear, permitting me, if I found occasion, to use sandals of my own making. They then urged me to persevere, blessed, and dismissed me. Notwithstanding Austin's manner was collected, and his memory retain¬ ed, even to a minute degree, what had passed, yet Fitzwalter could plainly perceive, that his mind had not yet gained its customary strength. His eyes still sparkled with more than even their usual vivacity, and though his vi¬ sage
sage was palid, and his form wasted, yet no weakness appeared tò attend the change, but rather that force and animation, that frequently accompanies insanity. Fitzwalter, in vain, had re* course to intreaties and remonstrance ; both were unavailing : Austin w T as not to be moved from his purpose, and to force a man, admitted as a novice by · the brotherhood of FYanciscans, was an exertion of power, that even the rank of the baron Fitzwalter could not answer. The fathers, he readily conjectured, would not easily allow themselves so grossly mistaken, as to have admitted a man disordered in his mind into their order, and should he force him to the castle, he should draw upon himseif the vengeance of the whole body: relinguishing, therefore, his
his first resolve, he conjured Austin not to give into all the severities of the or¬ der he had chosen, requested a promise from him, that hc would see him daily, and take no step for a removal, without giving him previous information. Aus¬ tin refused to agree with the first re¬ quest, but readily promised the tvvo latter; and the day being advanced, they soon after separated,
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII. Though Fitzwalter had the utmost reverence for religion and its ministers, yet he could not forbear, as he return¬ ed home, forming 'some severe reflec¬ tions on the friars, whose zeal for pro¬ selytes had carried them so far, as to make them overlook the disordered mind of Austin. In these reflections he, however, judged erroneously; for though the malady under which Austin laboured was evident to the scrutinizing eye of friendship, yet there was nothing in his conduct that could be particularly no¬ ticed by any person less interested, ex¬ cept that it might haye caused wonder, to
to see a man in the prime of life, gift¬ ed with all the graces of person, and dignified by a strong and enlightened mind, thus willingly embrace the most severe and mortifying of all the holy orders. On Fitzwalter's reaching the castle, he had a long conversation with Alice, who, though she held the baron's opi¬ nion in the utmost reverence, was not afraid, in this case, to dissent from him. She highly applauded Austin's resolu¬ tion, and concluded by saying, " that wben the mind was so deeply wound¬ ed as his mujt necessarily be, she could see no source of consolation so- likely to be efficacious, as religion and retire¬ ment." " True, Alice," answered Fitzwal¬ ter; " and equally so without hair¬ cloth
cloth or a cowl,—Heaven knows," continued he, walking hastily up and dovvn the apartment, " my bosom, though covered with sumptuous appa¬ rel, suffers frequently, even to agony ; and my face, though at the festive board it wears tîie semblance of plea¬ sure, yet it often conceals an aching heart." (( True, my gracious lord," answered Alice, £C but sins and sorrows require different expiations, and must be judg¬ ed, according to the sources from whence they arise. Early in life, you, niy noble master, lost tlie beloved of your heart, the fairest and best of wa¬ rnen." As Alice spoke, the ready tears flowed from her eyes, and drop¬ ped upon Margaret's hand. " But you lost her by no unworthy means, but
but by the will of that Power, wh· gave, and had a right, at his owrn plea¬ sure,.to call her back to himself. After her death, though sinking under the weight of your afflictions, you forgot neither the duty of a son, nor the affec¬ tion of a parent. Such sorrows as yours, my lord, therefore, can need no expiation; but for the errors of your noble friend, you must pardon me, if I think the severest penance necessary to expiate them." " In the situation he has chosen, there is no way to afford him even common comfort," said Fitzwalter. t( 1 do not mean luxuries, Alice ; but for a man, habituated to the softest in¬ dulgence, to stretch his limbs on the damp earth, or, at best, on sorry rushes, is a sad exchange; and from being ac¬ customed
customed to the dainties of a well-co¬ vered table, to feed on the mountain- berries, a few shell-nsh, or what the casual bounty of strangers may bestow, is a life, which I am convinced Austin can never long sustain." " My lord," said Alice, ec the saints that inspired the thought can enable him to support it. Conscious of mak¬ ing, even in this world, every expiation in his power, peace and rectitude will act as powerful opiates, even on a bed of rushes; and for a table, why should we pamper our bodies for the worms that will devour us ? So nature is satis¬ fied, wdiat have we more to crave :— No, my good master, the noble Austin has chosen a better part, and means to enrich that which never perishes; so that when the Great giver of all good shall
shall call him to his dread account, he' may render his soul, purified, even in this mortal life, by penitence, fasting, and prayer." * { Alice," replied Fitzwalter, " Thon reasonest like a christian ; I speak asa friend. Thy pious councils taught'my sainted Blanch that patience, fortitude, and sweetness, tliat raised her, even on earth, above mortality ; teach my darling Margaret, my good dame, the same lesson, and thou wilt bestow on her a better portion, than any Fitzwal¬ ter has in his power to give." <c Tbe qualities ; you speak of," an- -swered Alice, c * are the immediate gift of Providence, and the utmost my weak efforts can effect is, to cherish, and en¬ deavour to bring to perfection, those inestimable blessings," The
The nurse of the young Isabel at that moment entering with her charge, the conversation ceased, and Fitzwalter left the apartment
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. From the time of Fitzwalter's dis¬ covering Austin in St. Margaret's Cave, he never failed to visit it daily, and in spite of remonstrance, to pass some hours there ; an exertion of friendship that the novice sincerely felt, though he constantly refused all indulgence of what kind soever. In a sheltered spot between the mountains, he had planted some vegetables and roots, wdiich, with the shell-fish he picked up on the shore, constituted his whole food. His drink was procured from a spring that issued from the side of the hills, and wliich served not only to quench
quench his thirst, but to fertilize his littie plantation. His dress was that usually worn by the Franciscans *, with sandals of his own making on his feet, and his head uncovered, and exposed to all the inclemencies of the weather. Accustomed, from his infancy, to an active life, idleness, by no means, suited the temper of Austin ; and as devotion now mingled in all his pursuits, he formed the project of cleaning, and as far as in his povver lay, repairing, the part of the old chapel nearest the altar. For this purpose, with indefatigable perseverance, he fetched shells from the sea-shore, which, burning, he formed into lime, and by that means, and with infinite
infinite labour, replaced many of the stones in their original destination. In these employments, broken in upon only by the duties of the life he had adopted, and the visits of Fitz- 4 « waiter, passed the year of Austin's no¬ viciate, which expired, hc again visited the fathers at Scarborough, ahd was admitted, with the usual ceremonies, into their community. Permission was still continued for him to reside in the dwelling he had chosen ; with this only clause, that he should no longer so en¬ tirely seclude himself, but by active exertions of piety, endeavour to render himself serviceable, by visiting the sick, comforting the afflicted, reproving the wicked, and standing forth in the cause of truth and innocence. They also or¬ dered him to refrain from so severe an 3 absti-
abstinence, except on the fasts ap¬ pointed, as it w r as evident from his meagre and care-worn person, it might be productive of the worst conse¬ quences, by not only impairing his health, but wilfully shortening his life ; a sin of such magnitude, that no peni¬ tence could obliterate. This last order, though unsuspected by Austin, was the device of Fitzwalter, who had paid the fathers a visit, in which he so clearly pointed out the dangerous severity in which his friend lived, that they pro¬ mised to exert their authority, to make him, in some measure, change it. These commands were not entirely conformable to the plan Austin had wished to adopt ; he did not, however, think himself authorized to retract from the rules of the order, and therefore vol. i, f resolved
resolved to endeavour to fulfil its de¬ crees, though still with severe absti¬ nence. On Austin*s taking up his residence at St. Margaret's Cave, his appearance caused the utmost alarm to some of the peasantry, who, by chatice, had seen him; but the frequent visits of lord Fitzwalter, and his affection to the friar, were speedily so well known, that all fear gave way to reverence for the holy man, who had thus, though they knew not from what cause, de¬ voted himself, even in the prime of life, to such severe and voluntary re¬ tirement. The respect that had, at first, arisen for Austin from the attention of lord Fitzwalter was soon paid to him for his own merits. Lenient to the poor « and
and suffering, mild in his reproof to the wayward sinner, firm in the duties of his profession, and cruel only to him¬ self, he was universally beloved. Un¬ dismayed, would he enter the houses where contagious sickness reigned, and unwearied tender his prayers for the sufferers, while all fled, but those whom the most tender ties of nature or af- 4 fection bound. Not content with of¬ fering prayers alone, in the hour of danger he had once exerted himself, by leaping into a rapid stream, and snatching an infant from certain death ; and durmg a fire that destroyed one of the cottages of the hamlet, at the im¬ minent hazard of his own life, he had rushed through the blazing timbers, and with a strength his worn form did not promise, brought out an aged man, f 2 whose.
whose palsied limbs 'must otherwise have doomed him to certain destruc¬ tion. Such deeds as these made the father almost idolized, and had it not been for his express commands, and the visible humiliation it occasioned him, the peasantry would, on his ap¬ pearance, have followed him with blessings and prayers, even to his own habitation· Of their choicest fruits they never failed to bring him a part, as also eggs, milk, or whatever they considered most pleasant to him (for flesh he strictly refused) ; but these were always accepted with so sparing a hand, that the good people frequently retired distressed and dissatisfied, and many from offering their gifts took a different method, which was, at break of day to hasten in a company of four or five, for they
they were not even yet bold epough to venture alone, and place thçir pre¬ sents at the entrance of his cell. These private gifts Austin attributed to the lord Fitzwalter, and in truth he was frequently not mistaken; though to do justice to the country people, they never forgot to supply the ffather two or three times a week. Among the friar's visitants, few were more constant than Fitzwalter's old servant, David, who would frequently steal opportunities, whilst Austin was absent, to iay fresh rushes for him to sleep upon, and in the winter months kindle a fire, sufficient not only to dif¬ fuse warmth and comparative cheerful¬ ness over the dreary cave, but also to purify it from the noxious vapours of the damp air. When the weather f $ would
would permit, Alice was equally atten¬ tive, though, as^she frequently observed, her visits were merely to profit by the lessons of thè friar, and to join with him in pious supplications in the old chapel. Little Margaret was always a party in these visits, and was scarcely more attached to the baron, than to the good father. sfc 4 # * « The infant Isabel, by the care and skill of Alice, had now entirely over¬ come the weakness of her first months. She walked, chatted, and in the youth¬ ful graces of her person, was scarcely excelled by Margaret, It was Alice's first wish to unite the sisters by the bands of affection, and that wish, as far as can be judged from their early pro-
propensities, was gratified, much to the satisfaction of the baron, though by no means to-that of the baroness, who fre¬ quently declared to her favourite de¬ pendents that the baron's conduct was shameful, in placing ¿lis legitimate^ child as companion to his base-bdm daugh¬ ter. She had, likewise, more than once, attempted to remove Isabel from the care of Alice; but this Fitzwalter con¬ stantly objected to, with unshaken firm¬ ness, saying, that unless ?? baroness could allege some just cause of com¬ plaint, he could never countenance such gross injustice, or give his child a lesson of such early ingratitude, as to take her from the person to whose care she, in all probability, owed her life. The fondness of the children for each other, was also a cause of discontent to f 4 the
the lady Fitzwalter, and while their littie arms clasped each other's neck, and their lip$ met in affectionate kisses, her heart would overflow with bitter¬ ness, and she would turn aside to avoid the sight; while, on the contrary, Fitz¬ walter encircling both in his arms would bless them, and with raised eyes pray that Heaven might cement their affection with their years ; a* supplica¬ tion to which the pious Alice never failed to say amen.
CHAP.
CHAP. Χ. Margaret had nearly attained her ninth year, and Isabel completed her sixth, when the baron's health, which had long been declining, became appa¬ rently worse, though not sufficiently so to alarm his family. He had, at this period, long and frequent conferences with the friar, who even sometimes left his cell, and was shut up with him for hours alone in his apartment. One evening Fitzwalter, pleading business, excused himself from supping in the hall with some guests the baroness had invited, and retired to his closet, where he passed the hours, till near ten, in writing, when summoning David, he f 5 said,
said, as he lighted him to his chamber, Cf Fail not, at early dawn, to hasten to friar Austin, and entreat him to come to me as speedily as convenient. I am sick at heart, David, and a secret mo¬ nitor seems to whisper, that ere long, my wearied spirit shall rest in peace." " My dear master," answered David, " Heaven, of its mercy, grant, that even in this life, you may regain that peace you stand so much in need of, and so well deserve.—Thirty-one years, my lord, have only passed over your head, and more than sixty over that of your poor servant j and much do I pray, that you may survive me as many years, as I passed before you came into the world." " The will of God be done," an¬ swered Fitzwalter : — " My Blanch, David,
David, was scarcely nineteen ! Sweet fiower," added he after a pause, tf I have mourned thee for nine long years, but the time will come, ?? thou truly said'st, when we shall meet again/* As Fitzwalter spöket he raised his eyds, and saw the old man's cheeks were bathed in tears. " My faithful servant," said Fitzwalter, shaking him by the hand, " or rather 1 my long tried friend, to-morrow I must again call thee back to scenes long past ; my mind will then be more at ease, and my health, per¬ haps, benefit by the change." " The Holy Virgin grant it !" an¬ swered David.—·" Before the lark has left her nest, my lord, will I hasten to your noble friend, or if you have the most distant wish to see him this night,. I will away to St. Margaret's ; the moon f 6 shines
shines bright, I shall be back speedily/' «r—" No, niy good David, the, business, t*· though I earnestly wish it concluded, is; not, I trust, so immediately pressing* Sleep has lately,been almost a stranger to me :, to-night I feel uncommonly heavy, and will retire, to rest.—The ba¬ roness, I judge, is in the hall with the guests : disturb her not, I entreat you ; but when the cpmpany retire, tell her I felt too much disordered to join them." ^As Fitzwalter spoke, David assisted him to undress, and scarcely was his head placed upon the pillow, before the heaviness he complained of over¬ powered him. David, from the words of his lord, his declining health, and uncommon sleepiness, felt alarmed, and though he did not dare disobey him, by disturbing
disturbing the baroness, resolved to watch in his apartment. Fitzwalter's sleep, though heavy, was restless. He breathed at times hard, and, at inter¬ vals distinctly articulated the names of Blanch, De Hoffman, Margaret, and Austin. David drew near the bed,, and can*- tiously advanced the lamp > but his lord's features being composed, he be¬ came more satisfied, and gently re¬ placing the light, resumed his seat. The castle bell, at that moment, an** nounced the hour of midnight, and die distant noise of the company sepa¬ rating, appeared to disturb the sleep of Fitzwalter, who started and groaned aloud. David again hastened to his side; but far from the ease he before experienced, he was struck with horror and
and dismay, to find his noble master struggling in a paroxysm of one of those dreadful fits, in which life and death are so equally poised, that the weight of a hair would turn the balance. At this sight, not only the chamber, but the surrounding apartments, resounded with his cries, Which soon reached the domestics, who hastened, in a body, to learn the cause. General alarm for the event took place, but certainty too soon succeeded ; for after a few struggles, the whole of which did not last half an hour, Fitzwalter yielded up his soul to its great Creator. The baroness, vvho had been apprised of the danger, and who was present at his death, gave way to the mo t violent sorrow, and at length, supported by her women, was conducted to her chamber.
chamber. Alice, though she slept in a distant apartment, was alarmed by the general confusion, and hastened to be informed of the cause, which she heard with the most piercing grief, and find¬ ing all human cares unavailing, for the baron had little remains of life when she entered, she with unaffected piety knelt by his side, and bathing his hand, which she held in hers, with the tears of pure and disinterested affection, of¬ fered up her prayers for his eternal repose. The aweful struggle- ended, and the baroness withdrawn, Alice still re¬ mained kneeling, as by her example did also the servants, tiil the break of day, when she spici, " David, I pray you lose no time, but seno! to father Austin. I dread the effect this me¬ lancholy
lancholy event will have upon him, but it is necessary he be informed of it without delay." David, thus recalled to recollection*, in a voice often interrupted by his emotion, related the orders of his mas¬ ter the foregoing night, and then, by the advice of Alice, departed upon the melancholy errand, hoping to be able to divulge the tidings,, more gently than those who felt them- less severely. On David's reaching, the cave, he found the friar already risen, and judging he should find him at prayers in the cha¬ pel, he repaired thither. Austin was kneeling before the altar ; but the un¬ expected appearance of David, and the sorrow depicted, on his features, made him arise hastily, and advancing to¬ wards the old man, he said in a voice of
of alarm, " My honest friend, what brings you at this early hour ?"—How doth Fitzwalter ? — Your looks alarm me." David's only reply was tears. " Merciful Heaven î Speak—let me know the worst. I deserve punishment, and pray constantly for fortitude to sup¬ port it 5, say, then, wh^t sorrow shakes thus your aged frame, and in which I already feel I am to participate ?'W- David struggled to speak, but his voice was stifled by .the violence of his emo¬ tion, and he could only, in broken ac¬ cents, give the friar to understand the extent of his loss. Austin, for a mo¬ ment, appeared thunderstruck ; then throwing himself on the flinty pave¬ ment, he exclaimed, " Wretched sin¬ ner that I am, I have now lost the only friend
friend my crimes had left me.—Oh my generous, my noble Fitzwalter ! would I had died for thee, my more -than brother !" " My good master/' answered Da¬ vid, endeavouring to restrain his own grief» fearful of increasing that of the friar-, *Mf I mistake not, there are duties relative to my lord, that you ialone can fulfil; nearly his kst com¬ mands were, for me to seek you at early day, and crave your presence." David's words appeared to arrest the friar's attention, and after a long pause he answered, " True, my good old marvthou and I have both claims upon us, that should overcome our selfish feelings for this severe loss:"—" But," added he, with a degree of wildness David had not remarked in him since his
his residence in the cave, " when did the murderous tyger protect the Iamb ? or when did the fell kite preserve the dove ?—No, no, ' thou knowest I am proof against the smiles of innocence, and that my dagger Js ever ready to destroy it." " My gracious master," answered David, " moderate, I conjure you, this emotion, and endeavour to resume your accustomed calmness. Heaven sooth your sorrow ! I am convinced that you wculd not wilfully crush even the worm that crosses your path ; and for daggers, you have none : the only wea¬ pon you use, are prayers and gentle persuasion." Austin pressed his hand to his fore¬ head, and remained silent for several minutes; then turning, with more calmness,
calmness, he said, " I thank you, my kind friend, I will endeavour to over¬ come a distraction that disgraces the holy habit I have chosen. Hasten back to the castle ; in a short time I wih follow." fC From my lord's earnestness last night," returned David, " I am assured much depends on you. The Holy Virgin forgive me, but I like not the baroness; for often have I remarked her malignant looks when my lord caressed his little Margaret." " Your, conjectures are, I fear, not ill founded," replied Austin, after a pause. " Fitzwalter's will, I doubt, is not finished, though Τ know it is nearly so; I will therefore banish this unavailing grief, and without delay, take what steps are in my power for the
the interest of the orphan." So say¬ ing, the friar, accompanied by David, took the road to the castle. Plunged in the deepest melancholy, neither spoke by the way, David relieving the fullness of his heart by tears, and the father breathing forth sighs, that ap¬ parently shook his frame even to agony.
CHAP.
CHAP. XI. On reaching the castle, Austin and David went immediately to the cham¬ ber of Fitzwalter, where they found only Alice, and two female servants, sitting mournfully by the body. On the friar's entrance, the attendants withdrew, judging the father came to offer up those prayers, which religion demands in cases of sudden and unex¬ pected death. No salutation passed between the friar and Alice ; for the former, with anguish, falling on the body of his friend, clasped him in his arms, exclaiming, " Oh, Fitzwalter î I trust I commit no sin, in thus bathing thy virtuous clay with the tears of one so
so polluted with crimes as myself. Oh, thou, who perforce obliged me to suffer life, would to heaven I could impart to ûiee tlte like gift í - Thou, so beloved and estimable, and whose life is so much more requisite than that of the wretched Austin." " The noble Fitzwalter," said Alice firmly, " favoured by God, has soon hastened to reap the reward of his vir¬ tues ; pardon me, therefore, good fa¬ ther, but surely we should not mourn him as orte without hope.—In this dis¬ tress, from you we look for advice, consolation, and future guidance—Dis¬ appoint us not ; by your example teach us that resignation, that true devotion' can alone inspire, and over the inno¬ cent and defenceless Margaret stretch your
your protecting arm, and supply the place of her parent." " Virtuous Alice," answered Austin, '* I stand reproved. Here, before you and the worthy David, I swear by alb my hopes of pardon, that every duty in the power of man, and consistent wdth the life I have adopted, I will exert for our beloved orphan. May the spirit of my Fitzwalter be per¬ mitted to witness this oath, and may Heaven ratify it 1" tc And I," said David, kneeling, " with equal solemnity, swear, by all my hopes of happiness, to be equally faithful to her interest, as I have here¬ tofore been to that of my honoured master; and call Heaven equally to witness this oath." " The like vow rest upon me," said Alice.
Alice. " With the tenderness of a mother, and the solicitude of a friend, will I watch over her youth; but, alas ! what should occasion call, can iny weakness effect against the strong hand of power, which, like a torrent, sweeps away all before it?" Ci Dame Alice," answered the father, <c the race is not always to the swift, nor tlie battle to the strong. Power belongs to God alone, and as he wills so all shall be : his rain watcreth the young plants, and his sun bringeth them to perfection ; so also shall his might bring to maturity our unshelter¬ ed flower. The storms of adverse for¬ tune, that beat over the head of youth, destrovs not the buds of virtue, but rather strengthens, and accubtoms them to bear with fortitude, the turmoils vol. i. g they
they meet as they advance in life. The pampered lord, wdio never heard the voice of reproof, or felt the keen blast of the wintry wdnd, is usually a slave to himself, and a tyrant to his vassals ; while, on the contrary, he that, by adversity, has been taught that he îs no more than his fellows, treats his dependents wdth gentleness, and be¬ comes a blessing to all.—So may it be wdth our Margaret, good Alice ; and Heaven make us the humble guides, to lead her in the path her noble fa¬ ther would have approved, and what the Father of us all will sanction." " Amen," answered Alice ; " me¬ thinks my heart beats lighter.—I wdll away to my dear child, whom I left in my first alarm sleeping with the young Isabel, and in the care of her nurse.—- Fare-
Farewell, good father, I conjure you -sustain your spirits ; remember, to you we look, as to our friend, our teacher, and protect or.' \ With these words, Alice left the apartment, and a short silence ensued, when David's eyes filling anew with tears, he said—" Alas ! I must needs hasten to perform the last duties re¬ quired of me to this honoured body."— " My gracious master," continued he, affectionately kissing the baron's lifeless hand, tc thy noble heart, I well know, would have heaved a sigh for ihy faithful David. Ah ! much I wish that thou had'st sighed for me, rather than I have wept for thec ; for it is unbeseemly for youth to press thus be¬ fore age to the grave." Austin turned away his head, and ? 2 ven-
ventured no further speech than a ge¬ neral benediction, with which he leit the apartment. *£· ïl* v ï* t& *I* ef. *!· rj» «t. i¡. The friar passed through the gal¬ lery, and descended into the hall, where he found some domestics, one of whom he prayed to gi\e a message to the baroness' women, rcqu ^ting them to deliver it to her, and which was to thb puiport.— <c Friar Austin, in all humility, salutes the lady Fitz- w alter, and prays, as speedily as may be convenient to her, to be admitted ΊιΑο her presence, to converse with her on some business, relative to the melancholy event which has taken place. The father w T aited near an hour be¬ fore
fore he received the baroness' an¬ swer, and which was simply declining his visit that day, but appointing him to attend her at twelve the ensuing morning. Alice, in the mean time, had hastened to Margaret, whom she found playing with Isabel, unconsci¬ ous of the misfortune that had befallen them. The sisters ran to meet her, and clinging round her, asked where she had been, and whv she had left them so long. Alice pressed both İn her maternal arms ; but unequal to holding any conversation, took a scat in silence. Margaret viewed the good woman for some time with attention. " Dame," at length said she, " your eyes are red ; if you are ill, Isabel and I will nurse you." (( Yes," added the prattling Isabel, g 3 "I will
" I will not make a noise at all, if good dame is sick." Alice took one on each knee, and in the raost gentle accents, suited to their youthful capacity, informed them, that it had pleased God to,remove their fa¬ ther from the troubles of the world to endless felicity. The children listened with attention; but Isabel was too young to feel the loss so acutely as did Margaret, vvho wept so bitterly, ihat neither the soothing of Alice nor the caresses of her sister, had for many hours the least eiiect. * ^! $ # # Father Austin, as appointed on the ensuing morning, waited on the ba* roness, to whom he was immediately admitted. The foregoing day, and the whole
whole of the night, he had passed in prayer, and by that means had regain¬ ed a composure, that befitted his holy habit. On his entering the lady Fitz¬ walter's chamber, she dismissed her woman, and having received the con¬ dolence of the father, required to know the business he alluded to the day before. cc The business, lady," answered Aus¬ tin, " w T as to inform you, that there are some requests in my lord your hus¬ band's will, that it may be necessary to apprise you of before his funeral." 6( If the baron had a will, I am un¬ acquainted with it," answered she ; " are you possessed of a copy, fa¬ ther?" " No, it was not intirely compleat* cd the day previous to his death ; but g 4 enough
enough to satisfy all honest minds. You will find İt in the cabinet in the baron's closet, wdth his other papers." cf 1 have the keys, father; they were brought me yesterday, take them and brin rr it hither." Austin, calling some of the princi¬ pal attendants, entered the late baron's closet, and unlocked the cabinet, which contained a number of different wait¬ ings; but the will was not to be found among them. Austin, fearfully alarm¬ ed, sought every place, but in vain, and was necessitated to return to the lady without it. " By my life," said he, u there is villainy in this business. I not only saw, but read it, two days since ; a small addition was alone wanting to com¬ pleat it." <c I am
" I am entirely ignorant on the sub¬ ject," said the baroness. " My lord was many hours alone the night pre¬ vious to his death ; the will might not entirely meet his approbation, and he might destroy it." " Impossible !" replied the friar, " the confession of the lady Blanch was affixed to it with his own seal, think ye he would destroy that?" As Austin spoke, he fixed his eyes upon her ; and a blush, which she could not suppress, almost convinced him she was guilty. " The confession of Blanch Stanley,''* replied she, " could only publish shame, better for the honour of both forgotten." " Perhaps not, lady." u It could not be otherwise. The g $ baron
baron too well knew my father's will to marry her; as, in that case, the mortgage would remain in full force." " Grant it was so," replied the friar, " enough would still remain for the eldest daughter of Fitzwalter." " Eldest daughter of Fitzwalter 1" repeated the baroness, passionately. (ζ I acknowledge no lawful daughter to Fitzwalter but Isabel : had there been any other, think ycu not the baron would bave appointed her proper guardians ? As it is, I regard Margaret as my especial charge, and shall un¬ doubtedly do all for her, that my re¬ spect for the memory of the baron de¬ mands." The friar paused—lie clearly con¬ ceived that, by the loss of Fitzwalter's 6 will,
will, the first right to Margaret re¬ mained with the baroness, imd fear¬ ful of exasperating a serpent that might sting her to death, he replied mildly : " God alone, lady, is a judge of the human heart, and in his own time de¬ velops or conceals its secret move¬ ments, as it tends to manifest his glory, or the good of his creatures : this event, therefore, for the present, must rest. The Parent of orphans knows best what is proper for his children, and to him we will leave her." The mildness of the friar calmed tho warmth of the baroness. iC Father," said she, " every care that Margaret enjoyed during the life of the baron shall be continued, but when g ? you
you speak of placing her in the seat of 'his lawful daughter, you mtist excuse the anger it forces from me." The friar made no reply, but chang¬ ing the conversation, asked if she was informed, that the baron wdshed his remains to be taken to Germany, and deposited in the convent of St. Mary, near Bremen. The lady answered in the nega¬ tive ; but said, that as there was no wdll to enforce that request, she should, for the baron's own honour, prevent it being put in effect, as it must be highly derogatory for him to be carried from the burial place of bis ances¬ tors, to be laid by a woman, whom ~she much wondered the nuns had ad¬ mitted into their holy ground. 5 The
The friar felt a sentiment of anger that he could scarcely repress, but struggling to overcome it, he retired, with an appearance of calmness that he was far from feeling.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. Twelve days after the baron's death, his body was deposited in the chapel of the castle, as his lady had ex¬ pressed to the friar. She then took unlimited command over the whole do¬ main, and made several new arrange¬ ments respecting the vassals, which caused them to teel keenly the loss of their good lord. Alice she had never approved, but bound by her marriage articles not to remove her from Mar¬ garet, she could only shew her dislike, by treating her and her young charge with disrespect. The care of Isabel she gave to one of her own women, and assigned her apartments in a dis¬ tant
tant part of the castle, strictly ordering, that no communication should be held between the children. This command was no sooner given than obeyed. The tenderness of Alice for Isabel, and the affection she had assi¬ duously cultivated between the sisters, young as they were, had taken too deep a root to be easily removed. Marga¬ ret's fondness for Alice, and the gentle soothings of the good dame, in some measure compensated to her for the loss oc her sister ; but not so Isabel, Unaccustomed to look up to her mo¬ ther with the tenderness she felt for Alice, and disliking the person in whose care she was placed, she either sat sul¬ lenly silent, or giving vent to her little passions, screamed and called aloud on Alice and M argare t, with a perseve¬ rance
ranee that few children are capable of, but which lady Fitzwalter declared to be the unbending and obstinate spirit she inherited from her father. Austin, who seldom visited at the castle during the baron's life, now rarely omitted a single day, unless Alice, with Margaret, or David, called at his cell. The baroness' dislike to the friar was even yet stronger than that she felt for Alice. She well knew, hc was thorough¬ ly acquainted with all the late baron's affairs, was tenderly attached to his memory, and warmly interested in all that concerne d either Margaret or Isa¬ bel, both of whom he would fondle with even paternal kindness. There was also a dignity in his be¬ haviour, which, together with the mys¬ terious
terious manner in which he had first been introduced at the castle, that in¬ spired lier, at once, with a mixture of respect and wonder. Frequently had she questioned the late baron concern¬ ing his friend y but his answers were ever so careless or evasive, that they rather increased her curiosity than sa¬ tisfied it. Willingly would she have closed the castle gates against him, but that, from powerful reasons, she felt it impossible. The bosom friend of her lord, and almost idolized by the sur¬ rounding country for his virtue and hu- militv, w 7 hat excuse could she make for such a conduci Thus situated, she was perforce obliged to submit ; and as he ever behaved to herself with respect¬ ful deference, she the more readily yielded to it. Resolved, however, if possible,
possible, to unravel the mystery that hung about him, she one morning commanded David to be sent into her apartment, when she addressed him thus: " The cottage and land, David, which you held from my lord Fitzwalter, as I have some reason to suppose he meant it as a gift for your long services, though he did not express it, I am willing to ratify to you." David sighed, and buwcd, but did not speak. ςς Nay, more," continued she, ei I will myself be your friend ; but \ must be treated wdth sincerity and openness. I will have no secret plotters, who, un¬ der the guise of piety and mildness, steal into my family concerns, to for¬ ward views, derogatory to the fortune and
and honour of the family of Fitz¬ walter." " If such plotters there be, lady," re¬ plied David, with modest but manly firmness, " may their arts be exposed to all men, may the evil recoil on their own heads, and shame finally overtake them. For me, I am ojd ; but in such a cause, methinks, I should possess all the energy of youth ; and had I an hundred tongues, and as many hands, thcy should all be employed, in vindi¬ cating the rights and woiih of my ho¬ noured lord." u You speak warmly," answered lady Fitzwalter, wdth a sentiment of anger that she could not entirely suppress^ ( ' respect, as well as zeal, is necessary in niy presence." <s I crave your pardon, lady, my error was
was unintentional ; but even the frosts of sixty winters have not been suffi¬ cient to deaden the spirit of gratitude, I must ever feel for the respected name of Fitzwalter. Two hundred years, lady, have my poor family been vassals to my noble lord's, and if I had a drop of blood inimical to his honour, and knew what part of my body it dis¬ graced, by my soul I would let it out," " Enough," replied she, " of this attachment ; let it suffice, that I have both the will and power to serve you. You, I am well aware, are acquainted with the former situation of Austin; say then, what was he ? and what in¬ duced him to take so extraordinary a step, as becoming a friar ?" ' f His misfoitunes, lady, as I should conjecture,"
conjecture," answered David, " which had sickened hirn with the bustle of file. As to his former situation, I be¬ lieve it was highly respectable, and his family distinguished-------" " You believe," answered lady Fitz¬ walter, " and is this all the information you choose to bestow ?—If so, take the consequence of my displeasure, which you merit, and shall not fail to meet." " I should be grieved to meet your anger, and yet more so to have deserved it,lady," answered the old man.— <c If I, in reality, knew ought of the good friar, and that was entrusted to me under the veil of secrecy, and w T as of such a na¬ ture that it injured no man, wdiat should you think of me w r ere I to disclose it ?" " You would merely perform a duty yoi )we your superiors," replied she.— cc The
u The respect you owed to your lord İs now devolved to me, therefore give the proof I require, by answering those questions I have asked," " The duty I owed my gracious lord is indeed transferred," replied David, " but for the love and respect I bore him, these shall accompany me to my grave. One of his commands was, tc Forget all respecting Austin, that hc himsdf does not choose to disclose ; and should I falsify that order, should I not be unworthy the trust reposed in me ?" " Prevaricating knavo '" said she, %ζ this obstinacy shall not pass nnre¬ membered. Leave me ; but beware how you give your tongue licence to my disadvantage." David waited no second permission, but bowing, left the apartment. The
The imperious conduct of the ba¬ roness to her vassals, made her univer- sally disliked; and though her rank procured her the outward marks of re¬ spect, yet that glow of satisfaction and pleasure, that formerly used to enliven the features of the peasantry at the ap¬ proach of their lord, was now never to be discovered. On Margaret they looked with an anxious and curious eye. During the baron's life, all had been silent respecting her, yet he had treated her as one whom he had no reason to blush to produce to the world ; and ihough now, by the lady Fitzwalter's command, she was considered as the baron's natural daughter, yet the same respect and attentive kindness attended her whenever she went abroad. The baroness was observant to all that passed,
passed, but too artful to discover the impression it made upon her. She con¬ tinued her usual conduct, and if her behaviour could not merit praise, at least it escaped severe reprehension. **1* iJ* ili *ìr φ ¥f» »f. φ The baron had beeu dead about a year, when, one morning that Austin paid his usual visit, he heard the ba¬ roness' voice loud in the hall, and entering, found her accompanied by Alice, Margaret, and Isabel, all of whom she was reprimanding with the greatest bitterness, for disobedience of her orders, the children having been found that morning, in direct opposition ίο her commands, fondly embracing each other, in one of the galleries of the
,f)R, the castle. Alice was accused of pro¬ moting such meetings, which one of lady Fitzwalter's women averred to be frequent ; for that Isabel seized every opportunity to steal from her attend¬ ants, and was certain to be found in iMargaret's apartment. Alice denied the eharge; but candidly confessed, that when meetings had taken place, she, undoubtedly, had not endeavoured to restrain the mutual affection of the children, as she should have considered such an act as sinful, and acting in di¬ rect opposition to the will of that Power, who had commanded universal love, especially among those so near of kin. The baroness replied with acrimony 5 und regardless of what was due to her rank, descended so low as to use seve¬ ral bitter invectives, more disgraceful vol. 1. ? to
to herself than the object against whom they were intended. The respectable Alice was severely reprimanded, Isabel w r as repeatedly struck, and Margaret threatened, and called bastard. At that moment the friar entered : the op¬ probious name besto wed on her darling, had called forth, on the cheeks of Alice, a glow of anger she w r as unaccustomed to feel, but which, mingled piety and prudence made her refrain from ex¬ pressing in words. Margaret, terrified at the baroness' violence, had clung closer to the good dame, and was en¬ deavouring to suppress her tears, while, on the contrary, the little unbending Isabel, regardless of blows or threats, appeared resolved to increase her mo¬ ther's anger hy her disregard of it. u I grieve to hear the voice of dis- 3 cord,"
cord," said the friar, as he entered : " Heaven guide all, forgive the of¬ fender, and direct the offended." Tliough Austin's words were per¬ fectly consonant with his holy function yet, as they might be applied to either party, as that injured, the baroness made a short reply, but Isabel, running up to the friar, said : " I pray you, dear father, tell me what is a bastard. I know it is nothing wicked, because Margaret is a bastard ; but be it what* it may, as she is my sister, I will be the same," The resignation, mildness, and hu¬ mility, that usually marked the features of the friar, for a moment gave place to the deep crimson of anger ; his bent form became erect, and his eyes sparkled with a vivacity and rage, that made the h 2 baronesi
baroness shrink within herself vvith con¬ scious inferiority : but as suddenly sup¬ pressing these emotions, he gently eja¬ culated a prayer, and turning wdth mild¬ ness to Isabel, he replied : " A bastard, my sweet innocent, is á name, given by the unfeeling and narrow-minded, to children, who suffer shame, not from their own errors, but trom those of their parents. Margaret can inherit no shame from her parents, therefore that name cannot be applicable to her." " Not applicable to her," repeated lady Fitzwalter. " It would be well, friar, that you would bestow more time on the duties of your profession, and less in nourishing ideas, that can end only in disappointment and remorse." '·' Remorse and disappointment are the companions of sin, lady. Alas ! I have
have severely felt them. Heaven shield tlie children of my nobie friend from the cause, and they will never feel the effect." " My actions and their motives," re¬ plied lady Fitzwalter, looking malici¬ ously at the friary " are open to the world; / need no subterfuge to cover them, and therefore will not be dic¬ tated to, by any priest whatever." - " The actions of all," said Austin, " are open to, the inspection of Heaven, however they may be concealed from man, and the subterfuges of deceit are developed at the time appointed. To dictate, becomes not a servant of the church, neither is it consonant with my will nor inclination ; but to stand forth in the defence of truth and innocence is my privilege, not only as a priest,
but as a man. In this conversation, however, I have unwittingly oflended, for I simply replied tothe sweet Isabel's question, as [ coukl have no idea, that «ny one could bestow an epithet of shame on the eldest daughter of the nobie Fitzwalter." u That title cannot be disputed," answered she ; " but surely some dif¬ ference ought to be made, between a legitimate and a natural child." c< Tliey are distinctions I cannot enter into," returned the friar calmly, iC as, in this case, I consider them not applicable." Alice, wdio felt the utmost uneasi¬ ness to have Margaret present at a con¬ versation which she knew would not fail to make an impression on her sus¬ ceptible mind, taking her by the hand with«
withdrew, as did also the attendant of Isabel with her young charge, lea\ ing the baroness alone with the father, vvho, after some short conversation, abo took his leave.
ii 3 CHAP.
CHAP. ??. The baron Fitzwalter had been dead somewhat more than two years, when a grand tournament to be held at Westminster was proclaimed through¬ out England, and to which all tU Bri¬ tish nobility were" invited, either to be actors or spectators. The baroness, who had never visited the capital, resolved to profit by this opportunity, and at once to display her riches, and gratify her vanity, by appearing to the world ?? the widow of Fitzw T alter. This resolution once formed, the whole family were busied in prepara¬ tion for the journey ; the lady Titz- waltcr making her arrangements for an absence
absence of at least some months. Of Alice and Margaret she took little, no¬ tice ; but for Isabel, she left her under the care of her usual attendant, with a strict prohibition, that no communi¬ cation whatever should be held be¬ tween the children. Elegantly accoutered, mounted upon a beautiful palfrey, and attended by a large train of dependents, attired in new liveries, emblazoned with the arms ©f Fitzwalter, the baroness, at length, left the castle, and took the road to the metropolis. During the baron's life, his absence, though for ever so short a space, was accustomed to throw a gloom over his dependents; but not so that of his widow, whose departure gave almost universal satisfaction, and to no one more particularly than Alice, though ? 5 she
.she was careful not to express it.*— .Again did tlie youthful Margaret skip cheerfully through the apartments of the castle : unrestrained did she, as in her father's life, speak to the vassals ; and what gave her and Alice yet more satisfaction, they, without reproof, could everv afternoon visit Austin in his cell, and join in his prayers at the old chapel. The baroness had not left the castle more than two months, when the at¬ tendant of Isabel was seized with a malignant fever, wdiich, in a short time, terminated her life ; and as there w as not any person so immediately proper as Alice, to tale on them the care of Isabel, she necessarily resumed that charge, using tlie precaution, however, to send a messenger to the baroness, to apprize her of the change. Surrounded
Surrounded by the pleasures of a court, and dazzled by the attentions paid her rank and fortune, lady Fitz¬ walter thought little of home, and Isa¬ bel became, at most, a secondary con¬ sideration ; she therefore returned back an answer more moderate than she was accustomed, that, for the pre¬ sent, Isabel must remain under the care of Alice, until she couid select some person to replace her former attendant. Involved in her new pursuits, this pro¬ mise was neglected, if not forgotten ; for not only months, but even three jears passed, without any aireration in the arrangement that had taken place. The inhabitants of the castle seldom heard from the baroness, and Margaret had attained her fom teenth, and Isabel her eleventh year, before they were in¬ ii 6 formed,.
formed, they might speedily expect her, not as the widow of Fitzwalter, but as the wife of the lord De Launcv, she having, during the last year of her re¬ sidence in and near the metropolis, married the baron of that name. Whe¬ ther lady De Launcy did not possess, by nature, that fund of tenderness, that most mothers feel for an onlv child, or that the difference of Isabel's character from her own estranged it, certain it İs, she had never shewn those proofs of affection for her that might be expected, and her pride, rather than her love, apparently actuated her conduct to¬ wards her. To consider her as the heiress of Fitzwalter, gratified her va¬ nity ; but to have conciliated her af¬ fection, it would have been necessary for her to have been as sensible of the advan
advantages of rank and fortune as her self. On the baroness' return she was ac¬ companied by her lord ; and though the vassals did not dare omit the usual mark of respect of going to meet them, yet no sound of joy testified their satisfac¬ tion. The lady they had never loved* and for their new lord, his haughty and distant demeanour did not inspire them with warmer sentiments. He had at¬ tended the king when he first came to England, and had since been high in his favour, and repeatedly employed in several embassies to foreign courts. Dc Launcy, when he married lady Fitz¬ walter, had been a widower some years, with only one son, the fruit of his for¬ mer marriage j and though he was dis¬ tinguished by courtly employments, and receiving an ample appointment there- ι from,
from, yet his paternal patrimony was small, and lady Fitzwalter's fortune a desirable addition. The news of lady De Launcy 's re¬ turn, as it caused no joy among the de¬ pendents, neither did it among those more immediately concerned. Alice, though she was careful to conceal her thoughts, remembered the former in¬ dignities too well, not to shudder at the idea of their being renewed ; and for Margaret, though then young, they had made too deep an impression, to be erased by a three years' absence. For Isabel, as from the haroneas she had never experienced that tender affet tion which mothers alone can feel, neither did she experience that attachment which is the natural result. Alice, Margaret, and friar Austin, she felt loved
loved her sincerely, and to her young and susceptible heart they appeared the dearest friends she had in the world. This idea was, however, strongly dis¬ countenanced by Alice and the friar, both of wdiom endeavoured to inspire her vvith that duty, she owed by nature to the baroness. On tl,ie arrival of the lord and lady De Launcy, the latter, noiwitfastanding her former apathy, could not foi bear tes¬ tifying her astonishment at the grow th and improvement of both the children. She embraced Isabel with an affection she had not shewn heretofore, but Alar¬ garei she regarded with the same averted eye. The baron's conduct was similar 4 he appeared studious to conciliate the affection of Isabel, but to Margaret hc assumed
assumed all the haugtiness with which he addressed his dependents ; and happy was she when dismissed from the hall to her apartment, and found herself pressed in the maternal arms of the af¬ fectionate dame. Though she had suppressed her tears in the presence of lord and lady De Launcy, she gave them free vent on the bosom of Alice. " Oh dame !" at length exclaimed she, " though my dear father has been dead five years, I well recollect him ; I remember his seating me on his knee, kissing my cheeks and forehead, press¬ ing me to his bosom, and whiie he called me his second Blanch, the tears falling from his eyes upon my face and hands—and to see that hateful lord De Launcy, placed in the very chair where hc
lie was accustomed to sit, at the very board where he used to preside, and drinking out of the very silver cup which was appropriated to him, I thought my heart would have burst,— Oh dame ! I well know, that both friar Austin and you will condemn me, but at that moment I wished to possess a giant's strength, or rather that Heaven had made me a man, that I might have shewn, that though an alien to my fa¬ ther's fortune, I am none to his blood." Margaret's temper was uncommonly mild, this effusion, therefore, the more astonished Alice. She, however, at length succeeded in calming the agita¬ tion of her spirits, by the pious rea¬ soning she made use of on the occasion ; at the same time pointing out to her, the inconveniences that might arise from
from Isabel adopting her sentiments, as her temper, though generous, noble, and open, w T as, notwithstanding her youth, unyielding, where she supposed herself or those she loe ed injured. In the evening, Isabel being engaged with her mother, Alice and Margaret walked to the cave, where Alice re¬ lated to the friar the agitation of her charge. Like the good dame, he strongly recommended calmness.— " Time, my beloved child," said he, " brings strange things to pass, and to bear with impatience the state in which it has pleased Providence 'to place us, is sinful. By the loss of your dear father's will, for well do I know he had one, the wdiole povver over you devolves on lady De Launcy ; it has, therefore, for years, been the study, both
both of your friend Alice and myself, to sooth, not to provoke her; and tliough I am far from recommending dissimulation, yet common prudence requires you to conduct yourself in a similar manner, not only on your own account, but in consideration that she is lord Fitzwalter'a widow." "My dear father," replied Margaret, " I hope I shall never forget myself so far as to act otherwise. Your com¬ mands, and those of my good dame, are sacred to me, as I am convinced they,are dictated by rectitude ; but in¬ deed I cannot forget the harshness of lady De Launcy, before she left the castle, not only to me, but to Isabel, and dame Alice. I well remember, though I never mentioned it before, the opprobious names she bestowed upon
upon me, and which, I am assured, neitiier you nor my dame think I de¬ serve : for if I did, then must my blessed mother have been an ill woman, which I know is false ; for both you, father, and dame Alice, loved her, and speak of her with the highest respect, and even at times call her the sainted Blanch." ** Margaret," replied the father, " you are no longer a child, therefore we shall not treat you as one. Of your father's honour, or your mother's chas¬ tity, neither Alice nor myself have the smallest doubt; but a stronger testi¬ mony than ours is wanting, and with¬ out which we should hazard all. Let this information suffice, and lock it in your bosom. Unheeded I have, since the baron's death, watched over you with
with a scrutinizing attention, and though the baroness has given some cause of complaint, yet it was not sufficient to make me throw oif a mask, which it is your interest I should wear some time longer. Her absence of three years I regard as a favourable event, as du¬ ring that period you have escaped the violence and meanness of her temper. Bear up, therefore, some years longer : time may assist our wishes, or should it not, at least we will make a bold ef¬ fort, and if we fail, Margaret, we will submit as Christians, to a blow that hu¬ man wisdom could not prevent." Tbe friar's discourse was not entirely intelligible to Margaret ; she, however, felt, that the good man was her friend, and promised to be guided by his coun¬ sel, and with somewhat more cheerful-
ness
ness than she left it, returned to the castle, accompanied by Alice, At the hour of rest, Isabel joined them. She, by no means, appeared satisfied with the manner in which she had passed the day ; she notwithstanding expressed herself pleased with her mother's kind¬ ness to her, but for the baron, she felt all that repugnance, that prejudiced minds experience for a father-in-law. Alice, with her usual probity, combat- ted thb disposition, called it weak and sinful, and finally, though she did not convince her voune charge, succeeded in making her restrain her dislike within the bounds of prudence.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. The baron De Launcy's employ¬ ments at court did not permit him to be long absent from it, and the amuse¬ ments and bustle of the capital, being far more suited to the temper of the baroness than retirement, it was not designed to prolong their visit to Nor- thumbetland beyond the summer sea¬ son. On her return, she resolved to take Isabel with her, and time having, if not eradicated her dislike to Mar¬ garet, at least weakened her fears on her account, she determined to leave at the castle. In lady Dé Launcy's resolve concern¬ ing her daughter, the baron entirely coincided ¿
coincided ; a wary negotiator for the king, his master, he was not less skilful in arrangements for the future aggran¬ dizement of himself and family : and which way could that be so easily ef¬ fected, as by an union hereafter, be¬ tween his son, Richard De Launcv, and Isabel ? These schemes he, how¬ ever, divulged to no one. Time was necessary to bring them to perfection ; all that could be done in the present instance being to give the young peo¬ ple an opportunity of becoming ac¬ quainted, that as they increased in years, familiarity might the more easily be ripened into affection. The baroness' designs, respecting the future destination of Isabel, made her consider her fondness for Margaret with less acrimony than usual. She had no doubt,
doubt, but time and absence would speedily destroy so youthful a partiality, and that, at a proper age, Isabel, intro¬ duced to a life of splendour and plea¬ sure, would have as great an objection as herself, to admitting a sharer in her fortune. Six months that the baron and his lady passed in Northumberland at length elapsed, and preparations began to be made for their removal, wdien, for the first time, lady De Launcy pub¬ lic! ν declared her intention of taking her daughter with her. This news was a heavy blow, not only on Isabel, but also on Margaret and Alice, wdio both loved her with that warmth of affection, that youth, innocence, and the early promise of a noble and generous dis- vol. τ. ι position,
position, is sure to claim from kindred minds. The first evening after receiving the intelligence, with more melancholy than was usual to the party, Alice, with her beloved children, as she frequently called them, walked to St. Margaret's, to inform the friar of the arrangement which had given them such uneasi¬ ness. Even the father did not hear it unmoved- He had flattered himself that the strong affection the sisters had for each other would grow up w T ith them, and take so deep a root, as to render it permanent as their lives. Isabel's youth and removal appeared to crush this idea ; but unwilling to in¬ crease their depression, by shewing the effect the intelligence had upon him, he
he treated it lightly, but at the same time strictly enjoined Isabel, to perse¬ vere in her affection to Margaret, as a duty she owed the memory of her father. Isabel, alternately throwing her arms around each, in broken sentences pro¬ mised all that the friar recommended, with that firmness that particularly marked her character. u You need not charge me to love Margaret, father," said she, (c is she not my dear sister ? And though I may be taken from her, I will be torn to pieces before I forget her.—No, no, if you think I am iikeiy to be such a weak wicked girl, pray that God may take me before I become so. —One of my mother's women said some days ago, because she saw me sad, that ι 2 she
she wondered how I could weep, when in a few years I should be mistress of the castle, and lady of the domain.—- Y'ou may be angry, father, and so will dame; but I asked her how long first, and she said in less than ten years ; and though it is a long while, yet it made me glad, for then Margaret and I will live together with Alice ; and for you, father, if you will not come to us, why we will go to you, for I love even this great dreary cave, with my friends around me, better than the sumptuous carved hall at the castle, with lord De Launcy in the upper seat, for I know it is by his advice that I am to be removed." " My dear child," replied the father, taking her hand, tC I fear my injunc¬ tions will have little weight, for you speedily
speedily forget them. To obey your mother in all lawful commands, and in what docs not interfere with your duty to Heaven, and your fellow creatures, is a submission she has a right to ex¬ pect, and you an equal right to fulfil. She has, also, now given lord De Launcy a power over you, by making him her husband: Submit, therefore, without murmur, and be assured, that all in the end will be for the be^t, and that patience, rectitude, and an approv¬ ing conscience, vviil effect, what violence and resistance strive in vain to accom¬ plish.—For you, Margaret," continued the friar, " should you ever forget the affection of Isabel, you would be yet more inexcusable : her extreme youth might prove some excuse, but you have the advantage of three years, and not ι 3 only
only that, but in dame Alice a monitor, who during her life will never let you forget your duty." " When I forget to love my Isabel, father," replied Margaret, " I must first have forgotten myself,—Xo, 1 will never cease to pray that we may again be together.—Ah ! I wdsh we could be even in one of the poorest huts in the hamlet with dame Alice : ??? would be our dear mother, and we her dutiful children." " Isabel," replied the friar, " has al¬ ready a mother, persuade her then, Margaret, to submit without repug¬ nance to what is unavoidable, rather than increase her dislike, by wishes that are impossible, and would be ungrateful for her tojóin in." After some more discourse, the friar and
and his friends separated. Isabel, sob¬ bing and clinging round him, was some time before Alice could calm her agi· tation ; nor was the good man un¬ moved; his eyes overflowing with tears, he repeatedly blessed her, and prayed, that the saints would keep her in their especial protection. Some time after their departure, Austin's meditations were broken upon by the entrance of David. " Welcome, my worthy friend," said the friar ; " but what brings you here this evening ? you have already visited me once this day, and surely you might have spared your¬ self this second fatigue." « My gracious master," answered David, " in the hour of distress, to whom can the suffering fly, but to those ι 4 whom
whom they know will kindly sooth their w r oes, and teach them to bear them ?" " If that is your case, my honest David, I would that my power equalled my will ; but, a!a^ î I have nothing but counsel to offer, and the prayers of a contri 1 e inner. But oay, w T hat is amiss ? The faithful servant of my Fitzwalter has a l'gh to all my attention and friendship." " My good master, forgive the lo¬ quacity of an oíd man ? My ances¬ tors have been vassais to the lords of Fitzwalter these two hundred years. In the halls of he castle they have eat their bread ; in its chambers have they yielded up their souk; in the cloisters of the chapel are they laid side by side, and against the w r all is a memento of their merits, erected by the generosity of
of their masters : not one, in the period I have mentioned, has suflered the dis¬ grace of being discarded, until myself. Thank Heaven, however, that blow came hot from the house of Fitzwalter, but from one whom Providence, only for a time, permits to usurp his place." " Discarded !" repeated the friar, iC I surely misunderstood you ; so flagrant a mark of disrespect cannot, I think, be shewn to the memory of my friend, as to discard so old and faithful a ser¬ vant." " Lord De Launcy, in the presence of his lady, informed me, hc had no further occasion for my services. He was pleased to say, I performed them with an ill grace, and perhaps he spoke true ; for though I was master of my wOrds, I was not hypocrite enough to i õ be
be so of my looks. On my own account, I declare, I should rather rejoice than grieve at this event, but for the sake of my wife, I severely feel it ; for her de¬ clining years render her unfit to be cast upon the world, which must inevitably be the case, if the cottage which she has so long resided in be taken from us." " David," replied the friar, " for the first time you make me feel the loss of fortune ; but bear up, my good friend, lowering as the prospect may now ap¬ pear, you will yet, I trust, live to pre¬ sent the cup in the great hall, to the lawful owner of the domain." " The Virgin grant I could once see that day, how readily would I lay dovvn my life :—as it is, I fear to die, for weak as I am, my testimony may be of service." « The
' The most essential ; but we have taken every precaution in our power, a nd should it please Heaven to remove us all, still in my brethren, the friars minors, would our Margaret find true and indefatigable friends." It being near the hour of vespers, David soon after took his leave, and left the father to his orisons. Pfî »fí <* ίρ »¿í At the appointed time, the lord and lady De Launcy, accompanied by Isa¬ bel, and escorted by a splendid retinue, left the castle. The grief of the sisters at this separation, or that of Alice, thougli moderated by reason and reflec¬ tion, would be difficult to describe. Margaret, clasped in the arma of Alice, ι 6 and
and concealing her anguish in her bo¬ som, would not raise her eyes to see her beloved companion depart, while the good dame, in silent anguish, strove, in vain, to suppress the tears, that a se¬ paration from so amiable a child forced from her. Isabel, on the cqntrary, gave unrestrained scope to her vexation, and wdth all the energy that marked her character, no sooner saw the horses and retinue, than she screamed aloud, and peremptorily refused to go. Lndy De Launcy's violence was ill calculated to overcome this obstinacy. Isabel disre¬ garded both threats and blows, and on the servants, by their lacly-s order, attempting to place her on the palfrey prepared for her, with the vehemence of paosion slie even struck them.— Alice, grieved at this conduct, bothon Isabel's 1
on, the nun's story.' 181 Isabel's account, and the effect it might * have on the baroness in respect to Mar¬ garet, gently disengaged herself from the latter, and approaching the yet re¬ sisting Isabel, she said in a low voice, " My dear child, how soon have you forgotten the good father's lessons, of shewing obedience to your mother ; she will, doubtless, think this obstinacy is dictated to you by Margaret and my¬ self, and in consequence, we shall ex¬ perience her displeasure.,— Go then, let me conjure you, as becomes a du¬ tiful child. I have no doubt we shall meet again; until when, the Floly Vir «rin «'uide, direct, and bless you." As suddenly as a shower succeeds a thunder-storm, and calms the fury of the tempest, so, at this gentle reproof, did Isabel's tears allay the anger she had
had given way to : turning to Alice, she threw her arms around her neck, and in a voice scarcely articulate, sob¬ bed obedience.. The baroness, vexed at the delay, and perhaps not less so at the power she could not but observe that Alice had over the mind of her daughter, with increased acrimony commanded the do¬ mestics to place her upon the horse, at the saaie time regarding the dame with a malignancy, that she neither endea¬ voured nor indeed could suppress.— " Pardon me, lady," said Alice with her usuai mildness, tt but I am accus¬ tomed to the lady Isabel, this Utile pe¬ tulance over, she will be grieved for having oflended you : gentleness will always recall her to a remembrance of what is due to you and to her duty." " I will'
" I will oblige her to remember it," answered lady De Launcy with vehe¬ mence ; then, turning to the domestics,. she added, " wait no longer, obey me, place her upon her horse, I am resolved to overcome this childish obstinacy." The domestics,, though unwillingly, again advanced towards her, and again Alice spoke in a low persuasive voice, when Isabel', wdth a haughtiness which astonished all around her, said, " Were my dear father living, which of you would dare to treat me thus ?" With these words she, without look¬ ing back, rushed from the hall, and the cavalcade soon after left the castle. Austin, from a hill at some distance from his cell, saw the departure of the baron and his lady, and truly judging of the state of mind of both Alice and Margaret,
Margaret, hastened to the castle, where he found them, as he expected, plunged in grief. His pious exhortations, se¬ conded-by those of Alice, at length, in some measure, soothed the sorrow of Margaret ; for true religion inspires that confidence and hope, that never fails to enable us to support our afflictions with fortitude, until, by perseverance, w T e overcome them, or if they are un- surmountable, to indure them with a patience and magnanimity, that, in spite of fortune, makes us respectable in all the vicissitudes of life.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. The baron De Launcy had not been long returned to court, wdien the king, his master, employed him to negotiate some political business in Flanders, and which, as it was at¬ tended with great state, lady De Launcy, wdth her daughter, accompa¬ nied him. The baron, as from the first, treated Isabel with· so distin¬ guished a kindness, that it. ? dd not have failed of its effect on her suscep¬ tible heart, had she not, in other caces, found him to his dependents harsh, overbearing, and cruel. The lady De Launcy 's ruling passion, as before ob¬ served,
served, w r as splendour, rank, and show, and gratified in that, everv other con- sideration became secondary :—not but she felt a secret satisfaction in pro¬ ducing to the world, particularly as she had no other child, a daughter, whose person so early gave the promise of perfection, and whose rank and for¬ tune must hereafter make her a de¬ sirable acquisition to the first family in the kingdom. Richard De Launcy w r as now some¬ what turned of nineteen: in character he resembled his father, and therefore readily entered into his future views ; rejoiced at the prospect of an early in¬ dependence, and regardless of the ap¬ pendages that might belong thereunto. Isabel's age, however, precluded any immediate step towards perfecting the plan,
plan, and when she embarked with the baron and his ladv for Flanders, he re- mained at the court of Henry, waiting promotion. In the mean-time all was peaceful at the castle of Fitzwalter. Margaret, now approaching towards womanhood, was almost idolized by the vassals of the domain ; and as, accompanied by Alice, she visited the sick, or adminis¬ tered the assistance which her con¬ tracted means afforded, they would, in the warmth of their hearb, call upon the Saints to ble^s her, and secretly wibh tliey migiit consider her as the future heia ss of the castle. Every care of her education, in the power of Alice, had been exerted, and what ex¬ tended beyond her knowledge, the friar had perfected. He taught her the French
French and German lanfruarçcs, and gave a polish to the vvhole of hu· in¬ struction, thai though bred in a lonely dwelihv.;, and barDu\dcd bv îhc mere simple children ed' nature, her under¬ standing was ripened even beyond U r years, lier manners unaffected and graceful, and her person such as the fabulous poets or painters might have chosen, to personify beauty, blended wdth innocence and dignity. In a small cottage nearer to the mountains, and consequently to the friar's cell, David and his wife had now taken up their abode, and scarcely vvith less comfort than during the life of Fitzwalter. Alice, with Margaret, vi¬ sited them daily, and spared no pains to supply their necessities, Alice ex¬ erting her industry in spinning flax and woo!,
wool, which was sold for their support; and Margaret sewing fine works, which were sent to Berwick, and disposed of for the same purpose. Thus passed nearly three years, when one morning the whole hamlet was alarmed by the appearance of a troop of horsemen, gallantly accoutred, and at whose head rode a leader, distin¬ guished from his fellows by tbe richness of his dress. On bis arrival at the castle, an avant-courier announced the son of tbe baron De Launcy, who, in reality, bad paid this visit, from no motive but to examine tbe estate, be now hoped, in the course of another year or tvvo, to enjoy. Though not received with the satisfaction of an old master, at least be *vas entertained vvith the distinction bdiitting the ba¬ roness'
roness' son-in-law, and all being ar¬ ranged, his dinner was served in a state, that made his heart exult, as he considered ?ll around him would speedi¬ ly be his own. It is true, Isabel's age, now barely fourteen, had not suffered her to be consulted, but with such powerful auxiliaries as the baron and the baroness, he could have no reason to doubt a success equal to his wishes. The rei.ast concluded, Alice re- quested to be admitted into his pre¬ sence, which being granted, the good dame entreated to be informed of the baron and his lady's health, as also that ot Isabel. There was a respectability in the appearance of Alice that com¬ manded attention, and De Launcy im¬ mediatelv anwvued, that his father and the baroness were well, as was also Label:
Isabel : that tbe former were yet on their embassy ; but that the lady Label bad been for some months past with a young lady she had formed an ac¬ quaintance vvith, at the convent of St, Marv, near Bremen. " St. Mary, near Bremeni" repeated the dame, crossing herself; but in¬ stantly suppressing her surprize, sbe added, " Tlie Blessed Virgin guide her wherever she be ! for a more generous or innocent heart never warmed a hu¬ man bosom." " If I do not mistake," said De Launcy, " you are the person whom I have heard had the care of the lady Isabel in her iu.aney, and also of the baron Fitz,waiters natural daughter?" " I was happy in the ca.e of both the lord Fitz waiter's children," replied Alice.
Alice. e( I can but thank yc for the news of tlie family's welfaie, and take my leave:—many an anxious hour have I passed on account of the lady Isabel, and now rejoice at her health and safety." Thus saying, Alice niddc her obei¬ sance, and left the ball. Margaret and Alice w r erc mutually rejoiced at this information of Label's well-doing, for, during her long ab¬ sence, they had seldom heard of her, and then onlv slifjitlv, bv the means of the persons ladv De Launcy employed to collect the annual dues from the vassals. De Launcy, somewhat recovered from his fatigue, explored every part of the castle, with the scrutinizing eye of a man wlio ? upon the point of making a pinchase, but first wishes to be well apprised
apprised of its value. On passing through one of the galleries, Alice and Margaret were seated sewing, and though De Launcy had before no cu¬ riosity respecting lord Fitzwalter's el¬ dest daughter, when once seen, she ' was neither to be overlooked nov yet forgotten. Accustomed from his child¬ hood to a court, diffidence formed no part of his character ; bur all advances towards familiarity Were cut off, by the cold and repellant manner of Marga¬ ret. Common politeness could not 9 however, suffer her to refuse conversing ' with him on trifling subjects ; though, as speedily as she could, without giving offence, she rose, and wishing him a good evening, with Alice left the gal¬ lery. De Launcy, after Margaret's de¬ void, τ, ? parture,
parture, remained for some time lost in thought. Isabel, when she went to Flanders, was little more than eleven years old ; he was then nineteen, and had merely considered her as not an unpleasant appendage to the estate of Fitzwalter, which title, by the favour of the king, he also hoped some future day to get conferred upon himself Three years had passed since that pe¬ riod -, he was now twenty-two, and by letters from his father was informed, that with lady De Launcy's consent, the intended marriage should be con¬ summated, as soon as Isabel had com¬ pleted her sixteenth yean Intoxicated with this idea, his whole thoughts turned on rank and riches, until the sight of Margaret put them all to flight, and made him feel, that he was susceptible of 2
of even a stronger passion than avarice· lunged in these reflections, the bell tolled the hour of eight, without De Launcy having explored more of the castle, when a domestic, named Ste¬ phen, informed him, that supper was «erved in the hall. u Request the baron Fitzwalter's daughter to favour me with her com* pany," said De Launcy, " I am a stranger, and the honours of the house done by so fair a maid, will enhance the satisfaction I shall receive from my visit." " Dame Alice and the lady Marga* ret have been gone out almost two hours," answered the servant. « Put back the supper, then, I will wait her return—she scarcely ventures far in the evening from the castle," ? 2 Stephen
, Stephen was warmly attached to his master's house, and naturally too lo¬ quacious to be prudent, knew no grati¬ fication superior to conversing on what respected them. " By my faith," replied he to De Launcy, <( but she does, where I would not venture alone at twilight for the king's ransom ; as far as the old chapel, and to father Austin's ceil. Neither she nor dame Alice seem tö know what fear is ; but in truth they are, I believe, safe, for no mortal man living would hu' cither, and for spirits, I have heard they are not permitted to, visit the like of them, unless ior some great and good purpose. Another thing is plain: the friar, by his piety and prayers, has $\l the .ghosts, that used formerly to haunt the chapel, in subjection, and he would
would sooner cast them into the Red Sea, than suffer them to hurt a hair of either dame Alice or the lady Marga¬ ret's head." , De Launcy found he had met one whose loquacity would satisfy his cu¬ riosity, he therefore said,— " Wbat dis¬ tinction do you make between »the baron Fitzwalter's daughters? I re¬ mark you name his natii mi daughter the 'lady Margaret, you can give no higher ^distindtioii to his legitimate ohe A' " The vassals all call her," answ r ered he, €< the same as they did durmg' the baron's life. . Certain it is, he loved the very ground she trod upon :—and if she bo, as some people give out, a bastard, she is still, as' you say, my good master, .my lord's natural daughter, for she is as like him, not only ; person but good-* ' ? S ness,
ness, as two peas. Marry, well do I remember her mother; many a night have I seen her, and my then young lord, walking through the wood, her light step scarcely pressing the herbage under her feet, and her bright amber- coloured locks, flying loosely in the wind, and shining like threads of gold. We all then thought she w r ould have been our lady; but it proved otherwise, for she died in a foreign land;, and right sorrowful was my lord : troth ' I think he never was himself again." " 'Tis strange, if what I have he^ard be true, that the baron made no provi¬ sion for the offspring of so warm an at¬ tachment," replied De Launcy. Ί' Too true," answ r ered Stephen-—" though David, who was in all my late master's secrets, affirms, that the baron had a will :
will : and so, in truth, does friar Aus¬ tin ; but none was to be found." " Who is this friar ?" said De Launcy, " who was so well informed." " That," replied Stephen," is more than I know, or any person here, ex· cept David, who, as I said before, was in all my lord's secrets ; but you might as well inquire of one of the old statues in the hall as to ask him. There is not a better tempered fellow living, nor a worthier heart than David's ¡ it is a thousand pities he is so close." De Launcy's curiosity excited, he questioned and obtained of Stephen aU the information in his power to give ; as, friar Austin's first arrival in the country—his madness—his flight—his assuming the holy vocation—his rigid austerity of life, and lastly, his warm ? 4 attachment
attachment to all those who had been estimable to the baron, and most par¬ ticularly to Margaret. De Launcy making him a trifling present, asked the road to the old chapel, saying he WOuld walk half an hour, and then return to supper.
????.
CHAP. XVI. Alice and Margaret, as soon as they left De «Launcy, had hastened to the friar, whom they found r at vespers in St. Margaret's chapel. Joining his prayers, no conversation passed till ?? rose from their knees, when Alice ex¬ claimed, " Father, I am convinced; in spite of the cloud that has so long hung over our dearest prospects, sill hi''the end will work together for the best— L lord De Launcv's son is our «ruest ittAhè castle, and welcome may he be, for \\k brought us news of our Isabel. " : b ííS : « My good dame," answered the friar, " I congratulate you ; L cah clearly discern that your news is plèsr- it > sant,
sant. That our dear Isabel may re¬ main such as your instructions began to make her, is one of my sincerest wishes ; and may the virtues and honour she inherits from Fitzwalter, predominate over all other qualities in her heart." " She is not now with the baroness," replied Alice, she is upon a visit at the convent of St. Mary, near Bremen." " St. Mary's 1" repeated the friar, in a voice scarcely articulate ; " but, sin¬ ful wretch that I am, what is the con¬ vent of St. Mary to me ?—Merciful God I" continued he, raising his hands antl· eyes to Heaven, " accept my con¬ trition, pardon my manifold offences, and dismiss me." Never did Margaret recollect seeing ,the friar thus moved. Before she had -attained years of reflection and obser¬ vation,
vation, his frenzied sorrow had given way to mental suffering, without any outward sign, except his woe-worn form, and the heavy dejection that con¬ stantly hung over him. " Dismiss you, father," repeated Margaret. " Surely you do not mean by death : if you do, pray that the same stroke mav serve for dame Alice and me, for if we lose you, we have no friend left upon earth." The energy of Margaret's manner, the tears that filled her eyes, instantly recalled the friar to recollection. " My beloved child," answered he, " forgive me ; the wish, was, indeed, sinful, but it was involuntary. There are -affec¬ tions, Margaret, which death alone can overcome; and notwithstanding that grey hairs begin to shade my temples, ?? and
and the sacred vocation I have adopted, yet, even now, one of these rend my heart.—Pity me, therefore, my child. I endeavour to act uprightly, but alas 1 I am still a man, and cannot forget what formerly constituted the happiness of my life." * c Father," returned Margaret, " you were the most beloved friend of my parents; Oh! consider me as a daugh¬ ter to you. From their hearts I w r ould, if possible, have chased every care, had Heaven spared them to me ; but as it has not, accept the duty I have to be¬ stow, and spare me the distress of see¬ ing your mind thus shaken with sor¬ row." As Margaret spoke, she bent her knees before him, when Austin, raising her
her in his arms, repeatedly blest her, and at length replied : " Oh ! Margaret, thy uncertain situa¬ tion, thy virtue, and unprotected youth, call for every exertion, and every selfish thought shall sink before them. Thou art now seventeen, and the decisive stroke must soon take place, that fixes thee either high in rank and honour, or dooms thee to remain through life even as thou art. If the first, receive the good as becomes thee ; if the latter, re¬ member that our situation here is but transitory, and will speedily pass away." " Father," replied Margaret, " what¬ ever you judge right, I shall endeavour to obey : but if, by a decisive stroke, you mean ought that may injure our beloved Isabel, upon my knees I con¬ jure you, abandon it; for sooner would I forfeit
forfeit my life, than yield her the smallest vexation." " The peace and welfare of Isabel is as dear to me as to yourself, and unless she be greatly changed, I think her too nobly minded, to be swayed by the paltry consideration of dividing her fa¬ ther's fortune with an elder sister. But should she even deceive our hopes, re¬ member what is due to yourself, to your father's honour, and your mother's chas¬ tity.—Margaret, they call upon you from their sepulchres to assert your right, and to shew them to the world as they really were. In this very chapel, at this ruined altar, did they plight their mu¬ tual vows, six days before they departed for Germany. The priest who united them was a Benedictine, and soon after went on a mission to India, since when we
we have not been able to trace him* Alice and David, who were present at the sacred ceremony, are our only -vouchers; for,the strange loss of your father's will, and with it your mother's confession, has deprived us of all other. A copy of that confession also remained in the hands of a friar at Bremen, but as if all things conspired to counteract the right, the good man removed, and after tracing him for years without effect, we found he died only two years since in the FIoly-Land, where he had gone on a pilgrimage 5 but what became of his papers, if he had any, we conld never be certified. You will, perhaps, won¬ der how, buried in the solitude of my cell, I could learn even so much; but know, Margaret, though apparently in¬ active, no precaution has been neg¬ lected.
îectecl. After the loss of your dear fri¬ ther, fearful that another sudden death should deprive you of the testimonies left, I not only caused dame Alice, but also David, to give their oaths to every particular event : these I transmitted to the Franciscans at Berwdck, and by their means made the inquiries I have in¬ formed you of. I likewise to them gave my own testimony, respecting my know r - ledgc of the baron's will and its con¬ tents, praying them, in case of my de¬ cease, to spare no pains in—." The fall of a fragment of stone ar: some small distance, caused the friar to cease ; but all being again still, Mar¬ garet replied : " My dear father, pardon my inex¬ perience. I am convinced you have done all for the best, yet surely my mo¬ ther's
ther's honour should have been excul¬ pated long since." 4C But how, Margaret, was that to be effected ? During your grandfa¬ ther's lite, duty, and the request of your dying mother, kept your father silent. After the baron's death, pru¬ dence made him wish to continue the deception, until, by economy, he could clear the incumbrance, and leave his beloved child an estate, worthy the eldest daughter of the house of Fitz¬ walter. This plan was, in some degree, effected, though not compleat, at his decease, when, at all events, the truth would have been disclosed, but for the villainy of secreting the will." " If it was secreted from a fear of my claims injuring those of Isabel," replied Margaret, " how little could they
they judge of my heart who took that step.«—Never yet did I feel a sentiment for her but of the most sincere affec¬ tion.—Yes, father, I am content- to wave all claim, but that of being lord Fitzwalter's lawful daughter ; and that title, now I know my right, death itself shall not make me forego. The blessed spirits of my parents, as you truly say, call upon me to proclaim my mother's chastity and my father's honour.—Oh!" continued she, throwing herself before the altar, and kissing the marble step, " here did they pledge their faith, and receive the nuptial benediction, and here doth their daughter call upon the sainte to assist her in clearing their fame, and shewing them unspotted to the world." " My dear child," said Alice, "we have
have rich and powerful enemies to con¬ tend with, and the baron having mar¬ ried previous to his espousing Edith Mountford, will, I fear, by her father's testament, leave the estate greatly in her power." " Be it so," replied Margaret, " still was my mother no unchaste wanton, as I once heard the cruel baroness name her—I am no bastard, dame.—Oh fa¬ ther ! though J have concealed it in my own heart, how deeply have I felt those epithets. In such a case, now, me· thinks, I could return scorn for scorn. Let her take all, drive me to want, to penury, still the consciousness of my parent's honour should support me." " Again I repeat, prudence, yet awhile, Margaret, must still guide us. You want four years of being of age, until
until which the lady De Launcy can, undoubtedly, claim a right over you. That consideration has, for years,* kept me silent, as also Alice, and-David."*" After some more conversations, '* the gloom of night, which began to over¬ shadow the chapel, made' them ^think of separating,' ι the father conducting them to the castle gate, where he bade them good even. When Margaret and Alice entered; De Launcy was in the hall, wrapped in his cloak. " You walk late, fair maid," said he, addressing Margaret, " are you 1not alarmed in those lonely paths?" " Our errand was of a nature to pre¬ clude fear," replied Alice. — " The evening was fine, arid we walked to the old chapel." /< You
" You Jaave a good friar there, I un¬ derstand," answered De Launcy, fixing his eyes inquisitively on Margaret. " You heard truly," answered Alice. " I wished to entreat you to honour me with your company at supper," said De Launcy ; " the table has no plea¬ sure fot, me, unless a lady presides." " I am sorry for it," answered Mar¬ garet coolly. I am not accustomed to take my seat in the hall when the lady De Launçy resides here, and must be excused accepting the invitation of a stranger." " That punctilio is surely too far stretched," replied he. " It would be injustice to punish me, for lady De Launcy not being sensible of your merit. t You are formed to grace the hall of the castle of Fitzwalter, let me enjoy
enjoy the honour of seating you there ?" As he spoke, he attempted to take her hand ; but recoiling, she said— « You—From whence arises your right to place me there ?" " I plead no right," replied De Launcy, " I only asked a favour, which I should have been honoured by your granting me." " I am sorry you ask what I must refuse—Good night." So saying, with Alice, she left the hall, and retired to her apartment. What had passed at the old chapel employed all Margaret's thoughts, nor was she speedily tired of conversing of it ; for though she had always been as^ sured, from the discourse of Alice and the friar, that her parents were lawfully united, yet she now possessed the posi¬ tiv«
tive certainty of even the time and place, together with the reason that had made it so long concealed. From a discourse respecting her parents, she reverted to the friar. " My dear dame," said she, " my satisfaction of this night met with a considerable drawback, at the visible uneasiness of our dear friend, Austin. I am convinced some severe sorrow hangs over him ; would to Hea¬ ven I could remove it 1 Did you not mark his violent emotion at the men¬ tion of St. Mary's convent ?" « I did," replied Alice. " Notwithstanding his extreme mea- greness, and grey hairs, he has not even now the appearance of age," said Mar¬ garet. ** Pardon me, dame, but indeed I could not help surmising, that he had formerly loved some one that dwelt there." « You
" You, perhaps, judged truly," an¬ swered Alice. " He is, I believe, now not more than fifty; but what little I know respecting him, as he chooses it concealed, I am not at liberty to dis¬ close." " My t dear dame," said Margaret, " I meant not to express curiosity, though I confess it has frequently been excited, from the accounts that have casually reached me. My father loved him, and you highly honour him, I therefore know that he is a good man, and all other information is super¬ fluous." Such conversation filled up the hours till Margaret and Alice retired to rest.
v/H</V* ·
,
CHAP. XVII. On the ensuing morning, ás father Austin, after matins, was seated at the entrance ofhis cell, he perceived a man, whose appearance bespoke, him of rank, advancing towards him. <c Good day, father," said he. « My name is De Launcy : I come to crave your advice and assistance, which X hope you will not refuse me ?" " My advice and assistance, in all that is good, you may command," re¬ plied Austin coldly, " though I cannot conjecture in what the advice and assist¬ ance of á poor Franciscan may be ne¬ cessary to the son of the lord De Launcy." vol. i. h " In
" In this case, father, you can be of the utmost service ; and to wave all ceremony, I must first inform you, that I love Margaret Fitzwalter, and am willing to make her my bride —" " Make her your bride 1" interrupted the friar, " I thought you were unac¬ quainted ; that you never saw her till yesterday." " Granting it so, father, is she not made to be bejöved r" " As far as outward form I should judge so ; but are you convinced that your minds will assimilate ? Are you sure of her concurrence to your de-» sires ?" *' No, father ; but your influence wj)! have its proper effect. Every one is acquainted with the^ deference, she. pays to your opinion."
ζζ On this subject I shall decline giv¬ ing it," answered the friar, " particularly if it might influence her ; as marriage, more than any other event in life, ought to be free and unprejudiced. The af¬ fection too, you have conceived for her, is so young, that it ΛνίΙΙ easily be com- batted ; for it is surely no difficult task, to forget what we have only momenta¬ rily known." u I do not wish to forget her," re¬ plied De Launcy, " nor wiii I endea¬ vour it." ít At your pleasure. I am not autho¬ rized to answer for Margaret ; but well I know the purity of her mind will not sufier her to descend to clandestine ad* dresses.—-Are the the lord and lady De Launcy apprised of your inclination ? Do they authorize your offer ?" h 2 « As
<c As yet it has been impossible to ask their concurrence; but were it otherways, father, am I the only person who hold secrets trom lord and lady De Launcy ?" ' ( That I know not, nor care," an¬ swered the friar, with some haughti¬ ness ; " the ties of blood and duty de¬ mand that respect from you, that is not requisite from others." " Father," said De Launcy, " let us understand each other. I am not to learn, that you hereafter mean to pro¬ duce Margaret to the world as the baron Fitzwalter's legitimate daughter ; but, on my honour, no motive of in¬ terest sways me. On the contrary, both my father and lady De Launcy have consented to unite, in giving me their sanction to espouse the lady Isabel, as sole
sole heiress of Fitzwalter. I build, however, upon my father's affection; and Margaret once my wife, which with her concurrence and your assist¬ ance could speedily be effected, it would become his interest and honour, to exert his influence with the king, to acknowledge her right, as joint heiress to the late baron." " Young man," answered Austin, <e should Margaret stoop to any secon¬ dary means to ascertain her right, I my¬ self should doubt her claim to such a father as Fitzwalter. You say, on your honour, you have no interested views in the alliance ; but may I not distrust the honour of a man, who, con¬ cealed in the shades of night, steals upon the unsuspicious, and with a i· 3 mean-
meanness that upright minds disdain, robs them of their secrets r" t( Friar," replied De Launcy warmly, " you forget yourself ; though your ha¬ bit protects you, you should remember what is due to my rank." " While you remember it yourself, I shall not easily forget," replied Austin. " My habit, as you truly say, protects me ; nor is this the first time that, united with those holy vows which shall ever hold me, it hath protected others.—- Elated with youth and prosperity, young lord, if you think you may act wdth impunity, you mistake ; all good men- will despise you, if you transgress these bounds which are the only safeguards of society. By the pitiful meanness of listening, you have possessed yourself of
øf Margaret's secrets. But would it not have been more nobly done, to have made your proposals first ? Would that not more effectually have shewn your disinterestedness ? You might then have been entitled to our confidence and to our thanks." " And how are you assured that I listened, friar ?" said De Launcy. " By your being informed of what you could not otherways have known. ■—Go, go, young man ; learn, I repeat, to respect yourself, and others will re¬ spect you.—Or should you ever more descend to so derogatory a deed, re¬ member first," said he, ironically, " to take the feathers from your hat. Those decorations are, doubtless, meant to distinguish you from the vulgar, and to bespeak your quality and honour. ?4 In
In such employments they are super¬ fluous, and often lead to discovery : as witness the plume that I found this morning in the aisle of the chapel, and which is similar to that yoi\ ???* wear." De Launcy remained silent. After a pause, father Austin conti¬ nued, " Believe me I am ;io one's enemy, therefore I cannot be yours.— Truly will I lay before Margaret, what you have said ; but no word or action of mine shall influence her judgment. As to her cause, that I leave to Him who has protected her from the cradle. not doubting, but his powerful arm will fix her in the state most conducive to her happiness. " By my soul, father," said De Launcy, « I came not intentionally for such a purpose as you infer. My curiosity w^as, undoubt-
undoubtedly, excited, by an account I had heard of you ; and being also toid that Margaret had walked hither, I came to seek her. On entering the chapel, your discourse arrested my at¬ tention, and I involuntarily listened. unto it." " You will excuse me conversing longer on the subject," answered the friar, " I have, at this hour, occupations,, to which all others must give place." With these words the father bowed slightly,, and took his way to the cha¬ pel, while De Launcy, vexed at the ill success of his application, returned to the castle. Revolving future plans, he passed the remainder of the day in his own chamber, complaining of a slight indisposition, but cautiously observant. on all that passed. l 5 Towardá ;
Towards evening, Margaret and Alice, who were far from suspecting the discovery De Launcy had made, took their usual walk to the chapel, where they found the friar and David in earnest discourse. The father, after bidding them welcome, candidly re¬ lated all that had passed between him¬ self and De Launcy, though without comment, leaving the answer entirely to Margaret. With fixed attention she remained silent until he concluded; wiien sbe replied, ablush tinging her cheek: u To answer methodically to the strange relation you have made, I irabf begin by the affection you say De Launcy professes for me. I think you called it love, father ; if so, how erro¬ neous an opinion had I formed of tent pass" .n.
passion. Methought it meant friend¬ ship and esteem, in the most extensivo meaning of the words ; but now I find it otherwise, for what friendship or es¬ teem can De Launcy have for me on so short an acquaintance ? The love I feel for you, for dame Alice, my Isabel, and honest David, has been growing for years, and, like a tree whose strong root is immoveably fixed, must shatter the soil that nurtured it, ere it can be des¬ troyed or displaced, Such alone, fin ther, is the love that I comprehend, and such, I am convinced, is that which my friends bear to me ; I will, therefore, none of this strange sudden affec¬ tion, that springs up like a summer flower, and doubtless fades as soon. I love neither the lord De Launcy nór his son ; and am grieved the latter should ? ? bestow
bestow a thought upon me after I quit¬ ted his presence." The whole of Margaret's words and manner convinced her friends, that there were no hopes for De Launcy 5 Austin therefore replied í '* As you appear entirely determined in this business, I shall not scruple to speak my sentiments.—Though I have no doubt of the efficacy of De Launcy 's espousing our cause, yet I confess I would rather owe all to right and justice,. than submit to an obligation so humi¬ liating, and for which I should think you paid far too dear, by giving your hand, where you could not, without he¬ sitation, bestow your heart." The friar then proceeded to inform them, that he meant to lose no time in bringing forward Margaret's claim, which,
which, if contended, he would lay be¬ fore the throne, and personally demand of Henry the Seventh, protection and justice for the daughter of his, friends Fitzwalter; *4İ» il* %t* *î* •J» Wp *?» *S4 As Margaret and Alice walked home¬ ward, passing a small wood. they.met De Launcy, apparently plunged in. thought. At their approach he, how¬ ever, shook oft' his reverie, and,advanc¬ ing, said: " Fortune favours me to-night, wilb you permit me to attend you home ?" Margaret bowed coldly, but remain». ed silent, " The friar is a happy man," conti¬ nued he, taking his place by Marga¬ ret's side, " that can thus tempt youth 4 and
and beauty tö brave the horrors that are ¿aid to attend his dwelling, and to en¬ counter the damps of the night air." r " For his happiness," replied Mar¬ garet, " I cannot answer ; but if hap¬ piness, as we are taught to believe, is the result of virtue, he is doubtless so." - " I am, unfortunately, not in his fa¬ vour. I consulted him this morning, on a subject very near my heart, but he listened unpropitiously." • " Might I advise, then," said Mar¬ garet, " relinguish it; I never yet found his judgment.erroneous." f( That council is more easily gi ven¬ tilan adopted," answered he. " I am convinced you know to what I allude, and though I was unfortunate in my ap* plication to him, yet may I flatter myself with a patient hearing from you." " í know
" I know not in wbat I can be in¬ terested tbat concerns }??/' replied Margaret. " However, if you request it, you may depend upon my candid opinion." A youth, plainly attired, of a com¬ manding height, and as it should sceni by bis manner, (for tbe evening was too far advanced to render bis features dis¬ cernible), of superior rank to the pea¬ santry around, at that moment turned from an opposite path, and advancing towards them, said: " ? pray ye direct me, if in your power, the shortest way to father Aus¬ tin's cell. I know he dwells near this spot, for I had a direction from yonder cottages; but unacquainted with the country, have bewildered myself in the wood." « You
" You are a stranger then," replied Alice. " I am, lady; but am no stranger to the character of the pious father Austin." 1 Alice then directed the youth through the wood to the old chapel, where, if he did not find the friar, she informed him of the path to the cave. The stranger bowed, and with thanks was 3 turning from them, when Margaret,, who had not spoken, addressing him, said: " Good youth, walk as speedily as you can through the wood, for the evening draws in, and the way, though short, is intricate to those unacquainted, with it ; beware, also,, as you leave the path to cross to the chapel, for there is- a deep pit on the left side." lhe
The youth had instantly stopped when Margaret addressed him. " Heaven shield you, lady," replied he, " I will cautiously observe your council. The good will you bear to others revert upon your own head." With these words he pursued his way, and Margaret, with Alice and Dc Launcy, walked forward to the castle·
CHAP.
CHAP. XVIII. De Launcy again attempted to prevail upon Margaret to sup with him in the hall ; but declining the in¬ vitation, she retired to her chamber, consenting, however, at his earnest re¬ quest, to see him on the ensuing morn¬ ing, as he declared he had business to communicate of the utmost importance. " I wonder w hat that youth wanted with father Austin," said Margaret ? Alice, after they had retired ; " 'tis evi¬ dent he is a stranger, methought too he had rather a foreign accent." " Doubtless he comes," replied the dame, " to relieve his mind from some sorrow that oppresses it; if so, the good man
man will speak comfort to his wounded spirit." " I trust he may. Perhaps the loss of tender parents. Poor youth í if it be so, how much should I pity him." <c If he has been guilty of any gross error, I shall pity him far more," replied Alice. " The loss of affectionate pa¬ rents, though hard to support, is to be overcome by reason and reflection ; but an evil and reproaching conscience wdio can bear ? It is like a vulture, perpe* tually gnawing at the heart." " He appears very young, daine ; ?? deportment too was gentles and hi£ v oice sounded as one familiar to my ear." The discourse then turned upon dif¬ ferent subjects, and among others, the interview with De Launcy on the ensu¬ ing day. 6; I neither
" I neither respect nor esteem the young man," said Margaret, « there¬ fore wdsh at once to convince him of the futility of his paying me attentions, which I am predetermined never to re¬ turn. — No, dame," added she with warmth, " I would sooner bear my father's name, without blemish or dis¬ grace, in the meanest cottage, and clothed with the most humble habili¬ ments that poverty could give, rather than be lady of this domain, however just my title, were it to be received as a favour from the baroness De Launcy's son-in-law." fp *P 4* Sp *n In the morning De Launcy entreated of Margaret the promised audience, and
and was immediately admitted. At first, some confusion from being aware of the subject on which he wished to converse, marked Margaret's features ; but re-assured by the supporting pre¬ sence of Alice, she speedily overcame it, and received him with collected firmness. With earnest warmth he made her a tender of his hand and heart, touched slightly on what he had over¬ heard at the chapel, entreated her not to suffer the friar to prejudice him in her opinion, and finally declared, that the whole of his interest should be ex¬ erted to establish her in her right, was it refused to be acknowledged by the lady De Launcy. " For your offer, permit me to return you my thanks," replied Margaret.-— " That you do justice to my parents, I also
I also thank you. Honour* as yet, is ?? only dower ; perhaps it may be all I shall ever possess : it therefore befits ?? to preserve it unsullied, which it could never be, should I listen to a clandestine address from any man.— You will therefore excuse me declining thb^ as derogatory, at once, to me and 1 to yourself." De Launcy had hoped to win Margaret to hearken to a pri- yate marriage, as he before proposed to the friar ; but there was a dignity in her words and manner, that at once made him relinquish the thought. " As to my address being elandes^ tine," answered he, "that circumstances alone -have occasioned. I should be proud to acknowledge my attachment in the face of the whole world. Would you but honour me by the smallest ' gleam
gleam of hope, you shall be convinced of the truth of what I assert." cc I should be wanting to you and to myself, not to answer with candour and openness. As a man who has honoured me by the offer of his hand, and as the baroness De Launcy's son-in-law, I should be happy to respect you : but believe me, and receive my decided opinion, we ean never be nearer re¬ lated: I therefore entreat, that you neither give yourself norme further trouble on the subject. My resolution thus frankly declared, permit me to wish you a fairer and a richer bride, one whose claims need no justification, and who feels for you that preference, which I conceive necessary to render the state of marriage happy. For my mheritance, I am poor but proud, and wish
wish to owe it to no secondary means ; for I cannot stoop to obligation, for what, in truth and honour, is my own." The firmness of Margaret's manner astonished De Launcy. Accustomed to courts, to be refused by a mere girl, educated in a distant county, surrounded by peasants, and the means of informa¬ tion so contracted as hers necessarily were, surpassed his belief. In vain he endeavoured to soften her resolves ; but with a perseverance that left him no room for hope, she arose, and taking the dame's arm, quitted the apartment· Anger and affronted pride for some time reigned alone in De Launcy's heart. A thousand bitter execrations did he vent against the innocent Alice and the friar, both of whom he re¬ garded
garded as Margaret's advisers, yet un¬ willing to relinquish her, he resolved to alter hb plan, and as he surmised that Austin would now, as he had made the discovery, bring forward his proofs of her legitimacy, he determined that lord and lady De Launcy should receive the first information from himself. Thus resolved, he immediately wrote letters to his father, relating his visit to Nor¬ thumberland, and his discovery at the chapel; but cautiously avoided men¬ tioning bus proposals, as those would too completely have explained his mo¬ tives for the communication. This point arranged, he dispatched a trusty messenger, with orders to make the capital in his way, as there was a re¬ port before he left Westminster, that the king had recalled the lore} De Launcy. voi. ι. m ????.
CHAP. XIX. The youth who, the foregoing evening, had inquired the way to the friar's cell, by following the direction of Alice, speedily reached it* At the entrance he hallooed aloud, and was immediately answered by the father. ** Who calls so bud," said he, " at this late hour ? If ye have lost your way I will bring you into the right path to the village, or if ye are benighted, to such food and lodging as this cave af¬ fords ye aré welcome, so ye come in the spirit of peace and good will to all men." ? « That I truly do," replied the youth ; ** but I have neither lost niy way, nor yet
yet am I benighted. My business is with father Austin ; it has brought me many a weary mile, nor do I repent my la¬ bour, since I trust I have found him." " You have, indeed, met the sinner," answered Austin ; <c but what business can have brought you from far to him is past my conjecture : however, if hé can be of service to the meanest crea¬ ture God hath made, nay even to one whose errors are great as his own, be¬ hold him ready.—Enter, therefore, good youth, I have flint and steel, and will instantly light my lamp." The youth entered the cave. The father struck a light, ahd raised it to the face of his guest. "The peace of Heaven rest upon you, my son !" said he. «« The hand of your great Creator has blessed yon m 2 % with
vtàth a good exterior, be it your study so to temper your conduct, that your heart and manners may not disgrace so fair a temple. I pray you be seated," pointing tô a stone ; " such food as I have I will set before you ; when you are refreshed you shall inform me of the business that brought you hither." The eyes of the youth were fixed upon Austin, the mildness of whose manners, mingled with dignity, inspired him at oftce with veneration and esteem* u Father," replied he, «* I thank you, but I do not wish for food* Give me your blessing, »nd then I will enter on my emmd." As he spoke, he bent his knee before the friar, whoi laying his hand on his tiesni, said, "A blessing, more powerful than 4 .mine,
mine, rest upon thee ; in the straight path of rectitude mayest thou Walk; may no turbulent passions assail thee ; may the flower ofthy youth be unsullied, thy middle days honourable, thy age re¬ spectable, and thy end that of the virtuous." ** Rude and unskilled in the graces of language, my heart, rather than my words, must thank you," replied ?? stranger.. " May your blessing be pro¬ phetic—As hitheito, I trust ray youth has been unsullied by any gross crime, though I have, unwittingly, faedn guilty of disobedience*— But for ho¬ nour, father, it is not easily wooed to grace the erest of the usfeiiowa and unfriended—Can i therefore merit «- spectability ? I must be content, and , m 3 trust
trust in that Power who gave me being, to make my life such as may insure peace beyond it. Pardon me, father, I have insensibly strayed from the bu¬ siness I came here to execute. These papers," continued he, drawing a packet from his bosom and presenting it, " were entrusted to me to deliver to your own hand, and from my heart I rejoice that I have succeeded in my errand." The friar received the parcel. His opinion and counsel were often re¬ quested by many at a considerable dis¬ tance from his dwelling, and he had no lïoubt, but the present was on business of a similar import. It was carefully sealed witb the impression of a cross, and addressed in the following manner: u Sisler Adelaide, superior qf the convent
convent of the Holy Virgin y ??? Bre* ??? to her honoured brother^ the holy Franciscan, Austin, greeting. Austin's eyes glanced on the direc¬ tion ; but he read it not : for suddenly the hand of death appeared to strike him ; his features assumed a ghastly paleness, an universal tremor shook his whole frame, the drops of cold perspi¬ ration hung upon his hollow and care¬ worn cheeks, the packet fell from his unnerved grasp, and with a deep and heart-rending groan, he fell upon the rocky flooring of his cell. Surprised and terrified the youth hastened to his assistance ; with manly vigour he raised him in his arms, and placed him upon the rushes on one side the cave, where using such means as were in his power, as rubbing his temples and loosening m 4 his
his vest, he at length had the satisfac* tîon to find returning life beam in his yet half-closed eyes, and tinge his palid cheek« Recalled to recollection, the attention of the youth was not lost upon the friar, Alas, my son !" said he, " I am not worthy your care, the sins of my youth deservedly punish my later years. By my example take warning. Vice is a serpent, whose sting is never to be overcome : like a wound cicatriced, but not healed, it bleeds afre¿h upon every occasion, and inflicts upon the guilty soul, sufferings which all the malice of men or devils can never in¬ tact upon the innocent." «* Fadder,? replied the youth, still kneeling oa the rushes by his side, " you a^e injurious tagrourself. In an¬ swer
swer to my enquiries for you, even at the village, added to what I had heard before, they said your life was,holiness itself, and that you had resided in thb solitude fourteen or fifteen years. At that period you must have been young. Youth is prone to error, which, doubt¬ less, the sanctity of so many years must have obliterated." " Look at these hands," young man," answered the friar wildly, " the whole ocean is too small to wash them clean." " The ocean, father, ? bounded/' replied the youth modestly, u but the mercy of Heaven is unbounded." " You say trae/* interrupted Austhj, " therefore let us pray-—give me your hand, I will rise ; pray er will calm this tempest tiiat destroys me." vol. ι. m 5 Austin,
^\ustin, as he spoke, by thè assistance of the youth, arose ; but his agitation was stiil so great, that if he had not knelt he must have fallen. İferemained a considerable time in fervent but silent prayer, the youth kneeling piously by his side; when, at length, rising, though 'feebly, he said, with calmness, ' - <( Grace be to Heaven, I am once more myself. I grieve, good youth, to give you so unworthy a welcome ; but "forget it not, it is the tribute of sin ; let it prove a beacon to warn your youth to avoid it.—I pray you now reach me the packet ; the saints inspire me with fortitude to peruse it !— My sufferings *are many, hut they are deserved." The stranger again presented the packet ; but theAand of Atistin was, as yet, too unsteady to remove the enve- - - * lope ;
íope : he, however, with a fervour that astonished the youth, pressed it first to his lips, and then to his heart. " Reverenced be what it contains," *said he, <c though it should be a curse ·" then with a degree of forced courage he tore it open, and read as follows : " Sister Adelaide, though not per¬ sonally known to the Franciscan, Aus¬ tin, is not a stranger to his virtues, Distant, like himself, from a vain and turbulent world, she contemplates with horror the past, and bows with grati¬ tude to the all-wise Power who has placed her in safety from the danger. That there were earthly affections onee so dear to her, that they weakened 'every other, and left tú her God a di¬ vided heart; she now confesses with ' contrition, and prays only forpc~ver to fulfil
fulfil those duties, which the sacred vow, * that banished her from the world, en¬ joins her to keep——" The friar groaned, and for some time, his eyes raised to Heaven, appeared even to forget what he had been perus¬ ing ; at length resuming it, he con¬ tinued : " The shipwrecked mariner, snatched from the storm, must yet feel for those condemned to buffet with its violence > and thus, father, do I feel for two help-, less females, whom I understand you have for years favoured with your prayers and counsel ; need I say, the daughter of William Fitzwalter, and her trusty friend, the virtuous Alice'? the unhappy situation of both of whom I have learned, by means of the young and deserving Isabel Fitzwalter, who has,
has, for some months, been an inmate at this house, wifh a daughter of the count De Ranstade. Her ingenuous disposition and affectionate manner have won my heart; in my breast she has confided her secrets and sorrows, and among the latter, her distress for the situation of Margaret Fitzwalter and the dame Alice, pointing yourself out, as the only means by which I could serve them. What I would therefore request is, that you would offer to them my services, and an asylum such as I myself possess. From Isabel's disjointed account I also learn, that a report is spread, that Margaret is not the legi-' tímate child of William Fitzwalter ¿ a falsehood I can refute, as I have proof in my hands to the contrary, as the youth who brings these dispatches cari ascertain,
ascertain. He is also intrusted by Isa¬ bel with tetters to Margaret and dame Alice, which you will have the good¬ ness to deliver ; and if opportunity serves, remit the answers by the same messenger.—In the mean-while, that God may have you in his holy keeping, is the prayer of, " Adelaide, " Abbess of St. Mary's, BremenA* This letter was not read without frequent interruptions, and an emotion, which though it inspired the youth with wonder, inspired him also with .pity. Like Margaret, he surmised that the friar, in his youth, had loved some one at the convent of St. Mary ; and what one so probable as Adelaide ? who, though past the flower of her age, he had
had himself contemplated with a de¬ gree of admiration and respect, be¬ yond any woman he had ever yet seen. This idea was, however, soon put to flight; for Austin, somewhat recovered, reaching him the letter, bade him read it, after which they would talk further. By this he found the friar and the abbess were strangers to each other, and his vague conjectures were instantly ba¬ nished. The father, though the ef¬ fects of his emotion were still dis¬ cernible, did not neglect the duties of hospitality. He placed before his guest such food as his cell afforded, and though he did not himself set the ex¬ ample, pressed him to eat, with an earn¬ estness that bespoke his welcome. The repast ended, resuming the sub¬ iect that had brought the youth to England,
England, the friar said, though his voice faultered as he spoke : " I think the noble-minded abbess refers me to you * for a knowledge of proofs of Margaret's legitimacy. I can by no means conjecture how she, or much more you, can possess any thing satisfactory on the subject. Tis true," continued he, " that the lady Blanch, wife of Fitzwalter, lies buried in that convent, but that is no proof. We have, indeed, two witnesses ; but they were known friends and vassals to the parties, consequently their evidence maý he disputed. What we have long in vain sought after is two priests, the one who married William Fitzwalter to Blanch, the other who took her last confession—-*" « And
" And whose name was John," in¬ terrupted the youth. " He was con¬ fessor to St.Mary's convent; a good and virtuous man, who, influenced by a dream, in his old age went to Pales¬ tine, where he died." Austin regarded his guest for a mo¬ ment in silent wonder. " Young man," at length said he, " your whole appearance, your speech, your errand, your knowledge of what so few are acquainted with, astonish me¿ yet I well know, from undeniable evidence, you are no impostor, and that the abbess of St. Mary truly sent you; yet have I my doubts that you are not what you seem.------Does not that peasant's garb conceal one who may hereafter aspire to the highest ho¬ nours (excluding royalty) of the Ger¬ man
man empire ? The cast of your coun¬ tenance, too, is, methinks, familiar to me, and I mistake grossly, if the son of the count De Hoffman is not now before me." " Father," answered the youth, " I trust that we may be better acquainted, and that, as your knowledge of me increases, you may form a juster esti¬ mate of my deserts than you have of my quality.------In truth, reverend sir, I am neither more nor less than what I seem ; a peasant born and educated, my name Leopold, the humble friend of the gallant youth you mistake me for, a devoted servant of the abbess of St. Mary's, and equally, at command, of yours." The friar sighed.—«—" Your fea¬ tures," replied he, <t bear a stamp of probity,
probity, that I cannot, if I would, dis¬ pute.——The count De Hoffman, or I judge too hastily, would suffer no dis¬ grace by calling you his son. Sudden prepossessions should not, however, be blindly yielded to. We will sometime talk further ; fpr I candidly own that I am lost in a labyrinth of conjecture—" " And which cannot be dispelled, father, unless you will condescend to Lsten to a narrative of my uninteresting life ; therefore, to-morrow, if you will give me an hour's attention, I will ex¬ plain how I obtained the small know¬ ledge I possess, and also how I became honoured with the noble Adelaide's commission." Gladly would the father have fore¬ gone sleep, to listen to a youth that had so greatly interested him ; but to breathe such
such a wish to a weary guest, was a breach of hospitality his humanity would not suffer him to commit ; he, there¬ fore, expressed his thanks for his offered confidence, and prepared some rushes, that lay in one corner of the cave, for bim to repose his wearied limbs. The youth received the friar's atten¬ tion with respect; and, after joining him in his orisons, retired to rest.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
frinttd by Cox, Son, and Baylii, Great Queen Street.
