Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
St. Margaret's cave: or, The nun's story: an ancient legends
St. MARGARET'S CAVE : OR, THE NUN's STORY. CHAP, I. On leaving the hall at AVestminster, Dc Launcy with his son returned home, vvhere his lady was anxiously expecting him. He gave her ?? time to speak ; for throwing himself into a chair, he exclaimed ------ ίέ I ??? undone !—Ac¬ cursed be the hour in which I entered upon this business: instead of involv¬ ing the friar in disgrace, I have risen hirn to. honour, and even to be favoured with a private interview writh the King ,------He will now have him to himself, vol. iv. ? aud
and arrange all to his own satisfaction. His insolence and pride were not with¬ out foundation ; he was, doubtless, some friend of Henry's before he came to the crown." " The King/' said Richard, " knew him not ; that therefore could not be. Ilis cowl, indeed, was on ; but it rather shaded than concealed his features." " How to act," said De Launcy, " I know not. To stop the trial im¬ pending on Margaret's account, would at once bespeak fear and guilt ; ahd to carry it on, involve us in shame and IULI1. 99 AVhere is Margaret now ?" asked lady De Launcy, in an agitated voice. " Curse on the friar's arts, secure from our power.—She is at Bremen, in the same convent with Isabel, under the protection
THE protection of the Abbess, who is niece to the Pope." Lady De Launcy trembled with pas- sion—*" Isabel/' said she, " shali in- stantly bc sent for home ; she has'every disposition to act contrary to my wishes; and, by the advice of such associates, she will become yet more self-willed/* " The friar is to be brought intç court again to-morrow : he was found guilty of stealing Margaret; but the sentence will, at most, in the King's, present frame of mind, be a fine------ For Isabel, I think with yourself, it were better she was sent for imme¬ diately: select some of your w T omen, and let them attend her—Richard, for her better security, shall accompany them." This plan arranged, it was resolved ? 2 to
to put in execution on the morrow ; at least as far as related to Richard's de¬ parture," The uneasiness and anxiety of De Launcy would not suffer him to stay from court. In the evening, he re¬ paired thither; but all he could hear w r as, that Austin had been three hours in the King's closet, and still remained there. AVith this intelligence, he re¬ turned to his lady. To her it was yet more vexatious ; and unable to eat or sleep, she passed the hours in those un¬ pleasant reflections, that sooner or later arc the consequence of a deviation from the paths of rectitude. *f» 4* Ψ *** *** Austin, conducted to the King's clo¬ set, was left to himself; but in a short time
time was joined by Henry.—" Friar," said he, " take thy seat, and throw back thv cowl—thou hast to .dav asto- nished me. I have m vain endeavoured to recall thy person to my remembrance. —That sword, thou laid'st at my feet, I gave, as my pledge, at the battle of Bosworth to Fitzwalter, and his friend, a young German, named De Hoffman : they both bravely fought for me, and much was I indebted to them. The first has* long since, been dead ; and, for the second, thou art not he; for though, on a narrow scrutiny, some of thy features resemble his, yet it is im¬ possible : hé was taller than thou art, his form athletic, his visage florid, and though a German, possessed all the life and vivacity of a Frenchman." " My liege," answered Austin, " sin ? 3 and
and sorrow, while tney prey upon the conscience like a canker-worm, under¬ mine the constitution, and dry up the bprings of life ; they bend the body to the earth, and hasten on a premature old age------Alas! all that vice and grief have left of De Hoffman, stands now before you—" " By my faith, it is scarcely to be believed !" replied Henry. " líow ! the count De Hoffman, the head of one of the most noble families in Germany, devoting himself to a religious life in a foreign country, and living for years in a solitary cave ? I shall be of the opinion of De Launcy—It must be insanity alone, that could tempt you to so strange a resolution," " Alas !" said Austin, " Insanity was but the beginning of my punishment,— My
My crime," continued he, with a sigh, that agitated his whole frame, " was heinous, and dreadful has Keen the ex¬ piation," " Friar," said the King, " thou hast promised me thy confidence, and thou shalt noc repent it—The debt of Bos- w T orth must be repaid—" 99 My liege," replied Austin, " the world and its honours to me are dead for ever—When you hear the sad story I have to relate, you will view me in a different light. On, the orphan, Mar¬ garet, confer that protection you would have granted her father—She is, as my soul shall answer, his lawful child, as can be proved by the oaths of two do¬ mestics, the confession of her expiring mother, and by the word of Fitzw r alter, ? 4 who
who has avowed it to me a thousand times." " She shall have justice ; but at this moment, I am more interested on thy account than curious on hers.—Inform me why thou didst turn friar, and that too in the flower of thy age ?" " Dead, in the opinion of all my friends," answered the fiither, u I might steal to the grave unknown, and my me¬ mory be safe from reproach ; but I wiH brave all for the orphan of my friend ; and while I disclose truths of myself, that cause humanity to shrink, judge whether I would lie for another." " Though as yet my eye hardly ac¬ knowledges thee for thc once sprightly De Hoffman,, yet my heart inclines to yield thee belief; begin thmefore thy Story ;
story; we are both men and sinners; and Heaven forefend, I should judge harshly." " I thank you, my gracious liege—· You shall see my heart as openly as I lay it before my Creator ; but while you condemn the sinner, I pray you pity the man ?" So speaking, Austin folded his arms across his breast, pulled his hood over his brows, and began his relation.
? 5 CHAP,
CHAP. IL The Friar\s Story. 44 John, count De Hoffman, was my father—AVould that with his estate, I had inherited his virtues ; but though I partook his blood, I was a stranger to the qualities of his heart. Myself, with a second son named Joseph, and a daughter called Clarice, constituted the wriiole of his family. In my youth, I became acquainted with William Fitz¬ walter; w r e travelled together, and ani¬ mated by the hate of tyranny and op¬ pression, attended your grace to Eng¬ land, and fought under your banner at the battle of Bosworth Field—Tiiere, my îiege^ your partiality made us proud, ν ¿UiU
and we returned home, elated with the remembrance of having lent our feeble aid towards the completion of so great an event. Fitzwalter went to Nor* thumberland, and I returned to Ger¬ many, where I found my father in health, my brother Joseph on the point of marriage, and my sister Clarice in the convent of St. Mary's, Bremen. My duty paid to my father, I flew to see Clarice, whom I had ever tenderly lov¬ ed. I found her the same cheerful good girl I left her. She had a com¬ panion about the age of seventeen, se* cond daughter to the count of Eltzen, a maid so fair, so exquisitely beautiful, shat surely never did earthly clay so strongly resemble what our ideas form of the perfection and beauty of celes¬ tial beings. To enrich his eldest son ? 6 and
and daughter,, the count of Eltzen had devoted his youngest child to spend her days in a convent : she was now in her noviciate, and unknown to the world, felt no repugnance to the life chosen for her. She conversed affectionately with Clarice; and on being mtroduced to me, spoke with such innocence and blushing modesty, that a man must have been more insensible to the power of beauty, than I naturally was, to have eeen and heard her unmoved. In short, I returned home, resolved, if pos¬ sible, to snatch the devoted victim from the power of parental authority, and to make her mine for ever. 99 1 candidly opened my mind to my father ; he entered into my views, and we resolved to offer to transplant the beauteous Adelaide into our family, withouÌ
without other fortune than her own inr estimable worth. It was, however, ne¬ cessary to consult herself. I rather flew than walked to the convent, where I saw Clarice alone, and explained my intention, entreating her to be my adr vocate— 9 De Hoffman,' said she, t I have known- Adelaide from her childr hood, and if there be on earth a being formed to confer happiness, it is she. Can'st thou, consider thy heart, deserve such a woman ? If thou can'st, behold me thy friend in the cause; but take time to reflect, her beauty only hath caught thy eye, know her better, be¬ fore thou makest the proffer of thy hand/ From that time I saw Adelaide, with my sister, daily at the grate, and at length obtained her consent to apply to her iather. Not to weary your grace, I w T as
I was successful; the lady Adelaide became my wife, and I considered my¬ self the most happy of men. I had the misfortune soon after to lose my excel¬ lent father; my brother was wedded to a daughter of the baron Lebitz; and my sister Clarice, who had left the con¬ vent, resided writh her friend. " Adelaide was acknowledged the most beautiful woman in Germany. She was guileless as the lamb, gentle and affectionate as the dove, diffident of her opinion, but possessed of a strong and clear understanding ; pious without af¬ fectation, and universally beloved by all who knew her ! " Oh, my liege ! what is man, when, against his better judgment, he gives way to unbridled passions ? I was na¬ turally vivacious, Adelaide was naturalJy grave.
grave ; and though I loved her above all women, I shame to say, I frequently left the treasure Heaven had intrusted to me, to w r aste my time in shameful dalliance with women, who, however high in rank, my cooler thoughts despised. " In less than a year I became a father—Oh God ! do I live to speak it ? Villain ! villain, that I am—Adelaide made me father of a son, lovely as her¬ self. Ob, would to Heaven ! the hour that gave him life had given me death, then might he have lived a comfort to his mother, and under her instruction, have been an honour to his rank and name." The friar's voice was stifled with sighs, but recovering he continued-— " My love of Fitzwalter caused me to have
have my son' called William, after him; I' had not seen him since we parted in England, but I heard from him con* stantly; he frequently in his letters spoke highly of a maid named Blanch Stanley, and at length informed me he had espoused her. Soon after this Fitz¬ walter came to Germany with his wife and two attendants, or rather shall I say friends, for they have truly proved themselves such. " Under the displeasure ofhis father; and idolizing the gentle Blanch, Fitz* waiter declined residing at the castle of De Hoffman, but· occupied a small house on my estate, at a short distance from the city. Adelaide and Blanch appeared to possess the same sweetness of disposition, and speedily became attached to each other ¿ but an event hap-
happened at this time, that prevented their nearer acquaintance. The only son of thc count of Eltzen was seized with a malignant fever, which commu¬ nicating to his sister, who resided at home, they both died in less than a fortnight, The pious and duteous Ade¬ laide, though heretofore neglected by her father, in this calamity was not tobe restrained, but leaving her chiid in safety hastened to her parent, I loved her too well not to attend her, and during three months left even my friend Fitzwalter, to assist in her filial duty.-- At that period I returned again to Bremen, but at die earnest request of the count of Eltzen left my wrife, and sister, who accompanied us. Before the Joss of his other children the count was scarcely acquainted with Adelaide, whose
whose gentle unassuming spirit so daily won upon his heart, that he hourly blessed Heaven that she had not taken the veil. 99 On my return to the castle of De Hoffman, the wife of Fitzwalter was pregnant, and impressed with a thou¬ sand fears for her beloved husband, who was still under his father's displea¬ sure, gave way tn a despondence which he endeavoured to dispel, by every effort that tenderness could devise, and frequently, in my presence, pressed her to suffer him to proclaim their mar¬ riage. This, however, she absolutely refused, and the time of her delivery approaching, he expressed the warmest hopes, that her uneasiness would speedily give way to maternal cares. ** Fitzwalter» thottgh younger than myself»
myself, possessed more solidity, and at¬ tached to Blanch, passed the greatest part ofhis time with her, while I, giving way to the natural depravity of my dis¬ position, ran into numberless excesses, some of wdiich reached my friend's ears, who did not fail to give me his opinion upon the subject, with openness and even severity. I knew his motives too well, not to receive his admonitions calmly ; but, sua«; I they h»d no efferr. A young widow, called Deltring, en¬ grossed all my attention. I shame to say I neglected my lovely wife, for a creajture made up of pertness and va¬ nity, but who, studying the weakness of my temper, by insensible degrees made herself necessary, if not to mf happiness, at least to the gratification of my grosser passions. "Ade*
" Adelaide, on her return, met me with the same delicate affection that had ever distinguished her, though I afterwards found my errors were not unknown to her. I observed, indeed, wdth a pang that sunk to my heart, that as she pressed her boy to her bosom, her tears dropped on his face, and by her raised eyes she appeared to be en¬ treating for him that protection from a heavenly Father, that she doubted his receiving from his earthly one. Soon after this tbe lady Blanch Fitzwalter died. The countess and myself were sponsors to her child. The sorrow of Fitzwalter found no vent in words, but preyed on his health, for he never over¬ came it. A year afterward he returned to England at the request of his father, and yielding to his parent's prayers and tears,.
tears, consented, at the endof another twelvemonth, to espouse the rich heiress of Edward Mountford, now lady De Launcy. " Soon after Fitzwalter's departure the count of Eltzen died, and the whole of his immense possessions fell to his daughter Adelaide, and in case of her demise, to her son. Nothing elated with this acquisition, her meekness ap-' peared to increase.—She gave large sums in charity, and passed the greater part of her time with Clarice and her infant. She ever received me with a smile, but it wras frequently mixed with anguish, and though she was evidently not fond of noise and bustle, yet she received my friends in a manner that called forth universal esteem and admi¬ ration. In the midst of my libertinism, strange
strange as it may appear, I loved my wife, and shuddered to find her perfec¬ tion so much above my deserts ; I even repeatedly resolved to abjure the errors which, in my heart, I condemned, and by every means in my power, to shew Adelaide she was dearer to me than ever. — At this period the baroness Deltring, by her allurements:, insnared the superannuated count of AVeinbach to espouse her, and with all the effron¬ tery of profligacy, intruded herself in ail companies which her new rank entitled her to.—Among others, she one morn¬ ing unexpectedly visited Adelaide, who playing with her infant, was seated with myself and Clarice, I confess her ef¬ frontery startled m<r, but her easy con¬ fidence speedily banished my confusion. Adelaide received hcr with a dignity ? I had
I had never before seen her assume, while Clarice, with a cool and some¬ what contemptuous air, withdrew to her ovvn apartment. — The countess talked to Adelaide, caressed the infant, and at length kissing him, returned him to his mother, from whose arms she had taken him. Adelaide's actions were the pure impulse of her soul, wdiich knowing no guile, knew not how to assume the appearance of de¬ ceit. She took up her son, and instead of kissing his lips, which he presented to her, with a look of anguish; that I cannot express, wiped his mouth with her handkerchief, and calling an at¬ tendant, delivered him to her care. " The counters AVeinbach at length left us, when seeing Adelaide more re¬ served than usual, I asked the reason— 'My
' My lord/ replied she, c since I have been your wife, I believe I never yet objected to any company you thought fitting to present to me ; but for thc countess AVeinbach I like her not, and as I would, if possible, save myself thc pain of seeing hcr again, I could wish her to know it.' " You must then inform her, my dear Adelaide," replied I. < My lord,' answered she, 9 it be¬ fits not a daughter of the house of Eltzen, and the wife of the count De 1 loffman, to hold communication w ith such a woman, I shall therefore, should she come again, leave her to herself.' * " Nay," replied I, " use your plea¬ sure ; but in what hath she offended you r * In wdiat, mylord, have I offended vou,
you, to ask that question ? —To kiss my child/ added she, 4 Heaven forbid ! bufc I should not wonder to see the place marked writh a blister from her polluted lips/ " This is the first time, Adelaide," replied I, " that I ever heard you speak acrimoniously of anyone." 4 I shame to do it now,' answered she, * 4 The Virgin pardon me ! and you, my lord, excuse a warmth that in* advertence has forced from me/ " So saying she left the room,, and for some minutes I remained buried in un¬ pleasant reflections. My wife, I feared, suspected the guilt of the countess and myself, and I felt at once grieved and luuniliated. At that moment Clarice entered ; she seated herself, and turning veu. iv. ? her
her eyes full upon me she said, * Bro¬ ther, you may recollect, I warned you, before you wedded Adelaide, to be well assured of your own heart. The family of Eltzen, in rank and wealth, surpasses your own. Her beauty, worth, and accomplishments, none can equal—* " All this I readily allow," inter¬ rupted I ; " but to what doth it tend ? 4 It tends,' replied Clarice, 9 to prove, how poor and despicable that man must be, whose depraved appetite can fad him from such an angel, to seek acquaintance with a woman whom modesty shrinks from.' 99 I am naturally passionate, and ill brooked reproach. Clarice was not calm : she upbraided me with suffering so infamous a Woman as the countess AVein-
Weinbach to intrude into my wife's presence, and accused me with a shame¬ ful intercourse with her. 99 Poison Adelaide's mind Ì " ex¬ claimed I, " with your suspicions, un¬ dermine her happmess, and with the narrow prudence of a conventual edu¬ cation, teach her to judge harshly of every woman, who follows not ¿exactly the rule ??? wisdom hath laid down. t Would to Heaven l answered she, * I could preserve Adelaide's mind from every suspicion, but it is impossible j your secret meetings, and infamous in¬ trigues with that vile woman, are too well known. —· As to her happiness, you, and only you, have destroyed it.-r— Are you blind to the sorrow that han«rs over her ? AVould she had for ever been devoted to her God, rather than have ? 2 wasted
wasted her virtue, youth, and beauty, on one that is so insensible of their value.' 99 1 would to Heaven ijou had," re¬ plied I. " Adelaide's change of dis¬ position and gloom are now explained ; she implicitly believes all you say, and you have, by your calumnies, estranged her affections from me." Though I spoke thus I believed it not j but borne away by passion, I was regardless of truth ; for Clarice was ever more dear to me than my brother, whose cha¬ racter was reserved, while hers was open, generous, and affectionate, though warm and yindictive* where slie thought those she loved oppressed. *' Clarice answered me with increased bitterness, and both equally passionate, our dispute ran so high, tliat at length she
she vowed to leave my house. Had I given a moment io reflection I should have known that step would be a mor¬ tal stab to the happiness of Adelaide,. •who some few years younger than my sister, had loved her from her infancy ; but regardless of all but the anger of the moment, I urged her to do it, that I might be relieved from a troublesome spy upon my actions, and even added, I wished her to relinquish all intercourse with my wife. * You shall not urge me to that,' re¬ plied she, * while I have life I will see Adelaide ; as to yourself I feel no diffi¬ culty, the friendship of such a brother cannot be painful to resign.' " Our dispute ran so high, that nei¬ ther the prayers, nor tears of Adelaide ^ould prevail on Clarice to teraain in ? 3 the
the castle of De Hoffman, thou crii she I could observe, vvas careful to make my wife believe the quarrel originated in some family arrangement. That very- day Clarice went to St. Mary's, and I requested to sec her no more. I was at once grieved and vexed at the unea¬ siness that this event caused to Ade¬ laide ; I surprised her frequently in tears, and at times could not refrain upbraiding her, with having more af¬ fection for Clarice than for myself. To one of these accusations, with a sweet¬ ness that made an impression on my memory never to be effaced, she re¬ plied, 9 That I love Clarice above all women is most true 5 but De Hoffman, the husband of my dearest choice, the father of my infant, must ever hold the first place in my heart.' 99 Speedily
u Speedily after this, myself, with Adelaide, paid a visit to my brother, who resided at a distance of two leagues from Bremen ; our little William ac¬ companied us. The house was full of eempany, and the count of Weinbach with his wife were among thc number. The intelligent face of Adelaide plainly shewed, that she was not satisfied with the presence of the latter; hut too gentle to hurt my sister-in-law by her objections, or rather too delicate on my account, she submitted to endure her company, though she treated her in so distant and reserved a manner, that it was infinitely galling to the high spirit of the countess. Young Lebitz, bro¬ ther-in-law to Joseph De Hoffman, was of our party; he was of the age of twenty-five, designed for the church, ? 4 uncom-
uncommonly handsome, but of a dis¬ position so reserved and reflective, that he seldom mingled in conversation, ex¬ cept with his own or our family. I Ic, however, speedily became more appa¬ rently interested by Adelaide than any one. He nurScd her son for hours, he convsrsed with her in preference to those he had formerly selected, and in return, it was visible he possessed her esteem. Though there was nothing in this to awaken suspicion in the most jealous temper, yet the fiend AVeinbach found means to work on my weakness. î frequently caught her with her eyes Æxed on Lebitz and Adelaide, and then turned toward me with a sarcastic sneer that I could ill brook. Though I was as well assured of the purity of Ade¬ laide as of that of an angel, the poison was
was not without its effect ; I considered the similarity of disposition of Lebitz. and Adelaide, and wdien she smiled on him, felt tortures that I cannot describe. At length we returned home, where I hoped to see Lebitz no more ; but I was deceived, he visited us constantly, and once or twice, when I entered un¬ expectedly, it appeared that I broke on the conversation, for it suddenly ceased. Adelaide visited St. Mary's daily, and three or four times returned accom¬ panied by him, a circumstance which, though my pride would not suffer me to ask an explanation of, stung me to the quick. One morning, to complete my vexation, I received an anonymous-let* ter, advising me to look to my wife, adding, that a convent was a safe place cf assignation, particularly when a sis- ? 5 tu
ter could be intrusted. There w r as more to the same purport, but I do not re- colkct it ; but have now no doubt it was the weak and wicked device of the countess A\ r einbach. Determined, how¬ ever, to try Adelaide, I hastened toheiv and presenting the letter requested her to read it. She perused the contents, and returning it with a smile of con¬ tempt replied, 9 Thank Heaven, my lord, I neither deserve nor experience humiliation from this pitiful attempt to injure me in your opinion.-—I have, for some time, been in the custom of re¬ ceiving anonymous letters, but lately, as I know the hand, I always throw them in the fire unopened.' 99 And whose writing do you judge this to be, Adelaide ?" said I. * The countess AVeinbach's/ answ r ered she
she firmly ; « Heaven forgive her, and change her heart, is my earnest wish/ " Adelaide's superiority I could not but feel and acknowledge. " AVe will see AVeinbach no more," returned I ; " but, my love^ my Adelaide, though in my owrn heart I am intirely convinced of the falsehood of the accusation, yet something is due to the world—AVill you oblige me by relinquishing the ac¬ quaintance of Lebitz, and for a short time decline visiting my sister ? 9 Is it possible,' answered Adelaide, 4 that you can demand such a sacrifice ? The friendship of a virtuous man, and the company of your own sister ; and for whom ? No, De Hoffman, I can¬ not condescend to appear so capricious ; be assured, before long, you will be sa* ? 6 tisfied
tisfied of the rectitude of both my ac¬ tions and intentions.' 44 Though I ought to have been con¬ vinced of the virtue of my wife, yet judging only by my own depravity, the most absurd and violent jealousy seized me. I forgot myself so far, as to insist on her complying writh my inclinations» and even wrote to my sister in the most bitter and derogatory terms, accusing her of sowing dissension between Ade¬ laide and myself, and influencing her to treat my commands with contempt and disregard.—The answer of Clarice w T as calm ; she conjured me to cherish the blessing bestowed on me in such a wife, assured me that, if I gave way to jealousy, I should very speedily blush for my folly, and concluded by saying, 4 that
that the honour cf our family was equally dear to her as to myself. " This was, how r ever, without effect ; my suspicion did not subside, and though Adelaide, in the mildest terms, replied to the injustice my folly uttered, she would promise to give up neither Le¬ bitz nor my sister. My cruel violence on this occasion, however, sunk deep in her ljeart, for the next day she was confined to her chamber, and shortly after to her bed. If ever a man was possessed by a demon, I surely was, for though I was miserable on account of my wife's illness, I stiH continued my unpardonable conduct, and even went so far, as to order, under pretence of her health, that no one should be ad¬ mitted to her apartment, but simply her own attendants· "Tlie
-ΕΓ " The day following, an, old man r wdio had long been her spiritual di¬ rector, called, and being denied admit¬ tance, appealed to one of her women, wdio hastened with the, complaint - to Adelaide. She sent to request me to attend her: I obeyed, and confess I felt severely humiliated, when I learned the cause, and immediately ordered thc friar admittance at the pleasure of the countess. For a fortnight Adelaide had languished with a slow fever, and I had in vain called in the assistance of thc most skilful men around us.—Fool that I was, the remedy was in my ow r n hands ; I should have began by throw¬ ing off my brutal suspicions, and placing that trust and security in her that she so justly deserved. At this period I re¬ ceived a second letter : the venom was not
not yet deep enough in my heart to drive mc to perdition, I was doomed to drain it to the dregs.—This letter, which I was too weak io cast from me as it deserved, informed me, that my wrife still deceived me, and that under the pretence of seeing her confessor, she had for two nights past admitted into her chamber a young man in a friar's cloak and hood, but who, in rea¬ lity, was nothing less than what he ap¬ peared to be. This information ap¬ peared too gross to be credited, but calling a domestic, I after some casual questions asked when the old friar at¬ tended the countess—He replied, with apparent bluntness, that the father was sick, and for the last two days had sent a young priest to officiate for him. I could bear no more, I dismissed him in haste,
haste, and for a time gave way to the rage that overpowered me. I well knew Adelaide's particularity respect¬ ing her confessor, and that when he wa;» ???, she had ever declined a sub¬ stitute until he recovered ; the charge therefore on thc whole appeared so im¬ probable, that my better judgment re¬ coiled from it ; but I possessed neither openness nor generosity sufficient to seek an explanation, where virtue and candour would assuredly have given it me, but with despicable meanness re¬ solved to wait the friar's coming, and from a closet adjoining Adelaide's cham¬ ber be witness of the conference. This was the more easily effected, as the door was latticed, and an opening from the gallery of the castle. 44 At the hour of nine the man, ac¬ cording
cording to the orders he had received, informed me the friar was come, and now in the countess' chamber. I lost no time, but hastened to the closet.— * Adelaide's chamber was enlightened only by a lamp.-—AVrapped in a long loose robe she sat on a couch, and by her side the friar, whose face was so covered with bis cowl that I could not discern any of his features ; I, how¬ ever, saw enough to convince me it was not Lebitz, as his form was consider¬ ably larger than that of the new confes¬ sor. They spoke in a low voice, and as the apartment was spacious, not a word reached me, but once or twice from Adelaide the name of Lebitz, and that of her uncle, one of the cardinals. A momentary thought struck me, that through his means she was applying to his
his Holiness the Pope to free her from my tyranny ; and though that reflection was distracting, it w r as heaven to tliat of being convinced I had a rival in her affection. " At length thc friar rose to go, he leaned his arm over the back of the couch with a familiarity that again re¬ vived all my jealousy;*he still talked in a low voice to Adelaide, and at length stooping over her, his face ap¬ proached hers.—I know not w T hat I felt at that moment ; it was an anarchy of passion no language can describe. To my distracted sight he appeared to kiss hcr bosom : when, giving way to the fury that overpowered me > I rushed from my concealment, and drawing my dagger aimed a blow at his heart, even at the moment he thus disho¬ noured
nourcd mc ; but starting aside the stroke fell—Do I live to relate it ? not, wdiere it w r as designed, but on my smiling innocent infant, who wrapped in his mother's robe lay sleeping on her bosom ------ '* As Austin spoke his visage became pale, his lips trembled, his whole frame was agitated, a heavy perspiration co¬ vered his brows, and for some minutes he was unable to continue. 9 Thy errors have indeed been heavy,* said the king ; * but thy crime was in¬ voluntary, and the expiation terrible.' " Oh, my liege !" at length replied he, " no earthly suffering can expiate so deadly an act.—Pardon me, I will speedily resume my relation, which nothing but the present emergency should have force d from me." c Take
4 Take thy time. Heaven pardon thy crime, and restore thy peace.' Austin for some moments appeared lost in sorrow, but at length continued his story.
CHAP.
CHAP. III. 77ie Friar's Story concluded? 4i I did not," resumed Austin, " give myself time to consider the fell act I had committed* but clenching the dag¬ ger in my agonizing grasp, made a second stroke at the friar; but flying from me the voice of Clarice exclaimed —'Stop, De Hoffman,infatuated man! will nothing but the murder of your only sister gratify your diabolical re¬ venge ?* " Struck as with a blast of lightning I turned to Adelaide, her white gar¬ ment was dyed with blood, and press¬ ing her child to her bosom, whose cries
cries resounded through the apartment, she sat the image of horror and de¬ spair, * Alas ! what has your race effect- ed r' said Clarice. 9 AVould to the Virgin, my bosom had met your mur¬ derous dagger, rather than that of thc- infant. Speak to me, Adelaide, for pity sake call help, the infant will bleed to death.' " As Clarice spoke she approached Adelaide, and endeavoured to take the child from her convulsed gripe, but was some minutes before she could ef¬ lect it. Adelaide, at length recovering her speech, and rising from the couch, looked round with an air of mingled anguish and distraction, then exclaimed, 9 Oh ! thou accursed. of God í the measure of thy crimes and my miseries arc
are now full—Cain slew only his bro¬ ther, a mail like himself; but thou, fell assassin, hath slain an unoffendinof innocent, and thy own child, which duty, honour, affection, and all, should have prompted thee to save.' " Oh ! Adelaide l' exclaimed I, " in¬ crease not the pangs that overwhelm me— * Monster! tyrant! murderer!' in¬ terrupted she madly—* See the pangs of thy expiring infant, bear him to thy infamous comrades, rejoice in his tor¬ tures, and laugh at thc agonies they cause thy distracted wife. Villain ! See'st thou this blood? it is thine, mingled with that of the wretched Adelaide.' " In the mean time Clarice hastened away with the dying infant, and send¬ ins:
ing in assistance, Adelaide was borne away by force to her chamber; her gentle spirit, that had never before suffered her even to complain, vcntin£ itself in execrations against the mur¬ derer of hcr child,—Alas ! though dis- traction urged them, they were heard on high, and the anger of Heaven has never ceased to hang over my devoted head. 99 For some time I remained lost to myself and all the world. AVhat had passed appeared too horrible to be true, but the entrance of Clarice speedily shook me from the delusion------* Un¬ happy De Hoffman,* said she, * the surgeons fear thy son's wound is mor¬ tal ; what will be the event, Heaven only knows—Adelaide will never sur¬ vive it/ « Whv,
" Why, cruel Clarice," replied I, " did you force me to" this dreadful step?" 9 Alas !' answ r ered she, 9 your refu¬ sal to admit any one to see Adelaide urged me to use disguise. I simply was kissing your infant when you rushed in ; surely it was madness that actuated you?' " In agonies, not to be described, I sunk upon.the couch, stained with my vson's blood, and for a time was insen¬ sible, even of the miseries I liad caused. " After an interval of many hours restored to recollection, I saw my bro¬ ther Joseph, and to my yet greater sur¬ prize, Fitzw T alter standing by me. Tears w r cre in the eyes of both, but the features of my friend expressed at once fear, horror, and pity.------ 9 De Hoff- voL. iv. n man/
man,* said he, 9 1 only reached Bre¬ men this eventful night ; the vessel that brought mc lies on the coast.------You must accompany me to England.' 49 AVhere is Adelaide and my child ?" interrruptedl. * They are both as yet living/ he answered ; * but, till the event is known, I must request you to submit to my wishes.* « * f Never," exclaimed I. 99 I mur¬ dered the infant of Adelaide, and will pay the forfeiture, AVhat tortures can equal those I now feel ?" * No bodily ones, perhaps, my dear brother,' answered Joseph; 9 but for the present your friend Fitzwalter ad¬ vises well, consider your family, and the grief and shame such an event would involve them in.' " Alas!
" Alas ! what is rank and family to me ?------1 am alone, and curst among mankind. — Cain, as Adelaide truly said, was innocent, compared to me. " I insisted on going to my wife's apartment. I will die at her feet," said I—- I wili, writh my own blood, atone for the murder ofher chiid/ " From this I was, however, with¬ held by force. Fitzwalter did not leave me the whole night—For my brother, he took on himself the care of arrang¬ ing all in the best manner he possibly could, and ordered a strict silence to be kept, respecting the direful tragedy transacted writhin the castle. " On the succeeding day Fitzwalter, in answxr to my inquiries, replied, that Adelaide and my son were yet Hving ; but the answer gave no hope, for his ? 2 countenance
countenance was expressive of the most agonizing grief, and his averted eyes shunned mine, as though he feared I should read irt them the deadly tidings he forbore to relate. " Evening came without comfort; when my brother said—* My dear De Hoffman, you must this night consent to accompany Fitzwalter. Alas! I grieve to inform you, that the death of AViiiiam is hourly expected, and your personal safety demands you to use that precaution.' " From that moment my senses be¬ gan to leave me; I peremptorily re¬ fused to go, and insisted on being given up to the laws which I had violated. All persuasion being fruitless, I that night at the hour of midnight, was bound, forced on horseback, conveyed to
to thc coast, and put on board the vessel wdiich had brought Fitzwalter over. ------As I afterward learned, we sailed witb the dawn, and reached Yarmouth speedily; but my senses· were so fearfully deranged, that I was forced to be kept strictly confined, not only during the voyage, but for a con¬ siderable time afterwards. " As soon as possible, though my senses still continued unsettled, Fitz¬ walter, and a faithful domestic named David, tied me upon a horse, and pur¬ sued their way to Northumberland,— Oh í my liege, suffer me here to speak of my obligations to my friend!-— During near three months from the time I left Bremen, till we reached Northumberland, for we remained near' two months at Yarmouth, the noble n 3 Fitzwalter,
Fitzwalter, or his faithful David, nevçr left me, so fearful were they, that strangers might, from my ravings, hear Something they wished concealed. At length we reached the Castle of Fitz¬ walter, the good old Baron received me as a friend of his son's, though he was ignorant of my rank ; for Fitzwal¬ ter merely introduced as a fellow-stu¬ dent, who, deranged in his under¬ standing, had no one in that calamitous Otate to notice hhm>. He adopted for me tbe name I had used on my travels, and which was Austin, and confined ?? so closely even at the castle, that I had no intercourse whatever.------My senses at length began to bc more cob fccted,* or rather I began to be more sensible of all the horrors of my situa¬ tion. Fitzwalter frequently sat by me for
for hours ; his tears excited mine, and- at length he told me, that even during our stay at Yarmouth he had learned my son's death, and that Adelaide, af¬ ter having long struggled with a fever and delirium, had retired with mv sis- ter Clarice into the convent of St. ' Mary. by distraction, but by a settled melan¬ choly, that weakened my constitution, and reduced me to the brink of the grave. Fitzwalter conjured me to exert my reason .tø conquer the remembrance of deeds that could not be recalled, and in his own person pointed out an ex¬ ample of sufferings that he bore- with fortitude.—Alas í my liege ! his sor¬ rows all arose from a virtuous cause r while mine were redoubled by the d 4 stings
stings of conscience, and the reflection of having drawn them on my own head. At length Fitzwalter began to make me ride and walk, and my mind became daily more collected, though wdth in¬ creased melancholy. In one of these excursions he wrought upon me suffi¬ ciently to obtain my oath to follow th· advice he laid down. The first article was, not to disclose my ???? or name, but to hold that he had chosen for me : the next was, not to leave England without his knowledge : the third, that I would use no means against my own worthless life, but endeavour to bear with resignation the sorrow I had brought upon myself. 44 I should not neglect to tell your- grace that Fitzwalter hao\a letter from my brother. After particular inquiries
respecting my health, he entered into the state of my family. Adelaide, he said, still continued melancholy, and had openly declared her fixed intention for a religious life, in which case Clarice had vowed to adopt the same. 9 In consequence of this determination/ adr ded he, * a secret has transpired, that we were far from suspecting. My bro¬ ther-in-law, Lebitz, has, it appears, for some time loved Clarice, but re¬ strained by the holy function for which he was designed, forbore to declare it, till charmed with the countess De Hoff¬ man, he opened his whole heart to her^ Adelaide, in consequence, wrote to her uncle the cardinal, and requested his interest with the Pope, and since the unhappy accident that has overwhelmed our whole family in sorrow, his holiness l> 5 has-
has sent his full permission to the mar¬ riage. These, then, were the secret conferences that gave De Hoffman such uneasiness, the subject of which, it ap¬ pears, Lebitz requested to have care¬ fully concealed, kst bis family should endeavour to cross his views.'—Your highness may judge how severely I felt this information. My unpardonable jealousy had destroyed my child, and impoisoned not only my own happi¬ ness, but that of my wife and sister ; young Lebitz would curse me as the ruin of his hopes, and my whole fa¬ mily would think with detestation of a man who had disgraced them by mur¬ der. The more I considered these events, the more I became fixed on a life of penance, and making all the re¬ paration in my power. I urged Fitz¬ walter
waiter to consent to a plan I had de¬ vised, which was, to inform my family I was dead, as that would at once set them at ease respecting me. My life was forfeited to the violated laws of God and my country ; and I must re¬ main an alien from Germany for ever» My wife, by my death r would be ,at liberty to take the veil, and mistress of her own immense possessions, while my property would fall to the lawffuj successor, Joseph De Hoffmaiu "As my mmd became more calm the resolution I had formed of retire¬ ment strengthened. Fitzwralter,. I welî knew T , would not consent to it wil» lingly, I therefore resolved to execute ? without his knowledge, and. for that purpose effected my escape from, the castle. To the father Franciscans I re- d 6 lated
lated the extent of my guilt and repent¬ ance; and, after the usual prelimina¬ ries, was admitted into their order, with a permission to reside in the Cave of St. Margaret.------ There did the inde¬ fatigable friendship of Fitzwalter disco¬ ver me, and, in spite of remonstrance during his life, render, by his daily visits, my penance easy. 99 Fitzwalter had declined informing my friends I was dead, but after I be¬ came a Franciscan he adopted the mea¬ sure, saying, that as I was dead to the WOrld, and for ever separated from my familv, it w r as of no material conse- quence, and might tend., towards re¬ storing their quiet respecting me, and put a stop to curiosity : he accordingly wrote to my brother in somewhat like the following terms : fi William^
" William, Baron Fitxivalter, to Joseph Count de Hofman, greeting. 99 William Fitzwalter grieves to ad¬ dress Joseph De Hoffman by the title appertaining to his brother; but his dear friend, John De Hoffman, hath for ever done with worldly things, and bath taken uo his rest no more to be j. disturbed with distracting passions. Let this event be broken with all tender¬ ness to the countess and the lady Cla¬ rice. If sincere and bitter repentance can cleanse thc soul, let their minds rest for that of De Hoffman.------Let them pray for him, but dry their tears, as his sorrow here might be but a preparatory step, to prepare him for happiness here¬ after, as sincerely trusts, William Fitzwalter." « Such
" Such nearly was the letter of Fitz¬ walter to my brother. He did not ex¬ actly say I was dead, but no one on reading it would have judged other¬ wise, and Dc Hoffman, in consequence, took possession of my estates and title. To Fitzwalter's letter Joseph sent a re¬ ply. He expressed his sorrow for my death ; informed my friend that Ade¬ laide and Clarice had both taken the veil; that his brother-in-law, Lebitz, had, in vain, attempted to change the resolution of thc latter, who, regarding herself as the cause of Adelaide's mis¬ fortune, had vowed to pass her days in assuaging her anguish, and, finally, that Lebitz had resumed his original design of an ecclesiastical life. " After this, little communication was held between my brother and Fitzwal¬ ter,
ter. I cannot but confess to your high¬ ness, that had any one in such an hour so materially served Joseph, I should have thought the obligation could never be repaid ; his opinion, however, ap-< pears to have been different, for if ever he wrote afterward, his letters were evi¬ dently forced, and merely complimen¬ tary. The death of Fitzwalter was the final close of my receiving intelligence from Joseph, but the Franciscans were kind enough to make frequent inquiries for me. My brother's only son Ferdi¬ nand, I have learned both from them, and by other means, is a noble and vir¬ tuous youth ; may the honours of his fa¬ mily sit well upon him, aad may he wor¬ thily transmit them to posterity. Ade¬ laide, for some years, has heen abbess of St. Mary's ; her uncle, formerly the Carina!,
Cardinal, is now Pope, and particularly honours with his esteem both Clarice and his niece." As die friar ceased, thc king said-— * In truth De Hoffman, thy life has been replete with sorrow. Thy obligations to Fitzw r alter were many, and never to be forgotten.' 99 Oh ! my liege ! I cannot recapitu¬ late a tenth part of them," replied Aus¬ tin. " On his death, I regarded myself as obliged, by every tic of honour and faith among men, to keep a watchful eye over his children, and flatter myself the proofs of Margaret's legitimacy, when laid before your grace, will fully establish her right." * They shall be strictly examined/ answered Henry, 9 1 shall see you again to-morrow/ The king then called at thc
the door of ?? closet, and some of his officers attending, he added----- * Take ? Ì large of thc friar ; it is my will that he 'oturn not to prison.—Give him food, ¿i\d what he may require, and see you treat him as becomes his habit.' With these words Henry left the apartment, and the officers conducted Austin to a private chamber.
CIIAP.
CIIAP. IV. On the ensuing morning the court again met in the Hall of Westminster, to pronounce sentence against Austin : ? was, however, with different feelings from the preceding dar. The hid^i-Q and counsellors easily discovered the prisoner had some powerful claim on the king's protection, and, like true courtiers, saw the business in a more favourable light than at the first view. The-haughty De Launcy appeared crest-fallen, and Richard, dreading the event, had readily, at an early hour, taken his departure, to escort Isabel from Germany. The father Francis¬ cans, elated with the -conduct of their brother,
brother, no longer felt any fears for him, but attended to hear the final de¬ termination of the law. The respectable David, who had been unable to procure admittance to the friar, also waited in anxious expec¬ tation; for he loved Austin too well not to have his hopes mingled with fear. 'Fhe judges being met, and the king seated, Austin was placed at the bar,— " Ycm have, doubttess, thought o*> this* matter," »rid Henry, addressing the" court. " The friar is guilty, but his motives should be considered ; you will therefore give sentence accordingly." 99 AVe have unanimously resolved to kave the judgment to your Highness," said one of the judges, " and to abide by it." " I thank
" I thank you," replied the king.— " To the best of my ability I wrill act justly------Stand forth, friar Austin------ AVhereas, against the laws of this realm, thou hast been found guilty of aiding and abetting Margaret Fitzwalter to elope from the protection of the lady De Launcy/, we condemn thee to------" " My gracious liege, I pray your pardon," exclaimed a youth, rushing forward, and throwing himself at the king's feet—" Friar Austin aided her not : I alone, unassisted, bore away the lady Margaret, and for fourteen days previous to the. event, waited an op¬ portunity in the castle, my skin coloured as an Ethiopean, and under the guise of a minstrel." " Heavenly powers !" exclaimed Au¬ stin, " it is Leopold. This blow is more heavy
heavy than all the rest : I was safe, but he is come to meet death." " God's truth," said the king, " but thou art a bold youth : knowest thou the forfeiture of thy crime ?" " No, my liege, but it cannot reach farther than life, and to me life is of no value, more that it may be serviceable to my friends." " Thou then art that villain Cuth¬ bert," said De Launcy. " I am, my lord ; but there are more villains than Cuthbert to fill up the space between earth and heaven, — Stratford, for example, and the priest, who was to force unsanctioned wed¬ lock on the lady Margaret, what were they ? and what was thcir employer ?" De Launcy turned pale, and made no reply. ------" By my life," said the king, • ~ ? " the
" the plot thickens, and the trial re¬ specting Margaret can alone clear it- Say, youth, why did you not appear sooner in this cause ?" " My liege, I only reached London late yesternight, when I heard the event of this trial, and flew to prevent a sentence falling on the friar, which in reality appertained to me. I am lately arrived from Bremen, where I attended the lady Margaret, and her venerable friend, dame Alice, and left them safe in tlie protection of the abbess of St. Mary's." " Can you bring proofs of this ?" said the king. 49 Yes, my liege, on my arrival I first visited Northumberland, uncertain of the destination of the friar. To my great disappointment I found him rer moved *
moved to London; but, Heaven be praised, my disappointment has been greatly repaid------" Austin, as Leopold spoke, raised his head and fixed his eyes upon him. " How was thy disappointment re¬ paid ?" said Henry. " By meeting with a respectable Be¬ nedictine in the chapel of St. Mar¬ garet, where he came to pray, and who proves to be the person so long sought for—the priest who* married the baron Fitzwalter, to the lady Blanch." " It is false, a vile contrivance to arrest the course of justice," said De Launcy. " AVhere is he ?" Leopold, in an instant, turned aside, and kd forth the venerable Benedic¬ tine.—« Behold him, lord De Launcy," returned he, " Should you live to have your
your head so awfully coloured with grey, will you dare to lie? If you do, you are a bold man, for you may chance to die wdth the lie upon your lips." " Youth," said Henry, " these proofs must be brought forward on another occasion, they are now foreign to the purpose—But who art thou, that thus devotest thyself in the cause ?" " My name is Leopold Stemheim, a peasant born, my liege, whose greatest ambition is to gain in arms, that fame denied him by birth." " I would I had an army of such as thee," replied Henry — " A peasant, saidst thou ? By my life thou hast spi¬ rit enough for a prince." " May it please your highness," said one of the council, " the friar hath been found guilty, and this youth acknow¬ ledges
ledges his own guilt, what would your ferace direct ?" " To treat them alike," answered the king. " They are equally cul¬ pable, let thcir punishment be simi¬ lar." " AVe left it to your highness," said one of the judges. " True, but this mad youth, who is so anxious to appropriate another's crime, prevented me.—-You, friar Au¬ stin, being found guiiiy υί plotting thc escape of Margaret Fitzwalter, and vou, Leopold Stemheim, of executing the same, wdiat have ye to say to mitigate your sentence?" " Nothing," so please your highness but the motives that compelled mc to the act," replied Austin. vol, iv. ? "And
49 And you, Leopold Stemheim, what say you ?" " A stranger in this country," replied Leopold, " and unsupported by the advice of those conversant in the law, I throw myself on the mercy of your grace.—The father of his people will not judge harshly of a youth, whose only crime is protecting one of his children." " Stand forth, then ; my will is, that ye be fined a mark each, and dismissed from this court, till called upon on a future day—Let the judges confirm or dissent from this sentence as they think fitting." The judges immediately confirmed the decree, and the court, interested by the friar's manner and the graceful per¬ son
son of Leopold, resounded with cries of applause. The king then rose to go. Austin threw himself at his feet, as did also Leopold.— ςς Marry,"said the king, with a smile he could not suppress— cc Go to, the next wench yc steal, ye shall not get off so easily." The court was then broken up,— Leopold was sufficiently rich to pay thc fine of both, and embracing Austin with transport, he presented the aged Benedictine. David also joined them, and too happy to enter on particulars, they adjourned to the monastery of thc Grey Friars, to converse at leisure on the occurrences that had taken place.
e 3 CIIAP.
CHAP. V. On reaching the monastery, thc Benedictine retired to repose him¬ self, while Austin, with David and Leopold were shewn into a private cell, w ? here they related to each other all that had befallen them. Thc friar chid Leopold for his rashness in ven¬ turing to conic forward on the trial, though, he observed, as the event had proved, he regarded it as a fortunate circumstance. " I couid not act other- ways, dear father," replied Leopold. " Arriving only last night, I had not time to obtain particulars, and only learned tbat you had been found guilty, and were to-day to receive sentence.— Could
Could I then do less than claim the deed for which I feared you might suffer ?" Austin then asked many questions respecting Margaret and Alice; but it- was plain, though he did not directly enter on the subject, that the abbess Adelaide was the first object of his concern. He inquired respecting her health, her appearance, whether she was more calm than she was said to have been formerly, and a number of other questions, that testified his anxiety on her account. He also expressed the most lively interest respecting Clarice, and when Leopold informed him the sisters w r ere well, testified the utmost satisfaction. The Benedictine next fur¬ nished them with a subject of conver¬ sation. The meeting with him in thc e 3 chapel,
chapel, Austin observed, appeared to be one of the great events which Leo¬ pold was designed to bring forwaid, " and," added he, ic such are Margaret's obligations to you, that could she ever forget them, I should be almost sorry 1 ever interested myself in her cause." " And why, father," answered Leo¬ pold, " should she think of me beyond the inoment I was useful ? —Indeed it were better she did not. I couid fight for her, or die for her, if occasion de¬ manded ; but to receive her kindness and gratitude, would be more than I could sustain vvith honour." " I understand you not," said Austin. " Yet," answered Leopold, " my meaning is obvious ; to those I love I can use no disguise. I am a man, fa¬ ther, and Margaret is fair enough to make
make me forget the distance Heaven hath placed between us ; therefore once reinstated in her right, Leopold and her must meet no more." f ' Holy A'irgin !" exclaimed David, I would that she vvere my child ; then shouîdest thou bc my son, had I all England to give for her dower." " Leopold," said Austin, " thy can¬ dour at once charms and wounds mc Was Margaret mine, as freely as I ha¬ ven gives sun and rain to thc earth, so freely would I give lier to thcc ; but thou knowest, she is a sacred tabt, and I must act accordingly." " Father," answered Leopold, " 1 am not to-day to learn your kindness ; it binds me at once, not only to you, but to act with that honour, which 1 trust will ever distinguish me, I ovvn l 4 I love
I love Margaret, I wrould proclaim it to the world, and in sorrow follow her through every vicissitude, that ill for¬ tune could pour upon her ; but once restored to that happiness and rank she so well merits, I will see her no more, but remembering my own situation, know how to respect her's." Leopold then presented the confession of Blanch, and repeated minutely all that had passed wdiile he was in Ger¬ many. He insisted of resigning to the care of Austin' the money confided to hirn by tbe Abbess, but that the friar ' peremptorily refused, as he observed it could not be more properly placed; he however, to Leopold's great surprise, asked him for thc purse which contained it, raying, he would keep it as a memo¬ rial of thc lady Adelaide's kindness,— Leopold
Leopold then shewed him the ring pre¬ sented him at the same time. " I am rejoiced, my dear youth," said Austin, " that you met her favour ; engaged in laudable pursuits, it may beguile her of unpleasant remembrances. That ring," added he with a sigh, forgetting at that moment the secrecy he had be¬ fore observed respecting Adelaide, "was her's before she w r edded ; I remember to have seen it on her finger." " You then knew the lovely Abbess; father ?" replied Leopold. " I did ; yet she knows not Austin, nor must she know him. The word inadvertently escaped me ; hereafter, Leopold, if we see calmer days, thou shalt hear the story of my sins and sor¬ rows; but it must sleep with thee·—■" " Father," replied Leopold, " I have E 5 no
no curiosity beyond what your own pleasure wishes to gratify : content with your esteem, I ask no more." * * * * * The friars entertained Austin with kindness and hospitality, and for his sake Leopold and David. The good Benedictine returned to his own mo¬ nastery, saying he would be ready when called upon ; but as he was old, signed a paper, signifying the time and place of the contested marriage. Leopold's heart would have led him to return to Bremen, to gladden his friends with the apparent success of their cause ; but that step the friar strenuously opposed, as he surmised his evidence might be necessary on the trial, c Two
Two days,after the friar had been liberated, a messenger from the king came to the monastery, and, demanded to speak with him, and the youth Leo¬ pold—They immediately attended.— 49 The king," said the messenger, " re¬ quests you both to attend him this even, on business of import ; fail ye not, at the hour of six, as he will then have leisure to converse witb you," " AVe will carefully observe his com¬ mands," answered Austin. 99 God speed you—farewell." "There are orders for your admit¬ tance, so no mistake can arise. Good dav, father." 99 AVhat can these orders portend ?" said Leopold. " I hope no unwelcome change in thc king s mind." ^ Fear not," replied Austin ; " as I e 6 should
should judge, it is merely to question us respecting Margaret. — AVe have began so prosperously, that I trust w^c shall conclude our business the same. *Φ Φ Φ ili *t* ??£* .*?* *?% ^ At the hour of six, Austin, with Leo¬ pold, attended at the palace, and were immediately introduced into the king's presence. Ordering the attendants to withdraw, " Friar," said he, " I have considered, and will, as speedily as may be, cause to be brought forward this trial thou so warmly desirest. — If Margaret be truly proved the. legiti¬ mate daughter of Fitzwalter, she shall have her right ; if otherways, she has no claim. On questioning the baron De Launcy this day, he informed mc, that
that were even the marriage proved, his wife hath a claim on half the estate by mortgage to her father, in failure of a marriage contract—AA'hat say you to this ?" " It is most true, my liege ; but it is also true, that on the baron Fitzwalter's death, there was in his cabinet, with his will, money and jewels sufficient to liquidate a great part ofthat debt, should the wridow claim it. My friend had lived frugally, as it is well known, ever since his father's death, on purpose to leave his child unincumbered." " And where is this will ?" said the king. " I saw it, on my oath, even the day previous to Fitzwalter's death, which was sudden—It was then nearly finished, but not witnessed or sealed.------On the
the day following his death, neither will, money, nor jewels were to be found." " Read you the purport of the will," said Henrv. w' " I did, my liege. The sam in the cabinet, writh wdiat money arose from the sale of the jewels, was appropriated to discharge the debt ; thc domain, by right of eldership, fell to Margaret, and Isabel w r asportioned thereon; by my ad¬ vice, as we feared Margaret's long mino¬ rity should Fitzwalter die, he entreated your highness to take her under your especial protection." Austin then re¬ lated minutely every circumstance that had influenced his conduct, shewed the king the confession of Blanch and the oath of the Benedictine, and finally re¬ lated thc active part Leopold had held in the whole." Henry
Henry turned to Leopold.—"Youth," said he, " thou hast had some powerful motive to stimulate thee in this busi¬ ness.—Say, is it not love ?" "My liege !"—replied Leopold blush¬ ing deeply. 99 Bv mv honour thou art guiltv," returned Henry, " AVhat he may be now I know not," answered Austin, " but when he brought the confession, and entered the castle to effect her escape, he had never ocen her." " lf, y} at length said Leopold, endea* vouring to overcome his confusion, "to think thc lady Margaret the fairest of women, to know her among the most gentle and pious, be to love her, I am indeed guilty—But that secret to hcr shall never pass my lips. I love her person,
person, my liege, but her fame and honour are siili dearer to me, and never shall Leopold seek to tarnish them." " Act thus, and thy deeds will give thee more tme honour than blood alone can bestow. I shall, for tbe trial, con¬ vene all the parties concerned, and mean to send my ovvn especial re¬ quest to the Abbess of St. Mary's, to commit to the care of the lord Nevil the orphan Margaret. If she is ac¬ knowledged she may act at her plea¬ sure; if not, I will return her safe to hcr noble friend." " I humblv thank vour highness," answered Austin. " And now," said the king, " as I love not young men to be unemployed, tell me, youth, hovv would'st thou like Henry the Seventh for thy master?" Leopold
Leopold threw himself at the king's feet ------" This is the second time," answered he, " that I ever stood in such a presence. Your highness is the only king I ever yet saw, and first im¬ pressions arc usually the strongest, there¬ fore could I choose a master from amidst the rulers of the WOrld, Henry the Se¬ venth should be my choice/' " I take thee at thy word------Rise, and observe me. To which doth thy wishes lead, the field or the court?" " The field, my gracious liege ?" " Give me thy reason?" " Undignified by rank, and unsup¬ ported by wealth, at the court I should perhaps be subject to insults, which my nature would not easily brook. In the field, your grace's favour, seconded by
by valour, would supply thc place of birth and fortune." " Thou think'st justly," replied Henry —Go on." " At court, if honoured by your grace's favour, I should live surrounded by an army of envious and secret ene¬ mies ------In the field, foreign and pub¬ lic foes would be all I should have to fear, and either successfully distinguish myself, or die nobly, in the cause of the king and country that have adopted me. " I will order thee a commission. Attend my court to-morrow. Act well, and Henry is thy friend." So saying, before they could reply, the king left the apartment, and Austin and Leopold quitted the palace, and retook their vvav to the monastery. Austin
îji # Hí # # Austin and Leopold walked for some time in silence ; at length the lartcr, catching hold of the friar's garment, ex¬ claimed—" Father ! am I awake ?" 99 Yes, my son, awake, I hope, to honour and happiness——May every blessing attend the gracious Henry ! Never did I think my heart could have been susceptible of such a sentiment of joy as it now feels. Not ail the fa¬ vour that the king could have bestowed on myself, would have given me such satisfaction, as this advancement to thee." " Father," replied Leopold, " I re¬ joice not so much at my own elevation, as that it will, in some measure, justify my friends* partiality for me.------ 1 am elated,
elated, I confess, with the king of England's kindness ; but, so prosper me Heaven! if I value not that less than your friendship." Neither thc satisfaction of Austin, nor that of Leopold, surpassed the joy of honest David, when he heard the king's intention respecting the latter. " My dear youth," said he, " my heart foretold truly, you never were designed to pass through life ingloriously; any man may inherit nobility from his an¬ cestors, but he is truly noble, who en¬ joys the distinction from hisown merit." " That is yet to be tried, my good friend," replied Leopold. " The king, it is plain, has a partiality for our dear father Austin, and as he cannot serve him, hath taken this means to oblige him in the person of his unworthy son." Thc
The next day Leopold attended at the palace, and was admitted into the presence-chamber. The king was sur¬ rounded by his nobles, among whom was De Launcy, who was uninformed of the king's intentions in Leopold's fa¬ vour. " Youth," said Henry, " draw near — receive from my hand the pro¬ mised commission. If I draw a judg¬ ment from what I have heard, and read your character aright, I chose rather to make you a friend than a foe." " My gracious liege," answered Leopold, kneeling and receiving the parchment, " undignified by your fa¬ vour, the humble Leopold must ever reverence the virtues of the king of England.------1 trust I am no man's enemy ; but would wish for power, to be
be a friend to all wdio suffer sorrow T and oppression." " Particularly if they are young and beautiful. Is is it not so, Sternheim?" said Henry, smiling. " Youth and beauty, doubtless, are most interesting to the eye, my liege ; but the man whose feelings are confined to so narrow a sphere, deserves to have his name erased from the records of hu¬ manity." Henry made no reply, but turning to his courtiers, said—■—■" My lords, you will oblige me by knowing Sternheim. Some y r ears since I w r as under material obligations to friar Austin : Leopold is his adopted son, and I chose to shew my remembrance, in a way which I am assured will be most pleasing to him." Henrv's
Henry's attendants were too polite not to immediately adopt their master's opinion. All noticed and congratu¬ lated Leopold, except De Launcy, who taking his opportunity while they were thus employed, left the presence.
CHAP.
CHAP. VL De Launcy had been nearly dis¬ tracted on account of thc issue of thc trial, and his lady, sinking wdth tli ? present vexation, and the fear of the disgrace and shame that hung over her, was entirely confined to her chamber. Lord Dc Launcv at home was morose and gloomy, and forced her to think of some object, from whom, in such a dilemma, she might meet comfort. Iler mind at length recurred to Isa¬ bel« Hcr warmth of character she well knew; but she had, ever since she had knowledge, been affectionate and dutiful, and jealous, even to anger, of her mother's honour, had more than once
once made lord De Launcy recollect what was due to her. Lady De Launcy greatly lamented ever having left her in Germany, and anxiously waited her re¬ turn ; her only fear being, that her at¬ tachment to Margaret would prepon¬ derate against every other object. * sf: φ * * After a speedy voyage Richard De Launcy reached Bremon, and hastened immediately to St. Mary's, where he presented a letter from his mother-in- law to the Abbess, requesting Isabel to bc sent -honro âa speedily'as possible. Isabel/ w¡ith, her sister, was "with the lady Adelaide when she read the con- tents^T—« Jsafe.el, »my love," said she, " did you not wish, some short time vol. Tv. f since,
since, that you might be sent for home ? The wrish is accomplished, a messenger now waits for you, and I must resign you to those, who have a nearer claim on your duty and affection." " I trust you jest, dear lady !" an¬ swered Isabel. " Indeed I do not—Read thc letter; your brother-in-law waits to escort you to England." " Míj brother-in-law," replied Isa¬ bel, glancing her eye over the letter. " Surely my mother keeps domestics enough to have spared one, without sending a person whom I detest." " I should suppose," returned the Abbess, " that lord De Launcy's son was sent for your honour and safety ; there are, doubtless, domestics to attend you." " Lord
49 Lord De Launcy's son," replied she, " can confer no honour that I will accept : and as for safety, I hope I shall· never trust mine in so shallow a bark. I understtand his coming, but it shall do him no service. Perhaps they may sup¬ pose me a lamb, like Margaret; but they mistake, they will find me a tyger in regard to him." 44 Indeed," answered Clarice, smile- ing, " I fear we shall all find you so. The news, it appears, has different ef¬ fects ; it makes Margaret weep, and you scold." " Is it possible," said the Abbess, " that you can feci reluctance to return to your mother ?" " Surely not," replied Isabel with quickness ; " but why send this hateful De Launcy ?" f 2 « AVere
" Were I to advise you," returned the Abbess, " it WOuld be to receive the messenger, with thc respect due to him as sent by a parent : should he presume on more, it \$ then time enough to ex¬ press your disapprobation. To receive him with disgust and anger, would bc to shew you expect somewhat disagree¬ able, and what perhaps he never means to offend you by proposing." " On my own account I care no¬ thing about him ; but for his conduct to Margaret I will never forgive him." 99 Respect to your family requires you, howrever, to see him," said Cla¬ rice. " I will accompany you to the grate." " I thank you ; and will act as you * direct.—Let me first compose myself, I should not like him to imagine that I could
could be disturbed by so insignificant a creature as himself." " Do so," said the Abbess. " I trust, my dear child, though we part novv, we shali meet again, even in this world." " The A r irgin grant it," returned Isa¬ bel, throwing her arms about hcr. " I w T ould I were indeed your child, then would we never part." Adelaide turned pale, and trembled. 49 Isabel, my love," said Clarice, " you affect my sister, her spirits are weak. You know she loves you, and like your¬ self grieves at a separation. Let us leave her with dame Alice and Mar¬ garet, and attend this visitor. Your departure cannot be immediate, for you are not prepared." f 3 Isabel
st, Margaret's cave: Isabel obeyed, and followed sister Clarice to the parlour. Richard De Launcy, on mature con¬ sideration, despairing to gain Marga¬ ret, like a good politician, had resolved to change his views, and adopt his fa¬ ther's opinion, and if he could not wed for love, at least not to neglect inter¬ est. To be refused by Isabel never en* tered his thoughts, for not having been accustomed to her he knew little of her disposition. At court he was called a handsome and a gallant man, and could not suppose that both sis¬ ters could be so infatuated as to refuse him. Clarice, with Isabel, received him at the grate. He paid his compliments to both : Isabel replied with cold po¬ liteness,
liteness, adding, " my mother, mûd your father, arc, I hope, well." De Launcy answered, that his father was perfe*ctiy so, but that lady De Launcy's health did not appear so well as it was accus¬ tomed to be------" She then," replied Isabel, " requires the attention of hcr child, and I shall be ready whenever your vessel can sail." " It will be prepared in two days," an¬ swered he. " One of lady Dc Launcy's women attends your pleasure." " I thank my mother for her care. Domestics were alone necessary : I am sorry this task was imposed on you." " It was no task, lady% but a plea¬ sure." " Courtiers compliment, as cowards fight, from custom,------Know you that my sister Margaret is with mc?" f 4 « 1 heard
44 I heard it, lady, but scarcely gave credit to it." 94 It is true. I am grieved that any thing should render the Castle of Fitz¬ walter so disagreeable, as to oblige her to seek another home." " Some disagreeable events," re¬ plied he, " exist more in imagination than in reality." " From the little I have heard, for [Margaret has spoken reservedly on the subject before me, her vexations ap¬ pear to have been real.------ But I w r eary you to converse on a subject in which you can have no concern." As Richard made no reply, Isabel immediately took leave, saying—" You ï may depend on my punctuality, and you will oblige me, by suffering the woman
woman my mother has sent to attend me ------ go M day." De Launcy returned the compliment, and left the convent, by no means pleased with the specimen he had re¬ ceived of Isabel's disposition. On returning to the Abbess, Isabel said—" I have, in reality, had a hard struggle, and have behaved better than I expected I could have done to that man." " Yet," answered Clarice, " few people who know you only in the con¬ vent, would suppose you capable of be¬ having in the coid contemptuous man¬ ner you have done." " He deserved a thousand times more," replied she, " Oh ! how I hate the man, whose pliant features are for eyer bent into a smile." f 5 " Isabel,"
" Isabel," said the Abbess, " speak not writh such acrimony ; never did I before hear you give way to it." " My dear lady," answered she, " the reason is obvious. In tbe convent, here, my bad spirit never predominates; with dame Alice and Margaret it also sleeps ; but let me once have my tem¬ per roused by knavery, and I am no longer master of myself." " The relationship he holds to lady De Launcy demands your respect," said Alice. 99 Let him then earn and claim it," answered Isabel. " The oppressors of Margaret shall never meet my esteem nor friendship." ." Did he, my dear Isabel, mention Austin or Leopold?" said Margaret. 99 Neither; nor did I think it pru¬ dent
dent to question him, however anxious I was to learn. Had I, I judge he would not have told me truth." They conversed more on the subject; but the result öf all was, entreating Isabel to bc calm, lest her w 7 armth should irritate lord and lady De Launcy, against herself. On the appointed day Richard De Launcy, true to his word, came to escort Isabel on board the vessel. The friends parted with reluctance, Isabel promising to make all possible inquiry respecting father Austin, and to devise. some means to inform them of his situation. *Ί* *t ^t· 4* *t» *¡> ÏJw «t» After Isabel's departure, Margaret's anxiety daily redoubled to hear from f 6 England;
England ; but scarcely a week had elapsed, when a messenger of high rank from king Henry was announced to the Abbess. It was lord Nevil, who, in his master's name, and under his sig¬ net, requested to have leave to take with him to England Margaret Fitz¬ walter, and thc dame Alice, in order for them to be ready, if necessary, on the impending trial; promising, if the event terminated in Margaret's disfa¬ vour, to send her safely back, or, if otherwise, to leave her to the guidance of what friends she chose. : The Abbess received the messenger with respeci, and, readhag the letter, she ordered Margaret and Alice to be called. " My lord," said she, pre¬ senting Margaret and the dame, " thc f¿rst of these I ægider as my child, the second
second I respect as my mother. I re¬ joice that your gracious king conde¬ scends to interest himself in the cause of a fatherless orphan. On my life, her claim is just ; for a more virtuous man than her father I never met with, nor doth to my thoughts a chaster wo¬ man breathe than was her mother." 44 Sweet lady," said lord Nevil, ad- dresssing Margaret, " your appearance alone will bribe all hearts in your fa¬ vour, and the respectability of your good dame, at once do credit to herself and to you." The Abbess then informed them of the king's request ; but in lieu of re¬ plying to it, Margaret said, " Pardon me, if my first question is after my dear friend and father, friar Austin—is he living ?
living ? 1 fear lie hath had much to suffer on my account." " Fair maid," answered lord Nevil, " the friar hath stood trial, and has suffered only a small fine. You doubt¬ less know, though I do not, what claim he hath on the king's favour ; but not a man, as I shoukl judge, stands higher in his highness' good opinion." " Just men are then, indeed/' said Margaret, " protected by God.—For your intelligence, noble sir, a thousand thanks. There was also a youth called Leopold," added she, blushing------ " know you if he be safe ?" " He, lady, hath received a com¬ mission from the king's own hand ; both are well, and high in honour and esteem." " Thank
" Thank Heaven !—Thank Heaven !" —replied Margaret, " I am then wil¬ ling to go, whenever the gracious Ab¬ bess, and my good dame think fitting." 99 I have no doubt of all being arrang¬ ed in the best manner possible," said the Abbess ; " but under whose protection, I pray you, will Margaret remain until the business be concluded ?" 99 By the king's command, under mine and that of lady Nevil; and no care nor attention shall be wanting that we can bestow." " I thank you," answered the Ab¬ bess, " and regard the favour as done to myself, Margaret shall be ready when you appoint." " In three days, if the wind serves, I shall be prepared," " Margaret will attend you," an- swered
swered the Abbess. " I would my ne¬ phew De Hoffman had been at home, to have paid you that attention your quality and merit deserve, but though he is not, I entreat you use his house during your stay. I will send orders for your reception, and what may be amiss, I pray you attribute to our want of knowledge of your coming, rather than to want of respect." " As a stranger here, I will accept your offer, lady. Rest assured, no care that my wife or myself can bestow shall be wanting to your fair charge------but I intrude on you: farewell------at the time appointed I will again see you." 99 The Saints guard you !·—farewell." The lord Nevil then left the convent, and joined his train that were waiting at the gate. They took the way to the 6 Castle
Castle of De Hoffman. A messenger, full speed, had a few minutes before reached it vvith a message from the Ab¬ bess, and already were the gates opened wide to receive the strangers. Every attention that could be devised m the ab¬ sence, of the master of the mansion was .shewn to the visitors ; for the domestics too well knew their youthful lord's dis¬ position, to fail in the duties of hospi¬ tality.
CHAP.
CHAP. VII. ΛΥί?Εχ lord Nevil had left the con¬ vent, the Abbess and her friends ex¬ pressed the highest satisfaction at thc prospect before them; but Margaret had no sooner seen the stranger de¬ part, than flying to thc chapel, she threw herself at the foot of the altar— 19 Holy Virgin !" exclaimed she, " re¬ ceive my thanks for the preserva¬ tion of the good Austin and the ge¬ nerous Leopold—From the breast of thc first dispel the cloud of sorrow that saddens his life ; and, for the last, guide and direct his youth to a reward befitting his merits—For thy suppliant, Margaret, bc it unto her as thy
thy wisdom judges best. If to raise her to the rank of hcr father, teach hcr to bear her fortune wdth moderation, to remember her days of adversity, and to feel for others—If to degrade her, enable her to support the disgrace with patience, content with the testimony of hcr friends and of her own heart ; and receive, as thy child, her whom a crue! step-dame denies chastely to appertain to the noble Fitzwalter." The Abbess, with her sister Clarice and Alice, at that moment joined her. " You are well employed, Margaret," said she. " AVhat was the object of your prayer ?" " Thanks for the preservation of Au¬ stin and Leopold," replied Margaret, " moderation for myself, if unexpec¬ tedly raised to honour, or resignation, in
in case of my birthright being denied ; with a wish to pass my days in your so¬ ciety, lady—" " AVhatever may be thc event, you arc too young to form any decided opinion," answered the Abbess. " A woman who passes her life in a convent, far from sin and the turmoil of life, doth well ; but she who fulfils hcr duty in domestic life doth better. At our great and final account, the vestal can only plead that she perhaps escaped sin by shunning temptation ; but the chaste wrife, surrounded by hcr children, and her children's children, shall claim a higher distinction. These shall she say ¿re mine, I bred them virtuous citizens of the world, and now present them candidates for immortal happiness." 49 Lady," said Margaret, " if such is your
your opinion, who so proper as your¬ self to have enforced the example ?" " Alas ! Margaret, you know not what you say. I am a wife, a wretched wife, whose tears can never cease to flow." " If you could be wretched, let women forswear marriage," answered Margaret. "Not so," replied thc Abbess. "All arc not born to buffet w ith adversity ; all mothers are not to suffer so severely a^ I have done." " Alas !" said Margaret, " I grieve that this subject was advanced, for all are weeping round me.—Dear lady, you wound my heart ; the dame too turns away, and sister Clarice—Forgive me, I have erred unintentionally." 99 My sweet child," returned the. Abbess,
Abbess, " there is nothing to forgive I am selfish thus to intrude my sorrows ; but at times they will have vent, though lately my mind has been more easy than for many years." " The Saints be praised," replied Alice, " the great Physician of hearts in his owrn time, can heal the severest wounds." The discourse then turned on Mar¬ garet's voyage to England : all ex¬ pressed satisfaction at the news they had obtained respecting the friar and Leopold, deriving therefrom a happy prognostic- " As Margaret will ap¬ pear in England as one for whom I am nearly interested," said tbe Abbess, " for my honour, and her own, it is ne¬ cessary that all should be suiting ; you, dame Alice, will therefore be good enough 8
enough to take a sum of money, and make her clothing befitting a daughter of the house of Fitzwalter." tfc· .¡? «?. «J* rnjt ff. ??. .φ. *? ?? * All being arranged ; at the time ap¬ pointed lord Nevil attended at the con¬ vent, and from the hand of the Abbess received Margaret; who, with Alice took leave of their friends. The sepa¬ ration cost both parties many tears ; but the Abbess assuming a chearful coun¬ tenance at length said, " My dear child, my heart forbodes good ; dry your tears, we shall, I trust, meet in honour—But should injustice triumph, remember you have a friend and a home at St. Mary's"—Then turning to lord Nevil she added—" Mv lord, to you
you I intrust my daughter Margaret and my friend Alice, I intreat you, with all duty, pay my respects to the king of England, and tell his grace, that in the impending cause, I only pray thc right may prosper and thc false bc confounded." Margaret then knelt, the Abbess blessed and embraced her; Alice ap¬ proached to -kiss her hand, but the un¬ assuming Adelaide saluting her vene¬ rable cheek, said, " Fie on this distance, there is no rank superior to virtue.—> Heaven guide and protect you—fare¬ well." So saying she pulled down her veil to conceal her emotion, and wav ing her hand as a final adieu, the heavy gates of St. Mary's closed.
????.
CIIAP. ATH. During Isabel's voyage to Eng¬ land, Richard De Launcy endeavoured all in his power to obtain her favour; for though her person did not affect his heart so powerfully as that of Mar¬ garet had done, he was by no means insensible to the united charms of vouth, wealth, and beautv. Isabel be- havcd vvith great reserve, she avoided all he could construe into rudeness, but treated him with an unvaried coldness, little flattering to his pretensions. On their arrival in London she was* conveyed to the house of the lord De Lam \ey. She was shocked at the al· tcratiou that had taken place in her v u í . n , ? mother's
mother's person, but concealing her emotion, she paid her duty with the warmth and affection that was natural to her. AVhether lady De Launcy was inte¬ rested, from the knowledge of how little she deserved her daughter's ten¬ derness, or that illness, by detaching her from dissipation, rendered her more awakened to it, she received her with an affection she had never before shewn. She appeared charmed with her per¬ sonal improvement, and expressed the utmost satisfaction at her return—" Yet, Isabel," said she after some discourse, " wc arc under much anxiety on vour account, as we have every reason to dread that we shall be obliged to ad¬ mit a sharer in the estate, of which you are the rightful heir." 2 "So
4 * So 1 have no sharer in your affec¬ tion, my dear mother, I am satisfied; und I promise, in return, you shall have no sliare r in my duty------In this preca¬ rious state of your health, I have no time to think of fortune." Lady Dc Launcy then questioned her respecting Margaret, to all of which she replied vvith candour ; but hcr mo¬ ther could not but observe, that the cir¬ cumstances vvhich had taken place in Northumberland had, in thc relation to ber, been much softened, or that she herself suppressed the most unpleasant paris. No persuasion, when night ap¬ proached, would make Isabel leave her mother's apartment : she intreated to have a small bed by her side—" A daughter'b attention is more salutary than that of any other person," said bhe, " and unless my mother is dis- g 2 pleased ,
pleased with me, and compels me to leave her, I will remain here ; if she finds me a bad nurse, she can but change me to-morrow night." The most unfeeling minds have their moments of compunction ; a before un- felt sensation played about the heart of lady De Launcy, and wdiich, as she became more accustomed to Isabel, daily strengthened. She regarded with astonishment a character so unlike her own ; for though amusement and plea¬ sure courted her daughter on every ride, she declined all forthe melancholy attendance of a sick chamber, and wben pressed by her father-in-law to pay her duty at court, replied—" Ex- case me, my lord, I have a higher duty fire t to fulfil. My mother restored to health, I shall gladly accompany her." 6 Though
Though lady Dc Launcy trembled at thc disgrace that might attend her from the impending trial, she had no means left to draw back wdth honour. Her health visibly grew worse, for tbe gnaw¬ ing worm of conscience preyed upon her life. Lord De Launcy 's ill humour likewise increased ; he surmised his hiffh favour at court was declinino:, •J O' and should his wife die, he had small hopes that Isabel would wed lus son, whom she appeared cautiously to avoid. Resolved, therefore, if possible, to bring that event to an immediate certainty, he took an opportunity to speak on thc subject to lady De Launcy, in the ab¬ sence of her daughter. She promised to exert her influence, yet could not but think the measure precipitate in her present state of health, g 3 On
On speaking to Isabel, she urged her own and lord Dc Launcy's wishes, and though she did not press her to wed immediately, intreated her to consider Richard De Launcy as the man de¬ signed for her husband, and to receive him as such. " My dear mother," an¬ swered Isabel, " it may be lord De Launcy's wish to see me married to his son, for he can have no interest in me, save only to my fortune ; but to you, my happiness, I am convinced, must be of some account.—I love not Ri¬ chard De Launcy, nor ever can ; and suffer me to say, that at this moment, when your health ought to be the first object to your family, that I regard thc proposal as an insult." Lady De Launcy's persuasions were vain, she could not obtain from Isabel the
the smallest concession in Richard's favour.—" My dear child," at length said she, " you will have much to con¬ tend with, and the power of lord De Launcy may be necessary to support your cause." 49 1 have no cause to support—I stand not against truth ; I am as convinced, as that I have life, that Margaret has a just right to the domain of Fitzwalter, and am content to receive the portion of a younger sister." 44 AVeak, infatuated girl ; if you throw fortune from you, you will hereafter, when grown wiser, repent—The foolish attachments of childhood^ are in ma* turer age soon forgotten, and duty to your parents and to yourself demand' that you defend your property to the utmost of your power." ? 4 "I will
" I will do so by that which is justly mine," answered Isabel ; 99 but I am convinced, that you know not all the circumstances that attend this case, or indeed you would think as I do. I would sooner enjoy a fourth part of my father's property with peace, than the whole with injustice.—Margaret is an affectionate and a good girl ; no word derogatory to you ever escapes her lips, and if she might, I am sure she would love you," Lady De Launcy turned aside, but made no reply. " My dear mother," continued Isabel, seeing she was some¬ what moved, " I wrish these contentions had never taken place ; there is wealth sufficient for both Margaret and I, and should the trial be determined against us, a stigma of wishing to deprive the orphan
orphan of her right will ever hang over us." " It is too late to retract," said lady De Launcy, " or I now myself almost wish no dispute had arisen ; for I have no doubt but the friar will have power to make the king believe what he pleases." " All proceedings might be easily stopped," answered Isabel ; " and surely it would be better to give up with a good grace, what we shall be obliged to yield to force." " Lord De Launcy wdll never con¬ sent," replied she. 99 AVhat concern can it be to him ? Margaret hath already refused his son's hand, and I will never accept it." This was a subject of which lady De Laune/ was as yet unacquainted, for it g 5 had
bad been carefully concealed from her '; she therefore questioned Isabel mi¬ nutely, and afterwards asked an ex¬ planation of her lord, who, as it coukl not be denied, by his equivocal replies confirmed the truth of what Isabel ad¬ vanced. His ill humour on hearing that she totally rejected his son was not to be restrained ; he even forgot himself suf¬ ficiently, to speak in terms that shewed how little the illness of his wife affected him, and grossly declared, that as he was not to be benefitted by lord Fitz¬ walter's property, he should be cautious how he shared the disgrace attached toit. AVeakened by illness, lady De Launcy felt this reproach severely — "Alas!" ,ν.ά.Ι ri:t\ i9 it U too tnv% tV-'A Txvts^ed
. by the rage of avarice, I have acted unworthily ; but that, my lord, was known to you speedily after our mar¬ riage, and you aione have enjoyed the profit of what now so bitterly torments me." More words followed, but Isabel's entrance broke on the dispute, and lord De' Launcy passing her without speak¬ ing, left thc apartment. Froni that day he seldom visited his lady, though her illness increased ra¬ pidly. Isabels cares, on the contrary, redoubled, and hard and corrupt as hcr mother's heart naturally was, she made her feel thc worth of an estimable and virtuous child.
? ? CII VP.
CHAP. IX. Ferdinand De Hoffman had reached England in safety. Uncertain where to find Leopold, he judged it best to land in Northumberland, and proceed to the domain of Fitzwalter, judging that, at all events, he should there learn the destination of Austin, from whom he concluded Leopold was not far distant. At the castle he learn¬ ed that the friar had been taken to London, and also gained intelligence where to find David's cottage, as he had frequently heard Leopold mention the good old man. From Bridget he obtained all the information he re¬ quired, and forcing gold upon her, de¬ parted.
parted. On his arrival in London he inquired at the religious houses, and soon learned the event of the trial, and that Austin was now at the Grey Friars, where, for a time, the fathers had suf¬ fered Leopold to attend him, **mm» ·!* «1* *ww* 'P *F 'J* *** Austin,» Leopold, and David, were seated in the cell, conversing on the subject nearest their hearts, the expec¬ tancy of Margaret's corning, (for lord Nevil had been gone some days), when the friar said, " By the mercy of Heaven., I trust all will end well------ how much happier am I than my deserts. Thou, Leopold, art in the high road to gain honour and renown, and, Margaret's cause concluded, I trust to be able to fulfil
fulfil my duty, better than heretofore my distracted thoughts would permit. My poor, but honest friends in Nor¬ thumberland, I will see once more, and then, methinks, I should like to follow the example of your first patron, friar John, and end my days in the Holy Land." 99 Father," answered Leopold, " I grow too old for a truant ; but if you adopt that measure, I shall be strongly tempted to follow youJ' i9 Mercy forbid," replied Austin. " Thou, my son, hast many duties to fulfil : I have but one, and that is, to prepare my sinful soul for its great ac¬ count." " Friar John," answered Leopold, *' never doubted but he was destined to so to Palestine, to eflect, as a se-
condary means, some particular event, and in the same opinion he died,—— For my own part I cannot presume to judge, but I think otherways, for no material circumstance attended his go¬ ing thither.—You, father, have no call, and therefore why should you distress your friends by such a step ?" rC As yet I can form no decided re¬ solution ; but as Heaven wills it, so be it unto me." At that moment a friar came in. " Brother," said he to Austin, " there is a youth at the gate, that inquires for thee or Leopold—■—good truth, as I should judge, his brother, for he favours him much." u I have no brother, father," replied Leopold, " that can come hither ; it is dmihtless.
doubtless, some messenger from the court or elsewhere." " I pray ye admit him," said Austin, " we will come forth and receive him." The friar went out, and Austin and Leopold followed to the gate of the convent, where a tall youth, cloathed in the deepest semblance of outward sorrow, awaited them.------In an in¬ stant Leopold sprang forward* exclaim¬ ing, " My noble friend ! my generous De Hoffman ! can I believe my sight ? —Is it possible that I see thee in Eng¬ land ?" At thc name of De Hoffman Austin involuntarily started, turned pale, and trembled.------" I pray ye pardon me," said he, in a hurried voice ; " but I have feelings that demand an immediate answer—who, I pray, have ye had the misfortune
misfortune to lose amidst your family ? —Too surely my heart forebodes it is the Abbess Adelaide------" As he spoke he leaned against a pil¬ lar for support, his eyes ñxed with ener¬ getic earnestness upon Ferdinand, and every muscle of his face working w ith agonized expectation. " Good friar," answ r ered Ferdinand, 49 I bless Heaven, my aunt Adelaide, and all in the convent, were well when I left Bremen------Mv loss is nearer— my dear and honoured father is no more." " Alas ! alas !" exclaimed Austin, apparently lost to all around him, " poor Joseph, thou hast hastened early to the grave.—The Saints receive thee into the mansions of the blest,——Thou hadst but
but few errors, and those not heinous, and I doubt not art at peace." " Ferdinand," said Leopold, " need I say I grieve thou hast cause of sor¬ row?—Thy noble father is, I trust, happy; let that thought enable thee to bear with resignation, what one day thy children must bear for thee." Ferdinand pressed Leopold's hand, but made no reply ; the father's man¬ ner and emotion astonished him, and turning quickly, he said—" You then knew my father, good friar ? " Austin, recalled to recollection by the question, paused a moment, then replied—-" I knew him some years ago, and grieve that his latter days were sg visited with suffering as I have heard they were." if I thank you, kind father.—I have lost
lost no time ín hastening to England, as I have business of the utmùst import with Leopold, and entreat you, as his nearest friend, to be present at what I have to disclose." " You may command me to-morrow —for the present I will retire, and say a mass for the repose of the count De Hoffman." 99 I thank y r ou. Leopold and I will attend you; but what I have to say cannot be delayed beyond this night. —A man, friar, that is heavily laden, wishes to be relieved of the weight, and even so doth the youth before you." * f In the evening then, my son, I will attend thee. I will go now to the duty I spoke of j you will join me in the chapel ?" *< Wc
" AVe will," answered Leopold.— " And now, my dear Ferdinand, so sorrowful is the event that has brought you to England, and so sad are your looks, that I am almost grieved to see you.—You say you have business of importance with me ?—Command me, I will fly to execute it." " Alas ! there is nothing to execute, I have, indeed, a heavy task to fulfil ; but I will accomplish it, Leopold, and then ------" " If there is danger you shall not meet it alone," interrupted Leopold.—- 99 AVhat have I done, Ferdinand ? you look at me if not coldlv, at least with sorrow, and a sentiment that I cannot express—Pardon mc fcr mentioning* the subject ; but perhaps the count, your father, revealed to you thc cause , of
of his aversion to me, and you find it so just, that you adopt it ?" Ferdinand threw himseif into the arms of his friend—" Probe not my heart, Leopold — Speedily thou shait know all; but both on thy account and on my own, I wish the presence and advice of a wise and good man," " Be it so, then/' answered Leopold. 49 Tell me then, I pray you, all you know respecting our friends at St, Mary's ?—The lady Isabel we have heard is in London, though to see her is impossible, as she is at the lord De Launcy's. His lady is said to be ill ; but I speak only from a report that I have collected at court." Ferdinand expressed his surprise at hearing Isabel was in England, as he left hcr at Bremen ; but as he had been in
in Northumberland, and she had come straight to the port of London, thc, mystery was easily explained. At that moment a friar announced to them that thc mass was beginning, and ceasing their conversation they im¬ mediately attended. The sacred duty fulfilled, Ferdinand and Leopold followed Austin to his cell. David was already there, but modestly withdrew on their entrance, and each taking bis seat, a silence of some minutes ensued—" Father," at length said Ferdinand, " I thank you for your attention to the memory of my dear parent — your eyes, during the holy ceremony, plainly shewed, that you held him in some estimation—Oh, if you loved the father, at this moment pity his son, who labours under thc most
most cruel and distressing of all sor¬ rows." Austin and Leopold regarded Fer¬ dinand with astonishment—-" My good youth," answered Austin mildly, " bc assured of my friendship and advice, in all you may wish to consult me.—- The loss of a parent is, doubtless, heavy, but religion teaches us to mo¬ derate our grief. If you are unhappy, seek consolation from our common and glorious Father, and thc meanest and most sinful of his creatures here before you, will, by night or day, by his prayers and consolation, endeavour to calm your mind." " I thank and bless you," answered Ferdinand with a hurried accent,— " Leopold drew of you a faithful pic¬ ture—You call him son; if the un¬ happy
happy are y r our children, no one's claim is superior to that of Ferdinand." " The unhappy are indeed my child¬ ren," answered Austin ;- " but the count De Floffman hath too many duties to fulfil, to sufler him to be of that number." " True—true he hath so," replied he ; " but Ferdinand De Hoffman hath no inheritance, save shame and sor¬ row." The insanity that had afflicted Joseph De Hoffman at that moment struck for¬ cibly on the minds of both Austin and Leopold : fearing the like affliction was fallen on Ferdinand, the latter wept bitterly, and attempted to leave the cell ; but Ferdinand catching him by the garment said—" I pray your pa¬ tience ; but had ye my task to execute, you
you would take as much time as I do— Leopold, look on me, neither thou nor I are what we appear—Thou art a sufferer—and I an impostor"— " My dear youth," interrupted Au¬ stin, " sorrow hath fevered thy brain ; thou shalt retire to-night,, to-morrovV we wrill talk at full,—Leopold and my¬ self will watch thee." " I wonder not that ye think me mad," answered Ferdinand — " but though my brain is bursting with shame and anguish, my senses are clear.—I repeat, Leopold is not wdiat he seemeth. —He is the true and lawful heir of De Hoffman." Leopold concerned beyond mea¬ sure, answered—" I am, my beloved friend, what you please to-night, so you retire to rest, which I conjure you vol. iv. h to,
to, unless you would grieve mc to death." " No," exclaimed Ferdinand, " not till the fatal secret bc revealed, the weight of which hath been so great, that my sad soul hath sickened, even at the sight of the blessed sun." " For pity's sake defer what you have to relate until the morning," said Austin, " you will then be more col¬ lected.—The count De Hoffman had. but one son, and you arc he." —"Joseph De Hoffman had,indeed, but one son, and I am he ; but the count John De Hoffman had, by his wife Adelaide, a son------" " Gracious Heaven ! enable me to bear the suffering thou infiictest upon me," exclaimed Austin. Then turning to Ferdinand he added mildly—" Alas I good
good youth, know you not that un¬ happy child perished in his infancy ?" 44 He did not perish," returned Fer¬ dinand quickly—" Open thy vest, Leo¬ pold, hast thou not a deep scar in thy side ?" The friar trembled, but did notsoeak. A. 99 I have," answered Leopold ; " but how I received it I know not." " From the hand of thy father, as thou laid'st sleeping on the bosom of thy mother, Adelaide of Eltzen, coun¬ tess De Hoffman." Leopold convinced the whole arose from insanity, was preparing to make a reply, when turning, he discovered Austin falling to the earth writhout sense or motion. " Gracious powers ! what may this mean I know not ; but for the love of h 2 Heaven,
Heaven, Ferdinand, support him while I fetch water.—But sec, his colour re¬ turns. - Father, are you better ? Sure some malignant planet is abroad to vex my dearest friends." " I thank ye—give me air—Con¬ tinue Ferdinand, from whom hadst thou this tale ?" " From my expiring parent." " My good youth, thou art not now to learn, that thy unhappy father was, for some years previous to his death, at times deranged in his intellects ?" " This account is, however, true," resumed Ferdinand—"'Hie story is long, but the deception was executed by means of one Nicholas Deuhopt, who w T aited on the count, and his wife Do¬ rethea, who was the infant's nurse." " Oh ! youth, if it be possible, and thou
thou canst tell the story collectedly, I conjure thee, by my soul's peace, to do so," replied Austin. — " I have great and weighty reasons for this request, that thou shalt hereafter know." Leopold thought the friar equally distracted with Ferdinand, but oppo¬ sition being fruitless, he resolved to attend the result in silence. Ferdinand then related minutely the story of the count De Hoffman 's mar¬ riage with Adelaide of Eltzen, his jea¬ lousy, and its fatal catastrophe, as he himself had before disclosed it to the king, save that his pity for his ???? was expressed in the warmest terms.— The friar's emotion made him pause, but entreating Ferdinand to proceed, he added—" So far doest thou indeed too truly know the sad story." H 3 « Alas !
" Alas ! it is methodical madness," observed Leopold mentally. " The countess De Hoffman/* con¬ tinued Ferdinand, " already weakened and affected with a slow fever, was un¬ able to bear the calamity that had fallen on her. She gave way to the most ex¬ travagant despair, and though by na¬ ture ?? mild as the dove, vented a thou¬ sand execrations against her husband, that redoubled the unhappy man's de¬ spair. Raving, she was at length con¬ veyed to her chamber. My uncle's state was yet more distressing, and un¬ certain how to act, my aunt Clarice sent for my father. On his arrival at the Castle all was in confusion The death of thc countess, w T hose vehemence had been followed by convulsions, was houijy expected, as was also that ot thc child.
child. On the ensuing day the baron Fitzwalter came to Bremen: he was on the point of a second marriage, but warmly attached to the memory ofhis first wife, he resolved to visit the spot that contained her ashes, and also to see the count De Hoffman, who was his dearest ι riend, before his marriage took place. The calamities that hung over our house made it necessary my uncle should withdraw, till the event of the infant's wound was known. My father pressed it, and w T as warmly se¬ conded by Fitzwalter ; but their en¬ treaties were vain, and the infant's dan¬ ger increasing, to prevent him from the shame that might accrue, be was forced on board a vessel and conveyed to England.—Alas ! novv my friends, pity the youth, whom cruel necessity, ho- H 4 nour,
nour, and the strong injunctions of a dying parent, forces to disclose crimes, that he would give his life to erase.— The countess lingered, as it were, in the arms of death, during which, Cla¬ rice, who accused herself as the cause of all the sorrow that had befallen her, never quitted her apartment, but to visit the infant, who was in the care of his nurse, Dorethea, a woman in whom the countess placed great trust. Do¬ rethea was the wife of Nicholas Deu¬ hopt, one of the count's valets, an art¬ ful villain, who would have scrupled no action, how r ever heinous, for profit.— The infant, after its accident, had two or three times been visited writh fits, and one day was so severely attacked, that the news of its death was published throughout the castle ; for it lay with¬ out
out sense or the smallest motion. Cla¬ rice, who was present, unable to bear the sight, withdrew, leaving in the apartment only my father, Deuhopt, and his wife Dorethea. Whether my father had by any means shewn his wish for increased wealth I know not, but Deuhopt, looking, at the infant, said, — " May your spirit rest in peace, my young lord—his honour the count can novv never return to Germany." Alas !' hovv cautious ought we to be, to stifle every incentive to commit evil. The bare words of Deuhopt awoke in my father's mind, the unjust and detestable idea of possessing himself of his bro¬ ther's fortune. "To their great surprise, however, after some considerable time thc child began to struggle* and ina few minutes opened h 5 its
its eyes, and cried faintly.—My father and Deuhopt then withdrew. " You were mistaken, Deuhopt," said the count—" AVilliam will, I firmly be¬ lieve, recover." " It is impossible," replied he, " Was I as certain of the estate as your lord¬ ship, I should already think myself the count De Hoffman." " ƒ count De Hoffman ?" repeated my father, " that his death could not make me." " Not immediately ; but pardon me, my lord, your brother couid never re¬ turn, and yourself and son are the im¬ mediate heirs." " This infernal poison once strewed in my father's mind, I grieve to say en¬ grossed all his thoughts. The child's health grew better, and ought to have Θ quelled
quelled all expectation ; but the fiend avarice had taken such deep root, that it was not to be displaced—" Deu¬ hopt," said my father as he attended him—" thou hast awakened in my heart a thought, that I would give half my fortune to forget." 99 AVith humility, my lord," answered he, " may I crave to know it ?" " I would," replied he, " I could hide it from myself—Had AVHiiam died, my son, as thou saidst, would be hereafter count De Hoffman ; for my brother, though warm and impetuous in his passions, idolizes his wifc 4 and child, and would, in case of the death of either, never long survive—N'ay, in¬ deed, hb state of mind is such, that I much question but he sinks under the h 6 dreadful
dreadful consequences his passion has already occasioned." " My lord," said Deuhopt, " and whose right by justice is far prior to yours ? —A thousand events may happen be¬ tween this and the baron William's at-' tainnig the age of manhood. For my part, I think a wise man should ever seize fortune by the forelock, and —" " Deuhopt, what meanest thou ?" interrupted my father. 49 Children are mortal, my lord." My father started— c ' Deuhopt," re¬ plied he, " dost thou think I would murder my brother's child ?" " No, my lord, but there are vyen who, for a competent sum, might serve themselves and you." 49 By murder," repeated my father—· " A curse attend them." " Your
" Your lordship is so irritable—I have no interest, and simply meant, that a report of the child's death might be spread, and for a stated sum he might be adopted, and though not brought up baron De Hoffman, yet be made a respectable member of society/' 49 Leave me—I will call when I have occasion for thee." 44 Deuhopt left my father—Alas I his evil spirit predominated, for in less than an hour he recalled him, and then— Excuse me the horrid detail 1 It cost my repentant father many and bitter pangs to relate it, and would cost me an equal number to repeat it.—Let it suffice that Deuhopt undertook all; his only fear, he said, was his wife, who started at shadows.—The baron Wil¬ liam— Thou, Leopold — wert then drenched
drenched by the villain with an opiate, which gave every appearance of the fits iriiat had before attacked thee ^Cla¬ rice was called, the servants attended, all declared thee dying, and by my father's advice, in heavy sorrow, they at length withdrew, leaving only him¬ self, Deuhopt, and the nurse. Dore¬ thea wept bitterly, but the brutal harsh¬ ness of her husband terrified her to silence, and the night being chosen for this diabolical scene, wrapped in a cloak, under which in thy state of in¬ sensibility thou wert concealed, the ac¬ cursed wretch by a private gate left the Cabile, and bore thee to a lone part of the city, where he placed thee with his sister, as a child he had unknown to his wrife. To account for thy ap¬ pearance, and the wound not yet healed, he
he said thy mother w r as lately dead, and that being neglected, thou hadst at play fallen on a knife, and had scarcely escaped with life. " In the mean time^-Gracious Hea¬ ven ! would the infernal story was ended —my father locked the door of the child's apartment, saying to Clarice, it were better the infant was not seen any¬ more by the domestics, as they might examine the wound, and the convul¬ sions in which it had expired had ren^ dered it a sight of horror — that he would take on himself the whole care, with Deuhopt and the nurse, that all was properiy executed, and himself at¬ tend its funeral, saying to all inquiries, that fits were the immediate cause of its death. " Pardon me ifl digress here to say, that
that my misguided father had no sooner completed this unjust action,, than he declared, by all hk hopes of peace here¬ after, that he would have sacrificed his life and fortune to have undone it ; but as that was impossible, he was forced to proceed—A coffin, and all the deco¬ rations of death, were provided, and Deuhopt and Dorethea were appointed to prepare the infant for the tomb.— Clarice, with tears, pressed to see the child for a final adieu·, but with great difficulty w^as dissuaded by my father ; and all being arranged in a private manner, a rich coffin, filled with mate¬ rials of a proper weight, was deposited in the chapel of the castle of De Hoffman." " Is the coffin there now ?" demanded Austin with a faultering accent. "It
" It doubtless is ; but I sought it not, as it may be a satisfaction to Leopold, or rather to the count De Hoffman—" " Dear fiither," interrupted Leopold impatiently, " how can you suffer my friend to exhaust his strength and spirits by such a recital ?" " Is it possible, my brother, or rather my much-wronged cousin, that you can yet think that the account is false ?" said Ferdinand. " I think nothing to-night, dear Fer¬ dinand," replied Leopold, " but what you please." Austin, lost in reflection, with min¬ gled passions working on his features, interrupted him—" Peace, I pray ye, Leopold,—AVhere is now this Nicholas Deuhopt ?" " A prisoner in % the castle of De Hoffman».
Hoffman. From his false heart shall every secret be rent—but spare the me¬ mory of my father—Nicholas Deuhopt and Nicholas Sternheim —are the same person. " Nicholas Deuhopt and Nicholas St^rnheim the same?" replied Leopold, for the first time interested in the narra¬ tive ------He may, indeed, be a bad man ; but spare him, remember he is my father." - α Hath the curse of incredulity fallen: on thee ?" interrupted Ferdinand. " Ni¬ cholas Sternheim, or Deuhopt, is not thy father : to the noble, generous, but misguided, John De Hoffman, dost thou owe thy being." " I pray ye^ Leopold," said Austin* 99 for 1 am unable—fetch me a draught of water—my legs tremble, and my tongue
tongue cleaves to my mouth." Leo¬ pold obeyed—and the friar, somewhat revived entreated Ferdinand to con¬ tinue. " Thc* coffin laid in the grave," con¬ tinued Ferdinand, " Dorethea was sent to claim the baron William, saying, as she had no children living, she would adopt him—My poor cousin, some¬ what recovered, knew his nurse ; he articulated her name, and called on his mother, Dorethea, w r ho was accom¬ panied by Deuhopt, was fearful of giv¬ ing way to her tenderness ; but pressed the infant to her bosom, and having before received her dismission from the count <De Hoffman, she Jeft Bremen during the night. Some few days after Deuhopt pretended to have heard that his wife was sick, and accordingly asked permission to attend her, as had
been jointly devised by my unhappy father and himself. The conditions of their agreement were—That Deuhopt should leave the kingdom, but be pre¬ viously furnished with a sum of money sufficient to purchase an estate, which was, with all the profits thereof, to be his for life, and also for that of Dore¬ thea ; but at their death to devolve to their supposed son. Deuhopt executed one part of this commission faithfully, for to secure himself he travelled all the w T ay to Marseilles, near which he pur¬ chased a vineyard ; but he never in¬ formed my farhcr where, for well know¬ ing that he did not dare ????? him to be pursued, he took away on his de¬ parture, several rings and jewels that appertained to his late master. - My aunts some months after retired into a convent, aud my father received new *
news from England that his unhappy brother was dead. But though now ail was arranged to his wrishes, he was in truth the most miserable of men.------ He knew no peace—he would rise in the middle of the night—call the do¬ mestics—alarm my mother, and, by every action, betray the strongest symp¬ toms of derangement. All the count De Hoffman's old domestics he dis¬ charged on various pretences, and with small sums of money, he settled them at a considerable distance from him----- Leopold's story you doubtless know, father. Father John's fixed determina¬ tion to go to Jerusalem was no chime¬ rical fancy, but assuredly the immedi¬ ate inspiration of Heaven to protect the rightful heir. On Leopold's being pre¬ sented to my lather, he must recollect the emotion he underwent. The strong resem-
resemblance he bears the family could not be overlooked; and, on question¬ ing him, though Deuhopt had changed his name, he became almost convinced. AVe encountered robbers—the scar in Leopold's side was then discovered, and if a doubt remained it then va¬ nished. ------Resolved, however to be ascertained, after some stay at Bremen my father took a journey to the south of France. There he found Deuhopt, and all his fears were confirmqd. He furnished the villain writh more money, and overlooking the robbery he had com¬ mitted, ordered him to follow him in a short time, to Germany, as to have at¬ tended him might have caused suspicion. It was their design to have forced Leo¬ pold home with Deuhopt, but by the blessing of Heaven that was prevented, for before his arrival in G ermany Leopold was
was gone to England. I have now only to add, that my dear, but mis¬ guided father, previous to his death, made to me the full disclosure of all I have related. Deuhopt is, as I have before said, a prisoner in the Castle of De Hoffman, and now that my heart is relieved, willingly WOuld I call on death, to hide my shame for ever." Though Leopold had, at the com¬ mencement of the narrative, thought the tale merely the effervescence of a heated brain, yet there were some cir¬ cumstances towards the conclusion that staggered his belief. He remembered to have seen manv curions rinçs in Sternheim's chest, though it never be¬ fore struck him that they were of any particular value : he had also frequently heard Dorethea speak of the dreadful fits
fits he had been afflicted with in his in¬ fancy'—Sternheim's astonishment when he saw the letter from friar John to the lady Dc Hoffman, and which Leopold novv conceived was designed for Ade¬ laide. Though these reflexions swriftly crossed his fancy, he could not conceive the" whole but as a dream, and there¬ fore remained silent. " Doth the lady Adelaide know this w r onderfu! relation ?" demanded Austin. " No, father," answered Ferdinand ; " as speedily as possible after my fa¬ ther's death I departed for England to seek Leopold, that I might bear to hejr arms her long lost son.—Had any evil happened him, never more would I have seen Germany. In case of acci¬ dent to myself, I ordered to be con¬ veyed to my aunt's hands, a box writh papers,
papers, which would have disclosed the whole ; but, blessed be Heaven,, there is now no occasion. I requested it not to be opened under six months, before which period I trust to see him in his mother's embraces." 49 Supposing all this to be real," re¬ plied Leopold, " which I am far from believing, think } r ou so poorly of me, as to suppose that I would accept wealth that you did not share ?—No, the rich and extended domain of De Hoffman would I throw from me, if it must be purchased with the loss of the friend¬ ship of the generous-minded Ferdi¬ nand." De Hoffman threw himself into his friend's arms. " My more than brother, dost thou indeed forgive me ?" said he— " Adelaide too, mild and pious saint, vol. iv. χ w ill
will pity me, and pray for pardon for my deluded father. But alas ! one evil never can be removed: the spirit of my much wronged uncle, who fell a victim to the cruel delusion, will cry from the tomb, and settle a lasting curse upon'me." " I will obliterate it," said the friar firmly. " The virtues of Ferdinand De Hoffman shall efface the remembrance of his father's errors—Oh ! Leopold, if this tale be true, my partiality for thee was the strong voice of nature—Be it as it may, I throw concealment off for ever; and if a son can receive to his heart a ? parent, whose fell poignard was bathed in. his infant blood, receive to thine, not friar Austin, but a father." As Austin spoke, he threw himself upon Leopold's neck, and clasped him witn
« with almost convulsive earnestness.—* " Oh i" continued he, " should this weight of guilt be indeed removed from my so ;I, and I be father of a sön like thee, how greatly are all my suffer¬ ings overpaid.—Oh Adelaide! gentle and suffering angel, not to the sinful De Hoffmari is this biessing sent, butto thy prayers, and to shew that virtue is the immediate care of Heaven." " Father Austin !" exclaimed Leo¬ pold, in a tone of astonishment, return¬ ing his embrace. " Friar," said Ferdinand, with equal surprise. " If Ferdinand's account be true*" returned he, " Austin is lost to ye for ever, but John De Hoffman remains in his stead.—Oh! Ferdinand, virtuous, noble-minded youth, receive forthe first ι 2 time
time the embrace of an uncle—nay a of father, to wdiom Leopold is only dearer for the share he hath in Adelaide." «Ferdinand grasped the friar's hand.— "Pardon me," answered he; " but surely it is impossible.—The count De Hoffman died many years since, as my father had advice from the baron Fitz¬ walter." " He died, Ferdinand, only to the world ; he wished to set the heart of Adelaide at rest, and to see thy father inherit what was his right, in case his brother was without heirs." Ferdinand sighed deeply.—" AVhere will these strange events end ?" said he,— « If, indeed, I stand before the much wronged count De Hoffman, I have nothing to plead—I throw myself upon his mercy," " Bewil·
" Bewildered in the wonderful events that Ferdinand hath related, and that you, dear father, apparently give credit to, my senses seem suspended; and the whole appears a dream. — The noble count De Hoffman, or rather the be¬ loved Austin, my father ? The peasant, Leopold, son.to the angelic Adelaide ? Impossible f the blessing is too great s to be real—Oh ! ifit be not illusion—bless —bless your kneeling son, my father- Bless also the generous Ferdinand, to whom this knowledge is owing." As Leopold spoke, he caught Fer¬ dinand's hand, and both knelt at the friar's feet. He repeatedly embraced and blessed them—" God," said he, 44 withheld one son, but returns me two." " At that moment David knocked at 1 3 the
the door of the cell, to inform thc friar that it was the hour of supper. The agitation of all was too visible to pass unnoticed — Austin, therefore, briefly informed the good man, that Ferdinand was his nephew, and that in Leopold he hoped hereafter to acknowledge his %on AVilliam, long since supposed to be dead. David was for some minutes too much astonished to reply—" Holy Mo¬ ther !" exclaimed the old man, " how this may be I know not, but my heart ean easily receive it as a truth. The tesemblanoe these youths bear to each other, bespeaks at ??? their consan¬ guinity—But the yet stronger likeness Leopold holds to you, my noble master, in your youth, is so marking, that even when I first met him, in St. Margaret's ch apely
chapel, it struck me writh astonish¬ ment." "Oh David!" replied Austin, "If after all, my hopes should prove abor¬ tive, my heart would burst at once.— Thou sayest Leopold resembles me— Ah ! nö —now that I consider his fea¬ tures, he hath, methinks, the open coun¬ tenance of Adelaide." " My gracious uncle, if I may pre¬ sume to use that name, Leopold, or rather I pray ye William, bears more resemblance to you than to my aunt Adelaide—Your countenance is open as hers, though your features are sad¬ dened with sorrow 7 ." Thc conversation was too interesting to suffer them to think of breaking it j David therefore fetched them some bread and drink, and at a late hour ι 4 they
they retired to thc respective cells ap¬ pointed them. Austin spent thc night in prayer; Leopold in a labyrinth of hopes and foars, respecting what had passed ; while Ferdinand, with a mind more at ease, than since his father's death, speedily fell asleep, satisfied with having tlone his duty; and, above all, with hav¬ ing with filial affection drawn a veil over the most dreadful of his father's crimes—Thc intended murder of Leo¬ pold.
CHAP.
CHAP. X. At an early hour Ferdinand and Leopold joined the friar. The collected manner of the first entirely dispelled every doubt, respecting the veracity of what he had advanced the evening be¬ fore. Austin related all that had hap¬ pened to him since he left Germany, and informed his nephew of the kind¬ ness of the king to Leopold. " Ho¬ nours, my son," concluded the friar, tc have latterly fallen thick upon thee. Heaven give thee moderation to bear them, as worthily as thou hast hitherto done poverty." While they were conversing, a mes¬ senger arrived, to order Austin to at, ι 5 tend
tend the court ; and writh some reluc- taace he soon after left the young mem and took his way to the palace, where he was speedily introduced to the king. •—" Good day, friar," said Henry—" I sent merely to give you intelligence, to be ready with all the proofs you have to bring fonvard in the cause of Mar¬ garet Fitzwalter; for as soon as may be after her arrival in England, I will order the business to be brought for¬ ward. But how is this ? To my eye you are greatly changed ; you look at least ten years younger than when we last met." " My gracious liege, a man relieved from a deed, which has embittered the happiness of his life, and which would have condemned him in the world to come,
come, may well shew the change on his features." " Art thou that man ?" demanded the thc king. ". I trust I am.—AVonderful is the relation that hath met my ear, since I last saw your highness, and wdiich I can scarcely doubt the truth of." " Doth it respect thyself?" "It doth—AVere it not intruding on your grace's time, I would relate it to you, though I mean not at present to disclose it publicly." " You will oblige me," answered Henry. Ausrin then informed the king of the discovery made by Ferdinand, soften¬ ing as much as possible, the part his brother had acted, and doing ample justice to the virtues of his nephew. i ô The
The king listened with the utmost attention—" By my life," said he, as the friar concluded, " but it is wonderful— How meanest thou to act in this case ?" 99 My liege," replied he, " Margaret's business concluded, I mean to hasten to Bremen, to see Nicholas Deuhopt, to gain my pardon of Adelaide and Cla¬ rice and then, blessing Heaven, to re¬ tire to my monastery. For Leopold-, or rather AVilliam De Hoffman, I have no doubt of fc his acting properly—Justice demands that he share his property with his generous cousin." " He indeed merits it," answered the king.-—" Be sure you send them to my court to-morrow." Austin, or rather De Hoffman, pro¬ mised obedience, and soon after re¬ turned to the Grey Friars.
#J* ^J* ?1 ^^ ^^ During the friar's absence a friendly contention had taken place between Ferdinand and Leopold. The first de¬ clared that he would give up all his estate, to pay whatever might be want¬ ing to make up the money expended in so many years—The latter declared, that if De Hoffman consented to any such step, he w 7 ould relinquish all— " No, r my dear Ferdinand," said he, " my heart acknowledges you for a brother, and as such will we ever be— Said you not once so to me, and will you withdraw that confidence ? If I am what you aver, do not Jet that make you love me less," " I do not love you less ; but con¬ sider,
sider, and make allowance for my wounded mind." 49 1 will, and trust time, and the care of my dear father and myself, will heal it." The friar's return put an end to the conversation. He informed them of the discourse that had taken place be¬ tween himself and the king, adding be¬ fore either could reply—" His highness is prepared to receive my two sons ; nay, sigh not, Ferdinand, I read your thoughts, I have been as cautious as yourself of your father's honour—I can¬ not degrade him without degrading myself." On the following day the youths attended at the palace, and were ad¬ mitted into the presence. The king received them with marked kindness, and
and after a long, but not particular con¬ versation, dismissed them, in a manner that convinced Ferdinand that his uncle had strongly interested the monarch in his favour. *??? ? tH ^k ^W^ '.İP ^l^ ^m\W Some few days afterwards lord Nevil arrived safe in London, accompanied by Margaret and Alice. AVell know¬ ing how much Austin was interested in their cause, he immediately sent word to the Grey Friars, and leaving his charge in the care of his lady, went himself to announce the success of his errand to the king. The friar immediately hastened to the lord Nevils, and was received by Mar¬ garet as a father, from whom she had been
been long separated. Numberless ques¬ tions passed on both sides, and with mutual satisfaction ; but amidst all, no¬ thing caused them so much astonish¬ ment, as the alteration that had taken place in the features of Austin. Margaret expressed her pleasure at seeing his health uninjured, and in¬ quired warmly after Leopold. " Leopold," replied the friar, " is highly in the king's favour; but, my beloved child, many changes have taken place since we last met—he is no longer Leopold Sternheim, but the declared Son of one of the first families in Ger¬ many." " Father," said Margaret, " I cannot dispute your word; but how such a change could take place I cannot com¬ prehend." 94 1 have
" I have not time to enter into a de¬ tail of unpleasant circumstances now ; but to astonish thee yet more—he is my son," " Your son, father ?" Alice looked at the friar, with fear and astonishment. 99 Yes, my son" repeated he. " Fear not, dame," turning to Alice, " my head is clear, you are at liberty to re¬ veal to Margaret all we have hitherto concealed. She will not love De Hoff¬ man less than friar Austin." " For pity say, is not thc count De Hoffman, whom my father loved,dead?" " He stands before thee, Margaret. Alice will tell thee all—To my gene¬ rous nephew I owe the discovery of my son." « Alas !" returned Alice, " if this be possible,
possible, it explains the young baron's conduct since his father's death." Austin then gave them a brief ac¬ count of what had passed, and it grow¬ ing late he soon after took leave. After his departure Alice related, though with great tenderness, the whole ef what she knew of the story of De Hoffman, who, she said, was only known at the castle of Fitzwalter by herfelf and David. She also told Mar¬ garet the strong charge Austin gave her when she went to Bremen to be careftil no word might escape her that could lead Adelaide to suppose he lived. The Abbess, she said, frequently ques¬ tioned her respecting his death, but she avoided the conversation as much as possible. * * * * * The
The arrival of Margaret was speedily known at lord De Launcy's, and though Isabel anxiously wished to see her, fearful of wounding her mother's feel¬ ings, she forbore to mention it. Lady Dc Launcy declined daily, and as the trial would now immediately take place, her uneasiness redoubled. Lord De Launey's views all crushed, for he found Isabel was neither to be soothed nor terrified into a marriage with his son, his con¬ duct was unmanly and brutal. His be¬ haviour at so trying a juncture, made the tenderness of Isabel have a double effect. She soothed her mother, and frequently entreated her to stop all proceedings ; but that was a step she could not consent to, and the day which was to end the contention w r as at length fixed, CHAP.
CHAP. XL The appointed day arrived. The king seated upon his throne, and all prepared, the trial took place. Lord De Launcy, notwithstanding all he had said to the contrary, had provided the most able lawyers. On one side was placed the friar, his son, the Benedic¬ tine, and David. On the other, lord De Launcy and his son, supported by lawyers, and immediately before them the blushing Isabel, who was ordered to attend, though her mother was un¬ able. At a short distance from her stood Margaret and the venerable Alice, who regarded both sisters alter¬ nately with affection and pity. On
On the entrance of Margaret, un¬ mindful of the presence of the king, Isabel rushed forward, and speaking hastily said in a low voice—" My be¬ loved sister, may all end to your wishes ; but, if possible, save my mother's ho¬ nour, or Isabel must die before you." She had time for no more, for lord De Launcy taking her arm forced her back to her place. The court opened, and the king or¬ dered the parties to be sworn. The Benedictine first swore to the marriage of AVilliam Fitzwalter with Blanch Stanley in the chapel of St. Margaret, and that two witnesses were present, whom he recognized in the dame Alice and David. Alice was next called. She attested the marriage and the birth of Margaret, 5 with
with eveiy circumstance of the lady Blanch's death, aqd her last confes¬ sion. David also swore to the marriage, the suddenness of his lord's death, and that he had every reason to suppose, from what passed the evening before, that he wished him to attest some deed he was preparing, to identify the legi¬ timacy of the lady Margaret. The friar, in his own name, swore to Fitzwalter's bringing his wife to Bre¬ men, his frequently owning her to be such, the birth of her daughter there, her owrn death, and finally her burial in the convent of St, Mary. He then produced the confession of the lady Blanch Fitzwalter, swore to his own signature and t% that of the countess, as did also the dame to hers. Lord
Lord De Launcy had nothing to controvert the testimony of so many witnesses, and the judges, in conse¬ quence, declared the marriage valid. Lord De Launcy 's council then brought forw r ard William Fitzwalter's failure of fulfilling the wrill of Edward Mountford, and claimed the whole of the forfeiture. Austin replied, that at Fitzwalter's marriage the mortgage became void, and that the whole of the property of Edith Mountford was settled upon her¬ self and her heirs, which was only the lady Isabel. But in case of that not being allowed, to prevent contention, Fitzwalter had left a will, and pro¬ perty in his cabinet to a considerable amount, and that he would recapitulate the contents of the testament, 'and the amount
amount of the sum, as he saw it two days previous to the baron's death, on oath. David corroborated this evidence, by swearing that, on the very night of his lord's death, he had been writing in his closet, that on attending to light him to his chamber, he saw him de¬ posit various papers, tied in a careful manner, in his cabinet, which papers were not afterwards to be found. " How knew you the particular papers ?" Said one of die council. " Easily," replied David, " I brought my lord thc string that tied them, and a seal was affixed on the outside/' " AVere they secured with keys?" demanded'the king. " They were ; not only the cabinet, but my lord's closet. The keys were carried to the baroness." Isabel
Isabel turned pale and trembled ; Margaret also seemed scarcely able to support herself; but suddenly stepping forward she fell at the king's feet. " Raise the maid," said the king— " give her time, she is not accustomed to the bustle of courts. Speak, fahr one, and fear nothing : what would you ?** " My gracious sovereign!" replied Margaret, with downcast eyes, " to vindicate my mother's honour, and to be the acknowledged daughter of the noble Fitzwalter, is my highest claim, I pray ye seek no farther------Let the mortgage take place." " Young maid, you know not what you ask," answered the king. " Re¬ tire; all hitherto is in your favour.'* Isabel, emboldened by the example of Margaret, advanced. « My liege," vol. iv, ? said
said she firmly, " we are listers, I will no ekim that injures Margaret—" ** Nor I that injures Isabel," re-. echoed Margaret. . " Ye are strange opponents," re¬ plied the king— " Lord De Launcy in rightof his lady claims the mortgage." * c My mother declines it," answered Isabel, " she gave it me under her hand yesternight.—I only am her im¬ mediate heir, and more to me is a third of my father's wealth with ho¬ nour, than the whole by injustice." * 9 By my life a generous maid," re¬ plied tbe king——" But you are not of an-age, fair one, to judge for yourself." " My mother, my liege, consents, and no one but herself and I am con¬ cerned." " If, indeed, your mother disavows t the
the claim, it is VoM¿— but how is thk De Launcy ?" 44 My liege," a^we^ed De Itøtmey, ** I starfd before yom aft injured ???. My daughter-in-law, Isalfel, if, htt statement be true, Mth taken *advai** tage of her mother 'á weakti^ss, -and persuaded her 'tQ, this step." " My rrfôthlr thinke she isindamm- fied, by wmat my father left at his death," answered Isabel—" There, my liege, is the discharge/' Isabel knelt and presented a paper; and the king read 'as follows :-^- " AVhereas I, Edith Montford, wi¬ dow of the baron Fitzwalter, and wife of the baron De Launcy, regard myself to be approaching to that awful crisis, where truth palone can bear the test, I ? 2 have
have maturely weighed the expected suit, and if, contrary to my expecta¬ tion, Margaret should be acknowledg¬ ed to be the legitimate daughter of Fitzwalter, I withdraw my claim on the mortgage, as I had in money, sun¬ dry valuables, and jewels, to a consi¬ derable amount at her father's death. 9( Signed, Edith De Launcy." 99 It is a clear discharge," said the king. " But how came a business of this consequence to be transacted with¬ out the knowledge of lord De Launcy? What means have you used, lady, to obtain this discharge from your mo¬ ther? for I much doubt it being her original intention." " For the first question, my liege," answered Isabel, " my lord De Launcy must
must reply toit; for the second, the only means I used were affection and duty. As to its being my mother's ori¬ ginal intention, I know not:------It is never too late to act well." 99 Shrewdly answered^ ------If I am truly informed, there is wealth suffi¬ cient for both. The domain, in right of eldership, appertains to the lady Margaret ; but I will take care you are properly portioned as a younger sister." " For myself I thank your highness," answered Margaret ; " but had I king¬ doms, Isabel should equally share them." ** Ye are two noble girls," replied the king. " Come forward, De Laun- ?? ; you appear to consider this matter too seriously. Is not this fair maid ? 3 affianced
affianced to your son?" pointing to Isabel. " So please your highness, I once hoped it, as did also her mother ; but with persevering „obstinacy she refuses to submit to our* wishes." ^ Is this true, lady ?" " Yes, my liege." 94 Wherefore, r pnay ???} ?—Richard De Launcy is high in my favour* his father is my long-tried servant; what reason is there for objection: P " I« am too young to* marry, my liege,'" answered she, blushing; "I know not the duties of a wife," " They are easily learnt——Respect, and obedience, and to love your hus¬ band above all men." 9e I cannot love Richard De Launcy above all men," anwered she. « AVhy
" AVhy not ? Love you any one bet¬ ter?" 44 Many, my liege." The king laughed, as did the whole court, while Isabel, with downcast eyes, remained covered with blushes. Wl You love many better ? resumed the king. Name them."" " I—I love father Austin better, and also with due deference—your high¬ ness." " Go to, thou art a keen and witty girl, I warrant, and in truth, a fair one. I pity Richard De Launcy for not meeting thy favour; yet I think if he hath not more dangerous rivals than the friar, or myself, he need not despair." The validity of Fitzwalter's marriage had been allowed, and the claim on the ? 4 estate
estate being withdrawn, the court was broken up. Lord De Launcy immediately seized on the arm of Isabel, and without suf¬ fering her to converse with any one, left the hall. Many of the first nobility of the king¬ dom then advanced, and congratulated Margaret ; and lord Nevil, willing to gratify her all in his power, invited the friar, his son, and nephew, to attend the mhome.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. On reaching lord NevU's, Margaret threw herself into the arms of Alice— 99 Oh, Holy A 7 irgin !" exclaimed she, " for one moment, if it be possible, suffer my mother to witness the triumph ofher child—Not for gaining the wealth of my noble father do I rejoice, but be¬ cause her honour is without reproach." —Then turning to the friar she added— " Pardon me, most respected father, if I acted to-day contrary to your wishes, in regard to the lady De Launcy ; but it was involuntary. Had I done other¬ wise, and my father's will, and the money in thc cabinet, been allowed, ? 5 which·
which I doubt not, she had been dis¬ graced for ever." " Margaret," replied he, " both Isabel and yourself have acted worthy the stock from whence ye sprung, and I am well content ; but here are young men who wish to congratulate you on your success, and I, for the present, givew r ay to them." As he spoke Leopold drew nigh— " Lady," said he timidly, addressing Margaret, " among the many that con¬ gratulate you on your success of this day, not one will perform it so awk- wardlyr as myself, and yet no one will more sincerely rejoice." " Leopold," replied she, holding out her hand, " doth honours change man¬ ners? If not, why have we not seen you before ?" " 1 obeyed
" I obeyed duty rather than inclina¬ tion," answered he—" Kly father's com4 mands must plead my excuse,"—Then turning to the dame, he respectfully ad¬ dressed her, as did abo Ferdinand. 44 If my beloved Isabel were here," said Margaret, <c methinks my happiness- would be complete ; yet then I should wish for our dear friends in Germany.'* " Now your claim is allowed," said the friar, " another arrangement must be thought of. As you are not of age to take the domain of Fitzwalter, how will you be placed during that period ?" " As you judge most fitting ;—but if left to myself, and my dear dame ar> proves, I should prefer the convent of St. Mary." " You meet my wishes, my dear ? ? elüld;"
child," replied Alice; " for there you wrill be secure from the machinations of your enemies, till past their power to injure you." " I will see the king, if possible, in the course of a day or two, and crave your leave of absence. After w T hat hath passed, ye may be sure I am anxious once more to see Bremen." " And Will you go with us, dear father ?" answered Margaret warmly. " Undoubtedly. The friendship of dame Alice must again be exerted ; for neither Adelaide nor Clarice shall be alarmed suddenly." " All are angry with you at St, Mary's," said Margaret, addressing Fer¬ dinand. " Dame Alice was, however, your advocate, and effected a dispo¬ sition in your favour/' " I thank
" I thank her, and you also, fair lady." The depression of Ferdinand w r as evident ; and Margaret, well informed of the cause, used every means in her power to restore his spirits ; but the conversation at length recurring to lady De Launcy, she said, addressing the friar—" Think you not, my dear father, it would be proper for me to write to lady De Launcy ? She hath at last acted justly; I would we were in friendship, for the sake of Isabel." " My dear child," replied he, " thy prudence needs no direction—The first duty of a Christian is forgiveness of in¬ juries. I joy that thou hast thy right, and that lady De Launcy has saved her name from the reproach that might have fallen upon it—Tlie money and will
will in thy f«tihcr's cabinet, taken from thence clandestinely, would indeed have disgraccdíher for ever. The latter I in¬ formed her of at his death, but was silent as to the money and jewels; for as thou wast in her power, it made me cautious, lest I might involve thee in destruction." " Thank Heaven, that she hath re¬ moved the weight of sin from her soul," said the dame. " I trust the deed will bring her comfort. Lady Nevil told me to-day she was sorely afflicted; I rejoice that the lady Isabel is with her." " Suppose I write," said Margaret, " by whom shall I send my „letter ? I like not to trust it to a common mes¬ senger, for I wish to obtain news of Isabel." 4i My father's presence,." replied Wil¬ liam
liam De Hoffman, 9Ç would appear ari insult, as would also mine ; but Ferdi¬ nand is unknown at tord De Launcy's, and he, I am- convinced, will willingly transact your'commission," Ferdinand-joined in offering his ser¬ vice ; but turning, he said to his cousin —" Ah ! why, my friend, would you wish me to court pain?" Margaret on addressing AVilliam De Hoffman still called him Leopold, until Ferdinand said with a smile— " My fair friend pardon, me, but you forget that the name of William must be more pleasant to my cousin's ear than that of Leopold." " I pray his excuse," answered Mar¬ garet with frankness, " but old customs are not easily forgotten. I owe to Leo¬ pold and Cuthbert, obligations which I never
I never can acknowledge to AVilliam De Hoffman." " Leopold, or Cuthbert, kt me ever be then," replied he with a pleasure he could not suppress. " Spare me but the hated appellation of Sternheim, and call me what you please." " AViiiiam De Hoffman cannot be ? less welcome friend to Margaret Fitz¬ walter than Leopold Sternheim," said the friar. " The baron De Hoffman must be estimable to me as your son, dear fa¬ ther," answered Margaret, " but Leo» pold Sternheim hath no such claim— His own merit, my obligations, with¬ out any other support, demand my friendship, and I could almost grieve that this discovery happened before I could evince my gratitude," The
The entrance of lord and lady Nevi!, who had left them to their mutual com¬ munications, broke on the discourse; but Leopold approaching Margaret, re¬ plied in a low voice, " Best and most lovely of women, should the honoured Leopold, find those flattering visions that now surround him realizad, he will snatch the first moment to thank you— Should they be dispersed, the remem¬ brance of your kindness shall only be torn from his memory by death." Lord Nevil had provided a sump¬ tuous entertainment, in respect to Mar¬ garet. The friar, however, declined parfaking it; but insisted on his son and nephew remaining, while he re¬ turned in pious thankfulness to the Grey Friars. % % % * % Dc
De Launcy, on returning home from the hall of AVestminster, hastened to his wife's apartment, where, regardless of her situation, he assailed her with every * invective that rage could suggest ; and finally, demanded, how slie had dared to take a step of such consequence, as giving a release from the mortgage without his. concurrence. Wè^kf Hed by sickness, and alarmed at his violence, she made no answer ; but Isabel, without hesitation, replied, "■ The reason, my lord, is obvious, though before the King, I declined to declare it. Your own conduct since my refusal of your son ; your harshness to my mother yesternight; your cruel declaration, that whatever disgrace fell on her, she might meet it alone, all de¬ termined her to give way to the prayers and
and tears of her daughter, who, cling¬ ing to her knees, refused to rise till she granted her request." " I knew it well, froward and in¬ solent girl î but this-bold avowal to my face, is more than I expected." " AVhy, my lord* could you thmk so poorly of me, as. tha* I feared toi speak truthi? Vfh&t is theremlorjd De Launcy to scare Isabel Fit^walt^yf ?- The irony which· marked the ques¬ tion, mastered even the small remains of lord De Launcy's patience, he trem¬ bled and: turned, pale with rage— ---- " Both .your mother 1 and yourself shall repent this conduct," said he. " My mother-repent * it?" replied babel, with equal· passion. " Had I been a man, no one should have dared to insult hcr; as it is, wc must sub- mit :
mit : there is no danger in a contention with women." " You are too vindictive, Isabel," said lady De Launcy. fi I have acted according to my conscience, and will abide by the consequence." 99 1 pray your pardon, I would sooner die than offend you ; but though a poor defenceless girl, no one shall insult you with impunity——Sooner will I throw myself at the foot of the throne, and demand protection for the baronesa Fitzwalter." In the passion of the moment, lord De Launcy raised his hand, but check¬ ing it, he replied—" Virago 1 I rejoice my son hath escaped thee—Thy mo¬ ther hath often said thou inheritest thy father's spirit ; if so, his was a gift from hell" * Perish
94 Perish the tongue that dares to say my father's spirit came from hell," an¬ swered she with redoubled passion; but struggling with her emotion, she added w. with provoking calmness—" My, fa¬ ther's spirit was given from where you, lord De Launcy, shall never come," The weakness of the Baroness made her unable to bear the contest, she therefore peremptorily commanded Isa¬ bel to be silent. After De Launcy's departure, Isabel entreated her mother's pardon for her vehemence ; then with great candour, but many encomiums on Margaret's conduct, related the whole that had passed, not omitting, that the friar had been sworn by the name of John De Hoffman on the trial. The Baroness, on the whole, appeared relieved by the recital,
recital, and embracing her, said-—" My beloved child, that I took thy advice last night, I thank Heaven !—There U no doubt but all would have heen al¬ lowed, for John De Hoffman attended the King with thy father to England, and particularly served him. Yet, how he should fall into the state in which we have ever known him, surpasses my be¬ lief; yet more, when in Germany, I un¬ derstood the count De Hoffman was then living at Bremen, though I sought no acquaintance writh his family, from their former attachment to Blanch Stanley." 49 Be he who he may, Austin, or John De Hoffman," answered Isabel, " it is only necessary to be acquainted with him to love mm." " On thee," Said the Baroness mourn¬ fully, after a pause, « may, perhaps, fall
fall the punishment due to my errors ; thou, in thy turn, may be oppressed by those who survive me." 44 Fear not for me ; I trust you may yet be spared to my prayers. Mar¬ garet will have her right, and she will never wrong me/' Thus did the truly affectionate Isabel sooth the mind ofher erring and hither¬ to faulty parent, whom she had the satisfaction to see slept more compo¬ sedly the ensuing night than for a Con¬ siderable time before. On the evening previous to the trial, torn by the pangs of remorse, and a fear of detection, to which was added the unfeeling behaviour of lord Dé Launcy, the Baroness had yielded to the prayers and tears of her daughter ; and ' though she did not avow destroying the lord
lord Fitzwalter's will, confessed having secreted to a considerable amount in money and jewels after his death, which she supposed he meant for his daughter Margaret. Isabel, in consequence of this avowal, though not without ex¬ treme diinculty/obtained the discharge which she presented to the King. Lord De Launcy, on leaving his lady% had retired to his house at Sheene, where he was joined by his son. •^ Ψφ mw^t 0^? ^m Margaret, according to her deter¬ mination of the day before, sat down to write to lady De Launcy ; but, on ma¬ ture consideration, preferred addressing herself to Isabel. The letter ran thus : 2 " My
" My dearly beloved Isabel, 49 To Heaven, I return my un- feigned thanks, for the cloud being t ' ox withdrawn that has so long hung over me ; yet my happiness must be incom¬ plete, if I am for ever to be estranged from the family of my dear father. ..... - 99 Oh, my sister ! exert your influence vvith your mother; teílhér I thankfully acknowledge her kindness in writh- clrawing her claim on the domain, not only on my own account but on yours,; and that, if she will hereafter accept my duty, not even yourself wdl more wil¬ lingly pay it. " In a few days I depart for Ger¬ many, and shall be happy to convey your commands thither. Some mate¬ rial changes have taken place in tlie family of De Hoffman, but they are too vol. iv. l long
long to enter on here ; one only infor¬ mation excepted, which is, that in friar Austin you see your father's dear and ? *'' . ' long tried friend, the count De Hoff- man, who, for some particular family «reason, laid down his rank, and devoted himself to Heaven, as did also his Countess, the lovely abbess Adelaide. 49 That the lady de Launcy's health may be restored, is one of my warmest wishes ; and with a thousand blessings on you, ray dear Isabel, I subscribe myself, , " Your affectionate sister, " Margaret Fitzwalter." The friar and the dame both approved the contents, and Ferdinand was in¬ trusted with the delivery. On reaching lord De Launcy's, Fer- ' dinand
dinand requested to be introduced to thc Baroness; but being informed she saw no company, entreated-to be .ad¬ mitted to thc presence of ithe lady Isabel. A domestic having conveyed ithe message, kdy 'De Launcy desiçed íhèt daughter to attend the stranger. Isa¬ bels surprise surpassed all bounds, r whea on entering the apartment she saw ¿Fer¬ dinand; for though he had ¡been pfc~ sent at the trial, she was ido much, en» gaged to think of ought but the par¬ ticular subject in agitation. * After paying his compliments he presented Margaret's letter ; and though at first, recollecting his abrupt departure irorø Bremen, she received hirn coldly, his altered look« and -visible depression l 2 speedily
speedily banished a sentiment so un¬ natural to fier. She hastily read Margaret's letter, and kissing it, said—" Tell her my mo¬ ther is all I wish, and that I trust we shall meet hereafter in affection"------ *i But," added she, " I am so sur¬ rounded by wonders, that I cannot avoid asking an explanation. Our dear Austin is, I find, the count De Hoff¬ man ; and the equally dear Abbess, his countess—How these events are, I can¬ ti not comprehend." 49 Know you, sweet lady, that Leo¬ pold is his son ?" " His son !" repeated Isabel—" Im¬ possible I 1 * 99 It is, indeed, most true ; my fa¬ ther dying, revealed it to me." "If
" If father Austin is count De Hoff- man r and Leopold in truth his son, who am I to consider you ?" " An innocent intruder on another's name and fortune------My father was the Count's younger brother." ίς - Gracious heaven ! may I not judge that this discovery occasioned your abrupt departure from Bremen ?" " It did—Nothing else could have torn me from the spot where all my happiness was centered. I flew to per¬ form an act of justice, and to restore a deserving son to a despairing, parem* —But the story is too long to intrude on you now, nor have I spirits to re¬ late it." " I will not attend to it. Say only, in lessening your fortune, have you con¬ tracted your number of friends ?" 13 « I flatter
99 I flatter myself I have not------ Ì have found a father αηςί a brother, İn thc Count and his sonJ* m ' 9i Then, why look you so sad ? You f true friends wdlk now shew that thev esteemed ypu, not your gold." α Heaven is my witness^ that I la¬ ment only the loss of fortune, as I hoped to lay it at the feet of the Woman I Wed," . " AVhat then,* replied she shrewdly, " did yo» mean to buy her· ?" " No* sw-eefc maid, bu<fc my fortune was then worthy her acceptance ; at present I must teach my heart to forget her/* " She is avaricious then?" answered she. " Not so ; but she merits more than Ferdinand De Hoffman hath to offer." " Doth
" Doth she ? t Then you fove Mar¬ garet ?" " I do—as a sister; but there is one far more dear to my heart." " You have a bad taste then," an¬ swered she more gaily ; but despair not, all will end well,—-—Are you again going to fly from your friends ?" " I believe not; but overwhelmed in disgrace. Scorn some unpleasant circum¬ stances, Germany is become disagree¬ able to me." You must change it for England then ; unmerited disgrace is no crime. Consult father Austin, and he will ad vise you well." Ferdinand made no reply—" Nay then," added she, " promise me you will not again adopt one of those un- l 4 par-
pardonable fancies,to leave your friends in solicitude for you." " I have been the unhappy cause of so much mischief, that no one hath a right to be distressed on my account." At that moment a domestic entered, to say that lady De Launcy required her presence ------ " Say to- my mother, I come—I pray you, tell Margaret I will, if possible, w T rite to her; bear my best affection to alj our friends;· and say, often shall I wish jmyself in their society. For yourself, vex not the lady Adelaide any r more with your private excursions ; and if you còme to England, remember Isabel/ wifl be pleased to see you." " I wrill remember it, gentle maid, with pride and gratitude—Farewell ; may
may e\ ??? wish of your heart be grati¬ fied, and a happiness equal to your de¬ serts attend you." " Farewell !" holding out her hand. " By the trial that has lately taken place, I am by at least two-thirds poorer than I was expected to be, yet am not I sad ; on the contrary, I am happier for the change, nor do I expect my friends to love me less." " So far can I coincide with youy that I also am happier for the change,. as what I possess now, will be my own,. and writh justice." " AVell then rest satisfied------But I forget my mother's commands—Once moro farewell." As she concluded, he pressed her hand to his lips, and she left the apartment. On returning to lady Dc Launcy, L 5 she
she gave Her Margaret's letter. The forbearance of tte orphan, and the gen¬ tleness with which she spoke of one that liad so greatly injured hcr, dwelt on her* rnmd^;which already softened by the unwearied attention of Isabel, was prepared to receive a better impression. On thc following morning, Isabel replied to Margaret's letter in terms of the warmest affection;, she spoke highly of her mother, and concluded by say¬ ing, that the only thing wanting to her peace was to see the small remnant of her family united hi the bonds of love and unity.
CHAP.
ÇIIAP. ??. Anxtous to reach Germany, the friar lost no time in obtaining the king's permission for his son's absence, as also Margaret's ; and all being prepared, a small vessel was engaged, in which Margaret, with Alice,, thc father, his son, and nephew, were to depait. Previous to their quitting England they had many interviews with honest David, who rejoiced as sincerely as any one at the orphan's success. Both AVilliam and Ferdinand de Hoffman loaded him with presents ; and, being furnished w ith a good horse,, before their depar¬ ture he took his way to* Northumber¬ land. Margaret and Alice, on parting, l 6 shook
shook him w r armly by the hand, and did not forget presents for Bridget, the former saying—" My valued friend, I cannot now act according to my wishes, but I trust hereafter not to be ungrate¬ ful; in the mean-time I entreat you may want for nothing; I will endea¬ vour to supply you writh the means." Two days after David's departure the friends embarked for Germany, and the wind proving fair, they speedily reach¬ ed Bremen in safety. However anxious the friar w r as to re¬ lieve the bosom of Adelaide from the weight that had so long oppressed it, he resolved to be fully assured before he took that step ; therefore entrusting Alice and Margaret to be conveyed to the convent by Ferdinand, he, with his son, awaited his return. The Ab¬ bess
bess and her sister received them with mingled pleasure and Wonder; they had no supposition of the business be¬ ing so speedily terminated, and re¬ peatedly congratulated both Margaret and Alice. Neither w r as their joy less on seeing Ferdinand, though they treated him writh more reserve than usual. The first congratulations over, according to agreement, no word was said respecting either the friar, or his son, until the Abbess asking w 7 armly after them, Alice replied they were well, and if all answered to their wishes, they hoped to visit Bremen in a short time. The Abbess then men¬ tioned to Ferdinand the box she had received from Geofrey, and asked if he would then have it returned ; but declining the offer, he begged to be 9 permitted
permitted tó see them on the morrow, and took his leave. Left to themselves, Alice and Mar¬ garet related to the sisters every occur¬ rence that had befallen· them since they kft St. Mary's, exclusive of those, wherein the friar/ or his son, or ne¬ phew, were concerned. In the ineaivwriiik Ferdinand joined the friar and his cousin, and they took their way to the Castle of De Hoffman. A course of years, sorrow, and change of dress, had made such an alteration in the person of the count, that no one, but those well acquainted with him, wotìW liave recognized his features, which, the better to conceal,* he co¬ vered in part with 'his cowl. On reaching the Castle, thearrival of their young lord so ^unexpectedly caused but
but a momentary wonder, for his sud¬ den departure made them expect his return to be the same. On entering the hall of the Castle the friar, overcome by a variety of feelings, was obliged to lean for sup¬ port on his son. Ferdinand saw r his agitation, and pressed him to take some refreshment; but declining it, he en¬ treated to be shown to the apartment of Nicholas Deuhopt,------" My dear uncle," said Ferdinand, 99 I do not wonder at your impatience ; but suffer me, for once to advise. I left him in the care of Geofrey, and it will be proper to question him respecting his conduct during the time of my ab¬ sence. Tliis advice was too prudent not to be followed, and Geofrey was immediately called.—" Geofrey," said Ferdinand,
Ferdinand, " I wkh to be informed of the conduct of Deuhopt since my de¬ parture. Speak openly before my friends, no secret respecting myself is hidden from them." " In truth, my lord," replied Geo¬ frey, " he hath behaved in a manner not proper to repeat. Mingled with blasphemies, he hath uttered the most scandalous lies, so that I have thought fit to sufter no one but myself to see him. He would, if possible, have made his escape, but I took good care of that ; and as his arm still continues lame, and I have no doubt always will,. there was not much difficulty." " But what hath he said, Geofrey ? rroeathis w r erds." » " My lord, some time at your leisure- I will
I will endeavour to recollect his false¬ hoods," " Nay, Geofrey, now ; have I not told thee these are my friends?' 1 " You have, my ford ; but these are words not fit to reveal to any but your¬ self." " Honest Geofrey, I thank thy cau¬ tion—I must speak for thee-----He hath scandalized my father ?" " Most villainously, my lord." 44 He hath said that I am not tlie rightful heir of the domain of De Hoff¬ man?", " He hath, my lord." " That he can produce tlie true heir?" " Yes—but he bitterly cursed him as thc cause of all his sorrows." 46 Did he name him ?" • " NO ; '
" No ; but he said, villain that he is, my late lord used means to kill him." Ferdinand turned pale, and the friar rose ------" We but lose time, my dear youth" saki he. " Suppose Geofrey was to introduce me, as one sent to speak to him of the heinousness of his crimes ?" " As you judge best," answered Fer¬ dinand. " Command Geofrey, he will obey." 9e I thank you—-~JLea<i r the« way, my honest friend—-sknply express my* errant to him, and leave the rest to me." 99 I will-, reverend father."—-So-say¬ ing, Geofrey showed him to the apart¬ ment of Deuhopt, which the friar re¬ marked was strongly secured on the outside. The bolts being withdrawn, thev
they entered the chamber—" I bring you a good priest," said Geofrey, ad¬ dressing Deuhopt—" thc Virgin knows you want him. I pray ye confess your transgressions, repent your sins, and mend your life, for there ismuchneed," " I will na priest," replied Deuhopt. " If I must to helV he* cannot save me —I have nothing to confess, and ask no pardon." " Leave us," said the friau ? ?? low voice tw Geoftey. The old man obeyed^ and regarding Deuhopt from- under hi& cowl, De Hoffman was astonished at the change in his features, which habi¬ tual villainy had rendered ferocious and hard as his heart. The friar spoke in a lower key than he was accustomed, in order to conceal his voice,—*' I am in. formed/'
formed," said he, " that thy crimes are of the darkest dye, and conjure thee r for the good of thy soul, to reveal them." " I thank thee," replied Deuhopt, " but I am no priest-ridden fool. I have done nothing but what I can jus¬ tify, and fear no man/* " You are bold in iniquity," returned the friar. " Should you not fear to meet those you have most injured ? The abbess Adelaide, for example,/or Jolm De Hoffman ?" " AVho told thee, friar, that I had* injured them ? Go to, I am not to be caught thus—The lady Adelaide was. always too holy for this world, and is now in the state most befitting her— For the count, he had his good qualities* and
and his bad ones—his flesh hath long since fattened the worms of England, and his bones rotted in its clay." As he concluded De Hoffman threw back his cowl, and fixed his eyes strongly on his face. Taken by sur¬ prise Deuhopt started, his eyes appeared rivetted on the friar, his lower jaw dropped, his copper coloured skin be¬ came of a sickly yellow, and he trem¬ bled universally. "AVhat is thy boasting sunk at once?" resumed De Hoffman—" Nay, villain, shake not thus, I am mortal L<e thy¬ self—God hath spared me to bring thee to the fate thou so justly deservedst.— Nothing but a full and honest confes¬ sion can, in any manner, extenuate thy guilt, therefore, if thou expectest mercy, make it without delay " "My
" My lord—my lord"—said Deu- «hopt, after ^ considerable pause-—" I-— I know not your -will·!" · " My will is to tear every secret from thy false heart. AVilt thou give them without delay, or must the torture force them from thee?" " My lord, your brother------" " Heaven pardon him !—Proceed- but first say, who is Leopold ?" " Your son—Accursed be the day I involved myself in ruin for him." " Accursed, indeed, I fear it is to the guilty. AH thatremains for thee is an ample confession—make it, and I give thee hope." Deuhopt thus enthralled, with no subterfuge to escape, sunk, as villains on discovery usually do, into the ex*· treme of cowardice ; 'he threw himself on
on his knees and confessed all, *not omitting his stabbing Ferdinand. However shopke>l ,at thq unnatural conduct of his brother, De Hoffman saw the behaviour of his nephew in its proper view, and having obtained all possible information he withdrew, leav¬ ing Deuhopt in the care of Geofrey. Ferdinand, who had no doubt all would be discovered on De Hoffman's return, sat in trembling expectancy.— His uncle was, however, too generous to inform him of the dark traits he had discovered of,his ¿father's character, but assuming ?????* of composure he said— " My dear nephew, one more satisfac¬ tion -I must request, and then all my doubts will Yanish —^Could we not, think you, examine the coffin Which is said to contain my son's body ?" " No-
" Nothing more easy," answered Fer¬ dinand. " It is placed in a vault under the chapel of the Castle 5 I will attend you." \" No other witnesses are necessary but yourself and AVilliam," replied the friar. " I pray ye'lead the way," So saying, with a lanthorn they pri¬ vately adjourned to the chapel, where Ferdinand taking the keys from a small oratory, they descended the steps that led to the vaults. Both the friar and his son trembled, more particularly the latter, when they entered the silent and last retreat of their ancestors ; for they regarded this essay as at once the con¬ firmation or destruction of their hopes. "I have unfortunately - forgotten," said Ferdinand, " to bring something to wrench the comn." " Stop,
" Stop—we are, perhaps," said AA r iI- iiam, " on the point of committing sa¬ crilege. Should really the true heir be here ------" " I am convinced he is mot," an¬ swered Ferdinand. 4e Await my coming, I will not delay." So saying, without reply he left them, and speedily returned with an iron pro¬ per for tbe purpose, and with assumed courage, for his hand trembled, forced the leaden cover of the coffin. The friar and his son both drew back, but Ferdinand, raising the lanthorn, cried aloud—" Come forward, and if ye need more certainty, behold it; here is no child, nor any thing save wood and linen." The friar thus ascertained, they re¬ placed the coffin, and leaving the vault, vol. iv, m depo-
deposited the keys where they had found them, and returned to the castle. " My dear son," said the friar, " I wrill hasten to St. Mary's—Dame Alice shall prepare Adelaide, who, with the . blessing of Heaven, shall before she sleeps embrace her son." " I rejoice," replied Ferdinand, " that your doubts are dispersed." " They are, my good y r outh," an¬ swered the friar—" But come, we lose , time, it is seyen o'clock, at nine the gates wrill be shut." So saying, they proceeded to the convent, but were in¬ formed at the gate that they could not that evening see any of the inmates, as all would be engaged in the chapel, it being Friday, on which evening there was always a peculiar mass. " My dear uncle," said Ferdinand, "on
Ci on Friday evening my aunt, Adelaide, has constantly a solemn mass performed - for the repose of her husband and child, it wrill therefore be vain to at¬ tempt to break on it" " Alas !" replied the friar, " Friday was indeed the fatal day—Observe you, AVilliam, how your saint-like motlier hath prayed for the destroyer of her peace ?" " Ido —but much doth it move my wonder, that so long as I w r a$ in the castle, I never heard that the lady Ade¬ laide was countess De Hoflünan, or in¬ deed any of the circumstances that have lately transpired." " The reason is.simply this," replied Ferdinand. " On my aunt's entering tlie convent, she requested her rank m 2 might
might, if possible, be forgotten, and for every other event it was carefully hushed in silence, and the particulars but imperfectly known." The friar appeared lost in thought,— 44 Might we not be permitted to attend the mass ?" at length said he. " My dear unclë, wè undoubtedly might; but it would be more than your fortitude could sustain. I have frequently been present, though no strangers are admitted." " Fear me not—we will retire to the corner of the chapel, where we shall be unobserved." Ferdinand saw it was useless to con¬ tend, he therefore led the way, and speaking to the porteress at the gate he said—" Admit us, I pray you, to the chapel ;
chapel ; a gopd priest will, I know, be welcome, and for this youth, he is my near relation." The porteress immediately opened the door, and they entered, taking their places in the most concealed corner they could select. The friar trembled so violently, that even Ferdinand and his son could scarcely support him. The torches were lighted, the altar hung with black, and the aolernn music resounded, though the nuns had not yet entered the chapel. « We are too. early," said Ferdinand, " the service doth not begin till near nme. " She hath chosen the hour, too, of tfø accursed deed," replied the friar. Soon after, the mm began to enter, and to place themselves on each side u S the
the altar, their veils thrown back and their hands raised in prayer. Lastly came Adelaide and Clarice, their veils down ; and advancing in front of the altar, they knelt on the marble pave menfc, their hands crossed on their bo¬ soms, and thcir heads bent to thc earth. Tlic violent emotion of Adelaide was not unobserved bv thc intruders, for though they couid not see her, he^ righs and tears reached them. The friar more than participated her grief, he groaned in anguish, and smote his bosom, when he contemplated the wife of his youth, w ho in spite of his follies he had tenderly loved, thus self-devoted to suffer for his errors. Ferdinand, though he had before been present,'felt it differently from what he had ever done ; ne now con¬ sidered
sidered thc whole as his father's guilt, and shuddered to behold its effects.— AVilliam De Hoffman's feelings came nearer to those of his mother. He had been involved in the sorrow without participating thc guilt, and wanted only ' to wipe off her tears, to forget all his own sufferings. The service was long and solemn. Margaret, as well as Isabel, had often been present, but merely understood it was performed for some deceased rela¬ tion of the Abbess, but Margaret, who now knew thc real cause, was so sin¬ cerely affected, that it did not escape the Abbess unnoticed. Mass over, all withdrew, when Fer¬ dinand, his uncle, and cousin, came forward. On the stone that Adelaide had knelt the friar prostrated himseif m 4 and
and continued in fervent prayer till the bell gave notice, that if any remained, for tbem to leave the chapel. €< Ferdinand," said the friar, " not for the world beyond the morning would I delay presenting to my beloved Adelaide her son; take the necessary means, therefore, I conjure you." As they left the chapel Ferdinand spoke to the porteress—" I pray you," said he, " late as the hour is, inform the dame Alice, that Ferdinand De Hoff¬ man wishes to speak to her on business of the highest import—I will not de-' tain her." The relationship Ferdinand held to the Abbess, obtained what would other¬ wise have been denied, and the dame was immediately called—" Holy Mo- . ther !" said she, " seeing the friar and his
fois son, who only stood at a short dis¬ tance, " why hav^ you ventured hither > Such a surprise would be fatal to the Abbess." " Wc mean not, dear dame, to alarm her—prepare her only for to-morrow morning. My uncle is perfectly satis¬ fied respecting his son. Deuhopt hath confessed all," " Heaven direct me in this cause, weak instrument that I am," said Alice. " I will, be assured, do my best ; at present, I pray ye depart." " AVe will— Good night." So saying, he joined his uncle, and they returned to the castle. To sleep in the friar's state of mind was impos¬ sible, but to prevent disturbing his son imd nephew he expressed a wish to rc- M 5 tire,
tire, and passed the night in reflection and prayer. Alice, in the mean time, had returned to the Abbess, Clarice, and Margaret. The latter judged the message came from the castle, and ventured no com¬ ment ; butClarice speaking said—"My good dame, you look hurried ; nothing, I hope, hath happened unpleasing to you ?" " No, lady—the messenger w T as your kind nephew—The friar and Leopold are at the castle." "Already!" said the Abbess. " Surely ' such a sudden arrival was unexpected— I judge wc shali sec them to-morrow." "You will, lady, in the chapel, after prayers-—But it grows late— methinks some good attends us, for my heart, though hurried, feels light—Ihc Saints protect you !"
So saying, Alice left them, as did also Margaret. AVhen they met at matins, Alice ap¬ proaching Clarice said in a low voice— ' " Lady, - 1 must, if possible, see you alone ; I have business of importance to communicate." Clarice, somewhat alarmed, led the way to a private apartment—" Dear dame," said she, "you have at once ex¬ cited my fear and wonder. The me¬ lancholy that hangs over Ferdinand, his private departure, all float on my me¬ mory ; doth not your business respect him ?" " Only in part ; but fear nothing, all is well, sorrow is far from you, I only fear the extreme of pleasure." By degrees tempered to bear the dis¬ closure, Alice revealed the wonderful m 6 story.
story. Clarice looked at the dame, and almost thought her distracted, till by often repetition she was convinced to the contrary. 44 Oh, my dear mother/' at length said she, " if this be true, and I behold my beloved brother clear from his child's blood, methinks I shall die with pleasure. How many years of sorrow hath my folly entailed upon him — Cruel, cruel Joseph ! I ever thought thee unfeeling, but never suspected to what an extent------" " Lady," interrupted Alice, " I pray you carefully disclose this event to the Abbess." " Oh, is it impossible—Joy or sor¬ row would break out, and I should de¬ stroy her with the news by which I meant to bless her,—No—no—dear, and
and much respected dame, take thou the task, and angels direct thy tongue, to reveal it gently to her care-worn heart." " Lady, I fear—At least direct me." " I cannot, my senses are in such confusion, that I scarcely think I am awake,, I muc t retire and compose myself before I see her. In the mean time take Margaret, I will join you as speedily as possible." Alice would fain have protracted speaking to the Abbess, but that she feared the arrival of De Hoffman be¬ fore she was prepared, therefore leaving Clarice, she with Margaret sought her in her chamber. * " Most honoured lady," said she, " will you pardon a request I have to make ? I have at this moment in my breast
breast a secret of such magnitude, that it must have vent. It is good, there¬ fore fear nojr; it concerns you nearly, and at the foot of the altar will I reveal it. There, in the presence of the saints, have you nobly struggled with sorrow ; there, lady, give this young maid an ex- ample, with what equanimity a pious mind can bear pleasure, which, like sor¬ row, is here but transitory." 99 AVhat meanest thou, dame ? The strong vicissitudes of sorrow and plea¬ sure have long been dead in my heart J oy, thou well knowest, is lost to me for ever; and even sorrow, me¬ thinks, is lessened by perpetual tears— But lead the way, at thc foot of the holy altar I will attend to thee, and shall not, I trust, return unimproved by thy example." Alice
Alice obeyed in silence. On reach¬ ing the altar, Adelaide took her place ; the dame knelt by her side*, as did also Margaret. " Tliis solemn preparation bespeaks much—AA T hy summoned you not my sister Clarice ? but that curiosity is dead in my heart, you would awaken it." 99 Lady, you have read and heard of miracles ; it is not impossible but that one may be effected in your favour." " True, good mother ; but miracles are for sainted, though earthly spirits. Mine, alas ! is merely earthly ; for it hath never ceased to wander after my misguided lord and murdered child." " The Virgin inspire my tongue to tell the tale ; and you, lady, with forti¬ tude, to hear it.—Deign to answer me; and while I tear open your wounds, re¬ member
member I have a balm a,t hand to heal them~~—Who saw your infant dead ?" Adelaide shuddered at the question. " The count De Hoffman, his own nurse, the count's man, and I know not whom else, for Clarice ever shuns the subject."' " Pardon my boldness, I speak be¬ fore God, not from suspicion—The baron De Hoffman was an avaricious and a misguided man." Adelaide replied—*" He is gone to his account. Heaven granted him, I trust, repentance ; for all agree that he w r as greatly changed before his death," " He was. To his virtuous son he made ample confession of some dread¬ ful enormities, that the noble youth hath been indefatigable to rectify." " You
" You astonish me. That then, per¬ haps, was his business from Bremen ?" " It was. The box in your posses¬ sion contains, as he himself told me, the whole detail ; that in case of his death, justice should be done to the sufferers." " AVho are they ?" 49 You, lady, are one. " /," replied Adelaide. " The Vir¬ gin forgive him ! I do—But name the rest." " Exert your fortitude------Heaven, watchful of innocence, hath preserved your child—" The arm of Margaret supported the Abbess or she had fallen.—" Bear up, dear lady, I am no false propliet- Is the act above the power of him who gave him?------On my life, your son lives ;
lives ; in the generous, unassuming Leo¬ pold, regard your child." " Dame," at length replied the Ab¬ bess, " were 1 not convinced thou wert deceived, I would call thee cruel, thus to trifle with the agonies of a mothe/. ------ Oh İ dreadful remembrance 1 —did I not see his blood, his agonies—and did they not tear my heart, and drive my brain to madness ?" " Too surely ; but you saw him not dead, lady. Dorethea was misguided, and Deuhopt was a villain. " Adelaide shook her head in anguish. " Lady, I grieve at your unbelief. By what means can I convince you of the truth ?" " Alas ! by no mortal means—Thou mightest as well tell me, that Dc Hoff¬ man has risen from his grave." " Ladv,
" Lady, to add to your wonder, the count Dc Hoffman's body never yet knew thc grave. In tlie best, the most pious of men, you will recognise him— In friar Austin, who, for more than six¬ teen years, hath known no bed but thc damp earth, no food but vegetables, shell¬ fish, or eggs ; no drink but water—The supporter of the orphan, the comforter of the widow, the friend of the poor, the scourge of thc oppressor, and the kind leader of the wayward sinner. Can? you refuse your pardon to such a man and husband ? He comes with his son in his hand ; his son, only declared such by the dying breath of his uncle, the baron Joseph. Deuhopt is now a pri¬ soner in thc castle of De Hoffman, and hath confessed the whole truth—v^ay, bear up, I conjure you, lady. Exert yourself
yourself—You are at the foot of the altar, and are at once called upon as a mother and a wife." Adelaide's senses remained perfect, though some minutes elapsed before she could speak. At length she said— " Holy A^irgin ! if this indeed be true, let my glad eyes once see them, and then I die contented." 49 Oh ! say not so, best beloved of all earthly beings," exclaimed Austin, rush¬ ing forwards. " To thy pious prayers Heaven hath given back thy son—See, he kneels, as doth the virtuous Ferdi¬ nand.—Nay, her eyes are lost in their sockets.—Dame, Margaret, Clarice, all, I pray ye, assist. Qh! she will die t ^d murderer that I am ; I, accurseç^ am doomed to slay her." " Peace-^—-peace, I pray you," re¬ plied
plied Alice, " give her time and air ; these strong surprises blow not over like a summer cloud------Sweet lady, how fare you?—Speak to your son'—His side bears the scar of the wound that hath so'long separated you—Deuhopt is ready to witness his identity ; nay, his great Creator hath marked it in le¬ gible characters on his countenance." Adelaide raised her eyes, and fixed them for a moment on her son, then turned them quick to her husband— " De Hoffman," said she, throwing her arms around him, " great have been our sufferings here, may they be repaid * hereafter." " They to me are repaid even here, Adelaide : I see thee living, and I' see my son." " I see him not," Said she, " my eyes are dim, and my head is giddy—place him
him before me. As yet I have seen no¬ thing but tby changed face, and bend¬ ing form." AVilliam knelt at her feet ; she put him back witli her hand—" Is this indeed wy son ?" continued she, gazing on him. Repeat it, De I IorTman— repeat it, dame —affirm it, Ferdinand—that I may press him to my heart and die with pleasure." 99 On my life 'tis true, most honoured lady," replied Ferdinand. " Thc law¬ ful heir of the rank I have innocently usurped, but the brother of my warmest affection." 49 Oh !" exclaimed she, " ye force me to believe ye, for men give not aw ay iheir birthright—Oh, my son, my son, receive the embrace of a mother, whose heart İs labouring wdth a thousand anxious thoughts/'—As she spoke she clasped
clasped the youth ; but overcome by sentiments so new and transporting, he sunk senseless at her feet, grasping her hands with earnest affection. Adelaide screamed aloud-------" Fear not," said Ferdinand, " he will speedily revive ; the powerful voice of nature alone swells in his bosom too great for utterance." Margaret, who had stood by bathed in tears, on seeing the state of William, knelt by his side. Her tears mingled mith those of Adelaide, bedewed his face, and in a few moments he reco¬ vered his recollection. 99 Oh my mother!" exclaimed he, 99 may I indeed call you so ?—Have I really a mother, and such a mother that all the world might envy ?—Receive, receive your son—Let mc hear your voice
voice ------Bless me, and I shall indeed be blest," " The blessing of Heaven, of thy parents, and of all good men, rest upon thee/' answered she. ■ " But is it pos¬ sible this goodly youth should be the in¬ fant wdio, wrapped in my robe, I saw bathed in blood, and struggling in the convulsions of death ?" ** Lady, your mind somewhat re¬ lieved, you shall know all ; every doubt shall be cleared," replied the dame. 99 Such was his father, when he w T on my virgin heart/' said Adelaide, gazing fondly on her son——" Ah ! he was then called the graceful De Hoffman ; but dearer to me is that palid visage, and those sunken features, with virtue, than alíthat wealth, youth, or beauty, could give writhout it."—As she spoke, » she
she turned quickly from her son to her husband, and clasped him to her heart. For some minutes neither spoke. At length De Hoffman said—" Oh, Ade¬ laide ! at tliis altar our hands were united ; but this is the union of our hearts ------Thou hast suffered much, but great shall be thy reward; for if ever thy husband's soul knowest eternal rest, to thee he will owe it." Adelaide laid her hand on her fore¬ head, as if recollecting------" Where is my sister?" said she. " Oh, long ! long skice, she cautioned me not to be sur¬ prised at the sight of Leopold, he so greatly resembled De Hoffman------ Call her, I pray you, fet her share my " I am here, my sister," answered Clarice, coming forward. tí I have al- voL. iv, n ready
ready seen my dear brother and ne¬ phew, while you were engaged with the dame -----1 introduced them into thc chapel." After some conversation they all be¬ came more collected. A circumstan¬ tial account of every occurrence was given to the Abbess, who by turns wept over her son and husband, prayed for pardon for the deceased Count, em¬ braced Ferdinand, and called upon her friends to congratulate her on the hap¬ piness that surrounded her. At the hour of separation, sorrow saddened every face. " If this day," said Adelaide, " I have sinned in suf¬ fering worldly concerns to banish from my mind the more momentous one of Heaven, I trust the holy Saints will pity my weakness, and intercede for me
me——Ah î no one but a wife and a mother, who has suffered as I have done, and been as unexpectedly re¬ lieved, can form a proper estimate of my feelings."
n 2 CHAP.
CIIAP. XIV. De Hoffman and his son, with Ferdinand, returned to the castle, where, some days after, with the concurrence of Adelaide, the prin¬ cipal nobility of thc whole city of Bremen were invited. To them Ferdinand introduced his uncle and cousin, and informed them, as con¬ certed before, that for particular rea¬ sons, his late father had, for a time, assumed the rank, and used the fortune of his uncle, John De Hoffman, but that those reasons being now removed, he, Ferdinand, relinquished the whole in favour of the rightful heir, AVilliam De
De Hoffman, hitherto only known by the name of Leopold Sternheim. Many present, notwithstanding the alteration in the count's features and person, re¬ cognized him, and as no one could suppose Ferdinand would relinquish his right in favour of a stranger, they ac¬ knowledged the claim, though they could not but suppose some mystery lurked under it, which had hither¬ to been concealed. Ferdinand having concluded, De Hoffman next spoke.—" My friends," said he, " an alien from you for many years, my heart gladdens once more to breathe the air of my native country. Both by my vows and inclination, how¬ ever, shut from a converse writh the world, my estate and fortune descend to my son AVilliam, jWho is scarcely n 3 more
more dear to me than my nephew Ferdinand.^ ------The former and myself liave had some long conversations on the subject, and the result is, that as there are, now but two remaining of the blood of De Hoffman, that they equally share the property between them. Such is my son's will, and which I sanction •with my approbation, praying Heaven to keep them till death in the same friendship that now unites them." Ferdinand spoke in contradiction to the will of the friar ; but the applause bestowed on the disinterested conduct of all parties, obliged him at length to acquiesce, and a sumptuous entertain¬ ment concluded the w r hole. The friar, however, refused to share it. He con¬ stantly attended the service at St. Mary's, and saw Adelaide and his sister
sister daily. The cautious and affec¬ tionate behaviour of both De Hoff¬ man and his son, in some measure, began to reconcile Ferdinand more to himself; his father's shame was con¬ cealed, or at most so imperfectly known, and that to so few, that he hoped time would obliterate the re¬ membrance of it, or if the mystery re¬ mained, the crime be forgotten. On the minds of all being some¬ what tranquillized, the Abbess with her own hand wrote the full account to her uncle the Pope, requesting his be¬ nediction, and countenance for her son and the generous Ferdinand. In a moment of exultation and pa¬ rental fondness, AVilliam De Hoffman ventured to address his father in behalf of Deuhopt : his suit was long and una- N 4 vailing,
vailing, for he had not only his father to combat, but also his cousin, who warmly contended against him. The friar replied, that he could not an¬ swer to his conscience letting loose such a villain on the world ; but that as for the vineyard, purchased with the fruits of his iniquity, he could wish it to remain in his family, as it might be the means of supporting his children in honest industry. ------" Had he made his es¬ cape," said De Hoffman, " I know not that I should have caused him to be pursued, but to set him free I never will." AVilliam, who truly judged that the share Deuhopt had in the villainy ofhis employer (De Hoffman) would for his own sake force him to silence, resolved to use means to assist his escape, and trust
trust to his father's lenity for pardon ; he therefore one evening, when De Hoffman and Ferdinand were engaged at St. Mary's, called to Geofrey to con¬ duct him to his prisoner, and then sending the old man on some trifling errand, addressing Deuhopt, he said— " Though your actions are such as call forth my utmost abhorrence, yet I can¬ not forget that I have used to you the honoured name of father. Vain, of my justly offended parent, have I bég¬ ed your release : he is deaf to my en¬ treaties, and I hazard his displeasure by what I now attempt——Come forth— the night is dark—fly this city for ever, and repent your crimes, lest worse be¬ fal you—Take my purse—it will be more than sufficient to bear you home, and Heaven forgive you, as I do." n 5 Deuhopt
Deuhopt could hardly believe his senses. The man he had most injured, and cruelly treated for years, thus step¬ ping forth to save him. He attempted to express his thanks, but the youth prevented him. ** No words, I pray you ; the subject will bear none—away —you hazard by delay." So saying he let him from the cham¬ ber and fastened the door, then con¬ ducted him to the gate, which closing upon him he joined his father at St. Mary's. His agitation was visible, and being inquired into he openly confessed what he had done. The friar and Ferdinand both expressed their displeasure; butthe gentle Adelaide, who could find in the conduct of her son nothingmore than one of those traits of mercy, that particularly distinguished
distinguished her own character, pre¬ sently became his advocate, and pro¬ cured his pardon. Two days after the happy meeting of the lady Adelaide and her husband, William De Hoffman in presence of Ferdinand, declared to the friar the state of both their hearts, in respect to the sisters, Margaret and Isabels and in return received a promise of hfe ut¬ most interest, if he found the maidens propitious to their wishes.—" To see," said he, " my two sm», for such I regard ye, espoused to the daughters of my beloved Fitzwalter, would, methinks, be the heigth of aH my happiness—I will, however, advise nothing, but simply name yonr wishes to Margaret at present $ and té Isabel, ? 6 and
and her mother, as speedily as-may be." The friar was true to his promise. He communicated his son's desires to the lady Adelaide and Alice, the latter of whom replied, that she truly be¬ lieved, that if Margaret had any par¬ tiality beyond the claims of friend¬ ship, it was for the youthful De Hoff¬ man ------" But," continued she, " she is naturally candid, and accustomed to reveal her most secret thoughts to you, she will not now decline it; I will, therefore, call her, and the noble Al> bess will be kind enough to declare your son's wishes to her." On Margaret's joining them, the Abbess addressing her said, " My love, —I am a petitioner to you; but if my petition
petition meets not your good will, I pray you reject it, for so much depends thereon, that nothmg but your own will should direct you." " If you and my friends consider it for my good, I shall be convinced ye are the best judges." " Not so," said De Hoffman, " where the happiness of a whole life is con¬ cerned, the parties most interested must judge for themselves." " Father," replied Margaret, " what do you mean?" " He means, Margaret," said the Abbess, " that if your heart is disen¬ gaged, he would wish to give you a legal right to call him father, under¬ stand you that?" " Dear lady!—" returned Margaret, blushing " My
" My beloved child," resumed the Abbese, " I conjure you to consider well your answer. To see my son and you happy would be to me the greatest of all earthly blessings ; but though he prefers you to all women, it doth not follow that you must have the same partiality for him. Among the Eng¬ lish youths some one may have touched your heart, if so, hesitate not to declare it, I will still consider you as my daugh¬ ter, and love you equally." " Lady," replied Margaret," I never yet saw a young man whom I could esteem so highly as your son." 44 Well, then," answered she, " we will talk farther hereafter------For my¬ self, I delare that were I to select a daughter from the whole world, it would by thyself." Margaret
Margaret kissed her hand, and begged leave to retire, which being granted, De Hoffman left them to con¬ vey the news to his son. William, in¬ formed of his success, flew to return his thanks at the convent, and though Margaret at first received him with more constraint than usual, it speedily gave way to the most animating of all youthful reflections, that of loving and being beloved by a deserving and uni¬ versally approved object. In the course of a month the lady Abbess received a messenger from his Holiness: he warmly cogratulated her on the change that had taken place, and as her vows and those of the count had been taken under a cruel and base deception, ofc fered to disannul them ; and for the for¬ tune of Eltzen, as a great part was settled
settled on the convent of St. Mary, he commanded it to be relinquished, as it had been given under the same decep¬ tion, and to the injury of the rightful heir. The messenger was received with the highest honour; but piety had taken too deep a root in the hearts of both De Hoffman and his countess, to suffer them ever more to mix with the world : they, therefore, respectfully declined his Holiness' goodness, and on mature consideration, and after con¬ sulting with AVilliam and Ferdinand, resolved wdth the fortune of Eltzen to repair, even from the foundation, the convent of St, Mary, and also in me¬ mory of the dream of father John, to found a new monastery for twenty Franciscans,
Franciscans, at the distance of a quar¬ ter of a mile. These determinations took place in the presence of the Pope's messen¬ ger, before whom also the count in¬ vested his son a second timé with his title and half his fortune, the rest be¬ ing secured to Ferdinand. The am¬ bassador also was requested to beg his .Holiness' consent to the marriage of AVilliam De Hoffman with Margaret, and to grant them his benediction. On the messenger's return to Rome, the Pope was so highly gratified by the conduct of De Hoffman and his niece Adelaide, that he, without delay, wrote a letter in his own hand. He blessed Heaven for giving him such exemplary relatives, and in aid to their pious purpose, sent them a considerable sum
sum towards bringing it to effect.·*— To the young people he sent his be¬ nediction, and various rich jewels, as tokens of his friendship, and finally desired, when occasion served, to see them with the virtuous Ferdinand at Rome. This point arranged, De Hoffman, as bound by every tie of gratitude and dhty, resolved to depart for England, to crave the king's permission for the marriage of his son with Margaret. Ferdinand, however, entreated to be deputed in his stead, and his. offer being at length accepted, he was furnished with letters for the king, the lord and lady Nevil, Isabel, and one particular¬ ly for lady De Launcy from Margaret, requesting lier approbation of her mar¬ riage to the so» of her father's dearest friend.
friend.—Among all David was not for¬ gotten. Not only letters, but money- was sent him for his own use, and also to distribute among such of his poor neighbours as needed, with a promise of seeing them speedily. Thus provided, Ferdinand departed a second time for England, grieved at leaving bis friends, but in anxious hopes of not being an unwelcome visitor to Isabel, to whose mother he also bore two ktters, one from De Hoffman, and one from the lady Adelaide.
CHAP.
CHAP. XV. Ferdinand on his arrival in Lon¬ don paid his first duty to the king, who received him with distinguished kind¬ ness, and reading the friar's letter said —" By my faith ! I expected this. If my consent be necessary, they have it with my whole heart ; but I trust Mar¬ garet Fitzwalter will not forget that by the right of her father she is an English woman." " AVere it only that it is your grace's kingdom she would be ungrateful in¬ deed to forget it," replied Ferdinand. " She hath also here a sweet sister, to whom I bear letters, as also to the lady De Launcy, if she be living." " She is living ; and, as I am told, better,
better. The world speaks highly of the duty and attention of her daughter ; but know ye not the lord De Launcy is dead ?" " Did I understand your grace aright, that the baron is dead ?" 44 Truly is he, of an apoplexy, at Sheene. The trial gave him much vex¬ ation, it is thought ; but though I grieve at the loss of a useful servant, my con-' venience shall ever give way to justice," The knowledge of lord De Launcy's death rendered Ferdinand absent to every other subject ; he however was honoured with a long audience, and the king expressed a desire to see him again before his departure. On leaving the palace Ferdinand made the most particular inquiries, and soon learned that t^e lord De Launcy had
had been dead six w r eeks, a piece of information that caused him some won¬ der, as no news had reached Germany to that effect. Losing, however, no time in conjecture, he hastened to the lady De Launcy's, and was immedi¬ ately admitted to Isabel, who , after questioning him respecting all that had passed at Bremen, introduced him to her mother. Ferdinand found her re¬ lieved, in part, from her illness, which originating in her fears of disgrace and shame, had subsided since the cause was removed ; but she was pale and worn, and her temper sunk into a gra¬ vity, that made her more respectable than she had heretofore been. The conduct of lord De Launcy in the late event had shewn her that his attach¬ ment to her merely depended on her S fortune,
fortune, while, on the contrary, that of her daughter, wriiom she had neglected, conciliated her esteem, and forced her to acknowledge her worth. Isabel's account of her friends in Germany had awakened lady De Launcy's curiosity, she therefore immediately consented to see Ferdinand. Young, lively, and graceful, his appearance pleased her, while the marking respect he paid her flattered her self-love—He presented Margaret's letter, and had the satisfac¬ tion to find it received better than he expected. She invited him to see her again, and as he would not appear in¬ trusive he prepared to depart. ** Permit me, lady," said he, " before I leave you, to present two more letters, one from røy honoured uncle, the other from my aunt, the lady Adelaide; they earnestly
earnestly wish your acquaintance. But as those Ietterò also contain a request near to my heart as the life that warms it, I WOuld fain not be present at the reading; for if the contents meet your displeasure, I should be more severely wounded than I couid wish to appear in your presence," So speaking, he laid the letters be¬ fore her, and making his obeisance quitted the apartment. The friar's let¬ ter to lady De Launcy was worthy his rank and holy function. He spoke to her of her sickness in the most conso¬ latory manner, made no mention what¬ ever of the former dissension that had taken place between them, expressed his nephew's wishes respecting Isabel, and finally concluded, by assuring her that it wras his earnest wish to number € the
thc widow of the baron Fitzwalter among his friends. The letter of Adelaide was more ex¬ plicit—She expressed her sorrow for the lady Do Launcy's health ; and as, in general, she understood her illness was rather languor and extreme weakness than violent pain, invited her to Ger¬ many, vvhere she assured her, at the castle of De Hoffman, no care nor at¬ tention would be wanting; or ir she preferred occasionally being a guest at the convent, the whole sisterhood wouki be willing, by all the means in their power, to-alleviate her sufferings. AVhen lady De Launcy had read thc letters she reached them to Isabel, and bid her peruse them, Thc deep blushes that covered her check*, and her silence as she passed over that of thc friar, con- voL. iv. o vinced
vinced her mother the proposal was not disagreeable. On reading that of the Abbess she used no means to suppress her satisfaction—" Best of w r omen !" exclaimed she, " would indeed we w r cre with herj then do I truly think my dear mother woukl be well—You have no longer any thing to restrain you. and a short voyage might be salutary." " And is there no secondary motive for that wish, Isabel ?" " Can I have a dearer motive than a parent's welfare r" answered Isabel— 4t I will not pretend to misunderstand you—I presume you mean Ferdinand ?" added she blushing. " But no man in the wwld is sufficiently interesting to me, to make me wish a change of situ¬ ation that I thought unpleasant to my mother, '* «Isabel,"
99 Isabel," replied she, " I cannot from your conduct disbelieve you—but your rejection of Richard De Launcy is now explained." 99 1 know not how-^had Ferdinand never been born, my sentiments of him had been the same." Lady De Launcy, on mature consideration, was flattered by the attention paid her. It is true, she could not at once forget to regard De Hoffman as her enemy ; but her knowledge of his rank softened her asperity, and her inclination wavered, whether to accept or refuse the invita¬ tion of the lady Adelaide. A few days before a strict settlement had taken place between lady De Launcy and her son-in-law : mutual discharges passed on both sides, though on his part with an ill grace, 0 2 On
On the morning succeeding that in' which Ferdinand presented the letters to lady De Launcy, he with a palpi¬ tating heart again attended her. She received him with kindness, but de¬ clined, at once, giving an answer on so serious a point. There was, hovvever, neither in her manner, nor in the looks of Isabel, aught to make him despair.— As lady De Launcy conversed familiarly with him, he ventured to second his aunt's request of seeing her in Ger¬ many ; and on her observing that she prayed him to *ell Margaret, that she wished her all happiness in marriage, he added warmly, " Lady, wouki I had rhetoric sufficient to persuade you to be present on the occasion ; the lady Mar¬ garet is surrounded by the family of her destined husband, and the presence of hcr
her mother and sister would indeed be welcome." Adeep blush crossed lady De Launcy's face—" From what I have heard from Isabel, ?nrr¿e very extraordinary events have lately taken place in your family ; will the marriage therefore be private or public ?" " It will be public ; and, as I should judge, magnificent : for the Pope's le¬ gate wiil be present for his Holiness, and the lord Nevil for the king of Eng¬ land, whose consent I have obtained, and the lady Nevil kindly accompanies him." This intelligence was not without effect ; lady De Launcy found a strengthened inclination to go. The fear of meeting the friar alone withheld her ; but after Ferdinand's departure a ? 3 long
long and persuasive discourse taking place, she at length consented to gratify Isabel, by being present at hcr sister's marriage. Tliis news communicated to Ferdi¬ nand, he expressed the utmost joy, and a vessel being provided for the lord and lady Nevil, he entreated her to take a part, which being consented to, Ferdi¬ nand took his leave of the king, and in a few days after they sailed for Ger¬ many.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVL Never waa surprise equal to that of the friends at Bremen, at the visit of lady De Launcy ; for though she had been warmly invited, they scarcely flat¬ tered themselves with the invitation being accepted. The death of lord De Launcy ??? astonished them, though they could not but think it a cirfcum- stance in favour of Isabel. The reception of lady De Launcy was kind, beyond hcr utmost hopes. The Abbess received her with every honour that her retired state could be¬ stow; while Isabel, wild with joy, em¬ braced every one she met. Margaret, on being introduced to lady De Launcy, ? 4 tendered
tendered her a daughter's duty, by kneeling at her feet; a condescension that covered her heretofore unkind mo¬ ther-in-law with blushes------But hor greatest trial was the meeting with the friar ; he, however, on her attempting an apology for what had passed, said, " Sister, I pray ye, kt all be forgotten ; if you have erred, I have not been spot¬ less—and at our great account, I trust we shall both be forgiven—Happy, in¬ deed* is the soul which passes through the fiery trial of life uncontaminated ; but no less blessed is that which strug¬ gles nobly, and returns to the paths of rectitude." After some time, a clay w T as appointed for Margaret's marriage ; and all being .prepared, the ceremony took place in St. Mary's chapel. The conduct of all w is
was solemn ; but the animated features of the young count De Hoffman, plainly shewed the transport that reigned with¬ in his breast.—The solemnity over, he saluted his beauteous bride, and pre¬ senting: ber to his mother, he said?— ** Oh ! yc two best and most beloved of women, receive my thanks and wannest duty ; and Heaven grant that I may never be less sensible of my hap¬ piness than at this moment." They then knelt^ and received the blessing of De Hoffman, the Abbess, sister Clarice, the Pope's legate, and the lady De Launcy. The young count then leading his bride, knelt at the feet of the dame—" Bless us, my dear and venerable/ mother," said Margaret; " without your blessing my happiness must be incomplete." ? 5 Alice
Alice dropped on her knees. She raised her eyes to heaven—" The Vir¬ gin of her goodness," exclaimed she, 44 bestow her blessing on this union! May happiness and virtue increase with years; until, after a life of unblemished rectitude, ye be snatched at once to that world, where there is neither mar¬ riage nor giving in marriage—there to receive a recompense of never-ending joy.—And ye,blessed spirits of the noble Fitzwalter and the gentle Blanch," ad¬ ded she, "¿nay ye be permitted,for a mo¬ ment, to look upon this marriage ; may ye know the honest triumph of my soul, and the heart-felt gratitude that w T arms my bosom, while I acknowledge the goodness of Heaven, in suffering my years to be prolonged till tnis blessed instant." Margaret
Margaret embraced the dame, and bathed her face with her tears ; jthe count saluted her venerable cheek; when Isabel throwing herself into Mar¬ garet's arms, cried—" Happy, happy may you bc, my sister; and in your journey through life, may every one be as sensible of your merit as I am." Margaret warmly returned her sister's embrace, and mutual cong#airuİ3tipn> having passed, tliey adjourned to ati* apartment adjoining the chapel. The Pope's legate then, in the presence of the company, and in his Holiness* name, made the bride many noble pre¬ sents ; he also gave the friar a paper, in his Holiness' owrn writing, It em¬ powered him to fulfil his piojis inten¬ tions, respecting a monastery for thirty, o G instead
instead of twenty Franciscans ; and nominated him abbot thereof, with a perpetual gift of the same in his fa¬ mily. In the convent of St. Mary, he made the same regulation, with several 'particular immunities for ever. The friar having returned his thanks, lord Nevil next spoke—" The King, my master," said he, " by me, wishes all happiness to the bridegroom and his ■fair bride; and presents her, not only in memory of the worth of her brave father, but for her own modest and candid behaviour, with this casket of jewels, which he prays her to wear for his sake. He also wills me to say, with¬ out offence, that should, as he hopes, more than one son crown this marriage, he will renew in the second son, the name.
name, title, and arms, unquartered, of the baron Fitzwalter, and the same to his heirs for ever." Lord Nevil ceased; but Margaret trembled so violently, that she could scarcely take the casket, much less re¬ ply, but by bowing her head lowly. To the surprise of al!, lady De Launcy next spoke; her pride awakened by such examples, and willing to convince her new friends that she could be ge¬ nerous, she said-*-" Margaret hath call¬ ed me mother, and that I may prove-I accept the name, I give up from this hour, all claim on the domain of Fitz¬ walter, as shall also Isabel, as I have sufficient wealth to make her portion equal to her elder sister." If all had admired the generosity of the
the Pope, and of the King of England, that of the lady De Launcy claimed equal admiration ; all applauded her in thc highest terms, while Isabel clung round her, and regardless of the com¬ pany, repeatedly kissed her hands and cheeks. A public rejoicing of several days took place at the castle of Dc Hoffman ; but all accounted it the happiest time which was spent at the convent. The affluence of the family of De Hoffman, and its great and honourable connexions, soon gained the approba¬ tion of lady De Launcy, and Ferdi¬ nand was admitted an acknowledged lover to the lady Isabel for three months, after which the marriage was to take place. During
During this period, an event reached them, that strongly exemplified, that the justice of Heaven, though slow to pu¬ nish, is sure to fall.—The villain, Deu¬ hopt, in passing through a large forest in his w r ay home, had been attacked by two hungry wolves, who had so severely bitten and torn him, that he was scarcely alive, when some countrymen casually passing, rescued him. They bore him to their hut, where the next day he died ; begging them with his last breath to hasten to Bremen, and in his name implore the count De Hoffman's par¬ don (though he mentioned not for w T hat) or his soul could not otherwise rest, giving tliem for that purpose, w 7 hat mo¬ ney he had remaining. Not only all forgave, but prayed for him ; and send¬ ing back the messenger vvith a proper reward,.
reward, they also intrusted him with "a sum for the widow and children of Deuhopt. * * * * * Three months, which by Ferdinand's computation, was three years, at length elapsed, and he received the hand of Isabel, with every distinction and ho¬ nour that the family of De Hoffman could bestow. The rejoicing over, it was deemed necessary for the young count De Hoff¬ man and his countess to visit England. The friar, though unwilling to leave Germany, resolved to accompany them ; but the dame declined it, from her in¬ creasing years. Lady Dc Launcy gave leave, to their great
great joy, that when they returned, the dust of Fitzwalter should be brought over, and placed, according to his de¬ sire, in St. Mary's. All arranged, they sailed for England; and after a plea¬ sant and speedy voyage, reached the port of Newcastle. David, who regularly heard from Ger many, was apprised of their arrival. He had already informed the vassals of their lady's marriage, and they had re¬ joiced accordingly ; but now to see her among them, was a satisfaction beyond all bounds. They watched alternately for days ; and no sooner heard of the arrival of thc vessel that bore them, than in a body they hastened to meet them, playing on instruments, singing, dancing, clapping their hands, and tes¬ tifying their joy by every means that . unvitiated
unvitiated and grateful affection could devise. David, however willing to ac¬ company them, remained at the castle ; for his great age had rendered the jour¬ ney to London very wearisome to him, and he fearçd disabling himself from bidding his beloved lady welcome. Surrounded by the shouts of the vas¬ sals, they at length reached the castle ; but leaving their horses, had walked for the last mile. The friar walked first ; thc count De Hoffman and Margaret followed; and lastly, the attendants they brought writh them. The friar, as he passed forward, shook hands and blessed his old flock, who- knelt to receive his benediction, echo¬ ing forth their thanks to Heaven, for preserving him through so many dangers. On
On reaching the castle, all the gates were opened wide, gladness dwelt on every face, and in the outward court stood the venerable David, wdio, how¬ ever, dropped upon his knees as they entered—" Praised be Heaven !" said he aloud, " I have not lived in vain ; my eyes have seen the power of my Creator*—The rightful owner comes, and I shall depart in peace." The friar shook David heartily by the hand, and asked after bis health; but the old man's feelings were too great for utterance. The young count next addressed him—-^ My good David,,will you not speak to us?" said he. " See the child of your affection, and the ido¬ lized wife of mine------Your blessing will be welcome; give it her my friend." David's,
David's heart was yet too full; he grasped the count's hand, but made no reply -----" My dear David," said Mar¬ garet, " I conjure you, speak to me : we parted as father and daughter, so let us meet." As she sjpoke she clasped his venerable neck, and saluted his cheek. | Had not tears rushed fortil to ease the old man's labouring heart, his bo¬ som would have swelled to suffocation; but somewhat composed by that salu¬ tary relief, he at length answered------ " Welcome ! welcome ! a thousand -times welcome !—of all days in the year be this blessed, on which the dear and beloved child of my noble master takes possession of her right,— \Ah ! sweet and honoured mistress," added he, after a pause, " you' w T ellre- : member
member your promise—your dove is safe, and shall be returned ; but the most gentle of all doves is given back in your precious self." Tranquillity somewhat restored, they entered the castle, where they found all prepared for their reception; and, weary with their voyage, hastened to rest. % 3sr % % ^r Some days after the vassals were all ordered to attend at the castle, when Margaret herself informed them, that all arrears of· vassalage would be for¬ given, and sums furnished those that needed from misfortune, or other dis¬ tressful cause,------She also nominated David steward of the whole domain* 4 and
and ordered all the poor to be employed in repairing the chapel of St. Marga¬ ret, against her return the ensuing year. After a stay of two months, the friar, his son, and the countess, left Nor¬ thumberland, bearing with them the remains of the baron Fitzwalter. The voyage was mournful, but prosper¬ ous, for they speedily reached Ger¬ many where they were received with transport; and all being prepared, wdth befitting solemnity, the ashes of Fitz¬ walter were deposited by those of his beloved Blanch. The friar then immediately began to fulfil his design of building a monastery, as did also the lady Adelaide of repair¬ ing the conyent of St. Mary ; but eight months had scarcely elapsed since Mar- ret
garet left England, before they were called back to worldly thoughts, for to thcir great joy she gave birth to a son, who was named John after his grand¬ father. Her health re-established, with her lord, Ferdinand, and Isarjfci, she visited Rome, and paid jfcer duty to the Pope, who received them with distinguished kindness. Anxious to see her friends and her babe, who was left in the care of the Abbess and the dame, she returned to Bremen; but, after a stay of four months, again took a voyage to England, on board a vessel bound to London. Having tendered their duty and respect to the king, and passed some weeks with the lord and lady Nevil, they journied to Northum¬ berland, where Margaret's health being precarious, her lord obliged her to stay seven
seven months, during which period she gave birth to a second son, to be pre¬ sent at whose baptism the friar came from Germany. He was named AVil¬ liam Henry, and the lord Nevil stood sponsor for the king, wdio created him, according to his promise, baron Fitz¬ walter. On the count De Hoffman and his family's return to Bremen, they found the lady De Launcy's health had suf¬ fered greatly, in consequence of which no persuasions could prevent her de¬ voting the remainder of her days to God. She survived taking the veil two years: her life had been marked with error, but her death was exem¬ plary. Her immense possessions de¬ volved to her daughter Isabel, who showed her duty by every attention : . that
that filial affection could bestow. The family of De Hoffman also treated her with distinguished kindness and re¬ spect, so that one day, conversing with sister Clarice* she said, " My life hath hitherto been a pursuit after happiness : I sought it in rank, in riches, and in dissipation, but never attained it until I became an inmate of St. Mary's, where I found it in the retreat of peace and the exercise of piety/' The reparations of the convent of St. Alary were completed anno Domini 1510, and the monastery for fhe father Franciscans was finibhed building ¿? 1511. î£ # # * Φ This manuscript wa* written at the request of the sister Adelaide De Hoff¬ man, Abbess of St. Mary, for the be- VOL. IV. p nr fif
314- st. Margaret's cave : nefit of her descendants; and though w ben they read these pages, worms may have eaten her mortal flesh, and her bones be mouldered to their native dust; yet her voice calleth oh them from the tomb to watch well to their ways, that thcir conscience sleep not ; for dreadful to the guilty soul is its awa¬ kening.— Let them brave danger and death in the cause of virtue, and fear not; for though their earthly bodies .perish, their souls shall rest in ever¬ lasting peace. * * # # # The Remainder of the Manuscript ivas in another Iland, and of a much later Date.
Margaret, countess De Hoffman, was mother to two sons and two fîaiicrhters.
daughters. Isabel, baroness De Hoff¬ man, to three sons and two daugh¬ ters. The children of both w T ere educated with the greatest care; the bovs under the msnection of the elder J ι De Hoffman, the girls under thc di¬ rection of the abbess Adelaide. The storms of misfortune, that had for so many years vexed the families of De Hoffman and Fitzwalter, appeared dis¬ persed, for scarcely a cloud interrupted their peace, but attaining a great age, they died surrounded by their children and their descendants. The count and Margaret passed nearly half their time in Northumber¬ land, where their son AVilliam ever ac¬ companied them, as that domain wa<- acounted particularly his; but after tht 1 death of King Henry the Seventh, which i* 2 hap-
happened in 1509, they visited London no more. - The sister Clarice lived to thc age of sixty, uniformly cheerful and pious; the only difference being, that, as before, lu τ whole cares were bestowed on the Abbcss A they were now divided among the whole fiunily. David lived ten years beyond thc pe¬ riod affixed for man's life to be labour and sorrow, and when death called, bold¬ ly obeyed the summons, as having done his duty both as a man and a Christian. The family of De Hoffman, and That of Fcrdmand, ever remained united in the strictest bonds of love and unityö and actuated by one spirit of benevo¬ lence, knew no divided interest ti U death. END OF TUE MANUSCRIPT
