Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Anna St. Ives: a novel
ANNA St. IVE-S: A NOVEL.
LETTER CVI. COKE CLirrON TO GUY FAIRFAX. London, Dover Street, J OIN chorus and rejoice with me, --Fair¬ fax, for I feel fomething like a tranfient hilarity of heart. I think I am half in a temper to tell mý tale as it ought to be toW. Time was when it would have been pregnant with humour. The very mailer-devil that I wanted has appeared to me, and we have fignëd and confi gned, ourfely.es ovetto ,the great work of mutual vengeance ! * .Be.patieht and you iliáli hear, the manner of it,- v.OL. v. в, ' Two
Two nights ago I was at the theatre. The king was-there ; Gai rick/played ; » the crowd was great, and no places were to be procured. During the fitil act I and two more ftood elbowing each other at the door of one of the front'boxes, the feats of which were all full. The perfon who was next me was haid-favoured, had a look of audacious impudence, with that mixture of drefs which forms the vulgar genteel, and fpoke the brogue. The act being over the audience rofe, snd my gentleman, with the nonchalance affurance of liis character, a total difi egard of the feelings and convenience of othei ş, *aud an entire complaifance for his own, ftepped foiward into the fécond feat from the door, on which'there were previoufly four people, its full complement. But he had noticed they weie not all'fo athletic as himfelf, and was determined to make them fit clofe. The perfons ^ext him, obferving his re¬ doubtable look, hefitated for a moment, but at length began to remonftrate. They 'addrefled
addrefled him two or three times without his deigning to appear to hear them ; till, either encouraged by his filence or warm¬ ed by vexation, they fpoke loud enough to call the attention of the people around them. The Flibemian then fat himfelf down, ¿hrew bis arm over the railing of the box, and his body in a carelefs pofture, and very coolly anfwered—" Pray now be afy, " and don't difturb the good company." A fquabble enfued, and the Irifliman continued to anfwer them with the utmoft contempt. In a fliort time two of them gained courage enough to threaten to turn him out ; to which he replied—" Oh ! By " the fweet Jafus, but I fliould be glad to " fee the pretty boy that would dare to " lay a little finger upon me !" After another wrangle, and treating their reafonings and half menaces with the moil contemptuous difregard, a gentleman from the next box interfered, and obferved it certainly was very improper behaviour. The Irifliman turned round, furveyed him в 2 from
from head to foot, and anfwered— ff I find ." you have all got your quairelling tackle " on .board to-night· and fo as I muft fight " fomebody, and as you, mitler, appear " to be.the moil of a gintleman, why I ** will talk to you when the play is over. ( " For which raifon fit down, and make " all yourfelves afy." The beginning of the fécond act and the impatience of the houfe to hear their fa¬ vourite foon impofed filence, and the Irifli¬ man kept his feat. N I was fo much diverted by the complete impudence of the fellow, that though one of tbe box-keepers had found me a place, I determined to return, and fee how this petty brawl was to end. Accordingly I took care to be round in time, befoie the cui tain dropped ; till which" the hero of it had kept quiet poffeffion of his ufurped feat. The moment the audience rofe he turn¬ ed about, and with a look which, I ima¬ gine no man but himfelf could allume, fiift on this fide of him and next on that, ad¬ drefled
dreffed his opponents with—-" Now if any " of you aie ftill difordered'in the body, " and want to lofe a little blood, why " follow me." The* two perfons that fat next to him weie both Jews, and one of them who appeared to ha^e the moil fpirit had a knotted ciab-ftick in "liis hand, and in¬ filled that ihe Irifliman fliould not leave the company till he had firft given fatisfač¬ tion for the infult he had committed on them all. The Hibernian replied—" All ? " Is it all together you mane, or one after " another ? Perhaps you don't underftand " tbe tools of a gintleman, and want to box " me ! Faith and I fliould have no great " objection to that either, with any half « dozen of you, one down and t'other " come on. But you muft ufe no unlaw- " ful weapons, ray fweet ftilow." So faying, he wiefted the Jew's crab- flick fiom him, laid hold of it at each end, and fnapped it in two acrofs the railing of the box ; adding with infinite compofure .of countenance— " This is an improper в 3 «* pfr-V-'
■" plaything for yon, mafter Jackey, and " you might ι do yourfelf a damage with " it. Flere is half a crown for you. Take c< it, man, and buy yourfílf a" genteel bit i,; of rattan, to beat the little pug dogs " away, when they bark after you in the " ftreet," Infolent as the fellow was, there was no refining his humour, and the laugh was genera]. The vexed Ifraelite endeavoured to perfiil, and the Irifliman drew a dirty letter out of his pocket, from the back of which he tore the direction, and giving it io the angry Jew, faid— (i If. you have " any ftomach for a good breakfaft to- " morrow morning, I fliall be at home ; ·" and the hot rolls and butter will be " ready at ten." 'Fie then ftrode over the feats and went mto the lobby, where he was followed by •the crowd. Mý curiofity was highly excited, and I -requefted the Jew to let me read his ad- .drefs. · Imagine, Fab-fax, my furprife at feeing . the
the name of Mac Fane ! That is, of the gambler and>bully who fome time ago bad been attempting to plunder brother Ed¬ ward ; a.id who bad been fo fuccefsfuliy oppofed by the family knight-errant, Hen¬ ley ! Among the bufy conjectures of my fermenting brain concerning the inftru- ments I might happen to want, fliould things as they have done come to an ex¬ tremity, the fuppofed qualifications of this hero had-more than once paifed in review. The behaviour to which I had this evening been a witnefs pei fectly confirmed all my former conjectures, which I inftantly re¬ collected; I therefore determined not to Jofe fight of him. Before I knew who he was I had been glad to fee the fquabble continued, be¬ caufe it drew out the ftrong tiaits of this very eccentric genius ; but X giew impa¬ tient to put an end to it the moment I had made the difcovery. The thing was not difficult, His cha· raáter was too defperate and determined not to infpire fear ; and the humour of his в 4 pbrafeology
■8" ANNA ST. IVES! pbrafeology and brogue made the laugh. always on- his fide, The paffions of his opponents counteracting each other died away. "The farce was going to begin, and he advifed them to " go, and not lofe tf filli eighteen penny-worth out of their " five ihillings." Finding the morfel vy as too hard for their digeftion, they' took his advice and returned quietly to their feats :' while he leverai^ times traverfed the lobb)', and looked firft into one box and then into an¬ other, 'to let them fee that there he was. My., refolution was formed, and I foon found an opportunity of failing into con¬ verfation with him ; and · as I took care that my lone fliould anfwer the intended purpofe, 'be prefently invited me to ad¬ journ, and take what he called a bottle and a bird at the Shakefpeare. h • The propofal exactly fuited me, and away we went. / Fíe called for a private room, which I fliould have done if he bad not, though with a very different view. My appear-' ance
ance made him hope he had caught a gudgeon. Fie prefently began to turn the -difcouife upon various kinds of gaming. Billiards, tennis, hazard, and país-dice, weie each of them mentioned ; and, to encourage him, I gave him to underftand I knew them all. Fie then talked of -catds, and aiked if I had any objection to take a hand at picquet; " juft to pafs " away an hour before fuppei." I an¬ fwei ed none. j Accordingly the waiter was rung for, and the cards were prefently upon the ta¬ ble. He propofed playing for a "trifle ; from one guinea to five : not more ; " becafe " as why, he was tied up from deep play. " Fie had loft five thoufand pounds within 4f lix weeks, and they had had a pietty ■" pigeon of him '— [Flad you but fcen the form and features of this pigeon, Fairfax '] " For which raifon he muft take care and " not be plucked any"morcv~ It wasche " misfortune of his timpei not to know 4i when to flop; and there was not fo в ò un-
-" unlucky a fillow in the three kingdoms. " He was'always the bubble, play at '" what he would, and every fnap-jack " knew him to be his mark." Such was the leffon which this fellow 'had got by rote, and had been retailing to all comers for years. But I have obferved •of gamblers that they cannot forbear re- hearfing their own cant even in the com¬ pany of each other, and when they aie convinced every foul that hears them knows they are lying. I however had my purpofe to ferve, and we fat down to our game. The ftakes were l five guineas a fide. According to cuftom, I won the three or four firft games.; and he pretended to curfe, and fret, and again ran over his bead-roll of being pi¬ geoned, plucked bare, bubbled, done up, and the whole catalogue of like genteel phrafes. The firft game he won he propofed, as luck was perhaps taking a turn in his fa¬ vour, to double tbe ftakes, and I indulged bim. He fuffered me to win tbe following game.
game, I fay fuffered, cheating being taken into the account ; for I 'am certain that at the fair game I am his mafter. But that is no matter. The three following games were all his own, and he then began to repeat the re¬ mainder of his part. " By the bliffed Ja- " fus he would not believe his own eyes ! ííL Three games together!" The fellow fwore, with que of tbe deepeft oaths his -memory could furnifli, fuch a thing had never happened to him before in his/whole life ! <c But now that he was in luck, he " would as foon play for a hundred gui* ťf neas as for a thirteener." Fie endeavoured to provoke me to in¬ creafe the flake; and, by the fupper net coming up, I am convinced the waiter and he underftood each other, and that the ^fignal had been given. I refufed í6 play for a greater fum, and we continued till he had won fifty guineas, he inceffantly fwearing—" Щ the bliffed crook ! By the " bind leg of the holy lamb! By Saint <e Peter's pretty beard !" and by all man¬ is G ner
ner of oaths, fome of them of the moil wbimfical, and others of the moft -hor¬ rible kind, that he had never been a winner fo much before in all his life. From tlie firft ten guineas that he won to the laft it was ftill the fame tune. I then rang the bell and ordered fupper, thinking the fum facrificed quite fufficient; though not more than enough to ferve my purpofe. While we were eating, he endeavoured by all the arts he knew to excite the paf¬ fion of gaming in me ; and he is a tolera¬ ble adept. But my mind was too intent upon another fubject. I watched tbe mo¬ ment when he was at the height of his hopes, whicbT had purpofely encouraged to produce my intended effect, and then aficed him if hevdid not know r Captain St. Ives? , Impudent as the fellow is, his counte¬ nance for a moment was fixed, his mouth open, and his eye ftruggling to get rid of alarm, tliat it might begin its enquiries. I allowed up my blow by adding— You
You won three thoufand guineas of him, I think, Mr. Mac Fane, which I am told were never paid. The fellow put his hand into a fide- pocket, which he had in the body of his coat. I inftantly fufpected he had a fmall pair of piftols there, and my fufpicions were afterward confirmed. He drew it у Ьаск, having fatisfied himfelf that they were actually forth coming, and then re¬ covered himfelf fo far as to aik— Pray, fir, are you acquainted with Cap¬ tain St. Ives ?— N I am, fir, anfwered I—I likewife know Mr. Flenley. You do, fir? faid the aftoniflied Mac Fane. I do, fir. I am intimate with Sir Ar¬ thur St. Ives, and he is the fon of his gar¬ dener : a low fellow, that acts as the ba¬ ronet's man of all woik; his fteward, his < overfeer, and his cafli-keeper. This contempt thrown on the character • of Henley" gave the Irifliman fome relief. sBy the holy poker, faid Mac Fane, but I always
always thought he wcs, a fpalpeen, and no gintleman ! I think you have no gieat caufe to like bim much, fir, continued I, from the ac- .count that I have heard. His, choler began to rife, and his eyes; affumed an uncommon, ferocity-. Like him ! Sweet Jafus, fnatch me outr of the' world if I don't pay off anhold fcore with bim yet, before ïdie. I thought as much, fir, anfwered Í. Sir! Replied he, again ftaiing with re¬ viving alarm and fufpicion~--=. I continued.—T 4 o tell you the, truth,. Mr. Mac Fane, that is the very fubject which brought you, and I into company this evening. I fufpected your haţe of ţîenley, and to be fincere I hate him too. Flad you feen the- fellow's face brighten, Faiifax, and after brightening begin to flame," you would not have readily forgot¬ ten the pituie. But I am rather furprifed to meet you in public, fir, added Ï. What do you mane by that, fir ? I thought
J thought you, deemed it prudent to keep out of the way, on account of that affair ? I felt fome gratification in playing thus upon bis fears—He now once more put bjs hand into his fide-pocket, and pulling out his piftols laid them before him. By Jafus, fir, 1 don't very well know what you would be at ! But when I underftand the full tote of your queftions, I fliall know how to give an anfwer. I could not very well digeft this oblique menace ; but to have quarrelled with fuch a rafcal would in every fenfe have been madnefs. You have a well-mounted pair iof piftols there, faid I, Mr. Mac Fane. I'll bet you the fifty guineas, double or quit, I break this china plate at the fiift fliot, ten paces diftant. By the great grumbler, anfwered he, but I'll bet you don't ! Immediately de¬ livering me one piftol, and taking up and unlocking the other himfelf. Accordingly I placed the plate againil the wall, fired, and v/as not far from the centre. Upon my
my honour and foul, fii;, faid Mac Fane, hut I find you aie a good fliot, and I fliall be ,v glad to be bettei acquainted with ycu. Having convinced him that I could hit a mark as well as himfelf, I returned to the fubject of Henley ^ and though I could not bring him fo be explicit, I learned from him that he was acquainted with Henley's averfiòn tø profecute, but does not know an e what that averfton is founded. Befide which he confides in a want of witneifes, as I could pei cerve : except that he has fome fear of his accomplice, Webb ; a .man in whofe company this veiy Mae Fane once attempted to mb Sir Arthur, and whom I fufpeíl he would impeach, but that it would ìuin all his gambling views. For he has found means of affociating with that whole clafs of young fools of fortune, whofe perveited education leads them to take pleafuie in the impudence and hu¬ mour of fuch a fellow, as well as in feeing each other ftripped and ruined by turns ; but who would never admit him as a com¬ panion, did they know he had been guilty of
of an act fo defperate as that of going on the highway. Scarcely any thing fliort of this can expel fuch a fellow fiom fuch fo¬ ciety. But though he thinks himfelf fecure in confequence of the lenity of' Henley, he hates him as fincerely as if he were purfu¬ ing him to the gallows. The lofs of the three thoufand guineas is one great mo¬ tive ; and another İs that he felt he was out-braved by Henley, whom he could not terrify, but who on the contrary teiri- fied him. I found he had even formed a fcheme of petty vengeance, which was to waylay Henley with fome bruifing fellows ,of his acquaintance, for he is acquainted with daring villains of all defcriptions, one of whom was to infult, provoke him to fight, and beat him, while Mac Fane himfelf fliould keep at fome diftance,* difguifed. It was with fome difficulty I could per¬ fuade him to defift fiom this plan, and join in projects of my own. But at laft how¬ ever he was convinced that to rob him of his
his miftrefs;, anď awaken him from all his dreamsiof imaginary blifs to the torture L am preparing, would be more effectual revenge than a paitry beating. Not to mention that I firmly believe, inftead of being beaten, he would conquer the beft prize-fighter they could bring; for he is really a powerful and extraordinary feliow. But you will perceive, Fairfax, I was obliged to inforni ( hirn of a part of my own views ; and that I might fix him, I deter-, mined to"bid high. I told him I had Hen¬ ley and another perfon to fecure ; andithab if be would aid me himfelf and provide other affiliants to, act r under bis directions, ■without feeing or being informed of me, I would give him a thoufand guineas as foon as all this fliould be perfectly accomplifh¬ ed. And, as an earneft of my geueiofity, I put down the fifty guineas ; faying that the wager I had made with him was not a fair one, for that it was fifty guineas to a ftraw in my favour : he had no chance .of-winning. He was quite fatisfied with my offer, ftrengthened
ftrengthened as it was by the gratification of his own paffions. I told him what a puiflant hero Henley is, and ofr the necef¬ fity of coming upon him by furprife. I tokbhim I liad feen.a houfe, as before, de¬ fcribed, beyond Knightibridge, which pleafed me ; but that I could not find an¬ other near enough, in which to fecure Flenley. The geography, of the place I mentioned feemed to flart an idea· in his, mind, and he told me, if I would meet him'in two days at the famo tavern, he would in the mean time not only»raake preparations and procure affiftants, but peihaps bring' me further intelligence. As the fellow's brain feemed bufy, I did not wifli to rob him of the felf-fatisfaction of invention, and we accordingly parted, making the appoint¬ ment he propofed. Of all exifting beings, he perhaps v/as the only one who could in a country like this become the proper inftrument of my revenge. And yet, Fairfax, he is a hate¬ ful fellow ! Flis language, his looks, his manners.
manners,, hib paffionr, are all hateful í Courage excepted, there is not a fingle trait 'm him but what is abominable I Fie delights in talking of hocking men, chalk¬ ing them, and cutting them down i Every time his anger rifes againft any one, thefe are its attendant ideas. Such a fellow muft'come to fome tragical end. Fie can never die of old age, and fcarcely of dif- eafe. Nothing but the lead and fleel in which he delights can end him. So it is, and I have no remedy. But he fliall be to me po more than an imple¬ ment, with which I will carve the coming banquet. < How minute are the chances and events on which we depend ' A few flight al¬ terations of incident, and how diffeient would have been the train of my thoughts ' She might have been happy with me, for I loved her, Fairfax, I loved her. I feel it more and more., an» were but ciicum- - flanees a little morç favourable, I believe I fliould torn about and take a contraiy path. But
But it cannot be ! The barrier is infur- mountable I An adamantine wall, reach¬ ing to the ikies ! I remember what fhe faid, at her proud uncle's f able—" I have " an abhorrence, Mr. Clifton, of the er- " rors in which your are now indulging.'' —Abhorrence was' the word, Fairfax !—- It has been at my tongiie's end ever fince —And when flie talked of my errors flie meant me.—" I ultimately and deter- a minedly renounce all thought of him !" —This was her language ! I knew before which way her heart went; and can I fuppofe, now ihe has got a fair excufe, that ihe will not profit by it? Oh no ! I am not fo ill read as that in the paffions. But I have faid the word—They ihall never come together '—They never, never fliall !
С. CLIFTON.*
LETTER
LrETTrER CVll
COKE CLIFTON, ( TO GUY FAIRFAX.
-London, Dover Street. J[ rHAVE received; your 'diffuaflve -epiftle y Iľ^irfax. ilt found mç 1 moo4ysand did jiot .contribute to make me merry. To own the. truth, nojghoft need rifeto .tell'me the methods l ufo are inclined to the· violent. .Can youi find ,me· better ? 'Nay can youétid ■any „ other.? J ,care nptvfor-the confe¬ quences ; I brave them all. Time was that I could have been happy with her ! Ay and fliould, but for this fiend- Flerrley. He fleeps fecurely ! Let him ileep ort ! I will foon awaken him ! I thought I fliould have'been tortured but by one chief paffion, and that the love o£
of 'YBïïgfean'ce 'would'b ave enveloped me "wholly : 'but'they are albdevouring'me : bý turns. I certainly ìhate her, and himï ábhor. Yet pictures' of imaginary happi- 'nefs/that might have been, are continually rifing, and vaniihing in gloomy regret.— : Hetoo, 'at4he very moment'that ! 1 could murder him, F am obliged'to admire'! .Still he ihall not'have her! Though death overtake him, her and 4 me, he'ihall nöt have her ! But what is death ? A thing- "to-covet,-not toťlread. r, Tis'exiftence'only that'is hateful !—Would that my "bones- were now mouldering !—Why have' I brains and nerves * and fenfibilities ?—-Oh 'that'I were -in lhe poifonous de'fert, where T might 'gulp mephitic 'wiríds and drop dead ; or in a moment be buried in'tor¬ nados -of -burning fand ! 'Would thaťmy fcull" were, grinning there, arid blanching ; rather than as it is confcioufly parching, fcorched by ürés itfèlf has kindled í
'I fpent all -yefterday -with 'that 4 Irifh fcoundrek
fcoundrel. Malignity is his element, and mifchief ( his delight ! I fufpect by his af- fiduity that he is poor juft at prefent; for a more induftrious demon black Cocytus does not yield. He is already provided with affociates, and has found another •principal agent for the great work. It is a ftrange expedient ! But thefe are ftrange fellows ! And yet it is a lucky one ; fupe¬ rior to any that I had projected. When I mentioned the Knightibridge road at our firft interview, Mac Fane re¬ collected that an; intimate of his had juft fet íip^wbat was to him a new trade, in the neighbourhood ; that of being the keeper of a madhoufe. He determined to go and propofe the bufinefs to him ; and as the fellow was preparing to adver tife for luna¬ tics, but had not yet 'got a fingle patient, there was a complete opening for fuch a plan. Fie propofed taking me to fee this in¬ tended guardian of maniacs, and his houfe ; and Lordered"apoit-chaife for that pur¬ pofe, that I might bide myfclf in one cor¬ ner
lier of it; and not. let a living foul detect dne with fuch a companion, , · η As we were going, L enquired if this keeper were an 'Irifliman ?, He .took of¬ fence, and retorted—" What did I mane iC by an Irifliman ? Becafe he* is,a rogue " you think he is an Irifliman ' By the ff holy carpenter you ;nced not cóme to tc e Ireland for that kind of ware ! You " have a vtry ¿ri try breed 1 of-rogues of " your own ! tjjtßut he İs^notlriflı. 'Fleis " one of your owrt fulky Englifli bugs." ■ The defcription was .not inapplicable, for I think I -never beheld a more lower¬ ing, black-browed, eyil-eyed fellow, fince tbe hour I firft fawtight. He had all-the gloom of th« moil irafcible bull-dog/ but without his generous courage. lie feemed more proper to make men mad than cure them of madnefs.' But he had two excel¬ lent qualities for mý purpofe ; poverty,and a difpofition to all ill. ,. '' 'I am got into „excellent company i-;3ut , I care not ! I will on ! All this feemi as· if it were but the prologue to tlie trage- ·' , tt voh* v. с dv.
dy. " But be it that, or be it what it will —-I care nothing for myfelf ; and I have little caufe to care more for them. She never ►had any mercy on me ; and leaft this laft interview, * when I was pleading before her,pompous uncle. I have been obliged to hold -confuí tari¬ ons with thefe ' Satanic rafeáis, to conceit ways and means. The moil fecure we have been able to devife, relative to Hen' ■leyi is to have a -ftraight waiftcoat, to come upon him fuddenly, and to encruft him in tit before he fliall know what we are about. This with a gag will make him fafe. But ttìere muft not be lefs than four fellows, ancf thofe flout ones. ^ Nothing muft be left to ^chance. J Thiee more muft be provided for the lady, of whom Mac Fane himfelf pi opofes to be one. But he means to keep out of fight of Flenley, till he is in cuftody. I have various preparations yet to make. Mac Fane is to go and hire me the empty houfe to-morrow. It is furniflied ; but it muft be aired, for I would not have her die
die a paltry catch-cold death. I wou'd treat her like a gentlewoman in every re¬ fpect but one ; and in that I will have as little companion on her as flie has had on me. It might bave been otherwife ! I came to ber a generpus lover ! I faw her and was amazed at her beauties, captivated-by her enchanting manners, foothed* by her unvaried fweetnefs ! But this fweetnefs flie has turned to gall ! I adored her, and was prepared eternally to adore ! t . But injury followed injury ín fuch quick fuc¬ ceffion that apathy itfelf called aloud for vengeance ! I own il is true what flie faid at her uncle's, that Ί made a refolution not to marry her. But what were my refolutions ? She heifelf couid not but feel flie had the power to break them all. But ihe had not the will, Fairfax ! It ι ankles there ! She hates me, and what is more damnable flie loves another ! -
с 2~* I muft -
- X' muft turn my thoughts again to this detefled mad-houfe man, and the fcenery around it. AIL the avenues muft be ex- * arnined, and all the byè-paths and open roads that lead toward both houfes in¬ fpected, that Mac Fane' and his emif¬ faries may make no blunder. ( I will if poffible keep out of tbe action, but I will be near at hand. ' V have aiecret-wifh, the moment all is over, to fly the odious fcene y for horribly -odious it will'be : but it would have the appearance of cowardice. It muft end tragically ! Not even the poor creatures who ftand in the place of her natural-guar¬ dians, tame as they are, can fuffer fuch an infult. Yet which of them dare look me in the face, and call himfelf my ene¬ my? And, after injuring her, fliall I hefi¬ tate at trampling upon them ? ■ I muft feel my, heart, Fairfax, when I - go to the encounter ; muft recapitulate all my wrongs.· I have them noted down " everally as they occurred ! I need but. ead to rage !" What do I talk?—Read?—· Can
Can I forget them ? No; night nor da) ' They are my familiars. They wake with me, fleep with me,-walk with me, ride with me, glower with me, cuife with me —but never fmile with me. They 'aie become my deareft intimates. I cheriih and hug them to my heart ! Their biting is my only pleaiure ! ч I cannot forget this keeper. He is foul-faced fellow ! Flas a wry look ; a dog* ged, dungeon hue ; of the deepeft dufk and progeny of Beelzebub ! I wonder by whom, where, and-why fuyeh. fellows aie begotten ! There are hoi rid villains in the world! Villains by trade ; that never felt the ftrong impulfe of high-minded paffion; that could breakfaft in an hofpital, dine in aflaughter- houfe, and fup in the fanguinary field of battle, li ilen ing to tbe groans of the man¬ gled ; or tofs them on the points of forks, to fmelt in a heap ! I have heard her talk fomething of thefe depraved natures, and of the times when they are all topetm- manifed. Can you conjecture when, Falr- c S fax?
fax? Yét 'ihe'faid they f fliould be, and I was half inclined to believe her. f - С CLIFTON. • Pa S. I meant to notice that paflage in your letter in which you mention Beaunoir ; but'Iforgóť lit 'till this,moment. So you are at Jail inclined to' think Anna St. Ives muft bé fonie thing more than you every day meet, 1 from the. rapturous (defcription of that-rodomontade Count?.After all I have written/ youť faith wanted the feal of fuch à' lunatic? riad yoii ; forgotten that the time-was when I would have married her ? And did that fay nothing ? f The^Count is preparing for England ? Let him'come ! ' ¡ I remember one of his crazy phràfes and claims .was that he would Бе her champion, ffiould ever bafe knight -attempt to domer harm. - Nor have I for- gotten his intended vifit, received by Hen- " ley,- -May the « winds 'fot fair and-blow him-quickly over! Should he have any fuch frolics' in his brain, we fliall not be long incoming to-terms. « This
This Mac Fane is inceffantly importun¬ ing me to play, and what is ftrange has feveral times excited tbe defire, in me. I 4 took up the dice box, after we had been to tbe mad-houfe., and threw half a dozen cafts át hazard ; but I foon found it was in vain, and checked myfelf. I know I have the compiaud of my own temper in that refpect. I have been reading over this tedious homily, and find it moil ineffably dull.—. But what is to be done ? ]My gaity is gone. My high fpirits are converted into black bile. My thoughts are hellebore J and dead¬ ly night-ihade, and hilarity is for ever poifoned.
с 4 LETTER
Lli'ITER CVIII.
ANNA WENBOURNE SI. IVĽ3 TO LOUISA CLIFTON.
London. Grq/ketior Street. VE I been unjuft to the brother of rny friend } Or had my words the power overhinrto turn him'from a guilty pur¬ pofe?—Well j lather, ay infinitely father let me be a falfe accufer than he culpable! He feeks me no more, offers not to moleft me, and I hope has forgotten me ; at leaft bas feen the error of endeavouring to ac¬ compliih a purpofe fo criminal by means fo bafe. I expected ftorms, but a fweet calm has fucceeded that feems to portend tran¬ quillity and happinefs. AVith refpect to me and Frank, our union appears to be haftening to ajronclu- fion.
Ha
fion. Sir Arthur, impelled forward by his hopes and fears, proceeds though ïeluc- tantly to act contrary to the wiflies of my airogant uncle. Mrs. Wenbourne is 'dif¬ fatisfied ; but her oppofition is feeble, for Edwaid is reconciled to the match ; hav¬ ing no othei motive but the acquifition of a fum of money for his confent to dock the entail ; and of thc~.nanner in which thi's fura will be fquandered we have alttrady had fufficient pLoof. J ¡ 1 underftand Lord Fiťí-Allen affe£ts to credit a report of a vciy ridiculous, though as fome would think İt' of a vciy injuiious nature ; which is that there was a collufion between Fiank Henley and Mac Fane, re- fpeíling my brotlief s gambling affair. The circumflances neccflai y to fendei thisproba- ble are fo violent as immediately to expofe its ab fui di ty, and to make itmatteiofamaze7 ment how fuch·mi afleilion could be in¬ vented, or circulated. What could be' Fiank's motive?—My wife uncle has his anfwer ıeady —" That ' с 5 "pf
" of impofing upon the family in order to ■" ' marry me." *' And what Mac Fane's ? « A bribe" is a fliort phrafe, «and foon faid. I imagine it to be fome dream of my ■úncle^s^who has an aptitude for this kind of invention ; and who having once put a fewtncidents' together that feem to agree, perfuades himfeif with great facility that the fable he has created is fact. 1 Petty calumny like this is wholly incapable of moving Frank Henley. The reftlefs crafty Abimelech has pre¬ vailed on Sir Aitbur to go down with him to Wenbourne-Hill. He well knows how much bis'own power will be increafed by the old habits of Sir Arthur, and tbe eafe with which they can be revived by this his inteiefted abettor. Not but I am well convinced, when once eveiy thing ihall be fettled, and he have no longer any thing to fear from the oppofition of Sir Arthur, he will be аь little a friend to improving as any of us. Various hints which have drop¬ ped from him would have proved this to Sir
Sir Arthur, had }ie not been blind enough to fuppofe that, he being a baronet, honeft; Aby is bound ever to remain his nioft obe¬ dient flave and fteward; forgetting the proofs he has received that Abimelech at prefent is more inclined to command than to obey ; and that when he parts witb money be muft have what he calls the whys and the wherefores. His confidence in Frank however is now fo entire that he has entrufted the trans¬ action of certain money bufinefs to him, neceffaiy on the prefent,occafion, which he came up purpofely to negociate himfelf but which he is now convinced can be done full as prudently and fafely by his fon. But a few months ago, Frank tells me, he petitioned this father in vain for thirty pounds, who now commits tboufands to his keeping. Not but it is from a conviction that there is no propenfity in Frank to wafte one of thofe guineas of which he is fo enamouiéd. Without the leaft love of money, Frank is a rigid economift. The father indulges no с б falfe
falfe wants becaufe it would'be e^penfive ; the fon has none to indulge. Flabits which- in tht: one are the fruits of avarice, in the other are the offspring of wifdom. "Abimelech has fome confufed fufpicion that Fiank acts fiom higher motives than himfelf, and fuch as he does not under¬ ftand; but ftill he hopes they aie all found¬ ed on his own favourite bafis, the love of hoarding. Nor can-lv 3 very well peifuadc himfelf that this love is not the grand mover with all men of fenfe, among whom he now ranks his fon high. ' But ah, Louifa, how diffeient are the views of this worthy, this heavenly-gifted fon ' Fie is anxioufly ftudious to difeovei how he may apply the wealth that may reveit to bim moil to benefit that fociety fiom which it fiift fpiang. The beft applica¬ tion of riches is one of our frequent themes j becaufe it will be one of our fiift duties. The diffufion of knowledge, or more pro- peily of truth, is the one great good to which wealth, genius, and exiftence ought all to be applied. This noble purpofe gives biith
birth to felicity which is in itfelf grand., inexhauftiblc, and eternal. Irlow ineffable is the blifs of having dif¬ covered a friend like Frank Henley, who will not only purfue this beft of purpofes himfelf, but will through life conduct'me in the fame path, will aid my efforts, to promote the great work, and, by a com¬ bination of thofe powers we happen,to' poffefs, will add energy to effort, and per¬ haps render it fifty fold more pervading and effective ! · . Huiband and wife, parent and child are ties which at prefent claim, or rather ex¬ tort a part of our attention. But oh, how poor, how infignificant are tbey, when compared to the claims of eternal juftice ; which bind man to man in equal and im¬ partial benevolence over the face of the whole earth, and render the wandering Arab, who is in need of aid or inftruction from me, as truly my brother as the one my mother gave me. I feem now but beginning the journey of life; and to have fornida companion, guide,
guide, and confoler, like Frank Henley, is furely no common felicity ! May the fates grant my Louifa juft fuch another I A. W. ST. IVES". P. S. You do not think, Louifa„ no I am fure you cannot think that all the ar¬ dour I felt for the recovery of a mind Hke Mr. Clifton's is loft. Far, far otherwife ! I ftill hope to fee him even more than my fondeft reveries have imagined ! ' But I am not the agent ; or at leaft this is not the moment ;' or which is ftill more probable no agent now is' wanted. His mind has been obliged to enquire, and though paffi¬ on may for a time fuppreis truth, its ftruggles will be inceifant ; muft be fo in a mind of fuch activity, and muft at laft be victorious. The grand enemy of' truth is the torpid ftate of error ; for the beginning of doubt is always the beginning of difcovery., Let us then continue to love this man of won¬ derful genius ; not for what he is, but what he fliall be..
'2 LET-
LETTER CIX.
FRAïTK HENLEY то OLIVER TRENCHARD.. London, Grofutnor-Streetr OH, Oliver, how fair is tlie profpect before me ! How fruitful of felicity, bow abundant in blifs ! Yes, my friend, jointly will we labour, your moil worthy father, you/ I, Anna, her friend, and all the con¬ verts wc can make to truth, to promote the great end we' feek ' We will form a little band which will daily increafe, will fweU to ¿ a multitude, ay, till it embrace tbe whole human fpecies ! , Surely, Oliver, to be furniflied with fo many of themeans of promulgating univer¬ fal happinefs is no fmall bleflmg. My feel¬ ings
ings are all rapture ! And yet if I know my heart, 'tt is not becaufe I have gained a felfiih folitary good - T but becaufe I live in an age when light begins to appear even in regions that have hitherto been thick darknefs t and that I myfelf am fo highly fortunate as to be able to contribuie to the great, the unherfal caufe; the progreis of truth, the extlrparion of error, and the ge¬ neral perfection of mind ! I and thofe dear friends I have named; v^ho are indeed dear becaufe of their ardent and uniform Jove of .virtue ! ' Neither, Oliver, are ali our hopes of Clifton loft. Anna thinks, and fo do I, that he has heard too much ever to forget it all : or rather that he has a mind fo pe¬ netrating, and fo eternally bufy, that, hav¬ ing been once led to enquire, it is fcarcely in the power of accident wholly to impede the pro§ T efs of enquiry. And fliould ac¬ cident be favourable, that progrefs would indeed be rapid ! By his intercourfe with Anna, his mind is become impregnated with the feeds of truth Ç and furely the foil is
îs too rich for thefe feeds not to fpring, bud, and bear a plenteous harveft. Ay, Oliver, fear not. It is not the beauty of the picture that feduces, but tlie laws of neceflity, which declare the refult for which we hope to be inevitable. ' My prefent ftate of happinefs nieets fonie flight check from, incidental circumftances, not in my power to guide. My father and - Sir Arthur are doing what I believe to be a right thing, but from wrong motives. The prodigal Edward, from a very diffe¬ rent avarice of enjoyment, is eager to dock the entail. Tlie fum he is co receive will foon be fquandered, and he will then be as eager to imagine himfelf treated with injuftice ; and will conceive himfelf left half to perifh with want,, if his accuftomed diflipation be not fupplied. But that it muft not be. If we can teach him better 'we wiU; if not he muft be left to repine and accufe, and we muir patiently fuffer the error which we cannot cure. • Lord Fitz-Alien indulges himfelf .in thinking as much Ш of me as hs can, and in
in fpeaking all he thinks. But this is in¬ deed a trifle. I know that the miftakes of his mind, fituated as he is, are incurable ; and to grieve or feel pain for what cannot be t avoided is neither the act of wifdom nor of virtue. 1 F. HENLEY.
LETTER CX.
FRANK HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCHARD. London, G«ofvenor Street. 1 DID not intend to have written again fo foon, but an incident has occuiied which perplexes all reafoning upon it, and again engenden» doubt. It relates to Clif¬ ton. t > Γ lafl night attended Anna to Covent- Garden playhoufe, where about eight o'clock
o'clock I was obliged to leave her, having an appointment with fome gentlemen in the city relative to my father's money af¬ fairs at that hour 3 which having fettled, it was agreed I iliould return in the carriage for Anna before the play was ended, to conduct her home. Accordingly having met my men of bufinefs, whom on Friday next I am to meet again to receive eight thoufand pounds, I drove back to Covent Garden. -> It was then about ten o'clock. The coachman flopped at the Piazza. I alighted ; but, as I was ftepping out of the carriage, whom fliould I fee but the gambler and highwayman, 'Mac Fane, linked arm in arm with Mr. Clifton ! I was ftruck with amazement, as well I might be. A thoufand confufed doubts fucceeded to each other, which I had nei¬ ther time nor indeed power to unravel. -1 '- However it feemed to mb almoft impofc fible that Mr. Clifton fliould know the man, and fuffer himfelf to be feen nj'pub- lic with fuch a character. For certainly a want
want of felf-refpedt is pot one of the ha · bitual miftakes of Mr. Clifton. I flopped fome little time in this ftate of perplexity, but at \ lafl concluded it would be highly culpable in me to leave Mr. Clifton igno¬ rant of the character of bis acquaintance. They had gone toward King-ftreet, and I haftened after them. ţ I foon came up with them, and addreff¬ ing myfelf to Mr. Clifton, faid-— St Sir, it " is incumbent on me to inform you of ff a particular of which I imagine you are " ignoiant. The name w of the man you <f are in company with is Mac Fane. " You have heard his hiftory. Fie is the * f gambier who endeavoured to defraud " Captain St. Ives of three thoufand " pounds." î I have before acquainted thee, Oliver, of the ferocious character of this Mac Fane ; pf which I have now had further proofs. I had fcarcely finiflied my pbiafe before he replied, with one of his accuf- tomary oaths— <ť You're a fcoundrel and " aliar"
« a liar"—and immediately made a blow at me. Being previoufly on my guard, and watchful of his motions, I ftepped quickly back, and he miffed me and leeled. This was in King-Street, where I oveitook them. I turned back, intending not to notice Ыь infult^ but he'was too much^ enraged to fuffer me to efcape, unlefs I had thought proper to run. Fie is a very mufcular fel¬ low, and confident of his own ftrength. No man could be more determined than I was to avoid fo abfurd a conteft, had it been poffible ; but it was not. *He made feveial blows at me, two or thiee of which took effect, befoie I returned one of them. But finding that I muft be obliged to beat him in order to get rid of him, and that there was abfolutely no other mode, I began my taik with all neceffary determi¬ nation. ( L The mob collected apace, and we were piefently furrounded by paffengers, wait¬ ers, chairmen, footmen, hackney-coach¬ men
men and link-boys. ( It was a ftrange dif- gufting fituation ; but it did not admit of a remedy. This fellow, Mac Fane, has ftudied the whole fcbool of aftault, and is a pra£tifed pugilift. When I was a boy thou knoweil, Oliver, and before thy wor¬ thy father bad taught me better, I was myfelf vain of my ikill and prowefs. I was not therefore the novice which he ex¬ pected to "have found. Not to mention, Oliver, that energy of mind, if it be real and true energy, is itfelf, without any fuch contemptible knowledge, fufficient to overcome the ftrongeft efforts of ty- raniiy. "' Of this ï prefently made Mr. Mac Fane fenfible. After the very firft onfet, he felt himfelf cowed ; which 'increafed his rage fo much that lie endeavoured to have recourfe to the' moft malignant and ciuel expedients to obtain victory. This obliged me to give bim feveral hard and very dangerous ^blows, which T fliould otherwife have been cautious of doing, and
and the effects of which he will for fome time continue to feel. , ι \ Fie fought however with great obfti- nacy, and in a manner wbich proved bow much his ambition was wounded by being conquered. The mob, as in all fuch cafes, chofe different fides; but much the greateft part was for me. They lèverai times faw the malicious and evil intentions 'of Mac, Fane ;" and he once received a blow for them, from one of the affiftants, which made him more guarded. It is" delightful to the philofopher to perceive bow, even in error, juftice ftrug¬ gles to fliew itfelf. Thofe rules which are the laws of honour to the mob originate in this noble principle : and never is the in¬ fraction of juftice more' dangerous than at fuch moments, when the mind,is awaken¬ ed to full exertion. Still it was a painful and degrading fitu¬ ation ! Wert thou ever at the mercy of a mob ? 'Didft thou ever feel the lirtlenefs of thy own faculties, when' N exerted to make' a confufed multitude act rationally, at
at-the very time that thou thyfelf wert ap¬ parently acting like a fool or a madman ? If fo, Oliver, thou canft conceive fome¬ thing of the contempt which I felt formy- feif. during this fcene. Can a general, thinkeft thou, if he be really a fit perfon to be a general, feel otheiwife in the heat of battle ? For I am miftaken if armies of the beft difciplined men, brought into action, do not moie or lefs become a mob. And added to this fenfe of imbecility, what muft the geneiaľs feelings ?be the next morning, when he goes to view the wretched fcene of his own making ? Does he go to view it, thinkeft thou, or does he ihun the fight ?—If he go he is a fiend ; and if he ftay away heis worfe ! The battle being ended, and the rage of Mr, A Fac Fane, though peihaps increafed, obliged to reftrain itfelf, there ftood I, fur¬ rounded by my applauding admirers, fuf* fering a thoufand ridiculous interrogatories, and confined to the fpot for the want of clothes ! My hat and coat I had commit¬ ted" tb one perfon, and my watch and purfe to'
to another ; taking it for granted the latter would have been ftolen from me if I had not, as was actually the fact, for my breeches pockets were turned infide out. I had rightly concluded that th'e chances were more favourable in trufting to a per¬ fon I fliould felect, than to the honefty of a niob İn the confines of Co vent-Garden. I was fortunate : the whole of my move¬ ables again made their appearance; and it gave me great pleafure, becaufe I had trufted my purfe and watch to'a poor fel¬ low. 'Ihe confeioufnefs of his own ho¬ nefty was a greater pleafure to" him than the recompenfe he received from me ; though I thought it my duty to reward him libcially. Befide he had feeirme ill treat¬ ed, and had conceived an affection for me, or more properly for the juftice of my caufe. and he rejoiced exultingly in my victory. , I efcaped from the flioiits and congra¬ tulations of my greafy well-meaning com¬ panions as fail as I could ; and after a fur¬ ther delay of ftepping into a coffee-houfe, to wafli and adj uft my appearance as well ..vol. v. d as
аз circumftances ( would permit, I joined Anna,*who began to be alarmed, the play being over and the houfe almoft empty. I,faw no more of Clifton. But that af¬ fords me no clue. If he were before un¬ acquainted with Mac Fane, he would haften from fuch a companion with vexa¬ tion and contempt: and if the contiary, his chagrin at being feen by me would equally induce him to ili un us. Mind, as I have always remarked^, Oliver, and as I have before reafoned with thee relative to hiin, İs flow in ridding itfelf of the habits of prejudice, even when prejudice itfelf feems to have ceafed. 'Tis true that conjectures dìfadvanta- gcous to Clifton have, when Anna and I wei С confidering this incident, intiuded themfelves forcibly upon us : but they were only conjectures, and I hope ill founded. Indeed tbey are improbable ; for Clifton could not knowingly league himfelf with a man like Mac Fane, except for pmpofes too"black or too dcfpeiate for even paflions fo violent as his to enteitahv I know
ï know mind to be capable of aftonifli- ing miftakes ; nor can I pretend, when I recollect the proofs on record, to fay what are the boundaries of error; nor indeed what are the boundaries of probability. But I think Clifton could not make him¬ felf the affociate of Mac Fane ! I fliould pronounce more boldly ftill, but that I cannot conceive how it was pof¬ fible for a character fo legible and grofs, as that of this gambler, to impofe for a moment on Coke Clifton ; acquainted as he is-with the world, and accuftomed to detect and fatirize what he underftands to be abfurdity ! I can only fay, if he be proceeding in error fo flagrant and deep as this, he is a man much to be feared, bul more to be pitied. Г. ITĽNLEY.
d 2 LETTER
LETTER CXI/
COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Dover Street. /\GAIN and again, Fairfax, this is an infernal world ! A vile, difgufting, defpi- ,cable, ' befőtted afs of a world ! Exiftence in it is not worth accepting; and the foorier we fpurn it from us the better we ihall aflcrt.our claim to'the dignity and wifdom of which it is deftituré. Τ low do I defpife the blundering info¬ lent fcoundrel with whom I am linked! Flow defpicable am I to myfelf J Tlafi night mťť the fellow again at the Shakefpeare. Of all his dirty qualities, not one of them is fo tormenting as his fa¬ miliar
miliar impudence ! There is no repreffing. it except by cutting his throat ; a bufinefs «at which he is always alert., Nothing'de¬ lights him fo much as to talk of extinguifli-- ing men, treading out their fouls, feeding, upon their life-time, and other ftrange re¬ volting phrafes, all of the fame fanguinary fort. , - ' f Having confulted with him concerning" the feizure of Anna and Franks and 'con¬ cluded that the affair fliould be ended' as fpeedily as poffible, I wiflied tó have' ffiaken him off and retired : but the thing was impracticable. I do not choofe that my own carriage fhould attendme on^efo· expeditions ; and as it was a rainy night, I knew the difficulty of getting a coach. I therefore ftaid an hour till the entertain¬ ment ffiould be begun, and the Piazza probably more clear. As there is no fitting in bis company without fome fpecies of gaming, for 'his whole cpnverfation, that fubject excepted, confifts of oaths,, duels, and the impudent fcoundrels he has put out of the'world, I« d 3 ' took
took a few throws at hazard with him ; and, as I was very careful to call for frefli dice and to watch his motions, I was a winner; hazard peihaps being the fail eft of all games, if the dice be not foul. He ian over bis ufual litany of being pigeoned, and about ten o'clock I left play, and de¬ termined to fally foi th ; being apprehen- iive of engaging too deeply at the game, if I ftaid longer. The moment we had defcended the ftairs he impudently laid bold of my arm. My blood boiled, Fairfax ! Yet I was obliged to fubmit. This was not all! The precautions I had taken were but a kind of prefentiment of the vexation that was preparing for me. J uft as we quitted the door of the tavern, who fliould bolt upon us but the hated Henley ' I fliook with the broad fliame ! My teeth gnaihed cuifes ! How willingly could I have piftoled him, Mac Fane, every being that eyed me, and ftill more willingly myfelf' But there v/as nothing for it but to walk on,
ón, and feem not to fee bim. He however would not fuffer me to depart without'a double dofe of damnation ! The fame infernal officioufnefs, with which from the firit moment he faw me to the lafl he has been feized, came upon him ; and though I hurried through the Piazza to efcape, like a perjurer from the pillory, he pnrfucd us- purpofely to inform me I was İn company with a rafcal, and to warn me' of my danger. - v I never can recollect my own fituation, without an· impufe to fnatch up the firft implement that would deprive' me of a confeioufnefs fo deteftable ! k . The irafcible fury of the bully rid me of my tormentor ; he immediately affaulted Flenley, and I haftened away from two beings fo almoft equally abhorrent, but from caufes fo oppofite. On the following evening, having ano¬ ther appointment with the gambling ι af¬ eai, I took care to have a coach waiting, and to go muffled up and difguifed as much as poffible. But for once my n 4 caution
, caution was fuperfluous. No Mac F^ne appeared. ' / Not knowing what had happened, and it being night, and I thus properly equip¬ ped, I refolved to drive to bis lodgings.— Being there I fent up my name, and was admitted to tbe bed-chamber of this doughty exterminator,of men. If tbe temper of my mind weie not obnoxious to all cheerfulnefs, I could almoft have laugh¬ ed, the bully was fo excellently beaten, mortified, and enraged! His head.was bound up, his eyes were plaiftered, his thumb fprained, his body of all colours, and his mind as hotly fevered as Alexán-· der's itfelf could have been, had Alexander been vanquiflied at the battle of íífus ! His impatience to have Tlenley in his power is now almoft pbrenfy ; and it will be phrsnfy itfelf wben he comes to find, as find he will, that though he can tie the hands öf Henley his conqueft muit end there, and that the prifoner wiH ftill defy- and contemn his jailor. So would I have him. Henley, though I hate, I cannot but refpect
refpect and admire. The other is a crea¬ ture I deteft myfelf forever having known ! Yet who but he could have gratified the unabating burning paffion of my heart ϊ¬ ί feel, Tairfax, as if I had taken my leave of hope, joy, and human intercom fe ! I have a quarrel with the whole race, for having been forced into exiftence and into mifery ! I have fuffeied an accumulation of difgrace, for which I can never pardon myfelf! And (bail I permit the authors of it to live undifturbed in their infult and triumph over me ? No, by hell, come of me what will ' Lower I cannot be in my own efteem than I aheady am: tremble thofe who made me fo ! Beatinghasbut rendered this lafcal more impatient and active. Eveiy thing is pie- pared. The houfe is hired, aiied, <o-¿ provided wiji a proper guardian. Ίι,ο madman keeper has all his implemer·* ready. We have now only to watch atu' catch them at a pi opp r dtftancj fiom :li fuccour, to which in their anici ous waikb they have frequently ftrayed, n 5 Though
Though even you, Fairfax, feem to dif¬ approve my conduct, I care not. Not to give your e - further trouble with what you call fuch pofitive prudes might be a very good maxim for you, who love your eafe too much ever to be fenfible of the boiling emotions of, a foul like mine ! You are Guy Fairfax ; I am Coke Clifton. Not but I fliould have imagined the fwelling volumes of injuries I have communicated would -have lighted ,up a fympathetic flame of retributive vengeance even in you, which not all your phlegm could have quenched But no matter—Though heaven, earth, and bell were to face me frowning, I would on' My purpofe is fixed: letit but be accompliihed, and confequences to my¬ felf will be the leaft of all my <;ares. С CLIFTON»
LETTER
LETTER CXIL
COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX, London, Dovei 'Street. OlNCE the world began, never yet had fcroundrel wight fo many damning accef¬ fary incidents to contend with, as I have had during the whole progrefs of this af¬ fair ! AU hell feems bufy to blacken me ! —I have done the deed—Theyare fecure —But the hour of exultation itfelf is em¬ bittered, and the legitimate tiiumph of vcnee&iiLe made to wear the face of bafe- nefs —I have them ; but as ï tell you there is an event, that happened the very mo¬ ment preceding the feizure, which feems to have been contrived by the moil malig¬ nant of the fiends of darknefs, puipofely to ileep me in„guilt indelible* ! n б After
After our myrmidons bad been three days in vain upon the watch, on Friday laft Anna and Henley fallied forth, about two in the afternoon, to take one of their amo¬ rous rambles. As ufual they were follow¬ ed by Laura, who had fent me word of their intention, which flie bad learnt at breakfaft time. Henley it feems had pre- vioufly been into tbe city. < A fcout was on the watch, and when they appeared foon brought the intelli¬ gence. AU was in readinefs. The keeper with three ftout fellows in one party, and Mac Fane with four more in another.— The earlinefs of their fetting out denoted tbey intended to lengthen their walk. The great danger was that it fliould have been directed to Kenfington Gardens, as it has been feveral times lately ; but in this in¬ stance fortune was on our fide. They went into the park, paffed the gardens, walked bçfide the wall, croifed the Kenfington road, and ftrayed exactly as we could have wiihed into tbe fields in* «lining toward Brompton. I was
I was on hoifeback, and by the help of a pocket telefcope kept them in view,, without the danger of being feen, while they were in the park; but as foon as they had left it I thought it neceflary to fpur on, and be re~ady to pievcnt any blundeis, I crofted the road down the lane at tbe run> pike, palfed them, and faw them arm in arm. The fight was infupportable ! From what afterward happened they muft have feen me too, though I imagined myfelf under covci of the hedge. You know my determination nor to be robbed; and indeed robbery at fuch a time* and in fuch a place, was a thing I had little reafon to expeQ. But a fellow, who was lying in ambufli at the turn of the lane, calculated differently. He imagined nobody to be near, and fuddenly prefent¬ ed himfelf and bis piftol, with a demand; of my money. I made a blow at him with the butt end of my whip, which mifled his head, but fell on his ihoulder. My horfe ftarted, he fired and miffed, but fprung fuddenly for r wardi
ward, and feized hold of the bridle. He had another piftol which he was preparing, imagining I fliould be more intimidated when I found him fo defperate. All this happened immediately after I had paffed Anna and Henley; and the latter perhaps having feen the fellow, and certainly hav¬ ing heard the pifiol, flew in an inftant, leaped the hedge, and juft as tbe robber was again prefenting his piftol, made a blow and knocked it out of his hand. 'The piftol y> ent off,"and the fellow took to his heels. Henley, inftead of purfuing him, ftayed to enquire with much earneit- nefs whether I had received any hurt. , At this very damning fpeck of time, Fairfax, the keeper andhisfcoundrels who had been doggmgHhem came up. There 'were four of them : two before and two behind. The undaunted Henley feverally knocked down the two fellows in front, and in an inftant would undoubtedly have been far enough out of all reach; bur, "in the very act of ftriking the fécond rafcal, he received a blow from a bludgeon, dealt Ъу
by the blood-hound keepe", which levelled him with the earth. Never did my lieart feel a twinge like that.moment ! I thought he was dead !—■ He lay motionlefs ; notwithftanding which the infernal keeper continued his occupa¬ tion with unconcern, turned the unrefift- ing body over, flipped on the ftraight waiftcoat, and bound down his arms. At length he gave a groan I The inftant I heard it I galloped off, full fpeed. It was too much for heart to endure! I foon afterward heard him fliout for aid more than once, but to this they prefently put a flop, by forcing a gag into his mouth. They were not very far diftant from the houfe where he was to be confined, and to which he was immediately hurried away.— There he at prefent remains. His morn¬ ing dialogues, his noon-day walks, and bis nightly raptures are ended. They are things paft, never more to return ! Of that torment at leaft I have rid myfelf; and others compared to that are blifs inef¬ fable !
fable ! ï had fworn it fliould 'not be ! They might have read the oath largely written. on my brow, and ought inftinčtively to have known it to be the decree of fate ! No, Fairfax ! I never aiked a favour from him : never by my own confent re¬ ceived one ! Not all the tortures of all tbe tyrants the earth ever beheld fliould have extorted a confent fo degrading ! His re¬ peated inteifercnce was buta repetition ofinfult, and as fuch deferves only to be remembered. I aiked not life at his hands; and giving life, inftead of a bleifing, he did but give torture ! The gift was de¬ leitable and tbe giver ! Had I peiiflied, he might have been fafc and I at reft. I aiked not charity of him. No ! On any terms I abhor exiftence ; but on thofe, darknefs and bell are not fo hateful I It has ulcerated my heart, which not even vengeance itfelf I find has now the power to heal. For life I am made mifeiablej but it fliall not bea fingle mifeiy !
While
While the keeper was acting his part of this gloomy drama, Mac Fane, ' as you may well imagine, was not idle. Fie and his unhallowed fcQundrels prefently made fcizure of the lovely Anna. She ftood confufed and half terrified at the fudden flight of her enamóralo ! She was more confufed, more terrified at tbe fudden ар - peai ance of her ravifhers ! I charged the fcoundrels on their lives to ufo her tender¬ ly ! But what know fuch hell-hounds of tendernefs ? She made I find a brave and by them unexpected refinance : but there were too many of them, and it was in vain! Mac Fane himfelf is amazed at her beauty ; and harangues in his coaife and uncouth jargon on the cneigy and dignity of her deportment, in a manner which thews that even he was awed. They weie obliged however forcibly to nop her cries. This I imagined would be th« cafe, and I had provided them with a white cambric handkerchief. But what will
will not the touch of fuch unconfecrated rafeáis defile ? Yes, Fairfax, they laid their prophane hands on her, clafped her in their loath" fome arms, polluted her with their foul fingeis! The embrace of a Clifton flie might peihaps pardon ; but this violation flie never can ! Well then, let her add this injury to the reft ! I know her to be my enemy : fworn, rooted, and irrevocable ! And why fliould I tag regret to my fum of wretchednefs ? No ! I will at leaft enjoy a moment of triumph, however tranfitory ! Let her de¬ fpife me, but flie fliall remember me too 1 Give me but this brief blifs, and there I would wifli exiftencc to end ! Ihat ex¬ cepted pleafure there is none for me ; and of pain I am weaiy. Yes! I will glut my foul with this foii.taiy, "fliort rapture ; and contemn the ftorms that may fucceed ! I fear them not, fhall glory iathem, and be glad to find foes, if fuch fliould arife, with whom contention will not be difgrace ! I wilh and feek them. Their appearance would
would give me employment, and employ¬ ment would give me cafe, and eafe would be heaven ! C. CLIFTON.
LETTER CXIII. COKE CLIFTON. TO . ,CIÍY FAíllKAX.
London, Daver Strief,- A LARAI has- founded her horn. The family is all confufion, all doubt, hurry, fruitlcfs enquiry, and indecifion. The ab¬ fence of Anna and Henley at dinner threw' Mrs. Clarke into confternation ; for Sir Arthur is v down at Wenbourne-Hill, with old Henley and his fon Edward." Each is indulging
'indulging his dreams'of improvement, mairiage, docking of entails^ and other projects, to which I have put an eternal flop. Finding the evening advance, and that the two prifoners did not appear, the houfekeeperient to the aunt, Wenbourne. She heard the ftory and was amazed. She knew nothing of them. Ten o'clock came, and terror increafed. A meffenger was difpatched to Lord Fitz- Allen ; and he could not at firft tell whe¬ ther to be forry or glad, for be did not an » inftant forget to hope that it was fome raf- cally act on the part of Henley. He fent for the houfekeeper. She came, and be interrogated her. The anfwers lhe gave did not pleafe him, for the tendency of all his queftions was to the difadvantage and crimination of Henley, whom flie pcrtinacioufly defended. She affirmed fo pofitively,. and fo violently, that it could not be any plan or evil intention of his, that the proud lord was half angry but half obliged to doubt. I took caie to be in the way, expecting as
,as it happened that a meffage would'be fent to me. I immediately -attended his" lordfliip, and learned all that 1 have been relating. I condoled him, and pretended to pity tbe family; not ^neglecting to lead his,thoughts mto the channel that would beri ferve my purpofe, and to recapitulate -every circumftance I could remember, or invent, that fhould induce him to believe Flenley and Anna bad eloped ; but' affecting candour, and pretending to argue againil the poffibility of fuch a fuppofition. The effect I intended was produced.-'- lie was fully convinced of Henley's being alow, felfifli, contemptible fcoundrel;. ,and Anna a forward, difobedient, infolent mifs. ■ - ì I offered my fervices to purfue them, and preíľed hts acceptance of ihem vio¬ lently ; b;it was careful to counteract the offer, by fliewing tbe" impoffibility of their being overtaken, and by exciting him ra¬ ther to wifli for their efcape, that Anna might be flagrantly difgraced, and his pe¬ netration,
' netration and authority vindicated to the whole world. r I did not neglect, before the departure of Mrs. Clarke, to difplay all my eager¬ nefs, by .fending round to numerous inns and ftable-keepers, to enquire whether any poft-chaife had been hired, that fliould any way accord with the circumftances. Other meffengers were difpatched, by my advice, to the different turnpikes ; and a third fet fent off to various watch-houfes, to enquire whether any intelligence could be obtained of accidental deaths, or other mifchances. In fliort, I was very diligent to hurry the legs of the fervants and the brains of their governors into every direction, but the right; and thus for a little while in forne fort diverted myfelf, with the vaga¬ ries of the fools upon whom I was playing. One chop-fallen runner trod upon the heels of another, each with a repetition of his diverfified nothings; till his lordfliip thought proper to recollect it was time for his dig¬ nity to ι etire, and not further difturb itfelf on
on perfonages and circumflances fo dero¬ gatory. ' ■] > - In the morning I was careful to be with him again. I break failed with him,-and reiterated the fame firing of doubts, con¬ jectures, alarms, and infinuations. Airs. Clarke returned. She had been up all night, and her looks teftified the diftrefs of her mind. She propofed fend; ing an exprefs after Sir Arthur : of, the propriety of which I endeavoured to make the uncle doubt ; but flic was too zealous, and her oratory bad too much paflion, to be counteracted without danger. I there¬ fore, when I faw refinance vain, became the moil eager advifer of the meafure. ■ľ о There is no merit in impofing, upon ftu- pidity fo v grofs as that of this fupercilious blockhead. Mrs. Clarke would be much more to be feared, but that what flie may fay will be much lefs regarded. Her af¬ fection for Anna is extreme, and a high proof of the excellent qualities of her mif¬ trefs. Nor was flie one whit lefs enthufiaftic in
ji£ to' i^raife øf Hesleg. Notwithftaîiding the forbidding frowns and reproofs of his lord ili ip, lb« шй over his whole hiftory ; and dwelt particularly on an act of bene- у©1ейсе* done by bim to her niece; that Ъеюсг a circumftance that had come inmie- dmteíy within her knowledge. She fpoke with fach a fervour and overflow of heart that fiie онсе or twice moved ше. She perceived fomethmg of tbe ridicu¬ lous compunction I feïr, and íêlí on her knees, wrang my band, and adjured me, in a tone ^>f very extraordinary emphafis, to fave her dear, her precious young lady. I fcarcely could recover myfelf fufficientíy to afk her which way it was in my power to fave ber ; and to turn the converfation, by exclaiming *o the peer—" Ah ! Flad <f fhe but allowed me tbe happinefs and " honour of being ber protector, I think * T no man would have dared to do her « barm." Iheold houfekeeper however continued* and began to denounce impending and in¬ evitable evil on tbe perfecutors of Henley 4 and
and Anna. I have no doubt íhe glanced at me, and that her miftrefs had informed her of the tfmrnph gained over me. Why ay ! I íhould indeed have been the fcoíF of the very rabble, had I not taken ven¬ geance for my wrongs 1 Yet ber denunciations feemed prophe¬ tic : or rather were feeble defcriptions of the excruciating pangs by which I am hourly gnawn ! I grew weary of the dull farce, and put an end to it as fpeedily as I conveniently could ; leaving uis fage lordfhip with the full conviction that the fudden difappear» ance of Henley, and his niece, could no otherwife be accounted for but by wilful elopement. ■ I am now preparing for a very different vifit. A vifit of vengeance ! I expect no pleafure, no gratification but that alone ! To prove the danger of injury done to me, to puniili the perpetrators, to exult at their lamentations, and to look down with con¬ tempt at all menace, or retribution, is now my laft remaining hope ! Let me but en¬ voi,, v. s joy
joy this, and all other expectation I wil¬ lingly relinquifli !—I am going-—! have them in my grafp !—They fliall feci me now !— C. CLIFTON.
LETTER CXIV. ANNA WENBOURNE ST, IVES TO XOUISA CLIFTON. VV HERE I am, what is to become of me, or whether I am ever to fee my Lou¬ ifa more, are things of whicli I am utterly ignorant. I write not with an expectation that my friend fliould read, but to memo¬ randum eyents of which perhaps the world will neve: hear; and which, fliould this paper by any accident be preferved, it wil] fcarcely believe. This
This vile Clifton—[Surely I ought never again to call him my Louifa^s bi.other—] This perverfe man has grown defperate in enor ! The worft of my foicbodings bave not equalled his intents ! Flis plan has long been mifchief ! Hypocrify, уюЪпсе, rape, no means are too foul !—Such things are incomprehenfible ! I am confined in a lone houfe, fome- where behind Knightibridge. I was feiz¬ ed I know not how by a band of ruffians^ and conve)ed hither. Every kind of def¬ picable deceit appears to have been prac¬ tifed. F~ank was decoyed fiom me. ríe flew once again to fave the life, as he thought, of this bafo-minded man. 1 know not what is become of him, buc have no doubt that he like me is fome- wherc fuffering imprifonment, if he be peimitted yet to live. No thoughts aie fo tragical, no fuf¬ picions fo horrid as not to be juftified, by deductions and appearances whicii are but too piobable. Yet I will not fink under difficulties, nor be appalled at the fight e 2 of
»of danger ; be it death, or what elfo it *may. Thať I am in a ftate of jeopardy my feizure -and imprifonment prove. That Frank is ftill in greater peril, if ftill in ex- 'iftence, 'I have juft caufe to conclude. There were piftols fired, and one after he leaped the" hedge ; I know not at whom directed, nor what its fate!—I would if poffible ward off apprehenfion. I know it to be folly, and I will endeavour to fleel my heart againft this as well as other mif- takes. If he be dead, or if he be to die, grief will not revive or make him invul- nerabľe. His own virtue muft picfcrve liim, or nothing can ; and in that I will confide. That evil is meant to me it would be abfurd to doubt; but of what nature, where it is to begin, or where end, that time muft- difclofe. For I will not permit myfelf to imagine the trifling indignities, or violence I have hitherto encountered, -an evil woithy of complaint. 'Tis true my arms are bruifed, and I was rudely dealt with by the vile men who feized
feized me : and that there iliould be fuch· men is an evil. But to me it is none; or not worth a thought. If I would firmly meet what is to come, I muft not weakly bewail what is paft. Iam not immortal, neither is my ftrength' infinite i but the powers I have I will ufe. Wc are offener vanquiflied becaufe we aie fearful than becaufe we are feeble. Our debility takes birth in our cowardice, and true fortitude is not to be abaihed by tri¬ fling dangers. I meant to write a narrative, but thefe reflections are forced upon me by my fitu¬ ation. I will proceed.
I was brought here, on Friday #***#, by feveral men of vulgar but ferocious i -'countenances; and my maid Laura with me. I made all the refiftanee in my power ; and lhe men, without any regard to what I fuffered in body or mind, twiftcd my arms behind mc, fo that I imagined one of them had been difloca'ted, and r. 3 forced
■'ANŇA. : .ST^;iýfes .::'■■ ■:0Tcëïïi ja /handkerchief into; my mouth;: ' r handİhıg^töflihğ,; : : an^'ğfipm put :äflyV; : refp'ect 'whatever fo^décency or '' ! paîıV,'--;Îill tìièy iíádícoiiveýecí mc". from-the' ■fields,.in vyhich"ï,was walking with Frank ;Hénley,^tp ľ thb pläé'e where I am.'. ■,..-'■; T.fcäŕcely can. gueis ať'tíie diftance ; but : the)',^hurried iii e.-ííwáý with great violence, с roiling feveral gateé, ;. äiiď forcing aper¬ tures through hedges, for the fpace: I be¬ lieve^ of;licit mofe than half aii Hour: it mi°:ht bemüch lefs. ■'■■/ ; ; -. ; /They brpUghf hie to ä höufe 'wállèd round':; into vvliiehliaving been admitted by an oldwoman, they hurried me for¬ ward up ftairs, and ih ut me into a room . decently furniflied,'with a fire in it and a becí-phamSei* adjoining.; but with the win-" ddWs barfed up, and in which' every pré¬ caution Had evidently béëh -taken to render eïcïtpë im^raciicäble. . , ' : '·\ >; ï^üta; wás iìiiit up.with ^ nie ;.ä"nd there "Vváö 'ä Шр df jpäper ön the table', oh which' T ' was written^V/Laura is aìlowèd t'oiètòH'·/' c ^ whatever yöüniáy want 4 L-et her ring· 1 . : the ■
the bell, and the door will be opened."— The hand-writing was Mr. Clifton's. Among other neceffaries, there was a book-cafe, furniflied with the woiks of fome of the beft autliois ; and a writing- deik, with pens, ink, and paper. The fame old woman that opened the gate for the men, who brought me, con¬ ftantly comes to open the door for Laura, when [ ring. But this (lie does with great caution. A chain, fimilar to what is com¬ mon for ftieet-doors, is hung on tbe out¬ fide ; which flie puts up, and looks to fee that I am not near, every time ihe opens the door. The firft time flie came I ftood r juft behind Laura, and in a morofc tone ihe bade me go back, or ilie would lock the door again. After Laura had been feveral times down flairs, I enquired what difcoveries flie had made; and, as the informs me the houfe appears to have no inhabitants ( but this old woman and ourfelves. The ; old woman refides in the kitchen. The doors and windows are all fecurbd ; and в 4 the
the fame care is taken to prevent efcape below ftairs as above. The food that has been brought us was good, and well dreffed, but almoft cold. Laura fays flie is fure it cannot be dreifed in the houfe, which is moil probable. I communicate but few of my thoughts to Laura, becaufe I fear I have good rea¬ fon to be fufpicious of her. I have long remarked her partiality in .favour of Mr. Clifton, intermixed with fome contradic¬ tory appearances, which I could not folve atvthe time, but which I now believe to have been aukward attempts lo conceal that partiality, and to miflead me ; which flic in part effected. The bafe defigns of Mr. Clifton, from the nature of them, cannot have been very recent; and nothing peihaps was more neceffary, to carry them jnto execution, than the feducing of the woman who by ber fituation could give him the beft intel¬ ligence. c -Since I have begun to doubt her, I havç purppfely crofs-queftioned her occafionally, nnd
and flie has anfwered with hefitation and incohercncy. If however I can perceive the leaft hope that this letter fliould be conveyed to the poft-office, by any perfon who may vifit the houfe, and whom flie may fee but I cannot, I will truft it to her. The truft indeed is nothing, for it cannot increafe my peril. The perfecution of Mr. Clifton muft prove moft pernicious to him¬ felf. Unlefs he can deprive me of con=- fcious innocence,, it can injure me but little.
Among other ambiguous circumftances reflecting Laura, fhe fcarcely feems to repine at her confinement : thougrťflie has feveral times affected uneafinefs, which while flie acted it fhe evidently did not feel. Befide flie is permitted to ftay be¬ low, and run about the houfe ; which, whaLever caution of bars and bolls may have been ufed, flie would not be fuffeied to do, as I fliould fuppofe, were flie íeaJly in my intereft. e 5 About
'■i 'About !aW'Hòur.;-4^ tbéll, ring;ànçl thbigafé. opéň,;,and íllè ■ was 'è äger tÖ go 'down. ' Γ eiic'òu'ràg'èd her, , and flie 'rung for our ;;Шпкёу.;;$Ьё Kad 'feeri.· fine; writing, 1 ándy withÒiii being fpókèri to, took upon liér tõ fuppofe iţ 'was a letter töiiiy Löüiia, arid ťplď. : me 'flïé 'dia believe ■me could get it òpriveyed tò thè pofi. ЧГ âm peffùaclë'd 'this is' 'prëconoèriëdofficiouf- ïiéis. .." But-as. I ïaid, Ì liáVe nothing :'tö-' lòfè; anel there is.k ;baŕe poffíbiiiťy öf hope. ; When íhe came up ftairs again,. íhé told rhe tliat the perfon, who had rung the bell was fomeman of the neighbourhood, who- had'bróugrit ihë'öld wóm^aňvaVió'us 'trifling ^riHes,ranä whömihie had .Oiídered"tO:re¿ turn ; ať five'p'cíó^ fugări . . '^ïf:cpntfary'to:aïl expectátiòn-thís· 'íhould' cdrnétò liand,;Eöüifa, write .to rh'ytathër 5- îhfprrn 'him of'all- you; know : aiid efpé- ciaílý write to/Mr.'Ciifton.. 'It will Ъе in¬ effectual,, but Vnte-; If there be truth J ih. VvoSmá'i), .1 WQuid rejoice lp füffër. íñüch). more .mifchief than 'he : hás the power ta'' inflict, couldiI but by thať-ŕňeans-reftoŕe him
him to a fenfe of his ,own worth ; or-rather of the worth of virtue ! Why dő I talk of mifchief, and his power to inflict ? I hope to fhew him ¡he has no power over me; and that the ftrength of men, and the force of walls, locks and bars, are feeble, when but re¬ folutely oppofodby tbe force .of truth, ac¬ tuating the will of weak and defpifed wo¬ man?—Injury ?—Poor, depraved, 'mifta¬ ken man ! It is himfelf he injures ! Every effort he makes is hut a new affault upon his own peace ! it is heaping coals of fire upon his own head ; Which it has long •been tbe wiih of my heart to extinguifli ! Had I 'but any reafon ito believe Frank Flenley'in fafety, I would noťfúffer a fin¬ gle figh to efcape me. But I know too well Mr. Clifton dare not permit .him to 'be at liberty, while he lieeps meconfined. "Surely nothing can be attempted againft bis life ? And yet «I fometimes fliake with horror ! There is a-reafon which I know not whether I dare mention ; yet if Mr. ■Clifton fliould think proper to lay fnares to e 6 intercept
ι intercept and read my letters, he ought to be informed of this dangerous circum¬ ftance. I know not, Louifa, whether I am addreffing myfelf to you or him ; but Frank Henley at the time that I was feiz¬ ed, and he likewife as I fuppofe, had bank bills in his poifeffion to the amount of eight thoufand pounds 1 He had been that very morning into the city, to receive the money on his father's account ; and .intended as we returned to leave them with, Sir Arthur's banker. If men fuoh as thofe who feized on me were employed for the fame violent pur¬ pofe againft him, and if tbcy fliould difco¬ ver a fum which would to them be fo tempting, who can fay that his life would bé fafe ? Frank Henley, the preferver of Ciifton, the preceptor of truth, and the friend of man ; the benevolent, the magnanimous, noble-minded Frank, whofe actions were uniform in goodnefs, whofe heart was all affection, · and whofe foul all light—and nTiirdered ! Why do I indulge а ч thought fo inhu¬ man, fo impoffible ? It could not be J—
No, no ; it could not be ! A iuppofition fo extravagant is guilt—Yet though I who cannot aid him ought not to encourage fuch doubts, let thofe who can, be waited and be active ! I am addrefling myfelf to vacancy t~~ No one hears me ! No one will icad what I write !
I will be calm. It is my fituation, it is confinement, the bars I fee and the' bolts I hear that infpire thefe gloomy thoughts, They are unfounded, and certainly unavail¬ ing—Fie may have efcaped ! He mayat this inftant be in fearch of me ! Hurrying, enquiring, defpairing, and diftracted; in much deeper diftrefs than I am : for were I but fure of his fafety, I could almoft defy misfortune ! Let not the world lofe him ! Oh ! If any human creature fliould in time read this, Jet him hear, let him fliudder, let him beware ! Pardon, Louifa ! I do not, addrefs my¬ felf to you ! Too well I know my friend to 4 doubt
doubt her J No cold delay, no unfeeling negligence, no raffi phrenfy is to be feared from her !—Alas ! What I am writing flie "will never read ! It cannot'be! The man 1 have to encounter is too practifed in de¬ ceit, or' I íhould not have been where I am ! Well then, may he himfelf read ! And whilehe reads, thus let hisçonfcience fpeak —" There is a man whofe woi th and vir- " tues are fuch, diat the lofs of him would Cť be a lofs to the whole human race.—■ " From this man I received a thoufand " acts of kindnefs ; for which I returned " ten thoufand infulťs. I repulfed him, " fcorned f him, ftruck him ; and he, dif- " regarding 'the innumerable injuries I " had done liim, but a few hours after " plunged headlong „down the dreadful " ábýfs, to'fnatch rne from'the grave. I " was dead and he gave me life, in return " ï have robbed him'of what men prize " even more than life, of liberty. But if ^ I have put him in jeopardy, if I fufier « him to remain initie power of hardened " and,
'v and wicked men, and if he periíh, cc mercy cannot pardon me, juftice can- " not punifh, and charity itfelf muft hold <c me in abhorrence." A. W. ST. IVES. -' .. ■ ' " ' ' * * . ■" LETT E R CXV.
СОКЕ CLIFTON.. TO GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Dove) Street. Y actions are now become one con¬ tinued chain of artifice. But were that all and were not the objects of this aitifice of a nature fo new and fo painful, it would afford me amufement, and not be any caufe of vexation. As
M
As it is I feel apprehenflons which are r wholly different from any I ever felt be¬ foi e. To deceive in countries where de¬ ception is a paftimc, authorifed, pračtifed, and 'applauded, is I find fomething very ορροί' tc to what would feem the fame L thing, in this gloomy land of apathy and phlegm. There it is a fport and a plea¬ fure. Here it is a bufinefs of ferious dan¬ der and general deteftation. But no mat" ter ϊ¬ ί am obliged to watch times and fea- fons, for I have little doubt that I myfelf am watched.' That old houfekeeper I am fure fufoects mc ; and her affection for her miftrefs is fo full, fo reftlefs that İt cannot but fharpen her intellect 1 , and make her employ every engine flie can imagine for difcovery. I walked up to Fozard's as I often do for my horfe, and I faw one of Sir Arthur's fervants pafs the yard, foon after I entered it. I have little doubt but he was dogging me. I got on horfeback and rode flowly down towaid
toward Pimlico, and over Weftminfter- bridge, but I faw no moré of him. As foon as I was out of town I mended my pace, and gradually increafed it to a full gallop. Faffing .through Vauxhall, I crofled the Thames again at Batterfea- bridgc, rode through Chelfea, and pre¬ fently gained the Brompton road. My firft vifit was to the keeper. The follow has a ftrange look ! A villainous phyfiognomy ! I enquired after his prifoner and found he was fafe. The houfe is well fecured ; not modem, but in the ilyle of the laft century ; ftrong and heavy, and before this affair was thought of had, been fitted up for the pnrpofes of confinement, but is now ftill better fortified. It hasa garden, which is furrounded by a high wall, in which the prifoner is fuffered to exorcife himfelf; but not without the very neceffary precaution of confining his arms in the ftrait waiftcoat, fecuring the doors, and attentively watching his motions. I 01 dered the fellow Lo fee that Henley wanted for nothing, to let a boy be has wait
wait upon him, and to keep out of his way himfelf, for two reafons of my own. I do not wifh Henley to fuller the infults of fuch ja. vulgar and narrow-fouled rafcal : my revenge is of a nobler kind. Neither am I quite certain that this keeper, hardened, obdurate, and pitilefs as he is, could with¬ ftand Flenley's oratory. At leaft I would not willingly have him fubjectcd to the temptation : though the fellow is fo aveife to any fenfe of human pity that I think the danger is very fmall. He was offended howeyer at my think¬ ing proper to direct him, and furlily told me he underftood his trade. Flere I met Mac Fane, by appoint¬ ment. Fie cannot forget the difgrace of Covent-garden, and fpoke of Henley with a degree of malignity that would want but little encouraging to become dangerous.— I am to pay' him the thoufand pounds in a few days, and our place of rendezvous is then to be once more at the Shakef¬ peare. I was giaci to efcape from the company of
-of thefe new intimates of miné, thefe firft- boin of Beelzebub, and tony to my other prifoher. I fay íly, for I fet out with eager¬ nefs enough ; but every ftep I took I felt my aidour abate. The houfes are more than halfa mile apart, and I thought pro¬ per to go thither on foot, and not to take any common path, but to crofs the fields, as the fecureft made. Laura knew I was to be there, and had her tale íeady. She prefently came" down. I enquired after her miibefs, and if her account be true, this heroic woman has not flied a tear, but has behaved with all' her apparent cuftomary calm. She is a di¬ vine creature ! As I rode along, I made a thoufand determinations that all fliould be that day ended. I curfed myfelf, pledged my honour, ufed every method which might have fliewn mc how much I doubt¬ ed my own refolution, to prove to my¬ felf how irrevocably determined I was ! —The little remaining firmnefs I had left
left wholly died away at the relation ot Laura.— I muft ftay till the calm dignity of her mind fhall begin to decline. The nature, of her confinement, the fears flie cannot but have for her Henley, the recollection of her friends and father, and her appre- henfions of me muft all quickly contribute to produce this effect. I do, not pretend to deny that I feel a reluctance to a firft interview : but l· am determined the firft fliall be the only one. I know myfelf, and know when once I am heated it will not then be Anna St, Ives, a miracle though flie be, than can over awe or conquer me. I have the ftubbomncfs of woman, and the ftrength of man. I am rccklefs of what is to follow, but the thing fliall be ! ------There is not a particle in my .frame that does not ftand pledged to the deed, by honour and oath ! It is the only event for which I care, or for which. I live- Nor
Nor fliall I live long when once it is over. I forefee I fliall not. But that is not a painful., no, it is a fatisfačtory thought ! I would even prefent her the piftol, would flie but difpatch me the mo¬ ment my revenge is gratified. I would then fleep, and forget all that is, and all that might have been. ' She has been writing. I knew it would be one fou ree of amufement to her, and I provided her with implements. Laura aiked and flie owned it was a letter to my filler, which fhe could wiih were fent. But that mufl not be. She means to give it to Laura ; I of courfe ihall be the next receiver. This girl, Laura, acts her part ill. She is not half forro wfui enough. I wonder Anna docs not remark it; and Laura fays flie does not, though that is no very good pi oof. The complexion of her letter 1 think will tell me how far ihe does or does not confide in her maid. I know flie holds fufpicion in contempt ; and yet Γ think my high opinion of her difcrimina- tion
ţiop would find fome abatement, were I certain that flie did not fufpect thb ili a flow girl. ' My foul burns to hay? it over ! And yet like a coward I refi ain. But I will pot long fubmit to fuch contemptible .qualms. I w ill not continue to be diffi¬ dent of myfelf; for it is that only by wbich I am withheld. Not a fingle wrong is forgotten ! I repeat them in my fleep b— Ay, Fail fax, fuch fleep as I have is no¬ thing but a repetition of them ; and a re- hearfal of the icvenge by which they are to be appcafed ! I will icturn to-monow, or perhaps next day -, and then—! You fliall then hear more from C. CLiriOX.
LETTER
LETTER Ç55.VI.
COKE CLIFTON TO CUY FAIRFAX.
London, Duver-Street. oTR Arthur arrived in town this morning. He brought the ufurer Henley up with him in the fame carriage. Young St. Ives fet out before them, and was in London laft night. He drove di¬ rectly to my lodgings, and I was fortu¬ nately at home. This did not look as if I werf in the fecret ; and if he had any fuf¬ picions he had not the courage to intimate them. I condoled with him, faid it was a ftrange affair, a .riddle I could not read, a myftery which time muft elucidate, for it baffled
baffled all conjecture. He did little mote than echo me, and I pretended I would have ridden half over the world to lecovcr his fifter, had there been but the leaft clue; but there was nol, and I found myfelf obliged to fit ftill in defpair and aftonifli¬ ment. Fie faid it was all veiy Ime, and he was very tiied. lie fliould theiefote drive home, get fome lefreilimcnt, and go to bed. This fellow, Faiifax, walks on two legs, looks lhe woild in-the face, and counts for one on the muftei-ioll. " But " nature, crefcent in him, grew only in ct thews and bulk." Yet on the pai ade, fools and gapers will miftake him for a man. Contention with Anna St. Ives is ho¬ nourable, but to feem to flirink fiom be¬ ings like thefe, or to pračlife concealment with fuch mere images of entity, is repug¬ nant to the geneious fcorn they merit and infpire. Impei ious neceffity however pre- fcribes law, and I look care to prevent Sir Arthur's vifit to me, by having notice font me
me of his arrival, and immediately going to the encounter. To anticipate is to overturn the card- caftles of this puny race. Come upon them unexpectedly, flare at them undauntedly, and interrogate them abruptly, and they are put to the rout. Their looks even in¬ treat pardon for the ill they thought, but durft not utter. Sir Arthur, I own, beheld me with a fufpicious eye ; and though he endeavour¬ ed to feem to credit me, he did it with an aukward air. Mrs. Clarke hearing I was there came İn, and exceeding even all her former fer¬ vour, importuned me, İn the moft direct and vehement manner, to tell what I had done with Air. Henley and her dear young lady. She more than ever difconcerted mc. Her exuberant paffion addrefled it¬ felf alternately to me and her mafter. Her teai\> as well as her words were abundant, her urgency and ardour extreme, and flie ended her apoftrophe with again conjuring vol. v. f me
me to tell what was become of her dear, dear young lady ! " Ay, pray, pray do"—whimpered the baronet in a maudlin tone, moved by the unfeigned paffion of his houfekeeper. I gave him a look, and tbe driveller added— ** if you know." I was glad of a pretence to get away, and after telling him the diftrefs of his mind was the only apology for his conduct, I inftantly quitted him, without any effort on his part to detain me. Among other things, Mrs. Clarke re¬ peatedly reproached herfelf for not having written or fent to my fifter ; and the knight acknowledged—" Ay, it was very neg- " lectful ! But bis mind had been fo dif- " turbed that he had forgotten it too !" Why do I mifapply my time on beings fo imbecile ? Maugre all my refolves, I have not feen her yet, Fairfax ! Nor have I opened her letter! I dare not. Her Henley I am hire is in it, 'and additional rage would be indubitable madnefs ! Nei¬ ther is this the thing moil to be feared. She
She has an expanded heart, a capacious, a benevolent heart, and flie may have faid fomething which were Л to fee, and yet do the deed wbich fliall be done, it might fhew me more fiend-like than even tbe foul reflection of my prefent thoughts. Pertur¬ bation has done its work ; it needs no in¬ creafe. This quality of benevolence, in which they both glory, is torture to recol¬ lect. I fay, Fairfax, I never aiked their charity. Did í not fpurn it from me, the moment I was infulted by the offer ? Be pity beftowed on beggars : the partiality that fprings from affection, or the punifli¬ ment due to neglect for me ! I will be with her fpeedily, Fairfax ι Though I linger, I do not relent. Such mercy as the being out of doubt can be_ flow flie fliall receive; the pleading world fliould not wring a greater from me ! C. CLIFTON. P. S. I muft be fpeedy : my filler will hear of the affair by to-morrow's poft, and I fliall have her whole artillery playing 2 upon
upon me ; and in the form of letters I fup¬ pofe -, for I do not think flie will hope any thing from perfonal interview ; I made her ioo fenfibly feel her own iiifignificance wben laft we mei'. I expected indeed an attack from her much fooner, for the young lady does not want confidence in her own ikill and courage : flie is of the Henley fchool. However I do not intend to perufe any of her epiflles., I would fend them back un¬ opened, but, that it would be an avowal of a knowledge of their contents ; and I have no need го increafe fufpicion, whofe broad eyes tire already glaring at me. But I will immediately putan end to the witch, and engender black certainty in her ftead ' The imp fliall appear, and ihake horrors from her fnaky hair !
LETTER
LETTER CXVII.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES то LOUISA CLIFTON.
Tbe Lone Houfe. ÜNCE more, though but in imagination^ let me converfe with my friend, I know it is delufion, but it was the fweet cuftom of our fouls, and well may be indulged. Ignorant perhaps of the caufe, my Louifa is at this moment accufing me of a neglect which my heart d ifa vows. Let me as ufual give her the hiftory of that heart : it is a theme from which ihe has taught me toderive profit. This is the fifth day of my confinement. I have the fame walls, the fame windows and bars to contemplate ; and 1 the fame f 3 bolting,
boltingj and locking, and clanking to hear. It is with difficulty that I can at fome few intervals divert my thoughts from the gloom which my own fituation, the dif¬ trefs of my family, and the danger of a youth fo dear to virtue contribute to in¬ fpire. Nor do I know what at this moment may be the affliction of my friend. Should flie have heard, flie cannot but difcover the principal agent of this daik plot ; and exquifite indeed would be the anguifli of her mind, could flie.forget that fortitude and refignation are duties. May they ne- -"er be forgotten by me, during this my hour of trial! My ihoulder I fear has received fome ûrain orhmtï the pain of it continues to be great, and the inflammation is not abat¬ ed. The bruifes on my arms have in¬ creafed in blacknefs, and their tenfion is not in the leaft diminiflıed. The hands of thofe bad щеп muft have been as rough and callous as their hearts : they had no mercy in their; gripe. ? There
Tliere is a lonefomc ilillnefs in this- houfe, that favours the difmal reveries which my fituation fuggefts. If m ν hand¬ kerchief do but drop I ilart ; and the ftir- ring of a moufe places Clifton full before me. Yet I repel this weaknefs with all my force. I defpife it. Nor fliall thefe crude vifions, the hideous phantoms of the ■ imagination, fubdue that fortitude in which I muft wholly confide. For thefe laft two days, Laura has pre¬ tended to grieve at confinement : but it is mimic forrow ; words of which the heart has no knowledge. She perceives I fuf¬ pect her, and her acting is but the more eafily detected. I know not whether it be not my duty ,to determine to exclude her ; though that feems like cowardice. I think it is not in her power to harm me ; and for telling, if flie have been falfe, flie bas done her worft. I never made a practice of concealment, neither will I now have recourfe to fuch a fallacious expedient. Yet íhe fleeps in the fame chamber with me¿ and ought I not f 4- to
to be aware of r infpÍriríg pernày with pro¬ jects ? ' 'Tis true my flumbcrs arc broken, my nights reftlefs, and the cracking of the wainfcot is as effectual in waking mc as a thunder-clap could be. I am íefolved, however, to take the key out of ihe door, and either bide it or hold it all night in my hand, Mifchief is meant me, or why am I here ? J am continually looking into the clofets, behind the doors, and under the beds and drawers. I am haunted by the fuppofition ¿bat I lhall every moment fee this bad man ilart up befbie me ! What know I of the bafe engines he may employ, or lhe wic¬ ked arts to whicii he may have recourfe ? But he fliall not fubdue me ! He may diftuib me by day, and terrify me by night; but he fliall not fubdue me ! Shall the pure mind fliake in the prefence of evil ? Shall the fortitude wbich fafety feels vanifli at the approach of danger? Louifa, I will fteel my foul to meet him ! I know not how or when he<wi!l come ! I cannot tell whaťaie Üıe vile, black inftiu- nients
ments with which he may woik'! Sleep £ 'fcarcely have any. I eat with hefitation, and drink with trembling. I have heard of potions and bafe practices, that make lhe heart fliudder ! Yet I fometimes think I could refift even thefe. He fliall not fubdue me ! Or if he do, it fliall be by treachery fuch as fiends would demur to perpetrate. Why do I think thus of him ? Surely, furely he cannot be fo loft as this ! Yet here I am ! I own I tremble and recoil ; but it is with the dread that he fliould plunge himfelf fo deep in guilt as never moie to rife ' Poor Frank! Where air thou? Flow are thy wretched thoughts employed ? Or ait thou ftill allowed to think ? Art thou among the living ? If thou art, what is thy itate ! Thine is now the mifery of impo¬ tence, thou who haft proved thyfelf fo mighty in aci! Thou wouidft not ili ike, thou wouidft not injure ; and yet thy foe 'would fink before thee, had he not allied himfelf to perfidy, and had he but left thee f 5 fiée.
ifree. His moil fecret machinations could not have withftood tby fearching fpirit. Thou wouidft have been here ! Thefe bolts '•would have flown, tbefe doors would have opened, and I fliould have feen my fa- viour ! Fie hears me not ! Nor thou, Louifa ! I am deftitute of human aid ! Farewell, farewell ! - Ah ! Farewell in¬ deed ; for I am talking to emptinefs and air!
Do I feem to fpeak with bitternefs of •heart? Is there enmity in my words ?— Surely I do not feel it ! The fpirit of bene¬ volence and truth allows, nay commands me to hate the vice ; but not its poor mif- governed agents. They are wandering in the maze of miftake. Ignorance and paf¬ fion are their guides, and doubt and des¬ peration their tormentors. Alas! Rancour and revenge are their inmates ; be kind; .nefs and charity, mine. ŕ Л. W. ST- IVES,
LET-
LETTER CXVIIÍ.
COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX.
BroMytou-Hoit/ê, 1 AM here—At the fcene of action—flie is in the room above me^ and I am ridding myfelf of reluctance ; ftringing my nerves t for alfault. I know not why this fliould be neceffary, but I feel that it is ! I am waiting to queftion Laura ; but I ^ordered her to be in no hafte to come down, when ihe heard me ring. I would. not have my victim fufpect me to be here f I would come upon her by furprife, and not when flie was armed and prepared for ¡repulfe. I will order the old woman to go prefently and open and fliut the gate ; as F 6 if
if ihe were letting the perfon out, who carne in when I rung. I expect, nay am certain, her refiftanee will be obftinate—But unavailing !—I fay unavailing '—Neither houfe nor road are near, and yet I could wifli the fcene were removed to the dark gloom of a foreft ; erabofomed where none but tigers or hye¬ nas fliould liften to her flirieks—I know they will be piercing ;—heart-rending !— ^But— ! I tell you, Fairfax, I have banifhed all fenfe of human pity from my bofom : it is an enemy lo 'my purpofe, and thai muft be !—Though the heavens fliould fliakc and the earth open, it muft ! Yet do not think, Fairfax, bent as I am on the'full fıûition of love and vengeance, I would ufe ^cruelty—Undeiftand* me : Σ mean wanton or unneceffary'bıutaîity. I will he *as forbearing as flie will permit. Ffearthe will noťfúffer me to carefs her tenderly—But flie ihall never fleep -in the 'arms of Henley !—She'never ihall 1---I will make
make fure of that ! My mind is recon- •ciled to all chances, that excepted. As I paffed, -I called at the mad-houfe - „ where I found Mac Fane and the fcowling keeper in high divan. They have been horribly alarmed. Flenley has attempted an efcape, which he was in danger of'ef¬ fecting ; but he is brought back, after ■ having led them a fliort chafe. The apprehenfions of thefe fcoundrels concerning future confequences are very ■great, ' and fwell almoft to terror. They talked ftrangely, aiked whicii way we were to get rid of them at hit, and con¬ ceive him to be a dangerous enemy. Their thoughts feemed tinged with dark lurkings, which they dare not own ; and certainly dare not act, without my leave. Thefe fellows are all villainy! A league wth demons would be lefs abominable Ϊ¬ Ι muit clofe the account, and fliake off fuch peftilential fcoundrels !— 'Laura comes! I will queftion lier a lit- '.tle, and then------! .
lam
Don-er Streef* I am returned, and ащ ftill tormented Ъу delay!—1 cannot help it—I faid I would not ufe wilful cruelty: that were to heap unneceffary damnation ' Laura began by foftening my heart with her narrative. Her angel miftrefs is all refignation, all kindnefs, all benevolence ! She almoft forgets herfelf, and laments only for me ! f This I could have with¬ ftood ; but flie has been brutally treated,. by diat intolerable ban dog, Mac Fane, and his blood-hounds. Fairfax, how often have I gazed in rapture at the beauteous carnation,of her complexion, the whitenefs of her bands and arms, and the extieme delicacy of their texture ! And now thofe tempting arms, Laura tells me, nay, her iegs too, are in twenty places disfigured and black, with the gripes and bruifes flie received. Gibbets and racks overtake the wolf-hearted villains! Her flioulder is confiderably hurt 1 It is inflamed, and, as ihe .acknowledges, very painful 3 yet ihevdaes not utter а complaint ! Why
Why did this heroic woman ever injure me ? By wbat fatal influence am I be¬ come her foe ? Fler gentle kindnefs, her calm, unruffled, yet dignified patience I have experienced—Madman !—Idiot !— Have I not experienced her hatred too, lier abhorrence ? Did not her own lips pronounce the fentence ? And do I not know her ? Will flie recede ? And ihall I?—Never!—Never!—No, no—It mufl: be. But I did rightly. Tliis was not the moment. There would have been fome¬ thing barbaroufly mean, in making her exert the little ftrength ihe has with fuch pain and peril. I rode to Kenfington and procured her a lenitive, with which I returned. The purpofe of vengeance excepted, I would feel as generoufly as herfelf; and even vengeance, did I know how, I would dig¬ nify—But do not furmife that I would re¬ tract !—No, .by heaven ! Λ thought fo weak has never once -entered my heart i I am reftlefs, and muft return—Till к he
be over, earth has no pleafare for mc ; and after I am fure it will have none. No -—No— -1 have but this fingle gleam of satisfaction ! The light is going out ; give me bul one full blaze, and I fliall then welcome total darknefs ! C. CLIFTON.
LETTER CXIX.
•COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Dcvet Strest. JľOR a few-days after having fecuied my-tormentors, I enjoyed fomething-like ^comparative eafe ; but the ugly imps ihat haunted me, in fiercer crowds again arc fwarming round me, 1 1 am too miferable to
to exift in this ftate ; it muft be ended. It is a turmoil that furpaffes mortal fuffer- ance ! If flie will wreftle againft fate, it is not my fault. I have no wifli to prac- tife more upon her than is neceffary. But the thing muft be. Sleep I have none, reft: I have none, peace I have none. I get up and fit down, walk out and come back, mutter impre*· cations unconfeioufly to myfelf, and tura¬ tile eyes of infolent curiofity and ridiculous apprehenfion upon me in the ftreet. A fellow has juft now watched me home ; deeming me a lunatic I fuppofe ; for he had feen my agitation;) and heard the curfes which I knew not were uttered aloud, till his impertinent observation of me brought it to my recollection. But this fliall not be ! It fhall end !— Though I rend her heart-ftrings for it, I will have eafe ! The evening approaches; my horfe is ordered and I will be gone, I will not, cannot endure this longer !
Biompton-Houfe. I am here, and have talked with Laura. She owns flie is fufpected^ and that her miftrefs takes the key out of the bed¬ chamber door, when they go to reft, and hides it : Laura by accident has difcovered where. She puts it on the ledge behind ihe head of her bed, but within tbe reach of her arm. This has fuggefted a thought : I will wait here till midnight and ileep have lul¬ led her apprehenfions. It will be better than facing her in the glare of day. Her eye, Fairfax, is terrible in her anger. It is too fteady, too ftrong in confeious inno¬ cence to encounter. Darknefs will give me courage, and her terror and defpair.—' For it muft come to that ! It cannot other- wife be ; and be it muft ! In the blaze of noon, when fortitude is awake and the heart beating high perhaps with refent¬ ment, nothing but the goadings of defpair could make me face ber. * The words flie would ufe would be terrible, but her looks
would petrify !—By this ftratagem I fliall avoid them. Nor do I blufli to own my cowardice, in the prefence of Anna St. Ives : flie be¬ ing armed with innocence and felf-appro- bation ; and I abaihed by confeious guilt, violence, and intentional deftruction. Why aye ! — Let tbe thick fwarib of night cover us ! I feel, with a kind of horrid fatisfačtion, the deep damnation of the deed ! It is the very colour and kind of fin that becomes me ; finning as I do againft Anna St. Ives ! With any other it would be boy's fpoit; a thing to make a jeft of after dinner ; but with her it is lape, in all its wildeft contortions, flirieks, and ex¬ piring groans! I lie ftretched on burning embers, and I have hours yet to wait. Oh that I were an idiot!—The night is one dead, dun gloom ! It looks as if murrain, mildew, and contagion were abroad, hovering over earth and blooding plagues. I will walk but awhile, among them -^- Will try to meet them——Would tliat my -difturbed imaelnation could but coniure
up goblins, fliected ghofts, heads wanting bodies, and hands dropping blood, and realize the legends of ignorance and infan¬ cy, fo that I could freeze memory and for¬ get the horrors by which I am haunted I
It draws near midnight—I am now in her apartment, tbe room next to her bed¬ chamber. My orders have been obeyed ; the old woman, pretending to lock up her prifoner, fliot back tbe bolts, put down the chain, and left the door ready for me to enter unheard. Laura has her inftruciions. She is to pretend only, but not really, to undrefs herfelf; and I bade her not lie down, left flie fliould drop afleep. When flie thinks it time, fhe is to glide round, ileal the key, and open the door.
I am fully prepared ; am undreffed, and ready fon the combat. I have made a mighty
mighty facrifice ! Youth, fortune, fame, all blafted ; life renounced, and infamy afcertained ! It is but juft then that I fliould have full enjoyment of the fleeting blifs.
Surely this huffy fleeps ? No !—I hear ber ilir I------She is at the door! And now— ! '
Heaven and hell are leagued againft me, tofruftrate my fuccefs ! Yet fucceed I will in their defpite— 'Tis now broad day, andheie I am, in the fame chamber, encounteied, reproved, fcorned, frantic, and defeated ! Аь foon as I heard Laura with the key in the door, I put out the candles. She turned the lock, the door opened, and I fprang forward. Blundering idiot as I was ! I had forgotten to remove a chair, and tumbled over it. The terrified Anna was up and out of bed in an inftant. The door opens inward to the bed-chamber.-—- Hes
Her fear gave her ftrength ; flie threw Laura away, and clapped to the door. By this time I had rifen, and was at it. I fet my flioulder io it with a fudden effort, " and again it half opened. I puflied for¬ ward, but was repelled with more than equal oppofition. My left arm in the ftrug¬ gle got wedged in the door : the pain was exceffive, and the ftrength with which ihe refilled me incredible. By a fudden fliock I releafed my hand, but not without bruifing it very much, and tearing away the ikin. - My laft effort was returned by one more than equal on her part. But I imagine ffie had fet her foot againil fomething which gave way, for flie fuddenly came down, with a blow and a found that made my heart flirink ! Still I endeavoured to profit by it, though not foon enough ; for the firft moment I was too much alarmed. She could not feel pain or blows, and rofe inftantaneouf- }y. I forced the door fome little way, and flie then gave a fingle fliriek ! It was a dreadful
a dreadful one—and was followed by a repulfe which I could not overcome. The door was clofed, and like lightning locked, I then heard herbegin to pant and heave for breath—After a few féconds flie ex¬ claimed—Clifton ! You are a bad man Ι¬ Α treacherous, wicked man, and are feek¬ ing your own deftruction ! I am your pri¬ foner, but I fear you not ! Mark me, Clifton : I fear you not ! I hefitated fome time : at laft I ventured to aflc—Are you hurt, madam ? I dp not know ! I do not care ! * I value no hurt you can do me ! I am above harm from you !—Though' you have recourfe to perfidy and violence, yet 1 defy you ! In darknefs or in light, I defy you ! Let me intreat you, madam, to retire to reft. No ! I will ftand here all 'night ! I will not move ! Upon my honour, madam, upon my foul, I will moleft you no more to-night ! I tell you, man, I fear you not ! Night or day, I fear you not ! I requeir.
I requeft, I humbly intreat you would not expofe yourfelf to the injuries of the night air, and the want of fleep ! I will ileep no more ! I want no fleep ; I fear no injuries ; not even tbofe you in¬ tend me ! Indeed, madam, you do not know the danger— Mimic benevolence and virtue no more, Clifton ι It is bafe in you ! It is beneath a mind like, yours !—You are a miftaken .man ! Dreadfully miftaken ! You think mé devoted, but I am fafe. Unlefs you kill, you never can conquer me ! Beware ! Turn back ! Deftruction is gaping for you, if you proceed ! Need flie have told me tlu's, Fairfax ? Could flie think I knew it not ?—But flie too is miftaken. Her courage is high, I grant ; is admirable ; and, wereany other but I her opponent, as ibe fays, not to be conquered ! I adore the noble qualities of her mind ; but great though they are, when flie defies me flic over-rates them. I own
I own her warning was awful! My heart flirunk from it, and I retired ; taking care that flie fliould hear me as I went, that ibe might be encouraged to go to reft. My well-meant kindnefs was vaim She never did confide in me, and never can. I heard her call Laura, and order 'her to ftrike a light, fet an arm chair, and bring her clothes: after which I underftood, from what I heard, that fhe dreifed herfelf and fat down in it, with her back to tbe door, there waiting patiently till the mom- ilio" How flie will behave, or what flic will fay to Lam a I cannot divine. Moft pro¬ bably flic will infift on banifliing her the apaitment; for flie never gave fcrvants much employment, and always doubted whether the keeping of them were not an immoral act, therefore is little in want of their afliftance. ι But let her difcaid this treacherous and now ineffective tool. I want her no more. I will not quit the houfe, Fairfax; I will neither'cat nor'fleep, till I have put her vo'l. v. g to
to the trial which ihe fo rafhly defies f Ať hei uncle's table iflie defied me, and ima¬ gined flie had gazed me into .cowardice. She knew me not : it was but making vengeance doubly fuie. This experience ere now fbould bave taugiht her. Has flie efcaped me ? Is ilie not heie ? Does flie not feel herfelf in the raviiher's arms? If not, a few hours only and ihe fliall ' Lei her not be vain of this fccond re- pulfe flie has given me; it ought to in¬ creafe her terror, for it does but add to my defpair. My diftempered foul will take no medicine but one, and that muft be adminiftered; though more venomous than the fting of fcorpion or ¡tooth of ferpent, and more fpeedy in diifolution.
I left her room that fhe might breakfaft undifturbed. There is fomething adraiia- bly, aftonifliingly firm, in the texture of her mind. Laura has been down, bab¬ bling to me all ihe knew. At eight o'clock, when it had bfien light a full hour, Anna,
Amia, after once or twice 'croiľmg'her chamber to confider, turned the key and refolutely opened the door ; expecting by her manner, Laura fays, to fee me rulli in ; for flie threw it fuddenly open, as if fear¬ ful it fliould knock her down. She walked out, looked fteadfaftly a- round, examined every part of the cham¬ ber, arid after having convinced herfelf I was not tliere, fat dawn to write at the table where not an hour before I had been feated. When the breakfaft was brought, flie bade Laura t;ake it away again ; fay¬ ing flie had no appetite : but immediately recollecting herfelf, ejaculated—" Fie !— " Jt is weak ! It is wrong l"—And added " Stay, Lauta ! Put it down again !" She then, with a calm and determined fedatenefs, began to ferve herfelf and Laura; treating this perfidious woman [For no matter that I made her fo, fuch flie is,] with the fame equanimity of temper and amenity as formerly. The miftrefs ate> for flie was innocent and refplved ; but tbe maid could not, for flie was guilty and g 2 in
m a continual tremor. " Be pacified"—- faid Anna to her —- " Com pofe your " thoughts, and take your bieakfaft. lam ,e much more forry for than angry at the " pai t you have acted. You have done tc youifelf great injury, but mc none: at " leaft, fo I truft '------Be appealed and <f 'eat your bieakfaft. Or, if you cannot w eat with me, go down and eat it in " peace below." The benevolent fuavity of this angel has made the light-minded huffey half break her heart. Fler penitential tears now flow in abundance ; and flie has been officioufly endeavouring to petition me not to harm fo good, fo foi giving, fo heavenly a young lady ι I begin to fear flie would willingly be a traitor next to me, and endeavour to open the doors for her miibefs. But that I will prevent. I will not quit the houfe till all is ovei ' I have faid it, Fairfax ! I will then immediately fet Henley free, tell him where flie is, where I am to be found, and leave him to feek his own mode of vengeance ! Should he refort to the
the paltry refuge of law, I own that then I would elude puifuit. But fhould the fpi¬ rit of man ilir within him, and fliould he dare mó to contention, I would fly to meet him in the mortal ftiife ! He is woilhy of my arm, and I would fliew how woithy I am to be his oppofite !
It is now noon, and Lauia has again been with me, repeating the fame ftoiy/ with additions and improvements. Anna has been talking to her, and has made a deep impreffion upon her. She is all pe¬ nitence and petilion, and is exceedingly troublefome, with her whining, her teais, and her impoitrinity, whicii I have founl it difficult to filence. I learn fiom her own account flic has owned all, and betrayed all ihe knew ; and Anna has been telling her that ihe, and I, and all fuch finneis, however deep and deadly, ought to be piíied, ŕ counfoIled, and reformed; and that our eirors only ought to be treated with contempt, dif- G 3 dain,
dain, and hatred. She has talked to her in the moft gentle, foothing, and fympa¬ thetic manner ; till the fool s heart is ready to burft. Anna has drawn a picture of my ftate of mind which has terrified her—And fo it ought ! ------She has been fobbing, kneel¬ ing, and praying, for my fake, for Annans fake, for Cod's fake to be merciful, and do no more mifchief ; " Her miftrefs iő i! an angel, and not a woman I"—-»Why true !— ie Never had a young lady fo for* " giving, fo kind, and fo courageous a u heart !"—True again !—" But it is im- * ς poffible, if I fliould be fo wicked as to " lay violent hands upon her, for her not <c to fink, and lie for mercy jat my feet."— Once more true, true !— Mercy!—I have it not, know it not, nor can know ! She herfelf has* banifhed it from my breaft and from her own : at lean? the mercy I would 1 afk ------For could it be—? Were there not a Henley—?· No, no!·—There Î3 one wide deftruction for u a all ! T am on the brink, and tliey muft
muff down with me ! —Flave they not placed me there ? Are they not now pull¬ ing me, weighing me, Anking me? This is the moment in which I would conjuic up\all the* witongs, inf ults, con¬ tempts, and defiances flie has heaped upon me——AVtiat need I ?-—-They come un- biddend! -------And now for tbe laft act of ihe tragedy !
I have kept my word, Faiifax : I have been j have faced her, have— ! You fliall bear ! I will faithfully paint all that paffed. I will do her juilice, and in this fliew fome fpaiks of magnanimity, of which perhaps flie docs not think me capable—No mat¬ ter— It was neceffary the temper of my mind fliould be wound up to the higheft pitch, before I could appioach her. Frufhed up ftairs, made the bolts fly, and the lock ftart back. Yet the moment the door opened, I hefitated^— Flo we ver, I fliook myfelf with indigna- G 'í tion,
tion, entered, 'and faw her ftanding firmly in the middle'of the apartment, ready to affért lhe bold defiance fliejiad given ,me. The fixed refolution of her form, the evi¬ dent fortitude of her foul, and the ftead- faft encounter of her eye, were dífcomfit- ing\ Like a coward I ftood I cannot tell how long, not knowing what to fay, flie looking full upon qie, examining my heart, and putting thought to the rack. Benig¬ nant as flie is, at fuch onfets of the foul flie feels no mercy. Self-refentmenf at the tame, creft-fallen countenance I wore at laft produced, an effort, and I ftammered out—Madam-— Fler only anfwer was a look----- 1 en¬ deavoured to meet hei eye, but in vain. I continued.—From my prefent manner you will perceive, madam, I am confeious of the advantage you have over me ; and that my own heart does ¡ not entirely ap¬ pi ove all I have done. I fee fomething of your confufion—I wifli I faw more. 'But neither can it forget its injuries ! What
What are they ? The time was when I met you with joy, addrefled you with delight, and gazed J on you with rapture !—Nay I gaze fo ftill ! Poor, weak man ! Yes, madam, I know, how much you defpife me ! A thoufand repeated' wrongs inform me of it : they have rifen, one over another, in mountainous 'oppreffion to my heart, till it could endure no more. . Feeble, miftaken man !. In thofe happy days when I approached you firft, my ihoughts were loyal, my means were honeft, and ту intentions pure. Pure? Yes, madam, pure. You never yet knew what purity meant! I came void of guile, with au open and honourable offer of my heart. I made no difficulties, felt no fcruples, harboured no fufpicions. In return for "which I was doubted, catechifed, chidden, ti ifled with, and infulted. When I hoped for fympa-, thy, I met rebuke ; and while my affec- G 5 tions
tions glowed admiration, yours* retorted contempt. <Youn hearť was prepoffeffed: it had« no' room for me : it excluded me, fcorned me; and afr the 1 firft opportunity avowed its hatred. Go on»! ------ Neittíe-T your mift'akes, your itccufations, nor your anger fliall move me — F pity your errors. Continue to afcribe that'to^myinjuftice, or t04i worfe motive, if a worfe you can find, wbich was the proper fruit of your irafcible and vindictive temper. Reconcile your own actions lo your own heart, if you can ; v and prove to yourfelf F meriti the perfidy, afiault; and imprifonment you have practifed upon me: as well as the mifchief which I have every reafon to fuppofe you intend. Then,'madam, avoid it! Spare both yourfelf and me the violence you fore¬ bode ? What l· Sink before unruly paffion ? Staitd in awe of vice? Willingly adminifter to "fliamelefs appetites, and- a malignant fpirit of revenge ?~NeYcr, while I have life í Stop!
Step·!-—Bewarr!-"-*! am not mailer of my own affections ! I am iw ai fiate littìc fliort of phrenfy !—Be rhe mean« fair 01? foul!, mine-you fliall be-—The decrees öf Fate are not more fixed— -Ishave fworn xli and' though fire from heaven wailed to'dc- vour me, I will keep 1 my oath !—»Could you even yet but think of me as perhaps ï deferve —> ! I fay, could you^ madam— * I' cannot, will not many you ! Nothing you 1 can fay, nothing you' can' threaten, nothing you can act ihall make me ! Be lefs hafty in your contempt !—Fear mc not ! ------ Scorn for fcorn, injury foi* in¬ jury, and hate for hate ! I hate only your errors ! I fcorn nothing but vice—On the virtues' of which a* mind like yours is capable my foul would dilate with ecftafy, and' my hearť would doat ! But you have ibid yourfelf to crookednefs î Bafe threats, unmanly terrors} and brute' violence are your defpicable "engines j— ι Wretched man ! They are impotent !—» They turn upon yourfelf; me they cannot harm !—I am above you ! с б I care
Icare noti for myfelf—I have aheady fecuţed infamy—I haveţ paid the price, and vvill enjoy the forfeituie—Had you treated me with tlje generous ardent love I fo early felt for yoiJjfc all had been we'l— I the happieft of tóen, and you the firft of women ! But youi own injuftice has dug the pit into which we muft all down—It is Avide and welcome ruin '—Even now, contemned as I have been, fcoined as I am» I would fain ufe lenity and feci kind¬ nefs. I will take ìetiibution —no power fliall prevent me—but t would take it ten¬ derly. * Oh fliame upon you, man ? — Tendei ly? —«Can the mifchief j and the mifeiy in which you have involved youifelf and fo many orneis ;' can treacheiy, buital foice, bruifes, imprifonment, and rape be coupled with tendei nefs? If you bave any fpark of noble feeling yet remaining in your heait, cheriih it : but if not, fpeak truth to yourfelf! Do not attempt to varnifli fuch foul and, deteftable guilt with fair words ! I would
4 would advife, not varnifli ! What I have done, I have done--I know my doom— Ί am already ■ branded J Oppro¬ brium-has fet her indelible mark upon me ! I am indexed to all eternity ! , . You miflake, Clifton '—Beware !—You miflake ! You miflake ! ' [It is impoflible to imagine, Fairfax, the energy with' which thefe exclamations burft from her— It was a fleeting but falfe cordial to л ту heart.] Of all your errors that is the mofl fatal ! Whatever -rooted prejudices or un¬ juft laws may affért to the contrary, we are accountable only for what,we, do, not for wliat we have done. r Clifton beware ! Mark me—I owe you!no enmity for- the pail : I combat only wijth the prefent. Dò not delude me with fhadows.· Brins your doctrine to the teft : if you bear me no enmity, if what I "have done can be forgotten, and wbat I .would do— ! -Ma¬ dam— !■—Anna— !—Once more, and for the I aft time—take me ! - , s It cannot be !—It cannot be ! ■ Then,
Then, fince you will fliew no> mercy, ¿xpečť none. . Your menaces äre^ain, man ! ï tell you again, I do not fear you I I will beg no pity from you—I dare endutr more than you*dare inflict"! I ammot to be braved fionrmy purpofe'! "The bafis of nature is· more uPihaken ! High as your courage is, you' will find a fpirit in me that can mounťftifl higher! Courage? Oh fliame'! Name it not?! Where was· your courage when you de¬ coyed my defender from'me? The man you durft nott face ?-» Where is he!—What Jiave you done with nira 1 ?— Laura 3 has given 5 you myletter—Should your practices have readied his life !-—But no !—It can¬ not Be ! An act fo very vile as that not even the errors of your mind could reach t —Courage ?—Even me you durft not face in freedom ľ Your courage employed a band'of ruffians againil me, fingly; a wo¬ man too, over whom your manly valour would tower V Bilt there is no fuch mighty difference as prejudice fuppofes. Courage has
lias neither fex noť form : it is an energy of mind, of which your bafe proceedings- fliew I have infinitely the moll. This bids me ftand firm, and meet yauu worft: daring undauntedly ! This be affured wfll make me tlie victor ! I 1 tell you,, man, it places me above you ! Urge me no more!—Beware of met You have driven me mad ! Do not tempt a> defperate mam! Refinance will be de¬ ftruction) to you, no» matter that to me it be pei dition ! My account is clofedV and I am reconciled to ruin !— Yom ihall be mine !—Though hell gape for me, you ihall· be mine !—Qnce more beware ! ï warn you not toiconlend ! Why, man, w-hať would you» do ? Is murder your intenť? —While I have life I fear you not !—And think you that biu- fality can taint the» dead ? Nay, think you' that, were you endowed with the fuperior force which the vain name of man fuppofesy and could accompliih 1 the bafeñVpurpofe of your heart, I would falfely take guilt to myfelf; or imagine Γ Had 1 received the fmalleff
fmalleft blemiíh, from 'impurity which never reached my mind ? That I would lament, or ih un the woild, or walk in open day opprefled by Aliarne I did not meiit? Ko !—'For youipeihaps I might weep, but for myfelf I would not íhed a tear ! Not a tear!—You cannot injuie me—I am above you '—If you mean to deal me blows or death, heic I ftand ready to fuffer : but till Л am dead, oi fenfelefs, I defy you to do me haim!—Bethink you, Clifton! I lee tbe ftruggles of уощ foul : there is vir¬ tue among them. Your eye fpeaks the reluciance of yom hand. Your heart« fpurns at the mifchief your paffions would peipetrate ' — Remember — Unlefs } ou have recourfe to fome malignant, fome ciuel, fome abominable means, you ne¬ ver, ihall accompliih (o bafe a purpofe I т -But -you cannot r be fo guilty, Clifton ! »—You cannot!—I know not by what perverfe fatality you have been milled, for you have a mind fitted for the fublimeft emanations of vii tue! -^-No, you cannot!— There is fomething within yqu that lays tooihong a liands upon you! Malice fo black
black is beyond you ! Your very foul ab¬ bots its own guilt, and is therefore "driven frantic!—Oh, Clifton! You that were born to be the champion of truth, the in-" ftructoi of error, and the glory ot the earth ! —My heart yeains over you—Awake!—· Rife 1—Be a man ! Divine, angelic creature !—Tool, mad¬ man, villain! With thefe exclamations I inftantly burft from* the chamber—Conviction, aftoniih¬ ment, remorfe, tendernefs, all the paffions that could fubdue the human foul ruflied upon me, till I could fupport no more.
Of all the creatures God everjformed fhe is the moil wonderful '-—I have repeated fomething like her words ; but had yon feen her geftures, Jier countenance, her eye, her glowing indignant foi titude at one moment,- and her kindling compre- Benfive benevolence the next, like me you would have felt an iirefiftible impulfe to catch fome fpark of a -flame fo hea¬ ven! '- And
And now what is to be done ! I am torn by contending paflions I—»If I releafe her theie is an end to all ; except to my difgrace, which will be everlafting—'—■ Give her to the arms of Henley ?----I can¬ not bear it, Fairfax !—I cannot bear it '-— Death, racks, infamy itfelf to fuch a thought were infinitude of blifs I What can I do ? bhe fays truly : con- tpïdb over, her,, by any but brutal! means is irtöpoffible-^-SfasaU I be brtitaU—And moťe; brutal even than my own ruffian* agents? She has magnanimity—But what have thofe cyphers of beings who call· them¬ felves her relations ? Shall they mount the dunghill of their vanity, clap their wings, and exult, as if they too had conquered a Clifton ? Even the villain Mac Fane would not fail to fcout at me ' Nay the very go-between, the convenient chans* bermaid heifelf, forgetting the ligjitnefs of her own heels, would ,blefs heifelf and claim her fliare in the miraculous virtue of the
the fex ! WW ! Become the feoff of tbe tea-table, the bug-bear of the bed-cham¬ ber, and the ftandingjeft of the tavern ?— I. will return this- inftant, Faiifax, and put her boafted ftrength and courage to the proof—Madnefs !—I forget that no¬ thing lefs than depriving her of fenfe can be effectuai. She knows her ftrong hold : victory never yet was gained by man, ímglvj over woman, wk> was* mi wiflmg to be vanquiflied, I will not yield her up, Faiifax !—She -never iti ail be 1 Henley's ! ------Again and again flie never filali' !—I dared' not meeť hím '—So íhe 1 told me !—Ha !------ Üareí not?—I will' ftill devife a means'—I will have my revenge !—This vaunted^ Henley ■then ihall know how much í dare !------1 will conquer! Should I be obliged to come like Jove to âemele, in flames,' and fliould' we both be reduced to afheshľ tbe conflict, I will enjoy her !—Let one urn hold our* duft ; and when the fire has purified' it of its angi y and oppofing particles, perhaps it may mingle İn; peace. C CLITTON.
LETTER -CXX. Ί -—gSSgj?,Br ii COKE CLIFTON ν TO GUY TAIRFAX. \ London, Dowy-Slieet. İT' fhall not be !------ She fliall not efcape me thus !—I will not endure this infuffer¬ able, this contemptible recantation of my wrongs [' Fear is beneath me, and what have I to hope ? I have made mifeiy cer¬ tain ! I have paid the price of deftruction, and will îpg it to my heart ' I know how often I have prevaricated, and have loiteied with levenge ; but I have not loft the flame: it bums ftill, and never fliallex- piie 1— ţ \ The night at Brompton, though anight of ftorms and evil augury, was heaven to the
the one I have juft paffed. Sleep and refthave forfaken me. 'Tis long fince I clofed my eyes ; I know not indeed when ; but laft night I did not attempt it. I traverfed my loom, opened my windows, fliut them again, liftened to the difcontented mono¬ tony of the watchman without hearing him, thought over my never-forgotten in¬ juries, my vengeance, and all the defola- rion that is to follow, and having ended began again ' There were flirieks and cries of murder in the ih eet, about midnight; and this was the only mufic by which I remember to have been roufed. But it was momen¬ tary. My reveries returned, and feenes of horror rofe, more fwarming, dun, and gbaftly ! My waking dreams are eternal—Well, fol would have them !—They prolong re¬ venge !—I would have him by the throat for ages !—Him !—-—Henley !—Would grapple with ' him ;' would ftab and be itabbed ; not in the fictions of 'a torturing fancy, but arm to arm, ileel to fteel, poi¬ fon
fon to poifon ! Ay, did I not know be would refufe дну fair challenge, hero though he be and cafed in innocence, I would inftantly fly to Jet him loofe upon me, that î migbt turn and tear him !— Why ihat were delectable í And can it not be ? Can ¿no fuffering move, no wrongs provoke, no taunts flir hım to refentment ? Is be Godj, or is he man ? To me he is demon, legion, and has poffeffed "me wholly î Liar that I am ! How came I to forget thebeauteous fbrcerefs with whom I found bim leagued ? I have heard them called angels of light ; but I have known them only fiends ! They , goad me with their virtues, mock at my phrenfy, defy my rage ; and though furrounded by rape, deftruction, and .defpair, ileep and fmile, while J ,awake and howl !
Injury and infult are bufy with me !— This fifter of mine is in town at Sir Ar¬ thur's. As flie has made the journey I may
may expect a vifit fiom her foon : but flie fliall find no admiflion ¡here. I want no more tormentors !
As I foreboded, flie has juft been, and has behaved in character. She would take no denial from the valet ; he was but an infant to the Amazon ; flie would herfelf fee if I were at home, and in fhe came.—■ The fellow does not want cunning, and he ran up ftairs before her, and called out aloud, pmpofelyfor me to hear her-----~ " You may fee, madam, if you pleafe 5 " the door is locked, and my mailer has " taken the key-with'him." Fie knew I was determined not to fee her, and while he defignedly made all the clatter he could, and placed himfelf be¬ fore the entrance, I took the means he had devifed. She came, turned him afide s examined the door, puflied violently againft it, and I believe would willingly have broken it open; but finding her good intentions, I fet my Ihoulder to the panel,
panel, taking caie not to impede the light through the keyhole, which my valet fells me was infpected by her. She rumi¬ nated a few féconds and then went away ; incredulous and high İn indignation. Well !—I fought for waifaie, and it' has found me. My former encounters it feems were but the ikirmiflies of a paitifan ', this is a deadly and decifive battle !
It is now five o'clock, and I have had a ftin ing morning. So much the better; action İs relief. A meffage came to me from Lord Fitz-Allen, defiling to fpeak with me. I had an inclination not to have gone ; but reflecting fuıtheı 1 determined to obey his fummons. Flowever, when I fent up my name, I defired, to know if my fifter weie theie ; and was anfweicd in the negative. I then made my bowJ:o bis lordfliip, taking care to inform him that my fiftei behaved with great impropriety, and that I was refolved not to fet her, .left I too fliould forget that lefpect
refpect due to my family and myfèlf which ilie had violated. The peer began with circumlocutory hints concerning tbe elope¬ ment—" An unaccountable affair !—No " tidings had yet arrived !—Surmifes arid " rumours of a very ftrange and diflionoV- " able nature were whifpered! — Mif- " chief, rape, nay even murder' were « dreaded!" I refufed lo interpret any of thefe infi¬ nuations as applicable to myfelf. At-lafl. his lordfhip, after many efforts, faid he had a favour to beg of me, which he hoped I fliould not think unreafoliable. I de¬ filed him lo inform me what this favour was ; and put fome firmnefs in my man¬ ner, that his lordfliip might fee I was not in a temper to fuffer an infult. FIc anfwei ed, for his own part, he had no doubts : he knew my family, and had always affirmed I could not act unworthy of ibe gentleman. But, for the peace of mind of Sir Arthur and the other relations of the young lady, he would efteem İt an obligation done to him, if I would declare, vol. v. η upon
upon ray honour, that I knew nothing of lier elopement ; of the place flie has been conveyed to, or wheçe flie is at prefent. I then retorted upon his lordfliip, that the preface to this requeft entirely pre¬ cluded compliance ; that thofe who whif¬ pered and fpread furmifes, and rumours, muft be anfwei able for the confequences of their own officioufnefs ; and that with refpect to myfelf, I fliould certainly, under fuch cucumftances, refufe to anfwer to in¬ terrogatories. My tone was not very conciliatory, and his lordfliip knew not whether to be angry or pleafed. But while he was pondering I thought proper to make my exit; and leave him to fertle the conteft between his pride and his puerility as well as he w?s able. At my return I found a letter from my After, which I will neither anfwer nor open. I have my fill of fury, and want no more !
, Damnation on íheir infolence! They have
have been making application to the office at Bow-Street ! A requeft has juft been fent me, a very foft and civil one, it is true, from the fitting magiitrate, that,I would do him the honour to come and fpeak a word with him, on an affair that concerned a very great and refpectable fa¬ mily. I returned for anfwer that I was engaged, and that I fhould notice no fuch meffages : but that if any man, great or fmall, had to complain of me, the Jaw un¬ derftood its duty, and that I fliould be readily found at all times. Whether this be the motion of my fu- perb and zealous fifter, or of the arrogant peer, is more than I can divine. But I fliall know fomc day, and fliall then per¬ haps ftrike a balance. I have no doubt thai emiffaries and fcouts arc abroad, and that I am watched. I was this evening to have met Mac Fane* at the Shakefpeare ; but I will not go. Yet as it is pay night, the hungry fcoun- diel muft not be difappointed. I will therefore write a note to him, and invite и 3 him
him to come and fup with me. He will be an agreeable companion ! But even his Company is better, at this moment, than folitude. I will not let my fervant carry the note directly to him ; for if they have their fpies in the field, that might be dangeious. lie fhall take it to the Mount coffee-houfe, and there get a chairman to convey it in fafety. I will tell Mac Fane likewife to come'trnough the ihop door; for I am only in lodgings ; and to ftep immediately out of a hackney-coach. I laugh at their counterplots, and with 1 had nothing moie to difturb me than the fear of being de¬ tected by any exeition of their cunning, even though my kind fifler be appointed their commander in chief. С CLIFTON. P. S. They might have ferved the caufe in wbich they have engaged "more effec¬ tually, had their proceedings been lefs Violent and offenfive. They do but nerve me in refolution. The lefs public they had made
made the affair, the more they would have fliewn their gcncralibip. If they be thus determined to brand mc, can they fuppofe that my vengeance fliall not ouiftrip theirs? I own I am perplexed about lhe means— Invention fails me ! I have debated whe¬ ther I fliould call in the aid of Mac Fane ; but the idea is too deteftable !—No ! I would rather take a pair of piftols, and difpatch her firft and myfelf next, than expofe her beauties lo fuch'ruffian defpi¬ cable rafeáis !—Befide 1 would have her willconcerned—And how to conquer thai? —I fliall be driven, I forefee I fliall, to ι fomc unheard-of act of defperation !—■ Drugs aie a mean, a pitiful expedient : not to mention that flie is-aware of them, and ufes a kind of caution which it would be difficult to overcome. She referves the meal of one day for the next, after having fuffered Laura to eat her part; fo that inanity, fleep, or other effects, if pro¬ duced, would firft appear in the maid. This perhaps is one of the reafons by which flie is induced ftill to keep her : and η 3 were
were flie removed, and could fufpect it were for this purpofe, I am convinced ihe would eat no more—No ! She muft be fairly told the deep defppir of my mind ! and if that will not move her, why then— Death !
LETTER CXXL
LOUISA CLIFTON TO 4ER BROTHER. COKĽ CLIFTON.
G> oj verni -Street. WlïERE is Anna St. Ives?—Whcrefc my friend ? Where is the youth to whom you owe exiftence ?—Man of revenge*, an¬ fwer me! Oh God! Oh God !—Is it poffible ?—Can it be that you, Coke Clif¬ ton, the fon of my mother, the hoped for friend of my heart, the expected cham¬ pion
pion of virtue, can turn afide to fuch bafe and pitiful vice; fuch intolerable, fuch abfurd, fuch deep hypocrify ? And why? What caufe ? Is this the reward of their uncommon virtues ? And you, Ob man ! Did they not la¬ bor hourly, inceffantly, with the purity of faints and the ardour of angels, to do yoiţ good ? Was it not their fole employ¬ ment; their firft duty, and their deareft: hope ? Did they ever deviate ? Did they not return urbanity for arrogance, kindnefs for contempt, and life for blows?—Can you, Clifton, dare yoU be thus wicked ? And wiil ) ou perfiil ?— , If you have brought them to harm, if your practices have reached their lives, earth docs not contain fo foul, fo wicked' a monfter !— Surely·this cannot be ! Surely you have fome drop of mother's blood in you, and canriot' be actuated by a fpirit fo wholly demon ! What fhall-I do? 'What fliall I fay? Flow fliall I awaken a foul fo fteeped in ц 4 iniquity,
,ЦЯ ·.' ANNA;STţ,iyES.Î iniquity, Fp . dead to; excellence, :fo obili* nate, in 'ill.?--Clifton'! -r- You were 'not fprmed fox this ! You-hàvè: a mind that mjgbt' haye been tbe fit : companion of di¬ vine natures !—It maybe ftilf! —Awake ! ^iew the light, and turn from crimes, pol- Ijutipiv .and abhWrence, to virtue, love, and'ttultb,! ; ;: ,·. V: . •■:Kn.Gw you not tlie beaming charity of her whom.you perfecute, if—Oh God!— ' Surely this is. vain terror ! Surely Anna. St. Ives is (till among the living !—· . sCiifton, once again I fay, remember the un tainted'-benevolence of her foul! Js it, can it be forgotten by you ? Which of your good.qualities· was ev,er forgotten by her?. Flear her deforibe ihejii in her own language !*.. · ■■} ■.·'■:■'"■■■ λ : .-· '- ' /■ Thefe
Thefe are a few of the commendations with which her defciiptions abound, Com¬ mendations of you, oh man of mifchief and miflake ! >They*erc quotations from her letters. Read them ; remember them ; think on all flie has done for you, all flie has faid for you, and all you have made her fuffer ! What fliall I fay ? My fears are infi¬ nite, my hopes few, my anguifli intolera¬ ble !—For the love of God, brother, do not rob the world of two people who were born to be its light and pride ! Do not be this diabolic inftiument of paffion and er¬ ror ! If they ftill have being, reftore them to the human race.—You know not the wrong you do !— Tis heinous, 'lis hateful wickednefs ! Can a mind like yours feel no momentary remorfe, no glow of return¬ ing virtue, no fudden refolution to perform a great and'glorious act of juftice on your¬ felf? If you value your foul's peace, hear me ι h 5 Awake
Awake from this -guilty dream, and be once more the brother of the agonizing L. CLIFTON".
LETTER CXXII.
LOUISA CLIFTON TO MRS. WENBOURNE.
GtofvefiOi'. Street. PEAR hi AD АД1, Y OU have been kindly plcafod to rcr queft'I would give you fomc account of tbe means we are purfuing, in hopes to "Obtain traces.that fhould lead to a difcovery of the very ftrange affair by which we are all perplexed.and afflicted. I am forry to fav. that I can do' little .more, than narrate : the
the diftrefs of the various раз ties, who' think themfelves interefted in the lofs of tbe dear friend of myheait, and of the youth fo well woithy of her affections. Of the grief of Sir Arthur, madam, you have yourfelf been a witnefs : nor docs it feem to abate. I fliould wonder indeed if it could ; for though I wiih to cheriih hope, I own that the fecrecy and filence with which this black Arata gem has been^ carried into effect are truly terrifying. ' Highly as I efteem and reverence the vil tues of young Mr. Henley, I have been free enough to own to you, madam, I never was any admiier of the qualities and proceedings of his father. Juftice how¬ ever obliges me to fay that he at prefent expieffes a ι eg ι et fa deep, for the lofs of his fon, as to piove that he has a confider¬ able fenfe of his worth. Money has been the fole object of his effoits: yet, though his fon had fo gieat a fum in his poifeffion at the time be difappeared; he feems to think but little of the money, compared H 6 to
to the lofs which is indeed fo infinitely more deplorable. While 1 live I ihall love and efteem Mrs. Clarke, and her niece Peggy; whofc kind hearts overflow with affection, both for my Anna St. Ives and young Mr. Henley. Well indeed may Peggy remem¬ ber poor .Frank. He was her favİour in the hour of her diftrefs. She takes no reft herfelf, nor will flie fuffer her huiband or her brother to take any. They are all continually on the watch ; and lo do the men juftice, they do not need a fpur. Mr. Webb, her brother, with whofe unfortunate hiftory I fuppofe you aie ac¬ quainted, gives proofs of zeal which are very affecting. The tears have frequently guflied from mc, at feeing the virtuous anxiety of his mind, and at recollecting what that mind was, how and by whom it was proferved, and that its whole acti¬ vity is now exerted, with the ftrong and cheering hope of returning fome portion of the good it has received ! I know, madam, how great your forrow muft
muft be, as well as "that of all the once happy relations of a 'young lady of endow¬ ments and virtues fo iare. Yet deep "as this forrow is, I think it fcarcely can ex¬ ceed the anguifli I feel ; convinced as X am that my miftaken, my unhappy brother is the caufe of this much dreaded mifeiy. I told you, madam, I would go to him. I have bten, and could gain no admiflion. I have written ; and have received no an¬ fwer. Thefe circumftances, added to the perturbation of mind which was fo difco- vcrable in him when he was daft at Rofe- Bank, do but confirm my fears of his guilt. But as it becomes us to act, and not to lament, while tliere is^any poffibility that action fliould give us relief, I joined Mr. Abimelech Henley in his opinion, that we ought to apply to the civil power for redrcfs. We firft indeed prevailed on Lord Fitz-Allen to fpeak to Mr. Clifton; but it- was to no purpofe : my brother behaved, as I propbefied he would, with difdainful filence. town I had fome hopes that my letter
letter would have touched bis heart : ' I am* forry to find they were fo ill-founded. Mr, Clifton having refufed even to deny lìisknowledge of the affair tobis Lordfliip,- he confented that application fliould he' made to a civil magiftrate. But Lord Fitz-Allen is ftrangely prejudiced, and is perfuaded, or affects to be, that Mr. Clif¬ ton, being a gentlemen, is incapable of a diflionourable act; and that young Mr. Hepley and Anna St. Ives have eloped.— The fum of money Mr. Henley had it in his poffeffion confirms him in his opinion : and he has feveral times half peifuaded Sir Arthur, and fome others, to be of his fen¬ timents. Fîearîng this, and finding no pofitive accufation, and that nothing ~ but furmife could be preferred againft Mr. Clifton, whofe character was undei ftood to be' highly vindictive, the magiftrate refufed to do any thing more than fend a polite re¬ queft, that he would come and fpeak in his prefence to tbe parties concerned. My brother refufed in terms of menace and
NOVEL."
'and defiance ; and we returned home hopelefs; yet again having recourfe to watching the door of my brother's lodg¬ ings, as has been done for thefe feveral -days. But we have learnt nothing. And what indeed can we learn ? Mr. Webb and his brother-in-law have twice followed him on foot, to the livery itables ; and have feen him mount his horfe, and ride out of town: but the fpeed with which be went quickly took him out. of fight. The roads he chofo were in oppofite di¬ rections, but that they might eafily be, and yet lead lo the fame place. They are out at prefent ; for their induftry is un¬ wearied. It is in vain to think of purfuing my brother on horfeback ; for he muft infalli¬ bly fee his purfuer. FIc went one time over AVeftminfteï-bridge, v and the other through Tybuin-turnpike up to Padding- ton. _ Their prefent project is, the firft time he goes out, to waylay both thefe roads, and get afliftants. Mr. Webb is a fwift runner ; but the chance of fuccefs I am
am afraid is very fmall indeed ! Flowever it becomes them, and us, and indeed every body, not to defift, till the whole of this dark tranfaction be brought to light. I am, madam, &c. L. CLIFTON.
LETTER СХХШ.
COKE CLIFTON To GUY TAIRFAX.
London, Dova Street. W FIY ay ! He who opens the flood¬ gates of mifchief is neceffarily in moft danger of being fwept away by the tor- îent !------1 have drunken deeply of ruin, and foon fliall have my fill' ! You warned me to beware of this raven ; you told me he fcented carrion !-*-! laugh¬ ed
ed at your prophecy !—-It was fulfilled !—. I am a gull '—The fleeced, cheated, de¬ fpicable gull of tbe infernal vitlaiti Mac Fane ! > ( It was right ι that I fliould be loaded with every fpecics of contempt for myfelf. I have been the fool, tbe gudgeon, ibe ineffable afs to lofe a fum of money to him, which to pay would be deftruction !--—I begin to hate myfelf with moil ftrange in¬ veteracy ! Could I meet fuch another fellow, I would fpit in his face—Faiifax, it is true—By hell I hold myfelf in mofl rooted and ample antipathy ! I find I have ftrangely miftaken my own character and talents—I once thought to have driven the woild before me, and to have whipped oppofition into immediate compliance : but it feems I am myfelf one of the very forry wretches at whom I was fo all alive and ready to gibe, and fpurn ! Thefe aie odd and unaccountable things ! And it'appcars that I am a very poor crea¬ ture ! A moil indubitable driveller ! The twin-brother of imbecility! Ay, tbe coun¬ terpart
terpart and compeer of Edward St. Ives, and the tool of themoftbarefaced of cheats, as well as his familiar !—Well ľ I have lived long enough to make this difcovery ;. and it is now high time to depart !" I wrote to you but yefterday : but events haftily tread on each other's heels, and if I do not relate them now I never ihall.— I told yoit I expected the gambler to fup¬ per, by our own invitation—Ay, ay !—I am a very Solomon !—« I dined at home. I know not indeed to what extremes the St. Ives hunters migbt proceed : or whether they would make accufation upon oath, fuflicient to authorife a magiftrate in granting a war¬ rant, to bring me before him ; but the attempt muft .have been impotent and abortive, I therefore determined to brave them : however I heard no more of them or their fufpicions. As I fat ruminating on pail events, on my fifter and her epiftle, and particularly on the zeal with which Anna St. Ives ap¬ pealed to the letter written by her, which I had
ï bad received from Laura, my curiofity was fo far excited that at lait ï determined to read them both. I own, Fairfax, they both moved me !—This fifter of mine, en¬ raged as I am againft her, has fomebow found the art of making herfelf refpečled. Her zeal has character and efficacy in it : I mean perfuafion. I could not refiftfome of the fenfations ihe intended to infpire. She cited paifages from the letters of her friend that were daggers to me ! At the very time I was feeking to quarrel with Anna, flie angel-like was inceflant in my praife !—And fuch praifes, Fairfax — ! There was no refilling it !—She thought genei oufly, nobly, ay fublimely of me': while my irafcible jealoufy, falfe pride, and vindictive fpirit were eager only to find caufe of offence 1 And yet I know not !—I cannot keep my mind to a point !—Surely / had caufe of offence: real caufe ?—Surely the retri¬ bution I fought had juftice in it ?—She could not be wholly blamelefs ?—No ϊ¬ ί hat would indeed be diffraction ! I then
I then ventured rorread the letter of Anna—On paper or in fpeech ihe is the fame : energetic, awful, and^a'íFeťting ! ' While I was reading this laft, 'ВДас Fane entered, and foon put an end to.rny medi¬ tations. Did I-tell you I had'been fool enough to invite him to fupperi·—He had not been with me half an hour before I was moft intolerably weary of his com- After having vapoured of-'the feats of himfelf and the fcowling rafcal his col¬ league, to remind me of my high obliga¬ tions to tbem, and talking as ufual with moil bitter malevolence againft Henley, he foon began to defcant ou the old fub¬ ject, gaming----- To aflc à ^madman why he is mad were vain ! I was importuned by bis jargon—" He had been pigeoned " only taft night of no lefs than feven ** hundred pounds !" Repetitions, impre¬ cations, and lies, all of the fame kind, fucceeded as fail as he could utter them ! I know all this ougbr- to have put me upon my guard ; and I know too that it did
did not. I believe 1 had fome lurking vanity in my mind ; a perfuafion that I could beat him at picquet. I was weary both of myfelf and him ; was primed for mifchief, and cared not of what kind. If you afk mc for any better reafon, why, knowing him as I did, 1 fuffeied myfclf to be the tool of this follow, I can only fay I have none to give I I ordered my own fervant to fetch half a dozen packs of cards, and imagined this precaution was fome fecurity. What will not men i m agi ίο, when their paffions are afloat and reafon is flown ? To give you the hiftory of how I was led on, from one act of idiotifm to another, or how after having lofi one thoufand I could be lunatic enough to lofe a fécond, and after a fécond a third, and fo on to a tenth, is more than my prefent Lemper of mind will permit. It is quite fufficient to tell you that I have ruined myfejf ; and that there is not, upon the face pf the earth, a fellow I fo thoroughly defpife as Coke Clifton ; no not even Mac Fane himfelf!
himfelf! Below the loweft am I fallen ; for I am his dupe, nay his companion, and wbať- is. worfe his debtor ! It is time I were out of the world—So miferable a be¬ ing does not crawl upon its furface. It is the very heyday of mifchief, and I muft abroad among it. The exact manner of the cataftrophe I cannot forefee, but it muft be tragical. I have fomething brood¬ ing in my mind, the outlines of a conclu¬ fion, which rather pleafes me. I have fworn to avenge myfelf of Anna, difmhciit my fifter, and never to pay Mac Fane..— Thefe oaths muft be kept. Anna muft fall! If ffie will but deign to live afterward, flie fliall be my heir. And for myfelf, I know how to find a ready quietus ' My mind fince this lafl affair is better reconciled to its deftiny, and even lefs dif¬ turbed than before : for previous to this, there feemed to be fome bare poffibility of a generous releafe, on my part, and a more generous forgetfulnefs of injuries on theirs. But nùw s all is over ! I have but to puniili my
my opponents a little, and myfelf much, and having puniihed expire. С CLIFTON. P. S. I have not paid the fcoundrel his thoufand pounds. He propofed a bond for the whole, on which he faid he could raife money. This I was determined not to give, and told him he muft wait a few days, till I had confulted my lawyer and looked into my affairs, and I would then give him a determinate anfwer. lie was beginning to affume the contemptible airs of a bully ; but I was in no tempei to bear the leaft infult. The real rage of my look filenced the mechanical ferocity of his. I bade him remember I could hit a china plate, and that I fliould mink proper to take my own mode of payment. He then changed his tone, and began to commend his foul to Satan, İn a thoufand different forms, if he had ever won a hundred pounds at a fitting in his whole life before. I fneered in his face, fhewed him the door, and bade him gooçl night ; and he walked quietly away. LETTER
ANNÄ'ST ( ;'ivÉs:
■ : Lï"t;T;E..R--CXXIV. ■:- : ч; ¡LOUISA ; CLIFTÓN - : ■'■v-' 1 '"'..'· 'J".' ■-■ то - "" :.;MRS. WENBOURNE. • 'Grofvenor-Stteet.' ,., ;/ DEAR MADAM,. ■ . y ' r _ r A.S|;I havetaken upon myfelf the rTainful duty of informing you of all that paffes, relative to this unhappy affair it becomes me tö 'be punctual;, It is 'afflict ing to own that our agitation and 'diftrefs, inftead of abating, are increafed. Finding it impoffible to gain; a fight öf my brother, I determined to attempt to queftion bis yaleti Мп'Л^еЬЬ' received ınymftrüctıons accordingly, watched him to fpme diftaiice from ; thè houfe, and deli¬ vered à AneffägefiOm me^that if be would- Coiiie to nie I would prèfêiit 'Mm' with teii guineas. He
He made no hefitation, but followed Mr. Webb immediately. Either he is very artful or very ignorant of this affair. One circumftance excepted, he 4 appears to know nothing. I promifed him any reward, any fum he fliould himfelf name, if he could but give us fuch information as might lead to the recovery of our loft friends : but he prolefted very folemnly he had none to give ; except that he owns having been employed, by his matter, to inveigle thé lad away, who wrote the anonymous let- ler, and whom Mr. Clifton, by practifing on the lad's credulity and gratitude^ font to France. The valet indeed acknowledges his mafter is exceeding difturbed in mind5 that he does not fleep, nor even go to bed, .except fome times tofling himfelf on it with his clothes on, and almoft inftantly rifing again ; and that he has font for his attorney, to make his will. I will not endeavour to paint my fenfa¬ tions at hearing this account. I will only vol. v." 1 add
add that another incident has lia^pcned, which gives tbem additional acutenefs. I believe, madam, you have heard both my brother and my Anna fpeak of and defcribe a young French nobleman, who paid bis aádieffes 'to. her, and who was tne' occafion of the raffi leap into the lake, by which Mr. Clifton endangered his life ? This gentleman, Count de Beaunoir, is arrived in London ; and has this morning paid a vifit to Sir AithurSt. Ives. He enquired fiift and eageily after my friericl; wifh whom, like all who knQw Tier, he is İn raptures. Sir Aıthııı, foiget- ging his 'character, and the apparently rodomontade but to him very feiious man¬ ner in which he had declaied himfelf her champion, told him the whole ftoiy, as far as J it 'is known to us ; not onvitting to mention Mr. Clifton as the perfon on whom all our fufpicions fell, and relating lo hım fhe fulľgrdundsof thofe fufpicions. The aftonifliment of tbe Count oceafi¬ oned him to liften wïüVuncommon atten¬ tion to what he beard; and he'clofed the 'narrative
nafrativé of Sir Arthur by affirming it was all true. He was convinced beyond contra¬ diction 'of its truth, Yor he had himfelf brought over the lad, whom Mr. Clifton bad fent, with pretended difpatcbes, 4o a friend of his in Paris. The lad it appears, fufpecting all was not right, and finding no probability of returning, but on the contrary that he was watched, and even refufed a paffport,, had applied to the Count through the medium of his fervanls, with whom he had former¬ ly been acquainted, to protect and afford him the means of returning to England. The lad was font for, his ftory heard, and he was then queftioned concerning Anna St. Ives ; and he had heard enough of the affair from Mr. Abimelech Henley, and from the fervants, to know that the propofed match, between Mr. Clifton and Anna, Was broken .off; and that flie re¬ fufed to admit liis vifits. When Count de Beaunoir lafl faw Sir Arthur, at Paris, he had affured him -very ferioufly that/fhould ever Anna St. Ives find herfelf difengaged 1 2 and
and he knew - it, he would inftantly make her. a tender of his hand and fortune : and he had no fooner heard the lady's ftory than he determined immediately to make his intended journey to England. My heart fliudders while I relaie it, but I dread left it fliould be a fatal jour¬ ney, for him or my brother, or both ! For he declared to Sir Arthur, without hefita¬ tion, he would wait on Mr. Clifton direct¬ ly, and oblige him either to produce Anna St. Ives, or meet him in the field. Wretched folly ! Deftructive error !— When will men ceafe to think that vice and virtue ought to meet on equal terms ; and that injury can be atoned by blood ? The Count had left his addrefs with Sir Arthur, and the moment I heard what bad paffed F flew to his lodgings. He was not at home, and I waited above an hour. At lafl he" came, and I attempted to fliew him both the folly and wicked¬ nefs of the condu л he was purfuing. Jle liftened to mc wiih the utmoft po¬ litenefs, paid me a thoufand compliments, acknowledged
í' acknowledged the-V truth of every thing I faid, but very evidently determined to act in a manner directly Oppofite. I very afli¬ duoufly laboured to make him promife, upon his honour, lie would not feek re- drefs by duelling ; but' in vain. He an¬ fwered by evafion ; with all poffible defire- to bave obliged me, but with a foregone conclufion that it could not be. ^ ' ■ Pardon me, madam, for writing a nar¬ rative fo melancholy: but fincerity is ne¬ ceflary ; intelligence might have come to you in a diftorted form, and might have produced much worfe effects. For my own part, I have no other mode of conduct but that of writing and offpeaking the Ample truth ; being convinced there is no iliade of difgu'.fj, artifice, or falfehood, that is not immoral in principle, and per¬ nicious in practice. I have been vi r/ bufy. I have fen t "for the lad whom the count brought over with him, and have made enquiries. The anfwers he gave me all tend to confirm our former fufpicions. He has related the ï 3 ftory
ílory, at length, of the manner in which he was inveigled away, and prevailed on to go to France, I next queftioned him concerning his aunt ; and he knows nothing of her, has never heard from her, and is aftoniflied at what can have become of her. He means, however, to gourbis evening to a relation's houfe, where be thinks he is certain that he *fhall bear'of her; and has then promifed to'come and let me know—■—But to what *ригроТе ? We İhall find ibe has been fent Oiit of tbe way by Mr. Clifton : and what further'in formation will that afford?——- None, except 'to confirm what needs no confirming ; except to ihew'thè blindnefs, 'craft, and turpitude of'bis mind ! I am, dear.madam, &c. L. CLIFTON.
LETTER
Λ - "f' LETTER СХХУ. ""COKE CLIFTON. f A) i. ' l'-" TO GUY FAIRFAX, „ с г ι London t Dover Street, ЪРз Fairfax, you haye fuffered the lad ,to escape yo^u ; captioned and entreated as what means ; and with whom he is at pofont? —Vel t l, wefl!—It is no matter -—jI have^quarrcjs enpugb on hand, and enemies enough !—I would fain die in peace with fomebody !— J. forgive you—I fuppofe you did your beft. ţt is exceedingly poflible that,this may ,be tbelaft letter you will ever receive .from д-ре. Remember me now and ¿hen. Should I]Ienley and Anna St. Ives Survive me, t le.t 1 4· them
t them know I was, not fo entirely blind to their woith as they might perhaps fuppofe. Shew them my letters if you will : Л care not who fees them now ! Let the truth be iold ! I fliall be deaf enough to cenfure. I have juft had a vifit fiom the ciazy count ; a threatening one. A challenge has paffed, and we are to meet to-mor¬ row. v So it is agreed ; but I doubt whether I fliall keep the appointment. If there be one fpark of refentment in the foul of Henley, it is poffible I may fail. I mean to give bim the firft chance. It is his by right ; and why fliould not I do right even to him, once in my life ? This farrago of folly, this pride of biith, and riches, and 1 know not what elfe lumber, is very con¬ temptible ! Faiifax, the prefent flate of my thoughts forces more than one truth upon me. But what have 1 to do with truth, in a woild from which I learned fo much error that it was impoffible for me to exift in it ? Thefe wife people fliould leave us fools to wran¬ gle,
irle, be wretched, and cut each other's thioaţs as we lift, without intermeddling : 'lis dangerous. But Truth is a zealot; Wifdom will be crying in the ftreets ; and Folly meeting her feldom fails to deal her blow. My mind is made up : my affairs are fettled, my lawyer has written out my will, and it is figned. You will find your- Telf mentioned in İt, Fairfax. I have no¬ minated my finer my executor, and Anna St. Ives my heir. I have been reading Louifa's letter again : it is full of pathos. She has more undei ftanding than I have been willing to allow, and I have relented. She is not forgotten in my wúll : I would not have her think of me with everlafting hatred. I know not how it is, Faiifax, but* I feel more compunction, at prefent, than I ever remember to have felt before. I am grown into felf-contempt ; and the haughty notions, which were the fuppoit of my high and fometimes arrogant con¬ duct, are faded. I could think only of ι 5 Coke
Coke - Clifton, .andf I nowknow Coke Clif- ton-to^be a-very * wretched dolt ! • -Be ^not deceived by my prefent tone : make no falfe predictions in favouiv either of 'myfelf or Anna St.?Ives., 'Defpair and fate are not more fixed than is my.plan. My horfe-will prefently be at the- door. I fliall mount'híni' the momenť Fhave ended this Jetter, f and fliall proceed directly to Anna. "Tibere, 'after all is ended, the en¬ chantment too ι fliall end, ^and the m i fad- venturous lady-and her imprifoned-knight ihall both be fet free. Should Henley, urged by defpair to-feek revenge, «accept my defiance and meet me İn the field, the conflict muft be fierce, and fuch as might infpire terror. To fay tbe truth, were it not to ! prove myfelf bis e,qual, perhaps his- mailer and vanemiíher, T > would not lift my 'hand againft 'bis life. It r would' be fome relief to f my -foul to fall by bis aţm. He -is .a* no¬ ble fellow, and Л have>done>him^wrapg. Would-be -or Anna but charitably ftrike, Inwould die -ibleffipg them,- eafe d , by the expiatory
ŕ ţ cxptatory blow. Perhaps they s are t th„e oply two beings for whom I ever couţd have had the fame admiration; apfl, jf what they tell me be true, admiration con¬ tinued cilways ripens into love. Tbey -fliewed affection toward me, and would, ?I believe, have loved me. But we did not undei ftand each other, and, the miftake .has been mutually fatal—Would I hajd never injured them '—But it is vain !—The die is caft!—We arc all д fated!—Having accompliihed my revenge, and accompliih it I/wilJ, they cannot Jive and not be mi¬ ferable ! Tbey muft cuife my hated me¬ mory, and blafpheme againft my honour \ —It cannot be otherwife—Let our grave therefore be glorious ! They are brave fpi¬ rits, and will mock my power even ie^ the laft. , I love their high courage. Perhaps they fliall find I have a kindred foul !—rOh t would ; they die forgiving me— ! I know not ; well ^whither my thoughts are wandering—They perhaps may refufe to die—They may fay it is their duty to Jiye, cyen though dppme^l to be wretched ι 6 Д —I
—I know tbem—What tbey think they will act—Well, well!—Let deftiny difpofc ot events—To me all chances are wel¬ come, all are alike. ** As to this count, fliould Henley refufe ^vengeance, I owe him no mercy. 'Twas he who prompted me to the frantic act that firft made me the debtor of the man I have moil injured. I almoft contemn a foe fo infignificant—Not that he is deficient in bravery, or ikill—But what is he ?— What are his wrongs ?— 'Tis lunacy, not anger rankling at lib heart !—Or if it were ?—The hungry wolf-dog is no fii com¬ batant for the famiffied lion ! С CLIFTON. P. S. Fairfax, a new terror has come over me. I told you of the letters of my fifter and Anna, and defcribed fomething of the effect they produced upon me. You may remember I read them previous to my laft damned interview with the villain Mac Fane. I recollect having laid the letter of Anna upon the table, and that it continued
continued lying there for fome time after his entrance. I had my eye upon it, and meant not to put it in mý pocket left it fliould be left there, but lock it up as foon as 1 moved—I forgot it—The letter is loft —I have fearched every where, have en¬ quired, have curfed ; have threatened un¬ heard of punifliment to my fcoundrel, if he have purloined it ; but to no effect. He protefts he knows nothing of it ; and he looks as if he fpoke truth—it contained a fecret relative to Henley—! Should Mac Fane have taken İt up furtively, as I fuppofe fuch thieves are always on the watch—? Why, if he fliould—? FleM bounds!—Blood-thirfty vultures!—Iffo—! I will be gone this inftant !— dt is the very æra of horror !
FRAG-
- FRAGMENT.* ΛΛΠΗΕΤΙ -IER what I am about to write •may ever be found, or whether I thc'writer may ever be heard of more, are both veiy «doubtful events. It may be of fome ufe Ло mankind, íhould this brief narrative hereafter«be readj as it may tend to „ex¬ emplify the progrefs of the paffions, and До ñiew after diaving * begun in error the exceffes of which they are capable. I fpeak under, the fuppofition that this paper may fall into the hands of perfons whp know more of Mr. Clifton, and of the af¬ fair to which I allude, than even I myfelf at prefent know ; or, if I did, than I have time and opportunity to relate. With
Wi tiv that г hope, ι and addreffing myfelf to fuch perfons, Ί wilhendeavour, r astpng as I have the means and jam able, accu¬ rately to recount the particulars of what has befallen me, from tbe time I was firil befet-to tfye lateft minuto of my remaining where I am; whether ι my \removal hap¬ pen by death or releafe; of which, though apparently beyond -hope, it would cer¬ tainly, be wrong to defpair. * Oh, Anna St. Ives ! Should thine eye ever glance^over, this^paper, ignoranLas, I am of thy deftiny,« though-tpo^well affured it is a^fearful onej think not, while'It feem to, narrate thofe incidents only which have happened to myfelf, that I am, atte nti ve v to felf alone ; that I, haye forgotten-tbe. nobler duties of .which we ¡bayctfo,often Sweetly difcourfed; or that the memory of thee; and 'thy fufferings has ever been abfont^frpm my iheail!— ißut f why (bid thee,,be .juft ? Xo whom didft thou <ever»>>do а луПфД wrong ? r Oh paţdon ,me !i—^Liye pn, iliouldft 'thpu ì ftill r be permitted ¡ to live, and labour· with/r^kiJiWed шЬ.уг jiiiíbó .¡gtî.eaţ
great caufe of truth· ! Defpair not ! Heave not a figh, drop not" a tear; but facrifice thy private ills to public good !
, Before I begin, it is nccefllirj; to notice, that I had the fum' of eiffbt thoufand pounds about me, m bank-bills : for it is this circumftance wbicbTeems to have in* furcdmy death. Our walk ν was to have ended by four o'clock, and the money to have been left at the banker's as we re¬ turned. I cannot however acquit myfclf of neglect. I ought not ίο have forgotten that money, under our prefent wretched fyftem, is the grand ftimulus to vice ; that accidents very little dreamed of daily hap¬ pen ; and that procraftination is always an error. Às I was walking with the .lady whofe name I have juft mentioned, in fome fields between Kenfington and Brompton, we faw Mr, Ciifton pafs on horfeback, and I believe in lefs than a minute a man aftault him, and fire a piftol, with an intent to rob.him as I then fuppofed.
Iran to bis aid ; and, immediately after the flight of this real or imaginary robber. I was myfelf attacked, and laid fenfelefs, by a blow I received on tbe fide of my head ; which, as there was no perfon in front able to ftrike at me, muft have come from behind. , . I faw no more at that time of Mr. Clif¬ ton. The blow was very violent, and is' flill feverely felt. When I recovered my fenfes, I found my arms confined by a ftraight waiftcoat ; fuch as are ufed to fecure maniacs. I en¬ deavoured to call for afliftance, but the man who had charge of me, for there were feveral, thruft his thumb in the larynx, forced open my mouth, and gagged me. He has twice had occafion, as he fup¬ pofed. to ufe me thus ; and both times with fuch violence as feemingly to require the utmoft effort mind could make, to re¬ cover refpiration ; the thruft.of his thumb was fo mercilefs, and the fenfation of flrangling fo fevere. They brought me to a houfe thoroughly prepared
prepared for confineipenţ. Jt Ц ap old but heavy building, vyalîed rpun ( d, an^ providco! wjith bars, bc-Jts, chains, maffy tjocks, and every precaution ţp inipede ejTcape. I was led up one pair cf ftairs, to apart¬ ments confining of two chambers : the one j^omy» tl\e other m.ueb finaller ; in wiiich ¿tut is a bed. As foon as I was fafe in the roonj. tjfye flpaŞernıan among thcni, whp as I ( ţiave Дгдце learned is f a pi;o(efled ^е.ерег $ tbj? M ane > Wîgagge4 me, t^ojc^^e ftr^t w^iilcoat, arţ.d ijien ( ţţiev a^ll Jeft me. I (ÌQod I )¿no v w not hpw Iqng ^p ¿h^t ftrn^pr of amazement wl^ţch thejjfcene, an^ the crowding conjectures ( of i nnagina.tion> neceffarily produced. ^t length, I routed ,my min^l to mqre active jenquiry. I tţie,n fet myfelf ¡to ¿треф Ще apartments. .In ,the lai geil therp wajS ( a fire place, and a fire ; ЪцХ neither flıovçl, ţon^s nor poker ; except a final] ftick as a fubftitute for a poker, ^witb yvhich J cer¬ tainly v cpuld r npt^knpck a t man do^wn. ÍTlie furniture
furniture confuted of a chair, a table, a broken looking-glafs, and an old picture, in panel,- of the iacrifice of IfaaC, with Abraham's knife at his throat. It flares me now in the face, and is a ftrong em¬ blem of my own fituation ; except that my faving apgel feems wanting. *■ In the other room, exclufive pf »the bed and its appurtenances, there was a fécond chair, wlrch with an old waJnut-tóee clothes-prefs was its whole inventory, In this loom was a clofot, with feveral flielves almoft to the ceiling ; the toprnoft of them fo high as>but juft *to be reached by me, When ftanding on a chair. í »fwepfc my hand along the flielves, and found them as F thought empty. I then examinod,'the windows. There were only two, one to eacîh room ; the^re*· mainder having been walled up ; and thefe each of them provided witb'thick iron bars, fo near to each other as to admit but of a fmall part of the fface palling between them. There*was a cafement to-the front room only; and Lfound apiece of paper tied
tied to the handle of it, on which was written—" You are clofely watched: if " you attempt to make any fignals, or " ihouf, or take any other means to inform " perfons you are here, your lodging will " be changed to one much more difagree- « able." Having norhirg with which I could employ ·> myfelf except my thoughts, and thefe flowing in abundanèe, I fat medi¬ tating .and undifturbed till-it was almoft dark. - A little before five o'clock as I fuppofe, perhaps later, for I forgot to fay my watch and purfe had been taken fro'jfi me, w r ith a promife that they fliould be returned, I heard the found of diflant bolts and locks, that belong to the outer gates and doors, and foon afterward of men in loud converfation. ! The keeper and two of his afliftants came up to me; and once more .brought t the ftraight waiftcoat, into which they bade me thruft my arms. I hefitated, and told them I did not choofe to have my arms confined, To which the keeper re¬ plied-
NOVEL. 189 w Β ¥Ϋ * my b**** eyes! None'of your " jabber, or ITI fetch you another rum v" one! ì'ìl knock you off the rooft " again!" "From this fpeech I conclude it was he who gave me the blow with the bludgeon, when I was firft fecured. " . As he faid this, he raifed his bludgeon; with whicii kind of weapon they were all three armed, and had locked the door after them. There was no remedy, and I obeyed. As'foon as they had confined my arms ťney left me, and remembering the bank¬ notes which I had in my fob, I began to fear they had come to the knowledge of this circumftance ; though I could not imagine by what means. Some fliort time' afterward, perhaps a quarter of an hour, the bolts and chains of my dopr again be¬ gan· to rattle, and one' perfon finglý came in. It was dark, and F could not diftin¬ guifli his features, but I, ( recollected his« form : it was the gambler Mac Fane, the found of his voice prefently put it beyond a doubt. 3 Without
"í Without fpeaking a word, he came up to me and made a violetit. blow at me. I perceived it coming, fprang upward, and 'received it on the tip of my flioulder, his hand driving up to my neck. From bis manner, I guefs it hurt him at leaft: as much as me 5 for his paffion immediately became outrageous, and he began curfing, kicking, fpitting at me, and treating me with various other indignities; which are wholly 'unworthy of remembrance. His paflion was fo loud and vehement that the keeper, hearing him, came up. Juft as he entered, Mac Fane ftiuck me again, and'with more effect, for he knocked me down; and was proceeding to kick me in a manner that might perhaps have been fatal,"had not the keeper interfered. , I faid not one word the whole time, nor as I recollect uttered any found whatever; and it-was with-difficulty thaMhe keeper, who is even a 'more ^powerful man than himfelf, could iget him away. " I was once more left in folitude ^and darknefs,; andthus'fat, with freih'fubjects for
for reflection, ruminating on this wortblefs Mac Fane, my rencontre with him and Mr. Clifton, the extreme s malignancy of his temper, and all the connecting circum¬ flances that aie allied to events whicii I cannot know relate. About eight o'clock my door once more opened, and a little boy of fourteen years of age, as he tells me, biought me a light and fome food. The boy imagined me to be mad, and enteied the room with great reluctance, his mafter the keeper ftandinğ at the door, cui fing hım, threatening him with the horfewhip, and obliging him 'to do 'as he was bidden ! which was to re¬ leafe me from the ftraight waiftcoat, fpread a threadbaie half-dirty napkin over the ta¬ ble, fet the plates, and wait till I had eaten. The trepidation of the poor boy at fetting my arms at liberty was extreme. Tbe door was not open but ajar, and fecured by three chains, between which the boy crept; the keeperttandhig and looking on, with one arm leaning on the middle'chain, and his bead'only in'the chamber.
• . I obferved that the boy had an intelli¬ gent countenance, though confiderably under the .influence of fear; with ftrong marks of kindnefs in it, but ftrpnger of de¬ jection. Tlie furniture, the napkin, knives and forks, and every circumftance denoted the poverty of the man who is my jailor : and his proceedings proved there fcarcely could be any guilt from which he would ilart, to remove this fuppofed evil. The „thought could not efcape mei nor thejeo-* pardy in which I fliould ftand, fliould the money I had in my poffeffion be difco¬ vered.— I ate what was brought me, and endea- voured by the mildnefs and cheerfulnefs of my look to infpire the boy with confi¬ dence. I have no doubt but he was fur¬ prifed to fee fo docile a madman, not ' having yet ever feen any, and being from defcription exceeding terrified at the idea of the trade to which he has been forcibly apprenticed. I fpoke to him two or three times, apparently to aik him for the trifles he
lie could reach me, but in reality with another view I likewife addrefled him two or three other times in dumbffiow, with as much mildnefs and meaning in my look as circumftances fo infignİficanL would permit.— The effect my behaviour had upon him was very evident ; and after beginning in fear and confufion, he left me in fome¬ thing like hope and tranquillity. My piifon door was locked, the candle taken away, and I left in darknefs. I was no more molefted during that night. My thoughts weie too bufy to fuffer me to fleep. I fat without moving I know not how long. The extreme ilillnefs of all aiound me, added to the unity of lhe gloom, produced a ftate of mind which gives wholefome. .exercifo to foi ti¬ tude. Deep as I was in thought, I ie- member having been two or three times roufed by the fternnefs of the keeper's, voice, which I heard very plainly, and which was generally fome command, clofing with a curfe, and as I fuppofe,d greeted to the poor boy. ' Ml
My /bed-chamber door was open, and after fome time I removed into it, and fat down on the feet of the bed, again falling into reveries which fixed me motionlefs to the place. I'cannot tell what was the hour, nor how long I had been thus feated ; but I was roufed by the found of a door open¬ ing, and once more by the voice of the keeper, which I heard fo diftinctly as to doubt for a moment whether it were not in my own chamber. • 'At'the fame time a· broad ray of light fuddenly ftruck againft the wall of my bed¬ room. I followed it with my eye : I was ftill at' tbe foot of the bed, and its direction was'from the .left to the right. I had much inclination to pull off my flioes, and ¿endeavour to trace by what aperture it entered : but on further reflection, I con¬ cluded "it, would be beft not to excite any>alarm, «in a mind which cannot but be continually tormented by fufpicion and fear., .»·. I paid ftrict attention however ,to every circumftance that might aid my memory, in tracing it on the morrow. Tht*
\ The 'voice of the keeper, for he fpoke feveral times, was now much more diftinct than'before : he was going to bed, and the queftion—"Are you fure all is fafe?" -—was" repeated .feveral times with great anxiety, and was anfwered in the affirma¬ tive by a man's voice—"Do you hear him ilir ?" faid the keeper.—The reply was— > « No—But I am. fure I heard him a little ť . ŕ before ten'." The keeper however could not be fatis¬ fied, and in lefs than five minutes I heard my door unbolting. 'The keeper and both bis men came in with their bludgeons.— Fie aiked morofely why I did not go to bed. I anfwered becaufe I had no incli¬ nation to fleep. Fie went again to the windows, and examined the very walls with the utmoft circumfpection ; and af¬ terward turning away faid------" Sleep or " wake, I'll be d*** 1 * if you have any " .chance." . He then left me, and I prefently after¬ ward faw the ray of light-again, and heard bis various motions at going io bed. к 2 I paffed
ANNA* ST. -ÏVES : I paffed the night without clofing 'my eyes, and in the morning began to examine where it was poffible the' light fliould ob¬ tain admiflion. I placed myfelf in the fame fituation, and looking to the left faw the clofet was in that direction, and that tbe door was open. - ,. ' ■ ' ! Looking into it-I found that a part of tbe flooring in the left hand corner, was decayed; and that the ceiling beneath had a fiffure of fome width. I thought it a foi tunate circumftance that founds weie convoyed fo diftinctly into my apartments : though I fpeak chiefly of the bed-chamber ; for it was tbe Joudnefs of the keeper's voice, and the ilillnefs of furrounding objects, wbich moft contributed to my hearing him in the front apartment. Not but the decayed ftate of the building favoured the convey¬ ance of the found, in all directions. I beecan to confider how far I could im- prove the means that offered themfelves, and, watching my opportunity in the couriVof the day, with my fingers, and by tbe
thè ,aid of the ftick loft to fíir my fire, I removed fome of the decayed mortar to the right and left, and increafed the aper¬ ture on the infide ; but was exceedingly careful not to puih any flakes, or part of tlie ceiling, down into the floor, below.— The attention I paid to this was very,exact, for it was of the utmoft confequence.— Nor was I lefs accurate in prefiing toge¬ ther the rubbifli I fcraped away into va¬ cant corners .'between the joifts, and leav¬ ing no traces^that fliould lead to difcovery. All thefe precautions were highly ne¬ ceflary, as the behaviour of the keeper had proved ; for wben he came into my cham¬ ber in the morning, as he did early with his cuftomary attendants, he fearched and pried about with all the affiduiry of fuf- picion. At breakfaft I was again waited on by the boy, and watched by the keeper, it was neceffary I fhould not excite alarms, in a mind fo full of apprehenfion : I there¬ fore behaved with referve to the boy, though with great complacency, faid lit¬ tle, and difmiifed him foon.
In the forenoon the door opened again ; the boy was fent in with the ftraight waiftcoat, and the keeper faid to me—— > (( Come, fir; put on your jacket !—Here, " boy, be handy !"— I once more hefitated, and afked if Mr. Mac Fane were coming to pay me another vifit? He did not return me a direct anfwer, but replied—" If you will put on " the jacket, you may go and ftretchyour " pins for half an hour in tbe garden : if " not, ftay where you are, and bed 1 '***!" After a fliort deliberation, Γ concluded that to comply was prudent ; and I very peaceably aided the boy in performing his office. As my back was turned to the keeper, I fmiled kindly and fignificantly to the boy ; to which he replied by a look expreffive of furprife and curiofity. It cannot be fuppofed but that my mind had been moil anxioufly enquiring into the poffibility and means of efcape, while in my prifon ; and that the moment this unexpected privilege was granted me, its whole efforts were directed to tbe fame fubječt. I walked
I'walked in the garden overlooked, and andin a certain manner followed by the keeper and his attendants : I therefore travcrfed it in various directions, without feeming to pay tbe leaft attention to tbe object on which my mind was moft bufy. But the chance of efcape, my hands being thus confined, appeared to be as fmall in the earden as in the houfe. It is com- pletely furrounded by a high wall, wbich joins the houfe at each end. It had one fmall gate, or rather door, which was lock¬ ed and bolted ; and had no other entrance, except from tbe houfe. After having walked about an hour as I fuppofe, the keeper aiked me, in a tone rather of com¬ mand than queftion, if I were not tired. I anfwered—No. To which be replied, But I am. Accordingly, without faying another word, I returned to my prifon. I will attempt no defcription of the fuf¬ ferings of my mind, and the continual fears by which it was diftradted : not for myfelf - P for there was no appearance, at this time, that any greater harm than confinement к 4 was
was intended me, but for another. The fubject is torturing: but lefignation and fortitude are duties. My reafon for men¬ tioning it is that it ftrongly excited me to fome prompt effort at efcape. I could think of none, except of endea¬ vouring to convince the keeper it was more his intereft to give me my freedom, than to keep me in confinement. Confequently, when my dinner was brought, and he had taken his ftation, I afked him if he would do me the favour to converfe with me for half an hour ; either privately or in the prefence of his own men. lie did not fuffer me to finifli my fen¬ tence, but exclaimed — " None of your *' gab, I tell you ! If you fpeak another " word, I'll have you jacketed : and then « b * ,ŕ * me, my kiddy, if you get it off <: again in a hurry !" I faid no more, but ate my dinner ; calling an eye occafionally to the door, and conjecturing what were the probabilities, by a very fudden fpring, of breaking the chain, for he had only put one up, or of di awing
drawing tbe ftaple by which it was held, and which, from the thicknefs of the wood¬ work, I knew could not be clenched. It was not poffible, I believe, for mind to be actuated by itronger motives than mine was, in my wiih to efcape : the circum¬ ftance of the fingle chain might not occur a fécond time, and I determined on the trial. I prolonged my dinner till I perceived him begin to yawn, and at laft turn his head the other way. I was about twelve feet diftant from the door. I rofe quietly,· made two fteps, and then gave a fudden fpring. I came with great violence againft the door, but it refilled me, and, of courfe, I fell backward. After the firft moment of furprife, the keeper inftantly locked the door, and, in a rage of curfing, called bis afliftants. They however foon pacified him, by turning his attention to the ftrength of his own faften- ings, and fcofling at my fiuitlefs attempt. But this incident induced h-'m to change bis mode ; he ftood no more with the door к 5 ajar
ajar to watch me, but, after fonding in the boy, locked ançl bolted it upon us. I was in full expectation of the ftraight. waiftcoat; and his forbearance, I imagine,. was oceafioned by the ftrict orders bc muil have received to the contrary. ITis threat indeed, when I attempted ίο fpeak, is a proof rather againft this fuppofition ; and I can folve it no other way than by fup¬ pofmg that his orders were, if I attempted perfuafion with him, he would then be at liberty to do a thing to which he feemed exceedingly prone. His fears for himfelf, fliould I efcape, muft inevitably be ftrong; and a man, who has waded far enough in error to commit an act fo violent, will wil¬ lingly plunge deeper, in proportion as fuch fears increafe. The fudden fpring I had made at the door, combining with the fuppofition of madnefs, had fuch an effect upon the poor boy that, hearing the door lock, and fee¬ ing me as he imagined let loofe upon him, his fright returned in full force. His looks were fo pale, and he trembled fo violently^ that
that I feared he would· fall into a fit. I went up to him with the utmoft gcntle- nefs, and faid—Don't be afraid, my good boy ! Indeed I will not hurt you. The keeper fcarcely ftaid a minute be¬ fore, recollecting I had been long enough at dinner, he opened the door again, but with the caution of the three chains, and bade the boy take away. I then began to accufe myfelf of pre¬ cipitancy; but I foon remembered that every thing ought to be hazarded, where every thing is at ftakc. My fears were not for myfclf; and while my arms were free» could I have come upon them thus fud¬ denly, fuccefs was far from improbable. Vice is always cowardly ; and, difference of weapons out of the queftion, three to one are not invincible odds. It now firft occurred to me bow prudent it would be to conceal my bank-bills, and I began to confider which were the bell: means, I took them out, examined their numbers, and endeavoured to fix them irr my memory. к <5 This
Tins was no difficult taik ; but prudence required that nothing fliould be Jeft to chance, and I took the burnt end of my ftick, and going into the back room, wrote the numbers againft the wall, in a place which, from its darknefs, was leaft liable to notice. Indeed I eonfidered there was little to fear, even fliould the 'figures I made be feen, for I wrote them in one continued line, which rendered them un¬ intelligible without a key. I then once more took my chair, and placed it at the clofet door ; thinking that to bide them at one corner of the topmoft ,ihelf might perhaps be the fecureft place. I previoufly began to feci, and, at the far end of the flielf, I put my hand upon fomething; which, when brought to light, proved to be the remainder of a bundle of quills. I felt again, but found nothing more there. I then removed my chair toward the other end, and after two or three times fweeping my hand ineffectually along the Ihelf,
fbelf, I ftruck the edge of it "againil the wall, and more than half a 'quire of paper fell flat upon it. This led me to conjecture that the ihelf had been a hiding-place, perhaps, to fome love-fick girl, and that it was poffible there fliould be ink. After another more accu¬ rate fearch, and turning my other hand, with which I could feel better to the op¬ pofite fide, I found an ink-bottle. I took down my treafure, and examined it : there was cotton in.the bottle, but the ink was partly mouldy and partly dried away. However, by the aid of a little water, I prefently procured more than fuf¬ ficient to write down my numbers. But ï wanted a pen, and for this there was no fuccedaneum. As the fafeft way of preferving what. might become ufeful, I returned my trea^ fure to the ihelf on which it had been found ; and for that reafon began to con-, fider of another place for my bank-notes. After looking carefully round both cham¬ bers, I at laft lifted up the old picture, and here.
here I found a break in the wainfcot ; in which was inforte d, laterally, full as much more writing paper as the quantity I bad difcovered in the clofet. I took away the paper entirely, left, if feen, it fhould lead to further fearch; and, twifting up the bills, laid them fo as to be certain of re¬ covering them, when I pleafed. The paper I put upon the fliclf. When the boy brought my fupper, I aiked him his name, bow old he was, and other trifling queftions, to familiarize and embolden him ; and learned from his an¬ fwers that he had a poor mother, who was unable to provide for him, and that he had been bound apprentice to this keeper by the parifli. At laft I enquired if he could write and read ? He anfwered, yes; he had been called the beft fcholar of the charily fchool in which he was bred. I then aiked if he continued to praclife his learning? He replied, he loved reading very much indeed, but he had no books. Did
Did be write ? He bad no paper. Was there a pen and ink in tbe houfe? Yes ; but tbe pen was feldom ufed, and good for nothing. - Could he get me a pen ? If he had but a quill; be could make me one. Had he a pen-knife ? No ; he had forgotten that : but one of tbe men had a knife with feveral blades, and he could aík him to lend it. And what fliould he write, fuppofmg he bad paper ? A letter. To whom ? To his mother. I thought it not right lo expofe my flores to him, and therefore fuffered him to go for that time, without faying any thing more on the fubjeei. But my dif- " courfe with him had pretty well driven all apprchenfion from his mind. I was cau¬ tious to fpeak in a very low tone of voice j and, without being bidden, he had acute- nefs enough to follow my example. The
The next day, at breakfaft, I gave him a flieet of paper, and two quills ; and told him to make pens of them if he could ; one for himfelf, and the other for me ; and to take the paper for his letter. He look¬ ed with intelligent furprife—Where did tbey come from ? was the queftion in his thoughts ; but he faid nothing. Madmen were beings whom be did not compre¬ hend. My kindnefs to him, however, made him defirous to oblige me. I gave him a part of my breakfaft; and he ate what I <rave him in a manner that fliewed he was о not over-fed. At dinner he brought me both the pens. I afked him why he did not keep one to write to his mother? He faid he had ■written, but had cleaned and cut the pen over again. They were not ill made, con¬ fidering that, as he told me, the knife was a bad one. But what will you do for ink, fir ? faid he. I told him I had a little ; but that I fhould be glad if I had more. Perhaps, he
he replied, he could get one of the men to bring him a half-pennyworth. I faid I had no money, and he anfwered, a gen¬ tleman (Mr. Clifton, I fuppofe) had juft given him fixpence, for holding his horfe; that he intended to fave it for his mother, but that be would fpare a halfpenny to buy me ink. I took the boy's hand, and faid to him — " If ever I live to get free from this " place, I will remember you."—The emotions I felt communicated themfelves, and he looked forrowfully up in my face, and afked—" Why, are not you mad, fir?" The very earneft but mild manner with which I anfwered— <( No, my good fel¬ low"—both convinced him and fet his ima¬ gination to work. I faid little more, but finiflied my meal, wrote down my numbers, and gave him the bottle : but warned him, if he were queftioned, by no means to tell an untruth. The boy looked at me again, in a manner that fpoke highly in his favour, put tbe bottle in his pocket, and, as foon as his mafter
mafter returned to the door, removed the things and departed. He brought the ink with my fupper. One of the men bad taken his fixpence, hut refufed to return him any change ; and the ink he bad emptied out of the keeper's bottle. Such are the habits of vice. The boy related it with indignation, but faid lie dared not complain. I had nothing elfe to give. I therefore rewarded the generous boy with a couple of quills, and four flieets of paper for his own ufe ; cautioning him to keep them to write to his mother. While I wanted the means, I imagined it would have been a great relief to have had the power of writing down my thoughts ; but 1 found they were much too bufy, and difturbed, by the lecollection of Anna St. Ives and her danger, and by the inceffant defire of finding fomc means of efcape, notwithftanding a thoufand repeated con¬ victions of its impoffibility, to fuffer me to write either with effect or connection. I did nothing but make memorandums ; fome of thoughts that occurred, and others of
of círcumftanccí) that were prefent. I con¬ cealed my papers in the wainfcot behind the picture, where I mean to leave this narrative. The indulgence of my morning walk was continued; and on the fixtb day of my confinement an incident happened, by which I almoft effected my releafe. Confiding in the-ftrait waiftcoat and in tbe ftrength of bis locks and bars, and be¬ come lefs apprehenfivc from this perfua¬ fion, the keeper had left me under tbe care of only one of his men ; himfelf and the other were employed on fomething which he wanted done in the houfe. While, they were abfent, the garden-- bell rang. The voice of Mac Fane was heard, ■ demanding entrance, by the man who was fct to watch me, and fetching tbe key, he opened the gate without hefitation. My hopes were inftantly excited. I made a fliort turn and croifed him, as if continuing my walk, a few yards diftant from the gate. He eyed me-however, and I went -on ; but, the moment he was bufied
ле
bufied in unlocking and unbolting it, I turned round, fprang forward, and as it opened ruflied pail. The violence of my motion overfet Mac Fane. The mailer, whofe fufpicions had taken the alarm, was entering the garden and faw me. He and bis man and Mac Fane inftantly joined in the purfuit. Though I was in the ftrait waiftcoat, yet I happened to be fwifter than any of them. *The keeper was foon the firft in the chafe : it was up a narrow lane, with a high-banked. hedge on each fide. A man was coming down it, and the keeper called to him.to flop mc. The man fee¬ ing my arms confined, and hearing the ihouts of my purfucrs, endeavoured to do as be was defired. He placed himfelf di¬ rectly in my way, and I ran full againil bim. We both fell ; but the man by the aid of his hands was up rather the fooneft. He laid'hold of me, and a fudden thought ¡ftruck me. They were bawling behind— ft A madman! A madman!"—and I aft fumed
fumed that grinning contortion of counte¬ nance which migbt eafieft terrify, uttered an-'imcouth noife', and began to bite at the man. Terror feized him, and I again got away, the very moment the keeper iwas coming up. i ť I had not run a hundred yards ¡ further before I faw another mah ' at a diftance, and the hue and cry behind t was as hot as ever. The hedge in this place was lower, and I jumped over it into the field on my right. There was a ditch on the other fide, of which I had no intimation; and my feet alighting on the edge of it, I once more fell. My purfuers profited by a gate which I had paffed. It was the field of a gardener, and a man was at work clofe by. Fie came and helped me up ; but not foon enough : the keeper arrived, and prefently after his man and Mac Fane. I addrefled myfelf to the gardener, en¬ deavoured to tell bim who I was, and faid I would give him a hundred pounds, if he would aid me to efcape : but my efforts were
were I fairly out of the way, be could make Edward St. Ives pay him tbe three thou¬ fand guineas. The curfes which Mac Fane continually coupled with my name, and the rancour, the thirft of blood which preyed upon him, were incredible. He a hundred times im· precated eternai damnation to bis foul if there were the leaft danger." The fellows the keeper had with him were of his own providing : they knew he could hang tbem both : they durft not impeach. [Squeak, I recollect, was the word he ufed.] To take me off was the fafeft way. Clifton would in reality be an acceffary before ihe fact, and therefore obliged to filence.—- Befide—" He would do him ! Fie would " do him !"—This he confirmed by a new firing of oaths. The keeper however continued averfe to the project, faid the fellows would hang their own father if he could not bribe them, that there was nothing to be got by put¬ ting me out of the way, and that he would not venture his neck unlefs he faw good caufe.
While they were arguing the point, a loud and authoritative rap was heard at the keeper's door, accompanied by the voice of Mr. Clifton, demanding admifli¬ on. He entered, and tiie whole ftory of my efcape was related, with that colour¬ ing which their own fears infpired. Mac Fane darkly hinted the thoughts he had been communicating to the keeper ; but, meeting repulfe from Mr. Clifton whenever ideas of cruelty were ftarted, he thought proper to ufo more referve. The keeper concluded his account by aflirming it would be neceffary to continue me in the ftrait waiftcoat, and not to lei¬ me walk in the garden any more. Mr. Clifton affented to the latter, but pofitive¬ ly ordered my arms to hú releafed. Theie was no need he faid to puniili me in this manner, and it fliould not be. At the fame time he gave the keeper a twenty pound note, and repeated his orders to treat me properly, but to take care not to fuffer me to efcape. < л Mifguided man ! Flow' does your heart i vol. V. L pant
pant after virtue ! Flow grieve at the fla- very in which it is held ! What will its agony be, when the full meafure of error is come ! Yet this to me was the lucid moment of hope, for it fuggefted a tiain of conclufions whicii feem like heavenly certainties---Mr. Clifton has made his attempts on Anna St. Ives, and they have been repelled ' Even ftill, and it is feveral days fince, his efforts continue to be ineffectual !—It muft be fo ! ------The purpofes of vice are fruftrated by the pure energies of virtue : for, had they fucceeded, í fliould be releafed.— Fie art-cheering thought ! . Pleafure inex- preflible ! ¡Yes,- Anna St. Ives is fafe ! — Truth is omnipotent ; and out of my allies another, andprobably a moreftrcnuous and determined a ffei toi of it, may arife! Clifton at laft may fee how very foul is folly, and turn to wifdom I Would he midit be о fpared the guilt of purchafmg conviction at the price of blood ! ■ Three days paffed away, after, my ef- сдре, without auy remarkable occurrence. The
The fanguinary malignity of Mac Fane was *more than counterbalanced, by the rea- fonings of probability and hope in favour of Anna St. Ives. During my confinement I had flept but little. Wearied however at length, by the repetition of ideas that were unavail¬ ing, I was numbering more foundly than ufual on the night after the ninth day ; and was dreaming that my doors were unbolt¬ ed, the chains rattling, and men entering to murder me ; from which I was waked by ftarting in my dream to run and refill them. It was the real clanking of the bolts and locks of the houfe doors that in- fpired this dream; they opened to give fome ' one admiflion. 1 know not what was the hour, but it muft be very late, and it was completely dark. I foon diftinguiflied Mac Fane's voice. I jumped up, haftily dref¬ fed myfelf in part, and prefently heard the keeper's door open—The ray of light ap- pea/ed on the wall—I crept toward the clofe t. The firft word Mac Fane uttered was—■ L 2 1 told
" I told you I fliould do him !—I told you «Lflioulddohim!" He kept repeating this and other excla¬ mations, which I could not at firft com¬ prehend, clofmg each of them with oaths expreflive of uncommon exultation. But be defcanted almoft inftantly from Mr. Clifton, to whom his phrafe alluded, to me ; adding—it was high time now to do me too. His joy was fo great, his oaths fo mul¬ tiplied, and his afleveration fo continual,- that he would 11 cad me out, would fend my foul.to bell that very night, and other fimilar phrafes, that it was fomc time be¬ fore the keeper could obtain an anfwer to his queftion of------" What docs all this mean?" At laft Mr. Mac Fane besran to о sciate, as foberly as the intoxication of his mind would permit, that ho had done him [Mr. Clifton] out of ten thoufand pounds. Had he got the money r . No—But God fhiver his foul to flames if he did not make him pay ! He would blow·him to powder, drink his blood, eat bis bones if he did not! This
This Was not all -----He had another prize! Eight - thoufand-pounds ! The mo¬ ney, was now in the houfe ! He fropped fliort—The cupidity of the keeper was excited, and he grew impa¬ tient. . . Mac Fane I imagine hefitated to. rcconfider if it were pofíible to get all the money himfelf, make away with me fe- cretly, and leave the keeper in ignorance. But he could not but conclude this t'o be. impracticable. I could not fufficiently.. connect the meaning of all the phrafes that followed ; they might depend as much .on feeing as hearing; but 1 underftood Mac Fane was acquainted with the circumftance of the money I have in my poíľeilion ; though whether his knowledge were.gamed from Mr. Ciifton or Anna St. Ives, for they were both mentioned,.I couid not diftinguifli. He talked much of a letter, of his own . cunning, and of the contempt in which he held Mr. Clifton. · v " The keeper however was convinced of" the faci, for he propofed immediately to L..-3 murder
murder me, and fecure the^ money.—— This point was for fomc time debated, and J every moment expected they would leave the room, to perpetrate the crime. Mac Fane had his piftols and cutlafs, yet feemed to fuppofe a pofti bility even of my conquering them. The keeper was much more confident—" He knew how tobring " me clown ; he had no fear of that."------· Mac Fane remembered his defeat, and the keeper his cheaply bought victory. They agreed it could not be done fiient¬ ly, unlefs they could catch me afleep, and the unbolting of the doors would awaken mo. They wiihed the keeper's fellows to •know nothing of the matter 5 they would claim their fhare. At laft Mac Fane propofed that I fliould be put in the ftrait waiftcoat the next morning, on pretence of walking me out in the garden ; that perhaps it would be beft: ïo fuffer me to walk there, but not to take off the ftrait waiftcoat any more; that then the doors might be left unbolted, and even unlocked, my arms being confined ; and the
the next night they might come and dif- 2^atch me ! The converfation continued long after this, and fchemes of flight, either to Ire¬ land or the continent, were concerted, and the riches and happinefs they fliould enjoy infifted on, with great felf-applaufc and .pleafure. Poor, miftaken men ! They at laft parted, with a determinati¬ on to execute Tlie fcheme of the ftrait waiftcoat. Mac Fane took pofleffion of the keeper's bed ; and he as I imagine went to that of his men. And here I muft remark that Mac Fane either forgot or did not imagine that niy· immediate murder would be an impedi¬ ment to the payment of the ten thoufand pound gaming debt, from Mr. Clifton ; which fear afterward actuated him ftrong- ч ly. It could not do otherwife, the moment it was conceived. According to agreement, in the morn¬ ing the keeper came, with as much pre¬ tended kindnefs as he knew how to af- fume, to tell me I might have my walktn L 4 the
the garden again, if I pleafed. I an¬ fwered I did not wiih to u alk. He endea¬ voured to pcifuade me, but he foon found it was (o no puipofe. He then ordered the boy away, who had brought the ftrait waiftcoat, and quitted his ftation at the door ib great dudgeon. I foon aftenvard heard, as I expected, Mac Fane and him in his own room. Mac Fane curfed the keeper bitterly, and fup¬ pofed that, for want of cunning, he had in part betrayed himfelf, and rendered me fufpicious. The keeper refented his beha¬ viour and curfed again/till I imagined they had fairly quarrelled. Mac Fane however began to cool, and to talk of another expedient of whicli he had been thinking. This was to poifon me. In this the keeper immediately join¬ ed, and began to enquire about themeans of procuring the poifon. The boy was ruft mentioned, but that was thought too dan¬ gerous. At laft Mac Fane determined himfelf to go to London and buy arfenic, on pretence of poifoning rats and to fet off immediately.
immediately. On this they concluded, and prefently left the room. My whole attention was now employed in watching the opening of the keeper's door ; but there was reafon to apprehend they would converfe fomcwhcrc elfe on their projects. I imagine however they thought this the fafeft and moil inacceffiblc place, for a little before dark I again heard the voice of Mac Fane, and they prefently came back to their former ftation. Mac Fane related thexlifficulty he had found in getting the arfenic ; that feveral fliops had refufed him ; and that at lafl he had fucceeded by ordering a quantity of drugs, for whicii he paid, leaving them to be font to a fictitious addrefs, and return¬ ing back pretended he wanted forne poifon for the rats, aflc ing them which was the beft. - They recommended arfenic, which they directed him to make up in balls, and he ordered a quarter of a pound. They weighed it, he put it in his pocket, and they noticed th'e circumftance, telling him they would fend it borne with the other L 5 drugs ;
drugs ; but he walked away, pretending not to hear what they faid. Mac Fane, glorying in his own cun¬ ning, was impatient to adminifter bis drug, and propofed it fliould be font up in my tea. The keeper affented, and the boy very foon afterward brought me fome tea in a pot ready made, contrary to cuftom, I'having been ufed to make my own tea. The keeper was at the door. I aíked him the reafon of this deviation; and he bade me drink my tea and be thankful. I poured fome out, firft looked at it, then tailed it, and afterwards threw it into the aflies, faying it was bad tea. I next ex¬ amined the tea-pot, fmclled into it, and then daflied it to pieces on the hearth. I looked, toward the keeper, and told him there was fomething in the tea that ought not to have been. Seeing me take up the candle and begin to move, he inftantly fliut the door. His confcience was alarmed, and for a mo¬ ment, he forgot the fecurity of his chains. He even called up bis men before he opened
opened it again ; after which the boy was releafed, but not before I had time to tell him never to eat any thing that was brought for me. The poor boy noticed the fignifi- cancc with which I faid it,. and fixed his eyes mournfully upon me. I fhook him by the hand, bade him be a good boy, and not learn wickednefs from his mafter. The remains of the tca-fet were foon removed,, and a frefli confultation prefently began in the keeper's room. Mac Fane was again enraged, and blamed the keeper; who began to fuppofe there was fomething fupernatural in my behaviour. He faid I looked at him as if I knew it was poifon, and it was very ftrange ! Mac Fane fwore he would dofe me at fupper, and would go and make me eat it himfelf, or blow my brains out ; but he prefently recollected I had not the ftiait waiftcoat on, and al¬ tered his tone. It was however agreed that another attempt fliould be made. I now began to confider all circum¬ flances ; whether it wese probable, if I ate a little, that the keeper fliould fuppofe <, χ 6 it
it only a temporary want of appetite ; what quantity might be eaten without harm, and if it were,not practicable to watch the moment when they fliould come, by night, to execute their wicked purpofe, and to pafs them and efcape ? A little reafoning fliewed me that I fhould be in the dark, in a houfe the avenues to which were all fecured, and with which I was unacquainted ; that the number I had to contend with now would be four, three of them provided with bludgeons, and the fourth with a hanger and piftols ; that re¬ leafe by'the order of Mr. Clifton was not impoffible; and that, if I began a fray, I fliould excite cow T aidice to action; and, having begun, Mac Fane would fcarcely m 'ft fţich an opportunity, 'Ti&fe reafon s made me rather refolve to perfevere in failing; which remedy, though it could not be of long duration, appeared to be the wifeft. Yet caution was neceffaiy, for, fliould I make them abfolutely defpair of poifoning me, they would have recouife to other means. My
My refolution was taken, and when the fupper came I tailed a bit of bread and drank a fmall quantity of water, after care¬ fully infpecting it, and without faying any thing more fent the reft away. The keeper's door foon opened, the ray of light appoared on tbe wall, and a new confultation fucceeded. The keeper again was troubled with fupeiftitious fears; and Mac Fane was perfuaded that, having been alarmed at lea-time, I had from fuf¬ picion refufed to eal any fupper. After a debate, they concluded it would be in vain lo attempt to poifon me in my tea, for 1 fliould detect it : they would therefore fond me a fhort allowance at breakfaft, keep mc hungry, and prepare my dinner for the next day. The keeper propofed to give me no breakfaft, but Mac Fane faid that was the way to make me fufpect. They were both highly chagrined ; but Mac Fane was much the moil talkative at all times, and the loudeft in oaths and me¬ naces : though I fcarcely think even him a move dangerous man than the keeper. In
In the morning, obferving they had fent agreeable to their plan a fmall quantity, after a little examination I ate what was brought me, and the keeper retired ţippa- rentJy fatisfied. It was far otherwife at dinner, when I abfolutely refufed to eat ; and their vexa¬ tion was greatly increafed by my perfifting to refufe the whole day. Late at night a new council was held, and it was long in debate whether I fliould be fuffered to live the night out. At laft the cupidity of Mac Fane prevailed, and his fear of not getting Mr. Clifton's bond for eleven thoufand pounds, as he faid, though I underftood he had won but ten, feems now to have firft ftruck him ; and this induced him to defift. I underftood, however, that Mac Fane had ftill fome hopes from bis poifon, and confequently that to fail would ftill Jbe neceflary. Their final refolve was that, the mo¬ ment Mr. Clifton fliould have given Mac Fane the bond, they would then delay no longer: and from the threats which he vaunted
vaunted of having ufed, he expected the bond to be given the next day, when Mr. Clifton was lo come to the keeper's, if I underftood them rightly, after his vifit to Anna St. Ives. This idea again conjured up torturing images, and fears which no efforts I have been able to make can entirely appeafe. I began this narrative the firft day on which I found my life was in danger, and have continued it to this time, which is now the twelfth day of my confinement. The defire which the keeper cxpreffes to poffefs himfelf of the money convinces me of my great jeopardy. He was eager to have committed the murder laft night, dui İng the lait converfation I heard. That I fhould efcape with life from the hands of thefe wicked men is but little probable ; but I will not defert myfelf; I will not forward an act of blood by timidity. Were I to deflroy the bank-bills, and to tell them they were deftroyed, I fhould not be believed. I mean to try another expedi¬ ent—1 hear them in the keeper's room ! Thefe
Thefe are the laft words I fliall ever write. They are determined on imme¬ diate murder—But I will fell my life dearlv ^ # ^ эн-^г ^ ■% ' %? * _ * ■ * * * * * * -ж *■ ■* * ******
LETTER CXXVI. ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON. tjl-l niy friend! I am efcaped! Have broken my prifon Ifhd am fitting now—I cannot tell you where, but in a place of fafety. I have been thus fuccefsful by the aid of Laura. It is now four clays fince I faw your brother, Lulled to fecurity by the peace¬ able
able manner in which I bad fubmitted lo confinement, and imagining Laura to be frill in the intereft of Mr. Clifton, though this filly girl is now a very fincere penitent, lhe old woman began to indulge her in ftill greater liberties. I warned Laura very feiioufly againft any precipitate attempts, for I faw il was probable this incautioui- nefs would increafe, provided it were en¬ couraged. No good opportunity offered till this morning, when Laura was fuffered to take the key of my pri fon, chamber, and let herfelf in and out. The moment flie told me of it, I en¬ quired what other obftacles there were. Laura faid we might get into the yaid, but no further, for theie was a high wall which no woman could climb. I aiked ber if ilie thought a man couid climb it? She an¬ fwered yes, flie had feen men do fuch things, but flie could not think how. The abfence of Mr. Clifton for fo long a time, without releafmg me from my im,- prifonment, made me in hourly expecta¬ tion
tion of his return. I therefore did not ftay to hefitate, but defired Laura to ileal down itairs before me, and open the door, for that I was determined to attempt the wall. Laura was terrified at the fear of being left behind, for fhe faid flie never could climb it. " Alas ! What was to become " of her?"—I told her flie fliould have thought" of confequences long ago ; but that flie might be certain I would not de¬ fert her : on the contrary, I would go to the firft houfe I could find and fend her relief, if I fliould happen to climb a wall which flie could not. Though, I likewife added, it was weaknefs and folly to fup¬ pofe that men were better able to climb walls than women, or that flie could not follow, if I could lead. The affurance of relief in part quieted her fears: flie opened the fiift door, itole down to the fécond, I followed, flie un¬ locked it, and we both got into the yard. The wall, as flie faid, was high and not eafily climbed ; but I had little time for reflection : the old woman faw us through the window, and was coming.
To this wall there was a gate, equally high, but with a handle to fliut, ledges running acrofs, and two or three cracked places that afforded hold for the hand. You and I, Louifa* have' often difcourfe d on the excellence of active courage, and the much greater efforts of which both fexes, arc capable than either of them ima¬ gine, I'climbcd the # gate with great fpeed and little difficulty. The-old woman was already in the yard, and Laura ftood wondering to fee me on the top of the wall, fearing I fliould now break my neck in getting down again, and ftill in greater terror at the approach of the old woman. I made fome attempt to per¬ fuade the latter to give Laura her liberty; but our turnkey is very deaf, and inftead of liftcning to me, flie ran for fomc offen¬ five weapon to beat me off the wall : fo, once more afluring Laura I would fend her immediate aid, and keeping hold of the gate poll with my hand, I let myfelf down and with very little hurt. I proceeded along a narrow lane ; I knew
knew not in what direction, but hurried -forward in great haite ; not only from the poffibility of being purfued, but becaufe 'it began to blow and rain very heavily. In lefs than ten minutes I came to a houfe ; I rang, a man came to the gale, and I readily gained admiflion. I was fliewn into lhe room where I am now writing, and another perfon was font to me, who perhaps is the mafter of the hòufe, though from his appearance I fliould rather fuppofe the contrary. I aiked firft ifit were poffible to get a coach ; and he enquired where I came from ? I told him, from a houfe at a confiderable diftance, in the fame lane, where I had been forcibly fliut up, and where my maid flill was, whom I wiflied to have releafed ; adding I would well reward any two men, by whom it might eafily be effected, if they would go and help her over the wall. He liftened very attentively, flood fome time to confider, and then replied there was no coach to be procured within a mile of the place, but that a man fliould go for one ;
onu ; and that I might make myfelf eafy concerning the young woman (Laura) for flie iliould foon join me. The look and manner of the man did not pleafe me, but the cafe was urgent, the florm increafing, and I in want of flicker and protection. I then recollected it would peihaps be fafelt to write immediately to Grofvcnor- Street, to prevent furprife as well as to guard againft accidents, and I afked if he could fuinifli mc with a flieet of paper and pen and ink. He anfwered he feared not, but called a boy, and faid to him------ fC Did not I fee you with ct fome writing paper the other day?" The boy anfwered yes ; and he bade him go and fetch it, and bung methe pen and ink.— íle then left me, and the boy prefently returned, with a flieet of paper, an old ink-bottle, and a very indifferent pen.— The boy looked at me carneftly, and then examined the pen, faying it was a very bad one, but he would fetch me a better. The man who was juft gone had told me
me that nobody could be fpared, to go as far as I required, in lefs than an hour at the fooneft ; I therefore have time to write at length. I think there can be little doubt but that my Louifa is long before this in Grofve- nor-Street. I would not wifli Sir Arthur to be informed too fuddenly, I will there¬ fore direct to her at a venture ; but for fear of accidents, will add to the direction—— " If Mifs Clifton be not there, to be open- " cd and read by Mrs. Clarke."—In the prefent alarmed ftate of tbe family this will .enfure its being opened, even if both my good friends fliould be abfent.
Good heaven ! What does this mean ? —I have juft rifen to fee if the little boy were within call, and find the door is lock¬ ed upon me !
I have been liftening !—I hear ilern and loud voices !—I fear I have been very in- confiderate !—I know not what to think !
3ita
Where am 1. ?; —Oh, Louifa, lam feized with terror ! Looking into the table-drawer at which ,1 am fitting, in fearch of wafers,, I have found my own letter; opened, dir- ted, and worn ! Alas ! You know of no fuch letter !—Again I am addrefling my¬ felf to the winds 1—The very fatal letter in whicii I mentioned the eight thoufand pounds !—Where am I, where am I ?— In what is all this to end ?
All is loft !—Flight is hopelefs !—-The very man who headed the ruffians that feized me has juft walked into the room, placed himfelf with his back againft the door, furveyed mc, fatisfied himfelf who it was, then warily left me, locked the door, and called a man to guard it !—Oh my incautious folly !—
I am in the dwelling of demons !— ï never heard fuch horrible oaths !—Surely there is fome peculiar mifchief working!— The noife increafes, with unheard of blaf- phemy ! 3 Merciful
Merciful Heaven ! I hear the voice of Frank!—What is doing ?—Mull I íe- main here ?—Oh mifery !—What cries !— * Jk * * * * * * fr * Uf ' # *· ϋ
LETTER CXXVII.
COK Ľ CLIFTON то GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Dor er Streif. ALL is over, Fairfax!-------1 am juft brought fiom the fcene of blood !—You fee this is not my hand-writing—My hand muft never write more—But I would em¬ ploy the little ftrength I have, in relating " the laft fcene of this eventful hiftory."— My fifler is my amanuenfis. Thefe furgi- cal mediers ìffued their edict that I fliould not fpeak ; but they found I could be as obftinate
obftinate as themfelves : I would not fuffer aprobe to be drawn at me till I had writ¬ ten, for when they begin I expect it wijl foon be over. I remember I ended my laft at the very minute I was about to mount my horfe.—- It was a wintcry day. The rain fell in flieets, and the wind roared in my face.— My piftols were charged and locked in my· pocket. I rode full fpeed, but I fat off too late ! When I approached the madhoufe, I heard the moil piercing flirieks and cries of mur¬ der !—They mingled with the ftorm, in wild and appalling horror !—I rang vio¬ lently at the bell !—A ready and an eager band foon flew lo open the gate—It was Anna St. Ives!—A boy fliewed, her the way—It was her cries and his, mingled with the blafphemics of the wretches above, which I had heard ! Her firft word again was murder!------ '* Fly ! Save him, fave him !"-— I ruflied forward—The noife above flairs was dreadful—I blundered and miffed the vol. ν, m flairs,
ftairs, but the terrified boy had run after me to fliew me. I heard two piftols fire as I afcended—The hoi ror that ftruck my heart was inconceivable !—A fellow armed with a bludgeon was ftanding to guard the doer. My piftols were unlocked and ready: I prefented and bade him give way—He inftantly obeyed—I made the lock fly and entered!—The fiift object that ftruck my fight was Frank, befmeared with blood, a difcharged piftol in his hand, defending himfelf againft a fellow aiming blows at him with a bludgeon, Mac Fane hewing at him with a cutlafs, and the keeper, who had juft been fliot, expiring at his feet I I fired at Mac Fane------My fliot took place, though not fo effectually but that be turned round, made a ftab at me, and pierced the abdomen almoft to tbe fpine. But he had met his fate ; and the return he made was moil welcome !—Fie fell, and the remaining antagonifts of Fiank immediately fled. Frank is living but dreadfully hacked by
by the villain Mac Fano. They tell me 1 his life İs fafe, and that his wounds are' deep, but not dangerous^ Perhaps they mean to deceive me. Iffo their folly is extreme, and their pity to me ill placed. I well know I deferve no pity. With lefpect lo myfelf, my little know¬ ledge of furgery teaches mc that a wound fo violent, made with a cutlafs in fuch a part, muft be mortal. But mortality to me is a bleffing. To live would indeed be mifery. Toimen ts never yet were imagined equal to thofe I have for fome time en¬ dured ; but, though I have lived raving, I do not mean to die canting. Take this J.ift adieu theiefore, dear Fairfax, and do not becaufe) ou once efteemed me endea¬ vour to palliate my en ors. Let my letters to you do juftice to thofe I have injured. —To hav e faved his life who once faved mine, is a lay of confolation to that proud fwelling heart, which has fometimes de¬ lighted to confer, but has always turned aveifo from the receiving of obligations.—» I would have been more circumflaiitial in m 2 my
mys narrative^ were, it not for the teafing kindnefs of my fifter; î r Jt « - r Once more, and everlaftingly," adieu ! , ; С CLIFTON. P. S. ADDED BY LOUISA CLIFTON. As to a friend of my brother, fir, I have taken tbe liberty to delay fending the let¬ ter, till his wound 'has been examined.— The furgeons are divided in their judg¬ ment. Two of them affirm the wound is mortal ; the third is pofitive that a cure is poİTıble ; efpecially confidering tho youth and high courage of tbe patient, on which he particularly infifts. I dare not indulge myfelf too much in hope ; I meiely ftate opinion. Neither dare I fpeak of my own fenfations, Of the worth of a mind like that of Mr. Clifton, you, fir, his friend and correfpondenr, cannot be ignoiant.—· The pail is irrevocable ; but hope always fmiles on tbe futuie. Should he recover ! --Refignation becomes us, and time will quickly relieve us from doubt. , CLI'FTON.
LET-
LETTER CXXVIII.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES To MRS. WENBOURNE. . Grofvenor-Strect. J RETURN you my fincere thanks, dear madam, for your kind congratulations: and think myfelf honoured by the great jpy you exprefs, at my fafety and flie deliverence of Mr. Flenley. I will not attempt to defcribe my own feelings ; they are inexpreffible; but will endeavour to obey your commands, and give you the beft account I am able of all that has be¬ fallen us. For thisi purpofe, Iinclofe the narrative written by Mr. Flenley during his confine- , ment ; and ^-'c* letters addrefled to my friend, Louiia, but never fent¿ with a m 3 copy
copy of a letter dictated by Mr. Ciifton to his friend,' л Mr.' Fairfax. To ihcfc be pleafed to add the following particulars of what paffed "after Mf.'Hênley's narrative breaks off, and tbc fudden interruption of my third letter by terror. Mr. Henley heard but had not time to write their laft confultation. It was the ea¬ gei nefs of the keeper which overcame the reluctance of Mac Fane to the murder, till he fliould have procured the bond of Mr. Clifton. The keeper was violent : be had bargained with his two men to aflift in the murder, for fifty pounds each : and he told Mac Fane, if he would not ; con- fenr, they would proceed without hini, and he fliould have no fliare of the eight thoufand pounds. , This .argument had its effect, Mac Fane had fome doubts relative to the money vvon of Mr. Clifton ; and four thoufand pounds was a temptation not to be refitted. : Mr. Flenley omitted mentioning a cir¬ cumftance that occurred offome'momenr, becaufe he did not know the meaning of it.
it. Probably they had planned it out of his hearing. The day before the attack, the keeper'returned him his watch and purfe, with the fame fum, but not, as Mr. Henky thinks, the fame pieces, it contained when delivered. The puipofe of this, it appears, was to make İrim be¬ lieve the keeper a man of his word. ! On the morning of the intended mur¬ der, previous to the aftault, the keeper came up to Mr. Henley ; but not into the room. Fie talked to him with the ufual fecurity of his chains, and propofed that Mr. Henley fliould deliver up the bank- bills, which the keeper now told him he knew to be in his poffeffion ; with a pro¬ mife that they fliould be returned, as the watch and purfe had been. An artifice fo fliallow was not likely to impofe on Mr. Henley. Fie had deter¬ mined how to a£t, relative'^ to the bank bills, and anfwered it was tiue they were in his poffeffion ; but that he would not deliver them to the keeping of any other. Immediately after this repulfe, the keeper, m 4 Mac
Mac Fane, and the two attendants af- cended. The keeper (I fpeak after Mr. Flenley) was much the moil confident,- and feemed chiefly fearful that Mr. Henley fliould flip by them. He therefore ftationed one of bis men at the'outfide of the door, which he ordeied him to lock and guard. Him¬ felf, Mac Fane, and the other entered the room ; the keeper and the man each with a bludgeon, and Mac Fane with a pair of piftòls and his cutlafs hanging by his fide. Mr. Henley had purpofely kept up a good fiie, and had the bank bills in his hand. He bade them keep off a moment, as if he wiflied to parley ; and they, defi- rous of having the bills quietly, remained where they were. Mr. Henley then took the bills one by one, repeating the amount of each to convince them that the whole fum was theie, and then fuddenly thruft them into the fire. They all ruflied for¬ ward to fa ve „them, and this was the lucky moment on which Mr. Henley feized the two arms of Mac fane, who i( on account of
of his weapons, was the principal object, and who, intending to fire at him, in the ftruggle fliot the keeper. The other piftol Mr. Henley wrefted from him, during which conteft it went off, but without do¬ ing mifchief. Mac Fane then drew his banger, and made feveral cuts at Mr.' Henley, wlio Was attacked on the other fide by the keeper's man. In the heat of this conflict, Mr. Clifton arrived ; and what then followed, his letter will inform you. It is neceffaiy I fliould now fay a word of myfelf, and of the fmall part which I bad in this very di eadful affair. And here I muft ïemind you of the boy, fo often mentioned in Mr. Henley's nairative; for to him, peihaps, we all owe our fafety —■ At leaft, had it not been for him, Mr. Ciifton could not certainly have gained ad million. The poor fellow beard and faw enough to let him underftaîıd fome ftrange crime was in agitation. Hp has great acutenefl» m 5 and
and fenfibility :^ţie looked at me when I firft came, in a very fignificant manner,. and would have fpoken had he dared. The door of tbe room in which I was ihut was both locked and bolted ; but the man that was fet to guard it was wanted fora more blood-thiifty purpofe. I need not*inform you bow much my fears were alarmed, the moment I found myfelf in the cuftody ofthemanby whom I had at fiift been; feized But how infi¬ nitely was my tei ror bcreafed when I heard the voice of Frank, which I did veiy diftinctly, and prefently afterwai d of the honor'about to be committed ! My ihiieks were inceflant ' The poor boy beard them, and though flirieking with terror almoft as violent as my own, yet had the prefence of mind to come and 1 fot me free. - ! , Mr. Clifton's ringing was heard at the fame moment. Ilie top bolt of the gale was high, and I opened İt with difficulty ; but defpair lent me foice. It certainly could no* have been opened time,enough by the boy. Of
Of this and the following fcene, and of the agonizing fenfations that accompanied tbem, I will attempino further defcription. I will now only relate by wbat means, and whofe aid, we left this houfe of horror. You know, madam, with what activity my dear Louifa exerted herfelf, and em¬ ployed every expedient in her power.— You are likewife acquainted with the zeal of Mrs. Claike, her niece Pegg} 7 , and the two men, her hufband and brother.—. Their ardour increafed rather than abated. Mr. Webb, whofe watchings and effoils \легс inceffant, faw Mac Fane ftep out of a hackney-coach into the fliop where Mr. Clifton lodges. This I underftand to have happened on the ninth evening of my con¬ finement. It was natural that this circum¬ ftance fhould immediately excite fufpici¬ on and alarm. The coach was difmiifed, Mac Fane remained, and Mr. Webb cor> tmucd hovering about the door, waiting in expectation of feeing him come out, till two o'clock in the moining, but wait¬ ing in vain : after which, concluding that he had miffed him, he quitted his poil. m 6 On
On the morrow,' by very diligent en¬ quiry, he found out Mac» Fane's lodg¬ ings ; but he had not been at home all nicht. The fame-ineffectual fearch was continued during that and the next day ; but, on the morning of deliverance, Mr. Webb met a perfon with whom he had formei fy been acquainted, 'v*ho told hím of the houfe hired by the keeper, and mentioned the names of his two afliftants, with rumouisand furmifes fufficiently dark and unintelligible, but enough to make Mr. Webb fuppofe it was poflible the per¬ fons he was in fearch of were there con¬ fined. The intelligence was immediately brought to Louifa and Sir Arthur, and application as immediately made to the magiftiacy. Webb had obtained very accurate information of the file of the houfe; and, what was more effectual, had prevailed on his infoi mer to lend his aid. The relief he bought, though too late to prevent mifchief, was not wholly ufe¬ lefs : Mr. Clifton was the firft object of our
our< care ; for Mr. Henley, though bruif- ed, cut, and mangled, has received no ferious injury. Laura-was likewife fent for and relieved from her prifon. Proper conveyances were foon provided, and we all removed as fait as poffible from this fcene of horror. You may be fure, madam, we did not forget to bring the boy with us. Mr. Henley has an affection for him, which the poor fellow very fincerely returns; and finds himfelf íelieved from the molt mifer¬ able of fituations, and placed in the moft happy. That I may wholly acquit myfelf of the talk I have undertaken, I muft juft men¬ tion the Count de Beaunoir. lie, is a gen¬ tleman of the moft pleafant temper. Ur¬ banity is his diftinctive mark, for in this quality mofl of his flights originate. He has thought himfelf my admirer, but in reality he is the general admirer of what¬ ever he fuppofcs excellent. When he was told of my being affianced to Mr. Flenley, inftead of expreffing chagrin, he broke into
into raptures at our mutual happinefs, and how much it was merited. He does not feem to 'underftand the felfifhnefs of jea¬ loufy." ' ' Perhaps, madam, you have not heard- the laft accounts of the phvfical gentlemen, relative to Mr. Clifton. The furgeon who firft" gave hope is now pofitive of a cure ; and his opponents begin to own it is not impoffible, but they will not yet allow that Mr. Clifton is out of danger. The Count de Beaunoir has paid Mr. Clifton the utmoft attention ; he vifits him twice a day, and, according to the accounts my friend gives me, infufes a fpirit of be¬ nevolence and affeciion into his vifits which are highly honourable to his heart. Indeed T ! and Mr. Henley have feveral times met him there': for you may well imagine, madam·, we are not the leaft attentive of Mr. Clifton's vifitors. It is at prefent the 'fole ftudy of' Mr. Henley,' wbich way beft to addrefs himfelf to a heart and underftanding fo capable of ge¬ nerous fenfations, and noble energies.— There
There is an "attachment to confiftency in the human mind, which will not admit of any fudden and abfolute change ; it muft be gradual ; but thus much may with.cer¬ tainty be faid, Mr*. Clifton does not at pre¬ fent, and I hope will never again, treat with complacency thofe vindictive but er¬ roneous notions which bad fo nearly 'prov¬ ed deftructive to all. Fie makes no pro- feffions : but fo much the better ;- he thinks theih the more ftrongly. Flis mind prcferves its ufual tone ; is fometimes difturbed even to 'excefs; and bitterly angry, almoft to phrenfy, at its own mif- takes ; but has loft none of thofe quick and powerful qualities, by which it is fo highly diftinguiflied. Sir Arthur, madam, has defired me to communicate a circumftance, which I fliall readily do, without the falfe delicacy of fuppofmg that ^1 am not the proper perfon. It is agreed between him 'and Mr. Abimelech Flenley, that the marriage between me and Mr. Frank Henley fhall take place in a month ; to which I thought it
-б it my duty ťo-affent. I am forry, madam, that Lord -Fitz-Allen fliould continue to imagine his honour will be fullied by this marriage : but I am in -like manner forry for a thoufand follies,- which I daily fee in the'world, without having the immediate power of correcting 'one of them. J A. W. ST. IV£S.
LETTER CXXIX. COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Dover Street. IT is not to be endured ! They drive me mad ! I >vfll not have life thus palmed upon me ' There is neither kindnefs nor juftice in it. I will hear no more of duty, and philanthropy,, and general good ! I am,
am all fiend !—Flell-born ! ------The boon companion of the fouleft mifcreants the womb of fin ever vomited on earth !------ The arm in arm familiar of them !—In the face of the world !—■This it is to be ho¬ norable !—I—I am a man of honour, a defpifer of peafants, an affertorof rank!—- Day after day, hour after hour, here I lie, rolling, ruminating on ideas which none but demons could fuggeft ; haunted by vifions which devils only could conjure up ! And wifli me to live ? Where İs the charity ofthat ? Angels though they be, they have made me miferable ! I know I have injured them ; I don't deny it. Say what they will, they cannot forgive me— Shall í afk it ?—No !------Hell íhould not make me ! I will have no more favours ; I am loaded too much already. For it cannot be true !------Their heaits can feel no kindnefs for me !—Oh ! I have loft her !—For ever loft her !— Yet even this deep damnation I could bear, I think I could, had I not made myfelf fo very foul and deteftable a villain ! —It
—It is intolerable !—The rage of canni¬ bals to mine is patience ! I could feed on humán hearts ; my own the firft apd fweeteft morfei ! Well, well ' — Pier I have loft ; him I have injured !—Injured ?------Arrogance, outrage", contempt, blows, imprifonment, andmuider!------Thefe are the damning injuries I have done him !—I took great¬ nefs upon me ; I mimicked tyranny, and pretended to inflict large vengeance for petty affionts ! I trufted in wiles, and imagined mind might be caught in a net !
Lo bow the adder egg of vanity can brood in its own dunghill, and hatch it¬ felf to perfecution, lape, and murder '— Lo how Guilt and Folly couple, and en¬ gender darknefs to hide their own defor¬ mity !—The picture is mine !------ Black, midnight rape, and blood red murder !-— A horrid but indubitable likenefs.
There are but two ways, either to live and
and purfue revenge, or io àie and forget it. Of the purfuit I am weary. I have had a full meal of villainy, and am glutted : its foulnefs is infufferable, and I turn from it loathing. Then welcome death ! Again it would have fought me, but for their eternal officioufnefs. it is in vain. There are fwords, piftols, and poifon ftill. * Life has a thoufand outlets : and to live, know¬ ing what I know and never can forget, would be rank and hateful cowardice !—- I am determined. I will liften to their gloffes no more. Perfuafion is vain, and foothing mockery. Yet one act of juftice I will perform before I die. Send me my letters, Fair¬ fax. 'Ihey fliall fee me in my native co¬ lom s i —Send them diiectly ' ------There is confolation in the thought------They have dared to fhew letters that expofed them to perfecution and malice----- _-T will fliew what fliall expofe me to contempt and and hatred !—Let them equal me if they can—I am Clifton !—Inimitable in ab¬ furdity, in vice damnable !— Take
Take copies if you will. Proclaim me to the world ! Read them in coffee- lioufes, nail them up at tbe market-crofs ! —Let boys hoot at me, and trulls and drabs pluck me by the beard 1------ " Wbat can they ? ------It is I, myfelf, who hold the fcorpion whip J— 'Tis memory ! ,What ! Envy, rage, revenge, hatred, rape and murder, all poffeffing one man ? ■------Poor creature ! Poor creature ! — ■Pityjiinii Fairfax !—Pity ?— Afk pity ?— Defpife him ! Trample on him ! Spit in his face ! \ С CLIFTON. LETTER CXXX. FRANK HENLEY TC OLIVER TRENCHARD. London, Grofvtner· Street. ifiOW violent and reiterated are the conflicts, between truth and error, in eveiy mind of ardour !—And, of all eiroi s, thç love pf felf is the moil rooted, the leaft t eafy to detect, and fupremely difficult to eradicate.
eradicate. We can pardon ourfelves any thing, except a want of felf refpeci ; but that is intolerable. ' I defcribed, in my lafl*, the-diffatisfied fiate of mind of Mr. Clifton. But, while he imagined he fliould foon lofe all me¬ mory of a fcene become fo irkfome to him, his diffatisfaciion was trifling,, compared to what it is at prefent. Repugnant as the idea was to his habitual feelings, ftill I have more than half convinced liim that fuicide is an aft as cowardly as it is criminal. Yet to live and face the world, loaded as he imagines with unpardonable crimes and everlafting ignominy, is a thing to which he knows not how to confent. To combat this new miilake, into which he has fallen, has for fome time pail been my chief employment. No common efforts could affuage the tur¬ bulence of his tempeituous foul. Energy fuperior even to his own was neceffary r to fubječt and calm this perturbation. But, in the fimplicity of truth, this energy was eafy to be found : it'is from felr- diítruít, confufion or cowardice, ifitever fail. X haye
- I-have juftVIeft him, and our converfa¬ tion will give'you the beft hi ftory of .his 'mind, which is.well worthy our ftudy'. I found him verging even toward delirium, and a fever coming on, -which if not im¬ peded might foon be fatal. He keeps his bed * but inftead of lying at his eafe, he remained raifed on his elbow, haying juft finiflied a letter to his friend. " Louifa had defcribed the ftate of his mind, and I refolved tďcatch its tone, that I might the more certainly command his attention. Without preface, and as if continuing a chain of; reafoning, ■» be addrefled me ; witli his eye fixed,' in all the ardour of enquiry. What is man ?—What are his functions, qualitiesi and ufes? — Dóes he'not fleep trembling, live envying, and die curfing? -rrAnd is this worth aught?— Isit to be endured ?—Why do I fuffer life thus to be impofed upon me ?— ' .¡/It is not fuffering : or, if it be, fuch fufferings are of our own creation—To the virtuous and the wife, life is joy and blifs, . Perhaps.fo'—AYifdom there may be, and truth
truth and virtue. And, for the virtuous and the wife, tbe full ltream of pleafure may richly flow : but not for me ! Pi etend not that I may walk with the gods ! I who have been the inmate of fiends ! I, who propofed glory to myfelf from ¿ţie moil contemptible of purfuits ! I, who could dangle after coquettes and prudes ; feed on and inflate myfelf with the baubles of a beauty's toilette ; and, in the book of vanity, inferibe myfelf a great hero, a mighty conqueior, for having heaped ridi¬ cule on the ridiculous; or brought in¬ nocence to fliame, mifery, and deftiuction 1 And this I did with a light and vain heart ! Did it laughing, boafting, exulting! Sa¬ tanic dog! Peit of hell! What! Stretch fouls on the rack, and then grin and mock at them for lying theie ! 'Tis the fport of devils, and by devils invented ! Your prefent indignation is honourable both to your heart and underftanding^ Oh, flatter me not !—Vain, fupercilious coxcomb !—I fpicad my wings, crowed in conceit, threatened, refolved, laughed at oppofition, and kicked the world before me !
me !—Oh,' it was who, but I;-—And what was J it I propofed ?—Fair ' conqueft ?— Honourable 'opp'ofition'?—No !—It was treaclier}',' covert'malice, and cowardly confpiracy !—A league with hell-dogs !— Horrible, blood-tbirfty villains !—And baffled too ; defeated/ after all this' in¬ fernal enginery ! Nay, had I been fo wholly devil as to have'joined in' 4 mur¬ der/ wbat would have followed ? Why they would next have murdered mc ; and for the juftice of the fccond murder would have hoped pardon, even for the .hell-born guilt'of the firft !' Dp not, while you deteft and ihun one crime, plunge into a greater. This agony is for having been unjuft to Others ; you « arc now' ftill more unjuft to yourfelf. You will : not'fuppofe yourfelf capable of a fingle virtue ; yet, in your moft miftakcii moments/ you never could be fo illiberal to your'enemies. ' Would you perfuade'me I am not a mofl- guilty/foiil, and hateful monfter !—Oh be more worthy of yourfelf, avoid me, deteft me,' curfe me ! 2 * í will ·
I will anfwer when you are more calm.' Calm? Never, while this degraded being fliall continue, fliall fuch a moment come ! —I calm ? Sleeping or waking, I at peace ? I pardon hypocrify, treachery, biows, bruifes, prifons, chains, poifon, rape and murder ì Minifters of wrath defoend, point here your flaming fwords, annihilate all me¬ mory of what manhood and honour were, and fit me for the fociety of the damned ! Forbear !—(Never before did I addrefs him in fuch a voice—The lafl dreadful word of his fentence was drowned, -by my ítern and awful violence; which reafon dictated as the only means of recalling his maddening thoughts, from the defpair and horror into which they were hurrying —-I continued)—Frantic man, forbear ! Recall your wild fpirits, and command ihem to order. How long will you fufier this petty ilavery ? Flow long fliall the giant rage, and expend his ,ftrenglh, in learing up ftubble and rending ft raws ?— Stretch forth your hand, and grafp the oak—Labours worthy of your Herculean mind await and invite you. Away to the _vor,. v. к temple
temple of Enor; lliake its pillars, and make its foundation totter !—Be yourfelf. —Shall the foaring eagle fwoop at reptiles, the prey of bats and owls ? Do not mock me with impoffible hopes —What ! Flave you not held (he mirror up tome, and fliewn me my own hatefulnefs? Are you a man ? Will you never fliake off this bondage ? Oh it is bafe ! it is be¬ neath you í Of what have you been guilty ? Why of ignorance, miftakes of the under¬ ftanding, falfe views, which you wanted knowledge enough, truth enough, to cor¬ rect. Flave not many of the godlike men whom we admire mofl been guilty, in their youth, of equal or of greater errors ?—. Thus, alas, it happens thai minds of the higheft hopc 5i and moil divine ftamp and coinage, are cut off daily ! fvvept away by that other grand miftake of mankind— <f Exemplary punifliment is neceflary"— So they fay—But no— 'Tis exemplary re¬ formation ! Can the world be better- warned by a body in gibbets, than by the active virtues of a ünce mifguided but now enlightened imdcrflanding? The gibbet 2 will
will remain an object of terror to the tra¬ veller, who dreads being robbed and mur¬ dered : but an incitement to defpair, in the mind of the murderer?—Baniili then thefe black pictures from your mind, by which it continues darkened and mifled ; and in their ftead behold a foul infpiring profpect, of all thaťis great and glorious, rifing to your view ! Feel yourfelf a man ! Nay you fliall feel it, in your own defpite ! A man capable of high and noble actions Ì
Here, Oliver, I at this time left him. Flis eye remained fixed, and he was filent; but its wildnefs was diminiflıed : the frown of his brow difappeared, and his counte¬ nance became more clear. Such affocia- tions as thefe tokens denoted ought not to meet interruption. However I took care to return in lefs than an hour ;' fearful lefl he fliould decline into his former gloom, which was little fliort óf phrenfy. I had Leen fortunate enough to reduce his dif- cordant feelings to fomething like har¬ mony : and the moment I entered his room the fécond time he exclaimed—- - ' n 2 You,
You are a generous fellow ! a magna¬ nimous fellow ! You can work mímeles! " — I know you of old—Can bring the dead to life !—Can almoft perfuade me that even I, by living, may now and then effect fomc trifling, pitiful good; may fnatch fome of the remnants, the offals of honour—But aught eminent, aught worthy of— Be calm No ! It cannot be forgotten, or forgiven ! ■—CrUel, malignant, remorfelefs wretch ! Can you fpeak thus of the prefent ?— You biow you cannot !—And wherefoie unjuflly infift on the paft? Be firm ' Con- -quer this pride of heart ! Why, ay—Pride of heart !—It is the very damning fin of my foul ! Exorcife the foul fiend then, and in its ftead give welcome to firm but unaffuming feif-refpect. Aiife! Shake torpor fiom you, and feel your ftrength ! It is Atlean ; made to bear a world ! Cheriih life, and become worthy of yourfelf J What! Would you kill, a mind fo mighty ? Do you noL feci it now; poffeflmg you, emanating, flaming, burning to fpread itfelf ? Why
Why, that were fomething !—-Could 1 but once again get into my own good liking— ! You are a ftrange fellow !—You will not hate me J Nay, will not fuffer me lo hate myfelf!—Damnation ! To be caft at fuch an immenfo diftance ! Oh it is in¬ tolerable ! It is contemptible !—But I will have my revenge J—-Some; bow or an¬ other 1 will have my revenge! And, fince bale muft not be the word, why------ ! But nomatter—I willhave no more vaunting— Yet, if I do not ..... ! I have had a glimpfe, and begin to know you—The foul of be¬ nevolence, of tendernefs, of attention, of love, of all the divine faculties that mako men deities, infufes itfelf and pervades you—Had I but been wholly fool, I had been but partly villain—But I!—Oh mon- ftfous !—The fiends with whom I was leagued to me were angels! Why, ay; contemplate tbe picture, but do not forget it is that of a man you once knew, who is now no more. He has difappeared, and in his ftead an angel of light is come ! Stop !—Go not too fail !------ 1 promife nothing
notbing— Maik that I—I promife nothing ■—Do not imagine I am now in the fcveiifli repentance of white wine whey—You would have me ftay in a woild which I myfolf have icndcied baleful—I will think of it—I know youi arts—You would rea¬ lize the fable of Pygmalion, and would infttfe foul into marble ! Theie is no need ; you have a foul al¬ ready ; inventive, capacious, munificent, fublime ! Ay, ay—-I know—You bave a choice collection of woids. A foul of ten thoufand ' Nay, an aimy offouhinone' And muff I fubmit ? Are you determin-" ed to make a rafcal like me admiie, and Jove, and give place to all tbe fine affecti¬ ons of the heart ? Ay, determined f Oh, fifter ! -----(Louifa at this moment entered.) To you tool have behaved like a fcoundrel ! A tyrant ! A petulant, often- tätious, imperious braggart ! You miftake ! replied Louifa', eagerly. You miftake ! Y r ou are talking of a veiy different
different man J A being I could not un¬ derftand. You arc my brother!—My brother !— I have found the way to your heart ! Will make it all my own ! Will twine myfelf round it ! Shake me off if you can ! The energy with which flie fpoke, and looked, and kiffed him, was irrcfiftible !— He was overpowered : the tears guflied to his eyes, but he rcpreffed them; he thought them unmanly; and, feeing his medical friend enter, exclaimed—I have furgeons for the body, and furgeons for the mind, who cut with fo deep yet fo ftcady a hand that they take away the noxious, and leave the found to fuppurate and heal ! Can we do lefs ? faid I. Ours is no common talk ! We are acting in behalf of fociety: wc have found a treafure, by which it is to be enriched. Few indeed are thofe puiflant and heavenly endowed fpirits, that are capable of guiding, en¬ lightening, and leading the human race onward to felicity ! Whaťis there precious but mind ? And when mind, like a dia¬ mond
mond 'of uncommon growth, exceeds a "certain magnitude, calculation cannot find its value ! ~ I once more left him ; and never did I <juit the company of human being, no not of Anna St. Ives herfelf, with a more glowing and hoping heart. But why de¬ fcribe fenfations to thee, Oliver, with which thou art fo intimately acquainted ? To bid thee rejoice, to invite thee to par¬ ticipate in felicity, which may and muft fo widely diffufe itfelf, were equally to wrong thy underftanding and thy heart. F. HENLEY.
THE END.
PniitcdbyJ Crûwdc··, Wai wick -Sju rc.
