Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Anna St. Ives: a novel
ANNA St. I V E S : A X O V E L. L E T T E R LV. TRANK IILNH V TO OLIVER IRLNCIIARľ).
Pai h, Hotel de ľ U/ifoerfì/é. OOME events have happened, fince I Wto te to thee, on which I meant to have been filent, till we had met; but I want • *■ thy advice '- on a new incident, and muft therefore briefly relate what h'as paffed. I vol. in, j* have
trave had an opportunity of appealing that hungry vanity, which is continually crav¬ ing after, unwholefome food. I have proved to Clifton that it was not fear which made me fubmit to obloquy, which in his opinion could only be waflied away in blood. I have been inftrumental in fav ing bis-life. There is a half lunatic count, who was a vifitor at the Chateau, and who is ena¬ moured of her whom all are obliged to love and admire. I know not whether it be their climate, their food, their wine, or thefe feveral caufes combining and ffrength'ened by habit, or whether it be habit and education only which give the natives of the fouth of France fo much ap¬ parently conftitutional ardour; but fuch the fact appears to be. This count is one of the moft extravagant of all the" hot- brained race I have mentioned. He in¬ dulges and feeds his flighty fancy by read¬ ing books of chivalry, and admiring the mqft ; romantic of the imaginary feats of knight-errantry. The
The loo haughty Clifton, angry that he. fliould dare to addrefs her to w hem he openly paid his court, fell "into habiturd contcíiS with him, daring him to fliew who could be in oft defperate, and at laft gave a tolerably Rrong proof that, though he has an infinitely moie confiftent mind, he can be at moments more mad than the count himfelf. He leaped down a rock into a lake,'where it is probable he muft have peri fli cd, but for me. One would have imagined that what followed would have cooled even a Mar- fcİJlian fever of fuch phrenfy. Bui no: the count has been brooding over,the re¬ collection, till he had peifuaded himfelf he was a diflionoured man, and muft find fome means to do away the difgrace. I thought him gone to Fontainebleau; bul inftead ofthat he has juft been here.* He came and inquired of the fervants for the monfieur who had taken the famous leap; curfing all Engliih names, as too baiba- rous to be underftood by a delicate Pro¬ vençal ear, and wholly incapable of being в 2 remembered.
•remembered. The fervants, thinking he meai-st mó, for I was obliged to leap too, introduced him to my apartment. Luckily Clifton was out for the dav. She and Sir Arth.ur were with him. I am hourly' put to the trial, Oliver, of feeing him preferred------ But ------ Pili a w — After a torrent of crazy compliments from the count, who profeíľes to admire me, I learned at lad it was Clifton and not mc he wanted : and I alfo learned in part what was the purport of his errand. His mind was too full not to overflow. Know¬ ing how hot, unruly, and on fuch f ubje£i s irrational, the fpiriţs were that were in danger of encountering, I was immedi¬ ately alarmed. The moft effcciual expe¬ dient I could conceive to prevent mifchicf was to ihe w its actual abfurdity. ï faw no better way than that of making it ap¬ pear, as it really was, its tragical confe- quences excepted, ludicrous. But the diificulty was to give it the colouring which fliould produce that effect on a mind fo diftortcd. Mort
Mort de ma vie ! faid the count, I íhall never pardon myfelf for having loft fo fine an opportunity ! I am not fo heavy as he. I ihould not have been hint by the fall: I Ihould have faved the life of my rival, and been admired by the whole world ! My triumph would have been complete.' Every gazette in Euiope would have trum¬ peted the exploit ; and the family of Beau¬ noir would have been rendered famous, by me, to all eternity ! No ! I never fliall forgive myfelf! ; I think, fir, you ought rather to be an¬ gry with mc than with Mr. Clifton. Parbleu ! I have been thinking of that. Why did you prevent mc ? The thought could not long have efcaped me, if you had not been in fuch deviliih halle ! Τι u.c. Ihe only danger was that, while you were waiting for the thought, the gentleman might have been drowned. Diable m'emporte ! I had forgotten that. Well then, I muft have fatisfaciion of Monfieur Calif— Morbleu !—What is the gentleman's name ? б 3 [I wiíh
[1 wifh I, could confide enough in my French to write the dialogue in the lan¬ guage in wb.ich it paffed ; but I maft not attempt it, The ideas however are tole- iar?ly fijong in my memory, and they muft fuit" с c.] Clî.W Oui da — Calİfton —Monfieur Califton muft give me fatisfactİon for the f anelante affront I have received. But I cannot conceive, fir, how any man's thinking proper ro kill himfelf can be an affront ίο another. Cehvment, Monßeur? Fvjìe ! Butit h, if he kill himfelf lo prove me a coward ! Then, fir, ï am afraid there ¡¿ uot a madnpn in Bedlam who docs not daily affront Ihc whole woild. How fo, fir ? By doing fomething which no man in Ids fenfes dare imitate. $[om d'un Ľieu ! Monßeur, I am a man of honour' The family of Beaunoir is re¬ nowned for its noble feats, it fliall not be difgraced
difgracccl by me. ϊ have been defied, and I will have fatisfaciion. But you were not defied to fword, or piftol. You were defied to leap. AVcIl, fir? And before, as a man of honour, you can Iiave any right to give a fécond chal¬ lenge, you muft anfvver the firft. Is that your opinion, fir ? Nay, I appeal ίο yourfelf. Allons /—If fo, I muft leap ! Will you do me the favour to accompany me ? í will order pofb-horfes inftanlly. You fhall· be my witnefs that I perform the firft con¬ dition. Can you fwim ? Vcntrebleu ! What a queftion ! I am not heavy enough to fink. Befides, fir, I was born at Marfeilles.—Yes, we will gc/ together; you ihall fee mc make the leap; after which I may then return and pubhih my defiance to the whole uni verfe. No, fir ! If you leap you will never publiih your defiance ! How io ì в 4 You
You will be killed'.' The whole uni-* Verfe could not fave you ! Commenti diable ! Look at me ! Look at Monfienr Calif ! I am· as light as— ! refe J Yes ; but-you are not fo ftrong as he : you cannot leap fo far. His effort was prodigious 1 I have examined the place ; and; had he fallen half a foot ffiort of where He. did, he muft have been daíhed to pieces. Fer ét Feu ! —In that cafe, I muft die I ■ —Yes, ï muft die ! There is no remedy ! í muft not diihouour my family ! No man on earth muft brave the Count de Beau- noir ! I muft die ! And be laughed at ? Laugh, fir ! Mort de ma eie ! Who will dare to laugh ? When you are dead, of what fiiould they be afraid ? Morbleu ! That's true. He would be a rath fool who fliould dare to laugh at you while you are,living.. Foi d'un honnête homme, monfieur> you are
arc a man of honour: a gentleman. You are brave yourfelf, and know how to honour brave men, and I efteem you. Sir, if you really efteem me—■ Ventrebleu ! Sir, I eftecm you more than any man on earth ! Command my purfe, my fvvord ! I would ferve you at the hazard of my fife ! · Then let me prevail on you, fir, to con¬ fider well what I fay/ I 'folemnly afTiire you, I would not advife you to any thing which I woukl not do myfelf. Pardieu ! Monßeur, I am fure you would not. You have too much honour« I have too much regard to truth. C' (β la méme chafe*. Men honour themfelves moft by op- pQÍing, nay by adling in the very teeth of the prejudices of mankind ; and he is the braveft man who oppofes them the often- eft. The woild makes laws, and after¬ wards laughs at or^ defpifes thofe hy whom they are obeyed. lie proves the nobienefs of his natine heft who ačb wdth
в L>
moft
. - 'moft: wifdom. ■ Recollect the madnefs with which Mr. Clifton acted, how much he was blamed by every body, and imagine to yourfelf the temper of your own coun- . tŕymen ;■ 'tijen afli.· whether you' would not be'.laughed at, inftead. of applauded and admired, ' were· you fo'. madly to throw away a life which you ought, to :dedicate to '■ your country. The Parifians would write epigrams, and fongs, ' and fing them in every ftreet,. on 'the nobleman who, in¬ ftead of living to fight the battles of his country, ihould tofs himfelf like a lunatic d-own à rock, and dafli out his brains. f'Qùe Dieulne damne-, monßeur, but you are in the right ! Yec Ì · I am a fòldier \ My country claims niyfvvord ! I hear we are "foon to have, a war with England ;■ and then-—! Gardez-vous bien,. Mejjicurs les ''.Anglais ■■■'*:■ / —:-AYliere- is. Monfieur Calif--? ■' - : "■ ..' ' ; ' Mr. Clifton will' not beat home to-day. ■ A T /ell, fir, be fd kind 'as to prefent my : com]>fiments to hirn,-.and tell him I would;
certainly
certainly have run him through the body, if you had not done me the honour to fay all that you have faid to me. I have appointed to fet off for Fontainebleau to¬ morrow morning ; but I intend to vifit England : we may have the good fortune hereafter ίο meet, and then we will come to an explanation. After a thoufand whimfical, half crazy but well meaning, and I believe very fin¬ cere compliments, and offers of fervice, he left me; and I hope the danger İs over. But as I told thee, Oliver, the chief purpofe of my writing is to aik thy advice. Principle, as thou well kno weft, is too fevere to admit of falfehood; direct, or indirei). To mention this dialogue to Clifton might be dangerous. It ought not to be, I grant, but ftill it might. One would ima&me that, inftead of feelinp: anger, he muft laugh, were he told of what has paffed : but the ι с is no certainty. And is not filence indirect falfehood? The Count has been here , his errand was to Clifton. Ought he not to be told pf it,- в б and
and fuffered to judge for himfelf? And iá not concealment an -indirect falfehood ? To mc it appears the contrary. He is full as 'likely to take the wrong as the right -fide of ihe queftion. I fee a poifibility of harm, but no injury that can be done by iilence. Nor do I myfelf perceive how it can be claffed among untruths. Still the doubt has occuired to my mind, and I have not hitherto anfwered it to my'ovvn' iatisfadtion. I forgot to tell thee with what ardour О *» the count declared himfelf an admirer of her who is moft admirable ; and the ro¬ mantic but very ferious effervefcence with wdiich he called himfelf her champion ; one who had devoied himfelf to maintain her fuperiority over her wdiolc fex, which* he would die affirming ; and to revenge her wrongs, if ever mortai fliould be daring or guilty enough to do her injuftice. But as I tell thee he is an eccentric and undefinable character. I have lately received a letter from my father, from which I find he has bced led, by
by I know not what miftake, to conclude that Sir Arthur thinks of me for his fon-in- law.' His letter, as ufual, is aftrangc one; and fuch as I believe no man on earth but himfelf could write. Direct thy next to me hi Grofvenor Street; for we ihall be on our return, be« foie I ihall receive an anfwer. Farewell. F. HENLEY.
LETTER
LETTER LVI.
ANNA WĽNEOURNĽ ST. IVĽS . - TO LOUISA CLIFTON.
London. Grofvenor Street, W HAT ftrange perverfity of accidents is' it, Louifa, that has made me moft deeply indebted to that man, above all others on the face of the earth, who thinks I have treated him unjuftly ? We are under •fre fli obligations, nay in all probability we again owe our lives to Frank í 1er.Icy. We left Paris on Sunday laft ; and, af¬ ter waiting a day and a night for a iair wind at Calais, we embarked on board the packet-boat ; the wind ftill continuing unfavourable.
unfavourable, though it had changed a little for the better. The channel was very rough, and the water ran high, when we went on board. Sir Arthur would willingly have retreated ; but Clifton was too impa¬ tient, and prevailed on him to venture. Before we had reached the middle of the channel, La ura,. Sir Arthur, and foon afterward I, were very fea-fick. It is a moft difagrceable feniation when violent, and would certainly be more effectual in renderinga coward fearlefs of death than the dying fentiments of Seneca,, or Socrates himfelf. The wind increafed, and the captain laboured feirai hours, but in vain, to make the port of Dover. He at laft told us we were too late for the tide, and .that the current fet againfl us, and muft drive us down to Deal. Wc proceeded accord¬ ingly, and it was dark- before we came. within fight of the town of Deal; where the captain, in the fea phrafe, was obliged to come to an anchor.
Tîıe
The Deal boatmen, who are always on the watch, and are the moft noted as we arc told on the whole coaft for their extor¬ tion, foon came up to the fliip, inviting us. to be put on fliore, but refufing to take- us for lefs than ten guineas. Frank and. Sir Arthur were defirous that we ihould not be impofçd upon ; but Clifton pleaded my fea ficknefs, and would not liften to· any propofid of delay. He is very peremp¬ tory, when his paifions are excited; and efpecially when he conceives, as he then did, that reafon is on his fide. There were three boats ; but they had agreed among them felvés,, and two of them kept aloof. This wc are told is tí«·- ir common practice, that they may hot fpoil their market by competilorihip. We were not above a mile from fhore : Clifton however agreed to their extrava¬ gant demand, and we went into the boat. We had not been there many minutes before we perceived that the five boat¬ men, who managed it, were all in liquor, efpecially he who feemed to be their head 2 man ;
man; and that we'were much more at the mercy of winds and waves, in our prefent than in our former fituation. Clif- ,ton and Frank endeavoured to make them attentive, by reproving them ; and proba- bly-did fome good ; though the anfwers they received, in the rugged vulgar idiom of the fea, w r ere not very conciliatory.—■*> We were much toffed by the roughnefs of the water, but made however toward the fliore,. though evidently in an awkward and dangerous way. Moft part of the beach, at Deal, is ex* ceiftvely fteep ; and, when the weather is ftormy, the waves' break againft it very abruptly, and dangeroufiy to boats which arc managed by men that are cither igno¬ rant or have drunken away their fenfes. When the boat approached the beach, the man at the helm being ftupid, and it being dark,, did,not,do his duty, and the fide of the boat was daíhed againft the beach. The ìhock almoft overfet the boat, and it, was half filled by the wave which broke over it. The water is always a fickle and ' perilous.
perilous element ; but in an agitated fea, when the winds howl and the waves roar, foam, dallı, retreat, and return with ad¬ ditional threats and raging, it is then truly terrific ! I ihall never forget that night ! I think on it even now with horror ! ' One of thofe poor drunken creatures, Louifa, was in an inftant waihed overboard and loft ; almoft without a cry ; not heard, not aided, fcarcely remarked ;" no attempt made to fave him, for all attempt was ab¬ folutely impoflible : we were within a few- yards of land, yet were ourfelves almoft certain-of periihing. The remaining men were little better than helplefs ; for it was the moft active of them who was thuí> mi- ferably drowned ! ------Indeed, Louifa, it was dreadful ! The reflux of the water was in halfa minute likely to be equally violent. Frank, whofe prefence of mind never forfakes him, faw what the nature of our danger was ; and, ihaking off poor Laura, who clung round him, begging of him for God's fake to fave her precious life, ho flew
flew to the helm, turned the head of the boat in its proper direction, and called with that imperious kind.of voice which on fuch occafioiiö enforces obedience, for fomebody to come to the helm. Clifton was there in an inftant. Keep'it, faid* Frank, in this pofition. Every motion was neceffarily rapid.—· Frank" was immediately out of the boat, and almoft up to the fliouldcrs in the fea. He caught hold of the fide of the boat, retreated a ftep or two, fet his feet againft the fteep beach, and fteadied if, to refift the returning wave. It had no f noner re¬ treated than he called to me, took me in his arms, and in a moment I-found my¬ felf İn fafety on fliore ! He returned and brought my father next ! Poor Laura fhrieked, with fear and impatience ! She was the third whom he landed. He then ordered the boatmen to take care of themfclves ; and, drunk and re¬ fractory though they were, They did not neglect
neglect to obey the mandate. After which Clifton, leaving the helm;· jumped into the water, the fervants having gone before, and we all found ouifelves fafe, after fome of us had concluded we were loft beyond redemption. Our peril appears to have been'wholly owing to the inebriety of the boatmen ; for, had they been able to do their duty, there would have been none, or cei taiiily very little : and it was averted by the active and penetiating mind of Fiank, which feems as if it were moft acerrate and deteimined, in its conclurions and ex¬ pedients, in pioportion to the greatnefs of the danger, when common minds would be wholly confufed and impotent. Clifton, though he did not fo immedi¬ ately perceive wdiat was beft to be done, faw the propriety of' it when doing, and immediately affented, and aided, by keeping the,boat in the pofition Frank di¬ rected, almoft as effcntially as his coadju¬ tor. I am more and more convinced it is accident only that has kept him from pof- feiling
felfing one of the moft enlarged of human undei (landings. But I muft likcwife allow that this faid accident has rendered him petulant,'impatient of contradiction, too piccipitatc to be always aware of miftake, and too pofitivc to be eafily governed.—. But thefe are habitual errois, which time and caic will cure. I muft add too that his affection for me difplays itfelf in a thoufand various forms. —lie is apparently never fatisfied, except when it is excrcifed to give or procure me pleafure. I know not whether the píiífion, which infufes itfelf into ali his v\ oids and actions that relate to me, ought to infpirc all that fympathetic fenfibility which he intends; but I own it fome¬ times aku m s me. His ardour is afton till¬ ing. He feems ro wiih, and even to deiign, to make it irrefiftible. Yet it is mingled with fuch excefs of tendernefs that I have half loft the power of repref- Ü II o " it v But I muft not, no, I will nof, ftánd m
in awe of his impetuofity. Aidour is a noble quality, and my ftudy ihall be how- to turn it to his advantage. The moie I look round ine the more I perceive that fear enfeebles, withers, and confumcs the powers of mind. Thofe who would nobly do muft nobly dare. Rafli people, per¬ haps, are thofe who feel the tiuth oi this principle fo ftrongly that they forget it İs neceíľary not only to dare, but to difcover the beft method of daring. Clifton now avoids argument, and ap¬ pears fyftematically determined to be of my opinion ; or rather to fay as I fay.— The only oppofition he affords is now and then a witty, farcaftic, or humourous re¬ ply. But he is generally fucccfi-ful in his continual attempts to give the converfa¬ tion a new turn, when his favourite opi¬ nions are oppofed : for I do not think it wife to obtrude too many painful contra¬ dictions upon him at a time. Truth muft be progreffive. Like a flaih of lightnings it ftuns 01 kills by excefs. Clifton
Clifton will not long fuffer mc to reft, now wc are returned ; and confe quently my dear Louifa may foon expect another letter from her moft affectionate A. W. ST. IVES.
LETTER
LETTER LVII. FRANK HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCIIARD.
London, Gtofzeuor Si reel, W'E have now been in London four days, Oliver; and, known places revbing old ideas, it almoft feems as if we bad never moved from the fpot where we arc at prefent. I fall into the fame trains of 1 thinking ! except that I am more rcftlefs, more inclined to melancholy, to inaction, * tö a kind of inanity, which no trifling ef¬ forts can iluikc off. I have
I have received thy letter, arid find thy reafoning iu fome refpects fimilar to my own. I was aibamed of remaining in doubt,' on a queftion which only rcquiied a little extraordinary activity of mind to refolve. It appears to me that nothing can be claffed among falfehoods, except thofe things the tendency of which is to generate falfehood, or miftake. Confe- quently, not to tell what has paffed to ; Clifton is acting according to the dictates of- truth : for, to tell would be to run an imminent danger of falfe conclufions, Nol, if is true, if the whole-could bj told : thiit is, if all poffible reafonings, and confe- quences, could be fairly recollected, and ftated. But memory is firft to be feared ; and ftill more thai prejudice wdiich will not have the patience to lend mute atten¬ tion. I /therefore think, with ihee, that filence in this cafe is truth. We have been in fome danger, owing to the drunkemicis of the Deal boatmen ; but faved ourftdves by a little cxeilion. One of tlie poor inebriated wretches how- VOI. HI, с cvtŞ
ever was loft. We faw him only the in¬ ftant of his being waihed overboard ; and he was hurried away into the fea by the recoiling waves, in the ι oaring of which his laft cry was overpoweièd, without our being able fo much as to attempt to give bim aid ! By which íhou m ay eft judge that we ourfelves were in confiderable jeo¬ pardy. When we reflect how near danger is to us, daily and hourly thiough life, we are apt to wonder that we fo continually ef¬ cape. But, when we again confider how eafily even great dangers, that is fuch as take us by furprife, may be warded off, the wonder ceafes. My mind, Oliver, is not at eafe : it is too much haunted by fear. At leaft I hope it is ; for my fears are for one whom it is almoft tortine to fuppofe in peril. Thou never kne weft fo enterprifing, fo encroaching a youth as this Clifton ! Nay, ï am deceived if encroachment be not re¬ duced to fyftem with him ; and, ftiong as her powers are, impoflible as I know it to be
be to fliake her principles, yet, who can fay what may happen, in a moment of forgetfulnefs, or miftake, to a heart fo pure, fo void of guile ? Such terrors arc ridiculous, perhaps thou wilt fay ; and perhaps they are ; "at leaft Ί moft devoutly hope they are. „ But his temperament is fanguine, his wi flics rcft¬ lefs, ungovernable, and I almoft fear omi¬ nous, and his paifion for her is already far beyond the controul of reafon, to which indeed he thinks it ought not to be,nor can be fubject. As for me, all is ended. Jealous I muft not, no, I will not be ! And furely I am above the meannefs of envy. Yet I own, Oliver, I fometimes blame her. 1 think her too precipitate, too fearlefs, nay too ready io imagine her power, her wond: cus power, greater than İt is. She makes no fecret of her thoughts, and flie tells me that flie'and I, flie doubts nol, fliall trans¬ form him to all that we ouifelves could defire. Be not furprifed at her kindnefs to mc ; for flie has a heart that is all bc- c 2 nevolence,
nevolence, all friendfliip, all affection. If I can aid her, thou needeft not doubt my will. , But Heaven g-rant flie may not be miftaken !—Heaven grant it 3 And yet, I cannot fay. I even fome¬ times hope and acquiefce ; for his talents aré indeed extraordinary. But his pride, and the pitilefs revenge which he thews a conftant propenfity to take, when offend¬ ed, are dangerous fymptoms. For her, flie feems to act from motives wholly different from thofe of her age and fex. It is not paifion, not love, fuch as it is ufuslly felt and expreffed ; it is a fenfe of duty, friendfliip for Louifa, admiration of great talents, an ardent defire to give thofe talents their full value,- and the dig¬ nified pride flie takes in reftoring fuch a mind to its proper rank. - By*thefe flie is actuated, as all her w'ords and actions de- monftrate. ,*· / Well, well, Oliver! She foars a flight that is more than mortal ! But flie leaves a luminous track, thv t guides and invites, and I-will attempt to follow. 'Fhou jflialt ivo
-fee me rife above the poor flaviih wifhes that Avould chain me to earth !— Oliver, my mind, like a bow continu¬ ally bent, is too much upon the ftretch. •Such is the efTe6t ofmyfituation, of wliich my thoughts, my language, and my ac¬ tions partake. But I will calm this.agita- tion. Fear not : thou fhalt find me wor¬ thy to be thy friend, and the pupil of thy f mon excellent father. No ! I will not, Oliver, be a child >j 'though the conteft be indeed fevere. By day I am with her; for hours I liften, while ihe fmgs, or plays, or fpeaks. I am a wit¬ nefs of her actions ! Her form is never ab- fent from me ! The found of her voice is unccafing harmony to my ears ! At night, retiring to darknefs and thought, l' pafs her chamber door ! In the morning again I behold the place where all that is hea¬ venly refts ! I endeavour after apathy. I labour to be fenfelefs, ftupid, an idiot ! I ftrain to be dead to fupreme excellence ! But it is the ftone of Sifyphus, and I am condemned to eter — ! 'с 3 Indeed;
Indeed, Oliver, this weaknefs is mo¬ mentary ! Indeed it is ------Fear not : thou fhalt ñnd nie a man, be affured-thou flialt. Though the furies, or, worfe than all that' invention can feign, the paifions throng to a flau It mc, I will neither fly nor yield. For to do either would be lo defert myfelf, my principles, my duties. .Yet this encroaching fpirit that I told- thee of!—But then, what is the ftrength oflfim, compared to hers? What is there to fear ? What, do, I fear ? Why create horrible fhadows, puipofeiy to encounter them?—No: İt cannot be ! Farewell. F.-IIENLEY.
LETTER
t r LETTER LVnr.
ANNA WENEOURNE ST. IVES то LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Gicfvenor-Slieet. Y OUR brother has gained his point. The deed ib done. My confent is given. For, in reality, to have withheld it would have, had more the appearance of a co¬ quette than of the, friend of my Louifa. After fufficiently ftrong hints in the courfe of the two firft days, on the third after our arrival, Clifton came. His intention,wa s evidently to take no, denial. - It was with diificulty that I could bring him to liften, for a few-minutes, while I repeated prin- c 4 ciples
ciples before declared, and required an avowal of howfar he thought them an im¬ pediment to future happbéfs, To every thing I could aik he was ready tq accede. 1 " He had nothing to .contends nothing to " contradict; and, if he did not think " exactly like me in every particular, he " was determined not to think at all, till u he could.. Jßefide, my own conclufions, " in favour of truth, were my fafeguard. " I had not any doubt that reafon, if'at- " tended to, muft finally prevail; and I i( could ·ηοΙ deny that he was at all times *", ready to pay the ftrict e ft attention." Indeed he fèemed -aťfirft refolved, as it were, not -to enter into any- converfation, 'but to claim my promife. 'But 'I was ftill •more determined ito exert myfelf; that'the due influence which reafon ought always to bave, over -paifion, might -not be loft, anďfink into habitual and'timid conceffion. -When'he perceived*there vvas nó refifting, he then liftened ' with a tolerably -good grice ;' J ' but ftill,'' 'as 'I faid, vvith an ap¬ parently preconcerted plan -not 'to con¬ tend i
tend ; urging, and indeed truly, that fair arguments could defiré nothing more than ,patient hearing ; and this he pledged, iu bis energetic and half wild manner, ho¬ nour, body, and foul to give. I could not defire more fincere afleverations than he made ; and that they were fincere I cannot doubt. Nor do I regret that tliey were ftrong. -Where there is criergy .there Ís the material of which mind is fafliioned: and the fault muft be mine, Jf the*work be ,'ncomplete. Our converfation however was long ; and when at lait obliged to en¬ ter into the fubject, the acutenefs aud depth of his remarks were ffrong proof of his powers, had any proof been wanting— Yes, Louifa, the attempt muft be made. It is a high and indifpenfable duty ; and I muft neither be deterred by the dread of danger, nor fwayed by the too feducing emotions of the heart—They muft be fi¬ lenced ι —They muft I I have an affiftant worthy of the caufe. Frank does not flirink from the talk: though it is but too evident thai he has not с 5 change^.
changed his opinion ! I know not why, but fo it is, thofe two particular fentences continually reverberate in my ear—/ feel a certainty of conviction, that you act from mißaken principles ------ To the end of time I ßiallperßß in thinking you mine by right f ------Oh, Louifa ! Sir Arthur of courfe made no diificulty in giving his confent; and! imagine Mrs. CJifton will this poft receive a letter from her fon, and pci haps another from my fa¬ ther, requiring her acquiefccnce. Sir Arthur has flie wn me one of the moft ftrange, eccentric, and perhaps comic let¬ ters, from honefl Aby, tliat I think I ever read. I am glad it is not quite fo intelli¬ gible to Sir Arthur as it is to me ; for I fee no good that could refult, were he to un¬ derftand its true fenfe. The old—■— ! I can find no epithet for "him that pleafes mc ------Well then— Iloneß Aby is excef- fivçlv anxiouo that I fliould marry a fon of whom he is fo'uriworthy. But his motives arc fo mean, fo whimfical, and fo oddly compounded and defcribed, peering as к weie
were, through Jhe mafk pf cunning, with which he awkwardly endeavours to сод - ceai them^that nothing but reading his letter çan give you anridea of its c'harac- teriftic humpur. This pojrţ 1 fuppofe will likewife fliew him his miftake. How he will receive*the news I know not; though I Ijifpect he will raife obftacles, concern¬ ing the money which Sir Arthur .wants, in „order to pay my portion. But this will .foon be feen. I likewife learn, from his letter, that my brother is to join in docking the entail .of the hereditary eftate; and diat he is wil¬ ling, provided he may İh are the fpoil. How would my heart bleed,, were I not cured of that prejudice which makes hap- pinefs confift in the perfonal poffeifion of wealth ! But the t fyftem of tyranny would be more firmiand durable even thanitis, did not -this mutation of property daily exift ; and were not the ojd and honourable fa¬ milies, as thev call themfclves, broughtto ruin-by their fooliÛı and truly diflionour- .ahle. defendants. с 6* Every
Everything confirms me 1 in the fufpi¬ cion that honeft Aby has been playing a deep game; and that both Sir Arthur and my brother have ceded to all the extortion-s of craft and ufury, to have their whims and extravagancies fuppiied. My bi other perfuades himfelf that he ís determined never to mairy ; and I fuppofe has formed this determination purpofely that he may fpend ail Le can obtain, with¬ out being teafed by any qualms of con- fcience. „ For the deftructive fyftem of in¬ dividual propei ty involves a thoufand ab- furdities ; and the proud but inane fuccef- for of a Sydney or a Verulam, inftead of knowing how difficult the fubject of iden¬ tity itfelf is, inftead of perceiying that man is nothing but a continuity, or 'fucceifion, of fingle thoughts, and is therefore in're¬ ality no more than the thought of the mo¬ ment, believes there is a fiable and indu¬ bitable affinity between him and his great anceftor. I muft now be more than ever, deter¬ mined to accompliih the'tafk L have un¬ dertaken 5
dertakeii ; and to give -to the arms of my beft, my deareft Louifa, a brother worthy of a heart fo pure, and a fifter fuch as ihe herfelf could wiih to be that brother's other half------Very true, Louifa ! It is the old ftory: I am Sir Arthur's vapouring huffey ! But I comfort myfelf with reflect¬ ing that, after the battle,is won, the raih- nefs of the attack is never remembered ; or, if it be, it is always applauded ; and that all generals, great or fmall, confide in their own plans, till defeat has proved thern-to be abortive. Something muft be ventured, ere any thing can be won. Not knowing what might be the notions of Sir Arthur, or even of Mrs. Clifton, concerning the filence they might think it neceflary to keep, I forbore to mention their plan, of which my friend, with her confiftent ft anknefs, informed me, till our laft conference : but I then thought it an i'ndifpenfable duty to relate the truth; otherwife iL might have come, at fome unlucky mqment, in the difguife of falfe¬ hood, and have done mifchief. Secrets are
are indeed abfolutely contrary to my fyf¬ tem. 'Tis pride or falfe fliame that puts blinds to the windows either of the houfe or of the m i rid Let the whole world look in,-and'fee what is doing; that if any thing be wrong, it may have an opportu¬ nity to reprove ; and whatever is right there is* fome hope it may imitate. Oif- 4 ton was pleafed to find himfelf treated with undifguifed fincerity. Yes, Louifa, fear not : you wifl find hirn your bromer s in vii tue as well as in blood. Ever and ever moft affectionately, A. W. ST. IVES*
LETTER
A'' NOVEL,
LETTER LIX.
SIR ARTHUR ST, IVES то THE HOKOUEABLE MRS. CLIFTON,
London» Grofvenor-Strtet. DEAR MADAM, hJUR plan has fucceeded. to our wifh : Mr. Clifton is as I may fay quite fmitten with my daughter. And indeed I do not wonder at it ; for,' though flie is my child, I muft faý, fbe 'is ihcfweeteft, moft' charm¬ ing, lovely girl I ever beheld ! She has always been my darling ! I have a true fatherly fondnefs for her; and, though I owii it will not be very convenient to me, I mean
I mean immediately to raife twenty thou¬ fand pounds, to pay down as her portion. If at my death I fliould have the power to do more, flie fliall hot be forgotten : but J promife nothing. As I remember, dear madam, this was the fura which you faid was neceffary, to 'redeem certain mortgages, pay off encum¬ brances, and enable Mr. Clifton to appear in England, in a manner becoming the heir of the Clifton family. And this fum I think it very fit the daughter of Sir Ar¬ thur St. Ives fliould receive. T ihall ac¬ cordingly write to my agent, and put every thing immediately in train; after which, you ihall hear from me without delay. If any alteration fliould have happened in your own views, or affairs, which myy impede or forward our plan., you will be Jkind enough to inform mc. I am, madam, with the trueft refpect, your very obedient humble fervant, A. ST. IVES.
LETTER
LETTEER LK, — «s>*í*i:í-=»-* СО -KE cm J?TON то THE HONOURABLE MRS. CLIFTON. London, Dover Street. I 'WRITE to you, dear and honoured madam, with a ¡grateful and 'happy heart, 'to thank you -for a project/fo maternally and'wifely conceived in-my favour^ and of which J have juft iheen informed, by the ifrank-hearted and lovely Anna St. Ives. Of all the 'bleffings for which, madam, I 'hold mýfelf indebted to you, this laft, of difcovering and endeavouring to fecure for your thankful fon a gem fo -precious, a lady
lady fo above all praife, I efleem to be the greateft. You, dear madam, are acquainted with the propriety with which ihe thinks ?nd acts, on every occafion ; and 1 have no doubt will join with me, in applauding the entire undifguifednefs of lelating all that had paffed, which appeared to hei* delicate mind at this moment to be abfolutely ne¬ ceíľary. , r т - After obtaining her confent for that pur- pofe, I have fpoken to Sir Arthur ; who, at my requeft, has promifed immediately to writeto you. And, it being a project, dear madam, a kind one, of your own forming, Iihave no fear that it ihould be difçounte- nanced by you. My only doubt r is of de- • lay. Let me entreat you, my dear mother, to remove all impediments with every pof¬ fible fpeed ; and not to Jofe a moment in writing to me, as foon as you and Sir Ar¬ thur have arranged the bufinefs, that I may folicit her, from wliom I am certain to receive all poffible blifb, to name a time, when fufpenfe ili all joyfully end. Do
Do not, dear madam, let impatience feem a fault in me. Remember the lady; who flie is, and all flie is; and think, if her perfections could make the impreifion which they feem to have done upon your heart, what muft they have made upon mine ! I, who, with all the fire of youth and conftitutional eagemefs, in confe¬ quence of your own wife plan, am become a wiihing and expecting lover ! My fifter, I am fure, is .too generous, the happinefs of her friend and brother being pledged, not to join me in the re¬ queft I now make : and I certainly will not forget a kindnefs which, I acknow¬ ledge, I know not how I fliall ever repay. I am, dear madam, your ever affection¬ ate and dutiful fon, С, CLIFION.
LET-
LETTER LXI.
COKE CLIFTON. ÏO GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Oazer Sireet. 1 2-KM caught, Fairfax ! Spring guns-and man traps have been fet for me, and I am legged f Meilied ! Shot through the heart ! I have been their puppet ! They have led me, with a firing through my nofe, a fine dance! From*the fartheft part of all· Italy here to London, in order to tie me up ! Noofe me with a wife ! And, what is more ftrange, I am thanking and
and praifing, and bleifing them for it, in ìpite of my teeth ! I fwallow the dofe as eagerly as if it had been prepared and fweetened by my own hand; and it ap¬ pears I have had nothing to 'do in the matter ! I am a mere automaton ; and as fuch thev have treated me ! Is it not curfed odd that I cannot be angry? And yet, when I recollect all this, I really fufpect I am not pleafed. Damn it ! To be made their convenient utenfil ! To be packed up, their very obedient jack in a bandbox, and with a proper label on my back, pofted with other lumber from city to city, over hills and feas, to be taken out and looked at, and if not fiked return¬ ed as damaged ware ! Ought I to. fneak and fubmit to this ? Tell me, wiih not the court of honour hoot me out-of-its pre¬ cincts ? Will not the very footmen, point after me, with a—" There goes the gen¬ tleman that m ifs had upon liking,?'/ Why it is not yet full two months, fince I w.a-i the very prince of high, blooded',noble fportfmen, in the romantic manors; do- 2 mains,
mains, coverts and coveys of Venus ■ By what ftrange ncciomancy am I thus me- tamorphofcd, thus tamed ? I feel myfelf à hufband by anticipation ! I am become as pretty a modeft, well-be¬ haved, fober, fen timental gentleman, a? any you fliall fee on a fummei's day ! í get phrafes by rote, and repeat them too ! lfay « God blefi» you, madam," when the cat fneezes: and mumble amen to giace after meat ' - I told you that I had my catechifm to learn ; and, what is worfe, it is not the queftions and com mands of good old mo¬ ther church, with all the chance-medley promifes and vows of godfathers and god¬ mothers made in my name, [Foi which, by the bye, I think both godfathei s and godmothers are fools, and knaves.] but I have the Lord knows how much more to learn than ever 1 fuppofed the moft outra¬ geous morality could have exacted. And lam obliged to anfwer yes, and no, and I thank you kindly, while my finger's ends are fmoking, tingling, and aching under ' the
the ftroke of the ferula ! Yes ■ I, Coke Clifton, with my fvveetmeats in one hand and my horn-book in the other^ am whip¬ ped till I pule, coaxed till I am quiet, and fent fuppeilefs to bed, if I piefume to murmur · AVhy what" the devil is the Engliih of all this, fay you, Clifton ? AVhat does it mean ? My head is fo full of it, and I have it fo all by iote myfelf, that it had totally efca¬ ped me that every word I have uttered muft be heathen Gieek to you. Nay I had forgotten to tell you we have changed the fcene, which now is London. And as for accidents, by fea and land, why we have had fome or them too.—· Frank Henley has again ihewn his dexte¬ rity. I could eat my fingers, to think that he fliould hit upon a certain and fdfe mode of acting, in а moment of danger, fooner than I ! But fo it is. He feems boin to crofs me ! AVe fliould all have been toffed into the fea, and fome of us certainly drowned at the very water's edge, if we had not been alert, He took the command upon
upon.himfelf, as imperiouflyasif it were his by right indifputable, ; and 1 faw no expedient but to obey, or perhaps behold her periih. For curfe upon me if I know" whether any other motive, on earth, could have induced me to act as his fubordinate. But, as it was, I did as he bid me ; and fat grinding my teeth at the helm, while ï faw him reap all the honour of taking her in his arms; and after her the reft, and landing them in fafety ! If, Fail fax, you can conceive anyanguifli on earth more excruciatingi than this, why tell it ; and you ihall be appointed head tormentor to the infernal regions, for your ingenuity ! AVhat was I going to fay ?—My brain i.s as murky as the clouds under which I am writing------Oh !—I recollect — She had no hand in fpreading the trammel, into which, buzzard like, I have beep lured. It was the fcheme of my very good and careful mother; for!which I have been very ■ fincerely writing her a letter with-more thanks than words,; and of the wife Sir Arthur,; ' who, wdfe though he be, is
is not one of the magi. She knew nothing of it for fome time, nor would have known but for my communicative fifter ; and, as ffie fcorns deception, for by my foul flie fcorns с /ery thing that is bafe, or deroga¬ tory, it was flie who informed me of the trap in which I have been taken; of which otherwife perhaps I might have remained in eternal ignorance. " But ftill and once again, fay you, what trap ? What do you mean ?— Three words will explain the whole. I have been brought from Naples to Paris, not as I fuppofed to fettle a few paltry debts of a deceafed uncle, but to fee, fall in love with, and be rib-hooked to this angel. This my good mother, as I underftand, thinks the kindeft act of her life.—Nay, I think fo too ; and yet I am not fatisfied. And merely I fuppofe be¬ laufe I feel I have been tricked. I will not be the gull of man or woman. Wha t is it to me that they mean me well ?, I will judge for myfelf. It is infolcnt in an γ VOL HI. D f ' 0n l;„
one fo pretend to kiiow what befits me better than ï rüyfelf know, ïn íhort, I would quarrel, and bounce, and curfe a little, if I knew how——But they offer an apology fo ample r fo irrefifti- ble,*that there is no demanding to ex¬ change a íhot j they prefent Anna St. Ives as their excufe, and a fico for refent- ment. And nmv there is nothing on earth for which I fo earneilly wiih as to be yoked I What think you, Fairfax · fhall I bear my &iviih trappings proudly ? Shall I champ Upon the bit, and pianGe, and curvet, and ihew oft to advantage ? I doubt I ihall ftand in need of a little rough riding. And yet I know not j let her but pat me on- îhe neck, and whifper two or three kind •epithets in my ear, and ihe will gnide me аз ihe pleafe*> : at leaft ihe does. No I Hopes there are none of my ever again returning to my native \vilds y and delight¬ ful haunts ! Never was feen fo fond a booby as I am* and am· likely to ïemain ! Nor
Nor do ťbelievé I ítiould grumble, ha^ flie not fuch a fuperabUndánce 'of difcre¬ tion. She fmiles upon'me it is' true ; is all gcntlenefs, all benevolence ; but then fhè does juft the famcto every body elfe. Fór my part, I fee no difference ; except that I fometimes think ihe has a kinder fmile for Frank Henley than ihe ever yet had for me ! But he is juft a s difcreet as her¬ felf; fo that it feems impoflible to be jea¬ lous. Yet jealous I am ! Ay and jealous I fliould be of my cat, if flie were as ready to pur and rear her back to be flroked 'by eveiy coatfe ünwaíhed hand as by niine, Is İt not a curfed fliame that, when you feci a continual propenfity to quarrel with a man, he fliould be fuch a prince Prim as never to give you an oppoitunity ?-·*-·-' And why have" I this propenfity ? — I know not ■—Confound the fellow, why docs lie make himfelf fo great a favourite ? Why does he nót contrive to be hated a little ? and theii perhaps I might be indu¬ ced tb love him. I diflike td have friend¬ fliip or ап%Шоп forced upon me ás a duty. d 2 I abhor
í abhor duties, as I do iliackles and dun¬ geons. Let me do what I like. I leave others to examine whether or no my con- du£r be rational : 'tis too much trouble for mer This marriage is never out of my head! I wiih for İt, figh for it, pray for it, and dread it ! It may well be faid there is no „refifting our deftiny 1 If I could but find out the key to her mafter paifion—Well í What then?—-What, do I want? What do X hope ? To hope any thing íhort of the noofe is mere madnefs. Befide, coukl I think of living without her ?—No ! — I would be eternally in her company, foi\ ihe is eternal novelty: ihe is all the world in one... She,is herfelf a million of indivi¬ duals t ; and not the ftale, dull repetition }of the,fame ; which is fo horrible to ima¬ gination. One thought has ftruck me,—She has the utmoft confidence in ^what üıe calls -the force,¡ofítr,uth. It cannot fail ! That Jsjher confiant .language..^ I am to ţ be her firft conveit. I have humoured this whim lately ;
lately; except when my irritable fancy breaks loofe, and runs riot. If 'flie have any folly, it is this fad confidence r and whether it be one, or be not, is more than I have yet been 1 able to detei minel ,But ihe has furnifhed me with an argument, which I might carry to I know not what extent. "You," I urge to her, "you tf need not act with the timid and fufpi- " cious caution of your fex. You are fure íe of your principle ; and to proceed with fi d'ftruft and' fear' would prove doubt " inftead of certainty." She boldly replies, •—Yes, flie is fure ; and therefore ihe fpeaks and behaves with all that undifguife and fincerity which are fo uncommon İn the world, and which fome would deem fo blameable, J She fays true ; flie rifes totally fuperior to the petty aits and tricks of her fex. I feem to participate the truft which flie repofes in heifelf; and the confidence which flie appears to place in me, when fhe openly declares all fbe thinks and all flie means, is highly pleafing. Bur, if шу* ό 3 views
views were different fiom what they are? I doubt whether, madam confidence might not be brought to lull madam Caution fo fait afleep, at fome lucky moment or another, as to fuffer me to puiloin h^ľkey, and afteiwatd to rob her of all her trea» fure ; ffør fliould ( I fail, under certain çiıcumftaııçes, tø tiy the experiment. Neither is that intriguing fpirit wfiich fias fp jpng been m ( reftlefs habits of con- ■ţinualjpuifujt entirely idle. My fiijft care as ufual was to fecure the prime-minifter of my charmer, whofe name is Laura.—- The liuffey is handfome, cunning, and not ■without ambition. An occafional guinea and a few warm kiffes, when it was cer¬ tain that aU was fafe, for caution isnecpf- faiy, have bound her to me. The poor fpol is fond of me, and often finds fome ingenious chamhei maid's excufe to pay me, a vifit. It does not appear that I fliall neqpl hev agency ; otherwife here flie is, piopçıly pıepaıçd to be wholly at my de¬ votion. Anna Şţ. Ives affords the fancy fuJl emplov ment ', with any other woman an
an amour without plot and ftratagem,· at-^ tack and defence, would be too infipid to be endured, ' * ' v , ■ Not, but I fometimes find my confidence reproach me, forfuffering fuch active ta*·, •Jent's as mine to lie concealed and un¬ known -; being as they are capable of ac¬ quiring renown fo high,- When in Italy, having even there, in that land of artifice, rendered myfelf the fuperior of ah\compe¬ titors/ J ufed to glory in the havoc I fliould -make qn my return to England. But this the will of fate oppofes, at Jeaft for the prefent : and of what duration my honey¬ moon is to beds more than any preference .of mine can difcovcr. ' Write, Fairfax, and tell me freely your -opinion of all this ; only remember that, if you make your calculations and concluri¬ ons from any comparifon with woman- whoni you have ever yet feen, they will be all error. Tell me however what you think, and all you think. I forgot to fay that twenty thoufand pounds is the Turn to be paid me down, for n 4 .condefcending
-condefcending to accept thisjewel. I am informejd it is wanted, 'to pay „off I know not what encumbrances and arrears------ Pihaw !-rI care not—I have never yet troubled myfeif about wants, nor do Γ wifh to begin. My father lived faft, and died foon. Well! And is not that better than croaking and crawling over this dirty globe, haunted by razors, halters, and barebones ; fobbing in your fleep, groan¬ ing when awake, vetegating in forrow, and dying in the fulks ? Let me kick my heels in mirth and funfhine. Or, if clouds intervene, let pleafure and fancy create funs of their own. Thofe who like them, may find gloom and November enough any day in the year. Tell me, Fairfax, may they not ? Write and tell me. C. CLIf'ON.
LETTER
LETTER LXI?.
r- ï J ! *
SIR AKTHÜR ST. IVES •У то •ABI'MELLCft HENLĽY.
n J / ^C, J 1 . ¿- ÍJ j l'i ι HONEST AEV„ ' **·^ s ' Londo», GrofveMť-S treet, j j ti í ... U j '1 E are'once more arrived in England -> for which I am not forry. ■ Though I cannot fay 'that I repent·*' my journey into •'France. My former'fufpicions are con¬ firmed : j I' had vifited^the country-before, but út thartime'my tafte- -was not'formed ; I'did notJthen unde*#a*hd-hiying out,^ an'd Jimprovbg, as, I do at°prefefit. I had D 5 heard
•5В
heard that the French had begun to imitate our beft gardens tolerably well; but I have feeri fome or" th'ofe that are in moft fame, and what are they to Wenbourne- НШ ? ------No, no. Aby.·— I am now con¬ vinced that, as they fay of their Paris, -there is but one Wenbourne-Hiil. I do not know when the family will re¬ turn to the country. 1 The young people wifh to enjoy the divcrfions ţmd pleafures -of the town ; and I rather fuppofe we ill all flay here all the-winter. Perhaps we may take a jaunt or two, between this and the •meeting of parliament. -Not that any fuch plan is yet fettled. And as forame, I fhall be down wţth vQiiiOCcafioually, as affairs ihall require. I fhall take gieáť' delight, in once again treading over ajl-m-y-. grounds, «and walks, and ^dlls^an-çl in vifi-ţing places that are never out of my mind. /. L ! f .· I cannot forget the^heimita^e, arid the grotto;, x wß } ţiţe wiltifirptífs j of whMbi ¡the m^mçftt you tj^njsntionjsd.í-íb-smjíí Æ iìmd foţm^dj &,!с|^(т1й§а1»й^ /-ifohexeeMebtia plim] ! Thej jpictiif e ofcliăgSL tQ -j ат 'Ц. ш ^ were ;
were; and it grieves me to give it up,—- But fo it muft be. ' However, as I fay, I fhall come down' more than onee; and, for my part, ς I wónder how thefe young unthinking peo¬ ple can prefer the dirty ftreets of London, to all the delights and riches ofnatuie and of art ; which may be faid to be waiting for and inviting them, ι -a t Wenbourne- Hill. I am very glad to find, honeft Abime- Jech, that money is fo certainly to be had. But you were always intimate wdth the waim old fellows, who provide themfelves plentifully with what you fo aptly call the wherewithalls. You have followed their example, and learned to İnci eafe your own ftore. I am glad of it, and am pleafed to find you do not forget your fiift and beft friends. I muft own, Abimclech. that you have always appeared to me to under¬ ftand your fituation very properly, and to pay refpect where it wzs due. I have feen your pioud, upftarţ fre wards cai ry their heads as high as their mafteis ! Ay, and r> 6 inftead
inftead of ftudying their tempers and hu¬ mouring them, as it was their duty, have been fur-y, and always ready with their ifs, and ands, and objections, and advice ! Aş if it were any concern of theirs, what a gentleman fliall pleafe to do with his mo¬ ney J But you, Aby, have known how to ,comport yourfelf better; of,-which I be¬ lieve you have no caufe to íepent. As to the entail, as you fay, it muft be docked. I know no remedy. And fincc my fon is fo pofitive, and determined to ftîckle for a good bargain, why we muft do the beft we can. - I was once forry at his refolving never to marry ; but I think that is partly over now; Lcare little about the matter. My daughter's fon will be as* much my grand¬ child as his fon would have been.; and, as förnämes, they may eafilý be changed. I am certain, were any body to aik me vyhich is the wifeft, my fon or my daughter, I fliould not flop a moment to confider about ihat. Ay,
Ay, ay! She is myi.dwtf child!' Every body ufed to telFinei when ihe was a baby, how hke me. flie was ! '. '■"'·· l * ' n ; : ■· She has fome of her ^mbthér's features too ; who, as you -well; know, Abyv l was* a very good fort of an excellent kind'of a lady, and-very much refpécted -: ayy very much.; ; Indeed the; greateft fault of Lady St. lyes was фаг. (he ^wöüld not '■■ always : be· of my opinion;^ m But we bare' norte of'us* perfect. If it were not for that, one things I really ihould think my däugh ret'a young* lady:.,of 'more' good fenfey and ^gooď tafte, and indeed everything of that kind; thaïv ' any young perfon I was evérVa'cqtiairitedv with : but flie too is -a declared enemy to* planning .and' improving. If is very- ftrange'; arid-ï canonly fay there-is no ac-!, countingfor thefe thirigsdi >:'■'■■>'■■ ol e:·. ï ;. :-My ; fon .liowevér knows as little óf me' matter as 'ihe vdoes; ^hayT beìievè defs. 1 And, ■ as to other kihds'of knowledge,·-he- iş a, child to ľher!*. It delights, me to hear : her talk, 'and debate points, and.chop-Jo-* gic, withyourvFrank,-who is'-oňe o.f J 'her· own
own fort; and with Mi. Clifton, the young gentleman whom I intend for my fon in law. I gave you an account in my Jaft, Aby, .that the thing,avas in expectation ; and it is now as-good as í concluded, I haye/written to, Mrs, Cljfton ; the lawyer is ¡ordered to make a rough flcetch of mar- riage, articles, and every ithing will be got ready, while my attorney is preparing tbe i-ieceífaryr deeds down ¡in, the country, ac¬ cording to your inftiuctions, and you are raifing the money. Be fure however, lioneft Aby, to make as gooçl ai bai gain fox me as you can. I know »money is not to be had without pay¬ ing for it в and I truft to you not to fuffer me'to pay too deaily. Better fee uri ly, you know, Aby, cannot be'offei ed, and I begin to feel, my improvements except¬ ed^ Which indeed I hold to be ineftimable, that I am not fp rich as I was fifteen years ago. j But, as røy fon means never tó marry, and a£ the families of CJifton and Strives are to bç united in one, I have no cţaubt,-, fome tirne or another ι before I die, of
•of Teeing'every thing retrieved; though I grant 'there are heavy mortgages, ian!d other impediments toìovercomeì t <j ' · <~ Pray has my Ton told you what fum he expects? If not, endeavour ito learn, and let me know. Though>on fécond thoughts you need not, for· L hear he ís to be in town next week. Л -Ie *mufbrecollect the eftate of eight hundred a year, of which 'he has lately taken- fúch violent poffeflion. But he is a diifipated young man, and re¬ collects nothing** butthispJeafures. - 1 always faid, Aby, you were a^man 'of fenfe ; and you are veiy right^in thinking I cannot do.'too mucfrfoi; my daughter. 'I hope, to contriye tó leave ^Wenbourne Hil| her own. It is a rich fpot' And, though flie be an economift, and no friend to what flie thinks a wafte r of money'in im¬ provements/ yet I am fure, at my requeft, ihe wiff not be guilty "of what'I may well <*call facriicge, 'arid pull down my^temples., and dedicated gioves», and r-aïics* r of arr, and ruiiii, rnory aş. íny fon «would, Ueftrøy with a-Gcrtbic han dp «s the ploet'fays,'*and'tear away
away beauties, which it would rend my heart-ftrings not to fuppofe durable, as I may fay, for ages ! Lwould have my name, and my tafte, arid my improvements be , long remembered at Wenbourne Hill ■ I delight- in thinking it will hereafter be faid—" Ay ! Good'old Sir Arthur did this! -'* Yonder 'terrace was of his forming! " Thefe alcoves î were'built'by him J He " raifed the central obelíík ! ■ He planted " the grand quincunx !" And ah, Aby ! if we could but add,)" Hei was the con- - " triver of yonder charming wildetnefs !" I then ihould die in peace. (j . Let me beg,, good Abimelech, that you would writcyout thoughts in as plain and ftraight forward a manner as you can ; for, í I affure.you, I have been very much puz¬ zled .with;» fome' parts of your laft letter; w hieh Л cannot, yet fay that I undei ftand. • In fome, places itois-/very plain that you hint at Mr. Clifton, and wiih me no* to } dally with him ;« and, ias I know you have ,ту inte*ťeft t atfheait, and fpeak in a ftyle at which nolgentleman can be offended, why
Why I rather thank than blame you, for your delire to give good advice. Though I muft fay, Aby, that I do not think I have any need of it. I am miftaken if ï could not advife others. I wiih all the world would be governed by my plans, and principles. That's a favourite word with my daughter, Aby, and a very apt one. I once took fome delight in fuch things ; I mean in what is called polite learning, Aby. Indeed I was remarkably fond of Ovid's Metamorphofes. But then; as I aid not like to puzzle myfelf with the La tin, I read Garth's, or Rowe's, or Pope's,. or I don't know whofe tranflation. And I do believe it was that, and a vifit to Lord Cobham'b, which firft made me ftudy tafte and improvement. Nothing is wanting but riches, Aby, to. proceed to much greater lengths than any we have yet thought of. What richnefs of imagination is there in Ovid ! What ftatues might we form, from the wonderful tales which he relates ! Niobe at the head of the canal, changing
changing into ftone ! ι To be fure we fliould want a rock there. Then on one fide Narciffus, gazing 'at himfelf in the clear pool, with pooi Ec,ho wilhei ing away in the grove behind ! ι King Cygnus, in the very act of being mctamorphofecl into a fwan, on the other! It would be fo apropos, you know ; a fwan, and a canal, and king Cygnus ! And then at the fur¬ ther end Daphne ; with her aims and legs fprouting into branches, and her hair all laurel leaves ' You cannot imagine, Aby, aH the fan¬ cies which came into my head the other day, when I happened to lay my hand on Tooke's Pantheon, which brought all thefe old ftories frcili to memory. But, as I was faying, good Aby, write your thoughts as plainly as you can ; for I fometimes did not know whom you were talking of, and there were one or two places which made me think you wiih fomething ihould be done for your fon, Frank. And indeed he is a very deferv- jng, and a very fine young fellow ; and I have
have been thinking it would not be amifs, fince he has really made himfelf a gentle¬ man, if wo were* to purchafe him an en- fign's commiifion. What fay you to it, honeft Aby? He would make a fine of¬ ficer ! A brave bold ~ figure of a man ! And who knows but, in time, he might come to be a general ; ay, and r'.ommand armies ! For he fears nothing ! He has lately fa ved us a dipping, nay and for aught I know a drowning too, and we really fliould do fomething for him ; for he is a great favourite, and a very good young man. However, 1 thought it beft to men¬ tion the matte -ς firft to you, and will ex- peft your anfwer. A, ST, IVES.
(LETTER
ANNA ï
LETTER LXIII.
ANNA WENBOU'RNE ST. IVFS л ' 'то ι - ( LOUISA'CLIFTON,
- London, Grefvenor-StrMt, ■ JL MUST write, dear Louifa. My heart feels as if it were eftranged by filence, .and thinks it has a thoufand things to re¬ peat ; though, when it comes to enquire what,' they feem as if they had all vanifhed. Not but I have a little incident to relate, which interefts us both ; the Dramatis Perfonæ being,, as ufual, Clifton, Frank Henley; and the friend of my Louifa. We
We yefterday paid a vifit to my aunt Wenbourne, at her fummer villa of Rich¬ mond. But I ought to premife, that I am fony,to fee Clifton again looking on Frank Flenley with uneafmefs, and a kind of fuf- .picion that might atmoftbe called jealoufy. , Having confulted Sir Ai thur, I menti¬ oned it, as a pleafant excuifion, to Clifton; and added, as foon a's Frank Henley fliould come, I would defire him to hold him-elf in readinefs. Sir Arthur was prefent ; and Clifton, in a pouting kind of manner, whifpered me~" Can we never go any " where without that young fellow dog- " ging us at the heels ?" I fmiled it off, rapped him on the knuckles with my thimble, told him he was naughty, and faid we muft not fuffer merit to think itfelf neglected. Clifton began to fing Brilons, ftnke home; which he foon changed to Rule Britannia : fure tokens that he was not pleafed ; for thefe are the tunes with which he always fings away his volatile choler. ■ But one of the columns, on which I raife my fyftem, is a detei mination
determination to pérfift in the right. Frank Henley waà therefore invited, and accom¬ panied us. - ' CJifton endeavoured tö pout ; but, as I did not in the leaft change my good hu¬ mour, knowing how neceffary it was ra¬ ther to increafe than diminuii it, he could' nóť long hold out, and foon became as chearful and as good Company as ufual ; and his flow of fpirits, and whimfical combinations, are very exhilarating. After dinner, my good old aunt prefent- Jy got tó wordy wars' wdth Frank; in ivhich, as you may fuppofe, flie had little chance of victory. But flie called in Clif¬ ton, to be her auxiliary ; and he fell into the fame pettifh half-haughty, half-con- femning kind of manner, in which he had fo improperly indulged, previous to the accident of the lake, in France. I looked at him; he underftood me, and endea- Vöuredj but rather áukWardly, to change his torte. The" converfation continued, and he was agam becoming *wärm J ; and, white ' Frank
Frank was laying down the law to" my aunt, at which I could perceive his tongue tingled, I took an opportunity to warn him to beware, for that I had more than one crow to pluck with him already. However, as the beft and fecurett mode Was/ from the temper of the parties, to put an end to the converfation, I rofe, and propofed a walk, and my propofal was accepted. I was particularly cautious to fay as lit¬ tle to Frank as I could, purpofely that Clifton might have no retort upon me ; though a part of my plan is to accuftom him to fee me juft to the merits of Frank, without indulging any unworthy fufpici- ons. But this I did not think a fit occrr- fion for fuch experiments. We returned to town, and I purpofed, when Clifton fliould come to pay me his morning vifit next day, to read him a gentle lecture. Of this he was aware ; and, feeling, as I fuppofe, that he fliould make a bad ferrous defence, knew a comic one would better ferve his tura - f for his . fancy
> fancy and humour appear to be ineiihauf- tible. The firft thing he did, when he entered the room, was to fall down on his knees, like a child to his fchool-miftrefs, holding his hands preifed flatly together, with a piteous face and a " Pray, pray !" I laughed, ahd told him he was a very bad child. His " Pray, pray!" was repeat¬ ed, with another ftrangely pleafant con¬ tortion of countenance. But I ftill an- .fwered—"No, indeed—I fliould not for¬ give him, till I had made him truly fenlible of his fault." On which he rofe from his knees, pulled out a paper fool's cap, which he had been, carving and faihioning for bimfelf, fixed it on his head, and pla¬ ced himfelf, with a new kind of peniten¬ tial countenance, in a corner ; continuing fuch quaint mimickry, of a child in for- row, that there was no refining fair and downright laughter. j > I lUllimade two or three attempts to begin to argue, but they were ineffectual -, they were. all anfvvered with fome new antics,
aWics,' arid I was obliged ať ïaft to fay— « Well, well ! I find you are fenťíble how" " much you (Jeferve puniihment ; ' and' " therefore I dare fay will take care not " to offend in future." After this, he gave the whole difcourfe a comic and a witty caíl 4 embelltíhihg iť with all the flights of his rich and ftrong' imagination, on purpofé to avoid the pof« íibility of remonftrance. This is a certala iign that it muft be very painful to hirn $ unlefs indeed we allow for the pleafurë ( which he cannot but take, in exhibiting the activity of his mind. Yet painful I am fure it is. Contradiction is a thing to which he has~not been accuftomed. He has no doubt led/the opinions of his com¬ panions; partly by conforming to and •Çrenğthenîng their favourite prejudices, though chiefly by his fuperior talents : and to b& too often encountered/by any one whofe intellects are more clear and confif- tènt than riis own, is" a kind of degradati¬ on to which he fcarcely knows how to fubmlt. vol. in. e With
With refpeči to Frank Henley, when¬ ever he is pleading the caufe of truth, he is inflexible. I have fomethnes indeed known him filent, when he was hopelefs of doing good : but at others I have heard him blame himfelf for this, and afiert that we nevei ought to defpair ; 'for that truth, no matter-how violently oppofed at the moment, would revive in the mind, and do her office, when the argument and the anger fliould be whojly forgotten. í believe the obfervation to be juft. But he is no common фткег ! No ! I am almoft perfuaded he is the firft of human beings! Equal, nay I have fom e times even thought fupeyor, to Louifa heifelf! As you peiceive, dear friend of my heart, that I know you too w 7 el\ to fear offending you, I am' fure you will do me thejufticeat the fame time to confiTb that I do not feek to flaticr. Thus, dear Louijfa, you peiceive, we do not perhaps make quite fo fvvift a pro- giefb as we could wiih : but we muft be fatibfied. The march of knowledge is flow, •»impeded
impeded as it is by the almoft impenetra¬ ble forefts and moiaffes of error. Ages. have paffed away, in labours to bring fome of the moft fimple of moral truths to light, which ftill remain oVer-cIouded and ol^fcuie. Uow fdr is the world, at prefent, from being convinced that it is not only poffible, but perfectly piafticable, and highly natuial, for'men to aflociate with moft fraternal union, happinefs, peace, and virtue, h were but all diftin£)ion of iánk and riches wholly aboliihed ; weie all the falfe wants of luxury, which* are the ne- ceffaiy offspring of individual piooeity, cut off; weie all equally obliged to labom for the wants ofnatuie, and for nothing more; and were they all afterward to unite, and to employ the remainder of their time, which would then be ample, in the pio- moţion of ait and fcience, and in the fearth of wifdom and tiuth ' The few arts that would then remain would be grand ; not frivolous, not the effoits of cunning, not the proftitution ot genius in diftrefs, to flatter the vanity of ľ 2 infolept
ANNA ST. ÏVESî infolehtwealth and power; or the depraved täfte of än , ill-judging . multitude ; but energies óf hììndì uniting 4 all' the charms óf fancy v/ith' all the fevere beauties of confiftent truth. ■'''■'"i: : : ; v ; Jsídť; nót lamentable tobe ;obligèd to Őoübfwbether mere-be arı hundred people inali 'England, whoi were they to read fuch à letter as .this, would not immedi¬ ately: laugh at the abfurd reveries of the writer P-^Bţut let them look round, arid deny, if they can, that the prefent wretch¬ ed fyftem* ;of each providing for himfelf in'fteadof the whole for the whole, does nót iri.fpire fufpicion, fear, difputes, quar¬ rels, mutual cqntëmpV and hatred. In-* itead'of nations, or rather of the whole World, uniting to produce one great effect, the perfection and goqdof all, each family is itfelf a ftate y bound to the reit by inte- reftand cunningi but feparated by the very fame paflions, and à thoufand 'others ; li¬ ving together under a kind of truce, but tóntinuallylready to break out into operi war; continually'jealous of each other; continually
continually on the defenfive, becaufe •con¬ tinually dreading an attack ; ever ready to ufurp on the rights of others, and perpe¬ tually entangled in the moft wretched contentions, concerning what all would neglect, if not 'defpife, did not the errors of this felfim fyitem give value to what is in itfelf worthlefs. _, Well, well!------Another century, and -then— I In the mean time let us live in hope ; andi like our worthy hero, Frank-, not be filent when truth requires us to fpeak. We have but to arm ourfelves with patience, fortitude, and univerfal benevolence. Pai don this prattle !—The heart will fometiriîès^expand ; and it is then weak enough to plead that the effufions of friend- fhip clami attention, and refpedr. This is among the prejudices of our education, and í know not who has hitherto over¬ come them all. I can only fay, dear Louifa, it is not her who is moft affcciion, ately your A. W. ST. IVES.
E 3
P. s.
P.S.'CJifton is quire fuccefsfuhwith my relations : he has won.'the heart of my aunt. Every moment he was abfent was laviihed in'his praife. " He was a hand- <tr fome man, prodigioufly handfome, ex- <( ceedingly well bred, a man of great <f undeiftariding, and what was more a " man of family. His pretenfions were <ť well founded ; it was a very proper con- " nection, and was very much approved C( hy her." Nor did 'the good old lady -omit various farcaftic hints glancing at .Frank, and which were not foftened by the oppofition he made to her opinions.— But he is too great a lover of truth to betray it for the fake of f elf ; and flie too much an admirer of her own prejudices not to be offended at contradiction. Once more, Louifa, we are the creatures that educa¬ tion has made us, and confeqiiently I hope we fliall hereafter be wifer and better.
L E T T E R
LXIV.
LOUISA CLÏJPTON TO ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES.
x\Nodd circumftance, my'dear Anna, has happened here, of which I think it neceffary to inform you immediately. 4 Honeft Aby has again been with us.-— He came and enquired for my mamma. Difappointmept, chagrin, and ilUhumour were broadly legible on his countenance. He talked in his odd dialect; which! e 4 cannot
LETTER
3tt',9<3
■cannot remember accurately enough to repeat ; faid he had juft received a letter from Sir Arthur, from which he underftood fomething that to him appeared to be mat¬ ter of great furprife; which was that Sir Arthur intended to beftow your hand on ray brother ; and, ina half fubmiffive half authoritative way, wanted to know whe¬ ther it were true ; and whether my mam¬ ma knew any thing of the bufinefs. She acknowledged that fuch were the intentions of the two-families 3 and he an- fwered that, for his part, he thought they might as well think no more of the matter; muttering the words wherewithal and coal. Mrs. Clifton defîred him to be explicit; but he continued in half fentences, re¬ peating that the ready was not fo eafy to be had, and rhino was a fcarce commodi¬ ty. Neither could he tell what might happen. There were - foreclofures, and docking of entails, and many things to be fettled ; and catti muft come from where it
it could be got; .but not from him, he believed. My mamma,' mild as flie is, was obliged to check 'his growling inclination to be in¬ folent ; and then he had his whole bead- roll of fine words, with which he has Jo often tickled the ear of Sir Arthur, at bis tongue's end ; and ran them oír with his ufual gracious, and very humble obedient volubility. Had I not received your laft, * his dh> courfe would have been more enigmatical to me : but, as it was, I underftood him tolerably well. The bitternefs of gall is, at iııs heart. The greatnefs of his vifible diíappointment fliews how high his hopes had been raifed ; and I fufpeft he is de¬ termined they ihall not be very eafily pul¬ led down. For, after having acied all his abjeét humility, he could not forbear again to murmur over his threats, as he was
e 5 leaving
leaving 'the worn ; and there was an air of felf-fufficient confidence fo apparent, in his face that, Ί am perfuaded, the obfta¬ cles hechas the power« to raife are, much greater "than you, my dear ¡ friend, have ever fuppofed. ' ' I cannot defcribe.to you, my heft Anna, how deeply; my mind is agitated, at times, concerning this marriage. I cenfure my¬ felf very feverely, for feeming ţo indulge improper fears, one minute; and perhaps, the next, anymore angry with myfelf for not*difinteréfteo*iy pleading the caufe of Frank Henley. If there couid be a mira¬ cle in-nature, I ihould think his being the ion of honefi Aby one.. What can I fay?, My doubts are too mighty for me J I know not how, or what, -to advife. The rea fons you have urged' are indeed weighty : yet they have never made an,jmpreflion fo deep upon my mind, >as not to take flight, and leave their opponent arguments in fonie fort the victors. , Nor can I be more angry with myfelf; -on any occafion, than I am at this moment. I diftrefs
Γ diftrefs and trouble you with my fears, when I ought to keep them to' mvfelf; unlefs I could determine whe- ther they were or were not well found¬ ed. They are even incteàfed by the recollection that, in all probability, Clif¬ ton could now much lefs bear difappoint- ment than the ftrong minded and gene-· rous Frank. * Then, my Anna ! Should ill happen to her, from an undei taking the motive of which is fo worthy, fo dignified, what fliould I fay? Should mibfoitune come, how could I excufe myfelf, for having ne¬ glected to diffuade*, and to urge fuch ι ca¬ fona as have appeared to me the ftrongeft ? What could I fay, but repeat the diffidence of my mind, the want of full and fatís-v factory conviction, and the fear of mif¬ take i 5 The only buckler, with which I op- pofe thefe infurrections of reafon, is the omnipotence of tiuth, and Anna St. Ives ! And', when L recollect this, my terrors e 6 aie
are huflied, and I think her fure of con- queft. r Tlie very affirmative tokens which Aby difplayed of his own confequence, con¬ vince me however that there will be de¬ lay. How Clifton will fubmit to it is to be feen. His letter to my mamma is all impatience, and expectation. But 1 have talked with her, and flie appears to be determined that nothing can be done, till Sir Arthur is ready to pay the fum he propofed. My Anna will not be very ready to attribute this to avarice ; for no one can think more highly of her than Mrs. Clifton does. But ray father, at his death, left the family in abfolute dţftrefs, from which flie has retrieved it, by her eco¬ nomy and good fenfe : retrieved it, that is, in part ; for there are ftill many heavy debts to pay, and mortgages to be clear¬ ed. Her plans have been fevere ; and »of long continuance ; deeply thought on, and peifeveringly executed. To convince her
her that any part of them ought to be relinquiihed fcarcely appears poifible.-*·-- Nor ám I fure that, obliged as we are to conform .to the prefent fyftem pf things, they are not all juft. Befide which flic js not in a Aate of health to fupport the fatigue of argument, or the pam of con- tradiction. She likewife confiders Sir Arthur as a weak old gentleman -; who, if this oppor¬ tunity were abandoned, would perhaps never have the fpirit or the power, here¬ after, to do his daughter juftice :■ and flie thinks that, for your fake, ihe ought not in the leaft to jrelax. Should you, my dear Anna, reafon differently, I am ftill certain that you will reafon charitably. With refpect to my brother, it may per¬ haps be fortunate, fliould the fufpenfe af¬ ford you time for further trials ; and we may have caufe to jejoice at the accident, which had -checked the precipitate impa¬ tience of paifion. Though I expect a letter from you by to-morrow's poft, I think this of too much confequence
confequence to fuffer any delay: I fliall therefore feal it, and fend it off imme¬ diately. ' ' \" *■ -Heaven blefs and eternally preferve my dear Anna ! JU. Clifton.
I^ETTER
r
LETTER LXV ι »Ι ii iť
ABIMELECH HEIţLET . T0 J 1 SIR ARTHUR ST. IV T LS. Weithoiune-Hill. Moft onnurable Sir, my ever onnuid Matter, Yh" . OUR onnur has a thijown me quite into a quandary ! I couldn't have thoft it ' For why ? ; M/ thofts were all in the mer¬ cifool piaife and glorification of your on¬ nur ; and I had a done nothink but fay . *** ·« * how good and gracious your^onnur had a bin, *.ţo me and mine. But I do find, a favin and exceptin your ever onnurable onnur, 'tis all a gull queerum' >Whereof tlie face of } affairs is quite tranfmogrified I And
And fo, aft for raifin the wind of twenty thoufand pounds, I find the think is nei¬ ther kompariffuble nur a parallel to com¬ mon fenfe. For why? ît is not to be had. A man's money is his own, your onnur ; and when a has got it, there's as good law for he as for a dooke, "Always a favin and exceptin your moft exceptionable onnur, as "in duty boundin. For as I wus a fayin, your onnur, when a man has a got the fu- per nakullums, who fliall take it from him ? Becaufe why, it is his own. If fo be as the whats and the whys and the wherefores bad a bin a forth cummin, why then the fliiners might a feen the light of day, mayhap. But a man's fon ; why a's his fon ; a's his own ; a's his goods and chattels, a"nd law and .rite ; bein of the race of his own begettin, feedin, and breedin, Whereby I cannot but fay; love me love my dog. Always a favin and ex. ceptin your onnurable onnur, as aforefaid. And aft for the rhino, why fome do fave, and fome do fpend, and fome do hold, and fome do let go,^ and fome do have,
have, and fome do want. Whereupon if fo be as he as a has the moft a¡ may be as good as another. Why not ? Always a favin and exceptin your ever onnurable onnur as aforefaid. But when fo be as a man has the wherewithalls, why a let him begin to hold up his head, I fay. Why r-ot ff For why ? It is the x>mnum gathur- •um that makes the man. And if I do a doff my hat to my betters, there a be and a bin the whats and the whys and the wherefores for it. But I can a doff my hat, or I can a keep it on my head % and mayhap a can begin to look my betters in the face, as well as another. W'tiy not ? Always a favin and exceptin your ever exceptionable onnur, as in duty boundin. And aft for famalies and names, I axes nothing about they. A tell me who has the moft kole? I axes that! Mayhap Henley maybe as good a name as Clifton. And aft for ramalics, wby it is notorious ihat Adam and *Evc "wus the begettin of us all ; always a favin and exceptin your onnurable
onnurable onnur. Whereof a there's an end of that. Whereby your onnurable onnur wus a menfhinnin the mortgages ; and of a feein of every think a treeved and fettled, afore your onnur do die. But as thinks do be likely lo turnout, why every man fori him¬ felf, and God for us all. There be* fore¬ clofures mayhap, that a be to be thoft of. For why? There a be wheels within wheels. If fo be indeed as if thinks had a turned up trumps, why then ay, it would a bin fummut; all fmooth and go foftly, and there might a behappened to be funfhine and fair weather at Wenbourne-ilill. For why ? Every think would then a bin clear and above board. Thinks would a then a bin fare and fure to all fides; and your onnurable onnur w'ould mayhap a feen that your onnur would a loft nothink by the bargain. For why? Miffee my younk lady might a pai adventered to have had all, in the upfliot ; and an ever giacious and glorious and meicifool my }ounk lady miflee
miffce (he would a then a bin. Whereby as matters be likely to turn out, why thinks muft a take their courfe. Thof a mayhap folks may go further and fare worfe. Whereof if fo be as lives have a bin faved, by land and'by water, and a man's fon is thoft to be fomebody, why mayhap a may not a take it fo kindly to be choufe flickurd.. ' For my part, I Ihoft as thof all thinks had a bin as good as fettled ; and that İn all partïkillers miffee my younk lady, of ever mercifool affability, would a bin'left to pleafe herfelf. Why not ? When pre¬ cious lives have a bin faved, and when there a bin fliootins, and leapins, and fwimmins, and foııfuıs, I fay as aforefaid, why that's a fummut ; and a man's own fon mayhap won't a like to be flamdud- gind. And fo as to mortgages to be paid off, your onnurable onnur, why mayhap'that's a fooner faid nur done. I'o r 1 fay as afore¬ faid, that it feems, as if w hereby, if it had not a bin fortorne folks, fome folks would a now
a now a bin in their fait water graves: always a favin and exceptin your ever ex¬ ceptionable onnur, as in duty boundin. Whereby take me ritfly, your onnurable onnur, I means nothink amifs. If thinks be a ikew whift, why it be no fault of mine. IHs always a favin and exceptin ■of your onnurable onnur : being as I be ready to glorify to the whole world of all your futur lovin kindnefs of bleifins of praife, a done and a teftified to me and mine». Whereof as to frippery jerry my gingie Ted coats and cockades, why they be no- think of my feekin. For why ? They be v the betokens of the wainins of the figns of the bloody crofs of anti-chrift, and the whore of Babilon, and of the difpenfation of the kole, and the fquit- teŕ, fquandeiin of the wheiewithalls, and the fupeinakullums. Wheieby an honeft man's fon may become to be bam- boozild, aiid addle-biained, and foiftee fubbd, belike, as finely as his neighbouis. So that if fo be as I have a bin a ponder- aithi
aitin that there a be nothink to be got by it. Always a favin and exceptih 'of the bleffins'of praife, and mercifool glory, of your ever exceptionable onnurable onnur*s lovin kindnefs, and goodnefs ; and every think of that there umbel and very fub¬ miffive obedient kind, as in duty boundin. Witch is all at prefent, beginnin and endin to the everlaftin power of almighty joys eternal ; umbelly beggin leave to fu- perfcribe mefelf ABIMELECH HENLEY,
LET-
LETTE R LXVI.
ABIMELECH HENLEY то FRANK HENLEY.
ÌVe:bonrne-HìIl. WiïY what be all a this here ? What is İt that a be about, dolt r Here's a rum¬ pus ! Here's a fine to do ! You be a pretty fquire Nicodemus Nincompoop ! You a fon of my own begettin, fccdin, and breed- in ! You feeze the fulhams ! Why they would a draw your i teeth for ее ! Marry come fairly ! You the jennyalogy of my own body and loins? No, by lady ! And fo fquire my lord Timothy Doodle has a bin
bin flib gibbcrd, and qucerumd, after all? Thof if fo be as notwithftandin a that Mif- fee, my younk lady, had as good as a bin playin at catch me come kifs me, and all in the dark with'n ; and thof I had a fififi- cated the Sir Dandle Dunderpate, a here a do ftand, a fuckin his thumbs ! Thof fo be as how I told him to make up to Mif- fee, and the twenty thoufand pounds 1 What, a did n't I put words into your mouth, as good as a ready butterd, as I may fay ? What, a did n't I give ее all your pees and cues ? Becaufe as why, I did a know a wus a quaumee kintlin. And fo a has played vvith the moufe and lias a loft it ai laft ! A fine kettle of fiili a's made on't ! Whereof forfooth, fo as that novv as that aii o'the fat's in the fire, w r hy I muft a be fet to catch the colt if Г can. Why ay, to be fure ! Whereby if fo be as the Gaby goofe may novv go barefoot ! And a whofe fault is that ? No ! A would n't a be akin to a good eftate ; not he! But harkce me chit! Mind what I be about to fay to ее, Simon the fimple, and mayhap
mayhap thinks may become to be kompa¬ riffuble andparallel to the yellow hammers and the chink, for all of ail this here rig royfter. For why ? I can put a fpoke in the wheel of the marriage act and deed. Madam Clifton wonnot a budge a finger, to the fignin and fealin of her gratification of applaufe, whereby as if fo be as that the kole a be not a forth cummin, down on the nail head. And .where now might Timothy Tipkin fitnicate that it may be¬ happen to be for to come from ? Pummel thy pumkin, and a tell me that, Peter Grievous. Where, but out of my pourhe, Gaby ? That is, I firft havin and hoidin the wherewithalls, and the whys, and the wherefores. Do you take me now! So thai forfooth, fome folks may behappen to cry peccavi. Whereby mind what I do tell ее. For why ? I've as good as a told Sir Arthur the wind is a not to be raifed for any of a fitch of a flammbite of å tale of a tub. Whereby I a told'n a bit of my mind. And if fo be as if a will wince, a maphap it may come to
to pafs that I can kick. A ihall find ΐ was not a bred and a born and a begotten yefterday. An a champ upon it, Jet'n. An a will run rufty, mayhap a may belike to get his head în a hedge. Şo mind what I do fay to ее ; and tell 'em that they may a behappen to find that your father is fome¬ body, and that you are his fon. A tell 'cm that. So do you ftrikc up to Miffee boldly. Mind what ее be at ; and let 'em like it or leave it. For if fo be as when a man has a got the Marygolds, why then let'n begin to fpeak for himfelf. Why not? Whereby I have now once again given the coftard monger his pees and his cues. So that if fo be as if a do find that fweet fauce be good for goofe, why let'n a give his tongue an oilin. But if fo be as a do о find a be Sir Arthur Crabvarjus o'the high ropes, why then, fays you, look ее me, fays you, honeft Aby is my father; and when a man has a got the wherewithalls, why a begins to be fomebody, and may¬ hap a's as g'ood as another, A tell 'em that. vol. ш, г And
Aııçl fp no more at prefent; a favin and .exceptin of .the all bountifool glory of the everlaftin praife of joys eternal, livin and hopm for, time to repent us of all our mani¬ fold fins, and of a dyin in peace 'anal cha¬ rity with ¡ajl men.; Whereby we flia.ll be fure to partake of the refurrečtion of the juft iheep, and of the virgin oil w in our lamps, and of the martyrtand of the pro¬ fits and of the faints everlaftin reft. ABIMELECH" HENLEY.
SETTER
%
1 lE'TYER/L^V-tr, iì' Ι* ί ' 1 J\ Il ·., I» i.,. J ' ·'' ľ'Utj. * tii ·, . '.i f: . ;, ·, - ' ' PR ! A'NK ,í HENbĽÝ j TO „QUIVER TRENCJÎARÖ·, ,
London, fifippenor Smet. O-LÏ-VEU, íťis not half andìour fince I ended'Writing one of the molt nndutiful and bitter Philippics,'-that ^ver· was ad- dreffed by a fon to his-father. 1 fay undu- tiful, becaufe this-wife ivorld lias decreed that to abhor, xeprovej and -avoid' vice in a fathers 'inftoatî 'of being j the'performance ofa ditty, is offenfive to -aH moral feeling. *' IJI ...... ?2 : ' ( r I have
I have juft received a letter from him, chiding and blaming me, with his üfual acrimony,,fbr aiuppofed want of cunning; and for not aiding him in what I perceive ■now to be the deiign he has moft at heart; which is my marriage with the divine Anna. He has almoft difgufted me with myfelf, for having, though ineffectually, endeavoured to aid him fo well. Nay I have been tempted to fliew his letter to Sir Arthur. But, on recollection, I have thrown the Philippic I mentioned into the ure ; and have determined on filence ; for ï perceive harm that may refult from a contrary conduct, but no good. To fwerve, to the right or the left, from the direct path of principle and truth, becaufe •of the felfiíh, narrow, and unwife views of others, is to be weak and culpable. "iVhat, indeed, has relationfhip to do with truth ? . No human ties can bind us to error : and, while we rigoroufly act ac¬ cording to the rules of truth, as far as we knqw them, the commentSj miftakes> difapprobation, and even refentment, of relation,
ч relation, friend,· or father, ought to be dir regarded. I muft own, however, I have ftill the folly to feel additional grief that errors of fo mean, fo felfifli, fo diflioneft a nature fliould have taken fuch firm poffeflion of the mind of my father ; and I am afraid I could fupport them better in the perfon of another. Having determined not to write to him, I have written ta thee, to give vent and relief to thefe feelings. Of courfe thou wilt te 1 ! me if thou feeft any reafon, which I have not difcovered, why I ought to communicate' thè contents of his letter to Sir Arthur ; whom he vaunts of hayirţg in his power, and whom he is determined not to fupply with money, for the pro-' jected marriage with Clifton. ,My con¬ viction is that to fliew this letter would but increafe their mutual anger, and render compliance on my father's part, whofe temper I know, ftill lefs probable than it is ; if lefs it can be. Adieu. F. HENLEV. f3 * LET-
LETTER LXVÜL ANNA WENBOtTRNE ST. IV^S 10 "LOUISA CbIFTON. Ltmdon, Gwfvemr-Strteh Jl "WRITE, at prefent, to my dear Louifa, that by writing I may divert the peitur- bation of my mind. But I muft begin calmly ; for I have fo much to fay, that í fcaicely know what to fay fiift. Our mu¬ tual conjetures, concerning honeft Aby, aie İn patt Verified I conclude thus, not frem having feen " any mote of his letter but fiom knowing moie have been re¬ ceived, which, inftead of having been ihewn
ííiewn me, have, if I do riot miftake, thrown Sir Arthur into fome of the mott ft;rious reflections he ever experienced. ï never knew him fo grave, thoughtful, and penfive, as he has been for fome days— My brother too !—But more of him by aud by. Obforving the efforts of reflection, anct defirous of aiding, alleviating, or increaf- ing them, as fliould be moft prudent, I took an opportunity, after breakfaft, when Sir Arthur and I were alone, of fpeaking to him ; and we had the following dia¬ logue. I think, fir, you feem more thoughtful lately than ufual. I am afraid there is fomething difturbs you. Can I—? No, no—Nothing—Not much. Worldly matters, which you do not undciftand. I am far from wiihing, fir, to intrude into your private concerns; except they were fuch as might relate to me, and- Mere money matters, child ; of which you have no knowledge—[We paufed ; Sir Arthur feeming as if his mind laboured f 4* with'
with a fubjectwhich he knew not how to begin]—Where is Mr. Henley ? Retired to his apartment, fir. Thit* is¬ his time of day for ftudy.. He is a very learned young man. Not fo learned, I believe, fir, as wife. Aie not they the fame thing ? I think not, fir. Well then, a very wife young man— You think him fo ; do you not, Anna ? I do, fir. You have a very high opinion of him ? í have, fir. Perhaps a higher than of any other young gentleman, with whom you are ac¬ quainted. I am indeed afraid, fir, I have never feen his equal. Humph ■—You—You are not fpaiing of your praife. You afked me a queftion, fir, and would not have me guilty of equivocation, or falfehood. No, child : I am pleafed with your fin¬ cerity j
cerity; and ï hope and expect you wilt be equally fincere in every thing you fay. Of that, fir, you may be allured. What are your reafon s for thinking fo exceedingly well of Mr. Henley ? My reafons, fir ? Yes ; your reafons. I own I am a little furprifed at this queftion from you, fir ; who have been a witnefs to fo many of his virtues, and their effects« [Fthen briefly recapitulated the progrefs of Frank from a child in virtue, infifting on the numerous proofs of which we fo * lately had been witneffes. I recounted thé biftories of the highwayman, and of Feggy and her hufband; the adventure of the lake ; and the protection w r e found frorn bis fkill, ftrength; and courage' at Deal ; not forgetting the attendant incidents of each, nor neglecting to give fuch brief but ftrong touches as feeling dictated.] J I muft own, he is a very extraordinary young man! Tefc
Yet we can know buta pmt of the gnod effected by a mind fo aci'w·* and fo vii tu¬ ous. Though I perhaps know more thaa }ou, fir. Ay í —What ? Let me hear. You think me partial already, fir. No, no. Let me hear. The very night we arrived at Paris, he prevented Mr. Clifton and the Count de Beaunoir from fighting a duel.. Indeed ! Yet never mentioned it ; nor perhaps ever would, had not we afterwaid met with the Count at the Chateau de Villc- brun. That was very odd ! Nay more, fir; but a day or two befoie that he faved the life of Mr. Clifton, he had fubmitted to the infult of a blow fiom him, rather than fight a duel. A blow------? He does not want courage, fir, you are convinced^ No, no—It is what he calls one of his principles not to fight duels—He is a veiy extraordinary
extraordinary young man !—■—And hot I think much like his father. As oppofite, fir, as day and night, grace and deformity, virtue and vice. You think but indifferently of Abirhe- lech.—■ I think very ill of him, fir. I think him felfifli, cunning, covetous, and dif- honeft. Diflioneft ? In the eye of equity, though not pew haps of the law. ЛУЬу did not you tell me your opinion fooner ? J did, fir. 3 do not remember it. No, fir : it made no impreifion, becaufe you did not think it true. May be fo—And you do not find any of thefe bad qualities in the fon ? Bad!·— Ifall the higheft gifts of intel¬ lect , if memory, perfpicuity, percepti'on, and genius ; added to all the' virtues, wif¬ dom, benevolence, philanthropy, and felf- dcnial ; if to be the active friend of man r 6 and
and thé declared enemy of error,'and of that alone ; if thefe can entitle him to efteem, admiration, reverence and praife, why then efteem admiration, reverence and praife are juftly his due.. You are warm in your encomiums. Indeed, fir, I think I am cold. - How fo ? Becaufe my encomiums are fo very much beneath his deferts. • Anna------[Sir Arthur affumed a very ferious tone and look.] Proceed, fir—Do not be afraid of quef- tioning me. You ihall find, my dear fa-. ther, a child that will anfwer truly, affec¬ tionately, and I hope dutifully. . -ţî kiffed his hand, preffed it, and wet it with an unwilling tear. The impaffion¬ ed heart, Louifa, will fometimes rebel againft the cold apathy of reafon; but. fuch revolt is but of íhort duration.] ** Are you aware, Anna, of the ftate of. your own affections ? - I think fo, fir, You think ? Well
Well then, I am certain. You fay Mr. Henley has no equal ? ' In my opinion, none, fir. Look you there J But do you think, fir, I will not emu¬ late the virtues I admire : or that, be¬ caufe I have a juft fenfe of his worth, I will trefpafs againft my duties to the' World, my fex, my family and my father?' Anna !—Child !— [The tears ftood in Sir Arthur's eyes. Fie ftretchedout both hands, and I flew to his arms.—After a íhort interval of filence, Sir Arthur pro¬ ceeded.] Telime, Anna: What are your 1 thoughts of Mr. Clifton ? I think him, fir, a very extraordinary* gifted· gentleman. But not a Mr. Henley ? Not at prefent, fir, Time I hope will make him one. No, child, never. " ЛУЬу foi,fir? ' I cannpjt tell why, but I am fure it r never ¡wijl. They'are two very different' men, " α Mr,
Mr. Clifton, ..fir, has uncommon powers of mind. May be fo ; I fuppofe ib ; I only fay they are very different men. Their tem¬ pers are different, their opinions, their manners, every thing. I do not imagine, fir, they will ever exacily referable each other; but I think myfelffure they will continually approach. Indeed ! Yes, fir. May be fo ; but I own I doubt it. Mr. Clifton is a gentleman, both by birth and education. That I own, fir, may be a great difad- vantage ; but— Difadvantage, child í
Our converfation was here interrupted, Louifa, by a letter brought me .from my brother. Read it, and judge o£ what I felt.'
" Dear
" Dear Sifter, " I AM a ruined man, unlefs I could t: cornnland a fum of money which it is tc ímpofliblé foi' me to raife. I laft night (c lóit three thoufand pounds, upon ho- " nöür, which ì ùm totally unable to pay'. έί And, what is Worfe, I did not lofe it to " a gentleman, but to a iharper ; who, *' the Very laft throw he made, let a third ' f die fall upon the table. But this is of ** no avail ; he is an unprincipled, daring βί fellow ; denies any foul play with im- " precations and threats, and infifts on u being paid. I know you cannot help *' me to fuch a fum ; and I fuppofe my K father will not. For my part, 1 can " neither pay it nor think óf Jiving, under w the difgrace 'and infamy which muff ** follow. <c EDWAtl-JD ST. IVES." ! Sm Arthur faw my agitation ; and, had I been defirous, it would have been diffi¬ cult to have concealed the letter, or its contents.
contents. I ihewed it him} and his per¬ plexity and pain I believe exceeded mine, ît was impoflible, he faid, for him immet diately to pay the money : it would greatly diftrefs him at any time. It likewife ihew¬ ed the deplorable ftate of my brother's affairs. The Edgemoor eftate, every thing gone ! Sir Arthur knew not how to act. I was in a tremor, and could not perfuade myfelf there was any way io fafe as that of confuí ting Frank Henley. This L pror pofed; Sir Arthur inftantly acquiefced, and he was fent for down. After reading the letter, the only expedient, he faid, which he could think, of, was to vifit my brother; either accompanied by or under the fanction of Sir Arthur. My father ab·* folutely refufed to go himfelf; but he gavç Frank fall powers to act for him, and as he ihould think moft prudent. Before he went, he endeavoured to calm our fears : faying be thought it impoflible, if fuch a-, rafcal as this gambler were properly dealt witli, •but
but that he muft be glad to renounce his claim. Frank is now abfent on this defperate bufinefs; fent, by my officioufnefs, to en¬ counter a practifed ruffian í What could I do ? A brother threaten¬ ing his own life ! Yet what is the life of fuch a brother, to that of Frank Henley? I hope he is not in danger ! I think ï was obliged to do as I have done ; though indeed I am very ill fatisfied with myfelf. The chief purpofe of my writing this long dialogue, which I had with Sir Arthur, was to ward off fears : for furely it is but a folly to anticipate misfortune. I ihould elfe not have written till to-morrow. And muft I alarm my friend, by fending this before I know the refult of fo dangerous an affair ? I think I ought not.
Clifton has juft been with me. It could not long efcape his quick penetration that my
my thoughts were deeply occupied, He was earneft with me to accompany him, in the evening, to fee Garrick in Richard III. but could not prevail. He taxed me wdth abfence of mind, and was kindly ear¬ neft to know why I was fo ferious. I told him at lall it was a family concern ; and this did but increafe his eagemefs to know of what nature. í was obliged to own he was too impetuous to be trufted at fuch a critical minute. Frank Henley I hoped would effect every thing that could be done. Fie repeated, with great chagrin, " Frank Henley !------He was foiry not ** tò be thought as worthy of a truft of a danger, and as zea-bus for the honour íť of the family, as even the favourite « Frank Henley." I replied my mind was not enough at eafe, to give a proper anfwer to fuch a remark ; which however was far from a juft one. He felt the rebuke, and apolcgifed ; withpraifes of .Frank Henley's prudence, and
and ačcufatioľis of his oWn intertiperate hafte. " But wife people krt'eW how to íf be cool. Prudence and wifdom-Were " cold blooded qualities. Good or harm, if of any moment, if done by him, muft " be done in a kind of paifion. Il Was " his temper, his nature, which he tried " in vain to correct. Neither was he quite " certain that fuch a temper was not the " beft : at leaft it was the moft open and " honeft.------" I told bim he was miftaken In moil of thefe fancies : but he feemed not to hear me, and Went on—<- tc He could not but own he was piqued, " and almoft grieved, to find he müft de- " fpair of meriting the preference ; and " that he was deftined to find a rival, " where rivalfliip ought perhaps leaft to " be expected." t My temper of mind did not permit nie to argue with him ; I could much rather have indulged the woman, and burft iilto fears ; but I fubdued my feelings, 'and could
.could think of no better mode of reproving him than to retire. I accordingly with¬ drew, without anfwering, and left him making ineffectual ftruggles with his pride, his confcioufnefs of error, and his defire of being heard, and reconciled to himfelf, and me. He told me, yefterday, he was furprifed at not receiving an anfwer from Mrs. Clifton,, and at the filence of Sir Arthuc. I made no reply becaufe I had not confi- dered how I could addrefs myfelf to him with the beft: effecL · But I mean, when he mentions it again, to inform him of the probability of delay. I, like you, my friend, think delay rather a fortunate inci·- dent than otherwife. But why, Louifa, fliould you fuppofe it neceffary to juftify the conduci of Mrs. Clifton to me? lam well acquainted with ber virtues, and the purity of her intenti¬ ons. , Whether I fliQuld a»£t vvith exactly ,the fame caution, under the fame circum- ¡ilances, is more thaa I can fay : but nei¬ ther
Λ NOVEL.
ther can I fay that my prudence, and fore- fight, would equal hers.—I think, I hear Frank Henley, I am all impatience and alarm. Adieu. A. W. ST. IVES.
LETTER
,1lJät.
LETTER LXIX.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES To LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Grofvenor-Street. İP RANK has this moment left me. Fie is ftill in purfuit of this bufinefs, which İs by no means brought to a conclufion. He has been with my brother, and has met the gambler ; with whom two very cha. račteriftic dialogues have paffed, which Frank has repeated with confiderable hu¬ mour. My brother was only prefent at and bore his part in the fécond. The man is
is a perfect mafter of his vile trade ; a practifed duellift; as expert, Frank fays„ in killing of men as in cogging of dice.— A Hibernian bravo ; determined to purfue the moil defperate means to effect his purpofe. Energy in vice or virtue, Frank rçmarjks, is the chamcteriftic of the Irijb. Ifis a noble quality, of which no nation perhaps has more, if any fo much ; but it is fre¬ quently abufed by them, and made pro¬ ductive of the moft hateful effefts. Frank was with my brother in his dref* fing-room, when the man canie· and was ihewn into an anti-chamber by the fervant.. Edward was fufficiently unwilling to fee him, and readily agreed to the prop.ofal Frank made, of firft converfing withbim, as my brother's friend. Frank, accordingly went to him,, апД fays he was ftruck at the øght of the pian, being much deceived if he be npt an о,Ц acquaintance. I was and ftill am fur¡prjfe ( d at what Frank told me ; but he b£gge4 ţ would fufpend my curiofity, till he'him¬ felf
felf fliould be better fatisfied ; and pro¬ ceeded with hii> dialogue. ' Your name I believe, fir, is Mr. Mac Fane. At your farvice, fir, I am the friend of Captain St. Ives, * Then to be fure, fir, you are a gintle¬ man, and a man of honour. I am a gin¬ tleman and a man of honour myfilf. Do you fay that from your confciencc, fir? . From my confcience ? Ay, fir ! Why not ? When all my debts due are duly and truly paid, why I fliall have ten tho.ufand pounds in my pocket. There are people, fir, heretical enough to fuppofe that even ten thoufand pound? are no abfolute proof of honour. No, indeed !------Why then, for thofe very fcrupulous people, I have an excel¬ lent pair of proof piftols, which I believe are' abfolute enough. Becafe I would take the odds that they would bit a bird's 'eye flying.
Thofe
Thofe arguments I own are difficult to withftand. Stand !—Faith, and if any man fliall think proper to ftand, I will fetch him down.—[Remember, Louifa, I am imi¬ tating this man's language, as delivered by Frank ; though I believe my memory is tolerably correct.] But I ihould be proud to fpeak a word with your friend ; becafe that will be more to the point. He requefted me to inform you, fir, he fliould be glad if you would delay your viiit an hour or two ; and I think it will be the fafeft ; for you I perceive, fir, are rather warm ; and his temper, as you may ima¬ gine, cannot be fo cool, juft at prefent, as ufual. - His temper !—Faith, fir, and the devil a care care I about his temper ! And as for warm and cool, I can be either, or neither, or both. I have won the money, and the Captain muft pay it; or elfe d'ye fee, fir— ! You'll hit the bird's eye flying ? Ay; flying, or lying, or any way! — VOL» III. G HowCVCr.
However, I will take a turn and come back by and by. I have two or three calls to make on fonic peers of mý acquaint¬ ance. I am a man of nice honour,-fir. And you imagine, nice though it is, that your honour is fufpëcted. By my foul, ,fir, I imagine no fuch thing. Becafe as why, I think it would not be very fafe. I tell you very ferioufly, fir, thai I have a fure facrit to cure any impar- tinCnt fufpicions of my honour ; as I beg you would inform your friend, Captain St." Ives ; who/ being a man of honour him¬ felf, knows what belongs to the bufinefs. Thefe, fir, are tender points, with every gintleman. And fo, fn; I wifh you a good morning for the prefent. r * Frank* fays he" was'defirous of conven¬ ing with the man, that he might difcover his character, previous to his concerting any plan of action. . After he was gone, he endeavoured to lead my brother into a difcuffion ondhe ftate of his affairs. But Edward avoided all detail; fatisfying himfelf with affirming 2 he
he was a ruined man, and unable to pay the fum. г He had no objection to mec I the fellow in the field ; though certainly the chances were a hundred to one in his disfavour. He might as well d!c thai way as any other. With refpect to victory, of that there were but little hopes, with fo expert a ruihan, who had pracrifed piftol ihooting till he was fure of ht*i mark, which my brother had wholly ne¬ glected. Frank then enquired at what houle the money had been loft ; and found it had been at one of the common receptacles for gamblers of the fécond order. No perfon was prefent but the groom porter, whom Frank immediately determined to fee, and went thither for that purpofe. But, on enquiry at the ho ufe, he found the man had ahn,onded. lie returned, and had fome difficulty to convince my brother thai hit, honour would nol fuffci by dela) ; for il; was plain that Mr. Mac Fane was refolved on immediate!) pufhing the matter to an (. 2 extreme.
extreme. However, on communicating his own conjectures concerning this man of nice honour, Edward confentcd to permit Frank to act in his behalf. Frank obferves that our men of fafliion feem agreed to overlook a portion of infolence from thefe gamblers, under the affe-Station of defpifing them, which the tameft of the fine gentlemen among them would fcarce¬ ly brook from each other; In about two hours Mr. Mac Fane returned; and, being introduced to my brother and Frank,, another converfation very fimilar to the former enfucd. The man began. Your fervant, gintlcmcn. I told you laft night, Captain, that I would give you a call this morning : and as it is „an affair iu which your honour is concerned, why J was determined to be very punctual. Becafe why, you know, I am extremely nice and punctual myfelf, upon points of honour. I am forry to be obliged to tell you, fir, that Captain St. Ives, neither knows nor
nor owns any fuch thing; and that I have' good reafon to believe the very re¬ verfe. Sir !—You— ! [Frank fays the man put on the true look of a defperado, refolved on mifchief if oppofed ; but that, after paufing a moment, he began, with a kind of humourous anger, to rub the fide of his face, as if it were benumbed] Faith on recollection, I believe I got a bit of a cold Jaft night, which makes me ra¬ ther dull of hearing. Sir, I repeat— Repate !—Boo !—There is no occafion to repate, at all at all. I remember very well that my friend Captain St. Ives, owes me three thoufand guineas; and, it being a dibt of honour, why, to be fure he will pay it, without any repating about the matter. Sir, faid my brother, give me leave to tell you·— That you will pay me. You need not tell me that. Sir— ! g 3 There
There never yet was man that refufed to pay me, but oh ! The almighty thun¬ der"! I gave him a rcfate in fulf for thè dibi. I made him rep int after his death the day that ever he was born. There's the door, fir, faid Frank. Faith and I know there's the door, fir; but wh ore's' the money, Captain ?—That is, I don't mane the ready caih : that is not to be expecìed, from a gintleman— A bond in thefe cafes you know. Captain, is с uftomary. Sir, there's the door. I find that your friend, here, is difpofed to be a little upon the Captain Copper- thorne this morning ; and fo I íhall leave you for the prefent to confider the matter. X have no doubt but I fhall hear from you, Captain, in the courfe of the four and twenty hours. It is now full three weeks fince I heard the whiz of a bullet ; and I would advife you, as a friend, not to wafte any of your powder and ball upon the prifent occafion. It would only be a buz and blow by bufinefs, Captain : for, by
by the holy limb of Luke, I never yet faw lead that durft look mc in the face. • AVe ihould be glad to be alone, fir. Faith, fir, you may be as bluffas you pleafe ; but, when the Captain is a little cool, I ihall expect to receive a' bit of a meffage from him ; or may I never look on the bald pate of the bleffed Peter but he fliall receive a bit of a meffage from me. And fo once more, gintlemen, good morning. Frank did not lofe a moment after he was gone, but haftened home ; firft to inform us of his proceedings, thus far; and next to make the refearches on which he is now 4 abfent. Here, there¬ fore, my dear Louifa, I muft paufe ; and once again fubferibe myfelf, moft affec¬ tionately, a. w. ST. IVES. P. S. I have reafon to believe that Clifton is more feripuily offended than с 4 ,1 ever
1 ever knew him before. When I refufed going to the play with him, he perfift- ed in faying I might change my mind before night, and that he would come again in that hope. His manner of part¬ ing vvith mc, after being told Frank was cntruftcd with a bufinefs which we had not dared confide to him, was, as I have defcribed, imufual, and accompa¬ nied with more colunefs and referve than either of us had ever before aíTumed.— * It is now eight o'clock, and I have not feen hi;n fince. If he have refolution enough to keep away the whole evening, wliich J fufpeci he will have, the proof df the truth of my conjeciuies will be indubitable. J know not, when he comes to hear the bufinefs, whether he will be convin¬ ced that he was lefs proper to tranfaflt it. than Frank ; otherwife I ihould not be forry, could he but certainly feel himfelf wrong ; for it is by a repetition of fitch IcfTons that the good we intend muft be effected. Be
Be it as it will, let us neither recede nor fläcken our endeavours, I fufpect that every worthy taik muft be a laik of diffi¬ culty, and often of danger.
с Г/ LETTER
LETTER LXX. ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVEŞ Η¬ τα LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Gro/vetior-Street, '' ICe Jf RANK is returned' ; and, as ufual> crowned with fuccefs^ I had been puzzling myfelf to no pur¬ pofe, concerning Mr. Mac Fane being one of our old acquaintance. It appears he was the accomplice of the highwayman,. Webb, the brother of Peggy,, who was ihot by Frank at Turnham Green. lie forbore to tell me, in part becaufe he had not time to connect and relate the grounds Of
of his fufpicion ; though his chief reafon was left a whifper, lieard by Laura or any other, ihould have betrayed and overturned his whole fcheme. He went immediately to queftion "Mrs. Clarke, concerning her .nephew. She knew not what was become -of him ; for, after having determined to go abroad, he changed his mind ; and, being reproved and difcountenanced by her, he had for¬ borne his vifits. She had even refufed to hear his name mentioned. But flie be¬ lieved her niece, Peggy, had fome know¬ ledge of him; though ihc was not certain. Frank thought proper to confide in Mrs.- Claike, and ihey immediately went in queft of the niece. From her they learned ihat he had been promoted to the office of grcom-poiter at a gambľing-houfe : and in fact he proved to be lhe veiy man who had been prefent at the Iranftiction between Edward and Mr. Mac Fane. Peggy was next queft ionod concerning his prefent hiding-place. She was con¬ fufed ; flic fiam mered, and Lemblcd. Was g 6 пЯ
not her brother in danger ? Could flie be fure no harm would come to him ?—At laft, however, the .mild and humane rea¬ foning of Frank, and the authority of Mrs. Clarke, fubdued her terrors—He was in the houfe. It feems the moment he knew it was Captain St. Ives, my brother, whom Mr. Mac Fane had been plundering, he re¬ fufed to appear, or have any further con¬ cern in the affair : and being violently threatened by the gambler, who.vvantcd lo force him to come forward as his wit¬ nefs, he concealed himfelf for fear; not knowing to what excefs fo defperate a man might be carried by his paifions.· He and Peggy had juft been debating on the pro¬ priety of appearing to bear teftimony in my brother's behalf; but were too muchi alarmed to decide. Frank loft no time. He took the man v ith him in the carriage, and haftened to my brother's apartments ; where he left him, and immediately drove away to Bow- ftreet, to procure the affiftance of the po¬ lice.
lice. Previous to this, Mr. Mac Fane, having received fome intimation that there was danger, had written to my brother. The following is a copy of his letter; and ' no bad fpecimen of the man. « Sir, u I find you think that there is a bit of " a blunder in this bufinefs, and that you " doubt the doctors. I underftand too " that Webb, the groom porter, is under " obligations to your honourable family ; " for which raifon the lying fpalpeen pre- " tends that he fmoaked a bale of Fui- " hams—To be fure it is all a miftake—I " am a man of honour ; and you, Cap- " tain, are a man of honour alfo; for " which I give up the coal to your gine-^ " rofity, in raifon whereof huih is the cf word. And fo, in that cafe, I remain " your moft obadient humble farvant, " But if not, w r hy the bull'dogs muft " bark. u PHELIM MAC FANE." Is it not a pity, Louifa, that fo much courage
courage and ability fliould be perverted to fuch vile ends? The man, by means of the wealth he had fo rapidly collected in this manner, had fecured more than one fpy among the Bow-ftreet runners. This we learned fiom Peggy's brother; and it is confiimed by the event; foi he has for- faken all his former haunts, and it is con- iectuicd is either gone off for the continent, 11 İr or, which is mofe probable, is lying con¬ cealed till he can difcoverhow far he is in danger. He was conftantly provided with difguifes, has been to fea, and is intimately acquainted with the manners of the vul¬ gar , fo that, were any ftrict fearch made, he would not eafily be caught. But he need not fear, his fuppofed enemy takes no delight in blood ; and this he will pro¬ bably foon leain, and foon again be upon the town. - e You wonder, no doubt, how Γι ank fliould recognííê a man who, attempting to rob us on a daik night, had ftationed himfelf at the head of the carriage. Had he feen no moie of him, he would have been
been in little danger of detection. But, on one of the 'vifits which Frank made to Webb, the brother of Peggy, he bad met him on the flairs. , Mr. Mac Fane as he defccndcd was oppofite the window on the landing-place, and his face was full.in the light ; while Frank could fcarcely be feen by him, being then feveral fteps below hirn. His countenance is a remarkable one ; it has a deep fear above the left eye; and Frank, fufpečting him to be the ac¬ complice of the man he was going to vifit, had, fixed it in his memory, - Frank has fince been talking very feii- oufly with this brother of Peggy; and ap¬ pears to have .convinced him that his pre r fent profeflion is as much that of a thief as his former. However, in this íhort fpace of time, without underftanding the vile arts of a gambler, he has collected between two and three hundred pounds. Such is. the folly with which money is fquandered at thefe places. While Mr. Mac Fane is abfent, he thinks himfelf in no-danger; aud ihould 'ne return,, he has been ^pro¬ mifed
mifed the protection of our family, which he thinks a fufficient guarantee ; being ra¬ ther afraid of him as a defperado than as an accufer. Webb has therefore agreed to take a fliop, and exercife his trade as a mafter. He is a műn of quick intellects ; and, notwithftanding all thai he has done, has many good propenfities. As a proof of thefe, his poor fifter, the kind Peggy, has infinite affection for him ; and is fure now that he will do well. Sir Arthur and Edward have both been very fincere and hearty in their thanks to Frank : to which he anfwers, and anfwers truly, it was a ftroke rather of good for¬ tune than of fdrefight. But he has gained himfelf a character ; and they are partly of opinion, that every thing muil: profper which he undertakes. Aunt Wenbourne too overflows in his praife. Edward ís her favourite ; *and Frank ftands now almoft as high on her lift as he was but a little while ago the reveife ; for Edward is con¬ tinually talking of him to her, and every word he fays is orthodox. But opinions like
like thefe are too light, too full of preju¬ dice, too mutable-to be of much value. Clifton kept away all the evening; how¬ ever, after hearing the whole ftory, he was obliged to acknowledge that, let his other qualities be what they would, he could not have been fo fucccfsful as Frank in this affair ; becaufe he could have known no¬ thing of Mr. Mac Fane. But he did not forget that ihis was an accident, unfore- fi.en at the time when Frank was trufted. My conftant rule, of equanimity of tem¬ per, has reftored him to his wonted good- humour. But I perceive he regrets the poifibility of any man equalling him in the eftecm of thofe whofe friendfliip he culti¬ vates. Alas ! Why does he not rather feek to furpafs them, than to envy their vii tues ? He fays he yyill propofe an eulogium on Frank, and give a prize himfelf to the French Academy; for he finds he will never get fufficiently praifed in England. I ic never knew fo eternal a theme for pa¬ negyric. In ñne, it is evident, in defpite of
of his efforts to conceal it, that his jealoufy increafes : and I fufpect he feels this lafı decifion againft him more fenfibly than any preceding circumftance. Adieu. Moil truly and dearly, your· own A. W, ST, IVLS.
LET-
LEITER LXXI.
COKE CLIFTON. TO GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Dozw Street, W AR ! Fairfax, war \ —It is declared.! ■—Open war !—My wrathful fpirits are in a blaze, and I am determined. Hear and blame me if you can., But do I not know you ! Does not the temper of your letters tell me you will applaud my, juft anger, and fixed revenge ? Yes, Fairfax, longer to palliate, or wil¬ fully be blind to the partial edicts and haughty ordonnances of this proud beauty, were
were idiotifm ! She has prefumed too far; I am not quite lb tame a creature as fne fuppofes. She fliall find lam not the clay, but the potter. I w r ill mould, not be moulded. Poltron as I was, to think of finking into the docile, domcfticated, ti¬ mid animal called hufband ! But the lion's paws are not yet pared; beware then, my princefs ! The lady would carry it with a high hand, Fairfax. But let her ! If I not note her freaks, if I forget her imperious ca¬ price, if my embittered mind flumber in its intents, fay not I am the proud-fpirited CJifton you once knew ; that prompt, bold, and inflexible fellow, whom arrogance could roufe, and injury inflame, but a fuf- fering, patient afs ; a meek pitiful thing, fuch as they would make me ! Wonder not that I now am angry, but that I have fo Jong been torpid. A little phrenfy has reftored the palfied foul to life, and again has put its powers in motion. I'll play no more at queftions and com¬ mands
mands— -Òr, if I do, it ihall only be to make fure of my game. I have been reproved, filenced, tongue- tied, brow-beaten ; have made myfelf an ape, been placed behind the door, and have ihewed tricks for her diverfion. But I am not muzzled yet : yet they ihall find me one or the f erte natura? . • A moft excellent project, forfooth! When I am fuificiently familiarized to con¬ tradiction, rebuke, fillips on the forehead, and raps on the knuckles, ihe will then hear me my prayers, pack me off peace¬ ably to bed for to-night, and gracİoufiy beftow a pat and a promife upon me for to-morrow ! There is danger in the whim, lady; beauteous, though you are, and invincible r as you may think yourfelf. Model me !------No !—I am of a metal which not even your files can touch. You cannot knead, dough-bake, and temper me to your leaven. Fairfax, ihe had fafcinated me ! I own it ! There is fuch incantation in the fmall circle of her eye, as mortal man fcarcely can
14b' ANNA ST. IVTS: can refift ! I adored her; nay fìlli adore f But ihe knows me not. I have a foul of fire. She has driven me beyond the limits of patience. Her wifdom degenerates into rhodo- montade. She will prefcribc the hour and minute when ihe fliall begin to love. She does not pretend to love me yet ; and, if flie did, her looks, her manner would be¬ tray the falfehood of her heart. Yet let me not wrong her, vexed though I am. Double dealing is not her error : flie is fufficiently fincere. Why would I hide it from myfelf? Her paitialities all lead another way : ay, and her paifions too, if paifions flie have. But this moft incomprehenfible, this torment¬ ing, incoherent romance of determining not to have any, I believe from my foul, in part produces the effect flie intends, and almoft enables her to keep her determina¬ tion ! ' Still and eternally, this fellow ! This Frank ! Oh that I were an Italian, and that * my confidence would permit mc to deal
deal him the İlillcttoî— Let him beware! —lie is employed, prefeired, praifed! It is eulogium cverlafting ! Had Fame as many trumpets as flie has tongues and lies, they would all be infuflicicnt. And not only flie, but the whole family, father, ' brother,-aunts, the devil knows who, each grateful foul is oozing out the froth of its obligations ! Had they lefs caufe, perhaps I ihou J be lefs irritated : but he has refcued the poor being of a brother, Edward St.' Ives, who had neither courage nor capacity to refcue himfelf, from the gripe of a gambler. This Edward, wdio is one of the king's captains, God blefs him, and who has fpent his fortune in learning the trade, not of a man of war, but c f a man of fafliion, having loft what ready money he had, ftaked his honour againft a cogger of dice, and was prefenlly tricked out of three thoufand guineas ; which he was too poor in pocket to pay, and, if I guefs right,' too poor in fpirit afterward to face the ruffian •■whom he had made Ins companion. So
So Mr. Henley, and it pleafe you, was chofen, by father and daughter. Though flie owns flie propofed it firft ; for flie does not fcruple to own all which flie docs not fcruple to act. The holy miflion was his, to dole out falulary documents of reproof, and apothegms of Epictetus ; and to try Avhether he could not releafe the bird- limed owl. I was overlooked ! I am unfit for the office ! I am but little wifer than the booby brother! Whereas Solomon himfelf, and the feven'fages to boot, are but fo many men of Gotham, when he is prefent. The quinteflence of all the know¬ ledge, wdt, wifdom, and genius that ever faw the fun, from the infantine days of ABC 'and king Cadmus, to thefe mira¬ culous times of intuition and metaphyfical legerdemain, is bottled up in his brain ; from which it foams and whizzes in our ears, every time difcretion can be induced to draw the cork of filence.—Once again, let him beware ! I then am felected for no other purpofe but for her morality to make experiments upon.
upon.—She is called wife, and wife flie may be ; nay wife flie is, or at leaft all other women, flie being prefent, .are in¬ tolerably foolifii. But, by heaven, this is no "proof of her wifdom ! I am the fcape- g 0a t ! ------ 1 ! ------ Be it fo ! ------ Should flic be caught in her own fpringe, who can fay I am to blame ? She has feen my anger, for I could not bide it ; but flie has feen it only in part. A hypocrite flie wants, and a hypocrite flie fliall have. I will act the farce which ihe is compoímg ; let 'her look to the ca- taftrophc. I begin to think that marriage and I fliall never meet; for, if I witliftand her, woman cannot tempt me. And her I fliall withftand. At leaft I never will have ber till I have humbled her ; and then per¬ haps I iliall not be in the humour. And yet my heart tells me that I ihall. For in fpite of all its anger, in fpite of her injuf- tice and glaring indifference, the remem¬ brance of which puts me in a fever, it vol- in. π would
would be mifery to know her, recollect her, and live without her. But, patience ! Her pride fliall fiift be lowered. I muft command, not be com¬ manded : and, when my clemency is im¬ plored, I will then take time to confider. My brain is in a ferment, and its vari¬ ous engines are already in commotion. She herfelf, her hated favourite, her fa¬ ther, her brother, her aunt, her uncle, her maid, every creature that furrounds her muft each and all contribute to my pur- pofcs and plots. Parts fit for the actors muft be alfigned. The how and what I know not yet precifely, for I have fcarcely iketched the canvafs; but I have conceived fome bold and mafterly ftrokes, and I fore- fee the execution muft be daring and im- paifioned. I am in hafte to begin, and my hot ofcillatory fpirits can with difficulty be tamed to the ftill paufe of prudence and premeditation : they are eager for the fight, and think caution a tardy general, if not a coward. I know
I know not how it is, but when I am angry, very angry, I feel as if I were in my element. My blood delights to boil, and my paifions to bubble. I hate ftill water. An agitated fea ! An evening when the fiery fun forebodes a ftormy morningj and the black-bafed clouds rife, like mountains with hoary tops, to tell mc tempcfts are brewing! Thefe give emotion and delight fupreme ! Oh for a miftrefs fuch as I could imagine, and fuch as Anna St. lyes moulded by me could make ! One that could vary her perfon, her pleafures> and her paifions, purpofely to give mine variety ! Whofe daily and nightly ftudy all fliould centre in mc, and my gratifications I "Whofe eyes fliould flaih lightning to roufe the chilled fenfationsj and ilied appealing dews to quench the fire of rage. Thefe are the objects in which I could delight ; theie lhe devotions I require. Change for me. A true Engliih day; in which win¬ ter and fummer, hail, rain, and funfhine meet and mingle. и 2 Τ had
I had almoft forgotten one chief caufe of my refentment; though the moft fortu¬ nate one I could have wiflied for to pro¬ mote my purpofe. This Sir Ai thur dallies with me. I find, from various items which the candour oí her mind has fuffered to efcape, that the motive is poverty. I am glad of İt. I will urge and hurry her into a promife to be mine. The generofity of her temper will aid me. I will plead the, injury done me by hell tation. 1 feel it, and therefore my pleadings will be natural. It is her pride to repair the wrongs which others commit. This pride and this hero- ifin of foul, which I muft acknowledge in her are unaffected, fliall be the main¡ en¬ gines with which I will work. Without thefe perhaps I might defpair ; but with them hold myfelf fecure of victory. Yes, lady of the high fciences, you muft defccnd, and let my ftar mount the hori¬ zon ! The gathering clouds muft cclipfe your effulgeuce, while I ili ine chief of-the conftellation ! As
As for the reft of the family, more or lefs, they are all fools ; therefore are nei¬ ther to be feared nor pitied. On her per¬ haps I may have сопфаПюп, when I have taught her contrition, and when flie knows mc for her fuperior. I have written a volume, yet have not half diiburthened my labouring mind. Oh that I couid prefent the picture to you complete ! That I could paint her as flie is ; all beauty, all excellence, all kindnefs, all froft ! That I could fliew the fweet enthufiaft in the heyday infolence of her power ; pretending to guide, reform, hum¬ ble, and fubjugate me; while love and vengeance fwell my heart, hypocrify fniooths my face, and plots innumerable bufy my brain ! It is a fruitful, rich, re- fplendent fcene ; of wdiich, Fairfax, you have no conception. Me you have known, intimately, and are honeft enough to own you have admired ; but of her all ideal tracings are contemptible ! Nor ihould this knight of the magic lanthorn be forgotten; this Neftor junior; Л 3 this
this tormenting rival—Oh how I could curfe ! He who ftands, as ready as if Sa¬ tan, had fent him, to feed the fprcading flames with oil ? He fills his place on the can vafs. And who knows but I may teach him, yet, to do his office as he, ought ? How would it delight me ! Theie is an intemperance of fuperiority which no hu¬ man patience can fupport, nor any acts of kindnefs comperifate. A triumph over her will indeed be а triumph over him, and therefore doubly delicious j I grant he forbeais to prate of the life he gave mc. But am I not reminded of the oppreflive gift every time he dares to contradict me ? Would 1 endure his in¬ terference as I do ; would I be fliouldered and butted at, by him ; would I permit his opinion to be aiked, or his dogmas to filence me, were 1 not buithened with this unafked benefit ? Infatuated lunatic as I was ! But I am in the fchool of prudence, at prefent; and fuppofe I fliall learn a little fome time ; though I do not know when; fince, I am told,
told, it is not eafy to learn a trade one hates. Mean while I pay my court affiduoufly to the two peers, Evelyn and Fitz Allen, who at prefent are both in town. No¬ thing muft be neglected, nothing left un¬ prepared. Vigilance, forefight, and cun¬ ning muft do their office, and will foon be in full eırîployment : of what kind I can¬ not yet determine ; or whether it muft be open war or covert, or both ; but my au¬ gury predicts the fcene will foon be ail life, all agitation, all enjoyment. Com¬ motion is my element, battle my delight, and conqueft my heaven ! This is my hour o£ appointment*: flie is expecting me, yet my crowding thoughts will with difficulty allow me to lay down the pen : they rife in armies, and I could write world without end, and never come to an amen. But I muft be gone. Adieu. I imagine that by this time you are at Paris; or will be before the arrival of η 4- this
this letter; which, according to your directions, I ihall fuperfcribe Tofle te¬ jíante. С. CLIFTON.
LETTER
LETTE H LXÍKIÍ. ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES ΐο LOUISA CLirrON.
London f Gt of veno} Sí 'reet. EED I tell my afle&ionatc fiiend how great the pleafuie is which I receive fiom her letters, and from that free communi¬ cation of thought which fo eflectually tends to awaken the beft emotions of mind, and makf 1 us emulate each other's virtues? Like her I fit down, now while memory is awake, to ι elate fuch material incidents as have 'happened fince laft I wrote. η 3 The
The anger of Clifton is foftened into approbation. The moft generous minds are liable, from the acutenefs of their fenfibility, to, be unjuft. We ч aie once again very good friends. Not but we have juft been engaged in a very impaffioned fcene. The fubject of family confent was revived by him ; and, as I intended, I informed him that delay feemed inevitable. The ftruggle of his feelings, when he heard it, appeared to be violent. His ex¬ clamations were characteristic of his habi¬ tual impetuofity ; the ftrength of them excited fenfations, and alarms, which prove the power he has over the paifions. Oh how I defire to fee that power well directed! How precious, how potent will it then become ! One thing, and only one, he vehement¬ ly affirmed, could appeafe the perturbati¬ on of his mind, and preferve him from wretchednefs which none but thofe who felt like him could conceive—-—· And what, I aiked, was that ?— He
' He durft not fpeak it—Yet fpeak he muft, plead he muft. Should he fail, phrenfy, defpair, he knew not what, but fomething fearful would indubitably fol¬ low- Again, what was it ?— Alight he hope ? 'It depended on me ; and denial and diftraction were the fame— He made me ihudder! And, ferious when I heard it though I found his de¬ mand to be, his manner İnfpired a con¬ fufed dread of fomething repugnant; fome¬ thing eminently wrong. He ventured at laft to fpeak. I believe he watche'd his moment. The paffions, Louifa, however difturbed, are always- cunning. He demanded a promife, folemn and irrevocable, to be his. Such a promife, I anfwered, was un- neceffary ; and, if at all, could only be given occafionally·—· There were no conditions to which he was not ready to fubferibe— I replied, too much readinefs denoted h 6 too
too little refle&ion : and not fortitude fuf¬ ficient to fulfil fuch conditions. , Fortitude could never fail him f having me not only for an example but a reward. Again he repeated, without my 4 promift.\, my facred promife, he really and ferioufly feared diftraction ! That this was weak¬ nefs he was ready to allow : but if it were true, and true it was, fliould I want love, I yet had too much benevolence not to defire to avert confequcnces which, be¬ yond all others, are horrible to imagina¬ tion. ч He has furely very confiderable know¬ ledge of the human heart ; for his tone and manner produced all the effect he in¬ tended. I had forefeen the probability of fuch a requeft, though not all the urgency with which it was made, and had argued the queftion of right and wrong. My conclufion had been that fuch a promife, with certain provifos, was a duty; and accordingly I gave it ; ftipulating a power to retra6t 7 fliould experience teach us that our
our minds and principles could liot'aifimi- late.· . ■ ■ At firft he was not fatisfied. Intreaties the moft importunate that language could fupply were repeated, that I ihould muke no fuch exceptions. They were impoflibi- lities; needlefs, but tormenting. Finding however that I was refolved, he foftened into acquiefcence, thanked me with all the tranfports which might be expected from him, and kiffed my hand. He would not have been fo fatisfied, had I not very ferioufly repulfed the encroaching free¬ doms which I had lately found him affum- ing ; fince which he is become more guarded. ,·- What latent' inconfiftency is there, Louifa, in my conduct, which can incite the alarms to which I feel'myfelf.fubject? The moment I had made the promife I • ihuddered; and, while acting from the ftrongeft fenfe of duty, and the moft ardent defire of doing good, I felt as if the act were reprehenfible and unjuft.—It is the words of Frank that are the caufe : on them my
my mind dwells, and painfully repeats them, as if in a delirium : like a ringing in'the ear, the tolling of .death-bells, or the burthen of fome tragic ditty, which memory, it its own defpite, harps upon, and mutters to itfelf!—" He is certain. S( thats I act from mißaken principles J — " To the end of time he Jiall perßfi in " thinking me his by right Γ There muft be fomething amifs, fome¬ thing feeble in my mind, fince the deci- fion of reafôn 'cannot defend me from the awe-which this furely too hafty, too pofi¬ tive affertion infpires !. ,It haunts my very dreams l· ' CJifton left me; and, being gone, I went into the parlour. Frank was there. He had a book in his hand, and tears in his eyes. I never beheld a look more melancholy. Capable as he is of refifting the cowardice of felf-complaint and gloom, ftill there are moments, I perceive, in which he can yield*; and, fighing over others woes, can caft a retrofpeciive-glance onfelf.' He had been reading the Julia of
of Rouffeau. The picture given by St Preux of his feelings had awakened fym- pathy too ftrong to be refifted. We fell into converfation. I wiflied to turn his thoughts- into a more cheerful channel ; but my own partook too much of the fame medium, not to affimilate them- felves'in part to his langour. You feem penfive,' Frank. What is the fubject of your meditations ? The foi rows of St. Preux, madam. з Then you are among the rocks of Meillerie ? Or ftanding a partaker of the danger of Julia on the dreadful precipice ? No, madam. The divine Julia is dead ! —[Had you heard the figh he gave, Louifa------ ! ] I am at a paffage which I fufpect to be flill more fublimc. I am fure it is equally heart-rending. Ay ! ------Which is that ? It is Clara, at the table ofWolmar; where the child, with fuch fimplicity, conjurei» up the infantine but almoft per¬ fect femblance of the dead. If ever laughter
laughter infpired the horrors of diftrac¬ tion, it wasche laugh of Clara ! It is a wonderful paffage., But I find you were rather .contemplating the jforrows of tîıe friend than of the loveç. Pardon me, madam. I was confider- ing, fince .the friend was thus on the very brink of defpair, what muft be the force of mind which could preferve the lover. Friendfliip and love; in fuch minds, are the fame^ ■ Perhaps fo, madam. Can there be any doubt ? When the lover and the friend are united, the heart is reluctant to own its feelings can be equalled. - Ought you not to avoid 'fuch .a book, Frank ; at leaft for the prefent ? , Ifit led me into eiror; otherwife not.— I think I know what were the author's mif- takcs ; and he not only teaches hut 1m- preffes, rivets, volumes of truth in my mind. · , The recollection of what had juft -paffed with Clifton forced iţfelf upon me, Louifa ; it
it made me defirous of putting a queftion to Frank on the fubject, and I aiked— , What is your opinion of promifes ? I think them fuperfluous, nugatory, and therefore abfurd. Without exception ? Yes—We cannot promife to do wrong: .or, if we do, cannot perform—Neither can we, without guilt, refrain from doing right ; whether we have or have not pro¬ mifed. Some glimpfe of this truth, for I per¬ ceive it to be one, had ihot acrofs my mind ; but not with the perfpicuity of your propofition—I .am inclined to be a rude interrogator : I have another queftion to aik [He bowed]—I own you are feldom wrong, and yet. I hope—[I remember, Louifa, that I gave a deep figli here ; and it muft not be concealed]—I hope that you have been wrong, once in your life. Madam ! But perhaps you have changed your opinion—Do you ftill think as you did ?— Are you ftill certain that I act from mißa¬ ken
ANNA ST. IVES:'
ken principles ? [He inftantJy underftood me—Had you feen his look, Louifa— Î] I am, madam. Andjhallperßjl to the end of time f To the end of time. I could not bear it, Louifa. I buril away.
What ra,fh impufe was it that hurried me forward to tempt this trial ?—Alas ? It was the vain hope, for vain it appears to be, be might have retracted. My heart is too full to proceed—Hea¬ ven blefs you !—Heaven blefs you, my dear friend !—You fee how weak I am. A. W. ST. IVES.
LETTER
LETTER LXXIII.
FRANK HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCHARD,
London, Grofvenor Street, OLIVER, Χ muft 'fly ! There is nei¬ ther peace nor fafety for me if I remain— Refolution begins to faint under thefe repeated and oppreflive ftruggles—Life is ufelefs, virtue inefficient, time murdered, and I muft fly i —Here I сап do nothing but doubt, hope, defpair, and linger İn uncertainty : my body liftlefs, my mind incoherent,
.ïea
' :
incoherent, my days wafted in vain reve¬ ries on abfurd poffibilities, and my nights haunted by the confufed phantoms of a difturbed and fickly brain !—I muft fly ! But whither ?—I know not !—If I mean to be truly mailer of my affections, feas muft feparate us ! Impoifibility muft be made more imponible !— 'Tis that, Oliver, which kills me, that ignis fatuus of falfe hope—Were ihe even married, if her huf- band were not immortal, I feel as if my heart would ftill dwell and feed on the meagre May-be ! It íefufes to renounce her, and makes athoufand and a thoufand efforts to oblige me again to urge its juft .claims. I am in the labyrinth of contradictions» and know'not how to'get out. My own -feelings, my remarks on hers, the looks, •a£tions and difcourfe of this dangerous lover are all embroiled, all incongruous, rail illufory. I feèm to tempt her to evil by my ftay,* him I offend, and myfelf I •torment—I muft therefore begone !
Oliver,
Oliver, our heaits are united ¡-—Truth and principle have made them one, and prejudice and pride havej not the power to diffever them !—She herfelf jfcels this intimately, yet perfifts in her miftake. I* think, Oliver, it is not w,hat the world or what flie underftands by, love which occafions this anarchy of mind. I think I could command and reprove my paf¬ fions into filence. Either I miftake my¬ felf, or even now, fituated as I am, I could rejoice were there a certainty, nay were there but ftrong probabilities, that her favourite purpofe on Clifton fliould be effected. But the more I meditate, and my hours, days, and weeks pafs away and are loft in meditation¿on this fübje -Й, 1 the more does my mind perfift in its doubts, and my, heart in its claims, Suiely, Oliver, flie is under a double miftake ! Surely her reafonings both, οιχ him and me are erroneous. I muft be honeft, Oliver, and tell thee all my feelings, fears,, and fufpicions.—· They may be falfe. I hope they are, but they
166 they exift. I imagine I perceive in him repeated and violent ftruggles to appear what he is not, nay what I doubt he would defpife himfelf for being ! Is not this an unjuftifiabie, a cruel ac¬ cufation? Why have I this keen, this jea¬ lous fenfibility? Is it not diflionourable to my underftanding ? Yet fliould there be real danger, and I blind to it ! Should I neglect to warn her, or rather to guard and preferve her from harm, where fliall I find coniola- tion ? Oliver! There are times when thefe fears haunt me fo powerfully that my heait recoils, my blood freezes, and my whole frame is ihaken wdth the terrific dream !— A dream ?——Yes, it muft be a dream J If not, the perverfion of his mind and the obduracy of his heart are to me wholly in¬ comprehenfible ! I muft be more guarded !—Wrongfully to doubt were irrepaiably to injure ! Niy firn care muft be to be juft.
Mark,
Mark, Oliver, how thefe wanderings of the mind miflead and torment me ! One minute I muft fly, to recover myfelf, and not to difturb and way-lay others ; the next I muft ftay, to protect her who perhaps is beft able to protect herfelf! I have no plan : I labour io form one in vain. That fingle channel into which my thoughts are inceffantly impelled is deftructive of all order and connexion. The efforts of the underftanding are af¬ farìi nated by the emotions of the heart ; till the reproaches of principle become in¬ tolerable, and the delufions of hope dif- tracting '—A ftate of fuch painful inutility is both criminal and abfurd. The kindnefs of the father, brother, and aunt, the fympalhifing tendernefs which burfts from and overcomes the benign Anna, the delay of the marriage—Oliver J —I was recapitulating the feeming infpi- rations of my good angel, and have con¬ jured up my chief tormentor !—T,his de¬ lay !—-»Where does it originate ?--With whom ?—With— ! I muft fly !—Ibis of all
all motives is the moft irrefragable !—I muft fly !—But when, or how, or where, what I muft undertake, whither go, or what become, Is yet all vague and inco¬ herent conjecture, F, HENİEY.
LETTER
LETTER LXXIV.
SIR ARTHUR ST. IVES TO ABIMELECH HENLEY,
London, G.of.cn:r-Sireet. MR. HĽKLEYj is now fome time fincc I received your letter. It alionilhed and I muft fay offended me fo much, that I do not yet know what anfwer to return. You fay I have thrown you into a quandary, Mr. Henley ; and I can very fincerely return your compliment, Mr. Henley; for ηο-ίηπψ can be more unintelligible than your whole letter is to me. Mr. Henley, And I mull ' vol, in, ι fay,
It
fay, Γ think it not very grateful in you, Mr, Henley, nor in my opinion very pro¬ per, to write me fuch a letter, Mr. Hen¬ ley;'that is as far as I underftand its meaning, Mr. Henley. I have no defire, Mr. Henley, to quarrel with you, if I can help it ; but I myft fay ϊ think you have forgotten 'yourfelf, Mr. Henley. It is very unlike the manner in which you have been ufed to comport yourfelf to me, Mr. Flen- ley·,.. for,' if I underftand you rightly, which I own it is very difficult to do, you threaten me with foreclofures, 'Mr. Hen¬ ley; which I muft fay, Mr. Henley, is very improper demeanour írom you to me, Mr. Henley. Not that I feck a rupture with you, Mr, Henley ; though I muft fay that all this lies very heavy upon my mind, Mr. Henley. You infinuate that you are grown rich, I think Mr. Henley. So much the better for you. And you feem to know, Mr. Hênley, that I am grown poor : or I think, Mr. Henley, you would not have written to me in a itile which I could almoft be 2 tempted
tempted to call impertinent, but that I wifli to avoid a quarrel with you, Mr. Henley, unlefs you force mc to it. There is, a law as you fay, Mr. Henley, for e very- man ; but law is a very fretful and -in-·. deed fearful thing, to which you know I am a verfe, Mr. Henley. Not but there are proceedings. Mr. Henley, which may lead me to confider how far it is neceffary» I muft fay, Mr. Henley, that my afto- nifliment is very great, after writing me word, as you did, that I might have the money, which I took very kindly of you, that you fliould now contradict yourfelf fo flagrantly, [I am obliged to repeat it, Mr. Henley] and tell mc it is not to be had. What*y ou mean by the whats, and the whvs, and the wherefores beine*·* forthcom- ing, is leally above my capacity, Mr. lien- ley; and I requeft you would fpeak plainly, that í may give a plain anfvvér. You fay you can keep your hat on your head, and look vour betters in the face, Mr. Henley. May be fo. Bat 1 leave it to your better judgment to confider, Mr. ι 2 Henley,
1'7-î' ANNA ST, IVlïS:
Henley, whether you ought to forget that they are your betters. ' There are indeed, as you tell mc, wheels· within wheels, Mr. Henley; for I find that you, and not my fon, are in 'poffeifion of the Edgemoor eilate. God blefs usali, and give us clean hands and hearts; Mr. Henley ! I fay no more ! Though I muft fay that, when I heard it, my hair alraoft ftood an end ! * You talk a great deal about fomebody's fon', Mr. Henley. ' You have puzzled me much ; but I think you muft mean your own Jon. Though what you mean befide İS more than I can divine. I am very un¬ willing, Mr. Henley, to think any thing to your difadvantage ; and I muft fay that I could w i ili you would not fpeak by ifs, and ands, and innuendoes; but let me know at once what ус -u mean, and all you mean, and then I ihall know how toači. - Your fon, I'own, is a very excellent young gentleman ; a very extraordinary young gentleman ; and no perfon can be more ready to acknowledge his mci its than
than I, and my whole family. You feem offended with my offer of a commiifion for him ; which 1 own aftoniihes me ; for I muft fay, Mr. Henley, that I thought I was doing you an act of kindnefs. Not that I blame your prudence, fir ; or your averfion to the prodigal fpeiidthrifts, wlio too fiequently are fond of red coats and cockades, which are ib offenfive to your notions of profperity. I am not unwilling to own that I, and all my family, are even under.obligations to your fon. For which reafon ï am the more inclined to overlook what I muft fay docs not pleafe me, in your laft very un¬ expected letter. Ltt me tdl you, Mr. Henley, that 1 cannot but hope you will think better of it ; and that you will ufe your kind endeavours to get me the money, according to your promife, which I fliall take very friendly of you, fir; and fliall be willing to do any thing for your fon, in that cafe, for your fake as well as for his own, which reafon can require. I beg, Mr. Henley, you will confider 1 3 very
very ferioufly of this ; and I fliould hope you would not forget former times, and the very many favours which, in my life, 1 have done you. I do affure you, fir, I have the utmoft defiie to continue on a good underftanding with you ; but I think I have fome right to expect your compli¬ ance from motives of reafon, not to fay of gratitude. So, committing this to your confideration, and expecting an agreeable anfwer, I remain, fir, as ufual, А. Ы. IVĽb.
LETTER
LETTER LXXV.
AĽIMELĽCII 1IĽNLLY TO SIR ARTHUR ST. IVES.
MOST ONNURABLE SIR, Wenbourne-WU. IT doth appear as how your onnur be amifft. Whereby I did a partly a quecrv as much ; thof fo be as it be no fault of mine. For why ? There be reafons and caufes. For when as a man has a nothink to fear of nobody, I am of a mind that a may pen his thofts to any man. Why not? Always a favin' and exceptin your onnur¬ able onnur. ι 4 And
And aft for a man's a portin himfelf, there be times and feafons for.all thinks. Whereof as Friar Bacon faid to Friar Bungy and of the Brazen-head, A time was—A time is—And a time is paft. And aft for a threatening about foreclofures, why what have I to fay to a gentleman, if a will nobredeem his mortgages when the time be r ' The law, muft look to it, to be fure. Always a favïn and exceptin your onnuiabfe onnur, ftill fay I. So that it be altogether compus mentus that quarrels and rupturs are none of my feekin. Where¬ by your onnurable onnur will look to that. No man,can deny 'that every man has a rite to his own. For why ? A pays fcot and lot, and has a nothink for it but law. And aft for a man's a growin of rich, why as I do take it a's a not the worfe for that. And aft for a man's a growin of poor, why a what had I to do, thof fo be that fome be wife and fome be otherwife? Whereof fo long as the rhino do ring, the man-is the man,, and,the mailer's the maf¬ ter. A's a buzzard in grain that ..do flic¬ ker,
A NÜVLL. · 177
ker, and fleer, and tell a gentleman a be no better than a bob gudgeon, a caufe a do fend the yellow hammers a flying ; for thof it might a be happen to be true enough, a would get fmall thanks for his pains. F.very man eat his meat, and he that do like cut his fingers. The foolifii hen cackles, and the cunning quean chuc¬ kles. For why? A has her chalk;and her neft egg leady. Whereof I tout and trump about ar no man, an a do not tout and trump about at me. Always a favin and exceptin your onniuable onnur ; and not a feekin of quarrels and ruptius, an they do not feck me. Oiherwife, why i'o. Plain and pofitive ; that's befl, when a man do find the flioe to pinch. And aft for law, why he that has a got, the longeft head will have a moft on'l for money : and he that has a got the Jongciî: purfe will behappen not to be the fiift to- cry peccavi. Whcicof ii a man do don, bis hat on his head, an a fee good caufe, why not ? For I do a warrant a will fee good caufe, an a do doff it under his aim> ι 6 Whereby
Wbereby every why has a wherefore. Any fool can put down his five no think s ; but a's a clever kinchin an a can place a fo much' as a ι afore 'em. Whereof the firft froft that brings a white crow may/ in fitch a cafe, behappen to fliew him his betters. For why? A's a got where¬ withal! to get more : and a knows the-trick on't too, or a would a never a got fo much. Whereby an it comes to a huff an a gruff, a may not chufe to be arm a kimbo'd, any more nur another ; for a may behappen to have a Rowland for an Oliver, A may behappen/ to be no Jack-a-farthin wcazle- faced whipfter, A may have iiock and block to go to work, upon ; and may give a rum for a glum : always a /ayin and ex¬ ceptin your onnurable onnur. Show in whereby as I want no quarrels nur rupturs., but peacei arid good will towards men, if fo be as the whys and the wherefores do a bear røe* out. - Whereof thof a man be but a Mifter, a may behappen to buy and fell a knight of the ihire : that is under favour, and a favin. and
ahd exceptin of your onnurable onnur. For why ? I be.as ready to a quit my hands ,of quarrels and rupturs as another. Whereby if the Edgemoor eftate he mine, why it is my own. For why ? Bein it was my caih that a covered it. AVhereof his younk onnur was aU a mort, and a down in the mouth, when a did come to me. The world was wide, and a might a gone further and a fated worfe. А'ы a dolt indeed that will part with money, and not have money's worth. Whereby I had a bin ftarvin, and' pinchin, and fcrapin, and coilin, and moilin ; in heat and in cold ; up a early and down a'late ; a called here and a fent there ; a bidden and a chidden, and a forbidden to boot ; every body's Have, forfooth ; whereby I am now my own mafter. Why not ?, Who can gain fay it ? Mayhap a favin and exceptin of your onnurable onnur; witch is as it may be. For why ? I wants a noth'mk to do with quarreis and rupturs, no more nur another ; but that's as thinks ihall turn out. j 6 Whereby
Whereby one man's hair mayhap may ftand an end as well as another's, exceptin that I wears a wig. An I give' the kole,, I'll have the dole. And aft for fomebody's fon, if fo be as a man be to be tvvitted a thifn, after all the gunpowder piftols and bullets, and fcowerins, and ruins, and bleedins, and fwimmins, and finkins, and rifks, and rubs, and fea fcapes, and ikore fcapes, at home and abı oad, by land and by water, and favins of precious lives and precious caih, why if fo be as all this be to ftand for nothink, it is a time for a man to look about'n. To be fure your onnur is fo good as to fay my fon is a younk gentleman, and ίο forth. Whereby this gracious and ever mercyfool lovin kindnefc would go to the cockles of my heart; ay, and my chittei- lins would crow, and I fliould fing O be joyfopl, if fo be as I did find as words wus any thing but wind. Wheieof when your onnurable onnur is compulfionated, willy χι illy,' to be fo all bountifool as to profer¬ to the ownin of obligations, why that is finnmut,.
.fiimmut. '. But fair fpéeches worinot heal .broken pates ; r and a mouthfool" of mooiv , İh ine* will fend, a man hungry to '-bed. jPromife may be a fair dog, but Perform¬ ance will catch the hare., »,· ; » ( j t v Whereby had thipks a bin as they,might a bin, why then indeed it would a*bin fummut. But as to' the wherewithalls of the twenty thoufand, pounds, being as it be, ! why .the think is unpoíľable to be done; , For why? The cafe is altered. Whereof it is heft to be downright. Will is free, *and money for me. , Whereby this marriage'match with the Clifton family, 1 had my oar bin afked, would never,a bin of my advizin. For why ? I fhall not give my lard to butter my neighbour's bacon. And aft for favours received, why may be fo. ¡ But what then? Since if fo be thof it wus fomctirnes fair, why it w us fometimcs foul. And a good man may behappen to be ad as much as a good mailer. And if a man have a fpent his whole lifetime in a pickin, and a cullin, and
and a eöhffn, and a furbifhin up fine words, to tickle the ears of fine folks, why a ought •in all confcience to get the wherewithalls for hfc'ßains. For if an a gentleman will eat pine apples a muft not expect to pay 'for pipjiins. - Always as aforefaid a favin and exceptin your onnurable onnur. So that if quarrels and rupturs will come, they may not a be faid to be of my feekin Bein as î am, ever and amen, with all pious jakillatioiis arid jubilees of bleifins and praife, never failin to pray för due time to repent us of all our manifold fins and wdckednefs, God of his mercy be good unto us, and fave us, and deliver us, on our death bed, from the everlaftin flaniin fulphur of the burnin lake. Amen, an it be his holy will ! Umbelly beggin leave to fuperfcribe mefelf ABIMELECH HENLEY,
LETTER
LETTER LXXVL
ΛΧΝΛ WIiNBOURNlí ST. TVF.S το LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Grofvenor· Strat. 1 HAVE had a fcene with Frank, which affected -me much, and which has occa¬ sioned another quarrel, or kind of quarrel, with Clifton. Sir Arthur had juft left the room. He had been aiking Frank whe¬ ther there were any poflible way by which he could ferve him. We all were his debtors ; very deeply ; /and he fhouíd be happy
ι happy to find any mode of difcharging the obligation. Sir Arthur fpoke with an earneftnefs which, in him, is by rio means cuftomary. ' But'Frank had nothing to aik, nothing to propofe. -I was fitting at my harpfichord, amufing myfelf; and, Sir Arlhur being gone, ftop- pcd to tell Frank how fincercly I joined in Sir Arthur's feelings. í have nothing, madam, faid he, to hope from Sir Arthur: tmt^ f о you I have a requeft to make, which you would great¬ ly oblige me ihould you grant. I trembled, Louifa. I was afraid of fome new conteft of the paifions ; a revi¬ val of ideas which I myfelf had fo lately, and fo inadvertently, called to mind. 1 am perfuaded the blood forfook my cheeky when I afked him what it was : for Frank, with a tendernefs in his voice that was indeed honourable to his heart, prayed, conjured me not to be alarmed—It was a. trifle—He would be filent —He w T ould not give me a moment's pain to gratify a miL- lion of fuch filly willies. He
j Hú both moved anijl revived mc. ^ It could not*be any thing very dreadful, and •Î entreated him to fpeak. There was no¬ thing he could aik I would refufe. Ile helìtated, and I then became ur¬ gent. At laft he named-----His fong \~ Again, Louifa, he almoft ftruck me to the heart!—He feared he offended me; but there was fomething fo enchanting in the air that he could not forget it, could not refift the wiih to poflefs a copy. It was impoflible to rcfufc. I went to my papers, and brought it. The evil fpi¬ rit of thoughtleffnefs poffeffed me, and when' I delivered it, I aflced—Is there any ' thin«: elfe ?-«« - r . * . Your kindnefs, madam, faid he, is un¬ alterable. Could Ì ?— Durft I ?— What?— He paufed—■ Speak !— He laid the fong upon the mufic-deik, and looked -----No, no—I will not attempt to tell you how ! Words
Words were needlefs; they could not petition With fuch eloquence—A barbari¬ an could not have refufed. I rambled over the keys, hemmed, and endeavoured lo collect myfelf. At laft a fenfe of propriety, of reaibn, of principle, came to my aid, and bade me be mafter of my mind. I began to fing, but no effoit could enable me to give that expreifion of which I had before found the words fo fufceptible. Could you think it, Louifa ? Do you now forefee, do you forebode what hap¬ pened ?—Your bi other came in !— To have flopped, to have ufed evafion, to have had recourfe to falfehood, would have turned an act of virtue into con- temptible vice. I continued. Clifton came and looked over my fhoulder. The mufic was on one flieet of paper, the words were on another, in the writing of Frank. Your brother knew the hand. When I had ended, Frank took both the papers, thanked me, and retired. I could perceive the eyes of Clifton fparklè with'emotion; I might almoft fay rage. He
He would have fpoken, but could not; > and I knew not how fafely to begin. At length, a confcioufnefs of not having done or at leaft intended to do wrong ga\ e me couiage. "I determined not to wait to be queftioncd : I aiked him how he liked the long. Oh! Exceedingly I—Tt was very fine! —very fine ! The words are Mr. Henley's. I imagined as much, madam. I thought them expreffive, and amufed myfelf with putting a tune to them. I am as good as a witch ! How did you like the fubject ? What fubject, madam ? Of the words. I really don't know—I have forgotten- Nay, you faid you thought them very fine ! ' Oh ! Yes ' —Tme !—-Very fine ! —All about love—I recollect. Well, and having fo much faith 'm love, you do not think them the worfe for that. Oh, '
ч Oh, by no means !—But Σ thought you had. • Love in a fong may be pardonable. Efpecially, madam, if the fong be writ¬ ten by Mr. Henley. . Clifton !—You almoft teach me to de¬ fpair !—You do not know me '—Peihapr*», however, I am more to blame than you at prefent. TimidityJias given me fome ap¬ pearance of confeious guilt, which my heart difavows. But, as theie is fcarcely any error more dangerous to felicity than fufpicion, 1 own I am forry to fee you fo frequently its flave. Never think of that woman for a wife, in whom you cannot confide. And aik yourfelf whether I ought to mairy a man, who cannot difcover that I merit his confidente ? I find, indeed, implicit faith to be as neceffary in love as in religion—But you know your power, madam. An indifferent fpectalor would rather fay you know yours. „ You will not go, madam, and leave mc thus ? * I muft.
1 I muft. In this mifery ? I have letters to write, and vifits to pay. You cannot be fo cruel ?—By heaven, madam, this torment-is more than nature can fupport ! ' - Lefs impetuofity, Clifton ; lefs raptures, and more reafon. You would have me rock, madam ! Unfeeling marble ! I would have you a man ; a rational, and, if poffible, a wife one. Stay at leaft for a moment !—Hear me ! Do not leave me in thefe doubts ! What doubts ?—Do I not tell you the words are Mr. Henley's ? The air is mine. If fetting them were any guilt, it is a guilt of which I »am not confeious. Shew me that it is criminal, and I will inftantly re¬ tract. AVe muft 'either overcome thefe narrow, thefe felfifli propenfities, or we fliall hope in vain to be happy. I—I—I—make no accufation— Do
Do but examine before you accufe, and I will patiently hear and cheei fully anfwer to accufation. If you think it wrong in me not to treat virtue and genius with neg¬ lect, bring me your proofs, and if I cannot demontirate their fallacy I will own my error. Let mc add, the accufation of rea¬ fon is a duty ; from which, though pain¬ ful, we ought not to flirink. It is the miftaken accufation of the paifions only at which juftice bids the heart revolt. Here, Louifa, once again I left him, with ftruggles apparently more acute than the former. And my own mind is fo af¬ fected, fo oppreffed as it were by crowds of ideas, that I do not yet know whether this were an accident to be wiflied, or even whether I have entirely acted as I ought. My mind will giow calmer, and I will then begin the fcrutiny. I am minute in ι elating thefe particu¬ lars, becaufe I am very defirous of doing right And who is fo capable of being my judge, or who fo anxious I fliould not cır,
err, as my dear Louifa, my friend, my fifter? All good be with you ! A. W..ST. IVES»
L E T-
93 :
LETTER: XXXVII/ . \ — K'í=Ír*íÈKJí*"*·-— COKE CLIFTON то GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Lover Siteet. OH, Fairfax, if my choler rofe when laft I wrote, where íhall I now find words hot enough to paint the phrenfy of my foul?-* How could I rage and rave !—Is it come- to this ?*—So barefaced !—So fearlefs !— fo unbluihingly braved !— Fairfax, 1 came upon them !—By fur¬ prife I—My alert and watchful fpirit, an adept
adept İn fuch arts, accuftomccl to them, and rendered fufpicious by practice and' experience, foreboded fome fuch poifibi¬ lity—My knock at the door was counter¬ feit. I ftrode up ftairs to the drawing- room, three fteps at a time—Swiftly and fuddenly—I opened the door—There they fat !—Alone ! ------ She ringing* a miferablc ditty, a bead-roll of lamentable rhymes, ftrung together by this Quidam !—This Henley ! — Nay !—Oh !—Damnation !— Read and tremble !—Read and"aid mc to curfe!—Set by her !—Ay! ------ A ballad — A love complaint— A moft doleful woe¬ begone elegy; of forro ws, fufferings, fate defpair, and death ; fcribblcd by him, and fet and fung by her !—By her !—For his comfort, his folace, his pleafure, his di¬ verfion !—I caught them at it!—Nay they defied me, defpifed the wrath that drank up the moift ure of my eyes, blazed iu my blood, and feorched my very foul ! ------ And after this will I blench? Will I recant the denunciations which lcjritimat-j о vengeance has pronounced ? -- vol, in. · к Fairfax—
Fairfax--! am not certain that 1 do not hate her!— Noi— Angelic forcercfs !—It is not hatred, neither—But it is a tumult, a congregate anarchy of feelings which I cannot unravel ; except that the firft fea¬ ture of them is revenge !—Roufed and infulted as I am, not all her blanch' íh- ments can dazzle, divert, or melt me ! Were mountains to be moved, dragons to be flain, òr lakes of liquid fire to be tra- verfcd, I would encounter all to attain my end !—Yes—My romance fhall equal hers. No epic heeOj not Orpheus, Æncas, or Milton's Lpcifer himfelf, was ever more determined. I could plunge, into Erebus, and give battle to the legion phantoms of hell, to accomplifh my fixed purpofe í — Fixed'—Fixed !<--------Hoot me, h i ft at me, defpife me If I tum recreant '" 1Ыо — Then may all who ever heard the name of Coke Clifton make it iheir by-word and rh eir feoff : and eveiy idiot cini the noie and fu uff me to f^orn I
RccolIe6>
Λ IOV Recollect but the various aftroYtís I have ' received, Fairfax, from her and [Oh patLt ence !] Her inamorato ! For is he not' fd ? l — ЛУгопгч, fome of which irritate' nio ft' becaufe they could not Ъ'е refënted ; ( í nt - fules/ fome _ petty, forhc gigantic, 1 'which' ' ages could not obliterate ; call thefe to mind, and then think whether my refolves ' be not rock-built ! Infolent intfufion has been his part fiom the firft moment to the laft. The prince of upftarts, man could not abafli him, nor naked fleel affright !♦ On my firft viiit, entrance was denied by him! Perm i filo n was afked of a írindènei Ч , fon, and ihe cardener's fon fir· rdi lv refufed ! " 1 argued ! I threatened !— I l—And ai¬ gu merits and threats were fo much hoi о breath, butharmlcfs! Attempts to filence or fend him back to his native bam alike were baffled ; and I, who planned this re¬ moval, was conilraincd to petition for his ftay. Yes, conftraiuedd—It was do it, or !—Oh !—Be faithful to ine, memory !- He was elected pre fi den t of opinions and к 2 difputes.
difputes, paft, prefent, and to come. Ap¬ peals muft all be made to him, and his fentence was definitive. Law or gofpel, phyfics or metaphyfics ; himfelf alone fu¬ perior to college, court, or convocation. Before him funk fcholiaft and fchools. In his prefence the doctors all muft ftand un¬ capped : The feraphic, the fubtle, and the fingular ; the illuminated, the angelic, and the irrefragable to him, were tyros all. Our cenfor in private, and in public our familiar : like a malignant demon, no re¬ fpect, no place, no human barriers could exclude him. On no fide could the offended eye turn, and not find him there. Difgraced by his company, coun¬ teracted by his arrogance, infulted by his farcafrns; obliged to accept the fiift of fa¬ vours, life, at his hands ; his apparent in¬ ferior in the moment of danger; my mi- niftry rejected for his, nay contemned, in a cafe where the gentleman, the man of the world, and the man of honour merited •undoubted picference ; and, as the thmax oi
of injury, wronged in my love !—Rivalled! ■—■Furies !— "· And flie !—Has flic been lefs contume¬ lious, lefs annoyant, lefs tormenting ?-*- ïlis advocate, his abettor, liis adulator, with me only flie was fcrupulous and fe¬ vere. I generoufly and almoft inftantly forgot all former refolves, and would have thrown mvfelf into her arms—Unconditi- onalb------1, who had been accuftomed ш give the law, not to receive. I affumed not the dictator. I, whofe family, cou¬ rage, perfon, and parts have made me a favourite with the brave and fair, though. tluihed with fuccefs, far from claiming fu¬ periority, I came to caft myfelf, my free¬ dom, and my trophies at her feet—Came, and was rejected! Bargained with at leaft; put off" with ifs and poffibilities ! I muft ftop—Muft think no more—Or the hurrying blood will burft my veins, or fuffocate my fwelling heart, and impede juft retribution for thefe and all my other thoufand wrongs, which can only be avenged by cahn and fubtle forefight — к 3 'Yet
Xet think not the fmalleft of them is for¬ gotten—Oh no!— Y/ell then, calm will, ï be ; for I can be, will be any thing rather than not attain this fupreme of pleafures, divine ven- .geance ! Yes, anger muft be bridled : it has novv a fécond time made me tread backward more than all the fteps I had .taken in atbance. My brain is labouring .for fome cei tain and uni form plan, but is ( at prefent* fo difturbed that thought can pi eferve no fettled train. Previous to this fécond childifli over¬ flow of paifion [for if I woukl fucceed .childifli it is] I had played a mafteriiroke, in vyhich indeed I muil own paifion was for once my beft ally. With moft aident importun iry, I with great difficulty wrcfiV- cd a promife from hcr.to be mine. Thefe îomanccrs, Fairfax, hold love promifes to be binding and facred. And this ob¬ tained I thought a fair foundation for my fabric. . The current of my thoughts is now wholly .turned to this -fubject. A thou¬ fand
fand manoeuvres crowding prefent theni- feives*; nor can I fay how many muft be employed. I have generally found my brain rich in expedients, and I think it .will not fail me now. I recollect having mentioned the maid, Laura : She is fe- cu re d aud has been for fome time pzdl.—■ Tlie fondnefs of the fool with one lefs expert would be dangerous : but I have taught her to rail at me occafionally to her miftrefs, and to praife the favourite, who has never lately been any great fa¬ vorite with her, having as I guefs over¬ looked her when flic had kinder inclina¬ tions. She was tickled with the contri¬ vance, which promifed to fecure her Co well from the fufpicion of her* miftrefs, and ili e acts her part tolerably. In fact her miftrefs feems a being without fufpici¬ on, fuperior to it, and holding it in con¬ tempt—So much the better ! This fellow, this king of the cucumber- beds muft be removed. I -know not yet the means, but they muft be found.-— Prefent he is dangerous ; abfent he may дг 4· perhaps
perhaps be taught to act his part wit'h fafety and effect. My ideas are not yet mcthodifed, but I have a confufed fore- fight of various modes by which this and much more may and muft be accom- plifhed. But no common effoits can be fucccfs¬ ful—Deep—Deep muft be the plot by winch flie is to be over-reached, the pit into which flie muft fall : and deep it therefore ihall be. There is no art í will not practife, no reftraint to which I will not fubmit, no defperate expedient to which I will nol have recourfe to gratify my foul's longing—I will be revenged ! —·—The irrevocable decree is gone forth ! —I will be revenged !—Fairfax, you foon fliall hear of me and my proceedings.— Farewell. C. CLIFTON.
LETTER
LETTER LXXVIIL
ANNA WENEOURNE ST. IVES to" LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Grofvsnoi-Street. I HÍS letter, dear friend of my heart, is begun in a very melancholy mood. How eafy it is to undertake ; how difficult to overcome ! With what facility did I fay to myfelf -----Thus will I do, and- thus—. How iirmly did I promife ! Truth appear¬ ed fo beautiful, fo captivating, fo omni¬ potent, thai armed by her an infant couhl к Г» not
not but conquer. Perfcverance alone was requifitc, and I could perfcvere. The í olid balls of the earth fliould almoft fliake ere I would waver !—Poor, vain creature-! —Surely, Louifa, wc are not all fo— Heaven forbid '— Why am I thus? Why docs my heait faint within me ? Indeed, Louifa, l begin to fear I have vaunted of powers I do not poffefs ; and prefcribed to myfelf duties too dignified, too mighty for me—And muft í abandon an cnterpiife I deemed fo noble r —I have meditated on it, Louifa, till I could weep— I will not yet defpair. At leaftone effoi t more, and a ftrong one, I will male— Alas! I am weary of this promiiing. My braggart ftrength is im potency, or little better. But I will do my beft ; and trulli, fincerity, and good intent muft be my truft. My prefent determination is to relate to yom bi other all that has paffed between me and Frank. I will once more flato my ^feelings, my principles, and my plan. Ihc purit)
purity of my heart muft be my fliield. To contend thus is painful ; yet moft willingly would I contend, were it productive of the good jat which I aim. But inftead of gaining ground I feem to lófe. Oh that 1 were more wife, that 1 belter kn'evv the human heart, and that I well could wield the too gigantic weapons of truth ! Bili ί fear they aie above my force, and pity ray own imbecility. The hour of appointment is come Clifton will foon be here. I have been preparing my mind, taxing my memory, and аггащппц* mv thou «his. Oh thai this ťffort may bc inore fuccefidul than the pau! Did he but know all the good I wiih him, his heart would furely not fcei anger------ líc íliall not die, faid Frank !—Can I for¬ get it ? ------How did my foul glow within me, when, hopelefs but the moment bc- ftne, Л beheld nature again ftruggling for exiilcnce, and returning life once more ílir In the convulfive lip ! How did my cari. mude with—·" Пе fliall not die !"—I ftjw о a noble quality cxnioi. and though' it к G w Δ?
was but to with and to have, to imitate and to fucceed------The brother of my Louifa !—A mind too that might outfoar the eagle, and gaze on the fun of truth ! There muft be fome caufe for my failure, if I fail—With true fimplicity of hearu I can fay, moft earneftly do I wiih to do right: moil ardently would I endeavour to prove myfelf a friend woithy of Louifa Clifton, and of Frank Henley '—Perhaps the latter is the caufe ?—If I have done him wrong, Heaven forgive me ! For I think, were I convicted of it, I could not forgive myfelf ! The fervant has told me Clifton is be- iow. I muit take a few minutes to breathe ------1 muft collect myfelf. Oh for the tongues of mediating angels ! A. W. ST, IVRS*
LETTER
LETTER LXXIX.
ΑΝΝ,Α WENBOURNE ST, IVES. TO LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Grcfvenoľ'Sireeŕ. HEN laft my Louifa heard from me-, my mind was depreffed. I almoft de* fpaircd of the great taik I had undertaken. I had likewife an immediate duty, a dif- burthcning of my foul, a kind of confeffi- on of facts to make, from which education has falfely accuftomed us to flirink with pain, and my fpirits were overcloud¬ ed,
ed. This rigorous duty is performed; hope again begins to brighten, and my eafed heart now feels more light and cheerful. Not but it ftill is tremulous with the fenfations by which it has juft been thril¬ led. I feem to have rifen from one of the moft interefting and 1 believe I may add awful feenes, in which I have ever been engaged. The rcceffes of the foul have been fearched ; that no retrofpeciive accu- fation of want of abfolute and perfect can¬ dour mÍ2*ht, aš of late it too often has done, rife to affimi t me. .1 found Clifton in the parlour. His look was more compofed, more complacent, atid remarkably more thoughtful than it had lately been. I beg;m with Hating that the feelings of my heart required every aci, every thought of mine, that had any relation whatever to him, fnould be fully and explicitly known. 1 conjured him to have the goodnefs to determine not to in¬ terrupt me ; that I might perform tliis office, clear my conference, and ihe w my heart unveiled, undifguifed, exactly as it wat;
.was ; and that he might at once reject it, •if it were either unworthy his acceptance or imcompatible with his principles. He promifed compliance and kept his nvord. I never knew him a liftcnerfo long, or with fuch mute patience. I had as 1 may fay fiudied the difcourfe which I made to him, and which I thus began. li will not be my intention, Mr. Clifton, in what' I am going to fay, to appear bet¬ ter or worfe than I am. Should I be par¬ tial to myfelf, I wiih you to detect me. There is nothing I fo much defire as a knowledge of my own failings. This know¬ ledge, were it truly attained, woukl make the worft of us angels. Our prejudices, our paifions, and our ignorance alone de¬ ceive us, and perfuade us that wrong is right. I have before acquainted you of the pro¬ ject of Mrs. Clifton and Sir Arthur, for our union. I have told you of the unfeign¬ ed friendfliip, the high admiration, and tne unbounded love I have for your fifter : or ia other words for her vìi tuet». A flioit acquaintance*
acquaintance ihewed me that your mind had all the capacity to which the möft ar¬ dent of"my hopes afpired. It had indeed propcnfities, paflions, and habits, which I thought errors ; but not incurable.— The meaneft of us have our duties to fulfil, which 4 are in proportion to our opportu¬ nities, and our power. I imagined that a duty of a high but poffible nature pre- fented itfelf, and called upon me for per¬ formance. You no doubt will fmile at my vanity, but I muft be lineere. By inftručiion, by converfation, and by other accidents, it appeared to me that I had been taught fome high and beneficial truths and prin¬ ciples; which you, by contrary inftrudii- on, converfation, and accidents, had not attained. Convinced that truth is irrefift- ible, I trufted in the power of thefe truths rather than of myfelf, and raid here i& a mind to which I am under every moral obligation to impart them, becaufe I per¬ ceive it equal to their reception. The projet therefore, of our friends was com¬ bined
bincd with thefe circumftances, which induced me willingly to join their plan ; and to call my friend fifter was an ad¬ ditional and delightful motive. It ap¬ peared like ftrengthening thofe bonds be¬ tween us which I believe no human force can break. An obftacïc or rather the appearance of an obftacle fomcyvhat unexpectedly arofe. From my childhood I had been in part a witnefs of the rifing virtues of young Mr. Henley. Difference of fex, of fitua- tion, and of purfuits, prevented us till lately fiom being intimate. I had been accuftomed to hear him praifed, but knew -not all the eminence with which it was deferved. He was my fuppofed inferior, and it is not very long fince I myfelf entertained fome part of that pre- j udice. I know myfelf now not to be his equal. A recollection of combining circum¬ ftances convinced me that he had for fome time, and before I fufpected it, thought on me with partiality. He be¬ lieves
lieves there is"great affinity in our minds; be· avows it, and with a manly courage .becoming his character, which abhors dif- fimutation, has fince confeffed an aifection for me; nay'has affirmed that unlefs I have conceived fome repugnance to him, which 1 have not nor ever· can conceive, Д ought as a ilrict act: of juftice to myfelf .and lii m to prefer him before any other. I fliould acknowledge the cogency of -the reafons he aifigns, and certainly enter¬ tain fuch a preference, did it not appear to me that there arc oppoiing and irrccon- cilcable claims and duties. It is my prin¬ ciple, and perhaps ftill more ftrongly his, rihai neither of us muft live for ourfelves, hut for fociety. In the abftract-our prin¬ ciple is the fame ; but in the application we appear to differ. He thinks that the marriage of two fuch people can benefit fociety at large. I am perfuaded that the .little influence which it would have in the world would be injurious, and in fome fort fatal to the fmall circle for which I feem
.icem to exíft, and over which any feeble influence can extend. - t For thefe rcafons only, and in comp^- ancc with what I believe to be the j-igQ* ious but inflexible injunčlions of-juftice, have I rejected a man whom I certainly do not merit; a man whofe benevojent heait, capacious mind, and extraordinary virtues are above my praife, and I almoft fear be¬ yond my attainment. My memory will not fnrniih mc with every word and incident that have paffed between us; and if it would, fuch repe¬ tition would be tedious. But I wjih you cleaily to underftand that Mr. Henley has made thefe declarations to me ; that my mode of aciing and my reafon^ha ve been • fuch as I have mentioned; that I am-not myfelf fo perfectly fatisfied with ţhefe rea- fons, but that [ fometimcs am fubjeci: to leciirring doubts; and that I do at prefent, and while I have thought or'fenfe, ihall continue to admire hb genius and his vir¬ tue. If
If what he has faid or what I have done be offenfive to you, if you cannot think highly of him and innocently of me, if my thoughts concerning him 'can poifibly be ftained with a criminal tinge in your eyes, it becomes you, and I now moft folemnly call upon you,-as a man difdaiiiing deceit, at once to fay fo, and here to break off all further intercourfe. Efteem, nay revere him I do and ever muft; and inftead of being guilty for this, my principles tell me the crime would be to eftecm and revere him lefs. * I truft in the franknefs of my heart for the proof of its' fincerity. My determina¬ tion is to have a clear and unfpotted con¬ fidence. Purity of mind is a blefllng be¬ yond all price ; and it is that purity only which is genuine-or of any value. The circumftance I am going to relate may to you appear' ftrange, and highly reprehen- fible—Be'it fo—It muft be told. " We never had but one converfation in which the fubject of marriage, as it related to him and me, was directly and fairly debated.
debated. He then bohaved as he has done always with that fincerity, confiftency and fortitude, by which he is fo peculiarly characterifcd. A converfation fo intereft¬ ing, in which a man of fuch uncommon merit was to be rejected by a woman who cannot deny him to be her fuperior, could not but awaken all the affections of the heart. I own that mine ached in the dif- charge of its duties, and nothing but the moft rooted determination to abide by thofe duties could have Heeled it to refufal—It was a cruel fortitude ! But while it ached it overflowed ; ,and, to you more efpecially than to any other perfon upon earth, I think it,neceffary to fay thai, at a moment when.the feeling of compaifion and the dread of being unjuft were excited moft powerfully in my bo¬ fom, paradoxical as it may feem, my zeal to demonftrate the integrity and innocence of my mind induced me to—kifs him J - I fcarcely can proceed—There are fenfati- » ons almoft too ftrong to be fubdued-^The t mind with diificulty can endure that miftake, that
thať contortion, wdiich can wreft guilt out of the moft fublime of its emanations— However, if it were a crime, of that crime I am' guilty—I pretend not to appear other than I am ; and what I am it is neceffary at this moment that you fliould know. This converfation and this incident hap¬ pened on the day on which you met him in the' corridor, coming from my chamber, A day, Mr. Clifton, worthy of your re¬ membrance and of vour emulation ; for it afforded fome of the ftrongeft proofs of in¬ flexible courage of which man is at pi dent capable. He had been lobbed of the hope d'careft to his heart, had been rejected by the woman he had chofen lo be the friend and companion of his life, had been en¬ joined the taik of doing all polľible good tò'his rival, wdiich he had unconditionally promifed, and he left her to-·-—receive a blow from this rival's hand ! Farbe it froni me, Mr. CJifton,to with to give you pain,'or infult your feelings !·— Oh no !— T retrace the picture only becaufe Lthink ir ohe of the móil mftructivc leffom, for
for pi ivate life, the ftores of memory can fupply. I muft farther inform you that but a few clays ago I queftioncd him, whether he had not changed his opinion concern¬ ing me ; hoping that after mature reflecti¬ on he might have thought, as I do, that to rcfufc him was a duty. But he perfifts in believing it lo be an error. He does not however obtrude his thoughts upon me: on the fubject of love an anchorite could not be more filent, or a brother more delicate. That one converfation ex¬ cepted, he has made no further attempts. A few words were indirectly fakl, when, as I have juft told you, I queftioned him ; but they were excited by me. With refpect to the fong, at which you have laft taken offence, its brief hiftory is that it was written, or at leaft firft feen hy me, foon after our arrival in France.—- I. found íl on my mufic-defk ; and I dá'ré affirm it had been left there by miftake,' not deiign. I fuppofed it to Be his from the
the hand-writing;.and I fet it becaufe it affected mc. The day on which you found me ring¬ ing it to him was the firft on wdiich i*t. was ever mentioned by him to me ; and then, after he had been preffed by Sir Arthur to know how he could ferve him, a copy of it was begged from me as the only favour the family could beftow ! ------He has done us many favours ! Favours which wc fliall never have an opportunity to repay !— Though my hands are impotent, ere my thoughts can be reftrained from being juft to his worth I muft be convinced there is guilt in thofe thoughts. How to addrefs myfelf now perfonally to you, Mr. Clifton, I fcarcely know.— The world perhaps would call my views extravagant, my pretenfions impertinent, and my plan abfurd.—The world muft do its will—In the progrefs toward truth, I have prefumed to think you feveral fteps behind me. I have propofed to myfelf in fome fort to-be your inílručt refs. I have re ) ate 1
repeated my plan to the perfon whom you perhaps may confider as your rival; I have required his aid, and have avowed that I think him very confiderably your fuperior. Each and all of thefe may be and I fup¬ pofe are offenfive ; but the proceedings of rectitude never can be dark, hidden, and infidious. When I have faid all that I think of you I fliould hope you will be more inclined to believe me .equitable. There are many leading principles jn which we differ ; and concerning which, till we agree, to proceed to marriage would be culpable. Thefe you were at firft eager to examine; but finding'the fide you took not fo clear 'and well e^-*- bliflied as you had imagined, difpleafe ι by contradiction, and, in ihe fpirit of that gallantry which you profefs to admire, Cu¬ ing willing to appear complaifant to the female to whom you pay your add refles, you have lately declined difcuffion. You think no doubt that the lover ouçht to yield, and the hufband to command ; both of which I deny. Hufband, wife, or ■ vol. in L , lover.
lover, fliould all be under the command of reafon ; other commands are tyranny. Reafon and not relationfhip alone can give authority. You think.that fhe ^claims of birth to fupeiiority are legitimate : I hold them to be ufurpations, I deem fociety, and your¬ felf, to ,be the firft v of claimants. Duels with you are duties, with me crimes.— Suicide you allow to be generally an act of infanity, but fometimes of vii tue. I affirm that no one, who is not utteily ufe- lefs in fociety, or who cannot by dying be of greater ufe than by living, can have a right over his own life : and of the exift- ence of fuch a being I doubt. You main¬ tain that what you poffefs is your own : I affirm it is the property of him who wants it moft. Thefe are effential differences. Nor are thefe all, but perhaps they are more than fufficient to end the alliance we were feeking. Not that I defire to end it—Far, far the reverfe !—You, Mr. Clifton, are fo highly gifteds
gifted, fo diftinguiihed in the rank of in¬ tellect, and have a mind of fuch potency, that to behold its powers employed in the caufe of truth, to be myfelf inftrumental in a work fo worthy, and afterward to be¬ come the faft and deareft friend of fuch a mind is a progreifion fo delightful, fo fe¬ ducing, that for a time I laboured to per¬ fuade myfelf of its poifibility. Thefe hopes begin to fade ; and, did you know how much th}s circumftance afflicts me, you would at leaft abfolve me fiom all charge of indifference. Habits and prejudices which are fanc- tioned by the general practice, and even by numbers who are in many refpects eminently wife and virtuous, are too ftub- born to be evercome by the impotent ar¬ guments of a young female ; with whom men are much more prone to trifle, toy, and divert themfelves, than to enquire into piacticaland abftract truth. In the ftorm of the paifions, a voice fo weak would not be heard. L 2 That
• Tliat all thefe impediments fliould be removed I begin to believe but little pro¬ bable ; and, till they are removed, as we are we muft remain. - The obftacles to marriage are indeed fo numerous that I perceive calculation to be very much in favour of celibacy : I mean reflecting myfelf. I aík not riches ; but of wealth of mind my expectations by fome would be called extravagant. Yet lower thefe expectations I cannot; for that would be to relax in principle. I ended ; and your brother itili fat pa¬ tient and willing to liften, had I defined to continue. After a íhort paufe, he replied —The profound attention I have paid, madam, will I hope convince )ou I have not been an idle liftener. Your words, or at leaft the fubftance of them, have funk deep in my heart. Your defne that I ihould remember them fcaiCvdy can equal mine. To mc, madam, they aie fo important that the moment I letuni home, confident as 1 .ufuallv am of my memory,
memory, î will not truft it now, but com¬ mit them to writing. What your motives are for this imufual care, or whether you do or do not feel yourfelf offended, Mr. Clifton, it is not poffible for me to divine : but, as I think it alike unjuft to conceal what I have done or what 1 have faid, however miftaken my words or actions may have been, I will fpare you the trouble of writing, if you think proper, and fend you a tolerably correci tranfcriptof my thoughts to-morrow morning. lean eafily repeat them, affift- ed by fome memorandums that I have al¬ ready made, and by the ftrength of' my recolle Шоп and my feelings, which I think are in no danger of a fudden decay. You will infinitely oblige me, madam, and I will endeavour to profit by the fa¬ vour. My mind is at prefent as much awake to the fubje£t as yours—I hope you are not unwilling to con verfe with me on the topics on which we may happen to differ? L 3 Unwilling?—
Unwilling ?—Oh no !—It was your un- willingnefs that led me almoft to defpair -—But are you in earneft ?—Truly and fincerely in earneft ? In earneft, madam : truly and fincercly in earneft. And will you really reflect, ferioufly, deeply, on the fubject in queftion ? - As deeply, madam, as yourfclf could wiih. " " Mr. Clifton, your prefent tone and "manner rejoice me .'-—You half revive my hopes !—But let me conjure you to be fincere with your own heart. Examine every thing I have faid ; every thing ; ef¬ pecially " what relates to Frank Henley. All that I have obferved of your temper, from firft to laft, obliges me thus ferioufly to warn you. Fear not, madam; I will obey your injunctions. I will examine with all the feverity you could w i fli, —The cup may have its bitters, but the contents rnuft be fwallowed—You will not judge ili of me, madam, fox my franknefs ? Oh
Oh no ! Be ifrank/be true, be worthy of yourfelf ! Such as you would have me, madam, I muft become—All I requeft is that you would aid me in the taik. And are you indeed as determined as you feem to be ?' lam, madam, [I never before, Louifa, faw your brother look or fpeak with fuch firmnefs.] You have been kindly pleafed to fay you once prefcribed it as a duty to yourfelf to teach, or attempt to teach me your principles. Not mine, but the principles of truth. Cool and fair enquiry is all I wiih. Should any of your principles be better founded than mine, I fliall be moft happy to be¬ come your fcholar, I am aware how impoflible it is that any two people fliould. think exactly alike on any one fubject, much lefs 4 on all ; but on certain great leading points, were you and I to continue as oppofite' as we are, and were we to marry, felicity could not be the confe¬ quence. L 4 Let
Let us hope, madam, ;it is poffible : we fliould make a marriage of opinions, which you think as neceíľary as of per¬ lons.— - Quite !—Quite !■—Let me conjure you however not to deceive yourfclf !'■ Pretend to no cqnvi&ion you do not-feel.;" nor de¬ grade the honeft fincertty of your heart by an unworthy indulgence of delire !
■■. . ŢJere/Lomul, our con verfa tion ended, Company came in, - and tbe cuflomary oc¬ cupations of the day took place. But it is with heartfelt pleafure I add that your brother behaved as if he had forgotten his .former-character, and was.at laft firmly refolved to aíľume a new one. I have often endeavoured to encourage hope, but never before felt it'in any thing like the fame désrree. He cannot but be-in ear- neft ι his determination for the firft time to commit all Iliad faid to writing is an indubitable
indubitable proof!—May the fame pro¬ penfities continue and increafe!—"He ihall not die !" will again be the burthen of my fong !—What a noble mind might his become !—Might ?·—Letus once more be bold and fay will !-—-Oh that to do were as eafy as to fay ! A. W. ST, IVES.
LETTER
LETTER LXXX.
COKE CLIFTON 'r О GUV FAIRFAX.
London, Lover Styea. EFORE you proceed with my letter, Fairfax, read the4nclofed paper*!——— Read !—The hand-writing is hers !—It is addrefled to me ! Is tranfcribed for me !— Tranfcribed .by herfelf!—Read ! Anci ifit be poifible believe in your own exiftence !
Believe
Believe if you can that all you fee, all you hear, the images that fwim before your eyes and the woild itfelf are real, and no delufion !—For my part I begin to doubt ! —Read J Oh that I were invifible and ftanding by your fide '
Well !—Have you ended? —And do you ftill continue to breathe ?—Are you not a ftatue ?—Would not the whole univerfe denounce me liar if, knowing me, I were to tell it that words like thefe were not only fpoken to me but are written, left I fliould forget the maddening injuries they contain ?------What ! Make me her confeffor?—Me?------No fecret fin, of thought, word or deed, concealed !—All remembered, all recited, all avowed !—- Sins committed with the hated Henley !— Sins againft love, againft Clifton !—Does iliç imagine I can look on a paper like this and, while my eye ihoots along the daring, the infulting line, not fed ail the fires
fires that now devour me ?—Surely flie is frantic ! Thefe things, Fairfax, are above my comprehenfion î My amazement mufi: be eternal, for I never fliall be able to under¬ ftand them.-—What ! Tell mc, Clifton, of her amorous debates with fuch a fellow ? Appoint him her head-ufher over me ?—■ Announce him my rival ? Meet my eye unabaihed and affirm him to be my fupe¬ rior ? Inform me of the deep hold he has taken of her heart ? Own flie kiffed him ? Once again it is incredible ! Nay moft and ftiJl more incredible ; for, ftrange to fay and yet more ftrange for her to do, even this received fuch a varnifli from her lips, her eyes, her beauties, her irradiat¬ ing zeal, that reafon everlaftingly renounce me if I fcarcely knew, while flie fpoke, whether it were not the hiftory of fome fylph, fome heavenly fpirit ihe was recit¬ ing? Yes, Fairfax ! There was a moment, a íhort but dangerous moment, at which fo charmed was I by her eloquence, fo ama¬ zed
zed by her daring fincerity, fo moved by the white candour of a foul fo feeming pure, that, pofieffed by I know not what booby devil of generofity, I was on the* point of throwing myfelf at her feet, con- feifing the whole guilt of my intents, and proclaiming myfelf her true and irrevoca¬ ble convert ! And this before the'breath that uttered thefe injuries was cold ! The firen !—All the beauteous witche¬ ries that ever yet were faid or fung do not equal her !—Circe, Calypfo, Morgana, fairy or goddefs, moital or immortal, knew not to mix the magic cup with fo much art! Not that it was her arguments. What arc ihey ? It was her bright her beaming eyes, her pouting beauteous lips, her pal¬ pitating ecftatic bofom, her—I know not what, except that even this was not all.'— No '—There was fomething ftill more hea¬ venly !—An emanating deity !—The celef- rial effulgence of a divine foul, that íloweâ with fervour almoft convulfive ! Had
Had you* witneffed her elevated afpira- tions !—Such fwelling paifions fo mattered, fo controlled, till then I never beheld !— Like tbe flow paufe of the folemn death- bell; the big tear at ftated periods drop¬ ped; but dropped unheeded. Though flic couíd not exclude them, her ftoic foul dif- dained to notice "fuch intrufive guefts !— Her.whole frame fhook with the warfare between the feelings and the will—And well might it fliake ! I went prepared, and lucky it was that I did. My fixed determination was to be filent, that I might profit by what I fliould hear. That one dangerous moment ex_ cepted, I was firm !—Firm !—Not to be moved ; though rocks would, had they liftened ! Yes, Fairfax, I did my part. Not that I am certain that to fall at her feet like a canting methodift, own myfelf the moft reprobate of wretches, whine out repent¬ ance, and implore forgîvenefs at the all fufficient fountain of her mercy would not be the very way to impofe upon her beft. * I begin
ï begin indeed to be angry at myfelf for not having yet refolved on one confinent plan. Schemes fo numerous prefent them- felves, and none without its difficulties and objections, that to determine is no eafy taik. Circumftances in part muft guide me. I muft have patience. At prefent I can only prepare and keep İn readİnefs fuch cumbrous engines as this phlegmatic foggy land of beef and pudding can afford. I muft fupply the fire, if I find it neceíľary to put the machines in motion. But, having decreed her fall, my fpi- rits are now aleit, and there is not a being that furrounds me to whom imagination does not afììgn a poflible part : and that the part fliould be well fuited to the per- fon muft be my care. My firft exercife muft be on myfelf.—· Apathy or the affečiation of apathy muft be acquired—Inevitably muft be------ My. paftions muft be maiked : I muft pretend to have conquered them. In their naked and genuine form they are indecent, im¬ moral,
moral, impure, I know not what ! But catch a metaphyfical quirky and let vanity and dogmatic affertion ftand fponfors and baptife it a truth, and then raptures, ex¬ travagance, and bigotry itfelf are deities ! Be then as loud, as violent, as intolerant as the moft rancorous of zealots, and it is all the fublime ardour of virtue. Yes ! I muft learn to ape their contempt of all and every terrene object, motive, and refpeči ! Inclofe the ftrange paper I fent you and return it in your next. I fent it in her owii hand-writing, that your eyes might have full conviction. I took a copy of it, but I have fince recollected I may want the original. The time may come when flie may affail me with accufation and com¬ plaint : I will then prefent that paper, and flaih guilt upon her ! I am much deceived if I do not obferve in this gardening and improving knight a want of former cordiality, a decreafe of ardour, and peihaps a wiih to retract- Why Jet him !—To the daughters deadly 2 fins
fins let him add new: it will but make invention more active, and revenge more keen! I will have an eye upon him: I half hope my fufpicions are true! The aunt Wenbourne too ftill continues to give laud unto Mr. Henley !—Damn Mr. Flenley !—but die may be neceíľary ; and, a& flic is entirely governed by the gull Edwaid, I muft fubmit to bring myfelf into his favour. The thing may eafily be done. The lordly uncle Fitz-AIlen is fecure. I frequently dine with him on what he calls his open day ; he being overwhelmed with bufinefs, as blockheads ufually are ; and I do not fail to infinuate the reiationihip in which, if care be not taken, he may hereafter chance to ftand to a gardener's fon. His face flames at the fuppofition, and his red nofe burns more bright !— What will it do, ihould I make him my tool, when he finds to what good purpofe he has been an abettor ? Be that his con¬ cern;.
íves:
cern; it neither is nor ever fliall be mine. But none of thefe are the exact agent I want ;. nor have I found him yet. They at beft can only act as auxiliaries. Laura indeed may be eminently ufeful ; but the plotting, daring, mifchìevous, malignant yet fubaltern imp incarnate, that ihould run, fly, dive, be viflble and invifible, and plunge through froft or fire to execute my behefts, is yet to be difcovered. Were I in Italy, diiburfe but a few fe- quins and battling legions would move at bidding : but here we have neither cicifbeos, carnivals, confeffors, bravoes, nor fanctuaries. No— AVe have too few priefts and too much morality for our noble corps to flouriíh in full perfection. I know not that all this may be necef¬ fary, but I fufpect it will, and I muft pre¬ pare for the worft; for I will accompliih my purpofe in defpite of hell or honefty ! —Ay, Fairfaix, will !------Gentle means, infinuation,
«infinuation, and hypocrify fliall be my firft rcfourcc'; and if thefe fail me, then I will order my engines to play.
I have been once more reading my copy of this unaccountable paper, and though every word is engraven in my memory, it dropped from my hand with new aftoniih- ment ! Her hiftory of her Mr. Henley, the yearnings of herheart toward him, and her unabaihed juftificalion of all flie has faid, all flie has thought and all ihe has done, are not to be paralleled in the records of female extravagance". She comes however to the point at laft —Calculation is in favour of celibacy—For once, lady, you are in the right!--We may appear to agree on cafes more dubi¬ ous, but on that it will be miraculous if we ever hereafter differ. I cannot but again applaud myfelf, for keeping my preconcerted refolution of fi¬ lence
í lence and referve fo firmly. I rejoice in my fortitude and my forefight; for her eflorts were fo ftrcnuous, and her emoti¬ ons fo catching, that liad I been lefs pre¬ pared all had been loft. C. CLIFTON.
END of VOL. III.
Vttiil*d ly J, Ciowdrr, VVä*\*.*< k-s-illái С
