Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Anna St. Ives: a novel
ANNA St. IVES;, Å N O V E L·
LETTER LXXXI. СОКЕ CLIFTON, то GUY FAIR Г AX.
Loxdoi', Drier Sine:. ES, yes, Fairfax ! She takes the fure.· and refolute road -to ruin, and travels it,' with unwearied ardour !—What think you ihe has done now?—An earthquake would / have been more, within*mv calculation!. vol, iv. в —She
—She labours hard after the marvellous! —She has been angling again in Ше mud¬ dy pool of paradox, and has hooked up anew dogma!—And what is it?—Why nothing lefs than an afleveration that the promife fhe made me is not binding!— Promifes are nonentities : they mean no¬ thing, ftand for nothing, and nothing can claim. So be it—It is a maxim, divine apof tate, that will at leaft ferve my turn as effectually as yours. To own the truth, I never thought promifes made to capri¬ cious ladies ftood tor much ; nor were my fcruples at prefent likely to have been increafed. If flie, a woman, be fimple enough to have faith in the word of man, 'tis her fault. Let her look to it ! This is not all : the doctrine is not of her own invention.! Mr. Henley, the eternal Mr. Henley again appears upon the fcene, from which he is fcarcely ever a moment abfent?—Were it poflible í could relent, flie is determined I fliall not ' But they aie both down in my ta- hl<»t4.
blets, in large and indelible characters; on the blade lift; and there for a time at leaft they fliall remain. My plan, Fairfax, is formed; and í believe completely. When I was firft acquainted with her, as you know, my meaning was honeft and my heart fincere. I was a fool at leaft for a fortnight; for that was the fliorteft period before I began at all to waver. I was indeed deeply fmittcn ! Nor is defire cooled : delay, oppofition, and neglect have only changed its purpofe. She foon indeed taught me to treat her in fome manner like the reft of her fex, and to begin to plot. 'Tis well for ,rae that I ,have a fer¬ tile brain : and it had been well for her could flie have been contented with the conqueft flie had made, and have treated me with generofity equal to my deferts. But a hypocrite the has made mc, anda hypocrite flie fliall find me ; ay and a deep one. She has herfelf given me my clue : ihe has laid open her whole heart. She в ?.
•ilas the fatuity to mimic the perfect he¬ roine I. Tell her but it is a duty, and with the Bramin wives ffie would lie down, calmly and refolutely, on the burning-pile ! Well then I will tell her of a duty of which flie little dreams ! Yes flie fliall grant every thing I wifli as an act of duty ! I will convince her it is one ! I ! The pret¬ ty immaculate lamb muft fubmit in this point to become my pupil ; and it fliall go hard or I will prove as fubtle a logician as herfelf What fay you, Fairfax r Is not the pro¬ ject an excellent one ? Is it not worthy of the fapient Doctor Clifton ? Shall I lofe reputation, think you, by carrying it into effea? I am already become a new man. My whole fyftem is changed. She begins to praife nie moft unmercifully ; and, while my very heait is tickled with my fuc¬ cefs, the lengthened vifage of infpired quaker when the fpirit moved was never more demure ! I am too pleafed, too proud of my own talents, not to perfiil. Already
Already I am a conveit to one of her 11 uth, Do laugh, Faiifax! I have ac¬ knowledged tbat you and your footman are equal ! Is it not ridiculous ? However I am convinced ! Ay and convinced I will remain, till time íhall be. She fliall teach me a truth a day!—Yet, no—I muft not learn too iaft; it may be fufpicious : though I would be as fpeedy as I conveniently can in my progrefs. The zeal of difputarion burns within her; and, as Iteli you, I am aheady ont of her veiy good boys, becaufe the piu- fuit of my own project makes me now as willing io liften and hunt after 'deduc¬ tions, fuch as I want, as flie is to teach and to fupply me with thofe deductions. She ftaits at no propofition, however ex¬ travagant, if it do but appear to refuit from any one of her favourite fyftems, of which flie has a. good round number. Rather than íelinquifh the leaft of them, flie would fuppofe the glorious fun a coal¬ pit ; and his dazzling rays no better than volumes of black fmoke, poliihed and в 3 grown
grown bright on rb tir travels by attri¬ tion. She .profeffes it-to be the puipofe of her life to free herfelf from all preju¬ dices. But here flie has the modefty to add the faving claufe—" If it be practica¬ ble." iCoukl ihe, Fairfax, have a more con¬ venient hypothefis ? Do you not perceive its fecundity.? And, the talk being fo very difficult, will it not be benevolent in me to tend her my affiftance ? What think you ? Is it not poffible to prove that mar¬ riage is a mere prejudice ? She íhall find me willing to learn many or perhaps all of her doctrines; and in return I defire to teach her no more than one ,of mine. -Can any thing be more reafonable, more generous? Nay, I will go further ! I will not -teach it her ; flie illaff have all the honour of teaching it to me ! Can man do more? The moft knotty and perplexed part of my plan was to find a contrivance to make the gardener's fon an actor in the plot. The thing is difficult, but-not im« noffible.
poffible. I have various ftratagems and fchemes, in the choice of which I muft be guided by circumftances. That which pleafes mc moft is to invite him to fit in ftate, the umpire of our difquifitions. I think I can depend upon myMf t otherwife there would be danger in the project. But if I act my part perfectly, if I have but the refolution to liften cooly to their quiddities, fometimes to oppofe, fometimes to recede, and always to 'own myfelf conquered on the points which fuit me beft, I believe both the gentleman and ihe lady will be fufficiently fimple to fuppofe that in all this there will be nothing apocryphal. They will imagine the gilt ftatue to be pure gold. 1 fliall be num beted .among their elect ! I fliall rife from the alembic a faint of theirOwn subliming ! fliall be affayed and ftamped current at their mint ! Yet I muft be cautious. I w r ould put my hand in the fire ere undertake fo ap¬ parently -mad a fcheme, with any other couple in Chriftendom. Confidering hovV "в 4 very
.very warm—Curfes bite and tingle on mý tongue at the recollection !—Confidering I-fay how very warm I know their incli- .nations towards each other to be, nothing but the proofs I have had couid prompt mé to commence an entei prize fo impio- bable. But the uncommonnefs of it is a- main part of "its merit; and I think I - know the ground I have to travel fo well that I do not much fear I fliould lofe my .road. . 1 am aware that the enemy I have moft -to guard agamft is myfelf. To pretend a belief in opinions I defpife, to fit- with fatumine gravity and nod approbation when my fides are convulfed with laughter, to ape admiration at what reafon contemns and fpurns, and 4 to finooth my featuies into fuavity while my heart is burning with gall at the intercourfe they continually hold, of becks and-fmiles, and appioving kind epithets, to do all this is almoft too -much for mortal man ! But I have aheady -made feveral effays on myfelf, and I find that the obftinate refolution which an infa- tiable
fiable' thirfi. of ample retribution infpires is not to be fhaken, and renders me equal even to this taik. I am well aware however what dan¬ gerous quickfands the paffions are ; and that a good pilot is -never fparing of (bund¬ ings, i vvill therefore not only keep a rigorous watch upon myfelf, but take fuch meafures as fliall enable rae to ex¬ clude or retain the grub-monger, as I ffiali think fit, during our convcrfations. Thus you are likely foon to hear more of our metaphyfics ; nay, if you be but in¬ duftrious, enough to enable you to fet up for yourfelf, and become the apoftle of Paris. I know no place where Jf you have but a morfei of the marvellous to de¬ tail, you will find hearers belter difpofed ίο gape and fwallow. С CLIFTON.
* в 5
LET-
LETTER LXKXTL
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO ÌOUISA CLI-F-TON.
Lqndo>t : Grofvenor-Street, A FORTNIGHT has almoft elapfed fince I laft wrote to my Louifa, till my heart begins to cry íhame at the delay.— Could I plead no other excufe than the trifling occupations of a trifling world J muft fign my own condemnation ; but* your brother has afforded me better em¬ ployment. Our frequent converfations on many
many of the beft and moil dignified of moľal enquiries, his acute remarks and objections, and the difficult problems he has occafionally given me to fulve, have left me İn no danger of being idle. Oh, Louifa, how exquifite is the plea¬ fure I feel, to fee him thus determined, thus inceffant in his purfuit ! A change fo fortunate and fo fudden aftonifhes while it delights !—May it continue !—May it in¬ creafe !—May ?—Vain unworthy wifli !— It muft—The mind having once feized on the clue of truth can neither quit its hold nor become ffationary ; it is obliged to ad¬ vance. And when its powers "are equal to thofe of Coke Clifton, ought we to wonder at its bold and rapid flights ? Still lhe conquerís he daily makes over his own feelings cannot but furprife. His ftruggles are evident, but thev are effec¬ tual. He even refolutely caffs off the ftrong prejudices he had conceived againft Frank Henley, invites him to aid us in our re-, fearches, and appeals to him to explain and decide, в б « Let
"Let us if we wifli to weed out error bè fincere in our efforts, and have no remorfe for our prejudices." This is his own language, Louifa! Oh that I could fully communicate the plea¬ fure this change of character gives me to my fnewd. Yes, the reftiaint which too frequent contradiction lays him under will foon wear off, and how great will then be the enthufiafm with which he will defend and promujgate truth ! Nor is it lefs delightful to obferve the fatisfaction which this rcrorm fometimes gives to Frank Henley. At others indeed he owns he is difturbed by doubt : but he owns it with feelings of regret, and is ea¬ ger to prove himfelf unjuft. Yet refpečting me his thoughts never vary—Alas ! Louifa, I ftill "am his by right." His tongue is filent, but his looiss and manner are fufficiently audible. I furely have been guilty of the error I fo much dieaded; my caufe was ftrong, but my-arguments were feeble; I have pio- louged the warfare of the paffions which I attempted
attempted to eradicate ; or rather have left on his mind a deep fenfe of injuftice com¬ mitted by me— ! The thought is intole¬ rable !—Exciuciating! But oh with what equanimity, wdth .what fortitude does he endure his imagin¬ ed wrongs ' Pure, moil pure muft that paf¬ fion be which*at once poffeffes the ilrength of his and his forbearance ! There are indeed but few Fiank Henleys ! Sarely, Louifa, I may do him juftice ?— Surely to efteem the virtuous cannot merit the imputation of guilt ?—Who can praife him as he deferves ? And can that which is г'щЫ in others be wrong: in me ?—Yet fuch arc th rt miftakes to which we are fubject, í fcarcely can fpeak or even think of him without fufpecting myfelf of committing fome culpable impropriety ! . Pardon, Louifa, thefe wanderings of 'the mind! They are marauders winch uniform vigilance alone can íepel, ---- r They are ever in arms, and I obliged to be very alert. But it is petty warfare, and cannot fliake the dominion of truth. My
My feelings have led me from the topic I intended for the chief fubject of this letter. · The courfe of our enquiries has feveral ¡times forced us upon that great queftion, " the progrefs of mind toward perfection, " and the different order of things which " muft inevitably be thè lefult." Yefter¬ day this theme again occurred. Frank was prefent ; and his imagination, warm with the fublimity of his fubject, drew a bold and fplendid picture of the felicity of that ftate of fociety when perfonal property no longer fliall exift, when the whole torrent of mind fliall unite in enquiry after the beautiful and the t/ue, when it fliall no longer be diverted by thofe infignificant puifuits to which the abfurd follies that originate in oui faife wants give birth, -when individual felfiihnefs fliall be un¬ known, and when all íhall labour for thö good of all í A ftate fo diftant from prefent manners and ppinionS;, and apparently fo impoffible, naturally gave life to objections, and your brother
brother put many fhrewd and peitinent cjueftions, which would have filenced a a mind lefs informed and lefs comprehen- five than thai of our ipftru£ror. At laft a difficulty arofe which to me wore a very ferious form 3 and as what was faid left a ftrong impreffion on my memo¬ ry, I will relate that part of the converfa¬ tion. Obferve, Louifa, that Clifton and Frank were the chief fpeakers. Your brother begpn. I confefs^ fir, you have removed many apparently unconquerable difficulties: but I have a further objection whjch I r think unanfwerable. What is it ? Neither man nor woman in fuch a ftate can have any thing peculiar : the whole mult be for the ufe and benefijt of the whole ? As generally as practice will admit: and how verv general that may be, im¬ perfect as irs conftitution was» Sparta re¬ mained during five hundred yards a proof.
Then
Then how will it be poffible, when fo¬ ciety fliall be the general poffeffor, for any man to fay— This is my fervant ? lie cannot : theie will be no fervants. 0 Well, but— This is my chid Ρ ' Neithei can he do that : they will be the children'of the flate. Indeed'—And what fay you to—This is my'wife f —Can appiopiiation moie than for the minute, the hour, or the day exift? O), among fo difinterefted a peo¬ ple", can a man fay even of the woman he loves— She is mine ? [We paufed— Γ own, Louifa, I found myfelf at a lofs, but Frank foon gave á veiy fati,sh\ctoiy leply·] You have ftarted a queftion of infinite importance, which perhaps I am not fully prepaied to anfwèr. I doubt whether in that .better fiate of human fociety, to which I look foiward with 1 fuch ardent af piiation, 4 the intercourfe of the ftxes will be altogether promifcuous and umcfti ant¬ ed ; or vvhether r they will admit of fome¬ thing that may be denominated marriage. The
The former may perhaps be the truth : but it is at leaft certain that in the fenfe in which we underftand marriage and/the affirmation— This is my wife —neither the inititution nor the claim can in fuch a ftate, or indeed in juftice exift. Of all the re¬ gulations which were ever fuggefted to the miftaken tyranny of' felfiihnefs, none perhaps to this day have furpaffed the def¬ potifm of -thofe which undertake to bind not only body to body but foul to foul, to all futurity, in defpite of every poffible change which our vices and our virtues might effect, or however numerous the fecret corporal or mental imperfections might prove which a more intimate ac¬ quaintance fliould bring to light ! Then you think that fome flipulation or bargain between the fexes muft take place in the molt viituous ages ? In the moil virtuous ages the word bargain, like the word promife, willbe unintelligible—We cannot bargain to do what is wrong, nor can we, though there 'fliould
mould be no bargain, forbear todo what Ь -righi, without being unjuft. Whence İt rcfults, that marriage, as a civil inititution, muft ever be an evil ? Yes. It ought not to be a civil inftitu- iion. It is the concern of the individuals who confent to' this mutual aflcciation, and they ought not to be prevented from be¬ ginning, fufpending, or terminating it as they pleafe. ■ Clifton addreffed himfelf to me—What fay you to this doctrine, madam ? Does it not fliock, does it not terrify you ? As far as I have confidered İt, no. It appears to be founded on incontrovertible principles; and I ought not to be fliocked that fome of my prejudices are oppofed, or at Deing reminded that men have not yet attained the tuie means of correcting their own vices. Surely the confequences are alarming ! The man who only ftudied the gratification „of ms defires would have a new wife each new day ; and the unprotected fair would be
be abandoned to all the 'licentioufnefs of libertinifm ! Frank again replied—Then you think the fecurity of women would increafe with their imagined increafe of danger; and that an unprincipled man, who even at prefent if he be known is avoided and de¬ fpifed, would then find a more ready wel¬ come, becaufe as you fuppofe he would have more opportunities to injure ? I muft own that the men-fit to be truft¬ ed with fo much power are in rny opinion' very few indeed. You are imagining a fociety as perverfe and vitiated as the prefent : I amfuppofing one wholly the contrary. I know too well that there are men who, becaufe unjuft laws and cuftoms worthy of-barba¬ rians have condemned helplefs women to infamy, for the lofs of that which under better regulations and in ages of more wifdom has been and will again be guilt to keep, ï know, fir, I' fay that the pre¬ fent world is infefied by men, who make it the bufinefs and the glory of their lives
to bring this infamy upon the very beings for whom they feign the deepeft affection ! ■—If ever patience can iot fake me it will be at the îecollection of thefe demons in the human form, who come tricked out in all the fmiles of love, the protcftations of loyalty ? and the aits of hell, unielent- i,ngly and caufelefsly to piey upon confid¬ ing innocence ' Nothing but the malvcrfe felfiihnefs of man could give being or countenance to fuch a monfter ' What¬ ever is good, exquifite, or precious, we are individually taught to grafp at, and if poffible to fecure ; but we have each a latent fenfe thut this principle has îendei- ed us a. fociety of deteftable mifers, and theiefore to rob each other feems almoft like the fpoits of juftice. For which reafon, fir, weie la father, I think I fliould ihudder to hcai you in¬ ni uSting my àstìghteis in your doc¬ trines. I perceive you wholly mifconceive me ; and I very ferioufly ïequeft, pray obferve, fir, I veiy ferioufly requeft you to ìemem- ber
ber that I would not teach any man's daughters fo mad a doctrine as to indulge in fenfual appetites, or fofter a licentious imagination. I am not the apoftle of depravity. While men fliall be mad, foolifh, and diffioneft enough to be vain of bad principles, women may be allowed to feek fuch protection as bad laws can afford—It is an eternal truth that the wif¬ dom of man is fuperior to the ftrength of lions ; but I would not therefore turn an infant into a lion's den, I am glad to be undeceived. I thought it was fcarcely poffible you fliould mean what your words feemed .to imply—At prefent I underftood you ; and I again confefs my furprife to find fo much confif¬ tency, and fo many poweiful arguments on a queftion in favour of which I thought nothing rational could be advanced. You have afforded mc food for reflection, and I thank you. I fliall not eafily forget what has been faid.
Tell
ι/ Tell me, my dear Louifa, are you not delighted with this dialogue ; and with the candour, the · force of thinking, and what is ftill better the virtuous fears of your brother ? Ilis mind revolted at the mifchief which it feemed to foicbodc: he was happy at being undeceived. And, with refpect to argument I doubt whe¬ ther he forgot any one of the moil appa¬ rently formidable objc£lions to what is called the levelling fyftem. But he was pleafed to learn that this is only giving a good caufe to a bad name. Such a f) f- tem ¿s infinitely more oppofite to level¬ ling than the prefent ; fince the very ef- fence of it is, that merit fliall be the only claimant, and fliall be certain of pre-emi¬ nence, The fatisfaction I feel, my friend, is beyond expreflion. To have my hopes revived and daily ftrengthened, after fear¬ ing they muft all be relinquiíhed, increafes the pleafuie. It is great and would be Linmixed but for——Well, well ! — Let Clifton
Clifton but proceed and Frank will no longer fay—" To the end of time."------! You know the left, Louifa—AH goocl be with you ι A. W. ST. IVCS. P. S. I thought I had forgotten fomething. When Frank had retired, your brother with delightful candour praifed the great pei fpicuity as w T ell as ftrength with which he argued. He added there was one circumftance İn particular in his principles concerning mairiagc, al¬ though they' had at firft appeared very alarming, which was highly fatisfactory : and this was the confidence they infpired. tc Nothing, he faid, gave his nature fo <f much offence as: the fufpicions with <c which, at prefent, our fex view the *' men. About two years ago he had' u a patriality for a Neapolitan lady, and <ť thought himfelf in love with her :' but" " in
" in this he was miftaken ; it was rather " inclination than paffion. He knew not " at that time what it was to love.— " Neither this Neapolitan lady, though " beautiful and highly accompliihed, nor t% any other woman his feeling told him f ' could infpire pure affection, who was " incapable of confiding in herfclf; and, " wanting this felf-confidence, of confid- fC ing in her lover. Sufpicion originates " in a confciousnefs of felf defect. Thofe (t who cannot truft themfelves cannot be * f induced to truft others." Thus juftly, Louifa, did he continue to reafon. Nor could 1 foibcar to apply the cloctrine to myfelf: I have been too diftruftful of him ; my confcience accuf¬ ed me, and I am refolved to remedy the fault. I have always held fufpicion to be the vice of mean and feeble minds : —but it is lefs difficult to find rules by theory t than to demonftrate them by practice.
í am
1 ain forry, my dear Louifa, to hear 'that the infirmities of Mrs. Clifton in- , crcafe. But thefe are evils for which we can at prefent find no remedy ; and to which we muft therefore fubmit with patience, and refignation.
'%OT.. TV.
с
LET
LETTER LXXXIII,
COKE CLIFTON ι GUY FAIRFAX.
Lon dor, Dot et 'S f ree,*. JL WILL not fuppofe, Fairfax, you feek to compliment me, when you fay you enjoy the exuberant heat of foul, the fiie that pervades my epiftles. I am glad you do. I fliall not think the worfe of your talents. Many a line have I written in all the burft of feeling, and not a few in all the blaze of wit, and have fald to myfelf, —•Should
—Should he not underftand me now ?— Why if he fliould not, dulnefs eveilafting be his portion !—But you take the fure way to keep up my aidour. Wiiile I per¬ ceive you continue to enjoy I fliall coa- tinue to be communicative. A fympathatic yawner Γ may be, but I do not believe I am often the fiift to begin. I knew not half my own merits. I att my pai t to admiration. 'Tis true the combining chcumftances aie all favour¬ able. I muft be a dunce indeed ifin fuch a fchool I fliould want chicaneiy.------. Our difputations have been continual ; nor have I evei failed to tuin them on the moft convenient topics. But none of them have equalled the laft ; managed as it was with dexterity by me, and in the very fpirit I wiflied by my opponents. I fpeak in the plural ; for I took caie to have them both piefent. Several remarks which I had heard from him affared me he would fécond my plan ; which was no^ lefs than to prove—mairiagc a fai ce !—Would you have believed, Faiifax, I fliould have had * с 2 ihr
the temerity to ftep upon a rock fo flippe* ry ; and to have requefted· this Archimago of Adam's journeymen [Adam you know being the world's head-gardener] to ftay arid lend me his fupport?—Yet thus auda¬ cious was I ; and courage as it ought has be'en crowned with fuccefs ! _ The thought was fuggefted by them-· felvés ; and had you or I or any of us vile marriage haters been ' declaiming againft thé faffron god, and his eternal fliackles, I doubt whether thé bell of us could have faid any thing half fo much to the purpofe !—^-Is it not excellent ?— Then had you heard me preach, ay, me myfelf, againft libertines and liber¬ tinifm ! By the by, Don Cabbage-plant had the infolence to fay two or three devilifh fevere things, difhonourable to the noble frater¬ nity of us knights of the beb-chamber, ■which if I forget may woman never more ,have caufe to remember me ! However I brought him to own,—I— [Do laugh !] by my very great apprehen¬ fions
fions of the effects offuch a doctrine; that though marriage be a bad thing it is quite neceffary, at prefent, for the defence of the weaker veffels and modeft maiden¬ hood. Ay and I applauded him for hi$ honeft candour I I was glad I had mifun¬ derftood him ! Thanked him for all his·. profound information ! In fliort made him exactly what I wiflied, my tool ! ^.nd a high-tempered tool he is, by the aid of which I will fliew myfelf a moft notable workman ! ------ Not but the fellow's eye was upon me". I could obferve him prying, endeavouring, to fearch and probe me. But I came too well prepared. Inftead of ihrinking from the encounter, my brow contracted in¬ creafing indignation ; and my voice grew louder, as I ftood forth the champion- of chafte virginity and fa'nctimonious wed¬ lock !—The fcene in the very cri tital fenfe of the phrafe, was high comedy !—- It was well,- Fairfax, they went no far¬ ther than Paris : had either of them only reached Turin I had been half undone !— с 3 And
And had they touched at Naples, Rome, Venice,* or half a dozen other fair and flow· riíhíng cities, 'my character for a pretty be¬ haved, demure, and virtuous gentleman had been" irremediably ruined ! Upon my foul I cannot put it out of my head !—Had you heard me remonftrate wliat a horrid thing it would be to have marriage deftroyed, and us honeft fellows turned loofe among the virgins, from whom Ave fliould catch and raviih each a new dam fel every new day, and had you feen what a fine ferious undertakers face ï pui upon the bufinefs, your heart would have chuckled ! To the day of y oui death iťwould never have been forgotten ! Perhaps you will wonder how I could draw fuch a doctrine from thefe fpinners or hypothefis. I will tell you. I had heard them feveially maintain——Try to guefs 4vhnt !—Not in feven years, though you were to do notliing elfc.—You I fuppofe like me 1ш e heard that liberty, fecurity, "and propeity are the three main'pillars of political' happinefs ? ------ Well then, thefe* piofeiTois
profeffors maintain that individual proper-· ty is a general evil !-*-What is more, they maintain it by fuch arguments as would puzzle coliege, council, or fenate to re·* fute. But that I am determined never to torment my brain about fuch quips and quillets, may I turn Turk if they would not have made a concert of me, and have per¬ fuaded me that an eftate often thoufand a year was a very intolerable thing ! My intention was to keep my counte¬ nance, but to laugh at thera in my heart moll incontinently. However, I foon found my fide of the queftion was not îù peifectly beyond all doubt, nor then s quite fo ridiculous as I had imagined. /Tis true, I went predetermined to bo convinced, and to lake all they ffiould tell me for gofpel. I had a conclufion of my own to diaw, and if ï could but lead to that, I cared not how much I granted. * I, know not whether this predifpofitiõn in-me ! was of any, advantage to their argu¬ ment, though I think it was not ; for, fo ready was Lhe folution to every'difficulty,. с 4 I boldly
I Boldly ventured toriate objections which I meant to have kept out of fight, left I fliould myfelf overturn a fyftem that fuited my puipofe. I perceived their eagernefs, »faw there was no danger that they fliould ftop at trifles even if I fliould happen to throw them a bone to pick, and the readi- nefs of each reply ìaifed my curiofity. I fearlefsly drew out my heavy artillery, which they with eafe and fafety as fearlefs-i ly difmounted. With a breath my ftrong holds are all puffed_down, like fo many houfes of cards. By this however my main bufinefs was done more effectually. We came to it by fair .deduction. ' It was not abruptly intro¬ duced ; it was major, minor, and confis¬ quent— All individual property is an evil —Marriage makes woman individual pro,- perty—Therefore marriage is an evil------ Could there be better logic ? As for his faving claufe, that riiarriage in thefe rimes of prejudice and vice [I have the whole cant by rote, Fairfax.] ia a neceffary evil, leave me to'do that away. What.'
What ! Is flie not a heroine ? And can I not convince her that to aft according to a bad fyftem, when there is a better, were to defcend to the ways ofthe vulgar? Can I not teach her how fuperior fhe is .to the pretty miffes vvho conform to fuch miftaken laws ? Shall flie want the courage and the generofity to fet the firft good exaxple ?— How often have I feen her eyes fparkfej her bofom heave, and her zeal break forth in virtuous refolutions to encounter any peril to obtain a worthy purpofe ! And can there be a more worthy ? - Curfe upon thefe qualms of confcience ! Never before did I feel any thing fo teaz- ing, fo tormenting ! And, knowing what I know, remembering what I never can forget, the flights, injuries, and infults I have received, how I came to feel them now is to me wholly inconceivable. She is acting it is true with what flie calls the beft and pureft of intentions toward me; ihe believes them to be fuch ; flie fome¬ times almoft obliges me to believe them 1 ' fuch myfelf. She tortures me, by half con- c 5 ftraining
ftraimng me to revere the virtues in favour' of which flie harungues fo divinely. But" íhall J, like a poor uxorious laekadaify dri¬ veller, fit down fatisfied with a divideď heart ?—I !—Has flie not with her own lips, under her own hand, avowed and figned her contumelious guilt, her auda¬ cious preference of a rival !—A mean, a hafe, a vulgar rival !—And after this fliall my projects fuffer impediment from çlıeefe- curd compaffion ? Shall the querulous voice of confcience an eft my avenging ?rm ? — No, Fairfax !—It cannot be! Though my heart in its anger could not accufe her of a fingle crime befide, that alone, that damning preference would beall-fufficienL ' «—The furies have no ilings that equal this recollection !—
I have been throwing up my falhes, ftriding acrofs my room, and conftruing ten lines of Seneca, and my pulfe again begins to beat more temperately.
Let
Let' us argue the point with this pert. unruly, marplot confcience of mine. It was not at firft without confiderable .reluctance and even pain that I began to plot. I almoft abhorred reducing her to the level ofthe fex, not one of whom was ever yet her equal. But flic ufed me ill; Fairfax. Yes, flie ufed me ill ; and you .well know that want of refentment if. want of courage. None but pitiful, contempti¬ ble, no-fouled fellows forget infults, til] ample vengeance have been taken. And fliall confcience infolently pretend to con¬ tradict the decree ? Befide I could not but remember our old maxims, the Cyprian battles our jovial corps had fought, and the myrtle wreaths each wight had won. Should I, the lea¬ der the captain of the band, be the firft to' fly my colours ? Was it not our favourite .axiom the t he who could declare, upon his honour, he had found a generous woman, who never had attempted once to deceive, trifle with, or play him trick, fhould fiill be acknowledged a companion of our с 6 order,
order, even though he were to marry: but that all coquetry, all tergiverfation, all wrongs, however flight, were unpardona¬ ble, and only one way to be redreffed ?— What anfwer can confcience give to that/? Your letters too are another ftimulative. You detail the full, true and particular account of your amorous malefactions, and vaunt of petty obftacles, petty arts, and petty triumphs over Signoras and Ma- dames who advance",' challenge you to the "field, and give battle purpofely to be over¬ come. Their whole refinances is but to make you feel how great an Alexander you are, and that having vanquiihed them you are invincible ! As you will certainly never meet with an Anna St. Ives, 'tis poflible you may die in that opinion. But, 1 1 tell you, Fairfax, if you compare thefe practifed Amazons to my. heroine, you are jn a moil heterodox and damnable error, of which if you do not timely re¬ pent your foul will never find aclmiffion into the lover's Elyiium,
Bear
Bear witnefs, however, to my honefty ; of women I y allow her to be the moft ex¬ cellent, but ftill a woman, and not as I foolifhly for a while fuppofed an abfolute^ goddefs. No, no. Madam can ^curvet and play her prapks, though of totally a different kind ; and being almoft mort?l at prefent, mere moital muft become in defpite of confcience and its green fick¬ nefs ^hyfiognomy. Ai fii ft I knew her not -, and unwilling to encounter logic in a gauze cap, I ceaf¬ ed to oppofe her arguments, and thought to conciliate her by refolving to be of her creed. What could be moie gene¬ rous? But no, forfooth ! The veil was too thin ! To pretend conviction when it was not felt, and to be fatisfied with ar¬ guments before î had heaid them, weie all infufficient for her ' The pi ize could be gained only by him who could anfwer the enigmas ofthe fphinx í I muft enter the lifts of cavil, and run a tilt at wrang¬ ling, ere the lady would Leftow the* meed of
of conqueft ! Can confcience pretend to palliate conduct like this ? I then turned my thoughts to a new project, and endeavoured îo overpower her by paffion, by excefs of ardour, by tendernefs and impoi tunity. They had a temporary effect, but I found them equally inefficacious. Nor was the art by which I had ofteneft been fuccefsful forgotten; though I confefs that with her, from the beginning, it afforded me but little hope. I tried to familiarize her to.freedoms.------■ I began wkh her hands; but flie foon taught me that even her hands were fa¬ cred ; "they were not to be treated with familiarity, nor'to be kiffed and pteffed like other hands ! Let confcience if it can telime why. In fine, while to this infolent pedagogue flie has been all honeyfuckle, fweet mar¬ joram and heart's eafe¡ tome flie has been rue,_ wormwood and hellebove : him praif¬ ing, mc reproving : confiding in him, fufpecting me: jnnd, as the very fummit and
and crown of injury, proclaiming him the poffeffor, the mailer of her admiiation, or» in plain Englifli of her heart. And now, if after this impartial, this cool, this ftoic examination Mr. Confcience ihould ever again be impei tînent enough to open his lips, I am determined with¬ out the leaft ceiemony to kick him out of doors. When this famous conference of which I told you fome half an hour ago was ended, and our prefident, our monarch of morals and mulberries had quitted his chair and withdrawn, I played an after¬ game of no fmall moment. After pro¬ nouncing a panegyric on the gentleman, as a legiflator fit for ti uth and mc, I read the lady a modeft lettine on confidence, informed her of almoft the exact quantity which I expected flie would repofe in me, and declaimed with eloquence and effect againft thofe fufpicious beauties v/ho always regard us honeft fellows as fo many naughty goblins ; who, like the Ethiopian
Ethiopian monfter, voracioufly devour every Virgin-Andromedá they meet.—— But as I tell you I did it modeftly. I kept on' my guard, watched the moment to prefs forward or to retreat ; and wielded my weapons with dexterity and fuccefs. Poor girl ! Is it not a pity that the very fliield in which flie confides, s her perfect honefty and fmcerity, fliould be deftined to fall upon andoverwhelrn her? ------Thus fays counfellor Sentiment : and, co.unfellor Sentiment is a great orator !—. .But what fay I ? Why I fay, fo have the Fates decreed, and therefore let the Fates bøk to it ; tis no concern of mine ; I am but their willing inftrument. Thefe however are but the prelimina¬ ries, the preparations for the combat,— Ere long I fliall be armed at all points, and-what is better by her own fair hands, nor do I know how foon I may begin the, attack. 1 have been cafting about to fend* this fuperintendant of the cardinal virtues, this
this captain of cafuifts and caterpillerş cut ofthe way ; and I think I have hit upon a tolerably bold and ingenious ftratagem.· Τ fay bold becaufe I perceive it is not with¬ out danger^ but I doubt I cannot devife a better. Without naming or appearing to. mean myfelf, Ihave;fuggefted to him, by inventing a tale of two friends of mine, what a noble· and difinterefted thing it would be for · him - to go down into the country and prevail on his. father. to remove all obftacles to our mar¬ riage- How ! Say you. Is marriage your plan? And if not is not that the "way to¬ ruin all? There is the danger I talked of ^ but ï do not think it great. The fcoundrel gardener,.. I mean the father; who is heartily defpifed by every body, is de¬ firous that his fon ihould marry Anna.r— I know not whether, I ever before men¬ tioned this fublime effort of impudence. —The cunning rafcal has fo long been.the keeper:
keeper of Sir Arthur's purfe, that it is fuppofed two thirds of the contents have glided into his own pocket. This is the reafon of the delay on Sir Arthui's pari, which at prefent I do not wifli to flioiten. ■—That this fon of a grub-catcher, a De- mofthenes though he be, fliould pievail on fuch a father, if he were to go down as I hope he will, is but little probable.-— However, ihould the leaft prognoftic of fuch a miracle appear, I have my remedy piepared. ï will generoufly have a letter written to the fenior overser of the gravel walks", which if the chai act ci I ha\e heard of him be not wholly faife, fhall revive all his hopes, and put an end to compliance. In Italy, wheie amorous plotting is the national'profeflion, I was nöt -eafily cicumvented ;' and here, wheic another gunpowder treafon would as foon be»fuf¬ pected as fuch gins and fnaies, at leaft: by ¿liefe veiy honeft and fublime fim- pletons, I laugh at the fuppofitİon of be¬ ing unearthed. One-
Öne word more. I think I obferve in this knight of Gotham, this Sir Arthur; a more cordial kind of yearning towardour young prince of Babel land than former¬ ly ; a fort of defire to be more intimate with him, of which by the by the youth is not very prompt to admit, and an effort to treat him with more refpect himfelf, by way as it were of fetting a good example to others. If my conjectures are right, the threats of the old muck¬ worm father have fliakcn the crazy nerves of the baronet ; and I half fufpect there is fomething more of meaning at the bot¬ tom of this. Were it fo, were he to at¬ tempt to difcard me, it would indeed add anotlurfpur to the fury of revenge ! An affront fo deep given "by this poor being, this effence of infignificance, would make revenge itfelf, hot unfatiable revenge grow more hot, madden more, and thirft even after blood ! Patience foams at the fup- pofition !
Thank
Thank heaven I hear the noify poftinan with his warning bell, which obliges me in good-time to conclude and cool thefe fermenting juices of mine j C, CLIFTON.
L·ETTEΐt
■ 'li'ETTE-R LXXXIV r i n р Ц^ГЗГТт I ' . TRANK HENLEY то ;i ,. •OLIVER TRENCHARD.
London, Grofvenor-S tretí, lY mind, Oliver, is harraffed by a variety of doubts. I béliével fliall foon he down at Wenbourne Hill, and of-courfe fliall then not fail to meet thee arid vifit thy moft worthy father. Tlie reafon of my journey originates in the doubts I mentioned. I am angry with myfelf for feeling alarms atone mo¬ ment which appear impoffibilities the next.
next. If my fears have any foundation, this Clifton is the deepeft, the moft har¬ dened fiend-like hypocrite ' imagination can paint !—But it cannot be !—Surely it cannot !—I am guilty, hcinoufiy guilty for enduring fuch a thought 1—So much folly and vice, combined with underftand- , ing and I may fay genius fo uncommon, is a fuppofitİon too extravagant, too inju¬ rious ! And yet it is ftrange, Oliver !------A conduit fo fuddenly altered, fo " totally oppofite to old "and inveterate 'habits, is fcarcely reconcileable to the human cha¬ racter. But if diflimulation can be pro¬ ductive of this, is truth lefs powerful?— No !—Truth is omnipotent. Yet who ever faw it hafty in its progrefs ? My only hope in this cafe is that the fuperiority of his mind has rendered him an exception to general rules. But what could hé propofe by his hy- pocrify ?—I cannot tell—His paffions are violent and ungovernable ; andare or very lately
lately have been in full vigour—Again and again 'tis ftrange ! But what of this ?—Why thefe fears ? —Can flie be fpotted, tinged by the ftain of unfanctified defire"? — Never ! —^'The pure chaftity of her foul is fuperior to at¬ taint !—Yet —Who can fay ? —Wilfully her mind can never err : but who can af¬ firm that even flielmay not be deceived, and may not act erroneòufly from the moil holy motives ? Perhaps, Oliver, it is my own fituation, my own defires, but half fubdued, in which thefe doubts take birth. If fo they are highly culpable. Be it as it may, there is a duty vifibly chalked out for me by circumftances.— Her prefent fituation is 'furely a ftate of danger. To fee them married", would now give me delight. It would indeed be the delight of defpair, of gloom almoft approaching horror. But of that I muft not think. My father is the caufe of the prefent delay. , I fear I cannot remove
ţhisi impediment,-but it becomes me to try. Though I had before conceived the de¬ fign, this conduct has even been fuggeft¬ ed to me by Clifton ; and in a mode that proves he can be artful if he pleafe. Yet does it not likewife prove him to be in earneft ? . We have ' lately had feveral converfati¬ ons', one in particular which, even while it feemed to place him in an amiable, fin¬ cere, and generous light, excited fome of the very doubts and ' terrors of which I fpeak—If he be a hypocrite, he guards himfelf with a tenfold mafkl·"-It cannot— No—It cannot be !— " I mean to fpeak to Sir Arthur con¬ cerning my journey, but not to inform him of its purports it would have the face of infult to tell him I was going to be his advocate with his fervant. Not to mention that he has lately treated me with increafing and indeed unufual kindnefs. If I do make an effort, however, it -fliall l?e.
be a ftrenuous one; though My hopes that it fliould be effectual are very few.— My decifion it not yet final, but in my next thou wilt probably learn the refuit. Farewell. F. HENLEY. P. S. My brain is fo buried by its fears that I forgot to caution thee againft a miftake into which it is probable this letter may lead. I mentioned, in one of my laff, the pi eject ΐ had conceived of leaving England. Do not imagine I have abandoned a defign on which the more I reflect the more I am intent. The ffreat о end of life is to benefit community. My mind in its prefent fituation is too deeply affected freely and withoul incumbrance to exert itfelf—This is Weaknefs !—But not the lefs true, Oliver. We are at pre¬ fent fó imbufed in prejudice, have drunk¬ en fo deeply ofthe cup of error, that, after vol, ,., iv. a. hfl yin tr
having ^received taints fo numerous and ingrained, to wifli for perfect confiftency in virtue I doubt were vain. Here or at the antipodes alike I fliould remember her : but I ihould not ali^e be fo often tempted and deluded by falle hopes : the current of thought would not fo often meet with impediments, to arreft, divide, and turn it afide. I have ftudied to divine in what land or among what people, whether favage or fuch as we call poliihed, the energies of mind might be moil productive of good. But this is a difcovery which I have yet to make. The reafons are fo numerous on each fide that I have formed a plan for a kind of double effort. I think of failing for America, where I may aid the ftruggles of liberty, may freely publiffi all which the efforts of reafon can teach me, and ai the fame time may form a fociety of favages, who feem in confequence of their veryrignorance to have a lefs quan¬ tity of error, and therefore to be lefs liable to repel truth than thofe whofe informa¬ tion
tion is more multifarious. A merchant, with whom by accident I became ac¬ quainted,, and who is a man of no mean underftanding, approves and has engaged to promote my plan. But of this if I cornpa to Wenbourne Hill we will talk further. Once more, Oliver, adieu,
T> 2
LETTER
.
LETTER LXXXV. COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX,
L ondón, Dover Stnsi. ([_yOME to my aid, Fairfax ; encourage me ; feed my vanity ; let hungry ambition banquet and allow mé to be a hero, left I relent : for, were I not or Lucifer or Coke Clifton, 'tis certain I íhoukl not perfevere. By the hoft of heaven, Fairfax, but flie is a divine creature ! She fteals upon the foul ! A heart of rock could not refift her! Nor are they wiles, nor woman's lures, nor blan-
blandifliments of trickfey dimples, nor captivating fmiles, with which ihe forms her adamantine fetters. No ; 'tis the open foul of honefty ; true, fincere, and unre¬ lentingly juft, to me, to herfelf, to all; 'tis that enchanting kindnefs, that heaven¬ ly fuavity which never forfakes her j' that equanimity" of fmiling yet obftinate forti¬ tude í 'that hilarity of heart, that knows not gloom becaufe it knows not evil j that mfcrutable purity, which refts fecure that all like itfelf are naively immaculate 5 that—Pfliaw !— í can find no words, find you imagination therefore, and think not I will labour at impoffibility. You have read of ancient veftals, of the virgins of Paradife, and of demi-deitics that tune their golden harps on high ?—Read again —And, having travelled with prophets and apoftlcs to the heaven of heavens, defcend and view her, and invent me language to defcribe her, if you can! t Curfe on this Frank Henley Ì But for him my vengeance never would have been roufed ! Never would the fatal fentence d 2 have
have paffed my lips !— 'Tis now irrevoca¬ ble—^Sure as the lofty walls of Troy were ţ doomed by gods and deftiny to fmoke in ruins, fo furely muft the high-fouled Anna fall—" Ill-ftarred wench!"—I, Fairfax, like other conquerors, cannot fliut pity from my bofom. While I cry havoc, I could almoft weep ; could look reluctant down on devaftation which myfelf had made, and heave a figh, and curfe my proper prowefs !—In love and war alike, fuch, Fairfax, is towering ambition. It muft have victims : its recklefs altars aík a full and large fupply ; and when per¬ chance a fnowy lamb, fpotlefs and pure, bedecked for facrifice, in all the artlefs pomp ofunfufpefling innocence is brought, bright burns the flame, the white clouds curl and mantle up to heaven, and there ambition proudly fits, and fnuifs with glut of lufty deligiit the grateful odour. I know } our tricks, Fairfax ; you are One of the doubtful doctors ; you love to .catch credulity upon your hook. I hear fût laughter gurgling in your throat and out
oui bolts your threadbare fimile—" Before the battle's won the Brentford hero fings Te Deum,"—But don't be waftcful ofthe little wit you have. Do I not tell you it is decreed ? When was I pofted for a va¬ pouring Hector ? What but the recollée·* tions of my reiterated ravings, rcfolves, threats, and imprecations could keep mc fteady ; aflaikd as I am by gentlenefs, be¬ nevolence, and faint-like charity ? By the agency of fubtlety, hypocrify, and fraud, I feek to rob her of what the world holds moft precious. By candour, philanthropy, and a noble expanfion of heart, flic feeks to render me all that is fupe datively great and good—Why did the not feek all this in a lefs offenfive way ? Why did flie oblige me to become a dif- putant with a plebeian ?—Difputant !— What do I fay?—Worfe!—Rival!—De¬ vil !—Myriads of virtues could not atone the crime !—Yet in this deep guilt flie perfeveres and glories !—Can I forget ?— Fear me not, nor rank my .defeat among τ> 4 things
things poffible—Be patient and lend an ear. To one fole object all my efforts point : her mind muft be prepared, ay, fo that when the queftion fliall be put, chafte-as that mind is, it fcaiccly fliall receive a ffiock. Such is the continual tendency of my difcouife. Her own open and undif- guifed manners are my guide. Not a prin¬ ciple flie maintains but which, by my cun¬ ning queftions and affected doubts pufhed to an extreme, adds-Jinks to the chain in which 3 mean to lead her captive. Perhaps, Fairfax, you will tell me this is the old artifice ; and that the minds of all women, who can be faid До have any mind, ¡ muft thus be inveigled to think iightiy of the thing they are. about to lofe, Gi anted. And) et the difference is infi¬ nite. They are brought to think thus lightly of chaftíty : but, fliould you or any one of the gallant phalanx attempt to make Anna St. Ives fo think, fhe would prefently cry buzz to the dull blockhead, and give him his eternal difmiffion. Virtue
Virtue with her is a real exiftence, and as fuch muft be adored. Her paffions are her flaves ; and in this and this alone the lovely tyrant is the advocate of defpotifm. She foon taught me that common arts would be treated by her, not merely with determined and irrevocable repulfe, but with direŕl contempt. Some very feeble effays prefently faíbfied mc. No .encroach¬ ments ofthe touch, no gloting ofthe eye, no well feigned tremblings and lover's pal¬ pitations-would fcr an inftant be fuffered by her. Take the following as a fpecimen of my mode of attack. ■ Among her variety of hypothefes flie has one on mutability· " Little, flie fays, ic as we know of matter and fpirit, we " ftill know enough to perceive they are tc both inftarçraneouíiy, eternally, and in- (c finitely changing. Of what the world " has been, through this feries of never " beginning never-ending mutation, flie "" can form nothing more than conjecture: " yet flie cannot but think thai the golden " f age is a fuppofitİon treated at prefent d 5 , " with
" with ridicule it does not deferve. By " the laws of neceffity, mind, unlefs coun- " teracted by accidents beyond its control, " is continually progreffive in improve- " ment. AVith fome fuch accidents we " are tolerably well acquainted. Such u are thofe which have been deftıuctİve of " its progrefs, notwithftanding the high " attainments it had made in Greece and " Rome. The ruins fiill exifting in Egypt " are wonderful proofs of what it once " was there ; though Egypt is at prefent " almoft unequalled in ignoiance and de- " pravity. Who theft fhall affimi changes " ftill more extraordinary have not hap- " pened ? She has no doubt, fome^revo- "'lution in the planetary fyftem excepted, " that men will attain a much higher de- " gree of innocence, length of life, hap- Xi pinefs and wifdom than have ever yet " been dreamed of, either by hiftoiian, ""fabulift, or poet: for caufes which foi- " merly were equal to the effects then " produced aie now rendered impotent " by the glorious art of printing; which fpreads
" fpreads, preferves, and multiplies know- " ledge, in defpite of ignorance, faife zeal, " and defpotifm." Such was her difcourfe, and thus vaft were her views ! Nay, u 'ged on by my queftions, by the confequences which re- fulted from her own doctrine,?, and by the ardour of emanating benevolence, flie af¬ toniflied me by her fublime virions ; for flic proceeded to prove, from fcemingly fair deduci ion, " that men fliould finally " render themfelves immortal; ffiould be- " come fcarcely liable -to moral miftake ; " fliould all act from principles previoufly " demonftraied, and therefore never con- " tend; fliould be one great family with- " out a ruler, becaufe in no need of being " ruled ; fliould be incapable of bodily " pain or paffion; and fliould expend " their whole powers in tracing moral and " phy fie al caufe and effect; which, be- " ing infinite in their feries, will afford " them infinite employment of-the moil " rational and delightful kind !" d 6 Oh !
Oh ! How did the fweet enthufiaft glow, ay and ¿nake me glow too, while, with a daring but confiftent hand flic "fketched out this bold picture of illufion ! But, while the lovely zealot thus dc- fcanted on fplendid and half incomprehen- fible themes, what did I ? Why, when I found her at tbe proper pitch, when I faw benevolence and love of human kind beaming with moft ardour in her eye, and pouring raptures from her lip, I then re¬ called her to her beloved golden age, her times of primitive fimplicity ; made her inform me what lovers then were, and what marriage ; and what the bonds were which hearts fo affectionate and minds fo honeft and pure demanded of each other. What think you could her anfwers to all thefe queftions be ? What but fuch as I wiflied ? Could lovers like thefe fufpect each other? Could they bafely do the wrong to afk for bond or pledge ? Or, if they wanted the virtue to charm, could they ftill more bafely afk rewards they did not merit ? Could they, with the wretched felfiíh
felfiíh jealoufy of a modern marriage- maker, feck to cadaverale affection and to pervert each other intp a utcnfil, a com¬ modity, a thing appropriate to felf, and liable with other lumber to be caft afide ? No, Fairfax ; flie played fairly and deeply into my hand. She created exactly fuch a pair of lovers as I couid have defired : for with refpect to the truth and conftancy with which flie endowed rhem, if 1 can¬ not be the íhing, í can wear the garb ; ay, and it fliall become me too, fliall fit dťgagč upon mc, and be thought my na¬ tive d re fi». Think not that ï am a mere Jiflcncr: far the revcife. I throw in mafterly touches, which, while they feera only to heighten her picture, produce the full effect by mc intended. Thus, when ffie defcribed the faith and truth and love of the innocents of her own creation, how did I declaim againft the abufe to which fuch doctrine, though immutably true, was liable ! " Alas! madam," faid I, " had the ■" unprincipled youths with which thefe " times
" times abound your powers of argument " with their own principles, how dreadful Cf would be the effect ! How many unfuf- (i pecting hearts would they betray !"
I am once more juft returned from fhe palace of Alcina ! I broke off at the end of my laft paragraph to attend my charmer; and here again am 1 detefting myfelf for want of refolution ; and detefting myfelf ftill more for having made a refolution, for having undei taken that which I am fo eternally tempted to renounce. Your fneer and your laugh are both ready—I know you, Fairfax—" The gentleman is found¬ ing a retreat ! The enterprife is too diffi¬ cult !"—No—I tell you no, no, no—But I am almoft afraid it is too damnable ! I pretended to be exceedingly anxious concerning the delay, -and afflicted at not hearing any thing more from Sir Arthur. If I did not do this, it might be a clue to lead her to fufpect hypocrify, confidering how
how very ardent I was at the commence¬ ment. And, to fay the truth, I am weary enough of waiting ; though it is not my wiih to be relieved by any expedition of Sir Airhur's, who, as I hinted to you be¬ fore, does not appear to be in the leaft hurry, and whofe unction for the gardener's fon increafes. But had you heard her confole me ! Had you feen her kindnefs ' The tear gliftening in her eye while flie entreated me lo confider delay as a fortunate event, which tended to permanent and ineffable "happinefs i had you I fay beheld her foul, for İt was both vifible and audible, Fairfax, though yoa aie the marauder of marriage land and the fworn foe of virginity, even you would have" pardoned my tergi verfa- tion. Did you never behold flie fun buril forth from behind the riding clouds? The fcene that was gloomy, dark and difmal, is fud¬ denly illumined j what was obfcuie be¬ comes confpicuous ; the bleak hills fmile, nhe black meadows aflumc a bright ver¬ dure 5
dure; quaking ihadows dare no longer flay, cold damps are difpelled, andin an inftant all is vifible, clear, and ladiant ! So vanilii doubts when flie begins to fpeak ! Thus in her prefence do the feelings glow; and thus is gloom baniihed from the foul, till all is genial warmth and harmony ! Thefe being my feelings now, when í -am efcaped, when I am beyond the circle of her forceries, think, Fdirfax, be juft and think how reductive, how daiiireious an enemy I have to encounter— Liften and judge. « Oh! Clifton"—She fpeaks! Liiien I fay to her fpells !--" Oh ! Clifton, daily <f and hourly do I blefs this happy acci- " dent, this delay ! í think, with the be- " roic archbifliop, I could have held my fC right hard firmly till the flames had con- " fumed it. could I but have brought to ' c pafs what this b le fifed event has already " almoit accompliihed ! To behold your " mind what it is, and to recollect what " it fo lately was, is blifs unutterable ! I " confidei myfelf now as deftined to be " yours :
*·' yours : but whether I am or am not is " perhaps a thing of little moment. Let " felf be forgotten, and all its petty inte- " refts! What' am I? What can I be, " compared to what you may become? . "" The patriot, the legiflator, the ftatef- <c man, the reconciler of nations, the dif- KC .pcnfer of truth, and the inftructor of the if human race ; for to all thefe you are fi equal. As for me, however ardent, u however great-my good-will, I cannot " have the fame opportunities, Befide I " muft be juft to myfelf and you, and it " delights mc to declare I believe you tc have a mind capable of conceptions <e more vaft than mine, of plans more fi daring and fyftem s more deep, and of ec foaring beyond me. You have the f ' ftrong memory, the keen fenfibility, and u the rapid imagination which form the íť poet. It is my glory to repeat that your " various powers, when called forth, have " as varioufly aftoniflied me. To bid you i: perfevere were now to wrong you, for I c - think í dare affirm you cannot retreat. ťí You
f f You' have at prefent feen too much; ff thought too much, known too much " ever to forget. In private you will be " the honour of your family and lhe de- " light of- your wife ; and in public the " boaft of your country and the admiration " ofthe virtuous and the s wife." I fell on my knee to the fpeaking deity! She feemed delivering oracles ! My paf¬ fions rofe, my heart was full, her eulogium made it loath and abhor its own deceit ; the words·—" Madam, I am a villam !"—- bolted to my lips; there they quivering lingered in excruciating fufpenfe, and at laft flunk back like cowards, half wifhing but wholly afliamed to do their office. By the immortal powers, Fairfax, İt was paft refining ! Why fliould I not be all flie has defcribed ? The hero, the Ic- giflator, the great leader of this liitle world? Ay, why not? She feemed to propheiy. She has raifed a flame in me which, if encouraged, might fertilize or defolate kingdoms. Body of Cæfar, I know not what to fay ! 'Tis
'Tis true flie has treated me ill; nay vilely. It cannot be denied. But ill treat¬ ment itfelf, from her, is fuperior to ail the maukifh kindnefs which folly and caprice endeavour to lavifli. Fairfax, would you did but behold her ! My heart was never fo affailed before ! My refolution is fhaken, I own, but it is not obliterated. No; I will think again. My very foul is repugnant to the fuppofitİon of leaving its envenomed tu¬ mours unaffuaged, and its angered ftabs unavenged. Yet, if healed they could be, flie furely poffeffos .that healing art——« Once more I will think again, What you tell mc in the Poflfcript to your laft concerning Count Caduke [Con¬ fult your dictionary; or to fave yourfelf trouble read Count Crazy, alias Beaunoir] is wholly unintelligible to me. But as you fay the name of the gardener's fon was fey eral times mentioned by him, I fliall take an immediate opportunity of interro¬ gating the 'fquite of flirubs, who I am certain
certain from principle will, when afked, telí me all he knows. .. Apropos of poetry. The panegyric of this fylph of the fun-beams gave mc an impulfe which I could not refill, and the 'following was the offspring of my head¬ long nnd impetuous mufe ; for fuch the huffey is whenever the fit is upon her. I commit it as it may happen to your cen¬ fure or applaufe ; with this flipulation, if you do not like it either alter it till you do, or write me another which both you ami I fliall like better. If that be not fair and rational barter, I know nothing cither of trade, logic, or common fenfe, ANACREONTIC, I. WHEN by the gently gliding ftream. On banks where purple violets fpring, I fee my Delia's beauties beam, I hear my lovely Delia fing, When 1.carts combine And arms entwine, When fond счгегГеь, am'rous ldlľes Yield the height of- human blinb, Entranc'ii
'Ëntranc'd I gaze, and íighing fay. Thus let me love my life away. II. Or when the jocund bowl we pafs, And joke and wit and whim abound, When fong and catch and friend and lafs In fparkiing wine we toait around, When Bull and Pun lludc riot run, And finding ťlil! the mirth increafing, Pealing laughter roars fans ceafing, J peàl ann roar and pant and íny, Tims let me Luigh my life away. III. When dreams of fame my fancy fill, Sweet foothing dreams of verfe and rhymej That mark the poet's happy İkil!, And bid him live to lateft time, Each rifing thought With mufic fraught, Al! full, all flowing, nothing wanting, All harmonious, all enchanting, Oh thus, in rapt delights 1 fay, Thus let me fmg my life away ! IV. Oh lovely woman, gen'rous wine, Thefe potent ι leafures let me quaff !
Thy raptures, wit, oh make them mine ! Oh let me drink and love and laugh !. In flowing verfe Let me rehearfe· How well I've ufed yonv bounteous treafure ; Then at lait when full my meafure, Tho' pale my lip, I'll fmile and fay, I've liv'd the befi of lives away. С CLIFTON.
LET-
LETTER LXXXVL
FRANK HENLEY то OLIVER TRENCHARDv
Londont Grofvenor Stfaf. WITHIN a week, Oliver, we fliall ©nee more meet. What years of fepara¬ tion may afterward follow is more than I can divine. I furely need not tell thee that this thought of feparation, were it not op¬ pofed by principle, would indeed be pain¬ ful, and that it is at moments, almoft too mighty for principle itfelf. But we are the
the creatures of an omnipotent neceffity; and there can be but little need to remind thee that a compliance with the apparent¬ ly beft fliould ever be an unrepining and cheeiful act of duty. í have had a converfation with Sir Ar¬ thur, very ungular in its kind, which has again awakened fenfations in their full force that had previoufly coil me many bitter ftruggles to allay. I began with informing him of my intention to go down to Wenboui ne-Hill; after which I pro¬ ceeded -to tell him it was my defign to embark for America. He feemed furprifed, and faid he hoped notv I anfwered I had reflected very fully on the plan, and that I believed it was fcarce¬ ly probable any reafon fliould occur which could induce me to change my purpofe. The thing, he replied, might perhaps not befo entirely improbable as ï fuppofed. His family had great obligations to me. I had even riiked my life on various occaíb- ons -for them. They thought <my talents very
very extraordinary. In fine, Oliver, the good old gentleman endeavoured to fay all the kind and, as he deemed them, grate¬ ful things his memory coulti fupply ; anol added that, fliould I leave England witli-^ out affording them fome opportunity to rc-t pay their obligations, they fliould be much grieved. There were peihaps two or three very great difficulties in the way ; but ftill he was not fure they might not be over¬ come. Not that he could fay any thing pofitively, for matters were he muft own in a very doubtful ftate. " f He was himfelf indeed very confiderably uneafy, and un- dctei mined: but he certainly wiflied me exceedingly well, and fo with equal cer¬ tainty at prefent did all his family. His daughter, his fon, himfelf, were all my debtors. The good old gentleman's heart over¬ flowed, Oliver, and by its ebullitions raif¬ ed a tumult in mine, which required every energy it poffeffed to repel. What could I anfwer, but that I had done no more for his family than what it was my duty to do vol. iv, e for
for the greateft ftranger ; and that, if gratitude be underftood "to mean a remembrance of favours-received, I and my family had for years indubitably been the receivers ? Hé ftill perfifted however in endeavour¬ ing to diffuade me from the thought of quitting the kingdom. Not finding me -convinced by his arguments, he hefitated, with an evident defire to fay fomething which he knew not very well how to be¬ gin. All minds on fuch occafions are un¬ der ftrong impulfes. My own wifli that he ihould be explicit was eager, and I ex¬ cited him to proceed. At laft he aiked if he might -put a queftion to me ; afluring me it was far from his intention to offend, hut that he had fome uneafy doubts which lie could be very glad to have removed. I defired him to interrogate me freely ; and to affure himfelf that I would be guilty of no diflimulation.' He knew my fincerity, he faid ; but if when I heard I ihould think any thing in what he aiked improper, I pail difpute had a right to refufe. 4 ľanfwered
I anfwered that Л fufpected or rather was convinced í had no fuch right, and requefted him lo begin. He then ftammered, and at laft faid— I think, Mr. Henley, I have remarked fome degree of efteem between you and, my daughter— He ftopped—His defire not to wound my feelings was fo evident that I deter¬ mined to relieve him, and replied— I believe, uv^ I can now divine the fub¬ ject of your queftion. You would be glad to know if any thing have paffed between us, and what ? Perhaps you ought to have been told without aflring ; but I am certain that concealment "at prefent would be highly wrong. I then repeated as accurately as my memory would permit, which is tolerably tenacious on this fubject, all which Anna and I had reciprocally faid and done.—■ It was impoffible, Oliver, to make this recapitulation with apatlry. My feelings were awakened, and I affure thee the emotions of Sir Arthur were as lively as in Ľ 9, fuch
fuch a mind thou couldft well fuppofe.— The human heart feems to be meliorated and foftened by age. He wept, a thing with him certainly not ufual, at the recital of his daughter's heroic refolves in favour of duty, and at her refpect for parental prejudices. Her dread of rendering him unhappy made him even fob, and bui ft into /requent interjections of—" She is a " dear girl ! She is a heavenly girl ! I " always loved her ! She is the delight " of my life, my foul's treafure ! From " her infancy to this hour, flie was always " an angel !" After hearing me fully confirm him İn his efteem and affection for fo fuperlative a daughter, he added—You tell me, Mr. Henley, that you freely informed my daughter you thought it was even her duty to prefer you to all mankind, even though her father and friends fhall difapprove the match. ' I did, fir. I fpoke'from conviction, and 'fliould have thought myfelf culpable had I been filent. Perhaps
Peihnps fo. But that is very uncommon doctrine. It w T as not merely that more felicity would have been fecured lo ourfelves, but greater good I fuppofed would refuJt to fociety. I have heard you explain things ofthat kind before. I do not very well unùer- ffand them, but give me leave to aík —Are you ftill of the fame opinion ? I am, fir.—Not that I am fo confident as I was—Mr. Clifton has a very aftonifli- ing ftrength of mind : and, fliould it b» turned to the worthy purpofes of which it is capable, I dare by no means decide po¬ fitively in my own favour : and the decifion which I now make againft him is the refuit ofthe intimate acquaintance which Imuft neceffarily have with my own heart, added to certain dubious appearances as to his, which I know not how lo reconcile. Of myfelf 1 am fecure. And of him you have fomc doubts ? I have : but I ought in duty to add the e 3 appearances
'appearances of their being unjuft aie daily ftrengthened. Sir Aithur paufed, ltiminated, and again feemed embanaffed. At Iaft he owned he knew not what to fay: turn which way he would the obftacles weie very confide* lable. His mind had really felt more dif¬ trefs, within thefe two months, than it had ever known before. He could refolve on nothing. Yet he could not but wifh^ï had not been quite fo determined on going to America. There was no faying what courfe things might take." Mrs. Clifton was very ill, and in all probability could not live long. But again he knew not what to fay. He certainly wiflied me very well—Very well—I was an uncommon young man. I was a gentleman by nature, which for aught he knew might be better than a.gentleman by birth. The woild had its opinions; perhaps they weie juft, perhaps unjuft. île had been ufed to think with the world, but he had heard ib much lately that he v/as not quite fo pofitive as he had been-----[This, Olhcr, îeminded
reminded me of the power of truth ; how it faps the ftiong holds oí error and wind« into the heart, and how inceffantly its advocates ought to propagate'it on every occafion.] He was not quite fo well pleaf¬ ed as he had been wdth my father, but that was no fault of mine ; he knew I had a very different manner of thinking. Still t he muft fay it was what he very little ex¬ pected. He hoped however that things would one way or other go more fmoothly ; and he concluded with taking my hand, preffing it very warmly, and adding with confiderable earneftnefs------ ťf If you,can- " think of changing your American pro» " ječi, pray do !—Pray do !— After which he left me with fomething like a heavy heart. And now, Oliver, how ought Д to act ?" The oppofing caufes of thefe doubts and difficulties in his mind are evident. The' circumftances which have occurred-in my favour, being aided by the obftinate felf¬ iihnefs of my father, by his acquired wealth, .and as J fuppofe by the embroiled e 4 ftate
ftate of Sir Arthur's affairs, have produced an unhoped for revolution in tiie fenti¬ ments óf Sir Arthur. But is it not too late ? Are not even lhe moft tragical con¬ fequences to be feared from an oppofition to Clifton ? Nay, if his mind be what his words and behaviour fpeak, would not oppofition be unjuft? Were it not better with fevere but virtuous refolution ίο repel thefé flattering and probably deceitful hopes, than by encouraging them to feed the canker-worm of peace, and add new force to the enemy within, who rather ftunned than conquered is every moment ready to revive. Neither is Sir Arthur mafter of events. Nor is his mind confiftent enough to be in no danger of change. My heart is fufficiently prone to indulge oppofite fentiments, but it muft be filcnc- ed ; it muft liften to the voice of truth. Did I but better underftand this Clifton, I fliould better know how to decide.— That he looks up to her with admiration I am convinced. She feems to have dif¬ covered
covered the true key to his underftanding as well as to his affe£lions. Even within this day or two, I have obferved fymptoms very much in his favour. How do I know but thus influenced he may become the firfl of mankind ? The thought reflores me to a fenfe of right. Never, Oliver, fliall felf complacency make me guilty of what cannot but be a crime moil heinous? If fuch a mind may by thefe means be gained wdiich would Qtherwife be loft, fliall it be extinguiíhed by me ? Would not an affaffination like this outweigh thou¬ fands of common murders ? Well may I fli udder at fuch an act ! Oliver, I am re¬ folved. If there be power in words or in reafon my father fliall comply. As far as I underftand the human mind, there is and even fliould he perfevere there always muft be fomething to me enigma¬ tical in this inftance of its efforts in Clifton. Perfevere however I· moil fincerely hope and even believe he will.—But fliould he not ?—The fuppofitİon is dreadful !—;■— Anna St. Ives !—My heart finks within e . me!
me !—Can virtue like hers be vulnerable? —Surely not I—The more pure a woman is in principle the moré fecure would flie be from common feducers. But, if the man can be found who poffeffes the necef¬ fary though apparently incompatible excefs of folly and wifdom, there is a mode by which fuch a woman is more open to the arts of deceit than any other. And is not that woman Anna St. Ives ? Nay more", if he be not a prodigy of even a flill more extraordinary kind, is not that man Coke Clifton? . He came in the heyday of youthful pride, felf-fatisfied, felf-con-'inced, rooted İn prejudice but abundan! in ideas. Ar¬ gument made no impreffion ; for where he ought to have liftened he laughed, The weapons of wit never failed him; and, w T hile he lanched them at others, they re¬ coiled and continually lacerated himfelf. Of this he was infenfible: he felt them not, or felt them but little. His haughtl·· nefs never flumbered ; and to oppofe him t was to irritate, not convince, For four months
} months he continued pertinacioully the fame ; then, without any caufe known to me, fuddenly changed. It was indeed too fudden not to be alarming !. And yet my firm and cool anfwer to all this is, that hypocrify fo foolifh as,well as. atrocious is all but impoffible— Indeed, Oliver, I do not feek to wrong him : I do not hunt after unfavourable conjectures, they force themfelves upon me ■: or if I do it is t unconfcioufly. " The paffions are ftiangely pei verfe : and if I am deceived, as I hope I am, it is they that mifguide me.
Clifton has juft been with me. Some correfpondent from Paris has mentioned the vifit paid to me inftead of him by the Count de Beaunoir, but in a dark and un¬ intelligible manner, and he came to en¬ quire. I confefs, Oliver, while I was an¬ fwering his interrogatories, I feemed to feel that both you and I had drawn a faife Е б conclufion
conclufion relative to fecrecy; and that by concealment to render myfelf the fubject of fufpicion was an unworthy procedure. However as my motives were not indirect, whatever my filence might be, I anfwer¬ ed without referve and told him all that- had paffed ; frankly owning my fears of his irritability as the reafon why I did not mention the affair immediately. He laughed at the Count's rhodomon- tade, acknowledged himfelf obliged tome, and allowed that at that time my fears were not wholly caufelefs. He behaved with eafe and good humour, and left me without appearing to have taken any of¬ fence. I íhall be with thee on Tuefday. I know it will be a day of feàfting to the family, and I will do my beft endeavour not to caft a damp on the hilarity of benevolence and friendihip. *F. HENLEY.
LETTER
LETTER LXXXVIÍ,
ΛίΐΝΑ WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON,
Londen, Gropvemr-Sheet. A. LAS ! Louifa, what are wc ?—What are our affections, what our rcfolves ?— Taken at unguarded moments, agitated, hurried away by paflion, how fcldom have wc for a day together reafon to be fatisfied with our conduct ? Not pleafed with myfelf, I doubt I have given caufe of difpleafure to your brother. My father was in part the occafion : for a moment he made me forget myfelf------ Louifa
.80' IVES!
Iwouifa ! —Frank Henley İs going to Ame¬ rica í He does not Jigh'tly refolve, and his refolution feems fixed .'—Good God '—I— Louifa !—I am afraid I am a guilty crea¬ ture !—Weak!—Very weak !—And is not weaknefs guilt?—But why fliould he leave us ?—Where will he find hearts more alive to bis worth ? Sir Arthur came to inform me ofit : he bad been converfing with him, and had endeavoured but vvithout effect to difluade him. from his purpofe. He came and' begged me to try. I perhaps might be more fuccefsful. There was a marked fignificance in his manner, and I allied him why ? Nay, my dear child, faid he, and his heart'feemed full, you. know why. Mr, Henley- has told me why. What,'iir, has hè told? Nothing, child'— [Sir Arthur took my hand]—Nothing, but what is honourable to you— Í' queftioned him, and you know he is never guilty of falfehood. No,'.fir; he is incapable ofit. Well,,
Wel!, Anna, try then to perfuade him not to leave us. Though he is a very ex¬ cellent young man, I am afraid he has not the beft of fathers. I begin to feel I have not been fo puiden t as I might have been; and, if Mr. Henley were to leave Eng¬ land, the father might attribute it to us, and—[Sir Anhurhefitated]—I have receiv¬ ed fome extraordinary letta s from Abime¬ lech, of which I did not at firft fee the full drift ; but it is now clear; every thing· correfponds, and my converfation with young Mr. Henley has confirmed all I „had fuppofed. However he ic a very goocl, a very extraordinary young gentleman, and· I could wifli he would not go. I don't know what may happen. Your brother came in and Sir Arthur left mc, defiring mc as he went to re¬ member what he had faid. Clifton after an apology afked—Does it relate to me ? —At that moment Frank entered. No, faid I ; it relates to one who I did not think would have been í о ready to forfake his iriends ! A thoufand
A thoufand thoughts had crowded to my mind ; a dread of having ufed him ungencroufly, unjuftly; a recollection of all he had done and all he had fuffered; his enquiring, penetrating, and unbound¬ ed genius ; his fuperlativc virtues ; a hor¬ ror of his beins; baniihed his native coun- try by me; of his wandering among ftrangers, expofed to poverty, perils, and death, with the conviction in his heart that I had done him wrong !—My tumultuous feelings ruflied upon me, overpowered mc, and in a moment of enthufiafm I ran to him, fnatched his hand, -fell on my knee and exclaimed—" For the love of God, Mr. Henley, do not f hink of leaving us!" Clifton like myfelf could not conquer the firft affault of paflion : he pronounced the word madam! in a tone mingled with furprife and fevere energy, which recalled me to myfelf— You fee, faid I, turning to him, what an unworthy creature I am !—But Mr. Henley has taken the ftrangeft refolu¬ tion— ! What,
What, madam, faid your brother, re¬ covering himfelf, and with fomc plea- fanlry, is he for a voyage to the moon ? •Or does he wait the arrival ofthe next co¬ met to make the tour of the univerfe ? ( Nay, anfwered I, you muft join me, and not treat my poor petition with ridi¬ cule —You muft not go, Mr. Henley ; in-* deed you muft not ! I, Mr. Clifton, my father, my brother, we will none of us hear of it ! We are all your debtors, and it would be unjuft in you to deprive us of every opportunity of teftifying our friend¬ fliip. Your brother, Louifa, made an effort worthy of himfelf, repreffed the error of his firft feelings, affumed the gcntle,afpect * of entreaty, and kindly joined me. We are indeed your debtors, faid he to ι Mr. Henley. But I hope it-is not true. I hope there is no danger that you fliould forfake us. Where would you go ? Where can you be fo happy ? I mean firft, replied Frank, to go to Wenbourne
Wenbourne Hill; and after that my in. tentions arc for America. This, Louifa, brought on a long dif- .cufflon. I and your bi other both endea¬ voured to convince him it was his duty to remain in Knoland; that he could be more ferviceablc heie, and would find better opportunities for effecting that good which he had fo warmly at heart than in, any other country. He anfwered that, though he was not convinced by our arguments, he ihould think it his duty ferioufly to confider them.. But we could not make him promife any thing further. Previous to his return from Wenbourne Hill he would determine. Indeed, Louifa, this affair lies very heavily upon my mind. I am inceffantly accufing myfelf as the caufe of his exile. And am I· not ? By the manner of Sir. Arthur I am fure he muft have faid fome¬ thing very highly in my praife. I bave gone too far with your brother to recede : that is now impoffible. It would be more flagrant injuftice than even the wrong to Frank,.
Frank, if a wrong it be, and indeed, Lou¬ ifa, I dread it is !—Indeed I do\ —I dread it even with a kind of horror ! I thought reafon would have appeafed ihcfe doubts ere this ; but every occafion I find calls them forth with unabated vi¬ gour. Surely this mental blindnefs muft be the refuit of neglect. Had we but the will, the determination, it might be re¬ moved. Oh how reprehenfible is my in- confiftency. The rapid decline of Mrs. Clifton grieves me deeply. Your brother too has fre¬ quently mentioned it with feelings honour¬ able lo his heart. He is now more than ever fenfible of her worth. He has been with me fince I began to write this letter, a r xl there is not the ieaft appearance of re¬ maining?: innbrake on his mind. It was О О indeed but of fliort duration, though too ftrong and fudden not to be apparent, AH kindnefs, peace, and felicity be with •you. A. W. ST. IVES.
LETTER:
LETTER LXXXVni.
СОКЕ CLIFTON TO CUY FAIRFAX. London, Dover Sirtef. 1 WILL curfe no more, Fairfax. Or, if curfe I do, it fliall be at my own fatuity. I wilLnot be the dilatory, languid, ranting, moralizing Hamlet of the drama ; that has, the vengeance of hell upon his lips and the charity of heaven in his heart. I will u(g, not fpeak daggers— Fairfax, I am mad !—Raging !------The fmothered and pent-up mania muft have vent—What ! Was not the page fufficient- Jy
]y black before ?—I am amazed at my own infatuation ! My very foul fpurns at it !—But 'tis paft —Deceitful, damned fex ! -—Idiot that I was, I began to fancy my¬ felf beloved !—I !—Blind, deaf, infenfate driveller ! — Torpid, blockilh, brainlcfs mammct!------ Moft fublime afs !—Oh for a bib and barley fugar, with the label Mcacock pinned before and behind !— Fairfax, I never can forgive my own abfurd and defpicable ftupidity !—Mar¬ riage !—What, with a woman in whofe eye the pcrfeci impreffion and hated form of a mean rival is depicted?—Jn colours glowing hot! — Who lives, revels, tri¬ umphs in her heart!—I marry fuch a wo¬ man ?—I ?— " I had rather be a toad, " And live upon the vapour of a dungeon, " Than keep a corner in the thing I love " For others' ufe." I am too full of phrenfy, Fairfax, to tell thee what I mean : but flie has given me another proof, more damning even than , all the former, of the gluttony with which her
her foul gorges. Her gloating eye devours him ; -ay, I being prefent. Nay, were I tiffs moment in her arms, her arms would be clafping him, not me; with him flic would caroufe, nor. would any thing like me exift—Contagion!— Poİfon and boiling oil 1— Never before was patience fo put to the proof—My danger was extreme. _ With rage flaming in my heart, I was obliged to wear complacency, fatisfaction and fmiles on my countenance. The fellow has determined to ihip him¬ felf for America—Would it were for the Dottomlefs pit í —And had you beheld her panic?—St. Luke's collected maniacs at the full ofthe moon could not have equalled her i-r-Twas well indeed her frantic out¬ rage was fo violent, or I had been detected and all had been loft—As it was I half betrayed myfelf—The fellow's eye glanced at me. However it gave me my cue; and, all things confidered, í afterward perform¬ ed to a miracle. Her own enthuiiaftic torrent fwept all before it, and gave me time.
tíme. She was in an ecftafy ; reafoning, fupplicating, conjuring, panting. I, her friends, the whole world muft join her; and join her I did. It was the very relief of which hypocrify flood in need. I en¬ treated this ftraight-backed youth, ftiff in determination, lo condefcend to lend a pitying car to our pétitions ; to fuffer us to permeate his bowels of compaffion, and avert this fatal and impending cloud, fraught with evils, mifery, and mifchief— But marry no !—It could not be !—Sen¬ tence was paffed—He had been at the trouble to makf a pair of fcales, and knew the weight to a fcruple of every link in the whole chain,of caufe and effect—Teach him, truly !— Ádvife him !—Move him I When ? Who ? How ?—At laft compli¬ ance, willing to be royally gracious, faid, Well, it would confider—Though there was but little'hope—Nothing it had heard' .had any cogency of perfcrutation—But, in fine, it would be clement, and confider. Do you not fee this fellow, Fairfax ? Is íhe not now before your eyes ? Is .he not 'the
the moft confuinmate------? But why do I trouble myfelf a moment about him ?— It is her !-Л 1er!— . Nor is this all. Did that devil that moft delights in mifchief direct cverv concurring circumftance, they could not all and each *be more uniform, more coercive to the one great end. This poor dotterel, Sir Arthur, is playing fatl and loofe with mc. He has been at his foundings—He l—Im¬ becile animal !—Could wifli there were not fo many difficulties—Is afraid they cannot be ali removed—Has his doubts and his fears—Twenty thoufand pounds is a large fum, .and Mrs. Clifton is very po¬ fitive—His own affairs much lefs promifing, than he fuppofed------Then by a declen- jQon of hems, hums,-and has, he defcended to young Mr. Henley—A very extraordi¬ nary young gentleman ?—A rexy furprifing youth !—One made on purpofe as it were for plum-cake days, high feftivals, and Tarée fliow! —A prodigy!—Not begotten, born or bred in the dull blind-man's buff" way of fimple procreation ; "but fent us on a Sun-
a Sunday morning down Jacob's ladder ! —Then for obligations to him, countlhem. who could!—He muft firft ftudy-more arithmetic !—And as for affection it was a very wayward thing—-Not always in peo¬ ple's power—There was no knowing what was beft— The hand might be given and the heart be wanting—And with refpečt to whether the opinions of the world ought to be regarded, good truth he knew not. Many ! The woild was much more ready to blame others than to amend itfelf: and he had been almoft lately perfuaded not to care a fico for the world. But for his part he was a godly chriftian, and wiflied all for the beft. He had faith, hope, and charity, which were enough for one. Do not imagine, Fairfax, the poor do¬ tard would have dared to betray himfelf thus far, had not I prefently perceived his drift and wormed him of thefe difmal co¬ gitations of the fpirit. Ile beat about, and hovered, and fluttered, -and chirped mournfully, like the poor infatuated bird that beholds the ferpent's mouth open, into vol. iv. f which
which 'it is immediately to drop and be ,devoured. However, having begun; I -was determined to make him unburden his •whole heart. If hereafter he can poflibly find courage to face me, in order to re¬ proach, I have my leflbn ready. " Out x< "of thy own mouth will I judge thee, " finner." Gangrened as my heart is, I ftill find a fatisfaciion in this felf convalefcence. The lady of mellifluous fpeech fliall fuborn no more ; no more fliall lull me into beatific ílumbers. I have recovered from my trance, and what I dreamed was celeftial I will demonftrate to be mere woman. 'From his own lips I learn that this info¬ lent fcoundrel received a vifit from the Count de Beaunoir, which was intended for me : and, out of tender pity to my body, left, God 'ild us, it fliould get a drilling, he did beftow fome trifle of that wit and reafon, of which he has fo great a fuperflux, upon the Count, thereby to turn .afide his wrathful ire. I heard the gentleman tell his tale, and tickle
tickle his imagination with the remem¬ brance öf his own doctiloquy, with infinite compofure ; and, whenever I put a quef¬ tion, took care firft to prepare a fmile. Every thing was well, better could not be. With refpect to Monfieur le Comte, I'll take fome opportunity to whifper a word in his ear. It is not impoffible, Fairfax, but that I may vifit Paris even within this fortnight. Not that I can pretend to pre¬ dict. They fliall not think I fly them, fliould any foul among them dare to dream of vengeance. I know the Count to be as vain of his ikill in the fword as he is of his pair of watch firings, his Paris-Bir¬ mingham fnuff-box, or the bauble that glitters on his finger. I think I can give him a leffon : at leaft I mean to try. My mother's health declines apace. I know not whether İt may not fliortly be neceffary for me to vifit her. The lofs of her will afflict me, but in all appearance it is inevitable, and Ί fear not far diftant. . Once more, Fairfax, fliould you again fall in companv with the Count, and he' ~ f 2 v ihould
íhould give himfelf the moil trifling airs, affure him that I will do myfelf the honour to embrace him within a month at fartheft from that date, be it when it will. Adieu. С CLIFTON.
LETTER LXXXIX. ANNA WENBOURNE ST. ÏVES то LOUISA CLIFTON. London, Grofvenor-Street. Η E is "gone, Louifa ; has left us ; his purpofe unchanged, his heart oppreffed, and his mind intent on promoting the hap¬ pinefs of thofe by whom he is exiled. And what
what am T, or who, that I fliould do him" this violence ? What validity have thefe arguments of rank, relalionfhip, and the woild's opprobrium ? Are they juft ? 'lie refuted them : fo he thought, and fo per/týs to think. And who was ever lefs partial, or more fevere to himfelf f Louifa, my mind is greatly difturbed. His high virtues, the exertion of them for ' the peculiar prote£iion of me and my fa¬ mily, andthe dread of committing an adì of rnpardonable injuftice, if unjuft it be, are images that haunt and tantalize me in¬ ceffantly. If my conclurions have been faife, and if his afferted claims be true, how fliall I anfwer thofe which I have brought upon myfelf? The claims of your brother, which he urges withoul romiffion, are ftill ftronger. They have been countenanced, admitted, and encouraged. I cannot recede. What can I do but hope, ardently hope, Frank Henley is in an error,, and ihat he himfelf may make the difcovery ? Yet how long and fruitlefs have thefe hopes been ! My f 3 dilemma
dilemma is extreme ; for, if I have Ьепл miftaken, act how I will, extreme muft be the wrong I commit ! Little did I imagine a moment fo full of bitter doubt and diftruft as this couid come. Were I but fatisfied of the rectitude of my decifion, there are no fenfations which I could not ftifle, no affections which I could not calm, nor any wandei ing wiihes but what I could reprove to filence. But the dread of a flagrant, an odious injuftice diffracts me, and I know not where or of whom to feek confolation. Even my Louifa, the warm friend of my heart, cannot determine in my favour.
Your brother has been with me. He found me in tears, enquired the caufe, and truth demanded a full and unequivocal confidence. I ihewed him what IJiad been writing. You may well'imagine, Louifa, he did not read it with total apa¬ thy- But. he fuppreffed his own feelings with endeavours to give relief to mine.—■ lie
He argued to ihew me my motives had been highly virtuous. He would not fay —[His candour delighted me, Louifa,]— He would not fay there was no ground for my fears : he was interefted and might be partial. He believed indeed I had acted in ftrict conformity to the pureft prin¬ ciples; but, had I even been miftaken, the origin of my miftake was fo dignified as totally to deprive the act of all poffible turpitude. He was foothing and kind, gave high encomiums to Frank, took blame to him- felf for the error of his former opinions, and, reminding me of the motives which firft induced me to think of him, tendeily aiked If I had any new orrecent caufe to be weary of my taik. What could I anfwer ? What, but that I was delighted with the rapid change perceptible in his fentiments, and with the ardour witb which his enquiries were continued ? Frank Henley is by this time at Wen¬ bourne-Hill. You will fee him. Plead f 4 our
our caufe, Louifa : urge him to remain among us. Condefcend even to enfoice my felfifiVmotive, that he would not leave me under the torturing fuppofitİon of hav¬ ing banifhedhim from a country which he was born to enlighten, reform, and blefs ! There is indeed another argument ; but I knownot whether it ought lobe mention¬ ed. Sir Arthur owns he is in the power of the avaiicious Abimelech, and I believe is in dread of foieclofures that might even eject him from Wenbomne-Hill. This man muft have been an early and a deep adventurer in the bade of ufury, or he 'never could have gained wealth fo gieat as he appears to have amaffed. Paft incidents, with all of which you are acquainted, have given Sir Aithur a high opinion of Frank : and this added to his own fears, I am perfuaded would lead him to confider a union between us at pie- fent with complacency, were not fuch an inclination oppofed by other circumftan¬ ces. The open encouragement that he himfelf has given to Clifton is one, and it is
is ftrengthened by all the intereft of the other branches of our family. Your bro¬ ther is highly in favour with Lord Fitz Allen. My aunt Wenbourne equally ap¬ proves the match, and Clifton and -my brother Edwaid are become intimate. As to me, reafon, confiftency, and' my own, forward conduct, oblige me to be the ene¬ my of Frank. Louifa, I fcarcely know what I write ! Think not I have abandoned myfelf to the capricious gufts of paffion ; or that my love of unconraminated and rigorous virtue is leffened. No, it is indecifion ; it is an abhorrence of injuftice which fliake and difquiet me v Write to me ; let me kno\s your fenti¬ ments ; and particularly how far your ap¬ plication to Frank, when you have made ii, is fuccefsful. I am anxious to receive your letter, for I know it will infpire for¬ titude, of which I am in great, great need. A. W. ST. IVES.
f 5 LETTER
LETTER XC.
LOUISA CLIFTON τΌ ANNA-WENBOURNE ST. IVES.
Roß'BanL· OH my deareft and ever dear Anna, what fliall I fay, how íhall I affuage doubts that take birth in principles fo pure and a heart fo void of guile ? I know not. I have before acknowledged the mift is too thick for me to penetrate. The worthy the noble minded Frank has been with us, and I could devife no better way than to ihew him your letter. He was greatly moved, and collecting all the firmnefs of his foul refolutely de clared
clared that, fince your peace was fo deep¬ ly concerned, be his own fenfations what they might, he would conquer them and remain in England. The heart-felt ap¬ plaufe he beftowed upon you was almoft infupportably affecting. He has indeed a deep fenfe of your uncommon worth j and he alone I fear on earth is capable of doing itjuftice. But things have taken a different turn ; find what can the beft of us do, when in¬ volved as we continually are in doubt and difficulty, but aci as you do with impartial felf denial, and the moft rigid regard to truth and virtue ? Alas, dear Anna, I too am in need of fupport, and in fearch of fortitude!—My mother !—She will not be long among us ! —A heart more benevolent, a mind more exalted— ! She calls !—I hear her feebb voice !—Not even my Anna muft rob her of my company, for thefe few remaining moments ihe has yet to come I am her laft confolation. L. CLIFTON. f 6 I expect
I expect you .will-this poft receive a let¬ ter from Franks that will fpeák. more effec¬ tually to your heart than I have either the time to do or the power.
LETTER XCI.
FRANK. HENLEY TO ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES,
MADAM, Weiiheume-Htll. Y OUR generous and zealous friend has thought proper to ihew me your letter.—· I will not attempt to defcribe the fenfa¬ tions
tions it .excited'j but, as your peace of mind is precious to me., and more preci¬ ous ftill perhaps to the interefts of fociety, and fince my departure would occafion alarms and doubts fo ftrong, I am deter¬ mined to ftay. My motives for going I thought too forcible and well founded to" be overpowered ; nor could they perhaps have been vanquiihed by any lefs caufe. —If one of us muft fuffer the warfare of contending fentiments and principles, let it be me. It was to fly from and if pof¬ fible forget or fubduc them that J proje£t- ed fuch a voyage. Our duties to fociety muft not cede to any eíľeminate compaf- lion for ourfelves. We are both enough acquainted with thofe duties to render us more than commonly culpable, fliould we be guilty of neglect. To defcribe my weaknefs, and the contention lo which my paffions have been lately fubjeft, might tend to awaken emo¬ tions in you which ought to be eftranged from your mind. 'Our lot is caft : let us feek fupport in thofe 'principles which firft
firft taught us reciprocal efteem/ nor pal¬ liate our defertion of them by that felf pity which would become our reproach,— We have dared to make high claims, form high cnterprifes, and affért high truths; let us fliew ourfelves worthy ofthe preten¬ fions we have made, and not by our pro¬ per weaknefs betray the caufe of which we are enamoured. You will not—no, you are too juft— I am fure, madam, you will not attri¬ bute refolutions like thefe, which are more (infinitely more) painful to the heart than they ought to be, to any light or un¬ worthy change of fentiment. Superior gifts, fuperior attainments, and fuperior virtues inevitably beget admiration, in thofe who difcover them, for their poffef¬ fors. Admiration is the parent of efteem, and the continuance and increafe of this efteem is affection, or, in its pureft and beft fenfe> love. To fay I* would not efteem and would not love virtue, and ef- pecially high and unufual virtue, woul,d be both folly and guilt. But
But you have taught me how pure and felf-denying this love may be. Oh that ihe man of your choice may but become all you hope, and all of which his uncom¬ mon powers are capable ! Oh that I may but fee you as happy as you deferve to be, and I think I íhall then not beftow much pity upon myfelf I have forborne, madam, to intrude the petty difquiets of another kind, from which as )ou will readily imagine I can¬ not have been wholly free. ,Need I fay how much I difapprove my father's views, and the mode by which he would have them accompliflicd? There is no effort. I will not make to conquer aiid remove this obftacle. It wounds me to the heart that you, the daughter of his benefactor, ihould for a moment be dependant on his avarice. The injury and iniquity 'are equally revolting, and there are moments when my prejudices falfely accufe me of being a participator in the guilt. I have had two converfations with my father: they both were animated; but, though
though he was very determined, his refo¬ lution'begins to fail ; and, as I have juf- rice on my fide and am ftill more deter¬ mined than he, I have no doubt that,in a few days every thing which Sir Arthur has'required of him he will be willing to undertake. However as in a certain fenfe all is doubtful which is yet to be done, perhaps ftrict prudence would demand that Sir Arthur fliould not be led to hope till fuc¬ cefs is afcertained ; of which I will not delay a moment to fend you information. I am, &c. F. HENLEY.
LJi/J/-
LETTER XCII.
'COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX.
Loudon, Davet· Street» I HE moment, Fairfax, the trying, the great, the glorious moment approaches. Every poffible contributing caufe calls aloud for expedition, and reprobates delay. This gardening fellow is 'gone. For his abfence I thank him, .but not for the refo¬ lute fpirit with which he intends to attack his father and make him yield. Tie has a tongue that would filence the congregra- ted clamours of the' Sorbonne, anddumb- found'Beliaf himfelf in the hall of Pande¬ monium..
monium. 'Tis certain he has a tough morfei to encounter, and yet I fear he will - fucceed. This would deftroy all—Marry her ?— No !—By Heaven, no ! If the hopes of Abimelech be not ftubborn enough to. perfevere, they muft and fhall be ftrength¬ ened. His refufal İs indifpenfably necef¬ fary in every view, unlefs the view of marriage, which I once more tell you, Fairfax, I.now deleft. I fliould have no plea with her, were that of delay removed: What is ftill worfe, this delay may be removed by another and more painful caufe. My mother it appears declines ra¬ pidly: her death is even feared, and ihould it happen,,. I cannot pretend to infift on the obftacles of which her maternal cares and provifionary fears have raifed. I can think of no certain expedient, for this Abimelech, but that of aaanonymous letter. Neither the writing nor the ftyle muft appear to be mine -, nor muft the hand that writes it underftand its purport Tyros and ignqrant as my opponents are, in the tricks
tricks and intrigues of amorous ftratagem, ftill they have too much underftanding not to be redoubtable. The old necromancers, Subtlety and Falfehood, muft forge the magic armour and the enchanted fliield, under which I fight. Like wizards of yore, they muft render me in vifible ; and the fair form of the foolifli Clifton they have imagined muft only be feen. Honeft Ahy ? or I miftake him, is too worthy a fellow to defert fo good a caufe. And this cloud-capt lady, whofe proud turrets I have fworn to level with the duft, will not defcend "to plead the approaching death of my mother, when I fliall urge the injuftice of delay------Ay, Faiifax, the injuftice ! I mean to command, to dare, to oveiawe; that is the only oratory which can put her to the rout. She loves to he aftoniflied, and aftoniflied flie fliall be. If I do not fhrink from myfelf her fall is in¬ fallible. My heart exults in the coming joy ! Never more will the milky pulp of com- paflioa
paffion rife to mar the luxurious meal Г She has been writing' to the fellow. Fair- fix ; ay, and has fhewn me her letter ! For, let her but imagine that truth, or virtue, or principle, or any other abortive being of her own creation, requires her to follow the whims of her disjointed fancy, and what frantic folly is there of which flie is incapable ? 'Tis maddening to recollect, but ihe doats on the fellow ; abfolutely doats ! I am the tormenting demon that has appear¬ ed to interrupt her happinefs ; flie the de¬ voted victim, facrificed to fnield me from harm! The thought of feparation fiom him is diffracting, and every power muft be conjured up to avert the horrid woe! Never before did my feelings fupport fuch various and continual attacks ; never did I endure infidelity fo open or intuit fo unblufiiing. But, patience ; the day of vengeance is at hand, or rather is here ! This moment will I fly and take it ! Ex¬ pect to hear te of battles, fieges, difaftrous ct chances, and of moving accidents; but " not
" not of hair breadth 'fcapes !"—Efcape' flie cannot ! I go ! She falli ! С. CLIFTON..,
LETTER XCIII. FRANK HENLEY TO ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES.
Wenbourne Hi/l. J. Τ is now a week fince I wrote ro you, madam, at which time I took fome plea¬ fure in acquainting you with my hopes of fuccefs. Thefe hopes continued to in¬ creafe, and my father had almoft promifed to agree to the juft propofals I made, when 4 two
two days ago he fuddenly and pcrtinaci¬ oufly changed his opinion. I am forry to add that he now appeals to be much more determined than ever, and that I am wholly aftoniflied at and wholly unable to account for this alteration of fentiment. I delayed fending you the intelligence by yeilei day's poft, hoping it was only a temporary return of former pro¬ jects, which I could again reafon away. But I find him fo pofitive, fo paffionate, and fo inacceffible to reafon, that I am perfuaded fome fecret caufe has arifen of which I am ignorant. Yet do not be de¬ jected, dear madam, nor imagine I will lightly give it up as a loft caufe—No—My mind is too much affected and too earneft¬ ly bent on its object not to accompliih it, if poffible. I received your letter*, but have no thanks that can equal the favour. I hope the emotions to which it gave birth were worthy
worthy fuch a correfpondent. I can truly and I believe innocently fay, my heart fympathifes in all your joys, hopes, and apprehenfions; and.that my pleafure, at the progrefs of Mr. Clifton in the difcovery of truth and the practice of virtue, is but little lefs than your own. I am glad you thought proper to be cautious of giving Sir Arthur any uncon¬ firmed expectations; and I promife you to exert every effort to effect a propitious change in the prefent temper and refolu¬ tions of my father. I am, dear madam, &c. *. HENLEY.
LET-
LETTER XCIV.
COKE CLIFTON TO <И7У FAIRFAX.
London, Dover'Siieef. WHEN laft I wrote my refolution was taken, and I determined on immediate attack. But I went in a feeming unlucky moment; though I much miftake ifit were not the very reverfe. The fuppofed misfortune I had forefeen fell upon me. The 'fquite of preachers had fairly overcome his father's obftinacy, and
and induced him to give ground ! Inftead of having received the news of his deter¬ mined perfiftency, I found her with a let¬ ter in her hand, informing her that he had begun to relent, and that his full acquief¬ cence was expected. To have commenced the battle at fo inaufpicious a moment would have been little worthy of a great captain. My refo¬ lution was inftantly formed. After acting as much ecftafy as I could call up, I haftened home and wrote my projected letter to honeft Aby. I threw my hints together in Italian, that they might not be underftood by the agent whom I meant to employ. This was my groom, an Englifli lad whom I met with at Paris, who fpells well and writes a good hand. I pretended I had emitted my fin¬ ger and could not hold a pen ; and, with¬ out letting him underftand the intent of my writing, or even that it was a letter, I dictated to him as follows; a tranfciipt of which I fend to you, Fairfax, firft that you may figh and fee what the bleffing of a vol. iv. g ready
ready invention is, and next as~ an exam¬ ple which you may copy, or at leaft бот Which you may take a hint, if ever you fliould have occafion. " SO" you have been perfuaded at laft ■**" to give up your point, my old friend ! " And can you fwallow this tale of a tub ? " A fine cock and a bull ftory has been -** dinned in your ears ? Don't believe a *' word ont. I know the whole affair; " and, though you don't know me, be fc aflured I mean you w r ell : and I tell you t( that ifyou will but hold out iloti tly every " thing will foon be fettled to your heart's < ( defire: She is dying for love of him> " and he can't fee it ! She will never have " the man they mean for her ; I can affure *' you ofthat ; and what is more, he will f( never have her. What I tell you I <e know to be true. No matter who I " am. If I knew nothing of the affair л< how could I write to you ? And if the " advice I give be good, what need you tt care whom it comes from ? Only don't 4 « let
<ζ let youv fon fee this ; if you do it will « fpoil all. You perceive how blind he « is to his own good, and how pofitive « too. Keep your counfel, but be refo- " lute. Look around you, perfiil in your <ť plans, and the hall, the' parks, the gar- " dens, the meadows, the lands you fee " are all your own ! L am fure ч you can- " not mifunderftand me. But mark my " words; be clofe; keep your thoughts " to yourfelf You know the world: if You have made your own fortune; don't s <c mar it by your own folly. Tell no tales, " I fay ; nor, if you are a wife man, give <f the leaft hint that you have a friend in a <( corner." This I dictated to my amanuenfis, pre¬ tending to tranflate it out of the paper I held İn my hand, and which 1 took care to place before him, fo that he fliould fee it was really written in a foreign language. I likewife once or twice counterfeited a laugh at what I was reading, and ejacu¬ lated to myfelf—" This is a curious fcrap \" g 2 When
When he had finiflied I gave him half ti ctown, praifed his hand-writing, which ï told him I wanted to fee, for perhaps I might find him better employment than currying of horfes, and fent him about his bufinefs too much pleafed and elated, and his ideas led into too diftant a train to har¬ bour the leaft fufpicion. Nor did my precautions end here. I immediately ordered my horfe, and rode without any attendant full fpeed to Houn- flow. I there defired the landlord of an inn at which 1 am perfonally known, though not by name, to fend one of his own lads, poft, to the market town next to Wenbourne-Hill, and there to hire a countryman, without explaining who or what he himfelf was. to deliver the letter into the hands of honeft Aby. I requefted the landlord to choofe an intelligent mef¬ fenger, and backed my requeft with a prefent bribe and a future piomife. My plan was too well laid to mifcany, and accordingly yefterday a mournful ac¬ count arrived, from the young orator, that judgment
judgment is reverfed, and he in imminent danger of being caft in cofts. And now, Fairfax, once more ï go l'¬ Expédition, refolution, a torrent of words, a ftorm of paffion, and the peeling thunder that dies away in defcending rains ! The word^s Anna St. Ives, revenge, and vic¬ tory! C. CLIFTON.
LETTER XCV.'
СОКЕ CLIFTON. TO GUY FAIRFAX.
London, Dover Strett. ONCE more, Fairfax, here am Î. Well í And how—? Not fo faft, good fir. All things in g a their
their turn'. The ftory íhall be told juft as it happened, and your galloping curiofity muft be pleafed to wait I knew my time, the hour when flie would retire to her own apartment, and the minute when I might find admiffion 5 for ihe is very methodical, as all your very wife people more or lefs are. I had given Laura her leflbn; that is, had told her that I had fomething very ferious to fay to her miftrefs that morning, and defired her to take care to be out of the way, that ihe might be fure not to interrupt us. The fly jade looked with that arch fignificance which her own experience had taught her 9 and left me with—-" Oh ! Mr. Clifton !" And here I could make a remai к, but ihat would be anticipating my ftory. You may think, Fairfax, that, mar- fhalled as my hopes and fears were in bat¬ tle array, fomething of inward agitation would be apparent. In leality, not only fome but much was vifible. It caught her attention, and luckily caught. I at¬ tempted tó fpeak, and flammei ed. A faife
faife ftep, as it would have been moil fa¬ tal, fo was it more probable at the moment of onfet than afterward, when the heated, imagination fliould have collected, ar¬ ranged, and begun to pour forth .its flores. The philofophy of the paffions was the theme I firft čhofe, though at the very moment when my fpirits were all flutter¬ ing with wild diforder. But my faultering voice, which had I wiihed I could not have commanded, aided me ; for the tre¬ mulous ftate of my frame threw hers into moil admirable confuťfam ! " What was it that pUílurbed^ me? " What had I to communicate? She " never faw me thus before 1 It was " quite alarming !" Madam—[Obferve, Fairfax, I am now the fpeaker: but I fliall remind you of fuch trifles no more, Ifyou cannot diftin- guifh the interlocutors, you deferve not to be prefent at fuch a dialogue.] Madam, I own my mind is oppreffed by thoughts which, however juft in their purpofe, how¬ ever worthy in their intent, infpire all that g 4 hefitation,
st . íves: f ι hefitation, that timidity, that fomething· like terror, which I fcarcely know how to overcome. Yet what fliould I fear? Am I not armed by principle and truth ? Why fhun a declaration of thoughts that aie- founded in right ; or tremble like a cow¬ ard that'doubted of his caufe ? I am your fchoiar, and have learned to fübdue fen¬ fations of which the judgment difapproves. From you likewife have I learned to avow tenets that are demonftrable; and not to fhrink from them becaufe I may be in dan¬ ger of being mifconftrued, or even fufpect¬ ed. Pardon me !' I do you wrong. Your mind is fuperior to fufpicion. It is a mean, an odious vice, and never could I efteem the heart in which it found place. I for¬ get myielf, and talk to you as I would to a being of an infinitely lower order. Mr. Clifton- Do not let your eye reprove me ! 1 have not faid what is not; and who better knows than you how much it ь beneath us to refrain from faving what is ? Do,
Do not keep me in this fufpenfe ! I am fure there is fomething very uncommon in your thoughts ! Speak ! Thoughts will be fometimes our maf. о ters : the beft and wifeft of us cannot al¬ ways command them. That I have daily repreffed them, have ftruggled againft rooted prejudices and confiimed propen- fities, and have ardently endeavoured to rife to that proud eminence toward which you have continually pointed, you are my witnefs.. I am. Protracted defires, imagined pleafures, and racking pains [and oh how often have they all been felt!] no longer fway_me.-—« They have been repulfed, difdained, trod¬ den under foot. You have taught me how fliameful it is to be the ilave of paffion. Truth is now my object, juftice my impulfe, and virtue, high virtue n у guide. Oh, Clifton ! Speak thus, be thus ever !-— g 5 The
30 ANNA ST. IVES Г The moment it appeared, ï knew that delay was ominous. Nay, Clifton— l Hear me, madam '—Yes ominous ! I fee no end to it, have every thing to fear from it, and nothing to hope—There is a thought—Ay,' that verges to madnefs !—I have a rival— ! But I will forget it—at leaft will try. Who can deny that it is excruciating ?-—But I am a^uated at pre¬ fent hy another and a nobler motive. You know, madam, what you found me ; and I hope-you are not quite unconfcious of what you have made me. You have taught me principles to which I mean to adhere, and truths I intend to affért ; have opened views to me of immenfe magnitude ! In your fociety I am fecure. But habits aie inveterate, and eafily revived ; ana were I torn from you, I myfelf know not the degree of my own danger. Yes, madam, fain indeed would í forget there is fuch a perfon as Frank Henley ! Yet how ? By v/hat effort, what artifice ? Say ! Teach me '
me l· What though my heart reproaches me with its own foibles, who can prevent poffibilities, mere poffibilities, in a cafe like this/ from being abfolute torments? My foul pants and aches after cei tainty ! The moment I afk myfelf what doubt there can be of Anna St. Ives, I anfwer none, none ' Yet the moment after, for¬ getting this queflion, alarms, probabilities, paft feenes and intolerable fuppofitions fwarm to affault me, without relaxation or mercy. Clifton, you faid ypu had a nobler mo¬ tive. I merit the reproach, madam. Thefe effufions buift from me, are unworthy of me, and I difclaim them. You have par¬ doned many of my ftrays and miftakes, and I am fure will pardon this. [For the love of fame, Fairfax ¿ do not fuffer the numerous mafter-ftrokes of this dialogue to efcape you. I cannot ftay to point them out.] Yes, madam, I have a nobler mo¬ tive ! Yet, enlarged as your mind is, I know not how to prepare you calmly to g б liften
liften to me, without alarm and without prevention. Strange as it may feem, I dread t to fpeak truth even to you ! If truth it be, fpeak, and fear nothing-. Propofe but any adequate and worthy purpofe, and there is no p?in, no danger, no difgrace from which if I know myfelf I would fhrink. No difgrace, madam ? Your words and looks both doubt me—■ Puí me to the proof. Propofe -1 fay an adequate and worthy purpofe, and let your teft be fuch as nature fliudders at ; then defpife me and my principles if I recoil. The union of marriage demands recipro¬ cal, unequivocal, and unbounded confi¬ dence ; for how can we pretend to love thofe whom we cannot truft ? The man who is unworthy this unbounded confi¬ dence is moft unworthy to be a huiband ; and it were even better he ihould ihew his bad qualities, by bafely and diflioneft- ly deferring her who had'committed her¬ felf body and foul to his honour, than that fuch qualities ihould difcover themfelves after
A NOVEL,"
after marriage. There is no difgrace can equal the, torment of fuch an alliance. I grant il. You have attained that noble courage which dares to queftion the moil received doctrines, and brinir them to the teft of truth. Who better than you can appre¬ ciate the falfehood and the force of the prejudices of opinion ? Yet are you'fure, madam, that eyen you are fuperior to them all? Far otherwife. Would I were ! I am much too ignorant for fuch high fuch enviable perfection. But it is not poffible that fome of the moil common, and if I dared I fliould fay the moil narrow, the moil felf-evident of thefe prejudices may fway and terrify you from the plain path of equity ? Dare you look the world's unjuft contumelies fted¬ faftly in the face ? Dare you anfwer for yourfelf that ycju will t not ihudder at the performance of what you cannot but ac¬ knowledge, nay have acknowledged to be an act of duty ? I confefs
I confefs your preparation 'is alarming, and makes me half fufpect myfelf half de¬ firous to retract all I have thought, all I have afferted ! Yet I think I dare do whatever juftice can requhe. You think— ? Once more bring me to the proof. I feel a confcious [Again you make me a brag¬ gart.] a virtuous certainty. In oppofition to the wljole world, its prepoffeffions, reproofs, revilingS;, perfec¬ tions, and contempi ? The picture is terrifying, -but ought not to be, and 1 anfwer yes ; in oppofition to and in defiance of them all. Then—You are my wife ! How ? „. Be firm ! > Start not from the truth! You are my wife ! Afk yourfelf the meaning of the word. Can fet forms and ceremonies unite mind to mind ? And if not they, what elfe ? What but community "of fenti¬ ments, fimilarity of principles, reciprocal fympathies, and an equal ardour for and love of truth ? Can it be denied ? It
It cannot. You are my wife, and I have a right to the privileges of a huiband J A right ? An abfolute, an indefeafible right! You go too faft ! They are your own principles : they are principles founded on avowed and indifp^table truths. I claim juftice from you? Clifton Г Juftice ! This is wrong !—Surely it is wrong '— This cannot be ! Inftead of the chafte huiband, fuch as better times and fpirits of higher dignity have known, who comes v/ith lips void of guile the rightful claimant of an inno¬ cent heart, in which fufpicion never har¬ boured, imagine me to be a traitorous wretch, who poorly feeks to gratify a mo¬ mentary, a vile, a brutal paffion ! Imagine me, I fay, fuch a creature if you can !— Once I fliould have feared it ; but you have taught my thoughts to foar above fuch
fuch vulgar terrors. My appeal is not your paffions, but your principles. Infpired by that refulgent ardour which animates you, with a noble euthufiafm you have yourfelf bid me put you to the proof.— You cannot, will not, dare not be unjuft ■' And now, Fairfax, behold her in the very ftate I wifhed ! Cowed, filenced, overawed ! Her ideas deranged, her tongue motionlefs, wanting a reply, her eyes 'wan¬ dering in perplexity,' her cheeks growing pale, her lips quivering, her body trem¬ bling* her bofom panting ! Behold I fay the wild diforder of her look ! Then turn to me, and read fecure triumph, concealed exultation, and bui fling tranfport on my brow l While impetuous, fierce, and fear- lefs defire is blazing in my heart, and mounting to my face ! See me in the very act of faftening on her ! And fee— ! ' Curfes !—Everlafting curfes purfue and catch my perfidious evil genius !—See that old Incubus Mrs. Clarke enter, with a jetter in her hand that had arrived exprefs, and was to be delivered inftantly ! —Our mutual
mutual perturbation elicit not efcape the prying witch ; my countenance red, hers pale—The word begone ! maddened to break loofe from my impatient tongue.— My eyes however fpoke plainly enough* and the hag v/as unwillingly'retiring, when a faint—" Stay/ Mrs. Clarke"—called her back ! As I foreboded, it was all over for this time ! She opened the letter. What itö contents were Iknow not ; and impoffible as it is that they ihould relate to me, I yet wifli I did. I am fure by hér mannertríey were extraordinary. I could not aík while that old beldam was prefent [Had flie been my giandmother, on this occafion I fliould have abufed her.] and the eye of thexyoung lady very plainly told me flie wiflied me away. It was prudent to make the beft retreat poffible, and with the beft grace : I therefore bowed and took my leave, veiy gravely telling her I hoped flie would ferioufly confider what I had faid, and again emphatically pronounced the word ju'tice-! You
You have now, Fairfax, been a fpedta- tor of the fcene ; and if its many niceties have efcaped you, if you have not been hurried away, as I was, by the tide of paflion,, and amazed at the fuccefsful fo¬ phiftries which flowed from my tongue,. fophiftries that are indeed fo liké truth that I myfelf at a cooler moment íhould have hefitated to utter them ; if I fay the deep art with which the whole, was conducted,, and - the high acting witbyvhich I perfoni- fied the only poffible Being that could fub¬ jugate Anna St. Ives do not excite your aftonifliment, why then you really are a dull fellow ! But I know you too well, Fairfax, to do you fuch injuftice as this fuppofes. Victory had. declared for me. ------1 read her thoughts. They were labouring for an anfwer, I own ; but flie was too much confounded. And would I have given her -time to rally ?— No ! -— I ihould-then havtMnerited defeat. The gi and difficulty however is van¬ quiihed : ihe will hear me the next time with lefs furprife, and the emotions of paffion,
paffion, genuine honeft mundane paffion, muft take their turn ; for not even ihe, Fairfax, can be wholly exempt from thefe emotions. I have not the leaft fear that my eloquence fliould fail me, and abfolute victory excepted, ï could not have wiflied for greater fuccefs.
I cannot forget this letter. It difturbs and pefters 4 my imagination. I fuppofed it to be from Edward, who has been at Bath; but my valet has juft informed me he is returned. Perhaps it is from my fifter ; and if fo, by its coming exprefs, my mother is dead ! I really fear it bodes me harm—I am determined to rid myfelf of this painful fufpenfe. ï will therefore ftep to Grofvenor-ftreet. I may as well face the worft at once* You fliall hear moie when I letuin.
Oh, Fairfax ! I could curfe moil copi- oufly-,
ouíly, in all heatheniih and chriftian tongues ' She has ihut herfelf up, and refufes to fee me ! This infernal fellow Frank Henley is returned too. He ar¬ rived two hours after the exprefs. I fuf¬ pect it came from him ; nay I fufpect ------Flames and furies !------1 muft tel] you '-- I have feen Laura, though fcarcely for two minutes. She is afraid flie is watch¬ ed. ' s It is all uproar, confufion, and fufpicion at Sir Arthur's. But the great curfe is my groom, the lad that I told you copied my letter to Abimelech, has been fent for and privately catechifed by her and her paramour ! And what con¬ firms this moil tormenting of all conjec¬ tures is the abfence ofthe fellow: he has not been home fince, nor at the fiables, though he was always remarkably punc¬ tual, but has fent thekey ; fo that he has certainly abfconded. Had J not been a ftupid booby, had I given Laura directions to keep out ofthe way of Anna, but in the way of taking meffages
meflages for her, ihe might have received the exprefs, and all might have been well. Such a blockheadly blunder well deferves caftigation ! I'll deny the letter, Fairfax. They have no proof, and I'll fwear through thick and thin rather than bring myfelf into this univerfal, this damnatory dif¬ grace ! I know indeed flie will not be¬ lieve me ; and I likewife know that now it muft be open war between us. For do not think that I will fuffer myfelf to be thus fliamefully beaten out of the field.— No, by Lucifer and his Tophet ! I will die a foaming maniac, fettered in ftraw, ere that fhall happen ! If not by perfua- fioii, flie fliall be mine by chicanery, or even by force. I will perifli, Fairfax', fooner than dcfift ! Oh for an agent, a coadjutor "worthy of the caufe !------He muft and fliall be found. The uncle and aunt muft be courted : the father I expect will fide with her.— The brother too mùft be my partizan ; for it
it will be neceffary I fliould maintain an intercourfe, and the ihew of ftill wifliing for wedlock. I am half frantic, Fairfax ! To be baffled by fuch an impoffible accident, after having acted my part with fuch fu- preme excellence, is infupportable ! But the hag Vengeance fliall not flip me ! No I have fangs to equal hers, ay and will faiten her yet ! I have been injured, in¬ fulted, fruftrated, and fiends feize me if I relent. C. CLIFTON.
LETTER
LETTER XCVI.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES то LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Grofvenof-Sheet. JLOUISA !—My dear, my kind, my af¬ fectionate Louifa' — My friend!—AVhat íhall I fay ? How ffiali I begin ? I am go¬ ing to rend your heart. Keep -this letter from the fight of Mrs. Clifton : if flie have not already been told, do not let her know fuch a letter exifts— Oh this brother !—But he is'not your bro¬ ther—Error fo rooted, fo malignant, fo deftructive, exceeds all credibility í He
He came to me yefterday morning, as was his cuftom. There was fomething in his look which, could I but have read it, was exceedingly defcriptive of the work¬ ings of his heart. It was painful to fee him. He endeavoured' to fmile, and for a moment to talk triflingly, but could not. He was in a tremor; 1 his mouth parched, his lips white. His next effay was to philofophife ; lut in 1 this attempt too he was entirely at fault, The paffions are all fympathetic, and none more fo than this of trepidation. I cannot recollect what the ideas w T ere that' paffed haftily through my mind ; but I know he excited much alarm, doubt, and I believe fufpicion. But, though he had found all this diffi¬ culty to begin, having begun he recovered himfelf very furprifingly. His colour re¬ turned, his voice became firm, his ideas clear, his reafoning energetic, and his manner commanding. He feemed to- mould my hopes and apprehenfions as he pleafed,
pleafed, to infpire terror this moment, and excefs of confidence the next. v Louifa, my heart bleeds to .fay it, but his purpofes were vile, his hypocrify odi¬ ous, and—I muft forbear, and fpeak of foul deeds in fair terms. I know not how many prejudices rife up to warn me; one that I am a woman, or rather a girl ; an¬ other that I am writing to the man's fifter; a third lhat flie is my friend, and fo од with endlcfs ct ceteras. No matter that truth is to this friend infinitely more prc-< cious than a brother. 1 may be allowed to feel indignation, but not to exprefs 'my feeling. But the moft diftreffing, the moft revolt¬ ing part of all is, that he harangued like the apoftle of truth, the name of which he vilely prophaned, in favour of the bafeft, moil pitiful, moft contemptible of vices ; the mere vain-glory of feductİon. He has- noteven fo much as the gratification of fenfual appetite to plead in his excufe. I am wrong; it was not vain-glory. Vanity itfelf, contemptible as fuch a ftimulu4 ν от . u . would
would have been, was fcarcely a fecondary motive. It was fomething worfe ; it was revenge. My mind has been wholly oc¬ cupied in retracing his paft behaviour ; I can think on no other fubject, and every íraiťwhich recollection adds is a confirma¬ tion of this painful idea. lie does not wifli to marry me, and I almoft doubt whether he ever did, at leaft fully and unrcierv- edly. He came to me, Louifa, and began with painting the torments of delay and the pangs of jealoufy, which he endea¬ voured to excufe ; and concluded with a bold appeal to my juftice ; a dai ing, over¬ awing, confounding appeal. He called upon me at my peril, and as I refpectcd truth and virtue, to deny his claim. And what was this claim ? ------ 1 was his wife!—In every pure and viituous fciife his wife ; and he demanded the privilege of a huiband!—Demanded, Louifa!— Demanded '—And demanded it in fuch a tone, with fuch rapid, overbearing, bold expreffions, and fuch an apparent con- ftio'ifnefs
a novel;-' fcioufnefs of 1 right,.that fór;a moment my mind was utterly confufed ! . Not than it; ceded -, no, notan inftant. I knew'there was an· anfwer,. a-juft and irrefragable one, but· I could not imme¬ diately find it. He perceived my diforder, and you cannot imagine what a fliamelefs and· offenfive form 1 his'features affumed! I know not what he would not inftantly have attempted,, had not, while I was endeavouring to· awake from my lethargy, Mrs. Clarke come in ! She brought me a letter—It was fent cxprefs !—The hand¬ writing was Frank's ! -Agitated as I was„ fufpicion'influenced me, and I retreated a few fteps—I opened the letter, and the firft 'words -I law were—" Beware of Mr, Clifton."— It contained only half a dozen lines, ami I read on. What follows were its con¬ tents— " Beware of Mr. Clifton!—Had înot " good caufe, madam, I would not be fo "■ abrupt an acculer : but I am haunted, * f tortured by the dread of poflibiiirics, and и 2 therefore
\ f therefore fend' this away exprefs—Be- " ware of ' Mr. Clifton !·*-!· will not be ", long after the letter/ and I will then <c ex-plain whyT have-written what to you <c may appear fo ftrange. <e F. HENLEY." Think, Louifa, what muft be the effect of fuch a letter, coming at fuch a mo¬ ment!—I believe I was in no danger; .though, if there be a man on the face of the earth more dangerous than'any other, it is furely Clifton. But the watchful fpirit of Frank feems placed like my guardian angel, to protect me from all poffible harm. ' My mind debated for a moment whe¬ ther it were not wrong to diftruft the power of truth and virtue, and not to let Mr. Clifton fee I could demolifli the au¬ dacious fophiftry by which he had endea¬ voured to confound and overwhelm me. But my ideas were deranged, and I could not collect fufficient fortitude. Oh how dangerous is this confufion of the judg¬ ment.
ment, and how defirable that heavenly prefence of mind which is equal to thefe great, thefe trying occafions·! I therefore thought it more prudent to fuffer him to depart, and fufpect vilely of me, than to encounter the rude conteft which he would more audacioufly lecommence, were I to fend away Mrs. Clarke, which he might even mifconftrue into a fignal of approba¬ tion. Thefe fears prevailed, and I defired her to ftay, and by my manner told·him I wiflied his abfence. " - -,л Louifa, how fliall I defcribe my anguiih of heart at feeing all thofe hopes of a mind fo extraordinary, for extraordinary it is even in guilt, at once overthrown ? It was indeed iteration of anguifh ! What ! Can guile fo perfectly afiume the garb of fin- cerity ! Can hypocrify wear fo impenetra¬ ble a malk ? How fliall we diftinguifli ? What guide have we? How be certain that the next feeming virtuous man* we meet is not a------Well, well, Louifa—I will remember—Brother. My Louifa knows it is not from the perfon, but from
the vice that I'turn away with difguft. Would ï willingly give tier heart a .pang ? Let híer tell mc if flie can fufpect it. She has fortitude, flie has affection ; but it is an affertion for virtue, truth, and juftice. She will endeavour to reform error the moft: obdurate. So will I, fo will all that are wor¬ thy the high office. But me will not wiih me either to marry with or to countenance this error. Marry?—How.docs my foul ihud¬ der at the'thought! His reafoning was tuft i reduction would have Ъееп a petty injury, or rather a bleffing, compared to •this mafter .evil ! He was moft merciful when he meant me, as he thought, moft deftiuction. I have been guilty of a great -error. The reformation of man or woman by projects of mairiagc is a miftaken, a pernicious attempt. Inftead of being an act of morality, I am perfuaded it is an act of vice. Let us never ceafe our endea¬ vours to reform the licentious and the de¬ prived, but let us not marry them;
The
The letter had not been v deli vered more 'than two hours before Frank arrived.· You may think, Louifa, how hard he had rid¬ den ; but he refufed to imagine himfelf fatigued. He brought another letter, which Abimelech had received, but which 'fór fome iiöurs he obftinately refufed· to 'gi'veup, and for'this reafon Frank fent off Ше 'exi>ŕčfs. A letter, not of■: Clifton's writing, bú'ťoť his invention and fending·! Firiding that Frarik ; w;as likely to pre-' Vallen tiis father 'tö 'taife the money for Sir 'Arthur, 'and to 'obviate all further impedi¬ ments to our maiTiage» Clifton, fearful that it mould take place, wrote anony- moüíly to Abimelech, to inform him'Ivvas 'in love with Frank, and to encourage hinv 'to p'erfift. But read the letter yourfelf i the following is a true copy of it*. ;
Iffubh á letter be his> Ì am futé, Löu- 'ifa,, you will notify I háVe thought (or : : -;·"". ■·. : '■ ' .& Ί £' ■:'"■'■;" .-íjpoken;
fpoken too« unkindly of him ;' and that it is 4ıis we have indubitable „proof, 'though _.it was anonymous and .not in his hand» writing. , t ' > ч You "no f doubt remember, Louifa, the ihort ftory of the Englifli lad, whom your brother hired at Paris. It was .written jby him, though innocently and without know* äng what was,intended. This lad has L an aunt, who after having laboured- to old •age is now lame, infirm, and in n,eed of fupport. The aciive Frank has been w,ith her, has aided her with money, and cou* foled her with-kindnefs. The lad himfelf was defirous of affifting her ; .and Frank, .willing to' encourage induftry in the young, /gave him fome writings to copy at his lei¬ fure hours. By this accident he knew lbs lad's hand-writing, . I forgot to mention, in its proper place, the aftonifliment of Frank at the fudden change in his father,, and the firm refolu¬ tion he took to difcover the caufe of this ¿change.' The obftinacy of Abimelech was extreme j but Frank was ftill more perti¬ nacious.
cious, more determined, and fo unwearied and inceflanr, in his attacks on his father, that the old man at laft could refift no longer, and fliewed him this letter. From what has preceded, that is from his manner of acting, you may well ima¬ gine what the alarms and fenfations o£ Frank were. He brought the 'letter up with him, for he would not truft it out of his own cuftody, and immediately went himfelf to Clifton's fiables in fearch ofthe lad, brought him to me, and then'firft fliewed him the letter, which, that no pof¬ fible collufion might be alleged, he had left in my keeping, and then aiked if it were not his hand-writing. The lad very frankly and unhefitatingly anfwered it was ; except the direction, which this plotting Clifton had procured to be written by fome other perfon. Without telling the lad more than wa* neceffary, Frank advifed him to quit his fervice, for that there was fomething re¬ lating to that letter which would certainly occafion a quarrel, and perhaps worfe) к 5 between'
between him and his mafter: and, as'it would be prudent for'him to keep out of the way, he fent him down to AVenboume- Hill, where the lad is at prefent..
And now what fliall ï fay to my Lou¬ ifa ? How fliall I footh the feelings of my fiiend? Do they need foothing? Does fhe confider all mankind as her relations and brothers, or does flie indeed imagine that one whofe principles are fo oppofite 1o her own is the only brother flie pòífeífes ? Will flie grieve more for him than flie would for any other, who fliould be equal¬ ly unfortunate in error ? Or çloes flie doubt with me whether grief can in any poflible cafe be a virtue ? And if fo, is there any virtue of which flie is incapable ? What h relation, what is brother, what is felf, if relation, brother, or felf be at war with truth ? And does not truth command us to confider beings exactly as they are ? without any 'refpeijtto this relationffiip, 'this felf? But
But I know my Louifa ; (he will nevei¬ be impatibnt under trial, however fe¬ vere ; nor foolifhly repine for the paft, though ihe will ilrenuoufly labour for the future. All good, all peace, all happinefs, all wifdom be with her ! A. W T . ST. IVES. LETTER XCVII.
LOUISA CLIFTON •so ичп ПРОТИВИ COKE CLIFTON. Rofi uva. S· I R, ON Friday morning I íeccived the origi¬ nal letter from Anna St. Ives, of which h 6 the
í ι » · ' the inclofed is a copy ; and on the follow¬ ing day about a quarter of an hour before midnight my mother expired. I mention ihefe circumftances together becaufe they were noticed, by thofe who were neceffa¬ rily acquainted with them,, as having a re¬ lation to each other ; whether real or ima¬ ginary, much or little I do not pretend to determine ; but I will relate the facts and leave them to your own reflection ; and I will forbear all colouring, that I may not be fufpected of injuftice. My mother as you know has been daily declining, and was indeed in a very feeble ftate. She feemed rather more chearful that morning than ihe had been lately, and at her particular requeft I went to vifit the wife of farmer Beardmore, who is a wor¬ thy but poor woman, and who being at prefent dejected, in confequence of рог verty and ill health, my mother thought fhe might be more benefited by the kind¬ nefs ofthe little relief we could afford her it delivered by r me, than if fent by a lefs toothing and fympathetic hand. I fliould hope
hope, fir, 'it would be fome confolation to you to learn that my mother's active virtue never forfook v her, while memory and mind remained. But of this you are the beft judge. ¡ , WhìleT was gone the poftman brought the letter of my friend ; and as her letters weie always read to ray mother, and as I likewife have made it a rule and a duty not to have any fecrets to conceal from her, or indeed from any body, flie had no fcruple to have the letter opened, becaufe flie ex¬ pected to find confolation and hope : for, till the arrival of this, the letters of Anna St, Ives have lately been all zealous in your piatte. I will leave you, fir, to imagine the ef¬ fect which a letter beginning as this did muft have on a mind and body worn to fuch a tremulous ftate of fenfibility. Com¬ ing as it did firii into my mother's hands, the very caution which the benevolent heait of Anna dictated produced the effect ffie moft dreaded. My mother had ftill however
however a fufficient portion of Ъег formei energy toJiear it to the end. ' Tn about ^n hour after this happened ï returned, and found her in extreme agita¬ tion of mind. I neglected no arguments, no ■> efforts to calm her fenfations ; and I fucceeded forar that after a time ihe feem¬ ed to be toleiably refigned.-She could not indeed forget it, and the fubject was reviv¬ ed by her feveral times during the day. My chief endeavour was to lead her thoughts into that train which, by looking forward to the progrefs of virtue, is moil confoling to the mind of vii tue. She feemed at laft fatigued, and about eleven o'clock at night fell into a doze,— About a quaiter before twelve I perceived her countenance diftorted ; I was alarmed ; I фоке to her and received no anfwer ; I endeavoiued to excite attention or motion, but in vain. A paralytic ftroke had depriv¬ ed her of fenfation. ín this ftate flie re¬ mained four-and-twenty hours, and about midnight departed, I have
I have thought it ftri&ly incumbent on xne to relate thefe circumftances. But í íhould confider myfelf as very highly cul¬ pable did I feek to aggravate, or to ftate that as certainty which can never be any thing more than conjecture. My mother was fo enfeebled that we began to be in •daily apprehenfion of her death. I muft not however conceal that the thought or your union with Anna St. Ives had been one of her principal pleafures, ever fince flie had fuppofed it probable ; and that flie had fpoken of ic inceffantly, and always with that high degree of maternal affection and cheering hope which you cannot but know was congenial to her nature. The difappointment itfelf was great, but the turpitude that attended it much greater. This I did not endeavour to palliate. How could I ? I have told you I had no reiource for confolation, either for myfelf or her, but in turning like Anna St. Ives, from the individual to the whole. I would endeavour to fay ibmething that fliould fhe wyo» the folly of fuch conduit - 3 for 2 the
the folly of it is even more exceffive than the vice ; but, not to mention the ftate of my own mind at this moment,· I defpair of producing any effect, fince Anna St. Ives 'herfelf, aided by fo many concurring mo¬ tives, has failed in the generous and difin¬ terefted attempt. I imagine you will be down at the fune¬ ral. Perhaps it is proper. I cannot fay, ior indeed I do not very well underftand many of what are called the proprieties of cuftom. I own I am weak enough to feel fome pain at meeting you, under the pre¬ fent circumftances. But, fince it is necef¬ fary I fliould act and aid you in various fa¬ mily departments, if you ihould cóme down, I will not yield to thefe emotions, but confidering you as an erring brothen, will endeavour to perform what duty re¬ quires. 1 L. CLIFTON. P. S, Previous to this I wrote three different letters, but f they weie all as I fear too
too expreffive of thofe íh'ong fenfatioţis which I have found it. very difficult to. calm. I deftroyed them, not becaufo they were wrong, but left they fliould produce a wrong effect, * * '
КЙУ
LETTER XCViir.
- COKE CLIFTON TO HÏS ŞIST£R LOUISA CLIFTON.
. Lando», Lover-Street*, MADAM, - .1 HAVE received your very lenient, equi¬ table, calumniating*, infulting letter. ; and I would
ï would'have you put it down in y our me¬ morandum-book that I will'carefully re¬ member the obligation. It perfectly ac- cortls with your fublime ideas of juftice to decide before you have heard both parties -, and it is equally confiftent with your no¬ tions offiiterly áffect ión that you fliould páfs fentence on a brother. What is a brother, or all he may have to fay to ^Ou ; who, more infallible than the holy father him¬ felf, have fquared a fet of rules of your own, by which you judge as you beft know how ? Your infinuations concerning the death of my mother are equalJy charitable, and I have already learnt them by rote. Yes, madam, affure yourfelf they will not be forgotten. Any fufpenfe of judgment would have ill become a lady fo clear fighted. "However poffible'it may be that Anna St. Ives may herfelf have been im¬ pofed upon, and I both ignorant and imio- 'cent of this forged letter, yet for you to have entertained any doubts in my favour would have jártakén too much of thè foers
fogs of earth for fo infpired and celeftial a lady. But I muft tell you, madam, fince you can fo readily forego equity in a brother's behalf, I can and will be as ready to forget and caft off the fifter. I nevej* yet was or will be injured with impunity : I would have you note down that. I mean to be at Rofe-Bank to-monow or the day after, to attend the funeral and take fuch ordens as my affairs may requires and though I have as little affection for your company as }ou have for mine, I imagine it will be quite neceffary for you to be there : not only that you ihould be prefent to execute all orders, but likewife to liften to a few hints which I fliall proba¬ bly think proper to communicate. In the mean tíme, madam, be induftri- ous to plopagate the report, if you think fit, that I have caufed anonymous letters to be written to Sir Arthur's fteward, have endeavomed to betray Anna St. Ives, and have been the death of my mother. Spread the agi eeable intelligence I fay as quickly and
• í. arid as'widely as you can, and when you meet me you fliall receive a brother's thanks. ·' - . . C. CLIFTON,
•LETTER XCIX.
ABIMELECH HENLEY то SIR ARTHUR ST. IVES, BARONET.
Wenbourne Hi//. Moil onnurable Sir, my ever onnurd Mailer, 1 DO hear of ftrange queerums and quickfets, that have a bin trap laid for your ever gracious onnur, and for the mercifool
meTcifool lovin kindnefs óf fweet miffee.^— r Whereof I be all in a quandary, for it do feem I wus within an ames ace of a havin, bin choufe flickur'd mefelf. Whereby'I paradventered before to tell your noble onnur my poor thofts on this here Mr. Clifton match marriage, which is all againft the grain. And this I do hope your ever onnurable onnur will pry into, and fee with your own eyes. Whereof I have a bin ruminatin of many thinks lately, and of the ups and downs of life, fo lhat I fliould fing oh be joyfool if as your onnur would but turn them into your thofts, as I have done. Whereby ray fon has a bin down w ith-me ; and % do find that footh and trooth he be verily a fon of my own begittin ; and thof I fay it a man may be proud of fitch a fon; and as your ever gracious onnur wus moft mer T cifoolly pleafed to fifflicate, a wus born a gentleman, for a has his hid fool and fool of fine notions. Whereby if your onnurable onnur will but a be pleafed to lend a mercifool ear to
to- me, 'why-mayhap . I fliould a be willin to come down'- withu the- kole to your ònmir's heart's content. ' Why^not ?, For ï have a· talked matters.over with my fon, and a has faid a -many glorious thinks of your onnur and of fweet mercifool miffee, all a\witch alearned from me. For .why ? He is my own fon> and of the iffue of my loins, and-I did always giv'n* the beft of advice. A had his whole, feedin and brecdin from me, and. as a wus. always fain to- be a-man of Jearnin why I ; taught hini his letters mefclf 5 whereof I have , now reafon-to be,proudiof.'n. Bujthat is not whereof of. a,what I .wus a goin* to - think to fay. I wus about to peradventer to propofal to your onnur that, if thinks -might· behappen, toncóme, to pafs în the' manner of mercifool. Iovİn kindnefs and gracious condyfenfion, the where- withalls fliould a be forth cummin, to .the tune of fifty - thoufand ¡ pounds : that is with the betokenin of all proper· fecurities of parchments' andideeds v and doofoors to be firft s figned andftipulated,.as heretofore have
have bin on like future occaipns., Take me ritely, your onnur ; I, mear?, for the twenty thoufand,pounds. For why?-1 mefelf will be fo r all bountifooljasto come down on the nail head with, thirty thou¬ fand for my fon. And then we íhall fee vvho will be a better gentleman, as your onnurrable onnur wus moil gracioufly pleafed to kappaiíhus 1п"т 5 ? Whereby Wenbourne Hill would then be in all its gloiy ; and maj'hap your t eyer. gracious onnur might in fitch a cafe again, go on with your improofments. And r who can fay but the wildurnefs might, a begin to flourifli ? So that if your noble onnur will but think of that,, why thinks may behappen to begin to take a new turn, and there may be mirth, and merry days again? at Wenbouine-Hill. For ï do know in, your heart your onnur do lamentaron, the, lofs of all your fine tafte, and{ elegunt ideers, and plans, and alterations ; all of a, witch have a bin fo many years a.carryin on and a compaifm at Wenbourne -НЩ. Whereof
Whereof I umbelly condyfeñd to intreat your noble onnur would a give thefe thinks' a thinkin. For why ? The lawyers might a then be ftoptt,' and a fpoke might a be¬ happen to be put in the wheel of the foreclofures ; 'witch if not, as your noble onnur already knows, may not a turn' out to be altogether quite fo agreeable,' unlefs your ever gracious and onnurable onnur ihould be fo all mercifool as to rite to me ; whereof I could then give them the whys and the wherefores, and all thinks would be fmooth and fmilin. I befiege your moil noble onnur to ponderate mercifooly of thefe thinks, and of a dockin of the entail, and of a fett in of the deeds of the lawyers to woik.— Whereby every think may in fitch a cafe " be made fafe and fecure, nor forgettin Wenbourne Hill ; and the willdurncfs, and mayhap' the hermuttidge, and the grotto. - For why, your noble onnur ? Where one fifty thoufand pound be a forth cummin from,' another may a be¬ happen
happen to be found. But that's a nether here nor there, a favhr and exceptin the death and mortality of man, and the re- furrection of the juft and of the repentin finner in all grace and glory. And fo I moft umbelly remain, with the thanks givin of goodnefs, your onnur's moft faithfool umbel farvent evisrlaftin to command, ABltóELECH HENLEY. ι '— , ■ ...... » H I II I I il lu l l I——■ !■ I I ..... II I 1 1 1 LETTER С ι —зван ии ι ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON. » Lofido/Jf Grofveno)~Street. INO ; L will not attempt to confolc my· Louïfa, ' for I will not fuppofe even at the vol. iv, ι prefenk
prefent moment that flie yields to grief or is in need of confolation. She will not repine at what .is not to be remedied, nor debilitate her mind by dwelling on her own caufes of difcontent, inftead of awakening it to the numerous fources of happinefs, which by increafing the happinefs of others incite it to activity. Thefe are truths too deeply engraven on the heart of Louifa to be forgotten, and* it is fcarcely neceffary to revive them even at. this ferious moment. With lefpect to myfelf, my friend íhall· be my judge ; my whole conduct fliall be fubmitted to her, with an injunction not to indulge any partialities in my favour, but to cenfure, advife, and inftruct me whenever fhe finds opportunity. Such, Louifa, has been our intercourfe ; and we have mutual reafon to congratulate each other on its effects. I have juft had a converfation with Sir Aithur, He has received a letter from Abimelech, which he ihewed me. Of all the proofs Frank has yet given of ener¬ gy, this relative to his father is perhaps the
the ftrongeft. You know the character of Abimelech. Could you think it poffible ? He is willing not only to raife twenty, thoufand pounds for Sir Arthur, but to pay; down thirty more for his fon ? He begins t to be vain of this fon, and has even fome flight perception that there may be other good qualities befide that of getting and hoarding money. But his cunning is ftilî predominant- Having conceived the poffibility of this marriage, the accomplifhnient of it is now become his ruling paffion, and has for a moment fubjected avarice itfelf. He ne¬ glects no motive which he thinks may in¬ fluence Sir Arthur, not even threatening ; though his language is couched in all the art of apparent kindnefs and adulation,— His letter however has produced its effect on my father, as you will perceive by the following dialogue, which was begun by Sir Arthur. - What think you of this propofal, Anna? I ought rather to aík what are your thoughts on the fubject, fir, ι 2 lean
, Γ can fcarcely tell. I own it does not feem to me quite fo unreafonable as I ihpuld once have fuppofed it ; that is A as far as relates to me. But if you fliould havo. conceived any partiality for Mr. Clif¬ ton, I fliould then—— Excufe me, fir, for interrupting you, but M*"· Clifton isat prefent wholly out o£ the queftion. Were it in my power, which I fear it is not, to' do him any fervice, I ihould be as defirous of doing it now as ever ; but I can never more think of him as a huiband. Are you fo very determined ? I am ; and I hope, fir, my determina¬ tion is not offenftve to you ? I' cannot fay at prefent that it is ; for not to mention that I think very well of young Mr. Henley, I own the affair of the ano¬ nymous letter was a very improper and ftrange- proceeding. Your aunt Wen- Dourne and Lord Fitz-Allen indeed feem to doubt it ; but, according to the account y/hich you and' Mr. H'eriley give, I think they have no foundation for their doubts. The
The behaviour of Mr. "Clifton, without the letter, would have been quite fufficient to have fixed my determination. What behaviour ? The proof he gave of deceit and depra¬ vity of principle, by the maniler in which he endeavoured to feduce me. When was that ? The very day on which Fiank arrived. Endeavoured to feduce you ? Yes, Are you certain of the truth of,what you fay? He proceeded too far, and'explained himielf too bpenly for me to be miftaken. Seduce you ! -~Then pu have enliiely given up all thoughts of him ? AU thoughts of man y ing him I have moft certainly. And what is your opinion of Mr. lien- ley ? What can it be, fii ? Are there tvto opinions concerning him ? And if I weie blind to his virtues, for whofe fafety he ι 3 has
has been fo often and fo ardently active, who fliould do him juftice ? I own, Anna, I have often thought you had fome love for him, and I am tempted to think fo ftill. < Love in the fenfe in which you under¬ ftand it I have carefully fuppreffed, be¬ caufe till now I fuppofed it incompatible with duty and vii tue ; but I acknowledge 1 begin to doubt; and even to fuppofe that his view ofthe fubject has been more rational and true than mine ; and he thinks it is our duty to form an union, for which he owns he has an ardent wiih. Yes, he has honeftly told me all that paffed between you; and his fincerity pleafed me—But every branch of our fa¬ mily would certainly be againft fuch a match. I fuppofe fo, The world too would confider me as having diihonoured myfelf, were I to con¬ fent. I believe it would. And
And would exclaim againft the bad ex¬ ample—What ought to be done ? My opinion has been that the world would have caufe to make*this complaint; but I now think, or rather imagine myfelf convinced that I was in an error. It ap¬ pears evident to my mind, at prefent, that we ought to confider whether an action be in itfelf good or bad, juft or unjuft, and totally to difregard both our own preju¬ dices, and the prejudices of the world. Were I to pay faife homage to wealth and rank, becaufe the world tells me it İs right that I ihould do fo, and to neglect genius and virtue, which my judgment tells me wouid be an odious wrong, Ì fliould find but little fatisfaction in the ap¬ plaufe of the woild, oppofed to felf-con- demnation. Mr. Henley is a very good young man ; a very good young man indeed; and I believe I fliould even be willing to think of him for a fon, if it fliould not be oppofed by the other branches of the family. But that it furely will. ι 4 I am
I am afi aid fo—Lord Fitz-Allen is halt reconciled to us again, and I would avoid bi caking with him if poffible. Your aunt has a good opinion of Mr. Henley, But a better of Mr. Clifton. > Yes, fo I fuppofe. I muft talk to Ed¬ waid. Mr. Henley has been his friend. But Edwaid does not undeiftand friend- ihip. When he fays friend, he means acquaintance : and he fipds him the moil agi peable acquaintance, who tells him leaft truth ; which cei tainly is not Mr. Henley. I have obferved him lately to be rather fond of the company of Mr. Clifton, whom he thinks a-better companion. I own Mr. Henley is very obftinate in his opinions. If his,opinions be true, would you not have him perfiil in the truth ? But why fliould he be more certain that what he fays is truth than other people ? Becaufe he has examined with more in¬ duftry and caution, has a ftronger mind, and a greater love of enquiry. He does jnot endeavour to make his principles ac- coid
cord with his practice, but regulates his practice by his principles. But ftill I afk what proof he has of be^ ing more in the right than other people ? I wonder, fir, that you can put fuch a queftion-! He has furely given both you and me fufficient proofs of fuperiority ; and though you fliould doubt the arguments, you cannot doubt the facts. I own he is a very extraordinary young, gentleman. Ah, fir! The word gentleman ihews the bent of your thoughts. Can you not perceive it is a word without a meaning ? Or, if it have a meaning, that he who İs the heft man is the moil a gentleman ? I know your notions, child, and mine differ a little on thefe matters. However I do not think you quite fo much in the wrong as I ufed to do ; and perhaps there is fomething in what' you fay. Many men of low fortunes have made their way to the higheft honours ; and for what I know he may do'the fame. * ι 5 . He
•\ <. Fie may and 1 certainly will deferve the higheft refpect ; bui ifyou flatter yomfelf, fir, that he will feek òr accept the titles and diftinctions which men have invented. to impofe on each other's folly, and obtain their own artful· purpofes, I ought to wam> you that you will be miftaken. His whole life will be devoted to the difcovery and fpreading of truth ; and, individual acts of benevolence excepted, his wealth, ihould he acquire any, will all be dedi¬ cated to that fole object. I am afraid thefe are ftrange whims, Anna !. I hope yet to fliew you, fir, they are noble duties; which it is the excefs of guilt to. neglect. It puzzles me to conceive by what means his father could have become fo rich ! He has all his life been rapacious after money. His faculties are ftrong, but per¬ verted." What would have been wifdom is degenerated into cunning. He has made himfelf acquainted with ufurers, and they
they have made him acquainted with fpendthrifts. He has traded in annuities, and profited by the eagernefs of youth tø enjoy: and, fince I muft be fincere, he has encouraged you, fir, to purfue plans of expence with a view folely to his own profit. · , Well, well ; ihould this marriage take place, it will all return into the family. That ihould be no motive, fir, with either you or me. I do not know that. You underftand your own reafons, and I mine ; and if they fliould but anfwer the fame end there will be no harm. I was going to reply, but Sir Arthur left me; being unwilling to hear arguments which he took it for granted he ihould not underftand. Frank came in foon after, and I repeated to him what had been faid. Louifa, I muft tell you the truth and the whole truth. Since I have begun to imagine I might in¬ dulge my thoughts in dwelling on his ex¬ alted qualities and uncommon virtues, my ι б affection
affection for them has greatly mcrealed : and they never appeared to me more lovely than in lhe ftruggles and checks which his joy received, at the hope of our union, by the recollection of the lofs of Mr. Clifton. He like me is aftoniffied at the powers of your brother's mind, and at their pervcr- zìorì; and he fears that'this attempt, hav¬ ing failed, will but ferve to render that perverfion more obdurate, nay perhaps more active. Fie feems even to dread left I am not fecure ; which his deine to guard and caution me againft would not fuffer him to ìcprefs or conceal. Ilis tendernefs and ecftafy, and indeed, Louifa, they were,both very ftrong, were mingled with regret equally vivid : and Mr. Clifton ! Mr. Clifton ! repeatedly burfbfrom 'him: Whilft I was relating what had paffed between me and Sir Arthur to Frank, and now again fince I have been writing it to you, í accufed myfelf of coldnefs, and of ihrinking from, or rather of half delivering the truth, left Sir Arthur fliould think me a forward girf, or left I fliould think my- .0 felf
felf capable of too fudden'a change. Buť of the degree òfthat change 1 'dó you, my 'friend, judge. I have at all times endea¬ voured to ihew you my naked heart, and often have violently ftruggled againft every difguife. I 'never concealed 'from myfelf that I thought more highly of Frank Hen¬ ley th air of Mr. Clifton i buti imagined principle taught me to prefer what princi¬ ple now warns me to ihun, I am more and more convinced ofthe error of marry¬ ing a bad man in order to make him good. I was not entirely ignorant of this before, and therefore flattered myfelf the good might be effected previous to marriage., I forgot, when paflion has a purpofe to obtain, how artful-it is in concealment. I have another quarrel with myfelf, for having been fo defirous of proving to my own conviction that the world's" prejudices and the prejudices of my- -family ought to be refpecied, while that opinion accorded with my practice ; and of being now fo equally alert to prove the reverfe. Ouch .are the 'deceptions which 'thé mind puis upon
upon itfelf! For indeed I have:been very defirous of acting with íincerity in both inftances. I can only fay that I feel more certain at prefent ; for before I had doubts, and now I have none. Ifyou fufpect me to'be ¡influenced by inclination, tell me fo without referve. .ï , All good be with my friend ! May íhe profit by my miftake s ! л.· w. ST. IVES.
LETTER CL
COKE CLIFTON. TO GUY FAIRFAX. ■ "4 t»' ."f. *j a : ' i ',';; :u > M. RofcBank. jf OU will perceive, Fairfax, I have changed the fcene, and am now in the country.
country. I have a long narrative to detail, and am fitting in an old hall with gloom and leifure enough to make it as tedious and as dull as you could wiih. My poor mother has taken her laft leave of us, and. lies now a corpfe in the room under me. I could be melancholy, or mad, or I know not what—But 'tis no matter—She brought me here unaiked to make the journey of this world, and now I am obliged to jog on. Not that I think I fliould much care if İt were fhortened, nor how foon; except that I would live to have my revenge ; and that I will have, little troubling myfelf though the next mi¬ nute were certain to be my laft. It rankles at my heart, and lies there corroding, biting, fettering, night and day. I have quarrelled with my fifter, and I am fure fliall never forgive her ; nor will ihe forgive me, fo that we fliall eafily ba¬ lance our accounts. This Anna St. Ives is her fupreme favourite. But no wonder- No wonder—It would be ftrange if ihe were not ! Still to be fo ready to'give up a brother,
a brother,' and 'write me fuch a letter as flie did on the death of my mother! If I do not make her repent it Heaven re¬ nounce me ! But I confider the whole Vorld as my enemies at this ^ moment ; you perhaps, Fairfax, excepted. í fay perhaps, for I do not know how foon you may turn upon and yelp at mc with the reft. Forgive me, Faiifax. I am all venom, all viper, and cannot forbear to hifs even at my friend. Hut let my enemies beware I They fliall find I can iling !—Thefe cui fed gnawiiigs of heait will not let me begin my ftory.
I told you I was determined to deny the anonymous letter. I have been very in- $uftrious with uncle Fitz-Allen and aunt Wenbourne ; and have been equally care¬ ful to titilate the vanity of the 'coxcomb Edward, who is highly flattered v/ith the attention I have paid him, and will I am. certain become my w T arm partifan. They
They had all heard the ftory, but were all ready enough to gape and fwallow my talc ; which confidering it -was wholly in-, vention was not ill compofed. I begin to hate myfelf, 'to hate her,' to'hate the whole world, у for being obliged to fúbmit to fuch a damned expedient. But 1 will not re¬ cede. I will have my revenge ! Were the devil himfelf waiting to devour me I would on ; or were he engaged againft me, I would over-reach him ! I concerted my meafures, and learning that this lad of mine, who wrote the letter for me, was down at Wenbourne -ИШ, I fent my man to inveigle him to come to me, at an inn where I purpofely ftorjped, in my'way to Rofe-Bank. How duril they fuborn my fervant ?—But— ! I Will ftab and not curfe ! My valet executed his commiffioft, and prevailed on the lad to come ; though with fome difficulty, for he is a ftubborn dog ; and had not the valet followed my direc¬ tions, and told him it was to do'his old mafter a fervice, he would have been foil¬ ed.
ed. But I took him up at Paris, deftitute and in fome danger of ftarving, which he has not forgotten. , This ţîenley however is a greater fa¬ vourite with hirn than I am; as I foon found tw his difcourfe. I began by founding him, to try if it were poffible to prevail on him to affért he had written the letter at the mitigation of Henley, inftead of me ; but I foon found it was in vain, and durft not proceed to let him fee my drift. I then perfuaded him that they had to¬ tally miftaken my purpofe in writing the letter; that I had done it with a veiy friendly defign; that I had myfelf a very great efteem for Henley, and that I meant notliing but good to Anna ; but that there were fome reafons, which I could not explain to him, that had occa¬ fioned me to write the letter., As my next purpofe, s after ¡ that of mak¬ ing him an evidence in my favour, was to fend him entirely out ofthe way, if I fail¬ ed in the firft attempt, I began to remind him
him of the condition in which I had found him in Paris, which he was ready enough to acknowledge, and feemed indeed afraid of acting ungratefully. I prompted and ftiengthened his fears, and at laft told him that, fince I found he was a good lad and meant well, though he was miftaken and had done me an injury, I would give him an opportunity of fliewing hb gi atitude. I then pretended that I had a packet of the utmoft coi fequence to be delivered to my friend in Paris; meaning you, Fair¬ fax ; which I durft not truft to any but à fure hand : and as I knew him to be an honeft lad, I expected he would not refufe to fet off with it immediately. It was an affair almoft of life and death ' And, that I might imprefs his mind with ideas which would affociate and beget fuitable images, I began to talk of the deceafe of my mo¬ ther, of my own affliction at the mifunder- ftanding with Anna, of my very great friendfliip for Henley, and of the fatal confequences that would attend the mif- carriage ofthe packet. ^ Still
Stilt I found him relučhmt. He feemed half to fufpečt me ; and yet ï made a very clever tale ofit. He talked of Henley and his aunt i and he had likewife a dread of Paris. His aunt I find has been maintain¬ ed by Henley, flie being lame and difabled^ and as -fending him out of the way was a preliminary ftep abfolutely neceffary, I gave him a thirty pound bank-note, defir¬ ed him to go to his aunt and give her ( ten pounds, and to keep the reft to fecure him againft any accidents, of which he feemed afraid, in a ftrange country ; with a pro¬ mife that he fliould have as much inore, if he performed his commiflion faithfully, on his return. I further ^enquired the direction of the aunt, telling him I would undertake to provide for her : and fo I muft, for flie too muft be fent out ofthe way. At laft, by repeating my profeifions and again reminding him of my taking him up at Paris, I was fuccefsful. Though Ί had more trouble in gainings the compliance of this lout than would have been fufficient, were
were I prime minifter, and did I bribe with any thing like the fame comparative liberality, to gain ten worthy members of parliament, though five knights of the fliire had been of the number. He wanted to return to Wenboui ne-FIill for his neceffaries and trifling property : and this reminded me not only of the dan¬ ger of doing that but of his paffing through London. Accordingly I told him to keep the ten pounds meant for his aunt to buy himfelf what things he wanted, which I promifed to replace to her, and informed him I now recollected that he muft take the neareft load to Dover, which I pre¬ tended lay through Guildford, Bletchingly, and Tunbridge, leaving London on the left. The importance, huiry, and command I affumed did not give him time to reflect; and the injunctions I gave were fuch as I do not imagine he would have difobeyed. But for my own fecurity, pretending a fear that he might miftake his way, I fent my Yalet with him ; privately Ordering the valet
valet riot to part till he faw him fafe on board the packet-boat. And now, Fairfax, it is -not impoffible but the wife uncle, who has an excellent fcent at difcovery and no fmall opinion of his own acutenefs, may find out that Hen¬ ley himfelf was the forger of this letter -, that it was a collufion between him andthe lad, that he has himfelf removed both the lad and the aunt, and that his chanty is a farce. I fay fuch an event is poffible.— You may be fure that· the idea fliall be whplly his own, and that I will allow him all the juft praife which he will gracioufly beftow upon his penetration. My directions to the lad were to bring the packet immediately to youj which packet you will find to be blank paper, for I had no tíme for any thing more, except a íhort note of which the following is a C PP7* , " AN event which I have not leifure to A 4i relate occafions me to fend you this by *' a fpecial meflfenger, You will moil " probably
K probably receive a letter exprefs. from " me before he arrives, but if not detain " him carefully. Hint not a word of the " matter, but make a pretext of urgent " bufinefs concerning me, for the iffue of " which he muft wait. At all events 'do " not let him efcape, till you hear further " from 1 " C. CLIFTON.? J I was obliged to pretend extreme hurry to the lad, but I gave my valet private inftructions to take him round, and ufe as much delay as-he conveniently could.—' Meanwhile I will fend the letter I am now writing away exprefs, that ýoďmay be fully prepared ; for this is a point of infinite confequence.' If you are not in Paris the exprefs is to follow you ; and you will be kind enough to take meafures that the lad may follow the exprefs. He is r ordered to wait your commands, which' I told him might poffibly detain him a month or even more ; * though it might happen
happen that the bufinefs would be tamf- acted in a week. Not that I can hope the real bufinefs can now poflibly be fo foon finiflied. You will take care to make your ac¬ count agree with mine ; and circumftances oblige me to require of you, Fairfax, to condefcend to get the lad's favour, and not make his ftay irkfome. You may command me to ten times this amount, as you know. This is a melancholy fcene, and a gloomy houfe, and a difmal country ; and I myfelf am fretful, and moody, and mad, and miferable. I fliall foon get into action, and then it will wear off. I will have hen; ay, by the infernais will I! And on my own term s k I know flie is rejoicing now in her Henley. —Eternal curfes bite him ! But I will haunt her ! I will appear to her in her dreams, and her waking 1 hours íhall not want ,a glimpfe of nie. I know ihe hates me. So be it ! If fhe did not I could not fo readily digeft my vengeance. But I know ihe does^! And flie
ihe fliall have better caufe ! I never yet fubmitted to be thus baffled. * She is pre¬ paring an imaginary banquet, and I will be there a real gueft. I vv ill meet her at Philippi ! I wifli I were away from this place ! I wiih I were in my mother's coffin ! I hate to meet this infolent fifter of mine. We have bad a battle, and I was in fuch a frantic rage that I could neither find ideas nor words ; while ihe was cool, cutting, infolent, impudent— ! I never in my life had fo ftrong an inclination to wring a huffey's neck round. J3ut I will get away as faft as, I can, I am refolved however to turn her out ofthe houfe firft. She fliall feel me too, before I 'have done. Brother with her is no tie, nor fliall fifter be to me. Iler mother has made but a fmall piovifion for her, and has recommended her to my mercy. She liad better have taught her a little humi¬ lity- Plagues and peftilence ! Why do I worry myfelf about her ? I have quite caufes vol. iv. к enough
enough of diffraction without that. J muff: not turn her out of doors neither, now I remember. If I did flie would fly to her friend, and would make her if poffible as great a fury as herfelf. Why do I fay would make ? Do I not know that I am her abhorrence ? I loved her, Fairfax, better than ever I loved wo¬ man; and would have loved her more, havelove d her entirely, infinitely, heart and foul, if ihe had not wronged me. From the firft I was overlooked by her, catechif¬ ed, reprimanded, treated like a poor igno¬ ramus ; while her Henley— ! If I write any more I ffiali go mad !— Daffi through the window or do fome defperare act !— c, clifjon.
LF/f-
LETTER CIL
SIR ARTHUR ST. IVES •то ABIMELECH HENLEY. — «ŒlOÎÏCŒ»"— ' · London, Großienor-Stfect. Mr. HENLEY, О IR, I have received your letter, which I muft acknowledge is far more fatisfac¬ tory and in a more proper ftyle than your Iaft, at which I cannot 1 but own ,Lwas ex¬ ceedingly furprifed. With refpect to your fon, I muft,fay that he is a young gentleman of very great- merit; and though a marriage into lhe. family of St. Ives is a thing that he cer- к 2 ţainly
taiiily has no right to expect, yet I cannot deny that your propofal deferves fome con¬ fideration ; inafmuch as you now come forward like a man, and have likewife a recollection of propriety. Neither do I forget, good fir, what you have hinted concerning Wenbourne- Hill,-which is far .from difagreeable to me. And though there are many impedi¬ ments, for which Τ cannot altogether an¬ fwer juft at prefent, yet I think it Very probable that* this affair fliould end in fomething like the manner you defire. I accordingly expect, Mr. Henley, you will have the kindnefs to ftop proceedings rela¬ tive to the foreclofures. In return for which I affure you, оп¬ ту- honour, I will do every thing that becomes a gentleman to bring the affair to a proper conclufion. And as I have a very great refpect for your fon, and think very highly of his parts, and learn¬ ing, and all that, I find when things come to be confidered that he perhaps- may make my daughter more happy, and the match
match may have other greater conveni- en'cies than perhaps one that might feem to the other branches of my family more fuitable. But I know that for the prefent it will be oppofed by Lord Fitz-Allen ; and though I do not think proper to be go¬ verned by him or any man, yet I could rather wifli not to come to an open rup¬ ture with fo near a relation, It will perhaps be thought derogatory by fome other branches, of the family.— But my daughter 'has a very high opini¬ on ofthe'good qualities of your fón ; and /he reminds me continually that he has done us many fignal fervices, which I affure you, Mr. Henley, I am very willihg to remember. When things fliall bé in a proper train, I imagine it will be our beft way of pro¬ ceeding to pay off all mortgages on Wenbourrte-Hill, together with the fum for the'docking of the entail to my fon Edward, and to fettle the eftate in rever¬ fion on our children and their iffue ; my к 3 rental
rental being made fubject to the pay¬ ment of legal intereft to your fon for the fifty thoufand pounds. But we will con¬ fider further on thefe things when matters aie ripe, In the mean time, be pleafed to fend me up one thoufand pounds for prefent cui rent expences, which you will place to account. And now I hope, good fir, we fliall from this time be upon-proper terms ι in expectation of which I remain with all friendly intentions, A. ST, IVES.
LETTER
LETTER СП1.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES . TO LOUISA CLIFTON. London, Gwfxenor Sliest. OH that I could write to my Louifa as formerly, with flatteiing and genézou« hopes in favour of a brother ! Would it were poffible ! I am already weaiy of ac- cufation, though I fear this is but its be¬ ginning. I cannot help İt, but I bave ftrong apprehenfions. Not that I will be the flave of fear, or fink before dan irer fliould it happen to come. The lad that copied the anonymous let¬ ter has left Wenbourne Hill ! Is run away ! к 4 No
No one knows ^whither ! He went tlie very day on which your brother left Lon¬ don, to be prefent \vith you at Mrs. Clif¬ ton's funeral ; and Clifton now denies, with pretended indignation, having had any knowledge whatever of this letter !— Oh how audacious is he in error J Had the fame energy but a worthy object, how excellent would be its effects ! It is a ftrange circumftance ! And what is more ftrange and indeed alarming, Frank .has been to enquire for the lad's aunt, and. ihe is gone ! No one can tell what is be¬ is t come of her, except that 4 ihe went away in a hackney-coach, after having as the people fuppofe received a prefent; be¬ caufe íhe difcharged all her little debts contracted .during the abíènce of Frank, and bought herfelf fome neceffaries. What can this fudden and unaccount¬ able removal of thefe two people mean ? They had both apparently the ftrongeft motives to the contrary ; and Frank lias a very good opinion of the lad, and not a bad one of the aunt» This
This is not all. We were yefteiday in¬ vited to dine with Lord Fitz-Allen ; that is I and Sir Arthur, not Frank Henley, as you will fuppofe. I had a diflike to the vifit, though I did not fufpect it would have been half fo difagreeable. My bro¬ ther and my aunt Wenbourne were like- wife invited ; we found them there. Ever fince the fcene with Mr. Clifton I have been conftantly denied to him, and pofitively refufed all his applications for an interview ; conceiving it to be juft not to let hím imagine there was any doubt on my mind, relative tc- his proceedings and their motives. We had Icarcely fat down to table before he came in, as if by acci¬ dent. This was a fubterfugc. To what will not eiror and the abandonment of the parlions fubmit ? After apologies for dropping in and dif. turbing fo much good company, and a repetition of—I am very glad to fee you, fir; you do mý table honour, and other like marked compliments from Loi d Fitz- Allen, Clifton fçated himfélf and en dea¬ lt 5 voured
voûred to affiline his former gaiety and humour. But it could not be—His heart was too ill at eafe. His eye was continu¬ ally glancing toward me, and there as often met that fteady regard which he knew not how to fupport, and by which he was as continually difconcerted. I did not aŕľeci to frown, and to fmile would have been guilt. í put no reproof into my look, except the open-eyed fobriety of fortitude, fpringing from a confeáoufnefs $f right. But this was infupportable. 11$ talked faft, for he wanted fo talk away his fenfations, as well as to convince his obfervers that he was quite at his eafe. I know not how far he was fuccefsful, for they laughed as much when he failed, or inore perhaps, than they would have done had its wit preferved its ufual brilliancy. His manner told them -he intended to be jocular, and that was their cue to join chorus. Lord Fitz- Aliert w T as very marked iri his attentions tc* him, whicb were returned with no tefoaííUmr, Clifton 1 indeed evi* dently
dently laid himfelf out to plèafe the whole table ; but me leaft, becaufe With me he had leaft hope ; and becaufe he found his efforts produced no altération in that uni¬ form ferioufnefs on which I had deter¬ mined. As foon as the deffert was ferved up the fervants withdtewV and not one of them afterward came in till rung for; which I imagine had been preconcerted. Looks then became more grave, and the conver¬ fation foon dwindled into filence. At Iaft Lord Fitz-Allen, after various hems and efforts, for he has fome fear of me, or ra¬ ther of what he fuppofes the derogatory fufferance of contradiction, addreffed him¬ felf to me. I am forry to hear, niece!, there is a mif- underftanding between you and Mr. Clif¬ ton ; and as you happen now to be both together, I think it is a proper opportunity for explanation. You know, Mifs St. Ives, that an alliance wiih the family of Clifton has always met my approbation ; and I fuppofe you will not deny me the к б favour
favour of liftening with patience—Why don't you fpeak, niece ? 4 You defired me to liften, fir, and I am iilent—Let Mr. Clifton proceed. Clifton after fome ftammering hefitation began—I know, s madam, you have been prejudiced againft me, and have been told very ftrange things ; very unaccountable things. I cannot tell what anfwer to make, till I know perfectly of what I anx accufed. All I requeft is to be fuffered to face my accufers, and let Lord Fitz- Alien, or Sir Arthur, or this good lady [my aunt Wenbourne] or your brother, nay or yourfelf, though you think fo ill of me, be my judge. I am told fomething of an anonymous letter; I know not very well what ; but if any good evidence can be brought of my having written, or caufed to be written, or Kad any concern what¬ ever in the writing of fuch a letter, I fo- lemnly pledge myfelf to renounce the bleffing I fó ardently feek without a mur¬ mur. Lord
Lord Fitz-Allen exclaimed nothing 1 could be more gentleman-like. My aunt Wenbourne owned it was a Very proper propofal. Edward thought there could Uè no objection to it. Sir Arthur was filent. His infidious appeal to juftice, and be¬ ing brought face to face with his accufers, revived the full picture of the flight of the lad, the removal of the aunt, and the whole chain of craft and falfehood con- nectedwith thefe circumftances. It was with difficulty I repreffed feelings that were ftruggling into indignation—I ad¬ dreffed myfelf to Mr. Clifton. Then, fir, you coolly and deliberately deny all knowledge of Ше letter in quef¬ tion ? I have, told you, madam, that I will fuffer Lord Fitz-Allen, yourfelf, any per¬ fon to pafs fentence, after having examined, witneíľes. Anfwer me in an open direct manner, Mr. Clifton, without ambiguity. Were you not the author of that letter? I am
I am forry, madam, to fee you fo de ' ' firous to find me guilty; and í would even criminate myfelf to give you pleafure, but that I know I muft then neither hope for your favour nor the countenance of this good company. I affure yon, Lord Fitz- Affen, I affure you, Sir Aithur, and you, madam, and all, upon my honour I anf incapable of what is attributed to me. Do not appeal to my uncle and aunt, Mr. Clifton, but turn this way. Let your eyes* be fixed here. Liften while I read the letter; and then, without once ihrink¬ ing from yomfelf, or me, repeat as you have done, though in an equivocal man¬ ner, upon your honour you are not the au¬ thor. I took the letter from my pocket, and began to read. When I came to the fol¬ lowing paffage, I again repeated—Look at me, Mr. Clifton—" She will never have u the man they* mean for her, I can affure " you of that ; and what is more, he will " never have her." I proceeded to the end, and then added—Once more, Mr. Clifton,
Clifton, look at me and repeat— Upori my honour I was not the inventor and author of thofe words. Louifa !—He did look— ! I hope I ne¬ ver fliall fee man look fo again !—He flared and forced hiš eyes to'do their office, and repeated—" Upon my honour I was not " the inventor and author of thofe words." —He ftabbed me to the heait, Louifa !— Can he do this ?—Then what can he not do ? Ho even felt a complacency at the victory he had obtained, and turning round to Lord Fitz-Allen and the company again repeated—" Upon my honour I am not " the inventor and auf hor óf thofe words." Lord Fitz-Allen almoft crowed with ex¬ ultation. I am miftaken, niece, faid he, if you do not find theie are other people who can write anonymous letters : people of no honour; upftárts, mongrels, muih- rooms, low contemptible fellows, that would fully the mouth of a Fitz-Allen to. mention. The tone of this lordíy uncle was fo high, Louifa, and hhî paffions fo arrogant, loud,
loud, t and obftinate, that it was with dif-, iìculty I could recover the fortitude requie fite to affért truth and put falfehood to the , bluffi. I again turned to my opponent. Mi'. Clifton, I feel at prefent you are a dangerous man. But I do not fear you. Obferve, iir, I do not fear you·—[I turned to my*uncle] Sir, Mr. Clifton caufed this letter to be written. But, if there were no fuch letter in exiftence, I have another proof, ftronger, more undeniable, of which I imagine you will .not doubt when I in¬ form you that no third perfon was con¬ cerned. It was addreffed to myfelf. It was a ftrenuous, bold, unprincipled effort to feduce me. Let the gentleman again look me in the face, and tell me I am guilty of falfehood. I fpoke with firmnefs, and Lord Fitz- Allen's 1 features relaxed, and his eye be¬ gan to enquire' with pain and apprehen¬ fion. His great fear was of being con¬ victed of want of penetration. Clifton perceived the feelings of, the company turn upon him with fufpicion ; but his art, muft I add? his hypocrify did not fail him. He
■lie transformed the confufion he felt into a look of contrition, and with as much ardour as if it had been real replied— it is .that fatal error which has ruined me, madam, in your good opinion, and has occafioned you to credit every accufa- tion againft me, however improbable. I confefs my guilt. Not guilt of heart, ma¬ dam ; for honour be my witnefs, my views were as pure as the words in which they were uttered. I was at that time depend¬ ant on the will of a mother, whom I loved, and whofe memory I revere. My paffions were impatient, and I wifhed to remove impediments to my s happinefs which now no longer exift. I do not pre¬ tend to palliate what is unpardonable, and what I myfelf condemn as feverely as you do ; except that I abjure all diihonourabie intentions, and meant as I faid to be your huiband. The ftrongeft .proof I can give that this was my meaning I now offer, in the prefence of this noble and, good com¬ pany, I require no conditions, I aík for no fortune except yourfelf which is the only
..-.βίο : ANNA ST. IVÉS.' ' only bïéfîîng r I covet in this life. I will • joyfully attend you to the altar whenever you and your worthy relations fliall con¬ fent ; next week, to-morrow, to-day, this mohient;;and fliould think myfelf the moft favoured,. the moil happy man en earth ! Thé 1 offer is the offer of a gentleman. Sir Arthur, faid Lord Fitz-Allen. If Mr. Clifton had been guilty of any indecorum, -niece,''.[Turning to me] you could not re¬ quire more. honourable 'arnentb.v 'This is '■ acting: with'that dignity which chátacte- ŕižés a rnâh r òf 'family,·' Mrs. Wenbourne ; aha ás it is impoffibìè ;for Mifs St. Ivés to fee 'W in. any- other point öf vìe w, béve thè affaiť'-ivíii'naturklíý'éäai^íirid'.tlie'ŕe is nó '1пЬге:го ! ¥ё:ШШг :: .' ." ' : ; v ' •. i '"; s " ,V; '■ Vf lim^diätelyknfvvere^ by the affair ending· here, 4 yöií uiiďerftand any : further mte'rcôuí'fe between rň e ■ and Mr. Cliftdffi ^ rhuí| i: ínöt -fuffer you' to Continué ¡Π; fűühK aň v *érf or. Wë*·ariû and éVér műit ŕeinámV%äräfe,'' ; ;Häbit âhd' education have made üs tiwn fuch different* bèïngSi ■tliät : '
a noVel." ΰΠ that it would be the excefs of folly to fup¬ pofe marriage cbuld make us one. Mifs St. Ives—[My uncle collected all his ideas- of rank and grandeur] Mifs St. IveSjiyoit muft do me tho honour tocon- fider me as the head of our family, and fúffer me to remind you of the reipect and obedience whicb are due to that head. The propofal now made you I approve. It is made by a man of family, and I muft fake the liberty to lay my injunctions'upon you to liften to it. in a decorous and propef manner. I anfwered—I am forry, fir,' that our ideas of propriety are fo very ; oppofite. But whether my judgment be right or wrong, as,I am the perfon to be'married to Mr. Clifton, and not your Lordihip, my judgment as Well as yours muft and ought to be cònfulted. Lord Fitz-Allen could fcarcely reftrain his anger within the bounds of his own. decorum. He' burft into exclamations— Exceedingly well, mifs!—Very proper proper, behaviour to a perfon of my rank, and
and your uncle !—You hear, Sir Arthur í — You hear, Mrs. Wenbourne !—You, aU hear 1—But your motives and inclinations are known, mifs: I am forry that it would ' diihonour the tongue of Fitz -ЛИеп to re¬ peat them : and I cannot help telling you, Sir Arthur, that-you have been exceedingly to blame to admit fuch a fellow to any familiarity with a woman of rank and my niece j a fellow better entitled to be her footman than her—I will not permit the word to pafs my lips. I felt the cowardice of fuŕFering worth and virtue to be infulted, without a de¬ fender, from the fear that I myfelf fliould be involved in the infult, and replied— 4 lhe gentleman, fir, to whom you have twice aHuded in tçıms ofrfo much con¬ tempt, were he prefent would fmile at your miftake. But there are more people at this table thanr myfelf >who haye been witneíľes how little he deferves to be fpo¬ ken ofin the language of oppiobrium. Mr. Clifton appeared eager to be the fhfbto acknowledge Mr. Henley was a very
very worthy perfon. Edward muttered fomething to the fame tune ; and Sir Ar¬ thur feemed very willing to have fpoken out, but wanted the courage. lie began at Turnham Green, but could get no fur¬ ther. Lord Fitz-Allen anfwered— What tell you me of Turnham-Greetijt Sir Arthur? I was flopped once myfelf by a highwayman, and my footman fired at him, and fent him packing ; but I did not for that reafon come home arid marry my footman to my daughter. The full image of Frank and his virtues pervaded my mind, my heart fwelled, my thoughts burft from my lips, and I ex¬ claimed—Oh, fir, that you had a thoufand daughters, and that each of them were worthy of fuch a footman for a huiband ! Had you beheld this uncle of mine, Louifa'!—The daughters ofthe peer Fitz- Allen married to footmen 1 The infult was almoft agony. The only antidote to the pain which his countenance excited was the abfurdity and ridicule of the'prejudicë But I perceived how vain it was to expe£ thal N
that in this company the voice of juftice fliould be heard, and I rofe. My aunt^ rofe at the fame time, to retire with me ; but, recollecting myfelf, I turned and thus aoMreifed Lord Fitz-Allen and Mr. Clif¬ ton, alternately : That I may not be liable to any juft blame from your lordfliip, or you>, fir, for want of being explicit, you muft permit me tp ţepeat —I never will again admit ofthe addreffes, of Mr. Clifton. I have an abhorrence of the e.rrors in which he is now indulging. He himfelf has told me what a'mad and vicious act it would.be to marrya huiband in whorn I could not con¬ fide, and I never ca.n confide in him. My perfuafion at this moment of his hypocrify is fuch that, could I prevail on myfelf to the debafement of putting him to the trial, by ,preteii|ding to accept his hand, I am convinced he w ou ld refufe. 1 1 read his heart. He fçjks } an opportunity to re- vengeâmaginary .injuries'; for I never did, dq not, nor ever can wifli him any thing· hqigoqcl. . Lthjn^ I would^ay down my
life, without hefitation, to render him ^all of which his uncommon powers are capa¬ ble : but I perceive the impoffibility of its being effected by me, and I here ulti¬ mately and deteiminedly renounce all thought of him, or of fo dangerous an attempt. Mr. Clifton eagerly ftaitedup, and with a momentary foftening of countenance, a pleading voice, and fomething hke the tone of returning virtue exclaimed—Hear me, madam '—I conjure you, hear me ! My appeal is to the benevolence, the dig¬ nity of your heai t ! Remember the virtu¬ ous plan you ¡had foimed— ! ( , The combatir, his mind, was violent but flioit, Tiuth made a ftruggle to gain the majáky, 3,ηά hope raifed up a tranfient profpečt of fuccefs, which, was as quickly oYcicloujded by angei anr.1 defpair, and hç ftppped abruptly. At leaft Ьщ vpiçe and, featufQs were fo impaflìoned that, iLthefe, w r ere not his fenjatţonş, \ haye щ cjue ¿o the huma;! heart. Perceiving Jym papfo and doubt, ДхерДе4гг t It
Tt cannot be, Mr. Clifton ' You this moment feel it cannot ! You have begun a courfe of fraud, and which the whole arrangement òf to-day is only meant as fo much pitiful machinery to eŕFečt. You are confcious, Mr. Clifton, you are confcious, Lord Fitz-Allen, that our meeting was not, as you have both pretended, acci¬ dental. And I here call upon you—you, Mr. Clifton, to tell for what purpofe or where you have fent the lad who wrote the letter, and to what place you have re¬ moved his aunt ? Such an artifice is vile, fir' And to challenge your accufers tó ftand forward, and with a look fuch a§ you affumed to affirm, " Upon your ho- " nour you were not the inventor; and au- " thor ofthe letter," is fo much more vile that I ih udder for you! ' Your own pro¬ ceedings have conjured up a train of recol¬ lections that fpeak a concerted plan of perfidy. You mean mifchief ! But I once more tel! you, fir, I f do not fear you ! I will not fear ^you ! My fears indeed are ilrong, but they are for yourfelf. Beware ! The
The more guilt you have committed, the more you will be driven to commit. Turn back! You arc in a dreadful path ! It is unworthy of you, Mr. Clifton ! Jit is un¬ worthy of you ! H ■ ï inftantly withdrew, and was followed by Mrs. Wenbourne, who began;to'exprefs fomething like blame ofthe poctivé man¬ ner in which I had fpoken, and the high .language I had ufed to Lord Fitz-Allen ; bur it was too feeble to incite an anfwer in my then ftate of mind. I requefted flie would order her carriage, and fet me down. She aiked if I would not firft pay my refpects to my uncle. I anfwered yes, when my uncle fliould be more deferving of refpect. She faid I was a ftrange young lady. I replied I fincerely hoped there were many young ladies ftranger even than Í. She took offence at thefe retorts upon her words, and I perceived that, though the fpirit of my anfwer was light, the manner was wrong: and explained and apologifed as,bec4me me. She was ap- voL. iv. L peafed
peafèd, and when the carriage came, again aiked if I would not go with her to take leave. I anfwered, I imagined my uncle would be glad to wave the ceremony; and, as I thought he had acted very improperly, curtfying and taking leave would but be praÖifing thè cuftomary hypocrify of our manners,. which I hoped I fliould on all occafions have the firmnefs to oppofe. Accordingly my aunt went herfelf ; and his lordihip, ftill preferving his dignity, pretended to forbid me his prefence, till í better underftood what was due to the re¬ lationffiip and rank in which he ftood.— This my aunt reported, and I returned no anfwer, but left her to make her own re¬ flections. Thus ended this painful interview------ Tell mc, what ought I to think ? What can be tl)e purport of a conduct fo vciy wrong? Such a firing of falsehoods ! How different would the behaviour of Mr. Clif¬ ton have been, had not confcious crimi¬ nality opprefled and chained up his facul¬ ties ! Such perfiftence in duplicity muft have
have fome end in view. Could I corifent to marriage, which is now utterly impoffi¬ ble, he has certainly no fuch meaning.—► If he had he could not have written, he could not have acted as he has done ; and even lefs in this laft inftance fince his writ¬ ing than before, for he could not but know that, though he could appear this generous man of honour to Lord Fitz- Allen, he muft ftand detected by me.— It was not poffible he fliould fuppofe о ther wife ι Well ! Let him mean me all the harm he pleafes ; only let me find fome oppor¬ tunity of convincing him what a depraved, unmanly, trivial turn his mind has ta 1 .en, iind let nie but give-it a different b»nt, and I will willingly fuffer all he fhall \if<- ihe power to inflict. I do not find nrvfeif, Louifa, difpofed to ftand in that dread of bafenefs and violence which they generally infpire. Vii tue is not a paffive but an attive quality; and its foi titude is much more potent than the lafli vehemence of \ ice. L 2 Adieu,
Adieu, dear Louifa. Peace and felicity guard you ! A. W ST. IVES.
LETTER CIV.
COKE CLIFTON TO GUY FAIRFAX,
, London, Dover-Sirett. JL HANK you, Fairfax, for your fpeed and precautions, which I muft requeft you npt to ilaçken. Do not let the lad efcape you: his appearance here would be ruin. Let but my grand fcheme be completed, and
and then I care not though the legions of hell were to rife, and mow and run a tilt at me. I would face their whole fury.— The fcene would delight me. Het them come all ! 1 burn to turn upon and rend them ! The more defperate the more grateful. I told you, Fairfax, flie hated me ! I have it now from her own mouth ! JShe feels I am become her foe i Mv hand is already upon her ! My deepeft darkeft thoughts of vengeance do not exceed her imagination. And yet flie fears me not ! Her words, her looks, her gellures are all cool, firm defiance J She is a miracle, Faiifax; A miracle ! But I will overmatch her. A heroine ! She would have unhorftd Orlan¬ do himfelf, had fhe lived in the times of the knights Paladin. I am an infufferable booby, an eternal lunatic, for having firft thought of quar¬ relling with her. But it is too late ! I might have forefeen thè advantages I give a woman like her. She openly, magnani- i· 3 moufly
moufiy tells me what my intents arc, and then fpurns at them. She keeps her anger under indeed, but does not reprefs its energy ; a proof ofthe fubječtion in which ihe holds hei paffions. She once endea¬ voured ίο teach me this art, would I but have'liftened. But that is pail ! I could not have thought it was in woman ! The poor, wailing, watery-eyed beings I had before encountered would not fuffer. me to fuppofe a female could poffefs the high courage of the dar¬ ing, noble mirnh Never but one fliort moment did I overtop her : nor are there any means but thofe I then ufed. Infpire her with the dread of offending what ihe thinks principle, and flie becomes a coward. ! But I will roufe ! 1 will foar above her, will fubdue her, will have her pioftratc in-humble fubmiffion, or perifh ' In the prefence of witneíľes I feel I cannot fuc¬ ceed'; but fingly, face to face, paffion to paffion, and being, to being, diffinct and eminent as flie ftands above all woman¬ kind,
kind, I will yet prove to her flie is not the equal ofthe man Clifton. She herfelf has even thrown the gauntlet. I have had fuch a fcene with her ! A public exhibition ! I cannot relate the manner of it. I dare not truft' my brain with the full remihifcence. Why did I quarrel with her? She meant me well—Tortures !—I am a luna¬ tic to teafe myfelf with fuch recollections. This is a damned, wrong-headed, igno-· rant, blundering, vile world ; and I can¬ not fee my way in it. I fliould have had no fufpicion that it is all this but for her. That Henley fhall never have her!— I'll murder him firft ! Though thebottom- lefs pit were to gape and fwallow me, he fliall not have her ! The contemptible buzzard, Sir Arthur, is now completely veered about but in vain ! It fliall not be ι By hell it fliall not ! This fellow, this Henley muft fome how or other be difpofe d of. The contempt of the arrogant peer, her uncle, will harm L 4 him
him but little ; for the lord, with all his dignity, is no match for the plebeian. Neither will his loidfliip haftily feek another combat with his niece. The only advantage I have, in fo infignificant an ally, is that of hereafter making fufpicion alight on Henley, and not on me ; for í mean ίο carry them both off, Henley and Anna. I know not where or how I fliall yet difpofe of them, but there is no other mode of accompli ili ing vengeance. They muft be confined too. I care not how defperate the means ! I will not retract ! They fliall be taught the danger of raifing up an enemy like me ! I will have them st my feet ' Will feparate them ! Will glut my revenge, and do the deed that fliall prevent thcii ever meeting more, ex¬ cept peihaps to ìeproach each other with the madnefs of having injured, aggravat¬ ed, and defied a Clifton ! My whole days are dedicated to this fingle object. I have been riding round the fkirts of this ihapelefs moniter of a city, on
on all fides, in fearch of lonely tenantlefs houfes ; fome two of which I mean lo provide with inhabitants. I have met with moie than one that are not ill fituated. But I want agents ! Defperados ! Hun¬ gry and old traders in violence ! I care not where I go for them ; have" them I will, though I feek them in the purlieus of infa¬ my and deteftarion. To fucceed by any other means is impoffible. She will not admit me in the fame apartment with her¬ felf, nor I believe in the fame world, had flie the power to exclude me. I met her indeed at Loid Fitz-Alleii's, where the fcene above-mentioned paffed ; but it was a plan concerted with his lord¬ ihip, which flie eafily detected, and pub- iicly reproached him with his duplicity. I gloried to her hear ; for fhe had not injured him. A poor compound of pride and felfifhnefb I Incapable of underftand¬ ing the worth of fuch a niece i But flie made him feel his own infignificance. Henley and ihe are now never afunder. I have
I have mentioned the maid Laura to you- She tells me they have long conveifations in the morning, long walks in the after¬ noon, and at night they have neither of them the power to rife and feparate. But I will come upon them ! My fpirit at pre¬ fent is haunting them, never leaves them, girds at and terrifies them at every inftant, during their amorous dalliance ! I know it does ! They cannot get quit of me ! I am with them, weighing them down, con- vulfing them ! They feel they are in my gripe !—Hah! The thought is heart's eafe. When there is no company, and when Sir Arthur is not fitting with them^ this maid, Laura, has that honour. Whence if appears tbat even thefe immaculate fouls have fome dread of fcandal. And who is it infpires that dread ? It is I ! They feem to have difcovered that all circumftances, all incidents wear a double face ; and that I am the malignant genius who can make which he pleafes the true-one—Yes ! I am with them ! I fend the Incubus^ that hag-rides thenr in their
theh dreams ! They gafp and would awake, but cannot ! Why could ffie not have beftowed all this affection upon me ? Why could ihe· not? I once thought a woman might have loved me !—But it feems I was mif- taken>—The things that go by the general name of woman might ; but when I came to woman herfelf, flie could not, though ffie tried. Would I were any where but in this infernal gloom! It is a dcteftable country ! This town is one everlafting fog, and its inhabitants are as cloudy as its ikies '— Every man broods over fome folitary fcheme of his own, avoids human inter¬ courfe, and hates to communicate the murk of his mind. I am in a wildernefs. I fly the herd, and the herd flies me. We pafs and fcowl enmity at each other, fori begin to look with abhorrence on the face of man. There is not a fingle gleam' of cheeifulnefs around me. The fun has* not once flione fince the day of my difap¬ pointment, which was itfelf thick darknefs. Would
Would 1 could get rid of myfelf !------1 am going to take a ride, and make a fé¬ cond examination of a large lonely houfe beyond Knightibridge. It lies to the left, and is at a 'fufficient diftance from the road. I think it will fuit my purpofe. I muft not have far to convey them ; and Laura informs me their walks are moil frequently directed through Hyde-Park, and among the fields at the back of Brompton. I muft be as quiet and appear as little myfelf as poffible ; for which reafon I ride without a fervant. And though I have been induftrious in reading advertifements^ and getting intelligence of empty houfes,. I have not ventured to enquiie perfonally. Laura attends them in their walks; buL flie is fecure. They muft both be feized at the fame time, and in a manner that fliall frulliate all refearch. It will then be concluded they have gone off together. He is a powerful fellow, a dangerous fellow, and I muft be well provided. He fliall never have
"have her, Fairfax ! I would die upon the wheel, hang like a negro, and parch alive in the fun ere he fliould have her ! С CLIFTON. P. S. All fociety is become odious to me, but chiefly that fociety which I am obliged to frequent. This uncle Fitz-Allen, aunt Wenbourne, and brother Edward are three fuch poor beings, and the cenfures they pafs on a woman who is of an order fo much above them are fo vapid, fo felf¬ ifh, or fo abfurd, that it is naufeating to fit and liflen to them. Yet thefe are the animals I am obliged to court ! Flypocrify is a damned trade, Fairfax ; and I will have full vengeance for having been forced upon fuch a practice. The only prefent reliefi have is to make the arrogant peer foam with the idea of his rclationftiip to a gardener's fon. * This would be an exqui¬ fite pleafure, but that itris millions of times more maddening to me than to him.
LETTER
LETTER CV.
ANťNA- WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON.
London, Gioßveno Siteet, Abimelech ís come up to town, ι am obliged very refpečtfully to call him Mr. Henley when Sir Arthur hears me, in compliance to his feelings : and he has hinted that hereafter, when his name is ~ written, it niuft be tagged with an efquire. The old mifer [Well, Louifa, let it be the old gentleman] is fo eager in puifuit of his project that he can take no reft, and is
îs unwilling Sir Arthur fliould take any__ He has a prodigious quantity of cunning·! Whatever he may know of the theory of the paffions as a general fubject, no perfon certainly knows better how to work upon the paffions of Sir Arthur : at leaft no per¬ fon who wiU condefcend to take fuch au advantage. His difcourfe is fuch a con¬ tinued mixture of Wenbourne -НШ, his money, mortgages, grottos, groves, the wherewithals, and the young gentleman his fon, that laughter fcarcely can hold to hear him. Were the thing practicable, he would render Frank Henley himfelf ri¬ diculous. It is pleafant to remark what a check the prefence of this favourite fon is upon his loquacity. He never fufpeéts the pof¬ fibility of there boing a mortal fuperior to himfelf at other times ; whereas he has then a latent confcioufnefs of his own ri¬ dicule. The effect which the abfence of Frank has produced, with the favour he isin with me, and the refolute manner in which he conquered his father when he laft
Iaft went down to Wenbourne-Hill, have made a total change in the old man's be¬ haviour to this formerly neglected but now half adored fon. Were habits fo inveterate capable of being eradicated, Frank would yet teach him virtue : but the talk is too difficult. ■ He is certainlyin a moftdelicious trance. His fon to be married to the daughter of his mafter ! That mafter a baronet ! And the eftates of that baronet to be his own, as he fuppofes, to all eternity. For the .avaricious dreams of felfiihnefs are fatisfied with nothing lefs. Thefe are joys that fwell and enlarge even his narrow heait into fomething that endeavours to mimic urbanity. Whenever Sir Arthur mentions Lord Fitz-Allen, or the family confent, honeft Aby in a moment conjures up Wenbourne- Hill, a hermitage, and a wildernefs ; and for the" firft day, if he found that dole not ftrong enough to produce its effect, fore¬ clofures were added to the mixture.------ Your· own heart, Louifa, will tell you • what
what Frank's feelings were at fuch a mean menace ; and, though to ftop his garrulity entirely was not in the power of man, he determined to filence him on that fubject. But the cunning Abimelech turned even this incident to advantage, by taking care to inform Sir Arthur of Frank''; generofity. Thus, Louifa, things are at prefent in a train which fome months ago I fliould indeed very little have expected. But fuch are the energies of virtue ! How changed at prefent do all furrounding objects feem ! To me they were never dark ; but they wem not always pleafant. They are now all cheerfulnefs and perfpicacity. We have the moil charming walks ?nd the moil delightful converfations, Louifa ; and on fubječts fo expanfive, fo fublime— ! Often do I fay—" Why is my friend not u with us ? Why does the not come and " bear her part in difcuffion ? She whofe " mind is fo penetrating and whofe " thoughts are fo grand." But we fliall meet ! Days and years of happinefs are vol. iv. M before
before us ! The profpečt is rapture !—^~. Yes, Louifa, we. fliall meet, and I hope* .quickly ! A. W. ST. IVES.
END of VOL. IV.
J'rtoKd by J. Crowdcr, Warwick-Square
