Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Anna St. Ives: a novel
ANNA St. IVES: Δ NOVEL.
LETTER XXVL SIR ARTHUR ST. IVES то ABIMELECH HENLEY.* Pan'f, Hotel dEjpagMy Rue Guenegaude, Fauxbourg St, German:. Y OU cannot imagine, honeft Aby, the furprife I am in. Is this their famous France ? Is this the fineft country in the vvhoie worid ? AVhy, Aby, from Boulogne to Paris, at leaft from Montrerai, I am vol,- ii\ - E cerlain
certain I did not fee a fingle hedge ! All one dead flat; with an eternal row of trees, without beginning, middle or end. I fincerely believe, Aby, I fliall never love a ftraight row of trees again. .Ahcl the wcarifome right lined road, that you never lofe fight of ; not for a moment, Aby ! No lucky turning. No intervening hill. Oh that I were but the Grand Monarch ! AVhat improvements would I make ! AVhat a fcope fpr invention, Aby ! A kingdom ! A revenue of four hundred millions of livres, and a ftanding army of three hun¬ dred thoufand men ! All which, if the king were a wife man, it is very evident, Abimelech, he might employ in improve- .ments ; and heaven knows there is a want of them. AVhat are their petty corvées, by which thefe ftraight'roads'have been patched up, and~ their cverlafting elms planted? I would aflemble all my vaffals —[Your fon Frank, Aby, has given me much information concerning the prefent governments of Europe, and the origin of manors, fiefs, and lordihips. I can affure you
you he is a very deep young man ; though I could wifh he were not quite fo pcicmp- tory and pofitive ; and has informed me of fome things which I never hcai d of before, though I am twice his age. But he fce.ns to have them fo (aft at his finger's end-. that I fuppofe they muft be tuie. I had often heard of entails, and mortmain, and lands, held in fee or fief, I don't knov/ which, and all that you know, Abimelech. One's deeds ,and one's lawyers tell one fomething, blindly of thefe matters ; but I never knevv how it had all happened. He told me that—Egad I forget what he told me.« But I know he made it aH out very clear. Still I muft fay he is curfed pofitive.]—IIow r ever, Aby, as I was fay¬ ing, I would aflemble all my valíais, all my great lords and fief holders, and they fliould aflemble tlieir vaffals, and all hands fliould be fct to work: fome to plan, others to plant; fome to grub, fomc' to dig, fome to hoe, and fonie to fow. The whole country fliould foon be a garden ! Tell me, Aby, is not the project a grand в 2 one
one * ? AVhat a difpatch of wrork ! AVhat a change of nature ! I am raviflied witli the thought ! As for my ideas of improvement tobe.. picked .up here,: Abimelech, they muft· not L>e expefted. í íhall never forget the faraenefs of the fcene h So: .unlike tlie riches of AVenbourne-Hill ! Sir Alexander would have a country open enough here, at leaft. He vvould not complain of.being fliut in. The wind may blow: from vvhat pointit pleafes, atid you have it .on all fides. Except the road-fide elms I men¬ tioned,', and. now and then a coppice, which places they telline are planted for the prefervation of the game, I -fliould have fuppofed there had not been a tree in the country; had I not been told that there were many large forefts, to the.right, and the left, out of fight. . For my parti don't know where they have hidden them, and fo muft take their- word for the faft.
'Tis
'Tis true indeed that wc travelled à part ofthe way in the dark. I was mentioning the game, Aby. The game laws here arc excellently put in execution. Hares are as plenty as rabbits in a warren, partridges as tame as our dove-houfe pigeons, and pheafants that feem as if they would come and feed out of your hand. .For no fcroundrel poacher dare moleft them. If he did, I am not certain whether the lord of the manor could not hang him up inftantly without judge or jury. Though Frank tells me they have no juries here : which by the bye is odd enough ; and as he fays I fuppofe it ris a great fliame. For, as he put the caufe to me, how fliould I like to have my eftate feized on, by fome infolent prince or duke ? For you know, I being a baronet in my own right, Aby, no one lefs in rank would dare infringe upon me. AVell'! How fhould I like to have this duke, or this prince, feize upon my eftate; and, в 3 inftead
inftead of having my right tried by a fpecial jury ofmy peeis, to have the caufe decided by him who can get the prettieft woman to plead for him, and who will pay her and his judges the beft r For fuch Frank affures me is the mode here ! Now к ally all this is very bad ; very bad in¬ deed, and as he fays wants reforming. But as for the game laws, as I was fay¬ ing, Aby, ihey arc excellently enforced ; and your poor rafeáis here are kept iu very proper fubjcclion. They are held to the grindftonc, as I may fay. Andfo they ought to be. Aby. For .lhave often heard you fay, vvhat is a man but what he is worth ? AVhich in certain refpects is very true. A gentleman of family and fortune, why he is a gentleman ; and no infolent beggar ought to dare to look him in the face, without his permiffion. But you, Aby, had always a veiy great fenfe of propriety, in thefe refpects. And you have found your advantage in it ; as indeed you ought.' It is a pity, confider¬ ing what a learned young man you have made
made your fon, that you did not teach him a little ofyour good fenfe in this par¬ ticular. He is too full of contradiction : too confident by half. Let me have a long and full and whole account of what you are doing, Aby. Tell me precifely how forward your work is, and the exact fpot where you are when each letter comes away. I know I need not caution you to keep thofe idle fellows the day labourers, to it. I never knew any man who worked them better. And yet, Aby, it is furprifing the fums that they have coft me ; but you are a very careful honeft fellow ; and they have done won¬ ders, under my planning and your in¬ fpection. ' í do not wifli that the moment I receive a letter it fhould be known «o every lac¬ quey ; efpecially here ; where it feems to be one entire city of babblers. The peo pie appear to have nothing to do but to talk. In the houfe, in the ftreet, in the fields, breakfaft, dinner, and fupper, walk¬ ing, fitting, or ftanding, they are never в 4 filent.
filent. Nay egad I doubt whether thsy do not talk in their fleep ! So doyou diiect to me at the Café Conti —However I had better write the direction for you at full length, for fear of a miftake. And be fure you take care of your fpelling, Aby, or I don't know what may happen. For I am told that many of thefe French pec¬ are deviiiíh illiterate, and I am fure they are devilifh cunning. Snap ! They anfwer before they hear you ! And, what is odd v .enough, their anfwers are fometimes as pat as if they knew your meaning. In¬ deed I have often thought it ftrange that vour low poor people fliould be fo acute, and have fo much common fenfe. But do you direct your letters thus— A Monfieur Monfeur le Chevalier de St t Ive?, Baronet Anglais, au Café Conti, vis-a-vis le Pont Neuf Qua i Conti, à Paris. And fo, Abimelech, I remain, A. ST. IVES.'
LETTER
A NOVEC,
LETTER XXVIL —-cau.iac- . ' FRANK HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCHARD»
Pai h t Hôtel ď E/pague , Rue Gticnegaude f Fauxbourg St. GiY-main. A FIE black forebodings of my mind, Oliver, are fulfilled ! I have been ftruck ! The phantom I dreaded has appeared, has flaihed upon me, and all the evils which I prophefied, and more than all, are collect¬ ing to overwhelm me; are rufhing to my ruin ■ This brother of Louifa ! Nothing furely was ever fo unaccountable ! The very fame whom I prevented from fighting, in the Champs Elyfêes ! Ay, he ! This identical ъ 'i Clifton,
Clifton, for Clifton it was, has again appear¬ ed ; has been here, is here, is never hence. His afpect was petrifying ! He came upon me this fecond time in the Arranged, the moit infolent manner imaginable; juft as I had fent away my laft letter to thec ; when I was fitting the guardian ofa trea¬ fure, which my fond falfe reveries were at that moment flattering me might one day bc mine ! Starting at the fight of me ! Nothing kind, nothing conciliating in his addrefs; it was all imperious de¬ mand. AVho was I ? By what right did I deny admiffion to the young lady's wo¬ man, to inform her he was come to pay her hib refpects? He!—Having a letter from Sir Arthur, inviting him thither !—AVere fuch orders to be countermanded by me ? Again and again, who was I?------Oliver, he is a haughty youth; violent, headftrong, and arrogant ! Believe me he will· be found fo. AVhat do î mean ? AVhy do 1 dread him? How! The flave of fear? AVhy is my heait fo inclined to think ill of him ? Do I feek to depreciate ? She has men-
tioned him feveral times; has expefted, with a kind of eagernefs, he would re¬ femble her Louifa ; has hoped he and I flioukl be friends. " Did not I hope the " fame ?" Oliver, fhe has tortured me ! All benevolence as flie is, ilie has put me on the rack! 3 muft not yield thus to paffion: it is criminal. I have too much indulged the flattering dreams of defire. Yet what to do?—How toaft?—Muft J tamely quit the field the moment an adverfary appears! turn recreant to myfelf, and coward-like give up my claims, without daring to fay fuch and fuch they are ? No. Juftice is due as much to myfelf asto any other.' If he ' bc truly deferving of preference, why let him be preferred, I will rejoice.------ Yes, Oliver, zvili. ------He who is the flave of paffion, is uuworthy a place in the no¬ ble mind of Anna. But this man is, noi my fuperior: Ifeck Oliver, he is not;· and it becomes me- to* affert my rights. Nay, his pride afts. as a provocative -------Oiiver, I perceive how в b', wrongs
wrong this is; but ï will not blot out the line. Let it remain as a memento. He that would correct his failings muft be willing to detect them. " The anxiety of my mind is exceffive; and the pain which a conviction of the weaknefs and error that this anxiety oc¬ cafions, renders it ftill more infupport¬ able. I muft take myfelf to tafk; ay and feverely. I muft enquire into the wrong and the right, and reafon muft be abfo¬ lute. /Fell me thy thoughts, plainly and honeftly; be fure thou doft; for I fome¬ times fufpect thee of too much kindnefs, of partiality to thy friend, Chaftife the derelictions of my heart, whenever thou perceiveft them; or I myfelf ihall hereafter become thy accufer. I am diffatisfied, Oliver: what furer token can there be that I am wrong? I weary thee—Prithee forgive, but do not forget to aid me. F. HENLEY, P. S, He—[I mean Louifa's brother 5. for I think only of one he and one flie,. ät
at prefent] He has not yet taken any notice of our flrange firft.meeting; and thou mayft imagine, Oliver, if he think fit to be filent, I fliall not fpeak. Not that İt can be fuppofed he holds duelling to bc difgraceful. I have enquired if any rencounter had taken place; for I was very apprehenfive that the champions would have their tilting-match another time. However, as I can hear of no fuch accident, and as Mr. Clifton"is here con¬ tinually, I hope I have been inftrumen¬ tal in preventing fuch abfurd guilt. The follies of men are fcarcely comprehenfible,! And what ahi ï? Dare I think myfelf wife? Oliver, my paffions are inarms; the conteft is violent; I call on thee to ex¬ amine and to aid the caufe of truth.
LET
LETTER, XXVIIÏ.
СОКЕ CLIFTON ТО GUY FAIRFAX.
París, Hotel de PUniverßte, 1 HAVE found it, Fairfax ! The pearl of pearls ! The ineftimable jewel ! The unique ! The world contains but one !—And what ! —A woman! The-WOman of whom I told you !—Anna St. Ives !—You have feen the Venus de Medicis? —Pfliaw!—Stone! Inanimate marble! But . flie!------The very fight of her is the height of luxury ! The pure blood is feen to circulate! Tranfparent is the complexion which it illuminates! ------And for fymmetiy, for, motion,-for grace, fculptor, pamter, nor. poet, ever yet imagined fuchi Defire languitile s
A NOVEL. 15 languiflıes to*behold her! The paffions are all in arms, and the mere enjoyment of her- prefence is fuperior to all that her fex befide can give ! Do not fuppofe me in my altitudes: all I can fay, all you can imagine, are far .fliort of the reality. Then how unlike is her candour to the petty arts, the fliallow cunning of her fex ! Her heart is as open as~her coun¬ tenance; her thoughts flow, fearlefs, to her lips. Original ideas, expreffed 'm words fo felcft, phrafes fo happy, as to aftonifli and delight; a briUiancy and a ftrength of fancy that difdain limitation, and wit rapid and fatal as lightning to all oppofition; thefe and a thoufand other undefcribable excellencies are hers. I love her—.-Love ? ------ 1 adore her ! Ay ——Be not furprifed------Even to mad¬ nefs and marriage i ------No matter for what 1 have beforetime faid, or what I have thought, my mind is changed. I have difcovered perfection vvhich I did not imagine could exift. I renounce my former
former opinions; which applied to the fex in general were orthodox,' but to her were blafphcmy. I would not be too fudden; I have not yet made any direčt.propofal. But could I exift and forbear giving intimations? No. And how were'they received? AVhy with all that unaffected fianknefs which did not pretend to mifunderftand but to -meet them, to cherifli hope, and to give •a profpect of blifs which mortal man can never merit. She is all benevolence!, Nay fhe is too much fo. There is that youngfter here¿ that upftart; he who bolted upon us and mouthed his Pindarics in the Elyiiar» Fields; the furly groom of the chamber. This fellow has infinuated himfelf into her favour, and the benignity of her foul ■induces her to treat him with as much refpect as if he were a gentleman. The youth has fome parts, fome ideas г at leaft he has plenty of words. But his arrogance is infufferablc. He does not fcruple to interfere in the difcouife, eithei:
cither with me, Sir Arthur, or the ange¬ lic Anna! Nay, fets up for a reformer; and pretends to an infolent fuperiority of underftanding and wifdom. Yet he was never, fo long from home before in his life; has feen nothing, but has read a few books, and has been permitted to converfe with this all intelligent deity. 1 I cannot deny but that the pedagogue fometimes furprifes me, with the novelty of his opmions ; but they are extrava¬ gant. I have condefcended, oftener than became me, to fliew how full of hyper¬ bole and paradox they were. Still he as conftantly maintained them, with a kind of congruity that aftoniflied me, and even rendered many of them plaufible. " But, exclufive of his obftinacy, the rude, pot companion loquacity of the fel¬ low is highly offenfive. He has no fenfe of inferiority. He ftands as ereft, and fpeaks with % as little embarrafsment, and as loudly a& the beft of us: nay, boldly afferts that neither riches, rank, nor birth, have any claim. I have offered to buy hia;
, bim u beard, if he would but turn hea¬ then philofopher. I have feveral times in¬ deed beftowed no fmall portion óf ridicule upon him; but in vain. His retorts are always ready; and his intrepidity, in this kind of impertinence, is unexampled. From fome anecdotes which are told of him, I find he does not want perfonal courage; but he has no claim to chaftife¬ ment from a gentleman. Petty infults he difregards; and"has feveral times put me almoft beyond the power of forbear¬ ance, by his cool'and cutting'replies. His oratory is always ready; cut, dry, and fit for ufe ; and damned infolent oratory it frequently is. The abfurdity of his tenets can only be equalled by the effrontery with which they are maintained. Among the moft ridiculous of what he calls firft principles, isthat ofthe equality of mankind. Fie' is one of your levellers! Marry! His fu¬ perior! AVho is he? On what proud emi¬ nence can he be found? On fome AVelfli mountain, or the pike of Teneriffe ? Cer¬ tainlv
tainly not in any of the nether' regions! AVhat! AVas not he the afs that brayed, to Balaam? And is he not now Mufti to the mules?, lie will if he pleafe,! And if he pleafe he will Jet it alone ! Difpute his prerogative who dare ! He derives from Adam; what time the world was ail hail fellow well met! The favage, the wild man o'the woods is his true liberty boy; and the orangoutang his firft coufin. A Lord is a merry andrcw, a Duke a jack pudding, and a King a tom foo,l: his name is man ! ■ 'Ihen, as to property, 'tis a tragic farce; 'tis his fovereign pleafure to eat neftarines, grow them who will. Ano¬ ther Alexander, he ; the world is all his own! Ay, and he vvill govern it as he bcft knows how ! He will leghiate, die - tate, dogmatize; for vyho fo infallible? AVhat.' Cannot Goliah crack a walnut? As for arguments, it is but aik and have: a peck at a bidding, and a good double handful over. I own I thought I knew ionicthing; but no, I muft to my horn
horn book. Then, for a fimile, ii is fa- crilcge; and muft be kicked out of the high court of logic! Sarcafm too is an ignoramus., and cannot folve a problem : Wit a pert puppy, who can only flníli and bounce. The heavy walls of wifdom are not to be battered down by fuch pop¬ guns and pellets. He will wafte vou wind'enough tó fet ; up twenty millers, in. proving an apple is not an egg-fhell; and that 'homo is greek for a goofe. Dun Scotus was a fchool boy to him. I con¬ fefs, he has more than once dum-founded me by his fubtleties,—Pfliaw!------It is a mortal murder of words and time to be¬ ftow them on him. My fifter is in correfpondence with my new divinity. I thought proper to beftow a few gentle laflies on her, for a letter which fhe wrote to me, and which I mentioned in my firft from Paris', infinu¬ ating her own fuperiority, and giving me to underfland how fortunate it would be for tlie world ihould -I but prove as con¬ fummate à paragon as herfelf. She richly
richly deferved it, and yet I now wifli X had foi borae ; for, if fhe have her fex's love of vengeance in her, flic may injure me in tlie tendereit part. Nevei was wo¬ man fo devoted to woman as Anna St. Ives is to Louifa. I fliould fufpect any otlier of her fox of extravagant affefta- tion ; but her it is impoflible to fufpeft: her manner is fo peculiarly her own: and it comes with fuch unfought for energy, that there is no refitting conviction. I have two or three times been inclined to write and aik Louifa's pardon. But, no ; that pride forbids. She dare not openly profefis herfelf my enemy. She may infinu- ate, and countermine; but I have a to¬ lerably ftrong dependance on my own power over Anna. She is not blind. She is the firft to fcel and to acknowledge fu¬ perior merit; and I think I have no rea¬ fon to fear repulfe from any woman, whofe hand I can bring myfel/ to afk. One of Anna's greateft perfections, with me, is the ready efteem which flie entertained for me, and her not being in- fenfible .to thofe qualities which I flatter
myfelf 1 poffefs. Never yet did w cmaYi treat, me with affcčlecl difdain, who did not at laft repent of her coquetry. 'Tis true that .Anna has fometimes piqued me, .by appearing to value me more for my fifier's fake even than for my own. I have been ready to fay dif- fi.nulation was infeparable from woman. And yet her manner is as unlike hypo¬ crify as"poffibIe. " I never yet could brook fcorn, or neglect. I know no fenfation more delicious than that of innicimg pu¬ niihment for infult or for injury; 'tis in our nature. ' That youngfter of whom lhave prated fo much, his name is Frank Hcnlcyi de¬ nies this, and fays' that what the world calls nature is habit. He added, with fome degree of farcafm as I thought, that it was as natural, or in his fenfe as habitual, for fome men to pardon, and to feek the good even of thofe by whom they were wronged, as it was for others to refent an endeavour to revenge. But* as I have faid, he continually makes pre-
lenfions, to an offenfive fuperiority. You may think I do not fail to humble the youlh, whenever opportunity offers. But no! Humble him, indeed! Shew him boiling ice.! Stew a whale in an oyftcr- flicll! Make mount Caucafus into a bag pudding! But do not imagine he may be moved ! The legitimate fon of Cato's el¬ deft baftard, he ! A petrified Poffidonius, in high prefervation ! There is another thing which aftoniihes me more than all I have mentioned. Curfe me, Fairfax, if I do not believe that [God confound the fellow!] he has the impudence to be in love with Anna St. Ives! Nay that he braves me, defies me, and, in the infufferable frothy fer¬ mentation 'of his vanity, perfuades him¬ felf that he looks down upon me ! I muft finiih, for I cannot think of, his intolerable infolence with common pa¬ tience; and I know not what right I have to teafe you, concerning my paltry difputes with a plebeian pedant, and my ftill
itili more paltry jealoufies. But let him beware! if he really have the arrogance to place himfelf in my way, I will pre¬ fently trample him into his original non¬ entity. I only forbear becaufe he has had the cunning to make himfelf fo great a favourite. *■ This muft be horribly ftupid ftuff to you, Fairfax: therefore pay-me in my own coin; be as dull as you fometimes know how, "and bid mc complain if I dare. C. CLIFTON.
LETTER
LETTER XXIX. -»-^-^ ì.a gì - g?·*"· 1 — LOUISA »CLIFTON TO COKE CLIFTON.
Rofe^ank. I AVRITE, dear brother, ín anfwer to your laft, that I may not by any neglect of mine contribute to the miftake in vvhich you are at prefent. Your letter fliews that you fuppofe your fifter to be vain, pre¬ fumptuous, and rude; and, fuch being your feelings, I am far from blaming you for having expreffed them. Still, brother, I muft be fincere, and I would by no means have it underftood that I think you have chofen the beft manner of expreffing them ; for it İs not the mannejc which, ifl have fuch faults, would be moft vol. ir. с likely
likely to produce reformation. But your intention has been to humble me : and, defiring to be farcaftic, you have not failed in producing your intended ef¬ fect. I am fincerely glad of it : had you Ihewn that delire without the power, I flrould have been as fincerely forry. But where there is raind there is the material from which every thing is to he hoped. I fuppofe I ffiall 'again incur chaftife¬ ment, for rifing thus as уоц call it to the fublime. But I will write my thoughts without fear, and I hope will patiently liften "fliould they deferve reproach.-.If I have finned, it is in moft fervently wifhing to find my brother one ofthe brighteft and the beft of men ; and I have received more pleafure from the powers he has difplayed, in reproving me,-than I could have done. by any dull expreffion of .kindnefs; in which, though "there might have been words, there would have been neither fecl- jng, fentiment, nor foul. The concluding fentence of your letter warns me not to defame you with my friend.
friend. I muft fpeak without difguife, brother. A'ou feel that, had you received fuch a letter, revenge would have been the firft emotion of your mind. J hope its duration woulcl have been flioit. I will moft readily and w 7 arnly repeat all the good ofmy brother that I know: but I will neither conceal what ought to be faid, nor fay what I do not know, I take it for granted that he would not have me guilty of duplicity. Adieu, dear brother; and believe me to be affectionately your - ■L. CLIFTON,
* ^imiuA ■■ "■ Γι ι .ftiH frlTTl
LETTER XXX.
FRANK HENLEY то OLIVER TRENCHARD,
París¡ Hotel dEf pagne, Rue Gutnegautfe, \ Fauxbourg Sí. Germain; OW fevere, Oliver, ,are the leffons of truth! Butto learn them from her lips, and tó be excited to the practice öf them by her example^ are bleffings s which to enjoy and not to .profit by would fliew a dege¬ nerate heart. I have juft rifen "from a converfation which has made a deep impreffion on my mind. It was during breakfaft. I know not whether reflecting on it will appeafe, or increafe, the fenfations which the beha¬ viour of this brother of Louifa hourly exa* cerbates.
Ή
cerbates. But Ί 4vill calm that irritability wdiich would dwell on him, and nothing elfe, that I ŕnay repeat what has juft hap¬ pened. The interefting part of what pafied began by Mr. Gifton'saffirming, with Pope, diat -men had and would "have, to the end of time, each a ruling paffion. This I denied, if by ruling paffiori were meant the indul¬ gence of any irregular appetite, or the fof- tering of any erroneous fyftem. I was afked, with a fneer, for my recipe to fub¬ due the paffions ; if it were not too long» to bé remembered. I replied it was equally brief and efficacious. It was the force of reafon ; or, if the word fliould pleafe bet¬ ter, of truth. And in what year of the'world was the difcovery of truth to be made ? In that very year when, inftead of being perfecuted for fpeaking their thoughts, the free difcuflion of every opinion, true or falfe, ihould not only be permitted, but receive encouragement and applaufe. As ufual, the appeal was made to j с 3 Anna;
Anna : and, as ufual, her decifion was İn my favour. Nothing, faid flie, is more fatal, to the progrefs of virtue, than the fuppofition that error in invincible. Had I perfuaded myfelf I never,could have learned French, Italian, or mufic, why Joarn them Ijiever could. For how can that bs finiflied which is never begun? Bur, 'though all the vvorld vvere to laugh at me, I ihould laugh at all the world, were it to tell me it is more difficult to prevent the beginning, growth, and ex¬ cefs ofany pafiion, than it is tq learn to play excellently on the piano forte. ts that really your Opinion, madam? faid Clifton. It is. Do you include all the parlions ? All. What ! The paflion of love ? Yes. Love is,as certainly to be con¬ quered as any of them ; and there. is no miftake which has done more mifchief than that of fuppofing it irreiittible.---- r Young people, and we poor girls in parti¬ cular,
cular, having oncç been thoroughly per¬ fuaded ofthe truth of fuch an axiom, think itin vain to ftruggle, where there are nohopes of victory. We are conquered not becaufe vve are weak, but becaufe vve are cowards. We feem to be convinced that we have fallen in love by enchantment, and aie under the abfolute dominion of a necro¬ mancer. It is truly the dwarf leading the giant captive. Is it not—[Oliver! She fixed her eyes upon me, as flie fpoke !]— Is it not, Frank ? I was confounded. I paufed for a mo¬ ment. A deep and heavy figh involun¬ tarily burft from me. I endeavoured to be firm, but I Hammered out—Madam— itis, I am convinced he is jealous of me.— Nay he fears me; though he fcorns- me too much to think fo meanly of himfelf. Yet he fears me. And what is worfe, Oliver, I fear him ! I bluih for my own debility. But let me not endeavour to conceal my weaknefs: No, it muft be en¬ countered, and cured. His quick and au- c 4 dacious*
dacious eye was fesrching me, whiie I ftruggled to think, and rid myfelf cf con¬ fufion ; and he difcovered more th^n gave him pleafure.—She continued. I know of no prejudice more pernicious to the moral conduct of youth than that of this unconquerable psflion of love. Any and all of our paffions are unconquerable, whenever we fhall be weak enough to think them fo. Does not the garnener pîead the unconquerabler.efs of his paffion? 1 he drunkard, the man of anger, the re¬ vengeful, the envious, .the covetous, the jeaious, have they not aH the fame plea ; AVith the feiliih zed the feeble. paSiion fuc- ceeds to pafiion as different habits give birth to each, and tlie Iaft paňion proves more unconquerable than its predeceffor. How frequently do vve foe people in the verv fever of this unconquerabie paffion of Jove, wliich difappears for the reft ofiheir live. 5 ·, after a few weeks poffeffion of the object whom they had io paffionataìv loved! How-often do they as раГ.юшце'у hate ; while the violence of thcir barred and
and of their love, İs perhaps equally guilty! Sir Arthur I obferved was happy tojóin in this new coprine ; which however is true, Oliver. I am not certain that he roo had not his appreh-?n..G.is, concerning me : at leait his approbation ofthe principle wr.s ardent. lliîs was nor. all. Auer a ihort iilence, the added, and i-igain iixed her eyes on me —Next to the глг.к of fubduinç our ovvn pallions, I know none more noble than that of aiding to fubdue ťne pariions of oihers. To reftore a languifliing body is held to Ь»з a precious art; but îo give health to the rnind, to reftore declining geniu» to its true rank, is an art inf.... te.y. more inefti¬ mable. She role, and I withdrew ; lier w«r.:\.s vibrating in my ear, where they vibrate kII«. Perceiveít thou not thcir import :—Oliver^ lhe' has tormed a projeci falai :o иу hoıvsî Nav. I could aìmoic fev^r. ϊΙ*ίαΐ to herfeif! "«let wliat, 'who can harm her: Do:s the lavage, the monfter cxifr. that ouid *«ч k c »t- up ла
upon her and do her injury? No ! She is fafe ! She is immaculate! Beaming in beauty, fupreme in virtue, the refplcndent ægis of truth ihields her from attaint ! Yes, Oliver, her anfwers were to him ; but the intent, the foul, of them was di¬ rected to mc. It was a warning fpirit, that cried, beware of indulging an unjuf¬ tifiable paffion ! Awake 1 at the call of virtue, and obey l Behold here a fickly mind, and aid me in its recovery !—To me her language -was pointed clear, and incapable of other intei prctation. But is there not peril in her plan ? Re¬ cover a mind fo perverted ? Strong, I own, nay uncommon in its powers; for fuch the mind of Clifton is : but its ftrength is its difcafe. And ís it fo certain that for me tolove.her is error, is weaknefs, is vice? No. Or, jf it be, I have not yet difcovered why.-— Oliver, ihe fliall hear me ! Let her fliew me my miftake, if miftaken I b<\ and I will defift : but juftice demands it, and flie fliall hear me. AVe
AVe are going to remove, at his repeated inftances, to the hotel where he refides.— He leads Sir Arthur as he oleafes ; but it grieved me to fee her yield fo readily. Now that I have difcovered her intentions, I no longer wonder. Omnipotent as the power of truth and virtue is, I yet cannot approve the defign. The enterprifes of virtue itfelf may have their romance— 1 know not —This to me at leaft is fatal —Could 1— ? I muft conclude !— Lofe her?—For ever I—For ever;—I muft conclude— F. HENLEY.
с 6 LETTER
LETTER ХХХГ.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TQ LOUISA CLIFTON. Parh, Hsiel del'Vnh'srf.te, i H E affiduity of Clifton, my dear Louifa, is fo great that we already feem to be acquaintance of feven years ftand¬ ing. This is evidently his intention. His temper is eager, impatient of delay, quick in refolving, and, if I do not miftake, fometimes precipitate. But his intellec¬ tual powers are of a very high order. His wit is keen, his invention ftrong, his language flowing and elegant, and his ideas and figures remarkable, fometimes for theii humour, and at others for their fplen¬ dour. His prejudices are many of them deep i
deep; nor are they few; but he fpeaks them frankly, defends them boldly, and courts rather than ihuns difcuflion. AVhat then may not be hoped from a mind like his? Ought fuch a mind to be neglect¬ ed? No!—No!—Eternally no!—lhave already given a ftrong hint of this to Frank. I am perfuaded that, fince you faw him, he is greatly improved in perfcn. 'ľhe regularity of his features, his florid complexion, tall ftature, and the facility and grace of all his motions, are vvith him no common advantages. He has attached himfelf exceedingly to us, and has induced Sir Arthur to take apartments in the Hotel de ÎUniıer- jîtê, where he refides himfelf, and where the accommodations are much better, the fituation more agreeable, and the rooms more fpacious. A little incident happened, when vve removed, which was charafteriftic of the manners of the people, and drew forth a pleafing trait of the acutenefs of Clifton* and of his turn of thinking. One
One of the men who helped us vvith our luggage, after being paid according .to agreement, aiked, as is very cuftomary with thefe people, for quelque chofe pour boire ,- which Sir Arthur, not being very expert in the French idiom, underftood literally. He accordingly ordered a bot¬ tle of the light common wine, and being thirfty poured fome into a tumbler, and drank himfelf firft, then poured out fome more, and offered the por «er. The man took the glafs as Sir Arthur held it out to him; and, with feme furprife and evident fenfe of infult in his counte¬ nance, faid to Sir Arthur·— â moi, mon¬ fieur? To which Sir Arthur, perfeftly at a lofs to comprehend his meaning, made no anfwer; and the man, without tailing the liquor, fet the glafs down on a bench in the yard. Clifton, well acquainted with the man- -ners of the people, and knowing the man imagined Sir Arthur meant to infult him, by giving him the fame' glafs ou.t of which he had drunken, with great ala¬ crity
erity took it up the moment the man had fot it down, and faid— Non, mon ami, c'eß à moi —and drank off the wine. Fie then called for another tumbler, and filling it gave it to the man. . The French are a people of active and lively feelings; and the poor fellow, after receiving the glafs fiom Clifton, took up the other empty tumbler, poured the wine back into it, faid in his ovvn language forgive me, fir; I fee I am in the wrong; and immediately drank out of the tum¬ bler which he had before refufed. Each country you perceive, Louifa, has its ovvn ideas of delicacy. The French think it very ftrange to fee tw r o people drink out of the fame veffel. Not how¬ ever that I fuppofe every porter in Paris would refufe wine, if offered, for the fame reafon. Neither vvould they all with the fame fenfibility be fo ready to retract. The good humour as well as tîıe good fenfe of Clifton's reproof pleafed me highly; and we muft all acknowledge hini our
our fuperior, in the art of eafily conform¬ ing to the cuftoms of foreigners, and in readily pardoning even'their abfurdities. For foreigners, Louifa, have their abfur¬ dities, as well as ourfelves. But I have not yet done. I have an¬ other anecdote to relate of Clifton, from which I augur ftill more. I had obferved our Thomas in conver¬ fation with a man, who from his drefs and talking to Thomas, I kiiew muft be an Engliihman; and the care which it be¬ comes mp to take, that fuch well-mean¬ ing but fimple people fliould not be de¬ ceived, lea me to enquire who he was. Thomas began to ftammer;' not with guilt, but with a defire of telling a ftory, which he knew iiot how to tell fo Well as he wiflied. At laft we tmderitood froRi him it was a young Engliih lad, vvho had neither money, meat, nor work, and who was in danger of ftarving A becaufe he could find no means of returning to hh own country. Poor Thomas finding him¬ felf among a kmd of hcathensj as he calls the
the French, pitied his cafe very fincerely, and had fupplied him with food for fome days, promifing that he would foon take an opportunity of fpeaking to me, whom he is pleafed to call the beft young lady in the world; and I affure you, Louifa, 1 am proud of his good word. Your brother heard this account, and immediately faid------[For indeed I wifli¬ ed to know what his feelings were, and therefore did not offer to interrupt him,] " Defire him to come up. Let me quef¬ tion him. If he be really what he fays, he ought to be relieved: but he is very likely iome idle fellow, who being Eng¬ lifli makes a trade of watching for Eng¬ liih families, and living upon this tale." So far faid I to myfelf, Clifton, all is right. I therefore let him proceed. The lad came up, for he was not twenty, and your brother began his interrogations. You are an Enslilh lad, vou fav ? Yes, fir. AVhere do you come from ? AVol /erhampton, AVhat
AVhat is your trade Γ A buckle plater. And did you ferve out your appren¬ ti c e fliip ? No. How fo? My mafter and I quarrelled, he ftruck me, I beat him, and was obliged to run away. AVhere did you run to? ι I w^ent to London. I have an aunt there, a poor vvoman, vvho chah s Tor gen¬ tlefolks, and I went to her. Flow came you here? . She got me a place, with a young gentleman who-was going on hh· tiavels, I had been among horfes before I was bound 'prentice, and he hired me as his eroom. But how came you to leave him ? He is a very paffionate gentleman. He has got a Fiench footman, vvho ftands and Amiga, and lets him give him thumps, and kicks; and one morning, becaufe one boot was brighter than t'other, he was
was going to horfe whip me. So I'told him to keep his hands off, or I would knock him down. AVhy you are. quite a fighting fellow. No, fir ; I never fought with any body in my life, if they did not firft meddle with me. So you quarrelled with your mafter, beat him,' ran away from your appentice- fliip, got a place, came into a foreign country, and then, becaufe your mafter did not happen to pleafe you, thieatened to knock him down ! The poor fellow, was quite 'confounded, and I w r as half out of breath from an ap¬ prchenfion that CJifton had taken the wrong fide of the queftion. But I was foon relieved------This tale is, too artlefs to be "falfe, faid he, turning to me.------ You cannot conceive, Louifa, the infinite pleafure which thefe few words gave me. I ftill concinued filent, and watching, not the lad, but your brother. So you never meddle with any body who does not meddle with you? No, fir. I would fcom it. Ti,,.«
But you will not be horfewhipped ? No, fir, I won't; ftarve or not ftarve. I need not aik you if you are honeft, fober, and induftrious; for I know you will fay you are. Why fliould I not, fir? You have nobody to give you a cha¬ racter, have you? My Mafter is ftill in Paris ; but to be fure he will give me a bad one. Can you tell me his addrefs—where he lives? I can't tell it in French, but here it is. Can you write and read? Yes, fir. . And how long have you been out of place ? About feven weeks. Why did not you return to England, when you received your wages? I had no money. I owed a feilow fer¬ vant a guinea and a half, which I had borrowed to buy fliirts and ftockings. And thofe you have made away with? Not all. I was obliged to take fome of them to Mount Pity. ¡ÂÍ m aL
Mont Piété, you mean*. Belike yes, fir. AVell, here's fomething for you, for the prefent; and come to me to-morrow morning. r The lad went away, with more in his countenance than he knew how to put into fpeech; and I aiked Clifton what he meant by defiring him to come again. I intend, madam, faid he, to make forne inquiries of his mafter; and if they pleafe me, to hire him; for I want a fer¬ vant, and if I am not deceived he will make a good one. Think, Louifa, whether I were not pleafed with this proof of difcernment.— By this accident, I learned more of Clif¬ ton's charafter in ten minutes than perhaps I might have done in ten months. Fie faw, for I wiflied him to fee, that he had afted exactly as I could have defired·
He appears indeed to be a.favourite with fei vants, which certainly is no bad omen. He is Laura's delight. He is a free gentleman, a generous gentleman, [I fuppofe he gives her money] a merry gen¬ tleman, and has the handfomeft perfon, the fineft eye, and the beft manner of dref- fing his hair flie ever beheld ?~— She quite overflows in his praife. In a few days vve are to go to the coun¬ try feat ofthe Marquis of Villebrun, where we intend to ftay about a fortnight. Your brcdierhas introduced us to all his friends? among whom is the marquis; and, as we are intimate with our ambaffador, we have more invitations than wc can accept, and acquaintance than we can cultivate. Frank is to go with us. And now, Louifa, with anxiety I own, rny mind is far from fatisfied. I have not thought fufficiently to convince myfelf, yet aft as though I had. It is little lefs than open war between your brother and Frank. The fuppofition ofa duty, too ferious tobe trifled with, has induced me to favour ra- Jher
ther than repulfe the too eager advances of Clifton ; though this fuppofed duty has been but half examined. The defire to 'retrieve my mind cannot' but be right ;_ yet the mode may be wrong. At this moment my heart bitterly re¬ proaches me, foirnot proceeding on more certain principles. The merit of Frank is .great, almoft beyond the power of expref¬ fion. I need 'not tell ray Louifa which way affc£tion, were it encouraged, would incline : but I will not be its flave. Nor can I reproach myfelf for erring on that fide ; but for acting, in refiftance to incli¬ nation, vvith too little referve. No argu¬ ments I believe can fliew me that I have a righ ť to -fport with the feelings ofmy fa¬ ther, and my friends ;■'though', thofe feel¬ ings are founded in prejudice. - But my. inquiries fliall be more minute;, and my refolves will then be 'more permanent' and 'felf-complacent. Adieu, my beft and-deareft friend.— AVrite often : reprove. me fot all that I do- amifs——Would my mind were-more ac¬ cordant
cordant with itfelf! But I will take it roundly to taik. A. w. ST. IVE« -Н мм^Е»»*^ша|Е1 М| 11^ . | м. < Ем и 1<д ^ iii ιι ιι 1 1'ттчшшшт m jm m m ¡ М -ямид^^м ^м^^ ими^р LETTER XXXII. ı ^^ı^Jΐь l ı J ^^ ıı ^ ■' COKE CLIFTON то GUY FAIRFAX. Part's, Hotel de l'Vni'verßti, IS brief memorandum of my aftual exiftence, dear Fairfax, will be delivered to you by the Chevalier de. Villcroi ; a worthy gentleman, to whom I have given letters to my friends, and who will meet you at Turin. I have not a moment to wafte ; therefore can only fay that I am laying clofe fiege ; that my lines of circum valla rion do not pro¬ ceed
Th
ceed quite fo rapidly as my defires ; but that I have juft blown up íhe main baftion ; or,, in other words, have prevailed on Sir Arthur to fend this hornet, this Frank Henley, back to England. The fellow's afpiring infolence is not to be endured.— His merit is faid to be uncommon. 'Tis certain he ftrains after the iublime ; and in fact is too deep a thinker, nay I fufpect too deep a plotter, not to be dangerous. Adieu. С CLIFTON.
I am in a rage, ! Curfe the fellow ! He has countermined mc ; blown up mý works! I might'eafily have forefeen it, had I not been a ftupid booby. I could beat my thick fcull againft the wall ! I have neither time nor patience to tell you what 1 mean ; except that here he is, and here he will remain, in my defpite.
v-oi.. n. d LETTER
LETTER XXXIII,
FRANK HENLEY TO §: -OLIVER TRENCHARD.
Pan's,' Hoter delWni<verßte. .İT is as I told thee, Oliver. He fears me. Hetreatsme^ashe thinks, with the ne- glecì and contempt due to an unqualified'in¬ truder : but he miilakcs his own motives, and acts with in fidibus jealoufy; nay-de»: fcends to artifice. His alarmed fpirit never. refts; he is ever on the' watch, left at en-. tering a room, defcending a ftaircafe, ftep-. ping into ,her carriage, or on any other occafion, I fliould touch her hand. Ile has endeavoured to exclude me from all their
their parties ; and, though often fuccefs- fully, has feveral times been foiled. '· But his greateft difappointment was thtø veiy morning. Sir Aithur fent for mc, laft night, to inform me I muft return to AVen·· bourne-Hill, with fome neceffary orders, which he did not choofe to truft to the ufual mode of conveyance. 1 immediately fufpected, and I think I did not do him injuftice, that my rival was the contriver of this fudden neceflity of my return, I received Sir Arthur's orders, but was determined immediately to acquaint Annai , Cliftou was prefent. She was furprifed ; and, I doubt not, had the fame fufpicions as myfelf; for, after telling me í muft not think of going, flie obliged Clifton himfelf to be the interceffor, with Sir Arthur, that I fliould ftay. His reluctance, feigned affent, and chagrin were vifible. Her words and manner to me were kind ; nay ï could almoft think they were fomewhat more.' She feemed to feel the injuftice aimed at me ; and to feel it with t> Q as
as much refentment as a fpirit fo benignant, could know. , - What !——Can he not be fatisfied with half excluding me from her fociety: with endeavouring to fink m'e as low. in her efti¬ mation as in his own; and with exercifing all that arrogance which he fuppofes be¬ coming the character ofà gentleman? Oliver, I am determined in my plan : my appeal »fliaU be to her. juftice. If it prove tp be ill-founded, why then I muft acquiefce. - I am angry at 'my own delay, at my own want of courage ; but I fliall find a time, and that quickly. At leaft,' If condemned I muft be, I will be heard ; but equity I think is on my fide—-Yes—I will be heard. HENLEY.
LETTER
LETTER XXXIV.
— aas,·,*· FRANK HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCHARD.
Parh, Hotel de PViiivtrJttê^ .AlD me if thou canft, Oliver, to think, or rather to unravel my own entangled thoughts. Do not fuffer me to continue in a ftate of delufion, if thou perceiveft it to be fuch. Be explicit ; tell me if thou doit but Jo much as forbode": for at mo¬ ments I myfelf defpond ; though at others lam wafted tothe heaven of heavens, to certainty and blifs 'unutterable. If I de- . ceive myfelf?—AVell ! And if I do, what is to follow?—Rafhnefs?—Cowardice ?— p 3 What!
What ! Bafely abandon duty, virtue, and energy?—No! Looks, words, appearances, daily events are fo contradictory, that the warfare of hope and fear increafes, and becomes violent, almoft to diftiaftion! Clifton is openly countenanced by Sir Arthur, treated kindly by her, and is inceffant in every kind of affiduity. His qualities are nei¬ ther mean, infignificant, nor common;— No: They are 3 brilliant, and rare. AVith a perfon as near perfection as his mind vvill pennit it to be, a knowledge of languages, a tafte for the fine arts, much bravery, high notions of honour, a more than common Ihare of wit, keen and ungovernable feel¬ ings, and impatience of contradiction, and an obftinacy in error, he is a compound of jarring elements, that augur tempefts and peril. Vain, haughty, and felfwilled, his family, his fortune, his accompliihments and himfelf are thè piftures that fofcinate his eye. It is attracted, 'for a moment, by the fuperior powers of another ; but all his paffions and propenfities forbode that. he*
he is not to be held, even by that line of adama .t. , *· * ' And is flie to be dazzled then by this glare? Can her attention be caught by perfon, attrafted by wit ? And does f ihe not flirink fiom that haughty pride which fo continually turns to cómtemplate .itfelf; from thofe Raflions which are fo eager td be giatified ; and fiom thofe miftakes which it will ,be foon almoit impoffible to eradicate ? Even wore I to lofe her, muft I fee her thus devoted ?—The thought is •—I cannot tell what · Too painful for any word fliort of extravagance. Impreffed by feelings like thefe, the other day I fat ddwn and threw" a few ideas into verfe. The mind, furcharged with paflion, is eager by every means to dif· 'burthen itfelf. It is always piomptto hope .that the expreffion of it's feelings, if any -way j adequate, ι cannot but produce the effect it 'wiil\es ; "and I - wrote the fol¬ lowing fong, or loY&élegy, or vvhat thou wilt.
4
Raih
Raíh hope avaunt ! Be ftiil my fluttering heart ; Nor breathe a forrow, nor a figh impart; Appeafe each buflting throb, each pang reprove ; To fuffer daxe—But do not dare to love î Down, nown, thefe fiveJling thoughts.' Nőr dream that „ worth Can pafs the haughty bounds of \vealth and birth. Yeo, kindred fechngs, truth, and virtue prove ; Yes, dare deferve —But do not dare to love ! 'To noble talles and dang'rous heights afpire ; Bid all the great and good thy wiihes fire, 'J he mighty dead thy rival eftorts move, And dare ίο die—-But do not dare to Jove í Ihou knoweft her fupreme excellence ,in mufic ; the tafte, feeling, and expief- fionwith which ffie plays: and the en¬ chanting fweetnefs and energy with which flie fings. Flaving wiitten my verfes, I took them, when ffie was bufied elfewhere, to the piano-forte; and made fome υ n fuc¬ cefsful attempts to pleafe myfelf with an air to them. Sir Arthur came in,' and I left my fianzas on the deik of the .inftru¬ ment; very inadveitently I affure thee, though
though I was afterwards far from forry that they had been forgotten. I have frequently indulged myfelf in fit¬ ting in an antichamber, to liften to her playing and fingmg. I have thought that ffie is moft impaffioned when alone, and perhaps all muficians are fo. The next day, happening to Шей in the manner I have mentioned, I heard her finging an air which was new to me, and remarked that flie once or twice ftopped, to confider and make alterations. I Hftened again and found flie had been fetting my verfes ! By my foul, Oliver, I have no concep¬ tion of rapture fuperior to what I experi¬ enced at that moment! She^hacl collected all her feelings, all her invention, had compofed a raoft beautiful air, and fung 'it with an effect that muft have been heard to be fuppofed poffible. The force with which flie uttered every thought to the climax of dai ing, and the compaffion which flie infuféd into the conclufion—■ " But do not dare to love"------ produ¬ to 5 ced
c&i tl\e. гаоД aftèfting contraft I ever. heard.
This indeed was heaven, Oliver! Buta heaven that ominoufly vaniibed, at the enhance of Clifton. I followed him, and I faw her fliut the book, and wipe the tear from her eye. Her flow of fpirits is un¬ failing^ but the tone ofher mind was raifed too high fuddenly to fink into trifling. She looked at me two or three times. I know not for my part what afpeft I wore : but I could obferve that the haughty Cliftoli felt the gaiety of his heart in fome fort difturb¬ ed, and was not pleafed to catch me liften¬ ing, .with fuch mute attention, to the ra¬ viihing mufic flie had made. Once again prithee tell me, Oliver, what am I to think ? It was impoffible flie fliould have fung as flie did, had not the ideas affefted her more than I could have hoped, nay as much..as tliey did myfelf. She knew the writing. AVhy did flie figh ? AVhy
AVhy feel indignant? Why exprefs every fentiment that had paffed through my mind wdth increafing force ? ------ AVhat could flie think ?—Did flie not appiove ?—She fung as if (lie admired ·—The world fliall nöt perfuade me that her looks were not the true expreffions of her heart; and flie looked--! Recollect her, and the temper of raind ffie was in, and imagine how '—· Remember— She coiild love me if I would let her I I was difpleafed with the verfes when I had written them: they were very inade¬ quate to what I wiflied. I difcovered in fome ofthe lines a barren repetition ofthe preceding thought, and meant to have corrected them. But I-would not now alter a word for woilds ! She has deigned to fet and fing, them ; and'what vyas befoie but of little worth is now ineftimable. Yet am I far from fatisfied 1 with myfelf- My prefent ftate of mind is difgraceful ; for it cannot but be difgraceful to be kept hi doubt by my own cowardice And if L am deceiving myfelf—Can it be pofli- D 6 ble,
ble, Oliver? — But if I am, my prefent_ error is indeed alarming. The difficulty of retreating momentarily increafes, and every ftep in advance will be miles in return". CJifton will fuffer no impediment from the cowardice of which I complain; for I mucn miftake if he has been accuftomed to refufal; or "if he can fcaiceiy think, when he deigns to fue, denial poffible. I find myfelf every day determining to put an end to this fufpenfe, and every day delaying. The impulfe however is too great to be long refifted; and my excufe to myfelf continually ís that lhave not yet foundthe proper moment. If, Oliver, this hiftory of my heait be troublefome to thee, it is thy duty to tell me fo. But indeed thou teilen me the contrary; and I know not why at this in¬ ftant I fliould do thee ihe injuftice to doubt thy fincerity. Forgive me. It is a friendly fear, and not intended to do thee wrong. But I wifli thee to judge of me and my actions; and even to let thy father judge, if
if thou iliouldft at any time hefitate, and fear I am committing error. Do this, and Continue thy Ufual kindnpfs in rnmmnni- cating thy thoughts. F. HENLEV. P. S. The day after to-morrow, we are to fet off for the Chateau de.Villebruiij on a party of pleafure, as it is called. Thus men run from place to place, with¬ out knowing of what they are in fearch. They feel vacuity; a want of fomething to make them happy; but what that fome¬ thing is they have not yet difcovered.
LETTER
LETTER XXXV. "■- '. ' * ANNA »WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON. ι Pai h, Hotel de ľ Uní verft и'. 1 FEAR,' my dear Louifa, I am at pre¬ fent hurried forward a little too faft to act ' with all the caution which I could wifli. My mind is not coherent, not at peace with itfelf. Ideas rufli in multitudes, and more than half obfeure my underftanding. I find that, fince we left Wenbourne- - Hill, Frank has grown upon my thoughts very ftrangely. Indeed till then I was but partially acquainted whh his true cha¬ racter, the energy of which is very un¬ common. But, though his virtues are become more confpicuous, the impedi-
ments that forbid any thought of union are not leffened. J My chief difficulty is, I do not yet know how to give full effect to my argu¬ ments, fo as to' produce fuch conviction ая he fliall be unable to refift. Let me do but tbis, and 1 have no doubt of his per¬ fect acquiefcence, and refignation. But, fliould I fail, the warfare of the paffions will be prolonged; and, for a time, a youth whofe woith is above my praife rendered unhappy. A fenfe of injuftice, committed by the perfon of whom, per¬ haps, he thought too highly to fuppofe it poffible that either erior or paffion fliould render her fo culpable, may prey upon his peace, and defti oy the felicity of one to whom reafon and recollection tell me I cannot wifli" too much good. I am convinced I have been guilty of another miftake. I have on various occa¬ fions been defirous of expreffing approba¬ tion, mingled with efteem and friendfliip. He has extoited it from me. He has. obliged me to feel thus. And why, have I con»
I conftantly aiked myfelf, fliould I reprefs or conceal,fenfations that are the dues of merit?' No: they ought not to have been repreffed, or concealed, but they ought to have been rendered intelligible, incapable of mifconfl ruction, and not liable to a mean¬ ing which they were never intended to čon- vey.. For, if ever they were more than I fuppofe, I have indeed been guilty. Yps, my Louifa, Jet me difcharge my confeience. Let no accufation of deceit reft with me. I can endure any thing but felf-reproach. I avow, therefore, Frank Henley is, in my eftimation, the moft de¬ ferving man lhave ever known. A man that I could love infinitely. A man whofe virtues I do and muft ever love. A man in whofe company my heart affines me I could have enjoyed years of happinefs. If the cafuifts in fuch cafes fliould tell me this is what they mean by love, why then I am in love. - But if the being able, without a mur¬ mur, nay cheerfully, to marry another, or fee him properly married, if ihe poffeffion of the power and the refolution to do what is right, and if an unfliaken will to exert
this power prove the contrary, why then I am not in love, ι ■j When I may, without trefpafling on any 'duty, and with the full approbation of my .owmheart, yield up its. entire affections, fthe man to whom they ihall be devoted fliall then find how much I can love. . r My paffions muft be, ( ought to be, and therefore fliall be, under.my control ; andj being confeious of the purity of my own • intentions, I have never thought that the -emanations of mind ought to be fhackled by the dread of their bein^ mifinfeŕpret- ed. It is not only cowardiy, but in my opinion pernicious. Yet, with refpecì to Frank, I fear this principle has led me into an error. Among other efcapes of this kind, there is one which has lately befallen me, and for which I doubt I am reprehenfible. Frank has written a fong, in which his feelings and fituation are very ftrongly ex¬ preffed. He left it on my mufic deik,, by accident i - for his character is too open, too determined, to fubmit to artifice.
The words pleafed .me, I may fay af¬ fefted me, fo very much that! was tempt¬ ed to endeavour to adapt an air to them ; which, when it was written, ■ I feveral .times repeated, and accompanied myfelf fon thepiano-foi'te. Your brother came in juft as I:had r ended; and, from a hint which ba purpofely gave, Ί fufpect "that Frank had been liftening in the anti- chamber. " ι ' ' ' The behaviour >of Frank afterward con¬ firmed the fuppofition, i/Hcfollowed your brother,' and fat down While we converfed. Fiis whole foul feemed abforbed ; but not, as I have fometimes feer it, in melancholy. Satisfaction/ pleafure, J know not whether rapture would be two ftrong a word for the expreffions which were difcoverable in Jiis .countenance. \' ' ι My own-mind had the moment 'before been impaffioned ; and the fame fenfations thrilling as it were through myweins might miflead me, and induce me to fuppofe things that had no ekiftence. Still I do not think I w r as miftaken. And if not, what
what have I done ? Have I not thought¬ lefbly betrayed him into a belief that I mean to favour a paffion which I fliould think it criminal to encourage ! I know not why I delay fo long to ex¬ plain n\y fentiments. It is the weak fear of not doing juftice to my caufe; of not convincing, and of making him unhappy, for whbm T would facrifice my life, every thing but principle, to make him the very reverfe. However this muft and fliall foon be ended. I do not pretend to fix a day, but it ihall not be a very diftant one. I wiU arrange my thoughts, coHect my whole force, and make an effay,which I am convmced cannot fail, unlefs by my fault. The tafk is perhaps the moft fevere lhave ever yet undei taken. Twill re¬ me nibber this, and 1 hope my exertions will be adequate. Adieu, my dear Louifa: and, jwhen you come to this place, imagine me for a moment in your arms. A. W. ST. IVES,
LET-
LETTER XXXVI.
COKE CLIFrON TO GUY FAIRFAX.
Chateau de Vãlebrun. IN EVER was fellow fo peftered with malverfe accidents as I am ; and all of my own contriving! I am the prince of Numikuls ' The journey to the Chateau was a project ofmy own ; and whom fliould í meet hei e but the Count de Beaunoir ! The veiy fame with whom I was pi event¬ ed fiom fighting, by this infolent fon ofa ftewaid' They knew each other inftantly; and the whole ftory was told in the pie- fence of Anna. My fooliih pi ide would never before let me mention to her that a fellow, like him, could oblige me to put up
up the fword I had drawn in anger. Nor can I now tell why I did not run Ыиъ through, the inftant he dared to interfere ! I cut a cui fed ridiculous figure ! But the youth is running up along fcore, which I forefee he will fliortly be obliged to dif¬ charge. Damn him ! I cannot think of him with common patience ! I know not. why I ever mention his name ! I have raifed another neft of wafps about my cars. The French fops, here, all buzz and fwarm around her ; each making love to her, with all the flirugs, grimaces, and 'ready made raptures of which he is mailer ; and to which I am obliged patiently to liften, or fliew myfelf an afs. Thefe follows fubrait to every kind of monopoly, except of woman; and to pretend an exclufive right to her is, in their opinion, only worthy of a barbarian. But the moft forward and tormenting of them all is my quondam friend, the Count; who is halfa lunatic, but offo diverting a kind that, ere a man has time to be angry, he either cuts a caper, utters
an abfurdity, or acts forne mad antic or other,, that fets gra*,hy at defiance. Not that any man, who had the fmalleft pretentions to common fenfe, couldbe jea¬ lous, either of him or any one of thefe apes. And yet jealous lam! My dotage, Fairfax, is come very fuddenly upon me ; and neither you, nor any one of the fpirit¬ ed fellows, whofe company Ι υ fedito de¬ light in,- can defpife me half fo much as I defpife myfelf------A plebeian ! -—; A — ! I could drink gall, eat my elbows, renounce all my gods,' and turn Turk !— Ay, laugh if you vyill ; what care I ?—
I have taken a turn into the park, in fearch of a little cool air and common fenfe. All the world is met here, on purpofe. to be merry ; and merry they are deter¬ mined to be. The occafion is a marriage, in the true French,ftyle, between my very^ good frieud, the Marquis de A^illebrun, an old
old fellow upwards of fixty, and a young creature of fifteen; a child, a chit, juft taken out of a convent; in which, but for this or'fome fuch prepofterous match, flie might have remained, till time fliould have beftowed wrinkles and uglinefs as bountifully upon her as it has done upon herNarciffus, the bridegioom. The women flock bufily round her, in their very good- natured way, purpofely to form her. The men too are very willing to lend thcir aid ; and, under fuch tuition, flie cannot bui improve apace. AVhy are not you he-'e, Fail fax? lhave had twenty temptations to take her under my pupillage ; but that I dare not rifk the lofs of this divinity. The purpofe of our meeting however is, as I faid, to be joyous. It is teeming time therefore with every brain, that has either wits folly, or fancy enough to contribute to the geneial feftivity. And various are their inventions, and ftratagems, to excite furprife, attract vifitors, and keep up the holiday farce of the fcene. Muficians, painters, artifts,, jugglers, fages, all whofe. fnmp.
fame, no matter of what motley kind, has reached_ the public ear, and whom praife or pay can bring togciher, aie affembled. Poets are invited to read their productions ; and as* reading well is no mean art, and writing w T ell ftill much more difficult, you may think what kind ofan e.xhibition your every day poetafters make. Yet, like â modern play, they are certain of unbound¬ ed applaufe. Laft night w^e had a Fete Champêtre ; which it muft be granted, was a moft ac¬ curate picture of nature, and the manners of ruftics ! The fimplicity of the fliepherd life could not but be excellently reprefent¬ ed, by the ribbands, jewels, gauze, tiffany^ and fringe, with which we were bedaubed ; and the ragouts, frigafees, fpices, fauces, wines, and liqueurs, with which we were icgaled ! Not to mention being ferved upon plate, by an army of footmen ! But then, it was in the open air; and that wa prodigioufly paftoral ! * When we were fufficiently tired of eat¬ ing and drinking, we all got up to dance; inri
ànd the mild' fplendour of trie moon was utterly eclipfed, by the glittering dazzle of fome hundreds of lamps; red, green, yel¬ low, and blue ; the rainbow burlefqued ; all mingled, in fantaftic wreaths and forms, and fufpended amongthe foliage; that the trees might be as fine as ourfelves ! The invention, difpofition, and effect, however, were highly applauded. And, fince the evil was fmall and the mirth great, what could a man"do, but fhake his ears, kick his heels, cut capers, laugh, fing, fliout, fquall, and be as rpad аь the beft? To-morrow night we are to have fire¬ works; which willjbe no lefs rural. I was in a fplenetic humour, and indulged my¬ felf in an exclamation againft fuch an abo¬ minable wafte of gunpowder ; for which I got reproved by my angelic monitrefs, who told me that, of all its ufes and abufes, this was the moft innocent. I fuppofe our ftay here will not be léfo than a fortnight. But I have left orders for all latters to be fent after me; fc* vol. и. ' t thai
Ι ι diat your heroic epiftles will Come fafe and foon to hand. ' < r * . · , . Which is all at this prefent writing from, -> your very humble fervant to command, , C. CLIFTON.
LETTER XXXVIL
í -, anna wenbourne s't. ives - XO LOUÏSA CLIFTON. Chateau de Villebrun. N compliance with the Very warm en¬ treaties'of our kind French friends, we have been hurried away from the metro¬ polis fooner than was intended. AVe are at
aí prefent in the country, at the Chateau de Villebrun : where, if wc are not merry, it is not for the want of laughing. Our feet and our tongues are never ftill. AVe dance, talk, iìng, ride, fail, or rather pad¬ dle about in a fmall but romantic lake; in fliort we are never out of exercife. Clifton is as active ás the beft, and is very expert in all feats of agility. AVith the French he feems to dance for the honor ofhis nation; and, with me, from a de¬ fire to prove that the man who makes pre¬ tentions to me, which he now does open¬ ly enough, is capable of every excellence. Уои know, Louifa, how much I defpife the affectation of referve ; but he is fo en- terprifing a youth that I am fometimes obliged; though very unwillingly, tq exert a little mild authority. The French, old or young, ugly or handfome, all are lovers; and are as Jibe-; ral of their amorous fighs, and addreffes, as if each were an Adonis. Clifton İs well acquainted with foreign manners, or I can perceive» their gallantry to me would make e 2' him
him half mad. As it is, he has been lit tl« lefs than rude, to one or two of the moft forward of my pietended admirers, . I fpeak in the plui ul, as if we were Ira- ther in town than at a country feat; and fo we appear to be. The French nobility do not feej.n to have any tafte for Tolitude. Their love of variety induces them to .change the Tcene; but the fame tumult of guefts and vifitors, coming and going, ii every where thcir delight. AVhatever «can attract company they feek whh avi»· dity, I am de#r to them, becaufe I am an Engliih beauty, as they tell me, and all the world is defiious of paying its court Xo me, Clifton has equal or perhaps greater tmeiits of the fame kind, And I affure you, Louifa, the women here can pay their court more artfully and almoft as openly as the men. Fiank is idolized by them, becaufe he reads Shakefpeare. You would wonder to hear the praifes they beftow upon him, and which indeed he richly deferves, though
though not one in i-en of thenr under¬ ftands a word he fays. Cefi beau ! Cef inagrii fique I Cefifuperbe ! С eß fublime I Such is their continual round of good- natured fuperlatives, which they apply on all occafions, with a fincere defire to make others as happy as they endeavour to per¬ fuade themfeives to be. Frank treats their gallantry with a kind of filent contempt, · otherwife he would be a much greater fa¬ vourite. \ Perhaps you will be furprifed to find mer ftill guilty of procraftination, and to hear me defcribing Frenelli ¡manners, inftead of fhe mode in- which 1 1] addreffed a youth whom I have accufed myfelf of having, Ц a certain fenfe, miflecj', and kept in fuf¬ penfe. I can only anfwer that my intent tions have beenfruftrajed > chiefly iqdeed fyy this country excurfion, though in part by other accidents. My mind has not in¬ dulged itfelf in indolence^ it could not ; it is too deeply interefted. But, the more I have thought, the more have I been con¬ firmed m my former opinion. This is the e 3 hour.
Y ANNA ST. IVĽb :
hour of triî-I: this is the time to prove f have fome real claims to that fuperiority ., which I have been fo ready to 'flatter my¬ felf I poffefs. AVere there nothing to regiet, лау were there not fomething to fuffer, where would be the merit of victory ?— But, on the other hand, how much is there fo gain!»—A mind of the fii ft order to be retrieved !—A Clifton !—A bi other of Louifa !
This appears to be a feiious crifis.— 'Again I muft repeat how much I am afraid of being hurried forward too faft.— An error at this moment might be fatal. 'Clifton is fo much alarmed by the parti¬ cular refpect which the Count de Beaunoir [A pleafant kind of madman, who is a vifitant here.] pays me, -that he has this inftant been with me, confeffed a paffion for me, in all the ftrong and perhaps extravagant language which cuftoni has feemed to authorife, ahd has entreated *- v 4 with a degree of wainith and earneftnefs that
that coulcl fcarcely be refifted, my permif¬ fion to mention the matter immediately to Sii Aithur. It became me to fpeak without difguife. I told him I was far from infenfible of his merits ; that a union with the brother of my Louifa,i if propriety, duty, and affec¬ tion fliould happen to combine, would bc the fiift wifli of my heart, that I ihould confider any affectation and coynefs as cri¬ minal; but that I was not entirely fiee from doubt; and, before I could agree to the propofal being made to Sir Arthur, ΐ thought it neceffary we ihould mutually compare our thoughts, and fcrutinize as it were each other to the very foul ; that we might not aft íaíhly, in the moft ferious of all the private events of hfe.—You know my heart, 'Louifa ; at leaft as Well as I myfelf know it; and I am fearful o'f being precipitate. He feemed rather difappointed, anct was impatient to begin the converfatioifl wiihed for immediately. f told him 1 was unprepared; my ľ i thoughts
thoughts were not fufficiently collected $ and that the hurry in vvhich we at prefent exift would fcarcely allow me time -to per¬ form fo neceffary a duty. But, that Γ might avoid the leaft fufpicion of coquetry* if it were his defire, I fliould, fhut myfelf up for.a day from company ащ! .examine whether there were any real impediments ; thati would aik myfelf what my »-hopea andexpectaţions were* .and that I requeft¬ ed, or indeed expected^ that he ihould »do the fame. I ; added however that, if be pleafed, - it 'Would be much more agreeable to me to defer this ferious tafk ; at leaft tjll we ihould return to Paria. · . He ' repeated my words» if it would be much more agreeable to me, inpatient and uneafy though ]he owned he -was, he muft fubmit. . · , . - I anfwered .1- required no fubmiffion, exceptio reafon j. 'to. which I hoped both $ie and I Jbould always be fubject. Lßvej he replied, wàs_fo difdainful,of reftraint that it would not acknowledge the control of region itfelf. tlo we ver, by reprefenting
reprefenting to him how particular our mutual abfence from the compurty would- feem, unlefs we could condefcend to tell fome falfehood, which I would hotT: faid. fuppofe poffible to either of us, I prevailed. on him to fubfcribe to this ihort delay. His paffions and feelings are ftrong.-— One minute he feemed affected b'y the ap¬ probation which, as" far as ■ I could with truth, I did not fcruple to beftöw bn his many fuperior gifts; arid the next to con··. ceive fome chagrin that 1 fliould for a mo¬ ment hefitate. The nobleft natures^ Louifa^,. are the moft fubject tò* pride, can.the lenii: endure neglects and are apteft to conftrue* whatever is not directly affirmative in theie favour into injuftice. AVith refpectto the Count 1 de Beaunoir,. he has been more paffionaloj in expreP ling how much he admires me, than» my referve to him can -háve äutrtoriféd j. except fo far a&'he follows the matn-J ners ofhis country, and» the impulfe 'of his, ; peculiar character. I fuppofe he mean's- little 5 though lie has faid much, Not that- е 5 Ian?
I am ceitain He may be moie in eaincft than I défile ; but I hope he is not ; becaufe if I am to be your fifter as well as your friend, I ihould be foiry that any thing ihould excite a ihadow of doubt in the mind of Clifton. - -The Count is one of the Provençal nobi¬ lity; a whimfical creatme, with an ima¬ gination amazingly rapid, but extravagant. Your brother calls him Count Shatter- brain ;* and I fell him that he foi gets he has fome claim to the title himfelf. The Count has read the old Provencal poet*», and íomancc writers, till he has made him¬ felf a kind of Don Quixote, except that he has none ofthe Don's delightful fyftematic gravity. The Count onthe contrarr amufes by his want,of fyftem, and his quick, changeable incongruity..He is in ìaptuies one moment with what'he laughs at the next. AVere it not for the mad folHes of jealoufy,. againft which we cannot be too guarded, the maunei in which he addref¬ fes, or in his own language adores me, would be pleafant. . If I wiflied to r pafs my
my life .ia laughing, I would certainly marry the Count. I am called to dinner. Adieu. Ever and ever yours, A. w. ST. IVES.
LETTER XXXVIII.
AUNA WEN30URNĽ ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON.
Chateau de VtïUhwt. Cí 'alarms, Louifa, increafe; and witli them my anxious wiihes for an eclairciffe- ment with Frank. i Clifton has too ftrongly imbibed high but falfe notions of honour Ľ G and
and revenge» His quick, apt, and verfatile- talents are indubitable. He wants nothing but the povver to curb and regulate his paffions, to render him all that his generous and excellent fifter could defire. But at t. prefent his fenfibility is too great. Fie fcarcely can brook the flighteft tokens of .difapprobation. He is rather too firmly perfuaded that he^ deferves applaufe, and admiration ; and that reproof he fcarcely can defcrve ;o?; if he did, to fubmit to it he imagines wc hid be diflionourable. Frank and he behave more than ufually cool f о each other : I know not why, un¬ lefs it has been occafioned by an incident which happened yefterday. Clifton has bought an Engliih hunter, from one ofhis countrymen at Paris, which he was exhi- "biting to his French fiiends, whofe horfe- -manihip is very different from ours, and who were furprifed to fee him ride fo fear- ïefsly oyer gates arid ofher 'impedimenti*. They continued their airing in the-park of Tillebrun, and turned, round * á kind of hahaj which was both deep and wide,- and
and about hz\t full of water, by the fide of which they faw a party of ladies ftanding, and me among the reft. Frank was W ith us. Оде of die gentlemen aiked whether the horfe could leap over the haha: to which-difton made no anfwer, but irame- dţately clapped fpurs to his hunter, and over he flew. The whole company, gen¬ tlemen and ladies, broke out into excla¬ mations of fui prife ; and Clifton turned his horfes head round, and regained his farmer place, AVhile the.y were wondering, Frank Henley'happened to make it a matter of doubt whether a manor a horfe~could leap the fartheft; and Clifton, continually in the habit of contending with Frank, faid it was ridiculous to ftart fuch an argument, Tinlefs he .would firft fhew that he himfelf eould make the fame leap. Frank, piqued in his turn,· retired a few yards; and, without pulling off his coat or deigning ter leap, be made a fliort - an and a hop and fprung over, You,
You may imagine that the kind and good folks, who Jove to be aftoniflied, and ftill moie to tell the gieatncfs of their aftonifliment, were ma-.ifold in their in- teijeftions. Frank, in older to rejoin the company, was obliged a fecond time to crofs the haha; which he did with the fame fafety and truly amazing agility as he had done before. Clifton, indulging his wrong habits, though I have no doubt admiring Frank as much as the reft, told him in a kind of fcarcaftic banter that, though he could not piove the equality of mankind, he had at leaft proved himfelf equal to a horfe. To which Fiank replied he was miftaken; for that he had fhewn himfelf equal to the horfe and his rider. ■ This anfwer I fear dwells upon the mind*of Clifton; and I fcarcely myfelf can tell, whether it were or were not woi thy of Frank. How can Clifton be wilfully blind to fuch courage, rectitude òf heart, underftanding and genius? L The
The ftern unrelenting fortitude of Frank, in the caufe ofjuftice, and fome fymptoms of violence in the impetuous Clifton, have infpired me with apprehenfions ; and have induced me to behave with more referve and coldnefs to Frank than I ever before 'affumed. _ ' - Yet, Louifa, my heart is wrung to fee the effect it pioduces: He has a mind of fach difcriminating power, fuch mag¬ nanimity, that an injury to it is a deep, a double fin ; and eyery look, every action tcftify that he thinks himfelf in¬ jured; by the diftance with which I be¬ have. Oh that he himfelf might be im¬ pelled to begin the fubjeft with which my mind is labouring ! This is wrong ; I am afliamed of my own cowardice. Yet vvould there not be* fomething terrifying in a formal appoint¬ ment, to tell him what it feems muft be told?------^Yes, Louifa, muft------And is there - not danger he fliould think me fevere; nay" unj uft?------AVould it were over 1——I hope he will not think fo»
fo of mê !------It muft be done !—Muft ľ —» Muft!-— Indeed, Louifa, I could be a very woman----i-But I will noti— No,^ .no !· -—It-.is paffed ------1 have put my hand¬ kerchief .to my eyes and it is gone—I have repreffed an obftinate heaving of the heart------ , , Let,her blame me, if I deferve it, 1 but my Louifa muft fee me as I am— Y r et I will conquer-----Be fure I v/ill— But I muft not fing his fong any more ! A- w. ST. IVES,
LET-
LETTER XXXIX.
TRANK HENLEY TO OLIVER TRENCHARD. CTiateau de ViUehmn'. 'OH, my friend, my heart istom 1 » Iara о» the.rack, f My thoughts >are all tumult 1» My paffions rebel ! I feem to have yielded Up ' the beft prerogative of man, reafon ; ^and ta ( h<we. admitted revolt, anarchy, and defolaţioa! , . Her. manner Js changed! AVholly f Slie ís become'cold-, ϊ referved; has-marked me" out for neglect ; fmiles on me no more j, not a figh efcapes her. · And why? AVhat have I done?'I am unconfeious. Have I been too prefuming? .Perhaps fo. But why
why did her looks never till now fpeak her meaning, as intelligibly as they do at pre¬ fent ? I could not then have miftaken them. AVhy, till now, has flie feemed to regard me with that fweet amenity which was fo flattering to-hope? Perhaps, in the diftraction of my thoughts, I am unjuft to her. And fliall I, pretending as I do to love fo pure,, fliall I become her accufer ? AVhat if flie meant no more than.that commerce ofgraivrul kindnefs,. which knits together human fo¬ ciety, and renders it delightful? Yet this'fudden change! So »evidently intentional ! The fmiles too which flie be- rftows on the brother of Louifa,* and the •haughty airs of triumph which he affumes, what can thefe be ? Confident in himfelf, ardent in his defires, unchecked by thofe fears which are the offspring of true deli¬ cacy, his paillons violent, and his pride almoft infufferable, he thinks he loves.— But'he is ignorant of the alaims, the tre¬ mors; the " fitful fevers" of love. I cannot endure my prefent .torture. I muft
nui fr feek a defperate end to it, by expla¬ nation. AVhy do I delay ? Coward that I am ! AVhat worfe can happen than de¬ fpair? And is not defpair himfelf prefera¬ ble to that worft of fiends, fufpenfe? AVhat do I mean by defpair? V/ould I, being rejected, defert my duty, fink into felf, and poorly linger in wretchednefj ; or bafely put an end to exiftence? A 7 iolently end that which 'ought to.be devoted to the' good of others ? ------How did fo 'infernal a thought enter my mind ?------Can I be fo very loft a thing ?------No !—Defpair is fomething confufed, fomething horrid : I know not vvhat. It may intrude upon me, at black and difmal intervals ; but it fliall not overwhelm me. I will fliake it off. I will meet my deftiny. The clouds are gathering ; the ftorm approaches ; I hear the diftant thunder rolling, this vvay it drives ; it pointsat me ; it muit fuddenly burft! Be it fo. Grant me but the fpirit ofa man, and I yet fliall brave its fury, if I am a poor braggart, a half believer in virtue, or virtuous only in
- in words, the feeble victim then muft juftly perifli. I cannot endure my torments ! Cannot«, becaufe there is a way to end them. It ihall be done. I blufli to read, blufli to recollect the rhapfodies of my owir perturbed mind ! Madman ! 'Tis continually thus. Day after day I proceed, reafoning, reproving, doubting/ wifhing, believing and defpair¬ ing alternately .. Once again,' where is this ftrange im¬ poffibility ?- ----- In what does it confift ?—» «Are we not both human beings ? AVhat law of Nature has plăceţi her beyond my hopes?—AVhat is rank? Does it imply fuperiority of mind ? Or is there any other fuperiority?—Ami not a man?~Andwhq is more ? Have the titled earned their digni¬ ties by any proofs of exalted virtue ? AVere uot thefe dignities things of accident, in- which the o wneŕshad noihare, and of which tliey are generally unworthy ? And fiiallhope be thus cowed and killed, without my da¬ ring to exert the fiift and moft unalienable 9f
of the rights of man, freedom of thought ? Shall I not examine what thefe high dif- - tinčtions truly are, of which the bearers are fo vain ? Tliis Clifton------! Thou knoweft not how he treats me. And can ihe approve, can flie fecond his injuftice ?—Surely not ! »—Yet does flie not dedicate her fmiles to him, her converfation, her time? Does flie not fliun me, difcountenance me, and reprove me, by her filence and her averted eyes ? . Once again it muft and fliall have an end ! ------1 have repeated this too often ; but my next fliall fliew thee I am at length determined, F. HENLEY»
LETTER
.*
LETTER XL,
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES то LOUISA CLIFTON.
Chateau de Villebrun. AN affair has juft happened in this, country which is the univerfal topic of con¬ verfation. The daughter of a noble and wealthy family has fallen in lbve 4 with .a man of uncommon learning, fcience, and genius, but a. mufician. In confequence of his great ikill and reputation, he was employed to teach her mufic .î and flie it appears was too fenfible, at leaft for the decorum of our prefent manners, of his worth.
The ability to difcover his merit implies merit in herfelf, and the mufician and lady- were equally enamoured of each other. A plan for elopement confequently was laid*» and put in execution; but not effectually, for, before the lovers had paffed the confines ofthe kingdom, they were purfued and overtaken. The mufician knew his own perfonal danger, and by a ftratagem fortunately efcaped from his bonds, and attained a place of fafety. The lady was brought back; and, from the feverity ofthe French laws, and the'fuppofed atrocity ofthe crime, it is generally affirmed that the mufician, notwithftanding his talents and fame, had he been ferured, would have been executed. > - ¡ 1 have mentioned this adventure, my dear Louiia, not fo much for it's own fake as for what relates to myfelf. It 'was na¬ tural that I ffiould feel compaffion for miftakes, if miftakes they be, which have fo great an affinity to virtue ; and' that I ffiould plead for the lovers, and againft the barbarity
ΑΙΤΝΑ barbarity of laws fo unjuft and inhuman. For it is certain that, had not the mufician been put to deatti, his leaft punifliment would have been perpetual imprifonment. t In a former letter I mentioned the in-- creafing, alarms of Sir Arthur ; and this was a fit opportunity for. him to fliew how very ferious and great thofe alai-ms are- He oppofed ,ще, while ϊ argued in behalf of the lovers, with wjhat miglit in him bè called violence ; affirmed it was a crime for which no merit or genius could com¬ penfate; highly applauded thofe whole- fome laws that prevented fuch crimes, and preferved the honour of noble families from attaint} lamented the want of fimilar laws in England ; and fpoke pf the conduct of the young lady with a degree of bitternefs which from him was unufual. In fine, the fpirit of his whole difcourfe was evi¬ dently »to warn me, and explicitly to de¬ clare- what his opinions on this fubject arei Had I before wanted conviction, he fully convinced, me, on this occafion, of the impoffibility of any union between me .JL and
«and Frank Henley ; at leait without facri¬ ficing -the felicity of my father and iny fa¬ mily, and from being generally and fin¬ cerely beloved by them, rendering myiclf the object of eternal reproach, and almoft of hatred. Previous to this converfation, I was'tm- eafy at fhc ftate of my own mind, and par¬ ticularly at what I fuppofe to bc the ftate of Mr. Henley's ; and this uneafinefs is at prefent very much increafed. Once again, Louifa, it muft immedi¬ ately have aia cud. »I can fupport it no longer. I muft be firm. My hajf-ftag- gering refolution is now fixed. I cannot, muft not doubt. My father and family muft not be facrificed to fpeculativc pro¬ babilities. Frank is the moft deferving of mankind ; and tliat it fliould be a duty to reject the moft deferving of mankind, as the ftiend of my. life, my better felf, my huiband, is fu angé; but I am neverthe¬ lefs convinced that α duty il is. Yes; the conflicts of doubt are over. I niuft and will perfevere. vol. n. Ρ Poor
08 ANNA ST. IVESî
Poor Frank !. To be guilty of injuftice to a nature fo_noble, to wring a heart fo generous, and to negleft defert fo un¬ equalled, is indeed a killing thought ľ But the ftern, the unrelenting difrates of ne- . ceffity muft be obeyed. The neglect, the Injuftice "and the cruelty are the world's, not mine : my heart difavows them, "re¬ volts at them, detefts them ! Heaven blefs my Louifa, and give her ' fuperior prudence to guard and preferve her from thefe too ftrong fufceptibilhtes ! May the angel of fortitude never forfake her, as ffie feems half inclined to do her poor . - A. W, ST. IVES.
LETTER
LETTER XLI.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST.'IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON/
Chateau de Filhbrtm* T laft, my dear Louifa,- the charm is broken : the fpell ' of filence is diffolved. Incapable, any longer of reftraint, paffion has burft its bounds, and ftrong though the conteft was, victory 'has declared for reafon. My change of behaviour has produced this eflect. Not that í applaud'myfelf : oh the confrary, I am far from pleafed with my own want of fortitude. I have even affumed an auftcrity which I did not feel,.
I do not mean to fny that yll appear¬ ances, relative to myfelf, were falfe. No. Iwas uneafy; defiious to fpeak, defiious that he fliould fpeak, and could accom¬ plifli neither. I accufed myfelf of having given hopes that were feduftive, and wiflied to retraft. In fliort, I have not been altogether fo confiftent as I ought to be; as my letteis to you, my friend, will witnefs. Various little incidents preceded and indeed helped to pioduce this fwc-ll and overflow of the Iieart, and the eclaiiciffe- ment that followed. In the-morning at breakfaft, Frank took the cakes I ufually eat to hand to me; and Clifton, whofe watch fuLfpirit is ever alert, caught up a plate of bread and butter, to öfter me at the fame inflant. His looks fliewed he expected the preference. * I was forry for it, and paufed for a moment. At Iaft the principle of not encouraging Fiañk pie¬ vailed, and I took fomc biead, and butter from Clifton. It was «-.repetition of flights, .which Fiank had lately met with, and he felt
felt it; yet he bowed with a tolerable grace, and put down his plate. Fie foon after quitted the room, but re¬ turned impei ceived by me. The young marchionefs had breakfafted, and retired to her toilet; where ibme of the gentlemen were attending her. She had left, a fnuff-bcx of confiderable value with me, which I had forgotieň to return; and, with that kind of fportive cheerful- ч nefs which I rather encourage than re¬ prefs, ï саЛеа— " Here ! AVhere all my (i efquires ? î want a meffenger." Clifton heard me, and Frank was nn- expectly at my elbow. Had 1 known it„ I ihould not have fpoken fo thoughtlefbly. Frank came foiward and bowed. Clifton called—" Here am Î, ready, fair'lady, to * execute ycur beheílsj' I was a fecond time embanaffed. After a fliort hefitation, I faid—" No—I have <c changed my mind." Frank retired; but Clifton advanced, with his ufual gaiety, anfwering,—"Nay, ■ " nay ! I have not earned half a crown f 3 " yei .
" yet this, morning, and I muft not be " cheated ofmy fare." I would itili have ìefufed, but I perceived Clifton began to look feiious, and 1 faid to him—." Well, " well, good man, hei e then, take this " fnuft-box to the marchionefs, ilie may " want it : but do not blunder, and bi eak " It ; for if you do I ihall difmifs you my " feivice. Recollect the pİctuıe in the ** lid, fet with diamonds!" , It was fated to be a day of mortification to Fiank. His complaifance had induced him to comply with the ìequeft of the mar¬ chionefs, that he would leadone of the mad feenes in Leai, though Jie, knevy flie had not the leaft acquaintance with the pnglifli language. But flie wanted amufe¬ ment, and vyas pleafed to maik the pro¬ grefs of the paffions; which I never faw fo diftinctly and highly expreffed as in his countenance when he reads Shakefpeare. I happened to come into her apartinent, for the French are delightfully eafy of ac- cefif, and the reading was inftantly inter¬ rupted, t was the very perfon flie wanted to x
to fee. /Ήονν Ihould we fpend the even¬ ing ľ . The country was horribly dull ! •There had been no new vifitors thefe two days ! . Should we have a dance ? I gave my áffent, and away flie ran to tell xvery body. . ' I followed ; ( Frank came after me, and .with fome reluctance, foreboding a re- pulfe, afked whether he fliould have the pleafure to dance with me. . His manner .and the foregone circumftances made me -guefs his.queftion before he 'fpoke. My anfwer was—" I 4 have juft .made a pro- '" mife to myfelf that I will dance with " Mr. Clifton." It was true : the thought .had paffed_through my mind. Mr. Clifton, madam ! - Yes ------ . You~you— I have not feen Mr. Clifton?—Risht— But I faid I had made the promife to my- /df Poor Frank could contain no longer ! I fee, 'madam, faid he, I am defpifed ; and I deferve contempt ; I crouch to it,-1 in- F 4 vite·
\I04 ANNA vite il, and have obtained a full portion of it—Yei why ?—AVhat have I done ?—AVhy h this fudden change ? The falfe glitter that deceives mankind then is irrefiftible ! But fmely, madam, juftice is ?.s much my due as if my name were Clifton. Spurn me, trample on me, when I fully myfelf by ν ice and infamy ! But till then 1 fliould once have hoped to' have efcaped being humbled in» the duft, by one whom I re¬ gai ded as the moft benignant, as well as the moft deferving anď equitable of earthly creatures ! This is indeed a heavy charge: and I am aita id much of it is. too true. Here is company coming. 1 am forry I cannot anfwer it immediately. I can fuffer any thing rather than exift under my piefent tortures.- AVill you fa¬ vour me fo far, madam, as to grant me halfan hour's hearing? Willingly. It is what I wifli. Còmç to my apartment after dinner. - Clifton came up; and I have no doubt read ia our .countenances that* fomethmg more
more than common had naffed. Ineleed I perceived it, or thought fö; but his ima¬ gination took another tuin, in confequence ofmy informing him, that I had been juft telling Frank I had promifed myfelf to be his (Clifton's) partner. Йе thanked me, his countenance fliewed it as well as his words, for my kindnefs. He was coming, he faid, to petition, the inftant he had heard of the dance. But ftill he looked at Frank, as if he thought it ftrange that I fhould condefcend to accotmt to him for my thoughts and promifes. .Dinner time came, and we fat down to table. But the mind is fometimes 4 too buiy to.attend to the appetites, I and Frank ate but little; He* rofe fiift from table, that he might not feem to follow me. Hiá delicacy never flumberø. I took the ñtít opportunity to retire. Frank was prefently with me, and our dialogue be¬ gan. Tlie ft.'uggle'of the feelings ordained tbat I fliould be the firft fpeaker/ I have been thinking very ferioufly, f S Frank,.
Frank, of what you faid to me this'morn- Would to heaven you could forget it, madam ! • Why.fo? I was unjuft! A madman! A vain fool ! An.idİpt ¡--Pardon this mde vehe¬ mence, but I cannot forgive myfelf for having been fo ready to accufe one whom !—I cannot fpeak my feelings 1—. I have deferted myfelf!—I am no longer the creature of reafon, but the сЫЩ of paffion !—My mind is all tumult, all Ьь congruity i You wrong yourfelf. The error has been mutual, or iather I have been much the moft to blame, I àm very fenfible of and indeed very forry for my miftake— Indeed I am—I perceive you indulging hopes that cannot be realifed, and—- Cannqt, madam? Neyer 1-—I can fee you think yourfelf defpifed j r ,but you do yourfelf great wrong". My
. -A . t My mind is fo difturbed, by thé abrupt and abfurd folly with which I accufed you, unheard, this morning, that it is lefs now in a ftate to do my .caufe »juftice than àt any other time—Still I will ,be a man·-** Your word, madam, was—Cannot!-*·- It was. . Permit rne to aik, is it perfon— ? r No—certainly not. Perfon, would with me be always a diftant confideration.^— [You, Louifa, know how very far frorn exceptionable the perfon of Frank is, if that were any part of the queftion.] You are no flatterer, madam; and you have thought proper occafionally to ex¬ prefs your approbation } of my morals and mind. »-Yet my expreffions have never equalled my feelings !-—Never ! Then, madam, where is the impoffi-, bility ? In what does it conflit ? The worid may think meanly .of me, for the want of what 'I myfelf hold in contempt: but furely you cannot' join in the world's in-. juftice ? ï б I carinot
I cannot think meanly of you. ' _ F have no titles. I arnuvlíaťpride calls nolİody The fdn of a* man who carne» pennylefs into the feivice of your ffirníí^f hr whicli to my infinite grief he has grbwir rie h: I woulcl rather ftarve than acquile opulence by the efforts of cunning, flat¬ teiy, and avarice, and ifl blufli for any tiling, ι dative fo family, it i¿ J for that.'- I am either above or below the wiffi óf being what is infolently called'welt born. ' You confound, or rather you dó not fe¬ parate, two things vvhich are very diftiriftr; 1 that which I think of you, and that which the world wduld tliink rbf me/ vvere Pl:r> L encourage hopes which yoii would haV& me indulge. 1 л * Your actions, madam, fhew how much ahd how properly you difiegard thé worid V opinioni " ' J J But I do not difregard fhe effects whicfir that opinion may have, upon the happinefs* of my father, my family, myfelf, 1 and my* lluibandj if ever I fliould marry. 4J ' ' v "' * ■л , f.- M
e^n^^mefó ought to J bne'difregarded^ '■-'■ ■; ' ■ --rltídutótäťŕlyrľ' -Hg' r^· :^ ; ί ; :.ΐ 0 Ρ^;..Μ·^:' : ¡ pid^I'know'ïr márť'uipon.'the 'fëcë ; o;R earth;- who 'Md -a'ftill' deeper 'fenfe ofyour high qualities andVirtüè^-'thah' I have, whé , nrfdei'ftdòd' ; them :5 mor¿:mtimáteÍy,; would ftudy tíťertí, ; emulate:■ - them : more, · and' ., profiť beltéŕHiý; f hem," T have .confidence enough^ ih myfelf . your without repining. : But, when- F think ; oiir tlfö'umort· 1 between mind- ahd : miriď—-- '■"' : riidaj^gï^gate-^FL wanťlahguage^rmadamL , "''.T^tìd^^nthyouv, í;r;.. í ; = \ уг'\\ ■■P.f^ i y^' : - '.[ n ; Whën^F :; ré|eÊt ; -o3n' thè^ wpndìOus; hap- l . глпе^ :: ^ё г т%Ь^ ' ■ exerting 'ouŕíelyeš' ; ih the-general-caufé of . - virtuey ï r confëfs' the 1 thought ľ of :; reňbuhč- ' in^g To-much- bliíš, : ör; rather fùcb a?' duty-tc*. ^yf^Tptand' thié ^O%a^W r fd¿em^Í}aia¿·' ' '; Ätäŕe;· í? ¡Á : 'P [: > -jf- '-ЩР : ü ::i '': ; ; ψ° : '' : ' : j: y · : ^r '\ ( .'. : - ^^Yi^i^^eiE 'of living* ' Ά - the : сШе ' : òf Virtue ^délij^ts/lmé^^ .; wjtfí;:^ ■.. : ;yajyy: ._·. : ; ·..;;■'.■..; -; .; ;;,.':' ''.■■ J эдшозх;'"
union, or not, is a queftion which we are incapable of determining : -though I think probabilities _are for the negative. Fafts and obfervation have given me reafon to belieye that the Лею eafy .gratification of our defires is pernicious to the mind ; and thaťit acquires vigour and elafticity from oppofition. ^ . And would, you then upon principle, madam, marry: a- man whom you muft defpife? ". - ; ; · ' ' No, not defpife. If indeed I were all I could wifli to be, I am 'perfuaded I fliould defpife^ no one. I ffiould endea¬ vour to inftruft the ignorant, and reform the erroneous. However, Ι ΛνίΙΙ tell you what fort of a man I fhould 5 wiih ,to marry. Firft he.muft be a perfon, of whom no pre¬ judice, no-mjftake of any kind, ffiould inetùce thè wrorld,! that is, « the perfons neareft and moft connefted with me-in the world,, to -think,T,xeanly—Shall I,be cited by the thouèntJefs, the» fimple, and the perverfe, in juftification of their own irnproperxqnduft,?—.you canpot.wift it,, Frank í
Frank !——Nor is this the moft alarming fear—My friends !—My relations !—-My father!^-«—To incur a father's reproach for having diihonoured his family were fearful: but to meet, to merit, to live under his curfe !— God of heaven forbid ! .Muft we then never dare to counteract miftake? Muft mind, though enlightened by tiuth, fubmit to be the eternal flave of error ?—AVhat is there that is thus dread¬ ful, „madam, in the curfe of prejudice ? Flave not the greateft and the wifeft of mankind been curfed by ignorance ? It is not the curfe itfelf that is terrible, but the torture of the pei fon's mind by whom it is uttered !------Nor is it the tor¬ ture of a minute, or a day, but of years! —His child, his beloved child, on whom his hopes and heart were fixed, to whom he looked for all the blifs of filial obedi¬ ence, all the energies of virtue,, and all the effufions of affeft ion, to fee himfelf deferí-ed by her, unfeelingly deferted, plunged in forrows unutterable, eternally diihonoured., the index 'and the bye-word of
of fcandal, feoffed at for the fault of her - whom ;his fond and fatherly-reveries had paintedffaulţlefs, whifpered 'out of fociety becaufe of the fliame òf her in whoni he gloried,.and I this child ! ' ' . Were ._tiie 'conflict what your imagina¬ tion has figured it, madam, ycur terrors would be j nft—But lhave thonght'deeply on if ? and know that your vexy virtues mifguide you. If vvould not be torture, rnorw'ould' it be eternal—On the contrary, madam, I, poor as I- am in the efteem of an arrogant world, I proudly affirm it .would" be the lefs and hot the greater evil. You rniftake !—*—Indeed, Frank, you miftake !—The fear of poverty,- the fneers of the world, igrpminy itfelf,- were the: pain inflicted but confined to me, I.would äefpife. But" to ftretch my Tather upon the rack, and with him every creature that loves* me, even yeu yourfelf !—It muft not be !~It muft not be ! Ï* foo' fatally' perceive, madam, your mind
mind is fubječbd Ъу íhefe phantoms of fear. No, no —not phantoms; real exìftences ; the palpable beings of reafbn !»—Befide -what infiuence have I in the world, except over my fnends and family ? And fhall I renounce this little infiuence, this only power of doing good, in order to gratify my own pafiÌGiis, by making my¬ felf the outcaft ofthat family and oftbat world to whom it is my ambition to live «an example ?—-My fiimily and the world are prejudiced and unjuft : I know it, JBüt where is the remedy ? Can we work miracles ? Will their prejudices vaniih at our bidding?—I have already mortally xjffended the moft powerful of my rela- tions> Lord Fiirz-.4k.llen, byrefufing a fooliih »peer of his recommendation. He is my maternal uncle ; proud, prejudiced, and unforgiving. Previous to this ìefufal I was ttie only perfon in our family whom he condefcended to notice. He prophe- fied, in the fpleen of paffion, I fliould foon bring fliame· on my family ; and I as
as boldly ¿ctorted I would-never difho- nour die name of St. Ives—I fpoke in their own idiom, and meant to" be fo un¬ derftood- 1 -----Recollect all this !—Be firm, be juft to yourfelf and me !----- ^-Indeed, indeed, Frank, it is riot my Iieart that refufes you; itis my underftanding; it is principle ; it is a determination not to do that which my reafon cannot Juftify— Join vvith me, . Frank—Refolve—Give me your hand—-—Let us difdain to fet mankind an example which would indeed .be a virtuous and a good one, were all the conditions underftood ; but which, .under the appearances it would affume, would be criminal· in the extreme. - My hand and heart, madam, are ever- .laftingly yours : and it is becaufe this heart yearns to fet the world an example, higher infinitely than that which you pro¬ pofe, that thus I plead !—This opportunity is my firft and lait —I read my doom— Bear with me therefore while 1 declare my fenfations and my thoughts.—Tlie paffion I fcel is as unlike what is ufually meant
meant by love as day to night, grace to "deformity, or truth to falfehood. It is not your fine 'form, madam, fupremely beau¬ tiful though you are, which I love. At leaft I love it only as an excellent pari of a divine whole. It is your other, your better, your more heavenly felf, to which I have dared to afpire. I claim relation- ihip to your mind} and again declaľe I think my claims have a right, which none of the falfe diftinčtions of men can fuper¬ fede. Think then, madam, again I con¬ jure you, think ere you decide.------If the union of two people whofe pure love, founded on an unerring conviction of mu¬ tual worth, might promife the reality of that heaven of which the world delights«to dream ; whofe fouls, both burning with the fame ardour to attain and to diffufe excellence,. vvould mingle and act with inceflant energy ; vvho, having rifen fupe¬ rior to the miftakes of mankind, would diffeminate the fame fpirit of truth, the fame internal peace, the fame happinefs, the fame virtues which they themfeives poffefs
poffefs among thoufands ; who would-ad¬ mire, animate, emulate each other ; whofe, wiihes, effoits, and principles vvould all combine to one great end, the general good; who, being defiious only to dif¬ penfe bleflings, could not fail to enjoy ; if a union like this bc notftrictly conformable to tlie laws of eternal truth, or if there be _any arguments, any perils, any tenors which ought to annul fuch a union, I con¬ fefs that the arguments, the perils, the terror«s, and eternal truth itfelf are equally unknown to me. We paufed for a moment. The beauty, force, and grandeur of the picture he had drawn ftaggered me. Yet it was but a repetition of what had frequently prefented itfelf to my mind, in colours almoft as vivid as thofe witli which he painted. I had but one anfwer, and replied— The world !—My family 1—My faiher ! ■— Г cannot encounter the malediction ofa fathei- *—AVhat ! Behold him in an agony of curling his child ?—Imagination fluid- 4ers and ffirinks # from the guilty picture with
with honor!—I cannot!—I cannot!—It muft not be'—To forefee this mifery fo clearly as I do, and yet to feek it, would furely be deteftable guilt. Again we paufed'—He perceived my terrais v/ere too violent to cede to any ef¬ forts of reafon. Iiis countenance changed ; the energy of argument difappeared, and was fucceeded by all the tenderne!« of paffion. The decifive moment, the mo- niuit of tıİal was come. His features foftened into that form which never yet failed to melt the heart, and he thus con¬ tinued. , To the fcorn of vice, the feoffs of ig¬ norance, the ufurpations of the prefuramg) and the contumelies of the pioud,, Lhave patiently fubmitted : but to find my great and as I thought iufallible fuppor.fe wi efted fiom roe; to perceive that divine effence which I imagined too much a part üf my¬ felf to do me wrong, overlooking me; re¬ jecting me; dead to thofe fenfations which I tiiought mutually pervaded and«.filled our hearts ; to hear her, whom of all beings
on earth I thought myfdf nioft akin to, difclaim me ; pofitively, perfifting.}, un— Unjuftiy ? ------AVas that the word, Frank?—Surely not unjuftiy !—Oh, furely not! And could thòfe heavenly, thofe heart- winning condefcenfions on which I found¬ ed my hopes be all illufory ?—Could they? —Did I dream that уош* foul held willing intercom fe with mine, beaming divine in¬ telligence upon me ? AVas it all a ν ifion when I thought I heard you pronounce the ecftatic fentence— You could love me if I г«, ou ld let you ? No, it was real. I ïevoke nothing that I have faid or done. Do not, Fiank, for the love of truth and juftice do not think me infenfible ofyour excellence, dead to your vil tues, or blind to mind and merit which I never yet faw- equalled !—Think not it is pride, огЪаГе infenfibility ofyour worth ! AVhere is the day in which that worth has not increafed upon me?— Unj uil to you ?—Oh !—No, no, no !—My heart bleeds at the thought ?·—No !—It is my
love of ýou, my love ofyour virtues, your pi inciples, and thefe alone aie lovely, which has rendered me thus inflexible. If any thing could make you dearer to me than you are, it muft be weaknefs ; it muft be fomething vvhich neither you nor I ought to approve. All the good, or rather all the opportunities of doing good which mortal or immortal being can enjoy, do I wifli you ! Oh that I had prayers potent enough to draw down bleffings on you ! —Love you ?—Yes!—The very idea burfts into paffion. ' [The tears, Louifa, were ¿creaming down my cheeks.] Why fliould you doubt of all the affection which viitue can beftow? Do you not deferve iť?— Oh yes !—Love you in the manner you could wifli I muft not, .dare not, ought not: but, as I ought, I love you infinitely i Ay, dear, dear Frank, as I >ought, in¬ finitely ! * ' Louifa !-pBlame me if thou wilt—But -I kiffed him I—The chaftity ofmy thoughts defied mifoonftruftion, and the purity of the will fanftified the extravagance of the aft.
act, A daring eníhufiafm feized ше. I beheld his pallions ftruggling to attain* the very pinnacle űf excellence. I wiihed lo confirm the noble emulation, to convince him how different the pure love of mind might be from the meaner love of paffion, and 1 kiffed him ! I find my affections, niy feniibilities," peculiarly liable to thefe ftrong fallies. Perhaps all minds ofa cer¬ tain texture are>fubject t<b fuch rapid and - almoft refiftlefs »emotions ; and whether they ought to be encouraged or counter¬ acted I have not yet difcovered. . But the circumftance, unexpected and ftrange as it vvas, fuffered no wrong interpretation in the dignified foul"of Frank. With all the ' ardour of affection, but chaftened by* every token of delicacy, he clafped me in his arms, returned my kifs, then funk 'down tm one knee, and exclaimed—Now let me die ! ------ After a moment's paufe y I anfwered·— Noj Frank! Liye<! Live to be .a bleffing to the w,orlc.«, and an honour to the human tace ! I took
I took a turn to the window, and after having calmed the too much of feelmg vvhich I had fuffered to grow upon me, I continued the converfation. I hope, Frank, we now underftand each other; and that, as this is the firft, fo it vvill be the laft contention of the paffions 4 in which we fliall indulge ourfelves. Madam, thougii I ßill think, nay feet a certainty of conviction, that you act from mißaken principles, yet you fupport what you are perfuaded is truth with fuch high, fuch felf-denying virtue, that not to ap¬ plaud, not to imitate you would be con¬ temptible. You have and ought to have a will of your ovvn. You praftife what you believe to be the fevereft pre¬ cepts of duty, vvith more than human for¬ titude. You refolve, in this particular, not to offend the prejudices ofyour family, and the vvorld. I fubmit. To indulge fenfibility but a little were to be heart¬ broken ! But no perfonal grief can autho¬ rife me in deferring the poft I am placed in ; nor palliate the crime of neglecting its .vol. n. g duties.
duties. To the end of time I fiali perßß in thinking you mine by right ; but I will never trouble you more with an aiTertion of that right-----Never!—Unlefs fome jnew and unexpected claim ihould fpring up, of which I fee no probability. He bowed and was retiring, Stay, Frank, I have fomething more to fay to you—I have a requifition to. make which after what,has paffed would to common minds appear unfeeling and al¬ moft capricious' cruelty *, but I have no fear that yours Ihould /be.liable to this miftake. Recolle£r - but < who and what you are, remember what are the beft purpofes of iexiftence, the nobleft efforts of mind, and then refufe me. if you can* —I have formed a project,,- and call 'Upon you for aid—Cannot you-guefs ? Mr.-CHfton, madam— ? Yes. -1 fear it is a dangerous one ; and,'Whe¬ ther my fears originate, in felfiflmefs pr in > peneti ation, they ,muft rjbe. fpoken. Yes,. madam, Lţndbwarn »you »that the pallions öf
of Mr. Clifton are, in my opinion, much -more alarming that the refentment ofyour father. But they are alarming 'only to myfelf. And ought danger to deter me ? Not if the good you defign be practi¬ cable. And what his impracticable, where the will is refolved? Perhaps nothing—But' the effort muft be great, muft be uncommon. Has he not a mind worthy of' fuch an effort ? Would not his powers highly ho¬ nour truth and virtue ? They would, . Will not you give me your affiftance ? I would, madams moft willingly, would he but permit me. ' But I am his antipa¬ thy; a fomething noxious; an evil augury. You have been particular in your atten¬ tions to me. «.„And'muft" thofe attentions ceafe, ma¬ dam? They mùftbe'moderated; they muft be cool, difpaffionate, and then they willnot.
alarm.—I cannot poflibly be deceived in fuppofing it a duty, an indifpenfablc duty to reftore'the mind of Clifton to its true ftation. "-If I fail, the fault muil be my own. I am but young, yet many men have addreffed me with the common-place language of admiration, love, and I know not what ; or rather they knew not what; and, except yourfelf, Frank, I have not met with one from whom half fo ι much might bc hoped as from Clifton. ť He is the brother of my bofom friend. Surely, »Frank, it is a worthy taik —Join „with me !------There is but one thing I fear. Clifton is haughty and intemperate. Are you a duellift, Frank ? No, madam. Then you would not fight a duel? , Never, madam. No provocation, not the brand of cowardice itfelf, fliall ever induce me to be guilty of fuch a crime. Frank I—Oh excellent, noble youth ! . , Her?, Louifa, our converfation abruptly ended. The company had rifen from ta¬ ble, -and we heard them in the corridor. Lj-eauefted
1 requefted him to retire, and he inftanlly obeyed. Oh ! Louifa, with what fenfations did he leave my mind glowing!—His con¬ viai ion equals ceitainty, tliat I act from •miß aken principles ! To the end of time he fiali perßß in thinking me his by right / —Can the power oflanguage afford words more ftrong, more pofitive, more point¬ ed?------How unjuft have I been to my caufe! ------For furely I cannot be inan error!— 'Tis afflicting, 'tis painful, nay it iii almoft terrifying to remember!— Perßß to the end of Lime f —AVhy did I not think - more deeply ?—I had a dark kind of dread that I fliould fail !—It cannot be the fault cif my caufe !—AVrong him!—Guilty of .injuftice to him !—Surely, furely, 1 hope uot !—What I -Become an example to the · feeble and the fool i fli, for having indulged ihy pallions, and neglected my duties?— J?—His mind had formed a favourite plan, and could I expect it fliould be in¬ ftantly relinquiihed?·—I cannot conceive * torment equal to the idea' of doing him \ с 3 wroníľ !
wrongl—Him?------Again and again I hope not ! I hope not ! I hope not ! Then the kifs, Louifa ?—Did I or did 1 not do right, in fliowing him how truly I -admire and love his virtues? Was I oľ was J not guilty of any crime, when, hi the very acme ofthe paffions, 1 fo totally .difregarded the cuftoms ofthe world ? Or rather, for that is the true qucftio..., could it -produce any other effe® than that whicii I intended? .1 am perfuaded it could not, Nor, blame me who will, do I repent — And yet, my friend, if you fliould think it wrong, I confefs I fnould then feel a pang vvhich I fliould be glad not to de- ferve. But be fincere. Though I need not warn you. No fiilfe pity can or ought to induce you to defert the caufe of truth. Adieu—My mind is not fo much at its eafe as I hoped, from this converfation ; but at all times, and in all tempers, be- Jieve me to be, ever and ever, Your own dear, a. w. ST. IVES.
- LETTER
LETTER XLII _— tí>í,:e«3*— FRANK HîăNLEY OÏ/tVEE ÏRENCHAÏ.D. ι. ı. M ' i 'Mi -.ı.Î .l H" ' ....... ' Chateau de Vãlehnm. ÅLL is over !—My hopes are at an end ! ^—«I am awakened from a dream, in which pain and pleafuie were mingled to fuch excefs as to render its continuance im¬ poffible. Nor is this all. This trial, fevere as it was, did not fuffice. To the deftručtion ' of hope has been added the aflault of infolence, accompanied with a portion of obloquy which heart fcarcely can fuftain— Oh, this Clifton !—But—Patience ! g 4 Yet
- Yet let me do her juftice. Miftaken though I am fure flie is, the motives of her conduct are fo pure that even miftake itfelf is lovely in her; and affumes all the energy, all the dignity of virtue. Oh what d foul is hers ! Her own paffions, the paffions of others, vvhen flie afts and fpeaks, are all in fubjeftion to principle. Yes, Oliver, of one thing at leaft ffie has convinced me: ihe has taught me, or ra¬ ther made ine feel, how poor a thing it is to be the flave of defire. Not that I do not ftill adore Ъег !—Ay, more than ever adore ! But from hence¬ forth my adoration fliall be worthy of her¬ felf, ahd not degrading to me. From her I have learned what true love is; and the leffon is engraven on my heart. v She can confider perfonal gratification with apathy, yet burn with a martyr's zeal for thepromo- tion of univerfal good. And fliall 1 not rife equal to the bright example which flie has fot me? Shall I admire yet not imitate ?
Did
Did (lie defpife me ? .Did flic reject me for iny own fake ?—No !—All the affec¬ tion which mind can feel for mind flie has avowed for me ' And fliall I giieve becaufe another may be more happy ?—And why more?—In vvhat? Is not the union of fouls the firft, the moit permanent of all alliances ? That union is mine ! No power can Д]аке it. She openly acknow¬ ledges il; and has done, daily, houily, in every word, in every action. Whither then would my wiflies wander ? Oliver, I am a man, and fubject to the 'fiiakes and agues ot his fi agile nature ! •—Yet it Is a poor, a wretched pica ; a fooliih, and a^ falfe plea. Man is weak becaufe he is willing to be weak. He ci ouches to the whip, and like a cow ard pities^ while he iarhes himfelf. His wilful phienfy he calls iireiiftible, and weeps for the torments which he himfelf inflicts. Bat once again this Clifton ! — Read and tell me how I ought to aSt —I have received a biow fiom him, Olivei í— Yes,. have tamely fubmitted to iccéivé a biow! t g 5 What
What intolerable prejudices are thefe 1 Why does my heart rebel /o fternly, at what virtue fo pofitively approves? • I had juft left her ·, had that inftant been rejefted by her for his fake; had been fummoned to aid-her, in weeding out error from his mind. She fliewed ще it was a noble taik, and communicated to meher own divine ardour. Yes, Oliver! ï »came from ' her, with a warmed and animated heart; participating alliier zeal. Thè moft rigid, the moft painful of all abftinence was demanded from me ; but ihould I flirink from a duty becaufe I pity or becaufe I love myfelf? No. Such pufil- lanimity were death .to virtue. 1 left her, . while my thoughts glowed with the ardour of emulating her heroifm ; and burned to do him all the good which flie had pro¬ jected. ''. He was at the end of the corridor, and faw me quit her apartment. , His hot fpirit caught the alarm inftantaneoufly, . and blazed in his countenance. He ac- ccfted me—- 1 So/
A NOVEL·»' So, fir ! You are very familiar with that lady ! AVhat right have you to intrude iuto her apartments? AVhen flie herfelf defires me, fir, lhave a right. She defire you ! Tis falfe ! Sir? Tis falfe, fir! Falfe? Yes, fir. And falfehood defeives toise chaftifed ! Chaftifed? [It is in vain, Oliver, to en¬ deavour to conceal the truth from myfelf; my folly incurred its own puniihment— > I repeated] Chaftifed? [I was lunatic enough to walk up to him, with a ridi¬ culous and defpicable air of defiance. He re-echoed my words, and inftantly in contempt ftruck me on the cheek with the back ofhis hand.] Yes, fir, chaftifed! His raffinefs reitoied me to fome fenfe -of the farcical heroifm which 1 had been aping. I hurried from him, without ano¬ ther word. Oliver, I can conceive nothing more g 6 painful
painful than this wrefting, this tearing of paffion from its purpofe. I walked a few minutes to calm my thoughts, and wrote him the following note. "SIR, " ï FEEL at prefent the humility of " my fituation: but not from your blow ; " for that has brought me to myfelf, not " humbled me. No man can be degraded (t by another; it muft be his own act : and " you have degraded youifelf, not me. My " error is in liaving, for a moment, yielded " to the impulfe of paffion. If you think " I fccu you, continue to think fo ; till I l( can fliew my foi bearanee is fiom a bet- " ter motive. Cowardice might make " me kill you ; but true courage will <f teach me calmly to hear the woild call * c me coward, rather than commit an act " fo wicked, fo abhorred, as that of taking " or of throwin g away life. 1 wiíhčd to '« feek your friendfliip; and even now I " will
« will nbt fliun you. Make the world ff imagine me a coward : imagine mc one te yourfelf, if you can. 1 will live under " the fuppofed obloquy, and leave the " tenor of my life to fliew whether living « be the aft of fear, or of reafon. I par- " don you, fir, and leave you to pardon ff yourfelf. " Г. HENLEY," ' ! . · * « í My forbearance and this letter mitiga¬ ted rtiy fenfe of pain. Yet I am very ill fatisfied with myfelf. Am I fo eafily to be moved? 'Tis true the fcene I had juft quitted was fermenting, as it were, in my veins, and fliaking my whole fyftem. AVhat is worfc, I am child enough to be tormented, in my own defpite, by the recollection of bavin fir received a blow ! And why ? In many countries, and even in my own, among the clafs in which I was born, the ftigma is none, or trifling- Stigma ? Abfurd ! -* Cowardice J — Mur¬ der !—If vanity were ever becoming, I have
have perhaps more reafon to be vain, con¬ sidering the danger to which I had expofed myfelf, of this than ofany aci ofmy life. Well, vvell, Oliver—I hope thefe agi¬ tations are over; and that from this time thou wilt begin to think better of me. I communicate, my whole thoughts to thee. If the experiments made upon my mind can be of any ufe to thine, my let- iers vvill then anfwer the beft of the pur- pofesfor which they are written. V. HENLEY.
LETTER
LETTER XLIII
•COK-E CLIFTON.. -TO GUY FAIRFAX.
Chateau deVillebru^ -H» OUR laft, Fairfax, pleafed me. You fay truly, and I like your remark, t( Such ytt fellows ought not to claim a moment's- " attention from me. 1 fliould bruiti them " away, like flies from my forehead, when u they prefume to tea.fe or fettle them- Kt felvés upon me." -IJiave taken your •advice, and fly-flapped the wafp that was •more willing than able to fting. I have lately grown diffatisfied with .myfelfj I know not how or why, I fuf¬ pect
рей this youth, in part, has made me fo, with his vifionary morality. 1 hate fuch fermonizing. " AVho has a right to control me ? AVhofe flave am I ? I was born to rule, not to be ruled. - My appetites a e keen, mydefires vaft, and I would enjoy. AVhy clfe am I here ? Delay to. me is in¬ fufferablc ; fufpenfe diftracts me ; and the poffibility that another fliould be preferred to myfelf drives me mad ! I too heartily defpife the tame creatures, that ciawl upon the earth, to fuffer oppofition from them. AVho would be braved by bats and beetles, buzzing in his ears ? I never before faw a woman whom any temptation could have induced me to marry ; and now I have found one I aih troubled with doubts, infefted with fears, and fubjectedto the intolerable penance of procraftination. Impeded in my courfe; -and by what ? AVhy, I am told to fcru- iinize myfelf, and to difcover whe'her ï am quite as perfect as it is neceffary I fliould be ! 'Tis unjuft ! 'Tis unkind ! I did not doubt of her perfe6tions ; and both
both love and pi ide, equally jealous of their honour, demand diat mine fliould have been taken for gianted. The time has been when this would have been íevcngcd. But I feem to be half fubdued. My fierce fpirit, before fo untameabie, declines contending with her. Not but I frequently feel it ihuggling with fuffocation, kindling, and again ready to burft into a.more fuiious blaze. ' Yet let me do her juftice. Mild, gen¬ tle, and affectionate, flie conquers my im¬ petuofity with prayers, and foothing, and with kindnefs irrefiftible. Still flie con¬ quers. Then flic fuffers thefe animals to tor¬ ment me. I am angry to think that, in fo fliort a fpace, I fliould have fo entiiely loft all power over myfelf ! , Bul wheie is the moi lal that can look and not love? Weie í myfelf not an actor in the play, how fliould I enjoy the perplexity of thefe Ftench amoureux f There are I know not how many of them ; each more buiy than the other. 'Tis laughable
laughable to fee with what induftiy they labour to make love according to her liking ; for they find that their own tiifling manner is inefficient, and can never fucceed with her. One of them, that faid crazy Proven¬ çal Count, is very earneft indeed in his en¬ deavours -, but flie lieeps him ín due awe. And it is well perhaps for him thať ihe <loes, or I would. Still however he is damned troublefome and impertinent^ and I could wiih flie "were more peremptory. Yet it is unjuft to blame her, for the ani¬ mal is fo full of antics, that it is impoffible -to be angry. After all, I am far from fatisfied refpefö- ing myfelf and this youth, whom I con¬ defcended to chaftife. It was beneath me. It gave him a fort of right to demand fatisfačtion : but he affects forbearance, becaufe, as he pretends, he defpifes du¬ elling. And I hear he has actually given proofs of the moft undaunted courage. He wrote a ihort note of only three or four fentences on the fubjecr, after I had ftruck -him, which produced a very uncommon effeâ
effect upon me, and made me half repent, and accufe myfelf of haughtinefs, rafhnefs, and infult. But thefo things torture me. I am out öf' patience with them. AVhat right has any pedant, becaufe he thinks proper to Vex and entangle liis own brain with doubts, to force his gloomy dogmas upon mü ? Let thofo who love fackcioth wear it. Muft I be rande miferabie, becaufe an over-curious booby bewilders himfelf in inquiry,, and galls his confeience, till, like 4he w 7 rung withers of a battered poft-horfe, it ffirinks and fliivers at the'touch ofa fly's foot ? AVhat, fhall I not enjoy ithe free air, -the glorious fun, the flowers, the fruits, the viands, the whole flores of na¬ ture ? AVho fliall impede, who fliall dare ■difturb.the banquet? AVere it even a .dream, the meddling fool thatjwaked me fliould dearly repent his raffineis.—Let fpeculative blockheads, brew metaphyfical neftar, make a haih of axioms, "problems, corollaries and demonftra tions, and feed «on ideas and fatten. Be theirs che feaft of feafon
reafon ahd the flow of foul. But let me banquet with old Homer's jolly gods and » heroes, revel with the Mahometan houris, or gain admiffion into the favoury fancto- rum of the gormandizing prieftboôd, fnuff the fumes from thcir altars, and gorge on the fat of Iambs. ' Let cynic patos trufs up each his flovenly toga, rail at Hclio- gabalus, and faft; but let me receive his, card, with—" Sir, your company is re- " quefted to- dine and fup." . I cannot forget this gardener's fon. I am fometimes angry that I fliould for a fingle inftant trouble myfelf with a fellow fo much beneath me ; and at others equally angry, for not fliewing him lhe refpect which he claims. There are moments in -which lhave even .feared him as a rival; for when flie fpeaks to him, which flie is very ready to do, the ufual mildnefs and benevolence of her voice and features are evidently increafed.' She muft, flie_ ihall be moré circumfpect. Indeed I have made her fo within thefe few days. Prithee forgive all this. My mind is ' not
not at eafe ; but ï know not why I fliould infeft you vvith its malady. AVrite, relate fomething pleafant ; tell mc what has hap¬ pened to you Iaft, and relieve the diffatis- faftion I feel by your uuaflefted flow of gaiety. Adieu.
C. CLIFTON.
LETTER XLIV.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON.
Chateau de Villeèrutt, I CANNOT fufliciently applaud the re¬ folute propriety of Frank, fince our laft converfation. Indeed, Louifa, his 'forti¬ tude is admirable ! He does not indulge felf-compaflion, by brooding over his own lofs. Nor does he, like other "miftaken people whofe affections have met difap¬ pointment, fuppofe himfelf into fufferings,' which fweli into exiftence in proportion ' as they are imagined to be real. His evi¬ dent determination is not to permit any felfifh motive to detach him from the great ouroofes
purpofes of life ; but cheerfully to fubmit to what is inevitable, without thinking it 1 an evil. In the mean time, I have been indulg¬ ing a hope, which at moments has ap¬ peared almoft a certainty, that Clifton, by our mutual efforts, fliall acquire all this true ardour, which is fo lovely in Frank. How forry am I to obferve that the haugh¬ tinefs of Clifton and the coldnefs of Frank feem to be increafing ! To what can this be attributed ? Their behaviour is fo pe¬ culiar that I almoft dread fomething has happened, with which lam unacquainted. But perhaps it is the prefent temper of my mind : the effect of fenfations too irri¬ table, doubts too tremulous, and fears too ν eafily excited. í cannot forget the con¬ verfation: it haunts me ; and, did not Frank fet me the example of foititude, I have fometimes doubted of my own per- feverance. Oh, how mean is this in me ! Is not the tafk'I have propofed to myfelf a worthy Άπά a high one? Am-1 not convinced it* is
is an inevitable duty? And fliall he, even under a contrary conviction, outftrip me in the career?—Geneious and excellent youth, I will imitate thy moft eminent virtues !
The Count de Beaunoir ftill continues to be particular, in vvhat he calls his ado¬ ration of me; but-his tone and ñyle are too romantic to authorize me in any ferious remonftrance. Clifton is not pleafed, and the Count and he have fallen into a habit of rallying each other, and vaunting of what lovers dare do, to prove their affec¬ tion. Their irony took fo ferious a turn yefterday, that Clifton propofed they fliould load their piftols, and both holding by the corner of a handkei chief, fire at each other. Confidering the temper in which they were, and the conftitutional extrava¬ gance ofthe Count, the propofal was ter-. rifying: but I had the prefence of mind to give it an air of ridicule, by faying—You do not underftand the true point of gallant-
,Α ..
ry,, gentlemen. You ihould go to Japan, where one noble-blooded peribn draws his fabre,. and difpatches himfelf, to prove, he is..acquainted with the high punctilio and very effence of honour ; while another, enraged that he fliould be in waiting and ( have a. diffi to carry up to the emperor's table,/requefts he vvould condefcend to live till he can come > down, again, that he may..fliew .he knows what honour is as well as his difingenuous .enemy, who had taken fuch an unfair-.advantage. ., .The Count laughed, and Clifton I fliould hope was not difpleafed that it was impof¬ fible the converfation fliould again affume the fame .defperate .and abfurd tone. - î took an opportunity to aik bim 4 pri¬ vately how he .could indulge fuch intem¬ perate paffions ; but I was obliged to foften my admonition,by ( all poffible niild- nefs. I know not whether I did right, buti. even took Jiis hand, preffed it be¬ tween mine, and requefted of .him, with an ardour, which I think muft fink deeply in. his, mind, to ,do* juftice Ло himfelf, tq .... vol. ii. ir exert
qxcrt thofe powers of thought which he certainly poffeffed, and to reftrain paffions which, if not leftrained, muft deter me, or any woman worthy of him, from a union that would be fo dangerous. The impieflion would have been ftronger, but that unfortunately his quick fenfations took a different turn. Feeling me clafp his hand, he dropped on his knee, and with an ecftafy which he feemed unable to refift kiffed both,mine, talked fomething of blifs unutterable, and, recol¬ lecting the conclufion ofmy fentence, ad¬ ded that the very thought of lofing me was madnefs. AVe vvere interrupted, - and, I began to fear left my true motive fliould have'been mifundeiftood. Oh I Louifa, what a world is this! Into what falfe habits has it fallen! Can hypo¬ crify be virtue? Can a defire to call forth all the beit affections ofthe heart be mif¬ conftrued into fomething too degrading for expreffion? ' I know nqt, but I begin to fear that no permanent good can be effected at prefent, without
without peril. -If fo, ihall I liften only to my fears ; flirink into felf^ and fliun that which duty bids me encounter? No. Though the prejudices of mankind were to overwhelm me with forrows, for feek¬ ing to do good, I will ftill go on : I will perfevere, will accomplifli or die. Yet I know not why I am in this mood !. But fo I am, and Louiia will forgive me. I talk of fufferings ? AVhat have I fuf¬ fered ? - AVhat can thofe who, mature in reafon, are fuperior to prejudice fuffer ? - But who are they? My prejudices hourly rife up in arms againft me. Every day am I obliged to combat what the day before I thought I had deftroyed. Could we, at the fame morpent that we correct our own miftakes, conect thofe of the whole world, the work were done at once. But we have to ftruggle and to ftruggle ; and, liaving to-day fliaken off the burs that hung about us, to-morrow we give a. glance and perceive them flicking as clofely and as thick as ever ! h 2 I wifh
1 wifli to queftion Frank, conc?rníng. < thefe alaims; but he feems purpofely to avoid giving me an opportunity. Perhaps· however I am miftakeu ; and I hope I am. The reftlefs fancy is-frequently too full of doubts and fears. Ohy how beautiful is open, artlefs, und ; fguifed truth ■ Yet howr continually are diffimulation and conceal¬ ment recommended as virtues ! AVhat- evei miftakes, public or private, they may think they have difcovered, and however; beneficial it might be to conect them, meu muft not publiih their thoughts ; tor that w T ouid be to libel, to defame, to fpeak oť to write fcandal ! » AVhen will the world learn that the un¬ limited utterance of all thoughts would be virtuoub? How many half-difcoveied, half-acknow T Iedged tiuth^ would then be promulgated ; and how immediately would * miftake, of eveiy kind, meet its proper antidote ' How affectionately and united¬ ly would men foon be brought to join, not in puniihmg, nor even in reproving, but in reforming falfehood ! Aided and encou¬ raged
we have often difcourfed on thefe things, Louifa .\ Wd fhe .common accidents of life, as vvell as thofe peculiar to myfelf, render fuch converfations fweet to recollection. I muft conclude : fof though we write beft when thoughts flow the moft freely, yet at «prefent I "linci myfeif more- inclined to think than to write. «Affctt ion ately and ever A. VV. ST. XV£6.
H -S
-JL. *л_. J.—
LETTER XLA'.
ANNA WfiNBOÜRNS 8T. IVE3 TO LOVISA CLIFTON.
Chateau de VUiehrun. 1 KNOAV not, Louifa, how to begin ! I have an accident I о relate vvhich has alai med me fo much that I am half afraid it fliould equally alaim my friend. Yet the danger is over, and her fenfations cannot equal ours. She can but imagine what they were. But it is fo incredible, fo mad, fo dreadful ! Clifton is ftrangely rafli ! He
He had been for fome days diffatisfied, reftlefs, and difturbed. I knew not why, except that I had defired time fcr mutual confideration, before I would permit him to fpeak to Sir Arthur. 4 He has half ter¬ rified nie from ever permitting him to fpeak —But then he has more than repaired all the wrong he has done. Theie is fome¬ thing truly magnanimous in his temper, but -it has taken a very erroneous bent. The chief fubject of my laft was the dif¬ tance which I obferved between hrm and Frank Henley. Little did I know the reafon. But I will not anticipate : only remember, be not too much alarmed. Frank was but one of the actors, though the true and indeed fole hero of the fcene I am, going to relate. ' Indeed he is a wonderful, I had almoft faid a divine youth ! It took birth from the'Count de Beaunoir. • In my laft, I mentioned the ftrange de¬ fiance ofthe piftols and the handkerchief: and would you think, Louifa, a conver¬ fation fo frantic could be renewed ? It is и 4 true
* + true it fliewed itfelf under a new though icarcely a lefs horrible afpeft. AVe were yefterday walking in the park, in which there İs aremarkablu lakei > fmall but romantic. I before fpoke I believe of our rowing on it in boats. We were walking befide it en a fleep rock, -which continues for a confiderable length of w¿y to foi m one of k s banks. The Count arid Clifton were before: I, Frank Heruiey, and a party of ladies and gentlemen were following at a little diftance,. but not near enough to hear the» converfation that was pafling between' your brother and v »the Count. · - : 4 l It feems the latter had firft begun once Again to talk of tiniest of knight enantiý, ■and ofthe feats which ihc preux xhevalieh' s had performed for*their ladies, the head¬ long Clifton, .utterly .defpifing the prtend- ed admiration of what he was perfuaded »the Count"· durft in no manner imitate, after fome farcaftic expreffions ofhis ctín- - tempt, madly but ferio u íly aiked theCoimt .¡fhe durft jump off thev rock iato.-th&k&e, to
foul, faid he, if you have any ■ Jump you firft, faid the Count—! *****?.** i Imagine, Louifa, if you can, t the fliock I received vvhen, not knowing vyhat had paffed, but in an apparent fit of frenzy, I faw him defperately luih to the fide of the rock, and dafh himfelf headlong down into the Water! It was at an angle, and we had a full view of him fallinsr ' Every foul I believe ih rieke d , excejåt myfelf and peihaps Frank Henley. Never had I fo much need of the fortitude to which I have endeavoured to habituate my mind, The gentlemen all ran to the fide of the rock.—They faw Clifton, aftei rifing to the fui face, fink' He had jumped fiom a place where the ihelving of the"rock, under water, by projecting had ftunned him as he fell. Frank peiceived the danger, he threw off his hat and coat, and ran to another part, wheie the height was itili moie 4readfûl ■ Indeed, Louiia, it excites hor¬ ii 5 ror
ror to юок at the place ! But he feems to be fuperior to fear. He plunged down what might well be called an abyfs ; and,, after rifing for a few féconds to breathe, dived again in fearch of poor Clifton. > He was twice.obliged to rife and take breath,- The third 'time he found him, rofe with him, turned him upon his own back, and fwam with hîrh a very confi¬ derable diftance before 'he could find a place fliallow enough 4 to land. To all appearance Clifton was lifelefb ! But the excellent, moft excellent when you fliall hear all, the heroic Frank im¬ mediately applied himfelf to the remain¬ der ofhis office. He ftayed not a moment to reft, biu lifted him a feeming corpfe from the earth, threw him once more on his back, and ran fafter than any of us to the chateau, carried him up ftairs, un- dreffed him himfelf, put him between the blankets, and gave every' neceffary order with as much prefence of mind as if there had been neither accident nor danger. Wet
Wet astie was he loft not a thought upon himfelf. " Never, fliall I forget the indefatigable affiduity with which he laboured to reftore your brother to life ; the anxiety which he ftruggled to conceal; the variety of means he employed; the*ingenuity-of his con- . jeftures and the humanity of every mo¬ tion ! Two hours were I and he and all of us held in this dreadful fufpenfe. At laft he was fuccefsful ; and the relief í felt, the. load that feemed removed from my heart, it is impoffible to defcribe ! AVhen' your brother was perfectly come to himfelf, "Frank fuffered him to be bled. For it had been propofed before;* but· Frank, with a determination that could not be withftood, refufed to admit of it ; though he had been entreated, .and at laft openly and loudly-blamed, by the furgeon and thofe who believed in him, for his pertinacity. But Frank was not to be ilia- ken, even by the very ferious fear of future accufation. He followed, as'he tells me, u 6 * . the
the opinion 'òf Jbhn'T^uhto^r^hli'Véll might he think it of more woith than «that of ihe perfon *who pretended to> advife. But it leqiihds no common degree'oit^efb- lution to perfift, in this manne*!*, 14 ' inrike right ; and wholly .to defpife Galuhmy-änid its confequenoés.' ■ ^ If you think, Louifa; that after*- this, I can add nothing in praife of Frank you are gieatly miftaken; 1 for what' is 1 to/ come raifes his charafter almoft "to an enviable dignity. ·< i , · < · ,<* Coukl you imagine4hat this very Frank 1 lenley, this undauUed, determined, high- fouled Frank, whohadflungihimfclfdown the horrid precipice l after your и biother, who had fwu'ni with him, run with him-, Tİİked benig fuppofed in fomc fort his mur¬ derer, and at lafbťefloreu him ito life, had the very duy before received fiom the hand df this fame brother—a blow!—If, Louifa, there be one being upon earth capable of attaining virtues more-than human, r*it iis furely Frank Henley !" - » ŕ ' Much prah e how eveiy as well*a« blarøe-, is
heart moie painfully wrung, by the fenfe of гт" injury committed and ofa gopd, fo unexampled received,' as his has been. Tt was he who told ofhis own behaviour.— His total want of power to make retribu¬ tion is the theme by which he is pained and oppreffed, *> Frank, uniform in generofity, difclaims any fuperiority, and affirms Clifton would have done the fame, had he been iţi the fame danger. I think I would, anfwered Clifton, in a tone that fliewed be felt what he fpoke: but I know myfelf.^oo well to fuppofe I fliould havo fo unremittingly peifcveied, Jike you, in the peifoimance òf an office of humanity which feemed hopelefs. ι lhe diftinction was juft, difinteiefted, and worthy the difcernment ofa tnind Дже that of your bi other. Clifton 'fays that, 'though he ¡cannot think Jike Frankj [AVe hope r to make him, J -oui fiu] yet he cannot but; admiie the magnanimity
magnanimity with which he acts up to his principles, and proves his fincerity. Oh, my friend ! Yau can conceive all the terrors ofthe fcene I So fine a youth, fo accompiiihed, fo brave, the brother of my Louifa, brought to Paris to meet an untimely death ! I the caufe of his com¬ ing thither ! I the innocent inftigator of this laft raíh act! The eyes of all upon me ! The horror of fufpenfe ■------It was indeed atrial ! Yet who knows what accidents may occur in life? Who can fufficiently cherifli fortitude : and by anticipating defy mif- fortune ? A 7 iolent!y as ray feelings were affaulied, there yet may be, there are, fliocks more violent, feenes more drsadful " in the world. Nor is it impoffible but that fuch may be my lot. And if they were, I hope I frill fliould bear up againft them. all. It is true I tnay not always have a Frank Henley to cherifli and infpire hope. His conftant theme was—"He is not dead!" And I once heaid him murmuring to him¬ felf.
(elf, with a kind of prophetic energy— "He fliall not die !"—It was this /га lino £ by which he was laved : for, with any other creature upon earth. I am perfuaded he had been gone for ever. Oh this noble perfeverance ! it is indeed a godlike virtue ! The Count is lefs in fpirits, Mefs extra¬ vagant, fmce this accident. . It feems to hang upon his "mind; as if he had been out-braved. His anxiety, as might well be expefted from fuch a temper, was ex¬ ceffive, while Clifton was in danger : but he feems to repent now, that he did not follow the mad example. Parbleu ! Ma¬ dame, je fuis Provençal ; on dit que f ai la tête un peu chaude ; mah Mejìeurs les Anglois vont diablement vite aux épreuves ! Mes compatriotes même ne font pasßfous / — Je ne ne Juis pas content de moi — Paurais du faire le faut — f aurais fauve la vie à mon rival ! — Voilà une belle occa¬ fion manquee, et beaucoup de gloire à jamais perdue pour moi ! * My
..My mind ;at .-prefent is noť enfirpîy tranquil. The recollection of a temper fo rafh as Clifton's preys upon me. 4 Yet, where there are qualities fo high, and powers fo uncommon,, fliall I defpair? Shall I flirink from an act of duty ? It is a taik I have prefcribed to myfelf. Shall I witnefs the fortitude pf Frank, and be myfelf fo eafily difcomfited ? No, Louifa. Clifton Chali be ours ------ Shall be ! —Shall be the brother of Louifa, the Friend pf »Frank, and the better part of Anna.. Yes, 1 too will be determined.' I like Frank will fay-r-" He is not dead ! Fie fliall not die!". A, VV. ST. IVĽS.
LETTER
L ЕЛ- TER XLVI.
ТЛЕ HONOU-RABLE MRS. CLIFTOBt
.) İ'V.'JÎ 'l' Ч 'i Π,
ТО
;( ί iiri .t.« ι ι ť| - FllANK' HENLEY. •i'! «л 'И ЗЛ ' \' л ' · ·
Ro/t Bani. • ,« -.gj, .,i ľ „ ■ * ' ; - ·-·*· 'i- · . w . i V - 1 , t í ■» , I .! ' и . ! ' ι, . 1 İF the praifes, prayers, ano! .thanks ,qf,.a woman whom difcafe has robbed of more than half .bec faculties, could be of any value, if the Qverfiowing heart of a mo¬ ther could but fpeak its throbs, if admira¬ tion of gifts fo aftoniihing and virtues fo divine could be worthy your acceptance, or could reward you for all the good you have done us, I would endeavour to dif¬ charge the unexampled and unmerited obligation. But
But*no, fir; you are fuperior to thefe. I write hot for your fake, buťfor.njty own; that I may endeavour to relieve myfelf of fenfations that opprefs me. 1^ feel it in-. cumbent on me to write ; yet what can I * fay? Ί have no words. 1 defpair of any» opportunity of retribution: I am aged, infirm,- and feeble. ,1 am going down to .the grave; but ftill lhave life enough to revive and feel a new exiftence, at the recital ofyour virtues ! Forgive this fliort effufion, from the exuberant heart of a mother, who wiflies but is wholly unable to fay .how much flie admires you, M. CLIFTON·
LETTER.
.LETTER XLVII.
LOUISA CLTFTON Tti
Reß-BattL SIR, »J 5 LIKE my clear mamitta» am impelled to endeavour to return thanks for benefits, at the recollection of which the heart links, and all thanks become inadequate and vain. Yet fuffer a fifter's thanks for a brother fpared, pardoried, and reftored to life! Reftored at the hazard of your own, and after a mortal affront received! Re¬ ftored by the energies- of fortitude, faga- çity, and affection! Indeed, fir, I cannot tell you what I feel. It is utterly impoffible. Imagine me
: me your friend, your fifler. Command my life, it is jours. Yours - not.fq much be¬ caufe the youth you have faved happened . to be my brother, as for the true efteem I have for qualities fo exalted. 'This is not the firft time you have» excited my-admira- 'tion, and permit me to add my love.— Your heart is too uoble to müimderftand me, I love virtue, in, man or woman % .and if that be fin may'I be ever finful ! , I would wifli you the joys of heaven, but "my wiflies are vain ; you .have them •already : nor can 'a mind like yours be t cobbed of them, «by all the powers of man ¡ or accident. L. CLIFTON.
LETT.ER XLVIII. ... ,ί·/ , , LOUISAţ CLIPjTON ( ' * .то ■ /ι , ANNA WENBOURNE' ST. IVES.
"' x Rofi-Bank\" ' . ; Ч.Л 'j.., .,. r OUR three Iaft letters, my dear Anna, have affefted me in a .very uncommon manner. The pure.paffion, the noble re¬ fignation, and the fortitude of Frank Hen¬ ley are unparalleled. Not to admire, not 'to efteem, not to love fuch virtues is im¬ poffible. His unfliaken patience, his ge¬ nerofity, his forgivenefs, his courage, ^his perfeverance, are inimitable proofs of his fuperiority. AVho can, forbear wifhing him fuccefs ? Ought he not,to command it ; to^ fay it is mine ; v truth and juftice dare not deny it to me ? v
Indeed, Anna, my mind is ftrangely in doubt. To be guilty of injuftice to fuch worth is furely no common guilt. And yet my brother—Headlong lunatic ! whofe intemperance is every moment hurrying him into extremes.—I grant, my friend, his mind is worthy of being retrieved ; and it is a generous, a noble enterprize. Nay I own I fometimes perfuade myfelf it can¬ not fail, when Anna St. Ives and Frank Henley, from motives fo pure and with fo much determination, engage in the caufe. But at otheis, I fee peril at every ftep ! I find my heart reproaching me for not ad¬ juring my friend to defift; for not exciting her to beftow her hand on the man who of all others can moft juftly claim it, as his right. That I defire to fee my brotherall that emulation and wifdom could make him, the friend and huiband of my Anna, the rival of her virtues, and the bofom inti¬ mate cf him whom flie is willing to forego for this brother's fake ; that I defire this, ardently, vehemently, is moft true. If the
end be attainable, it is a noble enterprize. But the difficulties! AVhat are they? Have they been well examined ? —I, with my Anna, fay mind can do all things with mind : truth is irrefiftible, and muft finally conquer. But it has many modes of con¬ quering, and fome of them are tragical and dreadful. To fee my Anna married to ftrife, waft¬ ing her fine powers to reform habits which, though they may be checked, may perhaps be too deep ever to be eradicated ; to fee all her exquifite feniibilities hourly preyed upon by inefficient attempts to do good, for which inftead of praife and love, flie might meet neglect, reproach, or perhaps ftern infult—Oh ! it is a painful thought ! She would not pine ; flie would not weakly fink into dejeérion, and defert her duties, in pity to her own misfortunes.—No—But. ftill it is an unhappy, nay, it is an abhorred^ ftate. t s I am bewildered. One train'of reafon¬ ing overturns another, and Ί know not" what xo adyife. There are times in which thefe
thefe confequences appear moft probable ,- and theıe aie others in which I fay no, it is impoffible ■ Brutality itfelf could not be fo fenfelefs, fo deftiuftive of its own* felicity ! »- Anna St. Ives wrould win a fa¬ vage heart! ■ And my'brother evidently* has quick and delicate fenfations; capable of great good. But then are they not ca¬ pable of great harm ? Yes r but are they, would they be capable of harm with her ? AVould fiot fhe command'them» 1 regulate them,' harmonize them ? j Again, and again, ■ I know not. > ι * One thing however let mè add. Let me conjure the friend ofmy bofom not to fuffer herfelf to be fwayed, by the remem¬ brance of that'friendfliip. 'Nay, if flie do not feel a ceitainty of fuccefs, let me in¬ treat, let me adraoniffi her to defift, befoie it be too late , and before fui ther encou¬ ragement fliall feem to authoiize the pre¬ fuming Clifton, for prefuming I am con¬ vinced he -will be, to found claims upon her kindnefs. Oh
Oh that he were indeed worthy of her ! Would that he could but rife to fomething like that enviable dignity'? And can he not ?—Indeed I would not plead againft him ; but neither would 1 be inftrumental in rendering my friend, who is furely born a bleffing to*· the earth, miferabie. I am angry with myfelf for my own in- decifion : but in vain ; I have no remedy. I fometimes conclude thisindecifion ought to act as a warning, and for that reafon 1 have painted my feelings as they are.' If yours fliould refemble them, I firmly and loudly fay·—Anna, defift ! If not, I then have no advice to give. For this î blame myfelf, but ineffectually. Be affured liowever that, under all cir¬ cumftances of future life, be they adverfe or profperous, my beft wiflies will be with you, and my heart and foul ever yours. L. CLITTON. P. S. My mamma and I have mutually 'written to Frank Henley : you may eafily -vol. n. ι imagine
imagine in what tone and ftyle/ But I could wifli my brother to fee. our letters. AVe have both thought it beft to forbear writing to him, his* temper being wayward and tetchy. AVe would much rather he fliould be obliged to feel, indirectly, what our opinions and fenfations aie, than learn them from any formal addrefs, which he İs fo liable to mifconftrue. It is môft pro¬ bable thai. Frank will not mention thefe letters. But if you fliew him this, and being of my opinion will join in the re¬ queft, I have no doubt he will then com¬ ply. There is one fentence in my letter which makes mc likewife wifli that Clifton ffiould know I have requefted Frank would permit him to fee what I have written ; otherwife that fentence might very proba¬ bly by him be mifinterpreted. AVhen you. read the letter, you will inftantly know which I mean ; the word love makes it confpicuous ; and you will then perceive' my reafon. To raife the mind, which is habituated to the fufpicious practices of thp vvorld, above thofe piaftices, and to make
make it feel that the pure heart denes the pufillanimous imputation of want of deli¬ cacy, is a difficult tafk. But let us, my Anna, continue to act and fpeak all tliat our thoughts approve, void of the fear of accufation,
ι й LETTER
LETTER XLÏX.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO '•¿OUISA CLIFTON. Parh, Hotel de VUnivtrfitê. W E aré returned to Paris. Tlie Mar¬ quis and his bride have taken leave of their country pleafures, and are gone to Fon¬ tainebleau, to be prefented at court. The ftrange incident of Clifton excited much converfatio7i, in which v my name and his were frequently joined. The Count de Beaunoir became lefs particular in his behaviour to me, in confequence of 'the referve which I thought it right to affume. I find however that he told Sir «Arthur,
Arthur, after running over a great number of enthufiaftic epithets,, in his wild way, ■all in my praife, that he perceived at pre¬ fent I preferred another ; and that he had too high a fenfe of honour to put any re¬ ftraint on a lady's inclinations. But if •my mind ihould change, and his perfon, fortune, fword, and life could give me pleafure, they ffiould eternally be at my command. He likewife means in a few days to follow the court to Fontainebleau, as he faid ; and he again repeated he had loft a fine .opportunity of convincing me how he-adored me, and that he was di¬ ablement fâché . CJifton has^entirely altered his behaviour to Frank ; he now treats him with unaf¬ fected freedom and refpect. But his im¬ patience relative to me has not abated. To-morrow we are to have fome converfa¬ tion, after which I imagine he wiflies 'to make propofals to Sir Arthur. AVould you think, .Louifa, that I fome¬ times fuffer myfelf to be furprifed into fears; and that I then find myfelf ready to ι 3 retract,
retract, or at leaft queftioning whether I ou^hr to uroceed. There is iomethmsr faiaÏÏv erroneous ir^ the impatient propernkics of the human mtnd. " ïîovr feldom does it ftay fo rjììy to examine a queftion as to leave no re¬ maining doubr, and to act on s. urecon- cened and conilftenr plan ! Yet it never fivTts with fafety or with fatisfačtion, except whentt has or imagines it has made this examination. "If our motives be fow, flow, and feeble, we then are heavy, cTu.h aud ftupid:if they be quick, mzæerous, and ftrong, we are too apt implicitly ţo obey firft İmpulfes, and to hurry headlong into folly zná extravagance. Yet thefe iaft only can give energy ; and. having them, wifdom will connu in heing able co curb thein, fo as to give full cj.nie for con- ilderation. The confeious want of thb İn myfelf Is what I blame. How often am I furprifed by unexpected circumftar.ee·?, which I fcught to have forefeen, and againft vvhich I ought to have provided. if 1 have any doubts
doubts cf "myfelf, if I am no r certain of producing thofe effects ors ihe mini ct Clifton which I know I ought to be аЫе to produce, it becomes me to recede. Or raîher it becomes me to ap-j.y myf-df, with the refolution of which I am fo ready to vaunt, to attain that which is attainable» to difcover the tme means, the clue to hi* mind, and to perfevere. I have fcmetìnies tufpecied -myfelf of bein«· influenced bv h:> öne form, and the ¿harms ef hh wit and gaiety. Ar other,*- í have even doubted whether I were nr-i: more situated by an affeííion for my Louifa, than bya fenfeofbciimbectd-tr. But, conflder the fubject how I wiïï, thnt there Is a dutv, and that I trs csîîed uros to fuî6î it, is an unerring dtľcifcon. ч There rauft be no eonceih^snt. I ni.ft explain my whob chain cf resfor.ings ΐο lum : for nothing appears more indubita¬ ble to me th«m th-it dup.icitv never can conduce to good. The only fear :s that I fliouM be dencïeut in my desí!, ar.d pr«> ient my pb:: fo a< to gi;c it :t rrk.fe ar-
pearance. Truth partially told becomes falfehood : and it was a kind of blind eon¬ feioufnefs of this which fiift induced men to countenance diffimulation. They felt their inability to do juftice to truth, and therefore concluded hypocrify was a vir¬ tue, and, ftrange to tell, truth itfelf fome¬ times a vice. It was a lamentable mif¬ take. It is partial truth, or in other woi dt* falfehood, which is the vice. Clifton has from the beginning been a great favourite with Sir Arthur. He con¬ tradicts none of my father's prejudices; he admires grounds and parks beautifully laid out; has a tafte for architecture ; points out the defects and excellencies of the buildings of France with much difcrimi- ration; has a great refpeft, like Sir Ar¬ thur, for family, and prides himfelf in be¬ ing the fon of an honourable mother ; re¬ counts, in a pleafant and lively manner, the anecdotes he has heaid ; -and relates his own adventures, fo as to render them amufing. There is therefore no fear of oppofition from Sir Arthur. He
Не has another advantage with the fa¬ mily. M· uncle, Lord Fitz-Allcn, is at prefent in Paris, on his return from Swit¬ zerland, and Clifton has been introduced to him by his kinfman, Lord Evelyn, who is making a ihort excurfion to the fouth of France. The near relationfliip of your brother to this noble lord has given him great confequence with my uncle, vvho has once more condefcended to reftore me to favour. Could I or did it become me entirely to conceal thofe feelings wliich his arrogance infpires, I ihould ftand much higher in his efteem. As it is, he afts more from the love of his rank and family, that is of himfelf, than of me ; and has ac¬ cordingly fignified his mandatory appro¬ bation to Sir Arthur, As nothing however in the way of family advantage is to be expefted from him, he having feveral chil¬ dren and a prodigious quantity of dignity to maintain, his beheft is not altogether fo omnipotent as it might otherwife be. My brother, agreeably to his grand¬ father's will, has taken poffeffion of the ι 5 » Edgemoor
, Edgemoor eftate, which is eight hundred a year. This I imagine will oblige Sir Arthur, in defpite of his predilection, to retrench fomc of his improving expences. He mentioned the circumftance to me, and I thought that a good opportunity once more to attack his ruling paffion. Our converfation foon became animated. I boldly defcanted en the ufe and abufe of riches, on the claims of honeft diftrefs, and on the turpitude of feeking felf-grati- fications, and neglecting to promote the great ends for which men ought to live, the fpreading of truth, the rewarding of genius, and the propagation of mind. But it was to little purpofe. Sir Aithur did not underftand me ; and I was more angi y at myfelf than at him, as well I might bc, for wanting the power to ren¬ der myfelf intelligible. He as ufual was amazed to hear he had not a right to do what he pleafed with his own, and to be told it was not his ovvn. Nor was he fparing in pettiffi reproof to the felf-fuffi¬ cient young lady, who ihought proper to difpute
difpute the propriety and wifdom of his projects. The queftion that continually occurs to me is, when fliall thofe beings who juftly claim fuperiority of underftanding, .and thence a right to direct the world, find fome fimple and eafy mode df convincing the miftaken, and by conviftion of eradi¬ cating error ? Adieu. Bleffings be with you. I fliall moft probably write by the next poft, for I wifli you to be as perfectly acquainted as poflible with every thing that pafles, that 1 may profit by the advice· of a friend fo dear, fo frue, and fo difcerning. A. w. ST. IVES. P. S. Your laft letter is this moment come to hand, and has ftrongly revived trains of ideas that of late have repeatedly paffed through my own mind. It con¬ firms me in the refolution of being very fincere with your brother. But, unlets my fmcerity fliould fo far offend him, as to ι б induce
induce him voluntarily to recede, it like- wife'^lhews me İt is my duty to perfift. At leaft fuch is the refult of all the arguments I hold with myfdf, whenever the fubjecl prefents itfelf to' me, either through the medium ofmy own imagination, or pic¬ tured by others. . I will write foon. I approve the reafoning in .your poftfcript, will fliew it to Frank, and will aik him to let me and Clifton fee the letters,, who fliall likewife know it is by your defire.
LETTER
jbETTER L.
ŞIR ARTH VR ST. IVES то ABIMELECH HENLEY.
Path, Hotel de iVufaefuê. 1 FIA VE received yours of the 30th uit.* honeft Aby, and it gave me great pleafure to hear you had made fo much difpatch. AVenbourne-Hill is the garden of Eden. The more I fee, the more I am convinced. AVhat is there here to be compared to my temples, and my groves, and my glades? Flere a mount and a fhrubbery! There a dell concealed by « ' brambles !
brambles! On your right a ftatue! On your left an obelili;, and a fun-dial ! The obeliik is fi«xed, yet the dial· ihews that time is ever flying. Did you everthink of that before, Aby ? Apropos of this dial : Sir Alexander I remember faid it was ufelefs half the day; becaufe it was (haded from the fun to the weft and the north, by the old grove. His advice was that the grove fliould be grub¬ bed up; butit certainly would be much eafier to remove the fun-dial, obeliik, and all. I am fo delighted with the recollection of thefe things, Abimelech, that I had half forgotten the reafon of my writing to you. The fubject is difagreeable enough; and I fliould not be forry if I were never to remember it more. I very much' fear we muft ftop our im-, provements. My fon has claimed and en¬ tered upon the Edgemoor eftate. I thought myfelf fure that he would remain fatisfied as he was till my death. What could be more reafonable r I argued with him to the
the very utmoft, but to no purpofe. He is in great hafte to fet up for himfelf; and I don't know whether he would not eject me out of AVenbourne-Hill, if he had the power. In vain did I tell him that his pay in the guards, added to the three hundred a-year vvhich I had before allowed him, was more than any young man knew how properly to fpend. He has only himfelf to think of, and he very pofitively declares he never means to have a family, for he will never marry. I believe he İs quite- ferious in his declaration: and if fo, what does he want with an eftate of eight hun¬ dred a-year ? He ought to confider that ; and to remember that a provifion muft be madefor his fifter. But no; he confiderà only himfelf. Indeed I hear hut an indifferent account of him : he is a fafliionable gentleman, and would rather fquander his money at the gaming-table, than fuffer it to remain in the family. He has been a wild youth. I have fometimes wondered where lie got all the money which I am told he has fpent.
fpent. Not from me I am fure. And though I have often heard of his deep play, I do not remember to have' ever heard ofhis winning. But he follows his own courfe. My arguments, that. ï had the family dignity to fupport, his fifter to marry, and mortgages to pay off, vvere all İn vain. «He was equally deaf when I pleaded the improvements that I was making: all for his fake. For you know, Aby, he is to have them when I am gone : and go I muft, fome time or another. He had e\yn the confidence to tell me that, if AA r enbourne-Hill were his, he would quickly undo every thing that I have been doing. Is not this a fad thing, Aby? For vvhat have I been labouring? Have not we both fpent our lives in contriving ? Flow many charming thoughts have we had ! AVhat pleafure have we taken in planting and pulling up, digging and fcattering, water¬ ing and draining, turfing and gravelling ! Talking
Talking of water, Aby, I. cannot for-" bear mentioning a moft delightfully ro¬ mantic lake, vvhich I have met with in the park of the'Marquis de Villebrun. It is the only thing, in the laying out of grounds, that I have fecn to pleafe me in all France. One part of it a fine level : fuch a fweep! At the other extremity nothing but rocks- and precipices. Your fon Frank threw himfelf headlong down one of them,-into the water, to fave a gentleman's life, AVere you but to fee it, you would be aftoniflied. They have cal¬ led it the Engiifliman's leap. I vvould not do fuch a thing for a million of money. I ihould be dead enough ifl did. * · . But Frank is a bold young man, 'and I affure you, Aby, highly efteemed by ray daughter; ay and by myfelf too, and by every body: very highly indeed.' He was the whole talk for I know not how many days. But about this money, Aby. I fliall foon want a good round fum,'if I am not miftaken. I may venture, Aby, tò give yoû
you a hint that I expect very foon, indeed I don't know how foon, a propofal fliould he made to me for my daughter : and if it be, I am fo pleafed with the party, who let me tell you is a fine fpirited young fel¬ low, that I affure you I fliall not think of rcfufing my confent; efpecially as he is fo much in the good graces of my daughter. In this cafe, I cannot do lefs than pay twenty thoufand pounds down. I am afraid, honeft Aby, we muft re¬ nounce the wilderneis ! But when you know the party, I think you wiU allow I tould not act otherwife. Indeed, I And, however we may pleafe ourfelves, we can never fatisfy our chil¬ dren. Here too has Anna been lecturing me, about money thrown away, as ihe is pleafed to conceive ; and has faid a gFeat deal indeed, againft what I thought could not have been found fault with. ..... * But fo itis! Friends, relations, children, aliare wiferthan ourfelves !\Ali are ready enough to difcover or to fuppofe blemiihes ! Would you think it poffible for any body to
to be acquainted with AVenbourne-Hill and do any thing but admire ? My hope, nay my determination was to have made it the paradife of England, and to have drawn «trancers far and near to come and be delighted with its beauties. But thcfc rubs and croffes put one out of heart with the moft excellent thoughts and contri¬ vances. Let me. know what you think can be done in thefe money matters, if things fliould be as I expeft. You are perfectly acquainted with the ftate of my affairs. I fee no way but that of mortgaging more deeply. It İş exceedingly vexatious to think of ftopping our proceedings, Aby, But what can be done ? Flowever, as I do not in¬ tend to ftay much longer here, we can talk more to the purpofe on thefe matters when we meet in England. Perhaps it would be better to begin by difcharging the workmen gradually; which you will find proper opportunities to do, Aby. And if you were, by way of talk in
in the neighbourhood, to fay that you thought nothing more could be done to Wenbourne-Hill, and that you had reafon to believe that was my opinion likewife, fuch "a report might tie the tongues of ca¬ villers : ' for I vvould not have it thought we ftop for want of money. You may write to me here, in anfwer to this ; for we fliall not leave Paris before your letter will come to hand. And fo 9 good Abimelech, farewell. A. ST. IVES. P. S, I will not tell yoa the name of the party fram whom I expeft thepropofal, honeft Aby; becaufe if he fliould be fhy of fpeaking, as youngfters fometimes are, it might come to nothings but I may hint to you., that you are well acquainted with his family; and I dare fay you vvill not be forry for the match, it being fo agreeable ■to my daughter's inclination; though I grant it may not be fo good a one as my ftfter Wenbourne, and others of the family, * have
have been expecting ; becaufe of Anna's beauty and accomplifliments, which I own might well merit a man of higher birth and fortune. But the little huffy has been fo nice, and fqueamifli, that 1 began to fear flie would take up her filly fpendthrift brother's whim, and determine to live fingle : therefore I fliall not balk her, now flie feems in the humour.
LETTER LL
ABIMELECH HENLEY то FRANK HENLEY.
}УенЬоигие-НШ. WllY ay ! To be fure ! This will do ! I fliall be fain to think a fummit of ee, now you can flamgudgin 'em a thifű. I did'nt a think it was innee. Why you will become 'a fon ofmy owu begettin. I write to tellee the good news, and thaťee mightn't a kick down the milk. You have a fifflicated Sir Arthur. I could a told ee afore that you had a fifflicated Miffee. But I was afeard as that you wur a too adaflit. But I tellee it will do ! Father's own lad !
An ear-tickler! Ay, ay! That's the trade ! Sugar the fauce, and it goes down glibly. Liften to me. I a learnt the fecret on't. AVhat was I, I pray you? Pennylefs Aby! AVet and weary ! And what am I now ? A tell mc that. AVhy I'm a worth—But that's neither here nor there, I tellee.*— And what may you be an you pleafe? AVhat fhould I a bin, an I ad had your fettins out ? AVby lde a bin vvhat Ide a pleafed. A dooke, mayhap ; or a lord mayor of Lunnun ? — No — A' fekittary prime minifter? —No—A member of par¬ liament ? — No—Ide a bin treafurer !*— Treafurer of the three kinkdums. Ide a handled the kole !—Pve a feathered my neft as it is; and what'would I a done then thinkee ? Stick clofe to Sir Arthur. Mind your hits, and you have him affafe' enough.— Didn't I always tellee you muft catch 'д by the ear ? A cunnin curr always catches a pig by the ear. Ho' expects a propofal for Miffee ; »he dow.s not a know how foon. And who does he expect to propofe?
Guefs, Nicodemus, if you can. Do you mind me ? He flian't refufe his confent. Mark you me that ! They are his ov/n words. Twenty thoufand pounds down 1' His own words again. AVhat do you fay to me now ? It's all your 4 own ! I mean it's all our own—Do you mind me ? For who have you to thank for it ? I tellee it is but nik and have—And how do I know that?------ AVhat's that to you, Dolt ?—No, no—You are a no dolt now—You are a good lad. - , I tellee I'm in the fecret ! So do you flamdazzle Miffee. . I a heard of your jumpins and fwimmins : and fo that you do but fwirn to the main 'chance, why ay ! That's a fum'mit ! I a bin to CJifton-FIall. For why ? I begind to fmell a rat ! And there I talked with t'other Miffee. I a palavered her over. I a ferretted and a feagued and a worked and a wormed İt all out of ihe. Your name is up ! You may go to bed ! Do you mind me ? You may go to bed to twenty thoufand pounds ! It is as good as all your own. I am
I ara a to find the kole : that is, I firft havin and hoidin the whèrewithalls, and the whys, and the wherefores. And fo do you fee me, I expect to have the han¬ diin ont —But that's a nether here nor .there. Sir Arthur as good as faid it to me—So don't a ftand like a Gabriel Gai¬ ly maufry all a mort, íhilly fli ally, I would ifl duril— A dip in 'the ikimmin diffi and a'lick ofthe fingur—That's a not the way with a maiden—AVhat J A don't I know ? ■—Make up to Miffee, and fay to hei, Miffee ! Flere am I ! My name is Frank Henley ! My father's name is Abimelech Plenley !> A's a cunnin warm old codger— A-tell her that—And fays you, here Miffee Tays you am I, at your onnurable Lady- ffiip's reyerend farvice. My father has a got the rhino—A doiA forget to tell her that—fmug and fnug and all go fnacks--- Do you 'raind mei And fo, fays you, I haye f a p^radventered umbelly to fpeak my foolifh' thoftá, fays you. ι That is take me rightly, youi Ladyffiip, iays you; ι under your Ladyfliip's puiteftion and cui rection, * l vol. ιι. к, ai.d
and every think of that there umbel and veiy fubmiffive obedient kind, fays you. And fo fays you, do ee fee me Miffee, I onnurs and glorifies your Ladyfliip ; and am ready to have and to hold, fays you; go fairly go fouly, be happy be lucky, any day o'the week, fays you ; I and my fathei, honeft Aby, fays you. Fie can raife the wiiid, fays you ! He can find the whèrewithalls to pay for lawyer's parch¬ ment, fays you------But mind, that's a hether here nor there—So a here Miffee ftands I, fays you : I and my honeft old fatheť-^-A's.got the marygolds, fays you i The gilly flowers, the yellow boys, fays you! Golore !—But that's a nether'here nor there. So do you tell her all a that I bid ee, and a mind 'your pees and cues. AVho knows but Wenbourne-Hill itfelf may be one day all our own ? I fay who knows ? There be old fools and young fools-—I tellee that—Old planners, and improveis, and bite bubbles; and young fquitter fquanders, gamblers,, and choufe chits·^- «JMark
Mark you me that—And there be wax and parchment too—Ay and poft obits* ; and befides all doofoors and perkiffits. A what is money good for but to make mo¬ ney ? A tell me that. And íò in the name and the lovin kind¬ nefs of the meicifool fufferins of almighty goodnefs, and peace and glory and hea¬ venly joys, no more at prefent, ABIMELECH HENLEY.
Imu J -«,, » , L .h
LETTER LIL
ί.,;β<=— ■ :/ ABIMELECH, HENLEY : ' ·. TO .· .SIR- ARTHUR; ST.: IVESi
Wenbourne-Hill. - Moil onnurable Sir, my ever onnurd Mafter," - ■ «İÇ OR certainly your noble onnur knows heft. ',- •And ; /thof I háve päfadvehtérd, now and tan,.umbelly ^tb fpeak. my foolifh.. thofts, and haply may again a paradvehter, vvhen your mòft exceptionable onnur ffiall glo¬ rify me with a hearing, in fitčh r and fitch like cramp' cafes andqueerums as this here ; yet tä.keme ri tely, your, noble onnür, it is always and evermore with, e Very,, think': of ""' '"' л; - " ' :; ·- : -""'"'-' : ''■■■-■■■■ : ' :"·■■' -■-^■■ ; '-^thatL
dient kind. My younk Lady Miffee is as elegunt a my Lady younk Miffee as any iathe three kink's kinkdums. A who can gain fay it? She is the flour of the flock, I muft a fay that. The whole country fays it? For why, as aforefaid, a who can ¿ain fay it ? A teU me that ! Always a favin and ex- ceptin your noble oDnur, as in rite and duty boundin. AVhat, your moft gracious onnur, a hannot I had the glory and the magnififunce to dangle her in my arms, before fhe was a three months old ? A hannot I a known her from the hour of her birth ? Nay, as a I may fny, afore her bleffed peepers-a, twinkled the gloiy everlaftin of infinit mercifçol commifen> tion and fun-fhine ? A didn't I bob hçr here, and bob her there; a up and a down, aback and afore, and about, with a fweet giacious a krow and a kifs for honeft poor Aby, as your onnur and your onnurable Madam, my Lady, ever giacious to me a poor finner ufed then to call me? к S - Not
Not but thofe times are a pafst. Biitjv a favin and exceptin your noble onnur, - that's a nether here nor there. I may hold up my head as well,as another. A vvhy not ? AVhen fo be as a man has no mo- -ney,.why then, a favift and exceptin your onnur's 'reverence, a's but a poor dog. But when fo be as a man as a got the rhino, why then a may begin to hold up his head. Д why not? Always a favin r.nd exceptin your noble onnur, as afore·* faid'. Your noble onnur knows that I'm n be apt to let my tongue mag a little, when my wits be fet a gaddin; and whereupon the cafe is as witch your noble onnur'was pleafed to fifBicate me upon, in your laft rite onnurable and mercifool letter. For why? A man's fon as I may fay is him¬ felf; and twenty thoufand pounds, thof İt be not a penny too much, is fomethink. Fpr witch the bleffin and glory of good¬ nefs and praife be with the donors. Ne¬ verthelefs that there will likewife be the whèrewithalls, mayhap, notwithftandin, wffien
vvhen my head conies to be laid low. Thof if fo be I cannot but fay that a man vvould rather a not think of that there, if a could help it. A favin and exceptin that the bleffin and glory and power and praife of the faints, and the mai t\ rs, and the profits, and the cherubims and icia- fims, and the amen allelujahs, might a be fummut to a dyin foulj when a has had, god be mercifool unto us, time for repent¬ ance, and the waihhi away of the fins of this wickednefs world, by good deeds, and charity, and mercy, and lovin kindnefs unto all men; when the poor miferabie fmner, with groans, and tears, and eternal terrifyins ofthe flamin prince Lucifer Bel¬ zebub of darknefs eveilaftin is at laft ob¬ liged to take leave, of the foul from the body. Ah, a well a day! Man is a le- probation race ! A's a given over to «fin, and to lhame, and to backilidinç, and to the Hough of defpond, and to the valley of the'ffiaddow of death, and if a has not, miferabie linner, a time to repent, of a к 4 - . witch
witch be evermore granted unto us all, world without end. Amen! Amen! Ah, dear a me, vvhat have I bin talkin to your moft giacious onnur? I was a meant to tell your' noble onnur that the twenty thoufand pounds mayhap might a be forth cummin; on proper occafions, and certificates, and fecurities, and doo- foors, and perkiflits ; all of the witch, as -my ever onnurd mafter aforetime know s, there is'no a doin a bufinefs without. For vvhy ?—Money is money, and land is land; and there be troubles, and takins, and Feekins, and enquirins, and profit and lofs, and ifs and mayhaps, and all a that there ; 1 of the witch there is no a doing without. But neverthelefs I dares to fay, likewife and notwithftandra as aforefaid?, that the money may be a forth cummin*. . Nay and if fo be the witch that I might a paradventer to advife, but that to be fure I ihould not like to have it a thoft that I ffiould perk and put in my oar, all agog to my betters, and moreover one of his ma¬ jefty's baronets, otherwife I fliould fay ne¬ verthelefs
verthelefs as aforefaid that ihe younk lady is the flour of the flock; and if fo'be as I had the onnurable grace and bleffin to be her father, I would give her and a make over to her, now and evermore hereafter, all a that the law would a let me. And a let 'em tell me, your noble onnur, who defar ves it better. AVhat! Is n't ffie, asî may fay, the firmament of the power-and glory of praife? What is ivory and ala- bJafter a parallel to her ? Let 'em a tell me that ! If I wus the onnurable fatiier of fitch ever mercifool affabibility, would a not I be fain to give her gems and rubies, and carbuncles, if I had 'em? AVho fliould gain fay me ? A favin and exceptin your ever exceptionable and noble onnur. " I would n't a be meant to be thoft to put in a word for mefelf, by no manner of ac¬ count ; no, no ; far be it from me; but in other partikillers, if fo be that it wus me mefelf, 1 íhould n't a grutch her kinkdums. And aft to thwartin and knatterin and croffin the kindly fweet virginal foui, eveî bleffed as flie is, in love, for vyhat truly ? ' к 5 Your
Your noble onnur has too much bowels of fatherly miferation. No, no '—Your noble onnur, has a clencht it ; take her now flie is in the humour. Whereby maidens be wayward and fain and froward and full of ik^ttiih tricks, when they be happen to be croffed in love. Take her in the humoui your wife and alwife noble onnur. Whereof your onnur was a menfhinnin a ftagnation to be put in the fpoke of the wheel of improvements. Wheieof if I might a paradventer to put in my oar, I fliould fay why fhat fliould be as it might a be happen. AVhen if as I fliould ever live to fee the gloiious day of this mar¬ riage match rejoice the heart of Wen- bourne-FIill, why then I fliould know how to fpeak my poor thofts. For vvhy ? All would then be clear and above board; and we fliould all a know who and who was together. That would be fummut ! We, might then a be happen to raife the wind , and the whcrewithalls might a bc ibrth cummin. . And
And fo, as matters and thinks is likely to turn out, to be fure I muft fay that your onnur has a hit the nail on the head. Whereof as your onnur has a i.ihered your commands, I fliall begin to take care of the kole, and fend them there rapfcallions a packin. And as to the flickers and fleers of the neighbours« your onnurable onnur, a leave me to humdudgin they. I'll a fend their wits a wool-gatherin. For why? Your onnurable onnur has always a had my lo¬ vin kindnefs of bleffins of praife, as in duty boundin. For certainly I ihould be fain to praife the bridge that a carries me fafe over. And now that your onnur is a thinkin of a more of lovin kindnefb and mercies, to me and mine, why a what ihould I fay now ? Why I 'fliould fay and ihould glorify, to all the world, that your onnur is my ever onnured and rite moft mercifool bountifool faithfool and difre- fpeftfool kind mafter ; and that I be your ever rite and moft trufty true honeft Aby ŕ and every think of that there umbel and к t> yery
very fubmiflive obedient kind, as in duty boundin. But I a bin a thinkin, your ever gracious onnur, that a behap the kintlm may ftand alooft, a hang * * * * * *, and a be a- daflit. And a what is to be done then? AVhy then, whereupon if that your ever gracious onnur would but be fo all merci¬ fool in goodnefs as to fay the word,,, why we fliould be upon fure ground, and all - our quips and quandaries and afterclaps would a be choufe clikt. I moft umbelly pray and beilege your onnur to be fo mer¬ cifool as to think o' that there ! Do ee, your ever gracious onnur ì I pray your on- nui, doo ее ! Then we ffiould a be all found and fafe ovei, 'and it would all a be holiday at AVenbourne-Hill ' A that would be a 1 glorified day 1 The lawjus mighty, ay ! Xt would ! Witch is all in praife and onnur of the glory and peace to come, tnankfgïvin and gladnefs ; umbelly beggin leave to fuper fcribe me felf, ABIMELECH HENLEY.
~X..Ainsi,dx\',t.~,
I needn't a fay nothink of a concernili of a dockin of the entail, to your onnur. For why ? As your onnur knows, nothink can be done, in the way of the kole and whèrewithalls, without a that there But aft for that, a that argufies nothink. For why ? His younk onnur, I Knows, will be a willin enough ; that is, fettin the cafe of a provifo of a doofoor confideration in ready rhino for himfelf. A told me him¬ felf, his younk onnur, that a will have that. A fays a will fell his chance, and a does n't a care how foon ; but a wonnot give it away. AVitch if fo be as it be not to be helpt, why a whái be to be done, your onnur ?
LETXER.
İETTER LIII.
ANNA WENBOURNE ST. IVES TO LOUISA CLIFTON.
Paris, Hotel de VUniverßtS. Y OUR brother has this moment left me. Our convenatiomhas been animated ; and, as ufual;. I fit down to commit what has paffed to paper, while it is freih on my memory. He began with the warmeft expreffions of the force of fyis paffion. I have no rea¬ fon to doubt of their fincerity ; and, if af¬ fection can be productive of the end which I hope, its ftrength с ught to give me plea¬ fure. He would fcarcely fuffer me to fup¬ pofe it poffible there could be any caufe of
of difference between us : let me but name my conditions and they fliould be fulfilled. He would undertake all that I did, all that I could require; and it was with dif¬ ficulty that I could perfuade him of the poffibility of promifing too faft. This in¬ troduced what was moft material in our dialogue. My heart affures me, madam, faid he, that I never gave you the leaft caufe to fufpect the fincerity and ardour of my paf¬ fion: and I ihould hope that the fears, which I have fometimes thought you too readily entertained, are now diffipated. My fears are chiefly for, or rather of, myfelf. I doubt whether any perfon has fo high an opinion of the powers and energy of уоиг ч mind as I have : but I think thofe powers ill direcied, and in danger of being loft. I own, madam, I have been fometimes grieved, nay piqued, to perceive that you do not always think quite fo well of me as I could wiih. You
- You wrong me. You jourielf do cot think fo hıçhlv of vourfelf as I åo. Yet you fuppofe ше to be in danger? Of being miöed. Some of my opinions and principies», or fome of yours, are erro¬ neous, for they differ; I cannot at thi*? moment but perceive Ы\\~ liable I am to be mifunderitocd. í cannot b ľ icfenlîbîe of the awkwardnefs of the åmanon in which I now place myfelf« My age, my fex, the cuftoms of th? world,, a thoufand circumftances tonb ibute to caft an air of ridicule upon what ought to be very feri¬ ous. But I muft perfift. Do you endea¬ vour to forget thefe circumftances ; and confider only the words, not me girl by whom they are fpoken« It is not you, madam, buc I who oughi to dread appearing ridiculous. But for your fake------Let- me but obtain your Êivour and make me as ridiculous· as you pleafe. I told you fo ľ— Should the lordly let¬ tered man fubmit to have his principles queftioned.
ouetHoned, bv an untutored woman : Be fincere : your mbid revolts at it r 1 feel the jutmefs of your fatire. jNIen are tvTants. . Prejudice is a tviant : there is no other tyranny. Madam ! That is one of my ftrange opinions- it may be true; I ara w'uling to think it is. Such things are indiiterent to me. Let me but have your confent, to fpeak to Sir Arthur, and I have accompiiihed all I wifli. I do not defiie to trouble myfelf with examining opinions, true or iràlfe. I am determined to be cf your opinion, be it what it will. That is, you avow that the graidScation of your delires is the chief puďoíť'ef your life. We "have now found the effential point on which we differ. Is not happinefs, madam, the" univerfal purfuit ì Muft it not, ought it not to be ? Yes. But the grand diftincïion is be¬ tween . general and. individual haapmeíV. The happinefs that centres in the good of tho
the whole may for the prefent find momen¬ tary intei ruption, but never can be long fubverted : while that individual happi¬ nefs, of which almoft the whole world ii in puifuit, is continually blundering, mif- taking its object, lofing its road, and end¬ ing in difappointment. Then, madam, we muft all turn monks, pi each felf-denial, faft, pray, fcourge away our fins, live groaning, and die gneving. ì [I fmiled. Ь is his ufual way, when he thinks I am got a little in the clouds, to draw fome humorous or fatirical pift ure, to bring me down to what he cfteems common-fenfe. Rut, as I am-» convmced that the truth only need to be repeated, and infifted on, whenever there is an op¬ portunity, in order finally to be received, the beft way is always to join in the laugh, which is inoffenfive, unlefs pcttiffinofs give it a fling.] You find youifelf obliged at prefent to confider me as a whimfical girl, with a cerlain flow of fpirits, and much vanity^ defiling
4 defiring to diftinguifli herfelf by fingula¬ rity ? No, madam. Whatever you may think of me, my heart will not endure a thought to your difadvantage. ■ Nay, r«ny, forbear your kind reproaches. Every time you differ with me in fenti¬ ment, you cannot but think fomething to my difadvantage. It is fo with all of us. The very end of ihis prefent explanation is fincerity. We each think well of the other : but do We think fufficiently well ? Is there a certainty that our thoughts are in no danger of changing ? Of aU the* ac*· - tions of private life, there is not one fo folemn ss that of vowing perpetual love : yet the heedlefs levity with which it is daily performed, proves that there is fcarcely one on which lefs ferious reflection is beftowed. Can we be too careful not to deceive ourfelves? 'Ought we not minutely to examine our hopes and «ex¬ pectations ? Ought not you and I, in particular, to be circumfpect ? Our ima¬ ginations are vivid, our feelings ftrong, our
pur views and dcfnvs not bounded by common rules. In fuch minds, paffions, · if not fubdued, become ungovernable, and fatal. ι I am very confeious, madam— Nay, do not fancy I feek to accufe :— my purpofe is very diiferent. My mind is no lefs ardent than yours, though edu¬ cation and habit may have given it a dif¬ ferent turn. It glows with equal zeal to attain its end. Wheie there is much warmth, much enthufiafm, I fufpect there is much danger. AVe had better never meet mare, than meet to be miferabie. For heaven's fake, madam, do not torture 'me witb fo impoffible a-fuppo¬ fition ! ' You expect onö kind pf happinefs, I another. Can they coalefce ? You imagine you have " a right to attend ю your^ appe¬ tites, and purfue your pleafures. Д hope to fee my hufband fotgetting himfelf, or rather placing felf-gratification in the pur¬ fuit of univerfal good, deaf to the calls of paffion, willing to,encounter adverfity, ie- pioofi
proof, nay death, the champion of tiuth, and the determined the unrelenting enemy of error. I think, madam, I dare do all that can be required of me. Iknow your courage is high.' I know too that courage is one of the firft and moft f flential qualities of mind. Yet per¬ haps I might and ought to doubt, nay to aik, whetlier you dare do many things. AVhat is it, madam,.that I dare not do? Dare you receive a blow, or fuffer yourfelf falfely to be called liar, or cow¬ ard, without feeking, revenge, or what honour, calls fatisfaftion ? Dare you think the fervant,that t cleans your ? jhoes is your equal, unlefs not fo wife or good a man : and-your fuperior, tf wifer and better ?— Dare you-fuppofe mind has no fex, , and that woman is not by nature the inferior cf-man ?— , ., ) Mailani — , ,'.. '* t ' ·< Nay, may, no (compliments; .-I will not be røtentøpted^ —Dare -your think, that
and that wifdom and virtue only can claim diftinction ? Dare you make it the bufi¬ nefs of your whole life to overturn thefe prejudices, - and lo promote among man¬ kind that fpirit of univerfal benevolence which fliall render them all equals, all bro¬ thers,' all ftripped of their artificial and falfe wants, all participating the labour requifite to produce the ncceffaries of life, and all combining in one univerfal effort of mind, for the progrefs of knowledge, the deftruč¬ tion of error, and the fpreading of eternal truth ? There is fuch energy, madam, in all you fay, that¡ while I liften to you, I dare do any thing, dare promife any thing. ' ' Nay, but the daring of which I fpeak, muft be the energy of your own mind¡ not or mine. * ' Do not diftrefs yourfelf and me with doubts, madam. I haye heard you your¬ felf fay that truth ultimately muft prevail. I may differ with you in fome points ; but I am willing to hear, willing, to difcufs ; . and
and, if truth be on your fide, there can be no danger. The only danger is in the feeble or falfe colouring which the defenders of truth may give İt, and not in truth itfelf. * 1 am too vvell convinced of your ( power to feel ypur doubts. You oblige me to fee with your eyes, hear with your cars, be¬ lieve what you-believe, and reject what you think incredible. I am and muft be whatever you pleafe to make me. You Jiave but to prefcribe your own condi¬ tions. Prefcribe I muft not. · If I can perfuade/ if í can .win upon your mind— t , . If— ! You won my whole foul the very firft moment I i faw you ! Not a word or action of mine but what has proclaimed the burning impatience of my paffion ! True: the burning impatience—Your eagernefs to affent wiH ; not fuffer you to examine. Your opinions and principles are tíiofe which the world moft highly ap¬ proves, and. applauds: mineare what it daily calls extravagant, impracticable, and abfurd.
abfurd. It would be weak in me to ex·» peet jou íhould implicitly receive remote truths, fo contradictory to this general practicei till you have firft deeply confi¬ dered them. Ί aik no fuch miracle, But if I can but turn your mind to fuch con/i- derations, if I can "but convince youtiow ineftimable they^are, even to yourfelf »as well as to-the world at large, I ihall then have'effected'my-jpurpofe. . '-■'· Of that, madam, be Ture —You -fliall fee !—Upon imy honour, you íhall !— J^. will order a fur-cap, a long gown, a white wand,· and a pair of fandals this ivery day I No Grecian-ever looked more grave than I will! f Nay," if you (defire it,* razor fhall never tovicVmy 'chin more 5 -- ' . , »AVell, »well > í e-tfuip yourfelf fpeedi-y, and I will provide -»you - with a wooden diíhí a kmthorn, anda tutí. . *'■ But then'? having -madtT· your conditions, yíJtt'nóWígŕžŕnt meyoW^önfent ? That isîîobliging'/nie'bncfc'nlore td put Örí 'niy feriöüîifface— f Thè 'âanget in -which I«to ЛЙеТ -yf Îaty'you * hangs heavity' -Шгау
mind; that and the warm paffions by which it'was occafioned. And my excefs of ardour, to demon- ftrate iny love, you regard as a proof of my having none. 1 How paffion overihoots itfelf ! Youï conclufion is as precipitate as was your proof. I cannot be cool, madam, on this fub¬ ject. I wonder to fee you fo ! Did aflec¬ tion throb and burn in your bofom, as it does in mine, I am perfuaded it would bc otherwife. AVe are neither of us fo entirely fatisfied witli each Other as we ought to be, to in¬ duce either me to confent or you to apply to Sir Arthur. - t x For heaven's fake, madam·— Hear me patiently, for a moment.—■ Previous to this convei fation, I was "con·- vinced of the folly and danger of excef¬ five hafte. Should you imagine I have any felf-complaccncy or caprice to'gratify, by delay, you vvill do me great injuftice : I folemnly proteft I have none. My own vol. ii. h "inteieft,
interefte had I no better motive, would make me avoid fuch conduct. The in- con fiften cies and vain antics of the girl, which are juftly enough ftigmatized by the epithets flirting and coquetry, are repaid tenfold upon the wife./ I would deal openly, honeftly, and generoufly ; but not raihly. I have every predilection in your favour which you could wifli ; fuch doubts excepted as I have declared. But I muft not give either you or the woild caufe to accufe me of levity. My confent to fpeak to Sir Arthur would be generally under¬ ftood as a pledge to proceed; not it is true by me, ifl faw juft caufe to retract : but, thoughlearneftly defire to reform, I almoft as earneftly wiffi not unneceffaiily to offend the prejudices of mankind. Nay let me beg, let me conjure you— [He took both my hands with greal ardour.] And let me beg too, let me conjure you, not to think» meanly or unkindly of me, when I tell you that I muft infift on a fhort delay. I wdll kneel ! I will do any thing— ! Do
Do"nothing which your heart'does not approve; iť naver can be the way to for¬ ward any worthy fuit. For ,my part, I muft tell you, which you may reckon among my faults, that when. I h «ive once ' confidered a fubject, I 'am & very pofitive and determined girl. This maybe thought obftinacy ; but fuch I am,, and fuch there¬ fore you ought 'to fee me. ' And when,;madam, may í now prefume to hope ? ! Do not fpeak as if you were difpleafed. t Indeed it is far from my intention to of- ' fend. ' ч You .are too well acquainted, madam, with your own power'of pleafing, to fear giving oflence. Far the contrary, for I fear it at this moment. You are kind and killing both in a breath.—Be doubly kind, .and fuftèr ше immediately to fpeak to Sir Arthur. * I told you I am fixed, and·I affure you it is true. „ AVhen- then may I hope ? ĺ 2 » Г could
I could have wiffied to have feen my friend, your fifter, fiift: but perhaps Sir Aithur may make fome ftay in London, and I flrould be forry to delay a moment longer than feems abfolutely neceffary.— Let us both confider vvhat has paffed this morning, and provided no new accident ffiould intervene— * _ Another leap from a rock ? Provided oui* approbation and efteem for each other fliould continue, and in¬ creafe, I will. aik for no further delay, after we come to London. AVell, well. It is the poor lover's duty to thank his miftrefs for the greatnefs of' her condefcenfion, even when he thinks flie ufes him unkindly. I was going to reply, but my enterprif- ing gentleman — [Indeed, Louifa, your brother is a bold youth J—fnatched an un¬ expected embiace, with raore eagernefs Than fear, and then fell on one knee, making fuch a piteous face for forgivenefs, fo whimfical, and indeed I may fay witty, that it was impoffible to be ferious.—. Hnwť-ver
However I hurried away, and thus the conference ended. And now, after reviewing what has paffed, tell me, Louifa, ought I to recede ? Are not my hopes well founded ? Muft not the reiteration of truth make its due impreffion, upon a mind like Clifton's ? Can it fail ? Is he not the man who, for all the reafons formerly given, truly merits preference ? I muft not forget to tell you that Frank- readily complied with your requeft, and Clifton has feen the letters. He feems oppreffed, as it were, with a fenfe of obli¬ gation to Fiank ; which the latter endea¬ vours to convince him is wrong. Recipro¬ cal duties, he fays, always muft exift among mankind ; but as for obligations, further than thofe, there are none. A grateful man is either a weak or a pioud man, and ingratitude cannot exift ; unlefs by ingratitude injuftice be meant. Frank's opinions appear to Chfton to be equally novel with mine.; and muft be well L 3 underftood, 'r- J. Λ
undei ftood, to efcape being treated with moeken*. It is infinitely pleafing to me to perceive the foititude with which Frank ïefifts in¬ clination. He is almoft as chearful, and quite as communicative, and defirous of making all around him happy, as ever.— His conftanc), however, is not to be ilia- ken, in one particular. I could -wifli ii were ! It- pains me to recollect that he will 'perßß, to (lie end of timet in thinUng me his, by right ! I cannot proceed I A. W. ST. IVES,
LETTER
τ ν τ Τ Ε R LIV.
COKE CLIFTON TO GUV FAIRFAX.
Pant, Hotel de tUttivtrß i. ' LAUGH at me if you will, Fairfax.— Hoot ! Hifs me off the ftage I am no longer worthy of the confrai4T.it. of ho¬ neft, bold, free and fuccefsf il fel ^vs. I am dwindling into a whining, iubmiffive, crouching, very humble, yes it you pleafe, no thankyou Madam, dangler! I have been to fchool ' Have had my taik fet me ι Muft learn my leffon by rote, or there is a rod in pickle for me ■ Yes' I ■ That iden- L 4 tical
«ANNA .* tical Clifton; that bold,-gay, fpirited fel¬ low, who has fo often vaunted of and been admired for his daring! You may meet пае with my fatchel at my back ; not, with a fhining, but a whindliñg. lackadai- fy, - green-ficknefs face ; blubbering a month's forrow,. after havingbeen flogged Ъ} my mafter, beaten by my chum, and dropped my plum cake in the kennel. Tis very true, and I cut a damned ridi¬ culous figure ! *But ľll remember it. The time will come, or fay my name is not Clifton. Y'et what am, I to do : I am it for it, flounder how I» will. Yes, yes! She has hooked me Ì She dangles rae aţ the end of her line, up the ftream and down the ftream, fair water and foul, at her good pleafure ! So be it. But I wilt not forget» Then fhe has fuch a way of affronting, that curie me if ihe. does not look as if fhe were doing me a favour : nay, and, while fhe is prefent, î myfeif ačluaHy think fhe is ; and, if vexation did not come to my -relie£ I believe I fhould fo continue to think.
thmk. She İs die moft extraordinary of all heaven's creatures : and, in defpite of my railing, 1 cannot help declaring a moft heavenly creature ihe is i Everv* body de¬ clares the fame. I wiíh you could but fee her; for.a fingle moment, Fairfax; and, having gazed, could you but liiteri I ------ Her very foul is mufic. Form, features, voice, all are harmony. Then were you to hear her fing, and play —«— But why the devii does fhe treat me thus ? It is fomething to which I am un¬ accuftomed, and it does not fit eafily upon me. Ifl tamely fubmit to it may I------! I lie, in my teeth ! Submit I muft, bounce how 1 will. I have no remedy— She gives me the preference, tis true. But what fort of a preference г —AVhy a cold, «fcrutinizing, very confiderative, all wifdom and no paffion preference. I do not think there Ls, upon the face of the whole earth, fo nauteous a thing as an over dofe of wifdom i mixed up, accord¬ ing to the modern practice, with a quan¬ tum fufficit of virtue, and a farce double handful
handful of the good of the whole. Yet this is the very dofe flie prefcribes for me ■ Ay, and I muft be f obliged to fwallow it too, let me make what wry'faces I pleafe, or my very prudent lady is not fo deeply in love but fhe-can - recede ! And ffiall I not note down this in my tablets ?— I was fufficiently piqued at the firft de¬ lay. AVhy delay, when I offer? AVould you have thought, Fairfax, I fhould have been fo very ready with a tender of this my pleafant perfon, and my dear freedom ? And could you moreover have thonght it would have been fo haughtily rejefted ?-— No—Curfe it ! Lét me do her juftice, too. It is not haughtily. She puts as many fmiles, and as much fweetnefs, and plau- fibility, into her icfufal as heart could de¬ fire. But refufal it is, neverthelefs. I muft be further juft to her : I muft own that I have afted like a lunatic—I am mad at the recollection !— I told you of the young fellow—Frank Henley— Whom I talked of chaftifing. Ciufe on my petulance ! Fie has doubly chaftifed
chaftifed me fince ! He has had his full re¬ venge ! And in fuch a generous, noble manner—I am afliamed of myfelf—Fie has faved my life, and damn me if I do not feel as if I could never forgive him. Theie was an end of me and my paffions. AVhat bufinefs had he to interfere ?—He did it too in fuch an extraordinary ñyle ! He ap¬ pears to have rHked more, laboui ed more, perfoimed more for me than man almoft ever did for his deareft and fworn friend/ Mine was jan act of duch ridiculous phrenfy, that I am half afliamed to tell what it was. I jumped headlong down a declivity, becaufe I knew I was a good fwimmer, into a lake; but, like a block¬ head, neve:· perceived that I fliould get ftunned by the (helving of the rock, and confequently drowned. And for what, truly? AVhy to prove to a vapouring, crack- brained French Count, that he was a coward; becaufe perhaps he had not learned to fwim ' AVhen I look back I have abfolutely no patience with myfelf I— And then this generous Frank Henley ! After
—After a ftill more feemingly defperate leap than mine, and bringing me out of the water, dead as a door nail, two houis did he inceffantly labour to reftoie me to life ' I, who a few hours befoie had ftruck him ! And here do I live to relate all this ■ I think I could have forgiven him any thing fooner than this tnumph over me. Yet he claims and foices my admiration . I muft own he is a dauntlefs fellow—Yes, he has a heart—— ! Damn him ! I could kifs him one minute and kill him the next ! He has been the hero of the women ever fince. But they are fafe enough, for him. He has principles ! He is a man of virtue, .forfooth! He is not the naughty cat that fteals the cream · Let him be vir¬ tuous. Let him lave in his own imaginary .waters of purity ; but do not let him offend «others, every moment, by jumping out and calling—" Here ! Look at me ! How white and fpotlefs I am !" AsT tell you, the women are bewitched »to him ; are all in love with him ! My fif¬ ter, Louifa, does not fcruple to tell him fo, in
in her letter · But flie is one of thefe high- flyeis. Nor can I foi the foul of me per¬ fuade myfelf that, family pride excepted, flie—ay, flie herfelf, my flie, would not prefer him to me. But thefe gentry are all fo intolerably prudent that, talk to them of parlions, and they anfwer they muft not have any. Oh, no ! They are above fuch mundane weaknefs ■ As for him, he fits in as much ftern ftate as the Old Red Lion of Bientford. Yes, he is my Lord Chief Juftice Nevergrin I He cannot qualify, he ! He is prime tinker to Madam Virtue, and carries no foften¬ ing epithets in his budget. Folly is folly,* and vice vice in his Good Friday .vocabu¬ lary ------Titles too aie gilt gingerbread, Dutch dolls,- punch's puppet-fhow. A duke or a fcavenger with himlare exactly the fame—Saving and excepting the afore¬ faid exceptions, of wifdom, virtue, and the good of the whole ! Did ybu never obferve, Fairfax, how thefe fellows of obfeure birth laboui to
pull down rank, ani reduce all to their own ierel : .. Xot but it is curled provoking to be oblïiîed to own that a tide is no í umeten t pafíport for fo much as common fenfe. 1 fincerely think there is not fo fooliih a fel¬ low in the three kingdoms, as the ncble blockhead to whom I have the honour to be related. Lord Evelyn : and, while I have tickled my fancy with the recoUec¬ tion ofmy own high defcent, curfe me îi 1 have not blulhed to acknowledge him, who is the head and reprefentadve of the race, as my kinfman! I own however he has been of fbme fervice to me in the pre¬ fent affair ; for by his .medium I have been tatroduced te the uncle ofmy deity. Lord Fitz-Alien, who has contiderable influence in thefat&Jrhv and the very effence of whole character ts pride. He İs proud of him¬ ieif, proud of his family, proud of his ti¬ tles, proud of his gout, proud of his cat. proud of whatever can be called his t by which appellation in. hi? opinion his very coach-horfes are dignified, I happen to plea tè
pleafe him, not by any qualities of mind or perfon, of which he is tolerably infen¬ fible, but becauie there is a poiubiiity that I may one day be a peer of the realm, if my booby relations wiU but be fo induL- gent as to die iaft enough« Once more to the catechumenical in- fpeetori. of morality, thefe felt-appointed overfeers of the confeience. I do not deny tliat there is iome, nr.y much truth in the doctrines they preach to me. But I hate preaching! I have not time to be wifdom crammed. What con¬ cern is it of mine.- What have I to do with the world, be it wrong or right, wife or fooiifh ? Let it lau^h or err, kifs or curie, as it pleafes ! Like the Iriihman in the finking ihip, "* Tıs nothing to me» 1 am but a paffenger.*' But, notwithftanding thefe airs, I have my leffon fet me. A), and I mult con ir too x muft fay it off by rate j no parrot better ! There is no reflating one's deftiny ; aad to be her flave is preferable to reigning over
.
over worlds ! You have, for you can have, no conception of her and her omni¬ potence'! She is fo unlike every ofher woman on earth ! I wonder while Γ hear her, am attentive, nay, am convinced.' AVhat is moft ftrange, though the divineft creature that ever the hand of Heaven fafliioned, the moment flie begins to fpeak you forget that flie is beautiful ! But ihe fliould not hefitate, when I offer. No—She fliould beware of that ! At leaft to any other woman the world contains, it would have been dangerous ; and I am not fure that even flie is fafe. However, I muft Iearn to parfe my lef¬ fon, for the prefent, and be quiet. Yes, yes ; ihe fliall find me very complaifant. I muft be fo, for live without her I cannot. She muft, flie fhall be mine. It is a prize which I am born to bear away from all competitors. This is what flatters and confole s me. You, Fairfax, think youifelf more in luck. You continue to range at large. You fcoin to wear the chain to-day which you
row—Well I envy you not ----- When you fee her, if you do uot envy me may I be impaled and left to roaft in the fun, a ban¬ quet for tlie crows
Good night.
o"
C. CLtl'TON,
END op VOL. II.
Pruned by J. Crowder,. Wai wick- Square,
you. cannot ffiake off laughingly to-.mor- row —Well I envy you not—«-AVhen you Гее her, if you do not envy me may I be impaled and left to roaft in the fun, a ban- quet for the crows
Goodnight.
С CLIFTON.
END of VOL. II.
Printed by J. Ciowder, Warwick-Square».
