Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Warbeck of wolfstein
WARBECK OF WOLFSTEÏN.
CHAPTER I. íť The ample proposition that Hope makes <ť In all designs begun on earth below, i: Fails in tho promis'd largeness !" Shakspeare. Vallensteïn had now mì leisure for reflection, and plenty of food for it : the strange reverse in the fortunes of his father, a man whom he had never known, nor could conceive, other than great and powerful :—to see him degraded from his high command, equalled with those who so lately trembled at his nod, or ripened in his smile—it was a transition so mar¬ vellous, as his thoughts could hardly consider steadily. On the other hand, vol. п. в
'Z
his conjectures were vainly employed in scrutinizing the probabilities which might have led to the changes even then takin" place in Marchfeldt castle. He had heard the Friar assert that the event which had reached the eve of celebration would never be fulfilled. What might be the cause of this sudden frustration of Wolfsteiifs hopes? Had his dark, malicious, ferocious temper been too strong for his hj-pocrisy, and revealed itself prematurei}' ? Such a notion was not ill founded ; for, thought he, if the very babes of the hamlet shudder in¬ stinctively at the sight of Wolfstein, surely the penetrating eye of Wilhelms sister must detect the fiend where he lurked. Vallensteïn, soon after his arrival m the neighbourhood, had learned the ab¬ sence of Conrade, as it had, of course. been one of his first objects to obtain a conference with that faithful and well- tried domestic: now he had no suspicion of ins return, or he would not have puzzled
:s
himself long on the probable cause of Wolfbttiin *ь d iscom fit u re. The tomb where the ashes of Wilhelm and Blanchi· mingled in their last deep slumber attracted his footsteps; he hung over it ш mournful meditation ; he re¬ membered how Wilhelm had envied the dritti and irhastlv sleepers who strewed thv banks of the Sala the morning after his fin»t battle. "Ay, Wilhelm/' ыш! he, " I could not then comprehend thy feelings; but events change the heart vvonderouslv I Since »hat day I have seen life under d i fie rent aspects !" Hour after hour did he enuiiov in JL » рае ing the dark lung ais!e% or in lean¬ ing on the tomb wliich held all that wab niuľtal oť Lúa iri* nd. The hour ol matins had long sounded, ¡still Father Feli v came uot : w hat could detain him r At length, ini patience and the restless¬ ness of suspense, broke in on milder musings, and Vallenstem began to fear that his vigils were held in vain. He
4
himself had repeatedly trimmed the lamps and the tapers which burned before the several shrines, or dimly illumined, at long intervals, the narrow vaulted clois¬ ters $ but the oil in many of the lamps had already failed, and it was plain that some unforeseen occurrence had detained the Friar far beyond his intentions. Fret¬ ful, and despairing to obtain the end of this weary night's watch, he began pon¬ dering uneasily on the length of time which was likely still to elapse ere the gates would be open, and he could escape firom the murky damps and winking lights which surrounded him into the cool pure air. At that moment the slow approach ofa footstep fell upon his ear$ he con¬ cealed himself behind the tomb near which he was standing, when the private door which led from the castle opened, and the object of his long and eager expectation appeared. His first impulse was to reveal himself immediately; but the overwhelming affliction under which the Friar evidently laboured struck him
5
with dismay, and he paused ; wdiile the good old man, placing his taper on the tomb, fell prostrate before the shrine of the Virgin, and, in grief-broken accents, besought Heaven to restore the dying Louisa to his prayers. Nothing could exceed the horror and distress of Vallen¬ steïn, when, amid the heavy sobs which interrupted the old man's orisons, he distinguished those words. Still was he doomed to wrestle with suspense, for, until the Friar arose from his devotions, the slightest interruption would have been an outrage which lie could not, dared not hazard j and so busied in fervent petition was the heart of the good man, that poor Vallensteïn stood distractedly waiting the moment when his eager so¬ licitude might obtain some relief. At length that moment came ; the Friar arose, his agitation calmed apparently by the devout exercise in which he had been engaged. Vallensteïn quitted his lurking place ; but when Felix beheld the figure
t>
of a man present itself from behind the tomb, "Avaunt Γ he cried, "dark agent of Satan ! What dost thou here ? Shall not this spot be sacred in thine eyes? Avaunt, thou murderer !" " Hear rae father ! Hear me !" cried Casimir. "What must I hear? What wouldst thou do more? Thou hast blighted the sweetest rose that ever bloomed ! Art thou not content ? Avaunt, thou fiend ! Never before have I closed mine ear to man's entreaty:—but thou—thou art a monster !" u Oh, father! Holy Felix, look upon me ! I am no Wolfsteïn ! I abhor that man even as thou dost abhor him !" " Who art thou then ?'' asked the Friar with a bewildered gaze, " and what dost thou here ?" " Alas, father ! when I think who I am, and what brought me hither, did I not tremble to insult this holy place, my heart would relieve itself in curses on
7
that wretch for whom thou mistakest me, and who has so basely usurped my name and darkened my fair prospects. I am indeed Vallensteïn, —the Vallensteïn Wil¬ helm loved,—the brother of his choice!" "And art thou no counterfeit? Art thou verily Casimir? Alas, poor youth! thou shouldst have come sooner ! Oh, what an hour of misery might have been averted !" " And is it yet too late, my father ? Is all hope at an end ? 5> " I know not! I know not ! Wilhelm died j and, I fear nîe, she is dying! I saw him laid within that marble by the side of his pale bride, and I chanted the death-mass over him ; but Louisa,—she is the last !" A deep and hollow groan followed, as though it would have rived his heart to the centre* and the slow tear rolled down his aged cheek. The feelings of Casimir became painfully concentrated: he ap«
8
proached, and laid his hand on the grey sleeve ofthe Friar's gown. "Tell me," said he, in an inward voice, " has he murdered her ? Has he murdered the sister of him who sleeps in that se¬ pulchre ? If he has, the black blood from his heart shall flow for it ! I will hunt him through the world, father !" " Be it far from thee, my son ! The blood which thou sheddest in revenge will cleave to thine hand ! Think where thou art, and who hears thee, my son! No, no,—leave vengeance to Heaven !" "Where is Wolfsteïn, my father?" f< I know not :—-he went hence yester¬ day, and I trust he is far away." c< And how, by what means, my father, was the base counterfeit revealed ?" iC By the return of Conradefrom Vienna. Even should she die, sure it were better tbat her innocent soul should join its kindred in a happier dime, than suffer the long, slow trial of a life united to
9
the destiny of a fiend ! Another day, my son, and these hands were to have tied the fatal knot !" "I knew it, my father! I knew it! JLouisa's guardian angel slumbered not! J was lurking nigh—I was ready! I would have dashed the cup from his lip ; yea, snatched his bride from him at the altar !" " Ay ! It is plain then, that Providence was doubly armed against the hypocrite! But it was better—I would not that the sacred peace of this, place had been so broken !" " Yet, tell me, I beseech you, father, has the detection of this wretch fallen so heavily on the gentle spirit of Louisa? Was she so bound to him, that to break the tie has broken her.heart also ? Ohî tell me, father !" . "Alas! I fear it greatly. Who could have penetrated the false seemings ofthat man? Her person, her liberty is rescued ; but, I fear me,, he has despoiled her of b5
10
her happiness,—nay, even her life hangs upon a thread; and, if she dies, he is her murderer I" A long pause followed ; at length, " I thought," said Vallensteïn, " I flat- tered myself that the Baroness of March¬ feldt had owned a loftier temper ! Yes, I looked not to behold her the helpless, resistless victim of this fiend. This I was unprepared for ! And will she then die, think you, father,—because—because she has escaped the fangs of a monster ? No: I thought othervvise of Louisa of Marchfeldt !" The communication of the Friar was wormwood on his palate, and all the poison of jealousy worked within him. ^FaUíer^' he exclaimed, " methinks we are both dreaming. If the Baroness of Marchfeldt dies, Wolfstein is guiltless ! Those officious hands which tore from her her idol, they are to blame. Let us be jast, my father ! Conrade has murdered her, and has saved me the crime !"
11
" Ay, son," said Felix mildly, "let us be just. While Louisa believed Wolfstein virtuous, and knew him but as Vallen¬ steïn, she gave him all her love; but when he stoodjn all his deformity before her, a pale, detected hypocrite, she ab- horred him ! I would you had seen the glance which fell from her eye upon him ! I would you had witnessed the cool, resolved dignity with which she bade him from her presence,—the majesty with which she waved him forth !—He raved in impotent vvicath, but he trembled, and obeyed her ! * Alas, I was deceived ! I looked but on the calm without, and suspected not the strong internal con¬ flict !" "Oh, what a woman!" cried Vallen¬ steïn, " and she might have been mine ! And now, father, does she rave on Wolf¬ stein ? Does she utter his name ? How is it with, her, father ? Tell me, for I fain луоиН know." " She utters no sound, my son.—Look
12
on that pale, motionless eiïigy: —such, and so cold and unconscious is Louisa P* As he spoke, the private door from the Castle opened, and Barbara appeared· "Alasi" cried Vallensteïn, rushing to meet her, "what do you announce? Is it past ? Speak ! Are there hopes ?" Barbara's senses were too much ab¬ sorbed in the consternation and sorrow into which the sudden malady of her beloved lady had plunged them, to ad¬ mit of more than a faint and temporary surprise at the presence ofa stranger at that hour in the chapel. As for the ques¬ tions with which he assailed her, they were the general language of the castle : no one spoke any other. ** Father," said she, turning from him to Felix, " come to my lady ! She speaks, *-*she named j r ou, and she named the Count :—she seems as one awaking from a sleep, but we know not how we should reply to her} therefore hasten, father P* This intelligence overcame Vallensteïn,
13
whose mind was subdued by the long and fierce conflict it had sustained he burst into tears. "Be comforted, my son!" said the Friar, kindly pressing his hand— "I do not despair—we shall see better times yet*" "But shall we meet again, father? Will you, from time to time, have pity on my anxiety ?" * c Doubt it not, son : return at noon, and I will seek you here." Then, having opened for him the door which afforded egress towards the village, he pronounced his benediction, and quit¬ ted him· Exhausted, weary, and wretched, our hero returned to the spot from whence he had the preceding evening walked to the chapel, to Stephen's cottage. It was from the artless garrulity of Alice that he had first learned the truth respecting the proceedings at the castle: she, and her little boys, had imperceptibly stolen
14
an interest in his mind ; and, as he shared their brown loaf and drank milk from their pitcher, he felt himself beneath the roof of a friend. Thither then, almost mechanically, he bent his steps ; he did not even tap at the door, but lifted the latch, and entered. The voice of lamenta¬ tion issued from within the curtains which surrounded the bed of poor Alice. Little Wilfred and Leonard, hand in hand, stood in the middle of the room, their dimples composed in a grave and fearful sym¬ pathy. At a table near the casement sate a rough peasant, a fine, hearty- looking] fellow : his arms were folded, his brow was bent, and he л\ г аз gnawing his nether lip in all the sternness of sor¬ row :—it was Stephen, who, in the pre¬ vious visits young Vallensteïn had paid to his cottage, had been absent ; for the bounty of the Baroness was not lavished on idleness, and Stephen better under¬ stood the comforts and indulgences of his lowly home from the hardy, laborious
15
life which contrasted them. The instant Casimir entered, the little boys threw off the invisible chain which seemed to bind them to the spot where they stood, and sprang towards him, forgetful of the momentary cloud. " Oh, father ! father ! It is he ! It is the good gentleman !" Stephen rose, and placed for him a seat, into which he staggered, almost unable to support himself. " Dame," said the peasant," the stranger is ill : what must I give him ?" " Little Wilfred," said Vullensteïn, " give me the pitcher of milk.—I want food ;—I am chilled too—but that cheer¬ ful blaze will soon revive me." Stephen looked at him earnestly, and shook his head, saying at the same time to Alice, "I am not mistaken, dame; and if it should prove that thy unlucky tongue has had any thing to do in the sad work there has been at the castle, I would the storm of last winter had blown
ΙΌ
this cottage, and all I have in the world, into the Kaab! For, under God, by whose goodness comes it that I have any thing ? Here, sir/* and, looking sternly on Vallensteïn, he held to him the purse of gold he had the day before presented to Alice,, "you best know wherefore vou gave this costly present to my dame.— You arc a stranger—you haw been lurk¬ ing about some days, none can tell why. You have been here from time tu time, and Alice there is so proud of her w İsdom, that you could easily get from her the little she knew, and the much that ьЬе thought, about the young lord who was to marry my lady,—-Ay ! if tome mis¬ chief had not come between them, this very morning would have seen them made one by the priest ; instead of which the young lord fled in a moment from the castle, no one knows why, nor whither, and my lady, the pride of the whole world, is dying ! I accuse nobody. But all this is true ; and it is true likewise
17
that vou have been asking my wife many questions that could not concern a stranger, and that you paid her twenty dollars for answering them.-—I doubt this money is the price of mischief, and I would not keep it under m ν roof—no, not for alt the wealth of this barony ! Ay, sir, from the moment you entered, my mind was made up ! Your looks be¬ trayed you ; you have been about no good ; and, if one may judge by outward tokens, you are no more to be envied than the workers of mischief generally are." " Indeed, honest Stephen, I am not enviable ! The sorrows of the castle are my sorrows; but Heaven knows I am not their author!"' Stephen's misgivings had worked their way into the ductile breast of Alice : she was now convinced that she had actually harboured an incendiary, and that her information was the sole source of all the unhappiness which had arisen at March¬ feldt; that she had driven away the bride-
18
groom, and killed the Baroness ; though, on considering the sum total of her intel¬ ligence, it would have been difficult to bring it to such an amount. She drew aside the curtain, and fixed her swollen eyes on Casimir with a solemn and accusing look : " Oh, stranger !" cried she, <c evil for us was the hour when first you lifted our latch ! I never was so de¬ ceived before! But you had, to a cer¬ tainty, an innocent look \vith you—and then the lads took to you so, all on the sudden !" " Pooh !" cried Stephen. "Nay, nay, good man! I am not going to say any more about that. But one thing I must say : if you have any regard for yourself, stranger, you'll lose no time, but unload that guilty conscience of yours !—Get shriven as quickly as you may !—And, if you can make resti¬ tution, do it without tarrying !" In the very midst of this harangue the door flew open, and in rushed Conrade :
19
" Ah, sir !" cried he, " do I see you once more? My dear master's friend !" " Conrade! my dear fellow ! Faithful, trusty Conrade !" ťC Ah, sir ! when I heard the joyful news,—when they told me my Lady was on the eve of marriage with the young Lord Vallensteïn, little did I think such an hour as this was at hand ! But who knows what yet we may live to see ?" " Ay," said Alice, who began to be staggered by the cordiality subsisting between Conrade and the suspicious stranger, " vvho knows ? Now, its my advice that some one should mount a fleet horse directly, and ride for his life after that young Lord, and tell him, if he does not come back as fast as he went, he'll have a Christian's murder to answer for, and he must be a Turk if he stands that ! Mr. Conrade, its a ΛνοηύβΓ to rae you don't go after him !" " Would he were choked in the Raab !" said Conrade j " but, my Lord, you look
20
wretchedly ; I should hanliv know vou. I saw Father Felix ere I set out in search of you; lie bade me commend hitu to you, and sends vou word that our sweet lady ib belter, and his hopes are brighten¬ ing. Tiie deadly trance into which ves- terdav's hhock threw her is past—she kneus those around her,--she recollects what has happened, and is only impa¬ tient to quit her bed, and be far from MarchfV Idt. He has this restlessness to combat j but he has given her a com¬ posing medicine, and, when she sleeps, he will keep his promise and meet you in the chapel." Alice, who forgot her recent conversion to Stephen's faith, now cast on him a triumphant glance. " Good man," said she, " trust me next time ! I have told thee often, and í tell thee now, that if children take at once to a man, it is as sure a sign that there's no harm in him, as that it will rain when that bit of salt moistens.'*
21
11 1 hope, sir," said Stephen, "you will forget what I said ; but my lady's illness put me beside myself, and, in the soreness of my heart, I could have quar¬ relled with one of my owa little ones. ■mJ Father Felix and Mr, Conrade would have nothing to say to one that deserved to be ill thought of—I hope you will for* get it, sir !" " I will forgive it, honest Stephen, on condition you retain that purse,—but I will not forget it :-—I will remember it, be assured, though not in malice ; and, when I am wearied and disgusted by the corruption and treachery the world teems with, I will turn my sick thought for refuge to the simple, zealous integrity I have met in thy cottage !" So saying, he crossed the threshold, followed by Conrade, and again bent his way towards the scene of his midnight vigils.
oq
CHAPTER II. u Oh, God i I could be bounded m a nut-biidi, And count m) self a king of iníiníťj ьрасс ? ЛУеге it not that I have bad dreams" " Which dreams, indeed, arc ambition !" Time lapsed, and as it lapsed, the ma> lauv ofthe aroness subsided. Casimir, meanwhile, fixed hi¿ head-tpiarttrs with his friends Stephen and Alice; but his incessant haunt was ihe chapel or other immediate precincts of the ca-tie. To enter the eastle Father Felix m vain invited him : a ceriain instinctive scuse of propriety warned him to avoid such a step a« a trespass, although ke would have given half the world to ieel himself beneath the same roof with his idol ; nav } perhaps, to cross the \ery gallery in w hieb her apartment stood. None, however, save a lover of tk the olden time," a to vet
ÂÖ
¿ı ľ outrance, can understand or justly ap¬ pi eciate such privileges. As the health ofthe Baroness improved daily, and not a shadow of danger remained to appal the mo<t anxious, Vallensteïn recalled to mind the ties which summoned him to Prague. Inured from boyhood to mili¬ tary precision, he had never perhaps known what it was to allow his inclina¬ tion to supersede his duty : now, for the first time, the struggle between these rivals was strong and fierce, till they came to a compromise; for the young Count determined to wait only till he could obtain one stolen iook at the Ba¬ roness, and then fly to his father. Soon after, the Ladv of Marchfeldt was eman- eiputed from the confinement of her own chamber, vvith the advice of Father Felix, she took the air on the ramparts; for the season being far advanced, that elevated promenade was preferred, as being farther removed from the damps which rose thick and heavy from the river. By this ar-
24
rangement Vallensteïn obtained the in* diligence he coveted, though, like other privileges to which we have alluded, its value lay chiefly in the rate set on it by him wdio desired it; for Louisa was wrapped in a thick Polish mantle of sable, and on her head was a cap of the same material ; so that, except to a lover, neither face nor figure would have been recognizable. Fenced as she was from the weather, its shrewd temper pierced her fragile frame, so that she but appeared and retired. As Vallenstem's eye traced the receding form, his breast swelled high with emo* tion. "Thank Heaven!" said he, " she will not die ! Had Wolfstein caused tiie death ofthat creature, his dark soul would ha\e triumphed ; for such are the achieve¬ ments in which he glories!*' Father Felix now ventured to hope that the Baroness and her suite might set forward to Vienna in a week; for winter was coming apace, and the good Friar
25
was naturally anxious that his patient might anticipate its arrival. As for Val¬ lensteïn, the moment site quitted the ramparts, without pausing to think, he mounted a horse from the castle stables, and, accompanied by Con rade, rode to St. Guthred\s, where he bade adieu to one whose auspicious appearance had so effectually frustrated the machinations of his hated rival, and, followed by his grooms, took little rest till he found him¬ self within his father's palace at Prague. It may be curious to cast a glance on the actual situation of a disgraced man, the victim of adverse fortune. ЛУЬеп Casimir reached the city which was the residence of the fallen general, and espe¬ cially as he approached the Vallensteïn palace, he couhl not forbear to лУ01^ег at the solemn pomp and pageantry which reigne/ around : a patrol of armed watch¬ men paraded the environs, to prevent the slightest noise from without assailing the ears of their master ; nay, as young Val- vol. и» с
26
lensteïn and his grooms advanced, a bar¬ rier across the street immediately leading to the palace stopped their progress. " What is all this ? Is there danger ? Is my father persecuted in his retire» ment ?" Äí No, sir," replied the guard, who kept the barrier, " there is neither danger nor persecution. Our duke retires with his face to the enemy, and they are glad to keep aloof; but, since he came to Prague, it is his pleasure that no sound should presume to interrupt his studies ;—you must, therefore, alight here, sir :-—your horses may not pass." 6i Be it so," said young Vallensteïn, alighting; yet he could not hear without some astonishment that a man, who had spent his life chiefly amid the tumult of war, should, on the sudden, find the distant sound of a horse's hoof, or rather the idea of it, insupportable ; for, in fact, it was impossible that the faintest echo should reach his ear from that spot. This
27
superb abode was entered by six gates, each of which had its allotted guard, re¬ lieved as regularly as though it had been in a state of siege. At the principal of these gates Casimir presented himself, and was met by a young knight to whom that station was entrusted.—" I wish to be admitted immediately to the Duke of Fried land." " That is impossible, sir.—It is his Ex¬ cellency's hour of study.—The Emperor himself could not obtain entrance at this moment." tc And when does his Excellency ad¬ mit the visits of those who would confer with him ?" " He vvill not be visible till he meets his officers at dinner : soon after that meal he retires to his audience chamber ; but the claimants on his attention are so numerous and pressing, that even then your chance of being heard is small." Vallensteïn was fully prepared to find his father, intrinsically, as great a man as С2
28
when he was both the head and the heart ofthe finest army in Europe; but, as he Imd only one notion of disgrace, he looked to have seen him neglected and solitary ; deserted, save by his own high and con¬ stant mind: and thus, thought he, it would be in the history of any other man ; but here, fortune and genius are alike invincible. The gentleman, perceiving him im¬ mersed in thought, conceived that the disappointment his earnest desire for ad¬ mission to the Duke encountered had dejected him. ic Sir," said he, " have you a memo¬ rial? Perhaps by the interest of one of the favourite pages or nobles, who are permitted freer access to his Excellency's person, it may reach him this evening, or, at least, to-morrow/' " And is the Duke thus royally served ?" " Six Barons, and as many knights, wear his liverv, and relieve each other in personal attendance : sixty pages, the
29
sons of nobles, wait by turns in his ante¬ chamber; nor are his military depend¬ ants less worthy oť their glorious master than his domestic ones.—Generals Ter- ski., Ilio, Kinski, Blumenberg, and many others, are in Prague ; and the troops so lately disbanded flock hither daily by thousands, unwilling to follow any ban¬ ners but those of the man who so often led them to conquest*." * c I thank you, sir," said Vallenstein, " but I will farther encroach upon your courtesy; you say, his Imperial Majesty might wait before this gate till the studies of the Duke are concluded ; but he who now addresses you has a prouder title to admission than the Emperor:—I am the
30
son of him to whom so many brave men adhere in his adversity." The officer now unfastened the wicket, and applying his mouth to a tube which communicated with the entrance hall, a file of halberdiers appeared, and silently admitted the Count. In the n^arble hall fifty of these troops, all chosen men ofa most formidable aspect, and fully accou¬ tred, луеге drawn up. He was conducted to th® foot of the grand staircase, лупеге stood three pages in sumptuous liveries ; these attended him to the first landing, where they transferred him to the guidance of three others, and thus on till he had ascended the stairs, when a nobleman, who held the post of gentleman usher in the household of this haughty Duke, although covered with orders, crosses, and other badges, both of hereditary rank and im¬ perial favour, received the Count, and, to their mutual satisfaction, they recognised each other. Cť Ah, Winterfeldt!" cried Casimir, " I
31
am delighted to see you ! Take me to my father.—I was beginning to despair of ever penetrating the ceremonies which envelope him." "Why," said Winterfeldt hesitatingly, " I conclude there can be no great hazard in affording you access, Count;—but I have no orders, and you are the only man in Europe for whom I would so far ven¬ ture, as to break the barriers vvith which your illustrious father surrounds Ι^η^Ι^'* tť Is he alone then ?" demanded Vallen- stein, in great astonishment, íť No-—his studies are usually assisted by that strange man, whom, peradven- ture, you may have seen occasionally,— not that he is ever met in public, but he is frequently the privileged sharer of the Duke's privacy. I know that this man sometimes visited the Duke in his last campaign, but always with much my¬ stery.—Nay," said he, shuddering, " it is whispered amongst us, that by his means his Excellency was timely warned of all the secret proceedings of his enemies;—
32
and it is certain he had all the manner of a man prepared. Ilio, \vho was in waiting лу1}еп he received the Imperial messengers, said that he smiled on them, declaring he already knew T their mis¬ sion*, and would obey it; besides, all arrangements for his retirement were in order. In short, either he has strange emissaries, or his prescience is most лУ01^егп11 !" " Ah!" said Casimir, " it is the old Jesuit, Father Fieramosca, whom you mean !·—Yes, I have twice seen him :-— he
33
is, in truth, a mysterious being !—But come, dear Winte!feldt, I will not believe my father's interdict extends to me : con¬ duct me therefore to his chamber." With the most manifest reluctance did Baron Winterfeldt lead the way, through an endless suite of superb apartments, all furnished in a style of regal magnificence, such as the palace of the Cæsars might not aspire to emulate. The pages who waited in the ante-chamber beheld their entrance with countenances on which dismay was legibly depicted, nor did it even entirely disappear wheo the stran¬ gers claim to tread those inviolable pre¬ cincts was explained to them. " Devereux," said Winterfeldt to a youth who seemed to be chief of the pages, <c if any one may with impunity open that door, thou art he." " It is true," replied Devereux osten¬ tatiously, " I may perhaps boast of pos¬ sessing as large a share as any man of my Lorďs countenance, but I have never с 5
34
before made so bold an experiment. For your sake, Count Casimir, I will try, ne¬ vertheless/'-— And, with the air of one who commits some desperate act on which he may not trust himself to pause, he in¬ stantly opened the door and cried at once, " Your Excellency's noble son, Count Casimir of Vallensteïn." The word " audacious" burst in thun¬ der from the lips of the Duke of Fried- land, ere the cause of this intrusion reached his ear. He arose precipitately from the table at which he sate, and his companion, the mysterious Fieramosca, for he it ЛУЯ8, although, in the suddenness ofthe surprise occasioned by this unbid¬ den entrance, he had drawn his cowl over his face, as though he would have prefer¬ red concealment, flung a large black cloth which lay on the floor near him over the table, and covered entirely whatever stood thereon ; having done which, he hastened to the upper end of the room, and drew closer the folds of a thick sable curtain,
35
which hung from tbe ceiling to the floor, across the whole breadth of the apart¬ ment, which, unlike every other young Vallenstem had hitherto seen in the pa¬ lace, had bare plastered walls, on which were drawn figures to him inexplicable, and words of which he knew not the meaning í the uncarpeted floor exhi¬ bited similar signs and words, and all the furniture consisted of the table at which the Duke and Fieramosca had pursued their mysterious studies, and the stools on which they had been seated, except celes¬ tial globes of various sizes, books, charts, uith different representations of the pla¬ nets, and corresponding symptoms of the astrological calculations in which the students had been interrupted. Before the elder Vallcnsteïn reco¬ vered his surprise sufficiently to welcome his sou, a brief whisper was exchanged vvith his colleague ; then he took the arm of Casimir in silence, and, with somewhat of fierceness in his aspect, turned from
36
the apartment. Accustomed as young Vallensteïn had been to submit to all the austerities of military discipline beneath his father's rule, there was something wounding to his affection in this cold, haughty, nay, almost unkind, rece ption ; but he resolved to await patiently the result: and, as they walked together through the long range of apartments, he employed himself in recollecting his thoughts and poising his mind : they arrived at length at a small but splendid cabinet. Éí Here," said the Duke, íť we may be unmolested till dinner time—if, indeed, any place may be held sacred from in¬ trusion !" Chilled and repulsed, Vallenstein felt not only his affection but the pride of his heart outraged by the manner in which his father received him. " I trust," said he coldly, i( your Ex¬ cellency will not visit your page*s fault with rigour.-—! alone am to blame.—I
37
alone was guilty of the error of supposing yuur only son, especially, the events con¬ sidered which have intervened since om- separat ion, might have formed an ex* ception to the prohibitory orders which govern your household. One lesson, how¬ ever, suffices :-— trust me, my Lord, I shall not for eret it.'' о ίς No, Count ! pardon me ; the blame does not ì est w itli you ! You came hither in total ignorance of the imperative regu¬ lations I have thought it meet to institute in my palace. That boy Devereux pre¬ sumes on my favour and confidence, and must be checked,-—So, bir, you are come to visit a ruined man: to look upon the wreck ofa stately vessel.—Now solve me this problem : whether is a great man greater in prosperity or adversity ?—But peradventure, you will stay with me, and take time to observe.' 5 iC A great man, rny Lord, with sub¬ mission, as I understand the phrase, is the same through all fortunes ; neither in-
38
toxicatcd and elated by the prosperous, nor soured by the evil. In the first po¬ sition I have followed your march with an admiration such as no other character has ever excited in me :—in the second, I doubt not you will prove equal to your¬ self." ťí It is well, Casimir! your theory is excellent! but, although the same heart may be in us through all fortunes, more difference in our bearing is requisite than mere school philosophy teaches. For in¬ stance, in prosperity a great man should be affable, popular, careless of pageantry, ready to bend, because it is ahvays at his option to stand erect.-—In adversity, pride becomes him,—he should be stern, dignified, resolved, inaccessible, and every thing he speaks or acts should remind those around him that his power is not departed from him." Casimir bovved in silence: he now held the key to that wdiich had so puzzled him ; but whether the change which had
39
taken place in his father was produced by events on his temper, or whether, as he would have it appear, was the effect ofa system, was more than might easily be penetrated. From present appear¬ ances young Vallensteïn had but little en- eouragement to suppose that his haughty parent would interest himself in the ad¬ ventures which had befallen him since they parted, or even vouchsafe them a hearing : he was however mistaken, for the duke inquired vvith a sort of luke¬ warm kindness respecting his success. When he named the man vvho had super¬ seded his addresses, assumed his name, and taken his place at Marchfeldt, he was interrupted by the question, <c Have Wolfsteïn and you been for any time at variance ?" " From the hour on which we first beheld each other." " That is strange ! Wolfstein was much in my confidence, yet he never betrayed his enmity to you—indeed, I cannot call
40
to mind that he ever spoke of you.—Ay, this explains what was before mysterious ! —This makes all simple ! Be it known to you, Casimir, that this Wolfsteïn has, by the revelation of some secrets I re¬ posed with him, essentially assisted the Duke of Bavaria and that crafty old hypocrite, Father Joseph, to undermine my credit with the Emperor, or, to speak more accurately, to terrify that deluded prince into demanding my resignation. I never offended Wblfstein, and could not guess why he became a convert to my enemies, although I seldom muse long on the motive of state intrigue, as self-interest is the common stimulus; but Wolfstein is a singular man ; hatred is the main spring of his mind, and destruction the favourite exercise of his powers." " Detestable viper !" cried Vallensteïn. The duke smiled.·—" lie has a power¬ ful genius," said he, ic and the world will acknowledge it; but he will make no ef-
41
feet uai use of it, for his own vices will circumvent him;—his desire to ruin his enemy is ever more potent iu him than ambition:—he has obtained the world's wonder, and would disdain its applause. It seems then, that Wolfstein had no en¬ mity to me ; he only thrust at you through my side !—-This is the only mystery in the events concerning me that wanted solution, and I thank you for your assist¬ ance. Now it remains to be seen what are your future plans. Explain them candidly." " My father," replied Casimir, " my views and hopes, although they have lost much of their sanguine hue, still tend to the same object :—I would pursue that object until I am rewarded with success, or assured that pursuit is vain." (i You are a modest suitor, young man ! —I have aimed hich for you—I meditated demanding of the Emperor the princess Cecilia, whose hand he has disposed of to Ladislaus oť Poland, but mv intention
42
altered. Albeit, ruined man as I am, the heir of four dukedoms is a son-in-law for the proudest crown in Europe! I would not therefore, were I you, despair ofthe favour ofthe Baroness of Marchfeldt. I shall have occasion to employ you ere long at Vienna, where you will not appear, as heretofore, a private man, but radiant with hereditary lustre." To have an ostensible motive for pre¬ senting himself at court \vas a point he had much at heart. Louisa would soon be there : he might now meet her in his own person, and find the opportunity for restoring the brightness of his name from the tarnish left on it by the use of Wolf¬ stein. One of the numerous suites of state apartments in this extensive palace was allotted to Casimir, while a certain number of pages, a chamberlain, gentle¬ man usher, and master of the horse, were appointed to attend his person, as though he were a prince of the imperial blood; and he quickly found the pageantry, with
43
which it was his father's pleasure to sur¬ round him, cumbrous and fatiguing. At dinner, one hundred of the nobility and principal military who had followed the duke to Prague sate down to table : the covers and dishes were all of massive gold, and the table was in all respects served with more than regal pomp and delicacy; but he who presided at the feast was taciturn, gloomy, and solemn. Wben he spoke, his words were few 9 and uttered in a stern, arbitrary tone: his presence seemed awfully oppressive to his guests, who had caught the infec¬ tion from his silence, and Casimir sor¬ rowfully contrasted this pompous meal with the cheerful, social ones, of which his father was wont to be the souk The population of Prague were accustomed to press into the great hall, at dinner, to behold the duke and admire his magnifi¬ cence, and sometimes those who had any appeal to make to his clemency or justice hoped to catch his eye, and receive some
44
token of encouragement to present their address. On this day Winterfeldt, who sate next young Vallensteïn, directed his attention to a lovely, interesting girl amongst the crowd, whose eyes eagerly followed those ofthe duke, till at length, mistaking some motion on his part for encouragement, she pressed forward with an extended hand to lay her memorial on the table by his side, when the gentleman in waiting roughly seized her arm, and repulsed her. The little bustle this trans¬ action caused attracted the duke's inquiry, and Winterfeldt, who seemed to feel an interest in the scene, said, a May it please your Excellency, it is the sister of Desmond, the lieutenant, who, doubtless, is bent on soliciting your gracious pardon of her brother's trans¬ gression, or at least the mitigation of his sentence.'* " The sentence is irrevocable, and may neither be repealed nor altered," said the duke.
45
66 And what," whispered Vallensteïn to his neighbour, "what is the fault, and what is the punishment?" ťí Tlie fault is a slight neglect of orders, and the punishment is death ! This rigor¬ ous sentence takes place to-morrow." * ς Impossible ! My father was ever a humane and generous master. It cannot be!" " It is, alas ! nevertheless true, Count," said Winterfeldt. " Desmond is a young Bohemian of family : we have all ven¬ tured to the limits ofthe duke's patience in our intercessions—we must now wit¬ ness poor Desmond's fate in silence—he dies for our example !" Young Vallensteïn waited to hear no more, but interrupted the gloomy silence which reigned around, by exclaiming,— <c My father, grant me the life of Lieu¬ tenant Desmond." "On what plea, Count Casimir?" " On the simple one, my Lord, of in¬ dulgence to myseif. Let it prevail, I
46
beseech your Excellency. On my soul you shall not repent it!" He had risen as he spoke : his fine form was thus rendered conspicuous to the multitude, and his noble countenance, animated by the best feelings of man's nature, as he pleaded for a fellow-crea¬ ture's life, attracted the love and admira¬ tion of all who looked upon him :—-even the duke gazed on him with ill-concealed pride. " Be content, sir.—I grant you the life of Lieutenant Desmond! The warrant for his release from the fortress where he avvaits his doom shall be made out this evening. Sir," said he, addressing his public secretary, "see that it be so, and lodge the instrument in the hands of my son." The general feeling of approbation that now circulated through every heart relaxed a little,, for the moment, the gloomy, silent respect which, until then, the spectators had preserved. An accia-
47
mation of thankfulness echoed through the apartment ;—the duke waved his hand, and all луаз again silence. The sister of Desmond, who had fainted on the stern reply her application en¬ countered, had been borne from the room, and the subject of Desmond's danger laid at rest amongst the guests, who secretly rejoiced, while they mar¬ velled, at the result of the young Count's interposition.—Winterfeldt whispered, (( As your mediation may not always prove thus successful, I am glad it has not been wasted on a less important occasion ; albeit, there is a culprit now in durance, whose claim, from your sense of justice, might perhaps have super¬ seded that of poor Desmond-—I mean Devereux." " Devereux ! And is Devereux then actually disgraced, and for giving me entrance this morning ?" " He is under a cloud, sir," said Win¬ terfeldt, shrugging his shoulders : "he is only condemned to a week's meditation
48
in the dark, with a little abstinence; but, between ourselves, my Lord, Devereux wdl I profit by the discipline. His Ex¬ cellency has somewhat fostered his pre¬ sumption—he has not calibre to carry so much favour. I trust your Lordship will forbear to interrupt his meditations," Niemen, the secretary, who, in com* mon with the rest of the Duke of Fried- land's dependants, deprecated the un¬ timely fate of poor Desmond, executed the formula of his pardon the moment he arose from table, and brought it to the audience-chamber, where Casimir stood contemplating the crowd of applicants, noble and simple, by whom his father was assailed, and whom that great man received with more dignity than bene¬ volence. YoungVallensteïu was no sooner possessed of the important scroll than he hastened to quit the apartment, and the duke called after him, ŕť Count, do not be late; I shall expect you in my cabinet before nine: we will sup in private." As he descended the great staircase,
49
his pages and other attendants prepared to follow him ; but, asking for his cloak, in which he wrapped himself, he signified his intention of going alone to the fortress. Winterfeldt, who stood at the bottom of the stair, seized his hand, and kissed it· "My Lord/' said he, "you are like a good angel amongst us ! You revive within us the feelings of men ! Positively wo have been exhibited of late like the figures of some lifeless pageant, a piece of grim machinery,—our speech and mo¬ tion depending solely on the will of one great mover ;—but, dear Count, I am a petitioner to your goodness : let me at¬ tend you to the fortress. I have a personal interest in the man you have saved. My nephew loves his sister, and, I believe verily, would have died for the brother."
vol. n.
Ό
50
CHAPTER III. iw Be absolute for death ; or death or lite Shall thereby be the sweeter I й Shaitbpeare When the Count and Winterfeldt ar¬ rived at the sorrowful abode of repentance and condemnation, many a ponderous bar was removed, and many a huge key grated in the lock, ere they reached the cell of the prisoner they came to liberate. From the hard and gloomy being who admitted them they learned that he had just parted from his confessor, and that an hour hence his sìblcr, of whose fruit¬ less application he had been apprized, would be allowed to confer with him a few minutes for the last time. u I know not what ails me," said Casi¬ mir, as he approached the cell ; H I feel as much agitated as ifl was about to witness
51
the execution of this poor youth, instead of effecting his deliverance« Go in, Win» terfeldt; I will remain for a moment without." As the door heavily opened, the voice ofthe prisoner exclaimed, te Maria, I did not expect you yet! Ah! Winterfeldt, is it you ? Have you the duke's permis¬ sion ? if not, begone ! I wdll ruin no man but myself." ťí Be satisfied, dear Desmond, my visit is licensed. Count Casimir of Vallensteïn arrived at Prague this morning, and in« terests himself in your fate, so that hope still glimmers." 6i I am sorry for it/' said Desmond ; u it is Hope, that arrant cheat, that de¬ frauds a man of his firmness ; but I have done with her. My heart has been tossed like a foot-ball between her and her play¬ fellow Fear, ever since the Duke's decree laid me in durance, but I have done with both. No, no, Winterfeldt, the pendulum is fixed,—no breath shall stir it more. o2
52
To-morrow wdll hardly bring a more effectual sedative : in fact, what is death but the annihilation of hope and fear? The pang passes when they die, and they are dead, I can tell you, Winterfeldt·" u Only a little stunned, perhaps." C( No," said Desmond gravely, α I have left off trifling with myself, and will permit no man to trifle with me. I have made up my short account with a good father who is just gone hence, and he has put more courage into me than ever I imbibed from the juice ofthe Hungarian grape. I am but a boy, Winterfeldt, and have never committed a much more heinous crime than that for which my soul is banished to the skies. It is my better angel, who, dubious to what amount this small sum might swell if I had time for sinning, will to-morrow assume the shape of an executioner, and sever my head from my body. I dare meet the hour, Winterfeldt ; upon my soul, I do not shrink from it, and this is no time for gasconading j but
53
there is one pull yet,—I would that you, or your nephew, would prevail with Maria to spare it me—I dread my sister !"—and a tear sprang into his hollow eye. " But you will see Count Vallenstein, and hear how far his hope of your pardon is authorized ?" ťc I must see him, I suppose; but, for his errand, I would I might escape the persecution of it." The Count at that moment appeared : i( Excuse my intrusion, lieutenant, for the sake of its motive. My friend Win¬ terfeldt has of course announced me ; although, perhaps, he has not acquainted you that I hold from my father a warrant for some days respite, during which space who knows how much farther vve may succeed in obtaining from him ?" " I thank you, my Lord," said the prisoner, in a firm and solemn tone, "but I reject the respite! I avV/die to. morrow !—at ten to-morrow,—so stands my sentence :—-does it not, Winterfeldt ?
í^¿¡.
Excuse me, Count, if I be found deficient in due courtesy; but my equipage waits, my credentials are sealed, and all is ready for my journey. I have a gulf to leap, and I will not stand trembling and shud¬ dering on its brink." ts And do } ί positively reject my me¬ diation, Mr. Desmond ?"' 4ť I do, my Lord. I respect the bene¬ volence of your motives, but cannot con¬ sent to a renewal of my own suspense, even to gi at i fy the goodness of your Lordship's heart. I ivill not he respited ! I demand ofthe duku*s justice either my death to-morrow, or my h:ce pardon !" 44 Will you at least consent to peruse this scroll, lieutenant ?" He presented it to him, and lowered the dim lamp which twinkled against the wall. The two first lines acquainted him that his pardon had beeu granted to the intercession of Count Casimir of Vallen¬ steïn. A strong, deep flush suffused the prisoner's pallid cheeks; and, bent as he
55
was to die, life rushed back upon his heart in its full tide of hopes and pro¬ mises. His ears rung with strange sounds, his eyes were dazzled, and his breast agitated vvith strong throb bings : he had awakened from a dream of death, and the transition was almost too powerfed. He kissed the hand of his deliverer, but spoke not a word, for he could not speak, Winterfeldt, a soldier and a courtier, was drowned in tears, so irresistibly had this scene acted on his nerves. The gaoler was summoned, and the wrists and ancles of the prisoner released from their weighty fetters. Young Vallensteïn, as they quitted the fortress, observed that Desmond was dressed in the garment allotted to felons, and, with characteristic delicacy, threw his own pelisse over him. Arrived at the house inhabited by Des¬ mond's sister, Vallensteïn bade " good evening" to him and Winterfeldt, and returned, laden with blessings, not loud but deep, to the palace.
56
ŕí Upon my word, Count," said the duke, beholding him with a smile as he entered the cabinet, fi£ I never saw a candidate for popularity bid fairer: your first essay has been admirable. You have one fault, however : your benevolence is spontaneous, and, if you would use it as an agent, it should be systematic ; but I will not throw away good counsel on you—-I believe you are inveterately good, and, such as you are, remain Г He sighed-— ' ť It is better to go on as we begin:—I do not like deviations 5 for, after all, con¬ sistency is greatness." <c I would you had been with me this evening, my father." "I guess where you have been, Casimir. When I was your age, Ishould have enjoy¬ ed such a scene; but it uill not do now. v " And why not, my father ?" ť£ Because, my son, I am arrived at a point when I must fortify and steel my heart against all the intruding weaknesses of nature ; I have long held a tou^h
57
struggle with these yearnings, but they are conquered, and I am not only master of others, but of myself! Never have I given such victorious proof of this mastery, as in the condemnation of Desmond.— You have had it wdiispered in your ear, no doubt, that his crime was merely nominal ;—but, I am surrounded by a motley multitude, and there is pride and faction amongst them.—I wanted an ex¬ ample, and took the first which offered : since that hour there is not a heart amongst them that does not tremble at my voice. I know," said he, bitterly, u what it is to depend on gratitude and on personal affection—mere ties of silk ; a babe can snap them. My bonds are of firmer materials." ťť Alas! sir, and is this necessary— pardon me, if I add, is it just—thus to deal with men who have cast their fortunes in the same hazard vvith yours ? Believe me, 1 regard them as a noble, devoted d 5
58
band, proved and seasoned by your ad¬ versity." <c My dear Casimir, you are a child : they throng after me because I give them bread. Did I not make them men ? And w T ould they not crumble to nothing with¬ out mv 1Ыи and heat ? I am the sun of their system ; they cannot do without me. No one but you could have rescued Desmond, and I am dismayed ar this proof of your sway with me :—you sh^ll not stay with me long, or w e shall have a schism ; beddes, I have need to employ the abilities of so crafty and subtle a statesman at the imperial court : so," added he, with an ironical smile, u you must represent me there. As you persist in believing in gratitude, and such mat¬ ters, you shall take your client Desmond with you: he is become incapableof serving me : try if you can make any thing of him/' " I accept him, sir, thankfully, at your hands, and expect to have many oppor-
59
tuuities of rejoicing in your present ; but, sir, as I shall not long have the means of snatching a victim, now and then, from the paws of the lion, hear me acknow¬ ledge that I have one more boon to pre¬ fer, and then I will engage to tremble in silence with the rest," The duke's countenance underwent an inauspicious change. " I foresaw this," said he :— Cť well, sir, what more ?" " My father, you have punished your page for my fault,—liberate him then at my entreaty. Are you not aware that his disgrace is mine?" (i Oli ! Devereux," said the duke, smiling, u is that all ? Well, provided here is an end of your interposition, let him out, by all means ; but this mediation will add nothing to your popularity, count : Devereux is a favourite vvith me, and therefore with none else ; he might have pined in his dungeon till doomsday without any one but yourself pleading his cause.—This hint will teach him not
eo
to rely on his impunity—and that is sufficient." " Shall I take hiin too to Vienna ?" " No : he is gentle and playful ;—I keep him as one would a kitten, to divert me with his gambols, and relax my mind when it is overstretched ;—he sits by my couch, and warbles me to sleep of nights. No,—I cannot spare Devereux ; his prate is the only luxury I allow myself." The father and son sate engrossed in friendly converse till the hour of twelve sounded ; then the duke started with an air of perturbation : " Ha," exclaimed he, * c is it so late ? Good night, good night, Casimir ;" and taking a taper, he hurried out; and, as young Vallensteïn quitted him at the door of the cabinet, he remarked that he bent his rapid steps through the long suite which terminated in the apartment where he had been so unseasonably introduced. As for himself, he proceeded to the hall, and addressing himself to the captain of the halberdiers
61
who held the night watch, required him to procure the key of the keep, resolved to release the unfortunate Devereux from his dreary captivity. He approached the dark den accompanied by the gaoler, with far diiferent feelings from those which attended him to the prison of poor Des¬ mond : he would scarcely perhaps have advocated the cause of Devereux, but for the share he had in bringing on him his penance. " Why, surely," said he, as he reached the cell, " some one is with him." ec Oh, no, my Lord ; he is only swearing and raving a bit—he has been like a madman ever since he was put there. Please your Lordship, its a pity but he was left to tame a little." He W T as pacing about in his narrow cien, and as the glare ofthe gaoler's torch broke upon the utter darkness, it served rather to dazzle than enlighten the pri¬ soner. " Oh, oh," cried he, " I thought the
62
old tyrant would want his sone: to-nieht : but he is mistaken if he thinks Ì shall forget him. I am in his debt, and the boy Devereux will be a man ere long. Ay, ay, the kitten's claws are growing." The gaoler seemed to feel a malicious pleasure in hearing the favourite page thus expose himself, and was far from interrupting the pourings forth of his vexed spirit : in another moment, how¬ ever, Devereux was aware of his rashness, and stood in all the trepidation of detec¬ tion before his liberator, who, eyeing him gravely, said, " I fear, sir, my interference in your behalf has been most injudicious, It is quite evident you need time foi reflection ; so, good night, sir." He turned to depart; but Devereux, who had not fortitude for darkness and privation, sprang after him, clung to him with the most importunate entreaties, assured him the words he had uttered were the mere sallies of boyish lèsent- ment ; that he loved his master, and
63
would clie for him. In shore, he wept, prayed, and pleaded, till, with con¬ temptuous compassion, Vallensteïn per¬ mitted him to issue forth, half ashamed of his own weakness in allowing himself to bc so wrought on. The following day at dinner the favour¬ ite was in close attendance on his mas¬ ter, presented his golden cup wdth reco¬ vered audacity, aud appeared anxious to impress the minds of the guests that the sunshine in which he basked was brighter and warmer than ever for the temporary cloud» Winterfeldt whispered Vallensteïn to observe the presumption which every look and motion of Devereux betrayed, iC In truth/' returned the Count, " I repent of having opened the door of his prison." iC And when you are as conversant vvith his merits as I am, my Lord, your repent¬ ance will increase. Desmond has solicited permission to pay his grateful duty to the Duke this evening,—he has been sternly refused : and that would not have
64
been had yon little viper remained quietly in his hole." ίβ Is it possible?" " It is true, my Lord—Devereux is a coaxing, winding, soothing, insinuating, little devil !—He looks all mildness and innocence, and chirps like any bird ; but the urchin is full of spleen. Every act of mercy or favour that emanates from his great master seems to derogate from his pretensions, and he sets himself by all sorts of dexterous manœuvres to inter¬ cept or divert it." 4< How old is he?" said the Count, fixing his eyes sternly on him as he asked the question. Devereux, aware of his look, and guessing he was the .subject of ani¬ madversion, blushed bright vermilion. " Why," rejoined Winterfeldt, "though he blushes, and smiles, and weeps, and curls his ringlets on his forehead like a girl, he is eighteen.— It is wonderous to reflect what a weight of enmity that pretty youth has accumulated for himself.
65
He has but one friend in Prague,—a mighty one indeed ! But, methinks, I would not be the object of as much ill will for all the duke's favour. 5 ' Vallensteïn^ wrath was kindled to no slight pitch, at the thought of this minion daring to counteract in any degree the pardon of a man he patronized. As he followed his father to the audience cham¬ ber, Devereux inadvertently jostled him, and he pushed him off so rudely, that the page was startled. " Make way, sir, and keep your own subordinate place." Devereux humbly slunk behind. On entering the audience chamber, 4< I hope," said the Duke to his son, u that thoughtful look bodes me no more petitions! But be warned in time; my mood is this day inflexible !" " To say truth, my Lord, I am too conscious of the follies of yesterday to repeat them/' " What! has the lieutenant m ve n vou О к/ cause to repent your intercession r"
66
ζζ No, sir : he was well worth saving." tr And what then has poor Devereux done to forfeit your good will ?—But I need not ask—your mind has been poi¬ soned against him : the marvel would have been, had you escaped the infection. And he cast a glance of no gracious meaning on those around—" Nay," added he, uť I know the nature of men too well to be angry," And a contemptuous smile completed the sentence for him. When the audience closed, the Duke took his son's arm, and passed into his cabinet, having ordered his secretary to be summoned. ct We must spend this evening," said he, ť< in preparing our despatches for the Emperor :—to-morrow, or, at farthest, the next day, you will set forth :—your train is already in attendance, and you shall enter Vienna with an equipage, such as neither of the Archdukes can emulate." u You have, it appears, my Lord, some¬ what anticipated my journey," said Ca-
67
simir, blushing vvith resentment at the suspicion which crossed lnm that the in¬ fluence of Devereux had a share in this manœuvre. u Why yes, my son, I will not dissem¬ ble with you-—you are a fine, manly, warm-hearted fellow :—vou will mcke a magnifieent figure as my representative.; but, to say truth, I see plainly that yea are gloriously fitted for perplexing my plans, and thwarting my operations here - s so I must for a time bestow you else¬ where.—Be not wounded, my son," said he, assuming a more serious tone, " you shall know me again as your parent :—at present all the powers of my mind are brought to a focus—all the feelings of my heart arc expressed by one word—ambi¬ tion!— My projects are vast, and so are ray means of accomplishment :—and I know," said he solemnly, iC I know that they must be accomplished, for fate is with me!" As he uttered these words Niemen en-
68
tered, and the remainder of the evening was dedicated to diplomatic instructions and arrangements. The acuteness and subtlety in the art of state-craft, the deep knowledge of mankind, the infallible ma¬ nœuvres for baffling, disarming, or invei¬ gling an enemy, exhibited by the Duke on this occasion, as the wdiole arcana of this intricate science луаэ laid open to the view of Casimir, was wonderful in his eyes, yet he shuddered to think of entan¬ gling himself in such a web, and secretly resolved to select, for his own use, such of the instructions he had received as best suited his conscience. As the hour waned, the Duke from time to time cast a glance at a clock which stood opposite to him, as if anxious not to trespass a se¬ cond time on midnight. At length he rose. cc Count Casimir," he said, "think well on what has passed—I know your genius, your inclination has no bias this way, yet I trust your affection, and that ig a confidence I repose in no other hu*
69 man being.—Your demeanour is the chief matter;—be wary;—study a happy mix¬ ture of pride and pliancy;—insinuate yourself into the counsels of others, and preserve your own inviolate :—=be pene¬ trating and impenetrable."
70
CHAPTER IV. íť We go, it may be, to return во more, Or, if we do return, we bring again Only the form which we took hence with us :— The hopes are pcrish'd, and the thoughts are fled, And the affections frozen or exchang d, Andj save the frame, it is another man, Not him who hence departed !" On the day appointed by Father Felix did the Baroness of Marchfeldt bid adieu to the towers of her fathers, her health being considered sufficiently re-esta¬ blished to enable her to undertake the journey to Vienna \vithout risk. The recent shock had not passed, however, without leaving its tracer ; her cheek had lost its bright vermilion, and the very faintest tint of the rose now coloured it ; and her mind, which had gradually re¬ covered her brothers loss, was now re¬ lapsed into mournful thoughtfulness. To
71
Father Felix, and to Conrade, she had more than once named Wolfsteïn, but it was only to express the fear she could not help harbouring of his farther per¬ secutions; the threat with which he quitted her presence having left a heavy foreboding of evil on her mind. Felix in vain endeavoured to console her Λνΐίΐι the assurance, that the languor left on her spirits by the severe malady from which she was scarcely recovered луаэ sufficient to cause the gloomy misgivings which ever accompanied her recollection of the preceding events ;—-but no : she felt as¬ sured that Wolfstem would cast an in¬ auspicious influence over her destiny :—-it was no theme for argument; the mind was deeply imbued with one idea, and time and circumstances could alone de¬ liver it from such oppression. The Ba¬ roness believed she should be safer in the cnwded haunts of men. " There, at least/* said she, " his fear¬ ful image, which is incessantly menacing
72
my peace, will be driven away, for I will mix with the gay and the busy, and seek my companions amongst those who will assist me in the task of forgetting how cloudily my dawn has risen. If I can learn to forget, I may begin to hope·" Conrade, although far from encourag¬ ing the alarm of his lady, was extremely solicitous that her suite should be nu¬ merous and well armed ; for, in his heart, he bore witness to the justice of her ap¬ prehensions. Barbara travelled in the same coach with her lady and Father Felix : the latter sate wrapt in his grey woollen mantle, his cowl covering his face» and absorbed as usual in deep meditation. The change he was about to encounter was almost as severe a trial as he could be called on to meet, for the world was no place for him, and the world's ways w 7 ere not his ways ; still he was convinced it was the sphere wherein the Baroness of Marchfeldt was born to move, and that it was his duty to follow and watch over
73
his charge wheresoever her destiny might lead her : when, therefore, he found the contrast his mind presented to him be¬ tween the tranquil banks of the Raab and the tumultuous seat of empire too irksome to be dwelt on, he exchanged his reverie for his breviary ; so that me¬ ditation and prayer almost wholly oc¬ cupied him. Barbara alone looked with unmixed delight to the termination of the journey. She saw the world in pro¬ spect as a garden of roses, and cared not for the thorns ;—in short, though a few kmdly tears fell from her eyes as she re¬ ceived the embraces and admonitions of Justina, and shook hands with old Sigib- mond, the day on which she lost sight of the grey walls of Marchfeldt was entered on her tablet as the happiest she had ever seen. Albeit, this first day's pro¬ gress was an indifferent earnest of the future for this volatile maiden, who de¬ precated the silence and reserve of her fellow travellers, without having skill or VOL. ÏÏ. e
74
assurance to break it, and the only in¬ tei ruptions it experienced took place at the different post-houses. The Baroness, to whom the gay temper of Barbara had often brought amusement in the solitude of her castle, was accustomed to allow this favourite maiden more familiar in¬ tercourse than anv of her other attend- ants. As evening drew on she recollect¬ ed, with some surprise, that the voice of Barbara had scarcely been heard during the day. 66 My poor girl," said she, Ci I did not think to see you look so sad during a journey which has been in your breast the theme of so many splendid anticipations. You have observed a weary silence, and are no doubt preparing for your carnival by the severest of all possible penances." " No, my lady, it is not altogether that which makes me look so sad, for I was just then thinking of something, wdiich, if I did not fear to offend your ladyship, I fancy I ought to tell, and I was musing
75
how I should begin, and wondering whether I dared begin at all. This exordium somewhat alarmed the Baroness, fo whom the idea of Wolfsteïn was ever presen t. 4í You do not want sense, Barbara ; use it, therefore, in determining whether the communication you allude to is ne¬ cessary or not." C€ Why, my lady, I should not hesitate, but that I must needs mention a name wdiich I know you do not like to hear." " I do яо /like to hear it, Barbara ; but, for Heaven's sake, conceal nothing con¬ nected with that name, of w hich İt may concern me to be apprized !" ce Fc. that matter, my lady, I am net sure I should be justified in offending y our ear by uttering it, because I do not knoic that you were meant; but it is altogether so probable, that I think I can hardly be mistaken." " Speak on then, Barbara ; I am re¬ solved to listen to you." E 2
76 Cí You did not know, î dare say, my lady, that Rupert was very fond of your little French maid, Annette : hc was always walking with her and tidkiug with her, and they were to lure been married, I believe, when—when,—but thaťs no matter. Well, my lady,—one night, when you were getting better, and I and Annette were sitting up watching in the ante-room, Annette, who has incessantly Rupert's name in her mouth, told me one of her stories which has never been out of my mind since. C£ c When we lay in camp, at Halber¬ stadt/ said he, * a young nobleman joined the army. He was sad, and wan, and sickly, and mighty wilful and way¬ ward, and they called him the spectre knight : he was a youth of great family, and great domains ; he had one only sister, and if ever he did open his lips, which was but very seldom, it was to brag of her/ Now does it not stand to reason, my lady, that this could be
77 nobody but Lord Wilhelm— rest his soul !" i: Proceed, Barbara." ťť Well, it went about the camp that the young knight was going out like the snuŕť of a taper, and then his beautiful sister would be heir to all his lands, and wo uld be a worthy object of pursuit for any nobleman or captain, be he who he might ; but amongst all the camp, two young lords determined to try their luck, and laid a wager with each other who should win the prize ; but each was to take a different road, agreeing in no¬ thing, save the pretence of violent mutual enmity. One resolved to attach himself to the young lady's brotlier, though alas, it was but like a vulture waiting by a dying lamb! Accordingly, he was in- separable as his shadow, rode by him in battle, watched him in sickness—nay, he went so far as to give up a great post in the army to him, knowing, a crafty knave, that he could not keep it from
78 him long. They freely exchanged the privilege of circumventing each other, and were just as good friends all the while, in their hearts, as if they had been plav ing any game where each waa licensed to outwit and conquer his ad¬ versary. Well, my lady, the other young nobleman held liis opponent's plan in con¬ tempt, and said any blockhead mighthave blundered on as good a one ; besides, he thought there was something mean and unworthy in winding about a poor youth Λνίΰι such false pretences. * Now/ said he, c I shall go to work another wav. Макс me гл hateful as you please to the spectre knight, so m neh the better. I will assist you í I vvill thwart him, and irritate him, and I vvill make it my business to impress his ductile mind with sinister thoughts concerning me. It shall be my aim to excite his wonder and inspire him vvith hatred. We will be his Arimanes and Oromasdes : a mere common-place candidate will prefer the
79
latter claim ; I am well content with my chance of success/ ' And how/ inquired Annette, 6 has the game ended ?' * Oh/ said Rupert, ' it is phi} ing at this mo¬ ment, and there may be many а puzzling move yet before it ends ; but/ said he, fi I should hate to see that sik aking thief carry the prize, who kept fawning and clinging about the poor dving youth with every pretence of affection, while he was impatiently counting his hours for him ! Besides/ added he, s the other got weary of his frolic, and would have yielded to his adversary, only the lady's picture by а chance fell into his hands, and gave a new spur to his spirit, so that pure love is carrying on the plot, which self-interest, or rath.er the whim oi" the moment, began.' This is the story, my lady, as Rupert told it to Annette." '•Merciful powers!" exclaimed the Baroness. ťt Is it possible that such base and complicated treachery may find har¬ bour in the breast of man ?" The Friar, who had closely attended
80
to Barbara's narration, groaned deeply : to him it brought a w oful discovery. He had related to the Baroness the visit of Count Y'allenste'in to the village—their conference in the chapel—the affliction he had testified for her illness—and, in short, every incident respecting him cal¬ culated, in his opinion, to excite an in¬ terest in her breast; but his intentions and his judgment were too often at va¬ riance : he was too precipitate, and should have луаНеа to a more auspicious season. The affections of Louisa Λν τ 6ΐ€ not of a mutable and facile nature : she had loved Wolfsteïn tenderly and exclu- sively up to the moment of their sudden separation ; and she now besought Hea¬ ven to release her heart entirely from so detestable a bondage. But such prayers sufficiently implied that the chain was yet to break ; it was, therefore, no time for the introduction ofa rival candidate to her favour; and to her confessor's suggestions on the subject she replied, (i What time may bring to pass, I
81
cannot pretend to foretel ; but, at this moment, that half of the creation to which Wolfsteïn belongs is my abhor¬ rence !—All, save you, my father!" added she vvith a smile ; " for, however universal the taint, sure your bosom is spotless/ 5 The exact operation of Barbara's story on the mind of her lady did not become immediately apparent ; but her spirits re¬ vived, and, though she occasionally fell into her musing habits, she talked cheer¬ fully vvith Barbara, and encouraged her to converse; a permission which was not disregarded. The secret of which that lively maiden had disburthened herself gave her consequence in her own eyes, and she was not slow in perceiving that it had done her no injury in those of the Baroness. The poor Friar pondered si¬ lently and intensely on the wickedness of mankind, and put up his inaudible thanksgivings to that Providence which had so early removed the tender Wil¬ helm, wiih the innocence of his heart E 5
82
unviolated, from the world's pestilential atmosphere. Evening was now closing in, and a courier was sent forward to the post- house, where the Baroness proposed to pass the night, to apprise the host of her approach. Conrade rode up to the coach, and informed his lady that, as the post-house could afford her but mean accommodation, and as the night was clear and moonlight, and she well de¬ fended from the cold, moreover as her suite was strong and numerous, he would recommend her travelling forward. He owned, however, in answer to her ques¬ tions, that after passing ihe little inn, they must cross a wide moor, bleak and uninhabited, and extending several miles. The Baroness would have, nevertheless, adopted Conrade's opinion, but both Fa¬ ther Felix and Barbara discovered so much timidity that, in compassion to their scruples, she resolved to spend the night at the inn. When they reached it,
ьз
they found, indeed, that Conrade had by no means exaggerated its deficiencies in comfort ; and, had they been under the guidance ofa less powerful escort, it was a place well calculated for the engender¬ ing of dreary thoughts and foul suspi¬ cions. It was a desolate melancholy spot, standing on the edge of the wdld heath before mentioned ; not a tree or shrub grew near it, and its tottering walls, and rent roof, bore witness to the in¬ vasions of many a pitiless whirlwind, to which it had been an in .sheltered victim. The miserable room into which the Baroness and Barbara were ushered as their lodging for the night, afforded free ingress, through various apertures, for all the winds of heaven ; and the Baroness almost repented having yielded to the fears of her companions. " My lady," said Barbara, shuddering with cold and disgust, iC were you ever in such a place as this before ? For my
84
part, I dare say many a one has been murdered here !" " That is a very comfortable conjecture of yours, as well as a very charitable one to the wretched inhabitants of fhis dreary hovel. I trust you have no better ground for such a dark surmise, than the squalid poverty in which their lot is cast." " Oh, my lady !—The holy St. Francis forbid ! But poverty does not oblige people to look like this man and his wife. Poverty does not hinder the poor people at Marchfeldt from looking good-na¬ tured and honest ; but this men, I cross myseif vvhe* r er he comes in my sight. He has such huge glaring white eyes, and they are far frem being an exact match ; neither do they both look at once on the same object;—then, as if nature would fain hide such a piece of work¬ manship, she has overhung them vvith a pair of thick white eye-brows; but the oddest thing in his face is, that while his
85
forehead is contracted into a deep scowl, the corners of his mouth are bent up¬ wards in a perpetual smile, so that he frowns vvith one end of his face, and sneers with the other." Ci A most appalling portrait, indeed ! But you are sureiy exercising your fancy in the invention of a countenance such as nature never created." " Then, as for his wife, she looks as gaunt and hungry as a wolf in the win¬ ter !—She gave a keen glance at me, and looked as sharp as if she longed to eat me. Do you know, my lady, I could not help wondering, in my own mind, if it might not be probable that she is one of those creatures who are human in the day, and wolf at night. You have, no doubt, heard ofa wcre-wolf, my lady?" Ci Very probable truly, Barbara. Did ever foolish girl give up her imagination to such follies !" " Well, my lady, I wish you would observe these people, and judge for your-
86
self. There are some children too about the house, but the devil himself (the blessed saints forgive me !) might be their own father ; for such abominable imps did I never behold ! Babes as they are, you may read volumes of maüce in their little frightful faces ! I declare, my lady, I can compare them with nothing but the ugly shapeless things that flitted about my bed, grinning and chattering, and pointing at me, when I had the fever." The Baroness could not but be amused by the family picture, thus sketched for her entertainment by her garrulous attendant: yet, as she knew Barbara was a shrewd. intelligent observer, 'm spite of her vola¬ tile spirits, she inwardly congratulated herself on the strength of her retinue, which she hoped inight bid defiance either to treachery or violence, should either be at hand. It was yet early, and the hou.-ehold were not disposed of. The host had allotted an apartment to Father Felix, if the narrow dark hole
87
which was to be his dormitory could claim such an appellation ; and invited the remainder of the suite to take up their lodging, some in the stables wdth their steeds, and others in a ruinous out-building at some distance from the house. Conrade, who acted as head of the retinue, answered with indifference, that, wrapped in their cloaks, they cared not much for such moderate shelter as was offered them ; а*ч! that, as exercise would keep them warm better than lying in a roofless hovel, he would resume his old po<t of sentinel, and march to and fio before the house; the others, meanwhile, except a few who chose to seek repose in the stable, had taken his hint, and would follow his example. " it is a pity I have no better lodging to offer such a number of brave gentle¬ men," said the host, íť I never was so vexed before ; but 1 am thinking, as you are so many, jou might spare above half your company, to push on towards So-
88
pron to-night. A finer moon never shone, and the stars sparkle like so many diamonds. Your horses are quite fresh by this time. I will give you a guide, who knows every inch of the moor, so you need not fear straying, though it is a wild waste, and might puzzle a stranger. The people at Sopron will detain you, if they have not good notice for prepara¬ tion ; you are too many for one inn, and will find it good policy to divide." i: Your advice is excellent, friend Sturmo/' said Conrade, u but one night's watch vvill hurt neither me nor my com¬ rades. What !—I have served under Vallensteïn, man. Do you think I value а few hours stargazing ? We will send our courier forward to Sopron, as we did here, and shall find all ready for us, 1 doubt not/' " Well, gentlemen, as you please; it ís your own business," said Sturmo sul¬ kily ; i( but you may have nothing to say against a little additional warmth,
89
perhaps; I can give you a drop of famous mead, if that suits your fancy." 64 Ay, ay, Sturmo, with all my heart/* In Sturmo went, and presently re¬ turned with the promised beverage, of which Conrade, and each of the suite who were standing about him, took a copious draught. The courier, who had arrived at this post-house an hour before his lady, had whispered a word in Con¬ rade's ear, which satisfied him at once of the necessity of keeping his force con» centrated. Loitering about the moor, he liad passed a hollow, thick with furze ; and, in passing it, heard a half suppressed sneeze : this furze covered nearly halfan acre, and was therefore capable of con¬ cealing aformidablebanditti. The courier, startled by a sound the source of which he perceived not, turned hastily, and his eye resting on the covert, he was aware that the neighbourhood was better peo¬ pled than he had suspected ; he, how¬ ever, assumed an unconscious air, and
90
went whistling forward, though the hard beating of his heart scarcely left him breath to make up his music ; and a happy man was he л\ т Ьеп the car¬ riage wheels and clattering hoofs an¬ nounced the approach of his lady and her company. Conrade prudently re¬ solved not to alarm the Baroness or the confessor, whose personal courage he perhaps underrated, by relating tiie dis¬ covery Uthred had made. He, how¬ ever, called a council of his fellows, as to the preferable mode of proceeding; and it was agreed, that since they were prepared against any sin prise, there was no more danger in remaining stationary» than there would be in eres sing the moor. Sturino, with a bundle of fagots, en¬ tered the apartment where the Baroness and Barbara, wrapped in their pelisses, were cowering over a brasier, and trying to fan some feeble embers into a mere kindly blaze. The arrival of the fagots was welcomed by each ; but, as the Ba-
91
roness looked on him who bore them, her blood ran cold, for a more villanous as¬ pect never met her gaze. Light and warmth are, however, excellent revivers of courage, and these he brought them. The Baroness felt curious to ascertain if her host's voice corresponded vvith his aspect, and asked him if he had many children, and if he found his occupation sufficient to maintain them. i( Ay," said he, in an accent like the shriek of the night raven, u I have three little famished imps to feed, and had I no better occupation than the one you see, lady, I must be fain to choke them, one after another, and dig a hole for them in the next bog." " And what, my friend," said Barbara, " may your other business bc ?" " Oh," replied he, looking sidelong at her under his heavy brows, ťt only a little matter of partnership." And he quitted them. " Now confess, madam," said Barbara,
92
'* that you never saw a more unpromising physiognomy than that ofour host." " It is sufficiently so to make me shud¬ der at heart !—1 am weary, very weary, but I would not sleep for the world ! Tell me some of your stories, Barbara, and keep me waking > —1 give you license to talk all night," " Well, my lady, shall I tell you sad stories or merry ones ? Did you ever hear the history of the Princess Agnes of Hapsburg, properly called St. Agnes, who, when she saw the soldiers tossing infants on their pikes, cried, ς Now I bathe in May dew ?'" cc Nay, pr'ythee, good girl, select thy subject better ! Let us have nothing that can increase the gloom of this place." ci Did you ever lead how Pope Sixtus V. frightened his physician to death, by snapping at his fingers ?-----Oh ! the eleven thousand virgins be about us ! ' screamed she, iC what is that?" The sudden shriek and terrified gesture
93
of Barbara, and the fixed gaze with wdiich her eyes лусге directed to a spot im¬ mediately behind the Baroness, caused the latter to turn, лупеп she beheld the gypsey of the wood of Mornau glaring on them through an aperture in the луа11, π here w r as a wooden lattice which opened from without, and, as both the present inmates of the apartment луегс ignorant of its existence, the apparition was doubly unaccountable and appalling. u Why !"' cried the hag, with her usual hideous grin, cc you hardly expected me, sure ! Do you always greet an old friend thus ?—W T hat ! the wolf has dropped his prey this time ! ILware the next ! Be¬ ware Uie next !" And, with an air of diabolical enjoy¬ ment in the almost deadening terror she occasioned, she closed the lattice, and disappeared. For many minutes the Baroness and her attendant sate gazing on each other, in silent and shuddering alarm ; the latter at length sprang from
94
her seat, and by diligently stirring the fagots, and trimming their small lamp, augmented, as much as lay in her power, the light ofthe comfortless chamber, and began chafing the hands of her pallid, trembling, h alf- frozen lady, and speaking comfort to her. " Oh Barbara !"' said the Baroness at length, " I am sick with terror ! Would Conrade were here ! I should then feel more secure.·—-But how shall vve find him ?" Barbara, with all her flippancy, wanted neither zeal nor resolution where her lady was concerned, and in the midst of her own share in the terror the recent apparition had excited, she was yet more distressed by a sense of the danger such alarms might create, for one so lately risen from the bed of sickness ; she said therefore in a soothing tone, " My lady, if you dare permit me to look out, I will seek Conrade, and bring him to you ; if I find not him, I shall
95
sureiy meet some of our people : at all events, I will not be absent a moment." "Kind Barbara!" said the Baroness, languidly, " I could not ask it. But if you have the courage, go, dear girl; I shall feel security in Conrade's presence." She found the trusty domestic folded in his camp cloak, centincl-like, march¬ ing to and fro before the door, drowsily humming a military tune. Ci Ah !" said she, transported at the sight of him, and casting a comparative glance on the forms of some of his com» rades, vvho lay fast asleep on the ground, " one may be sure, whatever other lazy variets there may be, you, Conrade, are ever to be found on the watch. My lady wants you.—Why, bless me ! You stare as if you had lost your wits, and look so drowsy ! Do, pray, come to my lady ! She's dying with fright ! Oh dear ! How can }ou stand, like something stupid !" ťC Oh ! my lady !— Ay, ay, now I un-
96
derstand you ! I see it all at once ! Ah ! now I have it ! Well, it is an excellent joke that I should fancy all the while I was keeping guard before my young lords quarters at Halle ! Ay, ay, Fll attend my lady.—To be sure ; I'll attend my lady directly !" And, moving himself with no great celerity, he followed Barbara. The Ba» roness, who had kept her eye steadily fixed on the glowing embers in the bra¬ sier, fearful to hazard a glance round the apartment, now rushed to meet the man in whose protection she so confidently relied, but all sense and judgment had apparently forsaken him ; the transition from the keen frosty air to light and heat completed his overthrow, and, in spite of every effort put in practice by the Ba¬ roness and her woman to arouse him, he sank down in the corner, and was soon stretched in almost deathlike slumber.
97
CHAPTER V. *' Рлб&аго il pericolo, gabbato il Sanio !" The consternation ofthe Baroness was now at its height ; there was no alternative but to sit patiently, expecting the slow departure of this tedious, fearful night : Barbara, who had been ready to embrace Conrade, in the character of her pro¬ tector, now beheld hira with feelings of wrath and animosity. ** A precious guard, indeed ! Such a lazy, drunken fellow ! A lovely figure he'll make in the morning ! Were I him, after such an exploit I would hang my self ľ г u This is so strange and unwonted an event in Conrade's history, that I cannot look on it as the effect of accident :—In short, I know not what to think 1 Would that this weary night were passed !" VOL· IL F
m
It must have been sometime after mid¬ night, when the door softly opened, and Sturmo looked in upon them ; his glance wandered round the room, as if in search of something, and the inquiry seemed to obtain a satisfactory answer, when he espied the situation of Conrat „. " What is your business, friend?" said the Baroness, timidly. ťť I thought you might need some at¬ tendance, ladies ý but I see you are so well guarded and served, I might have spared myself the pains.—Do you always keep vigil, ladies ? You will tire of that plan, if you travel far. Let me bring you a drop of warm mead to comfort your hearts, and then, wrapt in those cloaks, you may sleep by the fire as sound as on a feather-bed ! Do, ladies ?" added he, in a whining tone, " such pretty, slight creatures as you are, cannot make too much of themselves." There was an insolence about the man, against which the spirit ofthe Baroness,
99
subdued as it was by fatigue and agita« tion 3 revolted. " Retire, friend !" said she, " we do not need your services ! Only do me the favour to send hither the first of my do¬ mestics you meet with." " Why, lady, it happens rather un¬ luckily, but the truth is, that the gentle¬ man in the corner there is a sample of all the rest. There is not one of your domestics whose own legs will carry him to you ; there thev lie, some at the door, and some in the stable, like so many dead men : if you don't believe me, you may come and see yourself, lady. Nay, you may well turn pale, for it has an evil look with it, there is no denying ; and how it has all happened, unless the devil has been amongst us, I can't pretend .o guess. Hark, ladies! Don't you hear something Γ " Oh Γ cried Barbara, u my teeth chatter so, I can hear nothing but them !" F %
100
* c No, no!" said Sturmo, " it is not the chattering of your teeth I hear—but do listen !" The Baroness plainly distinguished the buz of many voices, and no longer enter¬ tained the shadow of a doul .s to the danger of their situation ; collecting all her strength, she fixed her eyes steadily on Sturino. " Yes !" she said, " I do hear sounds, and I comprehend their meaning ! We have fallen into evil hands ; your poverty, perhaps, has led you into a connivance with the wicked, but deliver us from dan¬ ger, and you shall be both rich, and in¬ nocent, of ihis crime at least. Here," said she, offering a purse of gold, " here is an earnest that you shall not lose by saving us." " Well," replied he, " it would be a great comfort to a man's conscience, to be sure, to save two such pretty ladies, and gain such a purse as this into the
101
bargain;" at the same time concealing the bribe in his bosom, " so, I'll see what I can do." "Ay!" cried Barbara, with clasped hands, ^ dear good creature ! If he saves us, he will be an angel, in spite of his ugliness !" ζί He will not save us, Barbara!" said the Baroness, despondingly, ** the malice of his heart is too legible on his counte¬ nance I No, I have no hope, save in Pro¬ vidence, for there is nothing human at hand to help us." ki Then, if that's the case, we must look to ourselves, and I'll try, at least, if I can't make a cut at them, before they shall lay a finger upon you." And, springing on Conrade's sabre, she, with great dexterity, unfastened the belt, and in the next moment drew it from its scabbard.— Sturino re-entered, and Barbara held the w r eapon, with which she had armed herself, behind her. " Lady," said he, addressing himself
im
to the Baroness, " here has been a fuss about nothing, after all. A few poor Zingari— harmless people, my lady, just want to read your ladyship's fortune for you. Give them but their own way ; there is no danger in them :—I have no better friends in the world, so I can't think of contradicting them, be it how it will" Four or five of this wild tribe imme¬ diately poured after hua into the room, and, by their barbarous dialect and rude gestures, seemed to invite, or rather com¬ mand the Baroness to follow them. " You had best comply, lady," said Sturmo, u they'll not injure you ; and besides, there is no help for you.—You will find them ten times civiller, if you go of your own accord; and, as for cry ing out and struggling, its a jest—only giving yourself so much useless trouble." The Baroness, half distracted vvith ter¬ ror, recoiled shrieking, when two of these ferocious beings seized each a hand, and
103 dragged her towards the door ; then Bar¬ bara, who, in their eagerness to secure a principal object, they had apparently ne¬ glected, rushed after them, and with de¬ sperate energy made a stroke at the arm of one ofthe Zingari who held her lady, and inflicted so deep a wound, that he was obliged to let go his grasp, uttering a hideous howl. In a moment the room was filled with curses and imprecations, accompanied by dreadful threats of re¬ venge ; and Barbara, exhausted by the one powerful effort she had made, was instantly disarmed, and would have been sacrificed without mercy to the vengeance of these wretches, but at that critical juncture, the lattice opened, and the face ofthe Flag of the Wood of Mornau was again vdsible* "Quit your prey, and escape!" said the hoarse, rough voice, ** the hounds are upon you !" No second admonition was waited for. Ere they could believe themselves awake
104
and alive, the Baroness and her faithful Barbara were delivered from their tre¬ mendous assailants, and the nearer and nearer echo of a horn, indicating the ap¬ proach of travellers, encouraged them to hope that their danger was indeed, and effectually, averted. Conrade meanw hile, in spite of the confusion which had cla¬ moured around him, lay stretched in the nook where he had first deposited him¬ self, a lifeless log. Barbara flew to her lady, embraced and wept over her, but, save some faint and fervent ejaculations of gratitude to Heaven for their deliver¬ ance, neither spoke, for their faculties were nearly overwhelmed by the shock they had experienced. Again they shrieked and clung closer to each other as the door burst open, and two gentle¬ men burst wildly into the room, 4C Merciful Heaven be thanked Г ex¬ claimed one of rheui, " they are safe !" The sight of these strangers, and the consciousness of safety their appearance
105
inspired, aroused Barbara from hei- trance of terror, and she began, with all the vo¬ lubility of nervous trepidation, to relate what had happened, intermixing her nar¬ rative with tears and exclamations. w But," said the stranger, with (ear¬ ful eagerness, " are you indeed both *afe r That horrid blood-track which led us to this room almost shook my reason." " It appears, my lord/' observed his companion, ic that the ruffians must have met with some resistance—but from whom ?" Barbara shuddered as she i effected on her own exploit, and wanted courage to confess that the blood which had so ap» palled them was drawn by her hand. u It is very strange, Desmond, that not a single creature is to be seen about this place, except some fellows who Ue scattered on the ground, as ifin deadly slumber ! The villain who keeps this к 5
106
house, and his whole family, all, have disappeared !" si And yet, my lord, however skilfully they have commenced their retreat, they will hardly make it good. If they are material men, they cannot vanish, and this heath affords no shelter. Our mvr- w' midons wdil presently return from their gallop, and then we shall, you may de¬ pend on it, hear news of the ruffians." " Gentlemen/'said the Baroness, strug¬ gling to recover herself, u under Heaven, you are my deliverers ! Every hope had died within me when your providential rescue arrived—and my poor Barbara ! they would have murdered her ! " Infernal demons !" exclaimed both the strangers*, "but you surely arc wounded^ then ! It must be your blood we saw ! No one defended you, accord¬ ing to your own report, all your do¬ mestics having had some soporific drug administered to them, yet there is a track of blood, fresh and vivid, from this door
107
to that which leads from the house— wii ose can it be ?" 44 Really," said Barbara, with an hys¬ teric burst, u it is very hard to hear of nothing else ! if you must know, gentle¬ men, I may as well tell you at once, that it came from the arm of one of the wretches who were dragging away my lady ; and were it to do again, I would do it again ; nay, I would have killed him if 1 cotdd,-—and I care not who knows it." " You, lady !" said Desmond, looking on the little delicate form of the black- eyed maiden in astonishment, ** were you really capable of so courageous an act ? But, surely you dream ! However resolute your zeal might be, you do not possess the means of inflicting such a wound !" '* I had the means, though ; and look at my pelisse, if you doubt it." h was steeped in the blood wdiich had spouted from the maiťs arm, and Bar-
IOS
bara, assured bv the look of admiration and encouragement she received from the strangers, proceeded to explain the use she had made of Conrade's sabre, which w T as wrested from her hand the moment she had struck the blow. Mean¬ while, the Baroness expressed no small terror at the non-appearance and quies¬ cence of Father Felix, through a night of such alarm : the stranger who seemed the superior in rank immediately offered to search for him, vvith the consolatory observation, that he was almost certain he had heard his voice when he first entered the house, but such was his own dismay and confusion at that moment, that he could not determine whence it proceeded. As he quitted the room, Barbara approached the Baroness and whispered, " My lady, I thought I had seen that man before, and now I am sure of it : or else ? how should he know his Reve¬ rence's voice ? It is the very same person
109
I saw in the chapel, the night after your ladyship was taken so ill, and he was going mad about it." " What !" cried the Baroness, starting, " Count Casimir of Vallensteïn ! It is very strange !" At that moment her joy in beholding the Friar superseded all other reflec¬ tions. The poor old man was trembling and agitated, having suffered all the misery of consciousness that his be¬ loved ward was exposed to some dan¬ ger, which he was neither permitted to share, nor to exert his little strength in attempting to defend her from. He had entered the dark hole allotted as his dormitory wdth no intention to spend the night in it, but merely for the pur« pose of exercising his devotions in pri¬ vate. As they were not remarkable for their brevity, an hour or two rolled away unperceived by him, and when he did arise from his knees, his consternation was great in discovering that he was a pri-
по
soner. His cell had been barred without, and after having in vain wearied himself with appeals to those whose footsteps he heard from time to time, he resigned himself as well as he couid to that for which he knew no remedy, though niaugre his meek and gentle temper, he became nearlv frantic when his ears were as- sailed by sounds of tumult mingled with female shrieks, which brought the hor¬ rors of the night to their climax. What had passed totally obliterated from his thoughts the conversation of Barbara on the preceding day, and he beheld the hero of the hour with unalloyed joy and gratitude. It was not exactly so with the Baroness ; his critical appearance was in her mind a source of suspicion and per¬ plexity ; she was possessed with the idea that her peace and tranquillity had been, and would be the mere sport of two self- interested adventurers, that even the dangers of the past night might be a mere pageant, invented to assist an art-
Ill
ful scheme, by him who appeared so op¬ portunely as her deliverer. Imbued with this suspicion, she resolved warily to note whatever passed, and her dread of be¬ coming the dupe of deliberate treachery had acquired a very predominant in¬ fluence in her heart. Desmond now quitted the apartment to give orders and make all necessary arrangements for leaving this desolate spot, and for pro¬ ceeding on the journey. " I believe," said the Baroness, €i it is the Count Casimir of Vallensteïn to whom I am indebted for a rescue from a most appalling situation. Your arrival at the precise moment when our last hope had expired was little less, methinks, than miraculous," ic It is the natural effect of a very powerful cause, lady," replied Casimir, blushing, for the grave emphasis of the Lady of Marchfeldt's countenance abashed him, he knew not why, £S True!" said lather Felix, "it does,
112
indeed, appear miraculous, for, now I think of it, how came you hither? 1 thought you were at Prague, or, per¬ haps, travelling from Prague to Vienna* but this is the last place I should have dreamed of meeting you in." " Yet, it was a dream that brought me hither." " What," cried the good Father, hastily crossing himself, ,ς were you warned of our danger in your sleep? This is verily a manifest interposition." " You mistake tne, holy Father," said the stranger, smiling, " it is the universal dream, the reveries of hope, to which I allude. I expected to meet you at Vienna, and finding you not arrived there, as my ciedentials could not be delivered immediately, I set off incog. with my friend Desmond, and a small but resolved retinue, and, had 1 not met you here, should have proceeded as far as the banks of the Raab. We have travelled wdth great rapidity, for, should
113
my father discover that I had thus in¬ dulged my restlessness, he would resent it as a boyish frolic, unworthy the gravity of his representative." u Pardon me, my Lord, if I confess," said the Baroness, Si that even after your explanation, there seems to have been something so vague and indeterminate in your motive, that 1 can easily imagine the Duke of Friedland, acute and pene¬ trating as he is, might consider it un* accountable." Cť However weak and presumptuous, Madam, may have been the motives which actuated me, I can never cease to thank God for ilie result to which they have led me." " Strange to say," said Desmond, entering, "our mvrmidons are returned, and have* found no trace of the enemy. If your business, my Lord, would permit us to loiter, I woukl not desire better amusement than to blockade the villains, for somewhere at no great distance they
114
must be lurking, and we should have them at discretion in a day or two I dare swear. But vve have at least re¬ lieved a garrison. Some of the Lady of Marchfeldťs people were barricadoed in the stable vvith the horses. They had a share of the sleeping potion, but are shaking off the effects, and some of them begin to bestir themselves/' ťí Madam," said the poor disconcerted Vallensteïn, dejectedly : " may I pre¬ sume to suggest the expediency of your setting forward to Sopron. Conrade and those of your suite, who have not aroused from their lethargy, might follow you, either on to Vienna, or, should you deem it proper to await them there, to Sopron. Desmond, my dear fellow, you can re¬ main and bring them forward. The re¬ mainder of your escort, Madam, and the principal part of my own, will, 1 flatter myself, be sufficient for your protection, should any farther danger arise, which is not probable."
115
íS Ay, my child," said Father Felix, " it is a very secure and rational arrange¬ ment, and, if you please, we will in¬ stantly adopt it," Poisoned as was the mind of the Ba¬ roness, the unfortunate proposal to divide her suite and throw herself chiefly into the guardianship of that of the Count, struck her at once as most palpable con¬ viction. Her eye, for a moment, paused disdainfully on him who made it. ťť Conscious, sir, as you are/' said she, u of the depth and nature of my obli¬ gations to you, you will deem them ill repaid I fear, if I most peremptorily decline proceeding without that man," pointing to Conrade, Сй and his fellows. The situation to which my enemy, who¬ ever it may be, has found it necessary to the success of his plot to reduce that brave and faithful domestic, evinces very plainly their sense of his fidelity." Stung by the strange contempt and doubt in which he perceived himself
116
held, the heart of Casimir quivered as if a quick gliding arrow had pierced it; his colour went and came, and he stood for a moment speechless. u With the faith and truth of Conrado I am well acquainted," he replied. " It was my pride to act as his fellow servant to one for whom I would have died : in the present mstance I did not aspire to supersede his services, but only to act for a short period as his representative." The mention, hypocritical as she con¬ ceived it, of her poor duped Wilhelm brought her indignation to its acme. fiť Your talents, my Lord," said she, coldly, u must not be so wasted. I can« not consent to it. You have a much more befitting part to fill ; but, I am faint and exhausted, and cannot argue." " Am I then to conclude," asked the Count, timidly, " that the Baroness oí* Marchfeldt deems me unworthy to ride in her suite ?" α On that point, sir, I am passive.
117
Consult your pleasure. Only I am re¬ solved to await the recovery of my at¬ tendants." " I think, sir," said Desmond, u vve had best carry this fellow into the open air, its sharp touch will revive him sooner than any thing/' Even this natural proposition was a subject of mistrust, and the Baroness wdiispered the Friar to accompany the two gentlemen who bore Conrade forth, and watch how they dealt vvith him. It is needless to say he suffered no injury at their hands. The shrewd blast soon restored him to consciousness, and his surprise, as his opening eves fell on the Count, and the consternation and regret with which he heard the events of the night briefly detailed, may betterbe ima¬ gined than described. " No, never, never again can I face my Lady ! She nunß forgive, for her nature is kind and gentle, but she can never trust me more."
118
cí Fear not, Conrade/ said Vallensteïn, mournfully, c< she is grateful for your past services and confident in your future ones. You have no pardon to solicit, no rebuke to apprehend. She but awaits your recovery to proceed on her journey,—go show yourself to her. Ah!" he exclaimed, as Conrade obeyed her injunctions, " she will speak kindly to him j and perhaps smile upon him. Oh Desmond, how are my sanguine hopes defeated! How huve I deserved her hatred ?" " Truly, mylord," said the lieutenant, si it seems to me that the evil and the remed} lie close in the same shell. For¬ give me, sir, but iî you did not catch the infection from her imperious ladyship, ï did, for never in my life did í feel m; indignation more completely excited!— If it had not been for her pretty little black-eyed woman, I should have been tempted to regret that our officious in¬ terference deprived her of leisure for
110
studying the Moldavian jargon ; and positively her reception of her deliverer would lead one to conclude she thought the Zingari the least impertinent in¬ truders of the two. I beseech your lordship, do not accept her permission, so ungraciously accorded, to attend her to Vienna. Her suite are all recovered ; she can do without us. Do, I implore your lordship, recollect who you are." " Recollect, Desmond ! i луоиЫ 1 could forget myself, and her, and all the world !" ςί Λ hard gallop, my lord, will do you crood, believe me. It will answer ten times better than drawling after this peerless lad}'s litter.—Pray let us be gone ! " 4C Do not distract me, Desmond!" cried Vallensteïn, turning fiercely upon him. a Neither you, nor any man liv¬ ing, shall dissuade me from my pur¬ pose. You may think me infatuated — call me madman !—I care not. Less in
120
harmony with myself it is out of your power to make me !" At this juncture Conrade came forth, cheered and comforted by the reception he had met from his lady, and pro» claimed his orders for the immediate pre¬ paration of her equipage. * c How r , sir ¡-—Does she then honour me with no message ?—Does she not even vouchsafe to inform me that she is on the point of setting out ? Desmond, you are right !■—No : an ideot—the most abject slave that breathes—would revolt at such treatment!" a No doubt, sir,"said Conrade, staring, " there is some mistake ¡—Shall I return to my lady ?" " No, no, sir," said Vallenstein impa¬ tiently, 6i go and attend to your business •—you, who cannot do wrong!" ifi And I, my lord," cried the lieute- nant, " will fly to order our steeds, and get our people mounted, that we may be off without delay. 1 * For he was glad at
12İ lieart that the neglectful insolence ofthe Baroness had at length provoked the gall of Casimir. íC I sec, sir," said the hitter, ťí that \ ou lav hold of every word I utter that yjíts your purpose : but do not suppose İ s[,all be din'(led about like a wreath of snow in the wind. No, sir! I baiti I vuniid attend the Baroness, and I ici i i attend her." "Very well, my lord: no man pre- Mime^ to dictate to vou." Ci They had better not, sir! dictation Mfits me at no time, and at this momem the merest attempi at it is beyond -juf- ferance 1" The phlegmatic Desmond shrugged his shoulders, and looked on his fiiend with pitying forbearance. Little more inik elapsed ere all w us reody ; the Ba¬ roness came forili, Ici h) the good con- io^oiy and attendevi b) Barbara ; she was pale, laminili, nmì exhausted. Val- lensuiu spiane to the side ofthe coach, \ UL. I!. (,
122
and aided to support her as she ascended the step: that she did not forbid his assistance somewhat consoled him ; he had held her hand in his too for an in¬ stant. But, alas ! for poor Casimir !·— all this proceeded rather from the qui¬ escence of a subdued spirit, than from any mental consent ; yet it served a little to sweeten the hitherto bitter food of his ruminations, for nothing can main¬ tain itself on lighter food than a lover's hope. He contrived likewise to amuse himself with the following dogma of his own invention :— ťC The love I bear this woman is cer¬ tainly created in my heart for some spe¬ cific purpose : such a powerful and per¬ vading principle would never have been born merely to die of frustration ! Be¬ sides," thought he, €ť could I, even by a wish, eradicate her image from my soul, I am not sure if this torment be not preferable to the cold and cheerless calm which would follow."
123
Such sophisms fully employed his co¬ gitations, and he was satisfied, at least for the present, that it was advisable to love on, even in his predicament. " For," said he, " луШю^ юл^е life is objectless ! What signify wealth or greatness ?—Some one must share them with me, or I should hate them." As his musings took a gentler turn, he thought on poor Desmond, and was assailed vvith shame and remorse, for the petulance with which he had treated him. He observed that the lieutenant kept aloof; and the idea that he had hurt the feelings of one vvho was, in a manner, incapable of retorting, grieved him sin- c e rely. " What must he think of me?—What can he think, but that I a^ a narro w- souled fellow, devoid of delicacy and ge¬ nerosity ? Poor Desmond ! I have out¬ raged his feelings, and he, meanwhile, believes it incumbent on him to bear it patiently." g 2
124
He checked his horse, till the lieute¬ nant came up wdth him, but looked in Λ -ain in his countenance for the smo¬ thered resentment he expected to find in it. é£ Dear Desmond," said he affection¬ ately, " I have recovered sense enough to deprecate most sincerely the hasty impertinence of my conduct, and to thank you for your forbearance." " The truth is, my lord, I class intoxi¬ cation, madness, and love, together ; and the words of a man, under any of these influences, should never be considered resentfully. Besides," added he, more seriously, "1 аш persuaded that Lieu¬ tenant Desmond is the very last man in existence to whom you would address a wounding word !'—but let us wave such punctilio. My life is your gift, and I am bound to you for it ; but I own it is a secondary consideration ; and if, at any hour, I conceded my honour in ieonardy, I should think myself justified
125
in defending it, even against my life's preserver. Under these feelings have I fearlessly attached myself to your for¬ tunes, and i trust you will find I have discretion enough to steer my way be¬ tween the opposite extremes of servility and captious tenacity.' 5 Content vvith this explanation, the two friends rode on together, till the caval¬ cade halted at Sopron ; but, as the whole remaining journey was performed with¬ out the intervention of any striking ad¬ ventures, it is sufficient to record of it, that it terminated at Vienna, after having occupied a reasonable space of time, and afforded, on its course, little or nothing which might justify Casimir Vallensteïn in the entertainment of more promising calculations»
126
CHAPTER VI. " Oh, poiish'd perturbation ! Golden сдге ' That keeps the ports of slumber open \\\Ap To many a watchful night !" For the first few days after their arrival at the seat of empire, Louisa of March¬ feldt was necessarily employed in order¬ ing her household, by the aid and advice of her uncle of Erdenheïm (towards whom she was anxious to make repara¬ tion for her seeming neglect, by every demonstration of respect and observance) and in preparing her court equipage, and habits of ceremony, matters in the importance of which it w T as the business of this experienced courtier to instruct her. Baron Erdenheïm was a kind, good man, a pious Catholic, and a loyal subject. There were who accused the Baron of superstition, both in religion
127
and politics, because he was somewhat childishly addicted to that which in each was merely extrinsic. He had a large and valuable collection of bones, from the thigh bone and shoulder blade to the toes anu fingers of the blessed martyrs, collected at a prodigious, but worthily incurred, expense ; and no antiquary ever contended with half the zeal for the ge¬ nuine character of a rusty Otho, as would Erdenheim for the identical splinter of the cross, which he ever bore about him in his golden reliquary. With regard to his earthly master, nothing could exceed his precision in matters of ceremony, and the unseasonable omission of a bow was, in his apprehension, a species of treason ; but, let it not be believed, that in thus " tything mint and cummin," he neglected " the weightier matters of the law." No, there was not a shadow of hypocrisy in tlic formal observances of this nobleman ; his zeal might betray him into puerilities, but it was a pure and honest zeal: the satirists of the
128
court might convert it into ridicule, but the moralists, if such there were, could never have found aught that was im¬ peachable in it ; and Ferdinand, to whom the throne had not been a couch of roses, had reason to know that whichever way the blast blew, whoever wavered, or whoever deserted, the shock wdiich loosened others from his side would draw this old and faithful servant only the closer, add to the number and pro¬ foundness of his bows, and minile some- what of tender respect with his obsequi¬ ousness. Ferdinand would have looked in vain to the head of Erdenheïm for aid ; to his heart an appeal was ahvays anticipated, and he was become abso¬ lutely necessary to his master; a habit which could not, without pain or incon¬ venience, be dispensed with. Count Casimir of Vallensteïn now re¬ solved seriously to occupy himself in the fulfilment, with certain reservations, of his noble father's instructions. " I will," said he to Desmond, ťe plunge
129
myself in politics, and bend all my facul¬ ties to the accomplishment of that great man's views. What ! shall I sit still and resigt elf in abject idleness to a mere idea ?» - jv what else, after all, is love ? A caprice!—An absurd prejudice of the fancy ! And shall a being of nerve and intellect submit himself ΛνίΛ his eyes open, to more than Egyptian bondage?" Cť Why, my lord, I would not be the man to speak in such undervaluing terms of that little ape, that ÍÊ scaltro pargo¬ letto," Cupid, for a trifle; but as your lordship is pleased to g^ve n.e my cue, I will confess that every thing I have read or heard of the young gentleman favours the supposition, that one of his principal jests lies hi baffling the progress, lessen¬ ing the dignity, and darkening the fame of those whom nature intended should stand foremost among their fellows. >3ow, as I am an enemy to his power, at least unwilling that, under certain cir¬ cumstances, he should maintain any foot» g 5
130
ing at all in a manly bosom, I would hope, that with you the matter might be optional. As long as the varlet behaves civilly, and sings and harps you to sleep, as Devereux does his Excellency, I can comprehend the compact by which he holds his place : but his music has a dif¬ ferent effect on your slumbers, I fear," " The fact is, Desmond, the whole business has been laid in prejudice. I fancied I must love this one woman, and therefore, without waiting to compare or examine, fell straight in love with her ! Last night, as I lay pondering the sub¬ ject, I was struck with the conviction that this is the луЬо1е of the mystery. " íť Well, my lord ; having found the root of the evil, you fell asleep imme¬ diately, I make no doubt." ťC No, Desmond, not exactly that ; for I thought it best to meditate on the measures it might become me to adopt ; for instance, as it became clear to me that my foolish fancy for the Baroness is
131
founded on no superiority in her; and that the Empress's circle may abound in many lovelier women than the scornful beauty who has caused me this tempo¬ rary vexation, I can, you know, Des¬ mond, solace myself by forming an attachment to one of these : I cannot for my life help thinking she must feel that —eh, Desmond ?" fci Alas! my dear Count, you are still deluding yourself with the hope that she partakes your passion; otherwise, how can you expect her to feel it ? It may pique her pride, but it cannot touch her heart. Besides, if you really succeed in transferringyour affections, what signifies to you what she thinks or feels?—You have too much generosity to triumph in mortifying a woman." " I am not sure of that, Desmond. Oh ! I feel such bitterness against her ! I am glad I hate her, however—are not you, my friend ?" " Why, Count, to be candid, I would
jLiJéei
rather see you quite free from the ague 1 . neither burning in its hot fit, nor freezing in its cold one. I have seen the disease before, and know too well you vvill keep alternating between these two extremes." u Desmond, I am not so tame-blooded as you suppose me. No, no ; you have yet to learn my disposition !—But this then is not the first time you have seen a man slighted by the woman of his heart, or rather of his fancy. Tell me, dear Desmond, what was the sequel ?" £C The result, my lord, is the emanci¬ pation of a brave lad's heart from most contemptible thraldom," said the lieute¬ nant, blushing. i£ I луаэ the patient!— My pretty little Ella superseded my rea¬ son, and governed instead thereof; 'md. during her reign, the little king bm of man was in a state of total subversion—the winds blew at once from the four quarters of heaven, and there was one eternal tran¬ sition from fair to stormy—from cloudy to sunshine. I can only compare my situ-
133
ation to that of some unfortunate fellow caught in the vortex of a whirlpool, the passive victim of its sport. Sometimes, like your lordship, 1 plumed myself on my hatred of Ella. Alas ! it was only the bitterness of insulted love.—But to come to the catastrophe, Exulting in my humiliation, my fair tyrant exacted each day new proofs of it; and finding that, on one occasion, I had been ap¬ pointed expressly by the Duke to a par¬ ticular duty, she thought proper to make my breach of his command the test of my affection. ť It is/ said she, ζ my gala day; if you are absent at such a time, blame me no more for any mark of favour f may bestow on your more assi¬ duous rivals ;—make me this trifling concession, or take the consequences.' I made an unhappy choice between the duke's displeasure and the frown of a cruel, capricious woman ! The follow¬ ing morning found me a prisoner, with a speedy promise, however, of soon escap¬ ing from all my fetters, for the Duke
134
paused not an instant on my sentence ; and such was my weakness, that I felt it a privilege to die for Ella. I was per¬ mitted, from time to time, to see my sister, and thought it strange that she bore me no message, no token of pity and tenderness, from her for whose sake I suffered. ' How/ said Ι, ζ does Ella support this stroke ľ ζ Forget her, my brother! Think of her, speak of her, no more ; she is dead for you—she is mar* ried !* * Ella married !—Impossible !— She cannot be so base V fi She is mar¬ ried—married to that fop Zartowitz!' É And this/ said I, ' is the purchase of a brave man's life !■—One false smile ! And has she no remorse ? Can she ruin and murder without compunction ?' ť Alas ! my brother, she heard your sentence луШю^ a pang. * If Desmond would be a fool/ said she, ' how can I help it ? Truly so weak a head is not луогШ much lamentation/ The following mcrning she gave her hand to Zartowitz/ " ci My poor fellow," cried Casimir, " I
135
should have thought such an explana¬ tion would have anticipated the stroke of the executioner !—How could you bear it ?" " It operated, my lord, as if a basin of cold лу^М:ег had been thrown in my face ; it brought me to my senses. I gave one long whistle, and a c farewell, pretty Ella!' and have never experienced the slightest symptom of either the hot or cold fit from that hour." " And have you seen her since ?" " Oh yes, my lord ! immediately on my liberation, and ere the news of your generous and successful intercession had reached them, I hastened to pay my con¬ gratulations to the new married pair. Zartowitz looked like a cowardly thief, thinking, no doubt, I came to demand restitution ; and Ella was in full pre¬ paration for a scene. Perhaps, poor thing, she was really frightened, for a more unexpected apparition could not have stood before her ; and I believe she
136
would have preferred, of the two, to have seen me wdthout my head rather than vvith it, weak as she had pronounced it to be. Certain it is, that she turned pale, and contrived to twinkle a few crystals into her eves." V ê/ " And what then, Desmond ?" " Why then, my lord, I laughed, and laughed so significantly, that she saw her power was departed, and her dupe escaped. I despised her so ineffably that I could find no pleasure in plaguing her : so my visit was short, and unmarked by a single verbal reproach.'* " And you are effectually and radically recovered ?" " As you see, my lord ; but my medi¬ cine was a desperate one, and I trust your cure will be easier," From that hour Desmond became doubly endeared to his patron, who no longer looked on him as a young cynic, vriio satirized what he had not the heart to feel. Though a few years younger
137
than himself, he constituted him his mentor, and resolved to refer to him his symptoms, and, as far as he was able, to adopt his councils. Nor could this deli¬ cate trust have been lodged in more faithful and judicious hands. Si Cause yourself, my lord, to be re¬ spected by the Baroness, at all hazards. Let her see you firmly and manfully exerting vourself in such matters as best befit your eminent station ;—force her to acknowledge your merit. Let her see you at the right hand of the Emperor. Convince her that the son of Vallenstein is worthy of a father who has filled all Europe vvith hi* fame. And, finally, should her wayward fancy declare in favour of another, compel her to blush for the incľmatioa which sets judgment at defiance. Thus, my lord, you may be wounded and tortured, but you will avoid disgrace ! These women ¡—Be¬ lieve me, Count, nothing elates their haughty, ambitious spirit, like dragging
138
after their chariot wheels, a spectacle to the people—a captive such as you ; and completing the pageant by treacling on your neck ! Follow her like her shadow —languish at her—sigh for her—kneel to her—I have told you the result. Even if in heart she loved you, maltreatment would be the inevitable consequence— no human brain can bear such clouds of incense ! Take an advantageous posi¬ tion, and let her contemplate you at a little distance. I луоиЫ gladly assist you to Λνίη her, but I will never consent to see you throw yourself beneath her feet." Casimir's heart was soothed by this view of the subject s and his spirits elated by the thought of conquering the appro¬ bation, луЫсп had been, in the first in¬ stance, so ungratefully and unjustly withheld. He sent Desmond to the Vice- Chamberlain, to request his wish might be formally intimated for an introduction on the folkrwing morning to the Ľn>
139
peror. Desmond quickly returned, and, with an air of diplomatic importance, informed his patron, that he had himself been admitted to the speech of his im¬ perial majesty, who had received him in his cabinet; and having written a few words on a slip of paper, folded, sealed it, and ordered him to give it into the hands of the Count. Vallensteïn found in it a brief command to come that night to the palace. " Do not fail to be, at eight o'clock, at the west gate ; you will be met there, and conducted to an apartment, where vve may confer in private." " Well, this is prosperous!" said Ca¬ simir : " I reckoned on having days, weeks perhaps, to wait ere I could reasonably solicit that which is thus promptly and voluntarily accorded—-thus I shall be able to give the Duke early and important intelligence." Exactly at the hour prescribed, Casi¬ mir, wrapt close in his pelisse, stood at
140
the little western gate. A man, fenced, like himself, from cold and observation, awaited him there, took his arm in si¬ lence, and drew him into the palace, carefully locking the gate after him : they then rapidly ascended a narrow staircase, which led to a small and ap¬ parently isolated apartment, the door of which Casimir's conductor carefully fast¬ ened, and throwing off the mantle which enveloped him, revealed the Emperor. Vallensteïn bent his knee to his sove¬ reign. Ci Rise, sir," said Ferdinand, " rise, son of my best friend ! We do not meet here, young man, as sovereign and sub¬ ject ; harassed, ensnared, and disarmed by the Machiavelian arts of politicians, I pine after the return of mutual con¬ fidence, I yearn to hear once more the language of truth." c( Your majesty shall hear none other from the son of Vallensteïn/' " Y T et, alas !" said Ferdinand, " why
141
should I desire the truth from your lips? And what vvill it td!, but that 1 have been a weak ungrateful master to the noblest, best of servants?" iC My gracious Lord, such generous acknowledgment is the proudest tribute a noble mind can receive, and I trust your Majesty vvill have proof that the mind of Vallensteïn has in no degree de¬ generated on the decline of his fortunes; he is no less faithful in his passive duties than when he had the happiness to serve your Majesty in the face ofthe world."' " I know it well, Count! Look here, voung man!" and opening the private drawer ofa bureau, hc drew from thence certain papers which he put into the hand of Casimir : Cí Seat yourself at your ease," he added, " for we have much to talk of. Cast your eye mean¬ while over those letters, and imagine how bitter are my self-reproaches for having stretched forth my right arm, and permitted my enemies to sever it from m ν body."
142
Young Vallensteïn did as he was com¬ manded, and, to his surprise, found the first paper to contain the copy of a letter from Arn heim, who had deserted to the service of'Gustavus Adolphus, to his fa¬ ther, inveighing against the ingratitude of Ferdinand, and inviting him totake signal vengeance by adopting the cause of the Swedish monarch, and becoming an equal sharer in that hero's glory, who had empowered the writer to offer him the confirmation of his rights in the duchy of Mecklenburg, the guarantee of all his other vast possessions, and the cession of other privileges sufficient to inflame the ambition c^ a less exalted soul than that of Vallensteïn, whose re¬ ply ran thus : " Arnheim ! your advice is the advice ofa traitor, and I despise it as í despise him from whom it emanates. I shall rise again, and then, as you are fond of bestowing counsel, advise your king of snow to keep out of the sun. "FlUEDLAND."
143
" There," said Ferdinand, Ci is a glo¬ rious, a godlike spirit. No tampering 5 no wavering, no pausing to see the event of things, but a great soul, speaking its own coneise and spontaneous language. With shame and contrition, I confess, that when I signed my consent to your father's retirement, my hand alone was concerned in the act ; for both my head and heart protested against it. Alas! my reluctance has since been but too well justified ! Now I know the men at whose instigation—must I say under whose compulsion—that signature was wrung from me! 1 know them as they are—the creatures of llichelieu. Bavaria, Λνΐιοιη I loved as a private man loves his friend, and father Joseph, лл*кп whom every se¬ cret of my soul was deposited*. In short,
144
that capuchin has disarmed me vvith his rosary, and covered six electoral caps with his cowl." " But if your Imperial Majesty has the clew to these intricacies, surely they vvill easily unravel." " Ah, my son !" said the Emperor, "to the sanguine imagination of youth what is not easy? But I dare not even be¬ tray to these men that í have sounded their hollowness. I am condemned si¬ lently to behold their operations ; yea, to know as well as themselves, that the} tend to the downfal of my house, and the dismemberment of my dominions, and }ct to forbear. Aud this, young man, is royalty !" " It is possible, my gracions sovereign, that the private despatches 1 am charged with by my father may suggest some re¬ medy for an evil so mighty." The Emperor seized those despatches 'vvith avidity, as if he believed they con¬ tained some charm which could work the restoration of ins peace, and re-oi-
145
ganize his affairs. He locked them in his desk, and then proceeded to inform young Vallensteïn that he had reason to know the progress of the hitherto in¬ vincible Gustavus had been connived at by those of his electors and nobles, who still wore the mask of friendship and fealty to their abused sovereign, and whose secret practices were even more destructive than the hostility of those Λνΐιο were openly in rebellion. el My General Tilly," pursued he, u is brave and skilful, but presumptuous and cruel—his very successes make me shud¬ der to the centre ! The recent sack of Magdeburgh was a deed of horror, such as few Christian reigns can parallel: the brute himself boasted its comparison witli the burning of Troy and the destruction of Jerusalem ! Thus, луЫспеуег way I look, clouds and tempests seem thicken¬ ing around me, and, save the man whom í have driven from my side, my eyes vol. п. и
146
wander vainly round the world in seaich ofa friend." He confessed to Casimir, that should their secret conference be by any means discovered, it would involve him in in¬ calculable difficulties:— " For," said he, " it is not the least of my miseries, that I must dissemble with these dissemblers. My household is corrupt, my actions arc watched, m ν words registered, m v verv r/ О v rr sighs numbered. And you, young man, it behoves you to be wary. Born, as v on were, in the eagle's nest, there is no danger of your being dazzled and mis¬ led by this close admission to the coun¬ tenance of your sovereign; but you will be surrounded by crafty examiners. Be¬ serve, therefore, vvill bc insufficient; you vvill need address; and, above all, be cautious in your choice of those agents vvho travel between you and Prague." As Ferdinand proceeded in his admo¬ nitions and instructions; and in various
147
inquiries respecting the nobles and di¬ stinguished military who adhered to the fortunes ofthe Duke of Friedland, a light step was heard ascending the stair, and a tap at the door announced an in¬ truder. Casimir started, and changed colour, fearing that the much-dreaded detection of this nocturnal audience was at hand ; but the emperor's care-worn countenance relaxed into a tender smile, as he cried, ίς Come in, Mary Anne ! Did I say 1 had no friend on whom I might repose ni} harassed spirit? Yet here comes one whose precious sympathy entwines its roses with my thorny crown :■—it is m} wae i 4 it is my wife ľ thrilled to Vallen» stein's heart; and he now envied the man on whose destiny, but the moment before, all the compassion of his soul had been lavished. He knelt, and kissed the fair hand which was graciously ex¬ tended to him ; but the eyes ofthe Em¬ ii 2
148
press scareely rested on him for an in¬ stant. íť Oh, my Ferdinand !" said she, <fi your wasting form and hollow cheek but too clearly betray the consequences of these vigils ! Behold ! (pointing to the clock, whose finger touched the stroke of three), I became almost alarmed at your silence, and ventured to seek you/' Ci And this is the man," thought Casi¬ mir, " whom I deemed unhappy !" The cheek ofthe Empress, like that of her august partner, bore the characters of care : her soft blue eyes had a mourn¬ ful expression. She was attired in a sim¬ ple white robe, and divested totally of every note of sovereignty, but such as nature had impressed her with, and which were unalienable : her figure was somewhat above the usual height, and her air had in it an undefinable and un- assumed majesty, which at a glance se¬ cured the respect of the beholder as her unquestioned tribute : her sun had passed
149
its meridian ; but she had yet enough of loveliness to secure, from the tender ad¬ miration of her subjects, that homage which their factious tempers might have withheld from a less fascinating em¬ press : to Ferdinand she w r as the friend, the consoler, the repository of his uneasy thoughts, the kind pillow on which his weary head reclined itself. As Casimir ventured to lift his eyes to her counte¬ nance, he thought on Louisa. " Such as she is," said he mentally, ζζ will the Lady of Marcnfeldt be, some thirty years hence !" And there was, in truth, a similarity in the character of their beauty which authorised the comparison. The Em¬ peror briefly explained the nature of the conference, whicli had beguiled him through so many hours ; and, as he pre¬ sented the son of Vallensteïn, ťí You must not," said he, smiling, " betray our mysteries to our cousin Maximilian; for I do not despair, by
150
the help of this youth's father, of ere long surprising our kinsman, and would not find myself anticipated. To-mor¬ row," said he to Casimir, " you will ap¬ pear at the levee, where you must quite forget this night's dream, and I shall set you the example. Be not chilled, what¬ ever may appear on the surface. The frost-work pageant you will then behold exhibited is all artificial ; what you now see and hear is genuine, and }our heart may rest upon it." He then bade him cordially good night, and the Empress, again present¬ ing him her hand, said graciously, " Count, you have smoothed his Ma¬ jesty's brow by your communications : very seldom have his nocturnal vigils a like effect. In truth, your countenance bodes well. May a portion of what¬ ever good you bring rest wdth the mes¬ senger !" Entrusted vvith a key to the little postern door, which he was to retain for his
151
future use, and taught to elude whatever obstructions he might meet from centi- neis or others, he glided down the stair, and soon returned safe and unob¬ served at the Hotel Vallensteïn. Ile went to his bed with a mind and heart so full, that sleep was out of the ques¬ tion : even the image of Louisa was com¬ pelled to divide its residence with other objects—the purest zeal and compassion for his betiayed and persecuted sove¬ reign ; the most ardent desire to behold him and his own father restored to a position in which they might triumph¬ antly defy their mutual enemies; and, above all, an enthusiastic wish to be in the lowest degree an instrument in restoring happiness and tranquillity to that majestic woman who shared the t hi one and sorrows of the Emperor— such were the materials of which his reveries were made; nor were they un¬ becoming a temper so lofty and inge¬ nuous, lie could not conceive how
152
those who had daily opportunities of be¬ holding and listening to the Empress could find courage to implant a thorn in that gentle, yet exalted bosom ; for Casi¬ mir was a chevalier of the old stamp, and the ostensible motives which bade an ancient knight ride forth, afforded exactly the sort of spur which ΛνουΜ have stimulated him to range the uni¬ verse.
153
CHAPTER YIL " Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never Saw'st good manners; if thou never saw'st good manners, Then th) manners must be wicked ; and wickedness is sin, And sin damnation: thou art in a parlous state, shepherd !" Shakspeare. Тык Baroness of Marchfeldt was to be presented by her aunt of Erdenheïm, by a singular coincidence, on the same day on which Vallenstein's maternal uncle, Count Harrach, was to perform the same service for him. When the former en¬ tered the drawing-room, she found the Empress surrounded by the ladies of her household, and a few of the distinguished female noblesse : the gentlemen consisted only of her chamberlain and a couple of pages, one of them merely a child. u 5
154
There was a resemblance of person and correspondence of mind between the Empress and Louisa of Marchfeldt, which was mutually and almost instanta¬ neously felt: each internally acknow¬ ledged her kindred and accordance vvith the other, and they were friends in heart ere, in fact, they ceased to be strangers, Louisa had never before stood in Hie pre¬ sence of royalty ; a sentiment of filial awe mingled in the admiration with which she beheld her august sovereign, and the smile of the Empress was more than usually benign and gracious, as she raised and embraced the fair Hungarian. " At length, then, Baroness," said she, " we have succeeded in winning you from your beloved retirement: such a rose was not born to wither in the wilderness. And yet," added she, thoughtfully, " there is peace in the wilderness, and if there are none to flatter there, there are none to betray." Poor Louisa echoed the sigh vvith
155
whicli this was spoken from the centre of her heart, but she dared not say—though she thought, " Where vvill not treachery penetrate?" The Empress seldom trusted herself in pubiic vvith the utterance of words which might be referred to feelings, for Mary /inne of Bavaria was no less closely watched in than her Imperial spouse ; she was accustomed, therefore, to in¬ trench herself within the limits of court etiquette, and smiled, spoke, and curtsied by rule : nevertheless, there was some« what in the voice and countenance ofthe young Baroness which surprised her into the expression of a genuine sentiment, and, conscious of the lapse, she resumed her wonted position. " Welf madam," said she, Ci as we have caught you, we vvill not permit you to escape till vve have made a courtier of you; and if we do not succeed in teach¬ ing you to be happy amongst us, we will undertake that you shall learn, at least,
löt>
to abhor solitude.—-What say you, ma¬ dam ?" addressing Princess Stolberg, her principal lady of the key. ťC I think your Imperial Majesty is right :-—the Baroness of Marchfeldt will nevei endure the monotonous stillness of her old towers, when she has drank of the enchanted cup which circulates only in the haunts of the powerful and the brilliant. In fact, the true Lotos grows with us ; once tasted, home and all its homely delights are infallibly forgotten." " If," said Louisa, timidly, " to be a courtier, implies the privilege of bringing in person the tribute of dutiful attach¬ ment to the foot of my sovereign, I long to be installed in the office." " Very well, indeed !" exclaimed Prin¬ cess Stolberg, sarcastically : " Your first essay, lady, has so much genius in it, there is danger you will foil your in¬ structors." " But,"observed the Empress, c * though the phrase is of courtly model, there was
157
a rustic emotion in the utterance of it which savours ofthe banks of thellaab: you will have some trouble with her yet, I suspect." And though she uttered these words in an ambiguous tone, and trusted not her lips with a smile, a sort of intelligence seemed already established beUveen her and Louisa, and the latter felt a pleased conviction that her charming sovereign regarded her with partial favour. Baroness Erdenheïm was the counter¬ part of her lord, from whom she varied only in possessing somewhat less of sen¬ timent, and in rather caricaturing his etiquettes and formalities : she was, in short, a mere lady of procession, strictly attached to antique observances, and ab¬ horring the mere notion of innovation, however amiable and insinuating the form it might assume;—she was an automaton courtier, taciturn and solemn ; her words were few and well placed, never offend¬ ing by the indecorous introduction of an
158
idea: her curtsies w r ere admirably adapted to the pretensions of the individual to whom they were made ; indeed, so infalli¬ ble were they deemed, as almost to serve as a reference in points of precedence— as, for instance, tť I cannot think of giving place to Madame de Rochefort ! My superior claims need no vindication; but, if they did, I might appeal to Baroness Erden¬ heïm's curtsy ;— to Madame de Pi oc he- fort, if did not exceed six inches ; to me, it was a very ample quarter ofa yard." Madame Erdenheim never ilatteied, and seldom smiled, but she was silently assiduous, alvvays in her place, and alvvays ready to perform her mechanical duties : she was greatly surprised and shocked at the presumption of her niece, wiiich she attributed to her Hungarian breeding : — to allow the sound of her voice to be heard by the Empress, on her very first introduction, was in itself a deviation from the ton ofthe day ; but to speak in
159
an accent and with a countenance which betrayed the existence of that vulgar thing a heart, in such a presence, might well disconcert and confound the mecha¬ nical good breeding of the Baroness Er¬ denheim, and she blushed through her rouge at her degenerate relative, severely tasking herself for having neglected to keep her a short time in training. The Empress, fearing to excite the malignity of any of her keen observers by farther acts of attention to the interesting stran¬ ger, began to converse playfully with her youngest page, the orphan son of a lady who had shared and deserved her favour. Wonderful to tell, little Theodore was a favourite without foes; no one conde¬ scended to fear or envy a baby, and the happy rogue shared the comfits and ca¬ resses of all the ladies ofthe court. While they were laughing at his artless prattle, and provoking his repartees, the Emperor and some of his gentlemen entered the circle ;—a solemn bow and curtsy were
160
exchanged by the imperial pair, and Louisa underwent the ceremony of pre¬ sentation to his Majesty, vvho, without reference to the reluctance with which she had consented to visit the capital, bade her луе!соте with much goodness; indeed, he had little leisure to think or care about the caprices of his female sub¬ jects Little Theodore had been em¬ ployed for a few minutes in an earnest examination of Louisa's countenance. " It would seem, lady," said Ferdinand, iC you have made one captive at least, already—an earnest, no doubt, of many to come.-—But what are you thinking, Theodore ? You have been silent three minutes." " I have been trying to find out the difference between her Majesty and that young lady." u You are a shrewd knave, and have found the likeness, it seems. There is, in truth, a striking resemblance between the Empress and the Baroness of March-
161
fehlt. —It must unquestionably have caught your observation ?" said he, turn¬ ing to the ladies. <c Your Imperial Majesty is all good¬ ness/' replied Madame Erdenheïm ; " but my niece would not, for the world, be guilty of the presumption of supposing there can be the slightest degree of re¬ semblance between her and our gracious mistress." " Yet, madam, we cannot acquit her ofthe audacious fact, however innocent her intentions may be/* ŕí Why," said Theodore, " they are both tall, and both fair, both have blue eyes, both look serious till they smile, and then, it is beautiful. But besides, the new lady is altogether more like an empress than any ofthe others/' Ci You little wretch," said Princess Stolberg, " you have all the fickleness of your sex, it seems : but, do pray tell us, wherein is the new lady so like an em¬ press ?"
162
" Oh ! I can't explain why, if I were to try all day ! But she makes me feel as if I should be so afraid to vex her, and as if I could love her so dearly ! Just as I feel about my own Imperial mistress/' And he lifted up his rosy face to the Empress, his dark eyes shining with grateful sensibility. Poor Theodore had disconcerted nearly the whole circle t— Louisa felt agitated and embarrassed, for her native sense would have suggested to her that the idle prattl· 4 of the page was calculated to excite against her the re¬ sentful vanity of the ladies of the court, even had the cloud which crept over the brow of Princess Stolberg withheld its evidence ; but there was not а lady in the circle who did not find herself ag¬ grieved by the odious comparison, and the Empress was too well read in the tempers of those arianul her, not to de¬ precate internally the mischief to which the child's open admiration of Louisa would give birth. But the attention of
1G3
all present was quickly diverted by the entrance of Counts Harrach and Casimir of Vallensteïn. Count Harrach was bro¬ ther to the Duke of Friedland's second wife, who had died in the infancy of our hero : during the predominance of his brother-in-law, he boasted loudly of the connexion, and railed not to use it to the utmost in the piomotion of many a scheme for his own aggrandisement ; no one more pompously set forth the abili¬ ties, the transcendant genius, the almost supernatural influence of this great man : he was, in short, the eternal theme of his discourse ; in particular, if any thing seemed to indicate too light a valuation of his own person, he alvvays conde¬ scended to assist his importance by a little borrowed lustre : then, " my illustrious brother the Duke of Friedland" was sure to be dragged into the subject, even ifit turned on the texture of a pair of point ruffles: but Count Harraeh's fraternal feelings had received a seveit concussion
164
in the disgrace, and retirement from power, of the elder Vallensteïn, as he firmly believed he had " filien, like Lu¬ cifer, never to rise again ·," nor did he feel that natural yearning towards his young kinsman which, under other cir¬ cumstances, he might have felt, How¬ ever, being a man of timorous, cautious character, the fear of incurring the pon¬ derous displeasure of the exiled duke se¬ cured his courtly politeness, as he had learned from experience that there was something very searching to the soul in the rebuke of his once dear brother j he dared not therefore decline the office im¬ posed on him of presenting his nephew, though he would rather it had been spared him, and Casimir remarked with contemptuous enjoyment the embar¬ rassed hesitation of this genuine courtier, when he found himself in the mortifying predicament of reminding the world that tiie son ofa disgraced man was so nearly akin to him* Very fortunately for young
165
Vallensteïn, at the moment of his en¬ trance, the Baroness of Marchfeldt was standing behind the Empress, and he was not conscious of her presence, while the sight of him caused her carefully to pre¬ serve her invisible station : he therefore acquitted himself in the ceremonial with the manly grace natural to him, though, İn spite of the Emperor's warning, the freezing manner in wdiich he was publicly received chilled his spirits, and he could scarcely believe that the haughty, austere monarch, before whom he now stood, was the same individual wiih whom, during the greater part of the night, he had conversed with all the confidence of a favoured son and an indulgent father. He trembled to think that his reception from the Empress would wear the same character, and hardly felt courage to ap¬ proach one whose frown, he conceived, must be as insupportable as her smile was enchanting. Count Harrach, whose con* fusion increased in some proportion vvith
16G
that of his kinsman, was compelled to go through with his reluctant task, and to present Casimir to the Empress; an office, which, under other circumstances, his Imperial Majesty generally took upon himself. For the first time in his life diil Casimir feel his courage falter, and his confidence desert him : he stood in a new and difficult position, and луаэ driven to his utmost efibrt to meet the exigence with fortitude ; nor did he find his nen es braced the better for the conflict, by per¬ ceiving, at the moment when he bent his knee to kiss the hand of his august mis¬ tress, that his humiliations had been looked upon by the Baroness of March¬ feldt. Almost speechless from painful emotion, his colour varying from red to pale, his heart throbbing within him, and beset by a crowd of the most overwhelm¬ ing feelings, he rose from the floor scarcely conscious where he was, or what he did. The Empress, not unaware of the situation of his mind, suffered for
167
him, but dared not evince her sympathy ; the Baroness of Marchfeldt curtsied to him, and did not appear inclined to dis¬ courage, if she did not invite his advance. He murmured a scarce audible inquiry after her health, and attempted to express a hope that it had not been materially injured by her dangerous adventure at the post-house. His compliment and his questions were replied to with a com¬ posure more effectually annihilating to the dreams of a lover than even the dis¬ play of aversion, and Vallensteïn was mi¬ serable: nevertheless, at that moment, the eyes of several fair ladies were riveted to his countenance, and earnestly solicit¬ ing a responsive glance. The cold calm of the Baroness was so intolerable, that he soon relinquished the conversation, and leaning his back against a pillar, and fold ino* his arms, resigned himself in proud displeasure to most perturbed musings.—As if his mortification was to ι. J know no limits, the entrance of Maximi¬ lian of Bavaria, his father's triumphant
168
enemy, the friendly greeting with which he was met by the injured Ferdinand, and the insolent confidence with which the traitor was permitted to carry his plotting head in that very circle where he had been received almost like one who had no right to enter it, was the drop in his cup of bitterness which filled it to overflowing.—Bavaria retired with the Emperor to a corner of the saloon, and Casimir felt assured that he was the theme of their conversation, from the looks cast towards him from time to time by* the duke:—he could likewise per¬ ceive that the conference was not strictly amicable, " Ah !" thought he, " his highness, no doubt, takes exceptions at my license to stand here ! It is not enough, that the son of the first man in Europe is slighted and neglected, but his admission must be prohibited !—Nay, if you yield that, Fer¬ dinand, I renounce for ever the service of so cowardly a master !" He guessed right as to the subject in
169
debate. Bavaria was indeed expressing his displeased wonder, on beholding the son of the Duke of Friedland in that circle, and remonstrating with the Em¬ peror on the jealousies and schisms such an apparition was likely to create amongst the Electors, who had united their voices with his for the duke's dismissal. " Methinks, cousin," was Ferdinand's reply, " you take me for your pupil ; but there are bounds to my docility. You have succeeded in driving Count Vallen¬ steïn the elder from the head of my armies, but you shall not. comparative trifle as it may seem, drive his son from this circle." Maximilian, grown bold from impu¬ nity, as well as privileged by his near affinity to his sovereign, muttered in¬ distinctly something like a threat that either he himself or young Vallenstem must withdraw ; but Ferdinand felt his freewill so grossly attacked, and was so sensible of the gradual yet rapid innova¬ vo!.. II. ι
170
tions to which his dignity, not only as a sovereign, but as a man, ΛΥ -as exposed, that he turned from the exasperated duke, and left him to cool as hc might. Nor was this the only conference of which Vallensteïn was the subject : Princess Stolberg, луЬо had beheld him from his first entrance wdth admiring curiosity, drew Count Harrach to her side by a glance of invitation. íť Count!" exclaimed she, Cť what an Apollo is your nephew ! We have seen nothing like him at court this аце í How proud you must be of him !" tc Why, for that matter, princess,— I cannot altogether prêtent! to say that his presence in thb place has my concur¬ rence :■—it has no acquiescence of mine, you may be assured. As for being pi oud of him—-the youth is handsome, no doubt, but, I protest, there is a sullen fierceness about him, that,—that—■" " I understand you, Count," said the princess, archly ; "you would say, that
171
vou are not quii e so proud of him as you were of his father when he was in his zenith ! I remember how you did idolize him ! Positively, it was quite affecting to witness such disinterested attachment !" Harrach, vvho did not much relish the reference to his ťí dear and illustrious brother," was relieved by the Baroness of Erdenheim observing, that she could not possibly see any thing to admire in the young count. 44 And it is," said she, as if by way of assigning her reason for this negative senterne, st clear to me that their Im¬ perial M'ijesties look very coldly on him. And besides, a more ill-bred youth I never beheld ! I have witnessed, thank Heaven! many first presentations, but have never seen any of our young nobles, whatever might be their reception, so ig¬ norant as to betray resentment, either in eountenanee or manner; and I, for my part, cannot wonder if Count Ilarrach is ashamed anil disconcerted !" ι 2
172
ui Ay, madam/' said the count, com¬ forted by the volunteer aid of such an ally ; ζί nor docs the matter end there : his Highness of Bavaria, a prince, whom for worlds I луои!с1 not ofíend, regards me with a countenance of such displea¬ sure, as absolutely petrifies me ! I fiatter m\ self, no man stood in higher estimation with his highness than I did, till my in¬ fatuated brother-in-law chose to send his hoy to me, of all people, as if for the pur¬ pose of ruining me ; and now, for aught 1 can see, the noble Maximilian may never look on me favourably again!'* ťí Very hard, indeed!" responded Ma¬ dame Erdenheim, cc a most painful pre¬ dicament !" ťí Well," said Princess Stolberg, " 1 would rather see that fine expressive countenance, which betrays so powerfull\ the irritated feelings of a manly mind, expand into a smile, than receive a dozen nods from that black-browed Bavaria ; but Hiere is no accounting for difference of
17J taste. That young Vallensteïn should revolt against the reception he has met with I cannot wonder, unless it had con¬ verted him, as Duke Maximilian's frown has operated on you, my lord, into a pe¬ trifaction.-—I will go speak to him." Harrach and his ally uplifted their hands and e) es. éC I wonder,"' said the former, " how that rash and volatile lady maintains her influence." " I really cannot divine," returnod the tìaroncss ; i£ for unquestionably her inde< orums are of the most flagrant de¬ scription, and her disregard to precedence is not the least inconceivable part of her character." ^ Her notice of Valleibtcm is the most ill-judged thing I ever heard of," observed the Count : ik 1 really did cherish a hope thai if he was leh to 1rs own suileniHss, he would, pu haps, take huil' and be oil'; but now there is no cab culai ing,—young men are so vain. Uo
174
see, madam, she has made him smile ! and I dare say he wid stay tormenting me, ifit be only to dangle after her. if he does, I shall sink into the earth with vexation." How delighted must a man fee], who, thrown upon a pathless desert, which owns, as he supposes, no second inhabit¬ ant, hears unexpectedly the accents of a human voice! It is somewhat similar in the world's wildness ;—there are few who have not occasionally known the dreariness of complete isolation in the midst of a crowd, where a thousand con¬ comitant circumstances augment and iu- hance their sense of individual solitude. It was the soft and soothing tone of a beautiful woman that awakened poor Casimir from his dream of neglect and desertion, and convinced him he was not alone. Princess Stolberg, in addressing him, divested herself of all the piquante flippancy with which she had amused herself in tonnenting the two courtiers,
175 and threw into her voice and manner a modest gentleness which struck him аъ the product of generous pity, and, with¬ out exciting his vanity, awakened his gra¬ titude. " You, Count," said she, " vvho have no doubt frequented other courts, must be forcibly aware of the joyless solemnity ofour ionnal Germanisms. They are dis¬ couraging to a novice, but beneath them there is something worth patience." tr I am loth, madam, to form my opinion of the Austrian court from my present impressions« The circumstances ofthe times may have tinged it with the sombre character it now exhibits ; and that it has attractions, equal, at least, to anv other in Europe, cannot be denied by the most perverse or iusensiblj spirit." And he marked tiie application of his courteous reply byas courteous a bow. While thc\ were in conversation, the Duke of Bavaria passed so close, that his sword and that of Vallensteïn clashed.
176 Some similar feeling at the same moment covered with а crimson flush the cheek of each, as they turned suddenly and faced each other. ťí I conld not help it, sir," said the Duke, abruptly, anticipating the ques¬ tion he saw was coming. " Of course !" replied joung Vallen¬ steïn, as briefly. " That," said the Princess, " is our ursa-major: he is a pompous brute! I hate the sight of him ! He did us, I sus¬ pect, more mischief than his Gothic Ma¬ jesty himself threatens us vvith, when he removed bv his arts the greatest soldier and the finest gentleman in Europe írom the head of our armies, and gave liis post to his owu little fright ofa general, Count Tilly." Casimir couhl not help smiling as he replied, " Nature Las in truth used Tilly somewhat shabbily as to externals; 1 ut that unprepossessing form is the shrine ofa gallant spirit,"
ΎΨΎ ьЧ Some vv hat shabbily ! She certainly for¬ pot totally what she wasabout, and thought she was making an ape ! Xot that I am sorry to see him here occasionally; for his rude tricks are so comically discon¬ certing to the arrangement of some of our court puppets, tliat I have been more tlian once treated, at the expense of de¬ corum, vvith a very comfortable St of laughier. And that, Count, let me tell you, ís an obligation not to be forgotten. Weil -do I remember his grotesque ligure, his little poised face eclipsed nearly by his prodigious vv luskers, his stiaight, short grey bail-, and his drv savage aspect, vvith his half Spani-ih, half Cernían attire, and his pist td stuck in his belt, strut¬ ting about the saloon v. ith tlie air ofa sentinel mounting· guard ; reckless whom he elbowed, or on wdiose toes he trod. In an evil Injur he nearly overset poor Count Ilarrach, who so fur forgot his well-known prüdem e, as to turn with somewhat of contemptuous indignation ι 5
178
upon Tilly ; but he was quickly restored to his pacific habits by the voice of the little general, who roared like a Stentor, 6 Ybu may smile, sir, at the difference of our fashions; but know, that ΛνΜι this pistol in my girdle, and ΛνΜιοηί ever drawing it from thence, I have gained seven battles, and when you have done the same, Count Harrach, you will stand the shot ofa coxcomb's smile ľ And his great mustachios curled themselves up of their own accord, in the mo? t frightful manner imaginable. You cannot think how your uncle's nerves were affected." The lively chat of this volatile lady interrupted, not unpleasantly, the me¬ lancholy tenour of Vallenstein's medi¬ tations; and hc was comforted in t Inn king that he was not so forlorn a beino; at the court of his sovereign, as to be an object of interest to no one. lie was surprised at the freedom with which she discussed subjects which he considered as pro¬ hibited, and expressed his wonder.
179 u The fact is," she replied, Éí 1 am a living thing amongst all these automa¬ tons. I am moreover true woman, and, thinking and feeling, I find it convenient to speak." " But is there no penalty annexed to the gratification ?" £C ílave vou never vet learned that cowardice is oftener İn danger than courage ? No one suspects my frank¬ ness, and there is nothing portentous in the changes of one who has established a character for sportive caprice, and is notoiious for as frequent varyings as an April sky. Meanwhile, as a proof of my courage, I offer you my friendship. Stc, his Majesty looks as though he had some commands for me, and I must leave you ; but, here is my earnest," and snatching a ro^c from her bosom, she threw it to him, and joined the Em¬ peror. Almost immediately the Empress passed him near, and stopped on pre¬ tence of c ricating her traia from some»
180
thing on wdiich it had caught. Common politeness required that he should offer his aid, and as hc stooped in the per¬ formance cf this little service, she whis¬ pered, cc Nine to-night:—in the mean time, do not condemn, but pity." Then, turning to him vvith a gracious curtsy of thanks for his assistance, she quitted the saloon attended by all the ladies, and soon after his Majesty dis¬ missed the nobles not attached to his personal suite.
181
CHAPTER VIIL ■' IK, Mľb'.n! ib k tho life-blood from my heart! Ask all, bat ulut а soldier nmy not gi*-e." Joanna Baillie. As voiimx "\ r allenstein was ascending the step of his carriage, he was some¬ what surprised to find himself delayed by the formal Pai on Erdenheïm. ťť D ) not take it ami-,s, Count," said he, " if, although, in my official capacity, as things stand at present, I caunot with piopricty show you the respect I could widi in public, Г venture to express a hope that you will sometimes honour the hotel Krdenhenn with jour presence, as the friend of m v late nephews Wilhelm of Marchfeldt. I am, it is true, an old courtier, but I have not divested myself of certain home-born feelings." \ allenstem was half pleased, half in-
182
dîgnant, at this most unexpected so¬ licitation, " But, my Lord," said he, hesitating, " the Emperor,—he may not approve." " Oh," replied the Baron, frankly, 41 I have his gracious permission. After God, I owe my duty to my Imperial Master, and had he not sanctioned mv invitation, whatever regret it might have caused me, I should have stifled my in¬ clination to acknowledge vour kindness CD .r to my nephew as an inferior considera¬ tion." There was something in the naïve confession ofthe old com tier that won the esteem of Vallenstein :—still he paused. ii Come," said the Baron, Ci sup with me to-morrow, for the sake of him vvho is gone, and whom vve both loved. You shall meet his sister, the lovelv heiress of Marchfeldt. When I was as young as you are, I could not have turned from such a bait/*
183
Vallenstein hesitated no longer, but bowed compliance; and, his heart op¬ pressed by many feelings, most of them bitter, he drove home, attended by his pompous retinue. Happily Desmond was absent, and he had time to compose his spirits, and to consider what might be related and what must be concealed. Will ingly would he have reposed every thought in the breast of his affectionate and sensible friend, for he felt the whole burthen somewhat overweighed his own ; but he was dif¬ fident of his right to make the transfer. Having now leisure to think without in¬ terruption, and an opportunity for the calm examination of his own position, he w r as not long in arriving at the con¬ clusion, that it was one he could not maintain, and whose peculiar and appro¬ priate mortifications and penances he could not, would not endure. " I love, said he, striking his aching forehead, " love passionately, without a hope of exciting a mutual feeling. I am
184
denied the means of aspiring even to the esteem of the woman, wdio unjustly and ungratefully refuses me her affection. I am placed before her an object of humilia¬ tion and neglect. For my Imperial Mas¬ ter, above all, for the fascinating partner of his cares, what task of honour could they propose to me, however arduous, wdiich I would not execute, or die in the failure ! But to be made the victim of α cruel policy, to starul amid their fawning treacherous courtiers as a scarce tole¬ rated being; one whom it required more than county courage to notice—by Heaven, it is too much! No, never will I а second time be subject to such in¬ sult. 1 will stand iu my own place ; 1 will speak my own language, and asseit the inherent nobleness of my own na¬ ture in the face of these masqueradeis. This night I will take leave of my so¬ vereigns ; I will show them the inside of a manly heart, and then,—adieu, for ever, to courts !" When Desmond returned, he found
185
Vallensteïn quite decided on a sudden renunciation of all the views which had led him to Vienna. " Desmond, my dear fellow," he cried, " I am soul-sick. If I remain here another week I shall be mad. Every thing here is so artificial, that my senses stagger and are confounded. I cannot distinguish that which is real from that which only seems. Love, ambition, or rather let me call it the pure zeal which animated mc to serve my father and my Prince—-I must re¬ nounce all! In short, we must go hence. Oh, if I could properly reveal to you my reasons, your honest single heart would applaud my resolution !" il Well, Count," replied Desmond, calmly, " have vvith you through the world. I have no better employment than to follow your lead, for 1 conclude you do not mean to live an iille life. What, shall we join Tilly, and return to our old trade ? ,s
1S6
Cť I should ask no better, my friend, than to raise a regiment among my fa¬ ther's followers, and once more to the field ; but that path is not open. The duke will not permit me to fight till he is again leader ofthe Emperor's armies; and, though I must confess myself in¬ adequate to some of the tasks he has allotted me, I will never offend him by any positive act." ** What then remains, sir," said the lieutenant, gravely, Ci I cannot devise, unless we spend the time in playing chess ; or what think you of taking the cowl ? I would not adopt Saint Bruno's rule, but we might exchange the baldric for a cord, and make a couple of merry Franciscans." " But mi/ mood inclines me not to mirth. God knows if I shall ever smile again ! Few men have entered life with fairer prospects than I : yet now am I sick of my very existence! Yes, Desmond, I envy, deeply envy, the fate of that poor
187
lad to whose memory my earliest tears were dedicated." Desmond changed his tone.—" My lord," said he, " you are fevered and agitated : whatever you decide now will be decided rashly.—Wait till to-mor¬ row." ct I could wish, Desmond, to prepare immediately some despatches for my fa* ther, with луЫсЬ you shall set oif to¬ morrow for Prague. To unburthen my heart through the medium of my pen— to explain to the Duke why I cannot, will not, proceed, will be a wonderful relief." " Well, sir ; as you please." The lieutenant was a man who could not dissemble his thought, and his sullen " as you please" said all that was neces¬ sary as to his opinion of these sum¬ mary proceedings ; but Casimir felt all the pride of one who is about to make an energetic effort for his own eman¬ cipation ; nor could he forbear amusing
188
himself vvith visionary speculations on the effect his retreat would produce on the several persons whose conduct had, in one shape or other, led to it ; and this temporary elation he urged in justifica¬ tion of the step. tc You see," said he, t£ it was ab¬ solutely necessary I should thus decide, since, from the moment my mind was fixed, I have been happy—positively happy !" " I am glad of it, my lord," replied his phlegmatic companion. Vallensteïn sate down to compose his despatches, sometimes whistling, some¬ times thinking aloud, while the lieute¬ nant silently paced the room. iS Desmond, I shall have а powerful attack to stand to-night ; but it does not signify : I am firm as a rock—nothing on earth shall detain me above two days longer at Vienna !" He was not long in composing his ere« dentials : their tone was as pithy and
Î89
peremptory as could be made, accordant vvith his respect for him to whom they were addressed. He sealed and depo¬ sited the packet in the lieutenant's hands. " It is brief," said he, u but, I flatter myself, convincing. I shall not linger many days after you, and at Prague we may consult on our future plans." " I suppose, my lord, you would have me wait the result of this night's con¬ ference at the palace !" u Oh ! that can make no difference, since I am resolved ; but you need not depart till daybreak." The effervescence was still working, o' when he turned the key in the postern gate, and ascended the private stair of the palace. He tapped at the door of the chamber where he had met the Emperor, and was now r admitted by the Empress. " I am deputed hy my august spouse to receive you,"' she said. " In the meanwhile take your seat, and we will
190
converse." Her fine eyes calmly perused his agitated countenance. " Yes," she said, ťí I know well what is now passing within you :—I do not, cannot, condemn it." As Vallensteïn stole a look at her soft blue eyes, and listened to the liquid har¬ mony of her лчлсе, somewhat ofthe high tone of his resolution forsook him ; how. ever, he stood upon his guard. " It is impossible" said he coldly, " that your majesty should stoop to calcu¬ late the feelings of a single individual of your лvide and peopled empire; nor would I presume, but from necessity, so to abuse the privilege you now vouchsafe me, as to intrude one word of egotism on your ear- But, madam, I am a man ; and, pardon me, I never knew, till this day forced the truth on me, how proud a man." u You conceived yourself unworthily overlooked to-day?" " I thought, madam, that the son
191
of the Duke of Friedland had no place in your majesty's circle ; and I was convinced there are sciences of too difficult attainment for his capacity. Oh !" continued he, deeply touched by the mild, half supplicating, air Λνίώ which the Empress regarded him; and, throwing himself at her feet—- " Any ostensible, any honourable em¬ ployment, any thing for which I am fit, or wdiich is fit for me—name it ! I care not how desperate the enterprise—how rash the attempt! That voice of yours, the hope of one gracious smile bestowed on me in the sight of my country, might animate mc to any effoit; but a repe¬ tition of this day's trial-—pardon me, ma¬ dam—I must not, í re/7/ not, undergo it. ' " You will not ! Rise, sir, I command von. Your words and your posture are moat unhappily at variance." Yalleibtein obeyed, ?nd dejectedly awaited the conclusion of her majesty's j) a use. c - Am I to conclude, Count, that you
i 02
would change places with any of the forms which this day figured in the empty pageant, in which you conceive yourself to have borne so derogatory a part?—Would you barter the intimate and affectionate confidence his majesty has been pleased to repose in you, for the hollow mechanical courtesy state policy obliges him, for the present, to dispense to those by whom he is sur- rounded: I trusted, Count, that your ambition had soared a more exalted pitch !-—I did not suspect that you, like tlie million, were swayed by tlie influence oí such poor and heartless vanity/' "Alas! madam, the pageant was too well played: I could not discriminate between false and natural ; and it ь plain I lack talents to sustain the pari assigned me in this state drama." íť Young man," said the Empress, " you are not the first who has ap¬ proached the throne rich iu florid pro¬ fessions, boiling with fervent attachment and loyal zeal, who would, at his majesty\
193
bidding break his spear against the whirlwind—whose service no fatigues could weary—\vhose courage no diffi¬ culty could foil. But when the task was allotted—alas í then came the falling off- Then it was discovered that any test, save only the one by which they vieve tried, would have been courageously met. I thought you had belonged to a rarer class !" Vallensteïn stood speechless for a mo¬ ment, then again threw himself at the fcet ofthe imperial enchantress. í¿ Be it even as you will, madam," said he, ťí deign but to forgive my boyish petu¬ lance—I am your slave from this mo¬ ment ! Persuade me only that I am serving you, and 1 am active or passive at your bidding," The Empress smiled as bhe extended lier fair hand. " You are a froward youth," said she, " but you have a good heart yet. You will not disappoint me ?" 4£ No, by heaven !" he cried. VOL. П. К
194
** Well," she said, " perhaps it may soothe you to know that your penance of this morning was deeply shared. When my august Ferdinand first met me in private, his eyes were filled with tears. * Mary Ann/ he said, * never before have I felt so poignantly the degradation to which traitors have reduced me ! The mortification of that noble youth stung me to the quick. I will break these trammels !—What must he think of the man who fawns upon his enemies and treats his friends with wounding neglect ? I have debased myself in young Vallen¬ stein's eyes—I cannot see him to-night!' * Then I will/ said I, c for we must not lose him i' " 66 Oh !" cried Vallensteïn : " this is tenfold amends for this morning's pro¬ bation ! For this I will bear any thing, eve n"«—- and he paused. ** Ferdinand," pursued the Empress, *' has defied the resentment of our haughty cousin of Bavaria on your ac-
195
count ; and is resolved, moreover, that although he cannot yet extend to you, publicly, that portion of his favour which his heart accords, you shall never know a repetition of this day's en« durances." * € Enough, enough, my gracious mis¬ tress !—I cannot bear more." " Yet I have not done ; I am commis¬ sioned to command your habitual atteud« ance at court ; and you will take care especially to attend my circle. I expect assiduous homage from you» You are not half supple enough for a courtier, and must practise pliancy \ you must provide yourself луШг a countenance of ceremony ; it is no less indispensable than an embroidered habit. Such a one as you wore this morning was never seen before, I believe, in an imperial circle." " It shall appear there no more, ma¬ dam." " Well, Count, to execute all my cre¬ dentials properly, I must deposit these К 2
196
papers in your hands ; transmit them, by your best means, to your illustrious fa¬ ther. The Emperor is more than evei¬ ben t on accelerating arrangements for his restoration to a post in which the best must follow him imperfectly ; and, that you may not suppose your presence has been useless at Vienna, let me tell you the embittered feelings excited in the soul of your gracious master, by your unsuitable situation this morning, has proved a stimulus to the adoption of more decided measures than he has hitherto held expedient. Farewell !—We meet to-morrow." Away went Vallensteïn ; all thoughts of quitting Vienna eradicated from his brain, and all the mortification of his spirit, so far as it was caused by the con¬ duct of his sovereign, healed and as¬ suaged. On arriving at his hotel, he aroused Desmond, to acquaint him with the transition which had taken place in his ideas.
197
" You vvill think me a mere weather¬ cock, lieutenant ; for, after all, I have abandoned my intention of a journey to Pragu e.^ " I can only rejoice, that the wind sits in a better quarten —But will you permit me one question ? and it shall be a dis¬ creet one." ζί Propose it, Desmond !" " Was it the Empress who won you from your purpose ?" « Why, yes !—It was the Empress. Perhaps you think me the greater fool for allowing the arts of a woman thus to sway with me, but her reasons were un* answerable." " You mistake me, Count ; I rather marvel that you could for a moment— you, who are admitted to the discourse ofthat majestic woman—to listen to her silver voice—-to know that your own has admission to her ear—-to contemplate the mild dignity of those blue eyes—nay, sometimes to feel them resting on your
198
countenance! I marvelled you could think, for a moment, of evading her magic circle." " Well said, my friend," said Vallen¬ steïn laughing, surprised by the grave ardour with which this speech was ut¬ tered. " Our Bavarian Juno has stolen your heart, methinks ; but remember Ixion! Meanwhile, here is a packet which her hand put into mine ; you will carry it to Prague in lieu of the one I prepared for you a few hours ago. I have only to add, the sooner you return to me the better; I shall look out for you impatiently,"
199
CHAPTER IX. «' Why, what a deal of candied courtesy This fawning greyhound then did proffer me '" Shabpeaie. The following day, soon after the Em¬ peror and his train had joined the circle ofthe Empress, Vallensteïn appeared in it : no longer deeming it necessary to distress his politic uncle, by any claim on his countenance or sanction, he en¬ tered alone. Count Harrach rather sus¬ pected that even the bare toleration his nephew had been indulged with, at the preceding levee, was the fruit of his influ* ence; and now that the youth wanted this shield, confidently expected to see even that denied him. Greatly, there¬ fore, was he surprised and puzzled to observe that his imperial majesty received him with a gracious smile, and asked
200
him, in an audible voice, after the health of his illustrious father. u He is a most extraordinary man," added he; "never was there a more striking example of self-sufficiency, in the pure acceptation of the phrase ; he needs not the ripening sunshine of any man*s countenance, but is strong in his own self-sustaining genius. A man of lesser soul than your father, sir, would, under present circumstances, have either sunk into abject neglect, or burst forth into rebellion ; but he has read the world a practical lesson on true greatness." " My liege, whatever powers are in my father are yours, to use or to reserve at your gracious pleasure! IBs medi¬ tations in retirement are dedicated to the same end as his public acts have been— your imperial majesty's service/" The courtiers regarded each other vvith dismay, and Count Ilarrach, who had treated his brother's son as coldly as he dared, looked like the thing he was,
201
and knew not how to extricate himself nom his dilemma. Baroness Erdenheïm began to perceive that the young Val¬ lensteïn had a noble air vvith him, and that the most experienced cannot alwavs judge accurately of a man on his first presentation. We may easily conjecture that the Empress was ready to seize the tone of her imperial consort, and Casimir found the genial smile of favour succeed the neglect he had so ill brooked, as sud¬ denly as the northern summer treads on the heels of its grim and gloomy precur¬ sor ;—the ice melts, the river flows again, and the frozen waste is transformed into a verdant meadow, But he was conscious that his sovereign was indulging his kindly feelings at the expense of his po¬ litical judgment ; and internally, there- lore, blamed himself for the petulance which had, perhaps, tended to precipi¬ tate Ferdinand into this public avowal of his sentiments, and condemned his own selfish tenacity ; so that, except at ж. *j
202
the moment when his father's praises caused his cheek to glow, and his eyes to sparkle, he neither felt nor exhibited anv immoderate exultation. Princess Stol¬ berg, vvho stood behind the Empress, drew him presently to her side : she examined him for a moment with an air of mock gravity. " I am prophesying," she said, íť that you vvill soon be rich in friends. Count Harrach is darting upon you all the beams of his radiant countenance. The tide of fraternal tenderness has rushed back upon his heart ; but at this moment his most inveterate sentiment is that of nepotism, All this is common in our atmosphere. Pray, Count, where is my rose ?" Vallensteïn blushed for his neglect ot one of the simplest rules of gallantry, and began a hesitating compliment. 64 Oh," said she, interrupting him witb a laugh, α you left it on your pillow, I am sure! But do }ou know 1 have proved myself a better politician than
203
any of these state machines ? I could have told them, long before Count Val· lensteïn appeared this morning, that all things change. Look here ! you saw his Majesty summon me yesterday—he spoke to me vvith unusual benignity for a few minutes on the keenness ofthe air, and other interesting particulars, and then drew from Ins little finger this bril¬ liant, which now sparkles on my hand. Do you think the hieroglyphic has no meaning, Count? But what ails you, man ? Are you really then a youth of saturnine complexion, and do you wear the same aspect all weathers?" " Methinks, lady," he replied, adopt¬ ing the tone of 1 his lively interrogator, "you have said enough to prove, that shifting one's aspect according to the mutation of circumstances is a mere vul¬ gar popular fashion." 4i I trust you have not adopted the Wolfsteïn cut—one cynic is enough amongst us—a second animal, as biliou>
204 as himself, would tinge the whole court vellow." ςζ Wolfsteïn ! í would not reflect liis colour of all men in existence!" 4t No, Count; because you can afford to wear your own, I imagine; but if you live till he returns amongst us, you will see how delightful all the world finds it to be insulted. For m v own part, I am charmed with the Wolfsteïn, because every body is, except only those whom he has individually and despciatcly wounded, and even the bosom friends of the mar¬ tyrs confine themselves to thinkino; it a sad pity that so clorions a ¡renins should indulge in a rather too prevalent dispo¬ sition to severity : however, it is impos¬ sible to help laughing, you know, and the only consideration of importance is, how each may keep the lash from his own shoulder." u I," said Vallensteïn, u should deem the commendation of that man scan¬ dalous, and should consider myself far less
205 outraged by his most pointed satire ; мпсе the former î must share wdth the least deserving of my species; the latter, with all that is sacred and respectable." Cť Hush, hush, Count! For mercy's sake, what are vou about ? Did ever man utter his heresies so incautiously Un¬ less you wear some talisman, beware of his next philippic !" ' % Princes^ !" exclaimed Casimir, in a tone of bitter indignation, u speak of him no more! He is hateful to inc¬ arni, shall 1 confess it, he has been fear¬ ful f lie has implanted an exotic senti¬ ment \w my bosom, that of deadly, im¬ placable hatred; the very mention of his name arouses within me all that is un¬ kind and inhuman in my nature!" ίς î can conceive/ 1 said the Princess, " he must be a sad nuisance to a soldier, their weapons being so dissimilar. 1 am told there is no forcing him to fight." u Madam, there are few things more abhorrent to my principles than a deli-
206
berate single combat : he has forced me to sacrifice that principle to my resent¬ ment ; but there I have cause to thank him, since, but for his sang-froid, my hands," said he, shuddering, " might not be pure from the stain of premeditated murder." u I cannot divine," said Madame de Stolberg, pertinaciously pursuing her sub¬ ject, ťí why ice are all so fond of him— no other man has any chance in compe¬ tition vvith him. Can you account for it ?" And she fixed her penetrating eyes on his varying countenance; at that mo¬ ment Baroness Marchfeldt entered, and the cheek of Vallensteïn was dyed ofthe deepest crimson : the question of the Princess sounded confusedly on his ear, but his silent agitation was the most em¬ phatic answer it could have received. "· Oh !" exclaimed she, drawing a somewhat long breath, " I crave your pardon, Count, for pursuing a dis-
207
agreeable subject beyond the limits of courtesy ; but I have a better excuse than thoughtlessness. You interest me, and I would soothe that perturbed spirit of yours, if 'you will let me." And her v'oice resumed the tenderness with which she had at first accosted him. " You do not know the comfort of a confidante, nor the advantage of possessing a pair of eyes in addition to your own, which can survey the whole game, while you are absorbed in playing your own part of it. Do not look frightened, but confide in the aid ofa woman who has discernment to appreciate merit, and will to befriend it." Vallensteïn, who had stept from the schools of Padua to his father's camp, was little accustomed to female society, and the language of friendship and con¬ fidence breathed through the lips of an accomplished woman, was not to be withstood : he repaid her with a look of silent gratitude, and was not, perhaps,
sorry the Baroness should witness his in¬ timate intercourse with a lady, wdio, the Empress and herself excepted, had no superior at the Austrian court, either in the graces of her person, or the intelli¬ gence of her mind. cc Remember, Count," she said, as she quitted him, t£ nos liaisons ne peuvent pas être dangereuses ! —You, poor wretch, are hooked already, and were it not so, I bear a charmed heart, too proud, and too volatile, to surrender itself to a master, I shall be a pleasanter confidante than your grandmother, and every whit as safe a one." Count Ilarrach and Baron Erdenheïm advanced as she left him : vvith the latter he shook hands, no longer fearing to dis¬ tress the old courtier by such a symptom of cordiality. *' My dear nephew/' cried the former, " I am unspeakably grieved that you stood so far on ceremony as not to ac¬ company me hither this morning. It ap-
209
peared to me so much matter of course, that really I waited for you at home to the latest minute. In fact," said he, dropping into an hypocritical whine, íť the enthusiastic affection vvith which I have ever regarded my illustrious bro¬ ther, the Duke of Friedland, is rendered even more tender and ardent since his nobly-borne adversity. For my part, I despise those fawning sycophants, who turn from desert to worship prosperity. While at Vienna, Casimir, consider me your father, I insist on it." " You are too good, ray kind uncle," said Vallensteïn, with an ambiguous smile ; 4i you would suffer in the compa¬ rison. My father is in disgrace, a pre¬ dicament into which Count Harraeh's prudence will prevent his ever falling/' cc Perhaps so, Casimir; yet permit me to sav, my affinity to that disgraced man is the proudest boast of Stephen Count Ilarrach!" and he pressed his hand on ihat part of his left side where the heart
210
is supposed to have its residence. " I know this is not the way of the world, but it is my way." Much of this oration was idly wasted on the ear of him for whom it was in¬ tended; for Casimir observed that a young and very handsome nobleman was conversing with Louisa of Marchfeldt, who seemed to listen willingly, and as if she was deriving amusement from his words or their subject. Just, therefore, as Count Harrach rounded his last pe¬ riod— " Pray, sir," asked Vallensteïn, abruptly» |ς who is that youth ?" *' That," said he, " is the young Mar¬ grave of Lindau —a pretty youth—a very pretty youth !—well looked on at court, and a prime favourite with the ladies !— Shall I introduce him ?" ťí By no means, uncle ; he may lack your generous predilection in favour of a man whose father is in adversity." " True, Casimir, true ! And, now you
211
mention it, he is, between oui selves, a Uttle ofthe coxcomb, and when the Che¬ valier Wolfstein comes, you will see all that lively tone and manner exchanged for a dry, deliberate sneer, and that well-quilled ruff for the bare throat ofa Brutus." " Contemptible !" muttered Vallen¬ steïn. " Why, yes, nephew," whispered the Count ; " that is just what I say. There i* a servility in copying another man's dress and manner that cannot be defended \ but, dear Casimir, excuse me if I give }Ou a friendly hint—you are new here, and I consider your reputation as my own ! Do not speak so loud when you happen to have occasion to mention Wolfstein : some barbarous satire will fall on you in consequence ; for he hears whatever is said of him—nay, peihaps he may provide you with some ridi¬ culous nickname for life," 46 I feel confident he will not, sir j and
212
if I abstain from the mention of him, my silence will not be kept under the dread of his lash, which I perceive is so pre¬ valent, that I blush for my country¬ men." " Why, you must consider, Casimir, that his love ballads are so beautiful, all the young ladies sing and recite them : then in his graver performances there is a little, just a little, touch of that freedom of thought which pleases our petulant youth : not that 1 would call him a deist, or an atheist ; because I would always avoid strong language ; it is unkind and illiberal, and very bad taste ; but he seems rather to call in question the pro¬ bability of there being any farther state of existence when this life closes. There are some who object to this doctrine; but for myself, I am no critic—-I do not pretend to be one, and especially in mat¬ ters of this description, it is rash to ha¬ zard an opinion ; my court duties pre¬ cluding all possibility of study,"
213
<ť Ah !" thought Casimir, turning from his uncle with a gesture of horror, " well may Wolfstein hold the doctrine of ma¬ te? hiisin, if that thing were allowed to represent the human race." Fie had not yet mustered courage to approach the Baroness of Marchfeldt; but her prolonged conversation with the Margrav e made him restless : he ad¬ vanced to the bpot where she stood, with as much negligence of manner as he could collect— " Baroness," said he, '* you look charmingly to-day ! 1 do not ask if you have recovered the effect of your late perils ; your danger and its consequences are happily past, and you are making yourself amends by endangering others. I have thus far been profiting by my uncle Count Harraeh's general maxims of caution, and admired at a prudent distance." Louisa, who was only acquainted with Vallenstem as a timid, dejected, hope-
214
less lover, knew not well what to make of this mode of attack, but replied with the same nonchalance. ** And how came you to lose sight of these wary maxims, Count? Are you abandoned by your prudence, or is the danger past?" Cfi Neither, madam ; the danger exists in full force, and I am sensible of it; but, like a vortex or a rattle-snake, it draws me towards it wdth an attractive power, against which I am defenceless." " But, for Heaven's sake !" exclaimed Lindau, in a tone of affectation, " have you been in danger, actually in danger ? Do let me hear the whole story from your own sweet voice : how could you have the cruelty to let me learn it from a third person ?" " Oh !" replied the Baroness, u I re¬ commend you to apply for the narrative to Count Casimir of Vallensteïn ; he is the hero of it—and/' said she, with a glance which reminded him of those that
215
fell so coldly on his heart, on the night when he so seasonably rescued her, " I doubt not he will do himself justice.'* The young Margrave now turned, and said, bowing politely to Vallensteïn, "His heroism cannot be questioned, when we consider under whose auspices it has been fostered ; but I should give the Count cre¬ dit for preferring to have his exploits set forth in the warblings of a lovely woman, rather than they should be slurred over by his own abridgement ; for, if I do not forget, it is the Vallensteïn fashion to be brief in the mention ofa victory, though Count Tilly has lately reformed that practice/* " My victories, sir," replied Casimir, as he reproachfully returned the glance of Louisa, " afford me little to expa* tiate on; the one alluded f о partakes but too much the character of de¬ feat." " Ha! ha! I understand you, Count; you rescued the lady and lost your own
216
lieart ; but you should not for that reason look melancholy. Half of us have had the same accident, yet walk about, and eat, and sleep, una pei foi m all the functions of a perfect animal, notwith¬ standing our deficiency in so noble a part. But by all that is piquante and beauteous,—here comes the Stolberg ! "Wolfsteïn says our court would be un¬ inhabitable, if her enchanting sauciness did not give some taste to its insipidity." The Baroness blushed, and looked consciously towards Casimir as that name was uttered, and his brow contracted while he thought,—Am I to hear of no¬ thing but Wolfsteïn ? Princess Stolberg, who did not lose the conclusion of Lin- dan's speech, nor the blush of Louisa, nor the frown of Vallenstem, came for¬ ward and said, iC Lindau, I am ashamed of you ! Look into jour own mind, man, you will find ideas in plenty, lying useless ; bring some of them forth for us. Nature made a
%17
man of you, and gave }ou, if I mistake not, your fair proportion of original wit; why, then, should you abuse her bounty by assuming the attributes of an ape or a parrot ?" The margrave reddened.-—" What do you mean, princess?" " I mean to say that a man degrades his own tongue, when he permits it to be the eternal echo of another's sayings.— Wolfstein, Wolfstem ! Your incessant commendations anil repetitions are ex¬ cellent proofs of his genius; but, pardon mc, margrave, they lead one, rather, as Count Ilarrach says, to question the ex¬ istence of your own. Why, man,—-are you not philosopher enough to know that an echo eometh of emptiness ?" £ť And this from you, princess ! Y'ou, the goddess on whose shrine some of his fragrant incense has beeu burned! To whom did he dedicate his verses ? For whom did he bring honey from Mount Ilymettus, and by whom was he in return VOL. II. L
218
flattered, caressed, deified, if not by you, Princess Stolberg ?" " AU true, margrave !—He лл -as de¬ lightful, for a time ; but in truth, my dear margrave, the Wolfstein has been multi¬ plied through so many vile copies, that I am луеагу to death of him—I pine for something original. You, Lindau, for instance, might once have set up for yourself, but alas ! you preferred to come forth as another man's shadow, and have made but a moderate performance even of that subordinate part : you are a bad misanthrope, and no poet. And as for your valiant professions of infidelity,— you know I could tell tales about that, too,—Nay, never blush, margrave ; dare to seem what you are, and you vvill find yourself promoted." The poor margrave knew that Princess Stolberg had detected him one evening in an obscure church on his knees beiore the Virgin, at a time when he was noted for his liberal and anti-devotional say-
219
ings, which were so successfully delivered in all good company, as to be rated only second best to Wolfstein's ; he dared not therefore provoke her to betray him by an attempt to retort, and Vallensteïn ma¬ liciously enjoyed his embarrassment. " Never mind my caustics," continued the unmerciful princess, " they are sure to make you smart a little ; but if they remove the evil, what does that signify ?'' " Quarter ! Quarter, princess !" said Lindau, unbuckling his sword, and turn¬ ing the hilt to the ground : a truce was instantly granted, and the lively victor walked off in the full enjoyment of her triumph. " if it be true," said the Baroness Marchfeldt, determined that Vallenstein should not plume himself in the sup¬ position that she dared not utter this same name in her presence which filled every other mouth, " that the chevalier Wolfsteïn İs the theme of universal ad¬ miration and imitation, it would indeed be a satire on the German taste to sup-
220
pose him devoid of merit ;—in that case, where are we to look for a standard ?" " And if Wolfsteïn's merit is indeed worthy the universal suffrage, madam, we come to this conclusion—-all луе have been taught to hold sacred and honour¬ able is a mere jest." <( But why should you be so severe, count?" said the margrave. " Some of our ecclesiastics, without scruple, lean on his arm, and laugh at his pasquinades ; he ivill have his own way, you know, and he who would prevent him is sure to feel a touch in his side ofthe right Lernæan." u Those of vour ecclesiastics, who lean on Wolfsteïn's arm, would lean on the arm of his infernalissimo, if it were the fashion." "Why, bless you, count! Some of them were inquisitors !" But it was not the prattle of Lindau that occupied the thoughts or provoked the answers of Vallensteïn. He had listened to words from the lips of Louisa, which were indeed arrows dipt in the
221
hydra's blood, and he governed his mad¬ dened spirit with difficulty ; she too looked on him with a somewhat in¬ creased expression of scorn and resent¬ ment; but at that moment his exasperation could not well be heightened : instead of deprecating her scorn, he returned and defied it ; at least, at that moment he was fully persuaded that he did so. Baron Erdenheim joined them, reminded Val¬ lensteïn of his promise, and invited Lin¬ dau to make one of his guests at supper. That day the Duke of Bavaria had not appeared at court j no one ventured to utter a remark on his absence, save Prin¬ cess Stolberg, though every one observed it, and it combined with the Emperor's reception to render young Vallensteïn an object of attention and respect.
222
CHAPTER Χ. " Where is thy wound ? Is't here ? Poo, poo, begone! Thou ean'st do nought—4is in my head, my heart, 'Tis every where, where med'cine cannot cure.'* Joanna Baillie. At Baron Erdenheïm's suppe ι, Vallen¬ steïn found a goodly assemblage of nobles and ladies, with the addition of some of the most distinguished members of the university :—»a fondness for literature, or an appearance thereof, was altogether necessary at the court of Vienna, and no one cared for the feast which wanted the attic salt. Princess Stolberg was not of the party, and Vallensteïn looked around for her with disappointed expectation. Baron Erdenheïm had him" fast by the button, explaining to him the characters, situations, and pretensions ofthe several guests ; and he was very patiently under-
223
going the detail, when he perceived that the room where they stood, and which the moment before was overflowing with company, had become nearly deserted. " Ah !" said the Baron, " I do wrong to detain you ; something more agreeable than my prosing is to be found in the next room.—Either music or dancing, no doubt." Vallensteïn availed himself of his re¬ lease, and followed the stream : it was however his lot to come in only for a ge« neral buzz of bravas and bravíssimas! dolces and dolcissima ! some syrenhaving just concluded her song. He could not easily penetrate far into the room, and did not make any material effort for that purpose, but inquired of a gentleman, who had been named to him as Professor Westermann, the cause of such rapturous acclamation. The professor was a little, intelligent-looking man, with an uncom¬ monly vivacious cast of countenance. €< The cause, sir !" echoed he. " Upon my faith, I know not :~a Circe, a mer-
224
maid, for aught I know ! Certain it is that never before, from any mortal form, have my organs been refreshed by such heavenly breathings ;—but hark !" said he, clasping his hands, " Hark ! Again ! Oh, dolcissima!" Vallensteïn, who was at first diverted with what he deemed the exaggeration of the lively professor's fancy, was soon wrapt round in ecstasy, and all he had ever read or heard of the power of music was at that moment realized in his feel¬ ings ; not a whisper, not a breath was heard, till the strain ceased, but then the tumult of applause again rushed forth. The professor, especially, exhausted every phrase which might serve as the medium ofthe transports of dilettanti, while Val¬ lensteïn stood in speechless emotion at his side ? when Westermann had relieved himself of his owm oppressive delight, he had leisure to remark the silence of his neighbour. " Where is your soul, young man ? Harmony such as this might create one,
225
yet you appear unmoved by sounds which might soothe the troubled billow, or set the wolves in our Hercynian forests dancing." " It can be no other," murmured Val¬ lensteïn. " Tell me, sir, I entreat, if you know who sings?" " I know not her name, sir—but what are names ! Enough that she is an angel, a beatitude !" Vallensteïn now made a desperate ef¬ fort to penetrate the crowd which con¬ cealed from him the source of this ce¬ lestial harmony, and having effected his purpose, beheld the Baroness of March¬ feldt surrounded by a blaze of light, in¬ haling the delightful incense of flattery wafted from innumerable censers, and her bright and sparkling eyes betraying but too plainly that she was not quite proof againsi the intoxication of such a moment. Lindau, whose devotion was the certain meed ofthe prevailing novelty of the day, acted, as usual, the part of high priest to the reigning deity; he tuned
226
her harp, turned over the leaves of her book, and lisped his " exquisite, divine, adorable !" in her ear, unchecked and un¬ forbidden. Poor moth ! He was playing round the taper, rejoicing in its bright¬ ness, and reckless of the danger. Val¬ lensteïn gazed with desperate intentness on the bright vision before him—scarce a gleam of hope mingled with his admira¬ tion, but yet he gazed: a general move¬ ment announced that supper was pre¬ pared, and hardly knowing what he did, he rushed forward and offered to take the hand of the Baroness ; Lindau, sur¬ prised by the abruptness of the action, .stept back, but Louisa threw her eye over Casimir with that vacant expression which калта it doubtful if an object is perceived, and gave her hand to Lindau. That moment was fatal to each pre¬ tender ; the black and bitter drop of de¬ spair fell upon the heart of Vallensteïn, while into that of the margrave a deli¬ cious poison infused itself. Lindau, in spite of his fopperies, was capable of form-
227
ing something like a just estimate of his own comparative merits with those of his rival, whom he beheld with generous ad» miration, and when he saw him advance to take the hand of Louisa of Marchfeldt, he never dreamed of competition. When, therefore, it appeared that the handsome, noble, gallant Vallensteïn was rejected for him, he was immersed in wonder and exultation ; his good genius never re¬ minded him that such a thing as female caprice existed, and to love, love alone, would he refer the intoxicating preference. Casimir believed himself hopeless ere this evening's conviction smote him, but what was it then, that now shuddered and died within him, if it was not hope ? lie hesitated for a moment whether to rush forth and quit the assembly, or longer to abide the suffering her presence inflicted.— u if 1 disappear," he said, " she will triumph ; and that coxcomb,™ no, I will not augment his vanity by my flight !" With this brave resolution he entered the supper-room, and found him-
self seated exactly opposite the margrave and the Baroness ; the Lady Ulrica of Lindau, sister to the former, and Pro¬ fessor Westermann, vrere his neighbours. The Lady Ulrica луав one of those deli¬ cate plants which seem born but to fade : a breeze might have lifted her on its wing, so slight луаэ her form ; her cheek, save a faint hectic bloom луЫсЬ flushed it occasionally, л\ 7 аз of a cold, transparent white, and her large blue eyes shone with treacherous lustre : she л\ г аз a lovely spectre ; and as Vallcnsteïn regarded her, he thought on Wilhelm, and sighed. Westermann was absorbed in some in¬ teresting meditation, for he uttered to himself certain inarticulate sounds, and smiled, as though big with some happy oracle ;— meanwhile, poor Vallensteïn scarcely валу any thing but the objects immediately opposite to him, and al¬ though he tried to affect indifference, he could not withdraw his attention from the assiduous devotion young Lindau луаз paying the Baroness, or abstain from
229
numbering the smiles with which these services were remunerated. A young nobleman, who sate at some little distance below, and vvho had been previously in¬ troduced to Vallensteïn, challenged him to drink wine with him—he complied ; when the former, as if merely with the design to commence a conversation, in¬ quired of the count, as hc set down his glass, if he had read the poem Wolfstein had just published : he was about to reply in the negative, when Baroness Erden¬ heïm very abruptly diverted the attention of the querist, by asking him if the ice would yet bear his traîneau : this ma¬ noeuvre, for it was one, and understood to be such by the majority ofthe guests, took effect for the time, and the Lady Ulrica said, addressing Vallenstein, " It is a sad misfortune for so good- natured and well-intentioned a young man as Count Markoff, to be attended by a relentless fatality, which compels him perpetually to the utterance of some offensive blunder/'
230
€C Is he at present in that predicament, madam ?" " He would be, had not Baroness Erdenheïm hannilv turned the conversa- tion. Wolfsteïn's book, amongst many other things which ought to consign it to contempt and oblivion, contains a most unprovoked attack upon your worthy neighbour the professor. Yet, wdiy should I call it unprovoked, since Professor Westermami's life is in itself provocation sufficient." tť At what vulnerable part then docs the satirist aim his dart ?" 66 At his heel," replied Lady Ulrica, smiling. " He attacks the little pe¬ culiarities of a good and enlightened man. The professor is remarkable for the animated pleasure with which he be¬ holds whatever is admirable, and has ad¬ dicted himself to the use of certain ejaculations expressive of his overflow¬ ing delight. Wolfstein has wreaked his malice upon these, proving at once his * own weakness and the strength of the
231
man he would fain injure. Westermann has a sufficient share of genius and science to give him an honourable station among the sçavans of Europe. No man loves his muse with truer fondness, but Wes¬ termann is strong at heart: those who would behold him to the greatest ad¬ vantage must follow him home" The fair Ulrica spoke vvith an energy which almost exhausted her. " The professor may be well content," said Casimir, " to be attacked by a fiend, for the proud privilege it has won for him of being defended by an angel ! But do not the margrave and his lovely sister hold somewhat different opinions ?" " My dear brother," replied Ulrica, u has an excellent heart, but is gay and thoughtless. He has, I trust, many years before him, and reflection will follow experience; for me," added she with a sigh, " I have found it necessary to think betimes, lest thought should come too late."
232
Vallensteïn луаз deeply affected by the mournful sweetness of his interest¬ ing companion, which seemed to bios- som only for the grave ; and while he paused, collecting resolution to ad¬ dress some suitable reply to her, he felt his other neighbour touch his elbow, an interruption which not a little relieved him, and as he turned, the professor di. rected his attention to a paper he held in his hand below the table. £i Just run your eye over it, my dear sir," said he : u Tell me without scruple if any thing strikes you ? Stay, here is my pencil! Expunge — criticise·—pray don't hesitate ! I shall like you the better for your candour." Then putting the paper and pencil into the hand of Vallensteïn, he turned his shoulder upon him, and in order to leave him entire liberty for his new office, began talking rapidly with his neighbour on the other side. " I wonder," said Vallensteïn smiling,
233
and looking on Lady Ulrica, €i whether I may be permitted a coadjutor in my unaccustomed task ?" The professor, who had all the ΛνηΠβ an eye in his shoulder, looked back and wdiispered, iC Oh ! yes, she is a lovely creature, and the best critic in Germany." Thus sanctioned, the two critics scanned over the lines together, which proved to be a spirited poetical tribute to the phoenix of the hour, in return for the celestial harmony which had uplifted the professor's soul to Heaven. Ulrica, whose accurate taste had not been un¬ justly eulogized, took the pencil from Vallensteïn, and marked the only fault which struck her as rendering this ele¬ gant compliment imperfect ; and having so done, they returned it with sincere encomiums. " Don't expect to get off so, young man," said the professor ; a I have not done Λν^Ιι you : you have a fine deep sonorous voice ; possessing great pathos
234
in some of its cadences, and a musical clearness. You have moreover the ad¬ vantage of having scanned over my sonnet so carefully, as to be complete master of its tone and spirit ; therefore I must borrow your voice, as the fittest medium through which I can offer my homage to the spirit of music/' So saying, he gave Madame Erden¬ heïm a hint, whicli informed her that the company were about to be favoured by a song or recitation ; and the usual signal passed round the table, while Vallenstein was remonstrating, unheard, against being compelled into a task he was peremptorily resolved not to execute. Silence once obtained, he calmly but decidedly declined the honour intended him, and Ulrica, who perceived there was more in his refusal than a casual observer might calculate, said, " Wliy, professor, surely you would not supersede my brother! He will be offended past reconciliation ! If I can guess at his feelings, he would joyfully
235
hail the opportunity of uttering them in your language ; he has been looking poetry all evening.*' " Well, then," said Westermann, some¬ what reluctantly, " wiWyon speak to your brother, charming Ulrica? I have not quite forgotten his wilful murder of some of the sweetest lines I ever composed. Oh, he broke me on the wheel ! Let him re¬ member he owes me reparation." " The boy can read," said Ulrica, looking affectionately at the young mar* grave, " and something tells me he will not murder these." Having caught his eye, she signified the professor's wish, and the sonnet was presently in Lindau's hand ; silence was already secured, and the margrave rising, went through his performance with all the spirit and energy of one whose heart is with his voice ; in short, so evident and powerful was his emotion, that one might have thought him a young im¬ provvisatore, whom love had suddenly
236
touched with the spirit of poetry. Ap¬ plauses thundered round the table : the Baroness was covered ΛνΜι blushes, and ready to sink in not unpleasing con¬ fusion ; her uncle and aunt were flattered by a compliment so elegant and so distinguishing to their neice ; and Lin- dau could have hugged the professor, for having made him the happy medium of such ardent language as befitted his feel¬ ings, though, but for this fortunate in¬ spiration, he dared not have given them words, and for the first time in his life, perhaps, his vanity was forced to yield precedence to a still more potent senti¬ ment ; in short, he was less occupied în considering how he looked, how he read, and what tout le monde thought of him, than what she felt ; and as he re-seated himself silently by her side, he beheld Λνιίΐι tender pity the embarrassment in which, for a moment, she was over¬ whelmed. ч £ť Ah ! I said he would not murder
237 these lines," exclaimed Ulrica: ťfi and surely a more animated and natural re¬ citation never was delivered." Vallensteïn could not speak : he knew not whether to blame himself for re¬ nouncing the task which had been so ad¬ mirably executed by Lindau, or whether he should not have run the hazard of in¬ curring tenfold mortification by betray¬ ing his inextinguishable passion, not only still farther to its haughty in¬ sensible object, but to every spectator. Westermann felt his brows encircled by the well-earned laurel, and owned all the rapture so natural to the sanguine cha¬ racter ofthe genuine poet, when he feels his own triumphs identified with those of the good, the lovely, or the glorious. Count Mark off, who had taken a powerful fancy for Vallenstein, and was resolved, if possible, to draw him into conversation, was, by this poetical tribute, again un¬ luckily reminded of Wolfsteïn's book. " I think, Count/* said he, " you did
238
not favour me with your opinion of the work just published by Wolfsteïn?" ί4 I have never read it, sir, nor ever mean to read it." Lindau, лупозе thoughts were in a state of tumult, and Λνΐιο did not pause to recollect himself, cried, cc Why not, Count? You wdll gain by changing your mind ; it is one corusca¬ tion of wit." * e Then the impious ingratitude of the author is the more detestable in pervert¬ ing such a gift to such base uses." The professor w r as silently amusing him¬ self by witnessing the fruitless effbrts of his good host and hostess, aided by some of the guests, to turn the tide of con¬ versation into a different channel ; and in order somewhat to relieve the confusion under which he beheld them labouring, he himself addressed to the Lady of March¬ feldt the same question with which the unconscious Markoffhad persecuted Val¬ lensteïn. The Baroness, ignorant ofthe
239
manner in which her interrogator was treated in this same book, answered, rather timidly, in the affirmative, for, only that it was the fashion for the Ger¬ man ladies to read without scruple what¬ ever was published, the work in ques- tion was not, it must be confessed, cal¬ culated to purify or exalt the mind through which its ideas were permitted to flow, and Louisa, though she would not deny the fact, could not help blush¬ ing for it, while her eye involuntarily sunk beneath the stern and pointed rebuke which that of Casimir aimed at her. * c And what, fair lady," pursued the professor, " is your opinion of its merits?'* Cť One cannot but deeply lament the irregularities of so transcendant a genius," sighed the Baroness. " I should have thought/' said Vallen¬ steïn, his whole indignant soul in his countenance, " I should have thought no female eye could trace that com¬ position of malice and licentiousness,
240
without a stronger feeling towards the author than compassion. Surely, surely, I must have been deceived in its ten¬ dencies." Ci Oh," said Lindau, ί£ his audacity gives many of our pietists the better hope of him—he is training for La Trappe, be assured ľ* " At all events," observed the Ba¬ roness, who the more keenly felt the words.of Vallenstein, from a conscious¬ ness that they were not unmerited, and who was, therefbre, doubly exasperated by them. " 1 would sooner confide in the man wbo walks about in his own likeness, disdaining to deceive his fellow creatures, than in the more plausible criminal vvho covers a false and hollow bosom vvith fair and amiable pretences. I should think, perhaps, more harshly of Weitstem, were I not assured that such counterfeits pass current." It was impossible for Vallcnsteïn to err in the application of this speech: the tone in which it was uttered was too em-
2И phatic, and tlie look which accompanied it too significant; his conscience armed him in vain, his heart bled beneath the síroké and fainted within him, tears sprung into his eyes, and he shook in every limb» Éí Mother of Heaven !" he ejaculated in a thick and smothered voice, " win» can bear this !" > 64 What ails you, sir?" said the pro¬ fessor, turning in alarm at the e x chu na¬ tion, and hastily pouring wine iní о his ц'1ач>: " drink this, sir," said he, " \ou are ill,—no doubt the ice has disordered \ou " " Where is your pain?"' asked Ulrica, compassionately, shocked at the agony his countenance betrayed. " Here, madam!" said hc, wildly, pressing his hand agaiust his heart; antl, without waiting to apologise, he rushed from the room, and from the mansion, and w T as quickly restored to the solitude of his own apartments. u Bios« me!" exclaimed Baroness
242
Erdenheïm, startled by the noise his pre¬ cipitate exit caused, " what is the matter vvith young Count Vallensteïn ?" " I fear he is taken extremely ill," said the professor; "never in my life did I see anguish more forcibly depicted on a countenance,—his whole features were distorted by it! Surely some one ought to follow him." ςί He has, I am informed," said Ma¬ dame Erdenheïm, unwilling that the fair arrangement of her table should be farther broken, " a prodigious retinue, and amongst them his own physician, а man of high character." Meanwhile the feelings of Louisa oí Marchfeldt were not the most enviable. She could not acquit herself of having struck a deliberate blow ; and now, like many a murderer, she too late deplored the effect of her own cruelty, and could not but pity the visible torture she had inflicted on her victim. Ulrica had not heard the whole speech which preceded Vallenstein's sudden indisposition ; but
243
sne lemarked the changing colour of hei opposite neighbour ; she remembered too the singular obstinacy ΛνΐΛ which the í aunt liad refused to read her panegyric ; and she was convinced that the expres¬ sion of his countenance as he quitted the table, and the action by which he replied to her inquiry, Ci Where is your pain?'* had reference to no corporeal sufferings. 4i I doubt," whispered she to the pro¬ fessor, " that poor young man's misery does not come within the province of his ph}sician; his heart is the seat of the malady, and, if í mistake uot, I have the cause in my eye." Cr The cause of such grievances is api to be found in the eye of a young lady/ returned the professor, vvho could not resist the quibble, " but í нее what you meau—there is guilt apparent ! Weil, well, such things vvill happen ; and how would life's drama go on without them ? It is only a little fuming, and fretting, and tossing, and ali will be adjusted : as for that handsome, gallant, manly fellow
244
having reason to despair, I'll nof belie* e a word of it! He and his fair tyrant are made for each other." Ci Yet, I think," said Ulrica, " she does not discourage my brother's homage, and never have I seen him so fascinated before. Poor Frederic ! if she is on!} playing off a little of the artillery of caprice on the youth she has just sent wounded hence, what vvill become oí Frederic, who, if I mistake not, is quit ι ι ο η quered ?" " My dear/' said Westermann, ťí Lin¬ dau was born at com t; his heart and YaHensten/s, both good ones, arc of dii¬ ferent texture: your brother will nevei die for love —he will let his beard go unshaven as long as lie can, I dare sav, without being a fright, a compliment he would not pay to the Paphian godde-v» herself; and then he will parody some of his friend Wolfsteïn's love laments,— and then, why then—I know not what he can do, unless he falls in love again/'
245
CHAPTER XL * But these are all lies ' Men have died from time to time, \nd и orms have cateti them, but not í'qv lose. * It was near a fortnight after the gala at Baron Erdenheïm's, ere Vallensteïn began to recover from a fe\ T er, into луЫсЬ intense perturbation of mind had thrown him. When he was once more sensible, and capable of reflection, and when the rause of his illness returned distinctly to his recollection, he regretted the stupor in whicli his senses had been wrapped; still the very weakness of Ыч frame prevented the revival of memory from bringing with it that acute sensa¬ tion which might have endangered a relapse. For the first two days of the return of consciousness, he betrayed it only by signs; he pressed the hand of Desmond affectionately, and closed In\ eyes, as if to indicate his desire of remaining unmolested ; an intimation
Ž46
which was implicitly complied with. The first words he spoke convinced Ins attendants of the perfect restoration of' his mental powers. " Let all," said he, tc leave the apart¬ ment to Desmond and me. I have waited patiently for this moment ; andbelievt me,'' added he, addressing his phvsician, " I am not anticipating my strength— you may trust me." The doctor felt his pulse, and ac quiesced immediately in his patient*- request. tť Dear Desmond," said he, when they were alone, " you went, 1 remember, vvith the Emperor's despatches to my father—-you have no doubt delivered them. Mow were thev received?" £C With joy, my lord, which could noi be dissembled, and his highness the Duke condescended to treat the beare with much distinction. 1 have de¬ spatches for you when von are able t* { ar i/ examine them, and brought a packet for you to deliver to the Kmperoi ; bm as it contained matter whieb, as your
247
noble father told me, might not brook delay, when on my return I found }oti to ail appearance at the gates of death, I ventured so far to exceed my commis¬ sion as to deposit them myself in the hands of his imperial majesty." a Right, right, Desmond.—How long have I been ill ?" " Above a fortnight, my lord." bt And to what cause do you attribute my illness?" said hc, looking fixedly hi Desmond's face, which reddened as he u ч, íC To the cause which overthrew ihe house of Priam«—to the cause which lost 4n; к Antony his moiety of the world— to a woman!" a And is this opinion confined to vour own breast, or do others partake it ? ' " My lord, 1 will not deceive you, no one holds any other." A long pause ensued ; at length— ** Methinks," said Vallensteïn, u i have had many attendants :—·tell mv who have been about me."
5И8 u Father Felix, the confessor of .the IJaroness of Marchfeldt, who has rarelv quitted your bedside ; I found him there on my return. My fiist impulse, on be¬ holding him, was suspicion and le^cnt- nieut, but the mild piety ofthe old man disarmed me; and, iu truth, he has watched over you like a guardian angeh Conrade, too, has been here from time to time." si But who else ľ" said YallensUïn, with half fretful anxiety. " I am ípiit<¿ sure there was likewise another." " There was another, my lord ; and one wdio, in the powers of alleviation, excelled us all. No doubt it is the sistei of the order of Meicy ior whom jou inquire." 4r A nun of the order of Mercy!— Was she not often near me r" * ς She was most tenderly assiduous ; yet other duties would oblige her to quit you sometimes for Ьоигл When ihe was here, her skill and adroitness, in¬ duced all to give way to her,"
íe Was she tall and fair ?" 44 She was tall, but of a brown com¬ plexion ; 'her eyes were alvvays veiled after their manner.—But what of that, mý lord ?" " I know not, Desmond ; it is mere idle curiosity.—-Wlien conies she again ?" u She looked on you yesterday as you slept ; and, finding the favourable c'nınçe which had taken place in vou, she breathed a prayer over you, and retired, v'e'nifyİng that her ministry was ended." Cw Kuough, dear Desmond, I would deep ; let no one speak near mc." He cli rl not, however, resign himself í о slumber, but to thoughts almost equally refreshing ; the sister of Mercy -»till glided before his eves. u Ah f' thought he, íť cruelty has been too long exercised ; it is time that mercy should succeed, »She was brown» they say—but what of that? Can I be dull enough to suppose she would ven¬ ture hither undisguised? No! her de¬ licacy and dignity were carefully pro- ΛΙ s>
250
tected during this work of clemency, by the sanction of her holy confessor, and the guardian arm of her trusty Con rade." As he turned his head upon his pillow, he felt something tighten uneasily ahout his throat, and, on examination, he found ihat a ribbon chain, with a golden heart appended to it, was tied round his neck —íle examined the trinket with inde¬ scribable interest ; and, in so doing, touched a spring which opened the heart, and discovered a small lock ot dark chesnut hair. This revelation somewhat perplexed and entangled the train of his musings, for bv what so- phi stry could he reconcile this tress with the head from which he would fain per¬ suade himself it was severed? The in¬ fatuation ofa lover is of all subjects the most trite and fruitful in examples ; there is no reasoning upon it, because it is a matter entirely beyond the juris¬ diction of reason. Somehow or othei Vallensteïn satisfied himself, by its aid, ihat this little bit of dark chesnut hair had
251
been taken from amongst the light au- burn ringlets which curled over the ivory forehead of Louisa of Marchfeldt ; and had any one attempted to argue the matter vvith him, hc would, no doubt, have lamented his want of strength to knock down so flagrant a delinquent; but against any such offensive reasoning Vallensteïn wisely guarded himself. In hoarding the secret of the golden h can in his bosom, and sharing it with no brin«? creature. Louisa of Marchfeldt, meanwhile, had not passed unpunished , iu» knew that Casimir, the ostensibh «rieud of her deceased brother, was dan¬ gerously ill, and had too much reason to tax herself as the cause* She could not conceive how mere mortified pride could produce die agonizing effect she had witnessed, and she was puzzled to guess what motive could induce such a man as the voung Count Vallcnsteïn to expose himself to the humiliating pity of the rouit, as a rejected and despairing lover, if there was not within him some genuine
252
and overwhelming feeling, which* alf his manhood was powerless to resist. Be* this as it might, the daily accounts of his danger agitated and terrified her, and banished repose from her pillow. She could not, and did not, opposcthe djtrsire of the good Felix, to attend the sufiering Vallenstein ; and her permiasion, to the same effect, was readily accorded to- Con rade, who, next to her and Xhe w- mory of his master, loved im master's iriend. From them she learned every symptom of the unfortunate Vallenstein's malady, and from their simplo, un- vvarped representations, it became mani¬ fest to her, that whatever might have been his original views respecting her, his whole nature had now become im¬ bued with an absorbing, pervading, and irradicable sentiment, of which she was the object. She, vvith Wolfstein and Wilhelm, were the personages vvho peo¬ pled his visions : he called incessantly, in the tenderest accents, on the latter, to behold how his friend was sacrificed
253
îoîtreâchery, and conjured him to open the ? eyes of his sister. The Baroness was no coquette, nor was it in her heart to exult in p. c-ôriqiiest of thi« nature; she was unfeiginetlly and íleeply afflicted at thcÄthteuin which Vallenden lay, and trembled ior the result ; yet she knew t haü the whole court 'attributed his dan¬ ger to her-severity, and dreaded to con¬ fi rmutbe«n©tion, by betraying the slight¬ est symptom of the uneasiness which preyed upon; her. She was constant, therefore^in attendance at court ; where- evicr thetiioble and the gay assembled, there was the Baroness of Marchfeldt; she danced at balls, and sung at con¬ certs, and permitted the splendid traîneau ofthe Margrave of Lindau to bear her over the frozen waters of the Danube; for a traîneau paity by torch-light was now become the seasonable and fashion¬ able amusement of Vienna. The aflairs of the imperial house, meanwhile, wore every day a more in¬ auspicious appearance. Tilly had expe-
254
rienced a defeat; and the Emperor, having offered peace to Gustavus, had been answered by that spirited monarch, '* that when he was cured of the wound inflicted bv an eagle's claw hc should be able to think of peace, and not till then." Thus the thoughts of Ferdinand were more and more directed to that ever successful cenerai, in whose genius and resources his faith was unlimited ; and he only waited a secure occasion for re-instating hi/n in all those powers and honours, w hereof he had most reluctant!} deprived him. The present unfavourable state ofthe war had lowered the tone of those men whose measures had tended to produce it ; and Ferdinand now ven¬ tured to look on them with the air ot one vvho felt himself th.e victim of weak or evil counsellors. Even Bavaria, wdiose once invincible general had sus¬ tained a signal defeat, carried himself with somewhat diminished haughtiness. Before Yallenstem quitted his confine¬ ment, and presented himself once more
255
in public, he confessed himself to Felix. The good father was interested and edi- tied by the shrift of his young penitent; tor seldom could a soldier of six and twenty have exhibited so clean a bosom. This important rite having been duly pei formed, Vallensteïn set himself on a diligent perusal of his father's de¬ spatches ; they contained many Ante papers in eyphu, ^·ν\ directions as to their various cdloiment, accompanied by the following letter :— " You have nobly justified my con¬ fidence. During the few davs you have sojourned in the Austrian court, you have so happily borne yourself as to have already very materially assisted my plan of operations; in short, I could not have been more efiectively represented, and it is with pride and delight I perceive that }our person is no less acceptable to the Emperor than your mission. Hold vour position steadily only for a short time, and theu we have the game in our hands! The affairs ofthe empire
256
are in · glorious disorder :, Gustavus is piifrftfrig'On« without' obstacle, and it is written in my horoscope that I only can prescribe him· hil limits. Now, Casimir, a-word-for yourself :—I will not insult you with a suspicioni à that, initiated as you are in * the-solemn mysteries of am¬ bition, you can spare u glance to the toys of your boyhood. {I will therefore, with¬ out farther preamble, tell you what the maintenance of our present happy pos¬ ture demanda' from you. it has become a desirable point with rne to regain Wolfstein. You will sav the task is uot m' easy, but í will teach you how it mav be accomplished without trouble. Every man has his ruling passion—the master- key by which his bosom maj be entered. Wolfsteïn's is the vanity of a poet ; ad¬ dress vourself to that, and vou hwve hmi. Of course your penchant for the heiress of Marchfeldt no longer troubles your repose, since yuii have had small leisure for such trifling ; and I am told she has thought fit to treat vou vvith au insolence
257 suchasnomanl} brea^tcouidfor a moment brook. I therefore demand no sacrifice fi om you, ia expecting that you will leave io Wolfstem that wliich you do not pos- ^cs.s, and which, without degradation,you cannot persist in pursuing. We niu>t bribe those whom we would make our agents, and Wolfsteïn* will be cheaply bought, ifa Httle empty flattery,- and the apparent resignation of an insolent capri- t ions giıl, will purchase him· Allmu ^ numjils !— Λ la ¿luire ! ίζ Fuir.DLANn." it may, perhaps, puzzle the reader, when he is informed that a correct and wrbatim copy of this letter was already m the hands of Wolfsteïn, who was amus¬ ing himself iu conjecturing its effect on the haughty spirit and open heart of Ins rival; uhum, however, he scarcely deigned to consider any longer in that Iicdit, -ince the sevne at Ikirun Erden- heuu's table, and its consequences, had been dt-»cribed to him* At present hi-, miiui \\;ь txchbUely swaved bv the J tr ·/ -" desU'e (ďoblainiiu·: Louisa of Marchfeldt»: ? -У *«
258
to this point he resolved, for awhile, to concentrate his views, and cither b} craft or violence to secure his object. He harboured not, in fact, a doubt of suc¬ cess;—his emissaries reported to him faithfully every word she uttered ;—he knew she was surrounded by the pa- pillons ofthe court, and suffered them to dutter their gaudy wings around her ;-— he knew that the handsome, gallant, lively Lindau sighed, ogled, and son- netised, and even presumed to hope ; but all this rather helped to confirm hi·. security, lie had studied Louisa, and he knew that Frederic Lindau was no rival for him ; Vallensteïn was the onlv man whose influence could have alarmed him, and now he believed himself saie even there. The Emperor had twice visited the sick chamber of Vallcnsteïn incoa, and had testified the most gracious interest in his recoven ; he had condescended to glance at the supposed cause of his ill¬ ness, and to hint that if the interference
259 of the Empress with the Lady of Marchfeldt might be efficacious, it should he tried. Casimir was, however, too proud for the adoption of such a mea¬ sure; and, although he thanked his im¬ perial master with all suitable humility, he discovered an unconquerable repug- плпее to avail himself even ofthe good ónices of so exalted an ally in a matter which he rightly believed could only be transacted between heart and heart. The young Count came forth again among-1 his friends, amid the sunshine of omiles and the music of many wel¬ comes. Imperial favour now shone full upon him, without the intervention even of that thin cloud with which state polic} íjad, for a moment, veiled it, Lovely сил dwelt on him tenderly; and then were few amongst the vain and the am¬ bitious who did not envy him. 'I hev, .das! saw only the sparkling of his cup, bu< guessed not that one bitter diop was ^Indent lo poisou the whole draught. \Vh<4i he fui ered the imperial circle, fot
2бЬ the first time on his convalescence, I Vi - dinand led him instantly to the Empiva, who expressed, in the sweetest and mosi flattering accents, her joy at his recovo ν . Princess Stolberg, from whom he ex¬ pected the foremost greeting, w a s >ίκ last who approached; but Vallenstein was quickly convinced, that not one of those who preceded her had uttered then congratulations fiom a moie genuine source. She scarcely spoke of !иъ illness but a little falter in the voice, a little heightening of tlie colour ofthe check and a ť ansient dimness ofthe e}e, lent io her brief u I am glad to see you, count д ten ibid meaning íC f am sui e of it, my charming friend, ^aid he; <c and,that you aie so, gives an added value to returning hei 1th. lîui what is become of vour loses? You и e paler than when we last met." " Vh ! " said she, tc 1 am m love, 1 sup pose! For, apropos count— iß υ и have made it the fasluon—nobodv can appeal ,t court who л uot in love. Al! ош ac-
261 complishcd youth, who, till you came, guessed nof that aught was wanting to complete their perfections, arc now prac- í ising the sigh à la Vallensteïn. But what on earth could betray you into the public expression of your misplaced pas» sion for that unfeeling Baroness? But peihaps it is as well, alter all; the tuni¬ sien! humiliation, the jest of the hour, all that passos, all that is a trille îf vou havo but recovered your senses; and 1 will not believe that such a superb cica¬ line as vou are can possess so liitle power ine«* the action of his will as to conlinue chained to the triumphal car of that dis¬ dainful woman." ** Ah, princess ! the heart of that wo- nun is my vimnuuu bonum, aud, even \et, 1 do uot despair of gaining ill" 44 Her heait, count! I would as liej lieai vou í alk of finding the philosophers -tone,—they are, í believe, equall) non¬ entities! But í iell vou eandidlv, sou havı destro} ed } our last chance ;—v oni
2()2
only game was to mortify her vanity, and by one fatal exhibition of your weakness you have fed it to repletion. You stood the helpless mark of her barbarities, and in deliberate sportshe pierced you through and through with arrows, to display her skill to the company. You shrink, Val¬ lensteïn, —but I am acting the part of n faithful friend : ere vve cure the wound, we must probe it." ci But I have reason to suspect, thai Louisa,—that the Baroness has a heart, and that its pity, at last, has reached even to me.—Is not pity sometimes the pre* cursor ofa still kinder sentiment ?" et In truth, I have heard so ;—but she has given you proofs of pity, has she ?" ťí I think,— ! behove so." tc Will you trust them to my investi¬ gation r ,J ςΓ ' I am hardly certain it would be honourable." €i Welti count, I will not piess it;— but» if Louisa of Marchfeldt has a heart,
2Ш
and in that heart there resides love, pity, or sympathy,—then I will believe the Medicean Venus has the fellow to it/' The subject of their conference entered at that moment, and with her, her sha¬ dow, the Margrave of Lindau. The situa¬ tion ofthe Baroness was distressing, and she felt it so. She knew that the eyes of the whole circle were prepared to scan and criticise her demeanour and its ef¬ fect. That her heart, for she had one, in spite oí' Princess Stolberg' s belief to the contrary, had softened towards Vallen¬ steïn, and that she beheld his pale coun¬ tenance and attenuated frame wdth re¬ morse, was certain ; but she was equally averse from the thought of inflicting any farther wound by the coldness of her m 'inner, or creating any delusive hopes by its gentleness. ts Perhaps," thought she, ^ he will mark Ins seme of what has passed by determined avoidance, and to that chance I must trust for extrication from my em- barrassments."
*ìé4
ît was not long, however, eie Vallen¬ steïn and she found themselves, as it were, accidentally near each other :—Louisa луаэ indeed, at the moment, taken by sur¬ prise, for she was not aware, till their ev es met, of his vicinity ; and the delight of Vallensteïn was extreme on perceiving the emotion which instantly betrayed itself in her countenance as she faltered, c< I rejoice, sir, that your indisposition has left you, and that }ou are restored to your frien ds. * He waited riot to analyse the nature of this emotion; enough for him that she started and changed colour at his ap¬ proach, and that her eye no longer carried to his heart the chilling language of ie- pulse. instead, therefore, of tlie haughtv, reproachful return for which the con- scions Louisa was prepared, she quickis perceived that Vallensteïn had risen from tlie couch of sickness, to which her treat¬ ment consigned him, still more inex¬ tricably the slave of her fascinations, Frederic Lindau, who was in truth a verv
от
good-natured youth, and who was quite sure that the Count had been condemned to suffer for his sake, was engaged in carefully adjusting his behaviour to that nice balance, луШсЬ might secure him from wounding the feelings of his de¬ feated rival, either by an expression of compassion, which migjit offend his pride, or an appearance of exultation in his own more prosperous success, which might be construed into lugenerous triumph ; while, iu fact, no one thought about him, for Casimir, although he would have given much for but. one of those smiles which he so easily obtained, never for a moment vouchsafed to. regard him as a rival. Poor Liudau's study had a most unhappy effect; his. lively foppery, which became him well, being exchanged for a solemn ostentation of forbearance, which provoked the anger of Louisa, and ex¬ cited the smile of less concerned specta¬ tors, while it was all lost on him for whose advantage it was designed. As tho group separated, u Poor fellow !" exclaimed the VOL. II. N
•Joo
-Margrave, tc I pity him from the centre of my soul ľ' Cť Bity whom ?" asked the Baroness. u Why, Vallensteïn :—do you not see to what a shadow your frown has shrunk him ?—He has the arrow in hisside, Ba¬ roness! I would not be that man for all his father's dukedoms !" a I should think," retorted the Lady ei' Marchfeldt, " that if all his father's possessions were limited tu a square tower on the banks ofthe Danube, even then, Casimir of Vallensteïn might be a fair mark for the envv of the most accom- w' plished courtier in the Emperor's circle í Now, how can you, Lindau, indulge your¬ self in such a gasconade? How can you talk of pitying Vallenstem?" The Margrave felt that she had not ex¬ pended all her arrows ; she meant, in¬ deed, that the rebuke should not fall pointless, for she began to weary of the young courtier's presumptions, and to think it might be for her dignity io re¬ press them.
жг/
Ere the dispersion ofthe company the Emperor beckoned Vallensteïn, and the Duke of Bavaria advancing at the same moment, Ferdinand mutually introduced them. " His highness," said his Imperial Ma¬ jesty, u is disposed to coalesce with the measures which the situation of the em¬ pire render necessary, and I trust all my friends will now evince their loyalty by cordial and sincere co-operation." There was something in the look of Maximilian which did not answer for his cordiality, but hc received young Vallen¬ steïn with forced politeness, and more at such a juncture could hardly be expected from him. After a few words of ceremony he retired, when the Emperor, drawn ng Casimir beyond the circle, imparted to him the important intelligence, that all things were finally arranged for his fa¬ ther's reinstatement in all his powers and honours; and signified that Prince Schaumberg would set off* for Prague the following day, invested with the fullest credentials for that purpose.
2rø
CHAPTER XII. '· Say that some lady, as perhaps there is, Has for your love as great a pang of heart As you have for Olivia." Shakspeare: Princess Stolberg, who openly pro¬ fessed her friendship for young Vallen¬ steïn, was, as matter of course, the avowed partisan of his house, and resolved to be the first who should celebrate the tri¬ umph ofthe Duke of Friedland ; in whose honour she announced a masquerade and supper at her apartments for the follow¬ ing evening. This entertainment was to be considered a test of the temper of the court, and those who avoided appearing at it tacitly declared themselves mal¬ contents. The party given by Princess Stolberg, therefore, was a subject of in¬ finite interest not only to the gay and the dissipated, but to the politicians of the
SOF
hour, and the Emperor and Empress not only graced the festivities with their pre¬ sence, but resolved to mingle in them ; for the late arrangements had lifted from the bosoms of the Imperial pair the in. supportable vraght of care and anxiety wdiich had borne down their spirits. It was long since so superb and distin¬ guished a fete as the one полу antici¬ pated had been given } for the nobles and electors had divided and subdivided into parties and factions, and mistrust and jealousy had for some time saddened the German capital. The Empress, to mark her approbation ofthe part Princess Stolberg took in the present revolution, permitted her the use of an ample and mag¬ nificent suite of state apartments, adjoin¬ ing those which, as first lady of the key, she occupied in the palace, in order that nothing might be wanting to the splen¬ dour of the gala. The platonic attach¬ ment subsisting between the Princess and Vallensteïn placed them on the most confidential footing; and, when the
270
former perceived the entrance of two Tyrolese hunters, she recognised imme¬ diately her friend and his secretary, Des¬ mond, whose habits she had herself se¬ lected. She луа$ dressed as a Spanish girl, with her guitar: the Emperor and Empress were well content to divest themselves for a few hours of the cum¬ brous trappings of royalty, and appeared in the humble attire ofa Venetian gon¬ dolier and his wife; and Louisa of March¬ feldt, at the recommendation of her im¬ perial mistress, assumed, on the other hand, the ermine robe and regal diadem, which became her as her appropriate iïarb. It would be endless to enumerate the groups of Chinese, Turks, Tartars, Moors, devils, conjurors, zingari, figu¬ ranti, harlequins, Circassians, angels, fai¬ ries, grandees, and peasants, nuns and ecele îastics, who enlivened and diversi¬ fied the motley scene. A general spirit of harmony seemed to have diffused itself over the heterogeneous multitude ; and Princess Stolberg had the satisfaction to
271
remark, that the number of those bidden to her feast, who by their absence im¬ plied discontent, were few indeed. Val¬ lensteïn was in high spirits; the golden heart acted as a powerful talisman to heighten the zest of every pleasure, to give new value to every triumph, and to lull to rest every perturbing thought. Early in the evening he ventured to ap¬ proach the object of his Lopes, and met a benign and gracious reception, " I did not expect, Count," she said, £ť to see the real hero of this splendid hour equipt so humbly ; but true greatness may defy any disguise, and that, no doubt, is your axiom." " illas, lady! the humility of my garb well suits the level of my hopes ! Many au honest, light-hearted mountaineer would make an ill exchange with the hero of this night's revels ; yet one wave of your majesty's sceptre, and Europe would not hold a man so great and so happy/' As he looked anxiously beneath the
272
mask, which shaded the upper part ot her countenance, and awaited her reply, he felt his shoulder touched by a Domi¬ nican friar, .and, angry al the interrup¬ tion, said somewhat hastily, iC What would you, father?" The monk just raised his cowl, and revealed the features of Wolfstem. " Vallensteïn/' said he, in a friendh tone, "I have been seeking you. Come, come, man ! it is time to put an end to our mock quarrel,—I am tired of it¬ änd, besides, I have something to say to you, a message from your father : I come from Prague, and hearing the Val¬ lcnsteïn triumph was celebrating, weary traveller as I am, I would not be ab¬ sent." Louisa did not behold the counte¬ nance of the Dominican, but she heard the words, and in no spot on the wide and populous globe couid that voice have sounded on her ear unrecognized. For the instant, surprise and consternaţi* m chained her where nhe stood ; but. on
273
recovering her presence of mind, she at¬ tempted to retreat ; the crowd, however, pressing near her, she was compelled to remain stationary long enough to hear the whole of Wolfsteïn's address to Val¬ lensteïn, she, meanwhile, supposing her¬ self undiscovered by him. When at length she escaped to a distance from the singular being, in whose influence over her destiny she had acquired aimosi au implicit belief she pausett to reflect on the measure she had best adopt. " .Shall I retire immediately, and se- eure myself from the risk of meeting him this evening? Should I do so, my evasion will be the theme of general spe¬ culation—he will argue from it that I fear him, and although by High t this evening 1 might procrastinate the ren¬ contre, happen it must ; for Wolfsteïn will be every where*" She was confined entirely to her own resources, for in this assembly no one shared her secrets ; and whether her re- s 5
274
maining was the result of sound reflection, or of that fatal influence in which she was inclined to believe, it is impossible now to determine; луе Λνίϋ, therefore, return to Wolfstein and Vallensteïn. The former, ere his stunned and baffled rival t niel shake off his astonishment, с1гелу írom beneath his gown a packet, which hc advised Vallensteïn to conceal in his bosom. '* They are private," said he, iC and only for your own eye : consume them Λνΐιοη perused," All these proofs of intimate confidence reposed in this man by his father con¬ founded the senses of Vallensteïn ; he could scarcely believe himself awake, or that it was indeed Wolfstem with Λνΐιοηι he conversed. α It seems, sir," said he, " you wouldíàin persuade me that all the past is a dream ; that the deep, intense, inveterate enmity wbich has reigned mutually between us, and wdiich has instigated you to the
275
tbulest villanies, and has kindled in my bosom the most inextinguishable resent¬ ment, is a joke.'* " Exactly," said Wolfstein; " }uu lake my meaning precisely, and were vou a philosopher, as I am, you would see nothing strange in the expectation. The past is a dream, a mere empty vision ! Whether, in passing, it wa í real or imaginary is of little consequence : suf¬ fice it for us, that it is now nothing. But let us not mistake each other. It 1кл suited me to serve the views of your father, and he trusts me : the indulgence of my antipathy to you amused me for a time ; but all things weary, and I can¬ not fatigue myself by perplexing you farther." u Of course, sir, you relinquish all pre» tence to the hand ol' the Barones^ ot Marchfeldt !—you have awakened from that dream likewise !" " So far I have awaked from it, that î consider all that has passed there, tuo, as nothing: we shall begin again as new ac-
2У6
quaintance ; but she is an object Λνοιίίΐ} my pursuit, and I shall pursue her. We will start fair, Count; if indeed }ou yet consider vour chance worth trying for." " And is it possible, "Wolfstem, you can, after the detection of ycur base and wicked deception, think so meanly of Louisa to encourage a hope of success ?" " Oh, no ľ* said the Chevalier, with a diabolical smile, cc 1 am not so pre¬ sumptuous to hope. Hope supposes in¬ security—! am certain. But this is mere trifling ; our boyish frolics are not woith remembrance. I looked to have found in vou a supple statesman, involved iu cabinet mysteries, your head lull ot mighty projects, victories, albana s, de¬ thronements, revolutions! .Vnd, lo! I find you mewling out а love-tale about Louisa of Marchfeldt, like seme beard¬ less shepherd of Arcadia! I believed you had done with such nonsense. Well, I vvill not cross you—destiny, not I, must answer for your failure. Will you give me your hand, Vallenstein ?"
277 £ί Sever, Wolfstem !" íť Be it as you will," said the ('hevalier; in a graver tone : " it is a pity, never- t beless. You arc playing like a child over the aspic s nest—take луагпп^ ! Be¬ lieve me, I havj dreadful means of de* siiuction~when my hour of awaking ar« nves ? î shall confound the incredulous! Let us now separate ; for I advise you not Л) tempt me farther till vou have lead the Duke's despatches." \allenstun laid little stress on this parting threat ; he supposed it implied merely that his father had repeated and enforce 1 his injunctions to cultivate the friendship of Wolfstein, and to yield up to him his hopes of the Baroness; mea¬ sures to chicli e\en the most peremptory command would never have stretched his filili dut}, in spite ofthe love and ie\ erence hi which he held him from whom iî emanated, His first impulse was to seek Louisa, and obtain from her at least a hearing ; but as he wandered round the room in search of her, he met
278
the Princess Stolberg unmasked, vvho, placing her arm within his, drew him from the crowd. 6i Y^ou were," said she, " looking eagerly for some one : was it your friend and Mentor you so assiduously sought Ρ Let us seek a cooler apartment." They entered a recess representing a mermaid's cave, lined with shells, coral, and fuci. The genius of this submarine grot had deserted it to frolic amongst the inhabitants of the upper woild, and the fair Spaniard and the Tyrolese took advantage of her absence, to hold their conference free from the invasion of curious listeners. 4i Who is the Dominican by whom you were so deepl) engaged, and by what theme did he so effectually and unplea¬ santly rivet jour attention?" u How did you discover that he did »о г t( Because I mai ked you closeiy. Do }ou think no feature but the eye betrays the workings ofthe mind ? The mouth,
279
even in its apparent silence, is an equal tell-tale. The cowl of your companion disguised him effectually, yet I suspect I know him—it was Wolfstein." " You have guessed right, 'Princess." " For your sake, my dear Vai'enstem, í rejoice in his arrival." u You rejoice for my sake ! Vou are inexplicable, Princess ör treating me with most unseasonable irony." u No, my friend, I cannot jest with you on these matters; but his presence will bring your affairs to a crisis—you vvill be cured—all medicine is unpa¬ latable, but it must he swallowed ! One dose of coloquintida awaits you, and then adieu to your pining malady ! You shall even thank your physician." u It is plain, madam, you persist in thinking, not only that I ought to re¬ linquish all hope of obtaining flu» Ba¬ roness, but that the wretch Wolfsteïn îs secure of his victim ! Speak it at once, madam, is this what you mean ?" й( Alas ! it is, dear Vallensteïn ! I can»
280
not bear to see your misery, and I detest alike all that cause it." iC But, madam, you are deceived,'* said Vallensteïn, affecting a tone of com¬ posure, cc I can produce proof of it ; nay, had not that bane of all social enjoyment this night interrupted me, I was in the very act of making a decisive declara¬ tion, receiving a decisive sentence. My heart presaged all that was good ; never did it swell so high with hope, when that fiend stood between us, and"------ " Vallcnsteïn,Vallensteïn! how cruelh you deceive yourself! Had not the sen¬ tence yon ы) yearned to hear been sus¬ pended, at this moment nota hope had been left alive in your bosom/' iC That point, madam, shall be quickly ascertained ; this night shall end the con¬ flict!" And he started from his scat, and would have rushed back to seek Louisa amongst the crowd. ct Bc patient oue moment, I conjure you, Casimir! You talk of proofs ; have
281 you really proofs? Confide them to me; I will not betray you !" " This instant, madam ;" and, his hands trembling with agitation, he unfastened from his neck the ribbon, to which hung ilie golden heart, and placed it reproach¬ fully in her hands. 4t No, madam ! I am not such a cox¬ comb to build my hopes on the weak foundation of my own presumption ; but if this is not a token of woman's love, what is it?" Ci 1 believe it is, indeed, a token oi \voman\s love. Prom whom did you re- eeive it?" t« [.* lom whom could I receive ii ? Prom Louisa." "Ah! that is indeed decisive ! And when ?" iC Ah, Princess! that bosom you deem *><) cold and insensible is the bright abode of every virtue; gentleness, сошраъ- •моп, all that makes woman lovely ! Con¬ cealed İn the humble garb of a sister of Mercy, that angel ministered dmiy by
282
my couch, smoothed my restless pillow^ and lulled me with seraph hymns to re¬ pose. What a tyrant is sickness, that tiie mind should be enchained and stupefied by it, in defiance of a charm potent enough, one should believe, to call the dead to life ! She glided around my couch, and I remained reckless of her presence; yet, w r hen I recovered, a vague, indefinite, recollection of something in¬ finitely sweet and gentle kept haunting my thoughts, but the reality had vanished." iC Truly, a very marvellous story, Val¬ lensteïn ! It was, depend on it, the Lady of Marchftddťs ghost ; since, during your illness, her corporeal moiety was visible elsewhere, morn, noon, and night, I be¬ lieve. Instead of hymning you to sleep, she was employed in helping to keep all that was noble and gay in Vienna awake; and, while her spectre was gliding about your couch, the woman herself was gliding over the frozen bosom ofthe Danube, in Frederic LindauAs traîneau. I have often told yon she had no heait in her, and now
283
it is plain enough that her body and soul are not always in the same place." C( You are so prejudiced, Princess, there is no comfort in talking to you." ťC Don't bc angry, Vallenstein ! For though there is something very unac¬ countable in the gift of ubiquity pos¬ sessed by the Lady of Marchfeldt, your hopes do not depend on establishing that matter, since she has left in your hands this palpable and substantial token of her favour." She touched the spring and opened the heart; she considered the tress for a moment.' 1 íť Bless me!" cried she, u how one may be deceived ! I am now pretty well convinced that the lady I saw at court, during your illness, surrounded by lovers and bards, dancing like Terpsichore, singing like Saint Cecilia, and looking like a youthful Juno, was not after all the Baroness of Marchfeldt, for she had bright fair hair, a sort of glittering ambci colour; but this ringlet of the Lady Louisa's is a dark glossy chestnut/'
284
This remark seriously disconcerted Vallensteïn. "Doyoucall this chestnut colour?" said he. " I confess it did strike me that it was somewhat darker than Louisa's hair —but yet, it is not t Vestnut surely ! Be¬ sides, to whom else can it pobsibly be¬ long? Does not the hair sometimes darken when it is cut from the head ?'" " Such natural phenomena may occur to lovers perhaps, but I cannot say that ever an instance of such a fact pre¬ sented itself to me. However, you can consult Professor Pillcnberg." ŕť It is your delight, Princess, to make me miserable, to cut off* my hopes, and insult over my disappointment." " Oh, Vallensteïn ! would I could re¬ scue you from a false and ruinous illu¬ sion ! I could not have believed that love could so have warped the natural iacuities of a man ! Why, Count, you are become not only mentally and me¬ taphorically blind, but, positively, you cannot see! Call this branch of coral an
STQtŕ
orange tree, and it vvill not prove more incontestable the error of your senses, than your belief that this tress of dark hair ever occupied a station on the fair head of Louisa of Marchfeldt." " Alas ! it is but too true," said Val- ienstcin, sighing bitterly, and letting tlie heart fall to the ground, -' Ay, trample on it, sir," exclaimed the Princess; " it is metal that will uot easily break," Hc heeded not her remark, but sank into a reverie ; at length, ct What would you have me do, Prin¬ cess ?" said he ; a 1 am not fit to direct myself! All that governs man, the feel¬ ings of my heart, the faculties of my brain, are one wild chaos. Oh, Princess ! had you ever felt the pang of hopeless love, you would pity me." <c What is your own idea? What doe«· the present impulse dictate? Tell me; I will either confirm or oppose it, as it ap¬ pears creditable or derogatory to уош reason and dignity*"
m®
ΐ£ 1 would rush at once down the pre¬ cipice ! I would know r the worst!" " I consent ; the shock will awaken you from a feverish vision, and you will not break a bone in the fail. So alloiis ei courage! But," said she, as they rose, ct do you thus despise the token of a woman's love ? Will you leave it here amongst the Mermaid's treasures ? What selfish things are men ! You are at this moment \vrithing in the tortures of re¬ jected passion ! You have no ignorance to plead in excuse of your inhumanity ! This little token hints that there is owe in existence who endures for you what you endure for another! But Λνίκιί of that! Let her suffer!" iC True," said Vallensteïn, as he took it from her hand, " this one absorbing sentiment is destruction to every other. No, I will not unfeelingly fling away the gentle Beguine's token ; it shall return to its station." ťí How awkwardly >ou fasten it, Ca- simir! Lei me aid yon."
Zö/
And, tying it in a knot, she once moie threw it round his neck, and they left the grotto together. As they walked round the apartments examining the several groups, Vallenstein's ear was saluted on all sides with the abhorred sound of Wolfsteïn's name. Some had seen him, and were describing his looks, or repeating some caustic bon-mot; others were wondering whereabouts he was, how disguised, &c; and, according to appearance, he must have changed properties with Proteus, for at least half a dozen different charac ters were assigned him, all of which he was recorded to have personated incomparably. cî I would as lief hear the braying of au ass," said the Princess, i£ as this un¬ meaning popular buzz ! It is a fine thing, nevertheless, for a mere mortal to be borne aloft on a cloud composed of the breath of fools, like some heathen deity." Ah she spoke, the object of their search presented herself, but she was led by a young Greek, who seemed Intent on
"288"
drawing her from the crowd, and ap¬ proaching the grotto they had lately quitted. Vallensteïn paused for a mo¬ ment. íť If I lose this occasion," said he to himself, " another may not occur to¬ night;" and, bidding adieu to his Spanish lady, he placed himself near the Baroness. cc If," whispered he, " the Barones* of Marchfeldt would vouchsafe one mo¬ meuťs attention to a few brief but earnest words—" 4r From you, sir?' inquired she gravel}. i4 I will not, Count Valleustem, dissemble my know ledge of their import—my thank- are yours; but having nothing more to offer, the conference you seek would bt· equally embarrassing to each. My at¬ tention isat present occupied, but wen it not,—■" " You would not grant nil audkuci', madam ?" And he toi e oif hh пглк, unable to bear the suffocation which oppressed hnn.
289
(ζ No, Count, for the sake of each, I would not." Her heart smote her as she looked on him-—she had again given her hand to the Greek, and was proceeding, but she lingered. " You must acquit me, Count—I have never trifled with your feelings I Our very first interview should have been de¬ cisive-«-! t was even then too late." She waved her hand, and disappeared amongst the crowd, "Too late!" echoed Casimir, "too late !" This was the second sentence of similar import which she had that night pro¬ nounced, but with very différent feel¬ ings. The Margrave of Lindau had ventured to plead his passion, and his hopes received a most unequivocal re¬ jection, while his sorrow and mortifica¬ tion, however pathetically expressed, failed totally ia exciting one spark of sympathy ; but when the sister of Wil¬ helm turned from Caaimir, it was far vol» и, о
am
otherwise : her last words, " it was too late," explained precisely her feelings. Since the fête at Baron Erdenheínťs; since the truth and ardour of his attach¬ ment had been proved to her beyond a doubt, and he had become in her eyes an object of serious interest and observa¬ tion, she had uttered to herself those words, Ci It is too late !" a thousand times. The wolf had been already in the fold ; she had no heart to give, or she would have given it to Casimir. (i That man," thought she, " had we met earlier, might have made me happy; but, as it is, I am doomed to find my misery in the otber." Nothing could have been more art¬ fully timed than the speech with which Wolfstein accosted Casimir on their first encounter. It recalled to the mind of XfOuisa the deception she supposed had been practised on her brother, and had a most sinister operation on the fortune it was intended to blight. Never had she seen Vallensteïn in a light *so ad-
4SWx
vantageous. She beheld him surrounded by all that could inflatee the vanity or mislead the imagination, preserving the same simple, manly, gentle character, which seemed his by nature ; nor did he betray by a single word or action, that it was in the power of circumstances to elate his spirits : and had his good genius delayed the arrival of Woifsteïn one hour, that hour's issue might have been the reverse of what it was· When the Baroness waved her hand as a farewell token to Vallensteïn, she felt within her that the moment was doubly decisive, and that the words which had composed his sentence comprised hers also; still, she resolved not to submit to her fate without at least a struggle. The young Greek who led her ^vards the grotto had been long hovering near her, and had more than once succeeded in his evident design of exciting her attention, when some of her numerous slaves again diverted it. Once he drew nigh and whispered in her ear, " Lady, if you have οβ
292
any regard for your own welfare, let me speak to you for five minutes." The tone in which this луаз uttered startled her, but ere she could reply, Frederic of Lindau was at her side pour¬ ing forth a torrent of tender nonsense, and setting forth the ardoi.r of his pas¬ sion in all the adornments of poetical diction. The disturbance which the words of the stranger had created in the mind of Louisa did not tend to soften the reply which arrested the cur¬ rent of poor Frederic's eloquence, and all his vanity was insufficient to blind him to the fact that his pretensions had no basis. This suitor despatched, the in¬ defatigable Greek again pressed forward» <c Are you yet at leisure, madam ? Or have you any more moths to crush ere you grant me audience ? It is for your own sake, not mine, that I am thus so» licitous." " Well, stranger, I will hear you,— speak on." 4S Not here—the crowd closes upon
ш
us ; many eaves-droppers are amongst them. What do you fear ? I will but lead you to the mermaid's grot.—Take courage, lady." Towards the grotto they were pro¬ ceeding, when Vallensteïn met them, and challenged his fate. Again the Greek expressed his impatience. " Believe me, madam," said he, <c Ì have words of more importance to ad¬ dress to you than you imagine, or you would not thus loiter." The Baroness believed that her con¬ ductor had discovered some plot of Wolfsteïn's, and was about to reveal it to her. That arch enemy she saw, as 4\e imagined, in his Dominican habit at some tiistance, as she entered the grotto, and rejoiced that she had hitherto passed unrecognised by him. As she and her unknown companion seated themselves on tlie rocky bench which had lately been occupied by Vallensteïn and Pi in- ť'uss Stolberg, the Greek unmasked, ami Louisa beheld Wolfstein at her side. He
294 still grasped the hand by which he led her with more force than tenderness, as if prepared for an attempt to elude him, which, however, her extreme agitation hardly left her strength to make. He perceived that she was passive through excess of terror ; he therefore relaxed thu rudeness of his hold, and threw into his dark eyes, as they dwelt upon her countenance, that expression of melan¬ choly sweetness, which had captivated the first lovt 1 of Louisa of Marchfeldt. île spake not, sa\e by these silent yet eloquent interpreters, waiting tiil the terror he had, hy his sudden appearance, inspired, sliould gradual!) subside. " Yes, Louisa," said he, in those mu¬ sical tones which had once won a ready way to her heart, ^ it is I ! 1 could not meet лой first hi public-—1 dared not stand the trial. Pardon an innocent stra¬ tagem ; and, if it pleases лой, hid me begone, for 1 am WolbUm—the monster Wolfstein !" ^ Then, with all the energy of out-
295 raged and most indignant feelings, I do bid you begone !—Go, go, persecutor !" u Well, lady, I will begone. Vouch¬ safe but to accuse me ; let those lovely lips enumerate my crimes, and I vvill not offend by lingering near you.—Why am 1 thus proscribed ?" b< incredible!" exclaimed the Ba¬ roness, Ä< Are you so seared in con¬ science as to solicit a recapitulation o i ν our base impostures !" ŕí Hear me, Louisa !" She rose to leave the grotto— c< Nay, be patient, lady, for you shall hear me! 1 did deceive you— í did enter your hoibe and vour heart in dis¬ tinse; but шу original motive was л mere ! oy*s frolic, and had í uot loved from the monunt í heluld vou, I should have confessed ni} transgression, and bidden you adieu. But fate decreed otherwise! Young Valleu?)tein, but foi 'us v|ow military advances, might have ¿anmd α march upon me, Ibi in will w
296
were equal criminals. If stich a fault as this is beyond repentance, I appeal to your ladyship's hopes of mercy. Speak, Louisa!— Y r ou forgive me?" And in an instant he was on his knees before her, covering the hand he held, and which she could not by any effort withdraw, with tears and kisses, lier situation was unspeakably embarrassing, for anv instant might have filled the grotto with some of the gay groups she had just quitted. " Nay," said he, " let the world be¬ hold my punishment and your barbarity ! —I care not." ςζ And do yon think to move me by heaping insult upon insult?—No, Wolf¬ steïn, you shall never force a pardon from me!" ct Forbid me then to despair !«— Sav you do not hate me !" " I vvill say nothing till you rise —till you release my hand !" lie rose and released her.
" Haveyou any allegation against me, save my having counterfeited the person of Casimir Vallensteïn ?" íÉ Yes, and ten times more insuperable ones ! That, I will not dissemble vvith } ou, 1 could have forgiven." <É Then you will forgive the rest; for you know," said he, ** there is no resist¬ ing fate!—Has nothing ever whimpered to you as much ?" Overcome by the warring feelings which distracted her, she burst into tears; she felt all the keenness of this man's insults, all his insolent security; and. if it be possible that love and hate· can bc at once excited by the same ob¬ ject, she, at the same moment, loved and hated Wolfstein. Her tears encouraged hinn " Now," said he, u afford me but a hope—a distant, a remote hope—of your relenting, and sway me as you please ; I am vour slave for ever !" u No, Chevalier ; I have no hopes fo' a libertine and an infidel !"
298 He drew near, as bhe spoke, with a look of such fierce meaning, that she trembled. " Bravely resolved, madam !"' muttered he. " A libertine and an infidel com¬ bine to make a dangerous character İ Fear it!—fear it!" And he shook her arm roughly as he spoke, wounding its delicate texture by the savage pressure, till sbe almost shrieked with pain and dismay. ct Now go, madam, and brush a few more moths from existence ¡—Wolfsteïn lives still !" And he rushed from the grotto, leav¬ ing his mask on the floor, willing that no one should be ignorant either of Ыл in¬ terview with the Lady of Marchfeldt, or of its interestimr tenor ; nor was his wish ungratified, for many eyes had been upon them. The Baroness did not im¬ mediately quit the grotto ; terror, sur¬ prise, and indignation, for awhile en¬ chained her faculties. That the recent scene might have had observers, she
299
thought ΛνΜι some confusion ; and though, secure in conscious purity, she did not fear the comments of the mis¬ judging throng, she grieved at having in¬ voluntarily provoked them.
300
CHAPTER XIIL u And wecp'st thou o'er the wrecks of treacheious time ? (ìi», counsi 1 ! with thy coiibcieiicc! Search tl»} breast ! Look deep within, if ull be pure and *ouiul ! Hold ťiibt by heaven ! Then, let the changing woild Slide from beneath thy foot ; and, as it lapses, Smile in thine own security !" Day had already risen over the toweis of Vienna, when the maskers began to disperse, and the gala of Princess Stol¬ berg was mingled with the events which have been ;■—the flowers were faded, the lights extinguished, the music silent. and the merry groups vanished. But that gala had traced its memorial on many a bosom—memorials, which a long succes¬ sion of days and nights would fail to erase. The lively lady ofthe feast was not the one least interested in the con-
301
sequences of the departed hour, albeit, practised in courts from infancy, her countenance was skilful to conceal the emotions of her heart, She loved Val¬ lensteïn almost as devotedly as he loved Louisa—loved him even to the annihi¬ lation of that pride which might have caused her to revolt from the idea of accepting the homage which another scorned. His obstinate persuasion, that her ov\n chestnut ringlet had been cut from the brow of her rival, was a severe trial of her fortitude, wduch, however, was victorious, and did not permit a symptom to escape of her pained and irritated feelings. She resolved to await calmly the healing of Vallensteïn'^ wound, and to pick up, even from the earth, that heart which another disdain« fully flung away. Of the result of his declaration, her own accurate observa¬ tions did not permit her to harbour a doubt. She awaited him at some dis¬ tance, trembling at the thought of wit-
302
nessing his despair, yet incapable of letting him depart without being enabled to judge for herself how he bore his final sentence. He was silently passing her, but, as if recollecting himself, he turned, and, fervently pressing her hand, said— " God bless you, my sweet friend !— Good night." The calmness of his manner alarmed her. " Ah, Casimir!" she exclaimed:— fii how is it with you?" " 111 enough," replied he, with a pallid smile; " but fear not for me, Princess— it is but a pang, and all is over 1" He left the assembly, eager to fiiul himself alone ; but the Princess, although greatly re-assured by his words and manner, which bespoke far more of re¬ solution than she expected to see him evince, sent Desmond after him, relating to that faithful friend the utter rejection his hopes had suffered, and conjuring him to watch over and support his
303 spirits. Vallensteïn, therefore, had scarcely reached his hotel, when Des¬ mond joined him. " My dear fellow," said the former, 41 give me joy for the extinction of that dehidon whicli has so long enslaved ше." líe spoke firmly ; but DesmondN voice faltered as he said—■ tť Is it quite gone ?—Then let us think no more of İt !" As Vallensteïn opened the bosom of his vest, his father's packet fell to the floor, and the lieutenant took it up. " There is no sleeping now/' said Val¬ lensteïn, glancing at tiie bioad light that shone through the windows j u we will have cofiee, and examine these papers; and tlien a walk by the Danube will cool and refresh us, and give us leisure to meditate our reply." Ci But the packet is marked private, my lord." " True," said the Count, lecolleeting the words of him from whom he received
S04
it; " but as Wolfstem knows its purport, you shall not be excepted." He tore open the envelope, and, as usual, found that it contained divers cyphered papers, with various addresses, besides the one directed expressly to himself, and whicli ran as follows:·— ie Tiie planet under which I л\ая born has again turned the tide of human events, and the result of all present ope* rations, visible and invisible, is my glory ! This is their end and tendency, and in this point they must perforce concen¬ trate. The web of a great man's destiny employs the hands of unseen legions, and the things which lead apparently to its accomplishment are the work of those mysterious ministers to whom the in¬ evitable task is allotted. 1 must be great •—the sentence was, ages ago, written amongst the stars, and no human wit or force shall frustrate or evade it. Nature has conspicuously fitted mc to co-operate with, and adoni, my destiny; my dis-
305
position is aspiring, and the grasp of my genius vast and boundless :—these, however, might have deceived me, for many a mere foiled adventurer has en¬ tered the lists of fame endowed with every natural gift 'hat could lend hope to enterprise. It is not thus with rne— 1 have traced the page which lies not figure by figure ; I kno w the track before me ; and trust me, Casimir, whatever I do must be done ! Those events, which will seem the mere effect of my volition, and of the actions consequent thereon, are produced by causes which no mortal impulse can resist. But I am fruitlessly endeavouring to impress your mind with this immutable truth, for, as surely as I must keep my own exalted path till it terminates upon the mountain top, so surely will your nature and destiny im¬ pel you to impede my fortune, and to deprecate those circumstances which will seemingly bring it into birth. Of all this I forewarn you, and that is all I can do. The simple exchange ofthe phrase
306
6 my father's ambition/ for the signifi¬ cant and comprehensive word fate, would render ail easy, and you would calmly see me arriving, step by step, at that throne луЬегеоп it is decreed I shall finally be seated. Start not, my son !-— The throne, to a vulgar mind, is a pro¬ digious idea ; to mine it has long been common and familiar—-a little use would render it so to yours. I have waited pa¬ tiently the developement of those matters which must lead to this splendid climax ; they are now rapidly, manifestly deve* loping, though the clue will yet be some time ere it is all unwound. However, I do not think proper to approach nearer to the crisis without preparing your mind, as far as J am permitted, for that which will ensue. Secresy I do not pause to recommend, because, however it may suit vour character to call me traitor, it is neither in vour nature nm in your destiny to become a parricide. A grand coup de fhcaitc is preparing— ihe brilliant career of the Swedish hero
307 draws nigh its catastrophe ; he vvill soon vanish from the scene, and then—But it is enough. Onl) watch the train in its gradual ignition, and you will not start when the vast explosion follows. Tiust your reply to no one but Desmond." Such was the letter which Vallenstem and Desmond perused. " It is а forgery !" cried the former* " It is one ofthe diabolical contrivances of Wolfsteïn's plotting brain ! Never did my father's mind conceive, or his hand inscribe, that letter. What say yon, Desmond ?" " I fear, my lord, the dangerous mat¬ ter you have read is, indeed, the product ofthe Duke's reveries. How far Wolf¬ steïn mav have assisted in accelerating this is a question ; but trust me, my lord, ihe germ is i u your father's breast, and has long been maturili»;. " Again Vallensteïn read this poi tentou^ epistle. " What does ir imply, De*.mond ?— *
Ж)8
What can it imply but treason ? If loyalty, fidelity, honour, have any definite mean¬ ing, if it is treachery for the servant to circumvent the master hc has sworn to serve, then the man who wrote this letter is a traitor." €i My lord, your father wrote that letter, and the matter it involves pervades and identifies the whole man,—-He deals frankly with you ; he explains to you that he is not now commencing his peril¬ ous career, but that he is advanced upon the road,—that he will, that he must pro¬ ceed ! He does not ask vour advice, nor invite your sanction ;—he tells you what he is doing, wdiat he uill do, leaving you to the operation of your vvill, or 9 as he would phrase it, to the developement of your destiny. If your principles require that you should protest against his de¬ signs, you are free to protest ; and, in so doing, you fulfil your utmost warrant.— Oppose him you cannot,—denounce him you will not !"
309
Vallensteïn sate for many minutes with his hands tightly pressed upon his fore¬ head. " Desmond !" cried he, at length, e< there does not exist at this moment a more miserable wretch than Vallensteïn ! Doubly miserable, in that I cannot divest myself of a sense of guilt !-— Oh ! that my father had at least left me ignorant of his designs ! To be conscious of them is treason— to betray them were par¬ ricide ! An hour ago 1 was unhappy, but I was innocent. Oh Desmond ! with what pride, with what devout admiration did I lift my eyes to that man ! With what deep self-congratulation did I pro- nounce the word father !" Again he relapsed into a fit of despond¬ ing silence, and Desmond, who hoped that the tumult of his thoughts would gradually subside, forbore for a while to interrupt his meditations :—at length, " My lord," said he, " your situation is critical ; you stand between your so·
310
vereign and your father—between moral duties and natural affections :—you are not of a temper to vacillate—you have, no doubt, already made your election." tc What do you mean, Desmond ?—I stand between two crimes,—must I per¬ force choose one ? Must I betray my master, or denounce my father ?" " No, my lord, you are not driven to so ciuel an alternative." « Well, my friend, I will at least write without delay to the Duke of Friedland ; he shall not remain another week in doubt as to my principles ;—he shall not number his only son on the dark list of his conspirators." " You are irrevocably decided then, my lord, neither at present to sanction his views, nor at any future period to co¬ operate with his measures ? It is an im¬ portant decision, and time may alter your opinions.—Think of it well, my lord/' There was something in the lieute¬ nant's manner, and the expression of his
311
countenance, which compelled Vallen¬ steïn to pause and examine him with scrutinizing attention. *' What is in your heart, Desmond?— I have a right to demand it.— Mv father once punished you tyrannically—and you remember it uow ? Is it not so that I must interpret the unusual expression of your aspect?" a Your suspicion degrades us both, my lord. Of all the foul and debasing propensities to which man's nature is liable, the one I hold in deepest execra¬ tion is deliberate revenge : besides, do you believe my heart less tenacious of obligation than of wrong?—But your po¬ sition excuses you, my lord. No, Count Vallensteïn, I will never betray this morning's conference,—tlie rack should not wring it from me ! I will never lift my hand or my voice against your fa¬ ther;—and, if you will swear to me on the cross of your sword never to adopt his cause against our lawful and anointed
312
sovereign, I will adhere through life to vour fortunes." Vallensteïn took his sabre from the wall where it hung, and kissing the hilt, uttered a solemn vow never to deviate or falter from the principles which had hi¬ therto swayed him ; never to be seduced into any league, which had the ruin of the House of Austria for its object ; and, if it was contrary to the sacred law of nature to reveal the existence of any such plot, as forcibly as possible to pro¬ test individually against it. The next thing to be considered was Vallenstein's answer to his father. He and his friend were still in their masquerade habits. u Let us," said the former, iC divest ourselves of these childish trappings, which suit so ill with the awful and gloomy predicament in which we stand ! How hateful, at such a moment, are the remnants of past revelry ! Yet," added he, u I would I had been born to wear such a coat, and that none of costlier
SİS
texture had ever wrapt my limbs ! I might now have been ranging my moun¬ tain solitudes, free, innocent, and happy !" They were quickly restored totheir usual appearance* and Vallensfien, with small deliberation, wrote the following letter: " My Lord,—! do not expect to make the slightest impression on a mind so intrenched in its own determinations, as I conceive yours to be ; what I write, therefore, is not to dispute with yoa, but to justify myself. You, mylord, believe implicitly in the irresistible government of Destiny ; and, vvith respect to the influ¬ ence it holds over our fortunes, I am not prepared to dissent from your opinion, and, in fact, it signifies nothing, so far, how vve believe. I, for mine own part, hold an intimate persuasion, that every man's soul is inhabited by certain influ¬ ences, the proper direction of which be¬ longs to the conscience, and that accord¬ ing as the conscience or the passion sways, the man is free or enslaved. Your soul is filled by a predominant passion, wliich^ vou XI. F
314
pardon me, my lord, has driven the legi¬ timate sovereign from the field, and tri¬ umphed to the extinction of conscience! According to the creed set forth in your epistle, vice and vii tue, good and evil, are mere nominal existences, and the good and the wise of all times have been wasting their breath in prating of chi¬ meras. The astrologer may promise me success, or threaten mc with nuiif and I cannot disprove his assertions j but if he tells me I shall become a perfidious traitor, that I shall abuse the confidence of my sovereign, that 1 shall renounce all the principles which connect man with the Deity, and lend him courage to face all fortunes with an equal temper, 1 will never believe him, because I feel that 1 am free to resist the utmost force of cir¬ cumstances ; and were I not to resist, that I should become the artificer of mv own infamy. My ambition, my lord, is to preserve my honour unimpeachable, my faith inviolate, and my heart as pure as is consistent with the imperfect nature of
315
man.-—My father, is it too late? Will you not pause one moment ere you leap the gulf?—What is the stake for which you are about to sacrifice all that is pre¬ cious to a noble spirit? The very utmost you can obtain, is a few short years of remorseful splendour—the very utmost, for I vvill rather conceal my brows for ever within a monkish cowd, than they shall glitter beneath a diadem purchased at so foul a price. Your ambition ex¬ cites you to desire a throne at any rate, mine prompts me to disdain it. House up that which is really great within you, my father, and make head against this ideal destiny ! You arc now the guardian angel of your sovereign's rights, beloved and confided in by him, feared and reve¬ renced by his subjects, the terror of his enemies ;—- and you possess, even yet, my father, ifit be worth preserving, the filial veneration of your only child. Can you resolve, by one desperate act, at once to despoil yourself of all this? Alas! I do not expect to move you ! But if you are ρ 2
зт
inflexible, if your destury must he obeyed, or rather, if your leviathan ambition will needs swallow down every sacred consi¬ deration, let your first confidence on this fatal subject be your last:—I am not worthy of such counsels ! I protest against them with every principle, and every feeling of my heart, and, were j r ou not the author of my existence, I would de¬ nounce them !*—When we dare not claim the concurrence ofthe virtuous, to what dark and dangerous alliances are we compelled! You confide in one who, at his first convenience, %vill betray j r ou.— Wolfsteïn told me, with the exultation of a fiend, that he possessed dreadful means of destruction ;—he does indeed possess them, and, believe me, my father, he will infallibly use them." Such was Vallenstein's reply ;—he con¬ sulted with Desmond how, ΛνΜι the greatest safety, it might be transmitted to Prague ; for there was strong reason to suppose, that should the lieutenant be the bearer, he would be seized, and sub-
317
jected to the ignominious punishment from which he had been formerly re¬ scued ; nevertheless he volunteered his services, " If," said he, Cť our messenger, though we have no cause to suspect him, should by any means be tempted to violate his trust, your father is ruined." u Yet I believe the fellow to be faith¬ ful," said Vallcnsteïn; íť but so, alas ! the Emperor believes my father ! What must we du?" " My lord, we will trust no man : 1 will bear your despatches^ If it be γοη« sible I will keep my head out of the Duke's clutches; if not, he must e'en haye it ; at least neither you nor hc shall tax my cowardice vvith his destruction. I have twice volunteered in the forlorn hope, when the chances were ten thou¬ sand to one against mc ; yet here I am» and doubt not, my lord, I will return in safety." 4ζ I would fain believe an unseen boat protects aod blesses such a, spirit, Deg „mond,"
318
" You may believe what you please, my lord—I am sure of it. If the axe hung over my neck, I should be equally sure of it : in that belief I shall pursue my way steadfastly on earth, and in that belief shall my soul wing her flight to heaven." As Desmond's courage was more men¬ tal than physical, it had no tincture of rashness or bravado; and the friends con¬ ferred on the means by which he might, with the least personal risk, execute his iiihöîuii. ec I suspect," said the lieutenant, " that the Duke would fain hold me in his hands as a hostage for his son. Either he ho¬ nours me with a peculiar portion of his confidence, or he aims at inveigling røe within his power by the appearance of it; therefore it will behove me to avoid his presence. I will deposit my despatches iu the hands of Winterfeldt, and escape for my life, Winterfeldt knows that I stand on slippery ground wdth his excel¬ lency, and vvill find no mystery in such a transaction, and if lie should, my life for
3rø It was agreed that Desmond should set out accompanied by a proper escort, and use all possible speed till he came within five leagues of Prague ; where he was to disguise himself as a friar, exchange his horse fur a nude, ..ml prof eed alone to the goal, while hi» attendants, reaching Prague by another unite, should wait without the walls, ami be ready to re¬ ceive and remount him, his mission ful¬ filled. All things buing in order, the lieutenant stretched himself on his bed for an hour's repuse; and Vallensteïn, harassed, dejected, and forlorn, bent his way towards the banks of the river? which presented a comfortless, chilling aspect} suihcient y 'u uni on witli his own feelings. It does not, perhap , often hap¬ pen, in the course of human existence, that a virtuous heart seeks comfort in reflection, and finds it not; but Vallen¬ steïn examined hb thoughts in vain ; the path before him ьеепич! as frozen, as cheerier, as fruitless, as the scene on which his eye rested: but the ice woukl
320
dissolve, the banks would bloom a^ain, О ' and the linden trees, under which he walked, wave their green heads in all the pride of their vernal livery ! cc Ah !" said he, iC my destiny is in¬ deed sealed! Unhappy I must be, dis¬ graced I may be ; but my innocence no one shall wrest from me." An humble chapel reared its grey walls in his path, and the feeble chant of the few aged brother«, to whom its service was entrusted, was borne by the cold blast upon his ear: he accepted the in¬ vitation, and, prostrate before the altar, renewed, vvith added solemnity and de¬ votion, that vow which he had lately breathed in the presence of Desmond, fervently demanding ihe aid uf Heaven for the maintenance of his principles; for whatever reliance he placed in his own integrity, he knew, and acknow¬ ledged, that the favour of (iod could alone preserve it uibhakem
321
CHAPTER XIV. ** And Folly, as it grows in years, l'ho »юге extravagant appears/' II udibras, Valliinstum had felt such true com¬ fort in his communings with Heaven, as induced him to spend a considerable time in devotion; and when he came forth from the chapel, he was surprised to find man} of the actors in ihe revels ofthe preceding night collected hi their Polish cloaks, ьоше on the banks, some on the surface of the Danube, walking, skating, or skimming along iu their light traîneaux. Scai cely had he crossed the threshold ofthe holy place, when he was accosted by Count Ilarrach, with—- **Λ1ι, nephew! you are an example indeed to the dissipated, thoughtless youth of the age ! You need not blush, ρ Ő
322
sir : upon my word you are a most ex¬ emplary young man !" Vallensteïn, in fact, cared not who saw whence he came; but he wi\s pro¬ voked by his uncle's absurd and syco¬ phantic panegyric, and would willingly have escaped the gay groups entirely ; but his affectionate uncle would not part wdth him. " Do you know," said he, tc my illus¬ trious and ever-beloved brother, his ex- cebency the Duke of Friedland, mind¬ ful, as every great man should be, ofthe prosperity of his relatives, has presented me with a regiment in the handsomest manner ? It is not the thinff itself—it is о not the distinction—it is not the emolu¬ ment—but, Casimir, it is the manner of the thing. It went to my very soul, I assure von, Casimir." And, assisted by the keenness of the air, his emotion evinced itself by the redness of his eyes. *« Upon my soul !" continued he, ťí the Duke of Friedland is a great man, a pro-
323
digious great man ! They tell me he dis¬ penses regiments, titles, and estates, like a sovereign prince! To Baron Hoik, they say, he has given the choice of four estates, each containing upwards of fif¬ teen populous villages. One idolizes such а '~"т ! I declare, positively, I look upon hib excellency with un peakable feelings; in short, I consider him by many degrees the very first man in Europe." Having reach, d this climax, he stopt to take breath, when Professor Wester¬ mann and Lindau joined them, at once, from diiferent quarters. The kind- hearted Professor had, the preceding night, regaled die company vvith an ode on the occasion of the gala, happily com¬ memorating the former victories of the Duke of Friedland, and presaging future ones : it was an animated and brilliant composition, the joint production of Jus heart and beati ; for Westennann, like the bards of old, beheld military glory with a sparkling eye, and was ever ready to smite his lyre in its celebration ; his eu*
ш
logiums on distinguished worth or valour w^ere, in quality as well as fashion, as opposite as possible from those of Count Harrach, wdth whom self-interest was ever the inspiring principle. Westermann * walked in the light of song/ and never condescended deliberately to flatter any man ; while, on the other side, no one ever knew him guilty of lending a hand to precipitate the falling. Poor Lindau looked w f an and sad, but affected his usual light-heartedncss. " Ah !" cried Westermann, as he met him, i6 where is the snowdrop, the prim¬ rose pale ? Where is the interesting Ulrica? The little malcontent ! she did not assist at our triumph last night!" u Alas!" said Lindau, his studied smile vanishing, and his cheek flushing with manly feeling, Cť she assists at no triumphs ! The flowers you speak of are just emblems of my sweet sister ; she is an early spring-flower, born never to reach the summer !" Westermann*8 eyes owned the sharp-
óJtQ
ness of the air : they proceeded a few steps in silence, when the Margrave said, 6i Count Vallensteïn, I have a favour to ask. I have led a lounging, despica¬ ble life, till I am ashamed of it; I want to join the army. Α Λνο^ from you to the Duke of Friedland would at onere obtain me such a post under him as I should b č proud to accept. I do not seek emolument; but distinction is an object, ard I would strive to merit it. You will, no doubt, be besieged by hun¬ dreds of such applicants; but I come straight to the poiut—-I wish to serve, and would fain serve under your father. Will }ou oblige me, Count?" Vallensteïn would willingly have an¬ swered propitiously ; but he was so ill prepared for the request, that he could not conceal the confusion and mortifica¬ tion with which he heard it, and his blush and his hesitation astonished Lindau. 44 If, sir," said hc, u you have any scruple in naming the wish of the Mar-
326
grave of Lindau to your father, let it pass/* " Yes, Margrave, one objection I have, a powerful one ; I have no interest." " None to lend me s you mean, Count/' said Lindau, vvith an offended smile. " Hear my explanation, and you vvill he satisfied. Before the Duke's retire¬ ment, I served four years as lieutenant in his own regiment; after which proba¬ tion, he entrusted mc vvith a colonelcy, anil that was my sole preferment. I took humbly what was given, but never asked for aught, either for myseif or others, and my patronage was confined to the nomination of the officers of røy own corps: how much farther my inte¬ rest might have stretched I cannot tell, because I did not make the experiment. In the present instance I have nothing, nor is it my intention to accept any thing, nor to ask a single favour^ either for myself or another." a You astonish me, Count!" said the Margiave, adding, with some quickness,
327
** Sur jiy you cannot be disaffected to the serúce?" " So far otherwise, that I would gladly shed my last blood for the house of Au¬ stria. Ifl serve, it will probably be as a volunteer." The two young men had walked apart from the lively throng during this con¬ ference, and the mutual frankness which equally marked the request and the re¬ jection left them pleased with each other. As for the young Margrave, the peculiarity of Vallenstein's situation caught his fancy, and, though he could not undcisUcul it, rendered him more than ever an object of interest and ad¬ miration in his eyes. Had Count Harrach overheard the conference, its effect on his affections would have been very op¬ posite, and it would probably have swept away the crowd which now pressed close on the footsteps of the great man's son. As Lindau and Vallenstem stood, arm in arm, looking on the skaiters, Count liar-
328
racii came bustling up with a sprightly, handsome youth, on whom leaned a lady» whose wrinkles proclaimed her to have long, long, passed the æra of juvenile folly ; she was, in short, approaching the period of which it is said, that all be¬ yond * is labour and sorrow :' the lilies and roses, however, bloomed redund¬ antly on the furrowed cheek, and the oracle had not ceased within the anti¬ quated temple. Count Ilarrach hastened to present Baron Rosebec to his ne¬ phew, and was about to perform the like ceremony for the Baroness, when the fortunate spouse cried out, H No, no, Ilarrach ! Do you think I shall suffer my fair bride to flirt and co¬ quette with all the handsome fellows ?" SÊ Oli !" exclaimed the Baroness, on seeing Vallensteïn, " you delightful crea¬ ture ! Oh! I have been so mortified! Nay, I would ten times rather never have found the centre diamond of my neck¬ lace, which you remember my losing
329
at the favorita, Count Harrach, than have missed such an interesting, edify¬ ing sight." " What," asked the Margrave, " what have you missed, madam?" " Oh, that dear creature! I love him ten times more for his piety than for his heroism ! Oh ! had any one told me in time, I would have risen on purpose ! I would not have missed being in the chapel ! Besides, I could have taken the opportunity of saying my prayers at the same time. There is not a more beautiful sight than the piety of a brave youth. But how many pater nosters did you say in the hour, sir? For really people de¬ light in telling one such improbable his¬ tories, and I would not give a fig for a story ifit is not correct." Till this direct application Vallenstem could hardly convince himself that he was the theme of this rhapsody, and was in* express! Ы) vexed when the fact became maniiest.
330
ťe Really, madam," said he, in a tone of unrepressed petulance, " I do not un¬ derstand you. I said my prayers this morning in the chapel, and most people, I suppose, say them somewhere ; but I must decline entering into any detail on the subject." ' c It seems," said the animated Ba¬ roness, no way chilled by the repulse, " you come in nothing short of all that I have read or imagined of true heroism. Modesty, modesty, my dear sir, is a pearl of high price, and always adorns the helm of a genuine hero. Pray, sir, if it be not impertinent, how mauy rebel Bohemians did you slay with your own hand at the battle of Halle? I did hear all about it, but one thing or other has put it out of my giddy head ; and nozv that all the world is talking of }ou, I should like to know exactly how the matter stood." u My Hebe," said Roàebec, u do give the youthful warrior time to brcat he İ
331 And have the discretion to spare a little the modesty you so judiciously com¬ mend." Ci You saucy boy !" cried the blooming Baroness, " 1 vvill huve you go to the wars, and bring me home laurels, I will í I love a valiant man, and it is so interesting to tend and watch over one's wounded war¬ rior ! There's Baroness Blumenberg, such a rout as has been made about her as¬ siduities ! And after all, if I had the same opportunity-—" " Thank you, my dear," said the Baron, laughing; ťí there is something so tempt* ing in the idea of your tender quiet care, that I vvill get vvithin wind ofa cannon bail at my earliest convenience/' u Now, Count Vallensteïn/' said she, laying her hand on his arm, α this is the very point on winch I want a little private conversation with you—yon may stay, Lindau. Why, you mmt own Count, theie are few handsomer youths in the army than my Ilosebec, and if once you could see hint in the
ÔtJáU
Hungarian uniform, you would be charmed, /think he would be an orna¬ ment to the service—mot that I would have him killed for all the world ; should such a calamity happen, I conld not hope to survive him;" (apply ïïig her hand¬ kerchief to her eyes) " though there is no saying what one can go thiough till one tries; but I suppose, Count, few- young men come off without a wound or two ? Pray, Count, how often have you been wounded V 9 ** As discretion, madam, is in my opi¬ nion an excellent ally of valour, and especially as my fate has denied me the healing hand of a gentle spouse, 1 have taken all possible precautions to avoid injury, and been, on the whole, success* ful !" £6 Well, really,"said Madamede Rose¬ bec, '* however I may admire modesty, I could wisli you wouid be a little more communicative." t( I suspect/ 1 said Westermann, who had been silently amusing himself with
333
Ле conversation, " Count Vallensteïn has found the artillery ofa pair of bright eyes more formidable than Mansfeldt's cannon." ťť In love too; delightful!" screamed the Baroness : " lie is perfect ! Abso¬ lutely perfect! Count, of course, you have a divine traîneau. I shall never for¬ give you if you don't invite me to a drive in it — and pray do recollect to name Rosebec to the duke." Vallensteïn and Lindau were making their bows and departing, when the vola¬ tile Kosebec flew towards them, " Nay, you can't go," he cried; йС I have some excellent fun for you/' And little as either was in the mood for fun, they turned passively. 4i My Hebe, my Hebe!" exclaimed he, u what do you think I have done? 1 have laid twenty dollars with Holben that if you skait you won't break your neck.'* Many of the fair and noble ladies of Vienna were gliding gracefully along the frozen waters ; but that .Madame de
334
Rosebec should venture such an exhi¬ bition seemed incredible. ft You know Rosebec, dear, I have not brought my skaits: but,What on earth can induce that audacious fop to lay such a wager ?" " Oh, his confounded assurance, And I wou la not permit such an aspersion to rest on you, my life, if there are a pair of skaits to be had in Germany." The poor Baroness, vvho in fact did not much relish the exertion her vanity demanded from her, looked ruefully to¬ wards the ice. (l My dear,"' she said, ťí 1 love you for your zeal ; but besides that I have not my skaits, you know how I complained of that great clumsy clod of a man, the Rhingrave Glotzen, contriving to tread on my foot last night as he turned me in the waltz, till I thought I should have expired in agony." " Well/" muttered Rosebec, sullenly, C€ I see Holben is nearer the mark than I thought. What signifies my taking
Ö'ÓU
your part, laying wagers on your head, and defying men to mortal combat for your sake, if you leave me thus shabbily in the lurch? Well, #s you please! Holben may sneer for me in future! As for the twenty dollars, I don't mind the forfeit." Ilosebec's bride did not admire her bridegroom's aspect, nor could she bear to quit the held with the sarcasms of the detested Holben unrefuted, i( Well," said she, hesitatingly, " ifl had a pair of skaits I would not scruple, since my Adolphus wishes it." Till this sweet consent appeased him, he was gnawing the head of his cane, and looking as sulky as a bear. " Oh, you will skait then," cried he, brightening ; and he beckoned to a young lady who u as skimming lightly by, who immediately made towards the bank, and at Ilosebec's request surrendered her skaits, laughing immoderately while they were unfastened.
3Sñ
u I am sure, my Hebe/' said the Baron, " you are infinitely obliged to Erminia/' In the mean time, Lindau approached close to theLady Erminia, and whispered, * c Pray, do not lend your skaits ; it is downright barbarous !" " Nonsense!" replied the young lady, " how long have you turned saint ! I am sure, if Rosebec's Hebe breaks her neck, it will be a mercy instead of baibarity ! She has the conscience to outlast all tbe other old women in the world ; and there İs no chance of her dying a natural death, so Ilosebec is right to give her every opportunity." The fastening of the skahs was a- chieved, and die Hebe launched upon the Danube vvith a shout from the thought¬ less unprincipled Rosebec. Vallensteïn and Lindau rushed to the edge of the bank, anticipating falls and bruises at the least for poor Hebe, whose husband cried aloud, u Gentlemen, I bar that ! Let her
337
alone ! If you touch her the wager is void !" " It is so very ridiculous," drawled Erminia, " and so officious to be in¬ terfering and spoiling a little harmless fun, and so unlike young men." " Forgive me, lady Erminia," retorted Lindau, whose good heart revolted from studi sport, "ifl venture to hint, that it is very unlike the usual gentleness of a woman to find amusement in risking so wantonly the safety of another," iC I wish you had just such a Hebe of your own, Lindau, with all my heart," said the young lady, spitefully. u Should such a treasure ever belong to me, she shall find herself under the protection of a man of honour and hu¬ manity." " What do you mean by that, sir?" asked Ilosebec in a ferocious tone. " My words are simple and explicit. sir! Consider them, and you will pre* sently discover the interpretation/* vol. u. Q
338
Cí I care not what they mean, pro¬ vided they do not mean to insult me." " I see nothing else they can mean," said the little incendiary : " I wish he was obliged to ride double all through Germany, wdth your Hebe behind him, as Zerbino was compelled to do by the old hag in the Orlando Furioso. Dear, what excellent fun it would be!" Vallensteïn, meanwhile, had closely and assiduously followed the precarious pro¬ gress ofthe hapless Hebe,—a good office, which no one else had the courage to undertake, until the hero ofthe hour had set the example, and then many of the fashionable youth began to think they might, without shame, assist in the suc¬ cour of an old woman. Just as she was on the brink of a most dangerous fall, Val¬ lensteïn caught her; she had, however, wrenched her ancle severely, and was almost fainting with pain and terror. Her deliverer supported her to the bank, and Rosebec, already chafed by his angry
339
parley vvith Lindau, ran furiously to the spot where Vallensteïn, aided by other young men, unfastened the skaits, and were preparing to lift her into а traîneau, whose owner, having witnessed the ac. cidcnt, offeied it for her accommodation. " ï should have thought, sir," said he, ££ your knowledge of the world would have preserved you from such unwarrant¬ able interference." *' I hold all etiquette, sir, in high re¬ spect, but common humanity in still higher." " Well, sir, yon are prepared, no doubt, to purchase your exhibition of it for twenty dollars. It is a wager, sir ; and since you did not let her fall fair, of course you pay the foi feit. I would not, for twice the sum, that Holben should suspect 1 had any hand in so unhandsome a transac¬ tion." ut I will send you twenty dollars from my hotel the instant í return, which will completely exonerate you, sir/' Something like a murmur now arose a. e l
340
amongst the gay throng, and Ilosebec, who was appeased by this prompt ac* quiescence respecting the money, began in a milder tone to justify himself. " Is it not correct, gentlemen ? Is it not an established rule, that whoever breaks the course of a wager becomes liable to the forfeiture ?" " Why," said Count Harrach, Ci I am afraid you have justice on your side, A better intentioned young man than my nephew does not breathe, but he is more accustomed to camps than courts ; he was not aware, I am convinced he was not, of the strict rules ofa wager, or he would have been the last man on earth to vio¬ late them. Indeed I should have been foremost myself to assist my respected friend the Baroness, but I was aware it w r as impossible. Baron, considering my nephew's inexperience, what say you to a compromise ? Suppose you divide the sum, and shake hands upon the matter." 44 I must decline your interference, sir," said Vallensteïn, sternly: u I am en-
341 gaged for twenty dollars. But for Hea¬ ven's sake assist in lifting this lady into the traîneau! She is suffering dreadfully, while vve are neglecting her. Baron, I conci ude you vvill take charge of Baroness Rosebec." Seeing pretty plainly, in spite of Count Harraeh's candid decision, that the ma¬ jority did not look very approvingly on him, while the part Vallensteïn had taken in the business was the theme of loud and universal applause,—the Baron thought proper to take the reins and steer his poor Hebe home. As the margrave and Vallensteïn walked away, <c That man," said the former, Sí h celebrated for ¡us good nature. He is the best natured fellow in Vienna; and so incontestably is the fact established, that to-morrow, speak of Rosebec before any one ofthe crowd who witnessed this morning's transaction, and you will have it enforced upon you." When Valleinkin reached his hotel»
342
he thought on poor Desmond, and the perils he might be doomed to encounter ere they met again ; and almost repented that he had yielded to his generous proposal of Learing his despatches to the duke. Every day's experience had helped to attach him more truly to the lieutenant. He had not the gentle en¬ dearing character of the drooping Wil¬ helm, which had so forcib'y луоп the way to his heart; on the contrary, there was a stern unbending decision about Des¬ mond, which, at first sight, had some¬ what repulsive in it ; but it was certain that for the man луЬош he professed to love, or bound himself to serve, every fatigue v^as light, every danger con¬ temptible, every thing but honour to be sacrificed* There was nothing either of tenderness or exaltation in his expres¬ sions, but, phlegmatic in manner, and brief in speech, he would perform actions which would leave enthusiasm gazing after him in astonishment. Vallcnsteïn had found all this, and accorded him fhe
343
liveliest sentiments of admiration, friend¬ ship, and confidence; but he could not say of him as of Wilhelm, " Thou wert very pleasant to me, rny brother." Vallensteïn found a little perfumed, ornamented billet fiom Princess Stol* berg, entreating a line to say how it was with him, and concluding, Ci If you have not forsworn the sex, come to me this evening;—wc will not be entirely tele-à- tête^ so do not be alarmed. The Em¬ press has signified her intention of spend¬ ing an hour with me : we shall have Lin¬ dau, your uncle, the Erdenheïms, and I know not who;—but do not you dis* appoint me-" He answered,— ť£ I am not луоНЬ егь treating, my sweet friend ; therefbre your entreaty shall not be lost." He would fain have been left in solitude; u But it is," said he, " of little importance what I do vvith my time ; more fruitlessly í cannot consume it than in thinking. Would I were in heaven!"
344
As he uttered the ejaculation the door opened, and Wolfsteïn stood before him. " You are surprised, Vallensteïn," said he, " and well you may, for I do not often exhibit such symptoms of placa¬ bility. I come to dine with you, and let us dîne alone." Vallensteïn quietly took his resolution ; he believed it might be useful to con¬ verse calmly with this man, and that he might ascertain at least how far his fa¬ ther had confided in him. " Well, Chevalier," said he, ťí a cor¬ dial welcome you do not expect from me, but I will not deny the rights of hospitality to any claimant—not even to you." And calling his page,—'* Let the table be served in the library*" oaid he ; cc we dine in private/* i€ Yes/'said Wolfsteïn, €< I took shelter amongst your household gods, in full con* fidence of their protection. Entire know. ledge ofthe man I have to deal with is always a powerful engine. I knew we
should dine together, because I con 1 ? calculate to a point on your recept .1 of me. Ko man in Europe beats me at chess, nor am I less successful in any game I undertake; there is, how¬ ever, one disadvantage which may at length perplex my calculations. I have too many men to move—too many kings, queens, bishops, &c. X'iwjmrts! ÍM Jin coiif ъппе ¿у s (¿avivs!" This was rather muttered tlian spoken, and was a sort of thinking aloud that in Wolfstun was habitual, and that- in spite of the foul secrets of which his Ьоьош was the repository, his contempt for his fellow creatures forbade lum to guard against: they were listened tn usually as the dark and mystic sayings of an oracle, and аьмЧкч! in imprewng the common mind with the idea of his genius and singularity. Wol (stem oc¬ cupied himself with his meal like a man whose appetite was the i usu 11 of health, both mental and bodily j he spoke from
346 time to time of politics, of individuals, of books, with the indifference of one who looks impartially on passing events, as on tiie leaves or hi anches floating down a stream, or the swallows that skim its surface. " But you do not eat, Vallensteïn, ' said he. u Whv not eat? I delight in consuming my portion of the fruits of the earth, and therein assisting in the operation of the great principle of de¬ struction.·— But do you know İ am stu- dying a new language ?" áfc Thaf, Chevalier, surprises me, smce уоч are already rich in the tommes of many nations." 44 Yes ; I carry а few master keys about me : but the 1 mgnage 1 am adopt¬ ing is common to all countries and i^s vulgar 1ле has caused me hitherto to abstain from it; but my iamüiaritv with certain holy Dominicans reconciles me to it* In short, 1 am on the ev e of conversion—I am growing good. The
347 next time I dine ΛνΜι you, Count, 1 will say grace for j'ou with the air of a confessor." u Pardon me, Chevalier, if I doubt whether the meal will be more wholesome for your blessing." a That will depend on your faith. Father Joseph tells me I am the man for a convert, and we are in each others secrets Count Harrach savs, ζ it is а pity that a youth of such shining talent should rattier incline to the disbelief of certain thing--, which are written in cer¬ tain books, and promulgated by certain men, all hough he is read}' to pledge* him¬ self that·, in the main, I do believe all that ought to be believed; but then it were to be wished 1 would talk of things 'd little more as other people do/ f be¬ gin to think it a pity too ; so as í am no procrastimitor, 1 am already half eln¬ yerted :" and he drew an agnus from his bosom, which he kissed with mock devotion.
Mü
" So then, Chevalier, it is not Chinese or Arabic you are about to study." <c No, itis hypocrisy !—I have the gram¬ mar perfect, and only want the ac¬ cent" Dinner ended, he drew his chair nearer to his host, and, without farther ceremony, entered abruptly on tlie sub¬ ject which brought him thither. u You have read your father's packet ; and I may now, without surprising Casi¬ mir VallensteÏLi, hail him tiie future mo¬ narch of Bohemia. Whv man, vou look «/ ' »r as if your head ache dalready witli the weight oí' the regaì cucici." ie Hasí thou forni d me, oh, mine enemy ?" exclaimed Val lenst em. ** Often, Wolfskin, you have assailed me w ith dai к and indefinite men ice*?, and now they aie accomplished. If the letter I this morning read is no forgery—if it b<» not the invention oí' your malice—deep indeed is the destruction you have wrought!—You have pen erted the
319 brightest intellect, and poisoned the no¬ blest miud, in Fairope!" " Do not fiatter me, Casimir : your father's ambition is one with his nature-— inveterate in his blood; and the great designs which have sprung up vvithin him are indigenous to the soil ; they were born with h İni, have grown with him, and will only perish with him. I have no project to fulfil in deceiving you ; you may, therefore, credit mv assertion, that my sole implication with your father is my knowledge of his views, and my engagement to avist them, so long as 1 ma} fimi it my in tei est to do so* When he íÍíS f ki4 w that I wan privy to his de« signs, he would have secured my silence by otlar means than an alliance; but, Casimir, 1 < л\ fearful even to him.—-He danti not ! M The woids came slowly fotth, and the lips ofthe speaker whitened as he uttered them, while Valleustem bhnmw and shtiddere I at the inclining they con¬ veyed.
350 €€ Your Aither," continued the Cheva* lier, " cannot now stand on punctilio- he has chosen his road; the objects which impede him must be dispersed or crushed : a few drops, more or less, of vital blood are nothing in the way of ambition ; he outfit to have destroyed me if he could, for the alternative is very precarious—a fact to which he is not blind. But all is for the present secure ; 1 have no object to serve in separating onr interests." ťí But my father's good genius will yet ärrest his footsteps—he will pause upon the brink ; it is not vet too late." €< Hearken, Yaİlcnsteîn ! He has leaped the gulf already—he mu.d go on—he never can recede! No, no! he is pledged beyond all power to retract! To rush foiward is perilous, but to pause now were destruction." Casimir felt all the force of his ene¬ my's assertions, and was internally con¬ vinced of their truth* u After all," said Wolfsteïn, as he ob-
351
served the deep and bitter anguish his words created* " a few moments of calm and sober reflection will bring all this to its level. Think, instead of feel¬ ing, and you will be satisfied ! Your father is, as he says, accomplishing his destiny : such men are created to furnish matter for the records of history, or give effect to the tragic scene. Till the world tumbles again into chaos, or dissolves into that nothing whereto all things tend, your father's name and his deeds will shine, with small exagge¬ ration, on the pages of romance, or assist in exalting the fame of some modern Roscius. As for meaner considerations, what does it signify whether it be plague or ague, fhe axe ofthe execuUoner, or the dagger of the assassin, that divides between the matter and intelligence ofa man Ρ Severed they must be, it appears, sooner or later ; and who but a child, or an old woman, would cavil at the means ? If I do not err ia my calculations, you
352
are at odds with his Excellency.—Is it not so ?" iť Chevalier, you may calculate on my never partaking in any measures which my conscience disavows." " Just so," said he ; " I am right then. You must stand in that case in a difficult predicament. Well; it will require the more adroitness to maintain vour foot- ing. Desmond, I conclude, is departed ; or have you substituted some other mes¬ senger ?" e * Desmond left me this morning with mv determination." t& And when does he return ?—You must not be surprised by his delay, for, ifl mistake not, he vvill hu/.. to pay old Charon las fare, or wander headless on the banks of Styx." sť Surely, surely," cried Yalleibtein, €£ you are not serious !—My father vvill not hazard such an outrage«" " Most certainly he will, if Desmond is not skilful enough to elude him. Had
353
I known you were so interested in the person of your ambassador, I would last night have warned you ofthe danger that awaits him." " I will not lose another moment !" said Casimir, starting from his seat. tc I will pursue him to Prague; and, if too late to prevent his entering it, insist on his release—nay, exchange myself for him !" tc Take counsel, Count Casimir : these are critical times ! I have eaten bread and salt with you—I will not be accessary to your entrapment. If you go to your father he will imprison you, and prove your fortitude, till either your life or your spirit yields under the trial. Be¬ sides, the sacrifice will bc useless; your father has strong antipathies, and Des¬ mond is one of them j—but take hearts he shall not die ! 1 have a voice in the duke's councils ; and, in this instance, vou shall command İt, wliich never speaks but with effect." u May I trust you, Woifïtem ?"
354
ec Yes, on one condition. You are going this evening to the Stolberg's ; I am not specially invited, but I shall be there. When we meet in her apart¬ ments, you shall shake hands with me.—- What! is it too bitter?·—Will it not go down ? Alas ! poor Desmond !" " What security will you give me, that, in return for such a sacrifice, my friend shall, indeed, be rescued and restored to me?" " Have I ever dealt doubly wdth you ? Search your mind ; and, having weighed the matter, if the life of your friend be not worth the purchase of the conde¬ scension I require of you, the bargain is null—-he die^l and your hand is pure from the abhorred contact 1" " 1 will pay the price you exact, though most reluctantly." *' That rests between you and your own thoughts—-the act is all I ask. But why should vve be foes, since vve are no longer rivals ? Your perseverance in pursuit of Wilhem/ă sister is conquered™
355
is it not ? Thus the great cause of con¬ tention has ceased between us. The Marchfeldt did horrible execution last night ; she destroyed your substance, and miß shadow, for she has annihilated poor Lindau ! Well, au revoir, Vallen¬ steïn, I shall expect you with hand un¬ gloved."
356
CHAPTER XV iC How happy some, o'er other ьоше can be ! Through Athens I am thought a¡» fair as she, But what of that ? Demetrius thinks not so ; He will not know what all but he do know. And as he еггь, doting on Ilermia's ejes, So I, admiring of his» qualities." Shakspeare. Vallensteïn found a small but bril¬ liant circle, wdth the Empress at their head, at Princess Stoiberg's; and, in the moment of his entrance, Count Harrach was amusing the company with a recital of the morning adventures, and cele¬ brating the unheard-of heroism of his nephew in his usual courtly eloquence ; insomuch, that they vvho listened to his superlative epithets mighthave supposed that all the exploits of the rival heroes, Achilles and Hector, with titolo ot all their train of hostile knights, Greek and
357
Trojan, were a mere joke in comparison with Casimir's gallantry in rescuing Ba¬ roness Ilosebec from a downfall on the ice. He had the gratification, however, to find his oratorical essay crowned with universal interest and approbation, for his magnified nephew was the favourite of the hour; and it is easy to exalt the most insignificant action into a miracle of one who has attained that shining but precarious eminence. Count Harrach paused, as his hero entered. Princess Stolberg met and leti him to the Km- press, who presented him her hand vvith a look of such affectionate and gracious approval, as touched eveu his chilled bo¬ som with consoling waimth. He felt him* self regarded by all with unusual interest, for in fact İt was generally whispered that he had been finally repulsed by Ba* roness Marchfeldt, and the ladies all vo¬ luntarily accorded their pity, as the pre¬ liminary to a more positive gift ; for he was the handsomest man at court, and enjoyed the reputation of being at once
358
the bravest and the gentlest. Ilow this secret transpired no one could tell, but that it was widely circulated and impli¬ citly believed was certain ; and that the Baroness had not been bidden to the se¬ lect assembly of this evening, was justly interpreted a compliment to the feelings ofthe rejected swain. Harrach now, with an air of much im¬ portance, acquainted his nephew that his godlike brother had sent him a somewhat hasty summons; and that·, from the brief manner in which his excellency notified his pleasure, he conceived that he would immediately take the field. u To be sure, 1 * said he, u this prompt¬ ness in execution is only one of a thou¬ sand prodigious attributes ; but methinks I could have been well content, had it so pleased him, to pause a little while, for the equipping and accoutring of myseif and equipage is not the vvoik of a mo¬ ment. I could wish that the brother of the most illustrious antl conspicuous man in Europe should make a figure conve*
359 nient and suitable to such au alliance,— When do vou set forth, Casimir ?" He was saved the trouble of reply by the entrance of the Chevalier, which at¬ tracted every one's attention : Princess Stolberg hastened to meet him, w*th an aspect of displeased surprise. " You here, Wolfstein !" said she ; <c I did not expect }on,—You arc no nega¬ tive character, and therefore, when you are not bidden, } ou might draw a po¬ sitive inference." " That I am not welcome, Princess?" " I aui loth to utter words so dis¬ courteous ; but, in very truth, Wolfstein, you must not stay. I expect Piofessor Westermann, aml eveu were Ids philo¬ sophic good nature io overlook the insult of your presence, her Imperial Majesty, who selected the paity, wouid find her¬ self offended in his person.—Po uti vely, Wolfstem, you must amuse youi self some¬ where else this evening," 4í Hear me, charming Stolberg! f knew you expected the professor this evening,
360
and therefore I came.—Nay, hear me patiently!—I am ashamed to have cf- fended him, and came to request your mediation. I am buying up and collect¬ ing all the copies of that most offensive and petulant libel :—I will trample it to dust, burn it to ashes, or dig a hole in the ice, and send it to the bottom of the Danube !" " Is it possible ? Are you serious, Wolfstein ?" " If/ 1 said he, assuming the air of a man whose feelings are wounded, " you are not resolved to close the door against my repentance, by thus repulsing its first step-—if you do not compel me to re¬ trograde, you shall quickly find I am serious." <ť But the Empress,—your reprobate habits, and audacious avowal of them, have so revolted her, that she vvill never permit you to remain." " Very well, Princess ! Mark me then; my faults be on your head, and on hers ! A circumstance, which I can hardly deem
361
accidental, has turned the tide of my opinions into a new channel :—this mo¬ ment is critical ! I came out of the frosty air to-night into this scene of brightness, warmth, and beauty, vvith a heart of flesh in my bosom,—turn me out from among you, a proscribed man, and it will petrify again, and remain a stone for ever !" He spoke vvith such affecting, yet de¬ sperate energy, that even the penetrating lady of the key was moved and alarmed. " If you are sincere, Wolfstein, I vrill speak to the Empress, but I must not de¬ lay, for Westermann will be here." He snatched her hand and kissed it, and she found it wet with a tear. Had she been allowed a moment for reflection, her experience of this singular character inight have inclined her to pause in her work of mediation, but his earnestness had every appearance of being genuine; and in truth the denunciation, " my faults be on your head Ρ was appalling enough to enforce compliance, since it was no VOL. II. к
S62 light burthen with which .she was threat¬ ened. She approached the Empress, who saw, with very visible displeasure, that this interdicted personage had not only entered the room, but remained in it. To her he had, in a thousand ways, rendered himself obnoxious : his infi¬ delity,licentiousness, disloyally, his grobs, immani} abibe of some of the most re¬ spectable of her subjects, in short, his utter contempt and defiance of whatevei she held dignified and sacred, made him in her eyes an object of unqualified aver¬ sion. The universal anal exclusive privi¬ leges of this man had hitherto extended to the court, and the Empi ess had to¬ lerated his occasional presence there аь the ally of her cousin Maximilian of Ba- varia, and of Father Joseph, either of whom, a short time rince, it would have been impolitic to offend. Things were now changed, and the Empress was re- solved to make hei hilf amends for the painful trammels whicli had rer-tiaiued her utterance of displeasuu», so just ami
363 natural, by forbidding the cause of it to enter her presence. She saw that Prin¬ cess Stolberg approached her vvith a pe¬ tition, and prepared herself vvith a stern negative. The Princess knew every shade of expression in fhe beautiful coun¬ tenance of her aiunist mistress, and couli interpret its meaning; she therefore In¬ stead of immediately preferring her suit, ¡ield forth her hand, on which was the sparkling drop just fallen from Wolf- stem's eye. u If this," said she, <c is genuine, as I hope it is, your Majesty has not a pearl in your crown of half the value! It is a tear of lepentance from the eye of u yen notable sinner; and if your Majesty vouchsafes to accept his contrition, it may be followed by many gems of equal price." The Empress, who, like other royal pei'soib, lacked opportunity for the study of human nature, did not, tor a moment, •»uspeet the possibility that even Wolf blcm dared intiudu his mockeries upon
364
her: unaffectedlj r devoted to religion, the hope of gaining such a convert ex¬ cited the purest delight in her mind, and, like the angels, she rejoiced over this one sinner's repentance. Princess Stolberg saw the moment луаз favourable, and repeated the penitent's contrite ex¬ pressions respecting his late offensive publication. In short, Wolfsteïn луа8 per¬ mitted to kneel and kiss the Imperial hand. The blue eyes of the Empress were uplifted in thankfulness for this most unexpected transition from vice to virtue, л\1п1е her heart breathed a silent, yet fervent supplication, that this good work might not miss its accomplishment ; and the prayer, no doubt, returned into her own bosom. AVolfsteïn proved as perfect in the ac¬ cent as in the grammar of his new lan¬ guage, and his natural and ingenuous humility could not be detected as coun¬ terfeit, even by the lyr.x eye of Princess Stolberg. The Empress undertook to plead for him with Westermann, to whom
365
he declared he could not uplift his eyes till the road to reconciliation was smoothed between them. In the mean time the Che¬ valier crossed the room, and approached Vallensteïn, лу1ю was engrossed iu con¬ versation with Lindau and the interest¬ ing Ulrica, and taking his hand, shook it hastily, saying aloud at the same time, " We so prolonged our conference, that I feared I should have caused your arriving late." Vallensteïn had lost no opportunity of publicly expressing his aversion for Wolf¬ stein ; and, besides, the rivalry which subsisted between them луач strongly suspected, so that .this proof of cordiality excited general surprise, and not a little assisted in strengthening the credit of the new convert. ct I am satisfied," said Princess Stol¬ berg to the Empress, ct that there is no deception; Vallensteïn has certainly лvΊtnessed some proof of genuine re- formation ; for fiercer animosity no man rould bear to another than he to Wolf-
am
stem : he could not endure to hear him named j it луаэ an antipathy such as could only be justified against the prince of darkness, and the only blot 1 have ever been able to discover on the fine temper of that noble youth." The Professor entered, and at the sight of his adversary started; his first feeling was that of resentments his finst impulse to retreat ; but he recollected his duty to the Empress, and meantj having kissed her hand, to request her permission to retire. Being endowed with as much good-natured credulity as any man living, and willing to hope all things, and believe all things, he was not entreated in vain ; and when the man who had so grossly outraged him stood before him, faltering out his excuses, the good Professor frankly held forth his hand, saying, йй No more, no more, my good sir! lei us plant the olive ! let us shut the tem¬ ple of Janus!" If Wöif Дет had been capable of blu-di-
367
ing, the name of that double-faced deity might have produced a suffusion ; for never was a more impudent fraud car¬ ried on with more masterly address. ťí Did î not tell you, Count," said Lindau, íC that we should hear of the chevalier amongst the Trappists? 0 íe Ay, Frederic/' said Ulrica, with an arch smile, *'· and those who believe his conversion are iu la trappe already." íŕ Why, you little hard-hearted scep¬ tic ! are you the only one who dare re¬ fuse to be edified by this public and ex¬ emplary penance?" " She is not the only one guilty of such scepticism in this assembly," said Casimir. ťí But how, fair Ulrica, are your gentle and unpractised eyes able to look through this exquisite dissembling?" " Because 1 am rather a spectatress than an actress in Hies drama, and sub¬ stitute thoughts and reflections lor pas* sions and feelings." It was now judged delicate to give a
368
bew turn to the subject which occupied the circle, and relieve the neophyte Wolfsteïn from the etòbarrassíríent he mighťbe supposed to feel, in the-con¬ sciousness of forming the exclusive tlieníé. Princess Stolberg, therefore, who possessed: unequalled adroitness in such manoeuvres, observed that the little page, 4 Theodore, having been sick the night before, and deprived of the indul¬ gence'of assisting at her masked fete, she would, with the permission of the Empress, find habits for the party, and bring the child from his chamber for an hour's amusement. No voice dissenting, the plan луаа rio sooner proposed than acceded to, and the Princess led her guefåts '' tô an apartment, where each might' select the habit which suited his taste. Vallensteïn, Weary, spiritless, and quite unequal to the assumption of any character, took a domino; and, as he observed Wolfstein equipping himself as & Spanish muleteer, he could not resist saying,
>Щ9
?* You need no mask, Sir W T arbeck— .your own consummate skill will deceive your л г егу master ! The devil himself would, have taken you for а saint to¬ night Г " Yes, I got iţ up very creditably, and I almost think you are right, since the black eyes of that intelligent rogue, the Stolberg, were baffled. You," said lie, turning earnestly upon him, " are wise enough to anticipate the consequence of betraying the generous confidence I re¬ pose in you." " For Desmond's life and rescue vou are already pledged/* " That is truoi aud I луШ redeem the pledge: but/' added he, maliciously, " I have still a more important hostage for your silence; and, be it known to you, that if the Stolberg finds me out till I choose to lift the mask, no consideration of self-interest shall withhold the thun¬ derbolt from withering the proudest head in Europe. Nay, Vallensteïn, I do not R 5
370'
wish to menace or insult you ; I would usømiy power temperately; it suffice* that I can put my foot on the neck of mine enemy when it suits me to do so. I only warn you in friendship what a breath of yours may do, what a mighty destiny is suspended on it." Vallensteïn felt ■ the ice-bolt in his heart; he heard, and was compelled to hear, in silence, this cool, envenomed, deliberate insult; to endure, without re¬ torts a threat,'which he knew the man who threatened луаэ but too well pro¬ vided with the means to execute. Nor was it any alleviation to his suffering, that the being he so reasonably detested had constrained him to submit to the sem¬ blance of social intercourse ; even while uttering his fiend-like denunciations in his ear, he had laid his hand upon his arm, and to the rest of the assembly the whisper bore the colour of amicable com¬ munication. The motley group being attired in their various disguises, now
"371ľ
returned to pay their renewed homage to the Empress in their assumed cha¬ racters. " But where is my little page," said she, " to whom the gala is given ?" As she spoke, a Cupid with a pair of snow-white wings, a bow and well stocked quiver, ran towards her, knelt, and pressed his rosy lips to her hand ; and by his side stood, as Casimir believed, that self-same nun of the order of Mercy, who had smoothed his pillow and hymned him to rest in his sickness, " May it please your Majesty," said the nun, in the well-known voice of Princess Stolberg, " I would fain seduce this dangerous urchin into my service ; if he will but lend me сте arrow, he shall have kisses and comfits to last him for life." <c But where then is Baroness March¬ feldt?" asked the perverse little rogue: " I should like, methinks, to have half my wages from her." The child could not well have made a more galling speech, had all Machiaveľs subtlety been exchanged for all his art*
872
leasnfcss j-the presence of mind for which the Princess was remarkable, was neces¬ sary, besides her mask, to conceal her agitation. 44 You* preserve your character ad¬ mirably, Cupid/' she said: "I always understood you were a froward, un¬ grateful »boy, and now I know you 1 perceive you were not libelled." Vallensteïn was breathless : in the kind nqn who had watched his restless pillow, and soothed his feverish hours, he recog¬ nized one whom he never suspected, and whom his heart told him he never could reward with» the prize for which those vigils were^iekijand those cares endured. As a iriend «and a sister, lie loved Princess Stolbergs <but there his affection stayed, and farther he knew it never would pro¬ ceed : she луаэ the last woman on earth wjiose love he would have desired, be¬ cause she was the last woman on earth whom he could bear to reject. "Yes," said he, making an effort to throw off* his own embarrassment, and to do that which he believed to be just and
373
honourable, « ť Cupid is a froward un¬ grateful boy ; one whose business it is to confound opposites, to deceive, to dis¬ appoint, to misguide : I have forsworn him, holy sister—my heart is dedicated to a milder deity ; consecrate yours vvith it at the pure shrine of friendship; and, for this fickle, malicious urchin, let us leave him." When Princess Stolberg resumed the habit in луЫсп she had nursed Vallen¬ steïn, all the anxiety, all the tenderness, all the hope, and all the despair in ллЫсЬ she had hung over his'couch of suffer¬ ing, seemed to return upon her; she felt that the Rubicon was passed, that she had tacitly, but unequivocally, declared her passion; and she felt Нкелу^эе that it was -gently and kindly, but firmly, re¬ pulsed. " I have/ 1 thought she, " ruined my¬ self! My indelicate precipitation has for ever destroyed my hopes! I might gra¬ dually and imperceptibly have won him to love me; but now he will not even
"Ш~
esteem me—he will not trust me ! How should he trust one who has been so un¬ true to herself?" . The manly delicacy of Vallensteïn suf¬ fered for the woman to whom he gave every sentiment of «approval, gratitude, and kindness, »withholding only love. He felt himself, pursued by a 'persecuting destiny, agaiust which all the resistance of his will was impotent; and world-sick, and weary, his thoughts fled for rest to the spot where they always took shelter when he found himself tried beyond en¬ durance—the grave of Wilhelm. He re¬ membered how Wilhelm had longed to cast anchor in that peaceful harbour, and now he too well understood that longing. In. the tumult of feelings that warred within the bosom of Pxincess Stolberg, she still preserved the tact which so remark¬ ably belonged to her. The countenance of Vallensteïn луав concealed ; but his silence, his deep, yet involuntary, sigh, the dejection expressed in his posture, as he leaned with folded arms against
9f&
a cabinet, all. told her, without words, that whatever the weight of his own sor¬ rows might be, hers had made a cruel addition to them. " If," thought she, Ck there breathes a man to whom алуотап might safely con¬ fide the secret of her weakness, there he stands ! I have gone too far to pause or to recede—I will go farther ! Val¬ lensteïn," and she laid her hand upon ids arm, " let us take counsel together/* He started, and followed her to a less crowded part of the room, and obeying her silent invitation, sate down beside her. " Vallensteïn/* said she, at length, u you are suffering for your friend—your delicacy, your generosity, your compas¬ sion, are all suffering—your manly cheek blushes beneath your mask in shame for my weakness—is it not so, Vallensteïn ?" " No, Princess! if my cheek burns, if my heart aches, it is for my own per¬ verse and wayward affections. Augusta, to no woman living am I bound as I am
376 bound to you ; and, bh ! let not the en or of my capricious inclination break the chain which connects .usi Let a sacred and inviolable friendship unite us for ever! Çi it seems, Vallensteïn, л\е are like two children 'erving for the moon, each pines for thatuvfeich is unattainable : but let us examine.-your compromise—-a sa¬ cred, inviolafolei and eternal friendship— the umomofiour ^uls here and hereafter. Casimir, why quarrel about a name?" tc Ifit were hut a name, we would not contend for л; but alas, Augusta! friend¬ ship and luve are distinct ideas. I know it well; for both at tliis moment agitate my hcirt. Friendship may be expe¬ rienced with repetition, may be divided ; but love must not be shared nor multi¬ plied; it occupies, ii must occupy, its own separate shrine. Augusta, my friend, vve are both unhappy—but Heaven keep vou from n, y destiny !" Cí Ah !" said she, despondingly, tfi had 1 asked a b ,οη from Heaven, it would have
mı
been to share it. Casimir, I have seen you pale, languishing, helpless, sens íess, that bright intelligence extinct, that ac¬ tive, manly form supine and motionless, your mind imbecile, your beauty faded ; yet, even then, inert, unconscious as you were, amongst all the various mui titude L)f forms and intellects which people the universe, í would have~ chosen for mine own, the outstretched, feeble, scarcely mimate existence of Casimir Vallen- iteïn." She was strongly agitated, and her .ears fell fast from beneath her mask ipon her bosom. " Would I had died then!" said Ca- imir bitterly, unused to contend vvith he tears of a woman : c ' Augusta, de- 'ide for us ! What I am you know—what noportion of my heart I can offer, you ι αη calculate ; if such a gift be worth Our acceptance, it is yours; but remem- »er, I do not deceive you : at this mo¬ nument I love Louisa of Marchfeldt to
&?ъ
distraction ! If such a heartless being has value in your eyes, take me, Augusta, and confide implicitly in my honour— however my thoughts may wander, never again shall my tongue pronounce that name in your hearing. Oo with me as you will, but do not weep !" &ς Do not be frightened at my tears—I have shed many a tear for your sake, though they have fallen in secret. When do you quit Vienna, Casimir? Here you cannot stay! Without this mask I will never look upon you. My counte¬ nance shall never endure the wounding scrutiny of your eyes. When will you go? Will you go to-morrow?" " Let me think, August.a^—let me think for a moment ;—I must await the return of Desmond from Prague ; but a few days will bring him, and then I will not linger an hour." " Yes, you will go where death is busy, and you will seek him and court him, Casimir, for you are very unhappy;
ΟΊ V
I, too, I, who cannot make you happy, have added to your wretchedness :— Oh, Casimir !" ťe It is well, said he gloomily, si to have drank out the dregs of one's chalice.— But, no; let me not delude myself—the bitterest drop is yet iniswallowed !" Si Vallensteïn, my friend, take cou¬ rage : you will join your father—his glory will be yours ! The inspiring, energetic, absorbing struggle—the pomp, the pride, the echoing shout of victory-—all this awaits you—all this will soon drown with¬ in your bosom the feelings which are now rending it." u You are deceived—no such triumphs await me! My hopes of glory, like my other dreams, are faded already." " Teds is mere despondency, Vallen- st jïn. You will arouse from it with double vigour» Where do you join the Duke?" ct No where, madam!" 6i Nay, shake oif this dejection, and let me hear you speak once more as you
SSO
are wont to speak.—Whither do you go from hence ?" u I know not—I have no where to go Γ " Surely, Casimir, you know not what you say,!" " I tell you, Princess, when I go hence I Iiave no object, no business, no abiding spot on the globe!—I %vould fain go where, the sayings of men may not follow me; for they will·soon say what it will madden me to hear/' " Casimir, yon mmt go to your father *—your duty, your reputation, demand it! Wbat !— ishall a woman's frown shrink and wither wpj youç spirits? And shall one cold breath extinguish the spark mtbin y,ou?4 You were born for better things! Nay, I could havø hoped more nobleness in youi: wy despair. I would rather, see: you,a bleeding corse, than beap.you the^.ţheme of one·degrading imputation !" " Right* Princess-/' said Wolfsteïn, who hadi long stood -near^ them unob*
3S1
served. " Your advice is infallible ! Val¬ lensteïn was never made to lie weeping under a willow ! he should go to his father/' And he passed. " Fiend !" exclaimed Vallensteïn ; " he knows I cannot go to my father/' " You cannot!—Sure you have not offended him ?" <c No, madam, he has offended me ľ' " Pardon me, Vallensteïn, your resent¬ ment cannot be other than misplaced. Lay it, let a friend conjure you, at the feet of your illustrious parent! Such a sentiment, wrong at any time, would now be construed not only to your blame but to your disgrace!" " Forbear, Augusta! If you could turn over and examine the thoughts of my bosom, you would marvel at the store of misery one mind can hold. Unme¬ rited disgrace is, perhaps, at hand, to swell the account. I believe I can bear that too! With you, at least, methinks 'Lwould stand fair; but even that is de*
332
nied, for ťhe word of justification I dare not utter l" x • At that moment Wolfstein'once more approached, and said, in a solemil tone, 'ţ Jîemember! —Remember Γ And again he passed, while Vallensteïn ground his teeth and smote liis forehead, as' though he. suffered to the extent of his en¬ durance. cc For Heaven's sake," said the Prin- céssi ·** what does Wolfsteïn mean? It should seem die possesses some' myste¬ rious power over you, or some know¬ ledge of which you dread his revelation —but: I Will/not think it. Oh, Vallen. stein ! forget what has past—look on me once more as your friend, your consoler— share your:sorrows with me— fcmay find the means to!lessen them ľ' ·'*<! must notj Princess-^I must bear them all alone ľ* " Yefc Wolfstem kbows them ?" " Yes; Wolfstein tøows'thetet and that be does «o is theideadliesfc xlrop iin
383
my bitter draught—but see, he comes again : let us not name him." And he started from his seat ere this hated and dreaded intruder reached him j and, finding little Theodore in his way, lifted him from the ground, and began to play with him boisterously, so boiste¬ rously that the child, half crying, en¬ treated to be released. tc See," said he, " you have broken one of my wings ! You are й great rough soldier, Count ; I Iike<the ladies to play vvith me." " I envy the Count his fine animal spirits/* said the malignant Wolfstem. He had taken the place, for two mi¬ nutes, which Vallensteïn had occupied by the side of Princess Stolberg, for the pur¬ pose of ascertaining whether her belief in his conversion was shaken. He did not mistrust the strength of the chain by which he fettered Vallensteïn ; but as he held the penetration of the Princess in high account, he thought her well worth
384
securing also. The tone of her voice satisfied him at once of her scepticism. " Princess," he whispered, " I per¬ ceive you feel some confusion in my pre¬ sence ; but be assured that what my ear inadvertently received, my tongue shall never utter. Our affections are inde¬ pendent of us ; and that you should have been impelled to offer yours where they have not been received, is a misfortune whicli no one, save yourself, can ever in¬ duce me to betray." And he left her to digest this im¬ plied threat.
- -· ν
CHAPTER XVI. " This îs the state of man I To-day he puts forth The tender leaves of hope; to-morrow blossoms, And bears his blushing honours thick upon him ; The third day comes afrost !" Shakspeare. Some days after, the select fête at Prin¬ cess Stolberg's, Desmond arrived: he had entered Prague in the disguise of a monk, and made his way to the presence of his friend Winterfeldt, who could, with difficulty, comprehend the necessity for such clandestine measures, especially as he had no suspicion of the contents of the despatches which were deposited in his hands, but which, nevertheless, he promised should not reach the Duke till a day should have elapsed after the lieu. tenant was again clear of Prague. In short, all was securely executed, and, in respect to the existence of danger, no VOL. II. s
asa
proof whatever had occurred. Desmond was half mad when he learned the com¬ promise that had been made with W 7 olf- steïn for his deliverance. Vallensteïn, immediately on the return of his ambas¬ sador, sent him to the palace, to solicit a private audience of leave—a painful and most embarrassing ceremony, which might not be dispensed with ; and it was most readily and graciously accorded. He had, for some days, absented himself from court, but his non-appearance Avas attributed to the necessity of preparation for the campaign on which he was about to enter, while, in fact, he was employed in-incessant exercise—riding or walking without intermission, iu hopes, by in¬ tense bodily fatigue, to dull or silence the internal wretchedness. He foresaw the . innumerable k perplexing questions whicli awaited'him from his sovereigns;' and, after much vain deliberation, re¬ solved to trust» the impulse of the mo¬ ment for his replies,* determined on two points only—neither to betray his father*
WI
nor to utter an untruth. The august pair received him with the usual marks of interest and regard. Ci We have been consulting," said the Emperor, <c what token of our love might be most acceptable to a man, on whom it is scarcely in our power to bestow a larger portion of wealth, or honour, than he already possesses or inherits; your affections, therefore, are your only assail¬ able part, and there we direct our bribe :'' presenting, as he spoke, a case contain¬ ing the joint miniatures of himself and his imperial spouse 3 encircled with costly jewels. " No," said he, struck with the per¬ ceptible and strong emotion with which this royal gift was received, " I will have no verbal thanks. You will soon hold an ostensible charge against our enemies. No doubt your father reserves you a worthy and distinguished post, such as your merit, independent of your blood, may aspire to." s г
3»»
Vallensteïn lowered his eyes, and was silent. " Do you know, Count," proceeded the Emperor, " it will often, in all proba¬ bility,' be in your power to confer favours on your sovereign ? The Duke of Fried- land has stipulated,"—and something of a resentful glow passed over his cheek— **as the r price of his services, for the undivided rule and guidance of his vast army. He has not left to our option the nomination ofa general. I have not interest with him for the command of a »ingle regiment! If I would serve a friend, therefore, I will do it through your medium : those I would promote shall be your clients, for your interest must Ibe as sure a way to preferment as that of your father. What his jealousy would'-xefuse to the interference of his sovereign, 'his % tendemess will accord to the isolicitations of his «on/* «Stilt he was silent, and the Empress beheld, with wonder and sympathy, 'his
389
increasing and overwhelming agitation : partly she attributed it to the sensibility and modesty of his nature, and partly to the mournful feeling with which he was bidding adieu to a scene where she кпелу he had experienced the severest disappointment which a young and un¬ practised heart can suffer. " I could \vish, my gallant friend/' she said, " to see you go forth to the conflict with a brighter aspect, but you will return to us covered with exultation and glory." " What think you/' said the Emperor, " ofthe Chevalier Wolfsteïn's sudden con¬ version ? The Empress is sanguine, but I am very incredulous/* " I fear, my liege, he will never de¬ serve to be canonized." " And yet/' observed the Empress, " you sanctioned the general hope by exhibiting towards him tokens of such cordiality as you had not been supposed to entertain." " Your Imperial Majesty must deign
390
to remember that I am of late become a politician ; it is one of the signs of my profession to give the hand without ask¬ ing counsel of the heart." " Do you then," asked the Empress, with a disappointed air, " suspect my neophyte of hypocrisy? 4 · " Pardon me, madam, I am a pre¬ judiced man. It is well known I never loved Wolfsteïn/* "^ Your antipathy is not an inheritance/' said Ferdinand, " for he is deep in the duke % s сои^ек^ - *· He is, mý liege, and it was in con¬ sequence of his connexion with my father that I relaxed into that apparent cor¬ diality which struck her Majesty at Princess StolbergV " And when set you forth, Vallen¬ steïn ?" "■.With your gracious permission, to¬ morrow." <c May guardian angels be your com¬ panions/' said the Empress, " and hold their'invisible shields over you in those
391
conflicts which so. soon await you ! Go forth 9 my beloved knight, to the battle, and conquer/' The Emperor rose, and opening his bureau took thence a small packet: " Here, Count Casimir," said he, fC are papers which must be transferred di¬ rectly from your hand to that of your illustrious father. You will oblige me by keeping them about your person ; their contents are ofa delicate nature.'' Poor Casimir now touched the acme of his embarrassment. He well knew that before he quitted that august presence some explanation was inevitable, but in vain he endeavoured to rally his spirits for this severe trial—they utterly for¬ sook him—his colour went and came ; he opened his lips repeatedly, but spoke not, and leaned against the back of the chair on which the Empress was seated in order to conceal the unsteadiness of his frame. The Emperor remained stand. ing, his hand extended with the papers, beholding in silent astonishment the
дай
agitation which so visibly affected the young soldier. " Are you ill, Count?" said he, " or what am I to inf г from this unconquer¬ able emotion ? 4 ' iC Alas ! I am not going to m v father." ¿t Not going to vour father ! And whither then are vou bent, voung man ?*' bi My liege, I scarcely know—-whither chance leads me." He threw himself at the feet of the Empress, who had risen in surprise, and attempted to kiss her hand, but she withheld it a Rise, Count/' said she, coldly : " an explanation of this strange scene is ne¬ cessary—vve await it from you." Casimir arose, and with the deadly calm of desperation, said, c ' May it please your Majesties, 1 am not going to my father—I cannot go to him ! And whither I go, signifies not to myself nor to any human being, for a more forlorn wretch wanders not through the world's wilderness."
Touched by his despair, the Empress resumed the native benignity of her accent. ÍC Vou have no doubt had the misfortune to offend your illustrious pa- rent ; but, if y^u have erred past pardon, I will never tru-t appearances again." Uh Confide your distress vvith me, young man,*'said Ferdinand, soothingly, taking his hand ; 4Í í will mediate between you and vour father. You shall remain at Vienna till the paternal arms are open to receive you." ** Alas it must not be," said Vallensteïn; éi vour qraeious intercession will avail me nothing. The Duke of Friedland has no more a son—I have no more a father." Nothing could exceed the surprise and consternation of the imperial pair, or their disappointment in beholding their young favourite indulging an implacable animosity towards his father, or else, tacitly admitting that he had offended past forgiveness. tc Am I then to understand, young man, that you reject my mediation ? Ащ
394
I/ţŞ ţhînk that you réfuse to be reconciled wifb the author of your being ?" Casimir remained immersed in a sor- ro^vful stupor. He replied not, for he had nothing to reply ; and Ferdinand, who. regarded this silence as a proof of sullen: contumacy, said, ** Since, : air, you can outrage thus rudely the niost sacred bond ornature, I marvel.not that the.voice.of your sove¬ reign should sound idly in your ears.— But," and he waved him towards the door, " it is time" our conference should cease!—I.commend you to your better thoughts, sir." Casimir moved mechanically towards the door.—The Empress was skilled in the gentle pffice of mediatrix between a froward son, and an offended father, her own first-born having inured her to it. She thought: on him, and felt a mother's yearnings tpwards the present culprit :— she cast a supplicating glance at Ferdi¬ nand, and reading no discouragement in his benign countenance^
зго
" Nay, Vallensteïn," she said, " go not forth with your sovereign's displea¬ sure on your head : think towards whom your contrition is required. If you are too proud to ask forgiveness of your earthly father, you will soon forget to bend the knee to your Heavenly one.—I am not used to court compliance ; you will be sorry for the stubbornness which has bent me to it. Speak—speak, Val¬ lensteïn !" The earnest, affectionate sweetness which mingled itself with the dignity of this majestic princess/ acted powerfully on the feelings of Vallensteïn ; his heart opened to it, and a copious flood of tears fell from his eyes, as seizing her hand, he kissed it fervently, and exclaiming, " May the Ruler of heaven and earth bless you, and keep firm the foundation of your throne !" he rushed from the royal presence and from the palace, leaving Ferdinand and his consort in sor¬ rowful consternation. " Well !" said he, as he entered his hotel. " it is now all over !—I have dì-
396
vested myself of all hopes, interests, and occupations-—my lieart should be light now» Desmond, my friend, open that desk,—there is much money in it. Pay off my whole suite :—reserve not one of them : We will forage for ourselves a brace of sturdy adventurers ! My Mirza and your Ajax shall carry us forth, masters of ourselves and them.—Hurry, hurry, good Desmond! It must be α stirring night with us !" Desmond complied in silence, with an aching heart, but an unchanged coun¬ tenance; while Λ 'allenstein, humming a little wild and mournful ballad, which had been a favourite with Wilhelm, ra¬ pidly paced the apartment, and at length seizing a pen, wrote with a shaking hand as follows : " Sweet friend, adieu ! I go forth into the wilderness, a scape goat, laden with iniquities and sorrows ;—but, mark me | Only half the burthen is my own ! The pledge 1 inclose, and which you will pre¬ serve in my remembrance, is the dearest
-~*mr~
whose grave sorrow made betimes ; he received it fiom the young bride, whom death snatched, from Ьь side ere the priest had blessed their union ;—lie gave it to me, Mrange things have foli >wed the gift, but its evd charm is ι xhausted an my head ; advewtv has wrought out her work ! Take it then, feaiks^h, and when л on vve. ìd muse on something mournful, iî shall speak to you of Val¬ lensteïn ! Adieu, sweet friviid "* We folded up the billet, inclosed the ring, which was a ruby heait pieced through with a diamond arrow, directed the little packet for Princes^ Stolberg, and placed it in his bosom ; this done, he returned to his monotonous exercise, and for the live-long night paced his apart- ment. The task allotted to Desmond was one that required haste and address. The lieutenant would not, by ill-timed economy, cause the generous spirit of his patron to suffer impeachment; yet he felt the necessity for retaining some portion ofthe store intrusted to him, since, when
398 exhausted, from what source would it be replenished ? The young Count's nu¬ merous train remonstrated, intreated, questioned, and Desmond's phlegmatic resolution could scarcely preserve itself against the grief and importunit} by which he лл -as as-ailed. At length, just upon the break of morning, he joined Vallensteïn —placing in his hand the purse which contained the remnant of tue i r fort 1 s * We are alone,'' said he, " in this wide palace. All are gone, and our horses saddled in the stable/' " (rood !—And what is this for?" " To maintain us, Count Y allenstem." " Psha ! You should have given it to my people !" * c And on what, then, ¡should wo sub¬ sist ? Beggary is not pleasant, and J doubt both your lordship and mvself might prove but awkward mendicants." 4C Are not the mines open ?" asked Ca¬ simir, gloomily. il Ay, my lord, but whatever your
399
taste may he, I prefer the earth's surface to its bowels ; although, if need were that vou should enter them, Desmond would not be slow to follow vou." ίς Keep, then, what your providence has preserved for us ; I shall guide it un- thnftily." Yf hen the hour arrived for opening the gates, th·., friends, accoutred in plain Hungarian uniform, and each supplied vvith a small packet of linen, were on horseback. Vallensteïn halted before that wing of the palace which contained the apartments of Princess Stolberg, and delivered his letter to one of her pages; then, having performed his last business at Vienna, * ť Now, Desmond," said he, vvith a ghastly smile, íť the world is before us Γ They passed the gates, and were soon out of sight of the Austrian capital,
end of л>т. II.
LONDON РШМГГ) Ľ\ TltOi \Ч DUlsÜN, МНПЕППЛВВ.
