Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Warbeck of wolfstein
WARBECK OP WOLFSTEÏN
CHAPTER I. ki Qui perd pêche." THE news of the dispersion of Count Casimir of Vallenstei'n's noble retinue was quickly buzzed through Vienna : fierce yagers, splendid liverymen, w r e!l- trained grooms, were wandering master- less, seeking new employment ; and even the fine horses and splendid equipages of their late lord, which had been unre¬ servedly shared amongst them, were now offered to the most liberal buyer for sale. At the levee of the day which saw the departure of Vallensteïn, no other subject was discussed. The Emperor did not vol. in. в
2
appear, and the countenance of the Empress still bore the traces of the shock of the preceding evening. Prin¬ cess Stolberg absented herself on the plea of indisposition, careless at that moment of the guesses and rumours to which her conduct might give birth. Her imperial mistress was well acquainted with the partial kindness she professed for him whose departure, and its singular manner, was at that moment the theme of all tongues, and accorded her every indulgence; while the Princess internally resolved, as soon as she could in some degree recover the agitation which now overwhelmed her, to lay her heart and its secrets at the feet of her benevolent So¬ vereign, since the weight was more than even her high spirit could sustain alone, and to solicit or accept the sympathy of a less exalted mind was not in her nature. The word "disgrace" was wafted in whispers through the state apartment ; for as the illustrious lady who presided did not in any way allude to her late
3
favourite, no one dared to utter his asser¬ tions or conjectures aloud. Count Harrach entered in all the parade and splendor of his newly acquired mili tary distinction, in a full and magnificent uniform, decorated by orders and medals, and all the brilliant appendages which a long probation at court had acquired for him. Big with the theme of the hour, his countenance betrayed a double share of .sapient meaning, and as his mind usually contented itself with a freightage of one idea at a time, it did not occur to him that any subject; save the one of which he groaned to be delivered, could be discussed, much less did a single doubt assail him, that it actually laboured under a tacit prohibition. Those who would not themselves hazard breaking the silence of which the Empress gave them the example, rejoiced at the sight of the pompous, garrulous uncle of Vallensteïn, who, having knelt and kissed the hand of his mistress, and found himself b2
4
once more on his feet, cast upon her a speaking look full of wistful inquiry, which receiving no answer, he was compelled to utter forth his sole idea, since, like the helmet of Otranto, it was become too large for the mansion ; however, he was courtier enough to discern that it was necessary to come to his point by a cir¬ cuitous route. "May I presume, madam/' said he, "to express to your Imperial Majesty those contradictory emotions which assail me at this moment· In saluting your Majesty's fair hand, I could almost weep to think how long it maybe ere my knee shall again be bent in this presence.'^ cc You are then summoned to the army, Count Harrach ?" "My illustrious brother has put my services into instant requisition, and the idea that I may be permitted to perish in the cause of my imperial master, alone consoles me for an exile from the sunshine in which I have long ripened· To-mor-
D
row, madam, I set forth, and hope, ere my return, that this hitherto unspotted sword will have drank deep of the blood of your Majesty's enemies. There is, no doubt, something inspiring to a man of mettle in riding forth to the battle, and I would fain at this moment have preserved my mind clear and unclouded by any sinister event; but, really, the mysterious circumstances attending my nephew's departure—a youth indeed of very plau¬ sible manners, at least to the eye of natural affection it appeared so, has some¬ what dismayed·,—that is; has cast ra-ather a damp upon my feelings/ The Empress made no reply ; but, as the blame of having broken the silence which had hitherto prevailed throughout the assembly would rest exclusively with Count Harrach, many individuals now flocked around him, and besieged him on all sides with questions. " ľ suspected/' said he, with an air of penetration, " I suspected sometime ago
8
came to me in a delicate manner—it is only amongst friends that I would breathe the most remote suspicion of such a thing : I have had a notion suggested to me, that he is actually gone to join the desperate banditti who have established their dens amid the ravines of the Car- pathian mountains. My heart bleeds to the centre for my illustrious brother/* The majority of voices were at once upraised in a chorus of wonder and re¬ probation, while a few only hazarded a doubt of the accuracy of this afflicted uncle's intelligence : amongst these few Lindau stood foremost· c< Impossible, sir !" said he : " that the ambition of Count Casimir may have been piqued and disappointed j even that his expectations were extravagant, and his father's limitations just, and that he may have surrendered up his reason to a temporary fit of vexation, is within the scope of belief; although, judging from the few observations I have been able to
9
make on his temper, I do not believe it : but that Casimir of Vallensteïn will ever become the companion of a horde of robbers,—I should smile at such an in¬ sinuation, but that the source from whence tlie scandal emanates, excites a deeper feeling than can express itself in smiles/' u Well, sir/' replied Count Harrach, indignantly, " take your own view of the matter, and time shall be our umpire ; but if a man acts the extravagant part my nephew has done, conjecture will be busy ;—he may be insane,—not that on his mother's side it .is traceable in the blood.—But, sir, perhaps you are ignorant that of the princely retinue with which my illustrious brother sent him hither he has dismissed every man, except that gruff lieutenant, who always looked as if he was going to sabre somebody. His noble stud, and his costly equipages, are left as perquisites of these menials; and I have jusc been so fortunate to purchase, for a mere trifle, two of his finest chargers* ĽÔ
10
It was a lucky opportunity to befall me just on going to camp ; though, if my nephew had had a grain of consideration, he would have presented me with them, haviug no farther occasion for them him¬ self; indeed, it ra-ather hurt me to pay for things which ought in a manner to have belonged to me." " Certainly," said Lindau, with un¬ restrained contempt, " it must have been very painful/* Cť I should not," said the honest Count Markoff, " have suspected him to possess such a fierce, headstrong temper : there always seemed to me, on the contrary, a sort of genuine, native courtesy about him, peculiar to himself/' "Bless me, sir, you surprise me !—I am sure nothing could exceed my attentions to him ; and, setting that apart, our near¬ ness of blood, and my established cha¬ racter, ought to have weighed with him ; yet youcannot conceive to what pungent, abrupt replies I have been subject from
11
him. Believe me, there was something innately ruffian in him ; and, on the whole. I am not sorry he has shown him¬ self. Every one knows how he treated poor Baron Rosebec, than whom a better- natured young man does not exist.— Really, his behaviour was most unpro¬ voked and outrageous ; for the worst that can be said of Rosebec is, that he is ra-ather thoughtless, and, considering the disparity of his age with that of my re¬ spected friend the Baroness, every allow¬ ance should be made for him; besides, to interfere in a wager is downright brutal, an infringement on the laws of civil society, as I told my nephew ;— indeed, my representations on the subject were so strong, that I did induce him to take the forfeiture on himself." " Oh, monstrous !" exclaimed Lindau, turning away in disgust. " It is impossible not to feel an interest in him/' said Markoff: "I should like to know what is become of hira, poor fellow !"
12
Lindau echoed the wish with a sigh— " I cannot think that the true motive of his conduct has even been hinted at/' said he ; but what it really is surpasses my penetration· Tired of this courtly dawdling, I am resolved to make trial of my own mettle. I should like to ascer¬ tain, for my own satisfaction, if I have confidence enough to face a discharge of cannon, so I asked young Vallensteïn for a post : he frankly disclaimed all in¬ fluence, declared that he was himself without station or promotion, and that in case he served it would be as a volun¬ teer:—his accent and his countenance had a tinge of grief in them, but nothing of resentment /* u Is it possible, Margrave/' said Count Harrach, who had lent an ear to the conversation, " that, you are not aware of the hidden meaning of the word volun¬ teer ? Upon my. honour, sir, volunteer is a phrase often used instead of bandit. I can hardly conceive you to be ignorant of the frequently synonymous acceptation
13
of these terms; but I cannot express the mortification I feel in hearing that you incline to the service, when every post in my regiment is filled. Applicants pressed so rapidly upon me, I had scarcely time for breathing: natural enough, you know, sir, considering my nearness in blood and affection to the illustrious Ge¬ neralissimo:—but let us not despair—I make no doubt that, even yet, a request of mine—" "What, Lindau!" cried Wolfsteïn, " are you ambitious pf winning your spurs ? I will write to the Duke :—equip yourself with all despatch in the interim : you shall be in a week appointed to a vacant regiment." Count Harrach had now no occasion for any verbal expression of mortifica¬ tion ; his "nearness of blood and affection to the Generalissimo" would not, in fact, have supplied him with courage to ask for a subaltern's post beyond his own regiment ; and, albeit, partiality for cold
14
iron was not his leading foible : he would rather have eaten his sword than risk encountering such a repulse as he knew, from experience, his very dear and illus¬ trious brother could bestow. He stared, stammered, and all his courtly presence of mind and address failed to conceal the natural vexation he felt at having his own weakness so glaringly contrasted with another's power; for Wolfsteïn looked on him de haut en bas> as though. he would say, " You know very well, Count, that the sum total of your interest amounts to nothing/' and, very unwilling the look should be translated into words, he quitted the circle a somewhat less self- satisfied being than he had entered it. * c Can you be serious, Sir Warbeck ?" said Lindau. , " I will send off a courier this night, I tell you$ and, within a week, your com¬ mission shall be in your hands :—-you shall have a picked regiment/' "Well, then/' said Lindau, shaking
15
hands with him, "you are a fine fellow. It would be almost ungracious to ask questions; but I own you excite my wonder." " Most likely, Lindau —I was born to excite the wonder of my contemporaries." " I am almost as much beholden toy ou for crushing at a stroke that reptile, Harrach, as for my regiment : he has been treating his gallant nephew's name most scurvily." "What of that?" said Wolfsteïn : "it is the vocation of such a sneaking cur to fawn in your face and bite your heel— you should attend to breed and character —you would not take a turnspit to a boar chase, would you ? " Young Vallensteïn," said he, exalt¬ ing his voice, " is fit for a hero of romance; his breast is full of that quality called virtue, of which every one has read, but whose scarcity has rendered its existence as much a matter of question as that of the unicorn or phœnix. For Vallensteïn's sake, I grieve at heart that giants and
16
centaurs are exterminated, and that Sa¬ racen knights and foul magicians no longer persecute helpless, hapless females in their enchanted castles. I do verily be¬ lieve that the said Chevalier is equally sans tâche, et sans peur." An he spoke, he bowed humbly to the Baroness, whose vicinity he did uot sooner affect to perceive. A cold and very slight return was all he received, and more than he expected. 4Ç Chevalier," said Lindau, "you do yourself honour in speaking thus gene¬ rously of one with whom your cordiality is in doubt/' " I do not love the Count, it is true, but í admire him., and to strike at him now would reduce me to the level of his uncle, Count Harrach. No : I never judge through the medium of passion ; and, when I smite an adversary, he shall see whence comes the blow." The lady of Marchfeldt, although she preserved a cold and discouraging aspect
17 whenever her ' ve> ηκ'ΐ those of tlie che¬ valier, could not but admire the man!} sentimenti she heard hiiuuiUr, and felt pleased that he did nol f utidocend to join the throng who wore so ready to pour all sort*· of reproach and obloquy on the vanished favourite. The Empress had vouchsafed to relate to hor Wolfsteïn's reformation, and the sacrifice of his ob¬ noxious book, and her reply was an hum¬ ble expression of incredulity. * ς I fear," said her Majesty, " you are naturally of an incredulous, inflexible temper :—beware, lest you become cy¬ nical ; for the air of courts is, in itself, apt to generate scepticism/ 4 " May I presume*," sau l Louisa blush¬ ing, " to ask why your Majesty thus deems of me ?" " I have heard multiplied instances of your cruelty, not one of your kindness:— for the unfortunate young man," added she, lowering her voice, 6i who has quitted us in so mysterious a manner, the effect
18
of your severity on him was visible to every one.—Poor Lindau has improved under your discipline:—vanity was his ruling foible, and you have cured him. With respect to Wolfsteïn, I predict that the conflict will be longer in suspense. I, for my own part, exult in the hope that we are making a valuable proselyte to virtue: he has a powerful, a magni¬ ficent mind, and I should glory in such a convert ; for / do not," said she re¬ proachfully, « exclude from my chari¬ table hopes, or, shut my belief against, all who have deviated." The Baroness sighed : she saw that a shade of her sovereign's displeasure rested upon her, while she was conscious that by the simple detail of her own brief story she could at once dissipate the cloud ; but she had nöt the courage so grievously to inculpate Wolfsteïn. ** I have a strong suspicion/' said the Queen, examining the changing counte¬ nance of the Baroness, cc that this is a
19
critical moment, and that the confirmation of our new convert in his better thoughts rests in your hands :—it is a responsibility, Baroness, of some weight.—I hope you are not like the princess Tourandocte, the heroine of a Persian tale, whose glory consisted in the number of youths who died of her cruelty:—no, no, I shall live to see you rejoicing in a worthier triumph/' " Trust me, your Majesty is deceived, —not the slightest communication exists between Sir Warbeck and myself/' " Because you have quarrelled ;—but the quarrels of loyers are not irreme¬ diable. I will deal candidly with you, Baroness:—I am not ignorant of the scene in the Mermaid's grotto :—that it came to me unexagge rated I will not assert, for you are beautiful and charm¬ ing, and the evil eye of envy cannot select a fairer mark j-r-pri vate meetings of so intimate and agitating a nature, contrasted with apparent and public dis¬ avowal, give more scope than could .be
20
wished to the speculations of tiie censo¬ rious.·—Nay, Baroness," said the Em* pre^s, taking her hand, as she saw tlie tears gathering in her еуе>, " I would not ilbtfLss or agitate \<:u, but you are young, and í would gjard you/' 44 Ahb, Madam! that scene has lowered me iu vour Majesty's opinion ; yet was it forced upon me, and no effort of mine eouhl have rescued me from it." É * Will vou answer me to one point, Baroness : when Wolfsteïn compelled you io the performance of that scene, was it the first hour of agitation that ever passed between you?-—and did you not, at no distant period, smile on the chevalier?— Come, Baroness, your silence is inge¬ nuous : I will not urge you to speak—but all this strengthens my hope, that you are destined to make Wolfsteïn good, and he is destined to make you happy." That their union was written on the page of destiny the Lady of Marchfeldt implicitly believed; but her presages
21
were le^s bright than those of her august mistress : she had had sorrowful expe¬ rience of his talent for dissembling : she had no direct cause to suppose that she was the object of his present manœuvre, for he kept modestly aloof, and it was only through the medium ofa timid bow that he attempted to remind her of his presence ; yet was she possessed with an internal conviction that he was, spider- like, spinning at a distance from his vic¬ tim that web, in the centre whereof she would ultimately find herself entangled.
22
CHAPTER IL <ť Ego, et Rex meus.'* Within the stipulated time arrived Lindau's commission, and as the army was already in motion, an order to take the immediate command of his regiment came with it. Indeed, so general was the infection of military ardour, that ail the young courtiers, to the very pages of the Emperor, entreated to exchange their peaceful service for one in which peril and glory were united. All things were in preparation for a tremendous struggle, and the Duke of Friedland loudly de¬ clared that the eventful moment was at hand which must decide whether Gusta¬ vus or he should command the world. The very first steps of this great man on his resumption of power revived the hopes of the Emperor, and checked the advances
23
of the enemy : the Swedish hero no longer found his campaign a mere rapid, unobstructed march ; he must now wrestle hard for every inch of ground: yet Ferdi¬ nand could not, while he exulted in the happy change in his affairs, help reflect¬ ing with mortification on the extravagant price at which he had bought his haughty general's return to service.—The* entire and unconditional command, not only of the imperial troops, but of the Spanish allies; the levying contributions and sub-
24
sidies at his own free and unquestior/ed discretion; and when the Emperor pro¬ posed that the Archduke, hio eldest son, might have the nominal command, the brief and impious reply of this most pre¬ sumptuous man was, ζί I will not serve even under God." The Duke of Fried- land's mind had undergone a wonderful change during the period of his short re¬ tirement ; he looked on the temporary disgrace as a mere necessary link in the chain of his destiny, yet he resented it deeply, bitterly, and eternally .—From the hour when he disbanded his army all faith and trust in his fellow creatures w r as renounced, and he adopted, and pertinaciously maintained, the idea, that mankind could only be securely bound by awe and apprehension :—-from the highest to the lowest of his dependants, from the sovereign who courted his aid to the centinél who kept watch at his door, this stern and melancholy theory invariably governed his practice« Fer-
ditiaud now learned to tremble at the unlimited powers of this uncontrollable spirit ; but it was to his sovereign's dread, not to his love, the Duke of Friedland aspired : amongst his own troops death or infamy were common retribution, and tho zealous devotion with which he was beheld by the immense multitude which obeyed hiin, served to justify his op¬ pressive system. Cw Psha!" exclaimed he, when any one ventured a remonstrance on the danger of driving men to desperation, " the beloved and clement Cæsar surrendered his life under the daggers of assassins,— the abhorred and blood-dropping Sylla 1) real h ed it forth gently on his bed :~—the one was murdered by the men he had forgiven, the other spared hy those whose fathers, sons, and brothers, he had de¬ stroyed, and whose own souls he had crushed and trodden to the dust!" A wicked and dangerous empiric, the Jesuit Fieramosca, was the only human vol. iu. с
26
creature of whom he took counsel: this man was passionately addicted to the practice of those mysterious sciences from a belief in whose arcana few minds were entirely exempt.—By his experi¬ ments he succeeded in confirming his patron in the one day certain accom¬ plishment of those visions of glory which were ever swimming before his mental sight· As the decree by which these things were to come to pass wus pro¬ nounced, and irreversible, the Duke founded his stern, disdainful, unbending deportment on that principle. " Why/' he would say, <c should I court beings who can neither advance nor impede my progress?—destiny will inevitably dispose them so as they must co-operate for my advantage, and I am free to use them meanwhile as it pleases me; they are no doubt placed within the grasp of my power for that purpose." As for the Jesuit, he had tampered with these delusive secrets until their
27
jargon was become habitual to him, but it would be difficult to believe that he did actually accord to these gloomy un¬ lawful mysteries that implicit faith wbich he exacted from his pupils, or that his imagination was so far infected by his studies as to present before him, and compel within his circle, those powers of the air over which lie professed to exer¬ cise a limited and temporary jurisdiction. —That such power did exist, and that Fieramosca possessed it, was the creed of a man who gloried in his scepticism:— here was the confine of his proud and grasping intellect:—he refused to credit the most simple, self-evident, and ac¬ cepted truths, yet he yielded himself up, unresistingly, to the weak wild fablings of a subtle charlatan :—he gloried in the universal mistrust in which he held his fellow beings, and yet he surrendered the whole stores of his copious bosom to the investigation of as crafty and evil a spirit c£
28
as ever inhabited the human form. But í о return to our interests at Vienna. Wolfsteïn found himself delivered from all those competitors and observers, who. though beneath his fear or jealousy, might have crossed or harassed his pro¬ ceedings. The Margrave of Lindau, no longer blinded by vanity, and occupied by himself, might have proved trouble¬ some, and he had accomplished two ob¬ jects at once in obtaining his regiment,— he removed a man whose absence he desired, and he exhibited a convincing proof of his powerwith the great dispenser of profits and honours, which gave him a weight at court, such as he had never bel¬ fiore possessed. Ferdinand condescended to make him the medium of different pro¬ motions, and it was seen clearly that his word hael incredible potency with the Duke of Fried land. In proportion as the Emperor became obliged to Wolf- stein, the anxiety that his conversion might prove genuine and stable in-
29
creased : and as it is not difficult to re¬ concile our creed with our inclination, every day seemed to lend this charitable and christian hope fresh colour. No one had really a peep behind the mask but Princess Stolberg, and she dared not be¬ tray her suspicions ; with her the Cheva¬ lier affected a friendly and unceremo¬ nious familiarity, which present circum¬ stances rendered inexpressibly galling.— He had overheard her conversation with Vallensteïn, had witnessed the emotion which accompanied it ; it was painful and humiliating to meet his eye at any rate, but to read in that eve, whenever it å/ J dwelt upon her, a studied expression of insolent pity, was intolerable: yet was she compelled to endure it.^—She could not, by any sophistry, gloss over the fact to herself; that she had made a vo¬ luntary confession of love to one, who would not, could not, return it, and that her pride had so far deserted her, that even the repulse and rejection of her
30
affection did not rally it.-—-No ingenuity, thought she, can warp this tale to my credit, and if Wolfsteïn relates it, it will have every addition that malice can af¬ ford it. She resolved to confide her weak¬ ness to the sympathy of the Empi ^ ^ and to enable herself, in that quarter a. least, to deïy the enemy : nor did she misplace her confidence; they wept together uver the hurried farewell of poor Casimir, and the Empress repeated with pleasure and wonder the words, u I go forth laden w ith sorrows and iniquities, but only half the burthen is my own," To whom then might the other half appertain? That was a question to whose solution their mutual penetration was unequal. ¿í One thing, however," said the Em¬ press, " is clear aud manifest ; the breast which harboured the generous, tender sentiments expressed in that letter, could never lend room to a dark, implacable spirit of wrath towards the author of his b ing;· —the unhappy mystery may hr
31
long in developing, but whenever it comes to light, the honour of Casimir Vallensteïn will be justified." Unfortunately, as Princess Stolberg now found it, when Wolfsteïn first made his appearance at court, in all the pride of his audacious singularity, she, carried away by high spirits and vanity, and pleased to find herself the exclusive theme of his warbled flatteries, allowed him in return for this seductive homage a degree of familiarity for which those who envied her the fragrant incense which burned upon her altar were eager to censure and condemn her.—-It was a league, however, in which vanity alone was concerned:«—she loved to hear her¬ self flattered in such incomparable strains, and he delighted in being told by so lovely and brilliant a woman that the strains were incomparable. They were almost constantly inseparable, not be¬ cause each had any real attachment to the other, but because each loved
ж
and admired themselves. This tacit compact, however, gradually relaxed, for the Princess, on her side, felt herself re¬ volted, in spite of fashion, by some of the daring impieties of her colleague : while he, naturally fickle, wearied even of the piquante Princess, began, for the love of variety, to enlist his transcendant muse in the celebration of less conspi¬ cuous charms.—«It was true, besides, that the unqualified and monotonous applause with which the public fed their monstrous idol became at length ridiculous in the ears of Madame de Stolberg :—thus, without any actual breach, the distance between them grew imperceptibly wider, and Wolfsteïn, with all his affected non¬ chalance, could not save himself from a secret pang of vexation when he heard that the wit and irony of this lively lady had been frequently directed against those of liis followers who seemed to have no other business on earth than to feed his already bloated vanity by their indiscriminate
33
and servile worship. He rallied in turn, and all was outwardly well : but, in the meanwhile, the offender was entered on his proscribed list against the day of rétribution,^ — χι period which was now arrived, and the poor Princess, unknown to any but herself and her tormentor, w r as doing rigorous penance. One day that the Empress held her levee, the Chevalier entered, and with that chastened expression, which since his professed reformation he had thought proper to adopt, he approached her Majesty, and having performed his sa¬ lutations, laid on her footstool an elegant MS., saying, e( At length, madam, my pen has poured forth lays whose tendency at least will ensure your gracious reception of them." Theodore raised it from its humble station, and placed it in her hand, when she saw with delight that it was a para¬ phrase of some of the most striking pas- c S
34
sages in sacred writ, executed with that exquisite pathos and sublimity, which never failed to adorn even his most ex¬ ceptionable verse : they had been set to appropriate music by one of the most emment masters of that period, and the notes were interleaved with the subject they were adapted to accompany. The Empress expressed, in the most affec¬ tionate and encouraging terms, the gra¬ tification with which she accepted this promising token. tc Now, indeed," said she, " you are turning your talent to account ; for if ever human intellect may presume to glory, it is wdien it consecrates itself to such hallo wed uses. Persuade one of your fair friends to accompany some of these beautiful anthems with her lute ; I am impatient to hear if the music does them justice." i( From you they will derive redoubled force and pathos," said he, addressing Princess Stolberg, ζί you, who have im-
35
parte ri such seductive expression to rar other bieathingsofthe same muse; vouch¬ safe, lady, to lend your enchanting voice to her holier inspiration." The Princess was wofullv chanced since her agitating and decisive confer- о о ence with Casimir ; her spirits were fled beyond reach of an effort ; she was pale and silent, and the consciousness that a secret so humiliating was so insecurely lodged, kept her in eonstaut trepidation. " Spare me, Wolfsteïn," she said, f ' I cannot sing : my voice has lost its power of late;—indeed, I shall ruin the effect both of the lines ancl the music." "Oh yes, you xcill sing, Princess/re¬ plied he with a soft, entreating voice, but with a look which she well under¬ stood to mean you shall sing.—"Your spirits," added he, with insulting gentle¬ ness, ft want reviving-—I must bring you to your old habits, and you shall thank me for it. Time, time will cure all this, but we must aid him ;—besides,you, who were so fond of warbling that little naughty
зь
canzonet ofmine to Myra, cannot refuse to encourage the first steps of a reclaimed libertine· Oh yes, you xvill sing, Prin¬ cess !" This was hard to endure, but there was no helping it ; and, though she complied, she could not sufficiently conceal her feelings to forbear adding to the triumph of her wily enemy ;—she snatched the hook angrily from his hand, and having tuned her lute, and run over a prelude, to which her very agitation lent expression^, she burst forth into the song with a force and energy which arrested the admiration of her whole audience, but it was an over¬ powering effort; in a moment her voice sunk, her bosom throbbed, and her cheek flushed with intense crimson, while tears of indignation for the unmanly compul¬ sion she had suffered, forced their way into her eyes. ζζ Princess, you are ill," said the Em¬ press, compassionately; "you should not have attempted to sing—the heat of the
37
room overpowers you. Pray retire, and try the effect of air." Her persecutor again approached, and taking the hand she dared not withdraw, led her with an air of the most soothing attention from the apartment, every one admiring tiie manly suavity of his man¬ ners. He led her to the entrance of her own suite in silence, then " Princess," said he, " take a friend's advice :—I know that nothing implants so bitter a pang in the tender breast of woman as the scorn of a beloved object ; —there is but one cure,—-set your vanity on some other conquest—repulse in one instance should not discourage you,™ you have ample time before you ; but, upon my soul, if you go on in this style, premature wrinkles, faded roses, and gray hairs, are at hand, and you will be con» signed to cards, scandal, ratafia, devotion, and all the stimulants which remain to ren¬ der life endurable to a tarnished beauty." Thus saying, he left her, and retraced his steps towards the apartment of the
38
Empress, The lute and open MS. lay upon the table : her Majesty, in regretting the indisposition of her lady of the key, expressed her disappointment likewise in being deprived of her vocal powers, and losing the hope of hearing the sacred songs. The Baroness of Marchfeldt was the only lad} present who could have undertaken them : the Empress did not otherwise refer to her than by accom¬ panying her expressions of regret with a significant look, which was indeed a sort of tacit command. Louisa hesitated for d moment; then, with the haste of one about to perform some desperate act, she approached the table, and taking up the Jute, whose chords were already tuned, poured forth a strain of such sweetness and sublimity as could not fail to soften and exalt the mind of her dullest hearer. When she ceased, the delight she inspireel did not relieve itself in audible enco¬ miums—all was for some moments silent, as if the intranced ear still hung upon the thrilling cadence; no one spoke to
39
ber, or of her, for the feelings she excited could not be uttered ; but all thronged to congratulate Wolfstein, and no one svm- pathized more cordially in his conversion and success than Professor Westermann, The almost voluntary performance of his song by Louisa of Marchfeldt seemed like a dream to the Chevalier; the utmost stretch of his vanity would not have pro¬ mised him such a triumph. She had often sung to him, and often had he hung over her song with the most absorbing rapture ; but he believed that now, for the first time, he heard that angel voice to perfection; and, in truth, the emotion of her heart as she sung the words of Wolfsteïn —words betokening a purified and repentant spirit, lent a tremulous magic to her music, such as it had never owned before. He ventured not yet to -.peak to her ; but his hand shaking with uudissembled agitation, he turned the leaves till he openeel them at a hymn, which he secretly considered the chef ď œuvre of his muse.
40
feé Do you wish me to sing it, Che¬ valier," said Louisa,·—Hemadeno answer, and, save with his eyes, he spoke not ; but the Baroness resumed the lute, and poured forth the selected strain with, if possible, improved brilliancy ; for the embarrassment with which she began had subsided, and she was become mistress of her powers—powers incalculably height¬ ened by devotional enthusiasm, mingled with the still softer feelings of human attachment. In short, song after song- was executed, till nearly the whole book was exhausted. To Louisa's heart that hour had provee! decisively fatal ; and, for the Chevalier, he would have bartered half his life for such a moment, which was rendered still more precious to him hy the unexpected curtailment ofthat suspense, which, how¬ ever confident he might be as to its ter¬ mination, he had prepared himself to endure some time longer. Again, as at Marchfeldt Castle, he became wholly ab¬ sorbed by one tyrannical sentiment, and
41
ali the subtlety of his nature was em¬ ployed id restraining the impetuous and premature expression of his intense ael- miration. The book was closed, and the pent up applause now burst its fetters, each expressing their delight in the cha* ractcristic language of the individual. The Baroness sate with downcast eyes, receiving the universal homage. '* For my part/' said the Empress to Wolfstem ; " I recommend you, Chevalier^ to let no voice destroy the impression tb iBaroness has left upon our hearts of your hymns—no other music can do them justice/* 4t No, madam/' said he, with undis¬ guised emotion, * c my own impulse is but seconded by your Majesty's suggestion ; —no other voice shall ever sing them !" " Baroness," said the Empress, " we must prevail on you to indulge us once again ; the Emperor must hear those hymns, anel we will meet here to¬ morrow evening/' iC Chevalier, look at this passage," said
42
Louisa, ťC I am not sure that I snive it the true expression. Did I not sing it somewhat too slow ?" Smother' ig in his own breast the joy which this little token of encouragement gave him, he approached, and bent over the book. iC Perfection, 1 ' murmured he, "must be lost on him who could find a fault in your delivery of that passage. You see, ma¬ dam. Professor Krantz was doubtful of the precise expression, and has left it ad libitum, but from henceforth there rem s s no doubt." His subdued air and faltering voice were skilfully employed ; Louisa found her firmness giving way,—she turned over the leaves of the book till she paused at a duet ;—" Is this equal to the rest^ Sir Warbeck?" asked she. ťC I believe, madam, Professor Krantz calls it the pride of the collection." " Then we wall try it, if you please, to-morrow evening." These few words were uttered in a
43
hurried voice, and without looking up, —."Madam,—pardon me,—I am not sure 1 understand you." <l We will sing this duet together, Wolfstein/ 1 And rising, she approached her Ma¬ jest ν with a petition that the sacred melodies might be entrusted to her care till the following evening, as she wished to pi actise them, in order that they might have every advantage in her power to give them on the morrow's performance : the request was promptly accorded, and the Empress whispered, u You are all I wish, Baroness ; your conduct this morning is no less honour« able to vour sense anel feel i η о* than to your talents—I would have no coquettes about me." Louisa blushed anel sighed; she felt but too powerfully tbe intimate cor¬ respondence which subsisted between the well-meant suggestions of her imperial mistress and her own weakness ; for,
44
while she found herself yielding to tlie latter, and creeping at every step closer to the brink of the precipice, her internal misgivings were not silent, and the secret voice was there with its incessant warning. Beware of Wolfsteïn. Her affection for this fearful being, or else the fatality which she believed persecuted her on his behalf, had now, as she expected it sooner or later would, gained the advantage over the cautious and practised coldness in which she had intrenched herself; she could not reflect without doubting, and therefore, arrived at this crisis, she re¬ solved not to think at all. cc It is plain/* said she to herself, cc that whether happiness or unhappiness awaits me from Wolfsteïn s hand, I must receive the cup." When the royal circle dispersed, the Chevalier, with the same modesty of de¬ meanour which had hitherto pleaded his cause so eloquently, offered to take her hand with well-dissembled fear that even
45
yet it might be repulsed ; but she per¬ mitted him to lead her to her equipage, and, as he did not mean to confine him¬ self to this tedious pantomime longer than necessary, he hazarded a slight pres¬ sure of her hand as he placed her in her carriage, and no apparent resentment was awakened by the presumption. Louisa spent many hours in singing over and over the hymns and anthems of Wolfsteïn, an exercise admirably cal¬ culated to drown the intruding thoughts which persisted to harass her. While she was thus employed, her venerable Con¬ fessor entered, and, being a warm amateur of sacred music, expressed his delight at thib unequalled collection. It was long since he hael heard the name of the author pronounced by her lips, and when in reply to his question she said, cc The words are by the Chevalier Wolfstein — the music by Professor Kran t ζ ;" he starteel and crossed himself! ťí Wolfsteïn !" he exclaimed, Ci Hol v Mother, what sacrilegious mockery !"
46
For, though his pure mind wa> on- soiled by the perusal of any of the works of this distinguished infidel, yet his brother ecclesiastics had made him acquainted with their tenor, and he was accustomed to hear them, by those with whom he associated, reprobated and denounced. c ' How, father," said Louisa, Ci surei \ it is not the gentle, pious Felix, who so glaringly deviates from his constant max¬ ims and general practice, as to condemn a fellow-mortal to hopeless reprobation. Woïfistcïn has seen and mourned over his errors, father, and these hymns are the fiiNt fruits of his bleFjed chance." Slie .selected one distinguished by its affecting pathos : " Read this, and afterwards doubt if you can ! Can the energy of tho»e ex¬ pressions come from a feigning spirit ?" őí In truth, my child," said the good man, evading her question, íť ifit be feign¬ ing, the serpent which deluded our first parents, and has since betrayed many oí their short-sighted race, hath a part m him."
47
li Methinks, father," observed Louisa, impatiently, (i your belief is less easy than it is wont to be, and your charity less spontaneous.—Little should I have expected from you this harsh and re¬ pulsive treatment of the returning pro¬ digal." tfc Thc Virgin forbid, my child, that I should diminish in mercy and charity, as the hour advances when I must need them for myself; but, recollect, that it was this man who first taught me to fear dissemblers." "Well, father, I iia\e not forgotten tlie past, nor have I rashly, or without examination, lent my belief to his con¬ version. While all others concurred to assist and encourage his happy reforma¬ tion, I alone stood aloof, and with chill¬ ing forbiddance held him at a distance, even to the displeasure of our gracious Empress." êî Haply, my child/' said Felix, calmh , ct her imperial Majesty knew not the cır-
4i8
cumstances which rendered it impossible for you to depart from your reserve to that man." " Oh, certainly," echoed the Baroness, ci it was impossible : but, as for nourishing implacable resentment, were I inclined to it, vou have taught me it is a crime." "My child/ exclaimed Felix, with mournful tenderness, " take care of tby - self It is not incompatible with any gospel precept for the lamb to mistrust the wolf." iC You are prejudiced, dear father ; tarry with me, and I will try," said she, smiling, " to mollify your spirit—you have certainly been poring over some oí the most crabbed of the fathers, and imbibing their gloomy severities ;—you have been amusing yourself with studying anathemas, interdicts, and excommunica¬ tions ? Is it not so ?" And with the pleading, coaxing playfulness of one who dare not trust her cause to argument, she drew his chair beside her, and relying on
49
the*" prevalent effect of harmony on the feelings of the good man, she soon wrapt his senses in that enthusiastic delight with which she knew the subject and the music would certainly inspire him. " Well/ said he, with a deep sigh, as she ended, "I trust it is real. He is the first convert whose sincere adoption of virtue I have ever presumed to doubt. The Virgin grant him truth and faith, and forgive my failure in charity !" And he devoutly kissed the Agnus which hung upon his bosom. Indeed he had little skill to defend himself against ap¬ pearances, and it was only his vigilant anxiety for the happiness of his beloved charge that supplied him with tact suf¬ ficient to pause for an instant on the reality of the Chevalier's vocation.
VOL, lib
в
50
CHAPTER III. *' Why, I can smile, and murder white I smile | And cry¿ content, to that which grieves my heart ; And wet my cheeks with artificial tears, And frame my face to all occasions. I can add colours to the cameleon ; Change shapes with Proteus > for advantages, And set the murd'rous Machiavel to school." The following evening, the same circle re?assembled in the apartments of the Empress, with the addition of his Imperial Majesty. Princess Stolberg, who deemed herself somewhat more secure when she learned how the attention of her pei- secutor was likely to be monopolized, ventured tojóin the assembly, and was in close waiting on her royal mistress, from whose side she was immoveable, in the hope of being protected from any repeti¬ tion of insult. Nevertheless the malice of
51
Wolfsteïn was of too subtle and per« vading a quality to be easily eluded ;— immediately on offering his duteous sa¬ lutations to his Sovereigns, he turned to her, and, with the softness of accent he so well knew how to assume, inquired after her health, and added, " Have you considered my advice, Princess ?" se How, Chevalier/' said Ferdinand, " do you number medicine amongst your various gifts ?" " May it please your Majesty, I pre¬ scribe sometimes for the fairer moiety of the creation, who take counsel with more docility than ours. My sweet friend has every claim on my gratitude— she was the first to hail the return of one who had too long wandered— she was my sponsor» and by her intercession I won my way to the feet of my gracious mistress. I can never forget," said he, with a look which no one, save the Princess, could inter¬ pret, " who was the first to lend her gentle credence to Wolfsteïn's sincerity."
52
Provoked by his barbarous mockery of her unfortunate credulity, she remained silent ; words of retort or resentment she dared not hazard, and others she would not deign to address to him. Louisa of Marchfèldt was somewhat surprised, and not altogether pleased, by the close and exclusive attention the Chevalier was paying to one whose wit and beauty had long constituted her the reigning belle of the court circle. She observed that his eye was riveted to her countenance, which underwent a succession of changes, with a strong but indefinable expression ; she recollected that Wolfsteïn had the pre¬ ceding day compelled her, with gentle force, to attempt his anthems ; and she began now to account, by a thousand strained conjectures,for the uncontrollable agitation which disabled her from con¬ tinuing the song, and obliged her to quit the assembly ; nor had she forgotten the words uttered long ago by Lindau, "To whom did he dedicate his verses ? For
53
whom did he bring honey from Mount Hymettus, if not for you, Princess?" Wolfstein was not blind to the cautious, stolen glance, which from time to time reconnoitred his position ; and, while he gratified his innate malignity on one victim, he rejoiced in the conviction that he was at the same moment more in¬ extricably entangling another in his net. He had, on the entrance of the Baroness, addressed to her a graceful, yet diffident bow, as if he had not confidence to pre¬ sume on the intercourse of yesterday; and, having so done, returned to his conversation with the Princess, in which the Empress occasionally mingled, and never, to appearance , cast a second glance towards her: but the Chevalier was bet¬ ter furnished both with eyes and ears than other men, and few things past near him which could escape his observation. At length, the Empress reminded him of the purpose which had assembled them, and, looking with an air of regret, which
54
he took care should be conspicuous, on Madame de Stolberg, he said, u I must leave you, and even the gra¬ tification ofa poet's vanity hardly repays me for the sacrifice." u No," said the Princess in a sup¬ pressed tone, " because your vanity, over¬ weening as it is, is secondary to your malice." He took up the lute, and approaching the Baroness of Marchfeldt, 5 * Her Ma¬ jesty, Madam/' said he, " has commanded me to request a repetition of your good¬ ness of yesterday/' e Nay, Chevalier/' said the Baroness, iC you know I acted but as the substitute for Madame de Stolberg ;—I am willing lo aid, but should be sorry to usurp." "Ab, ha! the poison works!" thought he: "But the Princess is indisposed, or she lacks skill, or she lacks kindness; for yes¬ terday her consent was only won by much importunity, and you witnessed the result of the essay. She is well aware
65
of the consolation which followed her retreat, and would not, I conceive, be easily tempted to provoke a comparison ; besides, I cannot break my vow,—no voice, save one, shall ever give breath to these words/' The performance w r as now repeated with undiminished excellence, and was followed by unqualified applause; still Louisa made no allusion to the duet, and Wolfsteïn waited with all the patience he could summon, in the hope of obliging her to be the first to propose it But when she requested him to return her lute into its case, he began to fear lest caprice or reflection might withhold from him the luxury whose anticipation had kept his eyes waking, and of which, at all hazards, he resolved not to be de¬ prived, the exquisite enjoyment of once more mingling his voice in the same strain with that of Louisa of Marchfeldt. " Pardon me, madam/' said he, " you are not wont to break your promises—at
56
least," reddening as he spoke, " not with¬ out an absolving cause; and the last words you uttered yesterday, in my hearing, were, * Wolfsteïn, we will sing this to¬ gether/ " He threw so much tenderness into the tone with which he repeated her words, that she blushed at the implication, and wondered and doubted if she had indeed so spoken them. Well might he be perfect both in the phrase and accent; for, since his ear had first received them, he had gratified himself a thousand times over with the repetition. The Baroness made no further attempt to evade the duet; and, although her heart and soul were nearly absorbed in the thought that she was once more mingling her tones with those of Wolf¬ steïn, that once more their eyes were tracing the same line, and that the icy band in which her affections had been confined was dissolving, perhaps never to freeze again, she could not forbear send-
57
ing a look of anxious inquiry towards the spot where Princess Stolberg stood at the elbow of her Sovereign, and was forcibly struck with the aspect of indignation with which that lady regarded the Chevalier, and nothing could differ more widely from the genuine reading of the text than her interpretation«, She was convinced that the Princess loved Wolfsteïn, and that her countenance was the index to a heart stung with jealousy, while in fact it did but speak the just aversion with which that lady beheld a hypocrite profaning, with his double-tongue, the praises of his Creator, and throwing into his practised features all the illumination of a soul kindled by religious feeling. The whole assembly, meanwhile, was too deeply absorbed by the thrilling strains which enwrapped their senses to detect the sentiment, and the only one who per¬ ceived the effect misconstrued the cause. When the duet concluded, the performers were each incapable of replying to the ώ 5
58
buzz of admiration that murmured around them. Even Wolfsteïn had lost his usual command of mind, and scarcely knew in what presence he stood. Love and his enchantments, at that moment, ruled him wholly : he was conscious, too, that his feelings were partaken ; and, bending over the book, he whispered,—" Louisa, is it not sw r eet to sing together ŕ" —She did not, even by a look, reply; but the effervescence of his spirits could not be restrained, and again he whispered,— " Louisa, shall we not always sing to¬ gether?—Promise me;—never sing with any man but Wolfsteïn !" " Chevalier,^ said she, with a serious and somewhat ambiguous air, " what are you talking of? Remember where you are, and replace my lute in its case, if you please." He obeyed in some confusion, not knowing exactly what to make of her, and, having performed her command, he returned to her side, and found her süli
59
turning the leaves of the book of anthems : " Have you yet, madam, detected any pla¬ giarisms?" She smiled ; tc Yes, Sir War- beck, a very flagrant one." " I cannot deny it, and throw myself on the mercy of the fair minstrel whose sweets I have borrowed. Do you re¬ member/ said he, faltering as he trod the dangerous ground,— ci do you re¬ member with what rapture I listened as you recited to me the beautiful para« phrase from which this passage is plun¬ dered ? It was on a mild, mournful, autumnal evening, as we wandered to¬ gether on the banks of the Raab !— That evening, it was a happy one ! Alas ! many an evil one has succeeded it~*- sorat; of storms and tumults, some of dreariness and desolation. Do you re¬ member the sprig of myrtle of which you permitted me that evening to rob your boucjuet ? It is still in existence,— it refused to grow,—but I preserved it as the memento of days never to be for-
m
gotten, and as an emblem of perished hopes ; for, it is dried up, withered, and discoloured." u Forbear, Sir Warbeck ! Is it for your advantage that you call up such images ? / would forget those days. My relaxation in reserve towards you, which accident solely has occasioned, has led you per¬ haps into a suspicion that I had forgotten them, and you are disinterestedly averse to my losing the profit of my experience ; for other motive you can have none, I presume, in recalling certain associations to my mind*" He was disconcerted, and would have given vent to his resentment, but dared not ; fcr he dreaded to protract his period of tedious probation by any premature sally. " I know not," said he, humbly, "how I have been betrayed into the commis¬ sion of this offence—we were speaking of the paraphrase. May I venture to observe that your enchanting lines, which
61
have hung like a spell upon my mind, first awakened my ambition to try my success in a similar attempt, and my imagination was so imbued by them, that it could not, as you see, divest itself of the impression—hence the theft whichyou so easily detected. Perhaps," added he, tr the frequent recurrence of my thoughts to that anthem produced within me something better than poetical inspiration. Perhaps, lady, the same being was de¬ stined to break my heart, and preserve my soul." Louisa was affected. u Oh V 9 thought she, " that I might be the instrument of happiness to both !" He had sounded the right key, and had penetration enough to discover as much. u Do you perceive, madam," said he, ťt that I have ventured to deviate some¬ what from your idea ? We differ, I think, on the construction of the passage, as it stands in the sacred volume ; but you have meditated much on these subjects. Had I not so miserably forfeited your
m
indulgence, I might now have been your pupil in the loftiest of all sciences, and you might be my guide and directress in that path from which I have so widely wan¬ dered,—the path of peace.—Perhaps you would not even yet refuse to explain to me the right signification of that sen¬ tence, which my ignorance of the subject has led me to construe erroneously." The Baroness was not insensible to this delicate flattery, though she answered with a smile, ci Upon my word, Chevalier, you have a curious idea of the best method of studying divinity. Have your metaphy¬ sics been acquired in a similar way ? I fancy not ; but, in truth, Chevalier, you must not look to the lips ofa young lady for your instruction in these solemn mat¬ ters. Search the commentaries of the fathers, who are likely to supply you with a surer clue to these mysteries." Wolfsteïn could hardly forbear a smile at the notion, how little Thomas Aquinas was calculated to assist him in his real
63
pursuits, but, resolved not to be foiled; —" Well, Baroness,' 1 said he, i£ if you will not have compassion on my ig¬ norance, at least permit him who taught you to teach mc—-the holy Felix. That good del man will reprove me gently, and, instead of using goad or spur, will leael me mildly forward ; just such a guide I want." The Baroness had long been aware of his uncharitable and prejudiced opinion of the majority of spiritual pastors, anel was not therefore surprised at his par¬ ticular election of Father Felix, the simpli¬ city and purity of whose life formed a beau¬ tiful comment on the doctrine he taucht. " But," said she, " what will your friend, Father Joseph, who has the credit of your conversion, say to your seeking another guide ?" " My conversion was the work of an angel, and not of a capuchin. If I wished for a commentary on Machiavel, I would apply to my reverend friend. Politics
64
are too much mingled with his dogmas to suit my purpose. The secular occupa¬ tions of Felix, as I have contemplated them, realize my notions of primitive purity ; and, when I have watched him training and binding up the flowers in your parterre, feeding your birds, or rocking the cradles of the village infants, I have been led to suspect that innocence might find harbour under a friar ? s cowl. If such a man deceives me, I have at least the consolation of knowing it is because he is himself deceived, and that I am not the victim of deliberate du¬ plicity/* " In the hope. Chevalier, that Father Felix will teach you better thoughts of his venerable fraternity, I will make him acquainted with your wish; and, if the strayed sheep is not secured to the fold, I will engage, at least, that he is not lost for want of a faithful shepherd." When Louisa was once more at home, she lost no time in seeking her confessor,
65
and imparting the office to which she had pledged him. Slie related the conversation Wolfsteïn had held with her on his pe¬ culiar qualifications for it. She suspected that even the meekest bosom may have some inlet for the insinuations of vanity, and she wisned, if possible^ to lu 1 ! to sleep, if she could not destroy, his doubts of the new proselyte's sincerity. But vanity, which dwells with all, dwelt not with him; or if he was vain, it was of his possession of a superior method of pruning vine 4 , and his singular success in the inoculation of village children, on five hundred of whom he had in the course of his mortal pilgrim¬ age happily performed the operation— a token of the favour of Providence on which he loved to descant as well as ever client loved to boast the countenance of an earthly patron, while the horror he entertained of being beset by the demon spiritual pride, made him repress with unfeigned aversion all encomiums on his sanctity. €i My child/* replied he meekly,
66
" what I know I will impart freely, and de¬ sire no greater blessing than to be elected the instrument of this youth's confirm¬ ation in virtue; but he has been a fla¬ grant setter at nought of all holy ordi¬ nances and precepts, and a severe and exemplary penance, patiently complied with, should be one of the first fruits of his repentance." The new convert was the sole occupant of Louisa's thoughts: her Bible was studied with renewed zeal, assisted by the com¬ mentaries of the most celebrated and or¬ thodox doctors of the Church, from whom she betook herself to extracting diligently such passages as suited her purpose, ab¬ breviating their endless sentences, and bending and softening the crabbed style into the harmony of her own periods— for she was deeply versed in the abstruse learning of the times, having shared her brother's studies, with a capacity far more fitted for their reception than her fellow- student; andas she now earnestly pored
67
over these dry volumes she blessed the education which had enabled her to go through her task, not only with ease, but ardour, The day following the one on which WolfsteïVs petition was made and granted, just as the Friar was about to go forth in search of him, he made his appearance at the Hotel Marchfeldt, and was con¬ ducted to the oratory of the holy man. Trusting to the simplicity of his con¬ fessor, he began the conference by pour¬ ing in his ears, with a grimace of contri¬ tion which he would not have hazarded in the presence of a more acute examiner, such a strange rhodomontade of faults and follies as perfectly confounded his pious auditor, who had never iu the whole experience of his office heard any thing similar. Many of the errors he recapitu¬ lated were of so whimsical and fantastical a nature, that Felix began to doubt the soundness of his convert's brain.—When he had with much patience listened to
68
the conclusion of this perplexing detail, he gently hinted the expediency of cer· tain acts of mortification, such as strict fasting, or temporary retirement within the walls of one of the most rigorous and self-renouncing orders. Then Wolfsteïn, to the infinite edification of the confessor, opened the bosom of his vest, and ex¬ hibited a cilique of the very coarsest tex¬ ture, tightly fastened round his body with rough iron hooks, whose blunt points could not fail severely to bruise and lacerate the flesh, at the same time declaring himself the passive subject of whatever inflictions the holy Felix might deem advantageous to his eternal welfare. The sight of the hair-cloth, and the sound of this humble concession, had a most mollifying effect on the gentle spirit whereon they were practised. Felix, who had a great aver¬ sion to the contemplation of suffering, with his own hand loosened the hooks which pressed so barbarously on his pe¬ nitent's bosom. However, he was from
69
experience induced to keep a check on the indulgence and suavity of his own nature, fearing lest by too much lenity he might injure the eternal hopes of his pupil, for the sake of sparing him a few days endurance. " My son," said he, <c I commend your conduct—-I slacken your habit of peni¬ tence a little, lest the hook might cause a dangerous wound on your bosom, and I might have as much trouble with your body as your soul; but I advise your en¬ trance for one month into a Carthusian monastery which I will select for you, and enjoin that during your residence therein you strictly and undeviatingly observe its rule." u Father," replied Wolfsteïn, " my venerable friend, Father Joseph of the Capuchins, with whom I have held much discourse, has already suggested to me the expediency of such retirement, and has named me to the superior of the convent of Brothers Penitents, under
70
whose charge he proposed placing me for the precise term you have named, but I would prefer being guided by your direction/' " By no means, my son. You will be well placed with the Brothers Penitents : —I know not the superior, but he is no doubt worthy of his important charge." Nothing, in short, could proceed more happily, or more amicably, than this first and decisive conference between Felix and Wolfsteïn, wherein the wolf succeeded completely in beguiling the shepherd. When verbal communications and admonitions were exhausted, the Friar produceel certain ponderous and formidable tomes, w herefrom he com¬ menced a lecture which, had his convert confessed all that was in his heart, he would have pronounced most insufferably fatiguing, and a very appropriate exor¬ dium to a scene of penance. While he sat smarting in his hair-cloth, and bear¬ ing as well as he could the tediousness
71
of Saint Chrysostom, &c. administered to him through the organs of Felix, the Baroness, who really was ignorant that this interesting interview had been thus long protracted, entered the oratory, with, " Well, father, what hopes elo you en¬ tertain of"—and seeing Wolfstein, was about to withdraw abruptly, when the lecturer, with a benign smile, cried, <c Stay, my daughter:—it will not harm you to listen to precepts which cannot be too diligently studied, nor too urgently enforced." Wolfsteïn rose from his stool and pre¬ sented it to the Baroness, and, as the ora¬ tory did not abound in furniture, remained standing ti!l the conclusion of the lec¬ ture. When it was over, Louisa apologized for an intrusion which appeared to her so indecorous. One of her errands to the cell was to consult the Friar respecting the extracts she had been employed on for the use of Wolfsteïn ; and he, accus-
72
tomed to perform the part of critic to his beloved pupil, guessed her design, and took them from her hand. " Your intention, my child/* said he, glancing over the first essay that met his eye, " is laudable, and I doubt not well executed : I know not whether this easy pleasant method of arriving at important truths be calculated to impress them on the memory, but your pious labours shall not be lost, my child. " Here, my son," and he presented them to Wolfsteïn, Cŕ study these when your leisure serves not for more extended labours;—they will not prove a painful exercise, and will serve you as relaxation during your abode with the Brothers Penitents." The Baroness cast an inquiring glance at the convert, marvelling if she heard correctly, and that this wilful, head¬ strong being had really consented to par¬ take the humiliations and macerations of this most austere and inflexible order.
73
The benign and thankful aspect of Felix answered all the mute questions she ad¬ dressed to it satisfactorily. Wolfsteïn was taciturn, and looked sorrowful ; his cheek underwent such changes of colour, and there was so much anguish in his eyes } as, finished actor as he was, he could scarcely have assumed ; and the Baroness, who was not in the secret of the hair shirt, attributed the visible uneasiness to compunction for his many faults, and shame at this first confession of them. She endeavoured therefore in vain to re¬ vive and encourage his evidently fainting spirits ; but even her enchanting voice and healing smile were unsuccessful. Having left a most favourable impression on those whom it was his object to deceive, he joyfully escaped, cursing internally his uneasy garment, for he was endued with small physical fortitude, although the ample and various resources of his mind enabled him to conceal the deficiency. He arrived at his own hotel in little better vol. ni. e
74
temper than Hercules when he felt the fatal gift of Deianira clinging around him, but, happier than the demi-god, he di¬ vested himself, without a moment's delay, of the cause of his torment, which he trampled furiously beneath his feet, and then betook himself to anointing the lace¬ rations inflicted on his body by the iron clasps. This he swore should be the sole corporeal penance which his speculations should cost him; at the same time ex¬ hausting himself in execrations on the ideotic fanaticism of Father Felix, nor did the fascinating cause of this voluntary smart escape her share of malediction. On the evening of that day, the con¬ fessor, who began to take a restless interest in his convert, sought him at his home; being the bearer of a small golden cru¬ cifix, exquisitely wrought, from the Ba¬ roness, accompanied by a gift from him- " self of a rosary of agate beads, of which he expected incessant use would be made when his convert should be established
75
among the Brother Penitents; not for¬ getting a small vial containing a liquid, meet for the soothing and healing of such wounds as the patient might produce by his self-chastisement ; for he did not ques¬ tion, that besides the cilique and its hooks being worn habitually, till the penance was finished, that a few lashes from a knotted cord would be occasionally re¬ sorted to by the penitent, as a stimulant to his contrition. Nothing could be more consolatory or affectionate than the ad¬ monitions of the good Father; who did not in the least deem it necessary, in the present exigency, to enjoin practices of rigour and mortification,—so impressed was he with the idea that his beloved convert was inclined rather to exceed than fall short of his wishes on the sub. ject ; and, after a conference, which Wolf. stein was delighted to see draw to its close, he took leave of him, pouring on his head a torrent of prayers and benedictions. No one who has a peep behind the E 2
76
mask can suppose that Wolfsteïn har¬ boured the slightest thought ofa visit to the pious fraternity whither Felix be-* lieved him bent. He knew that the su¬ perior, though enveloped in the cloak of sanctity, was a crafty, ambitious, covet¬ ous man ; he had been the trusty agent of many a manœuvre of Father Joseph's, and, w 7 ith two such admirab)e coadjutors, nothing could be easier than to evade the lulled penetration of the simple, credulous Felix. It might seem, that a whole month's exile at the present period from the sunshine of the Lady of March- feldťs smiles w 7 ould, in itself be an insup¬ portable penance to so impetuous a lover as Wolfsteïn ; but this very impetuosity he so well appreciated, and so greatly dreaded, that even had it not proved ne¬ cessary to the furtherance of his schemes, he would have invented some motive for a temporary disappearance from court. His temper was furious, and by no means at all times within the curb of his own
77
will: during his residence at Marchfeldt, the presence of Louisa had repeatedly proved insufficiënt to restrain Ins intem¬ perate and brutal sallies ;—the deception it now behoved him to practise required the utmost stretch of his patience and address, and he rejoiced to escape for a while where he might breathe freely, without the incumbrance of his irksome vizor.
78
CHAPTER IV. " Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers ¿ Not ofthat dye which their investments show/' Hamlet. The ostensible cause of WoifsteiVs retirement was soon murmured amongst the court circle, some of whose members were inexpressibly edified thereby; and Father Joseph, who enjoyed the credit of having worked this miracle, was con¬ sidered by them as a fit object for canon¬ isation. In the number of the credulous and confiding were both the Erde h-nms, from their habit of believing, without ex¬ amination, whatever was believed by the Imperial pair whom they so faithfully served. Westermann gave it credence from an innate disposition to faith, hope, and charity : Madame de Rosebeck, be¬ cause she declared it was the most inter-
79
esting thing imaginable to contemplate the dawnings of sanctity; and that, were it usual for female penitents to do pe¬ nance in a convent of monks, she would, for the sake of making her observations on the spot, seize that opportunity to pay a visit of mortification to the Friars Peni¬ tents ; more especially as it was long since she had found time for any similar ex¬ ercise, and, " You know/' said she, " one really accumulates, without thinking of it, such a host of peccadilloes, one's bosom gets as full of cobwebs as a philosopher's apart¬ ment·" Princess Stolberg, and Ulrica of Lindau, were a robably the only females at court who were not deceived : the one he had scarcely attempted to impose on, satisfied that he had in his hands the means to ensure her silence ; the other had calmly watched him and his changes, and, comparing her own observations with those wafted around her from so
80
many mouths on the same inexhaustible theme, she was internally persuaded that the materials for composing a genuine saint \vere not in Wolfsteïn. The m«'u, except those who were habitually devi .., or those candid characters who had for ever renounced the practice of doubting of any matter, however difficult to swallow, not only questioned the miracle, but shrugged their shoulders, and laughed openly at the facility of those who had more faith« Baron Rosebeck of course was amongst the loudest laughers j and his risibility was the more heartily in¬ dulged as he reflected, that Casimir of Vallensteïn having joined a troop of ban» ditti, the Margrave of Lindau being em¬ ployed in facing the cannon of Gustavus, and Wolfsteïn seeking his amusement among the Brothers Penitents, in short, all the admired youth, who had crossed him in his vanities and eclipsed him with the courtly fair, being dispersed by va¬ rious motives in various directions, had
81
left the field of gallantry open to him, with scarcely a competitor. The Empress found but little difficulty in winning from the lips of the Baroness a confession of the softened state of her feelings towards Wolfsteïn, and even an avowal, that should his attachment re¬ main unaltered, she would not discourage the expression of it, since the ground of her reluctance existed no longer. In fine, it was not denied, that she looked forward as the certain climax of her fate to a union with him.— She was persuaded, that not a single doubt respecting him ought yet to survive, and wondered what strange and indescribable pang it was, and whence born, which would ever and anon shoot through her heart, whenever she allowed herself a glance to the future. Spring was now far advanced ; and the period arrived when the Imperial family and the nobles of the household usually prepared for a removal to the delightful summer residence at Lintz. But the un» e5
82
settled, precarious state of the country, overrun, not only by regular troops, but by armed bands of marauders, scattered throughout Germany in formidable num¬ bers, made it a matter of prudence to relinquish for this year so long a journey ; although the Duke of Friedland had written to encourage the Emperor to the under¬ taking, and offered to send a sufficient detachment to serve as an escort, in ad¬ dition to his Majesty's guards.—This pro¬ posal was graciously declined, and it has been rumoured, that Ferdinand had se¬ cretly received intimation, that a subtle, and almost infallible combination of schemes was laid for the surprisal of his person; theintelligencebeingaccompanied by the most pathetic and solemn entreaty from his unknown monitor, not for this year to hazard the journey to Lintz. However this may be, it is certain that the usual trajet had been in contemplation, but that all preparations were suddenly arrested.
S3
Wolfsteïn's month of penance was ex¬ pired, and on his return to Vienna, it was the universal remark, that a peculiar blessing must have hovereel over him, since, in despite of severities scarcely inferior to the voluntary and self-inflicted martyrdoms of elder days, in defiance of rigorous fasts, broken only by pulse, black bread, and water, in spite of hair-cloth and hooks, of vigils and weepings, a strict account of which was registered on the records of the convent, and copied as α certificate for his own private use, he was neither lean nor care-worn, his cheek had not wasted with abstinence, nor were his eyes dimmed by such torrents of tears, nor such persevering watchfulness. In short, both his health and his beauty seemed repaired and brightened by his retirement· He was now welcomed by the Baroness with undisguised favour, and as he had washed his character pure from the stains of infidelity and libertinism, he deemed it no longer necessary, as during
84
his noviciate in virtue, to bear about with him those externals of sanctity, which were inconvenient and cumbrous: since from this time forth he had established, with all sorts and conditions, his reputation as a very exemplary youth, andali that now appeared requisite to his ultimate success was to persevere a little longer in denying himself those sallies in which it had been his nature and his pride to indulge. He had promised and vowed te himself, that his probation should end here, and that he would brook no farther delay in re» ceiving the reward, for which he had sub¬ mitted to so irksome a task, or, to speak his own language, to which the whims of a woman had compelled him. At his second interview with Louisa after his return from the convent, he urged his suit so successfully^ that the prize which had formerly so suddenly slipt from his grasp was now again within his reach. The sister of Wilhelm answered his ardent declara¬ tion by yielding her hand to Iks, saying,
85
eť It is yours, Wolfstein." After having exhausted his store ot rapturous eloquence, his spirits suddenly drooped, and a mournful expression took place of the transport, which had a mo¬ ment before illumined his features. " What uneasy thought intrudes itself on our happiness, Wolfstem —Tell me 0,> u Once before," said he, smiting his forehead, u once before, the same ecstacy filled my heart, the cup was at my lip, when a sudden blow struck it from my hand, and the transition from bliss to miserv was instantaneous—once açain the same vicissitude may happen !'* cc Impossible ! There is now nothing to fear, because there Ís nothing to dis¬ cover/' '- You, Louisa, may be tranquil, it is your nature—but for me, remembrance hoots in my ear like a night bird,—I cannot silence it ! No, my Louisa, till that knot is tied, which no hand may dissever^ røy hours will be hours of restlessness!
86
Do you not love your Warbeck well enough to abridge this term of cruel sus¬ pense ?" i( What a wayward, unreasonable ani¬ mal is man !" exclaimed the Baroness : ζί I had flattered mvself, that the words I have just uttered would make you happy, and for a short moment they did so ; but the cloud is returned alreadv ! Well, Wolfsteïn, all my future life is jours ;—once resolved, I will not cavil for a few hours or days. Obtain a private audience of her Imperial Majesty,—ask her gracious approbation of our union,—and then, be it as you will." The consent of theEmpresswassolicited as a mere form, and most freely grant¬ ed : the Chevalier then imparted to her Majesty the anxious presentiments which tormented him, and which had impelled him to wrest from the Lady of Marchfeldt an acquiescence in their almost immediate union. The Empress laughed. " You are an artful wretch, Wolfsteïn,"
87
she said ; " your presentiments are a mere manœuvre, —I am sure of it." It was not necessary to his purpose to combat this accusation. Therefore, after having settled that the nuptials should be celebrated within the week in the cathedral church, in the presence of the Imperial pair, he hastened to disclose the arrange¬ ment at the Erdenheim Palace, and pay his duty to the uncle and aunt of his bride elect ; likewise to agree with the former concerningcertain legal transactions which were indispensable preliminaries. When the Empress, with infinite satis¬ faction, related to Princess Stolberg the union about to take place, she starteel in humane concern for the untoward destiny of a woman, whom, though she loved not, having considered her from the first hour of her appearance at court in the light of a rival, she coulel not behold led to the sacrifice without a deep and heartfelt sen¬ timent of compassion. The Empress did not notice the little sympathy her lady of
88
the key exhibited, in her gladness, since of late she had been accustomed to see her ever grave and thoughtful; but Princess Stolberg was haunted by the most sinister forebodings respecting the fate of the Baroness. The idea pursued her incessant¬ ly, that she, who was privy to the late deceptions of Wolfsteïn, would, if she forbore to warn his hapless victim in time to avert her menaced lot, be an accessary in her destruction» Still she darednotstand openly forward and unmask the villain, for, besides her horror of his vengeance, she knew his ' exhaustible stores of arti¬ fice, and felt assured, that he would easily foil an avowed enemy. Meanwhile time lapsed, and the eve of the eventful day was arrived. Wolfsteïn had omitted no proof of manly tenderness or delicate con¬ sideration towards his worshipped bride ; his preparations were suitable and mag¬ nificent. The Archbishop had requested to perform the ceremony, but Sir War- beck insisted on holding the claims of the
89
pious Felix inviolable; nor could he, by any other compliment, have spoken more home to the feelings they were meant to gratify. Immediately after the perform¬ ance of the ceremony, the happy pair were to proceed to the Chevalier's castle in Austrian Dalmatia, accompanied by the confessor. The evening before the marriage was spent by the Baroness alone in her oriel, and dedicated to elevotion ; and Sir War- beck, who had still some business to trans¬ act with her uncle, remaineel late at the Erdenheim palace ; thereby escaping the well meant persecutions of Father Felix, who had very earnestly invited him to a second dose of Saint Chrysostom. How¬ ever the eagerness of the good man on this subject was appeaseel by the Cheva¬ lier's remark, that they might consume whole evenings iu such stuelies, when once established at his retreat among the moun¬ tains. As Barbara sat waiting in the apartment aeijoining the oriel, where her
90
lady was devoutly supplicating a blessing on the awful change on which she wa s about to enter, the contemplations of the favourite woman, who was feedingher gaze with the rich robe and costly jewels spread forth in preparation for the morning, were interrupted, as a tap at the door announced an intruder. Barbara rose and opened it, with the intention of denying entrance to whomsoever it might be, but her design was frustrated, for a laely, veiled from head to foot, without allowing her time to speak, passed into the apartment, and having once secured admission, inquired for the Lady of Marchfeldt. "Really, madam/' said Barbara, much chagrined, u I wonder how you can ex- pect mylady to receive visitors this even- ins:, when she is to be married to-morrow morning !—I don't believe there is an atom of consideration left in the world,— not I ! My lady is in her oriel, and may be there, for aught I can tell, these two hours to come—and as for me, / find it no joke
91
to have my meditations broken in upon, by one does not know who !" The Baroness, surprised that her do¬ mestic had so little respect for her devo¬ tions, rose with the intention of chiding her and enforcing silence, and was much perplexed on beholding her veiled visitor, who advanced to meet her, saying, " Madam, I have a few words of im¬ portance to address to you,—I will not intrude long. Only have the courtesy to command your woman to withdraw/' The former interruption hael impressed itself as deeply on Louisa's mind as on that of Wolfsteïn, anei she shuddered as she asked herself what might be the motive of tins strange and unseasonable visit: she trembled ν iolently, and observed that the stranger partook her agitation. €C Pardon mc, madam/' said she, in a subdued voice, " if I ask whether you were not once deceived by him with whom you are now on the eve of union ?" íť That/' replied Louisa, i( is a subject
92
laid for ever at rest in my bosom, and it is no friend who would awaken it/* " Well, madam, I must however hazard one more question-—Would you prefer blindly to deliver yourself up the victim of a second deception, or would y ou thank the voice which brings you timely warning ? The being with whose destiny yours will be in a few hours for ever entangled is an artful villain ; his late conversion is a mise¬ rable farce, and, if you do not listen to me—if you do not consent to pause ere it is too late, you will open your eyes on realities too severe to contemplate calmly, even as the lot of a fellow creature,—I have no motive on earth—Heaven is my witness—but your preservation! Will you, lady, listen calmly to such facts as are in my power to reveal? I will not detain you long;" The Baroness paused— <c Doubtless, you do not object that the accused should be confronted with the accuser-.—produce your charge to the face of Wolfsteïn, and I will hear it.**
93
« No,—I cannot! Were I to do so, I should become a defenceless mark for the whole concentrated fury of the most ma¬ lignant, the most implacable of mankind. —No, }ou must consent to hear me, and engage never to betray me." At this moment an inflexion in the voice of the stranger revealed her, in spite of her precautions, to Louisa, who was immediately satisfied that the whole transaction hael jealousy for its motive« Her mind became instantly reassured, and she mentally thanked Providence that she had not } ielded up her confidence in hei intended spouse at the instigation of a disappointed rival. <ς Since you do not aequie&ce in mv proposal, lady," she said, " you must not accuse me of discourtesy if I decline to listen to} our narrative. I should cruelly insult the man to whom I have pledged myself, were I to suffer his honour to rest on the breath ofa veiled accuser/' u Alas, madam ! This is not the first
94
time you have reposed your hopes on his faith and honour, even when hewas prac¬ tising on you the basest imposture/' ci You avail yourself adroitly, madam, of your knowledge of past events; but be assured, that the only fruit derivable from this visit are a few banished recollections, vainly and most unseasonably conjured up." ^ " Well !" said the veiled stranger, mournfully/' I have risqued much for your preservation—Is it indeed fruitless ? Fare¬ well then, and may good angels soften, at least, the calamities which may not be averted !" The Baroness, more agitated than she wished even to acknowledge to herself, curtsied in silence, and not without cu¬ riosity as to the nature of the allegations to which she had refused to listen, beheld her depart. Barbara now entered. iC Upon my word," she exclaimed, " there is no end to interruption ! If there is not Conrade, ofall people in the world.
95
—and, who being your ladyship's maître d'hotel, ought to have more discretion, must needs speak a little word to his lady at this hour ! And for your ladyship to look at him at such a time of night is sure to give you bad dreams ; for what ails the fellow I know no*, but he stares, and looks so wild and pale—I declare he is fitter for any thing than a bridal proces¬ sion/' u Where is Conrade?" " Pacing the gallery, my lady/' The Baroness hael observed that this faithful domestic hael as much as possible avoided her presence since her engage¬ ment to Wolfsteïn was become public, and could but too well divine the matter of his discontent. It was therefore with great reluctance she prepared for the interview. " Well, Conrade," said she, ťí what is your business ?" " My lady," he replied, weeping bit¬ terly, u I am arrived at an hour such as I
96
hoped never to have seen !—I have dream¬ ed these three nights of my dear master, rest his precious soul !—I have seen him many a time look sad enough when he was alive, but never as he looked yester¬ night :—he pointed to some object behind me, and shook his head ;—I turned to see what it was, and there stood the hag of the wood of Mornau, who screamed with a loud and horrible laugh, u The wolf has secured the lamb ľ* I waked in cold per¬ spiration; the echo of the words, and the laugh, were still ringing in my ears." " Conrade, you presume too much on the favour in which I have ever held you since you accompanied my dear brother from the army.—Your conduct is harass¬ ing and disrespectful ; nevertheless, for the sake of the past, I overlook it thus far." " For the sake of the past, lady—for the sake of the past, I must bid you farewell ! —I cannot serve him whom my master hated.—Oh ! how I have seen that poor
97
wan cheek flush at his very name!—and this was the very thing he dreaded !— Alas ! my lady, I am come to tell you that Conrade will pray for you so long as he has breath.—I was born in your castle, and I love the very stones of it, and every bit of moss that cleaves to the old wails, but I shall see it no more." a Conrade," said the Baroness, in great agitation, " you would not leave me! Whither would you go?" i( To seek after him whom I love, be¬ cause my master loved him, the unhappy, circumvented Count Vallensteïn." " Conrade, I will not part with you! You, the foster brother of my Wilhelm! No, I cannot part with you ! You shall not desert me, Conrade !" His honest feeling coulel not resist the pleading of his lady, of Baron Wilhelm's sister; and finding himself somewhat re¬ lieved by the vent he had given his full heart, and grateful for the attachment his mistress evinced towards him, he con- vol. πι.
98
sented to remain in her service; stipulating only, not to enter the cathedral during the ceremony of the following morning. Two such interviews were not calculated to tranquillise the mind of the Baroness, and it was with difficulty she put to silence the sinister thoughts they awakened. No other warning, no other intervention oc¬ curred ; and the hour arrived, and passed, which was to decide her fate irrevocably.
99
CHAPTER V. ŕí Come, let me wring your heart I for so I shall, Ifit be made of penetrable stuif !" The ceremony which united Louisa, Baroness of Marchfeldt, to the Chevalier Warbeck of Wolfstein, was performed with all imaginable solemnity : a royal hand gave away the bride, and the Arch¬ bishop of Vienna, although he did not tie the knot, mingled his benedictions with those of Father Felix. Madame de Wolfsteïn imagined, that immediately on quitting the cathedral they should repair to the palace, to partake a farewell collation provided by the Empress; but it now appeared that Wolfsteïn had arranged otherwise, and had excused himself to the Imperial pair, on the plea of gaining such a station, on the conclusion of their first f2
100
day's journey, as would offer meet accom¬ modation ; and to effect which would render it necessary for them to push for¬ ward with all speed. These excuses had been reluctantly accepted, and the Empress, with tears and blessings, em¬ braced, and bade a long adieu to the bride. Madame de Wolfsteïn's conscious¬ ness of the efiect Princess Stolberg's warning and Conrade's grief had pro¬ duced on her mind caused her to struggle powerfully, and successfully, against the slightest exhibition oi 7 agitation, well knowdng she had a jealous, tenacious spirit to study; and such washer self- command, that neither sigh nor tear escaped her, till the tenderness of her Imperial friend for a moment shook her firmness. The bridegroom forbore to betray his impatience of their prolonged and reiterated adieus, and when they were over, with all due courtesy, handed the Empress, and such of the noble ladies as had graced his nuptials, to their several
ιοί
equipages. Then he returned for his bride ? and, with a slight bow to the Archbishop, who remained in conversation with her, said abruptly, drawing her arm some¬ what ungenti ν within his— sť Come ! shall there be no end to this execrable nonsense ?" A costly veil shaded her eyes, and flowed over her figure, so that whatever consternation her countenance might have revealed at this rude summons was hidden, a«, rather dragged than led, she arrived at her carriage: while she entered it, the Chevalier supported her on one side, and one of his 'principal domestics on the other. Too much absorbed bv her own awful situation, she did not ob- observe the man, till she heard a hoarse voice croak out, u All happiness to the fair bride of Wolfsteïn Γ The accent was very familiar to her ear, and she started with a half-suppressed shriek, as, looking round, she beheld, in the livery of her husband, the too well
102
remembered features of the hag of the Wood of Mornau. " Heyday ! what is the matter now ?" cried the surly bridegroom. " Surely, surely, I have seen that man before; I cannot be mistaken." " Oh, is that all ? Here, hone . Scha¬ raffa; thy lady rejoices in the sight of an old acquaintance ;—she offers thee her fair hand to kiss/' As he spoke, he snatched the reluctant hand, and compelled it to undergo the salute of that hideous mouth : the car¬ riage now proceeded. To the grief and wrath of his insulted wife, Wolfsteïn was alike insensible; and, in an ironical tone, he complimented her on the tact in dis¬ tinguishing that man with her favour. " Scharaffa," said he, " has not his fel¬ low on earth. His body is perfection, and his soul is the counterpart !— You have witnessed some specimens of his dexterity. Oh, I would rather cut off my right arm than part with him/'
103
Meanwhile, the unhappy Madame de Wolfsteïn sate wondering if the events of this morning were real, or only the wanderings ofa fearful dream ! She was too much stunned and bewildered to think clearly; and it was well nigh an hour since they had passed the gates of Vienna, and the silence on her part continued unbroken, and was likewise uninterrupted by her companion, save that he whistled or hummed, occasionally, parts of different songs. At length he cried out, suddenly, " Bless my soul ! this is our first day of honey-moon—we should be merry. If we look so sullen to-day, what shall we do next year ? Come, kiss me, my pretty bride!" And he rudely snatched the boon, without waiting to have it yielded. "What! you are not in the cue for talking !—Then you shall be indulged, for you will make the better listener, and I have a few little matters to relate
104
to you. I wonder/' said he, with a diabolical laugh, " what my old friend the Spectre Knight would say, if he could guess what we have been about this morn« ing,—if he had seen his incomparable sister give her hand to the man ne de¬ tested, and his saint ofa Confessor rati¬ fying and blessing the deed. He must sleep sound, if such intelligence provoke him not to burst his marble box.«—I trust he will not have the barbarity to haunt you, Louisa/' " Oh, Wolfsteïn," said she at length, goaded from her silence,, " art thou hu¬ man, thus to treat a woman who has confided herself to thy manhood ?" "Confided, say you, my dear! You forget then what a dance you have led me ; you forget that you hunted me like a dog out of the Castle of Marchfeldt ; you forget the hair-shirt, and the anthems, and the brothers penitents, and the whole farrago of grimaces and hypocrisies you have compelled me to practise ! Have
105
I not been obliged to cheat you, step by step, into this ? And talk you of confidence ! No, no, madam ; you may forget, but I shall remember." A pause succeeded, and was not again broken till they arrived at a post-house; and Conrade, who iiad hitherto remained with the hindmost of the train, now rode to the side of the eairia^e, and endea- voured to articulate some dutiful com¬ pliments to his lady, but he looked deadly pale, and so agitated, that Madame de Wolfsteïn perceived at a glance, that the same inauspicious omen which had opened her eyes to all the horrors of her fate had been observed by her faithful servaut. The moment Conrade saw and recognised Scharaffa, he devoutly thanked Heaven, which had withheld him from abandoning his mistress. ťe Ah, Co n rade, my good fellow," crieel the Chevalier, * c I must shake hands with thee, as an earnest of the pleasure with f5
106
which I number so honest a youth amongst ray domestics." Con rade hesitated, but a look from his unhappy lady determined him ; and, alarmed for the consequences his too visible agitation might produce, she em¬ ployed him to provide her with a glas of water. When the cavalcade once more set forward, Wolfsteïn said, " You see, my love, yen are fortunate in escaping the endurance of the tedious, vulgar routine of wedded life !—You have chosen a man in nothing like other men ;—my motives and my measures are all original—there are millions of men and only one Wolfsteïn. Love, or avarice, or ambition, are the first motives of most marriages ; my first stimulus to the pur¬ suit of you was hatred. Your brother's insane aversion for me, and my own antipathy to young Vallensteïn, were my provocations, long before your at¬ tractions furnished additional ones. Your
107
brother's mind was irritable and fanciful, and I wrought on it till all the dark chimeras of superstition were associated with my image ;—I fretted him nearly into madness, and my trusty Scharaffa completed the achievement. Nowmark* and applaud my skill in woman's nature. My whole scheme rested on the specula¬ tion, that you, in spite of rumour, were no phœnix, and that the perverseness of your sex was in you. I knew that the weak and feverish Wilhelm would amuse you incessantly, with the diableries his fancy had conjured up respecting me;— I knew he would warn you of Wolfsteïn, and that Wolfsteïn's name rinsfino: con- о о tinually on your ear, would at length find its echo on your mind. You had heard of humanity and valour before, and had read of them in romances, but, for such a one as Wilhelm described me, you knew no parallel. He had the weakness too to tell you, that he feared our de¬ stinies were some way entangled : thus
108
superstition aided the native contradic¬ tion of your sex. In short, my ground was sure,—was it not, love ?" "Remember, however, Sir Warbeck/* said Louisa, indignantly, " that it was in the character of Vallensteïn you were received at Marchfeldt, and that the mo¬ ment your imposture was discovered you were driven thence." "Trust my recollection, Madame de Wolfsteïn;- —-you shall have many a token that I ha v e not forgotten it/' " You are so communicative, sir," said the bride rendered desperate by tlie in¬ sults which her brutal spouse had, in so short a time, heaped upon her, " that I fear not to hazard a repulse, if I inquire whether the tale related by your valet to my woman was genuine, er the produce of your ingenuity?" c< As masterly and effective a ma-» nceuvre, madam, as any i u the whole train. I could almost have renounced my nature, and pitied the man I hated,
109
for the reception he was doomed to meet after his valorous rescue of you from the hands of my trusty Zingari, but that his officious interference drove me to the invention ofa new set of stratagems, just at the moment when I might have se¬ cured vou for ever. Vallensteïn, in his way, stands like myself, single iu the creation : iie is my antipodes. He is romantic, honourable, zealous, affection¬ ate, according to the most exaggerated acceptation of all those terms, but the odds were against him! Your brother, your angel Wilhelm y besought you, with his dying voice, to receive Vallensteïn for your husband ; and all the glorious contradiction of uoman was enlisted on my side." We may better imagine than enu¬ merate the thousand pungent self-up- braidings, which conspired on all sides to goad and lacerate the heart of this unfortunate bride. Iler L other's solemn warning disregarded, her own experience
110
set at nought, a long list of evidences, ex¬ tending even to the last moment that her fate was in her own power, despised and rejected; nor was the consciousness of her infatuated ingratitude to a being, such as even his direst enemy had described Vallensteïn, the least bitter of those remorseful feelings to which she now delivered herself up. u Now do not be too angry with your¬ self, my dear ; for destiny seems to have as capricious and froward a choice of favourites as any young lady in the land. There is poor Vallensteïn, driven out, a forlorn and desperate wanderer^ disowned by his father, in disgrace with his sove¬ reign, calumniated by the world, because it is his whim to be virtuous : he has not sufficient filial piety to become a traitor, although his parent is one, and w r anted ingenuity for the invention of a few lies, so he left court without an excuse. He was born with every auspicious promise that ever whispered round a babes cradle*,
Ill
but his virtue has thwarted his natal star. I was the last of a decayed and ruined house; desolate and joyless was the hour of my birth ; but my genius has triumphed, my sovereign trusts me, the beguiled world smiles on me, my wealth is con¬ siderable, my power tremendous,—-and the Baroness of Marchfeldt, Wilhelm's sister, is my wife," Still she preserved her melancholy silence, and the Chevalier longed to pro¬ voke her to some retort and upbraiding; for, as she drew her veil close over her face, and neither spoke nor wept, he could not with all his penetration discover the exact extent to which his poison worked, and was thereby defrauded of part of his diabolical enjoyment.-—-At length, tc Louisa, love," said he, fis do you never weep ? Brides always shed a few tears as a matter of custom.—Don't stand on ceremony with me, I pray!" " No, Sir Warbeck,— my sorrows are
112
too deeply Jodged for tears or sighs to relieve them. Whatever I suffer shall be endured without complaint; I have been a wilful, an iniatuated self-destroyer. I have no right to such relief as tears bestow/' "Well, you are a stout-hearted girl, and I honour your resolution !-—I could have had torrents of tears by this time, had I married any other woman in Ger¬ many,—So, we are to have no scenes! Since that is your determination, lady, it is well I have provided my castle of Lornberg with guests, or we should be consumed with ennui. I wish you would talk," said he, yawning; " I am weary of the sound of my own voice, melodious as it is. Do talk ! í command you to talk, madam !—And what ! Do you suppose your face is your own, that you wrap it up from the view of its master in that frippery !" And snatching the magni¬ ficent point mantle which enveloped her, and which was the gift of the Empress,
113
he rolled it into a bundle and threw it into the road. " Upon my soul," said he, " I believe I have wedded an automaton 1" " If you mean to compel me to tears or exclamations, Chevalier, I repeat that your efforts are vain. Every insult you have offered me I deserve ; your conduct is but the just retribution of mine. You are become, by my own voluntary elec¬ tion, my earthly master; I will not resist your right over me, nor weakly struggle to retract my irrevocable gift;—it is only in proportion as I meekly endure your outrages, that I can hope to be reconciled with Heaven or with myself." iC So you defy me, madam !" " No, Sir Warbeck ; on the contrary, your will shall in all things direct my obedience ; I will never thwart or oppose you. Say what you will, do what you will, you shall find no contradiction from me/ " Well, you are a gem of a wife. I
114
should be a churl to deny it ;—and yet it seems strange, that on this our wedding day we should have spent,"—and he looked deliberately at his watch,—" four whole hours, and you have been so hard¬ hearted as never to address a single caressing word to your own poor Wolf¬ steïn. —You don't love me, Louisa. Where is your heart, madam ? It is mine ! Have yoıi dareei dispose of it elsewhere, or do you sulkily keep it at home ? Where IS lt? "It is so crushed and broken, Che¬ valier, it is scarcely worth your inquiry/' " Such as it is, however, it is mine,-—is it not? Speak !" " In evil hour, Chevalier," said she, evading his question, "you beguiled me of it." " Oh, then, you mean to say it is mine ; that all its fancy, all its affection resides with me—Is that what you would say ?" " What I would have said." " Oh, then, you are trifling with me, it
115
seems, quibbling, and manoeuvring, and dealing in your verbal subtleties ; but you have met with your equal there—I will not be beaten from my point. Do you love me ? Would you, were the knot unknit that binds you to me, again select Wolfsteïn from the world ? I forbid yonr evasions, madam—speak to the point/' '* Chevalier, you cannot question the nature of my sentiments for you at this moment—I appeal to yourself! When I gave my hand to you this morning, I did love you with my whole heart ; I did choose you from the whole world. Judge yourself what change four hours have been capable of working." She uttered these words in a subdued voice, for she did not desire to irritate. " Do you love me, madam ?" exclaimed he, seizing her wrist, and grasping it with such force as to make the impression of his fingers, " I ask, do you love me? Speak to the point." "If," said she, trembling, "it will
116
content you that I should utter the tcords, 1 love you, I will do it, for I have pro¬ mised implicit obedience." " Oh ho, madam ! Do you know what you are? Do you know that a wife who does not love her husband is quilt ν of t.eason, peijury, and adultery? A pretty harsain I have made !—Who do vou love then? Some of'the court butterflies, no doubt-—vou like bergamotte and es- sence of mille fleurs. However, as I have got scent of you, you shall be watched, madam !" A more wretched and hopeless situation than that of Madame de Wolfsteïn cannot be conceived; doubly wretched from having been the work of her own will, and pei formed in the face efe\exy sinister omen; in short, as she could but confess to herself, a sorrowful proof how strongly the principle of contradiction must have ruled within her. Desolate and cheerless indeed was the path before her: to Hea¬ ven, and to Heaven only, could she look
117 for support, during the remainder of life's painful road, and there only could she hope for rest from her miseries. That clay's journey had been one of much corporeal fatigue to all the travellers, except Louisa ; the intense suffering of whose mind occasioned the weariness of its companion to be entirely overlooked. Yet no one shareel in the general satisfaction when they rested at the auberge, where for a fevt hours they were to take up their quarters, more truly than hei^elf;—it svas a change, and any chauge might produce ьоте amendment in actual circumstances, and ehe believed could not make them worse. The ChovaİKr affected prodigious anxiety about the hordes, addressing to them a profusion of such fondling and endearing epithets, as from the lips of a bridegroom might more appropriately have been otherwise applied ; casting on his ill-starred u ile, at the same time, significant glances, which might be easiiy
118
interpreted into, "You see I have some¬ thing to caress." To her infinite relief, he accompanied his grooms into the stable, and she had a few moments' respite from his now odious and fearful society. Meanwhile, Barbara, like something frantic, rushed after her into the house, invoking the protection of the Holy Virgin, and halfa dozen of the saints. She seized her lady in her arms, and, with many sobs, in¬ formed her of the horrible discovery she had made, that the grim and appalling being who had so terrified them at the lonely post-house had rode in their suite, and was the favourite domestic of the Chevalier. i& Oh my lady ! what will become of us ! To think of being shut up in a wild solitary castle in the midst of mountains with that man. I shall see his ugly face looking through my curtains as it did through the lattice. I know to a cer¬ tainty I shall die of fright, and what a
119
shocking death that will bei" Louisa, spiritless herself, endeavoured lo sooth and reassure her terrified maiden, lest Wolfsteïn should return and find her in this state of agitation, produced by the sight of his favourite Scharaffa. As she feared, it happened, for in came Wolfsteïn while poor Barbara was loudly pouring forth her wild lamentations. "What are those women about?'* cried he, fiercely. " Silence that girl, madam, or I will. It was the extreme of weakness in me to permit your encumber¬ ing me with such a useless fool. You will have sufficient attendance at Lornberg." The words of her master had a most sedative effect on Barbara ; her sobs, and her voice, whieh had been exalted to a sharp treble, sunk instantaneously. She looked earnestly first at her lady, then at the bridegroom, and every selfish appre¬ hension and anxiety were confounded in the sentiments of horror, compassion, and indignation with which she contem-
120
plated the miserable destiny of the former. Conrade, fearful lest some revolt¬ ing scene might be produced by the indiscretion of his fellow servant, had followed her, and now on some pretence called her forth. Father Felix, whose vehicle had been by some trifling obsta¬ cle delayed, entered at the same moment, and began his inquiries after his beloved charge,—-as how she had supporteel the fatigues of such a toilsome day's journey, &c, remarking on the beauty of the wea¬ ther and sublimity of the scenery. The bridal pair, with the exception ofa few brief answers from Madame de Wolfsteïn, were silent; a circumstance whieh did not alarm the acuteness of the friar. Sup¬ per was laid, lights were brought, and Conrade and Scharaiia attended the party at table. " For my part/ 5 said the Chevalier sullenly, u I hate all this parade and non¬ sense. I may permit it for once, because it is my wedding-day—but mark : I will
kZÏ.
have no more formal meals. My house¬ hold must eat as I do, or not eat at all." Felix looked astonished and bewildered, and Louisa, who perceived that her lord and master was not disposed to take a seat at the rablf\ suk 1 , íť Do you disapprove my sitting to the meal, sir? I will act as you command/ " Take your own way t madam, and leave me to mine ; when you have seen it you will know how / choose to eat." These words were a thunder-stroke to Felix, who had entered the auberge with¬ out a shade of suspicion how the case stood. iC Come, my dear," said lie tenderly, ec you look wan and drooping, and must needs require some refection ;—even judging by myself, I am sure it may not without injury be dispensed with." Louisa seated herself silently, and en- deavoured to evade the mournful glance of inquiry, which her kind-hearted con¬ fessor cast towards her : the good man, VOL, ΙΠ* G
Xmáhd
however, was far from suspecting the ex-* tent of the evil. Some unluckv misunder- standing had, he deemed, occurred be¬ tween the new-married pair, some trivial grievance which would heal presently.—- Louisa swallow eel a few morsels, and Wolfsteïn ate his supper as he strode about the room, helping himself, indifferently and unceremoniously, to whatever suited his fancy : the only person he vouch¬ safed to treat with any civility was Con¬ rade, who endeavoured, for the sake of lus lady, to conceal the contempt and ab¬ horrence in which he held him ; while poor Louisa built some faint and vague hopes on the favour her husband evinced for this valuable domestic. €i Scharaffa," said he, " I insist on your being kind and courteous to your new comrade: you know the sentiments Ì entertain for him, and I will have him used as he deserves/' u Doubt me not, master," said the hideous being, in a voice so discordant
Я.АО
that Felix turned, and looked steadily on the speaker, " What do you see in that fellow, fa¬ ther?" said Wolfatei'n, abruptly stopping in his walk. " You fasten vour eyes on him as if you were about to exorcise from him an evil spirit/' ** 11 struck me, my son, that I had seen his face before, but where I cannot call to mind." if And so you did, sir/' said the auda¬ cious Scharaffa : u I met your reverence at Albeiťs cottage on the banks of the Raab, and bv the same token vour re- verence may recollect tiie miniatuie ьо mi- racıılouslv deposited in vour sleeve ; the hand of your humble servant had the ho¬ nour to place it there." Poor Felix became perplexed and con* fused : what to think, or whereto all this tended, he kn ew not; he could only fear that it did not tend to good : he ventured to inquire of Conrade ifa book which he G 2
124
meant to make his midnight study had been deposited in his apartment. " Do Saint Chrysostom and the other Fathers, who took so obliging a share in my conversion, travel with us?" u They do, my son." 6 ζ I am glad of it : Lornberg in the win¬ ter is a cold station, and they will help to make the pine fires blaze gloriously/*
125
CHAPTER VI. *' For my revenges were high bent upon him, And watch'd the time to shoot." Shakspearc. During the second day's journey, matters proceeded much as they had done throughout the first ; certainly they were in no degree ameliorated : the brutality and fierceness of Wolfsteïn rather in¬ creased than diminished, and was more¬ over varied by occasional fits of fondling, not a whit less irksome or insulting ; and these transitions were so sudden as to resemble the caprice of insanity, inso¬ much that Madame de Wolfsteïn began half to suspect that the cruel treatment she endured had its source in mental derangement. Nothing could exceed the wild and almost terrific sublimity of the road they travelled; and in happier days,
126
Louisa's enthusiasm fer the grander fea¬ tures ornature would have been indulged to the utmost by such a journey ; but now she beheld the landscape with a passive, frozen gaze, neither delighted by the beautiful, nor affected by the awful. Now thev wound through rich and verdant valleys, the nests of many a little peaceful hamlet, whose inhabitants were cutting or training the vines which extended far along the sunny slopes of the hills that sheltered their cottages ; now they made their way through wide and leafy soli¬ tudes, whose glades stretched for miles, beneath the embowering branches of the pine, the oak, or the beech. Sometimes they would find themselves hanging, as it were, on the ridge of some stupendous precipice, from whose side tumbled tbe frequent and deafening torrent, hastening to augment with its tributary waters the river wliich roiled far beneath within its rocky channel, As she crossed the alpine bridge which rocked and creaked
127
under the carriage, Louisa would cast a vague, desponding glance on the scarce fathomable abyss over which they were suspended : she did not, as she once would have done, lift the crucifix to her lips and breathe a prayer that Heaven would protect her through the dangerous pass ; on the contrary, an indefinite notion that it might prove the goal of her hopeless pilgrimage would cross her bewildered thoughts. As the evening drew on, they arrived at a lonely post-house, from whence some slight and rude refreshment was brought to the superior travellers, while the do¬ mestics made the necessary changes of cattle, and other arrangements for pro¬ ceeding. The moon was beautiful, and nearly at the full ; nevertheless each horseman now provided himseii with a pine torch dipt in pitch. Louisa mecha¬ nically inquired the motive of this illu¬ mination, and was answered with some¬ what more than usual civility—«
128
ťí To protect us from the wolves, which probably will beset us on a plain about halfa league from hence: they attack in bodies, and it behoves travellers to be on the alert against them." She now perceived that this was not the sole precaution adopted against the approaching danger, for several wolf¬ hounds, which had been led in the rear of the retinue, were now brought forward, and set at liberty, their hoarse baying resembling nearly that of the animal they were designed to combat. *' Are you frightened, Louisa?" íť Not much, Sir Warbeck/' she re¬ plied with a faint smile. " Not much P echoed he contemptu¬ ously ; " I begin to perceive I have mar¬ ried an alabaster doll :—if you are not afraid of wolves, you are no woman ! Per¬ haps you are so inaccessible to all human infirmities, that you may deem my ad¬ vice to put on your pelisse superfluous; —though it has been hitherto warm, you
lit»
will find it cold enough presently, and such transitions are dangerous." This recommendation, though not very graciously made, was rather an improve* ment, and Louisa lost no time in wrap¬ ping herself in her Polish cloak. tc Now, go to sleep if you can," was the next counsel, " for we shall hardly halt again before the dawn/' At the same time stretching out his limbs, closing his eyes, and drawing his cap over his face, he disposed himself to set her the example : she was, however, employed too busily in the wretched ex¬ ercise of thought, to cherish a hope of such blessed forgetfulness. They crossed the skirts of the perilous plain, where the retinue halted, and formed themselves into a closer body, the carriages in the centre, the dogs ranging wide, but obey. ing the voice or the whistle, and the horse¬ men loading the pistols, which they placed ready primed in their belts, and waving their blazing torches. At length G 5
130
the bay of the dogs grew louder and more menacing, and the horses snorted and reared, as if they were aware of the vi¬ cinity of some dreaded enemy· Louisa believed, occasionally, that she could di¬ stinguish, from a distance, a long deep howl, between the baying of the dogs, as it w r ere in answer ; and momentarily as the sound increased upon her ear, and she was assured of its reality, she ex¬ pected the approach of some of those fe¬ rocious creatures from whose throats it proceeded. By the shouts of the escort, and the intermingled voices of various animals, she knew that some w/olves had appeared in sight, while the discharge of fiie-arms, followed by shrill yellings, in¬ formed her that some of the enemy had perished in the attack. They had arrived near the centre of the plain, which was a league across, and skirted by deep thickets of underwood, her lord and master con¬ tinuing all the time in a slumber so sound, as to have bidden defiance to
131
the noise and confusion which reigned amongst his equipage. Now, however, he started up, and, looking out, exclaimed loudly, ic What are you all about ? Have you forgotten?" " No/' said Scharaffa ; " we have just reached the spot: he awaits your plea¬ sure." '* Oh, Conrade, my good fellow, are you there ?" cried the Chevalier. Con rade rode to the side of the car¬ riage. " Do you happen to bear in remem¬ brance, my good friend, the courtesy you showed, in seeing the last of me when í cţuitted the castle of Marchfeldt ? Do you recollect the brief dialogue which passed between us, as I crossed the draw¬ bridge under your auspices ? You do b I perceive. It is my custom, honest Con¬ rade, never to remain in any man*s debt, and I have waited impatiently to
ItPJH
acquit myself towards you; —-the momeM of acquittance is at hand/* Conrade now found that he was com¬ pletely surrounded by his companions, and his bridle seized on each side. He essayed to snatch a pistol from his belt for the purpose of self-defence, when he received a blow on the head from behind, which stunned him for the moment, and rendered it easy to drag him from his horse. Once dismounted, hewas presently disarmed, all appeal or resistance being useless, and no less unavailing than the cries and supplications of the unhappy Madame de Wolfsteïn, whose hitherto passive endurance was now effectually conquered. She threw herself at the feet of her barbarous husband, and when she found him deaf to her pleadings, uttered the most piercing shrieks, while the voice of the poor victim was heard entreating his beloved lady to be comforted, and leave him to his fate, to which the sight
133
of her distress made him yield without any farther struggle. Meanwhile the cavalca' 1 assed on, and Louisa knew not whi is become of him: she be¬ lieved that Scharaffa had murdered him, and wringing her hands, her lips opened from time to time to give breath to the horror and anguish of her heart: once that she murmured to herself," Inhuman, blood-stained assassins!" ic What do you mean, madam? are you mad ? You do not take me> nor any of my people, for murderers, I hope ! Desist from your base and wicked c^'umiiies ! If the wolves eat your insolent minion, is it an act of mine ? He is free to outrun them if he can, anel there is at least one chance in ten thousand that he escapes them. Be silent, madam, and learn to command yourself with more decency ! ·~-Υοη> who talk of submission and obe¬ dience ! You are a vixen, a Xantippe!" ťí But is he not murdered ? Tell ще, dear Wolfsteïn !"
134
u Dear Louisa, that is more than my conscience will justify my asserting, for the wolves have, in all human likelihood, supped on him by this rime : he was alive when wo took leave of him/' Even this was a consolatory assurance, for Madame de Wolfsteïn did not fully comprehend how fearful were the odds against him. Poor father Felix, who was in part witness to this wicked and re¬ morseless outrage, exhausted his little strength in endeavours to quit his car¬ riage, in which, meanwhile, he was closely confined, and in uplifting his voice, now in vain supplications, now in denuncia¬ tions and maledictions ; but he, like his unhappy charge, was forced to limit him¬ self to protesting against what he could not by any effort prevent. His contem¬ plations were of a most disquieting na¬ ture; he had been the instrument of uniting his beloved daughter to a violent, ruthless man, and, as he feared, a hope¬ less reprobate. For the remainder of his
135
own little journey, he took small care whether it was rough or smooth, since, at all events, its termination could not be distant ; but he feared lest the faith and constancy of his tender child should be unequal to the terrible, and probably, tedious, conflict she was doomed to sus¬ tain. For Con rade, the foster-brother of Wil¬ helm, who had grown up from infancy under his eye, he had cherished a pa¬ rental regard ; and the heart which could not endure to see the hair-cloth press too roughly on the breast of a supposed pe¬ nitent must have suffered grievously in beholding an object, so justly beloved, cast forth as food to the famished savages of the wilderness. They had only another halt for the night ere they would arrive at Lornberg Castle : this halt took place the night fol¬ lowing the one on which Conrade had been abandoned to the wolves, and was the first time that Father Felix and Wolf«
136
stein encountered each other after this dreadful transaction. The friar had de¬ bated within himself whether, for the sake of the unhappy Louisa, he ought to keep silence, or whether an imperative duty did not command him to speak his thoughts in the face of that bad man : the Chevalier well understood what was passing in his heart. " Well, father ! how fares it ? What is this ? Do you refuse to shake hands with me s your friend and patron?—I could get thee an abbey to-morrow, man, if thou hadst sense enough tc appreciate the obligation." ťc My hand shall never come in con¬ tact with thine, till a true and exemplary penance shall cleanse it from the blood which cleaves to it." " Oh, you are thereabouts, are you ? But how could í help it? I had made a vow, from which I had never been ab¬ solved, and therefore I religiously kept •i(,„]Srow, 1*11 tell thee what, Friar; owing
Ì37
to a little infirmity in my nature, I am apt to breathe such vows, and to hold them sacred:—it is for the health of my friends that they should bear in mind this my pro* pensity." " I care not for thy threats, assassin ! I would rather be what Conrade is than what thou art!" (: Each to his fancy ;—but as you are in the mood for conversation, and I for repose, suppose you go and hold counsel with the pious Chrysostom, or some of his long-winded fraternity.—Scharaffa, con¬ duct the Friar to his dormitory/' The wretch made one of his hideous grimaces, significant of mischief, and replied, ťí Alas! my master! a grievous dis¬ aster befell us on our journey this day, such as I know not how to relate.—You remember the little bridge over the torrent that we crossed at noon,-—well, just as we were in the middle of it, as ill luck would have it, what should happen, but the Cart
138
and all the fathers tumbled over; and there they are, sure enough, travelling down the bed of as rapid a stream as any in the Austrian dominions—stop them who can!" " And was the poor mule precipitated into the stream ?" asked Felix. " No ; when we found the fathers were going, we cut the traces, and saved the beasf." " Upon my word/' said Wolfsteïn, with mock concern, ť< a most afflicting cata- atrophe ! And Father Chrysostom too !— As for the rest, I could console myself/' Felix had no doubt that the privation of his books was an act of deliberate malice, —but self-denial had been the habitual exercise of his innocent life, though hitherto its acts had been voluntary.—We estimate our grievances by comparison ; a few clays earlier, the Confessor would have rated the loss of his books amongst the heaviest which could have befallen him. ** Well/' said he, meekly s " this night
139
at least I shall not miss them, since I have a work of prayer and meditation to per¬ form, which will fill all its hours." Louisa, who had sat in silent de¬ spondency, now arose, and kneeling be¬ fore him, said, i( Pray for me too, my father !" He laid his hand on her head, blessed her, and, with an aching heart, retired for the night. The castle of Lornberg was situated in the province of AustrianDalmatia; it stood commandingly in the gorge of a lofty mountain, near whose base rolled the waves of the Adriatic. It had once be« longed to the Ottoman, and was in the days of its pride a place of great strength, its several towers extending irregularly along the brow of the ravine from which they seemed to grow like a natural crown. Its architecture was like its site, irregular and various, having been the work of many periods, and many a huge mass detached from the main structures either
140
by the hand of former violence, or the slow and mining operation of time, now hung suspended over the side of the ravine^ threatening to overwhelm the passenger in its downfal, or lay already prostrate at the bottom of the deep glen, which in the summer formed a pass for the shepherd, or hardy mountaineer, and in winter was the bed of a torrent, which made its pro¬ gress through this rocky channel to fulfil its ultimate destination in augmenting the waters of the Adriatic. There was a dreary, desolate, ruinous magnificence in the aspect of Lornberg castle; the light heart would have sunk on entering the huge dark jaws of its heavy portal, while the stern and melancholy mind would hail the congenial abode; but the master of this frowning pile was a strange mixture of the savage misanthrope and the selfish voluptuary. Its interior was well calculated to flatter the taste of an effeminate, un¬ principled being, addicted to every luxu* rious refinement; it had its theatre, its
141
niusic hall, its baths;—its halls and gal¬ leries were adorned by the most exquisite sculptures, and the wide staircases pre« sented groups of fresco painting which stood forward in such brilliant animation as might deceive the unpractised eye into a belief in their breathing existence. All the costly productions of Greece and Italy were exhibited throughout the apartments in lavish profusion,and the state chambers were so admirably arranged for the pur¬ pose of indulgence and dissipation, one might have thought that the Sybarite, who complained that the fold of the rose- leaf rendered his sleep uneasy, presided over their construction and decoration· It was night when the bridal array approached the castle of Lornberg;—about the distance of a quarter of a league several of the train had begun at intervals to wind their horns in chorus, and it was not long ere a lengthened echo answered them. As they advanced, the echo grew buder, and Wolfsteïn acquainted Louisa
142
that it proceeded from some of his people skilled in the use of the cornet, who wel¬ comed him from the battlements* All the gloomy solemn forms of feudal state were observed in the admission of Wolfsteïn and his bride within the walls of their castle. As they passed between a nume¬ rous file of armed men in strange uniform, and fiercely whiskered, who were drawn up to receive them ; ci Is all well, Pandulfo?" said the Che¬ valier. " Most prosperous, my lord !" a Good! Then salute your lady, and bid her welcome home." Captain Pandulfo bent one knee to the ground, and kissed the passive hand of Louisa : a burst of music proceeding from a concert of various instruments, all ex¬ quisitely played, now rose upon their ears; and the ponderous gate of the castle being thrown open, they entered the great hall in a blaze of light. Louisa was surprised to fmd herself surrounded by a group of
143
beautiful girľs, all in the costume of dif¬ ferent countries: their habits, though very dissimilar, rmd each its appropriate elegance, and the countenance of each of these girls formed a specimen of the cha¬ racteristic style of beauty of her native land. The music ceased, and one of the damsels stood forth from the group, and ecited, in the most mellifluous strains of Italian verse, an elegant epithalamium. She was a Venetian, and singularly skilled in the gift of improvisation. tc We thank thee, sweet siren ! We thank thee, pretty Zanina !" said Wolf¬ steïn, in a fondling tone. She then fell back into the group, and as the music recommenced, in a soft Sicilian air, joined her companions in a ballet, which ended in two of the youngest approaching Wolfsteïn and his bride, and laying at the feet of each a crown of intermingled myrtles and roses. Lou isa was confounded and bewildered, and knew not what to make of the scene she beheld ;-—she de*
144
clared herself exhausted and fatigued, and her pale harassedcountenancebore witness that the complaint was not frivolous. " Well, lady," said the bridegroom, " your damsels shall conduct you to the suite of apartments which are prepareel for you, and refreshments shall follow you. You must summon the blush rose to your cheek again !—I harbour nothing that is not beautiful within the walls of my castle, except Scharaffa, and his perfection stands in lieu of beauty." Then, saluting her forehead, he con¬ signed her to the care of her lovely at¬ tendants, who, each bearing a waxen taper highly perfumed, preceded her up the staircase. Having conducted her to her magnificent chamber, and led her through the suite which was allotted to her especial use, they proceedeel to press upon her, with officious courtesy, a thousand atten- , tions and services, which all their graces, and all their blandishments,did not prevent from adding to the already overwhelming
145
fatip-ue of the care-v om traveller—they were too adroit in the business of pleasing^ uot to perceive their want of success. iC Ah i" cried Zanina, who appeared to take the leael, " our charming laely needs repose—Speak then, lady ! Utter your commands, and with a thoucht thev shall he obeyed. Select from amongst us which¬ ever has the happiness to please you, as your principal woman, and the rest shall withdraw," Louisa mildly thanked them, but owned that the maiden she had brought from Vienna was neeessarv to her comfort, v' y and that her chief wish at that moment was to see Bai bara. They received this communication with perfect nonchalance, and wishing sweet repose to their lady, retired : in a (ew minutes her faithful Barbara was her attendant. Poor Barbara and Conrade Munster had been brought up under the same roof, the happy contented subjects of the same VOL·,, m. h
146
kaid rule from their earliest remembrance : the playful petulance of a volatile brother and sister was habitual between them, but they were truly attached to each other: it is no wonder then that Conrade's untimely and miserable fate should have produced a deep and mournful effect on this light- hearted girl.-—Till this moment she had no one with whom she could vent her feelings with any hope of sympathy, and to find herself restored to unrestrained intercourse with her beloved lady was such an indulgence, as she hardly hoped again to experience. Her first expressions partook of the joy which this unexpected privilege inspired, but she did n Jt allow much time to elapse ere she burst into a, torrent of tears for tiie fate of Conrade, accompanied by the most bitter invectives on her wicked, inhuman master. "Alas, alas, Barbara! that I cannot disprove the justice of thy words, yet that I must forbid thee to utter them ! Remem-
147
her it is of my husband, of thy master, thou art speaking;—we must see and suffer in silence."' " Teat is quite impossible/ 5 said Bar¬ bara, H tui 1 should infallibly burst. Pra), my lady, what do you think of all these dancing, skipping, impudent girls, with their songs, and their smiles, and their attitudes?" u In good truth, Barbara , I know not well what to think of them." íť They are not fit to come into sneh thoughts as yours at all, my lady, I be¬ lieve, nnd nobody but such a—as mv lord, would think of bringing his innocent bride into such a nest of harpies." " And are all those lovely, graceful, accomplished beings, such as you would insinuate ? 1 ' i( So Scharaffa says:·—he is an odious, hideous, abominable wretch; but for all that, he says I am better worth looking at than any of those dancing, singing, fan¬ tastical puppets :—tc/y/ he should think h l 2
148 чо," and she cast an involuntary glance towards a large Venetian mirror, <c I can't guess for he ne\er heard a civil word come out of my lips," " And did he tell thee that all thobC pietty creatures are the rdaves oí vice?" u He did not say so, my lady, because his ugly mouth never framed such a sen» tence, but he told me that his master had at one time or other made lo\e to all ol thern, and had snared them all by dit¬ te rent contrivances under hib roof. But," said she, drawing close to Loui*.a, ^ one shocking thing I did hear, enough to make one's han stand of an end. There ь a nun here amongbt the rest, whom the Chevalier stole out of a Neapolitan con¬ vent, and if they couid catch her, ьЬе wOuld be burned, or buried alne. Iler nanu is sister Dominica: Scharalfa helped to { arry her off, and now he sa^ s, he wishes she wa« dead, for there's more plague \\ ith her than all the girls m the house." " Horrible 1 " exclaimed Madame de
149 Wolfsteïn ; " and vvas this wretched u oman m the group who received us to-night ?" " Oil no, my lady ! Slie wanders about the house like a maniac m her пшА habit, and has even tried to escape, that slie may surrender herself up; but the Chevalier, who does not care for many things, he has such powerful friends. thinks this might bring him into trouble, and if she makes any more attempts to be off', she will be secured in a dai к dungeon, where she may live and die, and no out 1 ever be tho wiser ; or perhaps, poor soul f they may take the shortest method with her, tor a sin more or less is a trifle in the account between Satan and my master/' '* Реасе л , peace, Barbara!'' ik Methinks, mylady, I hear something stir in ihe next room!" And she imme¬ diately approached the door, which, at her touch, flew open: it was illumined by several tapers, and a table spread with rare and delicate viands, served on the finest china, stood in the centre:—those
150
who placed it there were no longer visible, and Barbara was half disposed to believe, that amongst the strange inhabitants oí íhe castle of Lornberg, wizards and ma¬ gicians might be numbered, it was long muco either had tasted food, and both partook thankfully of the tempting repast before them :—there were wines of dif¬ ferent sorts and hues ; but the invisible hands had filled a small glass from a bottle of rich Tuscan, by which lay a slip of paper, with the words," Wolfsteïn pledges his bride." It was one of the singularities of this inconsistent being, that he would, from time to time, address such minute and insignificant courtesies to her, whom it seemed, in all material instances, his delight to outrage and insult. The repast ended, they quitted the apartment. The same slight sound was heard, which had announced tiie arrival of supper, and almost immediately, when the curious Barbara again opened the door, the lights, the table, and all that was thereon, had
151
disappeared. A door on the opposite side of Madame de Wolfstvïn's chamber leu through an elegant dressing-room to that of her woman. The toils ofa long and arduous journey, inhanced by so much mental mi fler in g as they had endured, had so subdued their strength, that each easily ν ielded up their senses to a salutarv and refreshing slumber»
152
CHAPTER VII. — u You shall give me leave To play tbe broker in mine own behalf j And to that end, I shortly mind to leave you. ,? — Shalcspeare, Madame de Wolfsteïn and her at¬ tendant had been some time risen, when a tap at the door claimed their attention. Their visitor was the holy Felix, who came to mingle his morning orisons with those of Louisa, and offer her such pious con¬ solations as were but too necessary under the calamitous circumstances in which she was involved. In the course of their mu¬ tual communications, it appeared, that amid the luxurious accommodations of the castle, it possessed neither chapel, nor apartment of any kind for the especial purpose of religious worship. A chapel
153
i-ndeed there was, buţ it had been for many years grievously profaned, and rendered incapable of being applied to pious uses, Wolfsteïn having converted it ¡nto a theatre.—Louisa therefore led the Confessor through the suite of apartments destined for her occupation, and they made choice of one, which commanded from its bay window a magnificent marine view, fbr the oriel ; and the father promised he would endeavour to obtain permission to go to Venice, anel procure such holy articles as were necessary for the com¬ pletion of their purpose. Louisa whispered in the shuddering ear of this good man, the horrible sacrilege which hael been re¬ vealed to her by Barbara. 6 ' My child," he replied, crossing him¬ seif in deep consternation, " we ought not to weary of life, since it is plain there is still work appointed for usto do :—I will seek this poor strayed sheep, and save her if possible/' Engaged in similar contemplations, the и 5
154
hour passed calmly and usefully; when one of the beautiful thoughtless damsels of the castle entered the apartment, and kneeling to Madame de Wolfsteïn, pre¬ sented hera basket of sandal wood, filled with roses, jessamine and orange blos¬ soms, on which lay a billet, which she said contained the morning salutations of the Lord of Lornberg.-—It bore a request, couched in the most courteous terms, to be permitted to partake her breakfast, when her pleasure for the disposal of the remainder of the day might be declared. The damsel, whose name was Kara, and who was a little Turkish girl, as soon as Louisa had perused her husband's greet¬ ing, presented her with a sheet of or¬ namented paper, and a golden style, and Louisa briefly traced her consent to the request of her Lord. The Confessor took his leave, and Wolfsteïn was with her almost instantly. His manner on this occasion wore something of the softness and courtesy of former days, but no ex-
¿öt?
terna! graces could erase from the thoughts of his wretched bride the treachery, bar¬ barity, and depravity of his nature.—She dissembled her feelings, but unmixed ab¬ horrence vvas the ruling sentiment of her heart, as she looked on Wolfsteïn. Per¬ ceiving that either wearv of the exercise of his rude tyranny, or that for some secret purpose he was resolved to treat her with a decree of amenity which she had not expected ever again to expe¬ rience, she took courage, and mentioned the subject of the oriel, and ventured even to request permission for the friar to sail to Venice, and procure the means for fitting up the room as a small chapel. u It is yours, Louisa," was the repiy; te and, provided lam not molested by these weaknesses, you may, in moderation, in¬ dulge them. I permitted you to bring the friar, because he has not, like the rest of his fraternity, any genius for meddling or intrigue. I do not want a priest with eyes and ears, for Lornberg castle has its
156
mysteries. He shall have a gondola for his own use, and may go to-morrow, if he pleases, and buy a boat full of toys for his baby house ; but, besides his simplicity, í had another motive for bringing him hither: his skill in medicine may be often useful, and he will not lose his time, if, in procuring his spiritual nostrums, he sup¬ plies himself with such drugs as may be requisite in our remote station. I have no doubt we shall find him employ¬ ment." Now, with all tlie polish and suavity he coulel so skilfully assume, he requested his wife to signify her pleasure for the morning, and seeing her hesitate, " Shall I/' said he, ct lead you round the ramparts, and show you the magnificent scene they command? The day is glorious, and the sunbeams glance upon the waves till the Adriatic looks like a sheet of li¬ quid gold. I will show you my gardens, my vineyards, my kiosks and pavilions, and introduce you to my men of war. I
157
have not brought you to a hermitage, Louisa/' She readily acquiesced in his proposal: as they wound along the ramparts, his remarks on the splendid scenery beneath them were pregnant with that fine taste which was perverted to the most elis- graceful purposes, and her walk would have been one of enjoyment, had the heart of her companion been as excellent as his intellect. When they descended into the gardens, the same admirable taste was conspicuous : it was noon, and the heat was becoming intense, but the sun was efTectually debarred entrance through the thick boughs of the lofty trees under which they walked, and which were pre¬ served in the liveliest verdure by innu¬ merable little fountains, whose shining waters dashed over their marble basins, the spray of which spread far around in refreshing mists. Wolfsteïn seemed to take pleasure in exhibiting to his bride the luxurious enchantments of the abode
158
to which he had brought her, and she would not awaken the ferocity of his dis¬ position, by betraying the absence and indifference with which she looked on all things. She had remarked, as they paced the battlements, that the castle was strongly fortified, and the number of sol¬ diers seemed disproportioned to the need ofa private noble. She observed, <c Your castle is quite a garrison, Che¬ valier." 66 Yes," he replied, " my interests are numerous and intricate:—I am entangled in many schemes, and from such en¬ tanglements I derive my poe. er: neverthe¬ less, they are not without their peril, and for that I am always prepared." As they returned within the castle, " The marine breeze," said he, " has had a charming effect—you are beautiful. I must show you to some of my people. I will have you, therefore, appear this day at table in such attire as befits the bride of the Lord of Lornberg."
159
When the hour of dinner arrived, Louisa, who had minutely followed the commands of her husband, and selected for her dress the most splendid robe in her possession, was ready, when he ap¬ peared at the door of her apartment, to lead her to the banqueting hall· ic You are a good girl," said he, glanc¬ ing his eye over her figure: " this will do—for a while at least." Tiie banqueting room was already filled with guests, and a raised gallery at its upper end with minstrels, who saluted the entrance of the bride and bridegroom with a symphony. Many gentlemen were present, all in the uniform of the cattle, which bore no resemblance to any Louis*a had ever seen before, being en¬ tirely black, enlivened only by the gold belt and epaulette;—each officer wore his sabre and his dagger, and, which ap¬ peared somewhat singular, each had his brace of pistols in his belt. They were all fine, tall, well-formed men, and all had
ш>
Ыаск hair, and dark complexions, every countenance being rendered fiercer by a huge pair of mustachios. These men were Neapolitans, Ragu sans, Greeks; an d,w hat- ever might be their other qualifications for the service of their fierce and extra¬ ordinary chief, he had evidently selected them with a childish and fanciful regard to uniformity of appearance. Captain Pandulfo w 7 as commandant of the castle guard: he had been already presented to Louisa, and he, and a youth named Rufo, whom Wolfsteïn appeared bent on di¬ stinguishing, took their places on each side of her at table. Zanina and Kara were of the party, and when first Madame de Wolfsteïn perceived their presence, a sentiment of offended dignity made her hesitate to seat herself Her spouse remarked the scruple, and ob¬ serving the direction of her eye, said haughtily, iS Be content, madam ! All is as it should be; for my pleasure is law at Lornberg. "
161
It was some time ere he recovered the temper this incident had ruffled, and Louisa was aware that ever and anon he directed towards her a scowling and si¬ nister glance. At length he ordered his cup-bearer, whom he called Corylo, and who, though in boy's clothes, was an Italian girl, to bear the cup of state to the bride, that she might drink of it, and then bring it to him : his order being obeyed, he took a copious draught from it, and next presented it to Zanina, who sate on his right hand, after which it passed round the circle.—The men be¬ tween whom Louisa was seated seemed to regard her with admiration, especially Pandulfo, who stole at her occasionally a glance in which pity anei curiosity were mingled. As the wine circulated, the con¬ versation became loud and general, anel Louisa timidly besought permission to re¬ tire. • c< Let us not believe you already weary of your friends, madam/ 5 was tlie repiy.
162
—" It would be ungrateful, for your pre¬ sence is so precious we cannot part with you yet. Rufo, I have not congratulated y ou on your late exploit;—a more adroit performance was never executed by so unpractised a youth." Ilufo's black eyes sparkled—" May all your foes, Chevalier," said he, lifting a goblet to his lips, "fall into as sure hands as did the old Marchese ! But in truth, Wolfsteïn, you are well served :—Bruno and Zastrow the Pole were able coad¬ jutors;! must not rob them of their share in the merit/' " How did you manage it at last ?" u Ob, it was very simple—the great difficulty lay in selecting our moment ;— we lay in wait a night or two without success :—at length the crisis came. We dogged him from the cassino, where he had played late ;—«he had just dismissed his gondolieri, and was entering his own portico, when I flung the back of his mantle over his head : the daggers of
163
Bruno and Zastrow soon completed the enterprise. We ascertained presently his gains at the cassino, and threw him into the canal;—that one splash w as all the noise we made !—I would not boast, but never was a man disposed of more briefly, silently, and effectually. We were at home by tw T o, you know, Pandulfo." íť I shall know r how to thank you, my friend Rufo/' said the chief of the castle, with a look of ghastly satisfaction—* " What think you of sending Bruno and Zastrow to the mountains?—They would be a glorious acquisition there/' *'Tiue, Chevalier, but they are not needed—Ranuzzo has already a strong band of incomparable spirits.—Why should we weaken ourselves? Besides, these occasional midnight manoeuvres re¬ quire as desperate a baud and as stout a heart every whit as your forest adven¬ tures—No, no, we cannot spare these myrmidons ľ' " You shall have your own way, Rufo/'
164
said Wolfsteïn, in a conciliating tone. The young ruffian \vas evidently elated by wine and praise, and his manner soon became more conspicuously bold and pre- sumptuous than that of the rest. Pan¬ dulfo s eyes warily examined the coun¬ tenance of Wolfstein's bride, and he per¬ ceived, without difficulty, that she was making such deadly discoveries, as hardly left her ρ ver to support hei self. As Rufo was now occupied by his own merits, and in trying the extent of his interest with his chief, Pandulfo ventured to say in a low voice to Louisa, i( I fear, madam, our profession is only now made known to you, and, if so, you will, perhaps, have many an early and cherished prejudice to forego ;—to yield, however, or at least to seem to yield, till habit reconciles you to necessity, is all that remains. Disguise your aversion; it will only embitter your lot." "Surely, sir/' said Louisa, struck with the expression that softened his fierce
165
countenance, " you are not by nature a ruffian." " I am not, madam.—-One false step ruined me, or rather I should say obliged me to the adoption of new habits.—At sixteen, no one could have foretold my destiny—yet you see, lady, how custom hardens a man.—Whatever nature in¬ tended me for, I am now a ruffian." There seemed something forced in the firmness with which this was uttered, and 1 ,ouisa distinguished a deep sigh in spite of the struggle which was made to suppress it. Presently the Chevalier arose, and re¬ quested the captain to lead the bride into the adjoining saloon, whither all the party except a few officers who hail not satisfied themselves with the juice of the Tuscan grape, followed, and Zanina flow to col¬ lect her companions. After witnessing the performance of a ballet, Louisa was permitted to withdraw. Such werethe companions amongst whom this most unfortunate lady appeared dc-
166
stined to waste the remainder of her weary life. Many days closely resembling the one I have described—day s of outrage, of hor¬ ror, and misery passed over her head, and it seemed almost impossible to give foree or novelty to the insults which were accumu- lated on her.—It did not seldom occur that the lord of Lornberg would absent himself for a week, perhaps for a month, from the castle, and these were periods of comparative trane|dillity. Besides Felix and her faithful Barbara she had no one on whom she couid even look without disgust, although she could not but di¬ stinguish Captain Pandulfo by harbouring towards him a somewhat less confirmed aversion than for any of his с trades : for the young assassin Bufo her detestation knew no bounds, and he seemed to behold her with a corresponding sentiment. Once, during a prolonged absence of the chief of the castle, the coun¬ tenance of Felix, who was no adept aí concealing his feeling?, wore a singular
167
expression of thankful emotion* " Alas ! my father," said Louisa, as she looked earnestly in his face, " what can have happened under this roof, to have awaken¬ ed that smile of pious gladness ?" ťí Did I smile, my daughter?—-Do not question me—«I would fain have you re¬ main unimpeachable respecting the deed I have accomplished." tc Yet it has cheered your spirits, father/' said she, bursting into tears. ťfi Oh ! when will a gleam of cheerfulness open upon mine?—When shall I smile?" Finding he could not withhold from her the secret in which his benevolent spirit was exulting, he told her that he had &uc- ceeded in carrying the penitent nun to Venice ; that he had, at her own earnest prayer, placed her in a convent governed by the most austere rules ; that he had carried her thither in a secular dress, and had been able, without infringing truth, to conceal entirely her former profession ; that he had obtained her admission with-
168
out the form of noviciate, and that the following day she would be once more dedicated to that holy service which she had been induced so fatally and criminally to renounce. Louisa, while she partook the friar's thankfulness, was astonished at his successful perseverance. " My child," said he, tc it is not my least cause of rejoicing that all the inhabitants of this castle are not hardened in villany. i have beeu aided, otherwise I could scarcely have accomplished my purpose. Believe me, my beloved daughter, whatever sorrows we are doomed to endure in thi^ place, we have not been brought hither in vain." He now proceeded to explain that Pandulfo had sought every opportunity for conversing with him in private, which had occurred since the dav when he first entered Lornberg castle; that he even feigneel sickness, in order more at leisure to invite and listen to the admonitions and consolations of the pious ecclesiasl ic ;
169
that he had besought his advice, whether he should, as he easily might, fly from his present situation and devote the remainder of his days to a monastic life, or, by re¬ maining, act as a check on the ruffians under his command, and perhaps influence some of them to relent likewise, and above all to alleviate as much as possible the sufferings of many prisoners pining in the subterraneous dungeons of the castle. " Since it appears, my son/' said Felix, Ci that, your keeping your present station may prove a blessing to numbers, forsake ¡t not, but wait patiently till the hour ar¬ rives which will surely deliver you." By the means of Pandulfo, Felix had visited the prisoners, had administered to their necessities both mental and bodily, and instructed his willing convert how effectually to alleviate their cruel situa¬ tion, wher Wolfsteïn's presence in the castle would render his visits less prac" ticable. Generally when the Chevalier vol, hi. ï
170
was absent, Rufo was his companion, but Scharaffa was left as a trusty spy, whose vigilance was not easily eluded ; never¬ theless, Felix and Pandulfo had for once outwitted him. For some days subse¬ quent to the escape of Sister Dominica, the wretch was restlessly, but fruitlessly, employed in searching for her, but so dexterously had her evasion been con- trived, that not a trace could he discover, and he could only flatter himself with the hope that she had put an end to her ex¬ istence by drowning, a catastrophe to which, from the distracted state of her mind, he had often looked as the termi¬ nation of his troublesome charge. Wolf¬ steïn had trusted too implicitly to the simple character of Father Felix, and to the philosophical abstraction of his thoughts. Little did he guess how busy a life this contemplative man would spend at Lornberg, and little was he aware, that at the end of a few months, the commandant of his troops, and twenty of those he commanded, had each his
171
missal in his pocket and his agnus on his bosom. Every one of these regarded Felix as the delegate sent from Heaven for his especial rescue from perdition, and the slightest admonition breathed from his lips would have superseded tlie loudest command of Wolfsteïn, who remained all the while perfectly uncon¬ scious of the reformation wrought within his walls. Felix, as from time to time, in grateful exultation, he imparted his progress to Madame de Wolfsteïn, ac¬ knowledged, that even the loss of his dearly beloved Saint Chrysostom had been providential. i( But for that, my daughter, I should have surrendered myself up to study, and, buried in contemplation of the things of another world, might never ha\ r e opened my eyes to the good work which Heaven is pleased to allot me in this." It was about the middle of November, when, at one of the riotous feasts held by Wolfsteïn in celebration of some of his \%
172
mysterious successes, and at which his wife had been ordered to assist, a com¬ mand now less frequently enforced than in the earlier season of their marriage, a dispute arose which threatened to be the prelude to a scene of sanguinary violence* Zanina, the beautiful Venetian, alvvavs sate at the right hand of the lord of the castle, and on the present occasion held her accustomed place.—It happened that Wolfsteïn, wíio had been engaged in con¬ versation with some one on his left, ob¬ served in turning to look on Zanina, that after touching her goblet with her lips ? she gave it, with a significant look, to Corylo, who immediately bore it to the farther end of the table where Rufo sate near Louisa.— Rufo took the cup, and casting on the lovely Venetian a glance of passionate gratitude, was about to swallow the contents, when Wolfsteïn rose, and in a voice almost choked with fury, cried, " Drink not for your life ! Set down the cup or you die."
173
" If it be poison, I'll drink it," cried Rufe), rising likewise and applying the goblet to his lips. " And poison then it shall be, quick poison, presumptuous minion ! for death shall follow it/' Zanina prevented Wolfsteïn from reach¬ ing Rufo by clinging to his arms, and the. 1 officers ail called on the offender to quit the room; he had already drawn a pistol from his belt and stood sullenly on the defensive, but at length yielded to the remonstrances of his comrades and quitted the room, while Wolfsteïn continued raving like a maniac. Pandulfo, in the very commencement of the confusion, had led the laely of the castle to her apartments, as he expected the scene of uproar to end in some appalling catastrophe, and was not sorry to miss Rufo on his re- entrance. He found Wolfsteïn reiterating his threats of summary vengeance, and the officers, in one voice, protesting against any violence being practised on
174
their comrade for what had happened, although, being considered a favourite, he had in fact no friends amongst his equals, while all the most desperate of the sol¬ diery idolized him for his daring. The clamour at length in some measure sub¬ siding, Pandulfo, who after the chief of Lornberg, had a superior voice in the assembly, suggested calmly that it vvould be well to consider the consequences oí such an arbitrary proceedingas wasthreat- ened,—" Supposing, sir, that чте should all remain passive; Rufo is beloved by the soldiers, and a formidable band of them, with Bruno and Zastrow at their head, will mutiny to avenge him. You know best how you are prepared to meet such a contingency;·—but all this is the effect of wine, to-morrow no memory will har¬ bour it: in truth Rufo was not to blame, there sits the delinquent. Had the fair Zanina pledged me, I must have done as Rufo did.—Which of you vvould not ?" "Not one of us," was the reply.
175
^ No," continued Pandulfo, "nor would any one, but such a craven, as our gallant chief would spurn from his baud I Be just, noble Wolfsteïn, and confess that Rufo could not refuse to answer the fair one's pledge." Pandulfo conquered ; for his post and his character made him powerful in the castle : he undertook to seek the angry Rufo, and persuade him to apologise to his chief, whieh was performed, but as reluctantly and with as much brevity as possible, a mutual scowl accompanying the cold touch of each other's hand. Za¬ nina was sent sobbing to her apartment, and the Chevalier harboured, in his dark bosom, the resolution of shortly making himself fatal amends for this forced re¬ conciliation. But he was disappointed, for the following day, when the inmates of the castle assembled at the feast, no Rufo, no Zanina appeared ; a vain search was made, and ended iu the conviction that they were fled together, an event which
176
gave Wolfsteïn heavier and more dis¬ quieting cause for meditation than the mere loss ofa fickle courtezan, or a pre¬ sumptuous and fiery dependant, since the latter bore with him many a danger¬ ous secret.
177
CHAPTER VIII. ** Such men have boon, of whom it may be said Their spirits conquers when their clay was cold." Joanna Jiailiie. It was on the night of November the 15th, that the fierce anel arduous struggle between Gustavus of Sweden, the lion of the North, and the scarcely less cele¬ brated commander of tiie forces of the empire, arrived at tlie eve of its crisis. The Duke of Friedland, by the aid of Fieramosca, had discovered that the Anareta, or planet of death, in tlæ na¬ tivity of his illustrious rival, pointed to November, and had, therefore, by mam a masterly and skilful manœuvre, con¬ trived to protract this, great personal trial to this period. An impenetrable fog covered the eventful morning of the Kith, and not till noon, when the sun shoue l Б
178 forth in his splendor, was this natural curtaiu withdrawn, when two vast armies were discovered drawn up in order of battle on each side the high road which skirts the plahi of Luizen. The scene was inconceivably grand and awful— Gustavus gave out, in a loud voice, the 40th Psalm, cc God is our refuge and strength/' whieh was sung by the whole army, accompanied by military music, and then led forward his troops. Both sides fought wit it unparalleled despera¬ tion, being animated by every art of their respective leaders; but tlie imperialists being seasonably reinforced by the return of Genera! Pappenheim's wing, which had been detached on some distant expe¬ li it ion, the Swedes were repulsed fre¬ quently, while their magnanimous sove¬ reign, with the most heroic resolution, as frequently rallied and ied them back. Thus the fate of the conflict continued some time in suspense; but Gustavus perceiving that his left gave ground be-
179
fore the fire of the Imperialists, attended by the Duke of Saxe Lauenburgh, and a party of horsemen, galloped towards the shrinking wing. In the midst of his career, he encountered a few imperial horse, led by a youth, who seemed re¬ solved to push them wherever glory tempted or danger threatened. Thb. youth dashed into the midst of the Swedes, and called loudly on the monarch to sur¬ render, but Gustavus raising his pistol to lire on the assailant, was, by one of the Austriaus, shot in the arm, while the bullet of his first antagonist, nearly at the same moment, entered his breast, and he fell from liis saddle, exclaiming, 4i My God ! my God !" while the few Swedes, by whom hewas immediately surrounded, were seized with panic, and joined the main body on a gallop, carrying with them the mournful and discouraging news of the fall of the royal hero. The hussar, by whom the fatal shot was fired, threw himseif from his horse, and cried urgently
180
on Desmond (for it was young Vallen» stein) to assist him in raising and bearing away the expiring monarch ; but while they lifted liim from the ground, he sank a corpse in ¿heir arms. Pappenheim's division, of which Lin- dau's regiment made a part, now charged, and as it was to the Margrave's corps Vallensteïn and Desmond had attached themselves as volunteers, they were obliged in the sudden rush to relinquish their purpose, and abandon tiie body; but Desmond, taking off his hat, and waving it as he rode, cried " Long live Ferdinand ! There lies Gustavus!" As soon as the shock of the charge en¬ abled Lindau to pause, he demanded the Lieutenant's meaning, who exultingly proclaimed his frieneľs achievement. The flight of the Duke of Saxe Lauen¬ bure;!), who rode like a madman back upon the Swedish army, fearful oť sharing the fate of his illustrious companion, has occasioned his name to be stained by an
Î8Î imputation far more foul and odious than that of cowardice, since there were not a few who attributed the death of Gustavus to his treachery, and the immediate cir¬ cumstances attending that event are ob¬ scuri lv and variously stated by historians. Meanwhile the brave Beruard, Duke of Saxe Weimar, found means to Ьмур it re- portod that the King was alive, but in tiie hands of the enemy, and the idea of rescu- ing their beloved leader inspired the troops with almost supernatural force and fury. In the midst of the renewed conflict, Pappenheim received a mortal wound, and as he was seen carrying oiľthc field, a shout arose that the battle was lost. Lindau and tlie brave volunteers per¬ formed wonders of valour, but it was de¬ creed, that though Gustavus must perish on that held, the echo of his name should secure the victory to his troops. The fog uhkh had covered the morniiiir, again rolled over the contending armies and closed in the evening, while the re-
182
treat of the Duke of Friedland, dui ing the night, leaving his artillery behind him, decided that the laurel was won by the Swedes, and must be entwined with the cypress for the pale brow of their un¬ timely perished hero. The haughty spi¬ rit of the imperial general was exas¬ perated to fury at the thought that his dead rival had driven him from the field, and his indignation was revealed by se¬ veral acts of tremendous severity. Im¬ mediately on his return to Bohemia, seventeen of his officers were executed almost without a hearing, and the names of fifty others, by being attached to a gibbet, rendered for ever infamous, while those who had distinguished themselves, or whom he had private reasons con¬ spicuously to favour, were remunerated with his usual splendid and unlimited magnificence. Octavius Piccolomini, a General who had greatly signalised him¬ self, receiveel from him a present of 10,000 dollars. Knowing that it was a detach-
183
ment from the regiment of Lindau whieh surrounded the Swedish monarch at the moment of his death, and likewise being apprised of the noble efforts made by the Margrave and his companions, imme¬ diately previous to the intervention of tht» fog, he sent for that young Colonel, and having knighted him, presented him with a sabre worth 500 dollars, and two fine charters. There was something in Lin- о о dau's countenance whieh the Duke did not comprehend, ci Have you any request to make, Co¬ lonel Lindau? Speak, sir, I shall not easiiy refuse you/' The Margrave hesitated. " Do you know, sir, from whose hand Gustavus of Sweden received his death?" ίζ Show me the man, and I will ex¬ haust my power of rewarding upon his head ! Where is he? 5 ' <c I cannot show him to your Highness for I know not oliere he is, nor when, nor how, your Highness's favour may
Ï84
reach him; but Gustavus fell in fair en¬ counter with your son, Count Casimir of Vallensteïn." A convulsive motion shook the muscles of the Duke's face, and no one could dis¬ cern whether it was the sudden opera¬ tion of pleasure or pain ; he paused. * e Are you sure of this, Lindau ?" " As sure, as that it is your Highness who speaks to me, and I am likewise sure that the same hand, supported by that ot the faithful and gallant Desmond, twice rescued the lamented Pappenheim ert¬ ne met his death blow." " Casimir is worthy of me !" said the Duke, and wringing the hand of Lindau, he added, while a tear, ifin truth it wa-· a tear, stood in his eye, " Is he safe, Lin¬ dau ?" " I know not, my Lord, for when that dense fog fell like a veil over exeiy ob¬ ject, we were separated, and I have not seen him or his comrade since," " Margrave, I have given you proof
185 that I know how to distinguish merit, and remunerate service. If Casimir seeks you, deliver him without question to me; —you can neither apprehend risk for him, nor accuse yourself of treachery> in restoring a son to the arms of his father- —An attempt to influence his will would be fruitless—-you must surprise him into that for which he will one day thank you. —Have I your promise ?" a My Lord, you may command my life, but up to this hour my honour is clear from imputation,-—and, pardon me, I will so preserve it." " Well, sir, you are as stubborn in pre¬ judice as Casimir himself, anel I have no time to waste on you; but you must not take it ill, Colonel, if you find yourself watched," With this hint they parted. The next officer for whom the Duke inquired, in order to reward him according to his de¬ serts, was his brother-in-law, Count Har¬ rach, who had, with many misgivings',
ÏW
glanced his eye over the names appended to the gibbet; his however was not of this degraded company. " Harrach," said the Duke, bending on him the eye of a falcon, " my coun¬ sel shall be brief—Resume vour velvet coat without delay. I have discovered that the atmosphere ofa court suits yonr constitution better than that of a camp, siuce etiquettes and civilities are so inve¬ terate in your nature, you could not pre¬ vail on yourself to treat even the enemy with the least rudeness.—In short, sir," said he, raising his voice to a pitch which caused a strong vibration on the nerves of Count Harrach, "you are a coward,— and had you not been the brother of Casi¬ miros mother, I should have taken another mode of telling you so.—Go home, sir, and keep your own counsel." The imperative words of this very dear and illustrious brother were obeyed to the letter. Count Harrach resumed his velvet coat and his point ruff and
187
ruffles, went back to court, and kept his own secret. That same evening, as Lindau sate within his quarters, writing to his beloved sister Ulrica a detailed account of the battle of Lutzen, a man, wrapped in the camp cloak ofa common soldier, entered his apartment, and having carefully closed the door, threw off his mantle, and crying, " I know I am safe with Lindau/' re¬ vealed Casimir of Vallensteïn. u That is more than I know, mv dear Count," said the Margrave, as he rose in consternation, and looking out, he called to the sentinel on guard, " admit no one to me on any pretence, and if orders come from the Duke, instead of letting the bearer pass, summon me forth." Vallenstein abruptly explained that the object which had induced him to venture into the close precincts of his father, was the hope of obtaining intelligence of his faithful friend, whom fr©m the moment the mist covered them on the evening of
Î88
the l6th, he had never beheld. He had in vain explored the field of Lutzen for the body, supposing he might have fallen, but neither there nor elsewhere could he discover the slightest trace of him. Lin¬ dau freely promised every aid in his power, and having so dismissed the subject, he began to make trial of the filial disposi¬ tions of Casimir* and to persuade him to listen to some mediatory arguments, ťť I could not have believed you thus obdurate, Casimir. Your father yearns after you, and what son on earth, but yourself, would not think it glorious to call that wonderful being father?" <ς Lindau, the mystery will one clay be revealed—-You cannot judge at presents between the Duke of Friedland and my¬ self. Suffice it, that with a heart prone to filial affection, attached even with enthu¬ siasm to the person of my father, dazzled by his genius, proud of his glory, we are for ever disunited.—-Here let the subject
Î89
close between us ; I will not speak of it again." The words had scarcely passed his lips when some faint rumour was distin¬ guishable at the door, which, on opening, discovered the Duke. " Do not be surprised, Margrave—I >avc you notice you were under sur¬ veillance ! So, Count Casimir ! I am ob/iged to have recourse to stratagem to procure a conference with an unnatural son ! Margrave, good night." And taking the young Count's arm, he quitted Linelau's quarters, and without speaking pursued his course to his own, where being arrived, he led the way to a private apartment, the door of which having fastened, he began, as was his custom when agitated, to pace rapidly to and fro. <( Well, sir/' said he at length, stopping abruptly, and looking earnestly in his son's face, "Are we friends or enemies? Speak/'
100
cf I am your friend, sir; the friend of your honour, your conscience, your eternal peace/* " Cant ! base hypocritical cant, un¬ worthy a man and a soldier ! Some priest, some hooded fanatic has bewitched you, Casimir! —Where is your philosophy? Oh, my son, could I but once prevail with you to abandon tlie vyeak fables that enslave you, you bear a spirit and a hand gloriously to execute whatever my intel¬ lect conceives.— Think, think for an in¬ stant ; united, what may we not achieve ?" " The very utmost pitch of human gran¬ deur—-but be not deceived, my father— I will never, never, pay the price ! I will not pledge my soul to Satan for ail the crowns in Europe." u Effeminate, puerile boy ! Who is Sa¬ tan? What is he? An old woman's bun¬ dle of rags to scare a froward baby ! The very monks would laugh at you! — 1 trusted, Casimir, that time and coirobo- rating circumstances would have come in
191
aid of filial duty, and brought you ere this to the arms of your father. Do you not see," said he, solemnly, tC that des¬ tiny, as well as nature, has sealed you my ally, my principal and most effective coadjutor? Was not your hand elected from among the haihk of mulritudes, to fulfil on Gustavus of Sweden that decree which, on the hour of his birth, appointed the hour of his death ? Can you not per¬ cei 1 , e that you arc impiously thwarting fate as well as outraging nature ? And will you blindly, desperately oppose the grand, eternal, irreversible march of events? After all, Casimir, the tide xvill flow/ 1 ťí Yes, my father, I have read c offences icill come; but woe unto him by whom they come/ Since time began offences have come, but this is no argument to justify the offender. Treasons, perjuries, violences, have arisen, and will arise, but I will never be a traitor, a dissembler, or a ruffian ! I may not have power to arrest
192 the tide of evil, but I will not augment it," ζ( ЛУе11 у ьи\ I will telí you the vevy ut¬ most you can do in the way of resistance* since that is the way in which you are beut.— -You can cross vour father's heait with asickeningpang, you can tempt him to revile ihe memory of her with whost milk you have imbibed }our froward and head s 1 1 on g dispositions, but to pause or re+i ograde one instant, one inch, on my predestined path, you shall never compel me." Casimir stood with folded aims, and his eves riveted to the floor, while his father, now assuming a moie softened as» pect, perused his countenance» " Methinks/' said he, "your rebellion has not been unpunished—How lean and wasted you are ! No, nature never formed you for the part you are acting ! Aban¬ don it, my son." He extended his arms, and Vallensteïn, whose affections yearned towards his
193
father, rushed into them, and for a few moments all difference of opinion, ail discordance of sentiment, was forgotten. The Duke still kept his arm over his son's shoulder, and looked at him as if he con- .¿dered him half conquered. " One word from you, Casimir, and it might be always thus." te Alas, my father, that word never will be uttered !" u Enough, sir. Too much time and breath have been wasted on an unattaina¬ ble object, and, since what must be must be, to fate I consign the matter. Pro- oably your affairs are not so urgent as to •efuse you leisure to sup with your old onerai. You will be my guest to-night?" i6 Gladly, sir." " Well then, let all fruitless discussion . ,ise between us—I will send for Lindau f >d Winterfeldt, and we will make a so- -d meal of it/' The two officers readily obeyed the .i-umons, and the latter greeted Casimir y o L. III. к
1У4
with equal surprise and joy, for it had been some time the current opinion of the army, that a rooted animosity existed between the generalissimo and his son, nor were there wanting some shrewd spirits, who guessed, and guessed rightly, at the cause. Amongst these however were neither Lindau nor Winterfeldt, who, thouo-h f^ach «rifted with hi« d«f nrøoor- tion of sound, manly intellect, were neither of them remarkable for sagacity in scent¬ ing a plot, and therefore contented them¬ selves with marvelling and lamenting that such a feud should exist between two such men. They assisted at this apparent reunion, with honest, heart-felt satisfac¬ tion, entertaining no suspicion that it was a mere transient, and even hollow truce. Casimir and Winterfeldt openly exchanged expressions of mutual regret for the dis¬ appearance of Desmond, which they could onlv attribute to his death, and to his body having fallen in some spot where it had evaded the anxious search of his
195
friend. The battle of Lutzen was fought over again, and Casimir, at the request of his father, modestly detailed the imme¬ diate circumstances attending the fall of Gustavus ; but instead of assuming credit to himself, he bitterly deplored his own rashness. " Had I not," said he, " in the heat and tumult of the moment, fired that fatal shot, you, my father, might now have ex¬ ulted in the possession of a captive hero. The hope ofa gallant nation would not have now been extinct, and the magnanimous soul of Gustavus would still enrich and adorn the world with its virtues,—Des¬ mond, seeing the King level his pistol at my iiead, shot him through the arm, and 3 so disabled, he could not have resisted, he must inevitably have fallen into our hands, for Saxe Lauen burg h waited not to ascertain the event, but ere the flash of our pistols had vanished, deserted his master."
Sv JL
196
" Miscreant !" exclaimed the Duke, " I would he had deserted to me." u Would your highness have received him ?" cried Lindau and Winterfeldt in one voice. íť Yes, and have hung him up for an example to my officers." The topics discussed were such as be¬ came a military feast, and all was social harmony ; for the Duke, on this occasion, laid aside, to an unwonted degree, the austere aspect of authority of which he had latterly very seldom divested himself. The night was somewhat advanced ere the two officers made their bows to their commander, and shook hands with Casi¬ mir, well content in the belief that he would now resume his post amongst them, and that whatever had caused his absence was effectually removed. When they w r ere gone, " Whatever your plans may be, Casi¬ mir," said the Duke, " I conclude you are at present ill provided with the means
197
to accomplish them—It probably is not your intention to remain with me, since my measures and your opinions would be at constant variance, but we will at least meet to-morrow ere you departs for though you will not assist me, I may be essentially useful to you w ithout offend¬ ing any of yom prejudices." Having exchanged a kind good night, young Vallensteïn was ushered into an apartment contiguous to that of his father* and enjoyed a more refreshing slumber than he had done for many months; for the cordiality between the Duke anel him¬ self, notwithstanding the incompatibility of their principles, had proved consola¬ tory to his feelings. In the morning the father and son breakfasted together at an early hour, and the Duke asked several questions respecting the immediate de¬ stination of Casimir, a point to which it was not easy to yield a very definite an¬ swer, since he hardly knew and little
198
cared whither he was going. Their meal being ended, " It seems to me," said the Duke, " that you have not made up your mind relative to the course you would next steer,·— I will with your leave supply to your will the direction it wants* For the present you are my prisoner, Casimir —I will not detain you here, because 1 feci your im¬ mediate atmosphere damps my spirits, and palsies my energies, but I will send you where you will be safe, till my views are accomplished/' " Do you fear to trust me at large, my rather ?" asked Casimir indignantly. " I know not; but I am sure the mea¬ sure I have adopted is such as prudence would prescribe; at all events, it is the result of mature deliberation, and it will not be shaken by remonstrance." £ť Then, I will not remonstrate." "Wisely resolved! Now then, fare¬ well, Casimir !—When we meet again,
199
I will not invite you to co-operate in my labours, but to assist me in enjoying what I have accomplished by actions which will then have become past and irrevoca¬ ble, and which, as you will not be able to revoke them, your philosophy will forbid you to deplore or deprecate. Once more, farewell, Casimir.'* Young Vallensteïn did not refuse the oífereel hand of his father; he pressed it affectionately, and then without question or comment, descended the stairs and entered a carriage in which two sub¬ alterns awaited him, and which was sur¬ rounded by armed troops on horseback.
200
CHAPTER IX. (ΐ The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul í Thy Mends suspect for traitors white thou liv'st, And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!" Shakspeare. Wolfsteïn, ever since the elopement of Rufo and Zanina, had betrayed a restlessness and disquietude, very opposite to the usual insolent, cold security of his temper and manners. He seldom slept two nights together in his castle, business often required his presence at Venice, or other neighbouring places. Sometimes he would set forth, provided and escorted as if for a distant journey, and remain long absent. His garrison, strong as it seemed, was augmented, and Wolfsteïn was often conversing with his men in an affable familiar tone t making them presents^ and
201 in short, exhibiting towards them a total alteration of demeanor. With the officers he was become mistrustful, capricious, sudden, making frequent and unexpected changes amongst them, while those who were displaced were not suffered to quit the walls, but kept in strict imprisonment, as though they would at a proper season be called to answer the chai ges their chief vvould bring against them. Pandulfo still apparently enjoyed his esteem and confidence, but did not rely implicitly on outward indications, perceiving that many of his comrades were caressed and treated with every show of favour up to the instant, when without the form of accusation they were cashiered and im¬ prisoned. In fact, Wolfsteïn could not accuse, because he was actuateel solely by the misgivings of his own dark mind; he was beset by apprehensions of he knew not what, being well aware that there was no point of the compass from which danger might not come to him. Until к 5
202
the present period, he had always looked calmly and disdainfully on whatever menaced him, and smiled at the oppor¬ tunity it afforded him for proving his incomparable intelligence and adroitness» never harbouring a suspicion that he could or should be foiled, since nothing was regarded by him as an obstacle. The confidence he reposed in his own Machia¬ velian talents was his bane, since it had Jed him to multiply his schemes to an infinite extent, and involveel him in an endless labyrinth, the clue to which was become perplexed and entangled ; in short, as he once expressed himself, he now found he had " too many men to move." Besides in proportion as the ac¬ cumulation and intricacy of his affairs required a firmer nerve, a keener eye, and a more comprehensive intellect, were the faculties of Wolfsteïn declining instead of gainingforce; for he had, in the indulgence of his temperament, forgotten the insidious properties of dissipation, aud did not caí-
203
culate that he should rise from every scene of excess with unbraced nerves and a wavering brain, till the whole system would finally yield beneath the repetition. It happened one fine spring morning that Louisa was taking the air on the castle ramparts, attended by Barbara, when she perceived Pandulfo approaching, accompanied by a person whose arms and legs were secured by light fetters, which, although they did not preclude the power of taking an uneasy exercise, were an effectual bar against escape. She came rather suddenly upon them, and Captain Pandulfo, who on all other occasions sedulously sought opportunity to converse with the lady of Lornberg, now, forgetful of his wonted courtesy, turned abruptly to avoid her, causing his captive com¬ panion to do likewise. ct Forsorne reason," observed Madame de Wolfsteïn, " Pandulfo is averse to meeting us ; let us therefore turn :-—he cannot surely fear my disclosure of his
204
indulgence to his prisoner, whomsoever he may be, but perhaps he fears to involve me in some dangerous knowledge/* They turned, and looked behind them. " See," said Barbara, u the poor young man is so overweighted by his fetters, he is obliged to support himself against the bastion ! Did you ever see any thing so thin, madam?—And yet, what an elegant figure ! I wonder who it can be !" i£ Probably/* answered Louisa, " one of the many officers who during the winter have fallen under the Chevalier's dis¬ pleasure." tť Ah, see," said Barbara, in a com¬ passionate tone, " Pandulfo knows not what to do with him ! He cannot support himself farther !" This exclamation of Barbara's induced Madame de Wolfsteïn again to look back, when she perceived that the poor captive vainly attempted to rise from the bastion against which he leaned, but that either the weight of his chains, or his own
205
weakness, rendered it impossible for him to stand without support, whilst Pandulfo's attention seemed divided between a visible dread lest they should approach nearer, and the situation of his companion, " lam sure," said Barbara," there can be no manner of harm in going to help him, poor youth! Look how awkwardly that great whiskered captain sets about it.*' At that moment, Pandulfo, leaving his charge to the support of the wall, came towards them. i& Lady," said he, (i I have placed my¬ self in an embarrassing predicament,— the gentleman you see has been many months a prisoner in this castle, and was placed under my care with charges of so positive a nature, and the exaction of such strict promises from me, as I could not without imminent risk, and some dis¬ honour, infringe, to say nothing of the espionage of Scharaffa, which has been unremitting. The poor youth has been very ill, and the skill of our pious Con«
206
fessor has restored him, as it were, from death. This morning Scharaffa's vigilance has been diverted, and 1 have ventured to lead my captive forth to be refreshed by the air, for which he is pining—Father Felix said he would die without it. I dared not free him entirely from his fet¬ ter?, lest our chief, whose return is very uncertain, might surprise u$.-—-Just as we turned the angle, and beheld your ap¬ proach, the heat of this warm spring sun¬ shine overcame him, and I cannot re¬ move him.—Can you supply me with any pungent scent which may dissipate the sudden faintness ?" u Oh yes, to be sure we can '" cried Barbara, fii and I will come and help you, for men are such clumsy wretches about the sick. I saw you this moment, Cap- tain Pandulfo, handling him just like a bear ; though, no doubt, it was all out of kindness." " Stay, stay, Signora ! for mercy's sake !" exclaimed Pandulfo, and without
207
ceremony he pursued and caught her. " You must not, you shall not," added he, passionately, " approach the prisoner ! You know not what you are about/* u Do not agitate yourself, captain," said Louisa: u we will not, by our indis¬ cretion, involve you in trouble.-—Take this volatile essence, it is almost infalli¬ ble, and I trust you will be no sufferer from your humanity." She then proceeded to instruct Pan¬ dulfo how he might better support his feeble companion, and entreated that he would venture to unfetter him, at least, till he was restored to his prison. This petition was willingly acceded to, and the captain had his hand upon the lock of the fetters, when, happening to cast a glance towards the sea, he perceived the Chevalier's barge just making for the castle landing-place ; Wolfstem himself, his arms crossed, and his eyes directed to the objects on the ramparts, was stand¬ ing on the deck.
208
" We are lost !" cried Pandulfo, as, with an almost supernatural effort, he rather carried than led the invalid to the stairs which wound from the castle ram¬ parts to its base, and in a moment they were out of sight. Madame de Wolfsteïn and her attendant beheld the landing of the chief with indescribable terror, fear¬ ing they knew not what, both for the unhappy stranger, and the humane Pan¬ dulfo : certain they had been seen anel recognised, they knew not whether it was better to descend immediately to their apartments, or remain with appa¬ rent composure pacing the battlements ; while they were thus irresolute, the ob¬ ject of their terror joined them. " Oh !" said he, fixing his keen eye on his wife's countenance, which underwent a rapid change beneath his gaze, a How agitating is sudden joy ! My unexpected return produces an effect, which, if I did not know thee, Louisa, or if I were one of your jealous-pated spouses, I might
209
misconstrue.—How your little heart flut¬ tered with gladness, when you saw Wolf- steïn's gondola approach the beach ! Did it not, my life ?" ' c In truth, Chevalier, I elid not look for your return so early," replied she, faintly. " And yet," said he, u I did not name any definite period of absence ; but İt is unspeakable gratification to a fond spouse to discover, on his return, that the partner of his soul spends the live-long hours of separation in watching till his sail shall recross the waters/' Madame de Wolfsteïn was but too well inured to these ironical commendations, which were often the prelude to fits of terrifying fury.—He dismissed Barbara, and, passing her arm through his, began to speak of the beauty and freshness of the morning, and on other indifferent and general topics,—at length stopping suddenly, H I wonder/ 1 said he, " where Pan-
210
dulfo is to-day,-—he is sick, I suppose, for it was Valetti who received me on my landing." Louisa trembled, but spoke not. u Do you fine! the air piercing, my love ?" inquired her husband ; while hardly knowing what she answered, and conscious of the trepidation she was be¬ traying, she said, " Yes/' " Heavens !" cried he, €ť you lia ve the ague, then ! for the sun is intensely hot ! Is it the ague, or is it the effect of your immoderate joy at my return ? I believe it to be the latter. Now, speak truth ; are you not shaking like an aspen with terror ? And did you not think, when you saw your Wolfsteïn's boat, what a blessing it would be were the waves to ingulf it !—Come ! No lies ! I am not, as you know, one of your blind honest souls who cannot distinguish between genuine and counterfeit.—Who were those two men with whom }^ou were in conference at the moment when the appearance of
211
my gondola inspired the whole group with consternation, visible even at that distance ?" se One of them I did not see near, and cannot tell who he was :—the other,"— and she hesitated. " The other w 7 as my trusty command¬ ant.—And are you sure, quite sure, that you did not see the face of the other ? Will vou/ 1 and he snatched the a^uas which hung on her bosom, " will you kiss this, and tell me that you did not see his face, that you did not bear his voice, that you do not know his name ?" She kissed the agnus, and being re¬ assured by questions so easily answered, she repeated deliberately each of the ne¬ gatives he required, " Very well, madam ! I know that, although like all other women, you have a pretty turn for evasion, you would hold it a crime to utter a direct falsehood.— The matter is not in itself of conse¬ quence, but I wished to ascertain, pre-
212
cisely, how far Pandulfo had deviated fiom his duty." " I believe, Chevalier," replied Louisa, timidly, ct that I can exactly satisfy you on that point.*—The beauty of the morn¬ ing inviting me forth earlier than usual ; atteneled by Barbara, I hael reached the southern battlements, where I intended to pause, and inhale the reviving sea- breeze, when I perceived Pandulfo ap¬ proaching with a stranger, whose fetters occasioneel him to walk with difficulty. The commandant was evidently alarmed on beholding us, and instead of offering any salutation, turned away with his com¬ panion, whom he seemed desirous to hurry from our sight, but the extreme feebleness of the stranger, who sunk al¬ most fainting against a bastion, frustrated his intention. Barbara indiscreetly flew to offer her assistance, anel Pandulfo re¬ sisted the attempt, even with violence. Thus were we situated, when the sight of you, and probably the dread lest he
Ja I tj
might fall under your displeasure, in¬ duced the commandant to redouble his efforts for the removal of his feeble charge, and they almost instantly dis¬ appeared." " Then, what, in the name of common sense, made you shake like the leaves on that poplar ?" " Can you ask, Wolfsteïn ? It is not my nature to tremble, but it has become my habit." " Well," said he, affecting to disregard or misunderstand the insinuation, " this soft breeze and bright sky have soothed me into the temper of an angel, and I know not what I may be induced to con¬ cede to you ;—for instance, you, who are so tender-hearted and compassionate, would, no doubt, fain see that sick pri¬ soner at liberty—at least freed from his dungeon, and his fetters?* 1 She was too much accustomed to snares, not to apprehend them, and hesi¬ tated how to answer.
a Nay, since you are indifferent on the subject, it is all the same thing to me ;—- but I thought that either your curiosity or your sympathy might have pleaded in his favour, and was in the mood to grant you such a concession ;—but, after all, he is safer where he is." " Ah, Wolfsteïn ! Does it indeed de¬ pend on me to open the door of his prison, and if I ask his release, will you really grant it?" et Pray, madam, do I examine and cross-examine you ? Do I not give im¬ mediate credence to whatever you deign to utter? Why should you doubt my words ? But to show you that I am not trifling w ith you, I will tell you there is a courier waiting below with despatches of the utmost importance, only that my eagerness to salute my adored wife su¬ perseded his claims on my attention.— Now, I cannot engage positively for the liberation of my prisoner, till I have pe¬ rused this man's credentials, but, if their
215
contents prove such as I expect, I will, on your mediation, give the prisoner you saw this morning the range of the castle, subject only to his parole, and a few slight conditions." Madame de Wolfsteïn strove to make her thanks acceptable, though she still greatly mistrusted the performance of the promise, and expected that some morti- fy ing* and disappointing manoeuvre was couched beneath it. On returning to the interior of the cattle, she met Friar Felix, who awaited her, in visible uneasiness» having hael the occurrence of the morning related to him both by Pandulfo and Bar¬ bara. He followed her f о her apartment, anel had scarcely courage to ask the result of her conference with the tyrant: nothh g coulel exceed his astonishment at her re¬ lation, but lie so far partook her doubts that he could not for an instant venture to confide on the hope held forth. ic If," said the Confessor, " aught of evil should arise from this morning's in-
216
dulgence, I am the cause. Yet, alas! he must have perished in that murky, gloomy confinement, had another day passed over his head, and the pure air been still shut out from him. Poor youth, I could not see him perish ; and were my life the sole forfeiture, right willingly would I pay it" '* Who is the prisoner, my father ? And what is the cause of his rigorous confinement ?" " Preserve your ignorance, my child. It has been fortunate that you did not discover who he was previous to your ex¬ amination on the subject by your hus¬ band. Whatever indulgence may now be granted, would, I doubt not, have been withheld, had Pandolfo so far trans¬ gressed his trust as to have allowed any one the knowledge you are desirous to obtain ; and I am thankful to Providence that no accident or temptation has ever betrayed my feebleness into letting the secret transpire/'
*rf JL s
The step of Wolfsteïn now echoed along the corridor, and Felix, who had hitherto successfully avoided appearing at any of the entertainments in the castle, hurried away through the apartments, though, perhaps, his dread of being bidden to the feast was groundless. " Was that your monk, Louisa?" said the Chevalier, as he entered. " It was Father Felix." " He is a very cowardly ecclesiastic ! What is he afraid of? Time was, when he woulel bestow on me occasionally, the piecious sentences of the 'golden- mouthed' Chrysostom. If he flies thus when he hears my step, what would he do if the devil himself were at hand ! Far from emulating tiie prowess of Saint Dunstan, he would not so much as stay to throw a handful of holy water oyer his shoulder at him. But í suspect the Friar has more reasons than one for scampering at my approach ; he is like vol. m. L
£18
the rest of his crafty fraternity ; but let him tread warily." Louisa trembled, in the consciousness that the proceedings of the Confessor were not exactly calculated to meet the knowledge of Wolfsteïn, though she did her utmost to conceal the dismay with which she heard the implied accusation, " Now, my dear/' said he, " I come to redeem my pledge ; I have kept my word with you ;—you have ransomed the prisoner ;—he awaits you in the banquet¬ ing hall, where, as lady of the castle, you will receive him." He took her arm and they descended ; the feast was already spread and the company assembled. Panelulfo and the stranger stood at a window which opened on the garden, and did not immediately perceive the entrance of Wolfsteïn and Louisa ; when the former said, " Count, lead Madame de Wolfstem to her seat."
219
The stranger turned to obey,—It was Casimir! lie had been vainly courting to his aid the fortitude necessary to carry him through the present rencontre, but the feebleness of his frame seconded the agitation of his spirits ; he opened his lips, but his tongue refused to arti¬ culate, and he stood fbr a moment un¬ able to advance. When the eye of Ma¬ dame de Wolfstem rested on the counte¬ nance of that wan, dejected, emaciated being, and recognised the once hand¬ some, gallant Vallensteïn, she could not restrain her feelings ; but in an accent of mingled astonishment, grief, and com¬ passion, she exclaimed, u Casimir!" and burst into tears. Wolistem regarded them both with scornful fury ; at length, ' 4 Incomparable!" he cried: " 1 did not in truth look to be rewarded by the exhibition of a scene so pathetic, for Madame de Wolfsteïn is parsimonious of her tears! I think, madam, these are the first you have shed since our marriage L 2
220
—we have been so happy f Meanwhile, our feast is cooling ; suppose we have the sequel to these attitudes and ex¬ clamations as entremets or dessert." Vallensteïn scarcely heard this con* temptuous speech : Louisa, Wilhelm's sister, stooel before him, she spoke kindly to him, she wept for him! He saw, he heard nothing else, and he felt a healing balm glide into his chilled and broken heart. Fearful to forfeit the permission he had received to lead Madame de Wolfsteïn to the table, and seat himself beside her, he now hurried forward and grasped her hand in silence; while the rest of the company, consisting chiefly of the usual individuals, took their places likewise. In spite of the woful alteration sorrow had wrought in Casimir Vallensteïn ; in spite of his heavy eyes, his hollow cheek, and his drooping spectral form, the manly beauty with which nature had endowed him might be faded, but could not be
221
atfaced ; and even in the sight of one who had never beheld him in his pride, there was still that about him which could not fail of creating an irresistible interest. When the guests were arranged and the meal commenced, Wolfsteïn affected to occupy himself in general and indifferent conversation ; but he was all the while intently scanning the looks and actions of the prisoner anel his wife. It was sometime ere either coukl acquire courage to address the other. Casimir had never loved, save Louisa of March¬ feldt ; he believed, indeed, that from the moment when she gave her hand to Wolfstein, his passion was extinct, and knew not by what name to call the rest» less, wretched regrets which survived it. Since he became her husband's captive, and knew she inhabited the same walls with himself 1 , no one can wonder, that in defiance of every effort, her image was incessantly before him ; but still, it was not love, it was pity for her fate, it was
222
an anxious interest for the happiness of Wilhelnťs sister, it was curiosity. Love, in short, it could not be, and, therefore, it must be something else. That morn¬ ing, when he so nearly fainted at the dis¬ tant view of her ñgure, and the distant murmur of her voice, he began, indeed, to suspect that some symptoms of the old malady still hung about him; yet when his chains were so unexpectedly unfastened, and when he was invited to behold and converse with her once more, he had not fortitude to shun the danger, well as he was aware of the small strength he now r possessed to dissemble his feel¬ ings. As for Louisa, in her mind the ideas of Wilhelm and Casimir had be¬ come inseparable ; her infatuated re¬ jection of the latter had equally out¬ raged both, and often had the savage taunt of Wolfsteïn been realized, for often had the upbraiding spectre of her brother haunted her slumbers. The touch of the cold thin hand which led her to
223
the table, the pale sunken brow, and the hectic blush, which fled so swift across tbe wan cheek, all called to mind the last days of Wilhelm ; and as she looked on Casimir, her heart smote her, and she felt that her consciousness of ingratitude to him outweighed all her other suffer¬ ings. There was something peculiarly embarrassing in the silence, which neither could break, although each sedulously examined their thoughts for some meet subject, something which might not in¬ volve any particular interest; atlast, Lou¬ isa, remembering the friendship which subsisted between him and Princess Stol¬ berg, asked if it was long since he had seen that lady. " Ah, yes !" said he, " it is very long ago ! Perhaps you may remember my departure from court, and w r e have not met since ; but, though we never meet again, till that hour arrives which freezes the last kind sentiment in my heart, I will cherish the remembrance of one, who
224
showed such generous sympathy in the fate of an unhappy man," a I do believe/* replied Louisa, * c that, although her manners were volatile to excess, she had many sterling qualities. Would," added she with a sigh, ic that I had earlier appreciated her merits !—But alas! we are sad short-sighted beings; and few reflections weigh more grievously on the mind than those, which too late a sense of worth we have slighted, or ser- vices we have ill repaid, are apt to assail us with." There was something in the manner with which she accompanied those words, which caused Casimr to appreciate their meaning. " Alas !" thought he ; " she does me justice now, but it is to( late!" He could not rerist saying, * £ Surely, madam, you cannot have experienced the poignancy of such a sentiment/' ťí Does the heart of my brother Wil¬ helme devoted friend acquit me ?"
¿iii*}
And she bent over her plate, to con¬ ceal the emotion which overspread her countenance. He did not reply, but she heard him murmur inwardly those last words, with which she had dismissed him at the fatal mask at Princess Stol¬ berg^—" It is too late !—too hue ! v At length, as if anxious to give a turn to conversation, which was becoming too painfully interesting,— " I do not," said he, c< see Conrade! My good old friend and comforter, Fa¬ ther Felix, evaded my questions con¬ cerning him : that he is not now in your service I am aware ; his prejudices, no doubt, have separated you ; but you can probably inform me of his destiny, for you would not lose sight of Conrado." " Oh, Casimir !" saiel she, turning deadly pale, " do not name Conrade ! —It is horrible /' At this moment, Pandulfo, who occu¬ pied his usual seat on the left hand of Madame de Wolfsteïn, threw his arm L 5
226
across the back of her chair, and pressed the shoulder of Vallensteïn, who started, and, looking round, was soon aware of the meaning of this silent hint. The Lord of the feast had gradually relin¬ quished all conversation ; and, leaning his elbow on the table, fixed his eyes, in a deep and deadly scowl, on the Count and his wife; he had sate some tíme in this position, and Pandulfo knew not how to awaken the attention of his neighbours to this inauspicious omen. Louisa was terrified, Casimir distressed for her sake, and a dead silence prevailed round the table. iC What has happened ?" cried Wolf¬ steïn fiercely. ct Why gaze ye all upon each other? is it anything strange that an interesting youth and a gentle dame should whisper, and blush, and turn pale, and siffh, and utter their half-smothered exclamations, in the very face of her husband ? Ye are novices, all of you ! —It happens every day. But con-
227
versation languishes ; I would see my guests merry ! Come, since you are all dumb, I will tell you a tale to divert you. To the consternation of all his hearers, lie related the web-known storv of the 4/ Seigneur Fay al ; anel he dw r elt with si¬ nister emphasis on that part of the tragic tale, where the exasperated spouse serves up, as the repast of his unhappy wife, the heart of her lover, llaoui de Coucy ! u I have heard this story/' said he, %i treated as a fiction.—What do you think of it, madam ?" £C I believe it may be true, sir," re¬ plied Louisa. ťí Well, whether De Fayal fed his wife, or not, with the heart of his rival, it is a tale of vengeance prettily imagined, and may serve as instruction to an injured husband. I, for my own part, am happy in my wife; but there are men who might use the Seigneur's receipt to ad¬ vantage/'
228
Pandulfo muttered within liim self— u You must despatch a few of us, how¬ ever, ere v ou m actise inch Inferna! cookery !" tť Count Casimir oť Vallensteïn, 1 pledge you/' sa-d Wolfstem. Corylo poured wine ¡nio two goblets, and presented o í: e to Yadens'cïn, whose examination at w liat h ч! pi=scd caused him to hesitate ; but jv "печЛ the word "drink" faun h uiteuv by his fair neigh bour, ani he s \v:* lo 1 , v e d the draught Cí Here's to your jble fallier, Count —tlie Duke of Friedland, Sagan, Meck¬ lenburgs aiul Cïreat Glogau, and late 1 generalissimo ot the forces of his impe¬ rial majesty." " Did you ^ay laie generalissimo, Che¬ valier ? ~— Has my father, then, relin¬ quished his command?" Something like hope and pleasuie crosseel his thoughts as he asked this question ; he trusted the Duke, having seen the fallacy of his ambitious schemes.
229
had made a voluntary sacrifice of the power which tempted him. u Your question is a critical one, Count; the answer involves much sin¬ gular and important matter/' 4i Pardon me, Chevalier, I would only ask if mv father has maele a willing sur» render of his command, or ifit has again been required from him by his imperial master ?--()nc word will satisfy me." " í fear then, that Ferdinand has, by demanding the Duke's retirement, proved himself unworthy the services of so faithful and disinterested a friend. In short, Count, the crown of Bohemia is still in the stars, where old Fieramosca first found it, and, till the stars fall, it will never reach your father's head." " Unmanly insult!" cried Vallensteïn, turning pale. cc Be patient," whispered Louisa, ter¬ rified at the thought that, besides his feebleness, he alone of all the company was unarmed.
230
u Do not agitate yourself, Count.— There is now in the castle a courier from Egra, and I would fain have communi¬ cated the contents of his despatches for your satisfaction, but I will not multiply scenes —-I have had too manv to please me already to-day. To-morrow, unless my mind alters, you shall be made ac¬ quainted with such passing events as are connected with your father's destiny.*' The guests now all rose from table, and Pandulfo attempted to secure the privilege in which he had been hitherto indulged, of leading the lady of the castle to her apartments. " Not to-day, sir !" said Wolfstem abruptly ; and, seizing his wife's hand, he accompanied her to her chamber. He took a seat by her. " What were you saying, madam, when the officious Pandulfo gave you that timely hint ? It must needs have been something interesting!—Let me hear it; I like to have my sensibility
231 awakened." She hesitated. " Oh ! you have forgotten, no doubt ; but," said he, grasping her arm with his usual fe¬ rocity, <c think a little, for you shall tell me!" iC It is a subject, Wolfsteïn, which, for лош* own sake, I would fain suppress, if the nume of Conrade has nothing ap¬ palling to your ear, / may venture to pronounce it." " Dexterously evaded!" said Wolfsteïn, turning' pale; for, in truth, that name did occasionally produce a cold vibration on his nerves. u it is no evasion, Wolfstem :— Val¬ lensteïn was well acquainted with the worth, the zeal, and affection of my bro¬ ther's faithful servant, and he inquired where I had disposed of him, It was an agitating question, and the interruption caused by your menacing looks, relieved mc from the embarrassment of an an¬ swer." It was a foi tunate circumstance that
232
Conrade's name had occurred at that critical moment, since, of all the dark images which rose in succession before the mind's eye of Wolfstein, there wa^ none which he was so earnest to dismis. Jiis nerves were not strung for the con¬ flict as they had been ; nor could he, as heretofore, look back with indifference, and forward with confident presumption ; he was now neither clear and uniform in his purpose, nor resolved in his actions.
233
CHAPTER Χ. { ' Never did I know A creature, that did bear the shape of man, So keen and greedy to confound a man." The following day the Lord of Lorn« berg was much engaged in receiving and conversing with couriers, who came from various quarters, bringing intelligence > which, judging by the eagerness and agitation of Wolfsteïn's manner, was of no indifferent tenor, The hour of the feast was protracted, but when, at last, it was served, the Chevalier sought his wife, and led her to the banqueting hall ; where the meal was concluded with more than usual silence and rapidity. Warned by the example of the preceding day, Count Casimir, although as the stranger guest the privilege was still awarded
234
him, of leading the lady of the castle to her place, and occupying the next seat, was very cautious of casting a glance, or uttering a word which might incur for the unhappy Madame de Wblfstein the fury of his host. He contented himself, therefore, with partaking only what her hand presented to hi in, and with per¬ ceiving she was anxious to tempt his wayward appetite, by selecting whatever w r as most delicate from the costly lux¬ uries which covereel the table. The meal being ended, Wolfsteïn commanded the absence of the attendants ; and, turning to Vallensteïn, oaid, " I partly engaged, Count Casimir, to impart to you the tenor of the despatches which have reached me from Egra, since which I have received others more con¬ clusive than those of yesterday. Are you disposed to give them audience, or is your mood inclined to any other amusement ?" 6t You well know, Chevalier," replied
235
Casimir, his cheek flushing with emotion, " how long it is since I have heard tidings of my father !—I do most ar¬ dently desire to hear the despatches." fii Well, Count, the farther to testify my consideration for you, you shall not only be gratified immediately, but the dulcet voice of Baron Wilheln/s sister shall pour their contents on your ear/' He then took a letter from his bosom, which was handed to Madame de Wolf¬ steïn. u Favour Count Casimir, my dear, by a perusal ofthat epistle. None of you/' added he, looking round, iC have heard Madame de Wolfsteïn read; her voice, musical as it is in the utterance of her own words, lends infinite force and pa¬ thos to those of others. Head, madam, and read audibly !" She took the letter, surprised and em* harrassed ; and, as usual, apprehending that this apparent courtesy was but the veil of some malicious scheme. As she
236
prepared to obey, Captain Pandulfo, as though by accident, let fail the whole contents of his goblet over her, rose in great confusion, and, offering many apo¬ logies for his awkwardness, attempted to lead her from the room, that she might divest herself of her wine-dropping robes. " Stay, Pandulfo," said Wolfsteïn calmly, " there is spirit enough in that liquid to secure the lady of the castle from suffering more than temporary in¬ convenience from your libation. It is a pity so ingenious a stratagem should fail—is it not, my friend Pandulfo ?" iS What do you mean, Chevalier ?" " You need not ask that question. But, for the letter !—Will you indulge us, madam ?" " I entreat,*' said Casimir, Cí that Ma¬ dame de Wolfsteïn will retire and re¬ medy the effects of this accident. Per¬ haps you will trust the despatches to my own perusal, or will favour me by read¬ ing them yourself."
237
€i No, sir, if they are not read by Ma¬ dame de Wolfstein, thev will not be read by any one ; if she quits the room, they shall that moment be committed to the flames, and the intelligence they contain be buried in oblivion !" " Quit the room, nevertheless, ma¬ dam/' whispered Pandulfo. On the other hand, the dejected, agi« tated countenance of Casimir seemed to plead for the perusal of the manuscript, and, together with the dread of her hus¬ band's wrath, determined her. She un¬ folded the letter, and was glancing her eye over the first page, when Wolfsteïn cried, " How, madami is it not legible?— Must you spell it ere you begin ?" Thus urged, she commenced her task. " Since our letters from Pilsen, you will easily calculate on the probability of that which I am now to communicate. You were aware that the whole extent of the Duke's prodigious schemes was
2Э8
scanned by the eye of the Emperor, even before his majesty was prepared to avail himself of our intelligence."—Lou¬ isa's voice faltered ; the eye of Casimir, fixed as marble, was riveted to her coun¬ tenance. c< Read, madam!" said he; " read ! I am prepared—I will not distress you-—I can bear it." " Read, madam!—Read audibly!" echo eel Wolfsteïn. " After the sentence of degradation had passeei his majesty's council, and was known and published, the high spirit of this great man still maintained itself; he believed himself still surrounded by adherents inflexibly attached to his for¬ tunes; and he still confided in the pre¬ dominance of that star which promised him empire. Field Marshal Ilio, and Generals Terski, Morvald, Predau, Lozy, and Hinnersam, and even Piccolomini, signed a paper, pledging themselves to stand by their great benefactor, even
239
unto death ; but that same evening Pic¬ colomini set off for Vienna, and, in the middle of the night, procured entrance to the palace, bearing with him the scheme of the Duke's horoscope, drawn up by the hand ofthat crafty old traitor Fieramosca, who has been the grand wheel İn our machinery, together with in¬ numerable proofs of the Duke's criminal designs. The flight of the deeply trusted Octavius Piccolomini, of Gallas, and of Aldringer, looked like a wavering in the march of destiny, which somewhat startled the stout-hearted Duke ; nay, perhaps, although he affected to place no reliance on the faith and gratitude of men, he felt shocked by these desertions ; but it w r as decreed, that he should prove to the utmost the truth of his own doc¬ trines. He secretly quitted Pilsen, at¬ tended by me, and Butler, to whom you know he lately gave a regiment of dra¬ goons; and, escorted by Terski's regi¬ ment, we came to Egra, of whose go-
240
vernor he felt as sure as if he had been his son ; for, in fact, having raised him from the ranks, he was the father of his fortunes. Meanwhile, we were in pos¬ session of secret orders to seize the Duke's person ; but, in spite of the al¬ most general defection, he had still a few sturdy wights about him, whose stubborn spirits we knew how to appreciate ; and they rendered it impracticable for us to fulfil this clause in our instructions» Assassination was then the only alter¬ native, and on that we agreed !" Again Louisa falterééi, turned pale, and entreated to be spared the farther perusal of the paper. But Casimir, laying his icy fingers on her arm, exclaimed, " I conjure you, 1 conjure you, ma¬ dam ! proceed. Any thing but igno¬ rance!" " The Count must learn his father's fate from your lips, madam, or not at all," said Wolfsteïn* ** To make short my eventful story,"
241
proceeded the narrator, " Gordon, the governor, invited his benefactor to a feast in the fortress soon after his arrival, and with him all his true adherents, Terski, Ilio, Kinski, Winterfeldt, with Nieman, his old secretary." The cheek of Louisa waxed paler and paler, her lips shook, her voice became less articulate ; while Casimir hung on the words which he dreaded to hear, yet could not bear to lose; the inhuman Wolfsteïn sitting, meanwhile» as it were dev ouring the scene. The manly-hearted Pandulfo could no longer endure to wit¬ ness this slow torture. He had writhed upon his seat, as if convulsed by some intolerable spasm ; and now, rising sud¬ denly, he seized the paper from the hand of Madame de Wolfsteïn. " No," he cried, " it is no tale for a woman to read!—it is a tale of blood, and horror, and execrable perfidy ! The Duke is dead, Count Casimir ! He died vol. iu. m
Й42
beneath the daggers of cowardly assas¬ sins !—But he died like himself!" Madame de Wolfsteïn heard no more : the dreadful agitation she had endured in undergoing this most excruciating trial ended in insensibility : she fainted, and had not Casimir caught her, little able as he was to sustain even her weight, she woulel have fallen on tlie floor. Val- lensteïn's head was light and confused ; the tragical narrative to which he had just listened, had filled his fevered mind with vague uncertain images, and nothing around him seemed real ; he knew only ihat some heavy affliction had befallen him, and that it was the form of Louisa uf Marchfeldt he held in his arms, and which, in spite of his extreme feebleness, he grasped to his bosom with frantic tenacity. Pandulfo immediately com¬ prehended his situation, and endea¬ voured, but in vain, to take Madame de Wolfsteïn from him : while the savage
243
contriver of this scene came deliberately towards them. " What is this, sir?" said he: "Am I to see my wife suffer the embrace of my rival ?" " Your wife !" echoed Casimir, with a ghastly stare. " True!—Then I must relinquish her ! But she should have been mine/' And he calmly resigned her. A fear¬ ful, corpse-like insensibility still hung upon her. " She is dead!" said Casimir; " and so is my father, and Wilhelm, anei Blanche!—They are all dead, and I would die too !" As Wolfsteïn bore his unconscious wife from the banqueting hall, Vallen¬ steïn pursued him. " Living," cried he, u she was your wife!—Let her be mine when dead!— Let one tomb inclose us, like Blanche and Wilhelm, and then all will be well!" " Pandulfo!" cried Wolfsteïn furi- M L 2
^44
ously, Äí if you would not have me strike my dagger into your prisoner, let him not provoke me ! We must talk farther of this. He must be meeker than I am, who bears it tamely. Return to the hall. I will seek assistance for this ladv, and join you presently." They returned to the table; Casimir took the seat he had before occupied^ and sate with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed on the vacancy left by Louisa ; while Pandulfo, in order to divert his at¬ tention, took up the paper which had fallen from his hand when Madame de Wolfstein fainted. This excited the ob¬ servation of Vallensteïn, and he began asking several vague and wandering questions respecting the contents. Only a few of the officers had been invited to remain during the perusal of the de¬ spatches, which were written and signed by the treacherous favourite Devereux ; and of these, some now began openly to express their disgust and indignation at
245
the inhuman manoeuvre they had wit¬ nessed. As Wolfsteïn had apprised Pandulfo of his intention to return, the rest requested his advice, whether they should remain or separate. iť Stay !" said the captain. " Some altercation will probably take place be¬ tween us; and, tj whatever I may be provoked to act or spe Ji, I would have witnesses." " For my part/' said one, ct the wine has unsteadied my judgment; I shall be ofl itti e use to you." u And I," said another, " would not be implicated in any of these broils : í have seen enough of the Chevalier's sum- тагу mode of proceeding : I wish not to experience it in my own person." The number, therefore, of those who remaineel with Pandulfo and the half- conscious Vallensteïn, elid not exceed three or four. Meanwhile, the Chevalier, having roughly flung the still inanimate form of
246
his wife on her couch, he called on Bar¬ bara, who waited in the next apart¬ ment. u Look to your lady ! Call the monk —bid him bring his lancets ! If she is alive, she must be bled." " You have killed her !—You have killed her !" crieel Barbara in a phrensy, as she looked on the apparently lifeless corse of her beloved laely. " You shall be broken on the wheel, you wickeel monster !"—all his power and all his ter¬ rors vanishing from her thoughts, before the grief and indignation which seized her on beholding the supposed murderer of Louisa. " Peace, thou noisy fool !" said Wolf¬ steïn, seizing and dashing her from the room. " Go, call the friar, I tell thee, and return on the instant !" He did not, without alarm, contem¬ plate the total stillness of Louisa's coun¬ tenance, the paleness of the c! sed lids,
247
and the seemingly total cessation of her breath. Now he stood, with folded arms, regarding her—now he chafed her hands or earnestly felt her pulse—and some¬ times he called upon her name. <c She is dead !" he said sullenly. "Dead!— and I have done it!" Then again he approached ; and, hav¬ ing listened in vain a moment for her breath, giving way to his fury, he stamped, and shrieked in her car, " Louisa, open your eyes when I command you !" At length, perceiving a silver vase full of scented water, he seized it, and poured the cold liquid over her face, when, with a sudden sob, she raised her head.—At that moment Father Felix and Barbara entered. " Abandoned, unhappy man !" ex¬ claimed the former, " what hast thou done?" " Nothing!" replied Wolfsteïn, re¬ suming his usual cold indifference of
248
manner; " I thought she was dead, yet it was all a trick. Look to her, Father ; ƒ have business elsewhere !" And leaving her in the tender hands of those, whose whole of earthly hope was involved in her existence, and who harboured no care, entertained no pros¬ pect beyond it, he retraced his steps to the banqueting room, bearing with him a he.art full of tumult and perturbation. He re-seated himself at table, and filling a goblet to the brim, dranl it off*. " I am glad," said he, looking round him, " that some who were witnesses to the recent scene, whose eyes beheld my outrages, remain to judge between me and my guest. None of you will dispute that the cause of Madame de Wolfsteïn fainting was her sympathy (1 think they call it) for that man : but, tender of a woman's weakness, I restrained my feel¬ ings, and, in spite of tiie corroboration such a circumstance lent to other proofs in my possession, I would have ovet%
249
looked it; but, in contempt ofa hus¬ band's presence, my guest (you all be¬ bélel it), seized my wife in his arms, anel even refused to yield her up, pouring over her I know not what farrago of amorous nonsense, till I tore her from his grasp. Are ye not all my witnesses?" Each looked on the other, but no one spoke. " I am not," said Wolfsteïn, 4i ac¬ customed to refer my affairs to any man's arbitration ; but I have been outraged before my people, before my friends, before those to whom my in¬ juries in a manner belong. You, at least, my trusty faithful friend, Pan¬ dulfo, will not you speak? I ask only, if I have alleged what any man present can impugn ?" * c As the question is directed to me, my Lord, I will not hesitate to answer faithfully," said Pandulfo. " The facts you have stated are correct to the letter; but, pardon me, the spirit is per-
250
verted : my steady services have pur¬ chased for me the right of speaking truth without scruple, and, since you invite it, I will avail myself of the pri¬ vilege. Your guest was consigned to your care and your hospitality by his fa¬ ther : how the trust was executed, I am not, perhaps, called on to examine/' " If," cried Wolfsteïn, indignantly, " you would inculpate me on that ground, I fear not to meet the charge. I accepted the trust and would have ful¬ filled it; but that Vallensteïn, instead of submitting to remain with me a prisoner at large, threatened to use every means allowed him of escape, and even treated me, within my own towers, with an in¬ solent defiance which justified me in the act of abridging his freedom/* " You have gone nigh, Chevalier, to abridge his life; but permit me, without interruption, to trace my view of the scene which has this day occurred, and then call any umpire you please, provided he
251
wears the form and bears the heart of man. Y T ou have for two days, at the end of many dark and lingering months, con* ceded to your prisoner the light and the breath of Heaven, and you invited him to the courtesies of your table, and on what diel you feed him there ? On poison ! or rather you distilled it on him slowly, drop by drop, till his mind gave way under the infliction, and you compelled your delicate wife to a task so revolt¬ ing, as not a man amongst us but would have shrunk and shuddered to perform. Count Casimir did seize the inanimate form of Madame de Wolfsteïn anel strain it to his bosom ; we cannot deny it ; we all witnessed the action ; but he had not the guidance of reason, he acted under the impulse of delirium produced by your tortures : he is now at liberty on his own parole, seconded by mine, anei when he returns to his dungeon, I go likewise/ 5 Wolfsteïn sate, his elbow on the table, and his hand shading his twisted brows,
£àO&t
while he ground his teeth in silence. There was no man present, except Pan¬ dulfo and his unconscious prisoner, who continued sunk in feverish stupor, that did not tremble to calculate the result of this hardy speech, but, to the surprise of all, Wolfsteïn struggled with his violent emotion till he smothered it. * { And гдш, Pandulfo," said he, rising, 44 you, in whose hands I have deposited my life—on whose faith my safety re¬ poses—in whose attachment only I am strong : is it you, who set the example of insubordination? Is it you, who threaten your friend anel your chief before the eyes of your comrades? Is it you, who would procure that by menace, which you can win by request? Fie, Pandulfo! I looked for other at your hands/' Pandulfo rose likewise^ and likewise relaxed the stern expression of his brow» " I have been tempted far, my Lord ; but in truth the sufferings of that noble
253
youth have acted strongly on my feel¬ ings/' Cw Be it all forgotten then/* said the Chevalier ; u let him be led to his apart- ment, and consigned to the care of Friar Felix, and we will drown this nighťs unkindness in a goblet of sparkling Tus¬ can." Pandulfo conducted Casimir to his chamber; and» aware that Wolfsteïn's mood was unusually conciliatory, a temper for which he could in some measure account, he returned, with the intention of obtaining over the festive bowl some promise, as to the future destiny of Vallensteïn ; since there existed no longer any pretence for holding him in captivity. Wolfsteïn knew the infinite importance of the trust Pandulfo, as commandant of Lornberg, held in his hands, and the strength and integrity of him who held it, but he hated him ; and as he saw him quit the room with Casimir, his aversion
254
made a violent and sudden attack on his considerations of interest, which were overthrown in the contest. * s Loscho," said he, drawing one of the officers towards the croisée, through which they leaned as if to enjoy the balm of the evening ; " am I deceived, or did I read in your ingenuous counte¬ nance a horror of the mutinous, factious spirit our commandant evinces? Me¬ thinks, I have seen a movement in your eye which has more than once indicated your feelings on that subject." Loscho was taken by surprise.—" No doubt, my Lord, Pandulfo was very in¬ temperate/' " It is true," pursued Wolfsteïn, " that he has talents for command ; that he is a skilful engineer, and------but what signify his merits if he knows not how to obey ; if he is the first to teach those under him the lesson of mutiny ; if, in short, he looks on me with personal disaffection. I have pondered the matter, and, my
<&£к>
good Loscho, I have marked thee dili¬ gently : thou hast a peculiar zeal for my service, and wert thou where Pandulfo is, we should have done with these cavils :—but no more, my excellent Loscho. Here he comes! Keep your¬ self sober," he whispered : " I must drink." They returned to the table. When the wine had for a short time circulated, i( I have been thinking, Chevalier," saiel Pauu./fo, 4C that now the Duke of Friedland is no more, «your charge of his son has expired with him. It is not probably your intention to detain the young Count much longer?" fit Certainly not; I have no object in his detention ; yet as his health has de¬ clined within these walls, I would fain see it restored ere he quits them,—the Friar you know is another Galen." The commandant felt satisfied, and did not press the subject.
256
16 I am happy, my gallant friends,** said Wolfsteïn, " in the thought that I shall ere long be in possession of means worthily to reward your services. The enormous spoil of that Leviathan, who has lately perished beneath the weight of his own ambition, will now be divided among those who assisted in his ruin, in proportion to the part each took ¡n that prodigious event. Mine was a lead¬ ing one: my power to supply the Duke both with men and intelligence com¬ pelled him to trust me, to admit me into the very centre of his intriguing breast. Fieramosca, Devereux, and myself, were the grand instruments of his destruc¬ tion." He now proceeded to expatiate on the boundless possessions of the fallen ge¬ neral, and the share thereof which would probably be his allotment ; tjll the avarice of his mercenary companions be¬ gan to inflame, and as the wine operated
257
on their spirits, they became profuse in eleclarations of attachment and fidelity to a chief, who could so nobly remunerate their love. For a while Pandulfo had very dexterously evaded the subject in discussion ; fbr he abhorred treachery, though his situation had obliged him to witness and connive at much, but it was with a revolting spirit. Wolfsteïn had pressed the goblet upon him with such perseverance, that his discretion, at length, began to waver ; and the wily chief, watching his morment, let fall some expressions, on which he knew his now unguarded commandant would in* stantly seize. A short but sharp parley passed between them, Pandulfo's part in which proved sufficiently that his reason was reeling ; but Wolfsteïn made a most pathetic appeal to the remainder of the company, " Whether it was fitting for a chief to sit tamely, listening to the re* peated and aggravated contumelies of his
258
own officer ; whether they would refuse their consent to his avenging himself by degrading the offender from an office he held under his appointment and by his sufferance ; or, whether they deemed it meet he should submit himself, day by day, to be thus braved to his face ?" Loscho, who had scrupulously attended to the caution he had received, and who was the only sober man present, cried out, " The man who can sit to see his chief insulted is a traitor !" And was immediately echoed by every other voice. Pandulfo's situation was critical, for every man's hand was on the guard of his sword ; but Wolfsteïn and Loscho appeased them. " Look/* whispered the former, «' we can secure him without difficulty :—he is defeated already, and we have neither strength nor sense to contend with. Go, good Loscho, summon Scharaffa, and bid
259
him bring Vespo and Scorezzo—make no noise, and speak only to Scharaffa. I like to transact business quietly." The commandant elect soon returned with his myrmidons. cc Scharaffa," said Wolfsteïn, winking as he spoke, " Captain Pandulfo is, as you may see, a little unsettled by this evening's libation—he cannot walk to his apartment. Do him the courtesy to convey him thither." Scharaffa looked earnestly at his master 5 ho did not half like the commission with which that wink charged him, for he knew that the times were critical, and that the step was hazardous ; but Wolf¬ steïn, now inflamed by intoxication, said, stamping as he spoke, Ci What is this? Thou hideous son of darkness, what dost thou glare at? Take him away, I say, and let him sleep himself sober in the vaulted room ! Turn him in and bar the door on him, and thou shalt receive farther orders in the morning/*
260
Obedience was the only alternative, and Scharaffa and his assistants carried offthe helpless Pandulfo. The remainder of the guests retired to their several chambers ; and Wolfstein, with Loscho, went round the castle, saw the guard re¬ lieved, explained that the commandant had drank too deep to attend that night to his duty, and then held a conference of some length, in which they exchanged congratulations on the ease with which their manoeuvre had been effected ; and Loscho went to his repose, with a promise of being invested the following morn¬ ing in the important post which the dis¬ grace of Pandulfo had rendered vacant. Father Felix had passed the night in watching by the bed-side of one or other of his patients, and wandering between their different apartments* Madame de Wolfsteïn, although feverish and restless, was not now in a state to alarm his ap¬ prehensions. Once recovered from her long and death-resembling trance, she
261
had no relapse, arri he feared not but the methods he adopted for her restora¬ tion would prove effectual. It was other¬ wise with Casimir; the long and cruel confinement he had undergone, assisted by the harassing disquietude of his mind, had undermined his strength, and a slow hectic was consuming his once athletic frame. Every new shock, therefore, made a dangerous inroad, and Father Felix feared that death had already marked him for his prey. His union with Louisa in the tomb had taken anexclusive and powerful possession of his thoughts ; and, in his delirium during the night, his notion of her death, and the anxious an¬ ticipation of his own, were the only ideas which remained distinct from among the events of the preceding day.
262
CHAPTER XL u That is wormwood Γ Hamlet. Wolfsteïn, in the pride and courage of intoxication, was not a little elated by the revolution he had effected in the go vernment of his garrison, and retired to his chamber highly applauding himself ; but with the first dawn of morning, and the first dawn of reflection, the whole danger of this rash manœuvre pressed upon his thoughts. For a moment he de¬ bated with himself, whether he might not better treat the whole transaction as a drunken frolic, liberate and conciliate Pandulfo, and compound as he might with Loscho, for his disappointment ; but pride and personal dislike combated this prudent counsel. 6ť No/' said he, u the deed is done ;—-
263
and, come what come may, I will not sit in my own castle, braved and cowed by one of my own creatures, and sneereel at by my officers for my imbecility. Let Pandulfo's boasted talents, and his un- tameable audacity, set him free from my fetters,-—this hand of mine shall never be so weak. Loscho is a fool!—But what of that ? I can mould him to my will, and s tifle r clay I never encountered than that of Pandulfo." While he thus ruminated, Scharaffa en¬ tered his apartment. c< I come, sir," said he, " to ask your pleasure concerning your late command¬ ant ;" and he helel in his hand the key of the vaulted chamber.— " Shall I let him forth before his men get tidings of what happened last night ?" " What ! would you have me manage, and study, and compromise with my slaves ? I awoke this morning under the illusion that I was lord of this castle, and of all, breathing or inanimate, that it
264
Contains. It was a dream, perhaps,— and, if so, who is lord of Lornberg?" " Even yourself, my noble Chevalier : but if your servant may speak his thoughts, as heretofore you have per¬ mitted, he would suggest that even the mightiest among the earth's mighty have ever found policy an excellent second to their will." 41 I tell thee what, Scharaffa," and he held his head with both hands, " I am sick of scheming ! My whole life has been a plot ; my brain is entangled in cobwebs of its own weaving, and if I have not yet earned the despotic and absolute use of my will—But I will try it at least.—I hate Pandulfo, and he shall feel I hate him," " And, like a faithful servant, I hate him too," said Scharaffa, showing, as he grinned ferociously, his discoloured fangs.—" Do you think I would stand be¬ tween him and your aversion ? No,—But you are not secure, my lord, you are not se-
265
cure ! Wait till your hands are strength¬ ened/' 6S How, Scharaffa ! Are there traitors in the citadel ?" 4i Or I am greatly mistaken.—Wait, my lord, till some of those bands you lent the duke return, when you can, gra» dually, and, as it were, man by man, ex¬ change your present garrison. Wait till you have received your proportion of the duke's spoils-—in short, wait the auspici¬ ous moment ;— you cannot strike now." At that moment some.one tapped at the door of the ante-room, anel Scharaffa, having looked out, returned, smiling hideously. íť It is," said he, with an ironical grimace, " your new commandant, my lord." " Come in, Loscho ! What brings you here ?" Pale, and trembling with a mixture of terror and wrath, he entered. " My lord, the whole garrison is m a VOL. III. N
266
state of tumult and mutiny: I have been insulted, hooted, threatened ! Pandulfo has corrupted them to a man,—-and as for me"—·— Ci As for you, you had better stop to take breath, sir ! It is marvellous to me, that coolness and intrepidity such as yours should have bailed in restoring order amongst them ¡—-Stay here, sir, lest that creamy cheek and wandering eye should confirm the mischief; a rebeľs strength is in his chief's weakness. Stay with Scharaffa." So saying, he seized his sabre, and placing his pistol in his belt, he stalked down into the castle court, where his tumultuous soldiery were assembled in groups, every man having left the ram¬ parts, in short, not a single post being kept. As Wolfsteïn deliberately took his way to the scene of mutiny, he digested the counsels of the crafty Scharaffa ; he per¬ ceived that his situation required address
267
and patience, and that he need only sub» mit to procrastinate his revenge to a fitter hour, *' I have yielded more than this/' thought he, " for the accomplishment of slighter purposes ; it is but weakness io hesitate. Is not dissimulation my forte, and shall I now desert it, with the light¬ headed impetuosity of a boy ?—How now, comrades!" said he, " how now !" And he stood in the midst of them, looking as though İt was his right to be feared, tc Why, noble Chevalier, 0 said they, " it is no great matter, only we would fain know what is become of our brave Captain Pandulfo, and whether we are to do the bidding ofthat craven, Loscho !" " Is that all ?— Methinks Captain Pan¬ dulfo might have held you in better training. Your mode of asking a question is not after the order of strict discipline.*' Jealous for the renown of their beloved captain, they hastened to assure him that N %
268
he never should have cause to doubt their subordination or their courage, while he gave them a leader worthy of them.— " But what, my lord," said one of them, * ť could we do against a foe, under a cap¬ tain who turns pale if one of his own sol¬ diers looks steadily at him ?" Wolfsteïn now, by a few calm inquiries,, discovered that Loscho hael exhibited amongst them, in the course of a few minutes, the two prime qualities of an insufficient leader,—rashness and cow¬ ardice. The admirable composure of Wolfsteïn's conduct immediately re¬ minded them they stood in the presence ofa master. ét Now, my men," said he, " let us un¬ derstand each other.—You have unhap¬ pily injured both yourselves and your commander in my opinion by this rebel¬ lious tumult, for I did believe my castle garrisoned by troops of as steady disci¬ pline as any fortress in Europe ; and for Pandulfo, I held him, as a soldier, so
269 stern in his allegiance, that had I de¬ manded his head at your hands, he woulel himself have commanded the exécution of my order—but let that pass. I am not the first who has found himself deceived in the steadiness of those he trusted!— í thought ye heroes, but ye are common men ; und the blame lies, not in your in¬ feriority, but in my error." <u Indeed, my lord," said one of them, ts Pandulfo will be the first to rebuke and punish our rashness ! We only prefer a captain that xce fear, to one who fears us/" " Well, gentlemen, I will explain to you your leader's absence, that you may icarn, on the next emergency, to think before you act. I held, yesterday, a revel in the castle, to celebrate some changes in the state, which auspiciously affect my fortunes, and will consequently affect yours, if ye deserve my love;—nay, this v ery day it was in my mind to have given largess to my garrison, that they likewise might keep feast and holiday. Our hearts
270
were light, and in the hour of carousal we forgot the caution whieh might have be¬ come men who had the conduct of others. — We drank too deep; — the strength and intellect of Pandulfo were both over¬ whelmed in the torrent:—words of de¬ fiance and wild bravado passed amongst us,—their import or their aim I know not now. The glimmering of reason that yet remained to me suggested how un¬ meet it was your captain should hazard the esteem in which you hold him, by encountering your sight, as I beheld him, and I had him borne where such ex¬ posure could not await him. But for your tumult, he should have come forth to you this morning, his nighťs defeat unknown." " But Loscho, my lord, usurped his command, and was bragging amongst us like a Hector!" '* Psha! he has not slept off his wine! He dreamed of promotion, peradventuie, and would fain dream on."
271
The soldiers now all waved their caps, crying, " Long live our noble Chevalier ľ' and the officers who had stood aloof, un¬ certain how to act, some of them fearing the men, some Wolfsteïn, and most of them attached in their hearts to the commandant, now assembled round him. " I go," said the Chevalier, " to send your captain to you. For your sakes I have stretched condescension to its limits. Tempt me thus no more !" Anei he left the court amidst the cheers and acclamations of the troops. The Lord of Lornberg, having moulded these ductile spirits to more favourable temper, returned to his apartment, where he found Loscho and Scharaffa. Ci My lord," saiel the latter, " I have been talking with Signior Loscho, and have found the cause of this tumult: the jckes which passed last night over the goblet went for current in his brain, and took possession there. This morning he verily did believe himself the captain oi'
272
your garrison, and so began to exercise his rule, waiting no warrant." "Isit possible, Loscho?" said Wolfsteïn contemptuously: Ci I have seen manya strong man's wit taken captive by the contents ofa goblet; but an hour's sub¬ jection has redeemed it. Thou art a strange fellow, to work the fumes of yesterday's revel into figures, and swear by their reality. Banish thy conceits, or intoxication will slide into insanity. I did not deem thee a wight of so infirm a brain." Poor Loscho was astonished ; he be¬ gan to believe his faculties were really bctiaying him, and that, instead of being the only sober individual at the revel, he must have been deeper drowned in wine than any of his comrades, üne fact, however, he was now able to distinguish clearly, his own total unfit ness for the command in which he had been so eager to see himself invested, and, on the whole, he rejoiced it was a dream ;
2?ã though the cold scorn with which his lately affectionate chief surveyed him was somewhat galling, anel the broader derision of the hideous satellite into¬ lerable. Ci You may retire, friend Loscho," saiel Wolfsteïn, 4Í and be happy to feel your¬ self snug in a station, where your abilities will not be placed in too strong a light. You aie fortunate, sir," aeldeel he, some¬ what sternly, " that your waking dream has not ended in a tumble down a pre- c ι pi ce. Loscho bowed humbly, and very will¬ ing! ν accepted permission to withdraw. u Now comes my toughest and least digestible task : 1 must perforce take vour counsel, Scharaffa; so follow me." There was such innate malice in this gran being, that even in beholding his master foiled and humbled, there was enjoyment. Wolfsteïn himself had a sort ofaweofhim; the diabolical force anel subtlety of talents so often and infallibly N 5
274
exerted for his use, made this human monster necessary to his fortunes. The coolness and deliberation of Scharaffa's temper was far superior to his own ; but, as in all such alliances, between such spi¬ rits, it was interest solely which kept them united, and there were moments when Wolfsteïn looked on the incom¬ parable ugliness of his useful domestic with a loathing antipathy, which would almost, in spite of every restraining ef¬ fort, force its way into his countenance. But Scharaffa desired only that his master should fear him, and depend on him; knowing well that no one could love him, nor any eye, not inured by long practice, dwell on his aspect without dis¬ gust and abhorrence. Morning was some¬ what advanced, when, provided with a torch, they wound through the long, damp, narrow passages which led to the subterranean abode, called the vaulted chamber. Having removed the ponderous bars which secured the door, Wolfsteïn
27$
took the torch from Scharaffa, and en¬ tered. Pandulfo, who was, with folded arms, pacing the contracted limits of his dark apartment, now stopped, and looketi in the face of his visitor as steadily as the sudeien transition from obscurity to light would admit. " Why, Pandulfo," said Wolfstein, " of all the preposterous tricks that ever wine inspired, our having provided you with such a lodging is the most whimsi¬ cal. The whole transaction had escaped me ; and here, for aught I know, you might have lain some time longer, so effectually hael my libations washed away the memory of the deeds they caused. But, come," said he, shuddering, " this is no place to parley in. I trust, my dear fellow, the damp has not injuriously af- fecteel you ; in that case I should never forgive myself. Come, and í will tell you a few more excellent results of last nighťs frolic, that shall make you burst with laughteiv In eonseiiuence of }our
276 non-appearance, that fool, Loscho, be¬ lieved himself invested in your office, and began to play the commandant in a mode so pompous and fantastical, as had well nigh astonished your men into mu¬ tiny. But come forth, and 1 will tell you the whole ^tory." Ci Hold, sir!'' said the sturdy Pan¬ dulfo ; u though the events of vcsterdav may have filtered through your brain, thev have rested in mine. 1 rernembei that I have been insulted and degraded — Ì recollect the reason, too, as elea riv¬ as tlie fact, nor will I forget till the in¬ jury is repaired." " Surely, Pandulfo, y ou are nut awake, thus to resent, with unforgiving tenacity, an offence committed bv men who knew not how they acted! I rejoice, indeed, that the records of last night are wiped from the tablet of my memory, if their existence would have thus embittered my humour; for, no doubt, I might have traced a catalogue of affronts thereon,
277 almost as flagrant and substantial as those you hold so valuable. Well, there is some excuse, however, for this sullen mood—thou hast had a colei beel and a hard pillow, and, no doubt, thy head aches unmercifully. Come, come, Pan¬ dulfo, you shall laugh at this—your men await } on." iC You had better keep me safe where you hav e nie, Chevalier ; for if í go forth among my men, I will relate at full be¬ fore them all the events of }e-4erday. I will fell them 1 am not fit ίο command them. Such troops deserve a leader л hose lion our has received no stain, i will residu the moment 1 am at liberty, and, no lcnrer holding} our commission, we may decide our quairel as soldiers use to do." As he spoke, Scharafia appcarcel with Father Felix. "■What brings vou here. Father?" asked Pandulfo in a softened tone* i( I come to bend thy stubborn spirit,
278
my son ; to exhort thee not to abandon thy post, or desert the troops thou hast trained, and to coniure thee to come forth in peace with the lord of the castle." The eyes of Felix seldom convened a meaning beyond or at variance \vitlî his words; but now there was something in his look that gave irresistible effect to his admonition. Pandulfo cast a glance at Wolfsteïn, and hesitated. "How is the Count, holy father?" said he. u He is ill, my son, and his mind still wanders." u Well," asked the Chevalier, sullenly, " are wc to swell this folly into a quan el, or will you take my apology. Captain Pan¬ dulfo ? Now, friar, which of the two is the better Christian ?° c< Be reconciled, my son/* said Felix emphatically, and he added, in a whisper, u for the sake of mam ! ' Pandulfo, now, coldly, but without far-
279
ther delay, received and accepted the apology which had been so repeatedly offered; and Wolfsteïn became con¬ vinced, to his astonishment, of the irre¬ sistible influence possessed by the con- fessor over the mind of his otherwise sturdy and inflexible captain, Scharaffa, the moment he perceived the humour of the commandant, well knowing that his non-appearance, or his going forth un- appeased amongst his men, would be equally productive of general disorder and mutiny, had flown to the friar ; and told him that his good offices were re¬ quisite to extinguish a flame, which, with¬ out check, would blaze to the destruction of all within its precincts; for Scharaffa had by this time discovered that the meek ecclesiastic possessed а spell powerful enough to counteract their best-laid schemes : he resolved, therefore, in the present emergency, to make it useful. The party now proceeded into the re-
280
gions of daylight. Pandulfo changed his dress, and consented to join his men, ac¬ companied by Wolfsteïn : discontent and suspicion had again crept amongst them, owing to the delay which fol^ved the Chevalier's promise ; but now that they beheld their beloved captain and the lord of the castle approach in such ami¬ cable guise, they signified their joy by very audible demonstrations. " Your attachment, soldiers," said the former, " is grateful to my feelings ; but I condemn your mode of evincing it. You do little credit to the discipline í have laboured to establish : these sud¬ den and unbidden impulses are hostile to every rule of military tactics—we must reform them." The rebuke took instantaneous effect ; from a tumultuous crowd they fell into regular order, and the utmost silence and precision prevailed. Wolfsteïn called them generous, fine-spirited fellows, and
281
audibly commended and excused them; publishing his intention to distribute the largess he had previously hinted at. " Pardon me, my lord, no largess to¬ day, nor for many days to come. Our discipline is relaxed already ; when it is re-established, I will remind your lord¬ ship of your promised bounty/' " You are too stern, too severe, Cap¬ tain Pandulfo !" A serjeant, who acted as spokesman, now came forward, and observed re¬ spectfully, that the soldiers were satis¬ fied their commandant was in the right ; and that until they were assured of his approbation and acquiescence, however long withheld, no bounty would be ac¬ ceptable. In short, Wolfsteïn in a very few hours became instructed in the hu¬ miliating anel appalling lesson, that there were greater men than he within his own ramparts. Determined to go quite through his task of conciliation, he sig¬ nified his intention of visiting the bed-
282
side of his guest, accompanied by Felix ancl Pandulfo ; and, observing that the former would fain have diverted him from the performance of this courtesy, and heard him announce it with uneasi¬ ness, he resolved the more strenuously í/ upon it. They found Casimir rambling wildly; he believed that Princess Stol¬ berg stood beside him, and was inces¬ santi v apostrophising her. " No, Augusta," said he, " it is im¬ possible ! I had but one heart, and Wil¬ helme sister, she had that long ago, and never restored it ! Here," said he, lay¬ ing his hand on his bosom, " if you search vou will be convinced—there is a vacuum, is there not ? It is empty ; yet there is a pulse—beat, beat ! I would it might be still ! If that pulse would be quiet, .here would be an end of the mat¬ ter,—I should go to sleep." Pandulfo and the friar were equally disturbed at tl e tenor of these wander¬ ings.
283
" Methinks/ 1 saiel the latter, " the fewer forms that cross his sight the bet¬ ter ; a variety of objects only assist in confusing his already bewildered brain." Pandulfo understood his meaning, and would have quitted the apartment, but that Wolfsteïn turned a deaf ear to the suggestio ; and, affecting to be wholly absorbed in sympathy for his unhappy guest, approached him closely, anel even took his burning hand, and leaned over him. " I know it," saiel Casimir, looking earnestly at him; " I will not upbraid you, Wolfsteïn —you have elone what you could : I forgive you the marriage—that is past ! You have killeel us both, that we may be wedded in the grave : it was an excellent thought ! Augusta ! sister of Mercy ! you will come and strew flowers, and sing the requiem ;—you will do it best!" "It seems strange/ 7 said Wolfsteïn, a that his thoughts should be so inces-
284 santly engrossed by Madame de Woli¬ stem. You will tell me this is delirium ; yet what is the effect c f delirium, but todischaige fearlessly, and without me¬ thod, the whole burthen* of the mind; like the miser, who, intoxicated or in¬ sane, will pour foith at random his hoarded treasures? The man may be mad; but the coin is nevertheless ge¬ nuine.' 1 " And yet," said Pandulfo, " a deli¬ rious man will reverse, in the height of his wanderings, his antipathies and at¬ tachments." " Do you believe it is thus in the pre¬ sent case?" asked the Chevalier, with a suppressed sneer. " For my part," was the answer, cc I cannot lav much stress upon the matter; nor have I ever heard that words uttered in the crisis ofa fever were laid to heait and weighed as oracles." ct Become a husband, Pandulfo, and listen to such words as I have listened
Zoo
to, similarly directed, and then tell me wdiat stress you lay on the matter." " Peace!" said the friar; " he is now- quiet !" and he accompanied them to the door; but ere he returned into the apart¬ ment, he paused, and said to Wolfsteïn, " You are disturbed by the ravings of that unhappy youth ; but be pacified, I conjure you ! His heart is broken, and his frame is wasting, and that offending voice will soon be heard no more ! But even were it not thus, should health ever ie-visit him, should he awaken to the consciousness that his secret passion is betrayed, he will fly its object to the end of the world ! No, fear not, Lord of Lornberg' for all lhe transitory enjoy¬ ments oí' earth he will not forfeit his hopes of a union with the sister of Wil¬ helm in heaven, and there"—he paused; but he would fain have said, " There f hou wilt not stanei between them/' Wolfsteïn was in a frame of mind he had never before endured ; embittered,
286
dejected, humbled. He had formerly been content to be hated, since he was at the same time feared; but now there was a spe¬ cies of resistance and contradiction, either tacit or avowed, wdiich, hard as it was to brook, he knew at present of no alterna¬ tive. He began to think, that life, with¬ out a single being on whose affection he could reckon was cold and comfortless, and to envy the meanest of his fellow- creatures, if indeed he could call himself man's fellow, whom somebody loved. He took his way towards Madame de Wolfsteïn's apartment— " I will go to my wife," thought he ; " I will speak gently to her·—her affec¬ tions were mine—I can easily win them back/' He had not hazarded an inquiry after her, and knew not, therefore, whether ¡die still slept : he opened the door of the ante-room cautiously, lest he should awake her abruptly ; a faint, but earnest, voice exclaimed,
287
" Oh, father ! what tidings ? Say, is he calmer ? What of the unhappy Casimir ?" " Distraction!" cried Wolfsteïn, stamp¬ ing madly, iC I am pursued by furies! The very angels turn fiends to torment me !" Barbara, who had advanced to meet him, imagining, like her laely, that it was Father Felix, on perceiving her error, uttered a piercing shriek, so powerfully had the events of the preceding evening impressed her mind with terror and dis¬ gust. In short, tokens of antipathy, si¬ lent or proclaimeel, assailed him on all sides : he could have wept as he turned gloomily from the apartment, muttering to himself, " No! this is not the mo¬ ment !" Scharaffa met him in the corridor— Ci I have been seeking you with these de¬ spatches ; I wish they may prove wel¬ come." Wolfsteïn snatched them from him—
288
ťť I hardly care," he cried, 4Í what they contain !" " So much the better," said Scharaflii, with a sinister scowl ; S4 for í doubt their contents." " Ay?" said his master: " Who bore them ?" " Ubaldo." Wolfsteïn tore open the packet, as, followed by his satellite, he crossed the castle to his own apartment. It was from Devereux, who acquainted the Ch' a- lier in brief, yet formal, terms, that he regretted it was not in his power to ra¬ tify certain conditions to which he had pledged himself; that Gallas anil Picco¬ lomini had already, by an effectual ap¬ plication of bribery and menace, secured the troops which Wolistem had lent foi a subsidy to the late gei. orálisaim о :-— a This is unfortunate, no c'oubt/* added the writer ; " but your only alternative is to be passive, and to draw your affairs
289
into a narrower focus ; for, with respect to sharing the confiscated possessions of tlie Duke, your name has not occurred a-nongst the individuals thought worthy of reward: the two generals above men¬ tioned, together with Aldringer and Les¬ lie, have already, with the Emperor's sanction, divided the spoil; while Gor¬ don is nobly remunerated by Terski's Ioifeited estates. I do not name the pittance allotted as the acknowledge¬ ment of my sei vices, which, as they were both political and personal, is barely ade¬ quate ; but, Miicerely, 1 think complaint on) our pai t will be imprudent, as cer¬ tainly it will be unavailing. Our joint affairs being brought, as it were, to a urbis, I will not needlessly multiply de¬ spatches, especially as I am now much empio} ed and trusted, and my time is, consequently, ainubt wholly engrossed. So wishing you repose in your Dalma¬ tian territory, farewell, dear Chevalier." vol. in. о
290
Scharaffa stood gazing on his master with a ghastly stare. t£ Well!" said he, at length, "what admirable villany ! Av, he does it easily, with the hand ofa master! That boy Devereux! Who would have foie- seen it? What must be elone ?" " Oh !" said Wolfsteïn, íC should the worst happen, we can blow np the castle, anel finish our pantomíme nt the bottom of the Adriatic!"
291
CHAPTER XII. βί Of chance or change, ohi let not man complain, ELe, shall he never, never cease to wail 1" Beatile. We must now, for a short season, quit the shores of the Adriatic for the banks of the Danube, and as we return to the Austrian court, the reflection is pressed hard upon ns how many a melancholy change a few years, nay, a iew months of absence create in the haunts once peopled with forms dear to the heart or the fancy.—How many are gone or al¬ tered, or it they are stili what they were* they are become otherwise to our fickle perceptions! But what avails it tosigli over time's ravages ! They will proceeds and he who has courage to let the current pass, bear what it may along its surface, о 2
294
of her august mistress, beheld its ter¬ mination, and wept over that bier where she would fiiin have laid her own head, Lindau, once the gay butterfly of the Austrian court, had felt the blighting in¬ fluence of the season, and he, too, looked back with disgust and scorn to the toys and rattles of his youth. Just at the pe¬ riod when the real designs of the elder Vallensteïn became manifest to his army, and when the officers found themselves compelled to choose their master, be¬ tween him and the Emperor, the Mar¬ grave, whose allegiance the Duke had only attempted cautiously, endeavouring to attach him by acts of favour and de¬ monstrations of affection, received so cri¬ tical an account of his only sister, the v' sweet Ubica, that he abruptly de¬ manded leave to absent himself, whieh the Duke of Friedlaud was not then in circumstances to refuse. Desmond, for whom Lindau had caused a strict and secret search to be made, was at length
295 discovered amongst a heap of slain, de¬ sperately, but, as it proved, not mor¬ tally wounded. Iiaving obtained posses¬ sion of his person, he concealed him, watched over his cure, and now took th" opportunity of carrying him unsuspected and unknown to Vienna ; and Conrade, whom we left to his fate, alone, unarmed on a wide plain infested by wolves, was likewise in the Margrave's train. His sabre, his pistols, and his torch had been taken from him, and his doom seemed irrevocably decided. As the equipage pa^ed on without hhn^ however, and thn cries of his distracted lady and of Bar¬ bara, and the carnet remonstrances of Father Felix died on his ear, instead of breaking forth in curses and imprecations on his assassins, lie mingled a prayer for İıis afliicted friends, with those supplica¬ tions fbr Ids own eternal welfare, which he believed were the last he should ever articulate, when pi reeiving something bright on the ground, he approached it5
296
and found it to be one of his ow r n pistols, which had been dropt in the struggle, the lock of which reflected the moon¬ beam. The moment before not a ray of hope existed in his breast, and he snatched up the pistol i u an agony of thankful¬ ness :—it had been discharged in the short and unequal conflict which had taken place between him and his persecutors, but his pouch was well stored with am* munition, and he lost no time in re¬ loading. u Now," said he to himself, " I feel con¬ fident that Providence is with me i What¬ ever may be my fitte, í shall not feed the wolves to-night !" Yet his situation seemed worse than precarious; armed with a single pistol, and surrounded by beasts of ptey, in danger, too, of deviating from the right track, and of choosing one wiiich might betray him into the very coverts and re¬ treats of the enemy.'—But what ofthat ? The moon-beam which lighted on the
297 lock of his pistol was a token from Plea* ven, a pledge which he doubted not would be redeemed·—nor was he deceived. Iu the view of attaching himself to the fortunes of Count Vdlleibtein, he made his way to the Duke of Fi iedlaud's camp ; —there, however, he could learn no tidings of his lamented master's friend, and after wandering through the German States in fruitless 1 search, he at length re* turned, unhappy and desponding, and willingly accepted the oilers of Lindau, who honoured and cherished his unavail¬ ing zeal, and beheld him rather as a friend than a servant. It is needless to say, that an union of interest so decided failed not to awaken a sympathetic attachment betsveen Desmond and Conrade; each incessant ly mourned, and regretted the same object, yet they kept up a constant interchange of hopes, for neither would believe him irrecoverably lost, and they looked forward to going forth one d al¬ together and prosecuting a mutual search, о 5
29S
which should only terminate in death or success. In the meanwhile, both Lindau and Winterfeldt trembled for the chance of Desmond's falling into the hands of the Duke, and he had been, until he quitted the camp, kept in strict although friendly imprisonment. Winterfeldt resolved on sharing tl^ Duke's fate, and connecting himself ir¬ revocably with Im foi tunes, nor could any remonstrance his friends could dens* shake Ins resolution :—it wat» in standing between his master and the treacheiou·. ungrateful Devereux that Winteifcldt H!. never to пье again; and the brcathle.^H corpse of the celebrated man, whov life he unavailingly defended, was si>o,i stretched upon his. Lindau arrived only to see his рл\с snow-drop render up a brief and fh'gd< existence, and long as he had anticipated the event, it came at last coldly over hi* heart, and it was long ere he could I if r his spirits from the earth where this s^eet
299 gem vvas buried. The Emperor, afflicted himself, beheld the man who mourned as his brother, and showed peculiar con¬ sideration for Lindau: lie spoke to him, on their first private conieience, of Casi¬ mir of Vallensteïn. " My Mary Anne," said he, £i always predicted that the character of that youth would come fortis spotless;—die r .judg¬ ment is now confirmed. What has he not endured, lathor than swerve in his duty to his sovereign, or inculpate his fa¬ ther !" Tne Empress had not only repeatedly on her death-bed и commended this un¬ fortunate but noble vouth to hisprotcc tion, but had lelt apaper enforcing the request, and as the fulfilment oí eve. y w isli she had ever utu red, or that he had even suspected she might have entertained, wíls now become iu the eyes of Ferdinand a bacred And consoling obligation, he had taken every means he could devise for the discov evy of Casimir's π treat, and he now
Ш(Ш
èöfteulted eagerly on the subject with XiiiidaUiWho related the manner in which Ш» father had obtained possession of him, вша his subsequent mysterious disappear¬ ance. To some of those counsels Desmond was admitted, but nothing conclusive resulted. It was at length Princess Stol¬ berg, whose attachment to Casimir was only equalled by her horror of Wolfsteïn, by whom the spot where he was actually concealed was guessed at, and the instant it crossed her thoughts, she imparted the idea to those who might avail themselves of the suggestion. Lindau had been obliged to Wolfsteïn, but, loth as he might be to heap suspicion on his bene¬ factor, the narrative of Conrade had con¬ vinced him that no misconstruction could darken the true character of that son of Satan. Sangtime, therefore, i u hope that their long anxieties approached a termi¬ nation, and tliat at least they had found a certain clue which would lead them right, they determined to mt forth together, and
301
in the disguise of pilgrims visit the castk of Lornberg, binding themselves by a solemn vow never to return until they had either ascertained that the object of their pursuit was not within its walls, or till they had delivered him from them. Towards the coast of Dalmatia, therefore, they bent their way, travelling as expeditiously as fleet steeds would carry them, until they arrived at a town of some importance about seven leagues from Wolfsteïn*» castle;—here, taking every possible pre¬ caution, and having addressed themselves to the governor of the phtce, for it was fortified, ihey showed him the Emperor's order, that he should, on peril of the im¬ perial displeasure, assist thethree travellers with whatever furtherance or accommo¬ dation their affairs might demand, and, in short, to yield implicitly to their directions. The governor was not sorry to find that the credit of his oppressive and terrible neighbour was wavering, as some of the numerous bands in WoifsteiVs dépendance
302 would frequently harass his citizens, and carry off flocks and herds close to his walls ;—- thus highly sanctioned, therefore, he was very willing to aid the strangers to the utmost extent of his means, and posted a considerable body of troops, fully ac¬ coutred for a siege, within the jaws of a defile half way between —— and Lorn¬ berg, their captain having received in¬ structions to march to the attack ot Wolfskin's castle, if, within three days, no tidings arrived from the strangers, \\ ho. having thu> provided against all ¡осеней contingencies, in mantle grey, with stall and scallop shell, set forward to finish their journey on foot, in high anticipai. on of success. We will wish them God spec tl, and return U>> tne inhabitants of the ιμ<4 whither they are bent. From the hour when the le ttt r of 1)< - véreux had completelv opened the evos ui L tí i lai Wolfsteïn to a truth, which, howev<r immutably fixed in Ü e bosom of ever v calm and philosophic observer of man aud
303 his ways, had been, with him, hitherto either unknown or despised, that there is no allegiance among the wicked,-—a strange, frozen composure seemed to take possession of his mind; all his unsettled thought^, his busy, anxious ruminations, reposed coldly together, like the waves of the lake, when the frosty breath of winter has blownover it. He became unusually bik ut, buttile keon observant penetration he Ind been accustomed to с че reise dur¬ ing híí intervals of taciturnity were imt now to be remai ked ; in short, ¡t seemed as though he had yielded hin. sí if np to indifference, and was resolved to let Ins fate find him unarmed and unprovided, and dispose oi' hun even as it might. S'-haraila evi d hun intently and meet»- santly, w uh ill the ,u utene>s of su^pie' on ; but he was ballh'd, aud could not fathom the thought^ of liis master. S anetime¿ he inclined to the belief that the ovi rwroucrht mind had really «riven way, and that thr .sudden disappoint ment of so many and
304
intricate schemes had crushed it into imbecility; at others, he could not divest himself of the notion that something was still working beneath the outward silence and inaction ; yet was he condemned to waver between these opposite с pinions, since he could discover nothing ofa con¬ clusive nature in the words, loe)ks, or actions of Wol fistt în. Amongst the nu- merous intrigues in which the Lord of Lornberg u as implicated, wasa clandestine correspondence with his· Ottoman neigh¬ bours, whom he had occasionally supplied with information, for which he had re¬ peatedly been rewarded by prevents to a magnificent amount, aud he iiad often within his towers an Italian Jew, who acted as the Turkish agent. While Wolfsteïn continued apparently absoibed in his unusual apathy,Scharafia presented him with a packet, which, he said,had been left at the outward barbican by a shep¬ herd, who had disappeared immediately. TheChevalienmfoldedj and calmly perused
305
the paper, and Scharaffa meanwhile eagerly endeavoured to peruse his coun¿ tenance: still it remained impenetrable; yet something like internal conviction struck Scharaffa that the letter was fraught with evil intelligence, and seeing Wolf¬ steïn read it to the end, fold it, and place it in his vest, deviating from his usual practice of confidence, he could main¬ tain his wily and mute examination no longer. íť Have you no commands for me ?" said he, sul len! v, íc No.—What commands ?" exclaimed Wolfsteïn, as if awaking from a reverie. " That letter, my lord—-methought your aspect wore somewhat of a perturbed cast during its perusal. Have you no commands ?" Wolfsteïn surveyed him with an air of cold surprise.—" Did I look perturbed ì Sure you are mistaken.—But it is no matter, good Scharaiia ; I have read the letter, and that suffice^/*
№6
" The time has been, my lord, when you have found me necessary," said Scha¬ raffa, becoming more hideously ghastly from smothered fury. ťt True, my friend; but things change, thou knowest. A wide conti tient once covered the Atlantic—so they say, at least. What signifies what was in the time that has been ? It is nothing to thee or me." ťt The things that are , my lord, may sig* nify to both of us ! Like an ideot I have entangled myself with your fortunes, or rather have lent myself as the ladder by which you have ascended, and you are now worthily rewarding me—but beware, my lord ! The mine is under your feet!" " Not yet, not yet f Scharaffa/' said Wolfsteïn, with a grim laugh; * c but thou art unjust! Is it not the practice ofa sound politician to kick clown his ladder when he has used it ? I have not kicked thee down !—And be merry, Scharafia ; thou shalt share thy master's fate."
307
" Methinks we are trifling, my lord. Eitheryou are sunk in imbecility, and have no designs, or you use me villanously, and harbour schemes which you do not impart to me. In the latte.' case, you shall repent: —to the infernal deities J am already devoted, but to save myself, even now, I would not let go my revenge." * ť Come to my heart, Scharaffa," cried Wolfsteïn ; ÍC we are worthy of each other ľ' " What is in that letter, my lord ?" Éfi Only a little news from the inquisì- tiou." íť What! Dominica?" "Ay, Dominica, and other matters : -—the old fellows have taken ( xception at that pretty pantomine I and my people performed, when we received the Grand Seignor's firman, in Mussulman's habits. Could you have believed, after all, that they would have been such fools as to have interfered with my pastimes?— 1, who have served ihem so zealously !" u It is bat the old story, my lord—they
308
can do without us. From whom comes your intelligence?" " That I know not ; but take the letter, and have done with it I I have spent a stormy life enough—am I never to find rest ?" " If you can sleep, sir, on the brink of such a precipice. For mine own part/* and he shuddered, " I would rather watch a little longer than awake from my slum¬ ber, to adorn the procession of an auto da fé." " Thou art a screech-owl, Scharaffa, and I abhor thy booti n gs." " This letter, sir, is from a friend, and written for your warning.—Will you neglect it ?" u I tell thee, I am weary and reckless ! If thou hast any precaution, I give thee licence to use it—but plague not me!" " Enough, my lord ! Then sleep, if you please—my eyes will suffice us both ! Do you object to my getting rid quietly of Pandulfo, siuce his presence, i u case of
309 Mirprisc from the inquisition, would b dangerous?" " No, no, do as thou wilt—only leave me, Scharaffa !" And thus the conference ended. it now appeared as if Wolfsteïn's whole pleasure consisted in visiting alternately the apartments of Casimir and Louisa:—■ the former, although his fever was greatly abated, under the vigilant tenderness of Felix, was yet subject to temporary de¬ liriums, and when they possessed him, the same unvarying idea held its place in his thoughts,—Louisa dead already, and himseif eagerly anticipating the mo¬ ment which should unite them in one dark and narrow home!—The sight oí Wolfsteïn seldom failed to produce this effect ; but as he sat quietly by the bed oí the sufferer, and iu no way indicated resentment at these ravings, which, at the same' time that they betrayed the force and intenseness of lhe predominant iicntimmt, cxhibiteel the candour and
âlO
purity of an uncorrupted soul, Felix be¬ lieved that his heart could not remain for ever untouched hy such a contem¬ plation, and took no pains to evade or discourage his visits. Once when Vallen¬ steïn, as was hiscustom, earnestly appealed to him respecting his right to repose in the same tomb with W il helm's sister> grasping his hand, and repeatedly calling for his promise, Wolfsteïn rose, and to the utter consternation of the Friar, he breathed a solemn and terrible vow that one fate should await both. c€ For," said he, after a pause, " she cannot die, Vallensteïn, till thou diest ! Destiny has compelled thee to live with¬ out her, but ye must die together." The confused intellect of Casimir forbade him to comprehend clearly the meaning of what he heard, but he took it as an assurance of future bliss, and pressed the hand of Wolfsteïn close to his bosom, while Felix said,
311
" In Heaven's name, what mean you, my Lord ?" "Time will unravel my meaning, Friar, —and to time I refer you." And he stalked from the apartment to that of his wife. Madame de Wolfsteïn, no longer confined to her couch, endeavoured to occupy her melancholy mind by works of ingenuity : her graver studies, with the ¿ole exception of thatfrom which a promise of such peace as this evil world knows not is derived, were become irksome and uninteresting; her eyes wandered in vain over the most admired passages of those authors who had once awakened her interest,—they had no consolation to offer her,—she hael no longer either thought or feeling to give them. From her pencil she obtained occupation, if not amuse¬ ment ; she would spend hours in the use of it, and as, if there was a sympathetic correspondence between her musings and the delirium of Casimir, the subjects she chose were all ofa lugubrious and funereal
312
tendency ; she was never weary of sketch« ing the tomb of Wilhelm and Blanche, the little chapel on the isle of willows* dedicated to their memory> or solemn processions of nuns and friars, following to the grave some flower-decked bier. Except when prostrate before the crucifix in the privacy of her oriel chamber, or in communication with the holy Felix, she exhibited no emotion ; the same calm, apathetic indifference seemed to absorb her feelings which had taken possession of those of Wolfsteïn, and evinced itself in nothing more strikingly than in the still composure with which she received his now frequent visits:— he would sit, even by the hour, w atching her work, which she would pursue with an untrembling hand; -—sometimes he would say, in a soft tone, '* Lay down that pencil, Louisa, and put that hand in mine." Slie would obey, as if mechanically, but his pressure received no answer, and he would almost ask himself if the soft
313
fingers he held were indeed indued with life and feeling. Sometimes he harboured a faint, vague hope that some look, or smile, or word, or act of tenderness would proceed from the pale yet beautiful form by his side-—but he waited in vain ; yet he often thought of Marchfeldt and of the days of dawning passion, and felt that he лvouldnow have bartered a life but for one fugitive expression of that love he had so brutally thrown away, and trampled under foot. <c You once loved me, Louisa—did you not ? 5 ' iC I believe so." i£ You believe so/' echoed he, groan. ing deeply: u do you only believe so? Then y ou have forgotten to be sure of it ! Yet I remember it, Louisa," and striking his forehead violently— u Oh! that ï did not ! That remembrance is my sole tor¬ ture! But tell me, Iconjure thee, tell me, is there nothing left ? Is every spark extinct ? —You loved me dearly once, Louisa—- VOL, III. ρ
su
something, something remains—I know it does !" " I believe not, Wolfsteïn/' said she, with a cold inanimate smile. " Unfeeling, barbarous woman ! Hast thou been to the inquisition, and learned to drop the slow cold drop on the brain of thy victim ?" ςί What mean you, Wolfsteïn ? Heaven knows I would not torture you !—But you cannot for a moment imagine that love survives ? I will never, never de¬ ceive you Γ " But you shall deceive me, madam/* he cried, in a sudden access of fury, " you shall feign love though you feel it not!— But this is folly," said he, sinking into a calm: £c I once thought this world held nothing unattainable, but now I know my error ;—my wife, the creature of my will, a being so fragile as one stamp of my foot or one determined grasp could crumble into atoms, can close her heart against me ! I have talked with Ca.
315
simir, Louisa, —he has been telling me his dreams—and what think'st thou? They are almost as gay as thy w/aking medita¬ tions/* and he took up the paper on which a funeral procession was slightly sketched # f c His fancy, like thine, is full of tombs and shrowds and epitaphs—but how is this ? I thought this moment that death could hardly freeze thy cheek into colder white¬ ness, and now—now İt is all spread over with vermillion !—Nay, iiever heed—there is nothing to be discovered—the blush has told no secrets !— Vallensteïn has besought me to let him share thy grave— - It is a foolish frolic, is it not? What sayest thou, Louisa ?" She was silent. " I could half wish/* said he, musing, ťí ye had been long since united—yet then™Well, there is no unwishing time ! We shall soon see the goal, and thou knowest que lafın couronne les œuvres." Such were the interviews of this un» happy husband and wife. In the period
S16
that elapsed from the day on which Wolfsteïn received the letter of Deve¬ reux, to a few days subsequent to the arrival of that which brought him a hint of the designs of the Inquisition, many similar scenes had occurred. Louisa en e dured them with cold patience, and Wolf¬ steïn repeated them with perseverance. One evening, a soldier put into the hands of Pandulfo a twisted billet, which he said, as he stood sentinel at an out¬ post, a stranger had given him to deliver, and who then immediately returned to a boat which lay against the beach. Pandulfo with great emotion read as follows : i£ If the commandant of Lornberg cas¬ tle can, for a few hours, confide his trust to another, and repair to the Cervo Bi¬ anco, he will there find one who can fur¬ nish him with tidings of his long deserted family; and from whom he may, if any natural yearnings still cleave to his 'dien- ated heart, learn all that may be known
317 of the fate of his once dear brother Ju¬ lian." w Julian ! Julian!" cried he, excess¬ ively agitated, íť art thou still living? Is this no illusion? Alienated! No, my brother, 1 would fl} to the world's limit to embrace thee Γ tc Captain," said the soldier, (ς that paper, it seems, makes you very happy— but, if it be to lure you from the castle, I would I might prevail with you to be cautiou«! As for the man who gave me that letter, he was so quick that I know not what he resembled; but those who waited for him in the boat had an ill look with them ; one of them I am sure I have seen before, and, or I misjudge him, he is as adroit with his stiletto as any man in Venice." Pandulfo, absorbed in the idea that a brother long imagined dead was thus almost miraculously restored to him, treated all Vascos remonstrances with indiffer¬ ence—on re-examining the letter, he
318
perceived the words cc Come alone ;" alone therefore he resolved to go, and alone he went, having deputed an officer named Alexis to be his substitute till noon the following day.
319
CHAPTER XIII. " Adieu! Je vais dans ce pays D'où ne revint point feu mon pere : Pour jamais adieu, mes amis» Qui ne ïïie regretterez guère." Voltaire. Scharaffa had for some days been indefatigable in his attentions to the sub¬ alterns and soldiers of Lornberg; he had especially applied himself to pouring into their ears insinuations of the severity and despotism of their commandant ; hinting, that even the lord of the castle was in¬ sulted by his haughty, fractious spirit, and restrained in many an instance of favour and indulgence with which it was his desire to reward and encourage his garrison ; in short, that his removal from the com- mand woulel release both them and their true master from Egyptian bondage, as
320
it would be Wolfsteïn's first care to gire them a captain, who would relax that rigor¬ ous discipline in which they had been so needlessly held, for the mere gratification ofa tyrannical spirit.—Some of the most flexible and ductile amongst them lent a willing ear ; others affected to do so, and a few sullenly and decisively repulsed the suggestions, although accompanied by golden persuasion. Scharaffa, till lately, had been known only to the soldiery as a malignant, hateful being, a rejoicer in human suffering, and one who was ever on the alert to stimulate puni e hmenr, and ever eager to witness it : that his nature, therefore, should thus suddenly become mild and conciliating, struck even the most blunt-witted among them as a strange paradox. But there are, who may be bought if they cannot be con¬ vinced, and it would have been wonderful if amongst a set of men, whose lives had been one scene of desperate adventure, all had proved inaccessible to the sub-
321 stantial part of Scharaffas argument. Alexis, who was one of the converts of Felix, saw and heard that all was not right, ami was proportionably strict in his orders and vigilant in his observations. A letter bi ought to tlie barbican, and thtrc left tu tiie ii. M had been, was re¬ ceived by Scharalfa for his master, and aware as he was of the moody, wild, ca- pricioiib humour that had lately seized on Wolfsteïn, he resolved to secure the con¬ tents oí thi-» criticul billet, lest they might be withheld fiom him;—he read, and as much dismay followed the perusal as it was possible his long practised mind could experience: he saw the hour of safety rapidly escaping, and his thoughts fell into momentary confusion. " Will it/ pondered he, <4 avail aught that he should read it likewise? We may try at least; it may arouse him from his apathy, and that incomparable acute¬ ness which ever defied surprise may revive ρ 5
Hmm
to assist us :—at all events I must not Jose time—if he will not act, I must!" He flew to Wolfsteïn, whom he found ; his cloak wrapped round him, his plumed cap hanging over his brow, his head drooping, and his arms tightly folded over his bosom, pacing the corridor like a troubled spirit. "Ah, Scharaffa!" said he, with a ghastly smile, íť what bringest thou ?" "That which I hope, my lord, will operate like the blowing of a bugle in your ear, and start you from this fatal stupor/' and he presented him the letter —-" Is it not time to awake r" inquired he, as he perceived Wolfsteïn, having ran his eye over the paper, crush it together without the smallest visible emotion, u It will soon be time to sleep," was the reply. " What!"' cried Scharaffa, tc do you aban¬ don yourself to despair ? Is this the self- relying, philosophic Wolfsteïn ?" " Peace, good Scharaffa, peace! All
éttá
things have a crisis, and mine and thine is come!" He burst into a horrible laugh. <f Nay, do not be frightened, Scharaffa; we have seen all but the end—Hast thou no curiosity ?" 66 Maniaci"' cried Scharaffa, gnashing his teeth, and rushing from him to make such preparations against surprise as his active spirit suggested to him. Bad as he was, he had an invincible notion of the reliance wiiich might be reposed in the good. " It will be better," thought he, ťs to confide the truth at once to Alexis, and throw ourselves on his lidei İt v and courage: if he once pledges himself, he will die in defence of his trust." With this well founded notion he sought the temporary commandant in the castle court, and disclosed to him briefly the terrible fact, that a body of troops sent by the Inquisition were employed to seize Wolfsteïn and all his adheients. " When the attack will be made, and whether force or stratagem will be em-
324
ployed,I know not ; but, from this moment Ido know that all security is at an end,— in our brave gan ison lies our whole de¬ pendence." Alexis musid: —" I would Pandı-îl·' were here ί" 4 'Nay, A f ex is, i f thy affect ions are light, thou art sufficient," cc Well, Scharaffa, I would willingly have defended him, whose pay I reçoive, from any povter save that of the holj church:—but since he has made oui holy mother his cnemv, and since Λ has соше thus suddenly upon us,—wh}> 1 will not desert the man who trusts me, in his ex¬ tremity,—though I would fain have an¬ other foe to face." " Gallantly, loyally resolved." " I will go man the ramparts and se¬ cure the outposts :—but hearken, Scha¬ raffa!—Beware how you impart to the men tlie nature of the peril !—A few must be ti usted, but I can best select them ; —
325
besides, they who act ignorantly, will not be involved in the crime of this defence." Scharaffa could have dispensed with theconcludinG:observation, buthesawthat Alexis was bent on performing his duty as the sei vant of Wolfsteïn and captain of hb «arr. en, and therefore took leisure to provide without farther delay for his own personal escape. He went to ex¬ amine a subterranean path, which led from the c i devant chapel to the back ot the mountain, and to which, in his misgiv¬ ing moment'-, he had often mentally re¬ ferred as his chance of evasion. Wolfsteïn, delivered from the importu¬ nities of his now detested satellite, took a few more turns along the corridor, anel then, stopping at a smalt chamber near his own, called, "llolfo! Rolfo !" and forth came a dwarfish ideot boy, on whom, to the surprise of all the inhabit¬ ants of the castle, he had for some el ays amused himself with lavishing the most extravagant caresses. This little monster
326
was the offspring of Scharaffa, an epitome of his hideous sire ; but his mind was merely that ofa mischievous ape-—He had been i rom his birth an object of contempt and abhorrence, and had known nothing but cruelty and neglect;—from the pre¬ sence of his father he always fled in ter¬ ror, since from him he ever experienced a double measure of ill-treatment, and was not unfrequently threatened by liim to be hurled from the ramparts or starved to death in one of the vaults of tiie castle ;— he had acquired therefore a hatred of every human creature, but especially for the author of his being. The gentleness, the sweetmeats, aud the to}s f "Wolfsteïn had their effect on this foilorn, despised outcast, who now came rushing forth at the sound of his voice, grinning with de¬ light, while Wolfsteïn patted his huge mishapen head, stroked his coarse matted hair, and, taking him by the hand, led him down a narrow staiicase to the vaults of the castle, on the side towards the sea.
327
Here he gave hi m certain instructions with a distinctness and precision fitted to im¬ press even his intellect : they were indeed merely the repetition ejf an exercise which had been daily rehearsed between them. te And now, Rolfo, my boy Rolfo," said he, "if you do as I have shown you, the moment you hear the horn thrice blown,·—-you shall have this,—and this/' pointing to the glittering star of an order which adorned his breast, and his splendid sabre. " And this too ?" said the little monster, touching the horn which hung from Wolfsteïn's neck, and whieh he loved for Us noise. " Ay, and this too, only don't '•tir till )ou hear it sound thiiee —-and then, my boy Rolfo, don't forget! Do as í have bidden } ou f' The boy, with his finger on his chin, kept muttering his instructions to him¬ self : Wolfsteïn had so trained him to his purpose, that he harboured small doubt of him, and having left a feast of confec-
328 tionary, he retook his way to the habit¬ able part of the castle. As he approached his wife's apartments, he deliberately took from his vest a box of opium, whieh had bc( n a present from the Grand Seignor, and possessed extraordinary potency.— This eastern habit had of late crept on him, or, rather, had been adopted by him, since he had imbibed the notion that his history approached its denouement ; for there had been a time, when Woli- stcin could not have been surprised ini о any propensity, which his reason in¬ formed him was destructive of the intel¬ lectual powers; and nothing could exceed in calmness anel deliberation the despair of this man. He swallowed a large piif, and opened the door of his wife's cham¬ ber.—It was a lovely autumnal evening, and Louisa was, as usual, engaged with her pencil.—He approached her w»th somewhat t >isterous gaiety. " Psha !" said he, taking up the sketch, whereon he found her intent, " how in-
ш
herent is the perverseness of woman ! Till this evening, your fancy has been ranging death's dominions, and nothing would amuse you save the things which appertain to his grim majesty.—What ! tired of the siirowd and the grave, and the pick-axe ?—That is unlucky !" " There is something in this evening," said Louisa, £ ' so mild, yet so refreshing, —I know not how it feels—but life does not press so hc.iv'dy on me as usual, and I do not turn ъо sick an eye on living things ι— why İt is so I know not, I only know that so it is." " Indeed !' said Wolfsteïn, " what a froward thing thou art ! There is an anti- sympathy bctw.een us-—we cannot ponder the same theme at once I—Now I have death in my thoughts, and my mind will not change! It would be a gay world, would it not, Louisa, with these soft sunny skies, the fair green earth, and these blue glancing waters, if Wolfsteïn were but safe wrapt in marble ?—-I do believe
азо
that then thou wouldst sing again ; nay, and smile, perhaps, and coo like any dove •—but, darling, I will provide against such treason. Our wedding was no jest, and thou shalt find it!—Dost thou not, Louisa, admire the providence of some barbaric kings, who, when they depart from the scene wdiere they have glittered out their hour, take with them, on their dark journey, their wives, their ministets, nay, their very horses and falcons? It \ь a magnificent thought. Those wives and those ministers might have feasted at the funeral !—What is there in the grave, Louisa?—Is there any thing but dust and worms ?" cc Art thou disposed, Wolfsteïn, to in¬ quire what is beyond it ?—if thou art, I will call the pious Felix, and he shall tell thee/* ci No, no, Louisa ! It is too late to ask, and he is a mere dreamer ! I but resemble the man, who, on the eve ofa distant jour» ney f glances over the map of the country
S31
whither he is bent :—but,for the grave, I know it is a hole in the earth where the material form moulders—and, for our sentient part, I do suppose it is absoibed in the element from whence :t emanates —that which is passion or thought in us, why it evaporates and regains its original source:-—this is philosophy—-the babbling of an old Friar will never confute it !" " I cannot prevent your thinking thus, Wolfstein; —but I hnoxv that what now lives to suffer, will live to smile on this brief conflict in another world :—it is therefore I love to gaze on yon blue fir¬ mament, and to let my thoughts climb far, far beyond it !" ťť Well, well," said Wolfsteïn, impa¬ tiently, fii to-morrow, by this time, these matters will be past dispute, and the whole affair settled !" As he spoke, a tumult was heard m a distant part of the castle :—a domestic, with a countenance of terror, looked hastily into the apartment, crying,
332
" Oh, my Lord, we are betrayed !" and disappeared, Wolfsteïn's eyes sparkled— <e Now, then Γ he exclaimed, cc now for the thun¬ derbolt! One kiss, Louisa !—This is our second marriage Γ' He folded her in a long and earnest embrace, then throwing her from him, rushed from the apartment. We will now pursue the footsteps of Pandulfo, as we flatter ourselves he has acquired sufficient interest with the reader, to rescue his fate from indifference,—Ar¬ rived at tiie piazza, where stood the inn in which he hoped his long lost brother, Julian, awaited him, and as he walked hasti)" along a colonnade, he was surprised by the sound of footsteps, treading so closely upon him, that he could hanby attribute such near pursuit to accident and the thought of Vasco's warning in¬ stantaneously darted through his mind, iu spite of the bright sunshine which sur¬ rounded him. As, laying his hand on his
здз
sabre, he turned to eye the intruders, for there were two, a cloak was flung over his head by one, while the other disarmed him. It was the work of a moment ; but when he was thus hoodwinked, and al¬ ready felt, by anticipation, the cold steel in his bosom, a well-known voice uttered the following words : " Courage, Signor Capitano ! What ! Know you not the trick of an old com¬ rade ? Submit to our guidance, and you are safe—no injury shall befall you !"— The voice was that of Rufo, but Pandulfo knew his old comrade to be a despegue assassin, and was not much re-assur¬ ed by the recognition. He permitted himself, however, since there was no al¬ ternative, to be led whithersoever they would, and became quickly conscious, from the foetid closeness of the air, that he had quitted the open strada. It seemed to him that he was led through a house, or some kind of building, into a court¬ yard, which having crossed, he was made
334
to descend a long flight of damp, broken, unequal steps, which brought him to a narrow winding passage, where two could not walk abreast, and the voice of his friend Rufo, whn followed him close, bade him proceed fearlessly, since he could not go wrong, and they should soon arrive at the goal.—It was not long ere they were impeded by the termination of tlie pas¬ sage, and Rufo having given three loud hens, a door openeel and admitted them. Pandulfo, as they led him forward, per¬ ceived that he was in the midst ofa lighted apartment, from the warmth and fragrance of innumerable perfumed tapers, and pre¬ sently he was svt at liberty from the cloak wliich had been bound tight over his eyes. Sevi i al men, of no very prepossess¬ ing aspect, were seated round a table, in the centre of this subterranean chamber. He who sate at the upper end invited him to advance, and mildly requested him to look on avoung man who stood by the table heavily fettuied.
335
fi Of course/ Signor Pandulfo, said he, " you behold features familiar to you— your heart yearns towards him, does it not ?" ŕí Your question perplexes me, sir : I have never, to my knowledge, looked on those features till this moment." " Then you do not recognize the linea¬ ments of your beloved brother, Julian? Instinct is strangely wanting in your bo- :>^m, methinks !" " It is ten years since Julian's ship¬ wreck :—he was then but eighteen ; but his traits are deeply impressed on my re¬ membrance—he was a tall, dark, hand¬ some youth.—-That is no Julian." ** Yet this man's hand penned the in¬ vitation which allured you to the Cervo Bianco, nor was it altogether on a false pretence, for, had we not interfered be¬ tween him and his purpose, ins stiletto would, ere this, have united you with your brother in another world,—Have you
336
any guess how you have incurred the enmity of this man ?" " None-—I never saw him before." " Can you guess at his employers?" Pandulfo paused :—" One," saiel he s ** who has indiscriminately injured many, may look for sudden vengeance—and one who associates with villains, need not be surprised at treachery." " Well, captain/' said his principal in¬ terrogator,—" run your eye over that billet :—it may enlighten you for the present, and prompt you for the future/' It was from Scharaffa to the prisoner* whom he called Veraldi, informing him that Wolfsteïn had occasion for his bervices, to rid him of Pandulfo, in* closing a sketch of the false letter from Julian, and directing him to transcribe and send it to the commandant of Lornberg, who would assuredly fall ¡nto the snare, and concluding with the promise of an enormous reward
337
when the deed of blood should be perpe¬ trated. u Now," said the person, who had from the first addressed Pandulfo, " to your deliverance, and our advantage, this pape- fell into our possession ; for Ve- raldi s hand is stronger than his brain, and having copied the contents he forgot to destroy the witness—we have saved you from your perfidious enemies, and revealed them to you. You may be grateful." " Name the means," *" Introduce us within the castle of Lorn¬ berg, and confirm the garrison in passive obedience to whatever measures we adopt." "Who, and what are ye? And for what purpose would ye obtain admission into the castle of Lornberg?" 44 We are not much accustomed to be interrogated, friend—nevertheless thou shalt be indulged," and pointing to a large crucifix, he said, " Under this sign vol. in. о
ш
we go forth !·—We are the servants and ministers of the holy church. We can per¬ form our mission without thy aid, but thou mayest facilitate our task, at the same time obtain absolution for the violence and error of thy past life, and sanctify an act of just vengeance," Pandulfo, whose devotion had acquired a timorous character from the reproaches of a laden conscience, threw himself at the feet of the inquisitor, and bound him¬ self to do his bidding, with a compromise that all the less hardened of the soldiery, all, who with himself, had relented at the admonitions of Father Felix, should de¬ part unharmed. All was quickly agreed between them, and Pandulfo was now in¬ structed how the fortunes of Wolfsteïn had been led to this dangerous crisis : Rufo, when with Zanina he fled from the castle, was boiling over with wrath and malice against his late rr.aster—he remembered his insult, and, though a fortunate competitor in his amours, still
339
hated him as a rival. Besides, he could not without trembling reflect on the innume¬ rable stilettos which gleamed around his path, and although by him unseen, threat¬ ened him, he doubted P A t on all sides; nor was his peril less imminent from the stroke of justice than from that of re- venge :—whichever way he looked, a san¬ guinary and hideous doom threatened to abridge his days, and unable to bear the distracting influence of perpetual terror, he resolved to purchase his security by a full disclosure of all the transactions of Wolfsteïn to which he had been privy. The Lord of Lornberghad for a series of years enjoyed the protection and con¬ nivance of the Holy Office, through va¬ rious secret services he had rendered them, and through his alliance with the capuchin Father Joseph, and Fierie- mosca, bothof whom wcîg inquisitors;—» but Wolfsteïn, by no uncommon mistake, while he looked on them as his agents, was in fact their instrument, and now, Q 2
340
that not only he was no longer serviceable but might become troublesome, they had no other sentiment with regard to him than his destruction. Rufo furnished them with ample materials for the ac¬ complishment of their end, received in return a full and sufficient absolution, and was now a pensioned, privileged, secure villain, the blood-hound of the Inquisition. The enterprise was agreed on for the following evening, and Pandulfo, who possessed a master key, which opened to him every inlet to the castle, proposed to land the inquisitors and their troops dur¬ ing the darkness of the coming night, and carry them into a little bay far to the back of the castle, where he knew how to conceal them till the proper moment for action. We left Scharaffa on his way through the subterranean passage leading fiom the chapel, a sabre hung at his side, bis- loaded pistols were in his belt, he carried
341
a dark lantern, without the aid of which he could not have explored his way across these dismal vaults, and his person was nearly weighed down by the quantity of jewels and other valuables wherewith he had encumbered his flight—he turned his dark lantern slowly round, for the vault¬ ed apartments were wide and dreary, and the light he bore discovered only a small part of their extent.—It seemed to him, as if some one whispered near him, —he stopped— " No," said he, " it was the echo of my own footstep !—Now, Wolfsteïn, take care of thyself!" he exclaimed, as setting down the lantern, he placed the key iu the low heavy door, " for this moment divides our fortunes for ever V 9 As he spoke, three or four men seized him, and thrusting a handkerchief in his mouth, secured his silence* 4i What/* said Pandulfo, " art thou even deserting him ! Nay then, í forgive thee thy good will to me, for since thou art
342
all devil, it were mere folly to upbraid thee Г' Then taking up the la vern, and leav¬ ing Scharaffa in secure hands, he crossed the vaults, and presenting himself in the castle court, was most joyfully hailed by Alexis and the garrison : he found that his trusty substitute was preparing to make every disposition of a loyal and skilful commandant against a perilous crisis; the posts were secured, the ram¬ parts manned, the artillery mounted, and in short all seemed in order to cope with violence, or to counteract fraud, Pandulfo took Alexis by the arm, and, in a few brief sentences, made him acquainted with the events which had followed his departure from the castle, assailing him with such reasons as determined him to remain neuter through whatever conflict the capture of Wolfsteïn might occasion. With as much expedition as possible, an order was circulated among the men to keep their several posts quietly, and with-
343
out taking any active part in the events which were about to happen, and having taken all possible precaution that no resistance should be offered to the troops of the Holy Office, Pandulfo could not for¬ bear flying to the apartments of Madame de Wolfsteïn, whom, in hurried accents, for it was now time to act, he besought not to be alarmed whatever unusual agi¬ tation might prevail iu the castle, and having reiterated hischarge, most earnestly to this effect, he returned to the chapel. As he entered the apartment of Madame de Wolfsteïn, the Lord of Lornberg rushed from it, and, passing rapidly along the corridor, ascended some steps which led to the ramparts : he did not regard Pan¬ dulfo with any surprise, and the latter, feeling only that his enemy was on the brink of ruin, passed him without defiance or upbraiding, either verbal or tacit* Louisa, who from the wild and emphatic adieu of her spouse, and the friendly warning of Pandulfo, could not doubt that
344
some critical moment was at hand, taking Barbara with her, entered her oriel, where she found father Felix, and, prostrate at the foot of the crucifix, Ihey resigned themselves to the decree of heaven. As Pandulfo hastened to rejoin the in¬ quisitors, he found the cause of Wolťstenťs hasty retreat from his wife's apartment; the troops stationed at the back of tlie castle, and close to the lower gate, having become careless from security, had been discovered, the domestics were alarmed, and general consternation prevailed.— The commandant exclaimed to the ter¬ rified menials as he took his way-—** Only be passive, and fear not ! But beware how ye resist the Holy Inquisition!'' On regaining the vaulted chambers, he explained the arrangements he had made, and all being now ready, and the assail¬ ants assured of non-resistance, a small body of troops, conducted by Rufo, who solicited the office, and bearing with them the chained tyger Scharafta, penetrated
345
into the castle. — In the meanwhile, the principal inquisitor presented three pil¬ grims to Pandulfo. " These men," said he, " were found lurking about by some of my soldiers, who secured and brought them hither—- they demand the son of the late Duke of Friedland, in the name of the Emperor. whose warrant they bear.—-Conduct them to him ; it will be a less revolting task than a personal participation in the cap¬ ture of thy master." Gladly Pandulfo accepted the alter¬ native, for never before iiad he felt so like a coward ; his heart beat, and his knees smoie eacli other, and as he turned to that division of the casile where Casimir Jay, ho could not forbear casting back a glance of horror towards the steps, which he had seen the wicked, but now unfortu¬ nate Wolfbteïn ascend. It happened, that on the bastion when- Wolfstem stood like a statue, with İıis еуеъ q ò
ш
fixed on the waves of the Adriatic, were stationed, among others, Bruno and Zas¬ trow, the trusty myrmidons of Rufo, and they broke forth into audible expressions of joy at the sight of this favourite leader. Wolfsteïn turned slowly at the sound— " Ah! Bufo/' said he, * this s a gav moment for thee, is it not ? Thou art an excellent fellow ! Thou art returned to thy old master, never more to part ! But what is this,—Scharaffa ! Has Satan abandoned thee ? Has he delivered up hi.- foster brother to durance?—I could not have thought it of him ;— but we will be even with him yet—doubt it not." " There are, however, moreof the family of his infernalissimo," said Rufo, eying him with malicious triumph, * 4 who must be content to share the bondage of Scha- raffa." " I understand thee, my friend Rufo/' replied Wolfstein, with a most deliberate and unperturbed manner— fiť Thou art
347
civilly hinting at thy commission, and I will not compel thee to the use of blunter terms." 44 Here !" said he coolly, taking his pistols from his belt, while all around beheld the action w ith mistrust, and stood fearfully on their guard; but he speedily relieved them by presenting the pistols, with the butt end, to Rufo, and in like manner he unfastened the belt of his sabre, and made a voluntary surrender of it, nor did he even retain his dagger. All stood gazing on him in astonishment—-to cow* ardice they could not well impute an action which was performed with every appearance of indifference and intrepidity ; his hand was steady, and not the smallest huny or emotion was evinced, either in word or deed ; neither could his submis¬ sion be attributed to repentance, or to awe of the power into whose terrible hands he had fallen ; for a cold sneer dwelt, during the whole transaction, on his countenance, and his speech bore the stamp of irony.
348
" I do not like him," whispered Rufo to Zastrow; ťí he has something in his head, and, if I mistake not, he has yet arms about him." The quick ear of Wolfsteïn caught the whisper. u Search me!" said he; "I conjure you, stand on no ceremony." The Inquisitor, who accompanied Rufo, now interfered—" The Cheva¬ lier," he observed, " has been unusually submissive, which shall be remembered in his favour. Let him declare on his ho¬ nour that he conceals no weapon about his person, and we will forego the search/' Wolfsteïn sarcastically invited and urged them to convince themselves. " For," said he, " when, as Rufo is conscious, I look as I do now, I am dan¬ gerous—you should not trust me ! Now, here, for instance," and he lifted the bu¬ gle-horn which hung at his neck, u I have read of a fellow who destroyed a whole squadron of enemies with a weapon scarcely so effective to appear-
349
ance as this—why not secure it ? It may prove as murderous as the jaw-bone of an ass !" There was something inexpressibly provoking in the contumelious apathy with which, even at the stake, Wolfsteïn taunted those who baited him. IC Let us secure him at once/ said Rufo; fit I hate his sneers." " I believe," replied the Inquisitor, " it will suffice to fasten his arms lightly, till we have conducted him below ; he cannot escape us in our descent down the narrow stairs, even were he more re¬ fractory than he seems inclined to be, and farther bondage would only impede our conveyance of him from hence." " As you will," said Rufo; ' ς but 1 know him better than you do, and, in spite of his jesting, I vvould take that horn from him : he is so stored with con¬ trivances, there is no being too cau¬ tious," Wolfsteïn, with affected readiness*
350
slipt from his neck the string on which it hung, and was presenting it, as he had done his weapons, when, as if suddenly recollecting himself, he paused, and said, " And yet, ere ye deprive me of my sweet bugle, let me once more—once, for the last time, listen to its echo over the waves." " Is it possible," asked the Inquisitor, " that its sound may act as a signal, and bring any of his freebooters to his re¬ scue? Can he have any motive save the one he alleges for blowing his bugle ?" " None whatever/' «nid Scharaffa. "None, non** ľ* echoeel Zastrow r and Bruno. " Wind your bugle, then/' said the Inquisitor, " and come with us/' " Yes," replied Wolfsteïn, " three farewell blasts—and afterwards —after¬ wards!—What a fine sunset it is! Do yon all mark it well ? I marvel if it will set as red to-morrow !** " Come, blow, blow, Chevalier Γ cried
351
Rufo, impatiently : '* let to-morrow take its chance !" ίς Spoken like an oracle !" said Wolf¬ steïn, lifting the horn to his lips, and blowing a loud blast : * c you hear the echo ? Hark ! how it dies along the waves !" Again he blew, 44 Now/' said he, preparing for his third blast, " the effect of this last echo will astonish ye all—mark !" The bugle was still at his lips, when, with an explosion that seemed to rend the world, the bastion on which they stood was hurled high in the air ; all for a moment was uproar, dust, darkness, and chaos : a large portion of the castle was riven from its foundation and flung 1 о into the sea, and the Lord of Lornberg, attended by a multitude of unprepared souls, was plunged deep beneath the waves of the Adriatic.
352
CHAPTER XÌV. " If plagues or earthquakes break not Heaven'« design, Why then a Borgia, or a Catiline ? n Pope. Wolfsteïn had always considered that his choice lay between two alternatives, success, either present or prospective, or death, (i. e.) annihilation. Why a man should consent to continue breathing in a degraded and fallen state, " when he himself might his quietus make with a bare bodkin/' was a question which, as he believed in no religion, save that of Nicolo Machiavelli, whose dogmas he had devoutly studied, and zealously re¬ duced to practice, he did not waste his time in discussing. He had found himself alive and conscious in the midst of many
353
beings, outwardly resembling himself, but for whom the intelligence or the chance which had created him hael not endued him with one spark of sympathy or affection : his intellect, which was powerful, told him, that since these re¬ sembling beings in no way awakened his love, orcontributedtohispleasure,in short, that he delighted not in them, they might, at least, be rendered subservient to his use. Early, therefore, he became a subtle and infallible analyst, anel as a skilful chemist, neglecting the gay or fragrant plants, the boast of Flora's train, would select for his purposes the hemlock, the poppy, or the ominous nightshade ; so would Woifstein extract from the hearts and brains of those from whom other men would turn with dread and abhorrence, such deadly vir¬ tues as might assist in corroborating those possessed by himself, anel in ren¬ dering them more intense anel subtle. He was well -aware of the penalties an¬ nexed to such associations, and it was
354
after mature and deliberate calculation that his election was made. " Men," thought he, " at the best, are weak, wa¬ vering, fickle, liable to eternal fluctua¬ tion of mind or circumstance ; if, with good faith and simple integrity, be¬ lieved in and believing, you identify your interests with any of them, ten thousand to one but some chance, or in¬ consistency, or fraud, perhaps, for there are fewer honest men than honest men deem, breaks the pious league, and then the cheated fool stands staring on his blighted views, .with nothing to curse save his own folly ! Now, I know my men, and they know me—I know that my associates are dissembling, treacher¬ ous, deadly—I know that only one hook will hold them, and I trust to no other; thus saving myself a weary parade of geemings, and following the bias of my own nature by the light of my own rea¬ son. Assured that my agents would ruin me, if their interest prompted them to
355
the deed, no tie withholds me from an¬ ticipating them whenever they become troublesome, dangerous, or useless ; for the imaginary incumbrances of gratitude or conscience are unknown amongst us/' A resolved penetrating mind, anel a robust, well-tempered, and active physique, lent their combined strength to the powerful bias of this bad nature, anel operated to form a most extraordinary result. It is useless to dilate farther on Wolfsteïn's theories, as we trust his life and its termination form a comment suf¬ ficiently illustrative. On the fall and death of the elder Vallensteïn, he hael grounded the most splendid hopes of prosperity and aggrandisement, nor was there ought romantic in the speculation; but here the interest of his fellow villains warred with his;—his share, from the mag¬ nitude of his services, must of necessity have been a large one, and the plunder would have been thereby considerably diminished for the other claimants. This
356
alone was reason sufficient to determine his fate, but it had many concomitants, for Wolfsteïn was no negative character, and those, whose colleague he had been, knew that every moment of his existence was perilous to theirs from the hour when the tie broke between them. The letter of Devereux was the production of se¬ veral heads, for Wolfsteïn's quondam associates, sensible that their victim was neither mentally nor physically the man he had been, trusted that inflamed with sudden rage he would abandon his cau¬ tion, seek those by whom he had been circumvented, and personally prefer his claims on the confiscateel possessions of the fallen Duke, and thus throw himself into their hands. But, as he quitted not his strong hold, their next alternative was the Inquisition, of whom, by being their useful agent, he had hitherto pur¬ chased impunity, but who had carefully treasured a long black list of crimes against the hour of need. The deep
357
concentrated fury with which Wolfsteïn first perused the letter of Devereux soon subsided, and he relapsed into his usual habit of reasoning. €i Well/ said he to himself, " the thing is simple enough—I have lost the game; yet I staked high and played skilfully-— n'importe, let us pay the for¬ feit! What is more absurd than to see a losing gamester gnashing his teeth, stamping on the dice, and amusing the spectators with his impotent rage, as if he had not foreseen, that when two play, the chance of success may fall on the adversary. For my part, since I have lost, I will lose like Wolfsteïn— ma fin couronnera mes œuvres /" The warning he received from some friendly hand of the terrible visitors who would shortly seek him at Lornberg, he disregarded, because he had bent up all his faculties for whatsoever might hap¬ pen. The louder the storm raved, the more the clouds lowered and blackened
358
around him, the more desperate his cir¬ cumstances, the more signal his ruin; the more dignity would be added to the fearful catastrophe for which he was de¬ liberately preparing, and he laughed in his heart at the perplexity and dismay of his grim agent Scharaffa. Wearied of life, and satisfied, to use his own phrase, that his game was lost, he looked to the end with a hard and moody satisfaction, and there existed on earth but one tempt¬ ation which could have diverted him from the grand coup de theatre he me¬ ditated—the hope of recovering the af¬ fection of his unhappy wife. lie con¬ vinced himself that w/as impossible. Well then, all that remained for him, was to secure her from ever bestowing on an¬ other that wLich was unattainable by him ; therefore he so ordered his opera¬ tions, that one doom might overwhelm himself, his wife, and his rival; how many others was a matter of total indif¬ ference. Such a plan, to such a mind,
359
was not very difficult to arrange— Ле choice of an agent was his sole obstacle, on which, while he pondered, the de¬ formed idiot offspring of Scharaffa, as if sent by some fatality across his path, stood before him* From that moment he took the shapeless, mindless imp to his apartment, and, except during his visit? to Louisa or Count Vallen¬ stein, never lost sight of him» Having by dint of persevering caresses, by toys and sweetmeats, won from him a sort of brute fondness, he led him daily and regularly into the vaulted passages which communicated beneath the whole extent of the castle ; he constantly laid a train of some harmless combustible powder, which, when ignited, would ex¬ plode with a slight sound. He taught llolfo the use of the flint and steel, and made him comprehend that he should never set fire to the train till he should hear three blasts of a bugle.
360
By force of repetition, Rolfo be¬ came perfect in his task, and even at« tached to it. The explosion amused him greatly, and the rewards which never failed to follow, were such as suited his imbecile yet greedy fancy. This daily exercise was continued шь remittingly, up to the day on which the deed wbich it prefigured was destined to take place. Immediately on being ap¬ prised by the second warning of his friendly monitor that his foes were even at hand, Wolfsteïn hastened to lay hh train. He had by persevering diligence, and with much manual labour, dis¬ tributed such a portion of gunpowder and other combustibles through the vaults of his castle, as he conceived would rend the whole fabric fiom its foundation : he placed his unconscious en¬ gineer at his fearful post, and, with a feel¬ ing of desperate and diabolical triumph, looked to the near approaching crisis,
361
when one sudden destruction should in¬ volve himself, and all with whom his in¬ terests were now connected, regretting only, that Devereux, Father Joseph, Fieramosca, &c. w r ere not at that mo¬ ment his guests»
vol. in.
it
362
CHAPTER XV ч · ľhe bitter past, more n cleome Ь the sweet !" Shafojieare* Having allowed the shock, the thun¬ der, the smoke, the chaotic confusion of this terrible explosion, to subside into that ghastly calm whieh succeeds an event of horror, we will proceed fearfull) to explore the extent of the ruin which has been effected.—The bastion which more immediately overlooked the gulf of Venice had undergone an almost total disruption from the iest of the massy pile :—it was in this division of the castle that llolfo was stationed, and here the mine took most ample and destructive effect—here were the festive apartments of Wolfsteïn, his scene of banquet and revelry, and here resided many a light and thoughtless minister of his pleasures,
363
One thunder clap pealed through it, and all that remained was a black, yawning, hollow shell ! At the extremity of this bastion were the chambers of the Lady of Lornberg ;—every one of the suite de¬ dicated to her use was involveel in the ruin, save only the oriel, where she, with her Confessor and Barbara, were devoutly kneeling before the crucifix, at the mo¬ ment when the castle was rent in twain. The shock was too suddeu and intense to be felt; ere a shudder could creep through their veins, or a shriek escape their lips, they were all stretched un¬ conscious before the holy image at whose feet they knelt, and which, strange to say, was not shaken from its upright position :— lie outward wall of this apart¬ ment had fatlen, so that the still erect crucifix, and the inanimate forms winch lay extended around it, were visible from without, though surrounded by dust, smoke, and rubbish, while the spot, which seemed hitherto to have been pre¬ ti 4
364
served by its sanctity from the destruc¬ tion which had annihilated the rest of the bastion, was still rocking and tottering from the recent convulsion. The true cause of Wolfsteïn's plan not succeeding in its fullest extent cannot now be as- certained;—-that he meant to have in¬ volved the whole pile, and all its inhabit¬ ants, in one undistinguished ruin, nor have " left a wreck belline!" to mai к the place where it stood, could not be doubted.—-We may hazard a probable guess that the failure was owing to Wolf- stein's ignorance of military tactics : he had, very likely, erroneously calculated the strength of his fortress, and the quan¬ tity of combustible necessary to effect its complete annihilation. However this may be, the sea bastion was the only part of Lornberg castle effectually destroyed, though the whole pile trembled and qui¬ vered to its base. The confusion, the horror, the mistrust ofthe surviving part of the household, &c.
365
for some space of time following this aw¬ ful catastrophe, was inconceivable ; the first impulse was flight, for a second shock seemed in every one's expectation and the rocking walls offered but an in¬ secure asylum, since the whole founda¬ tion was more or less shaken. It was Conrade and Pandulfo who first discovered the awful situation of Madame de Wolfsteïn ; their immediate anxiety was to remove her and her companions, without delay, from a chamber, whose rent floor and yawning walls miöht the next moment have given way beneath them, and where the lightest footsteps might have proved fatal. They did not lose time, therefore, iu endeavouring to ascertain their existence, till they had borne them to a place of comparata e safety ; but, having done so, it was with infinite thankfulness they beheld these most interesting objects of anxiety restored gradually tospeech and consciousness, although totally ignorant of the cause of their late insensibility, or
366
of the bustle anei confusion reigning around them. Louisa's joy and surprise at the sight of Conrade was extreme ; and that faithful servant, in the midst of the horror such a catastrophe as we have recordeel must excite in every hu¬ man breast, was filled with transport at this providential rescue of the sister of his idolized master. In the space of one year from tlie death of Wolfsteïn, Louisa Baroness of March¬ feldt gave her hand to Count Casimir of Vallensteïn ; and the castle о Marchfeldt, on the banks of the Raab, became the scene of such domestic felicity as rarely brightens the cloudy history of man. The hearts both of Louisa and Casimir had been severely proved in the fiery ordeal of adversity, and they came brighter from the furnace ; their intimate acquaintance with suffering, while it
367
softened and refined their natures, had strengthened the temper of their minds, and they doubly enjoyed e\evy blessing, contrasting it with the terrible past. Count Vallensteïn, though, from his knowledge of his father's treasonable schemes, he could not resent the con¬ duct adopted by the Emperor; yet so much of that father's memory was dear to his heart, that he could never con¬ sent to accept from his imperial majesty any of those personal favours, or honours, which lavishly courted his acceptance. Ambition had been the ruin of his fa¬ ther, ancl he determined to erect his own happiness on a far different basis. Un¬ der his mild rule, the domain of March- feldt improved and extended ; nor was he less blessed and adored by his vassals than the lineal barons had been before him. lie became the father of gallant sons and blooming daughters ; and a blessing seemed to hover over his house and territory. Conrade, to whom Bar-
368
bara committed her happiness, on the same auspicious day which saw the union of their lord and lady, succeeded his father, Sigismond, as Seneschal of March¬ feldt; and Stephen, the husband of our old friend the sapient and garrulous Alice, whose health was now restored, was promoted to be bailiff of the lands imme¬ diately surrounding the castle ; an office for which his unshaken, sturdy integrity eminently fitted him. Desmond, the man¬ ly-hearted devoted Desmond, would not quit his friend ; and, as in that frontier station, every feudal baron was necessi¬ tated to keep on foot a certain number of troops, and a garrison of no inconsi¬ derable strength, the military department was placed under the charge of Des¬ mond, and admirably fulfilled. Casimir rarely took the field in person, unless some special occasion called him forth ; and whenever it was necessary to send a body of Marchfeldters to reinforce the army, he could rot have consigned them
369
to a better substitute than the brave and experienced Desmond. When Lindau returned to Vienna, with an account of his commission, he coulel not help feeling in his inmost heart the grateful encomiums of Princess Stolberg. The emotion she betrayed on learning the rescue of Casimir, and her enthusiastic reception of him who had undertaken his deliverance, only revealed how strong a hole! her unavailing attach¬ ment still maintained in her heart ; but gratitude on the one hand, a sense of service on the other, gradually created a mutual sympathy ; they insensibly sought each other till they became reciprocally necessary, and friendship softened into love. Princess Stolberg was the first to disclose to Lindau the circumstances which had occurred between herself and Vallensteïn ; at the same time surrender¬ ing to him the token she had received from that unhappy youth when he had so abruptly quitted Vienna.
370
" It was the pledge of friendship," said she, blushing ; ťí accept it from me, Frederick, as the sacrifice to a still ten¬ derer sentiment." As for the Margrave, he had no secret to return, his passion for the Baroness of Marchfeldt having been exhibited for the public amusement, and the whole history of his attendance and dismissal being duly registered in the court annals. Soon after the Princess Stolberg be¬ came Margravine of Lindau, the happy pair were welcome guests at Marchfeldt. For many a succeeding year their friendly visits were repeated ; and, in after days, an intermarriage of the offspring of these families cemented the friendship still far¬ ther by alliance. We dare not flatter ourselves that Count Harrach has won for himself much of our reader's sympathy; it will suffice, therefore, to state, with respect to him, that he continued to bow, smile, and flatter through the term of his in-
371
significant life ; no one loved or re¬ spected him while he walked upon earth, and he went down to the dust unre¬ gretted. Yet Count Harrach hael no vices, the accusation against him was a mere negative—he had no virtues. His son died before him ; and, as he himself had ever looked with shrinking horror towards that period which must separate him from Ci the warm precincts of the cheeiful day/' he had forborne the omi¬ nous operation of making a written con¬ signment of his earthly possessions, so that they fell, by inheritance, to the son of his once dear and illustrious 1 , but now abhorreil and fallen, brother ; and Count Vallenstem of Marchfeldt was indebted to his uncle's pusillanimity for a very con¬ siliera ble addition to his already ample possessions. Father Felix lived in holy rest and thankfulness, loving anel beloved, amongst his flock at Marchfeldt for many years.
372
He lived to breathe his pious benediction on a young and lovely race, till, at length, he gently and willingly obeyed the summons to the tomb, wept and re¬ gretted by many a friend and disciple.
THE END.
LONDON: PR1NTF ß SY ТНОМАЬ DAVISON, WHO EflttAß*.
