Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Warbeck of wolfstein
WARBECK OF WOLFSTEÍN.
CHAPTER L It was a bright, warm, blushing evening in the month of July· The villagers of Marchfeldt were rejoicing on the eve of their patron saint, dancing and regaling on the wide and verdant lawn in front of the castle of their feudal lord the young Baron Wilhelm of Marchfeldt, dressed in their holiday gear, and crowned with gar¬ lands of living flowers. The young ones tripped to the music of the pipe, the flute, and the mandoline, while the elders of the village reclined beneath the spread¬ ing boughs of the acacias that skirted the lawn, rejoicing in reflected joy, and thinking, peradventure, how much more vol. i· в
2
athletic, alert, and graceful were the dancers of their day· Be this as it may, there was probably nothing invidious in the comparison, since those who had taken their turn in the dance were their own offspring, their children and grand-child¬ ren ; for the Marchfeldt peasantry were a healthy, happy, and long-lived race. Their lord was little less than absolute sovereign of his small territory, but he was mild, merciful, and generous. A long succession of such lords had followed each other ; and whoever had talked to these contented vassals of despotism and oppression, would have found it difficult to teach them the meaning of words, now rø such popular use. They had one sub¬ ject of concern and alarm. Their young Baron had been two years at the wars with the famous Vallenstem, Duke of Friedland. Two years had elapsed since he had quitted his castle; he was in his ¿Sth year, and yet unmarried; brothers he had none, and, besides himself, one only
3
sister, the fair and excellent Louisa of Marchfeldt, was all that remained ofthat ancient barony. Thus, those who blessed the present dynasty must needs tremble at the danger of being transferred to an¬ other line. Lady Louisa was very beau¬ tiful ; seldom has so much soul beamed from a face whose contour was so per¬ fect; her features might have served for the model of a Grecian artist, while her complexion was that of her own country, the delicate mingling of the rose and the lily; her hair was a pule but bright au¬ burn, so bright that the sun, as she sate on the ramparts of the castle on the even¬ ing of the feast of Saint Alexis, made it sparkle like waves of gold. She had no companion but her favourite damsel ; the rest, in obedience to her commands, and in compliance with their own inclinations, were gracing the revels below. As she watched with sweet complacency the mirth of which her absent brother's bounty was the source, she breathed a в 2
4
secret prayer, that every chord in the breast of that beloved brother might vibrate in harmony with the gay and happy group she overlooked, and she wondered when she might hope to see him preside over and encourage such a scene· " Yet, alas!" said she, as the thought passed over her heart, " why should I be impatient? Father Felix tells me every day, and my own conviction echoes his assurance, that the longer Wilhelm is absent, the more confidently I may hope to see him return to me cured. Hearken, Barbara ! do you not hear a horn ? Surely, surely, it has the sound of Wilhelm's horn ! It cannot be him ! He would have despatched a rnessenger—but yet there is a horn! Oh! let us go to the postern .tower/* The postern tower commanded the banks of the river Raab, which rolled deep beneath between steep rocky cliffs ; and the castle of Marchfeldt was, on that
5
side, accessible only by its drawbridge. By the time Lady Louisa had reached the tower, the warder and the few domestics not busy on the lawn were in commotion ; they knew the horn, and the silver-headed warder and his assistants hasted to let down the bridge, and give entrance to a much loved lord. A few minutes elapsed, and Lady Louisa, who had darted like lightning down the narrow tower stairs, threw herself into the arms of her only brother, her only natural friend, and wept on his bosom a silent welcome. Their emotion was strong and mutual, but Louisa was the first to recover the confusion of spirits this unexpected event had occasioned. " Welcome, welcome ! dearest Wil¬ helm !" she cried. But Wilhelm did not speak ; he grasped her hand and led her towards the grand staircase, for they were still in the hall of entrance. He waved his hand to the aged warder and
6
other domestics, who pressed around him with congratulations on his safe return, and thej understood his grateful and affectionate, yet mournful look, to say, * c I feel your kindness, my friends, but I cannot speak my thanks." His attendant Conrade, who had followed his lord when he left the castle, cast a significant look at old Sigismond, and shook his head. Lord Marchfeldt led his sister to a small private apartment which over¬ looked the castle gardens. He walked to the casement, and, leaning his forehead against the bars, seemed oppressed by a strong internal struggle ; a struggle be- held with infinite sorrow and disappoint¬ ment by one who looked to him as her only friend and protector, the sole re¬ maining prop of an ancient and illus¬ trious house. At length he broke the mournful silence which his sister had not dared again to interrupt. ¿t ««My imbecility shocks you, Louisa i
7
and no wonder. It were better to have never returned than to return thus." " Oh, no, dearest Wilhelm ! you are harassed and fatigued ; you have tra¬ velled iar. What body—what mind can resist the temporary consequences of over exertion? Besides, you could not but feel the first moments of your return to Marchfeldt. Indulge the feeling» my brother 1 To-morrow I will show you what has been done in your name since you left us; I trust our improvements will meet your applause." He turned from the casement, took her hand and smiled upon her; but it was a smile which smote her to the in¬ most soul ; it spoke of grief, bitter, deep- seated, and irradicable. a Yes ! to-morrow/' replied he, in a hopeless tone, " to-morrow we shall be gay perhaps. I have rode hard, and I am a fool!—As I ascended the portal steps a giddiness seized me, but it is
8
over· Come, Louisa, ht us to the western rampart ; the warder says it fa the feast of St. Alexis. Let me see toy people/* u Willingly*· willingly, dear Wilhelm ! how they will delight to behold you4" <c Strange, 5 ' murmured the Baron, "that one so joyless can inspire joy." They proceeded together to the ram¬ parts, and Louisa began to admit a hope that it was really to over fatigue, com¬ bined with a natural agitation on return¬ ing to his home, from whence the severest sorrow had urged him forth, that the me- kmcholy and languor now so apparent might be ascribed. The moment they ap- peared upon the rampart, *' Long live the noble Wilhelm! God bless our young lord Γ echoed through the old ivied walls oftheeastle, till they appeared to vibrate tù the loud and reiterated shouts. A faint glow of satisfaction broke over the palò cheek of the young soldier, as lifting
9
from his brow the heavy sable cap, he waved it in the air, and cried, " God bless my friends !" He gazed for a moment with bene¬ volent interest on the long remembered faces turned up to behold him, and re¬ peated fervently, " God bless them !" Louisa would, indeed, have rejoiced at the happy feeling which this assemblage of faithful vassals seemed to awaken; but Wilhelm had thrown aside the large hussar cap which concealed in some de¬ gree his countenance; it was now re¬ vealed to her in all its alteration : she beheld his pale hollow cheek, his heavy hopeless eye ; she saw too, that a broad band of black crape divided the thick sable of his cap, and another encircled his left arm· " Three years !" said she, internally, ci three years ! and still those badges of mourning !" ■t» He remarked the direction of her eye» в 5
10
and read her thoughts; then again glancing at the throng below, he asked abruptly, " How are Albert Feltheïm and his young wife ? Are they happy ? Have they children ?" 44 My brother, Alice is no more ; she was summoned away a few months after their union/* c ' Dead ! and what, what is become of Albert? How one is deceived! I took that guy-looking lad with his hat all covered with ribbons and roses for poor Albert/' "And why not, dear brother? Sure it is Albert, and the pretty fair girl his partner will soon become his partner for Ше -they- are affianced." He turned with shuddering disgust from the scene, to regard at length that object, who was in fact nearest and dearest of aught living to his heart, but whose glance he had hitherto shunned meeting· u Louisa, how you are grown I you
11
are much taller, and you are very, very beautiful ! Heaven keep you happy !" Barbara now joined them : a table was spread with refreshments, and the young lady of Marchfeldt, whose spirits were strained to their utmost pitch, busily occupied herself in attending the poor, weary, melancholy Wilhelm· " I have been to the wars, Louisa, and you ask no news of my adventures. There !" said he, unbuckling the belt of his sabre and casting it from him, " I have done with you ! You need not ex¬ amine me, my sister,—for scars I have escaped; but the wound which went forth with me is open yet : never mind, it will close soon !—My only sister, do not heed me ; I am sick and wayward, I want nothing but repose—we will talk in the morning ; but mark me, Louisa, if my perversities keep you waking, if those pretty eyes are made hollow with watch¬ ing, I will away again." She made no answer, but took his агщ
12
вша led him to his chamber. After a thousand heartfelt anxious good nights, she retired to the garden parlour, and sent for Conrade. &ί Ah, mv lady/* said the youth, who was Wiihelm*s foster brother, 4 ' we have seen tine hacking and hewing since we turned our backs on these old towers, and for that matter thev are at it vet; but my master heeds nothing but his own ways. He never fought with the rest, bat just when he was in the mind; and the great lords and captains let him have his fancy : they knew v\ hen he did not mingle in the battle, it was not coward ce that kept him out ofit." * 4 But, Con rade, he U very ill ; his poor thin lingers, when we parted for the night, were burning, and he is so wan, fías he been constantly thus?" u Alas ! yes, my lady : I have never seen him take delight in any thing ; but he does not complain, and goes his own way. However, I do wish, my lady, you
13
could have seen him at the battle of Dessau. He rode his tine Persian blacks Mirza, and as we galloped towards a position Prince Schaumberg had ordered us to occupy, we saw a poor woman on the ground, where the sabre of some brute had laid her dead and bleeding : a living baby clung to her breast ; my mas¬ ter was off Miľzďs back in a twinkling, and, what do vou think, mv ladv? If he did not sit down on the ground and take the little foolish bit of a thing, that was smiling aud crowing at its dead mother, and wrap it in his cloak and fondle it as if he had nothing better to do, I am a Turk ! As for me, I was fit to go mad, and Mirza neighed and snorted enough to deafen one, and pranced and plunged that I thought he would have broken either my arm or his bridle 5 and no wonder, for I verily think no nobleman or colonel of division ever thought of doing such a thing before, and every body dashing on pell mell to the
14
charge! Well, presently up came Cap¬ tain Zollendorff with the rear of the di¬ vision· * Why, what in the devil's name are you doing, Baron Marchfeldt? Is this a time to sit nursing a baby ? Come, come, throw it away ! Mount your horse, and gallop on to the front·' e Ay, do, bless you, master/ said I ; ' what will they say of us?' * Zollendorff,' said my master, * take the command for twenty minutes. By Heaven! I will put this innocent life in safety, cost what it may.· Zollendorff shrugged up his shoulders, and gave such a look—but there was no time to lose,—so off he rode ; and as for my master why it would be about as easy a job to turn about the cathedral at Vienna as alter him when he is once de· termined· Now, pray don't be angry, my Jady! but it was so provoking, I did really feel as if I could have killed hím, and I did mutter some very ugly words to myself Well, he rolled the atom care- fully up, sprang upon Mirza, and bid.
1&
ding me follow, rode as hard as lie could three miles back to quarters. I have not seen him smile such a smile since my lady Blanche died, as he did when he had lodged this mighty prize safe in the hands of one of our men's wives· You know Kenred, my lady—it was his wife, and he tossed a great purse of gold to her· lie saw what he never saw in his life before,—he saw me looking as sulky as a bear at him ; so he said, ť Take heart, Conrade, we shall be time enough yet ;' and, thanks to our steeds, so we were, as it happened, but that black-browed Zollendorff had been cracking his jokes, for as my lord rode to the head of his division, I saw shrugs, and winks, and grins, enough to have made his re¬ verence Father Felix swear at the im¬ pudent monkeys." " Oh, my brother!" exclaimed Louisa, " what a heart is thine ! Why, Conrade, I doubt the wars have hardened you! I think it is not so wery long since» you
16 could not have left a little helpless orphan baby to be rode over by a het of raer- cilesb troopers/* " As for that, my lady, it is all mighty line talking; but, saving your presence, how should a woman know any tiang of tlie matter? I \>as minking all the time how my master'» honour and mine were to come oil'; but after all, I believe Heaven stood his ťiieud, for before the dav was decided, we had the ¡χοοιΐ luck to save Prince Sr T »aumberg\ life, by rescuing him from the hands of as u<j,ly aset of mustachioed Spanish thieves as ever vou looked upon—some of Mans- ·/ 1 feldťb men; and the Duke of Fuedland said he should love my master for that act as long as he lived. Jn truth, I can¬ not tell how it happened, but sad and mild as he was, there was not a man more respected in the army than my lord. Many of the commanders were bullying, swaggering hectors, but not a mother's son of them durst curl his
17 whiskers in my lord's face, though ihey might and he never have seen them ; but then our genei aluminio and hi*» 1>κι\ι -oo 5 and Frmee Schamiiberg and one o t two more, would no more huve sufteied a wink or a tçriıı at him, when he w ^s in h.,·» abstracted hts than Father Felix \\ouÌJ let me blow out tin* taper which burns before the blessed Virgin " ** 1 tlo not marvel indeed, Con rade, that he \%d$ so beloved," said Louisa, her e\e^ swimming ш tears. éť Who can * *y^ know and not luxe him f f * tť \\Ίì^, that is true; anJ \et there was oììq young gent lem m at head-quar¬ ters, between whom and my lord there was no love lost. lie was :i> odd ín his way as my master; but í question if hb fault lay in over-kindness to any thing : iie had a mighty scowling, pugnacious look with him." ť ' Wells good night, 'Conrado ! You have had a fatiguing journey, and it is hard to keep yon from repose.'*
18
CHAPTER IL ** Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a suit of sables ! What İ two months dead, and not forgotten yeti" Hamlet, Louisa of Marchfeldt was early at her orisons in the domestic chapel, offering up her thanks and praises for the safe return 'of her brother to the castle of his ancestors, and fervent petitions for the cure ofthat cruel melancholy which had fallen like a blight upon his youth. She received the usual matin benediction of her venerable preceptor and confessor, Father Felix; and together they pro¬ ceeded to the vestibule of the castle, where the young soldier soon joined them; he bent his knee in pious sub· mission to his spiritual father, from whose lips, from the earliest dawn of reason, he had imbibed the best and
19
purest notions of religion and morality. Unhappily» the good father never foresaw that religious fortitude would be the first Christian virtue his pupil would have oc¬ casion to practise ; and he now perceived w T ith regret that, abounding in all the charities which soften and humanise man, kind, gentle, benevolent, pious, almost angelic in his dispositions, strength of mind was denied, and the first heavy trial threatened to be fatal. The late Baron and Baroness had been summoned hence in the infancy of their children. From the period of their deaths, Wilhelm and his sister were consigned to the guardianship, as to temporal matters, of their maternal uncle, who had faithfully and kindly fulfilled his important trust, till it expired on the majority of the young Lord of Marchfeldt \ and in spi¬ ritual ones, to the excellent and pure- minded friar Felix, who still resided in the castle; beheld by those whom he cherished as his children with filial love
2í) and reverence ; reverted, consulted, and even obeyed, whenever he found it ex¬ pedient to dictate, by all its inhabitants. When Felix saw his elm' go ioith to the wars, he looked conlîdentlv loru ard to the eíľect which he expeehd the novelty, glitter, and Ьпмче^ of the scene, the desire of giorv, >o readv to blaze in a you n ľ; and noble heart, w ould produce in eiu .eating the profon ml >ad- ners into which a ^uddui. eternal >e¡>ara- tion from anidoii/ed, ailianeeil bude had plunged him. Λ year had elapsed since tlie death of Lady Blanche, w heti, ач if awakening from an o\ erwhelmirg .^iupor, the young b iron announced 1пЧ intention of" adding the banner^ of the hou^e ot 3Iarci 4 tchlt to thosi' which aheady fol¬ lowed the standard of the bra\e and adveiitnrous Vallenstein, Duke oí Fried- land. The late baron was passionately addicted to arms, and Felix, theiefore, naturally hoped much from what he deemed an hereditary impulse; he re-
21 lied, too, on that wonder-worker. Time, nor harboured a single doubt but Wil¬ helm wí uld return, not only with a healed spirit but gay, elate, and proud of distinctions, earned amongst the nobles and warriors of his country. Hut akbl the heart knoweth its own bitlener Who bhall calculate or limit the soïrow of another? Grievous then \v;b the disappointment com eyed to him tliat 1ШШШ1Ц', in a communication with Lady Louisa ; grie\ou< were his self-up- braidings, as he attributed to some de¬ fect of firmness or discipline in his plan of education, a malady of mind which menaced the most sinister conclusion. It was discovered that, instead oí' seek¬ ing the repose of which if was evident he stood much in need, Lord Wilhelm liad spent many hours of the night in the chapel, watching the cold mai ble which contained the remains of the late lovely and beloved Blanche of Fribourgh: there he had been scattering flowers, and there
22
he had been weeping with unabated agony, though three years had now rolled away since the day that witnessed her interment. " The holy Virgin lend him strength and comfort !" ejaculated the good Felix, * ; and enlighten our minds how to deal with him for the best." Relying on the long experienced do¬ cility of his pupil, he resolved to assume an air of more than wonted austerity, and to make trial of that influence which, in all other matters, lie had never known to fail; he raised and tenderly embraced this darling son of his adoption, and said, in a measured tone, from which he en¬ deavoured to banish all touch of emotion, " You are welcome back, Wilhelm Lord Marchfeldt, to the domain of your fa¬ thers! Welcome back from the fields of your renown, where you have been adding new glory to a name long ennobled by the heroic deeds of those who have borne it ! We rejoice in your laurels, my son ; even
23
I, a man of peace, cannot deny myself a share in the exultation of your family : your campaign has been fruitful of ho¬ nour, and your return is most seasonable, for, albeit we have not neglected your interests in your absence, the counte¬ nance of a good master is like sunshine on a country, and there is no stimulus like his personal encouragement. Be¬ sides, it is time the Lady Louisa should break the silence and seclusion in which it has been her pleasure to live, till she could enter the society she is fitted to adorn, supported and sanctioned by her brother." " Yes/' said Wilhelm, evasively, but with a look of affectionate pride shining through his sadness ; Ci Louisa is indeed fitted to adorn society." cc Ay," rejoined Felix, " you, my son, allude to those attractions which are su¬ perficial, accidental, and fugitive. I look through them, at that which is the pride of the beautiful casket, a pure and elevated
mind. I shall see hei go forth with con¬ fidence, foi I know that, tender and de¬ licate as she is, she is likewise stiong." Feb seldom 01 nevei, intentionally, used phi ases of doublt import, he spoke to, not at people—but something m the close of his commend ition of Louisa went to the heait of Wilhelm, whose pale cheek flushed at what smott him as an indirect reproof, but it was conscience that brought home the ariow. I ehx now endeavouied to engage the young soldier m some detail of his adventures, and win him " to hght his battles o'ei agam ," he made him minutely describe the person and habits of that smgukai man, V illen- stem ; m short, he touched every chord, but found all out of tune, for short and abstracted weie poor Л\ îlhelm's answers, his eyes had not piofited by the last night's occupation, they weie still more hollow and I avy, and his thetks paler yet, than on the preceding evening, Louisa hardly dared to look at him as
25
she ministered to him at breakfast, and Father Felix groaned inwaidly. At length the good man, in pursuance of tht plan ht had arranged in las own mmd, looking steadily at Wilhelm who had laid aside his military gaib and as¬ sumed one of deep mourning, said in an accent of grave inquiry " My son, for whom do you wear that sable vesture ? I have not heard that any of }oui noble family have quitted this sublunaiy world for a bettei, since we pai ted, but your dress bespeaks some iecent loss ' Now he stiuck the master chord to which tbe whole fíame vibrated; а deep pause ensued, and Felix was about to repeat the question, when Wilhelm in a hurried voice ened, " Stay, Su ' stay, my father ' spare me a veiy little while' eveiy thing has its cnsis, and mine is coming—it is at hand' It is owing to this conviction that you now see me within the walls of March- vol. t. с
20
fehlt. I have much to do in a space of time, peihaps, veiy limited. I know the urgency of what remains to be done; let me but take breath, and we will proceed to bu mess." íle staltet! fiom his scat and approached the finn , he took his hand and pressed it. " I conjuieyou, my fathei," said he, "by the love you have evei borne me, to wait a day, peihaps only an hour, till I may collect what strength I have, and I will open my heait to you. You aie not moie desirous to heai my confession than I to make it, only do not begin the subject. You shall not wait long ; I would not wilfully proci astinate." The agitation of pooi Louisa was ex¬ cessive as she listened to this ambiguous speech of hei biothei, and obseived the deadly hue which ovei spi ead his counte¬ nance and the univeisal tienibling of his fíame. He on the othei hand seemed re¬ lieved that the ice was thus bioken, and with foiced animation, abiuptly mquued
27
concei ning the impi ovements of his castle and lands, and affected an inteiest in various grants, purchases, &c. that it had been found expedient to transact dunng his campaign. " W e must look а little into these matters," said he ; " we'll sally forth jiresently, and old Philibeit the bailiff shall go with us; we will ìeconnoitre the villige at least, but I believe," said he, famtl} smiling, "a shoit walk must content me to-dav." lo the village they bent then cotuse, and as Philibeit accompanied them, the conveisation turned on meie matteis of business, but Felix had occasion to re¬ mai к the good judgment as well as be¬ nevolence of heait that was conspicuous m all the young Baton's dncctions. As they walked they encountered Albert Feltheïm, whose gay appeal ance in the village levels has been mentioned; the young peas int approached respectfully and offered his humble and heaity wel- C 2
28
come, aftei congratulating his lord that he had come safe ft om the wai s. " Why, to be suie," added he, "it might have been ju^t on puipose, as I said to Om, Haiold the miilu s dangl er, my lord, you know Una 1 ' twisting his hat upon his thumb, and looking like а simple¬ ton. " W hy, we had got my lady ь con¬ sent to be sure, but it will be more com¬ plete like, now that youi loidships come home, to give у ouis too." " If you have the consent of your own heart, Albeit, the iest is of little con¬ sequence,' iephed the Baion in а chilling accent. " Oh, my loid '" exclaimed the clown, ready to cry, " I know well enough what уош lordship's thinking of, you aie think¬ ing about Alice ' And foi that mattéi I am willing to thmk of hei too, if it would do any good, but I got so lonesome with thinking and thinking. And foi sooth, my lord, if youi loidslup would not be angry; and you used to let a body speak his mmd
29
befoie yöt· went soldiering, Albeit Felt- heim, simple as he is, could give your lordship a bit of advice that would put a little honest coloui into that pale face of youi s." Indignation did immediately colour it, he touched his hat and walked haughtily on, leaving Albeit staling after him in dismay, but had not pioceeded halfa fui long when he stopped. " My father," said he, " will you be my almonei—will you give this purse to Albeit ? Tell him I am not angiy, and tell hun tint with all my heait I wish him happiness. I will wait foi you, and we will turn homewauls." Well pleased, the benevolent fimi per¬ formed his mission, and dismissing Phili¬ bert, they bent then steps along the banks of the nver towaids the castle; it was now that ГеЬх, with mexpiessible soi tow, beheld the feebleness of his young com¬ panion, who leaned upon his aim m evident need of hu suppoit. Halfway between the castle and village stood a
30
small ŕishing-lnit : " Let us iest heie, my father, for I will lose no moie time, I must speak with jou, and I will do it now." " Not now, my son 1 not now 1 " said Feh\ gently, " tlitie is no need ot hurry, and )ou seem ill pnd weaiy youi body wants my advice, methinks, as much as youi mind, but I know ceitain heibs from which I can make an extiact of sovereign virtue ; you shall take my medicine foi a little while, and then we will talk." " No, father ' we must talk now ' you aie not wont to be lavish oí time, and I have little to spaie." It is difficult to ascertain v.htthu the peituibition with which the auditoi or speaker pitpaitel loi this conference was greater, thev entered tht hut, and the fimi, at Baron Marchfeldt's ltqutst, seated himself m silence, while the lactei folded his arm» and leaned ".gainst the wall. " Sir," said he, at length, m a hollow
31
concentrated voice, " I would begin by deprecating youi just i epi oacheş I have grievously repaid уош exemplai y and parental cue lou have watched and tolled for an ungiateful wietch, one who is about to disappoint all youi hopes and fi usti ate all youi assiduities I am dying, my father' Nay, beai me, I pray you, hear me patiently, now that I am able to speak to you, and answer me truly to what I shall ask, as you hope in Heaven' Look upon this fiad, feveush, emaciated fíame , it will soon be cold md tenantless, it will soon pensh—its own desti oyei " " Now the holy stmts m heaven for bid 1 " cued the honoi stiuck fnar m las literal appiehension of bis pupils words. " Yes, I hive desti ov ed myself' not indeed by my positive act, but by con. lavante with my tltstioyti. No mother ever lmg b td bei nt ν boni baby to her bieast with fondci c u e, th m I the souow which Iı ıs tonsumtd me. I h ive fed it gradually, fed it with my vita! blood, till
32
all ıs wasted Whtn she died, my spa it turned cold within me, it sei med ıs if the tie which united me with hei, vv is tvv isted antl mtangled with the thread of my being. I loved to believe it so, and to feel myself, as it were, palpably pulled towards the sepulehie of Blanche In short, fathei, I doubt I might h ive lived ifl had struggled Tell me, tell me, on your soul, does a second death await me, because the first has been voluntaiy ? " " My son ' my son '" said the good Felix, "you rive my heait But you are not dying 1 ' eageily examining his countenance, " you ire, it is tiue, some what weak—and,—and youi habit h ıs m it rathtı moie of tht htttic thin one could wish—md youi pulst," said he, feeling his hand, " 10 doubt, I h ive felt a betta pulst , md it h ıs n ugly fluttet with it —but theie snodinoti, my son ' and, while ht thus wilfully deluded himstlf md his pupil tht teaij rolled down his veneiable cheeks
óó
" My father, were it not necessaiy 1 would not afflict you—but my horns are numbeied De ith stole so gently on me, that I peiceived not his approach till some maiks of feebleness weie obseived by my fcllow-solcbus Young Vallen¬ stein insisted on my peimittmg the visit of his fatl ei's physician, the skilful and celebiated Mullei, he give me no pre scnption, he advised only that I should lose no tm e m seeking mv home, but his mode of treating me at once opened my eyes, and I ρ itmptonly demanded his opinion—he ., iv ¡t re un mtly, but decisiv elv " Mulici ' ani did Muller despau of you ? " said lelix with agio η " The moment my destiny was an¬ nounced, the consciousness of tnme struck upon my bent, but I lesolved to employ the leinnmt of time in fulfilling such duties as were still m my power, to Louisa, to you, to my vassals bmce my return, I have baldly dai ed to look с 5
34
upon my si'tci. I was hoi n her pio- tector, and I am basely, cowaully de¬ serting my post. Oh ! my fathei ! my venerable fiiend! is theie forgiveness for me m heaven, 01 have I separated my¬ self eternally from her, whose loss on earth I have lebelbously deploied ? " Alas' you aie not guiltless, my son' My tenderness shall not induce me to betiay my tuist. You have sinned, but theie is meicy in heaven' Would that I had no share in youi offence ! But I am conscious your mmd needed α wisei and fiimer dnector, one vdio would have braced, not softened it." The self accusa lions of 1 athei lelix were fai fiom gioundle ss, though such refeienee to time now no longei letneva- blc, could avail nothing. W ith α heavy and uccplj afhicttd heait, he consented to bicak to the Lad ν I ouisa the ap pi oath of tint calamity, which waj not only inevitable, but appaiently nigh at hand ; foi the moment Wilhelm had re-
35
peated to lum the sentence of the sage Mullei, the feel le hold to which he clung gave w iy within his gì isp, md he was compelled to admit th t the ease was indeed hopeless " it should seem, u y father," said the Baron as slowly the} pin sutil the path to the castle Si that I Inv t lifted а bui then fiom my own bosom to 1 iv it upon }ouis I have not felt so 1 ght, I dai e not si} hipp} since the di} ¿/¿eleit us II tone ie í ms ι —she hsa strong mind —slit ıs a n b » he uted „,ιιΐ, anel will spai t me ti e uı sciy о seen., het sufici inu lelix ŕouní some consol ilion m obşti v ing- tli it lus e mp miou u ıs almost adıffeıeııtbeıı ^ fi >m the o ıcvvh ) en*e eel the hut with lum, his cheek h id now some t ngv. of life, Inst} t w is Its h iv}, and his step moie aleit Ihe b ood í ithei v ould willing!} hive del lyed the peifounintt oi hb «uti tıs) , but Wilhelm, intei nally convinteti how pıecıous were tut
36
ebbing moments, uiged and entieated; he ι etn ed to seek ι epose in his own apaitment, while Felix went to request an audience of Lady Louisa in hei oriel chambei. It weie useless to dwell on the shock convc}ed to the heart of this affectionate sistei by these sad tidings. Who has not suffeied fiom like cmses accoidmg to then individual cvpicity foi sufici mg > It may be imagined, theie- foie, what she felt, whose feelings were of the finest temper, attached to Wil¬ helm, not only as hei sole, hei dailmg brothei—hei deaicst fiiend md nituial piotceloi , b it is the head, the prop and pude of an ancient md noble house yet, m the mulst of the most icute sense of the due с dimity tint ivvaited hei, she opposed and subdued the over¬ whelming sens itions vv lut h ci ow tied upon her, and cie the good fimi could repeat the entre itics of hei brothei, she said, "'Ibis sti оке ıs indeed haid to bear 1 But I will die ıathet than any vvoid or
37
look of mine sh ill toltine mv dying Wii lein' 11 om tilts moment, i ıtheı, Ictus unite oui foices' I call on you to aid my lesolution '" ihe old mm was but ill able to an- s vei the call, he had been the spiritual diuctoi of tiit Muchii lilt f unity foi many yeais, and it vicissitudes weie the onl} vicissitudes iie had known " Bless thee ' bless tiue, my dtughtei ' cuci he, " I wíl ask of Iltaven to stiengthen my natme, and in the mean time I will endetvotu to inntatt where I ou ht to hive ν n tue to leid, but das' I am aged md feeble-heated '
3S
CHAPTER III. " And pmmg love shall waste their youth " Baeon Marchfeldt and his sister metat table with mutual trepidation, but it was only visible in the fonner, they stole a look at each othei, antl then glances met. Louisa's countenance exp essed pity, affection, foibeaumte. Wilhelm's mute mquiiy was answued, ht undei stood his sistei, and was assuied, at least, that he was sife fiom upbrudmg , eithei direct 01 implied , nay, almost was he willing to hope that the shock she had sustained had been less seveie in its con¬ sequences than he had anticipated Fa thei Felix blessed the meal with α falter¬ ing voice, but even he felt ι evi ved on perceiving how successfully the Lady Louisa had banished all traces of hei
39
ι ecent agitation. W ìlhelm affected to be gay, and, filling his goblet, said— " Come, fathei, you shall pledge me to the happy piogiess of the Duke of Fritdkmd's aims , may he soon make oui empei οι mastei of his own dominions!" " Yl hen }ou, my son, foimed part of Vallenstein's aimy, my fti v ent pi α} eis followed hım ; but now"— " And now—are not Zollendorf and five hunched biave Mairhftldtcis woith even a wish? îs ay, fathei, you must pledge me. Besides, while I sei ν ed linciti the banners of Vallenstein, he was a fathei to mc ; and lus son, the I lave, geneioĽS, noble-souled Casimii, he was my biothei in aims. Oh ' would he wtie indeed my biothei ' Louisa, have you no cuuosity to leam my camp άά- ventuıes ? Do }ou think I hive nothing to ι elate vvoith asking foi ? Battles and sieges may not suit a maiden s taste, but a camp furnishes sometimes singulai spe¬ cimens of that marvellous animal, man,
40
at least, í found such without any dili¬ gence m seeking." " Well, Wilhelm, you blnll relate your tale in the cai of no diowsy lis¬ tener. I will take my embiouleiy, and we will go sun oui sel v es on tht western rampart." lhe young bai on was unspeakably re heved by the explanation of the morn¬ ing; and the contiast of his feelings, to those with which he had the pieceding evening enteied the castle, pioeluced a lightness of spirits which had long been unknown to him , while Louisi, without bemg deceived into false hopes, itjoiced m the transient animation Tithei Ttlix declined making one in the paity on the rampai ts, his thoughts being deeply ab¬ sorbed in compounding an infallible nos trum foi а wasted constitution, and he was bound to a neighbounng heath in pursuit of ceitam simples, in whose effi¬ cacy his confidence was almost unlimited. Having ascended to the battlements,
41
Louisi seited heiself at hei enl ïoidery, and W lihthn, stietchmg himself it his eise in the sunshine, thus begin — " \ou know, Louisi, my lesolution to join the aimy wis somewhat sudden It was an effort I can tell you, but I felt I was doing nothing, of no eaithly use, wasting m obscurity, the g ucf and de¬ spau of those whose pride I might h we been Well, niy sistei, this thought goaded me occasion diy, it stiuck me too, that I should do bettei amongst stiangeis, and the roughei and more caieless I should find my new associates, the moie suitanle would they be to my puipose lo siy tiuth, my sister, and let a not seem ungiateful, youi tender witchuilness, delie ite as it w ıs —the mild and cautious lunonstianccs of the good lelix— toi tuied mc like the peipetual weaun e of a gilbn^, fettei, md I thought with cageintbs of eh inging suth society foi that of iu ie and ieel less men, fiom whom I had no sympithy to diead
42
I quitted my cistle, as some captive wietcb issues nom bis dungeon, in all the consciousness of newly ucovered fieedom,—but alas 1 I too soon disco- veied that my gaoler and I weie inse¬ parable. I could not fly from myself, only one hand could unlock my puson ' —But this is not to the purpose. I found the duke at Halberstadt, in the full caieei of conquest: my small rein¬ forcement was unexpected, and theie¬ fore doubly welcome , and nothing could be more giauous than my ìeception The general was seated amongst his mi¬ litary dependants, with all the pomp and magnificence of α sovereign ,—indeed, many reigning punces stood aiound, listening in submission to his iinpeiative mandates. Wiapt within myself, inca¬ pable of loss and îndifïeient to gun, I beheld the glittering imposing scene as α cold obseivei, with whom it could have no relative inteiest. " ' Baion Marchfeldt,' said the duke,
43
'We are scarcely stimgeis—we shall soon be fuuids The name of yotu no ble f ither, Baion Uine, ıs deu to chi valry, one of moie esteemed piowess neva giaced the annals of wai I saw lum once , he was of α fi τ\. martul, ma¬ jestic figuie, such а mm as we ruely look upon in out d tys Tor your f teller's memoiy welcome, Loi d of Muehfeldt. You sh ill teach us to prize you foi your own s ike, you stole on us une\p»ctedly, 01 we wo id nave icseiied you smtible qi u tti s loi vou 1 tuttu mts wc will endeıvoııı to piovici , anil, while we remain at IIibt stalt, will divide my aputments with you ' 1 bowed my ac knowIeılgtntııl4 and was i t ring—'Stiy, baion I must ρ e ent you to уош cotn- lades My son, Co mt Casi m ι of Vallenstein, Punce Scliiumbu b tlie Clievibu W tibeck of V obsten ,-but, m shoit, why shoi 11 I um ovci a list of names to vh cii you t m annex no clu- r ietti? Those I hivt mentionéi v l'I
44
suffice. And,' added the duke, ' you will sup with me to night.' " I had flattei ed myself that, this au¬ dience over, I might ι etue and commune unmolested with myself dunng the ¡est of the day, and at night take my moon¬ light walk beyond the tamp. Now I felt the chain I had voluntauly forged for myself; but, unaccustomed to pay obe¬ dience to man, a novice in militai y eti¬ quette, I peiceived not that the duke, in bidding me to the feast, was issuing α command ; and, thanking him respect¬ fully for his couitesy, I buefly declined his invitation, and ietti ed, unconscious of the astonishment my l.istiboicbnation excited, wondeied at, and peihaps even envied, foi tiie ¡mud insensibility with which it seemed that I icpud a ìeception so unusually auspicious. No second efloit was practised to detain me, and, Hav¬ ing made a few necessary ai rangements with Zollendoif, in whose expenence of camps I implicitly confided, I left the
45
oi dei ing of my Marcbfeldters to his dis- cretion, and strolled foi th, well pleased to find my»elf once moie alone Hal berstadt was such a scene of business and rumour as I had nevei befoie beheld, and I impatiently hastened beyond its wads,—still it was difficult to piocure the solitude I panted for, even *he little uvei, which washed the lampirt , was ciowded with bo its beai nig the pea- santiy, who dwelt on eithei bank, with provision for Villcnstems aimy, and tai and wide the countiy was covered with tents and swarming with men I was speeding sti u^ht au oss the camp, thinning only of gaining а wood, which flmked it on the ught, beneath whose shades I piomis n d myself to spend the remainder of the day, when I arrived at a post, whose sentinel challenged me I was ignoiant of the piss woid ' I am α stranger, said I, ' my name is Baron Maichfeldt I aruved this meining w uh
46
a reinforcement of Hungarians, I have not learned the watch word ' " ' lhat is α pity,' sud the inflexible sentinel, ' foi it is the only key which will open this dooi '— ani he ìepl eed his pipe in his mouth, puffing away, and renewed his limited match backwaids and fot vv aids with the coolest uncon¬ cern While I stood silently gniwin^ the cuib, which thus unexpectedly bri¬ dled my will, a gentleman came up, whom I recognized as one of those to whom I had been introduced at the lev ее of the genual " ' Hatk ye, sn " said he to the soldier, 'let Baion Marchfeldt pass, I am his wanant. But take the word with you, su ' you wiil aiuve at many posts as stubboi niy guarded as y ou have found tla« ' " I tinned, ani looked thankfully on my debveiei, whose vo.ee was no less musical than its effect was satisfacloiy
47
He smiled at the warmth with which I expressed my self obliged. " ' Fu haps, sn,' said he, ' theie is not а man in Gei many who can better under¬ stand the extent of the favour I have conieired. You aie bent on explonng yondei foi est, I fancy. You do well. keep y oui self out of the hei d —pieserve your identity—and Warbeck of W^olf- stein wdl be pi oud to icknowledge you, if not foi hi» mend, at least for his fellow.' " I was surpi ised that any external object could obtain even a lemjioiary possession of my thoughts ; but there wis something mdescnbable about this Wolfstein. His figuie had nothing sti ik¬ ing m it, his comjilexion was olive, and bis featuies veiy h mdsome ; his brow, natuially smooth an I open, was alter¬ nately contracted by thought, ci biight- ened by genius ; antl а mass of blatk hair, black as the uivcn's wing, waved over it. In spue of the regulai beauty
48
öf his features, if was impossible to dwell upon lib count nance without doubting, strongly doubting, the om plexion of his mind I can convey to youi fancy no idea of this man's smile,— never did appi obation, kindness 01 plea sure awiken it, but stoni and hatied found an able ınteıpreteı foi then deep¬ est meaning in the cuil of Wolfsteins lip Ile w 01 e no uniform , yet, as it should seem, he was not without his fop¬ peries, for it was his custom to have his thioat uncovered, and when at feasts, his Bohemian hat and cloik vvcie laid aside, his bust bo e a staking lesemblance to those of tht tidei Romans I have given you Wolfsteins pittine as much of it, at least, as а pamtei could give you,—the rest, as far as I know it, must develop itself moie giadually — Would to God," and he smote his fore¬ head with involuntiiy agitation, "you may never have an oppoıtunıty to com
49
pare my portrait of him with the ori¬ ginal !" " Why, dear brother, have you cause to fear any fatal mischief towards me in such a rencontre ?" " I could ill explain to myself what I foresee—what I apprehend ; but certain it is, that a painful thrill creeps over my nerves whenever I think of Wolfstem ! I feel a sort of dim perception that he is somehow implicated in the destiny of all that is precious to me—of you, my sister ! And where he is implicated, there must be mischief." " But we may never meet ; and should any chance throw him in .my way, it would be easy to avoid him." " It is, at least, easy to talk of doing so now he is distant ; and why should we not thus beguile ourselves, since our knowledge offuture events, which are out of our control, is but a mere fruitless anticipation of evil? The momentary restraint I had endured, served to make vol. i. D
50
liberty delightful. I wandered, careless of my way, amid the glades and laby- unths of Faltonberg Forest. The mur¬ murs of the camp—the neighing of steeds—the deep beat of the drum—the btavmg of trumpets—and, occasionally, the loud volley ot the signal gun, instead of distuibmg, heightened the charm of my leafy solitude I strayed I knew not, I caied not, whithei. The moon ai ose full, bnght, and majestic, and 1 w as unconscious that it signified whethei I was occupied in watching hei pi ogress as she sailed through the immtasuiable fields of æther, or lay restlessly counting the hours on my own couch As I stood meditating on unseen worlds, and then inhabitants, the bieeze bore upon my tai the stiokes of the cathedial clock as it tolled midnight, and immediately α heavy roll of chums bespoke a change of guai d , οι some such evolution In stmctively I endeavouied to dnect my steps homevvaid but to extncate myself
51
from the mazes of the forest was no easy task, and anothei day had dawned ere I piesentcd myself at an outpost of the cam]); wheie, notlun» doubting, I de¬ in ei eel my pa^s-woi tl. " ' Ah, ha'' cued the sentinel, ' that won't do, my fnend ; you must tiy some othei tuck. What' do ye think we shall take the old pass-woid 3 —No, no But as you seem a suspicious, luiking soit of poison, I'll just tiouble you to step into this vvatch-bo\, foi I should not vvondu but my captain might like mai ν ellonsly to ask y οα α few cıvıl question».' "Contention was vain, the soldiei only did his duty, and I turned passively into the seiitiy -Ьич, and, wiapping my -.e If in my cloak, awaited mdiffeienlly the change of guaiti, which was to bt the signil of my dehveiance. Here, now evei, I liad not been long confined, when I heaid tht pass word givtn, and an mimate 1 pailey taking place between -■ome new comer and the sentinel—it a 2
52
was Conrade's voice; and almost imme¬ diately my narrow puson was unfastened. ' Oh, my lord,' cried Conrade the mo¬ ment he beheld me, ' I have been wild with fright—I have been inquiring at the quarters of every nobleman and captam in and out of the walls. Captain Zol¬ lendoif is as phlegmatic as an old dry ciust, he would not let a man stir to seek you. He said, as you were gone on one of your stai gizuig expeditions, theie was moie need he should stick to his duty, and threatened to put mc under arrest for raving at him. What an ugly r old devil it is, with his black fieiee whiskeis culling ovei his smoky paichment fice' But, sir, I don't think m my conscience that the general is ovei and above pleased at youi taking this opportunity foi a little walk I just came in his way when I was asking every body if they had seen you, and so I asked him. It was past midnight, and he was going to his lodgings. s What 1 '
53
said he, ' is he not in his apartments ? This is a strange beginning !—This will never do '—Your master and I must have some conversation.' " * Lord love you, sir,' said I ; ' you had better let him alone. There's no more harm in him than in a sucking babe :—but as for having his own way, if you find out how to prevent it, it's more than I expect.—I have left oft' trying long ago.' " ' Ay ľ Is your master so wilful ? U that be the case, he had better not have placed himself under my command ; for / have my way too : and my way is to be implicitly and invariably obeyed.' I die! not like his looks over and above, so in as humble a voice as I could— " ' If your honour,' said I, ' would take a bit of advice from a foolish fellow, only just make believe, as it were, to give him his way, and you'll manage him all the while easy enough, and he nevei¬ be none the wiser. I have tried it my-
54
self, I assure your honour.* It was a good thought of mine; but let me alone for getting out of a scrape. He turned pleasant in a moment, and began to laugh. ' There/ said he, giving me a dollar, e you are a good fellow ; go and seek your master diligently.— Ľut/ said lie, turning about, ' is the second in com¬ mand at his post ?—Are all the Marcb¬ feldters, except their leader, properly disposed of?' íC í í thought it was the nick of time to b и even with olì Zollendorf, and told bun how grulT Tad sulky he had been/ Éí ς Yes/ he sr.LL * Zollendorf lias seen service j your master is happy in being -,o seconded / and this was all I erot for ' e J my pains. Well, the next peison í met ι ί my scardi was the young Count Ca¬ simir : í thought he might know some¬ thing of you ; but when I told him you could not be found, he started, and said, — c How unlucky ! I would I could assist
55
your search, but I have an appointed office for the night, and my orders are precise. Be cautious, however, to whom you speak. I have a strong reason for wishing my father may not be informed of Baron Marchfeldt's absence« To¬ morrow I will have the honour to give your master, who is apparently a novice in camps, some hints respecting our manner of living/ c Why, sir/ said I, ζ the general does know my master is missing ; but I told him there was no use in finding fault with those wandering ways ; so I don't think he'll be angry/ й I am afraid you are a blockhead, sir/ was his civil reply. ' I would not for ññy dollars you had said a word to my father about your master ; you have per¬ haps done him an injury I may find it no easy matter to counteract/ u ' Sir/ said I, < it's no use talking such impossible talk as that!—the best friend mv master has in the world is
56
Conrade Munster, except you reckon old Friar ГеЬх , and, God help him, he is a good old man, but his best days are passed.' " · Well, friend, I have no time fo talk, I must to m} duty Find your mastei, if possible,—tell lum he must not fad the general's levee at ten to¬ morrow, and if he will be in the great aisle of the cathedial at half past nine, I will endeavour to meet him there ; but и I do not arrive, in the mean time, 1er him be assured that necessit}, not neglect, occasions my absence. At all events, let him not fad the levee '' " Well, there was an end of him '— But as I crossed the camp, almost ciying with vexation, I met a handsome gentle¬ man wrapt m his fur m intle " ' Good even, fnend , }ou ate one of Baion Maichjeldt's men, I think ? ' " I would not tell him jou were reiss ing, that 1 was deteunined, but he was
57
even with me.—* What time did yom master ieturn ? ' " ' Iieturn, sn '' said I.—' W'here should he return from s ' " ' I met him going to the foi est, about foui yesterday aftet noon. " ' To the forest, did y ou ? ' said I ' What a fool I was never to guess it — Ay, ay , he is at his old tricks, sure enough ' If I had not been an ass I might have known wheie be was, antl found him witiiout any fuss, 01 say mg ι word to a living soul.' " ' To whom have you named it 3 — Docs the duke know ? ' " ' Ay,' said I, ' he does know,—but what of that ? —I can't stand chattering here.' " ' Good '' said he ; and I thought he meant something, but he walked off, and here I am. " The sentinel now treated me with tht lespeet due to my rank, and apologized и 5
5S
that his orders were so positive he might not release me without his captain's sanction; but an explanation soon took place, and I found my way to the quar¬ ters I had so truant-like abandoned,
ot»
CHAPTER IV. " I do note that grief and patience rooted in him, both " Mingie their spurs together." Cymbeline. " From Conrade's story it was easy to gather that I had sinned against the rules of the profession I had adopted ; that I had already incurred the censure of one, into whose hands I had surrendered the power and the right, not only of reproof) but coercion. I mused somewhat dis- turbedly on this fact. My apathy would have counselled me to take no care about it, and to let things work themselves out even as they would—to continue my own separate path—and to forget the existence of aught but myself. Some secret voice, in opposition to this doc¬ trine, told me, that as I had of my own choice assumed the yoke, it would be
60
ibsui I, childish, and frowaul, to begin b} bi tiking it I tm the son of many noble filheis, thought í , the concluding link of α bnght chain /Vn illustrious i ame has been tiansmitted to me'—the iact of Maichfeldt has been hithei to glonous' —and shall I just at the goal, falter? Thus leflecting, I di essed foi the levee, and, eie I pioceeded to keep my appointment at the cathedial, I went to Zollendoifl's quaiters The grim countenance of the honest veteran be traced his mwai 1 displcasuie thiough d I the duly paid submission our ι elative stations exicted fiom him ' Zollen doiff, my fnend, said I, ' I am а }oung and inexperienced soldier— jou must be my tutor in aims I suspect I have aheady been guilty of some failine in piopnety ' "'A}, my lord , I doubt your recep tion at the levee this morning will be of a diffeient complexion to that of yester day 1 General Vallenstein is a strict
61
commander, he knows how to pi eserve ordei and discipline in his camp as well as any leadei in Lui ope.' " ' Well, Zollendoif, I have this once committed the euoi of a raw leciuit— I will be more obseivant in futuie, and to }our expenence I commit mj igno- ìance.' " As I tuine 1 to speak to one of the lieutenants, I heaid him muttei nig— - "'I have no hopes of him '—He a Maichfeldt' His fathei, the noble Uhic, ms' e id of sitting all night in а wood listening to the owls, and staling at the moon, would have been up with the laik, visiting eveiy post ïound the camp, talk¬ ing to the soldieis, and minding hu bu¬ siness. Uns lad has been changed it nuise, thcı e ıs nevei а di op of M u ch¬ ic Idi blood in those ci caray checks' — Whoevci hves to see the diy, he'll iun away lhe hist chaige, and sh une us all.' " I veuly believe the old man was care¬ less vv bethel I heaid bun or not, so con-
62
temptuous was his opinion of my man- hood The conclusion of his speech did gall me , but I betrayed not that it had ι eached my ear. I felt the spin m my side, and my sluggish spiut stnred withm me ' No,' said Ι , 'pen she whose loss has thus changed me, she would have blushed to heai bei \ dhelm so doubted I Shall Ι piove myelf un¬ worthy to love hei living, 01 liment hei dead' \o, old Zolle idoif, Ι w U oblige you to confess youi injustice—you shall learn toi ecogmze the son of Buoni Inc ' " In ti u'h, the opprobuo is woids ot thisrudeveteian weie fnends m di guise I wanted the stimulus, and the inter luption thus given to my const mt and unvaiying tiain of thought w ıs essential I had a sort of instinctive sense of this, besides, as he had been my fathei 's tiusty comrade, I lesolved instead of turning to upbraid him on the spot, to wait patiently till I had proof to ofïu tint his thoughts had injured me
63
" The houi now appioached when I was to meet young Vallenstem m tht usle of the cathedial, thithei then I lepmed. He was not theie, nor came he, and I disposed of the time, till it was ι ecessaiy to appeal at the levee, m tiacn ι the vanoib lecoids of human caduuty seat- teied throughout the ν enei ible pile. " As I ascended the st m s vv 1 ich led to the sdoon of audience, I wis coolly gi ceted by several offieeis, who, the day befoie, hid been, on my piesentation by their genu tl, somewhat piofuse in then civilities I should not piobablv have noticed the alteration, but W ollstem, who w is lounging against the bahtstiatk, looking with ipparent caiclessness on the passeis bv, just lifted his eyes, and said, 'Swallows, sir 1 —All swallows' Mind them, and you may know when the wind blows fiom the notth-east.—Believe me, no weathercock ıs tıueı.' " As ht spoke I felt а slight tip on my should« * it was Count Casimn, who
64
ran up the stan case almost breathless with haste. " ' Baion,' said he, ' if my message was faithfully debveied, you excuse my faıîuıe, tiust me it was unavoidable But a soldier m these stn ung times is no fiee agent. I was anxious to have held some fuendly counsel with you eie you again meet my fathei—but all will go well. One woid, however, you must pei nut me Should my fathei adveil to any thing that his passed in teims some¬ what moie impei ative than you aie wont to listen to, I beseech you govern youi feelings—do not chafe lum, and trust ine, su, theie ıs not a biave man in the dukes aimy who has not occasionally needed such a caution. I pledge my honoui, su, that y oui s shall sustain no tainish fiom your patience ' " ' I should thmk, λ allenstem,' said Wolfstein disdainfully, « your list of fnends must vie in number with your fithei 'ь mustei-ioll' You aie safe here,
65
no doubt; but pr'ythee, Casimn, have you always redeemed your honour un- sliom of its beams, m pledging it so liberally to your fnends of yesterday ? ' " ' You ai e aware, at least,' replied young Vallenstem, ' that we aie not all swallows. Fie, sir ' think better of hu¬ man natuie. We have buds among us of eveiy fcathei—doves, falcons, eagles' I hope I am not such а craven as to quad at your sarcasm. Baion March¬ feldt, do you accept my pledge ? —Will you confide in my counsel ? ' " And he offered his hand with a w iming fiankness it was not m me to ìesist. In the voice and countenance of Casimir Vallenstem dwelt somethmg which, without giving the judgment tune to inquire, seized on my confidence, while the chaiaetei of Wolf stem's aspect excited the mmd to dei p and sciuti- liismg investigation. 'Ihe formu took my aim, and togcthei we enttitd the presence of the Dukt of 11 ledkmd. í
66
peiceived that my conductor in no way presumed on the close tie which subsisted between him and the genei d , the same stiff military salute was exchanged—the same foimal homage paid by the young count to his father—is maiked the ap- pioach of the othei officers He pre¬ sented α small packet of papus, and then, tuining to me, whose enti anee, I believe, the duke had purposely neglected to notice, said, " ' Baion Maichfeldt, my loid, awaits jour command», and deputes me his apo- logist foi ceitam omissions into which his mexpenence of camps h ıs beti tytd hım, but which a shoit cımpaıgıı, under your banneis, will süflice to ıtfoım in him " I was touched and suipuscd by the generous md earnest anxictv which was visible m my young medi toi, as he pleaded foi me, and the tl piec ıtmg look with which he iwaited his fathei's reply I perceived, too, tlie cuuosity.
67
ramgled with other feelings, that mai ked the coimten mees of those who stood aiound us, while I, the temporary sub¬ ject of so much speculation, was peihaps the most unconca ned individual amongst the svvauns of human beings ,vho awaited my sentence from the commandci. " ' I am soiry,' said the duke duly, bowing to me with а needing an as he spoke, ' that the Baion has so caily found occisión toapologi/e'— W ill you do me thefavoui, su, to iernam till my ii lends dispei se, as it is expedient we should coincise а little in pi ivate ' " I bowed my silent submissio ι to his will I believe the spectator, wuc dis- app nnttd of some tnumpli, the} ex¬ pected to see the tyio humbled and agi- t ited ' they little guessed what an mvul- ntiable p inoply guarded my bosom fiom all the aitdlciy with which moitified pude issails her victim. My sole re¬ maining ambition was to do my duty blamelessl}, and, as pei sonai feai nevei
63
had a part in my composition, I felt a calm assurance that I should not disgrace my fathers.' " ' It is well ovei, Baion,' said Count Casimir, his eyes sparkling with benevo¬ lent pleasure ; * I can see at a glance that the geneial regaids you auspiciously I have never known any one come off so lightly. But you behaved like a hero, you happily tempered the acknowledg¬ ment of erroi with the dignity of a man and a soldier. It is the w ay to my father s esteem—it is the way, too, to foil the machinations of the envious, foi, in spite of my dispute with Wolfstein, if the truth must be told, we have amongst us, I am afraid, some birds that would gladly see your plumage moult, so they might deck themselves therein But we are α min¬ gled ι ace—neither for the most part all devil, 01 all angel, but a little of both— ainsi va le monde ' " Wolfstein now joined as Count Casi¬ mir quitted me.
m
" ' I suspect,' said he, · this mummery, this representation, this solemn farce, this breathing machinery, does not im¬ pose upon you. If nature had not made human creatures so much alike, the world might be tolerable. As it is, ma foi! c'est an triste séjour I For ever, and for ever, and for ever, the same un¬ meaning routine ! My breathing time in this dull and misty planet of ours has already extended to the space of twenty- eight years. I have lived with all sorts of men, and been smiled on by women of all complexions ! Mark you, Sir ! There lies the difference—black, brown, or fair, grey eyes or hazel. For their hu¬ mour, its foundation, its ultimate bear¬ ing, is the same ; the apparent variety in their dispositions lies in the mode of dressing them—they are all intrinsically alike. For mine own part, I have pro¬ ceeded hitherto en maître. Men always regard with awe the spirit that dis¬ dains them ! Now I would not have
70
stood befoie the duke, and enduied the bending of his brow, as you allowed yourself to be persuaded into by that ignis Jatuus of a fellow, his son, for all his blood-stained laurels' Baion March¬ feldt, you must undeistand that custom has no sway with me I despise it' 1 speak to you in my own chai acter ' ι ou have, οι I mistake, something distinct and original in your composition, some¬ thing worth pieserving in its puntv, something which should spurn the con¬ ti ol of beings with whom it has nothing m common. Should you piove what I take you for, we will foi m a league , the woid fnendship suits me not—too much impuie bieath has been exhaled m the utteiance ofit.' " ' I feai, Chevabei '' replied I, ' I shall foil your penetiation ; my diffeience from the mass of my fellow-creatures comes not fiom nature, it is the pioduce of event«. In my conduct this mornn g, my own temper and raison would have
71
instigated me to the same behaviour which failed to meet your approbation, if Count Casimii had been out of the question. I will imitate you, chevalier, in speaking my own language, and con¬ fess that I am dull in comprehending what pi ofit can ause to either fiom any league we might form, since there is not a more lifeless machine in the duke's army than him whose identity it pleases you to con¬ sider vvoith pieseivmg ' " ' Well ι follow your destiny '' said he, ' since thus it must be ' The gross of mankind are made by destiny—a few shape out then own course' Ilowevei, while theie is aught to unriddle about you, I shall obseive you, sift, and ana¬ lyse ,—it will do as well as any other pastime.' " Meanwhile the levee was dispeising, and the duke sent a gentleman to me with a message, lequesting my attend¬ ance in his cabinet ; I approached, when Count Vallenstem said, smiling,
72
" « For once, Baron Marchfeldt, grant me precedence I' then addressing his father·—* My lord, I am somewhat straitened for time; will you indulge me with a private audience, only for five minutes ?' " The duke formally requested my ex¬ cuse, and preceded his son to his ca¬ binet, while 1 waited alone in the saloon. The father and son remained some time closeted, when the latter opened the door, and summoned me without retreating himself: I found my general's counte- nance cleared of its clouds ; he took my hand and said, smiling, " ' I am desirous, Baron, you should have an ostensible post allotted you without delay, such a one as suits your pretensions. I appoint you, therefore, colonel of division, in the left wing of my army, which is commanded by Prince Schaumberg; my son's regiment is there: Casimir is a veteran at five and twenty, and will be your military Mentor, if you
73
will ti ust hım. I shall announce youi appointment on pai ade to-morrow You will have no sınccuıe, I promise you, for I have supplied you de (¡ног penser, de quoi fane You will find youi captain, old Zollendoifľ, α tieastiic, an active and efficient light hand. You have your spurs ) et to win, ind the honour of man) noble f ithcis to support, and although )om fiist lttempt at military etiquette his been omewh it ectentuc, I fetl an intimite pei suasion that your first field will not diminish the lauitL of the house of \bichfcldt' " M v Lord,' said I, ' the generous mamici m which you have overlooked the ïiiegiilaiity of m) conduct y estérela) sh ill nevei be foigotttn, and T will en¬ deavour to piove to yon that I ieel it.' " I he count looked on me with α smile of s ich benignit), as one who had sten hım only m public, as % dtspotic military chief, could not have believed had evei adointd his countenance. voi ι. E
74
" ' Now,' said Casimir, as we quitted the cabinet, * I have, m fact, nothing to do for the next hour ; so as I am to make a soldier of you, suppose you let me expmine how you are appointed and accoutred for the post allotted you. In the first place, let us i ısıl y our stables, those, I mean, belonging to youi staff. I daresweai old Zoliendorff has taken caie to mount youi regiment well ' " Imagine, Louisa, how completely I was now compelled to change my habits, but I could only resign myself to that which an act of my own had lendtred inevitable, and to that which I was con scious the honour of my house required at my hands Casimir's admiration of my stud was extieme "' It .s supeib,' he cried: ' there is not a field officei in the aimy, except my father, better appointed.' " In short, all my military furniture was pronounced well chosen, and an hour was quickly consumed in the examination.
75
" ' Now,' said he, ' I must be off'— but, Baion, you will dine with me to¬ day. You meet the General, Prince Schaumberg, and several of our great men. Two is the hour, and remembei we aie punctual as clock-work. For Heaven's sake,' added he, laughing, ' keep out of the enchanted wood. But in tiuth I am seiious—punctuality is a law with us, and we must not be waited foi, even at feasts You are new amongst us, and have opinion to purchase A little while hence and I shall see you a privileged man.' "' btij, Count,' said I, ' if jour business is not of α pi ivate nature, take me with you, that I may steal experience fiom you. It will, at least, secure me from the danger oi losing myself.' " Louisa, it was an effort of resolution, and cost me dear, thus to lebnquish my beloved solitude, but an effort which I found must be made, and I patiently f 0
76
followed young "Vallenstem through a long, dull loutme of mihtuy directions. The clmnei houi appioiched, and I ac¬ companied him to his apaitmenls. " ' I am impatient,' he said, ' for tlie assembling of my guests, though my feelings towaids some of them aie not of the most hospitable n aure. Some of Wolfstem's swillows peck at t iy tibie today. They aie hu c gmg themselves in the thought that you aie undu aricst at this moment, foi so they unci pi eted tite fiow n on the genual's hi ou. I sus¬ pect then pity foi youi supposed chsgi ice will be almost equalled by then satisfac¬ tion, on beholding you piomoteil to a post, which m my ot them vainly tovet. Theie is something so base and despi¬ cable in envy, that fiom my inmost soul I Ujoice in its defeat." "'I αϊ lived,' said I, 'yesterday at Halbei stadt a pei fect stiangei. How is it possible, that, m so shoit a space of tune, I can be tlie object of so many
77
passions, good and evil, in the bosoms of my futuie associates' 1 —But since thus it is, I will content myself with adding no fuel, by my own act at least, to the ma¬ lignity ol envy , and ample consolation is ace 01 tied me, m the humane and be¬ nignant reelings whicn exist tovvatds me m the noblt mind of Count Vallenstem.' " ' fill it, Λ you please, fnencbhip, Buon,' lejihed Casimn, Ins cheek glow¬ ing with benevolent kindness ' Do not judge me by the insinuations of the nu- smthiopc Wolfstem. I thffei fiom him, it is tiue, not only m that I feel goodwill towaid eveiy living soul (except the swallows), but that I do love а few, a vtiy Lvv, in myheait's cote, while theie live s not the being lot whom Wolfstem owns kmdied 01 affection My fithei,' adeh d he, with a smile of cnthusiism— ' lhat is а noblt tiealure'— а majestit, dignified, poweiful, geneious man' As yet you know him only in the austeiity of his high oihcial chai attu , you shall
78
see hım anon the social convivial soldier. Pimce Schaumberg, our immédiate ci m mander, ıs a polished gentleman, ar ! brave and skilful ofhter. Wolfstem, by my faith, I know not how to describe htm —he is beyond me. I can neither fathom his temper noi account for his privileges—But we are mteirupted, and it is well, for I am interested that you should form your own judgment of this inexplicable man before I tell you all I know of him. " lhe Duke of Tnedland now entered, attended by a numerous tiain of officers, Austrian, Hungarian, Bohemian, &c He himself distinguished, even m exter¬ nals, as one fitted to be the leader of men—till, athletic, majestic; his coun tenance bnght, pieicmg, and intelligent, his eye quick and penetrating, his voice deep and sonoious, his whole appeai- ance breathing authouty and dem Hiding lespeet. He g uly returned my salute. ' You have found a docile pupil, it seems,
79
my son,' saul he, looking affectionately on Casimn. ' And you, Baron, have found α friend w οι th cultivating, bchaumberg, [ must piesent you v ith youi new office!, Baton Maichfeldt. He has brought us а tioop of fine young fellows fiom the banks of the Raab.' " Pimce Schaumbeig bowed, shook hmds with me, and said somethmg po¬ lite on the subject of my bung attached to las wing, but theie was something emban ıssed in his muniti of paying the compliment, which stiuck me, and I wondeied if it was possiblt this noble¬ man might be the pation of some of the pretenders to the post eonfeired on me, ol which Casimn had spoken In seat¬ ing ош selves at tibie, the etiquette oí piecedcncy was closely obseived I was placing myself at the lovvei end, which the duke noticed to his son, who imme¬ diately uied, " ' Baron Marchfeldt, do me the fd·
80
voin to tike joui seat next Pimce Sehatuııbcıg ' " As I complied, I could not but pei¬ ceive tint suipnse, sticngthened and seconded by some othei feeling, was veiy mindest m the countenances of seven! of the captains. I was tieited, dunng· the feist, with muketl distinc¬ tion by the duke and his son. Pi mee Miauinbeig, too, excited himself to diavv me into conveisition 1 torn lum I Itameli, that we might any diy ixpect the ippioich of the rebels, mil lint the tıoops wue held in constant pitpaiation , const qutntlj, th it the most ngid disci¬ pline was muntameli in the city antl camp 1 confessed my own total lgno- niiite of niihin ν duty. " ' l'ut,' said I, ' I hive lesionai myself to the guidane of the young (. ount λ alhnsU ρ ' " ' \ou do wt 11,'itplied the Pi шее 'Le is α ν iv nob'e fellow, and he has given
81
you α valuable pledge of his faith—he has bid high foi youi confidence.' " I did not undeistand lum, but ima¬ gined he alluded to ( isimu hiving answei ed foi my inline conduct to I is fathei. It was, howevei, scon obvious that some fathei mtatimg w ь couched m the Pimee's expieos on, and I ¡c- qtitsted his c\p( untion. " ' Is it possible, then, cued lie, 'von u с not au ue th it tht post fo which }< u ne pioinotcd has been loi'g pionnsul <> t ount Y alit ristein, —tint lie, th s шо tı¬ nı, , volunte cied its li m lu to ve u, n \, obstinately insisted on its icliiqu h ment, m consequence oí vvlicli vem wan ml of ippo nün nt is pup mug, aid will bc pies nted to you on paade to- moiiow ? III tyiyou whit, voung m », - youi p ets and moi dist tul 1 oí t'itsc soi t of tim _s vuv libuaily, but this s a ibsmtu ested açtım, md woitiiy cf ıs ntble a young fellow as cvci buckled on a sabie. ι j
82
" My heart was oppressed almost to suffocation. " * And has Vallenstein done this foi a mere stianger ? ' exclaimed I. " ' Ay,' said the veteran, " y our won¬ der is natural. It must be confessed that Casimii is romantic·—Ins father had once a touch ofit; but he knows more of mankind, his head has had many α tough struggle with his heart, and has won the battle, as is meet it should.' " Conversation now became general, and I sank into that silence which it was nksome to me to break. The new and beautiful page I had turned over m the histoiy of human nature, somev hat softened the intenseness of thought in which I was habitu illy buued. I foi got the actual scene, and knew not that I was seated at α military feast, sm rounded by many obseivers. Taney ι arı ıcd me back to the banks of the Raab, and do you know, I ouisa, she beguded me into a happy, happy vision. Icon-
83
ceived myself presenting Casimir to my sistei, joining then hands, and bieathmg blessmgs on their heads. Uow long I might have lemamed thus absoibed I know not, for the multitude of voices rathei lulled than distui bed my i evene. But Count Bbunenbeig, who sate oppo¬ site to me, ca'led on me to pledge lam in a bumpei. 'ihe sound of my own name stai tied me. lho ( ount happily vv as engaged m idling his ow n goblet, and not in thesciutmv of my countenance ; but V» olistem, who was next ban, sate with his eibov, on the table, hi» lyn v. eye fastened on me, and dei oui ing, as it weie, my veiy thoughts, nor was my einbiuassineiit the less, f ¡om the con¬ sciousness tint the teais hid involun¬ tarily gathc-ied in my yes. I disposed them hastily, and poni ed a little wine mto my glass— "' Na}, nay, Baion'' cued Blumen¬ berg, ť we make no compi om ise —my challenge was a bumper.'
84
" ' Pai don me,' said "Vallenstem, ' Ba¬ ron Maichfeldt must be excused—we must give him time foi seasoning. 1 take up the pledge foi him, and will match youi goblet, tlmugh it be α deep one.' " Soon aftei, we lose fiom the feist to attend paiade, and the duke said, " ' You accompany me to-night to а masked ball, given by Baioness W aientza I shall piesent you, it is α house you ou„ht to fiequent.' " Ibis was too much I was about to excuse myself fiom the intended honoui, but Casimir saw my design, and, seizing my arm, pinched it hau' I undei stood him, and most reluctantly bowed my assent.
85
CHAP'IĽR V. " Mit diter lik ' M h it ıs mmc afta lift 3 M} d iy tb dost d ' i hi „loom of nijit is tomt ' V hopcitsb dırkıiLss. sttiks o tı mj 1 iu ' Ivi sten tht list look oi hu heavenly tytb' 1 vt lu ııd thi 1 Ы sound·, oi im blisstd voıct ' Jumna Jailli, " ' Win, Baion,' exclaimed Vallen- bttin, as we vwdked off' to paıadı, 'what an mijii atticable fellow aie you to tital with! If I had not been on the aleit, voti would have ι eluseti to po to the ball! I <ell you, Su, tht se matleis aie iinpeiative' llave patience, antl the bonds whith fict you so much will sh'cketi by ib gi ees. At piesent many eyes aie upon you, and it behoves you to be catumspett '' " ' < ount С asının, why have you in¬ stalled me in lhe post you ought to fill— the post on which your active, manly
86
spint, and martial ardoui, would have reflected such splendoi ? I shall make but a pooi hguie m it, foi, to say tiuth, the utmost scope of my ambition is to get thiough my days work cieditably. How can I puisue, with success, any visible pnze, when a voice, heaid only by myself, sweetei than any melody the eaith owns, summons me without ceasing > ' " 'Alas, poot Mai chftldt ' I did suspect as much, lu »he moment I beheld > ou fiist, I was suie j ou wtieunhippy' \a}, I was convinced too, tint the steji >ou were taking was despei ite, md that }ou only thi ew } oui self amongst us todiovvn, in the noise of ι cani}), the whispeis of remembiaice. 1 hough ν oun.,, I have been long а soldiei, I hue nevci loved, have nevei heaved ι sigh loi souow of ni} own I will sigh foi vouis, Maich¬ feldt, }ou shall thvide it with me. Hoarded tieasuie ıs evci mischievous to the owner. It shall be my caie to
87
ïelieve you ti om many a burthen, that the exigencies of our situation would lay upon you,— m return, use me as a brothei '' " The last word echoed on my ear .— Vallenstem,' said I, would to God you were my biother ' " ' 'W hy ? ened he 'It is of little im¬ portance whethei wt weie locked m the same cradle, I takt it This unforced fi itemity suits my fancy well enough Thti e is ι fntnd, saith Solomon, 'who sticks tlosei tii m а biothei ' " ' But > m have nevei loved С ısıma ' I doubt if wt cm undtistmd each other How can von sv inpathisc with one, whose w hole soul is Iov e v ho h ts b\ eu upon it who must the f н it—who ıs dead ıh e uly t j all the intuits md piuposesof this life ? ' ' Muk me, ch u M u chftldt It is tuie I h ıvt ne v ti loved, yet I do not mean to quit this pi met of ouis, on which it pleases W olfstein to bestow so many op piobiious epithets, without experiencing
88
the sweetest sensation of which man's natme is capable;— л passion at once puie and feivent. My heait, by some instinct oi othei, has discoveietl that there remains foi it а ¡nppiness as yet unexploied, and often th earns theieof It is odd enough, I own, that none ot the angels I have seen have avv d^cnetl m me moie than ti insient ..dmuatmn , but my time is not yet come, I suppose. By the by, you will see а fine citatine to¬ night, with whom we aie all in love, and who, m bei fashion, loves m.itiy, buthti- self most.' " We ι сран e d to the \\uent/i hotel, almost immediately on otu j etui n fiom paiade: it was а «uptib edifice, contain¬ ing extensive suites of ap utments, m u>- mhcently adointd·, united, the inicimi decoiat.ons of this palite gave it the an ι athei of the habitation of a 4, ooin>h voluptuaiy, than of a Genu, и lady. One extiemity of the ball-ioom con¬ tained an oi chestia, consisting of almost
8ü
eveiy insti ument of music fitted foi the saloon, the othei opened mto spacious md delicious gaidens, still иЛч-тоны/ш, with shad} giovcs, maible fountains, and oiangc bow eis ; and stationed behind then leafy sci eens weie sev л al homs, and othei wind instalments, tonti ibuted by the militai у guests. On the enti ance of Casimn and my-elf, the duke, who seemed wailing foi us, led me to the baioness, to whom he pi csented me with vtiy flattenng expiessions of esteem, whith wtie letiunetl on liei pai t with an elegant compliment, utteitd in а voice whose honied sweetness sounded like the eileet of piactice. My fast glance was hastily witiithawn, foi you с umot imagine, Lomsi, with what kailess und united seiutmy she ex¬ amined the countenance ot a stianger. To me, accustomed to all th it was de¬ licate, ι dined, and modest in iemale mamici s, the g ι 'e, Ι n. α} almost call it aident, of tlie Baioness Waienl/a was
90
most ojipiessive, and I sniank fiom it instinctively. Yet I have seldom, pei¬ haps nevei, seen any thing so dazzling as the meucban loveliness of this lady hei costume, like the furmtuie of hei palace, was Moorish, and though many other ladies were piesent, in different fancy dresses, all more 01 less becoming, she was the Armida of the scene,—-the eclipsing planet. As I stood m irv elling at the difference peiceptible amongst beings of the sime species and sex, cast¬ ing a compaiative glante tow uds the towers of Marchfeldt, I was loused fiom my unseasonable musings by the voice of Wolfstem " ' Couiage, Sn '' sud he ' vou are α little disordeied, I perceive, by α coup de wletl Ihey aie common in this atmo sphere, and not leiy dangerous.' " I had alwa}s lemarked a touch of irony in the speech of W olfstein , but his tone, at that moment, was pregnant with gall. The baioness felt it, foi hei cheek
91
betrayed that she did, even through the artificial blush which covered it. " ' Ah 1 ' cued she, ' I peiceive you aie in one of youi unaccountable moods to-night' But do remember, Chevalier, that I detest a cynic 1 ' " ' Not more, madam, than I detest a tnflei, male 01 female' You dance, I suppose ? lhat is of course.' " ' "W hy v es, Wolfstein, I cannot avoid it, you know I am engaged to waltz with the duke.' " Right, madam, right' But why waltz? You can t pietend to rival Γ infarina, waltz as you will ' Youi ancle 1» as well turned, too, almobt, as hers, I thmk ; and the turn of yotu neck is graceful enough,— I know not, for my part, wheie you fail These aie all matteis of taste Fanf αϊ ma' pretty 1 tnfu ma' Well, I will mai к you critically, Buoness. Who knows but I may discovei when lies the dilfuence ? ' " 'I here was something mdesuibably strange and singular m the insolence
Ü2
with which all this wis u'teied. 1 ui- fani a is a ballet dancei at \ lenn i, and one whom it was evei} wa} insulting to name m competition with am wo¬ man of chuactci I vas confounded, and scaicel) kntw whethei it wis not my piovince to mteifeie, but tiie tle- meanoui of the baioness suipuscd me almost a» much as that of W ollstem her bosom swelled with vexition, till I thought it wo dcl h ıvc buist the diamond cl isp which fastened bei vest, tens lushed mio hei e} es, and the flushing of hei check must have been ¡innful, yet, m spite of lcsentment, something like depiec Ниц tenderne s w is mingled m hei agitation as she mumun cd, " ' Pei veise and iiijuiious 1 But you shall ïepent this, Sn ' I will not be in suited with impunity ' ' '" Nay, why be angiv, Baiontss ? lou know it th ties not me 1 \ou well know my humorn, i hose who smile on me, must smilt on no odiei ' But go ' the
93
duke seeks jou —you must go walt/, madam '' " ' But, Wolfstem, how could I avoid it?' " 'Tuie, madam tiue! But why not waltz- 1 It is α pi ett}, animating, blood tii- eulatmg txeicise' Waltz, by all means' I nevci wait/, nor shall the woman I love evei wait/; but why y<> и should not, upon ni) soul, Baioness, st pu/zles me to guesi '' " 'I he duke at that moment advanced, and, taking the h tnd oí the baioness, led liei to the centi о of the loom. I fclt pained for her ; I couhl not doubt that the sneei ing misanthiopical W ollstem had ac quii eel а poweiful antl oppressing influence ш hei bosom, and, agitated as I had 5 een hei, I deemed it impossible she could poi foi m the task of exhibition she had undei taken , but, my Louisa, 1 soon found myself no less α nov ite in the ball-ioom than m the camp- to my astonishment, Baroness Waientza exc-
94
cuted her waltz with all the skill of the opera, mingled with a grace and senti¬ ment peculiarly hei own : but I thought, with Wolfstein, I could not behold the woman I esteemed thus exhibited. Ap¬ plauses echoed through the ι oom ; and the cheek of the baroness was now as highly flushed with tnumpli, as it had lately been with resentment and provocation. As her noble partner led hei to a seat, she letumed his flattenng compliments with a look of giateful delight: in shoit, I knew not what to thmk of hen As foi Casimir, he was engaged in fluting, chat¬ ting, flattering, and vvalt/ing : I could not inquire of him, and I stood leaning against a pillar, wreathed with loses and ever¬ greens, carelessly watching the gay groups that flitted by. The pressure of a light hand on my arm, and the sweet and liquid accents of the baroness, aroused me. " ' You dance, surely, Baron ? Try one turn of the waltz with me."
95
" Something impelled me to throw a glance round the room in search of Wolfstein, but he had disappeared. " ' Lady,' replied I, ' take it not amiss that I resist your flattenng challenge Amongst all these gay gallants, Baron Marchfeldt is little more than a breathing automaton.' " ' Ah '' sud she, ' if that is the case, we must find some Prometheus to an.mate so fur a machine We shall bieathe a soul into you, I doubt not, Baion '' But with a voice of gentle intieaty, ' Will you not dance ? Aie you inflexible·" " ' It is not a thing of choice, ma¬ dam ' said I, coldly. ' it is impossible '' " ' Uien be it so, Baion/ said the fair Waient/a, haughtily ' we must for¬ give a little provincial rusticity, it is an inciustation which often conceal:, a valuable gem. We shall live to see you such as we are '' " ' Never, madam '' " ' Lh bien ι c'est egale '' and she left
96
me to puisue my it venes Presently Wolfstein came fiom behind the opposite pillar, passed his aim thiough mme, and directed his couise towaids the gaiden "'What aie you made of, Baion ? Are vou wi apped in asbestos, 01 aie you а salamandei ? Do you defy the cy es of woman, roll they nevei so bughtly, languish they nevei so tendei ly ? What chaim do you weai ' Not that I me in to bonovv it, but tic desne of 1 now ledge, a philosophic spiut of mqiii y, prompts mc to isk ' " ' I do not undeistmd you, Che vahei " " ' Noi I y ou, Bai on but, by Heaven, I will befoie we have done with each othei, though I begin to doubt whethei you aie woith the pains, whethei you have more oi less in you tbm youi fellows' Do you know, Maichfeldt, that I have in tui n adopted eveiy cieetl that the wit of the few oi the ciedihty of the many have brought mto fashion, since
У7
Father Noah's era. The metempsy¬ chosis had its reign , and positively, as I watched you a few minutes since, it came into my head that you could be no other than a resuscitation of that worthy, dispassionate gentleman, who stood for half a centuiy on the top of a pillai ' One thing you can tell me, as it is matter of fact. Did you not, even now, with baibanan ciuelt}, resist and ι epel the advances of а fan lady ? Did not the Warentza solicit you to lead hei thiough a waltz ? And did not you, most discourteous knight, repulse the lovely petitioné·· ? ' " ' This, Chevalier, is somewhat too much '' exclaimed I c M} patience has its limits, and you are treading hard upon them ' I will not answer а question you have no right to ask.' " ' Bravo ' bravo ' You are not made up then only of eaith, ur, antl water, but have youi portion of hre ' A proper fellow, in whom all the elements aie to be found, voi i F
У»
though somewhat oddly mixed ' But you nere solicited, Baion 1 loi yom ıefusal to answei my question says yes, more distinctly than α coxcomb's avowal would do lhat woman—that Waientzi ' Na¬ ture has made a bewitching creatine of hei ' And why should I rail that she has no soul, since women have none ' if they had, they would be mtoleiable ' " ' No souls, Chevalier' Women no souls ι I would not so think, foi all this woild holds precious ' " * I understand you, Baion I ou have found a woman with α soul' Well, that may be,— ι hnus natu? a I, foi my p u t, believe ııothmg^ —and eveiy mm„ ' I never saw а Phœnix , but whit does tliat signify ? Such a bud m y exist— nav, I luve met with ti ivclle s who vuy giavcly ivei tint it does, and fu bc it from me to conti übet them I obseived vou it chnnu, mil one thing I discovei td, winch tins evening conhuns— уош sou!, if vou have one, has jot a fur-
Ô9
lough. It has had calls this day that would othei wise have roused it into action Ambition, vimty, aie either quite extinct withm yon, or very fast asleep By my honour, Maichfeldt, you aie а lucky fellow I take it, you have known all the delicious blindness of love, and she tc whom you were in¬ debted foi the heavenly illusion, va¬ nished ue your eye» opened thus, you aie clei nally a lovei, md ihe has ob¬ tained hu ipothecsis > I thmk I have ι clue to you Now I will give youauddle guess it il yoncan How comes it, think you, tint I, Chev ilici Wolfstein, wdk appaiently defenceless amongst men, ι distinct aid sipuitul being·' Ileie I im, you see, m the midst of α с imp, ι piivdcgeel spect ıtoı ' It is the same m coin Is Ileguciless of the poweis that bt, I u ouch not, I Hattu not' I vuy m m Iceis hi. 1) ıs no fellow in Wolfstem lhe „ι oss ol m uikmd instinctively shııtık bene th mv İmce, fm 1 li ite fiols, am i 2
100
the gross of mankind are fools ! Look you, Baron, here comes folly, unadul¬ terated.' " A pretty, conceited youth - aproach- ed us with an air of bustling importance. "'Ah, Chevalier!' cried he, 'there you are. I have had a fine search for you, and began to despair of success ! But, why do you hide yourself? The beautiful Warentza is positively droop¬ ing ; a cloud obscures the fair face ! I heard her inquire if any one had seen you, and volunteered myself her Mercury.' " ' Really, Margrave,' said Wolfstein, throwing on the luckless messenger a glance of withering scorn, ' your mission is of that weight and dignity, as well be¬ fits the capacity of such an ambassador. Hav ing disburthened yourself thereof, my humanity prompts me to send you back empty? " And he turned away, saying, loud enough for him to hear, ' By Satmnius, I would rather be the blast which shrivels
101
and scatteis suth insects, than the sun which fostei s them.' " The gardens were now brilliantly illuminated, and the dmcers ciowded into them. Casimir joined us I saw Wolfstein whisper in his eai, and he re¬ plied aloud, " ' No, no, Wolfstein ' You and I must hunt in sepaiate tracts ' Our game is very diffeient' I am no playmate for you' I have no taste foi стрептег.^.' " ' Ilcvv should you, being one of the million—less fit to act, than to be acted on?' " ' I have proved, however, C hevaber, that I have wit enough to thwart your opeiations; and, as to will, it remains to be seen if yours or mine has the ascendant.' " ' At lease, Sir,' said Wolfstein, with a look of daik meaning, 'you have placed youi self m α pi etbe iment you would pei haps have avoided, had vou compre-
102
hended it' I am lavish of m} contempt, but he may be pi oud whom I honour with my hatrdd It is likely, Count Casimir, you do not undei st I the woid, moxe than as an empty pln.se, since it belongs only to mastei spiiits to hate effectually I will teach you its utmost signification, Count Casimn [ ' " lheie was something poi tentons and deadly both in the look and w ouls of Wolfstem his cheek was white as marble—even Ins bps w eie blanched, but his tone was cold, с dm, and de- libeiate 1 shuddered as I beheld and listened to lum, and, aw aie ıs I was that Vallenstem was highly incensed, I endeavoiucd to mterfeie between them ' ' Nay, Bai on,' said W olfstein, with a sneei, ' set }oui gentle beut it iest W t vill shed no blood' \ allenstem knows I will not fight—biutes right— men hght ' and, theieloie, Wolfstem fights not ''
103
" ' No' e\cl umcdVullenstein, fieicely, * Demons have slowei and more refined methods of dtstiuction '' "'Right, Sn'' sani the Chevalier; ' and now, good night, gtntlemen ' I luve ied а listless life foi some time. í pined lor an impulse, and, 1 thank you —you have sup] lieti me ' "' liy mv soul,' tued Casimir, ' I have not misii uned that fellow—he n a demon 1 lhe disset tion of a living hu¬ man heait is his delight. He mai ked }ou foi his piey , but there I have foiled him. v\ hat predominant influence he possesses I cannot guess ; but he has ruined many а fine young fellow. In¬ fidel himself, his business is perversion. Natine has endowed him withapovvei- ful, bi illi mt genius, only, as it should seem, to make him moie suiely, more fatall} destiiictive · but the most singular part of this mys'eiy ¡s, the impunity, the pi iv ilt ge, which pitees hun by the side of the gieatest men of the da} !—My
104
father, for instance W olfstein has а distinction with him, which few of the princes and nobles of hts army can aspue to. I do not undeistand it—but so it is The women idolize him he is at once their delight and their terror. Of the Emperor he speaks in the most insulting, the most degrading terr. s —and every one knows it, yet he stan us audaciously amongst crowds of com tiers, unques¬ tioned for his disloyalty ' But why should his disiespect foi an earthly soveieign suipnse, when he dai es question the ex¬ istence of the God who made him—or, carrying his rash impiety still farther, îepiesents him as an evil spint, whose habitation is darkness and whose will is destruction ? His egotism is most offensive and disgusting ' Heai lum talk, and you would suppose theie is but one soul m the univeise—the one which mfoims and enlightens him' But tf I proceed, Maichfeldt, you will deem me actuated by revenge, and so fai it is
шо
true, that passion has burned me into a descnption which I meant to have de¬ fenecí till }0U could observe linn awhile foi youi self: yet am I guilty of no cx- aggeia*ion.' " ' I wish, Casimir, you had not pio- voked the malignity of such a being. —What evil may not íesult fiom tins night's dispute '' " ' For that matter, be assured, March¬ feldt, what you have witnessed must, soonei or later, have happened. The feelings he this night openly expressed towauls me have long been secieti} nouiished : the stoim has been some time githeiing! Besides, so warned, and knowing my adv ci sai}, I must be weak indeed* allow of а sui puse One vvoitl moie, howevei, on tins odious theme. You mai к his told, disdainful tempei, Ins insulting tieatment tven of that halt of the ti cation whom it is man's pi ci¬ vilice to piotect and theiish. \et the pathos of his madngals and love-laments f ï
106
ıs uııpatallcled Oui young soldieib snig them by moonlight, and the ladies—deai souls' aie suie that the aulhoi is a most divine cieatuie ' " ' Well, Λ alleiistein ' sud f, ' I wou'il we had ncvu met' I am tioubîed md hai ib^ed, md full of gloomy nnb„iungs Let us nence ' foi, suıeh, even y οι ι must be w eat y.' " ' No,' replied he, gaily, ' not α whit ' Soldieis know no weaimess 1 We must yet await oui geneial s pleastue—but sec 1 he is ι etn mg, and we will do likewise '
107
СПУГНИ Vf uoi Ιιι \ii \ ou luu ι u il ι* little as ие c u ! lo l¡( 1 Ml 11! Π Ι ι 1)1 III 1 Ml l„l i ' / i/oh f ili ιί * Lv ι m day bıon«V o e neu prooi of Casimit'sfiiindship, etc iy clay bi ought iiesh conviition of lu , woith. Ì on spaik- bng i/uic fu m unent, Louisa, i" a just emblem of the bnght, unclouded punt} ol his mmd '—I do η >t believe he hai- botns ι thought w hu h liomu might not smile on Buhl, g a, с rin-ipi 'sing, lit optnlv iv owed his contempt of dissipa tion, bn ılı testation ol ill tlııl tends to huit disc οι th b sı inn's η ıtuu (omit 'v alituskin was bt lu ld by hi, lathti with txiilliiii, alice turn, and ,n ictuin almost deified his lathu , y 11 V tUuisteın h ul nt distinguished i ink ni the ai my, bung simply the coloni I ol a regiment, noi dui
im
he possess any obv ous puvileges —th it his seciet influence, howevu, was of no negative foi ce, 1 had о casum to piove, foi aftei the fiist few d \ s I f und myself the object of almost unii n iteci ìridulg ence My fue id m l /oliendo!ñ ti ins acted all my m 1 tuv btism ss, and I vv is no longer compel ed to mix m uve Is, agunst which my sick spuit levoltcd Casimn watched my ictiicment, and guarded it with α fi itti η il ttnduness which ought ncvu to be foigotten Louisa, you must lemembci it, for'when the bieith of mm goetn fottìi, he tm η eth again to his e uth, md then ill his thou 'hts pensli ' ' " My lean si bini h ц f c u not tint Louisa cm f >i n и the fnend of hu Wii helm" " M ahm а ucek," ulumu! the Bai on, " iftei the bill t the Hotel de Warentza, ι vex itiotis incident осени et —You will ie cbly colicene, tli it I I eld no miei couise with the piofessed loe oí Casimn a slight bow pissed between us
109
when we met ancl I believe veuly, that had the enemy of mankind stood visiblv befoie me I should not have ïegaidcd him with moie abhoi rence I resumed my visits to the loiest of Ialconbeig, sometimes iccompanied by Cisi nu, but foi the most pai t alone, foi between my duty nul lus own, my fiiend led ι li boi ious life It chanced one evening as I sate musing undei the wide spreading shade ofa tiee in the veiy heart ot the wood, gating alternately on youi minia¬ tine and tint of Blanche by the light vhicli a w inmg yet brilli irt moon shed tin ou 0 h the foliage I w ıs stai tied by the wlustl ng of a bullet winch pissed mc so near, is ibnost to ^rt/e my um, and whit h vv is follow el on the instant by a deep i d hi Icons howl I spi ang isto nished on my feet, nid tinning towaids the sound, saw a luge he wolf, which li 1 1 linked m ι thicket withm a y ud of my stition, in the igontcs of clt ith the bulitt hiving enteitd its thioat. Wolf-
110
stem, with the dischiiged pistol in his h md, с une slowh up, ind touching lus t ap, sml coldlv, ' Good even, Buon ' ' W hen I bc hohl bv whom my life was sivcd, 1 almost spumed the obhgition, and it vv is not without ι stiu^glt tint 1 utleie d somethmg like m icknowledg- nient 'N i\, spue youi s If the tiouble, Baion Muehfeldt ' letiunetl he ' í fanes you haidly deem the gift vvoith thanks 11 ıtheı ought to ask y oui ρ π don foi mv officious intci feitnet, m fencing on you that which you ne we uy of 1 "'\ou au ι good nitiksinan the vahei " ' \is ' iephed hc, in his ι s ι il siguí heant ıceent ' I seldom um vuthout hitting " His tve dwelt on the jiletine I still held in my h md it w ıs th it of Bl mehe y oui s hul fillen amongst the gi ass " ' Pu mit me, Buon, one gl nice it the fur object oi yom contemplation' " ' Chevabei, you have saved my life,
Ill
and it seems ungiacious to deny a icquest appai enti} ummpoi tant, but thei e ıs some¬ thing »acı etl in this pietin e It may not be submitted to }Otu ga/e '' " W hile I spoke, I w is intently seat th¬ ing the tall, lank glass foi my othei minutine. —Wolfstem peiteived that I sought foi something, and in spite of my lepulsive conduct, silenti} but diligent¬ ly commenced the same emplo}ment Scai ccl} m my life have I experienced a feeling of such bittci piovocation as I did at th it moment, combined vut h а sti ange ni} stei ions tei ιοί oí, I kut w not what — У1 my anxiety was to suptisttle his seat ch I coniti not beai to think of his beholding x oui poi ti ut ' Oli, Ionisa' why is n, that whtntvei by any accident his uh ι inti }ouis aie associated in my mind, my hent tums sick ? ' " But, tie u biothei, has not youi pitju- diee a httl«, tliscolouied the chaiattei of W oliste in ? Did he not save youi lift—the life of one whom he knew th tested him ?
112
And was there no virtue in the act ? — Nay—bc more just, my biother'" Wilhelm gioaned inwaitlly, and m an instant Louisa beheld him sti etched f unt- ing au her feet. In this situation she was obliged to leave him, while she flew down the tunet stans to piocure some watei — With the aid of hei women she soon le- eoveied him, and, when his iccollcction entnely returned, " Oh Louisa '" said he, " never, nevei, if you love youi biother, couple W T olfstem's name with woids of indulgence and palliation '—Louisa ' the diead of that man's influence on youi destiny will scattu thoins on my dying pillow ' No, do not contend with me ' The juesage is stiong, and youi aigu ment will but stiei gthen it. Send youi women away, and I will ι esimie mystoiy. " But you aie feeble, W dhelm—delay the sequel till to-mouow.' " No, Louisa, I am eagei to tell it now. ' The attendants were dismissed, and thus he resumed :
113
" In spite of my diligence, the lynx eye oí Wolfstein fiist discoveietl the tieasure I was so bent on concealing from him. He snatched it with exulting insolence, and stood fui some moments intently gizmg on your featuies· then, turning to me, ' This,' said he, ' I conjecture is the sembl mce ofy our sister, the lovely Louisa of Maichfeldt ' " ' Whoevei it may resemble,' replied I, ' now, th it y ou have satished your cu¬ uosity, I must lequire youi îestorationof that vv Inch} ou have long enough detained " ' But I have not satisfied my curio¬ sity, Baton ' You are not aware, perad- ventuie, how great a connoisseur I am m beauty —I must look and look agam. Do you suppose I can be satisfied with such an examination of this bewitching countenance as the dim light of yon wan- 'aced planet pcunits ? Besides, you see cun that is fading—No, this is no light foi the study of such a picture 1 ' And,
114
to mv inexpiessib'e is^onishm^nt ml n dignation, he quietly and delibe ι itch de posited the mimatine n tl e bosom of his vest- Chokm, with wiath, I deminden his meaning " ' Do not al u m y oui self, B u on, I be¬ seech you ' cued he ' ι our munitine ıs pei fectly safe ' I want to studi it Iteli you' It is an exquisite bit of ıvoıy '—I have seen it by moonlight —I want to see it b} the midnight lamp, and bj the dawning sun, but I pledge my self that to morrow I will honoui ably iestoie it into your hands Fill then Su, no powei on eaith shall wiest that pictuie fiom me 1 ' " I was comi iced th it I could not help myself —it is tuie I hid a sabre bv m} side and a clipei m mv gnelle but, nn tated as I was I could not lift а hostile hand igun f the m η who hadsoiecentlv dehveud me i ioni tbc íin,s of an mı mal little moie fu oc ious th η himself I made howevei, moth ι с floi t " 'Chevalier 1 ' sud I, Ithiow mv seb
115
on >our genei osity. I enfreai yoü ι estore that pıttın t '' " ' H ч young VaHeiutcin seen it 5 " ' No, he has not.' " ' Inched ' And have you as gieat an objection to its cnduimg the violation of his glance as that of Wolfstem ? ' " * Chevabei, will you iestoie my pio¬ tine ? ' " ' Why, yes, Baron, I will ι estore it— but not till to monow.' " ' Good night then, Sn '' said I, and again flung my self at the foot ot the tree. " ' Vo, Baion ' rou will no doubt exe¬ cute me foi a nuisance, but I shall not bid you good night m this wooel. I he centié¬ in in who was so neu miking his s upper upon you hu mai v Inends uid con¬ nexions in the neighboui hood as hiuigiy is hunsclf, and thty do not alvvavs attack singly —\ou see how dai к it glows' If voti h ive αην pi cfu с ntc with 11 »aul to yom plico ol sepıdtıue I would not ad¬ vise you to huget heieaiiothei half hour—
116
if you do, the wolves will eficctudly save the sexton Ins office '—I 01 m> part, I nevei entei thisforest late without abrace of loaded pistols in my belt ' " In shoit, Louis ι, hai asset!, baffled, caieless w hithei I went, and ïnxious only to rid myself of his odious societv, I lose, and we walked in silence, bioken but by the exchange of the watch-word at the several posts, till I reached my quaiters, when Л1 olfstein said, " ' Now good night, Baron ' I will not fad to wait on } ou after morning parade.' And away he darted. " In a state of mind inconceivably tor¬ menting, I p iced ui} apaitment, —some¬ times I thought of going to tonferwith Ca¬ simir on the niauppoitable behaviour of Wolfstem , but, aware of the fieiy indig¬ nation it would excite m hım, I ıelın- quished the idea besides, I knew not in what qu utei oí the camp he might bt en¬ gaged, and h ill the night might be vv isttd m seeking him. I had lately discovered
117
that my míense and habitual mental suf¬ fering was frequently accompanied by something correspondent in my corpoieal frame, especially a violent and rapid pal¬ pitation of my heart, that seemed to aug¬ ment the agitation of which it was the effect, this symptom now attacked me with unusual force, and in older to coun¬ teract the mtoleiable ι estlessness that pos¬ sessed me, I swallowed a large dose of opium, and w lapping myself m my cloak, thi ew m} self on a couch, and at length ob¬ tained a happy oblivion of my cares. An unaccustomed noise in my room vv aked me with a start, and when I could sufficiently throw olí the oppression of my artificial slumber to look about me, I perttiv td by the glare of a couple of lamps that two men weie m m} chambei. I watched their motions with astonishment and in silence foi α few moments, as thty seem ed so intend} occupied m relieving some of my flunks of then contents that they paid little ìegaid to the continuance of
IIS
my i epose indeed, besides the noise within my chamber, judging by the stun¬ ning vanety of sounds w Inch assailed my eats, general confusion prevailed without My sabie lay on α chau unsheathed be side mc I seized it, and vv as m α ι nut mt on my feet, pi epaied to m ike an efloi t to delivei myself fiom such unce cmonious visitor — lhe noise I made in spimging fiom my touch cbstuibed the lobbus they tinned ïound, and, to my suijinse í beheld the countenances of \ illcnstun and Lomade, foi so eflectually «tit then peisons disguibtd by the weight of then acconti cments th it only then f ice wue lecognizable " 'C)ool mellow, gtoi monow my den fellow txthimtd tht loimu 'W t luvt na doubt suipuscd you 1 would not iw d с you 1 11 it vv is ibs lutely ne cess u v — "ion have ι diy s woik befoie you, an 1 oid> the Pow u ahne cintili wheie you vuil letp to ni ft hi to i t le and I hive prt p u ed youi aicoiiticm nis
119
like faithful sqiiucs .— all ıs ıeatly, fi om helm to sput '—The gall mt Muza ıs neighing and planting at tht tlooi ! Zol- lendoiff is on hoi schack at the head of youi biave Maichftldtu», in all the phlegmatic ıh tti initiation oí a Gei man lieutenant, his pulse nevei beating half ι sti oke qutekei than if lit weie puffing his staai m his o u cabin on the banks of tht li iah. \ou must hivt sh pt ilke the dead, oi the lepeated llouush of the levulL, ılıt dısthaıge of aitdlciy, biay- ing ol tiiimpetb, and mustennet of men, would hav t dľ-tuibed you '' " ' lhe tııuııy aıı at hanti the n '' sam î, as niteli une illy 1 big in to du ıs im self, " ' Nol еч letly I I ney , but tht v aie not f u oll, aud wt musi tmd them ' " lheie w ıs a îiiivtuii ot thought and inini mon m С isinm's tonnten ince I had nevci iein u kid in it bilon win n í w is du ssed, ' Now, - ud he, ' d u M tuldeldl, all js it ulv ' 1 he v in Sı t Joi w ud an hout
120
ago—The left wing is now beginning its march-—My regiment and youi s aie by this time a mile off, but a few minutes will bring us up with them —Maichfeldt, you are not accustomed to the пике oí battle.—I do not ask you to pieserve your piesenee of mmd, since it does not appeal to me possible you should lose it, only, under ail cutumstances, stick close to your hoi se I et nothing unseat you Neglect not this piecept, and then, my noble Wilhelm, we shall shake hands agam I doubt not '' " ' Ay, master 1 said Coniade, ' Μη/α is such а tapeiing beast, antl he'll be in such α passion if he gets а vv ound, that you must keep ι good look out, 01 he'll have you out of the saddle ' Viul do,— bless you, deai mastei, be minding whit you aie about, and not thinking of things that cannot be helped '—Ioigive me foi mentioning hu,yotu honoui, but if the Lady Blanche, Heaven iest hei sweel soul' knows whit is gom„ on, she ι»
121
watching, you may be sure, for youi Loidship's honoui and safety '' " lhe pooi fellow, oveicome be¬ tween his feu of my displeasuic that he should dai e to utlei α nune so sacred, and his mixed anxiety foi his mastci's u nov η ι id piesei v ition, buist into tears. His mention oi that piohibited name at such ι moment sei ve I to endeai him to ine, md 1 pi«-Sscdlinu to mv hta t. ' ' Now we will be off 1 ' said \ allen- sltin 'Wilhelm' I luve had no sinister hint, bul I ahv i}sbnl faitweil to piovale foi totbeqiitntes, so Heaven and all goo 1 пц К guud ilice, tkai Wilhelm 1 ' \iid mistel, mistel '' eind Con- iik ι wt dest tmi ti t/t ,Lıııs, pu strıt- ПЦ ı \_,nus vei κ Ί he hul untied nom his own neck, 'just pop thi into your bos mı ' We. v tu о ni mounted, and iode sı hud, lliit, ıs ( ısının hiel au- jautel, ı lew n mute b ought u up with om t ic îi , ν e then sl κ kei eel our pice, Uld I sud, ν οι ι о
122
" ' My fnend, I have one request foi you: should this day bring my task on earth to a conclusion, and you survive,— promise me, that you will make Wolf¬ stein surrender into y oui hands my sistei's picture, which he has most insolently wrested fiom me.' " ' Wiested fiom you, Baron 1 ' echoed he, with a look of vexed surpuse : ' How could that be i' " ' Yes, wrested fiom me ' Having fiist disaimed me of the means to vindicate my own light ' But I hav e no time to ex¬ plain—Say you gi mt my icquest, and having obtained tbe picture, will, with youi own hand, iestoie it to that of Louisa of Marchfeldt' " * I call the Holy Vngm to witness, that if I sui vive, I will execute y oui will. Coniade, should Muza be shot, be aleit' Remount > oui mastei as quickly as pos¬ sible ' and waving his hand, he galloped to the heul of his ugmient. "lheie is something so nnpiessive,
123
ьо awakening, m the hostile march of a well dressed, well oiganised aimy, that, as I joined my men, I could not help feeling some funt lekmdling of the thoughts and emotions of happy days, when my heait beat as aidently to the hopes of futuie gloiy as that of any youthful captain m this huge multitude of w u uoi s Noi could I ieri ain fiom ι effecting, with somewhat of the pude of а military novice, on the singular trans¬ formation which the tactical skill of Zol¬ lendorff had produced among the rustics of M trchfeldt, for theie were no tıoops in the Duke's aimy better disciplined, better mounted, oi, what is best of all, stionger beai ted, than my ownpc nanti y . As we advanced, the mating of aitdlciy towards the b inks of the Sila infoi med us that oui adv mce wasengiged with the enemy Ihe Duke had desp itched a herald to Pi mtt Stlmumbeig, ordeung lam to send foivv ad with all expedition, a ftw picked lcgunents, to m ikc а diversion, t, 2
124
his left being outflanked by the Bo¬ hemians, &c. who, having obtained possession of a wood, pressed him very hard in that quarter. Casimir had, of course, eagerly petitioned to be sent on this duty ; and the Prince not only granted his request, but likewise, at his suggestion, ordered my division, which consisted of three regiments, to push forward with all celerity. Such was young Vallenstein's anxiety to fly to the relief'of his noble father, that I believe I owed the distinction rather to his opinion of the superior strength and speed of our horses, than to any feeling ot' private friendship. We set forward, and charged upon the wood on a gallop. My March- feldiers behaved gloriously. The rebels, who expected nothing Jess than our ap¬ proach, were fatally surprised: and, in less than halfan hour, all the troops that were stationed in the wood were either stretched beneath our horses' feet or flying before us in the utmost disorder.
125
" I do not wish, Louisa, to give you a detailed account ot ou~ battles · suffice it to siy, that Count Mansfeldt effected a hasty and disordeily ι eti eat, with the shattered ïemains of his army, and we, complete!} mastei s of the field, reposed that night withm the walls of Halle, the keys of the town being, with all submis¬ sion, tendei ed to the conqueror. As we rode into the town, a subaltern officer made his way through the press— 41 ' Colonel,' said he, ' I am ordered by tbe geneial to tell you he gives a supper to-night to the chief magistrates and the offieeis of the gaiuson. Hc expects his own field-officeis, and sa}s, that to-night he cannot possibly dispense with the com¬ pany of Baion Marchfeldt.' " Only the centi e and part of the left wing of our αϊ my had been engaged, and these weie now drawn up within the walls of Halle. Men and horses wei с woe¬ fully fatigued; yet the legular form ofa pai ade was still to be gone through, and
32G
the loss of each ïegiment to be ascer¬ tained by refeienee to the mustéi roll. The vacancy to me, inexpenenced in the bloody work of wai, seemed awful, although it was pionounced mconsidei- able, and I peiceived that the íesult of this seiutmy added no small zest to the happiness of the vieton The Duke iude round the squaie, distnbuting his thanks and praises. " ' Count Vallenstein,' said he, as he approached his son, and his voice fal¬ tered with emotion, " I am satisfied with you, sir ; youi men and their leadei are worthy of each other. " Foi my sell, I knew only that I had done my best and fulfilled my oideis, and was totally unpitpaied to find my¬ self the object of maiked appi obation, I own, theiefoie, my sens itions weie almost oveiwhelming when oui g illant gennai cried aloud— " ' Bv vou, Buon Maichíildt, by the spinteti and icsistlcss enige 1 1 tde by
127
youi division, at а veiy critical moment, was this da} 's foi tune decided ! I thank }ou, sn , and request }ou to accept my congratulations on this glorious com¬ mencement of your militai у career. Take my advice—go rest for an hour, I shall want } ou at supper. Meantime our biave old fnend Zollendorff will be on duty for you.' " He left me, and I joined Zollendorff, who, elated far beyond his usual pitch, ordei ed my men to cheer. When this tumultuous salutation subsided, " ' Henrich Zollendorff,' said I, ' tell me, have I behaved like α changeling, or will }ou now own me for the son of Buon Ulne ? ' " ' I would blow any man into the air who dai ed ask the question, but your¬ self' ' ' I hat is enough, my tuend.' And, attended by my faithful Conrade, who was civ mg, luighmg, and apparently ¡uli deranged, I sought such quaiters
128
as the confusion of the time affoidtd, and, hiving found them, gl idly hsea cumbered myself of my weighty cn up- ments, and resigned my self to an 1 oui 's repose. I was aire idy usen much ic- freshed, and piepaitd to sMly foi th, when Casimn enteied, Ins eves bnght with tiiumph. "'Marchfeldt, I am veiy pioud of you,' said he, as he piesstd mc to his heart, ' I knew you would acquit your¬ self cieditably, but nevci chcamed you would distinguish yourself as you have done ' " ' I do venly r believe,' iephed I, ' I am indebted foi such distinction to the maniluvios of the sune man to whom I owe my post in the aimy ' " ' So far,' said Casimn, ' you are ught, I solicited foi you, and foi my¬ self, α duty to which sign d honour, or signal thsgiact, would ¡iicutablv ittich, but how ν e should tome с lì m tht busi ness was α qucs^on of indivi lud muit.
129
We must not stand arguing here, how¬ ever, but away to the banquet.' " The o ly incident to be recorded of this banquet which will interest you, Louisa, occurred immediately on oui sitting dow n to table : α golden dish and cover was handed to the general by one of his page s of honoui. " ( It is well,' said the Dukc y smiling, * eau y it to В iron Maichfeldt.' " I lifted tht cover, and found beneath it a pin of gold spuis. " ' Yes, Baion/ said he, îeplymg to the giateful look with which I icgarded him, ' jou have fauly maintained your knighthood, wear these in memoiy of this day's achievements.'
G 5
130
CHAPTER Λ II. " What ıs this qumttsbince of dust—this piri_cn of animals ' Hamlet " The duke resolved to temim а few days, to lefiesh and ıest hu tıoops, in the pleasant town of Halle, which stands on the biow of a vme-coveied lull, at whose foot flows the hala. The moinmg after the conflict, Vallenstciu рюролес! our walking togethu to the held of bat¬ tle, and I consented. My hist emotion, as I contemplated ascent so ghistlj, was а sliuddei ol h moi but, ь I » i/ed, my eye by degites bee ime leconci'eel, and, when n unit's tin ill bul ρ sst dovei me, the musings which ¿nette did tuie, though mouinfu', fai iiom imple ып» I conti istcd the detp mil solemn sdente now leigning witn the wild ionu niions
131
tumult o ( estei day—the roat of guns, the cla sabies, the loud hoarse menace, tue trampling lush of the charg¬ ing horse. All this was over, and а strange stillness prev uied. Neai the spot wheie I stood lay α young hussar, whose yeais could scaice have numbered twenty, hc was а handsome, manly hguie. Ihe moital sti оке had probably been too suddenly inflicted even to allow las countenance to take the anpiession of pain . if it had vvoin it, a was gone , foi such an mdescnbable calm sate upon his ftattucj as communicated itself even to my ftelings, as I stood absoibtd m the contemplation. Vallenstem heaved a deep sigh "' Boor fellow 1 ' s ud he, 'this is luthltss woik, God knows ' Ibis boy, no doubt, h ıs I etn the pude, milis now the despau ol some loud mothei. Some pietty gul is now vainly tornititi« liti bc ids foi his stiet}, mil v utily du uns of his ictuin Well such things have 1 en since the
132
beginning of the woild, and such things will be till men aie mt f imoiphosed into angels Battle, likeievthy, is pleasant enough in the antitip ition md in the act, but odious the morning iftci How cm you ga/e so steuiilv on the 1 if less face of that beautiful biv ">—Il sickens my heart to look at lum ' " ' Into mme it sheds a stiande con solation, Casimn iou, wai m in hie, full of gay hopes and bulbant pusages, who scarce!} guess at soriow , vru ma> sigh ovei his Pile——I env} it ' " Neu the }oung 1 nssir lu a gri¬ lle uled veteran the gi isp of his de td h md had stiffened upon the hilt oí his mbie , md his re »tuie-, fixed as thev v\eic in the sleep w hieb w ikes not, boi pi ob ihly the siine cinnetti thev exhibited befoie the soul which liilonned them hid fled aw 1}—th it of h u d inflexible 1 1 solution. He had mm} wounds, and lus silvei hm was· steeped m goi e " ' I know not wh},' said Casimn, ' I
m
should visit this scene of devastatior, like some demon, to biood ovei the destiuc- tion I have issistcd in causing, but it is ι « ustom, antl I im not sure that the thoughts such scenes excite aie not si Jtitiiy But let us hence, Maithftidi In tiuth it oveicomts me—it is too ivvful " Is wc ttiined wc pu eived Su W u b c' tf Wolfstem stan Ung neu ıs, md си ца! ıpı uently m ι smuln e miem pi Iti I) "'Y ,' sud lie, eehoin ö Cismin s list woids 'it is iwful' Hue, iddcd he, t iking out his vv itch, ' hue is, υι ias, ıs fint aid subtle ι piece of mech mısın ıs inv m Uit woild It wis ι faithful useful companion, m uiiuiui 0 lemem- bi incei uul monitoi Its vit d pulse, how¬ evei, is stopped —the spi mg is bioken All pulses ¿//slop, all spi mgs сг// bicak And, ulhu by vioienu? 01 time, ail mi chines, how tv u killui md subtle tbc mech mist, will ce ise to act, bkt those
134
on the giound before you—like this in my hand! Oh' Baion, I ujoice to peiceive youi wheels aie still m motion ; and my congiatulations aie ti uly disintei ested. Had you fallen } esleída}, you would now be sleeping with the brave, antl I shouhl not be under the painful necessity of redeeming ni} honoui, by lestonng into }ош hand this copy (it the pamtei be d tiue mar and no flatteici) of the sweetest ongmal tvti moulded by the hand of natuie.' " ' \oui detention ox that pictuit, sn,' said I, ' even had I not suivived to de¬ mand it, would have bten a dishonoiii- able outiage. But 1 did not цо into battle without pioviding foi suth ι con¬ tingency. My incuti, t ount Casimn of Vallcnsttui, was pLdgtd to pi oc tue }oui sunenelei of that pie tin ; since it wis to him I confided the office of depositing it in the hands of mv sistei, and of heal¬ ing liei ni} last aditu. " ' That was not vu с, Bai on. Count
135
Vallenstein's ti ade ıs war ; and these are days when Mai s has cut out work enough foi all his sons Now I am an idle fellow, and ìaielyfìnd a task suited to my fastidious taste,-—that mission was made on puipose foi me ' In ptoportion to my indirici enee to things in geneial is my aidota when once txtittd. I piomistd toiestoiethe pictuic to you, but, had you ce iscd to bicithe, would have ıe- stoitd it to no man bicathing. Ni}, fiow n not, gentlemtn I am but sup¬ posing ι case which does not exist, and you ait not acquainttd ytt with hall my audacity. I dit tmed, list night, I re¬ ceived ihatveiy miniatine, 01 one won- dious like it fiom the alabastei hind of the ί ι ι ongin d ' " ' A 1}ing vuion, su,' sud I, ' be¬ lieve ηκ Ihcmcie vipoui of уош own consumiu ite picsumption ' "' Why il is vtiy possible, lcplitd h slowly, with ι look ot dtt mihu,
136
* that you may not live to see the oiacle accomplished.' " ' Sir Warbeck,' said Vallenstein, ' nom this Jioui I foisweai уош society ' In public I must encline }oui pi esence — but wheiever we meet, be it as stiangeis. I will not exchange the slightest л oid, the mei est couitesy, with jou. The w 01 Id has space enough foi both—why should we jostle each other -" "'Γοί that mattéi, }on si) justl), Count.— W h\ should w e josde ? I ha\ e made manya man feci me without tì) visible contact, and intend to do so again '' " Thus saying, he took oft lib cap, made a low bow, and quitted us. "' Maichfeklt,' said tasıma, some¬ what caielesJy, as we turned towards the town, ' let mc have a peep at that picture.' " ' Nay,' replied I, piqued by the coldness with which the icquest was made, ' it ь not woilh asking foi.'
137
" ' You aie an unaccountable fellow,' said he, misconstiuing the flush on my cheek ' I believed it was only that odious Wolfstein who caused your te¬ nacity , but he has excited my curiosity, and I just wish to ascertain if his i ap¬ unes aie mciely affected foi the puipose of tormenting you, οι ν hethei theie is cause sufficient m this little case. If the lattei, Louis ι of Marchfeldt must look to heiself —peisecution, m one shape or other, awaits her.' " Saying which, he opened the case. I think he stood at least five minutes, intently tiacing your featuies, ancl then, closing the case, silently returned it. Till we leached the gates he ajipeaicd to be lost m the deepest levene, while I waited, m angiy suspense, till he should find utteiance " ' My si tci's features,' said I, at length, ' have seldom been looked on with uidifFeience, either m the copy oi the ongmal.'
138
" ' By Heaven '' said Casunii, tuining mt suddenly ïound, ' this is most un lutk} '— lhe e} es of that basilisk ought nevei to have icsted on those featuies ' Without any tiue feeling any soft or geneious sentiment, \\ olfstein is a keen pursuei of female loveliness Why on eaith, Maichfeldt, wae vou so bewitched as to suffei that min atuie out or }our giasp foi an instant ? But it is fiuitless to net and fume—the mischief ι done' Wilhelm, of what sort of mood is }our sistei ? Flexible, and, like most of her sex, easiJy mtrtated ? "'Wheievei religion, pnntiple, and reason, sanction hei ph mey, sht h ıs no resistance,— bui, pi ititi, fnm, and dıg- nifitd, no eaithl} influence tan bend ha fiom the right ' " 'That i« excellent' cued Casimir ' Гше, the leading expíes ion of hei countenance is ι sublime tombinition of myest} and inteligence ι pt sn, Mncliltldt settin ill it itti ıı tl pitju.
139
dice aside, has not the painter flat- teied f ' " ' I would I could appeal fiom your doubts to the ongmal, Vallenstem ' " And aftet much like conversation we ι etui ned, at length, to oui quaiters. But my story should draw towards its close As foi the militai y pait of my adventures, suffice it to say, that I have bi ought home my spuis untarnished. One battle in detail is like another, and the specimen I have given you, no doubt, appeases youi desire for information on that head. By degrees, tht ftebleness of my fiamc tendered the perfoi mance of my duty, trifling as it was made by tendu ness and indulgences, n ksomc, and at tunes almost impossible. I have be¬ lieved, occasionally, that I should expire tf fatigue, but 1 said nothing , and per¬ haps only the watchful eye of my chosen biolhu, aided by his faithful ally, the titbty Coniade, would have thstovtied my lini st ite. He communicated his
140
suspicions to the Duke, who sent Muller to nu, and his sentence was decisive. I thankfully accepted my genu il's pei- miSoion to ι etui n to my famil) My little arrangements weie soon made I left Mirza with Casumi. lhat mcompliable fnend followed me a day's journey fiom the cimp Oui puting was not without its pang, for both knew it was final. " On my ι otite, aftei the retin n of Casimn, but one cucumstance oeuuied that deseives teco d. As we pissed, the second evening, thiough the sknts of a wood, we peiceived that we had taken а wiong path, in shoit, that we weie completely bewilducd Jasper md Ru¬ dolf beat about m vain, we could not extncate oiuselves, and I, fevued and weaiy, began to think of giving up the attempt, wiapping myself in my jiehsse, securing the horses, and passing the night vihue we weie. We h id aheady dismounted and tied oui steeds to the trees, and were pieparmg to col'ect some
141
diy sticks, intending to kindle a fiie with our flints to keep ofl the wolves, when one of the men descued α smoke using from α thicket at some little disturne. He appioached it cautiously, and ìe- tuined unthseoveied, with the intelli¬ gence that а tioop of /ingiù site ca- l onsun, in the hollow; but tint, fiom the deep silence which picvailcd amongst tlicni, I с suspected they hid pttcciveci and nt ut to suipnse us. We now held ι e in ult lion J ispu Mid, the tioop, u milt , women, nc ıtheı less fe¬ nicio s noi much !ess checuvc than tlie mui, lidt at least twenty slicing , while we ıı uslu ul only f oui —soldieis, indeed, md well aimed but yel tlie odds were foiiiuddi e. Vitei a shoit pai ley, what we had best do m the exist.tig tmtigtnty, I duu mined to had lliein, to ask them (oi a di light of vv itti , ui which I stood much in iicul, m 1 to lujucsi then guid¬ ance into tie pith bom winch we had unluckily deviate I. 1 own I haibotued
142
a stiong sense of peni ,—my ııçht hand was on the hilt of my sabie, my left grasped a pistol m my belt, while C on- l ade and his companions, who, m oider not immediately to betiay our numbers, stood a little m the ìeai, weie pei fectly ìeady to ìesist, on the instant, any attack which might be attempted Oui paity thus an anged, 1 stood foi a moment examining the gioup. The scene was beautiful, and the wild hoi de which had taken possession of one of the tangled thickens of this extensive wood gieatly augmented the romantic sublimity of the landscape. 'Iheir daik, sun bin nt featuies—then black matted ban, sur¬ mounted by the sh iggy Moldavian cap— then baibaious and lagged ν estui e —the mystenous sinistei expiession of their aspects, exhibiting a stiange mixtuie of cunning and fuouty—the squalid ар - peai ance of the naked chiliben, who site squtiled on the giound, with each а finger on then lip, m token, doubtless,
143
of obedience to the silence they had been enjoined—the gigantic oak, under whose antique and widely spreading arms they had pitched then iude tent—the luddy bla/e of а lai ge fiie, ovei which a kettle hung suspended, antl which thiew its bioad ied ghue ovei the gioup ;—all conti ibuted to lendci it α scene worthy the pencil of Sah ıtoı. Pushing aside the bianthts which cont caled me, I placed bi)sclf duectly in thtu view. Instinctivei) . as it weie, some of the men gasped tatlı a huge couteau, which It\ on the giound btsitle tiu m , but, on a signil made by one who ippcuetl their cinci, tiıey lud tliem down again, and lesumed then position. No one spoke, but the wdd black eye of the chief m- qunitl my hi smess. " ' Γι lends,' said I, ' I am а sti anger, tiavelbng by chance thiough this wood; my j) uty and I aie unluckily ent mgled m its ïiitiicacie·) . give me a guide, and you shall not ïepent yotu touitcsj. In
144
the mean time, have the chant} to be¬ stow on me a di aught of w atei, foi I am choking with thnst " Hit chief mule а sign to one of the vvomc ι, if, indeed, the h i 0 m q itstion merits such an tpptil ition she enteied the tent, and biou_,ht thence a huge leathern bottle I put it to ni} mouth, and th ink ti b eih, but ıııstcad of viater it wis wine of no b d fi ıvc ui " it is betici foi vou,' s i t slie now foi the Inst tme lici in_ the silence of this mute pul} , 'vou u e iot, md watei wou'el el dl vt u ' lie icceiit in which this was spoken nude nie ug id tl t ^υυά и ¡tıucd hig with btoiushmtnt it v\ ıs the deep iou & h tone of ι mm, ind is I locked upon hei, g e ith di ! the it юс it} of her featuies belie the hinninitv ol hei iet hei eves wcic black, 1 ke tl e iest, but hid ι ied ílu ι noun I them, winch added loihtii heitcntss, the uppci put of the face was of а livid, mudd} vs lute,
145
unlike the deep olive of hei companions, bei chin and upnti lip wao ι endued daikei thin the us, by whit appealed to me a thick s iblc bend, aid as she spoke oi „unnt el, f hc long jellow tusks, with which hu mouth wis spiely adointd, weie disclosed, hu he id was wrapt in a icel sh iwl, which ill concealed the guz^ltd laven locks which sti i}cd fiom beneath it she wis tall md of gaunt limbs, and seemed α cicatutc of imuitn t coi рш с αϊ powei " ' \ϋ\ν,' said she, ' I will be }otu guide But} otu men no doubt would fam taste of the bottle — Hue ( om ule bispei' Rudolf 'W I it do } t leu ? * " 1ht mt n bel oldın ö tht couitesy oi my leceptıoıı mel e jii tcpiciitn ie nung ш then tuition, hi l m mvvhilt id vanctl, but itvu sh dl I í > „ι t then feaılııl c m t in ilion, is the^ he ml then names tini f u uhu!} < dleti ov» ι , nor, I must с ι ues , w is nunc much infermi to tuen \ me of them, howtvti, voi ι ,ι
14β
deemed it expedient to reject the offered draught It seemed to me imprudent to exhibit my purse to the view οι this formidable horde, yet í could not resolve to make a thankless return to their hos¬ pitality* nor ungenerously persist in mis¬ trusting beings who treated us so kindly. Besides,it would appear that the sybil who held the clue to our labyrinth needed no information from us respecting our actual circumstances. The Zingari, beides the wine, supplied us with eggs and bread, and not one of our little party but felt his wasting strength and courage much revived. í approached the chief, and, with affected confidence, took some dollars from my purse» and presented them with thanks: he immediately sprang from his seat and made me a lowly salutation, touching my foot with his forehead; and then we followed our wild mysterious guide from the thicket It was some time ere we gained a heaten path t but »he who led us broke
147
or divided the entangled branches which opposed our passage with her long brawny arms, triumphing with apparent ease over each impediment : at length we reached a brake which seemed impenetrable. Our guide then turned, and calling Conrade by name, bade him lend his sabre, " c No/ said Conrade, c that I won't ί I am not such a fool í You can break away the brushwood well enough with those iron arms of yours. Not but I am willing to lend a hand in cutting it down ; but you don't get my sabre in your clutches !' " The gipsey grinned hideously, having made the request, í suspect, merely for the purpose of diverting herself with Conrade's misgivings, The sabres of my nien, and the natural strength of our guide, soon surmounted this obstacle, and the sun had still half an hour of his daily journey to perform when we stood on the verge of the wood, and witiiin two leagues distance of the post-house,
148 wheie we meint to ust for the nijht I now bade «rood even to our conduct itss, and pi e suited iiu w tit tiie icwaid 1 thought fâ ιί cirntd bv the iss st mce sht li id if' id d us " ' \\ ill, im lou 1 su I she 'vou are α geneious noblem in, and hiving led you thus fu fauiiiullv, I would fun give you a iltie to lite futuie I el me look upon vom ¡nim £ '' \1 is, b icntl ' leplied I, smiling ' I belie ve I cm ι e id to the e nd of Ide s p i r с without ud of tl mt wiutiemams is bin I md simple " ' Tuie ' she upli d ' vom sun tonchi s tlie viistein hoi ı/on u is most true' I hue st ι ids votn cmbi m' uul she pointed to ι voung nuilbuiv tree with ud bom the summit to the loot bv ι sli oke of hjitnuij, ' look it it, my lord, it his iiuthu pith, noi sip, noi vi dnu 1 he ι! cuín., ι tv s of tlie sun and tiu nouushmg, ufiishmg tbvvs of evenuu visit it, as thty visa its nugh
149 boms , but then visit is vain ι ïoikeiy — it noi feels noi ïetksthtm' I siv it not Ion-, since, when it w is gi ecu gıy, mil vi 0 oious thi sip swelled its voung vtins, and its spie ibn bianthts wue thick a ith fob ige One tinnitici tt oke has done this to it' It sh ill fill to monow ' Such thy md slu ivi lied wood suits us foi f ι m n "' lour inibitili ıs ipt, inend,' sani I, ' but we must pirt, foi I would lam bt n 1 ι tow nds W 11 t /Ί iu ' " iet, sul she, still iletunin 0 me, ' thou di i)mi tincad be well nigh spun is thtit no point on which you au einioiis ? It in iy be you niisttiist mv knowli Це il ι, (»id [ned you, nubb tol nel \c t, le ι y u sl oui i fenget the Zuip, u iot thi wood oí Moni m, I tell vou tins m j oui t n, — soni lui b ь maikid by ι violi \ν, ild 1 site with t hoi ible I ıtırlı, '1 tki ( u e if she e tu " Having uttu d th se woids, sle
150
entered the wood, and was soon lost to our view Her parting sentence rung like a knell in mint ear ' Your lamb is marked by a wolf' Too well did I un¬ ravel the sinistei and ambiguous import of this mystenous vvamins,, which has left its eternal echo in my heart '" " My Wilhelm ' M} dearest brother' Let me beseech y ou to duv e these haiass- ing misgivings from }our mind' They are mere hectic imaginations of а sick fancy, believe mt, brother " " Гат, fam, Louisa, would I believe it ' But did not even the healthful, gay, and candid Casimii, did not he partake in my forebodings ? and he knew tht man ' Louis>, sti mge as vou may deem it, it is neveitheless tiue. Two men who never beheld jou, whom you have never beheld, are eath ai denti} bent on obtain¬ ing you,—the one а godlike cieituie, tht other а fiend Will y ou trust me, my sister ? \\ ill ) ou choose between them
15)
now' Give me v oui pi omise to become the bude of Vallenstem within three months after my death. Do, Louisa ' One bieath of }Ouis may lay the mis¬ givings }ou so much déploie at rest foi evci." Cuielly agitated, Louisa could no longer suppoit her conflicting emotions, and buist into teais. lor the appeal now so earnestly piessed by 'Wilhelm she was in some degree pitpaitd " My beloved Wilhelm, I will not dissemble with you my hitndship, my giatitude, mj sisteily ltgaul aie duc to Саачшг Vallenstem , but compel me not, I eonjuie you, to btlioth lmsclf to one whose í ice I h ive not seen- whose voict I have not heaid. But, Wilhelm, timéis yet а mode by which í can appease youi appichcnsious I will engage ι «vself b} d solemn vov, neve» to bt tome the wile of W ulistun, by, Wilhelm, will that tonum }ou ? '
152
" No, no," sai 1 he, dcspondmgl}, t! it is no matter 1 I w ill h i ve no vows' What aie they against the deci ees of destiny ? ' The) row descended fiom the iam- part, foi the slndnis of eveimig were filling thick α ound Ihe j oung Buon wis fituued b) hb imiatmn, and İni ıssed by the toi menting sensations which the nanu of Vi olisti in, whenever he ıepcıted it, «■tuied up within him, and rot Louisi, with tlie piofound md pieicmg guef wheievvith she contem¬ pi tied the failing, hopeless stile of her onh biothei, weie η > ν nan el a new and ρ ι plexiiig liam of thou hts Ile who had pioduced so ti ui^e md in uispiaous anelleet on In mind if Wilhelm, h united nei fmc\ maivcll usly, his thieits le¬ speet n g hei \ eie pioductne lather of cunosit) l h in l nti, md nothm Ď could be moie \ igne and mdehnibk ihan the m unici in win h lus idei influenced lut un ι illation
153
Meanwhile the good old ГеЬх had been busied, fiist, in collecting his in¬ fallible simples, and then, shut up in his laboiatoiy, extiacting their virtues; and he had already prepaicd an incomparable elixir, which his patient swallowed with giateful docility.
H 5
154
CHAPTER VIII " Say, is there } et a pang more sharp than theirs, Who watch their human ticosim a» it »tirs And see ' the dust they dote on melt -may In swift, retricveMs, visible dec ij ^ Tor a few days sutceeding tint on which Baron Muehfeldt hid tivui his sistei the buef sketch of his с imp id ventures and, in some soit, disbiuthened his bosom of those anxieties which hid so heavily piessed upon α, ι pensive cheeifulness took pi ice or his deep nn lancholy, only lntciuipttd by octisiond flashes of lartit munition still tht du ties which îem uned foi him to fulfil weie executed with с ılın puscıumce A notary was su unione I fiom \ lcnna to assist m tiamacting tint, winch is cvuy min's last business on tallii —the sur¬ render of his eaithly possessions This
155
being done, he sent foi his sistei, and presenting bei with г scaled paeke f of papei s, ' Ί ike these, I ouisa 1 " said lie " I ock tliem for the present in уош cabinet In youi twentieth ycai, you are gifted with α matureness of mind, a rectitude of judg¬ ment a fiimness of puipose, such as few aie so happy as to extiact fiom the ex penence of а long life —Solely, then, to the pin ity and ibgnitv of vom own will, and to the giiaidiuiship of Heaven, do I consign you > " \ ou sh dl ncv u i с pi υ ich the memory of y oui hi othu tii u he li ts sliac kled and peiplexed you wali conditions You will find v oui self fic ,— n d m ty yotu gun dun an^el leul you to It tppiness ' One thing, my sistei, I would siy to you, ш the piisuuc of otu good fithu, nol as my will but is my wish I un desìi ous tii it no moie th ш time months should elapse, iltu у ni sitili luve ııcuved the mvcbtıtuıc of the bu my, u e you shall
156
perfoi m yotu due homage to the Fm- peioi. I have jirot uied that m the mean tune you shall not b disttubed, and that you shall lea'iu youi patents without suflei nig the emb ıı ι ssments of public ce¬ remony. W ai ned by my ow n fate, I would not allow you leisuie to nuise souow in youi bokorn til! it becomes too stiong for you î ıtheı 1 ehx sanctions my desire, and will accompany vou to Vienna " Fathei Felix nioiun'ully smiled his assent. " Vow," sal W ìlhelm g uly, " I have time to be idle, and I an gl id of it "I wis thinking, my biothei," said Louis i, "tint we w oul I not ie-a«tend the town stans till vou aie stiongei— they aie too steep ioi you, and 1 lave been devisin» what amusement would least faiguc von—What say you to a sail on the ııvu r " "It is а htppv thought' iou shall tike \oin lute, Louisa—It is а hcıvenly evening '"
157
The luu looked disturbed and un- 1 ippv is he listened to the arrangement, and evi n mule m efloit to meet the glance of Iouisi's eye, but she hiving obt until hei bi other s issent to htr pro¬ posti, vvtnt to 0 ive ortlus foi pitpin tion lelix would have followed her in stmtlv, but Wilhelm with ι ρ diti smile laid his hau I on his aim— " Be satisfit d, mv kind fithu ' said h "I see vou lemembcr it but I im bent on t sul this evening —my mind is imputili bed, and you hive nothing to fc u —I thought to hive piojioscd it, md w lien 1 ottis ι dul, it seemed ıs though it was to 1 с ' " Vh '' ti ought the Inu ' w h it an adımı tblc coıdı d ь mv clixii ' W ould ht hi hul tıktı it etilici But, with the blessing of tht II ly \ u 0 in, it m iv not even yet be too 1 ite ' lhe w iter w ıs smooth mil tianquil, md the sky w um md beni n t blessed calm sec mctt to nyi tuuvusaily as the
158
little boat skimme J along the uvei, wah scaiceh biet/e sufficient to fill its silken sail, m α couple of oais weie deemed necessaiy to acecínate its motion Y\ ìl¬ helm, reclined undei an awning, lay ¡,ι lently listening to their measuied stiokt, to the cheeiful hum fiom the villages and hamlels, which studded the shoic, oi the songs and Imghtei waited from ι distant fishing boat Wilhelm at length bit ík ing tht pensive silence ν Inch picvailcd, said, " Louisa, do we stoji this evening at the Isle of W ìllows ŕ I et us 1 nul oui le- freshments thei t ! At the mention of the Isle of \\ dlows Louisa lui ned pile it mst mtly dirtcd on hu meinoiv thai it vv is thai evening, the 4th of August, tin ce yens igo, that the Lady Blanche de iiibouig, m all the bloom and vivacity ol licilth, youth, innocence, and hijipinc s, listening to many ι fond piojtct of fuuiie bliss, had sailed along tini sue un, and tlie 'W il
159
helm, now so wan, so wasted, was then blithe, attive, vigoious, blessed m the present, confident in the futuie. They had th it evening disembarked on the little picturesque Isle of Willows: it was a fa\ounte haunt with Blanche —there the) spent an hour of puie and genuine enjoyment, such an one as it was destined they should ncvei lepeat. Л.ч they sailed homewaids, Manche complained of shi- venngs, and in a weck f mm that evening hei innocent happy spait had fled fiom eaith. í oid Maitltfeldt poiccivcd Ins sistei's changing colour—■" He not tiou- bled, my Ionisa' — Il ıs the 4 tli of Au¬ gust— í know it," said Iu ialini), " but indulge me. 1 ct us land this c vi oing on the Isleoi Willows; I ht aid α song Hutu veais ago, winch I would heat once moie, and then foie I bade you bung ) oui lute." lhe little bai к boi e them to the well known ^pot the ι e foi sonic time they rented, md tlieie I ouisi, it hei biothci's bidding, sang the song oi Bianche, butit
160
was hei utmost, and when ovei, she thiew herseil on his neck, extlumuig, " Oil, Wiliithn ' tins is hard pioving ' I pi ay you tiy me no fai thai ' ' He piessed bei tenda ly to his bosom, saying, " loi give me, my sistei ' It is the last'" That night, when the inhabitants of the castle weie wiapt m slumbu, all, save those whose pillows weie undued îest- less by anxtelv, а uy of disliess was heaid, which summoned many a sleepei fiom Ins com li toni idt, who slept ш an apartment idjoinmg th it of the baton, heaid himself feebly called . he ilew to his mastei, who ai nudate el, with dif¬ ficulty, the n mie of I uhu I'clix, when а slight convulsion su/ed him. C oni ide was disti ictcd , lit knew not how to quit him, yet anxious to obiam both spıııtual and tempoial aid, he uislied to tlie dooi ol the apaitni nt, and ened m piucmg accents on 1 ıtheı IiLx, whose chamber was m the same galluy. The good pucst
161
was accustomed to hold, ^ ill Units, long and sevei e ν ì^ Is, and moi с of e ich night wis clctotcd bv him to pr iy« and medi- tition thin to ujiose—now, when Ins gentle, pious mind was oppi essed by sore affliction, he sought with even mei cased diligence the consol itions of lcbgion — hippdy, he hid not on tint night, as often was his wont, puisued his devotions in the th ıpıl, md the ijip tiling sound of Conrule's ciy mstmtiy ¡cached 1m ear. Its mournful meining went stiaight to lus hent, I с vv is pitscntly by the side of his bel nul puţul, whom the eon- v ul ion, illhou_Ji ¡list, hid left ma state of sj) ее bless ι \h uistion, but lie ju essed the h md of 1 eb\, tnd lifted his eye s in jnoiis 1 1 ι ttto t to the ciucifix which the goni 1 th t pie ented to lum lussjnnt minali l fu v t ut I y m th jıı lyu which his ííllicti 1 ( mfessoı, кпсе1пц by Ins sule, o îc ıcd uj) ioi its c tsy md h îjqiy ti msition ίι mı the nıoıt tl ίι une, m l h tving, as it wc r vv uted foi its ρ iss ıoı t, fled íor evu
162
The tuno had been shoit and intensely occupied, fiom the moment that Coniade perceived his mastei's situation to that which concluded the final stiuggle; and not till all was ovei, did I ehx lecollect the existence of any othei being than that of his once bright hope, his dai ling Wilhelm. " Ah!" said he, gioarnng internally, " the woist ¡s yet !" And caufully closing lhe tlooi, he slowly puisued his way touaids the wing of the cd tie that contained the apart¬ ments of .bad} Louisa and liei women. As he went, the deep, dull, lugubnous sound of the muffled bell smote his ear, and he stai ted with a beating heait, as though some unwelcome intelligence sud¬ denly leeched him. Ihe castle, whose inhabitants the dismd warning of their loul's passing belt had fc urtili} aioused, was all tumult: 1 atlitt lelix mtt the Lady Louisa at the dooi of hei apa.tmtnt, aghast, dishevelled, speithltss. With
163
gentle foice he would have led hei back, but she would not be resisted ; the just and n itural grief, till now so foi cibly and painfully pent within hei bosom, bioke its lestiauit ; she bathed the cold and precious lemams of her lost Wilhelm in the waters of aflhttion, and Ttlix had little heai t to chide emotions, whiJi, m- teinallv, he so deeply pai took. Sad and solemn was the week which followed the deceise of Wilhelm, Bai on of Mai chftldt. 'lhe standaids and ban¬ ners of his noble house fioited on ihe castle toweis, sui mounted by tbe sible death flag. In the tenti e of tlie gi eat hall, w luth was hung and cai pete d with black, untiti a canop) a owned with waving plumts, on а magnificent bier, lay the pale toi se of the lite masttn of the tastle and all its wide domains. Ptiiumttl tipas burned d i) and night btfoi' 5 it, the hall was lined with mute moiiineis, muilled in thtu long funereal cloaks, and ílom tune to time the fathers
164
ofa neighboui ing monaster} came, m long and solemn pioctssion, to sing their masses foi the i epose of the dead, and to sprinkle the bier with holy water. On the anmveisuy of the day on which three }eais befoie, the lifeless, yet lovely remains of Blanche tie Fubouig weie de¬ posited in the vault of the chiptl of Maichfeldt. w cie those of Bai on W ìlhelrn conve}ed with suitable ceiemonies to the same spot, lint night, iiom the time the leqtuem ceased, 1 eh\ parsed alone in the cemeteiv. Not a single thought in the puie he ut oí his lamente d pupil had been unexploietl b) the eve o^the vene¬ rable tonfcssoi, uho knew lh.it too pts- sion ite an atl ithmtnt foi otic hu nan cieatuie was the onh spot thai stained the white p ige; anti he hoped, tint as peiftttion dwells not m min, tim spot would be visutd as in lnfimiit}, not as a cume , nu, while he pi tved and wept, he bee une suddenly ıssın ed ihat it was so, and, h ibilu di} convinced thai
165
eveiy dispensation of Heaver ıs good, he breathed an mte ι ml vow that no tcai of bitterness should agun descend fiom his ejes foi the f ite of one who had con eludid ι pılgı image of souow, in ihlessed íestiiig pi ice M my of the noble fnends and îelativcs ot tht house of M u chftldt hid shown then lespeet to the memoiy of the late Baion bj iepuun 0 to the castle, to assist m the 1 ist s ul hom i„e w hu h e m bc ren dered to e uthl} honoui , Ι ut when these mouiníul uteš weie duly pci foi mcd, and dust to dust was lcstoied—whtn tht list \ ibi ition of thi ι tquicm h id cc iscd m the usle of the eh tpcl, tin guests til with¬ drew, le i\ ui„ then ulens mil condi Jenccs foi the Buoni s who q tiitcd not hei ij) u tun nt 1 Ic ι in cle, 1 inest of Ι ι denin nn, done uni uned is im upre sc nl itiv e in the ti ins ittioli ol s mie neces suv busun ss, ι lhe к spiteli oí coin iers to \ icnii ι to ippust the í ni| eror of the late event, and the lecuving with all
166
due formality, the nobleman entrusted by Ferdinand to convey the patent investing Louisa of Maichfeldt with her deceased brothu's titles, estates, and privileges This done, the I oul of Eidenheim like¬ wise took his leave, and leturned to Vi¬ enna Once only, m compliance with indispensable custom, had Lady I ouisa appeared to any e>cs save those of bei spıııtual fallici , and hei f xv oui ite woman, since the deifh ot Wilhelm, butit was nccessaiy he should be piesent at the leading of the will, ^nd sanction the ful filment of such ol the mpnictions it con tamed as icquuc 1 mimed ite execution Hei uncle sci/edtb oppoıtunıty to w bis¬ pei ι few soothing and paicntal woids m hei си, asstiimg hu that m all emcıgen cies, his aduce ini protection were at hei comman I I 01 maiiv wee' s the hi ick bannei con tinned to ί ave ovt ι tht lovveis of Mach ft lelt, inilin н ti ill retained ¡ts ibsrn d fi tppinrs, a month с ' ipstd tic the v oung
167
Baroness found courage even to seek the refieslung bieeze on the castle rampai ts. In the mean time, Father Felix was busily engaged in executing ι pioject she had entiusted to his caic, —she had re¬ solved to build and endow a hermitage and sm ill chapel on the Isle of Willows, to mamt un two in irs, who should per¬ form two masses duly for the icpose of the souls of Wilhelm, Baton of March¬ feldt and the I idy Blanche of Inbourg. The good Ithx could not have been em¬ ployed at this se ison in a function better athptcd to his lntltnition —the Bishop of Raab h id promised to bless the giound, and the castle labouu is hid die uly clear¬ ed a sufficient spice for the e action of the bundings two holy men, distin¬ guished for the simplicity and piety of then lives, had offered, with the consent of their abbot, to quit the monastery of Sunt Guthrcd foi the lie· mit ige On the d iv appointed foi the conseer ition of the giound, the Buoness, t'iessed in the
168
deepest mourning, and close!} veiled, at tended by hei maidens all in sable vest¬ ments, was handed by the Bishop of Raab into liei state baige the tiam of the ie» veiend pi elate, and the seneschal, stew- aid, and othei chief domestics of the castle, followed m a long procession of boats It was night, and the mournful pageant moved by toich light along the watPis of the Raab so silenti}, that not a sound was heaid, save tl e legul u dip of the oar, foi all the sails vveie fuilecl. Amved at the Isle of W ìllows, the Ab¬ bot of Samt Guthrcd and his hoi} tiam, accompanied by Tathei 1 ehx, met them at the landing-place, chanting in deep choius then solemn dnge —\o w oid was spoken—nothingoccuned vvhieii could m aught distuib the mournful di_nit) of the scene: the bishop having, with all mete ceiemonial, coiistciated the site of the chape!, which wis to be annexed as a cell to the monisteiv of bamt G utlu td, the Baioness laid with her fan hand, and
W 1 )
sprinkl d vv th I ei te us tht brst stone of ι building thus dedic ttt d to the eteinal lepóse of a much loved biothei, and h vv ing by that act concluded tht t ffite of the diy, by the ö luc of tht toithts tht same silent pioees ion igam glided along the uvei, m I i e ain enteied the castle 0 atc Ihe bis! op iein unid th it nig! t at Muchfeltll, bu the impicssivc ute to which the diy hit 1 been levou tl tle'eat ed the intenti n ol it n sti ss who hid mtdit iteti do ng il ie 1 с n in t > htr ho!} guest b} p osiei n t sii; pci m ictuui fui his toni Icons Hilkuille icejuiesc net m hei wis! es , but tli s could η it be on tnteung the ¿it it h ill she Ι ι elt m sı lence, md uecne I his benedict on " Now ui} el inclite , ' sul the goo 1 man, ' it is tn )U 0 h c;Oto}cin th un ber, }ouı mtattu beut iccpuus upo e md se elusion— y oui venti ıblt conies о will take the einigt of my tntt it unm t nt 1 must c ul) to ho se to monow So goodnight, mu boud ale, deu lad} " vor τ
170
CHAPTER IX. " I found it m my chamber, where he dropped it For an especial purpose, that wrought to lm desire." Oriirr ι о The heait of Louisa Marchfeldt was deeply and sorely itnpiessed by the un¬ timely fate of her dear and only biothei , but, while bending in sorrow ovei Ins tomb, a wai ning voice seemed to is-ia thence, reminding her, that it was the indulgence of unchecked giief which laid him there whom she mourned. " Ah !' said she, " in my gentle W ι! helm it was infirmity—in me it would be lebellion. My r temper was ever fiimei than las, my will had ever more of force m it. Hc, alas ! has fallen beneath the fiist stroke. I am fitted, perhaps de¬ stined, for much endurance. Wilhelm '
171
Blanche '—Innocent spiiits ' This woiid was no home foi you " It was some time ere the Baioness even made an effort to combat hei afflic¬ tion sht kntw th it nature would resent an itttmpt to dtfi iut! htr of hei just tubute, md sh pud it without stiuple , sht givt w i\ to lui soi tow, but did not nounsli it ml she h ulttl and tncou ι i„e I tht hist ι mnıngs of lttummg se lemtv I he Michhidtcis, who had, tver sintt tht tit ith of L idy Ы uitht, bten ittiistom d to depend on ionisi is liitu piottttit s ancl fntnd 'к utel ι bi iti sigh to the mtmoıy of thai young buon ind Siw thuïistlvts tiansíuud beneath tht milt uil of lus sistu wit' but little it_,i t 1 tthtı 1 tlix soon tuight himself to think of the lovely pan who wut gont is inhibit mts <f Iki vtn, and his sunt lit! 1 fuq icnt tom numings with thtu thty mingiti! thtinselvi^b in his ρια)< ıs, tht\ v\tıt with hım in his solitary w ilks — ıbove all, ii
172
when the solemn chon uplifted then voices in deep swelling anthems of praise, Felix could ever distinguish ceitam hea¬ venly accents among the earthl} ones If it was illusion, it was innocent, and never could what we call leahtj possess α moie powerful, nevci hilf so sweet and sacicd, an influence, ps these vision ir} imaginings. Autumn w ts advancing, and the ch inging hveij of the woods, the giav tint oí the mornings, the hoi low whistling of the winds thiough the yellow fob ige, hinted tl e decline ol the vean J vuv moinmg the Baioness, sometimes on houebick, sometimes on foot, visited the. ne ι hioin mg hamlets and vlligcs, ionium! wub hei teiimts, and discou lcd, in a'l lur mtasines foi tbtn adv mt ige. an acutencss and ma¬ lmit} of judgment fu above hei years. She felt that the peuod was >t land when, foi tlie hist nmt, she n ust take 1 iv e, foi ast ьоп, othei í titillili tassais, and she was e igei to k i e nothing un-
I/o dont which might bc bettei donc m hei presence lhe Isle of Willows was hei fiequent lcsoi t ,—hu beut wis set on issistin., at the mst in iss which should be fautif m tht th tpcl befoit lie quilted Muehfeldt, md she wis e must m sti¬ mul Пиц the woi knien to inibisti у by icw u Is and emoni ı_,cıııent It hip pined om diy tint slit hi I visit I this fivouicdspot 1 ινιη β , v lh I il ι Ithx sailed thuliti bom th t tl tn 1, Inv in., I n £ ied t í t s ı ı ti, ! pioposcd to the í ilhe tin tli si ui be J iudeii on the opposite sl I wdk home don tht b nil ol the m ι iítei Iı ivin», vi iti tl tht s I if ι Ι t ι of tlu vil' in th v l t> I t íl doo , tli Ι leh vv ' ill) fi uı e , md 1 о lis ι si u Sı il nI < io sed i t isc 11 lit t ρ uu t S Uu sti in ti s u 1 1 ell ci ' i u wt un tx itti} il e tl ti ι I I lild _,ivv.i! oí tlie evil bodi ι., h uı t ιι vt > of vlom tu Ilıt iettigli ti ш wis it
17i
tended with a slight sensatie n of fi nt ness, md she turned pale she peicen el, with mcicascd consternatie n that the hideous being noticed hei emotion with a malicious smile, and she beheld thos long yellow, seitteied f ings, which с >m pleted the poi tint, md convinced lei that the gipse} who led hei biothei thiough the tu л 1ее1 In kes of the wood of Monuu now stood before hei I lie s}bil mutta cd ι few w ouls, which ни deieel ui} faitlei demolisti atiou n 1 less,— " Ί he tice ıs í illen tl e u " Louisa's piesenee e f mind now re tinned, and she. ipproichc I the bedol the sie к woman, vv hien occupied a e inti of the ipartment lining asked hei in ι whispci the necessu} questions i espe ct mg hei state, md ht u d hei petitions foi vaiious little com f οι t , sl e said, " Alite, who ıs mat vm mm —md Uien did she come to vou ' \ woman ıs it m tel un ■> i h !
17 >
veuly it had been а man fiom the voice ' Why she ι tme m ten inmutes ig) '•юте one knocked at the door, so thinking it was Liban, the millu's boy, I cued ' Come m i hen I he ud ihoaisc tone ísk leave io ust a little while, so I hitit them rest uid welcome, tnd sutl 'stephen would be home anon, uid thin 'hue would be food is well is usi When the Buoness uid the 1 ι u in i ud, two little i uti ly fieli ehildi ι ınıec cip п., fiom b lund then i itici Ικ ti «Imi the у hul nestle I then elvi hoin feu ol the gipst у worn ui ι c w ¡ tectlv ıssiıud oí sıteiy, iute the t loııcss nd hu levueud dinoiiu uc vt iy what it n udi I is usi! It ι π u ι inceis ί Uhu k ili\ vv is sı t n h Us tal nicchi ıtıve pi tını mitle ipse v st od close it lus elbow, supp» 11 ^ he t dl ,. nmt fonn <ii th n stili , uiti, ι I ouisi lunu d ίι om tl b i Ste ¡i ie ι luid, and bi n tn to potu f > il ht in polished, but gi ite ful hem t e, it tli
Ì7b
same tune eţcng his m\stt ious nicst With l aOlt OÍ ft II fill CUIlOMtV, of winch respect md coin te y foi tlie lily of ľía chftldt íoibide hım t) stek th t sci ı- tıficatıon ¿Mice mc nwhilt с dk 1 to htrlubbind—. ctt t ])htn tl cic ıs ι good w oni in iestin., 'iti s If, slis ь fu shed too, I w ui mt ii well ıs tutd leih ι eit with von and tl t Loj s " * t 1ч n tdl s-," sn 1 tht q psov, s*- tlc'iin I c i* up f om hei stiff " í did not v int vem bi d, — hit I win ttd I h ıs fu nd ' \ná, witiout ' t c mon , s'ıt lifted tht lite h, ш ' stí iti iw i) Stt phtn's ist ni h ntnt ni \ í o' c foi th "It it bt ι worn in,' cvehined he, " I nc\ei saw such ι oit ' foie ' lo be suit somt of thť -ι. /mo in ut nough to íii 0 ht ι ihtwitketl onci imseli but she who ь just ι o u nn hi 1 ицЬ it mv I hut sten' Ιι lul h / om, how t v ti " " ^Ъ g 00 ' ' >f plîtn," ilt! Β ι
\1¿ loness, " I am not ipt to ti' e tt m bitt lheie ıs α nııh 0 nı t e Â cssioıı ı lit coımtenuıc of tint -,ıpst^ v! ich h s »tııtltd mt 1 ıtheı İti \ md 1 ν ill wail while you give httl sV il f о I and Leon ud then eunuci lo ı s ι 1 itt nd us home, ind hwc yeiis ι et U and you em en у > ι ι 1 ' ! j medicines uid coidnts lei ' One of the bc\j ι η to si ь ι neighboui to b m liei eli Mi, > it bv the siel нош u , tl c ι > ι , Ί 1 ιι ιι, ι ι ! then u ι , in ut Ι t' n w iv uı moh c d lo i — I til woni tn pj l Ul ll I ) t ll m iv I c isily L tt ι ( ι ι was tn h s tn K i им hi c ıs niiasi , η Ι ι ι ıs t tU i s Ι hI ι appetì mec tmi e 1 1 1 t mi ' ie a fiilin 1 ului η ) t e ) ı u - ι I tombini d o n tki n i lo ol I dtmi)_, mil dıjıtlın ıı tine ihe s ι son toi —the hollow swell ol the evening wind—the muiinui of the Rub— ι ul ι J
I7S
the pale sinde of the setting sun—all united to impiess а mmd already en¬ feebled by iecent or, indeed, piesent souow. " My father," said she, " we will | ass this ev enmg on the battlements · it chcci s me to look down upon the villages, to see the smoke ascending fiom then dum¬ mes, antl to catch the d. stant hum of then songs Besides, I want tj espiam to you why 1 was so iiniisii illy appilled at the sight of the stiange woman in Ste¬ phen's cottage, antl to i elate to von ι tncunibiince with which she is con nected." 'I lie good I ehx, as his bten the id) obseived, w ıs apt to be absoibed in the contemplation of things not seen, uid со iscquci t'v, was no*· v ciy quick si< h ed to tlunus visible. He hid, a is tute, houd M dlıLİın's ston picce- ..al, ι ι the cotuse of bis sevtiil coures ¡ons , but follow шц the ustni beni οι his int ut, he had given his heed iatliei to ıhı»
179
which was mental in it, than to that which was actual, and had dwelt moie on the thoughts of his pupil's heart, than on the facts which had happened to lum personally when, however, the young Baioness lecallcd to his leeollcction the meedotc of the Zingan, and tht omi¬ nous emblem of the mulbtuy tue, he confessed then mettmg with this t\t¡ ι οι dinary woman, hei smile of mihcious tnumpli, and hu exclamation, had m appe u mee oí sinistei coincidence 1ht discussion of these matteis led, is is evu the case, fiom link to link thiough t long eh un of unti es т й discouıse, when itime one interi upttd the confutine by sinniiioniiij, the I u u to χ tend ι sit tn rt ci belo ν kind ind ite essible to t t w mts aud cbstitssts of ill iiound, lew bonis m the d iv clipset! in which some apph с ition foi ml spnitu d cn tempóid, foi ulvi e οι i с lief, did ı of uı Iı hım — it was his voi mon, mil he fu hiully obcytd it As Iit tui ned to deseen 1 the sun
180 which lcd nom the ι impali, something dioppcd fiom his sleeve, md В il aia, I id} I oiusi's f ivouiitt woman, who cn lei ed 't the moment, pi ktd ι up "All'" cued she, "win*· mi\ this he ? lhis case must contnn a muinline j с ше Ик stints piese /cis' ше ti ItJ} min docs in wen tin pu tuit с ' il dv m ins bo ι η '" Vi 1 <ctî 'un, ι spi η , íicv t pen , vv ht i ťu 'ond ex 1 m ten s'e lUtcıtd Uti с ^ ! the Ше itu n t í tht τ ι ) ess " Х Ч tib -m il d vt ith -λιν I uly, luvt дои e\ci setn this pictuit ? -Who с uı it ' ' \ ii lii. t Ih u ot the e ? 't im see " sul' n s ι I ıı uı Uy ' I с ı ol i ni ine," tınd ) ıı , pı e nt ı , ' vhı c ıı be ' ' 1 ı thcı 1 Ί eni t ut, it tuı ıblt l f mı 1 ıs b mı ι his sl evt I si oui l ıı \eı h ne tiıo Jıt í f i s ne i i ı lieh ι hing ıbout hi ini do hekl I 1\ vint ι bull ml settin ι· ' -sneh lov th dia
181 monds 1 Wclljthľ· ïspiettj tın ions, how¬ evei I n iv patt, I nevei siw 1 ıtheı ltb\ w cai nv Hing woith picking off the gio md befo ρ, even his tubatici e ıs nude oí ibt of walnut ti ее. As foi th it b intimi ics ¡v of niought gold th it I oul Wilhelm iest h s oul' give mm, 'e ι tie} lill lic j> esti ted il lhe, ^ ι ι,ιηιΐ stung oí cm mmn pii ce! u b ι 1 ms e id οι it " Λ Γ ш vh n t to th diimonds which siuioi id i t n v, m to the ita'utcs the u on j i u v \itie t t t \cs of ! o us ι im 1 ' m sil ! t ι tonis ιι unt — v ι ne an ! \un s ide ь ciovultd t) hei n inti ' ι/ , ι , s ne ι elmed Bu') u ι' c 1 1 ι 11 ι ι ' V h se и em- bl inte t i i 1 s t í on tih u within hei ov n ' u ι se mc ι to ι swei the cj íes' ion l н vn tu с me t — В} wh ι не il ılı í ıı ι o' in pos s ssiou ( ¡t ? — У l 1 it induced m to pusene un w e u it about hi i ? All
182
hese perplexing queries at once assailed iei, and it was in vain her ideas explored he legions of piobabibty for suitable epbes " Oh ' that Vallenstem resem- ded this '" rose on a sigh fiom her bo- >om, but the gai b was not that of a nihtaiy man Her biothei had never lescubed to hei the peison 01 featuies nf the younger \ allenstem, but he had ie peatedly, and m the most hvny colours, iepicted the counten nee of one, whom if all nen living, she 01 0 ht to hun, and she shuddeied as she felt an intci ml consuousuess that this man's poiti ut vv >s now in hei h mil placed thu e bv so sin 0 ultr, so inevitable m itti lent Whin Ь ubaia h ul ι little exhausted hei ulmnation of tht d nm η he ti ms fu i ed it to the pictuit "What ι white íoiehc ď \nd how those glossy waves of tbm m set it off' W nit tyc s I he che ks, n tiuth a e somewhat si'lovv but, ifHi '1, tha^
183
becomes a man But the mouth—the mouth is perfection ' What would I not give to see it smile'" "Why, Bai bara," said tht Baioness, " it seems ah each/ to have indued youi wits,—the smile might bc í ital ' Ancl, as she utteitd the words, the immiti m which Wilnebn had desenbcd tht smilt of tlio e lips came unets Iv "o hei mmd " It is tune, how evtl, wt should ie¬ stoie I ithc ι 1 thv his p optily ,—lit will pti haps ι tv til to us tht тщт! of this pictuie " ' Why, my hdy, а is not ht loi an old f ut to tiny sut Ιι ι thin 0 ıbout hım 1 í tl ıı si\ v>n lul) ship is quite wt iconic to it I mı sm , if he tikes it i„ un, ι sh dl m ike up my mmd th it he is _, owing chi dish II on the su I en, bu 111 uy ι doll u tini 1 h iv«, fi ind nit lhe mc anı _, of th s ¡ ıctııı ,— pe hips the tunnin., < id smil di opptel it on put pose Diptn 1 upon it, ι iy i uly, it is
184
the pictuit of yotu cousin, the young Loi I of I idcnhtiin \oui uncle gave it 1 alıcı I ehx, I doubt not, when he was hue, to show vou at the piopei time. Av, av, n y hdy, the whole stoiy is out'— The b u ony ot Miichleidt, md its ιο¬ ί e sis, ane' w о ids, and uvei, aud nulls, ancl νι'Ί^ s, aie wo th looking aftei Putl nope v ui lu'vship, w ho с in hive whom v ш plei«e bv ι ы i_,lc beck of v oui hand, won t iim ι iuisbiii 1 pdnictl o» y ou m tins vv iv ' "Slitnet 1 leu bubu ι \ ni ci i/e me w uh v oui noi enst — Y u d > mv unele cf luì n en ι ^ cit ıı justice m itti uut ч, to ii n such induit icy. Bc side» tho ι h it ıs e ıı tive y e us ı ¡ce I saw mv cous η, I îtmtni ci tli it his litu was iul, id tint he wis vuv plain, while tiis ıs— m shoit, theie is not tht shgiite t ι escili!)! шее l " " Yes but men iltu so much, said the pci tin tcious Bub ua, vt ho, s ttisfied with the sigacity of hei siiggejtion,
18Ъ
nevet «aíted to i effect whethei the na¬ tuial hiitoiy of the Iľunan lace afibided many examples of the tiansfoi mation of nd hm mto black. They descended the tuuet stabs, and the Baroness desueti Falhei Felix might be infoi mtd she wished to see lam. " The holy fathei his mounted his in de, mulam," said the sei v ant, " and ¡s gone to slu iv e a dying man some miles off he 01 (kí с Ì ι ie to tell }our lad} ship, th it as 1 e will noi qutt the sick man till he is ìelcwd —it maybe day-bieak ere he letutns to the castle; and he will call al the «, ite of St. Guthred's, and icquest Biothei Jestin to pufoim vcspeis and m ılı ıs in the chapel." " It ь veil 1 " sal the baioness : she believed Inns If, howivei, disappouaed m bem > thus kept m sı spense as to the 01 igni il ol tho pıt ш e. lhe uitent i, the lo igei she e s minit 1 it, tht moie she was t om me d th it it vv ıs \, olistem ; and the moi c stí t nuotisi} ^lıe endeavouied to per-
]86
suaele heiself that it was not W ollstem, h ι mmd was а prey to the most stiange and conti adictory feelings Had Con iade been at hand, her peiplexity mi r ht at once have been ended, but Conn ie, whose heait was half bioken by the loss of his master, had ìeceived pumission to go foi change of scene to the house of ι lektion near "Vienna he was to sujiei intend the exertions of the woi knien, who weie pujiaimg the Hotel de Marchfeldt for the ìeception of the Baioness,—it had been unoccupied since the death of Baion Ulne, so that gieat repaus and much modern decoiation wue become lequis le ' It ıs a pity Ce m ide is absent " said the Baioness, while pei hips she felt re heved that the miniatine would 1 11 ie mam some hours ш hei possession, while she was ıgııoı mt of the tiu oiigiual Theie wis something not ele ulv ex plained m lhe tonnten ince ol ti t umna tuie, — somtthing that ¡ecjuiied icpeated
187
examination but which, when repeatedly ex mimed, left the gizr ι still uncei tim "Alis 1 " sud I ouisa to beiseli, "I have no key to this mysteiy ' W îi it does this bemtiful f eet II ? It tells of genius md powei , but, foi the rest, it is only fiom the unclosing of those lips that I must expect the level iti m ' "Λ i d, ¡e tless, uneasy visions disti ictcd tin slumbeis of that ni n ht, mil when m the moinmg I ıtheı Ithx letiuntd fiom the peiloimmce ol his pious office the Buoness, pei lui bed md anxiou«, desìi cd immediitely to see lum , ha tily offeung the s dilutions of the morning— ' My fithci, sud she, " who is the ougin d of this pictuie ? " I ki ow not, my child," it tin ned he, looking с uelessly on it " he is pi ob ibly unknown to me, for th it ι ice, once st en, would not be foi_, iitcn " " But, deu f ıtheı, whit then induct >ou to weit the rtsemblmci ol m uu known ndivuluil ? '
188
" I weai it, my child ' I weai it not ' This " s id he, tiking an unadorned Ag¬ nus fion ins bosom, "tins I have worn foi many yeais, but it has had no com¬ panion Daughtei '" added he, mildly, " my business dunng the past night his been of α seiious η itine, unfitting me to solve the riddles you have prepáiul foi myi etui n, —I must leave y ou, to seek an houi's lepóse, — md then to the chapel '" " Yet, taiiy one mo» icnt, eh ai fathei ¡¡ This mnuatuie, when you wue last even¬ ing suddenly summoned horn tue ram¬ part, chopued fiom yotu bosom 01 your sleeve Is it not tliuefoie natu d I should »uppo e you could inforni me ie spectmg the oiigm ii ? " " 1 bat is indeed stnngc ' Believe me, diuglitei, I now behold tint poi- tiait foi the hist time nie ешцт d, I am confident, I netei stu —But," sud he, puisin., foi an ι stuit, " tlie îiiysteiy ıs not difficult to solve , it ь do ¡btless, oiii blessed Wilhelm's biothei m ums,.
189
the worthy son of theillustnous Duke of Fuedland '" " Indeed ! Is it indeed, father ? And is this in tiuth the lesemblance of Count Vallenstem 5 " " I know not, daughter, but we may conjectuie it Youi brothei must have biought it hithei, and lost it: he was not likely to be u about him any poi trait but that of his fuend, and by what other means can we account foi its bemg found in this castle ? To my belief, there ex¬ ists not a doubt that those aie the fea¬ tures of the young Count Vallenstem '" How veiy e isily do w e admit their tes¬ timony, and adopt then eiecd, who, even by the most palpable mistake, flattei om self-illusions ! " It is indubitable, fathei," cued Lou¬ isa. " How could I be so dull to hesitate foi a moment on а fact so obvious ? No one but om beloved Wilhelm could have brought it hithei, and assuiedly he would wear no pictuie but that of his friend.
190
This, too, accounts foi his never having destnbed Casimii unquestionably he intended to let this speak foi him ' How could I be so blind ' ' The good fathei was content, he hai bouied not a shadow of suspicion that die featuies befoie him belonged to any othei than the youngti V allenstem. He was well acquainted with his lamented pupils cai nest desne tint his fntnd and sista should o ie ela^ be united, and it gladden el his gtntlt spuit to peitem that Louisa did not look upon the pictuii with indiffuence. He was one of those simple stiaight-mindeel men v ho set ught befoie them, adopting ideas in then singleness, and atcoidmg as they hist pi esen t themselv es but seldom examining then diíkiciit suks, οι stifíeimg the pei plexing contest of opposite conjecture to oecup} the peaceful ai ena of his mind lie was no sophist, no analyst Ihat which appealed tiue, to him tidi tuie— he looked no raithei it was thei efort
191
well he had but little to do m tempoial matteis, foi veni} the wisdom of this woild abided not in him. Convinced that the porti ait in the hand of the Baioness was actually that of the m in with whom he hoped one day to join tint baud, the featuies seemed to h mi pitgnant with excellent meaning the calm on the countenance, which was of ι niture to puz/le the most skilful physiognomist, ptiz/led notFithci Felix it was the holy 'a mqudlity of religious foititude, since that was one of the í linstian vutues winch jioot I ehx had leuned highly to a,ipieciitc. Ihat the eves bespoke а bulb mt intellect no oni could doubt " And the mouth, deu iatliei ' What think you of th it ? ' " Ah 1 ' sud i athei I ehx, having mused ovci it loi а moment, precisely in the vvoids used the evening before by Bai- baia, " I would wt could see it smile 1 "
192
He now agam bade his pupil adieu, desirous to take some iest. " But, father, it is, after all, your pio- peity, since, by some chance 01 othei, il ceitamly dropped fiom }oui sleeve." " If it be my piopeit}, daughtei, I tiansfer it unto thee, and I hope one da} to make the ongmal thine also." Louisa blushed, }ct did not itpiove the wish :—howbeit, hei spuit was not so tranquil on the subject oi the pittine as was that of Fathei Felix : a small still voice kept distuibmg hei with hints and whispeis;—in vam she smotheitd it, -it would be heaid, though she nude as though she did not hear it '
193
CHAP TLR X. " Think st tliou tlieu aie no sli pents m the world But thoui who siidi along tin f,nssy sod Vncl ¡>tiii¿ tht luckless foot tint »tesse s than J Joanna Bailhe Tin poi tı ait, which hid thus mysteu- ousl} m idt its appe u mee at Marchfeldt tastle, had pioduced, unconscious igent as it vv u, α ni u vellous effect on the most impoitant individuals of the family . the baioness was thoughtful, abstiacted, and agitated; evir} leaf that wis blown acı oss the casement had power to stallie hei. — She puisued liti daily avocations, bei visits to the hamlets, and to the Isle of Willows, with undiminished pti severance, foi nothing w is neglected, but she ful¬ filled hu duties languidly, hei heait and hei tongue seemed engaged m ddfeıcnt matters, and hei dncctions hid some· VOI. I. v
194
what le^s of piecision and distinctness than the} weie wont to have. Bai bara raved incessantly 01? the beautiful un¬ known, on his ev ts, hisfoiehead, his raven han, and wondered dad} when he would follow his pictuie. The good Fuar was indebted to the same source for more of cheerfulness than he had ftlt since the death of W ìlhelm · he had one wish left on earth, and only one, and this auspi cious pictuie was the presage of its fed¬ itimeli t "Let me once see m v sweet tl ild united to the fiiend of hei biothei, and then my humble task below will clos blessedl} '" The new inhabitant of Louisa' ч bosom was not peaceful, bei tempei, fine bv natuie, rendei ed almost pei fect bv pun ciple, now exhibited some slight and un¬ usual touches of petulante and hastiness. That which his never been seen befoie is sui e to create wonder, and the most tn fling â^penty m the tone of the } oung
195
baroness was а phenomenon of magni¬ tude sufficient to excite much consterna tion. On its first occuuenec she pai took in the suipiise, and woiulcied what evd influence possessed hei , but on finding that what at hist; mi^ht Lv. deemed acci¬ dental w ıs reptated, and might become habitual, he was not of a disposition to content beiseli with col lly wondeiing at the с nise , indeed, ' fe s home questions sineeiely msvseicd eisily explained it " \l is '" sud she, ' 1 un at wai withm m}stll W 'th ii} c}cs open, 1 am lodg¬ ing an imposten m ni} thoughts, amongst which he is woikmg confusion and ptr- plexit} ' I /пота this, -md the íesult is in my own hmds' I havehithutomeuily cheated ni}stli ' Ί his is no Vallenstem ' A setitt voite ceases not, night noi day, to tell me th it it is not '- W hoetei it be, its influence is pciveisc ani unh ippy Iiom the hour on which I fiist bebt hi it, I have ceased to le m}self. Iiom this houi, theiefoie, he there 1 ' And she í. о
196
locked it in a cabinet. With a sincere and vigoious effort she endeavoured to extricate hei thoughts fiom then entan¬ glement, she followed bei daily duties with more than usual ardour, and, when within the castle, studied deeply and in tensely undei the tuition of Fnai ГеЬх in short, so successfully did she woik, that the enemy was well nigh conquered, and she enjoyed all the delight of con¬ scious triumph, while the pude she now felt was a tacit confession of the cbfficultv she had surmounted. It was neai the end of October, the hermitage and its smdl chapel wue a! most completed , autumn was closing in gloomily, the winds swept down with great foi ce fiom the mountains, the wateis of the Raab had assumed a ied and tiubid hue, and swelled and dashed against then banks, and the evenings weie sullen and lainy. I ate one evening, as the ba¬ roness sat alone m her Oi iel, deeply en¬ gaged m a book for w Inch the good Felix
197
had bespoke her attention, and listening occasionally to the hoarse chiding of the storm which lattled her windows and laved aiound the battlements, hei meth- tations weie suddenly interrupted by a loud peal of the castle bell, followed by such confused sounds m the gieat hall as not only smpiised, but somewhat alaimed hei The Inai, to the pei foi m- ance of whose duty no stoim was an ob¬ stacle, had se t foith on his mule on some chautable mission, and Louis ι was ex¬ pecting his ictuin , hei fiist di ead, there fou, was that some chsastei hal befallen the holy man, and that he had once too often hi iv ed а dai к inclement night. She snitched the tajiei which bui nt be¬ side liti, and hastened to the coiutloi which ian ïound the hall, fiom whence she could wtness what pissed below. Just as she u ichetl hei station, she saw α httei set down, on whicn 1 iy α jierson binici nig jppu tnt ly bom sonic guevous ittidtiit the littet vv ts home by tint e
IHO of her own vassals, the fo nth İKaıeı, who appeared in gieat affliction, w ıs α stian gei Fathei ГеЬх was bi sils eugıgedın issuing enders to old Jus' ma the house¬ keeper, and othei domestics, foi the ac commodation of the wountkd m in, to whose side was held a hantikéi chief st lin¬ ed with blood, and fiom whom no aiti- culate sound pioceeded. Peicciving that Piovidence hid tin own some disti esscd individual on hei hospitah'v, she de¬ scended to the hall, when 1 athei Felix ic- lated, " that as he had taken shekel fiom an oveiwhelming sbowti e í ι am undei the skut ofa wood, α feu fuilongs from U e village, he hea' d himself h uletl, when a man, appaienti} half disti icted with tc юг, intic iteti hım, foi th love of Heaven, to assist hım m tuning his master fiom that spat, th t th \ had been attacked bv α pait} of ıobheı s, and that in the first snip ise, he, ν ith the iest of hisloid's suite, lis 1 fled, Ltif that al¬ most immediate!}, }ct too ' it«, to lend
¿yy
any effectual assistance, he ι etui ned, find¬ ing his master, as he conjecttued, dead. ' But he has since ìepeatedly gioaned,' said he, ' and the aid ofa good Christian may iestoie him yet.' You may thmk, my child, I was soiely dismayed; but I felt tlie pooi stiangei's pulse, and took heait, foi he was in tiuth bettei than ten dead men , so I got Stephen, and the millei and his son, and, with the aid ol the sei vant, we have biought bun safe, foi I found thu e was uo sealing lum on the mule. Piovidence sent that showei of rain, foi had I not happened to sheltei close to the wood, he might have died there. Now, with the Vngin's blessing, we shall do vuy w Л m a day οι two, 1 cpiesti m not," " My good fellow," si.el the Baioness eo the sei vant, " du n it so bittet ly afflict y oui sell, iou Ιι,,αι the pioiuise of this holy nun:— vom ma4u will soon be it'btoied." "Ay tuily," said 1 athei IVbx, "I
200
hope so but eie we pionounce too con¬ fidently, we must examine his wounds, soretue, my daughtei, and I will bung you speedy intelligence " On removing the handkeichief, and washing off the blood, which had flowed copiously, а wound of somewhat angry appearancepiesenteditself, butthernu s surgical skill soon convinced him that it had no consideiable depth In ascutain ing this point, howevei, he was obliged to put his patient to some pun, and theieby îecalled him to letollection " Whpie am I э " said he, laismg him¬ self, and gazing mquningly about him " And what aie vou doing with me ? " " Be patient, su sai I the Inai, "you ire m gentle hands, though you have lately been in iude ones , but pi used be the \ngm' you have escaped without moital injury ' I feai tint m explonng the depth of yom wound I hive huif vou, though, believe me I touched you as tenderly as the case would idnut
20Ï
You have been sometime insensible, but that is e isily accounted foi b^ the effusion of blood " "Ah, tiaitor ' dcseitei'" ened the strangei, when his weeping valet met his eyes, "the sight of thee bun^s all that has pissed to my leeollcction ' ' " 11 is, sn'" said the Inai, ' His cou¬ iage foisook him, is in foisool } 1 1, in ι moment of weikness, but his finit was mstmtaneoiis, and gnev ously ι epe nttd had it not bten foi lum, you woultl Iı ive peushed in tht wood But you must, for youi own ь ikt, J iy iside ill u ι it ıtıng reflections— bt silent md dotile, oi we sh dl h ivo fe n" lillui 1 lix then supei intende 1 the eonvev mtt of his ρ itieut to the eh imbei piovute 1 foi lum indhum., t ikc η cat that the puoi wtepin^ sluveu i n do mistic wis divested ol his wct clothes md piovidcd with otneis, he left the wounded m m loi ι st ison to his vıgı- Imce, while he went to conici with las к r >
202 young w ud on tht accie! nt which had so unexpe cttelh biouqht ι s*i in^ei guest undei lici ι oof " 4ls foi the jot n», ,cn*ltmin,' ρ nel he, ' c m) mn el is it ι st c< nteining him —he is c'c ng well l u* f im vvotfullv gi ie /t I to fi ι I we hue ч ch h uı n цЬ boms —I will bt five J íoit v us nc\t e\e d St \ t ι hi s net I h \e ki o\ n the с st'e о '' I \ ť V df u d nev ti btioit, w ilbüi m ι me ubi ance, his mv its inblmg out це ρ ıs td so neu it line inon_,h, tht woild mw-, wo se ıs il н w-. ol 'ci ' " ï fe u " i pl td tl t 1' ι ne ss, ι hoi le of Zn ш i ene unpc ι 1 ш tht wood I h it worn n w snv it 's с plu n »e cm ^i tune, ρ ι ι v nune, to ι coniioitie. tht gi oun I, fiom what sht u 1, ι! vv p' un he 1 co n w snot к с tutli "die us covcifcd, ¡lis' that tins donun ί is n> ma tii, ind th ie foi sti ettei il foi t ne see il· οί cumes пш oui ι ι«, es, di ι mim they miv now bt committed with im
'203
punity. But, my fathei, we must not sleep in such a case as this a is now late, but theie is no tune to lose.—Let ten ol the stoutest ot oui men go foi t h with toi ches to beat the wood, and I will, wliatevei may bc the íesult of thtu seaich, iuu e sentinels theie mi some time to tome, 01 tilt pooi villagens u ill live n constant appieheusion. ' Highly appioving bei piompt and de¬ cisive meastues, uid pudi ig no bule ι ι the intelligence md jiicLment she dis¬ placed m all emugcnties, lie went to tiaiisiiut and niioitt hu dn celions ; aftei winch ite utuined to his paltent, who, gi ituuily piessin 0 ins hand, assın cd bun ins leinedies had lu Ay piodutid ι silutaiy erlett, lhat in vcotnid w is soothed by tne ointmint he Intel aj pin i to it, and tlttt lus finits wc e composi ci by lite diaughl lie itici nins d lunt lo swallow ( · ln shoit, holy sn," sud ht, ' wu % it not foi ni) ie» nd to yo tt pio¬ hibition, f should ass ul \ou with thanks
204 and questions, to the tin! of vom pi tience " " Smcc tint is the rise," cjibed ГеЬ\, " I will bid vou fuc well foi tht night ' 4t the s une tin he cist tn inquning glance on the counten met ot the 1 Uc disconsol ite ν ilet, which was now ι stoicei to sticiutv ' "'ics, sud the st in„oi, nau putin», the look " Uuj ut is ioi ncn lie is a good lid it vs ι tleh stili ini couii n i his sı tuned, he wili m et tie eeonc' betin ' lu the ·η ни f tie emis ului iu 1 fiom tlie n uve ti ition c í the wood bin wall ut tlie sn til s t 1 enee con eun ng etiti tilt i) i ıs ci tin n muntici oí ' e stí tn us fi ι η, thou.,! thev Ιι ul foum ι ste el b idi ii ind sul dieci, v nich Rut) it i eo ms d foi lib m ts'ti s lie 'ois \ feu ι "m oc mij, it il í к l of t t ι , m 1 sunimi uc hııııse I vvı hoi t η îttotscipi th of Kupéit li id ö tl oped iw iv on tile
205 ι idei ihghtmg to suecoui his mastei, noi vv as it now to bc found , but an houi aftei the ïeturn of the itconnoitung paitv it ippt ned m the vilbge, vv is caught, and hi ou^ht to the castle. V vague id ι nosses cd the Ι π u's mm l,thit, tithti vv il ing«i dieamin T hi had somevvlicit 01 othei seen his mticnt befoie, uid the thought oce isioned h ni tole tow ι с lo с ci ului > η his te itm s— ίο no pin pose, howevei , foi, though ne w ıs still li uniteti hv ılıt notion, he could b} no it ins und v h nee it οι igni iteti On tht moi ning ilici tht event winch hionein the ti in n ( ı t > the t ıstle, is the Ι 11 u s ite bv 1 ıs bi 1 ι 't c on n ı itu! ıtıng hım on Ins uuttu! mut — Mı t \ I unn Ih, W li it ťo 1 not we to voni num univ but púdon nu n vei t nd su, m l dt m ι ι not ι mj citi Kit if 1 isi who uni w ht ie is tht bid ol this с ι tie ? \\ eil mi 1 issiutd 1 t ι ib ei ί οι lis couitť-v vv oul 1 tit thu
206
have impelled hım to visit one tin own by such cucumstanc s on his chau y .' "Alas, alas'" said the Fnai, "this ostie has no loid. 4tai thtce months have elajiscd since the last buon of the noble line of Maichft lt't was laid in kin¬ dred dust. 1 tnisted he would hive seen mv head placed on its last pillow , but v» ho tin foretel ? — 'lhe saints jireseive us' W hat ails you, sn <"" loi the stiangci with а hollow gioin, had ышк b it k ujian the betl, ind fainted Huput and the 1 ιιαι m mediately bt took themselves to admuu-fuing eoiditV uul ícstoi itivcs, tht foi mei til tlie while ex elánmi) \ " \y, su, von hive done it' Oh, my pooi miste ι ' lins is woise than tie lobbus' lodimi· ih it this ıs the castle of Maichfeldt—to think th a y oung I oid Wilhelm should be dead' ies' suu enough this is woise than lhe lobbcis' \s toi a few doll us, υι the loss ot a
207
little blood, my mastei s never the mm to value it' But if his fnends gone, th it's another maltu ' Oh, what will become of us '" Iu the mem time the unfoitunite sti ngu opened his eyes " Vy father," said lie with ι look of ¡ icittno anguish, " leivt m , leive me ϊ ι с iij ι ι y ou ι little ν luie, lo e dicci ni tit ii^ii s, shocked ind coni usul they ut by this cruel intelligence I enne it vou sii leive me mv Leiings must hive supe in ι feu moments I will di pitch lìuptit to retili st уош li¬ tuni \tt stiy, holv su , is tl e sistei o W dite im — is tiu I 1} louisi it λι uthfildt? ' " Ъп ıs, my son ' I hen, sn, tt i uit me on livoin tel! he i not, ıs ν et, tit it hu biolhu s b isoni ft u d is bene ith bu iot ŕ — not iticisi till we li ivi conluiul lhe n, wiving lus hind to Iı isten 1 ι ♦ hu lelıv, tht gıod man vvıthcltıvı full
208
of pleased astonishment, though some¬ what appiehensive of the effect so sud¬ den a shock might produce on the rcco- \eiy of this most welcome guest lheie is no acquisition so delightful to a placid, benevolent mind such is ГеЬх pos¬ sessed, as tint ot a new clumant on the affection lhe death of W dhelm could lmdly be sud to hivt left a void in his heirt, suite the jihce he filled while liv¬ ing vv is now occupied Dy his memory " But now, ' »ud Ieli\, " it his pleased Heiven to send me the sweetest of all consol ilions, the pow ι to doth it, which, if my du ling Wilhelm ι onsuous of whit hippens on eaith, his spiul will bless me foi " Ai 1 lie cl sped hi ban Is in invent thankiulness, ytt, so ci n u wis he to thse'i u^c lib n md if t lis felic tous m telicene , that ht w ıs not ι bilie ti u biel it tht i sti unt impo ed o i hım by Count \ ilk nstem's piohibition lbs mom w is not fu fiom that in which his
209
patient lay, and he had taken care to point out to Rupert viheie he was to be found when the Count should inquire foi him ; noi did he wait long for the anxiously- expected summons. On re-entering the apaitment, he found the young Count sitting up, suppoited by his pillows ; his eyes vvcie ied with weeping, and his countenance betiayed the deepest af¬ fliction. " Holy father, ' said lie, holding out his hand, " í need not explain, that in me you behold ( asimir Vallenstem, the chosen biother of the ever deplored Wilhelm of Marchfeldt." And at the mention of that name he seemed com¬ pelled to yield again to the oveiwhelm¬ ing foi ce of his emotions " Be comroited, my son ; Wilhelm ıs m heaven, smiling on oui tears." At the same tune his own fell in sym- pithv with thegnef of the young soldur, who had in a ftvv momtnts won foi him-
210
self a wann station ai the affections of the good old man. " Alas su '" sud he, covenng lus f ice with his hands, " 1 am ashamed aid con¬ founded to beti i} su h weakness 1 — bı d a soldiei— mui etl to the ruthless woik ot wai—accustomed to death m all its tine I shapes—but \X dhelm ' ' " Ay, my son,' said lelix, " who can blame the teais which fall for W-illitlm'" " Besides," said the Count, " the shock has fallen so suddenly. My late deai fnend, when we patted, piessed me to visit his castle he was, m tiuth, blood¬ ing ovei а p-oject, of which, at а meet season, we shall peihaps speak faither. I consented willingly, but my mihtaiy duties have been uigent. \t length, howevei, m\ fathei's permis, on foi my tempoi aiy absence was gi mted I ast evening, by some thmct, w lu t οι 11 thei supposed ve h d lost ош v\ , though the f iet his pi ovni ili it ν e weit
211
much nea 1 ci to our destined goal than we could have mi igmed. We were nding ovei a wide heathy tiack when the stoim ovcitook us, and, seeing no sign of human habitation, we enteied foi shtltei the Wood of Oaks, wheie youi chanty pieseivcd my life, by what acci¬ dent it was endaiigeied you aie already info mul. And is it possible that he v hom I e une to seek is no moie ? —And is it jioasible that chance, 01 lather destiny, has indeed led me to the castle ol Maichfeldt?" "My son," sud Гпаг Pehx, "this castle boaits the gentle rule of a noble md lovely lady. May I not appi ise her whom it cont uns' —May I not gladden hei with the knowledge that Piondence biessci hu uth the means of arlording net om and hospitality to the bosom Inend ol hu only biothei ? " A pu tin bed uid a filate d look w >s the m' inini d te i e ply to the luai's к qu t
212
" Oh, holy sır i" he said at length, " what will you think of me ? and how shall I explain to you those vagi.e and inexplitable sensations, which aie even to myself incomprehensible ? W hat sh ill I do ? " said he, appealing to concenti tte his thoughts, and muse intensely. " It 1« indelicate to speak, yet silence m iy entan¬ gle me in mextucable embanassment." " Speak, my son ' speak feai lessly —lbs- burthen your heait ' 'W hat you confide to me »hall be sacı ed · and if you need advice or comfo t, the best I have to offer are youis." " Fathei, youi mild piety lends me com age. I will unbosom mystlf to you Retne, Rupeit. I athei, will you tell me—Did Wilhelm —did my biother— evei bieathe into yotu tai tiie wish he nouiished so aulenth —that I should be¬ come indeed his brothei ? ' "A thousand tunes, my son, it was his tleat est eaithly desne' "And to Louisa —to tiie Baioness'
213
Was she, too, aware of the tenour of his views ? " " My son, she was." " And—and------But I trespass ' My questions aie becoming indiscreet." " Pioceed, my son , I dai e believe you will inquire nothing which I may not answei." " \\ ell, fathei, îebuke me if I am too bold. Was the Lady I ouisa displeased ? —Did she consent ? " She ntithei consented, my son, nor withheld her qonstnt she would not pledge beiseli to an engagement with one she knew not,—but be not discou¬ raged. Had she beheld youi picture when she so declined to pledge herself, her denial methinks would have been less dteisne, and her brotliei's mind made easy. But, alas ' that miniature came not to hei hand till Wilhelm wab no more " " What miniatili t, holy sir ? Pardon me, you speak m ìiddles."
214
"The miniature, my son, w hit h doubt¬ less you presented to the late baron, when encamped together." "Believe me, sir, I piesented no picture to Wilhelm, nor did I evei sit foi one. A soldiei's time is far otherwise disposed of. But the simple candour of your conduct emboldens me, su , I will show you uniesen edly what is in my heart. I have nevei loved ' It is pos¬ sible that my lough, unpolished, soldiei's demcmoiu, moie piactiseil in camps than couits, moie accustomed to menaci than to flatter, may fail to win а lulv's gentle favour yet do I hold liti bro ther's will so sicretl, that I am bound to seek anil pitad for that f tvoui, while my hem tiembles at the piospect of a faiiuie " " r làke couiage, my son," said the Fnai smiling, " whencesoevei it came, theie did aiuve, α little while ago, an avant com ¡u, who u presented ус u ad¬ mirably, and has, if I mistake not, pro-
215
moted vour mtciests with the Lady of Maichfeldt" ' Y ou allude ag un to this mystenous porti ait But I have ye*- moie to speak —one word more will give you all my thoughts Remembci I am a soldier, and that tiuth is, or ou b hl to be, my native language The injunction of Wilhelm the flexibility of her nature, the pirtnl prejudice imbibed, perhaps, for him who love I hu biothei— dll the^e, independent of am individ d merit, n iy have crcited lot mc ι fuend m the bie ist of J ouis ι of Mucifeldt But, fithei I have ncvu loved'—I have nevci behel I hu whom l un to love 1 In shoit, if—if—in shoit, f ahu, űioutd liso chance tint I remain ıs cold and dull to the perfections of I ouisa of Maichfcl It as I have lutheito ¡»roved to the attraction of hu sex it would be dishonoui to deceive liei it would bc insult to m>ck hu with tlie offe ung of α cold insensible heait '
'Mb
Felix was surprised, for this last sciu- ple was such an one as he had not anti¬ cipated." " Well, my son, ' said he, after a pause, " I cannot say I partake m youi apprehensions ; but it is best, no doubt, to be beforehand with all things You are a young man of tiuth and honour, and how your heart may stand as to love, you know best yet, as far as / can judge of such matters, I should think it might find love enough foi Louisa of March¬ feldt, to make you both happy —but theie is no hurry, you shall meet and judge foi youi selves " Again Vallenstem entieated he would not be too pi capitate in revealing him to his hostess, though without any posi¬ tive injunction; and the} parted excel¬ lent friends.
217
CHAPTER XI * W K <it art thou hiding m thy bosom thei c ° Is t not do tspic J Fie Beware oí it ' Fis tolet ıs yet and quiet wl en tib w ırm d Twill etbe its natine, and implant α ¡>tin¿ \\ here it ıs hırbom d Whin the Baioness and batliei Felix met at dinner, theie was something so animated m the countenance and smgu lai in the absti actions ol the litter, that T ouisa tallied h m upon them Her ques. tions lespectmg the convilcscence of bei gucot wue answei cd in terms so vague and ambiguous, tint she knew not what to thmk , md wis most of all suipnsed to detect the good man, fiom time to time, m the act of legaubng bei wah а soit of tiiumphant snnlc, quite foieign to the habitud expiession of his count nance, and he apjieaicd to be mcumbeied md ovei weighed by his vor 1 r
218
thoughts, even to restlessness. Louisa forbore to press her investigation of the cause of these mysttnous indications, till she was relieved from the presence of her domestics and, as they quitted the apartment, an obseivation of the good fathei plunged her in tenfold astonishment ' e My daughti r, the jet beads with which you have biaidtd up your ban be¬ come you well —albeit, the coronet of pearls becomes you betttr, it is moie graceful and queenlike ' " My deai fathei," asked the Ba¬ roness, " how long is it since you have taken my attue into consideiation ? — How long have you known the diffeience between pearls and jet -" The Fua had thought aloud, and was somewh it confused "Why tuily, my d uighter, I know not how it tonms to piss, but ideas aie so oddly associated md cut mgled Sup pose, mv child von bung vour lute mto
219
the corridor this evening, and sing the vesper hymn. It will soothe and com¬ pose your wounded guest." " It may rathei disturb him, father Besides, fiom what I can learn, he is doing well : to-morrow, perhaps, he may qua his apailment, and, meanwhile, though I would be deftcient m n^> fair courtesy to my guest, neithei would I be deemed forwaid." " You are ever light, my child. But —but there are cncumstanccs which justify a more forwaid show of kind¬ ness than others, even nom a maiden. Louisa, my child, if you knew what eai would listen to youi vesper song, your ïeluctance would cease " " And who is this stiangei then ? " " It is, ' said the good 1 nar, no longer able to contam himself, " it is the gal¬ lant and virtuous Cisimir, our blessed Wilhehn's bosom fnend ' ' " С ısının '—Holy mothei ' Is it pos¬ sible ? " cued the Baioness, stai ting from τ О
220
hei seat, while the ι ose and bly alternately chased each othei over hei vaiying cheek. " Oh ' had I known the tastle contained such agilest' —But why, why, deai fathei, have I been kept m ignoiancc ? Has he been watchfully attended ? —His eveiy caic been shown him ? Oh, my fathei, I can Inuliy beai the suipnse 1 " "Be composed, my tinid, all ıs well —all is as it should be' Seat yomself, and I will udate to you what h ts passed ' When the good man desenbcd to hu the emotion exhibited by young Vallen¬ stem, on learning tbc t uly fate of his fnend, she felt hei in nit moved by the tencleicst good-will tow uds liei guest, and cvuy woid, as he pioceeded, m- cieised bei sympıthv and admuation, whe·. biie nittu upttd him, by feat fully and ciguiv asking—If in \ tlluisicm lie had lecosrtused the onj>inal oi tlie mi¬ niatine she bid found on the ca tic ramp tits ? "'liuly, daughtei, so much tloes he
221
resemble it, that last night, after binding up his wound, as the light of the tapers fell upon his face, I stai ted, thinking we had met befoie ; but he was so pale from loss of blood that it peiplexed my re¬ membrance." " And is he yet so pale ? —Is all dan¬ ger indeed ovei ? — Aie you convinced of his safety ?" " At. í сап be of the safety of rnoitai man ! If he dies, his wound, at least, will be guiltless." The good father now pioceeded to re¬ peal to bei that part of his conveisation with Casimir which regarded heiself. He had long been the sole superintendant and investigitoi of one female heart, but heaits aie, at the best, α baffling, puz¬ zling study. He, good man ni augi e long piactice, as will foithwith become manifest, was little bettei than α dunce in such matteis with the same sim¬ plicity as he had ueeived the communi¬ cations of Vallenstem, did he tiansmif
222
them to her whom they concerned. Fe- 'ix, as he magnified the honour and can¬ dour of the Count, and his delicate re¬ gard for Louisa's peace of mind, noted not the heightening colour on the cheek of his auditor. " I perceive, sir," said she haughtily, having heard him to a conclusion, " that Count Casimir of Vallenstein has formed a very false estimate of the character of Louisa of Marchfeldt! As he was the friend of my brother, I shall condescend to make him better acquainted with her. But is it possible, sir, you could wish me to serenade a man who has thus expressed himself?—How imprudent ! I might terrify the apprehensive gentle¬ man into a fever ! No, no, I will teach the Count to respect the dignity which abides in the heart, and governs the con¬ duct ofa noble female." " What mean you, my child?" said the Friar, standing aghast; " surely you are not offended by the tiuth and candour
223
of this confession? The poor young man says he has never loved, and how should he know whether he can love^cw till he sees you ? I expected you to ap¬ plaud his generous apprehensiveness of ensnaring your affections." " My dear father, in truth you are a novice in these matters. What you have related disappoints and surprises me ;— nay, had not this man been the friend of Wilhelm, I should not scruple to give his generous apprehensiveness the name of foppish presumption, and would take effectual precautions from the danger he fears for me, by not looking upon him while he remains at Marchfeldt ; but, as it is, I am compelled to the adoption of other measures." Highly disconcerted, the good Friar returned to his patient, who was quick- sighted enough to discover that the holy man was involved in some perplexity, and likewise gifted with sufficient pene¬ tration to trace that perplexity pretty nigh to its source. But it was easy to
224
change conjectuie mto ceitainty with so unsophisticated a subject as I ather Felix. " My father," he began, " I feel my¬ self w ondeiously iccov ered : youi un¬ guent has pioduced an almost magical effect upon my wound to-moirow you must emancipate me. And, my good father, you must be my ambassador to the fdn lady of the castle bear to bei my humble giectmg, and icquest that she will to-monow giant an audience to one who, fiom a thousand motives» yearns to throw himself at her feet." " Time enough—time enough !" said the Fiiar, with an embai rased an " Let us talk of other matteis , give me youi hand, we must not be too hasty. Let us see if there be my bngerings of fev er. " Oh, no ' my ftvti is gone. But will you not fly, holy fathei, and cany my solicitations to the Bai oness i'" " To-monow, deai son." " Ay, but my whole thoughts ait bent on this mtenview' Believe me, 1 shall not close my eyes this night if I
225
am kept in suspense. Go then, dear sir, obtain for me permission to visit the Ba¬ roness in the morning." " How wild and inconsistent is youth !"' thought the Friar. " A few hours ago I might not so much as name him to the Baroness. Now, forsooth, he is all haste to throw himself at her feet; and I am now as loth to be his messenger as then 1 was eager to perform that office." The good man's reluctance was very visible. " Oh !" cried the wayward invalid, " what new obstacle has arisen ?" And throwing himself" forward, he seized the hand of Felix with impetuous vehemence. " Oh ! sir, trifle not with a mind to which suspense is agony. Speak !—I «'¿//know the meaning of this cruel he¬ sitation.'' " In good truth, my good son, you be¬ wilder my senses ! If you will be quiet а moment, and allow me to breathe, I wilL speak. But when I have told you the
236
truth, you will throw yourself into a fresh paroxysm doubtless, and your fever will return." " Any thing, sir, any thing but sus¬ pense !" " Well then, my son, listen to the sim¬ ple fact. I revealed to the Baroness who was her guest." "Oh, Heavens!—and she heard it with displeasure ?" " No ! she heard it with delight. But, as ill luck would have it, never presaging that harm could result from it, I told her that as you had never been in love, nor had ever seen her, you could not answer for your affections, and were therefore fearful lest she should unwittingly sur¬ render hers to you. ere the equivalent was secured to her." The young Count covered his face with his clothes, and the couch shook beneath him from the violent agitation of his frame : in short, the distress of the poor Friar was extreme on perceiving
237
that his patient was convulsed by a strong fit of hysterical laughter. The piobable consequences terrified him, and he began bitterly to regret his want of skill m such missions, as he had, in his ignorance, that day undertaken. At length, in a voice which expressed his constei nation— " Be comforted, my son,' said he, " ¡f I have done mischief where I meant nothing but good, I must try to repair my fault I will seek Louisa, never has she refused a lequest of mine, nor will she this So take comfoi t, my son. And away he went to seek the Ba¬ roness, whom he stai tied not a little by his rueful countenance. " What is the matter, sir ? sure the Count is not woise' " But he is worse ' A hne days w oik I have made foi him, pooi youth ι í lis fever is letuining, and he is growing de¬ lu ious , and all for а matter of no more unpoi tance than because I declined so-
228
beiting you to receive hım to monow : yet I only wished to defer the request till I should be likely to find you in α more accessible mood than you were in when I left you, but it is not now a pe¬ tition I b r ng } ou, it is an appeal to youi Christian chant}'— Να}, foi aught 1 know, should }ou refuse ii, you will bur¬ then your conscience with the }oung m m s de ith " " 111 this ι« ver} mconsistent, and vei} embanassmg' —But the fuenit ot Wilhelm shall bave no just cause oi complaint against I ouisa of Marchfeldt lell the Count, when he can with pi u dence quit his apaitment, the Baroness of Maichfeldt will be happy to receive, with every due consideration, the friend of her lamented biothei. C ount Vallen stein as little needs fear to encountei ungracious lepulse as unsolicited affec Uon. Either he has seen but little of my sex, oi it has been his lot to meet with strange specimen». But h?sten, father '—
22Ö
If уош patient ıs, indeed, to dei ive any advantage nom my acquiescence, piay admmistei the medicine immediately." Fallici Felix waited not to be bidden twice, but wis soon by the side of his impetuous guest, who appealed tians- poited with the intelligence , antl Fathei Felix was almost as much alarmed for the effects of his extiavagant satisfaction, as he hul Litely been foi the íesult ot his unieasonab't despau. ' Well," said he, "Iron lhe little I hue seen of human natuie, I begin to suspect theie is full as much cligmt}, consistency, and foititude, m that half the cieation commonly deemed the weakest, as m oui s. 'I hu e ıs no lack of sensibility m the I uly of Maichfeldt ; yet no one, I wanant, will evci behold hei ι anting and îaving foi any calamity Providence ma} send hu, as }ou, my son, are doing loi a childish tulle; nor yet yielding heiself up the passive piey of despau, like my unhappy Wilhelm."
230
" Ay," exclaimed the incorrigible Ca¬ simir, forgetting his professed coldness of temperament, " those, father, those are the women to die foi '—Those who would die foi no man ι Let others pur¬ sue the yielding beauty, who flies but to be caught / must be subdued by the superb loveliness, the majestic tvranny of beauty ' What is theie on oaitli so sub¬ lime as the disdain ofa fine woman ? " " If that ь the case, thought the Tuai, " farther disquietude on my pai t ıs needless, for you aie likely to have youi taste indulged —But he is light¬ headed, pooi youth, to a certa nty, and it is wrong to encourage his lavmg by listening or ìeplymg to it " And with this reflection, and a few salutary hints to Rupeit, lespecting the management of his mastei should tlie fever mciease, bade lum good night. The pleasui e the Baroness would have felt in knowing Vallenstem was her guest was damped and tioubîed by the mtelli-
231
gence she had received from the Friar, and deep and intricate were her ponder- mgs theieon At ah events, she found infinite cause for self congıatulatıon that sht had listened to her better judgment, r ıtheı th m to the feelings of the moment, when hei beloved Wilhelm, with such |jo \ erful pleading, urged bei to betroth heiself to this mm the baie idea of lus allusion to the union piqjected by her biothei m so piccipititea manner, left an unfav om able mapiession oí his deli с icy, antl I ouisi ftlt she might be veiy unhappy with a man who was g illant in battle and faithful m friendship, if he possessed not also that mental tact, that pervading îefinement, to which all social mteicouise owes at once its softness and its tltvation ' Alas ' sud she, deeply sighing, " the most fuient, the dcucst, the latest wish of my beloved Wilhelm, must nevei be icih/ed '' Ou tl e second morning of Count Ca
232
sunn's sojourn in Marchfeldt castle, a% the Baroness sate at bieakfast, Γηαι I ehx entered.— " My deai daughter," said he, " I have attended many α sick body, and many ι sick soul, but so wilful and wayward а patient as this soldier have I nevei dealt with before ' I consented last night to his using this moinmg, because people in his state requne humounng, but he nevei waited for me to feel his pulse, nor admmistei his eaily tb aught, but юзе at peep of day, and \A\en I sought 1 im m his apartment the bud had flown m shoit, I found him paiadmg m the coiudoi, and when I appioached bun m 01 der to expiess my suipnse at las disobedience, be led mc up to the pictuie of that sly looking Cardinal Zoraschi, antl asked mc whose it was ? " c It is,' said I, ' the Caidmal Zo¬ raschi, who was gieat uncle to the lady of the castle ' " ' Then,' observed he, ' wc aie se-
233
latet! ; for he is likewise my great uncle.' " ' Ah ' Count, I iephed, ' you might have claimed kmdied through а puıeı channel '-— C oimexion with a mm who was in his tune the daikest mtngucr m Ľuiope, antl to whose plot» neither con¬ science, noi honoui, noi humanity, pie¬ sented a băniei, ıs no ti edit to any line. " ' He was a vtiy itsolute fellow,' re¬ turned the Count, ' and possessed α tleaı and tloudless intellect.' " You know, deai daughtei, that the пате of this ciulind ıs odious to my eat, for the disci edit he did to the sacı ed piofession; but soldieis and pucsts be¬ hold things, no doubt, with ν ciy tlifleient cv es. " I heie must be a sti mge defect m tint mans vision, nit thinks, who can view tiie deeds of /oiasclu with appro- bition In this point, how widely would Wilhelm have tb eoided with his friend 1
234
— He shuddered at the name of Zo- raschi ' " But, my daughtei, I folget —the young Count anxiously awaits my return, having sent me to repeat his petition for leave to present himself before }ou." "I will have the honoui to receive him immediately," iephed the Baroness. And in a few moments Count Casimir of Vallenstem was introduced. This introduction could not have taken place at a less auspicious moment,—all the strange conduct the Count had ex¬ hibited, since he had been her guest, »vas now working together in the mind of Louisa, and his implied approbation of a dark ciuci dissembler like Zoraschi compietti! her chsgust, so that she was obliged to call to hei iemanbrance all his kindness to Wilhelm, and all Wil- helm's affection foi him, m older to coun¬ teract the influence her opinion would have had on her reception of him ; but,
235
instead of the forwaul presuming de¬ meanour his conveisation with Father Felix had led her to expect, the most winning and graceful timidity charac- tensed his address, the leading expres¬ sion of his countenance was that of me¬ lancholy—the pallid hue of his cheek, as he entered the room, was exchanged for a deep crimson. Scarcely did he lift his fine eyes to the sister of Wilhelm, who extended her hand, which he approached and kissed, half kneeling —his embar- ìassment, apparently the effect of intense feeling, ovei powered him, and he silently took his scat near the Baioness. Louisa wa» touched and surprised, as she beheld him internally struggling with emotions so honouiable to his niture, for she doubted not that his whole thoughts were filled by W ìlhelm. She hid, how¬ ever, consideied the line of conduct it became her to adopt, and the more she felt her heart inclined to icspond to the sensibility of hei guest, the more her
236
mind resolved to hold its couise with steadiness and dignity. " My bid," said she, and the tears forced then w a} to his e}cs, " he is gone, fiom whom }ou expected joui welcome '—But the sister of Baion Wil¬ helm cannot be othei tbm the fnend of Casimn of \ tlkiistcm J fhütei myself, the skill and tendu ness of lathti Ithx have lemovcd the dang« of j otu wound, but }oui restonation will icquuc some time to accomplish. Mi} I then hope, that the gloom which at piesent h mgs ovei this castle will not ahum }ou into а premature lemoval ? " " AJas · m ulam," i etu ned Vallenstem, m а voice the most musical that had evu fallen on the eu of I onna, ' the gloom of Maichfeldt but too well hai monists with the colom of my thoughts ' If 1 am peimitted—If i nuv, without pie- sumption, continue а few days longei a trespassei on the hospitality of the í àa\ of Maichfeldt? —
237
And he looked timidly towards her, as if somewh it questioning the cordiality of the invitation hu couitesy had in¬ duced bei to orlu She was iwaie of this silent appeal, and igun iclmued not onlv tile debe icy and modesty of hei guest, but tlie tat t which lcndeied him stiisible to tht touch of cchlritss, slight as it vv is, tint mingled m hei ìeception f t ium 4 lhe fi i nd of my biothei, said she unphiticdlv cannot be a tiespassei undei this 100 \flci bic ti fisl attended by the l uar, they mule the toni of the e ıstle ascend¬ ed to the lamjnits visaed the pant¬ ings md s atu u у, antl ex mimed the collodion ci întinai histoiy, accumu¬ lated by tlie d ílu ent tilleis oí tlie house n osi of the 1 ite ι ones h iv in _ 1 een cele¬ bi iteti not only foi then j lowess in tht fit Id, but known to tht woild as tunnuit tot taste md sacın t In the comse of the noinin 0 s unu cmctitb the mmd of
238
Casimir giadually, and veiy modestly, developed such а fund of intelligence and information as astonished his hostess. Aichitecttne, painting, natuial philoso¬ phy, in short, every subject seemed to enter withm the íange of his compre¬ hensive intellect. But, m spite of the discussions into which he was naturally led, the deep melancholy of his counte¬ nance knew no vauation, nor did he depart, in the least, fiom the distant and half feaiful îcspect which he had, from his fust nitioduction, lendcnd the Ba¬ roness. The evening again closed in with gloom and tempest , lhe iam beat, the winds mareei: but I ouisa, seated at her embroidety, listened to the melodious voice of Vallenstem, as it pom eel on bei ear the sweet and lofty numbeis of Tasso; and the stoim that evening laved in vam aiound the bittlemcnts if Marchfeldt.
239
CHAPTER XII ' Thus, it ıs true, hom the sad years of life We sometimes do shoit hours,, yea, minutes strike Keen, blissful, bright ' Joanna Badhe. The following day the Baroness con¬ ducted her guest to tht* Isle of Willows, and availed hei self of his exquisite taste, in dn etting some finishing decorations fai the thaptl. Lvtiy altetation he sug¬ gested was eithti obviously useful, or highly ornament il, and she was de¬ lighted to perttive the advantage her jilan could not fail to dtnve from his idviee. As thty sailed homewaul— " I am feat iul, Count," said the Ba¬ ioness, " tint jou will weai} of the in¬ evitable monotony of your visit, and I would fun piotine jou some vauation. v ou hunt, no doubt —-the stables ton-
240
tam fleet coin sei s, the kennels well trained hounds, and the mews stiong winged filcons the neighbounng toun tiy, mortovti, abounds m game " " I thank you, imdim " ^turned the í ount With ^ an of moitific ition , " but will >ou pai lon mc if I ventuit to con ftss that I pitfti tht monotony of vom heh slm s oOtietv to in) vuitly )oui langti tan piovidt foi me " He piustd, md then sud, tonettmg 1 im elf ' \ct I ou^ht not thus to en gioss voui tune When I ¡effect how y esterni) and this moi mg hivt fitti I im btOHished it nn own unton tiotb pitsumptio ' — I Inv с indeed, monopo hsed youi whole leisure \i% madam I am fond of hunting with youi pti missun will take that txutist to moiiow "But, s I im vom sın con )oumust likewise t bt un mv cement, md tl at will not bc t isy, ml tht 1 ιιαι, " while the wound iii)oui sı İt ıs h udi) heıltd
241
" Tuie, indeed," said Louisa; "how could I be so thoughtless ? —Well then, Count, you must still keep the pleasures of ti e chase in peispective." He bowed, but refrained fiom paying tlie obvious compliment; and the more Louisa compared the humble, respectful, hom ige of his conduct towaids her, the mournful tenderness with which he de¬ ploied her brother, and the delicate re¬ finement of thought and feeling which spoke in every woid he uttered, and beamed in eveiy glance of his eye, with the repoit of lathti ГеЬх, the less could she leconcde such fligi tnt contiacbction; and she began to satisfy beiseli tnal the singulai naittk of the good pnesf had led bun into some strmce mistike. Day aftei diy elapsed, eveiy one of which ìevealed some new talent, some fresh mental puftuion, in tiie friend of Wilhelm, lie directed ard enlivened the studies of the Baroness ,—they drew, they sung, they rode, and walked to- vol i. M
% щ&
gether f and every evening Louisa dwelt, with added interest, on his mellow tones, his exquisite pathos, his accurate ear, as he read to her her favourite poets; or offered the strains of bards, hitherto un¬ known, to her admiration. Nor was her own intellectual store much inferior to that of her guest ; her mind could boast a masculine strength and scope, and was richly embellished by various and illus¬ trious acquit ements, which did not pre¬ judice or diminish the more attractive feminine graces. These acquirements had been the companions and beguilers of her solitude j but it now appeared to her that she had never before prized them at their true value. It is no won¬ der if the mistrust of the Baroness was gradually dissipated by the timid respect of Vallenstem, which never abated nor ibrgot.itself ; he even persevered in de¬ nying himself the use of such expressions oi' admiration as every polished man be¬ lieves himself entitled to pour into the
243
ear ofa beautiful woman :■ —it seemed as though he avoided flattery as an insult too gross to be hazarded with so pure and dignified a being. Thus matters stood ; but all Louisa's penetration was baffled, In her attempt to discover whether the breast of Casimir harboured for her any other sentiment than the cold and distant >ne of an almost awful esteem. It is only necessary to say, that this was be¬ come a subject of even painful inquiry; tor she found, with dismay, that the pre¬ caution she had deemed so needless» and impertinent, was more requisite than she could have foreseen ; but she determined that no inadvertency on her part should ever aŕľord Vallenstein the triumph of guessing at the new and troublesome inmate which had found entrance to her bosom. The day on which the Count left his apartment Rupert had been dismissed on some secret embassy ; and, immediately on his return, both his master and him« m 2
244
self appeared, like the iest of the inha bitants of Maichfeldt, in deep mouin mg When fiist Vallenstein stood befoie Louisa in his sible attue, she was sin piised into an exniession ot affectionate gratitude, for, with a mind sensitive and eneigetic as heis, ¡t was impossible to keep caution evei on the alert, and pre pai ed against attacks so delicate and aitrnl ıs those to which it was dul} ex¬ posée! Of one thing she soon became convinced,—if \ ilknstcia had nevci loved, and did n< t ι ow love, it was not bce ause he was me p ible of lov mg. " No, ahs'" tin ι dit she, " his heart has not }ct lound its object'—When il docs, how puie, how tender, how sub lime will be the woikin^s of that mastei passion m the bieast of λ allenstem '" Now she hai is ed ha se if with con jectures %hy she was not tint object, she exploicd wth restless an > et) her own defects, and still ι etui ned to tne conclusion, that love is no deduction of
245
ι casou or of v\ ill, but born of capricious í mey. (( Pei hips mv biothci's earnest desire toi oui union may hive piesstd like а ítttti imtasily on his mind '— -Ые may have ι fault, mil that fault may be а touch of human puveisincss. Well, though hc does not love, he shall respect ше Louisa of M uehfi Idt will nevei be ι ejected even by V allenstem." Vallenstem, meanwhile, was by no means unconscious of the piogiess he was making He saw, and exulted, mil, while he exploicd cvuy movement m the bosom ol 1 ouisi, he knew that his own was impei vtoua to her. He knew, md glouid in the knot Itd,i, that to the my stuv w inch tu tlopi d his ton- duet ill the pentti ilion ol hei mind was linet t d, and tl t on its solution hei ι tace ibc ids dejet, led VII lins he believed w ι, isttil until, uid hc was iglu It was now time that In sbould
246
change his plan of opeiations, and he pi epared accordingly. The lieimitage and chapel weie so fai completed, that the solemn sei vice to which the Baioness had especially decb- cited them might now coi imenee; and that day of the week on which the late Baion of Maichfeldt closed his eyes upon sublimai y soriovvs wis appointed foi the fiist celebration ofthat pious office, which, fiom henceforth, was to be per- founed dad} and foi evei. The soul of Louisa, as well as bei peison, was that iky wrapped in mourning, and her w hole thoughts were with those foi whose de¬ puted spiuts sue was invoking pai don and bins, bhe had not so much as a glance foi eaith, 01 the foims winch w ilk theieon; she siw only Wilhelm and Blanche in the bnght ι calms of etei¬ nal happiness Her countenance, hei fonu, had caught the chaiattei of bei spıııtual musings; and Val'enstem, as
'¿47
he looked upon her, felt his heart sub¬ dued bj the moie than moital pei fection which beamed around hei , so that, had hei mind bten less sublimely engaged, she might have peiceived tint his affec¬ tions had no lougei an oojcct to se» 1 · fhey iettimeli fiom the Isle of Willows, unmeised m the silent sadness that be¬ fitted tlie solemnii} at which they had assisted and, on αϊ living at the castle, the Baroness, extending bet hand to Vailtnstein,— " Valued fnend of my Wilhelm," sait! she, " I must iernam alone dunng the lemaindei of this day, lo-monow we meet as usual." He seized the offa cd hinti, anti pressiti it to his lips, and to lus bosom, with a leiveney th it would have suipuscd bei, but that the paleness of his cheek, and tkjtction of his eye, caused hei to attiibute this unwonted emotion to the softening impi essuin left on his spoils by the affecting ofhcc m which they had
248
been mutually engaged lhe lutheito unbudlel spirit of this man was now completely inextiicibl), enlhi died In the mental sense of the woid he hid never loved till now , but now his heait, soul, and even his reas η, v cie imbued, and peivided by ι sentim nt, m \ hose existence he had until this peuod, ie fused to believe Dty aftci div, houi after houi, the delightful mfl ι nee h ul been stealing nnpeiceplibly, yet ìapidly upon him, till he w ıs ill won He could not endure to lose si lit of I ouisa one moment and now, is she quitted the apartment, he flung himself impetuously on α couch, and w ioint í ıs ιί some he ινν calamity had ovei til en lam " No, exclama I he, it is now de creed'—\o pow ι on с uth shnl wi t that woman fiom ne li ait l, d ep an I eterna!'—-Love coi summ» md ¡owei ful' — \e strong, ye οι i ipoíeia infili enees, sh ill we not conqiiti " His heait, which Ind lutheito oheved
243
the dncctions of α cool and speculative head, was now а cbsoigmised chios, and he found tlit unwonted tumult insup- portiblt " \o," said hc, ' 1 will beai this no longei ' Besi h s, it ıs tmie she should beai me speak of love lhe pi oud heart, the lovely lips of Louisa, bh ill confess my tjumiph '" Thus, shilling over the apaitments, the eonidoi, the ι impaits, like a tiou¬ bîed spuit, and venting his ïestlessiiess m sudden soliloquy, did he spend a day, whose slow I ipse he found intolerable. It was midnight when the Baroness softly descended a puvate stur, leading fiom hu apirtnicnt to а ηαί row vaulted pissige, tummiluig m a low dooi of entrance to the chapel, covered with her long and flowing veil, α taper in her hand, and hu eyes fixed on the ground. She advanced towaids the tomb, which contained the ashes of Wilhelm and m 5
250
Blanche; but, on reaching it, stated in suipnse, to peiceive herself anticipated. Vallenstein was weeping ovei the remains of his fuend.—he stood by the sepul ehre, his right arm thiown acu ss it, and his face, enveloped in his mantle, was piessed against the maible entablature. lhat night many tapeis we.p burning in the diapel, so that the Baioness pei¬ ceived immediately who it was that thus usui ped hei rights. Deeply affected b> this new and staking instance of Vallen stein's sensibility, she was cautiouslv withdiawmg, but he heaid hei light step, and staited from the tomb. " Foigive me, forgive me, my lady' cried he· " on my soul this is no wilful mttusion " " Count," said Louis ι mildly, " be not thus agitated '—It is impossible the heart of Wilhelm's sister can lepay with displeasuie such true, such tender friend¬ ship ' No ; it blesses you, Casimir."
251
" Does it—does it bless me, Louisa ? Why may we not mingle our tears? Both mourn the same object. Oh ! let us weep together." It was the first time the words Casimir, Louisa, had been thus exchanged be¬ tween them. The Baioness paused for a moment,— " No, Count Vallenstem," she said, " not now ; my mind is composed and elevated by the exercises of the day, and I would pieserve my devotions in the same calm tenor they have hitherto held. Be not offended—I mubt remain alone." " And yet—yet, Louisa, could he, to whose spiutua! bliss those piecious hours of solitude will be dedicated·—could he look down on eaith, ¡f any eaithly desire still clings to him, what sight could he behold that would most gladden him ?— How may we best piove our affection for the memoiy of Wilhelm? Speak, Louisa, speak'.—What was the fervent
252
wish that he biealbed foüh upon his 1 wt iigh ?" " Oh, Casimn '" said Louisa; and the tears flowed fast fiom hei e^Co , " I un- deistand youi apped. I do not—cannot ieject it But this is no houi, no place, for a subject thus д Hating '—I pi ay you leave me " " Methinks," и tunad he solemnly, pointing to the tomb—" methinks it is the only pi ice Ileie, undei the sanction of Wilhelm's spuit —Ileie it is, and this is the houi, whtn lotusa of Maichfeldt should pledge hei pure vows with Casi¬ mn of Vallenstein '" JLoui*a knew that hei biothei had in¬ deed left the woild with but one tem¬ poral wish upon his heait,—and that in uniting bei late with that oí Vallenstem, this sole wish woultl be accomplished. " It is enough, Casimn !" she utteied —" Now leave mc '" Casimir, who had thrown himself at
253
hei feet, lose mst mtlj, pressed hei hand to his lips, and, without a woid, quitted the chapel. Ihe Baioness found it no easy task to ucall that spint of sobei melancholy with v Inch she had ap- pioached bei li othei's tomb,—bet thoughts wcic unsettled, hei bosom throbbed, .." I she looked back on the letent sc w ie as on а bevuldeung vision. Hei he in, indeed, was Vallenstein's, ere she knew, οι ρ к e ', that Iu had ex¬ changed his foi it, but now, that he had impetuously dt m indeel hei love, and enfoicctl lhe iLmuul by the sito. igest, the most liu-aVible appeals.—now, thai the w oul w ıs tillei ed whit h decided het fate, sneh was the tumble and agi¬ tation of hei thought>, that she was scarcely capable oí distinguishing if hap¬ piness had any jiut in the confusion. Ihe meeting oi tlie following moinuig was nol without cmbaua»sment on the pait of the Baioness; but the only dif¬ ference peiccptiblc in the conduct of
254
С ount \ dljıs ei i was, that now, the tenderness of lus accent, and the fond admiration of hts glance, mingled de hghtfullv with the delicate, though hi¬ thei to told rtspect, he had evinced foi his hostt ° i ıtheı ГеЬх partook with them of then moining ıepast, and no allusion to tht events of the chaptl was made till it was ended , then Casnnu rose, took the h tnd of the Baioness, and kne-ding beto e the holy m in, s nd— " I ıtheı, the last wish of W ìlhelm is fulfilled —his fnend and his sistei have mutually plighted their f nth Grant them vour ble sing, ŕ ıtheı Sui pi bed and ovcıjojcd, the good old man lul hi» hind upon then heads, wept ovei them, and blessed them de¬ voutly TI e Baroness, leheved from the tiouble and agitation in which the suddenness of so important a decision had at fiist plunged her, now acknow ledged to beiseli that she wis happy, nor did she forbid hei countenance to
25å
conress as much To divest herself of the dignity of hei chai ictei was impos¬ sible, since it w is hei leading featme, but fiom the moment that she became the afhmcul of Vdlenstem, it wis tem- peied with m mdescnbable sweetness,— a gentle obsuvmce of him who was to be the mastei of hu fate, srid who n it woultl soon become hei satied duty to obey and ehe usb A few diy s aftci tlie events we have recorded, the ( ount said— " Youi biolhu had a picture, Loin ι lhat pictuie t night my he trt Us caihest le son of love Now α his ι tuumphant uvil, yet I still feel some fond yearn¬ ings aftci my hist flame —Give it mc I ouisa " The Bironcss unlocked а cabinet con tainmg some pipus of hu brother's, and pioduced the minnture " You give it me, Louisa 1 It is mine for evei,—is it not ? " " How can you question it ? í give
256
you m} self ιοί ever. What motive then could induce me to withhold Uus lifeless copy fiom }oui wish ? " " This tin n, ' imu mured he to himself, " is accompli hed at least." And as he < ι \«-pcd the picture, and lodged it iii hi, bosom, he smiled, and the Baioness staiteli and shuddeied; it was а r mile Γ ΐι^1ι as she had nevei seen befoie, dthough .die had heaid the de¬ scription of one which must have ìe- semble 1 it: ihat smile was momcntaiy, but it wíj not the impression oí a mo¬ ment it kit b Ju ml it. lhe Buoness. peiceived th t some internal movement of the mm 1 had produced this «.ppallmg effect on the beautiful featuits of hei affianced loi d without his jieiaussion, he was aware al once that the meteoi had not passed unobseived, foi looking fixedly at hei, he asked in a slow, cold tone, " What is the matter 'i" Nothing, that could be explained, wae the matter. To diveit his thoughts and
257
hei own, she tui ned to α htlh neglect d box which stood in α cornei of tia ι oom, and touching α spi ing, said, " Pe hijs, С umai, vou flattei y ouï self you hive nevei had a uval' But look bei e " And she | ut mto his h mil the mmia- tuie she had found upon the castle iam parts "It sa di j d ссиые, said he , " no common utist pioduced this painting, but when it was liken, о how it ι cached you, is ι myste iy I cinnot solvt But,' added lit 1 1 a tont of pique, " I need not be jeal 11 of my uval, so fai as 1 can jud r e or his Ue tment, he ha» bten loueti to e intent himself with а cold lod 0 m , { I ncm 0 it the box fiom whence he η id s t η it t iken "Cisma sul the Baioness, "this pictuie emu to ne, si have told you, mybtcnc.li \) 1 с il 1 only guess who might be tie ou r inal, my biothei ь often expies cd desne foi oui union
258
induced me to wish it m glit be your ie semblance trd tht only piobable wav in winch I could account ioi its bung found in the ci te, wis denved fiom the notion tii it hi h id biought it hithei, in shoit, foi win should I dissemble it while I believed myself contemplating youi ft ituus, tint bit of ıvoıy was my insepti d it eonij miou ' " Antl bv whit accident was yotu opinion clunked-' lo whom did youi second thoughts attiibute these fea tures i Louisa had ever felt an mdescnbable reluct mce to uttuing tht nune of Wolf stun in tlie pustiite of Λ tllcnstetn it hid ncvu since then icquauitmce been pionounciti by etilici oí tliem \ow, howevu, thi i e vv is no alttinitive " I Ii ul ι vi e Uw suspiut n, she iephed, ' tint it mi 0 ht upre ent the counte π uu e of Sn W ubeck of Wolf stein a m m tow uds whom my biothei expiessed m uneonquuabic aveision "
259
" Really, madam'" exclaimed the Count, while а ele idly hue ov lsjireul his cheek and whitened his bps, " I thank you, fiom my soul, foi tlie com¬ pliment you have paid my ftaVncs. Did not youi biothei tell you \\ obstem was л fiend ? That tue fiend looked tiuougn his eyes and s niled upon hi» lips' 1 I know he did '" And, with a look of unutteiablc rage, he dashed the pittine to the floor and broke it with his loot " Count Vallenstun, ' s ud the Bai oness, " I nevei have contentied with aught like this ' I diti not even know that it might happen, but you shall hav „ lusin e îo lecolltet уош s li " And she quitted the apaitment.
260
CHAPTER XIII. • Now go и ť) me, and with this hoi;, m-m, Into tili, th 4i у l)j · thin, bitini him, And und incdtli that conseti.it«'' r u oi, Plight me tiie lull j-cursnte of jour i nth, That inj mobt jealous and too doubtlul soul May live in piaci. ' " Fool !" exclaimed the Count, gnash¬ ing his teeth and smiting lus fou head as the door closed between them : " Yet, no matter! This will blow ovei ! If 1 were α Iovei no«— only a lovei, I should seek such conflicts as these; I should ceiut ¡•nd cultivate them foi the zest they give to the languid monotony of' mutual love- But tune pi esses—theie is no к мне foi the luxuiioub vicissitudes of mutual loi- inent, mutual foigiveness, 1 in tut patch up α hun ied peace, even though I couch for it."
261
He wrote as follows "I hate ïecoliectel myself, and the result is repentance Come, Louisa, and by your gentle foi beai u ce undei nij self-upbıaıdıngs doubly bitter " lhe Baroness, as Ню relue d to her -paitment, found he like one who has i"cuved a stu Mow, all her ideas л. ere involved in confusion, and all she peiceived dľ-tnclb was by what hand the outiage had 1 n inflicted " Oh λ allenstem 'lb' •c 1 леи per fect," t ned slie, as on f ι ι ρ İki apart ment she site down tl ι.ι 'c αν om eel to îeflect coollv she kn ν rothu χ eithei pi actie illy oi tneoittc He of lovers' quail els, hei fetlings ' ι с thut'oie un mixe diy painini ' Casimn 1 Wilhuin'·, < ısının 1 My Casimn' He is dc„iidid' lie is no longei the manly, noble rational being I believed him yestucl ty Alas' what а humiliating change h >s one half hour produced '"
262
The Baroness slied no tears, but the pain of her heart was intense ; and the more deeply she mused 5 the move calmly svhe reviewed the recent scene, the stronger was her conviction that she had cafise to grieve. Meanwhile Bai bara en¬ tered with the billet. " Lay it down? Barbara, and leave me." When leit alone, she pursued her thoughts ibr some time ere she opened it; on opening it 7 her fiist emotion was pleasure, her next, surprise, that so \ioient a storm could be so suddenly al laved» u Yet/* said she, 6i the storm always parses long before the devastation it causes can be repaired. I will see Vallensteïn, and explain my feelings to him·" He, meanwhile» well versed in such matters, expected a long warfare of billets, and was much astonished when ihe Baroness entered, 41 Count/* said bhe, approaching him,
263
** I will not tell you I can immediately forget w'hat has happened,—for I will never deceive you ; but I forgive you, Casimir, from my soul. To-day you wiil not desire my society. To-morrow, every visible trace of what we cannot re¬ call shall be done awav, and we wiil re- turn, so far as is possible, to what we have been." These words operated like wormwood on the cold and haim-htv nature to which w v' they were addressed. The Count felt awed beneath ΐ Ite cairn dignified candour of the BaronobS ; his soul was stmiç to the quick ; he was offended, wounded, mad¬ dened ; he lifted his eves to her face, to seek some ti ace of that weakness which her words refused lo betray, but not ά tear had fallen : he perceived at once that to trifle with such a woman would be ruin, nor dared he give vent to the mildest of those passions which warred within him; he covered his face with his mantle·
264
" Oh Louisa! Louisa 1 ' he cried, "you do not, you cannot love rae, 01 for a momentdiy f mil, a fault ïepented on the instant, >on could not tieat me thus in¬ flexibly ' Do net quit me tc- lav, Louisa. or I shall go mad." " Casimn, mistake me not ; I have no lesentmcnt, but I have sustained a sudden, α violent she ck, and am not re¬ covei ed It I remain with you, some trace of what I have feit, nav, of what 1 stiilfeel, mav involiinlaiily lepiomh yon Be content then, my tuend. I et us part for the day." Now, foi once m his life he felt him¬ self the weakes , in I the iäge winch ac¬ companied this conviction shook linn to the centre: he lemuucd stili in the at¬ titude of despiu, mode nie·*, ins face covered in lus mantD The B'roness was softened and consoled by emotions which she believed weie excited bv le- moree and conti ition , she took his hand and pressed it.
265
" Do not give way to grief, Casimir ' Commune with your own noble nature till we meet again, and we will meet happily. Till to-morrow, adieu, deal Casimir '" " Well, madam," said he, as she dis- appeaied, " this is your houi, and to ae- celeiate mine, ) ou must enjoy youi short¬ lived soveieignty. Oli, how exquisite to tiample on the pude of such a woman ' What a supeib titatare it is' I have wiung her heait, yet not a tt u has fallen from hei eyes ' But it sh ili be my pas¬ time to bicak this stubbornness ' Ay, and we will have tears too, if sht knows how to weep " In fatt he loved to disti action, if any feeling in such a nituit ıs lus could pio perly be called love. It vv ıs e uly ι tha- l acter so natively maje tit as I oiiisa's that could have awake atti m lus bosom a sentimtnt so itstltss and predominant as that with which hi-, pride now combated, vol ι. N
adø·
yet was there something new and delight¬ ful in the conflict ; the calm continuing happiness of reciprocal consent was not made for him, and even with Louisa, he would have wearied ofit ; yet to be pro- bibitad the sight of her for a, whole day— that she, too, should have resolution to forbid him her presence; for however mildly the sentence was pronounced, still in effect it was imperative, it was incre¬ dible, unparalleled in his experience, and required revenge. " I ада glad, however," said he, " that í have met with this specimen. I divided the sex into two classes; sweet creatures, and viragoes—this is neither—this has what we call a soul in it." The following morning the lovers met as usual ; Vallenstein awaited in the cor- lidor the moment when the Baroness quitted her apartment : he .flew to her.— " Louisa 1 are you yet appeased ? Has a day's banishment from your society ex¬ piated my ctime?''
267
"Casimir ' let it never again be named between us ; it is all over." The day passed apparently as many oth>rs had done, in haimonious calm: another and another followed, and as Louisa did not cherish the remembrance of the unfortunate disagreement, it gra¬ dually faded upon her mmd to the dim¬ ness or a half-remein bered dream One day, as they were pursuing their mutual studies, a courier amved from Vienna, with a letter from Baion Erdenheim : its purport was chiefly to remind the Lady of Marchfeldt, that the time she had fixed foi her arrival at Vienna had been suffered to elapse, that hei hotel was completed, and that that of Erden¬ heim was, at all events, ìeady to receive bei ; and, moreovei, that the Emperor had inquired repeatedly when the Ba¬ ioness of Marchfeldt would be pre¬ sented, having even add« d, * It is time she should show herself at couit. Tell
268
hei so, Bai он.' —" An intimation which, ' said Baion 1 i denheim, " I need not re¬ mind my den mece, amounts to а com¬ mand." " Officious'" muttei ed Vallenstem " but what do you intend, my sweet Louisa ? ' " In the piesent instance it seems my intentions woultl be supeifiuous I must obey the I mpeioi. But," said she, re¬ mai king the cloud which instantly ov el¬ tast the face of bti beti othed loid, "wir should you be uneasy, ( asimir ? lint, ϋ e eilin, uubioken mtcı course we have enjoyed must cease foi a while , but you will follow to Vienna, and the 1 mpeioi will to iant ι willing sant lion to my union with the son of his in niest fuend Come, ι illtiistein, be thcniul. Weweiefoi- getlnig that the woild contained aught bi t, om selv es— tuist me, it was time we 1 ould ivvake lt is net essai у 1 should itj m to\ienni, and, theiefoie, 1 will
269
banish my ïeluctance to the step with all mv powu. Be advised, my Casimn, and do likewise. ' " I would, madam, I was gifted with youi philosophy. But peihaps you havı a taste toi exhibition—peihaps you an weaiy ol the monotony of Maichfeldt Nay, I cannot blame you, Louis 1, it ь indeed most meet that such a flowct should be tiaiisplantcd from the sohtaiy banks of the llaab, to bloom m tht un¬ pen il gudens," " L· it possible, Vallenstein ? But you lo not midn it—you aie indicci by this mtuittpiijii f o a life of hippin ss, but 1 t us at least enjoy the piesent Iiom , much pui u ilion must b made foi tbc joui nev , md seu ι d day s w ill y et с 1 ipsi ere í ¡mist mcd dc put " Villuisluu uıtb ivómul to ι ally h spiiits, but it wis au obvious cfroit to ihiovv oil tlie gloom which from lhat moment possisi d lutti. Uu ľuoiuss, bv a thousand n unless and deliča
270
proofs of affection, exerted beiseli to sooth and enliven him — something brooded heavily on his mind—he was restless and petulant, and scaicely seemed conscious of the incensed tenderness of Louisa's mannei The Baroness lesolved, befoie she quitted Maichfeldt, again to attend mass m the little chapel on the island, and the monks of St. G utbred engaged to meet her theie· Vallenstem, of comse, at tended hei. That evening, besides the monks, theie was a stranger m the chapel, clad like the iest, m moumimr Louisa b u elv peiceived the cuenmstance, but when the requiem commenced, the tones, some what tiemulous, }et sweet and poweiful, of the sti anger, mingling with the feeble ones of the ancient Liotheis, caught hei attention, and she looked on him a se¬ cond time , she beheld an elegant nnn h vouth, whose figuie w ıs till tnd mutiti, and his aspee 1 noble, its nituril expies
271
siou could haidly be guessed at, ат at that moment it seemed to have given place to some poweiful impulse of guef and indignation, and his eyes appealed bent on conveying to those of the Ba¬ ioness some message of bittci ıebukt'. Oppressed and confounded, she tinned I u glance on Vallenstem, hoping that the strangei had escajied Ins observation , butto hei suipiibc.she saw that hei mmia- tuie was, with the ease open, m his hand, md that he w ıs cast ng alternate looks of exultation on it and on the stranger, till, perceiving her eye duceteci towards him, he smiled fondly cm bei, and îeplaced if in his bosom, ihe ceiemony over, lit led her somewhat hastily to hu baige, and sunk agam into the gloomy mediti Hons which had loi some days involved bun. \t length, 1 Did you pu ttn t the sluuigti w h ; assisted m this с veiling's sc ι vice'' ' askul the Baioness, ·' Oh, yes ' 1 did obstu e bun
272
" Who was he, I wonder ? and why came he ?" u I.can answer both questions—who he was ? I 4oiow ; and why he came, I know:, his name is Wolfsteïn, and he came to insult your brother's memory." " And that," exclaimed Louisa, " was Wolfstem !", " Yes ! , And. do you not shudder to reflect that you have breathed the same air, and trod the same ground with Wolf¬ stein ? Have you already forgotten your brother's forebodings respecting that mani W nat think you brought him there ŕ" " However ominous his presence may be, with you by my side, Casimir, why should I,fe^r? My heart is yours; he cannot "endanger that, and it was to the fascinations of Wolfstem my brother's fears were chiefly directed. 1 ' " He does not consider himself so harmless, or he would not be lurking here. If Ъе fails in creating us some
273
trouble, if we find that no disaster fol¬ lows the sinister presage of this evening, why then, stars may shoot, and owls may scream at noon-day for me ; I will leave the prophetical mantle for who will catch it." " You alarm me, dear Vallenstein ! What can we have to apprehend ?" " To-morrow may tell us farther on that subject : as yet I know not.'* The Count had taught Louisa to think well before she spoke ; dissimulation no- thing could have led her to practise, and she had found the reserve and silence she was obliged occasionally to assume a new and painful lesson. Had it not been for her now repeated experience of Vallen¬ stein's irritable habit, she would have can¬ didly expressed her surprise at the small resemblance she could trace between the stranger in the chapel and the Wolfstein her brother had so frequently described to her. It is true, she had seen him by torchdight ι but either she was marvel· N 5
S74
ously decen ed, or the hair which waved ovei his forehead was not black, but я iithchesnut; his eyes, too, lesentfuily and accusingly as they weie bent upon hei, betrayed not, to her thinking, an} mixture of malice " »Still," thought she, " the man musi be m his natine diabolical, to have ex¬ cited such αν ti sion in the gentle heait ot Wilhelm, and such deadly misti ust πι tiu bosom of \ alleiistein It might weil bc construed pei vei seness, weie I to con¬ fess myself less unfavouiably unpiessed by his appeal ance than 1 ought to be Besides, the impious insult he h is coin mated maiks his maligna}. Just!}, in deed, might Vallensttm elude mc, could í haibour the slightest indulgence foi such а inoibtei '" Nevertheless she t ould not bung hei self to believe th it any impoitant dan gei tiu e it ened hei ti om the loi m she had beheld m flu thaptl, bin, secing Vallen stem was lesolved to pi edict evil, sht
•275
ιοί bore to pi ess the aigumcnt The fol¬ lowing moi ning his brow was unusuallj clear and cloudless: m answer to a pio- posal of the Baioness·, that they should ude togcthei, iie leaddy accpuesced ; but suddenly lecollect mg a difficult passage in Dante, whose obscurity they had igiecd to endcavoui joint 1} to eou- ¡uei — "Oi," said he, "shall w e content oui- stives with the fine an and noble view tumi the ιαιηρ uts this monung ? Mc- lfunks J un m the·» mood to att it к and ичкрк ι the old J loi entine." " W ith all my heut, Casimn. ' Ibis au ingeim nt WeS scarcely uttletl, yy he n old Maik, who was m attend uu <, and who, like most of the 1 supeuot do¬ mestics ol the t ıstle, had held his post lunn the time of Baion Ulut, said, " My lid}, what do you think I it- dene saw this nioining- 1 f date s iy joui ladyship will nevci guess. Vvlij he saw mv late young loul's hue Реыап thai gei,
276 poor M n /a, with ι gall mt looking gen tit m m on his back " "Its ι li , old in ш rn á λ Ilt η bttm, lus ejes tl ishin n ín e " N it so, ( outit, sul tl e i nones ^,1 ιν el) , " } ou ι e m f и 11 ηι, t » - ν th tt 1 itilene vv ıs ınistvl en Hetne, ni I ontst M uk " ' J own, ь id the í o int u swum tht 'ei 1 of gne ed ι и iu v ith win í ош a beheld in I ow u I> t h ik mt to li 'en to the stup li it itiö s < iolK I know ih t f ιι ι ι 1 \ tol υ i, m in f miti ir ι ι ι tlie с un ο! ι in i ¡ t u ! lu к c civ ι. d i i hi sl лп ι ' f WOitliti, upne Iti i) OU huw i uk ne t hl i li n > s ith ι ι noi , İl ıs ι 1 1 ι ι tl iin Mn/ ι ' I low*, ei th u m u b , in ι tin , t lei) vou Μη ι' Pi igne, il / un ν oithv l! bel ludan, tvtithclc niv Ικ ι mci enei ole ν uche , ι ι
277 which tase 1 beg tint my isseitioii may uc» wav piejuditt the ttbtimony ot >oiu gi 00111 " í ısının, (.asiam how often shall such scones as these iecur ? am I to look on them is piecuisois ot futuie happi uess J I feai not \ on kno« not, sine>. ıhı d iy on winch I welded mv consent to oui union, how oh tn you hue coui¬ ne ile d me to ask inysclt Is tin the s mn ( asının to whom I so feailesslv com¬ mand ihe ¡к ice of my life J ' Mv ingd' y ou aie unuisc t m tlie i ough ind month nutne oi nun, ind, tiu ¡clou you |iui,i vom ί astutit itu stiiieh \otn biitlieis Umici wis tun soitu tl m you nun, nI 1 l'Itti Itlit his Un tini lil uid m tn mt sın phu ty of bibvhood You ιοιψιιι iu with these, and well nuv th luti stili oí ,ι disposition sont whit UUJlUllOUS ) I [H u allouons " No— í eompiii ι hi «ith v om ell wah what von wue < ic I j umus' d to b
278
youi s Can you blame me, Casimir, if I am led to the question, whethei still greatei security may not produce a still moie grievous change ? ' " Poweis of heaven ' what a haish con elusion ' And what must I thmk, Louisa, of youi love—of your confidence ? By im soul, madam, you do not love me' you have scanned my character with the cold, keen, detecting eye of an analyst You have searched my bosom for its enois, and it has been youi studv, yotu business to magnify ihe ommon failures of humanity into cumes' Oh, 1 ouisa' did \ou tiulv love me, instead of agsi ι vatmg the errors of your С asının, von would have gently ti attd them to then souice , you would have found tint be is anxious, that he is unhappy, and, thtie foie, he is autable " *' Unhappy, ( asunu " Yts, lotusa I would hive w autel till suspense was ρ ist —I would tiavt spaied you the knowltdgt, till of nttes
279
sity ít must reach you, but, as I may not rely on youi indulgence, I will ex¬ plain what may palliate, at least, the cumes of Casimir Till the night (Oh houi of happy picsage ') when you ut¬ teied the woids, ' It is enough, Casimir 1 ' you saw me as I im the veiy day aftei brought me a packet fiom my noble, niy ma unanimous father, to tell me, that thiough the cncumvention of some cowardly, envious foes, his credit with the 1 mpcior is sinken Vallenstein is loid of himself Ihe pi ivate Bohemian Buon, who could by a wave of bis hand, ι simple efloit of lus will, bung fifty thousand aimed men mio the field, may laugh at mans t hinging ispect—md he does laugh But his son miy have с mst to gioan. I am not, like my falliti, suf¬ ficient to myself— mi/ soul s peace is ьш lendeied into the liantL of anothei " " And, on that point, my Villcnstun, what can you have to dreid fiom any of these political vicissitudes ? '
280 " 1 very tlimg, Louisa ' W ill tiie. I in nuor, think you, bestow the Hu mess of Maichfeldt on the son of а thy iced man ? Believe it not. Now, mi lini, he u ill my cxculp ilions, md then pionounce my doom, foi wc ippiouh the ciisis and decision will soon bicorne net essi \ W olístein,the u iítv, insidiou-, ming ι ι 'U olfstein, ht it ι-, who, sn tke li' с hi wound himself n to tit к unsels oi Iti din md, md slie 1 his venom into the Im peni) bu isi "Vív pi oof of this πι ι m hom befoie nn (nhn_s so unp u I m tblv exploded m voin p uite m' ι u ¡s on tîi tt d tv , \ Ι π tm Ιι 1 1 v stun„ md wound Ì bv ti ι π june s ol ι noille f ıtheı, tint Ì oui t \ ith coo! in ile jlc bubauii, dcbiucd me li mi in consolami! of hei pusinee, md ι in doned me to the wutlun 0 mı uv t ι ıım tin tights Now, 1 ou м ¡ıoı un tul,muit b tween thee uul me " I should h не been h ss stun, uni e ' nu í isimu, hul í knot n wii t vou шл
2ч1
tell mc but leave these cente iliiiuits— foi m tliem it last lies the i vult " W olfstein intituled limiseli I bt ni^ht into tlit ehipcl on the Islını!, to piof me the solemn ute, to mock youi biothci's memoiy, to insult yon, ml, ıbove ill, to insult tm Ihe tempu of ι sunt would inicily stmd finn ig unst so detest ible an < utiage but it i ests not theie —he comes foi mischief My mind is ι icked ind licuated by tvil pitsa b Cb ' H >w could you cany tins load upon yotu hcait J Know you not tlie dc irest } uv liege iflectioii owns, is th t of sharing md lessening the рань mel soirows of its object - 1 ' ' line,I ouisa, but y om powei extends s di futilei by tlie uitu mtt of ι vuy few woids, you с in it с ice tr nihil tie / у sonows I ou s , sud he in ι voice soft ned limosi to ivvhisju, milpiés mg bu li uul to his lie irt, ' they will η di his htlh i md fiom Ι ι шш, niel ^ιν t
282
to anothei.—Shall they, Louisa > —lell me—shall they ? " " Never, Casumi '" " Then,Louisa, I will tell thee asecu , my love.—Ihou must give it me now ' Лу," said he, replying to hei look ol »lai tied mquiiy, " now—01 nevei ! ' " I do but await the Lmpcioi's con sent, and I am y ouis; but uigc not, I pray, Casimir, α precipitation which would be unsuitable and indelicate." " Well, Louisa, be it as you will. But îemember, if I am indeed master of youi heart, you will ïepent this punctilio.' " Theie is so much of justice and goodness m Fei dinand, and he is so bound to youi fathei, by eveiy tic of giatitude, that I cannot thmk his puncely natuu will allow itself lobe duped to the pieju dice of so prov etl а fnend, so faithful α leivant, as youi llhistnous fathei ' Giatitude, Louisa'—When you aie « nti usted with α peep into the vceabulai}
2m
or α »talesman, show nie the woid, if you can fi ul it theie '" " Well, Vallenstein, we will, it leist, piepaic í n the woist: a day oi two must decide this matte«. Should л oui fathei 's enemies pi с vail, aid his ι etn emerit fi om umi mand be thi. íesult, my hesitation ıs ovei, and Tatlıcı lelix shall pionounce foi us the nuptial benediction " She had scaicely uttered this piomise, whtn Huput, with а huge packet of papeis, h ıstıly enteied the loom " My loid," said he, " a courier is now at the gite, despatched by your noble fa¬ thei he has iode day and night fiom Pi igne " "Iiom Piagne, Uiipeit' Now then, I ouisa, condemn my p'cupitation. Ihe plot has lcichul its catasti ophc." He sei/ed tlie fiist papei wlii'li pie- suited itself, ou winch were insti ibcd tbtsc woid , "lhe ! nıpeıoı's sta de¬ clines' Jitatheiv tiiumphs 1 My tıoops m dbbanded, uul l. un a [inv ttc nun 1 —
284
Albeit Wenceslaub Lusebuis 'V ilitn- stem." " liei e is the test, Louis i. W hat sa% v ou now ì ' " I say, Casimii, that m thi ce tlav , lather Felix shall latify my pmmise, uı the same spot wheie it was mult' -lu three days, Casumi, we will defy the malice of man to scpaialc us 1 "
285
CHAPTER XIV. Για oh ' ho« ult an idol proves this god í Shalnpeaie I ! u not to be believed that the heart of the liai oness was not tumbled and agi- tated on tlsus finding bei self bin lied into the adoption ot a measure, on which the whole futuie of' hi! earthly existence must depend : the morning's explanation, mvutheless, diminished hei solicitude icspc'clmg itic tempei ol Vailensteiii, and iv.ii nu lined hei to condemn beiseli'fol¬ lile ii'toiu and aiuteiity with which she had sm u keel hei sense of his conduit. She look d back to the time when ha tunp i, calm and lofty as it was, yielded io the suspense and uneasiness caused by tha finding of Casimn4 pictuie·, anil she· convicted hc'iself of injustice and cuielty к. 'lie· beinti she best loved; but u-tio-
286
spection was idle and fiuitless, since Y al¬ lenstem seemed to icmembei onh, that in three clays I ouisa would be his for evei '—His fathei 'ь wiongs, his own le- sentmei ts and anxieties, all the disap¬ pointments of ambition, vanished befoie tins bnght anticipation evety word, eveiy look, eveiy action, betrayed his tuumphant happiness, and twenty times ι day he would ask his bttiothed bride, with half playful icpioaeh, if she too was not happy, as he icmuked the mild and pensive expiession which dwelt upon hei biow, contrasting tlie tumultuous de¬ light which his own impetuous natuie exhibited. " Casimn, ask my actions ' If I loved you nof, even the mpmttions ol mv samttti W dhelm would nevti have united my late w ah у ош s — Y ou are my choice.' Weil ht knew that thus it was, >tt he was never weaiy of winning fiom her suth e onf tbsions, they w ere the music in w Inch hb heart delighted, md sometimes, with
287
the fond folly of love, he would procure a repetition of them by crying, " I heard you not—speak it again, Louisa." Louisa's was not in truth, by many, the first female heart which had acknovv- letlged his power, but his victories were usually despised as soon as gained, either fiom the ease with which they were achieved, or the small value attached to the object acquired ; it was now that he felt himself a conqueior in the proudest »ense of the word. Still Vallenstein ap¬ peared to be possessed by the dread, that •røme fatality might v et snatch his treasure from his grasp, ere it was finally securetl to him. Every hoi n that sounded neat the draw-lmdge to announce the ap¬ proach of some strangei, every peal of the castle hell, nay each time the door of the apartment opened, Ins eyes assumed a wild inquiring expression, and the co¬ lour of his cheek would vary *.—if she proposed riding, walking, sailing, " After Thursday," w as evet the reply;
28« ,! then we shall bc bevond the powei ur late, —then we nm laugh at all con¬ tingencies lhe Baioness beheld onlv m this feaî ι il solicitude the excess of his affection, md made bit h attempt to oppose, 01 compiei whims w hit h were bom of such ι puent ' It b this ¡flection, thought she " that m ikc s th L nn t make mv hippi russ W hv then should I thwart ¡t' Ihe eve oi tl it da} which was to tei шш ite the ы mxittits, and seil foi cui the f de oí tie I uly of Mnthlekit was n >* imul —thev weit engi^ed m ι _ mi it chess niwhid both wen idtpts Uid the B u ne s vv it, on the point of j ving her futuie Ion! check matt when 1 ıtheı Ì ehx cnftud, sivhip, ' 1 am gb I, im chıhhuı, tini youi nuptnls u e to take pi ice to monow suiti n stems tint the 1 mjuoi his expitsstd somt chspleisiiie it vour d lay, inv hughter, vilieufou, уош uncle of Ii-
289
denheim has despatched your faithful Conrade to urge your immediate presence at Vienna —Here he is. As Felix uttered these words, the Count started from his seat, and turned to the ooiòLc — Conrade entered, and bending his knee befoie his mistress, pie sented her tlie letter of which he was the beaier, offering at the «ame time, with tear., in his eyes, his humble congratula¬ tions on the auspicious event which had betn announced to him by I ithcr I ehx " Ί litre, my good C onradt," said tht Baroness, "pay youi duty to your new mastei, whom you will lent foi the sake of youi old one.—( asimir, I nted not itcommtnd the faithful dotnestit of our W llhtlm to youi kindness —you know mil value him airi ady." Coniade meanwhile looked wildly around, as one who sought lor that which was not visible ihe Baioness attubuted tht behivioui ol Valluisttm, who bull lemamed fixedly at the window, to tht
290
emotion produced by the presence of one who had so often assisted in his acts of kindness and affection for his lamented fnend. Impressed by this idea, she ap¬ pioached, and tendei ly taking his hand, " My Casimir," said she, " bid Con¬ iade welcome. I rejoice that he is come to assist m the festival of our union." " And I," replied the Count, roughly shaking oft hei hand, " I curse, bitteily curse the hour of his ïeturn to March¬ feldt ! He has ruined me '" And thus saymg, with his aims folded, he turned full round, and leaning his back against the side of the iecess where he stood, gameti m deadly defiance on the aste-uished countenance of Conrade, who exclaimed, " bamts and angels' What is this' Sn W arbeck of W olfstein '" The Baioness, already agitated and dismayed by the strange rudeness with which Casimir had flung hei hand from him, had sunk mto а seat, but now she
291
started up, and stood pale and motionless as monumental maible:—she struggled an instant with the shock, and then, with the cold composure of a stunned mmd, she pointed towards him, and said, "Coniade* W ho is that'" " I need no sponsor, madam :—I am Warbeck of Wolfstein." She passed her hand across her biow : " I undeistand'" said she.—" Then be¬ gone, thou base and impious hypo¬ crite '" " Louisa," said he, with a look of in¬ effable insolence, " the entrance of that fellow confused me for a moment-—and you too '-—you are bewildered ' Take time, and recollect yourself' Recollect that you are mine > Your whole soul is mine ' You are not weak enough to be¬ lieve that tbe shallow ceremony, the idle words, that old man was to muttei over us to-morrow, had а chai m in them ' No ' The mystei mus union of heai t with heart has already taken place between
292
us. They may not be torn asunder :—-you are irrevocably mine ! I command you, lady, to suffer that rite to take place on the instant I I will not wait for the mor¬ row ¡—-Father! the chapel is already pre¬ pared :—attend us thither." And he attempted to seize the hand of the Baroness. The good Friar, who until then had stood as it were dreaming and entranced, now exclaimed, " Desist, thou wicked man ! Thou hast already sufficiently polluted that sacred place with thy mockeries ! Never shalt thou enter it more !" " Hear me !" said Louisa, u and it is the last word I will ever address to thee ! Quit my presence on the instant,—and let' the next deliver this castle from thy abhorred footsteps ; or, by the duty and love I owe my brother's outraged me¬ mory, I will not foibear a single moment longer! Thou shall be forced hence!" " I will not so far urge youi gentle nature, Baroness ; I will retire unforced,
293
and leave you to the solace of youi own reflections—Extract the airovv as you may. By my soul, it gneves me to dis¬ cover that you too are a mere woman, governed by a name—a sound. You lo\e me, Louisa ' Your whole heart is mine '— A few houi s, and by y our own voluntary dedication your person would have been mine also' But my name, foi sooth, is Wolfstein' Weak, shallow woman ' But mark me, madam j my triumph is only delayed that it may be more brilliant. half it&lustre, but foi this accident, would have ι effected on the execrated name of Vallenstem.—Now, madam, look toy our- self 1 We shall meet agun '" The dooi closed after him , he crossed the diawbridge on foot, oi dering Kupert to follow with tht hoists, and in α veiy shoit time this dissembler was far from the precmtts of Marchfeldt. ÎSothmg could exceed the confusion of mind in which the Baroness was involved breath less and motionless, she continued ga/mg
294
on the door through which Wolfstei'n disappeared; when she heard the clang which accompanied «he letting down the bridge, she breathed. " Praised be the Virgin !" murmured she, " he is gone then !" The Friar approached, and would have offered some consolation ; but, seating herself, she waved him off with a ghastly smile, and remained immersed in a trou¬ bled ocean of thought, awaiting the sub¬ siding of the internal tumult, since to reflect or act to the purpose was at that moment equally impossible. Conrade believed it his duty to ascertain, and, if necessary, to enforce the retreat of his master's fbe from the castle, and had therefore, when he quitted the apaitment, followed close on his footsteps. Wolf- stein, having passed the bridge, turned, and perceiving the vigilance of this faith¬ ful domestic, " Ah ! art thou there, honest Con¬ rade ?" he cried : " thou hast been a bird
295
of ill omen to me, when next we meet we will settle our mutual account — lili then fare thee well " " My father," said the Buoness, break. ing the silence which foi neaily two bouts she had maintained " Did not that man threaten me is he depaited ? Methinks he did, but no mattéi Will you not sprmkle md puufy the chapel and tbe tomb, dear fathei > You e innot pei foi m the sacred service there agam till it ıs cleaıed from the pollution that man's presence has left " " Well thought on, my daughter I will about it immediately, foi this ni B ht shall be my me devoted to th inks^umgs foi thy miraculous tst ipt ' " Ay, fathei, the incense md tht holy watei aie ie uly loi the histi ition — Wh tt а deed of honor wut thev pup ıcd to hallow'—I will shire y o u devotions to night, and, fathei, let the h ιιι σ ι igs, an I gallands, and vases be umov cd ' " ihey shall, my dm btu "
296
Conrade now tapped at the dooi, and was admitted he came to remind the Baroness that Baion Erdenheim's de¬ spatches were impoitant, antl he feared, lest in the confusion which had followed his arma!, thty might be forgotten. Fathei ГеЬх opened the letter, winch contained α brief buf very uigent ex¬ postulation with the Lady of Marchfeldt, on the little respect hei delayed journey implied for the commands of the Γιη- peror. " It is tiue,' obseivedthe Baron, " that >ош late brother, m his doubtless w eli¬ gí oundcd confidence, thought proper to leave }our will unfettered, yet I will piesume to lemind you, that }Oti aie voung, and tint some deference foi the idvice of m old man, jour neai relation, who has long been intimately versed m tbe vvoiId's usages, to which you mustbt nearly ι sti anger, and who can have no object in view but jour honour and ad- v intagt, might betome jou— Albeit, I
297
say not this to the piejuthce of youi bbeity; but his Imperial Majesty is dis¬ pleased, and it is unseemly in so young а maiden to biave the displeasure of hei sovereign " "It is indeed most unseemly," said the Baroness, as ГеЬх pronounced the wouls, " but my whole conduct has been an erroi I have been di earning,—it is high time I should be aw ike, and act as if I were so—Fathei, punfy the chapel, I beseech you, for this night's devoťons. Spint of my Wilhelm' How hast thou been outiaged '—To-mono'v my journey shall commence . it is but a day s anticipa¬ tion, and we h ive nothing to prépaie " " Nay, my child," said thcľiur i,tnt!y, '« }ou h tv e} oui self to pup tie , you have been greatly shocked ' Rest but for л short season —Conrade shall again to Vi¬ enna to announce jour submission and speedy appi oath, but not to-morrow, deai daughtei." "A}, to-moirow, father, and I will
298
not lose sight of Conrade. He has snatched me," and she shuddered, " from the very grasp of perdition '—I feel safei while he is near—but go I must from hence, where every thing is hateful. All around rebukes my wretched weakness condemnation glares on me fiom every object.—Yes, yes, we will away to¬ morrow !" Father Felix beheld the Baroness with grievous misgivings; the lifeless hue of her cheek, the unnatural stillness of bei eyes, and the icy coldness of hei hand, appalled him. " What ails jou fallici ? Is not all well ? We aie dclneied ltom the snaus ofa villain' Are }ou not thankful ? " "Ay, deal daughtei, I bless Heaven foi it! Bui }ou aie so pale, so cold, and calm.— Methinks I would lain see vou weep, my child." " No, no, fathei : I am weak, but not «-0 weak as to pennit that man's defeated villany to diavv а teat fiom mej besides
299
you know added she ripidiy, "we have no time— W hue is Bub n' W e must be bujy—md lmgu not, m\ fithu To the ch ipel io the clt ipel " Го tlie e'iipcl he went, mexpiessibly altrmetl by the singuluity of Louisis mannei assisted by the Situstim, he betook huibtlf to depuvm b this holy spot oi such oí its decoiations ts had been iddcd m honom of the ceremony winch v c uld hive been thu em celebi iteti the lollowing diy but foi the piovidtntiil auival oi í oni tdt the puntillas, the h mgings, tiu g u lands, the missive gold plate, which lotdcel the iltu, dl wut it moved, mil tlie hisli itien otevuy \ irt of tlie clujul, tsptcnlly <l tint s i t'y intride sliticture which lose ovii the ıı mams oi Wilhelm mt' Bl inc ht vis so¬ lemnly diai vuy compititi} pei formed ioi the ood J eh Hhoti b h he lebed mou ou tht spuit th ι Ün onus enjoint tl by his ιι1ι Λ κη, dil vuily behtvı, ť it the p esence υι m evil beai ttd b ing
300
might have so far polluted the sanctity of that place, as to render such purification indispensable previous to the perform¬ ance thei ein of any holy office. When all this was fulfilled, he returned to seek the Baroness : she was gone to her cham¬ ber, whither she had summoned her wo¬ men, in order to apprize them of the fol¬ lowing day's intended journey, and to hasten their preparations. When he tapped at the door, Barbara opened it, saying, with a face of consternation, " Oh ! you are come, father ! St. Ursula be praised for it! Look at my lady!— She is lik· a statue! She neithei hears nor speaks !" Father Felix approached her :— " My daughter ! my dear child !—speak to me !" He had but a few minutes before been contemplating the effigies of some of her ancestors;—the form which now stood b- fore his eyes was hardly less white, less cold, less unconscious. He called
301
on her agam, but the pale lips unclosed not, the eye remained fixed and glassy, the same ghastly silence prevailed. Felix with no steady hand ventured to open a vem of the maibic arm, and, after some time, the blood came lingering forth, and something like feeling and consciousness returned, though no lecogmtion of those aiound hei. Her women laid her in bed, and ail piepaiations for the journey of the morrow were «uspended.
302
í HAPTI R XV If ti t the eirth could teem w th womit s teat l· ich dtO[) she f lis would ] rove а croıoüıle * OÙ lu C-vsniHi \ dienstem, amidst the tumul tuous cat eu of aims, udd alvviys iusuu to thmk and feel His w ıs not ili it muc atııınal coinage usui mg fiom the alí¬ sente of fe ai combined with ai attive tnd vigoious pl j ι /ul Ile wis the only son ot ι min on w'otn the cviso! ill I шоре ieste I, ind lie w iteht I tin steps of his filhei m ins stitely intuii c í ,,ΐοΐ) with profoun Ι uh in ition 1' It hui ш idol on ι uth it was lut, í ıtheı fime, for buns If, though ırdcnt bı nt jealous of honoui, lie hid no inibitimi, none it le tst of tint imbition which dt sties to climb, nor did lie culm it mv o' the its nccessaiy to tlie success of ι
зоз
climber he «as open as day, generous, manly, unsuspicious —he held no distin¬ guished post in his fathei's aimy, setting m example of modeiation and smgle- heaitetlness to his fellow soldieis Yet, let it not be supposed that such а fathei was blind to the merit of such a son lhe mm! oí mm is ilways a puadox of moie or less difficult solution Tht sti m ft st phenomenon in that of the eldei Vallenstein was, tint while eveiy oftci and kindei iecling of his n iture tended tow ads, md centred ι las son, his anbi ion wis individu d , hc ttít intuit on btiililin D , bv his own enei gus a n mi sm h ι not tun Ins succes 01 niľdit aspiit to c t iul itt V ul ( ısımı, low vei tcstiŕu d ш un hılıon to use, ie w ( uld Inve hetn m dii'gcd md sı t'ı posts md distinctions gi mlel hım ıs he dem inde d, but t the Dule knew fi uni tqitt cuce, th it tic dispos t ' ι ( í ι tn ι ι hi a ^ov( ι n ng m íl lente on his destiny, and that, how
304
ever such disposition may be warped 01 biassed, it will not essentully change, he was content to peiceive his sons indif- feience foi the acquisition of that which was the end and motive of his own ex¬ istence,— α η ime which should echo thiough the woild! Vallenstein was convinced of his powei with his no¬ ble falhei, and be used it glonously, in mitigating his seventies, in averting disgrace and punishment, m softening the hai d conditions imposed by the con¬ queror on the conquered, in saving towns fioin sack and pillage, and in rescuing the Iaboius of the peasant fiom the íuth- less waste of the soldai) This gtntle soul dwelt m a fine, martai, mani) fíame; and, " when the blast of wai breathed in bis cai s ' a moie aident waiiioi than tasının \ allensttın rode not forth to the battle lhe friendship lit conceived foi the drooping, dejected Wilhelm was α tvpc of his nature the flist impulse was to pity, the next to
305
strengthen and support, if possible, the fragile stem, which he perceived the first rough blast míj ht snap · he fostered, watched, encoin^ged him, and quickly succeeded in obtaining foi him his fa¬ ther's indulgence. Whoever 1ms had the happiness to pi omote aiiothei'¡> wel¬ fare will know, that the piotectoi natu- lally loves the piotected. Vallenstem began his acquuntance with Bai on Marchfeldt by deeds of kindness, and the most tender affection ìapidly sprung from such good seed When the news of Wilhelm's < ail} fate came to Casimn, he was mounting Mir/a, and about to pioceed on α sortie which Ins fathei had tommitttd to his disti t- ttoti. lie dashed the tear fiom his tyt, and rode foi wai el, foi, unused to soi row, he was gl id to confound, m the tfloitand tlamou, of the moment, the pang which ctosocd his bosom, as lit said—■ " Ait thou at iest then, my pooi Wil¬ helm ? "
306
He had seen many a gallant comrade fall by his side, yielded him the buef sigh, and forgot lum ;—but the memoiy of Wilhelm clung to his bieast and pain¬ fully haunted him, till he felt almost indignant at the irksome perseverance of the pale mti uder. It became the employ¬ ment of his few musing houi s to consi¬ der and ie-consider such comeisations as had evei pasbeel between him and this now silent friend, even to the most in¬ significant word; and especially he re¬ called, with strong emotion, Wilhelm'» desire foi his union with the Lady of Maichfeldt. He dwelt on tins subject till he satisfied himself that to espouse the bistei of Wilhelm was his impei itive dut} j and that the silent homage of tendei rcmembiance was mei e mockeiy, if he shiank f¡om the test prescnbed. In consequence of this decision, he lesolved to \isit MarchfeJelt the first mo¬ ment of ìelaxation fiom active smite, and solicit the Jan hand uf its mistiess.
307
" Beautiful I cannot doubt her," thought he, " if she resembles her mi¬ niatole : it had all the pensive sweetness of her biothci's countenance, mingled with an expression of majesty, which m hım was wanting —But, be she what she may, 1 am bent on peıfoımıng the will of my fnend, and not on pleasing myself" It will be seen that a little of the tem¬ per of Quixotism governed the notions of the young soldier ; and, perhaps, he* would almost have chosen that the wo¬ man he conceived himself pledged to marry should have been gifted with somo ıepellant quahhcations, at least, that she had had less wealth, less beauty, less ment, that the purity of his sacufice to the manes ol her biother might have been unquestion ible. Iiom the houi that his mind was made uj) to this conclusion, lit was almost wholly cngiosstd by the sub¬ ject—his military duties were mecha¬ nically peifoimcd, and he became lest^
308
lessly weaiy of the length of the cam¬ paign in short, his ideal mistiess was the constant theme of his meditations, and, having been accustomed to regaid all difficulties as surmountable, the dread of failure nevei once assailed lum. " Wilhelm has ceitam'b mentioned his views to his sistei, and probably she is even now indignant at my tardiness in promoting then fulfilment, said he, as he paced his apartment..—" When will this eteinal campaign have an end ? " Wrapped m his own visionaiy projects, he nevei guessed tbat the mme was hol¬ lowing beneath the feet of his fathei, whoie ruin vv ts at that peuod the subject of many α setitt tonfeiencc in the cabi¬ net of Vienna Ίίίί eidei Vdlenstem coolly and steadily regai ded the progress Ins foes w ere making " The clouds apd vtpours," said he, " have been long and giadually congre¬ gating N T ovv they ire »H accumulated, and the storm mmt theiefore buist 1 Let
309
it burst'.—I will wrap my cloak about me, and go home for awhile, only to come forth more gloriously." This great man reposed implicit faith in omens and predictions; and the astro¬ loger and rosicrucian were permitted to explore the weaknesses of a mind which was only entirely accessible to the pro¬ fessors of occult science :— they governed his calculations, and by their deductions he was now enabled to smile with ineffa¬ ble contempt on the machinations of his foes—to look with cold patience on the ductility antl ingratitude of Ferdinand— and to moralise, en philosophe, on the mutations of human life. The explosion, however, waited; the clouds hung sus¬ pended ; and, except the intriguers, who were actually employed in working this change of fortune, few anticipated the event;—-the fall of Vallenstein was an idea too vast and comprehensive for the scope of the common mind. Casimir was confident in his father's destiny -,
310
and whatever rumours floated near him he despised as idle murmurings ·, such envious whisperings as he supposed every great man's fortune must excite :—thus, totally unconscious of the point to which events were now fast tending, he seized with delight a moment for which he had been eagerly looking ; when, without the abandonment of any important duty, he might bring his own designs into effect. He flew to his father, and, with the un¬ restrained frankness which ever marked their intercourse, opened his heart. He had anticipated no impediment, nordidhe encounter any. A short leave of absence was freely granted; and young Vallen- stéin, mounted on his favourite charger, pursued his way, attended only by a cou¬ ple of grooms, towards the banks of the Raab. In proportion as he approached the goal of his wishes, a slight damp fell upon his confidence; he remembered well that there was something awful in the beauty of Louisa of Marchfeldt, and be-
aıı
gan asking himself а few uneasy and un¬ wonted questions, in fact, the courage which had never faltered in the presence of mortal man, seemed hardly competent to the entei pi ise on winch he was now bent He lemembered, much to his satisfac¬ tion, the vicinity of tbe Abbey of St Guthied to Maichfeldt castle. Its abbot was a distant relative of his father, by whose interest he had been elevated to that sacred function. At St. Guthred's, therefore, hc determined to take up bis quaiters, and fiom thence order his ad¬ vances skilfu'ly and discreetly. He did not deem it necessary to disclose to hiá venerable host the full purport of his visit in that neighbourhood ; but the first evening of his arrival he spoke of March¬ feldt—of the aflection he cherished for the late Baron , and contrived to collect from tht Abbot many tircumstances of a natuie highly interesting to his feel¬ ings, as they respected the past, the pre¬ sent, and the future. Amongst the in
312
stances which tended to prove the pious respect, in which the Lady of Marchfeldt held her brother's memory, the dedi¬ cation of the hermitage and chapel on the Isle of Willows was not forgotten, and every sentiment of Casimir's heart was gratified by learning, that, on the following evening, the chapel would be opened for the first time, for the cele¬ bration of mass, for the repose of the souls of Wilhelm and Blanche—a cere¬ mony in which he might assist. The following morning he employed himself in reconnoitring the castle, which con¬ tained the arbitress of his fate. De¬ lighted witb interests and occupations so new to him, he was unwearied by this survey, and examined the fortress as carefully as though he had meant to take it by surprise. He wished, in fact, to catch a stolen view of its mistress, and did not watch in vain. As he stood at the end of an avenue which opened on the lawn, and commanded an angle of
313
the castle, he fcund tlie motion of his heart sti angely accelerated by the sudden appearance ofa lady on the rampai ts. Her smkingairof dignity and her deep mourn¬ ing, at once convinced him that the inter¬ nal alanım gave no deceptive warning— it ceitauily was the sister of Wilhelm· but the quick palpitation was checked, as if by the touch of a torpedo, when Casimn saw that she wis accompanied by ι young man The features of her attendant he was too fai removed to scrutinise, but as his eye was directed with intense curiosity to the spot where stood the objects of his interest, he could peiceive an air of mutual confidence that made his heait shrink withm him,—he saw that the lady seated herself, her fingeis being employed with her needle, but her mmd apparently engaged on some book which her uidcnown com¬ panion, who reclined at her feet, was reading to her, and he saw, oi fancied, that ever and anon the stranger, forget- vm τ ρ
314
ful of his book, would fall into a long pause,and indulge himself with an ardent, at least а settled, perusal of the counte¬ nance of the Baroness. Now, and for the first time, was Vallenstem enabled to form some notion of the doubts and toi- ments of passion ; for he had actu illy nurttued m his bieast a fancy foi W 7 il- heim's sistei till it became а passion of the most piedommant and engio^sing potency Ihat she should pie-engage her affections was a cont ngcnty which had entnely escaped his piescience , and now that it smote so hard on his convic¬ tion, the sensation was mtoleiable His eyes remained long nvtttd to that which he abhorred to look on at length, tinn¬ ing dejectedly away, he îetiaeed his steps along the avenue ; and, taking Mirza fiom his gioom, mounted bun, and reached the giey and metí walls of St. Guthied i» m time to join the pio¬ cession, which was that evening to meet the Lady of Marchfeldt at the chapel on
315
the Island. Such а waifare as that wheieof his bosom was now become the theatie had nevei before troubled its re¬ pose —he hardly knew hunself. In all the hitherto quick passing pertuibations of his life he had invai ïably found a soveieign lemedy in action " Even now," sud he, " I have not the slow miseries of suspense to contend with—I am about to meet my fate ' If the Baioness is attended to the chapel by the man whom I saw with her on the tamparts of her castle, I may observe them near enough to exchange con- jectute foi ceitainty. ' His ht ait tossed by the winds, cveiy thought of his mind afloat and waver¬ ing, lit joint d the holy brtthien of St. Guthietl's in then solemn piocession, and in their train enteied the chapel of the Island. As hc bent his knee withm tint situ d plate, tht internal tumult obeyed foi α moment that profound re¬ spect with which, though a soldier, he ť 2
316
everappioached the sceneofiehgious wor¬ ship. The memory of Wilhelm seemed almost palpably to meet him theie, and shed into his bosom a sentiment of mingled awe and tenderness The so¬ lemnity which reigned aiound, the blaze of tapeis, the hoarse rush of the autumn wind through the now yellow bram hes of the giove which shelteied the edifice, the sighing swell of the Raab, and finally, the full deep choius of voices of the brothers of St. Guthred, bmstmg foith in mournful chantmgs, all spake a lan¬ guage calculated at once to calm and elevate the spuit, and to foi bid the vulgar intrusion of eaithly anxieties, earthly speculations. A holy influence seemed breathing aiound, and Vallen¬ stem felt soothed and fortified, almost wondering at the serenity with which he now awaited the áruval of the tiam, whom the wateis of the Raab were bear¬ ing towards the Island, as the neaiei and neai er stroke of the oar announced.
317
At length the В ironess and bei suite entered the chapel he whose inauspicious appeal mce on the nmparts of the castle h id so unexpectedly damped the hopes of Vdlenstem, led the hdy ot Maich¬ feldt by the h uid —that was no pleasing sight, but what weie Vtllenstem's feel- ii gs when, as the bioad bla?e of the consociateti tipeis fell on the face oí the snanger, he beheld Wolf stun ' He utteied an exchmition which Wolfstem f w ho was not addicted to religious ab¬ sorption, and who, bung equally in¬ dirici cnt to the cuemony and its cause, had all his senses awake and aleit) heaid, and dnectmg his eye towaids the spot fiom whence il issued, peiceived im¬ mediately the vicinity of one, whom, of all God's cieituies, he least desued to encounter Piesenee of mind, however, foisoolv him not to piove that his sue tess wis ahtady btyond contesting »tunul his btst means of baffling ana
318
discouraging the enemy. Well assured that the Count had not forgotten the conversation which took place between him and Wilhelm after the battle of Halle, he took from his bosom the pic¬ ture which formed the subject of it, and did not replace it, till, having caught tie eye of the Baroness, he signified by a fond and grateful glance that she en¬ tirely acquiesced in his possession of this treasure. As Vallenstein looked on Louisa s scarcely could he persuade him¬ self that what was passing before him was no illusion : there was something in her fine countenance that seemed so to contradict her actions* €i Ah," said he, " how wonderful ! How magnificent a residence does that false and hollow soul inhabit! Never have I seen a form, a face that might vie with thine ! But, fie upon it ! It is all vile mockery! And canst thou uplift thy de¬ ceitful voice în tlie anthem ? And därest
319
nou thus insult thy brother's spirit, thoU .ovely image of fraud and frailty ? Oh, how I hate thee !" Meanwhile, Wolfstein, in the midst oť his triumph, trembled to reflect what might be the result of his dreaded rival's presence in the neighbourhood at this most critical juncture, and half a thought determined him that nothing could so fatally assist in undermining his own pro¬ jects as loss of time. The point then to^be carried was immediate union with the Baroness, ere Vallenstein should discover the manœuvre which had procured him so firm a footing at Marchfeldt. He was a man of such extensive and complicated intrigue; his secret connexions were so universally dispersed, and, although os¬ tensibly an independent and single being, he was, in fact, individually implicated in so many of the state fluctuations then occurring, that few things passed in the different cabinets of Europe without his
320
knowledge οι peihaps his participation He knew, foi he was assisting m the plot which had foi its objett the downfall of the elder λ allenstem, that this event wis near at hand The Duke of Bivam, and the Capuchin Inai, 1 iti ei Joseph, were, indeed, its mote av ove ed uithois, but Woîfstein's communications supplie l their ñr«, vv ith fuel He lud no pai ticulai animosity tow ai ds the eldt ι "V allenstem, noi any diiect intenst to seive in com¬ passing his uun, his hatred of Casimn was stimulus suffic nt besides, to vvoik the fall of such а man was, m itself, a gloiious testimony to his own desti ucti ve genius Of his knowledge of the gieat political climat about to take phce it lias been seen how uhoitl} he availed himself, m theieby exteitmg, is it weit, the consent of the Baroness to their speedy nuptiih Neithei of these nvals quitted the thipel on tht night of the celebi ition
321
of its opening ceremony in the most en¬ viable frame of mind. Grief and wrath contended in the breast of Vallenstem : he would fain have hated the sister of Wilhelm, and he almost flattered himself it was hatred which made his cheek burn, and his heart beav against his side, as though it would have burst its lodging. Wolfstein felt his cool crafty spirit shaken and appalled as he had never before on any occasion experienced : be hazarded one manœuvre, however, which nothing but his perfect knowledge of his adversary could have justified. Having seated the Baroness in her barge, he gave certain di¬ rections to Rupert, who overtook the bre¬ thren of St. Guthietl's as in slow proces¬ sion they moved homewards. Approach¬ ing Count Valitustein respectfully, " My Lord," said he, " the Chevalier Warbeck of Wolfstein greets you well. He hopes that the idle petulances kindled accidentally between you slumber in ρ 5
,122
ус-иг breast, as they do in his: he en¬ treats you, in token of peifect amity, to gladden the castle of Marchfeldt with your presence, and guaranties your wel¬ come fiom its peeiless mistress. Doubly will she welcome you as the fiiend of the late Baron, and the guest of Wolfstein." " Insult upon insult '" cried Vallen¬ stem, mad with indignation " I will not stam my knighthood by injuring thee, thou vassal of a fiend ' But hence ' lest I should folget mystlf and thee 1 " His first thought was to quit nn- meclntely the piecinets of Muehfeldt, leplunge himself in wai, and consign to oblivion his f ι usti iteci piojects, then, be would be m wait for Louisa, would upbtaid her with the foul moekuv, she was guilty of, m offering up masses foi the peace of one, to whose memoiy bei actions betiayed such flag!ant cbsicgaid " Yes, if she Ьаь а heait, I will pi obe it' Yes, she shall hear me out' I vuil
323
show her to heiself! I will speak daggers to her ! Ay, and if Wolfstein bears that, if his cold hard nature kindles not at that, she mubt detest him · He has murdered my peace! I will force him to desire my blood ' I will speak such words to a woman as manhood must îecoil at. He shall fight me '" Tired of pacing the narrow limits oí lu apartm ent, he descended to the aisles of bt. Guthred's church, where his tioubîed wandei mgs found wider scope ; and as he blooded ovei schemes of ven¬ geance, 01 even muttered his menaces aloud, α voice seemed occasionally to mingle with his abstractions, and say, " What place is tins foi suth unhallowed musings'" ButCasimu was tlesperatt,— be saw nothing as lit was wont to do,—be was no longti himself. His restlessness urged htm eailyfoilh, and, mounted on Miua, hc puisued lus way towards the village of Maichfeldt He alighted ш the
324
wood where Wolfstem's supposed rob. beiy took place, and which lay between the abbey and the village, and tin owing his bridle to the groom, 01 dered hım to ïe¬ turn to St Guthi ed's and avv ait him thei e , that he would retui n on foot, but when he could not tell · " To-day/to-roon ow,— m a week, perhaps—in shoit, I know not." He walked along the bank till he found himself opposite the Isle of Willows, and close to Stephen's cottage : he tapped at the door, and the feeble voice of the sick wife bade him lift the latch ami tnter He îequested a di aught of milk, foi his mouth wis paiched and feverish The two little boys weie busily engaged with their bieakfast, but Alice cued, " Wilfied, get upon the stool, and îeach the gentleman the pitcher of milk fiom the cupboaul." "VI hen he had quenched his thnst - 4 ' It seems, dame," said he, "tint your dooi opens leadily to the wander-
ть
ing stranger, md that you are no niggard of yotu simple store ' ' Vnd if I weie so sn I hou'd ill de- seivc the conduit and plenty m which it pie ses God md ош dear lady to mam tun Us ' ' Is tlie Buoness of Marchfeld cha ut ible then ' She is hl c tlie sunshine and dew of Heaven Ihe vuy sight of her brings а blessing " " Vlas" thought С ısının, " it has shed α cuise upon me " "iou seem ι sti inger, sir, continue I the g otl woman , « but I suppose you ait bound foi the cistle belike it ıs your intent to atenei the w cdchn tt which, theie is tdk, will soon tike place The blessai angels vv itch ovei it, tnd gi mt our be- lovtd lady a lord dcseiving lier ' fhey s ty indeed th it the ( ount t tsann dotes on ner, tint his еуез att ntvtı off her, and that whtn si e speaks İıı listtns foi
326
all the world as if some beautiful music was sounding in his ears. But I know not,—he may make never the better a husband for being so fonel a lover, as I tell Stephen." " Who ?" cried Casimir, " toho, good dame ? Who, did you say, was about to espouse the Baioness ?" " Why, sir, the Count Casimir of Val- lenstem, the great gentleman's son who beats all the Empeior's enemies. Our poor yúuiig Baron, rest his soul ! took α fancy that he should mairy his sister. I suppose they h Jped each other to fight at the wai ·, and so they got gieat fiiends. I have no business te speak, to be suie; but í always think Loul Wil¬ helm had little to do to thoose a hus¬ band foi his sister." " Are you sure theie is no mistake, my good dame? Ate you «pute certair that the poison now at ihe castle is Count Vasinur of Valleiistein ?"
327
" Oh yes, suie, su As certain as that you stand theie " " And on what do you ground this certami} ? " ' Dear me, sır, you are wonderra' haid of beliti, methinks' Why—let me see — lhe fiist that evei told me who he w as, was in} 1 id} s woman Barbara, when she tamt with medicines fiom the castle , and tht n old Sigismond—and then, Loi d' I know not who tlst ' But the Baroness and tht Count have come to stt me moie thin onct, and staid tvtr so long. SIk editti tht rt ctitlcman, ( tsiinn Sht 1 iiows, I w u r ml, who sht is O omg to bt m uned 1 1 ' If she nots «ι >«, she sh ill know " mutleitd \ dltnstcin "1 tist eiafty vil- lun ' III tioss yotu m itimi ttions ye t ' Buued m thought, he rose to quit the citti 0 t, but tuning at the dooi hi ul II I tindttstmd you ught, damt, jou are no İnen 1 to tin matu »„t'"
328
" Nay, sn ! 'lhe saints foi bid tint I should be its enemy ! Out you see, sn, as ï he heie, I keep pondering and ponder¬ ing, as it w de, on what may befall. Old Sigismond too,—he's a wise man, is bigis- mond, as I tell Stephen; one wink of Sigismond's eje is as good as an hotu of «mothei man's tdk." " And what says he, good darne?" " Wh), for that mattéi he does not say much, he nevei does—he's not one of \om talkers, i¡> not Sigismondo " W hat does he think then ? " " Wh) I tike it, he thinks uo t>ieat things oi the \oung Count" " \\h\, dots he suspect an) thing J " " W h ú bhoiild lie buipcct ? No, no, I faut) it is past suspicion that he\ putting л mask on a b td tempei, as many a m uı ıs done btíoie hım dui mg com Ung шие. I am nothing but ш ıgnount w oman, su, buttile neighboui s. íuobsh l«jlk, will ha\e n that \Iitc can sec· as fai —a\, a little falhei, peiad\entuie,th<iii lhos», that bíag
329
oftheii wisdom. Now, sir, I'll ask you one question. Did you even know a man, gentle or «imple, good for aught, that a child would not look at?" She put hei head through the curtain. " At, theie they are, little trouble¬ some vai lets, clinging to yom skirts. Ioı slıame, Wiltied ! Let the gentleman alone, Leonia d ! But, as I was saying,— when the ('ount came in, those two lads would cower behind the bed, and neithei bııbmg noi coaxing chew them nigh him. Foi my paît, / mi/, that hasan ugly look Willi it, let Stephen laugh as he wdl." " You aie ught, dame," ciied Vallen - stein ; ' ť the tesi ıs infallible! And you aie two honest hide fellows," said he, patting tiu n iieads, and pal tmg then t in Iy utiglets, at the same time putting a doilai into lit · hand ol each. " it is possible, dame·, th it I may call again al yom totlagt·, il yo ι gne per¬ mission."
330
" Ay do, and welcome, sir," said the sapient Alice ; and Casimir recrosscd the humble threshold, the thoughts and opi¬ nions with which he entered it having undergone a total revolution.
331
CHAPTER XVI Поре ıs a lovers staff walk hence with that, Vml tının, e it i¿ unst dc spaning thou¿hb Shahpcare. \ vi 11 nsxlin's iidignation was now all centi cd m the man who had, by so base α subterfuge, destioyed his hopes.—The mtcili 0 enee of the good Alice, however, icdeeined them fiom total annihilation, " It may be yet," thought he, " that bei afîcctıoııs ι cm un fice. This maybe α puu sttufitc to hei biothci's vill. — Intim ition may have no share in it. —· Yet, methinks, she had not the ait of one tomptlled. Stue those smucs were spon¬ taneous. Hippy villain '—Would that one such look might beam on me '" All that day, and the sutceeding one, he Imgeied about the castle, greatly mar¬ velling that neithei Wolfstein nor the
332
Baroness tame foi th. lie kept as much as possible unseen by tl e domestics, lest the apptai ance of a stiangei lurking nigh the castle might arouse suspicion, and occasion yet fmther caution. 1 athei Felix, fiom time to time, sillied forth on his mule, which cai ned hım mechanically, foi the holy man s optics weiegenei illy engaged with а book, 01 tm uul inwards in some act of medi¬ tation More than once Casimn was tempted to iccost him, and uni avel to hım lhe whole web of iniquity, foi he had learned fiom Wilhelm to leveience his simple, spotless chaiaetei 1 lis patience worn, and his mmd nntited by waiting so long m vam for the oppoıtunıty so ndentlv sought, he hid even lollossed the Inai some distance, lesolved to u- veal himself, md unmask \\ olfstein Still the disne he felt to sin prise ind confound his aibersiiy, ancl to behold, with hu own eyes, the eileet ot the dis- coveiy on the heat t and conduct of the
333
Baioness, withheld him. The day on which the ïeturn of Conrade to the castle had antVipated all these intentions, Vallei stem met, in his w andeungs, the groo n he had sent back to St. Guthred's, who came in search of him with a packet of papers. They ι etil ed together to the woo Л and theie, with sensations difficult to (''sci ibe, did Casimir peruse the fol- lowii.{> letten from his father :— " P ove }ouisclf my son, by disdain¬ ing eithei suipiise or lesentmcnt when you lcain that I am retili ned to my pa¬ lace at Piagne, а pihate man! Yes, Casimii, I have received my dismissal from the Emperor!·— My troops aie dis¬ persed. Ycsterda} I disbanded 1 5,Uüü of the finest cavalry in Europe; but to¬ day am 1 gì eater than I was yesterday. Yesteida} I called Feiditmnd mastei ; to-day I am lord of myself—no despicable sovereignty ' The Empuior gently sued and besought me to iclmquish my com¬ mand, for he dared not demand it.— I
зи
smiled and complied Ri» «па, the Ca¬ puchin, and another, under th° auspices of the politic Richelieu, have done this Now mark me, my son '—It is not the command of armies, the piedommance ш senates, the pomp of dominion, which constitute man's greatness, though they be splendid consequences theieof. It is the calm and lofty зр - f which cnn, with equal temper, take up and iái down these things \\ hen Vallenstein would contemplate ti ne gì e itncss, he tums his eyes mw nd, and seeks it m his ow n soul ' I regard the present political ι evolutions with the same coolnesb as I tnct those whose authors and victims exist no longer, save m the lecoids of histor), and look onwaid to the tatastiopht with the same patient mquiiy I explain this to you, that ) ou ma) not deem it a point of duty to histen hithei At joui lei sure, ind when ) oui own plans ai c ful filled, and not ful then, come to уош friend and father— \ allenstem."
335
" Powers of justice ' C m it be possi¬ ble ? —Can it be that this godlike man is yielded up a sacrifice to the nanow wind¬ ing policy of state intrigue f " The event seemed to Casimn so pro¬ digious, so impossible, that for an in¬ stant he stood confounded, as though the earth before him was suddenly rent asunder by the shock of an eaithquake, and be stood on the brink of the new¬ born precipi с His first impulse was to fly to his fathei , but m so dom 0 lit must abandon tht sistei of Wilhelm to the embraces ofa fiend lit stood suspended antl iiiesohitc—he knew not what to do He lead md le-reicl las father's letter —at length, tinning to his gi oom,— " Go," said he, " to Piagne lell my noble fatnu I will endeavour to de¬ spatch the business which det uns me in this neighboui hood. In α few days it shall be despatched, and then I will hasten to him." Having thus dismissed the groom, he
336
sate down for a while to reflect on the measures it now behoved him to pursue in ordei to bung his purpose to imme¬ diate effect, since he was resolved to pro- crastinpte no longen He determined to seek for aid at the cottage where the treachery of Wolfstein had been first re¬ vealed to him, and, repeating his pe¬ tition foi a draught of milk, again visited Dame Alice. Ihe good woman began gently chiding him for his bbeiabty to her boys, and the little in chins greeted him with many signs of good-will, so that he found himstlf at home m Stephen's cottage. " It should seem, dame," said he, " that the lady of the castle and the bndegioom elect aie almost as good housekeepeis as y oui self " " Ay," said Alice, " so I heai It is not their wont to be so , but Stephen tells me they have never walked oi rode forth since they wet e at the little chapel on tlie Island ; and I could almost weep
037
at the thought, that when next I see my deai, sweet lady, all these her fine do mains, ill we hei vassals , ay, and what is more than all, hei own pi ecious self, will have become anothei's ' ,c ЛЛ liat ' cried Vdlenstem ' is it so neai at hand?—When does the mar- mge take place ? ' " lint's a secret, su " I he maniage will be private, then ? ' " Why, theie aie no guests bidden, I believe, md I am sine the е ь no time to collect tl em now Well ι diy —As old Sigismund siys, one lives to see man} ι change, and but few of them for the bcttci , for says he, tune was when the wedding of α gie it lady made some noise m the countiy, when guests cime flocking hom fai and neu — кш 0 1)Ь and batons, md gıy lidies— when there weit hawkmgs, mil huntings, md joust- mgs, md mysttucs, and mummu its '— when theie was stite m the saloon, md mirtb m I wassail m the hill But, says Sigismund, to see а gieat lad} sneak into
338
hei chapel, without pomp or state, with scai ce a page to hold her tiain foi her, it's an ugly thing, Alice, said he, that j ou may take foi α ceitainty' Howevei, says he, send Stephen up with stoic of gi een lushes this veiy evening, to sticw the passage fiom the hall to the chapel. It's α mei с}, sa} s he, that even so much is done; but 1 believe theie will be the new altar clock and gold plate, if theie is nothing else." "Oh' then Stephen takes the ι ashes this evening " " A}, man}, he is cutting them now." " 1 hen," s nd ( isimn, " the mici ence I didw is lb it the budal tikes place to¬ mónos '" " Hush' hu-b'" cued Alice, putting her head thiough lhe cintam "Whit could I bc thinking of to mention those lushes > And, bv ni} tioth, jou must be a shaip one to find it out by such а infle. How could I foresee that tın pist talking of the rushes would have told jou anj thing about ni} ladj 'ь wedding."
339
" No, ceitauily," iephed hc, " you are not answei able for my guesses ; you very faithfully iifuscd to betray youi seuet: —What could you do moie ? Now, God bless you, dame," said he, using, " it is probable wc shall meet no moie; but," added he, appioachmg hei touch, " I shall nevci foigtt what I owe your kind¬ ness ;" and, putting into her hand а puise of dolíais, " as an earnest that I shall not, accept tlm fiom me." " .My kindness foisooth '—What sort ol α countiy do you come fiom ? Thete must be α famine iu it suie, u they pay α puise of gold foi α draught of milk! It is not oui custom, howevei," said she in the honest pude of independence, " antl I won't btgm it." " keep it then, at least, Alice, m token ofa stianoci Ч good will," And he (led from the cottage.—He could nov legniate his plan of operation ; " Thu« shall be, at least, one unbidden gutst at the ν aiding, to-moi row/'thought he, as he buít lus w iy towaids the chapel.
340
The gate of the poich which led fi om the village wis open, and Casimn enteied, he retreated, howevei ι nmediatclv, and unseen into one of the cloisteu, foi lus entrance h ippciicd "t the ıı iment when the Inai and the Sicustan w eie dis lobmgthc thaj>el of its festne tiaj p %i л sight which filled him with con¬ stei nation " Sure, 1 am not too late, sud he " should it be so— b it, no ' 1 w ¡Il not bc beve il And he glide ι as neai as he d u etl, to ìlio evvho occupinoli sopupk\cd bur« i rom time to tu ie tl e voice of tht Sa custm telifti dong the v mited usles, but latiu lcb\ sltntlv issisttd or iti iede 1 lin, he spoke onh when com¬ pelled lo bju d , and then m ι low,mourn ful u e ent \ ν ιι к tv oí mı giving·» now kıl on tne thoughts of λ allenstem foi hi m vu ebtaintd that lhe d scotei y iie mt liiîtil was mtiupiíed, I chici «ip¡n elu usions wui, lint ulhu Woi tun had continui to hi ten the ttumoin,
341
and plate himself beyond dread of de¬ tection oi else that the Baioness was ill. That some misfoittuie had occiiued, the dejected behaviour of the 1 inu icndeied indubitable. " It satins ι pity," said the Sacristan, at length, as if tlimkmg aloud, " that all these goigeotis h mgings should be put up one diy, and tikcn down the next, and nil foi no use'—I am suie, if any thing steps in between my lady and hei man цс, I sii ill btgm to thmk I am to see no moie weddings in this thiptl. Пш с was ту young loid, and the Lady Blanche, ι est then souls' \uther your Heveimet noi I could Iı ıvt guessed tliat that cold mu bit slumi wis to be then only m tını ,t btd '—Well, уош Rtveı- tnce know »wh it is in th wind now, and 1 mav be in old fool with my guesses, but my limd slukts ^o l t m h u diy get tlie n uls out of the Iı ingin s " (t I b tech thu, M ittlu is,' sud Ге¬ Ьх, " upte s thy с miositi, intuidas it ıs, foi tht pi csuit, all v ili bc weil ус t, I
342
doubt not :—'but, my good bi other, man's life is like the sky, sometimes bnght and sei ene, then cloud} ; and the moi al stoi m, like the natuial, though tiemendous m explosion, teheves the air fiom foul and pestilential vapouis. The mauiage, as thou conjectuiest, will nevei be ,—why it is bioken, îsnomattei to thee, 01 anyone. Vallenstem sought no firthei intelli¬ gence, but he earnestly wished the Sa- custau would ictre t, nd .foi 1 bun an oppoitunil} to conici with I thei lih\ This, howevei, cud not nippen ; but the Гни, on quitting the chapel, e\pic5scd his intention of peilonnmg his devotions theiein diiung the n ght, Casimn tl eie- foie conce ded limiseli, u solving to await tbe good mmV ictuin at the midnight houi.
ívd ω ιοί ι
