Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gondez, the monk: a romance of the thirteenth century
The horrible clmrççd ечЫЫ£с<| against Jiim.—The" arr tonobonited bysuptM-iidtural evulencc.—Torturer ot the rack.—Gondez brought ю u,iakt, conft&sion of пъсчпш s. CIIAP. Vif. —The sçqi^cl of Coûtât С/щю\> tute. — Car¬ dinal Nícolo'b monument. —Wonderful occurrence.— An infant commuted toQwm'^ciwge.— Euraoicíuuuy coincidence of circumstances.—The Count's lmpuwii- ment by the inquisicion.-^His release.—«-After many· уоагч of fruitless чгагсЬ he retires into the monastery of St. Columba. — II«' diarovtirs ш the рерьоп of the Abbot Gomles the wreteh Giovanm Maldidünı. CIIAP. VIII— Thç confessiate of Giovanni Ätaldichiní, otherwise Gondéi, m \\щск s^re ţecjţeţl, particula^> of his birth,·—The, charactei ь of his parents and himself.— The manner in which he attempted the í>uca'¿ life. ----- Subsequently seized ^d imprisoned the Duca. —Poi¬ soned the Marquis Alvaroni.-— Fercibly seized Rosnima Valenza.— Poisoned his own father the Cardinal Nicolo.— Chane¡ed his name t,o Gondez.—Effected the death ofthe Duca's bride.—Poisoned the Buca.-r~Becume Abbot of St. Columoa, ¿v r c. eve. &c.· —The dieadful sentence of the rnijuiKUionj a¿nd thş sulfuşequfnţ exécution of Gondez» — Huberto Aviö^u becomes possttssed of ttie Цф* and estates of the Üucí> GoivìatÌ щ$ ţhe ^laţquis Alveroni. CHAP. IX.— The Puca Gonzari and Count Ozimb return to the com t of Scotland—Nuptials of Laird Walter with Isabel of Pembroke î a*ıd of Edwin and Maude»— Ί hø Duca takes possession of the estates of Sir Alan Мдс- donald.—He, with the Kmg and whole court, vet if e to the castle of FmlapaA, wheise, in tiieir presence, .Ыз hap- pines«. \ь rendered colleté, \>y lıış цщоц with thç krøuit tity Доп»Щн. of ^bşiuı.
GONDEZ, THE MONK.
CHAP. I.
■ ■■ ' » ■ --------------Come, thick night; And pall thee in the dünnest smoke of hell f That my keen knife see not the wound it makes; Nor Heav'n peep thro' the blanket of the dark, Tocrv, "hold! hold." Lo, now my glory's smearM in dust and blood ! My parks, mv walks, my manors that I had, Ev*n now forsake me: and of all my lands Is nothing left me but my feedy's length·. SHAKSrEARE.
JL HE Count Ozimo, having witnessed the last sad ceremonies due to his de¬ parted mother, took the earliest oppor¬ tunity of abandoning tbe residence of his forefathers, in order to taste in the society of his friend, that serene state of vou iv. в
happiness which was best calculated to restore the lost tranquillity of his sus¬ ceptible mind. Sometimes the Count refercd to the contents of the Duca's dispatches, which gave a concise de¬ scription of the conduct of Gonzari'a uncle, and his introduction of Giovanni .Maldiehini, on whom the Cardinal would fain have had his nephew bestow that confidence which the Count was fully assured had been vested by the Duca in himself alone. There was something in this part of his friend's communication which the Count could not account for, # and he felt the most anxious desire to behold the person of Maldiehini, the Cardinal's favourite eleve, as his former disgust towards ^Nicolo, instead of ex¬ periencing any diminution in Ozimo's mind, had, on the contrary, acquired more strength ; in so much that the Count firmly believed that the Cardinal had some insidious design against his
nephew, the depth of which he was, however, unable to penetrate. The Count Ozimo proceeded on his journey, sometimes recalling to mind the mother he had lost, and, at other mo¬ ments, picturing to his fancy the bliss which his friend the. Duca' then enjoyed with the object of h/s fervent love; and in the hope of dispelling from his soul, in their society, the gloom which had found a sanctuary in his breast, he arrived with his attendants, in safety, at the city of Manfredonia, on the evening of the third day, after his departure from Taranto. ** The Count Ozimo, leaving his at¬ tendants at Manfredonia, quitted that city in order to proceed abne to the Villa Seveta, where he was anxious to surprize the Duca, by his unexpected arrival He had gained, towards twi¬ light, the forest of Saint Angelo, through в å
which he had to pass, in order to arrive at the termination of his journey ; when, suddenly, the last faint tinge of the fading gleam of evening became o'er- spread with dark clouds, which advanc¬ ing, extended their gloomy forms over the atmosphere, veiling every object in impenetrable shade, and portending a most tempestuous night. The Count, ere long, experienced the effects of the brooding storm ; the awe¬ ful thunder spoke in distant peals, the nun fell plenteously from the o'er-bur- thened clouds, and the howling blast, forcibly waving the leaf-clad branches of the forest, produced a constantly rustling sound, more awful, if possible, than the thunder's tremendous roar. In vain did Ozimo urge his courser, in the hope that some poor forester's dwelling might afford him a friendly shelter ; no habitation appeared in viewj
and the night became more dreary every succeeding moment; except, indeed, at intervals, when the vivid lightning's forked glare pierced through the thick recesses of the forest. As the Count advanced, the aweful conflict of the elements became more ter* rihc ; the rain, as from a spout, poured down in torrents ; the rumbling thunder rattled through the high vault of heaven, and seemed to threaten instant destruc¬ tion to this sublunary globe. No gemmy star was visible; all nature wore grim horror's ebon mantle. One less accustomed to such scenes than the dauntless ©zimo, might, per¬ haps, have shrunk appalled at this war¬ fare of the conflicting elements; but the Count having, from his infancy, been inured to hardihood, witnessed this scene devoid of every fear, save that which springs from heart-thrilling emo¬ li 3
tions for that all puissant Divinity whoac outstretched arm can annihilate worlds. " And, like the baseless fabric of a vis too, Leave not .4 «reck behind." At length the peals of thunder became less frequent, but the rain did not dimi¬ nish, although the moon began to dis¬ play her pallid influence,, faintly pierc¬ ing through the fleeting clouds. By this partial gleam the Count Ozimo at lengtii discovered, at no considerable distance, the dismantled walls of a castle, falling to decay. Anxious to shelter himself from the pelting rain, the sight of this ruined building afforded him peculiar satisfaction, and he accord¬ ingly bent his way thither, in order to await, beneath its roof, the termination of the tempest, and afford his jaded horse a short relaxation. Scarcely had the Count Ozimo spurred his couber, when, by the paly radiauce
of the moon, he beheld, at some dis¬ tance, through the aperture which led to the ruins, three men glide swifty along, apparently conveying, by force, a female form, towards the mouldering building. A supposition instantly flash¬ ed upon the mind of the Count, whieh roused the noble energies of his soni, and he determined to ascertain the truth or fallacy of his suggestion. Actuated by these virtuous feelings, Ozimo advanced, for some time, at full speed, when the sudden recollection of the force he should have to encounter, should his personal interference become requisite, prompted him to proceed with more caution, and, if possible, to ascer¬ tain the fact unperceived. The Count having alighted, led his horse along the path; and, ere his arrival at the aperture, conducting to the building, he fastened the bridle of Bê
his steed to the branch of a tree, and then proceeded onwards. On emerging from the gloom of the wood, a gentle acclivity met Ozimo's regard, Mİıich Mas skirted, in every direction, by venerable pines and other large trees of the forest; and, on the summit ofthe rising ground, Hood the mouldering and ivy-tMİned walls of the edifice, surmounted M r ith turrets which had partly yielded to the ravages of hoary Time. After gazing around with cautious eye, the Count advanced, no human form being visible ; and in a short period he arrived at the moat, which had once erved as an external defence to the walls of the castle. Having proceeded awhile along the margin of this almost dried up fosse, the great entrance to the building struck Ozimo's regard ; in which place the ditch was nearly choaked up with rubbish, and a passable track
.made even to the shattered portal ofthe fortress. The Count continued in his conrse > and, fearless of danger, unsheathed his trusty sword, when, having traversed thè moat, he entered the arched-way, and soon found himself in the base Court of the castle, M'hich was strewed with mas¬ sive fragments of the crumbling walls. On preparing to advance with caution, a loud clattering sound suddenly nit t Ozimo's ear, who, starting back a few paces, directed his eye towards the spot ; when, flapping o'er his head, he instantly beheld a raven winging its heavy way, which had apparently been disturbed by his presence ; and, immediately after, the melancholy hoot of the owl echoed mournfully amidst the blast of night. The Count Ozimo experienced a mo¬ mentary sensation to which his soni had ever before been e* tranced.·—He paused* ^ 5
— ( · And shall I then prove the dastard iu my own esteem/' said he, mentally.—· ťí Perish the pusillanimous thought-!— No ; I will never contaminate my mindj I will not be the slave of superstitiou. ^et the raven yving his death-portending flight: let the. ow.L.hoor, and the bat shriek omiiiouslv ; still will I disdain to- bend my soul, or debase шу шапп ]юoc^! ,, V Animated with the most enthusiastic courage, Ozimo, with firm yet cautious Step, traversed the desolate court-yard, when .a seçoud gateway presented itself, leading to the interior of the main build¬ ing. Having gassed the threshold, he entered a spacious hall, dreary, damp, and totally, i.uyo.lved in darkness, save where a partial gleam, from the watery orb of night, shed its sickly ray through: the lofty 7 , deep, and narrow easements of the chamber.
Ozimo, with attentive ear, listened to every echo of the howling wind. Some¬ times au accent of distres seen ed to* float along ; then would he pause, but dreary silence reigned around. Even the sound of his own footsteps was construed into the echo of others, but a momentary halt convinced him of his error; and in this manner did he continue to proceed through numerous dilapidated chambers, without the least appearance of the ob¬ jects of his search. The Count being at length weaviedl and conceiving the pursuit to be fruit¬ less, began to retrace his steps ; and as the storm seemed in a great measure abated, he determined on remounting his horse, and proceeding, without fur¬ ther delay, to the villa Seveta, which he imagined could be at no considerable distance; Already had the Count Ozimo gained вб
the chamber conducting to the hall, through which he haderst passed, wdien tiie distinctre verberation of an agonized groan aroused him ; upon which, having made a pause, the repetition of the hol¬ low sound fully convinced him, that the unhappy sufferer must then be in the adjoining chamber. The Count cautiously stole to the door-way, ånd, by the imperfect light, discerned a female form, in white gar¬ ments, stretched upon the pavement, while three men stood erect beside her. After observing them a few seconds, one of the men, in a harsh tone of voice, exclaimed ;—*- " I like not this business^ and % trust me, were it not for the reward I shaU ţecei ve, I would, ere this, have $ban^ cloned altogether the fulfilment of the design. By my soul, I never felt pity before ; but who çoukl have the heajEţ to
parted parent." At this jç&çtfirc the speaker was inter¬ rupted by ope of his companions, who cried^ in a menacing tone of -voice, 46 Curse on thy pity, thou half-created and infirm partner of our errand and re¬ ward ! Wherefore didst thou swear upon our employer's sword ? By my faith, I doubt Bot but thy squeamish soul will gladly partake of the golden recompense for our performance of the deed." Tlie third ruffian, in a more surly tone, e^cİAİmed —*' Would I had known thee before ! I should at once have eased thy soul from the burthen of this sin, and shared with Dominico here the full sum promised.-!-Yes, by Santa Maria, thou shouldest liave felt the power of this %rm, aiid the keen temperature of my steeU' .
*^ Nb i шоге, comrade," resumed the· first, stung with this reproof; "fl have disgraced my calling ; but never shall it again be said, tipt I have not a heart to aet the purpose I Aad sworn.' No, conw radës,; J ΛνϋΙ from henceforth лvad€^ through blood to prove myself sin¬ cere." The two wretches sullenly munnured forth their approbation^ when one of them proceeded aa follows ;*— '* If I mistake not, our gold will be easily earned, and our employer have na further trouble in the business ; ftuyby* her silence, I think she must be dead· On assisting her to remount my horse, from which she had fallen, slie shrieked aloud for succour; I bade her be silent. Curse on women's tongues ! she cried the more ; apd struggled so desperately, that I with much ado replaced her on the saddle. In this situation I continued ta
grasp her, tightly round the -waist, when^ fcarfiA of her screaming again, I raised my hand, with,intent to place it before her mouth, but she slipped from my hold, and Mas dashed with violence to the ground. I again attempted to raise hei^ hut found it impossible ; so, being well assured that you could not be far d istan X x and the rain continuing to pour down iu torrents, I waited your arrival in the path¬ way. Giachimo. will; guard our horses ; aiul as soon as г ощ employer, and his followers, arrive at the spot wher,e he awaits their coming, he will conduct them hither." For some time these remorseless wretches continued their cpnversation j but in so low a tonç of voice, that the Count Ozimo was not enabled ţo disting guish the purport of their debate. Hav¬ ing remained awhile lost in considera¬ tion, as. to the method that should \щ % adopted to rescue, ţipyţ unprotected vie*
tim from the power : of these ruffians, Ozimo at length resolved to rush upon the villains by surprize ; M'hich expedient he deemed absolutely necessary, as he had no other weapon than his sword ; whereas his three antagonists appeared, in every respect, perfectly Veil equipped, as меИ for attack as defence. The Count then dropping on his knee, raised his unsheathed sM'ord to¬ wards heaven, and bowing his head, in token of reverence, he thus internally exclaimed ;— " Jesu of mercy, aid me in this up¬ right deed ; nerve my arm, and shield me from the murderer's steel ! I fight the cause of innocence* thy cause, omnis¬ cient Lord !" Warmed with religions enthusiasm, and nerved with the lion's strength, in defence of oppressed virtue^ Ozimo, with
the fury of a galled tiger, darted for- wards,[and, at the first thrust, levelled to the ground one of the ruffians ; a second blow, like lightning, fell upon another of these miscreants, who, reeling to the earth, and groaning with anguish, exclaimed ;— " Curses light upon thine arm ; too well hast thou Ie vailed the blow !—I die· •—Oh, mercy ! The murderer instantly expired with a groan ; when the Count, having already turned upon the third ruffian, was on the point of exterminating him with the vengeful steel ; hut the miscreant, throw¬ ing down his weapon, fell upon his knees, supplicating aloud for mercy. Ozimo paused, irresolute whether to strike, or to desist from inflicting the blow of death. u Mercy ! mercy ! Sir Knight," vocife¬ rated the villain ; without my aid, your
efforts ΛνϋΙ prove vain ; the lady will be lost to you, and your death will be in¬ evitable. The Count suddenly called to mind the discourse he had overheard ; which had informed him, that the employer of this hellish band was every instant ex¬ pected, with several folloM'ers ; his horse was likewise jaded, and at some distance from the ruins ; and should he even escape, and bear away the lady, there was little doubt but his weak efforts to evade the pursuit of numbers would prove ineffectual. Swayed, therefore, by these suggestions, which rapidly suc¬ ceeded each other in the mind of Ozimo, he thus replied;— " Can I trust thy faith, abandoned wretch ! should I extend my mercy to¬ wards thee ?" ι " By the sacred host I swear," replied
the villain, with clasped hands, and every token of repentance."— " Hold," resumed the Count; " nor dare profane the sacred name of the Most High !—Arise; I grant thee life; but if thou fulfillest not thy word, expect immediate death." The ruffian quitted his prostrate posi¬ tion, and then addressed Ozimo to the following effect :— " The lady, Sir Knight, must be borne from hence without delay ; and if we but gain the spot where Giachimo awaits our employer's arrival, iu order to con¬ duct him hither, we may then compel him to yield up the horses in his care, and also force him to accompany us ; if not, his death will, at any rate, obtain an acquiescence with your Mashes." This advice, added to the manner with
which it M r as accompanied, tended to in¬ spire a degree of confidence in the mind of the Count, who, advancing towards the female form, found that her light, floM'ing robes were thoroughly drenched with the rain, which меге but ill cal¬ culated to resist the effects of so tempes¬ tuous a night; but if herhabilliaments were of such a texture, much less was her tender frame calculated to endure the ruffians' rude assault ; for although imperfectly, yet was Ozimo enabled to trace the lovely symetry of the sufferer's features, which were beautiful beyond the poM T er of description. Lost in amazement, the valiant friend of persecuted innocence, gazed with a thrill of agony upon the form before him ; and so intranced was he with the feelings of pity, as to be wholly un¬ mindful of his own situation, and heed¬ less of the M r retch whose protestations haďso lately wrought upon his forgiving
soul ; still kneeling beside the apparently lifeless corse, the Count stretched forth his hand and placed it on the bosom of the sufferer, when, to his infinite joy, he felt the languid palpitation of her heart ; and at that instant the eyes ofthe female, unclosing, bent their azure radiance upon the physiognomy of Ozimo. Gladdened with the prospect of her returning life, he was on the point of rising, in order to expedite their departure, but at that critical juncture, a dagger pierced the Count in the back ; who exclaimed, "Wretch! villain! traitor!" and, grasp¬ ing his sword, was on the point of rush¬ ing upon the ruffian, but as he rose, he felt a repetition of the hlow; upon which Ozimo, quivering with an¬ guish, groaned ah ud and sunk to earth, his cheek resting on the hand of her for whom he suffered and for whom he bled. " Thus perish, the murderer of my comrades !" exclaimed the ruffian, in a
tone of exultation.—" But hark i thev come ! " The increasing sound of approaching horses, at full speed, now broke upon the dreary blast of night, and in a few se¬ conds the ferocious employer, of those murderers, having his countenance veiled by a black vizor, entered the chamber, followed bv several of his creatures. The perfidious miscreant, M'hose hand had levelled the dagger м -hieh pierced the Count Ozimo, instantly began the recital of the unknown Knight's attempt tt> rescue the female, in Mİıich his two comrades had fallen ; he then, м -ith a malignant satisfaction related the traitor¬ ous conduct he had adopted to secure his own life, and aim the deadly steel against that of his preserver. . Struck with astonishment at the in¬ formation, the employer of this baud
of wretches, instar, tly demanded where the stranger Knight then lay, wdien the murderer still grasping his blood¬ stained poignard, pointed to the niotion- Icsss form of the Count, towards which the enquirer advanced, and then com¬ manded the body to be turned, that he might behold the stranger's features. The order was no sooner obeyed than, starting back and eyeing the ashy visage of Ozimo, still fierce, though clad in the livery of death, he exclaimed in triumph, ,4 By Heaven, it is the Count!" Then, after the lapse of a few minutes, he con¬ tinued thus :—" So, thou wouldst still have impeded our wishes ;—but, thanks to him who hath so well performed his office ! There lie and rot ; fit food for ravens, thy companions in this desolate abode. Come on, fellows," resumed the masked leader of this crew ; " support the fainting female hence, and then we'll to horse without delay ; the night wears on apace, and if we speed not hence,
the matin radiance will dawn upon my purposes." As the unknown leader spoke, he moved towards the entrance of the chamber, while his remorseless followers having spread their mantles on the pave¬ ment formed a kind of litter, whereon they placed their lovely charge, and thus transported her from the hall, following the steps of their employer ; while the malice of that wretch's heart who had stabbed the noble Count, urged him to return alone to the scene of blood, when tearing open Ozimo's vestments, he placed his hand upon the heart of the object of his hatred in order to be con¬ vinced that no throb of life was palpable. A damp chill had spread itself over the frame of the Count, and foitunately the faint motion of his heart was not ap¬ parent to the miscreant ; who fully satis¬ fied that his victim was no more : rose from the earth and sheathing his dagger,
quitted the chamber with sullen step, having first grasped the hands of his two breathless companions, while he ex¬ citingly exclaimed :— " I have fulfilled my duty, murdered comrades; the hand that struck ye is now as cold as yours, and his accursed body is laid aş low." During the remainder of the night Count Ozimo continued in a senseless state, and to all appearance bereft of every vestige of life. The radiance of the morning sun at length appeared, tinging the misty east with beamy gold ; the effects of the tempestuous night меге no longer apparent ; cheered by the glittering orb of day, prolifick nature smiled; the noisome reptiles and the nocturnal feathered tribe had sought their : gloomy retreats, and nought- re¬ sounded save the joyous notes of thç winged songsters of jocund day* vol. iv. с
The renovating light seemed to ex- tend its divine effect even to the ex¬ hausted soul of Ozimo, for by degrees he awoke as from a trance and once more fixed his regard upon the cheering radiance of the sun ; he had some faint re¬ collection of the past, and turned his eyes on either side to discern, if possible, the object for whom he had so nobly interfered, but she was now no longer visible. The Count then essayed to rise, but the pain from his wounds struck sick¬ ness to his very heart, and his languid evelids once more closed, as if in death. w- ' In this state he remained for some time longer, when recovering strength, he again made an effort, and with infinite difficulty arose ; but his knees had forgot¬ ten their wonted office, and he staggered backward several paces, when fortu¬ nately the wall of the chamber pre¬ vented him from once more sinking to the pavement
Although thus reduced to the verge of the grave, Ozimo's memory had im¬ perceptibly returned, and dire necessity prompted him to make every exertion, in order to quit the ruins, being well as¬ sured that no human being would enter its gloomy confines, to afford him relief; his only hope, therefore, was to gain if possible the exterior of the walls, where «ome passing forrester might appear, to vield that assistance of which, in his al- most hopeless situation, he stood so much in need. The Count, continuing to support him¬ self, moved onwards by degrees till he hatl gained the entrance of the hall. Having at length passed the portal, he reclined his exhausted frame against a fragment of the building ; when, as if Providence had ordained that he should receive un¬ expected succour, a massy stone, which had been excavated by time through the constant dripping of the rain from с 2
an overhanging turret, appeared full of water from the effects of the preceding nighťs tempest. Ozimo fixing his regard on this wel¬ come object, proceeded to taste of the limpid beverage, which he conveyed with his hand to his parched lips, thus instilling new vigour -throughout his frame, quite sinking wkh excess of lassi· tude. The Count being thus better enabled to proceed, gained the moat of the castle, over which he passed, and arriving with some difficulty, at the path, he there stretched himself upon the turf, unable any longer to endure the struggle. For some time all was silent, and Ozimo, having relinquished every hope, began to offer up to heaven the prayer of a resigned and dying victim in tlie cause of virtue. Having continued in this situation a sho*t $дае, £wo forresters
appeared in view, who were proceeding to their daily occupations; but ho sooner had they discovered the recum¬ bent figure of Ozimo, than they imme¬ diately proceeded to administer to his succour ; for which purpose, supporting him in their arms, they soon conveyed him to a woodman's hut at no great distance, where every method was in¬ stantly put in practice, by the humble family, in order to his restoration from that state of torpitude, which seemed, indeed, the counterpart of a total anni* bilatio» of every bodily faculty.
c3
СНЛР. II.
_---------------------------]\jy tortur'd heart Smk*, o'orwheímed with cares that rack my breast; Grief discomposes, nnd distracts my thoughts ; My panting heart, as if 'twould force its prison, Bounces and beats against my sides ; my strength Fails me through grief; and ev'n шу feet refuse To bear so great a load of wretchedness. BROOME,
Jb OR the space of five days the Count Ozimo remained beneath the shelter of the humble forrester's roof, as it was deemed dangerous for him tobe removed from thence until his wounds should assume a more favourable appearance. During this lapse of time, the suffering Count had completely regained his mental faculties, and had, in conse¬ quence, dispatched several messengers to
the Villa Seveta, which was, however, found bereft of every inhabitant, to the no small astonishment of Ozimo ; who endeavoured, but in vain, to gleau some satisfactory intelligence relative to this extraordinary news. Another step taken by the Count was, the ordering the in¬ terment of the two villains who had fallen by his hand, in the ruined castle, which accordingiy took place. In this state of incertitude, relative to the Duca, did Ozimo remain for the space of a fortnight, when it was deem¬ ed expedient that he should be conveyed to the City of Manfredonia ; upon his arrival at which place, he was imme¬ diately carried to the palace of the Mar¬ quis Alveroni. Then it was that he first became acquainted with the facts relative to the disappearance of the Marquis, the Duca, and Rosanna Va¬ lenza, from the Villa of Seveta ; M'hich were stated by an old domestic of the c4
£amily, and was, in substance, as fol* lows :— " A few hours subsequent to the de¬ parture of the Duca, in order to attend his uncle at Rome, a second express had arrived at the Villa Seveta, which was brought in order to hasten the Duca's departure, if he had not yet set out for that city; and the bearer of those press* ing intreaties, was a young man named Giovanni Maldiehini, who stated him¬ self to be an eleve of Hid Cardinal, and a particular friend of the Duca Gonzari. On account of the extraordinary dis* patch which Giovanni had used in tra¬ velling, and of his acquaintance with the Cardinal and thé Duca, he was re¬ ceived with open arms by the Marquis and his daughter, who entreated. Ыщ, but in vain,- to make the Villa Seveta his habitation until the ensuing morn* ing ; as they could only prevail on him
to remain there till the close of night ; when* having eaten of thd proffered re¬ freshments, and of which the Marquis always partook, previous to his hour of repose, the stranger youth, taking fresh horses, immediately set forward on his return to Rome, having indicated every mark of affliction on account of the ap¬ proaching loss of the Cardinal, his be¬ nefactor, which, he had stated, was every hour to be expected." The old domestic then proceeded with tears in his eyes, to state that " the Mar¬ quis having, as usual, retired to his chamber, he, about the hour of midnight awoke his daughter and the few attend¬ ants, who were at the Villa Seveta, having been attacked M'ith the most ex¬ cruciating agonies; and in despite of every endeavour, which was instantly put in practice, the Marquis Aţveroni yielded up his spirit in the arms of his daughter, ere one hour had trauspired.. с 5
Hisbodvi after death liad assumed alivid colour, and had become swollen to an enormous size ; his features too had been distorted in the most terrible manner, with the violence of the convulsions which had seized him." 1 After this statement, the Count was given to understand that " the afflicted Rosanna Valenza, having dispatched one of the domestics of the Villa, to the City of Manfredonia, was presently after informed that the attendant had sud¬ denly returned, in a state of dreadful agitation, and insisted upon being in¬ stantly led into the presence of his young mistress; upon which occasion, he gave the agonized Rosanna informa¬ tion that several persons were then sur¬ rounding the Villa, that he had, in vain, endeavoured to escape them, in order to proceed to the city, and that it was even with the utmost difficulty he had re-entered the mansion, without the
loss of his life. Scarcely had this infor¬ mation been communicated," continued the Counťs informant, " than the Villa was assailed, and the few attendants of Rosanna, being unable to cope with the armed ruffians who presented them¬ selves, had been compelled to suffer the person of their lady to be carried off by the merciless band ^ having been themselves incapaciated from rendering her any assistance, by the villains who had secured their arms with cords, and thus left them to their fate." Ozimo then learned the sequel of this tragedy ; which was, that on the ensuing morning, the attendants found means to effect their liberation ; when one of them being forwarded with an express to Manfredonia, a numerous guard had been instantly dispatched to the \ r illa, who had conveyed the lifeless corpse of the Marquis Alveroni to that City :— That the bodv having been examined. с б
by those skilled in medicine, it became obvious that his death had been oc¬ casioned by a subtle poison :—That the remains were solemnly deposited in the mausoluem of the Alveroni family ;—and, that ewery endeavour to trace the route of the ruffians, who had borne away tlie person of Rosanna \ r alenaía, had been unattended with success; m addition to which, no tidings whatsoever had been received from Rome, concerning the young Duca Gonzari, who it was then iicnerailv understood, had solemnized the marriage rite with the only child of the deceased Marquis Alveroni. Petrified at this terrific information, it was some time ere the Count Ozimo could sufficiently collect himself to make more accurate enquiries. But having further questioned the attendants, * who had been present during the whole trans¬ action at the Villa Seveta, he learned that the very night which had endanger-
ed his life in the ruined castle, was that on which these mysterious and horrible scenes had been transacted; and from still further questionings, the Count did wot doubt but the lovely female, for whom he had so gallantly interfered, was no other than the persecuted wife of his noble friend, the Duca Gonzari. A thousand surmises now flushed upon the brain of Ozimo, who was most minute in gleaning every information, as to the conduct of Govanni Maldi¬ ehini, during his short continuance at the Villa Seveta. From the account of the attendants, however, notliing of a suspicious nature could be ascertained ; notwithstanding which, the Count could not banish from his mind the idea of the Cardinars being Concerned in this bloody transaction. In the first instance, Ozimo would fain have had recourse to open measures, but
the power of the Cardinal Nicolo, in¬ stantly presented itself to his mind, and thus checked the adoption of such a plan, which must, in all probability, have ended in the total ruin of the Count Ozimo ; as the Inquisitorial Order of Saint Dominic, which had been established under the preceding Pope, Innocent tlie Third, and was afterwards confirmed by the Council of Lateran, was then in full force throughout the greater part of the Italian States, and at Rome, in particular; which tribunal had already displayed its exterminating fury, and had evinced the tuiible purposes to which it might be applied, by means of private hatred, or the impulse of mo¬ nastic vengeance. Burning with the hope of effecting the rescue of the beautiful wife of his noble friend, Ozimo had recourse to every expedient in order to the esta¬ blishment of his own recovery, and all
that skill could effect was put in prac¬ tice; notM'ithstanding M'hich, several weeks transpired ere the compleat cure of his wounds enabled him to enter into active plans for the benefit of Rosanna Valenza, and her noble lord. The first step taken by the Count Ozimo, M T as to proceed to the capital of Italv, where he M r as soon siven to un- derstand that the Cardinal Nicolo had, after a violent struggle, got the better of his dreadful nialadv, and that his total recovery would have long since been effected, but for the unaccountable disappearance of his nephew, the Duca Gonzari, who had never readied the palace of the Cardinal, after having quitted Villa Seveta; nor had any tidings respecting him since arrived at his uncle's; who had made use of every ex¬ pedient, in order to discover him, not¬ withstanding which, his person was still missing, Ozimo also understood, that
the Cardinal, on receiving ihtimatioil as to the report of his nephew's alliance with the daughter of the Marquis AU veroni, had at first discredited the cir* cumstance; but, on finding that the news was generally believed, he had, in consequence, intimated his entire ap¬ probation of such an union, and only lamented that his illness had incapacitated him from being himself the solemnizer of the nuptials. The procrastinated absence of the Duca^ although an event creating much astonishment at Rome, had still been accounted fbr by the Car¬ dinal, in the first instance, as it being per¬ haps the wish of his nephew to spend the early period of his union in seclu¬ sion ; but, when the extraordinary death ofthe Marquis Alveroni, and the forcible seizure of the newly married Rosanna was made public, Nicolo yielded to the general impression ©f horror that ensued, and the effect #f wliich was publicly
adduced, as the cause of his procrasti¬ nated recovery. The first wish of the Count Ozimo was to meet the person of Giavoni Mal¬ diehini, but this he found utterly im¬ possible, as few individuals were ac¬ quainted with that youth, whose studies were intended to fit him for some eccle¬ siastical pošt of eminence, and, con¬ sequently, kept him from the eye of publicity. In addition to this, the Count was given to understand, from some persons conversant with the house¬ hold of the Cardinal Nicolo, that the youth Giovanni Maldiehini had been dispatched by his patron to Florence, as his secretary, in order to transact some affairs relating to the church re¬ venues, then due to his employer. Upon finding that he was thus frus¬ trated, the Count Ozimo debated, for a considerable time, within his own mind,
whether it would be expedient to pre¬ sent himself before the Cardinal Nicolo; but it suddenly came to his recollection, that in case the Duca s uncle was at the bottom of the late hellish practices, his known friendship for his nephew would put Nicolo upon his guard, and that thus he might draw upon his own head the observant eyes of that ecclesiastic, whose machinations would infalliably frustrate every effort, on his part, to rescue the person of his noble friend, and his persecuted wife. After having had recourse to innumerable expedients, as to his future mode 'of procedure, the Count Ozimo suddenly adopted the plan of a disguise; for which purpose he made himself master of the habilliaments of a mendicant of the Order of the Holy Cross; and that he might the better assume that character, he also rendered himself conversant with the manners and customs of that wandering fraternity. Having thus arranged his
plans, without making his purpose known to any second person, the Count took his departure from Rome one evening by dusk, and, when at some distance from that city, having entered a wood that skirted, for some length of way, the road he was pursuing, he there changed his habilliaments for those of the humble mendicant ; and, burying his own apparel beneath the sod, the Count Ozimo emerged from the thicket, by the first hour of morning, warmed with the most disinterested zeal that ever glowed within the bosom of friendship, animated by feeling and uncontaminated virtue.
СНЛР. III.
-.,-... His robes, die outward vizor, tb conceal, A sou?, мгЫсЬ view'd, would evVy crime reveal. AFTER the seizure of thé Abbot Gondez, by the Lord Walter, and the providential rescuing of the objects of his detested tyranny, this monkish despot was instantly conducted on board the vessel of the Scottish leader, and a strong guard was placed over his регаоц, in order that he might not exchange a syllable with any individual whatsoever. A gloomy pride mantled the countenance of the father, wdiile his obdurate heart
regarded, with sullen indifference, the objects that surrounded him. In the mean time, the persons of the two un· fortunate beings, so providentially re¬ scued, were attended to with every re¬ quisite care ; while the tender soul of Huberto Avinzo, agitated beyond the powers of description, for the recovery of his adored love, was scarcely con¬ scious of the unremitting assiduities of his noble friend, the Lord High Steward of Scotland. As the aid of some person skilled in medicine was absolutely requisite, in order to effect the restoration of the emaciated youth, the troops were, the ensuing morning, ordered on board; after which, the lovely maid, as yet unable to hold converse with Huberto, or his friend, together with her companion in misery, were also conducted ţo the vessel; while John of Dunbar, whoip it was deemed expedient to conceal from
the eyes of the Abbot Gondez, took his station in another of the barks. The anchors being weighed, the little fleet set sail, and with a fair wind arrived in safety on the shores of Scotland, from whence they proceeded to Dumbarton, where Gondez was instantly confined, a close prisoner in the castle. From this place an express was Tor- warded to Edinburgh, when-the King of Scotland's practitioners in medicine were dispatched to lend their aid to the suf¬ fering youth; while the lovely object of 'Avinzo's affection, having, in a great measure, recovered from the mental anguish and corporeal miseries which had been inflicted on her by the perse¬ cuting Abbot Gondez, proceeded to re¬ late her sufferings to the expectant Avinzo, and the Lord Walter ; the latter of whom had already heard, from his
friend, the events which had transpired in the chapel of Saint Columba, during their detention in that monastery, on their first landing there; together with every subsequent transaction, which had taken place during their stay in that abhorred abode.
TALE OF RONILDA THE FAIR.
WITH downcast eyes and roseat blushes on her lily cheek, the maid thus told her sufferings; while Huberto with a tremulous heart, and eyes that darted forth love's radiant lustre, caught with attention every word that issued from her lips. " My Sire was the bold chieftain Guy Fitz-Arran, the Laird of Finlagan Castle, standing upon Ha, one of the Westernl&lands, scarcely twenty Scottish miles distant from thatof Oronza." At this information, Huberto could not restrain his wonder, as he instantly
recurred to the Legendary Tales of the minstrel, at the Castle of Finlagan, and the extraordinary and terrific occurrences which lie had witnessed on the Island of Jura, where he had again beheld the mysterious hag3, and the more dreadful vision of the Tall White Spectre of the mountain. As Ronilda proceeded in her story, the glistening tears bedewed her lovely cheek, when she retraced the hapless fate of her parent; which so precisely accorded with the tenor of the harper's legend, that Avinzo, producing lie scroll, gave it into the hand of the Lord Walter ; and as the occurences which had transpired at Jura, were so connected with this part of Ronilda's narrative, Huberto proceeded to inform his auditors, how the Spirit of Laird Guy, had appeared to him, in t he cavern of the moun¬ tain, and its subsequent beatification, γοι. iv. υ
jGONBĽZ, arter his having pressed with his lips, the sacred symbol of the Hoiy Cross.. It was with infinite difficulty that the lovely maid was restrained from blessing, on her bended knees, that being whom she esteemed the saviour of her parenťs tortured soul; wdien, having in some measure tranquilized her spirits, Ronilda *hu* resumed her history. 4 ' My remaining parent attended with assiduity to my infant years, and the un¬ protected childhood of her son, Our harmless prattle banished from her soul that excess of grief which had assailed her on the untimely loss of our fathers and thus were we blessed witli the tender anxiety of a mother's care, until the pe¬ riod of our ripening youth, when the tin- urriftsc shaft of death bereft us of that cheering* consolation, u Mv brother, the Laird Donald Fitz- с *
Arran, having then attained his seven¬ teenth year, and being versed in every warlike art, governed, by his courage and his unexampled wisdom, the island over which omniscient Providence had granted him the sway. Two years thus rolled on; during M r hich lapse of time the several Lairds ofthe isles and particularly of Skye, and Mull, demanded so undeserv¬ ing a being as myself in marriage ; and, for that purpose, they severally presented themselves before me. But my heart was not engaged," said the beauteous maid, -with a stifled sigh ; while Avinzo, melt¬ ing M'ith affection, unconsciously pressed her unresisting hand, M'hich she gently M'ithdrew from his ardent grasp, and thus proceeded :— " Laird Donald Fitz-Arran, whose soul disdnined rompulsatory measures, left the selection to myself, and T, in consequence, refused these several suitors for my haud. Thu* weie м*е situated, M'hen it so hap- i) г
pened that the trumpet tongue of false re¬ port proclaimed aloud my beauty through¬ out the western isles ; which proved, alasi the luckless cause of all the miseries M'hich have-since preyed upon the minds of my noble brother and myself. " One stormy night, Oh, bitter recol¬ lection !" exclaimed the maid, while the tear of agony burst from her azure eye, " a suppliant voice was heard beneath the lattice of my chamber. Anxious to afford the sufferer some comfort, my tears un¬ manned the warden at the castle gate, who permitted me to issue forth, to ren¬ der succour to the soul distressed. I flew to the spot, where, traitor-like, a mis¬ creant band awaited my approach, and the feeling of humanity, which had urged me to pity others, proved, alas! the sad source of my immediate seizure by the detested Abbot Gondez, and his crew. I shrieked in vain ; they bore me, feinting, on board the bark ; whither, fast bound with ma-
nacles, my noble brother, who had singly fled to my rescue, was shortly after brought. The vessel then wafted us from the shores of Ila, to an unfrequented bay of Oronza's Island; from whence we were conducted, by a secret track, within the monastery's gloomy walls. There my va¬ liant brother was speedily borne from my view, while I, his miserable sister, was placed within the confines ofa dreary dungeon. " Some hours elapsed before any living object met my view ; and the surround¬ ing gloom ofthe cell was oi?ly illumined by the sickly gleam of a lamp that rested on the pavement. At length appeared, in monkish garments, one of those trai¬ tors who, under the guise of a Scottisli seaman, had seconded the Abbot Gondez in his detested plans. This individual presented me with food, and then retired, deaf to my supplications, nor deigning υ 3
to disclose the cause of my imprison¬ ment. " Т1ш first impulse of my soul led mc to cbeü>Iı the idea of death as my only comfortei ; but the mercy of the Divi- u ¡ty, aud the sufferings of our Redeemer, prompted me, to hope, and fix,my faith oji high. I therefore partookof the viands, w hich the first erçıotion of despair had in* duced mc to abandon. Thus passed ou the dreary liours, till, worn with anguish, my tired ¿aul sunk into л heavy .sleep, from which I was aroused „by, the re¬ moval ofthe bars of my dungeon door; w hen speedily appeared in view the person oť the Abbot Gondez. Advancing to¬ wards me, he piade known to me his dig¬ nified station, and then, with unblushing countenance, revealed the extent of his abandoned desires ; which he concluded with an air of triumph, by informing me, that, although Lairds had sued to me in vain, í Miüuk!, thenceforward, bc the íjiis-
tress of his unbridled pleasures and ab¬ horred licentiousness. Fain would tiu- hated monster then have thrown his arms around me, but the dignity of virtue ap¬ palled liis soul, and he retired, venting bitter curses on me. " Thus rolled oa successive days, and weeks, and months ; during which time I was sometimes compelled to mask my real indignation, and to give the monk¬ ish hypocrite a hope that I might yield him my consent ; yet in vain did I crave to see my persecuted brother; no tidings could I gleau concerning him ; while all the liberty allowed me was, to tra¬ verse, every night, the solemn church of Saint Columba, where I first beheld the person of roy late preserver," cc At this period of her narration, the lovely Ronilda paused, and concealed her face within her lily hand ; while the fond youth, Avinzo, recurring to that solemn
eventful night, gave full scope to a succes-* sion of ideas that overpowered, at once, every other faculty of his noble soul. Having at length acquired sufficient for¬ titude, Ronilda, ouce more, resumed her talc. " Previous to that unexpected inter¬ view, the monk, who had ever been ac¬ customed to tender me the food allotted, was suddenly exchanged, and another father ofthe order assumed his post, be¬ ing regular in his attendances, but pre¬ serving the same determined silence. To explain the conduct of the dissolute Abbot, would call forth language which my tongue disdains to utter : a thousand times force was put in practice to accom¬ plish his iniquity ; but still the power of innocence enshielded me with its puis¬ sant arm, and I repulsed the daring ef¬ forts of this fiend of infamy and vice. * " That fatal period at lengtii arrived when the visits of this «econd monk
were no longer continued, and from the Abbot alone I afterwards received my nourishment for several succeeding nights. " Two days preceding that which gave me again to light and liberty, the hated Gondez, with an air of determined fury, burst suddenly on rny retirement ; upon which occasion, having eyed me a while with a contemptuous air, he proceeded to state that the period of his departure from the island of Öronza was at hand, that freedom and life should again be mine, and that my brother should also be set at liberty, if I would yield to liis embraces. I spurned the monster I and defied his malice. Furious, at this further proof of my determined hatred to bis purposes, he violently dragged me from the cell, wherein so many dreary months had thus been spent, and hurrying me to that from whence I was so latelv res- cued, the monster closed the portal on Dó
me, and I lemained awhile in total dark* liesN. Soon, however, he returned ; but oh . Avhat agonies rent my soul, when 1 belu Id my brother's wasted form, Who ua^led, by the manacles that encircled his limbs, towatfds t rJie inner dungeon, by our Send-like, perceeutor. i í ьсгеашес! fm th ithe .iiaiuje.^f .Donald 1 avJio turned his ¿simken eyes , upon wie ; hut his stí enetil? fii i ied, andîthe' maUcioAis, Abbot, 8*mwmg terribly, forced my юл г Ч1 hro- tlwrbaway, a while, stretched »upou the pav.cmcut,. *I remained lost to all .sei^e of subJwfltŞîiy anguish. ci Oo»a>v^keuhig fmm this trance pf death,. ii>y eyes became fixed ид>од the Abboťs Jigure^ who, with folded arms, and да ie?q)re^sion of determined malice, gazctl upjou niy Avrejtched form. Once more I breathed -forth supplications ; upon nxy knees J iuteicededjtor niy )>ro- ther's life, hanging upon the robes of my abhorred foe : he was deaf alike to pity
and to shame ; and casting me with vehe¬ mence from his person, he thundered in my ears this horrid mandate;"— u To-morrow, at .this hour, prepare to act in unison with m ν wishes, and thv brother shall be free ; or, at thv feet, thy Donald shall expire; the victim of thine ow.n obduracy; M'hilst thou, the companion of my voyage, shalt linger out thv davs în a foreign clime, the object of my desire, my vengeance, and την eternal hatred !" (ί As the Abbot moved towards the portal of the. dungeon, my indignant brother, feeling a momentary réanima¬ tion of his functions, vociferated his curses on the gnilty Gondez, calling aloud on Heaven for,vengeance, while his last sentence breathed the most bit¬ ter execrations tin my soul, if ever I .yielded to our persecutor's guilty .desires, I) б
in order to effect his own personal rescue from captivity and death, "The monk then turning, would have rushed forward and exterminated my brother, who had so magnanimously de¬ fied his vengeance ; but I knelt, and, by my prayers, thus warded off his direful pur¬ pose ; but, as he sullenly retired from the cell, he once more repeated his direful re¬ solve, c^d, closing to the portal, instantly withdrew. It was then I hastened to the entrance ofthe inner vault, that kept my Donald from his sister's fond embrace : in vain I strove against the opposing bolts; I sunk, exhausted, and for a time remained unconscious of my brother's voice, who, on roy recovery to reason, exhorted roe, in trembling accents, to seal by oath the wishes of his souk " I swore by Him who saved the worlds to see my brother fell, a bleeding victim, at my feet, ere I would yield my honour
to the Abboťs will, and then, upon my knees, I called aloud on Heaven to termi¬ nate our agonies in death. " Thus passed on one dreary hour. Horror was in my soul ; while the al¬ most famished and expiring Donald, in broken tones, exhorted me to bow, con¬ tented to the will of Fate. " Again a sound was heard, descending the steps leading to our dungeon, which I conceived to denote the re-approach of the Abbot Gondez, but at that instant, the voice of my preserver was heaixl : yet ah ! what tongue ean give utterance to all the torments that rent my heart, when the impossibility of your entrance was made known. From that hour my hands were never, for a moment, unclasped ; my eyes, unceasingly,were reared towards Heaven, and my lips gave vent to the fervent and spontaneous effusions of an¬ guish, horror, and despair. The period
of my woes atlength arrived. 'I heard appioachhg souuds ; my heart sunk wit!iin me.—The portel, once mere, un¬ closed, and, from that moment, I was awakened from the extent of humun mi¬ sery, to freedom, and the assurance,of a beloved brother's salvation from the re¬ morseless dagger of the-ruffian Gondez, by tiu gallant interposition of my brave deliverer." Huberto Avinzo and ihe Lord Walter, Vvho had cunto u ed mutu dmin^ the re¬ cital of tlie bu.atifiil ıluLikias tale, now T gave veut ţo their aohor.t нее of tjieguHty Abbots \iiLin. í at .LOi.v* \л alter then repa ii etl to û*. ch^mbi * ) f Lr/, ¡d ¿Ronald, to whom he cxpicssed tne n-utual joy that animated bi> u\\a bosom antl .that of tiie gLuerous Jtl u де. f o, .Vi ter wljicţi Lord Walter pioceixicii to narrate to Laird Donald £\ uy fact 1 relative ţo Avinzo s coiifiuGţ, in yrder to the rescu¬ ing of him and his beloved sister ; all of
which had been previously recounted to the Lord High Steward, by his friend Huberto. The intelligence greatly af¬ fected the recovering Laird Donald; neither wasche inattentive to the distant hints which were expressed by the Lord Walter, as to the ritual state of the loveis* heaits. Wiiile he was thus gene¬ rously occupied on behalf of his friend, the ardent Avinzo, snatching the short interval of privacy . which occurred, poured forth the effusions of his soul to his adored Ronilda, in the most im¬ passioned language, wh'tçh speedily found sanctuary in her bpsom; who, by her broken sighs, downcast looks, and roseate blushes, sufficientlv indicated timt love hail ever held emporium over lier soul, since their first rneeting in tlie sancti? iied chapel of Saint Columbas ; monas- terv.
CHAP. IV. ан ц-ш...! ....................... ■ Lo ! justice, with her scales appears, And pierces g'ult, with eajle eyeî In air, tlie trenchant sword, she rears, And dooms the tiembliug wretch to die. W. H. r.
AFTER the lapse of some few days the strength of the Laird Donald Fitz- Arran was sufficiently recovered to enable him to proceed to Edinburgh; incon¬ sequence of which, every previous ar¬ rangement having taken place, the Abbot Gondez was forwarded thither, under a strong escort of troops, and was followed bv all the other individuals who had-been concerned in the late extraordinary dis¬ coveries. On their arrival at the capital of Scotland, Huberto and his noble
friends were received with unfeigned testimonies of regard hy the Laird Douglas, Lord Edward Bruce, the King's brother, and a vast train of the nobility, while the guilty Abbot was led, a close prisoner, to the castle of the city of Edinburgh. Upon Hubertos presenting himself be¬ fore the Scottish Sovereign, that noble chieftain, yielding to the manly feel¬ ings that possessed his breast, gave the most marked proofs of his inviolable friendship for his former preserver; and, after thç lapse of some time, he requested to be informed of thè motives which had lately Induced Avinzoto quit the court in so mysterious a manner. Obedient fo the wish of his King, Huberto began the narrative by acquainting his Sovereign with his first interview with Ronilda,in the church of the monasterv ; after which he proceeded to develope every 'subsequent event; and concluded, by requesting
ţhatHi#0wrt4>r judicature might be sum¬ moned, to call thé Abbot Gondeü to an account, not Only upon the various charges* already adduced by the Monk Johu of Dunbar, lhe Laird Donald, and hb sister, the Jovely Ronilda» but also upon the more flagrant t rime of having beeu a traitor to his Sovereign in the hour of hiš røqst kwúntnt peril аша dis · tress, - Tlie ©bdurajtø villainy of tlie Abbat was such a$ to prevent all hope of his elevated ecclesiastical station shielding him from the ann of retributive justice; and King Robert Bruce, in consequence, vested full powers in the necessary fune-* tionaries of the law to see the form of trial duly carried into effect, against the accused Gondez ; at which the Scottish Sovereign, from the uncommon facts to be adduced, notified his intention of ap¬ pearing in person, to witness the regular course of those j^roeeedings which were
to punish crimes of so diabolical a na¬ ture. Huberto Avinzo and the Lord Walter having introduced the beautiful lionilda to Lady Douglas, she soon became the friend of her gentle daughter Maude, and the magnanimous Lady Isabel of РещЬтке, by whom she was, Qf course, introduced at the court of the King of Scotland. On thus occasion it was dif¬ ficult to ascertain whether astonishment at the sight of her .transcendant charms, pr joy for her late liberation from the cruelty of her persecutor, were the most predominant sensations of the nobility that crowded to behold her. By the bravç Huberto, the Laird Donald Fitz- Arran was also presented to bis Sovereign, who warmly testified his satisfaction iu finding another staunch supporter of his claims rescued from a cruel and prema* ture death.
As the Lord High Steward was fully acquainted with the state of Avinzo's af¬ fections, he took an early opportunity of communicating to the Laird Donald Fitz-Arran, unreservedly, every fact with¬ in his cognizance. The Laird Donald, not only anxious to repay the debtof gra¬ titude due to his deliverer, but equally overjoyed to find that Ronilda was on the point of forming an alliance with the acknowledged virtuous and brave pre¬ server of their own and their Monarch's life, he immediately, on the departure of Lord Walter, summoned his sister into his presence. Having tenderly questioned her as to the state of her heart, she can¬ didly avowed herpredeliction for Huber¬ to Avinzo ; in consequence of which, the Lord High Steward was deputed to ask the permission of King Robert Bruce, as tp the solemnization of their nuptials; with which desire the Monareh not only acquiesced with joy, but also took Ro-
nilda under his particular guardianship until the period arrived which should in¬ delibly seal the sacred bond of their mutual bliss. Thus were affairs situated at the court of Edinburgh, on the evening previous to the trial of the Abbot Gondez. Prior, however, to that event, the Lord High Steward, anxious to make known to Huberto the sanction of his love to Ro- nilda, by the Laird Fitz-Allan, her bro¬ ther, and the more gratifying ratification of his consent by the King of Scot¬ land, repaired betimes to the chamber of his friend; when, after having amply detailed the happy tidings to Huberto, the Lord Walter was not a little asto¬ nished to find that a fixed melancholy overspread his features ; and, upon en¬ quiry, he was given to imderstand that these painful sentiments originated in the bosom of Avinzo upon his recalling to mind tb* incertitude of his birth ; which,
when disclosed (if everthat event should transpire), might cast an indelible stain on the ancient family of the Thanes of Finlagan. In vain did the Lord Walter argue, in opposition to these scruples of his friend, that the inherent virtues of Avinzo counterbalanced all failure on the score^of nobilitv. Huberto was still obdurate, and disdained the idea of tar¬ nishing the lustre ofthat family M'hose alliance constituted, in his mind, the önlv bliss which this sublunarv state could afford. Although the Lord High Steward felt the most poignant sorrow as he con¬ templated wbat might prove the sequel õf this conduct, on the paft of his friend ; yet, he could not but internally admire the noble principles which gave energy fo his feelings ;* nor could he be led M swerve from the firm assurance, that in Huberto Avinzo, he beheld the represen¬ tative of some renowned and noble familv,
whose honours were only obscured for a season, to answer the purposes of Heaven, after whieh they would again burst forth with redoubled splendour. Being mutually occupied with this train of ideas, the Lord Walter and Hu¬ berto Avinzo proceeded to the hall ap¬ pointed for the trial of the Abbot Gon¬ dez, where King Robert Bruce and all the court were already assembled. On the entrance of Huberto Avinzo the Abbot was speedily brought forward ; and the bill of indictment, charging him with the ¿rime of high-treason against King Robert Bruce, Was then'read aloud; to which, the haughty Monk was, with sotfte din1c"u)f5^/|>^ailed upon to reply; liiit hé at ktigttí spoke as follows :— " ff it be deemed a fluty incumbent* on me to reply to the charge alledged against me, I «lainva trial befbre eccle¬ siastical, not lay judges. I answer to no*
unhallowed tongue. My diguily, as Ab¬ bot of the fraternity of Saint Columba, allows this privilege, and I demand i t." As the Abbot concluded this peremp¬ tory address, a deep-toned voice was suddenly heard to exclaim >■» " The day approacheth when thy will shall be accomplished !" Every individual present bent around a look of enquiry, but the speaker was no where visible; andJt,was some time ere tlie assembly, had regained its wonted tranquillity. Thjp public accuse/then proceeded to inform the delinquent, that the crimes imputed to him were cogniza- Ые to the secular aim, by Xim Jiteçttişh laws, and that the Abbot must, conse¬ quently, plead to the charge, or allow his guilt, when his judgment would be referred to an assembly of the votaries of religion·
s f Then I deny the^te^tia»," replied the Abbot, with a stern and commanding air. Scarcely had the father made this assertion, when, çlad in the .garments of his order, appeared the Monk, John of Dunbar ; who, .:fiKhig his« penetrating eyes upon Gondez, thundered aloud ;— " Behold in } me thine accuser/' The sudden appearance of this father, whom he supposed had fallen a prey to his abominable cruelty, struck a dread¬ ful terror to the soul of the Superior; who, nevertheless, recovered himself after a few* m inu tes, ; and prepared to hear the allegations ; produced against him, M'ith a view, if possible, to frame some bold defeuce, in opposition to the facts that were to he brought forward. The accuser being ordered to proceed, John of Dunbar spoke to the following effect:— VOL. IV. E
" The charge of treason, which I am on the poittfc*~of adducing against the prisoner Gondee, may perhaps in some measure militate against myself; willing, however, to meet the same retributive course of justice, I now stand forward, and, as I seek to atone for actions past, so shall my accusation be dictated by truth. I shall neither strive to throw a veil over my own misdeeds, nor to add to those of the accused. ** Bred to the bustle of a camp, my early youth was spent in advancing the cause of Baliol, in opposition to the claims of the present monarch, King Robert Bruce; before whose person I now bend the knee, with all the submission of a loyal subject. " The father having paid his homage to the sovereign of Scotland, then present, continued thus ;— u Upon the demise of Alexander the Third, when the twelve competitors for
the crown of this realm.had preferred their claims to King Edward the First of England, in order to abide by bis de¬ termination, I was the individual confi¬ dant whom Baliol employed to manage every secret négociation with the British monarch ; who, finding that my patron yielded implicitly to his ambitious pre¬ tensions, nominated Baliol king, to the ex¬ pulsion ofevery other candidate. It was then that the Sovereign of these Realms, King Robert Bruce, disputed aloud the nomination; and, upon this occasion. I was dispatched by Baliol, and the Bri¬ tish Monarch, to watch, in privacy, the actions of tiieir opponents, and to con¬ vey, in secret, every necessary informa¬ tion to the English court ; and thus, though unknown to the adherents of King Robert Bruce, Γ was nò stranger to his person or his"proceedings, and it Avas this circumstance which put me fully in possession of the real character
of those who sought for sanctuary in the monastery of Columba. íc \[ii consequence ofthe interception of someţiackets, signed with the name of Mac Mâtnock, which must he well re¬ membered by your Majesty," said the accuser, addressing himself to King-Ro¬ bert Bruce, who bowed his head in token of assent, " and which were written by myself, a general search took place; when I, with inanité difficulty, and hav¬ ing surmounted many perils, arrived in safety ón the English borders; upon which occasion, the first riews that reached my ear M'as the death/of my 1 pa¬ tron Baliol. Grief for his untimely loss, arid the full assurance that no aid of mine could prove of further effect, I forthwith fled for refuge unto the western isles ; and there, yielding to the gloom that had taken possession of my soul, I soon became an inmate of St. Columba's
monastery; where фе powerful .argument of gold speedily purchased for me, a dispensation, from serving the subordi¬ nate degree ofa noyiciate ? and I M'as, in consequence, raised to^the station.of a brother of the Order; from which time, I became the hősöm friend of the superior Gondez. " I had not long eqjoyecl this post, M'hçn the Abbot, perceiving trom the gloomy tenor of my thoughts, that I w;u not an ipmate tiiere for the cause of reli¬ gion, b ut that a cloud of discontents prey¬ ed upon my soul, began gradually to mi- burthen bis inmost secrets to me, avow- ing himself the friend of every personal gratification, the enemy of mankind in general, and the contemner^of that very religion of which he professed himself to be a staunch votary. It was on this oc- casiqn that the two captives, Lady Ro¬ nilda and Laird Donald Fjtz-Arraa, were committed to my charge, and, as if % 3
disappointment had perverted every ge¬ nerous emanation of my soul, I felt an internal satisfaction in that gloomy em¬ ployment. This, however, was not all ; the Abbot further communicated to me, that he had in secret leagued with King Edward, and espoused the cause of Ba¬ liol, during his struggle for precedency. Encouraged by this information, I cheer¬ fully unburthened my whole history to the Superior, and vowed to further him in all his designs ; whilst he, in return, laid open to me all his views, which as¬ pired to a Cardinal's seat in the conclave at Rome. For this purpose he had es¬ poused the pretentions of "Baliol, that so, in case of his ultimate success, the in¬ fluence of King Edward might also be insured to farther his endeavours; and* the riches which he had amassed, were li¬ berally dispensed by his emissaries, who were busily employed in forwarding his ambitious pretensions in the capital of Italy. ^ v * r
Some time after this event, your Ma¬ jesty, and noble friends in adversity, sought the shores of Oronza for refuge, and then it was that the idea of a glo¬ rious revenge fired my breast. I in¬ stantly recognized the features of our Guests, and as speedily made known the fact to the Abbot Gondez, who forthwith dispatched this information to the English Monarch, offering to deliver, as captives, into his hands, the persons who relied upon his hospitality. For this ¿ervice the superior exacted the most strenuous endeavours of King Edward, in order to his immediate preferment at Rome ; and so great was the exultation of the Abbot, on this occasion, that the papal chair did not seem far moved from his aspiring views ; while my re¬ ward, as to ecclesiastical preferment, was to be commensurate with the weighty obligations which I had thus rendered. " Here ends roy allegation respecting £4
the Motìk John of Dunbar; f|t yet, if I may be permitted further to address this assembly, a few short sentences will wind up the sequel of my tale." The father being ordered to proceed, he continued as follows :—- u That eventfiil night, which gave to freedom your gracious Majesty and your noble adherents, by some most wonder* ful and unexpected interference, biought to OronzaV monastery the troops of the Engl : sh King, who came to bear away, in close captivity, the present supporters of Scotland 's indépendance. Your escape was. speedily made* -known, though trrø means by which it was affected could not be unravelled ; and, notwithstanding the dispatcb resorted to oa that occar sion, the Abbot was frustrated in his hopes ; while I, unsuspectingly, was fixed upon by him, as the sole cause of your elopement from the monastery's walls.
Disappointed iţ\ ţheţr ardent expecta¬ tions, the English forces, which were headed hy £dwin, the Earl qf Hereford's only son, re-çmbarked, and weighing anchor, speedily quitted the shores of the island of Gronza." For a considerable lapse of time, I re¬ mained void of all suspicion, as to the real surmises of the insidious Gondez; hut, suddenly, he demanded atniy hands, the murder pf that nobje youth, Laird Ponald Fitz-Aİrı>|n, a name then un¬ known to me, which I was to perpetrate in the presence of his sister, with a series of procrastinated tortures, that struck my mind with liorror. I faultered, apd at length refused tp stain my soul witji such a damniug deed.' The Abbot gave po immediate token of his discontent ; but, by the means of some sf^pityjng drug, took from me %}ıç power pf resistance; in which state I was conveyed into the mo-
nastery's subterraneous vaults; átid, on awakening from my trance, I soon be¬ came acquainted with the horrors of my situation ; when, bound to earth, I saw around me, food in plenty, but which I was prevented from reaching, on account of the shortness of my chain ; and thus was I threatened with the agonizing tor¬ tures of famine. Scarcely was I awakened to a sense of my misery, when the Abbot presented himself before me, ащ! having upbraided me with being the traitor who had wrought the escape of those within his power* Re tauntingly bade me eat my fill, and then abandoned me to the hor¬ rors of starvation ; from which the hand of providence, in mercy, sent a being to preserve me, in order that I might thus appear, to pluck down vengeance on the head of guilt, and, seek to offer some atonement for the bad ef infamy that l^reyfr upon my repentant spirit * At the conclusion of tibe Monk's de-
position, a general murmur echoed through the hall, while internal curses where showered by the auditors on the guilty Abbot ; who, deaf to the voice of compunction, regarded with a sullen air every surrounding object, being occupied only in the contemplation of frustrating,. if possible, the host of evidence that was to be adduced against him. At length, the silence of the assembly being once more restored, the Abbot was called upon to make a defence ; on which occasion, anxious to gain a procrastina¬ tion of time, he spoke to this effect :— tl Having patiently endured the long and insidious depositions of my accuser, from which it is evident that other charges are to be preferred against me j I demand, in the first instance, that a regular time be granted me, in order to enable me to invalidate, in a great mea- surCj the charge of treason, on which I ¥ 6
stand accused ; and, in the second place, I desire the full statement of every other charge, that so, I may, in private, frame such a defence as it is utterly impossible for me to deliver, thus unprepared, and in the face of an assembly* whose very acti T ons demonstrate that they are prejudiced against me, and would, with one accord, annex to*me the epithet of guilt, м -ithout a dispassionate hearing." The mind of King Robert Bruce, though fully satisfied as to the guilt of the Abbot, was, in this instance, worked upon by the desire of м -itnessing, on some future day, Mhat arguments the wily Gondez would have recourse to, in order to confront such a phalanx of evidence as existed against him; and under these considerations, the superior s desire was consented to. In consequence of this, the depositions of the Laird Donald, and Ronilda, relative to their captivity, as >rfll as those of Huberto Avinzo, and thé
further evidence of John of Dunbar, were severally taken. During these pro¬ ceedings, it was with difficulty, that the peace of the auditors was preserved, who would fain have dragged the cruel Abbot to immediate death. Having listened to the several charges with an air of gloomy ferocity, the Ab¬ bot, at their conclusion, demanded;— " Are there any further charges to be adduced against me ?" A few moments of silence intervened, when, before the negative was pronounced to the Abbot's question, the same mys¬ terious voice that had been heard at the commencement of the examination, sud¬ denly thundered through the hall, pro¬ nouncing the following words, with hor¬ rid emphasis :—. " The inquisition of Rome shall take cognizance of crimes as yet untold."
A solemn silence reigned throughout the assembly, when, suddenly, two male figures, enveloped in sable robes, and wearing vizors to conceal their faces, stalked forward, each presenting a folded parchment, superscribed to King Ro¬ bert Bruce. These mysterious communi¬ cations were instantly handed to the Scottish Monarch, and a visible expres¬ sion of horror overspread his features as> he perused their contents ; which he had no sooner done, than,, commanding the Abbot Gondez to be conducted into close confinement, he arose from his seat, and ordering the two masked strangers to follow his steps, they were instantly led into a private chamber, in order to confer with the King ; whither also, after a short lapse of time, the astonished Huberto Avinzo» was summoned, leaving all the nobles and the whole assembly in the utmost astonishment. Although every trace of obduracy had
mantled the forbidding countenance of the Abbot Gondez during the whole of the preceding interrogatories and de¬ positions, he, nevertheless, could not refrain from displaying evident marks of horror, on the appearance of these masked accusers ; in vain did he endeavour to rally his sick'ning soul, during a con¬ siderable portion of time ; all his efforts were unattended with the desired effect, and the struggles of a guilty conscience were observable in every lineament of his countenance. The dreaded name of the Inquisition of Jtome, which had been so recently thundered forth by one of these unknown accusers, had raised in the soul of the Abbot the most appalling ideas, as he was fully aware of the various modes of torture adverted to by the inquisitorial judges, against such individuals as acted in opposition to their decrees ; and, with regard to the hidden crimes alluded to
by the same stranger, as cognizable to the fraternity of St. Dominick, Gondez was himself the best judge, how far there was validity in the charge; yet, if any thing might be gleaned from the changes in his physiognomy, it was but too ap¬ parent to the whole assembly, that an accumulation of guilt yet remained un¬ told, which would hold him up even to greater detestation, in the minds of all present, than they had hitherto experi¬ enced, on learning the enormity of his guilt, while Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Columba. An aweful silence still continued throughout the Hall of Judicature. King Robert Bruce remained absent with the masked accusers ; nor did Huberto Avin¬ zo again appear to grace the noble as¬ semblage. An hour having thus elapsed, during which the general expectancy became
heightened to an excessive degree, the curiosity of every one present was at length suspended by the appearance of an officer of the court, who came to en¬ force the orders of the Monarch for the breaking up of the assembly, and the re-conducting the delinquent to close confinement. The Abbot Gondez had fallen into one of those gloomy train of contemplation, which must ever appal the guilty breast, when the keen eye of justice searches into hidden guilt * The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept: -7 -------- —' ■■■ ...... - ■ ---------------now, 'tis awake , Takes note of what is done ; and, like a prophet, Look« into a glass, that shews what future evils Are ; now to have no successive degrees, Hut where they live to end/* On receiving this mandate, the Abbot, aroused as from a trance, raised for a moment his guiltv brow, while his visage was arra ved in the Hverv of death :—aa;ain
his head sunk beneath his breast, his eyes were bent to earth, and he, with folded arms and solemn pace, proceeded along the hall. On gaining the portal, the paralized frame of the delinquent sought support of one of the guards ; and as he retired from the observant crowd, a general sen¬ timent of horror at the remembrance of his bloody deeds thrilled through every breast, while anxiety to learn the nature of the mysterious charges yet to be pro¬ duced, was the predominant 4 charac¬ teristic of every individual who had formed this great assembly.
CHAP. IV.
Though love awhile hts bliss conceals» Though wayward fate true hearts annoy; Anew the blessing he reveals, Redoubling ev'ry former joy. w. n. Ï.
XT was some time ere the youth Hu¬ berto Avinzo retired from the presence of his sovereign, upon which occasion the Lord Walter observed that an air of melancholy and reserve clouded his brow. In vain was the conversation turned, even to the object of his souľs affection; a transient smile would at intervals illu¬ mine his countenance, which, however, speedily disappeared, when the former melancholy would overspread his features»
and he would relapse into his wonted state of silence. Lord Walter conceiv¬ ing that his presence was irksome to Avinzo, took an early opportunity of rising to retire; when the generous Hu¬ berto seizing the hand of his friend, gave vent to his burthened soul in the fol¬ lowing words :—' u The ways of heaven are inscrutable, my best of friends, and a chain of mys¬ tery remains to be unravelled, in which, alas, I am most pointedly concerned ï I would that I might divulge to you the fact, so far as I am yet enabled to solve the mystery ; but I am forbidden, and every circumstance must still continue buried, for a time, in solemn silence.-— Thus far, 1iq wever, am I permitted to explain circumstances which must imme¬ diately take place." " Yes, my friend," said Avinzo, seizing the hand of the Lord Walter, and pressing it with an agonized grasp, " this night must I quit
Edinburgh in secret, and accompany those mysterious strangers who this day appeared in the Hall of Judicature, toge¬ ther M'ith the abhorred Gondez." As Huberto pronounced the name of the Abbot, his limbs trembled, his colour faded, and his M'hole frame became most forcibly agitated. " To your generous care, therefore,** continued he, " do I consign the object of my souľs warmest affection. Yes, for a season, I must abandon all the fond ties that bind me to this beloved land.—Oh ! what a tale will be unravelled eré we meet again ! Oh! support me, heaven!"' sighed Huberto, with anguish.------" Be every thing to my Ronilda, I conjure thee, my Lord, until my return ! Yes, thou wilt share, with the Scottish Mo¬ narch, the task of alleviating her sor¬ rows for my absence ; for such was, even now, the promise made unto me by the generous King. I trust that I shall
prove worthy of her heart; nor by m^ alliance disgrace Laird Donald's ances- trv. But oh, Lord Walter! I have scenes to act that wring tny soul with anguish,—scenes which forbid me now to hazard even one adieu to the angelic object of my fervent love;— tell her, my friend, how anguished was my heart !— tell her, that on this side of the grave, I never can forget her—and that I live for her alone !"— Avinzo's voice failed iiim, and the Lord High Steward, feeling for the hid¬ den secrets that rent the soul of his friend, solemnly swore to act as he re¬ quired ; bidding him thereforea mournful farewell, he issued from his presence, while the warm tears started from his manly eye. As there was no time for delay, Hu¬ berto Avinzo "having, made the necessary arrangements for his prompt departure,
embarked that night in a vessel stationed at the Frith of Forth, where the two mysterious strangers liad already gone on board, together with the Abbot Gon¬ dez ; who, under a strong escort of troops, had been conveyed from his dungeon in the Castle of Edinburgh, and there con¬ fined within a private cabin, where every precaution was resorted to, in order to frustrate any attempt which he might he prompted to put in practice against his own existence. By the solemn hour of midnight, the wind being propitious, the sails were un¬ furled, and the anchor being weighed, the melancholy Huberto was soon rafted far from those shores, which had been the witness of his infant vears, as well as of the glowing virtues and hardy feats of valour which had shone resplendant in his ripening manhood. As soon as this secret departure of the
Abbot Gondez and Avinzo was made known, a thousand surmises occupied the breasts bf the Scottish nobility, who were already conviixsed of the guilt of the Abbot ; but when it was understood^ tlmt King Rohert Br4iee had himself heen ac¬ cessary to these steps, it was unanimously allowed, from the known justice which had ever* characterized that Sovereign's conduct, that the step was essentially necessary, and every one waited, there¬ fore, in the full expectation of learning the fact, at some period not very re¬ frióte. The Lord Walter, anxious to obey the ardent desires of his friend, soothed, as much as possible, the mind of the beau¬ teous Ronilda, whø also received the most solemn assurances, on the part of the King, that his absence from Scotland was a duty which Huberto was most pe¬ remptorily called upon to fulfil ; and that the sudden manner in which the whole
had been put into effect, was by his own advice ; with such assurances, therefore, however Ronilda might regret,her lover's absence, yet the full conviction that he acted in concert with his virtuous Mo¬ narch, was a great alleviation to her suffering heart, and the assurance which was given her of his speedy return, led her to look forward with ecstacy to tliat period, which would again present him to her longing eyes, in all probability, never more to be separated on tliis side of futurity. Shortly after Avinzo had quitted the Scottish shores, Laird Donald Fitz- Arran, anxious to re-visit the castle of his fore¬ fathers, and present himself to his loving vassals, demanded permission of the King to repair to Finlagan ; which being granted, aJfurther. petition was presented on behalf of the Monk, Jahn of Dunbar, and he having been freely pardoned, was íaken under the protection of the Laird voi., iv. t F
Donald ; who, having left his sister in the care of Lady Douglas, departed fiom Edinburgh with л chosen train, in order to repair the devastation which time had caused m the castle of his ancestors, and to gladden the heartsx>fhis expectant followers, to whose ears fame had already comvmmicated tbe extraordinary rescue of tiieir chieftaitf, and his lovely sister, Ronilda the Fair. Durrøg this succes¬ sion of events in Scotland, the following occurrences bad checquered the days of the generous Edwin, the Earl of Here¬ ford's son, and the bosom-friend of the воЫе Earl of Pembroke. From the period when that youth had committed to the Tower of London the captive Lady ţ)ouglas, and her daugh¬ ter Maude, (for whom his heart was so tenderly interested,) he had unceasingly accused himself of cruelty, and inter¬ nally reprobated the stern conduct of his Monarch» Edward the First, which had
compelled him to put so harsh a man¬ date into execution. Unceasingly re¬ curring to the angelic form ofthe tender Maude, aud shuddering at the con¬ templation of those sufferings, which herself and her noble mother must be compelled to endure, young Edwin, at length, formed an expedient for their delivery, which he proceeded to carqr into effect without delay. Having confided the secret of his soul to his trusty attendant Geoffrey, he, without much difficulty, procured for him letters of recommendation to the governor of the Tower of London ; and, after having been fuHy instructed in the measures necessary to be pursued, Geof¬ frey proceeded from the camp, on the Scottish borders, to the metropolis of England ; and there, having delivered the packets received from his Lord, into the Governor's hands, he was shortly in¬ vested with the station of one of the
F 2
keepers of the prisoners in the Tower. Among other unfortunate individuals committed to the charge of Geoffrey, were the Lady Douglas and her daughter Alaude, to wţiom he behaved M'ith all the lenity possible, without, however, awakening their suspicions as to his real inteptions, or. given cause of alarm to the rigid governor of the, fortress. As soon as Geoffrey had made himself master of the secret usages adopted within the fortress, he, according to hie Lord's desire, quitted his irksome em¬ ployment, and immediately hastened to the English camp, to acquaint his em¬ ployer with all the information he had acquired. , No sooner had Geoffrey abandoned his post within the fortress, than an in¬ human and remorseless keeper, named Fitz-Maurice, became stationed, in his place, over the unfortunate Lady Doug-
las and her daughter, against whom he exercised the most rigorous measures. In the mean time, the brave and inde¬ fatigable Edwin, having received every necessary information from his attendant*, made instant application to the* English Monarch for permission to absent him- selt) for a time, from the camp ; which petition, though backed by the noble Earl öf Pembroke, was sternly refused by the rigid Edward, Thus prevented from effecting his plans, the agonized youth remained patient, for a considerable time, till, urged by the violence of love, he suddenly determined upon hazarding tbe full force of his Monarch's disappro¬ bation ; and, having secretly planned every thing requisitei he accordingly left the English camp, accompanied by Geof¬ frey alone. Thus, unmindful of the dan¬ ger attending such a measure, did he boldly defy the rules of war, in the more f 3
gentle cause of persecuted innocence and fervent love. On the arrival of Edwin in London, his first step wa,s to procure, by means of gold, a commander of some vessel, who would undertake to convey the prisoners to tiieir native shore. Having effected thia, with much difficulty, cm account of the state of warfare, and conse¬ quent danger attendant on &uch a voyage, his next plan was to liberate the objects of his tender solicitude. For this pur¬ pose the indefatigable Geoffrey had com¬ pleatly arranged every measure; by visit¬ ing his former companions in the gaol, through whose means he became fully acquainted with the cruel practices which had been resorted to by Fitz-Maurice, and the separation of the unprotected Maude from her noble parent. Neither was the enquirer altogether debarred from information respecting the cause which had urged the villain to pursue
such measures. With this dreadful inteU ligence (after making himself acquaint¬ ed with the then cell of the persecuted maid,) he hastened to his expectant Lord ; who, agonized at the information, determined that very night to effect his plan. Every arrangement for this pur¬ pose having been promptly executed, tht; Lady Douglas, and her child, were conducted in safety м -iţhout the walls, and wafted on board the vessel, as before stated ; after the villain, Fitz- Maurice, had so justly fallen by the sword of their gallant deliverer. The generous youth, Edwin,- scorning to dis¬ cover himself, then quitted the object of his care, being personally unknown to them ; after which he retraced his route back to the English camp, where he was immediately placed under an ar¬ rest, and, for a lengtii of time, the stern sentence of death was held over him. This decree would, without doubt, have been carried into immediate effect, had r 4
the rigid Monarch been acquainted with the real cause of his absence, and ofthe freedom wliich he had, in consequence, given to the wife and daughter of the inveterate Douglas. But this circum¬ stance was cautiously concealed from the ears of King Edward, by the Governor ofthe Tower, on his becoming acquaint- 44İ with their escape, he being mindful of the hatred of his Sovereign towards their race, and consequently dreading the violence of his wraths which would, doubtless, have doomed himself to the block, for suffering the escape of two individuals. - whose imprisonment Mas deemed of so much consequence to the King. Owing, however, to the unceasing ap¬ plications of the Earl of Pembroke, and the petitions of those troops which were commanded by the Earl of Hereford's son, who M'ould have forfeited their lives for the preservation of that of their ge-
nerous commander, he was at length freed from imprisonment, and reinstated in his rank within the British camp. In this situation he remained until the ar¬ rival of the dispatches forwarded to King Edward, hy the Abbot Gondez, respect¬ ing the seizure of King Robert Bruce; on which occasion tlie gallant Edwin was appointed commander of the forces that were instantlv embarked, to secure and hring, as prisoners, the persons of the Scottisli Monarch, and his brave ad¬ herents. After having experienced tlie disap¬ pointment attendant on the escape of the Scottish King and his friends, young Edwin re-embarked his troops, and set sail again for that part of the shores of England which communicated with the line of the English encampment, iu order to convey to the British Monarch those unwelcome tidings. But in this endeavour he was completely frustrated, v 5
owing to contrary winds, and the dan¬ gerous shoals which presented them¬ selves, and, in the end, tne vessel w r as compelled to make the Scottish shore, where the noble Edwin, and all his fol¬ lowers, were made prisoners, and immedi¬ ately conducted into close confinement. This intelligence having been for¬ warded to the Lord Walter, he instant¬ ly recalled to mind, that, in the per¬ son of the captive youth, that very in¬ dividual appeared, who had so gener¬ ously afforded a free passport to Huberto Avinzo, on his having been seized in the English camp, after his escape from im¬ prisonment in London; and, warmed with those generous sentiments which, he was full v convinced, would have ac- tuated tlie breast of his friend Avinzo, then absent from the court of^Edinburgh, at the island of Oronza, the Lord High. Steward, in consequence, made known those facts to King Robert Вшсе, wh©
instantly commissioned Lord Walter to take from the brave Edwin his parole of honour, and escort him in person from the castle of Berwick, where he was then confined, to the city of Edinburgh. The Lord High Steward, obedient to his sovereign's will, repaired to Berwick, and immediately conducted Edwin to the Scottish court, where he soon disco¬ vered the'object of his adoration, the lovely Maude, together with the fugitive Isabel, the sister of his friend, the Earl of Pembroke. The Lady Douglas, ever mindful ofthe generous conduct of Edwin, when he was the appointed conductor of herself and daughter from the camp of Edward to the tower of London, and more poign¬ antly anxious for the restoration of the health of Maude, who obviously pined in silence, the victim of her passion for Edwin, did not fail to recapitulate f6
every favourable circumstance to Laird Douglas, in order, if possible, to soften the rigidity of his principles, with re¬ spect to the alliance of his offspring with any individual of English extraction. While the Lady Douglas was thus constantly occupied with her Lord, the High Steward of Scotland, being well acquainted with ¡the friendship which the Earl of Pembroke, Isabels brother, en¬ tertained for the noble Edwin, had im¬ plicitly confided to him the ardency of his affection, and supplicated his inter¬ ference, in his behalf, on returning to his native land. Such »implicit confidence, on the part of the Lord Walter, pro¬ duced a reciprocal mode of conduct in the mind of Edwin, who, without dis¬ guise, confessed his passion for the daughter of Laird Douglas; and con¬ fided to Laird Walter's bosom the circum¬ stance of his being the unknown indivi¬ dual, who had rescued Maude from tlie
attempts of Fitz-Maurice, and after¬ wards given liberty to herself and her fond parent; and although Edwin would not recapitulate the perils which had environed him, on his return to the British camp, that circumstance M'as, notwithstanding» discovered by Laird Walter ; who gained those facts from the lips of Edwin's attendant Geoffrey, who had been the follower of his Lord to the island of Oronza, and consequently be¬ came M'ith him a prisoner to the Scottish forces. Having acquired this interesting in¬ telligence, the Lord High Steward, with¬ out delay, communicated every circum¬ stance to the cars of his Sovereign, who took an early opportunity of summoning the Laird Douglas into his presence, to whom King Robet Bruce recapitulated every event, and then concluded by de¬ manding, that justice should be done to the preserver of his wife, and the cham-
pion of his daughter's liberty and honour. There was so much energy in the plea of the Scottish King, that even the stub¬ born heart of the Laird Douglas could not but allow its truth ; and, in the end, his sanction was obtained to the union of his child, with the generous and per¬ severing son of the noble Earl of Here¬ ford, as soon as peace should again rear her spotless banner, and give tranquillity to the rival countries. These joyous tidings being communi¬ cated to Edwin, he poured forth a thou¬ sand blessings on the indefatigable zeal of th« disinterested Lord Walter, and then vowed solemnly either to procure the acquiescence ofthe Earl of Pembroke with his wishes, or to forfeit, for ever, that friendship which had, from child¬ hood, subsisted between them. On the Lady Douglas being made ac-* quainted with the favourable decision of
her noble husband, she, with infinite joy, communicated the tidings to her gentle daughter Maude ; who was^ speedily after visited by the Lord Walter, accom¬ panied by the transported "Edwin, to whom, in presence of Lady Isabel of Pembroke, her enraptured mother, gave the hand of his beloved Maude, while in a flood of joy, she internally showered down blessings on their future union, which would at once unite two beings whom Nature seemed to have formed for the felicity of each other. As the Lord -Walter no longer disguised his predilection for the heroic Isabel of Pembroke, to his friend the Laird Doug¬ las, and the Scottish Monarch, who were put in full possession ofevery cir¬ cumstance relative to their mutual pas- ¿>ion ; both King Robert, and the father of the lovely Maude, interested them¬ selves respecting the fate of the Lord High Steward ; and young Edwin was,
in consequence, strictly enjoined to use his most strenuous endeavours with the Earl of Pembroke ; for which purpose, however painful the circumstance must prove to his affectionate Maude, he de¬ termined, with the permission of the Scottish King, to proceed immediately to his native land. Every arrangement being accordingly made, the faithful Edwin bade adieu to the nobles ofthe Scottish court, .and taking a sad fare¬ well of his love, returned with his atten¬ dant Geoffrey, to the encampment of the English forces, where he immediately proceeded to lay before his Sovereign, King Edward, the disappointment he had experienced relative to the seizure of King Robert and his nobles, in the monastery of Saint Columba, which had long before gained the ears of tlie exas¬ perated Monarch. Young Edwin after¬ wards unfolded the danger that had en¬ vironed his vessel on its return, and which, at length, compelled him to make
the shores of the enemy, in order to save, not only the ship, but the lives also of everv soul on beţard. From that period, Edwin was con¬ stantly employed in combatting the ob¬ duracy of the Earl of Pembroke, with respect to his rooted animosity towards the Lord High Steward of the Scottish Realms, whose character he proceeded to blazon forth in its high and just point of view. The young Earl, though swayed by prejudice, was not deaf to the language of reason, which so unceasingly flowed from the lips of the indefatigable Edwin, although, from the impulse of wounded pride, he did not think fit to yield assent to his arguments. It was not alone an alliance with a noble of Scottish blood that now exas¬ perated the Earl ? his sister Isabel had set
him at defiance, and sought the refuge 4 of those who were the objects of his bit¬ ter hatred. These were the accumulated circumstances which rankled in his bosom, rendering him deaf to the suppli¬ cations of friendship, and the w T urtti lan¬ guage of the heart, which was unceas¬ ingly breathed forta by the generous Edwm. " Can my friend, the Earl of Pern* broke, stifle every sentiment of affection !'* Edwin would frequently exclaim ; <ť let the refined dictates of Nature assume predominance over the frigid impulse of pride and prejudice ; let not the noble sentiments of my friend be thus fettered by worldly considerations. Has the voice of Edwin no sway ?~has the language of friendship no persuasive eloquence, to draw thee from thy stubborn purpose, and induce thee to bind the wreath of nuptial happiness around the heart of Isabel, for ever?—Yield, oh, yield to
the tender dictates of love ! nor teach me to forget I ever had a friend in Pem¬ broke's Earl. " Why thus assail mine ear with lan¬ guage repugnant to my mind ?" would the Earl reply, " Heaven be my judge, how fervent is the friendship which I bear thee, and the affection which I owe t<? my wayward bister, Isabel ! I would do every thing to give thee, Edwin, assur¬ ance of my faith, but that which thou requirest ; and I would, with open amis, receive my sister, were it ou any plea, but that of an alliance with a Scottish Lord.—Do not, therefore, wound my friendship thus, by asking that which is in opposition to my fixed decree*" Such were the unceasing conversations of these noble youths, who seemed to adhere, with mutual perseverance, to to their separate ideas ; when, on a sud¬ den, an event occurred, which placed the
circumstances of England and of Scotia in a different point of view. The revengeful Edward, exasperated at the constant inroads of the Scottish forces, during his absence in France, had prepared to annihilate, if possible, tlie Scottish race; but the shaft of death suddenly struck the Monarch, and thus put a termination to the intended bloody career, in which he waa ready to en¬ gage. On the demise of King Edward the First, the crown devolved to his youth¬ ful and weak son; Edward, surnamed of Carnarvon, (that having been the place of his nativity), who was inaugurated to the throne of his ancestors, by the title of King Edward the Second. The personal incapacity of this mis¬ guided prince, who, unlike his progenitor, was utterly incapable of war, being rather
calculated to dispense his favours on fawning sycophants, and to expend the treasures of the realm on gawdy pa¬ geantry and enervating pleasures. He, therefore, sheathed, at once, the blood¬ stained sword of Mars, and unfurled tlie spotless banner of peace, by a cessation of all further hostilities between the con¬ tending Realms. By this weak policy King Robert Bruce gained sufficient time to oppose any subsequent attempt that could be put in practice against the in¬ dependence of his kingdom. Mean¬ while nothing was heard of in England but the most magnificent arrangements for the ensuing coronation of the Eng¬ lish Monarch, who might have ex¬ claimed ;— " Why look ye then, how this same death doth scoff us, Cozening our minds witli sweet delusive thoughts. Binding round our temples the glitťring crown, Whilst we (bhort-witted fools) accept the task; Dream hut of smiles; look but for golden joys ; jtfow mark the chastisement of our conceits,
This regal gem becomes a galling thorn. Treason, and a whole catalogue of ill?, That are attendant on u kingly Jtate, Hush in upon our frail bark of nature, Buffet us to and fro with the fell Ыам, Which, like a meagre chatťring ague-fit, Turns our stern manhood into peevish fear;-* Sours the full tide of sweet with bitterness;— Till lastly, tired with this dalliance, The wiek of life quite dwindled and bewasted, We lay us down, beg only ground enough To sink a grave, then groan, and welcome death !* Λδ this happy termination of the war was in every respect propitious to the dearest hopes of Edwin, he made known to his aged sire, the Earl of Hereford, the beloved name of the object of his ardent affection ; at the sameiime giving the Earl an ample detail of every circum¬ stance that had transpired to rivet the bond of affection, which mutually en¬ slaved them.
The aged Earl of Hereford having no
objection to his son's alliance with a fe¬ male of Scottish birth, and only living to witness the happiness of his sole off¬ spring, and noble heir, acquiesced with joy in the union proposed. Being after¬ wards made acquainted with the circum¬ stances relative to Isabel and the Lord Walter, the intreaties of the venerable Earl were joined to those of his son, who then gave a full detail to his friend of every event in which he had been con¬ cerned, for the preservation of the family of Douglas, when the disinterested in¬ terference of the Lord High Steward, added to the.generous conduct which Edwin had experienced in Scotland, at length operated on the soul of the Earl of Pembroke, and he freely gave his consent to the alliance between his sister and the Lord Walter. The news of this event did not arrive at the Scottish Court, until after the departure of Hu¬ berto Avinzo ; when the lapse of a few weeks was to present, at the palace of
King Robert Bruce, the persons of the Eail of Pembroke and the constant Ed¬ win ; the former of whom was to give the hand of Lady Isabel to the object of her love, while the latter was, at the same period, to receive from the hardy Doug* las, the beauteous person of the Lady Maude. These joyful communications being made known to King Robert Bruce, his orders were immediately issued, that every preparation should be made, befitting the grandeur of the Scottish Court, in order to the intended nuptials of these votaries of the most ardent passion, as well as in honour of the alliance of four such noble ¿amilies·
chap, ia ■hw— ак<*еш—^м> ---------- ťor murder, though it ha· no tongney Will speak with most miraculous organ. SliAKSP£AKB, ' •IT ------ Tit ι tiVilVWiii'i'iiiif t JPHE vessel which contained Huberto Avinzo, and his mysterious companions-, together with the Abbot Gondez, ar* rived in safet v on the Italian shores! from whence, under a strong escort, the sullen delinquent was conducted to the city of Rome, where the necessary accu* nations having been preferred before the Abbot of tlie Dominican Monks of thai city, who then occupied the important post of Inquisitor General of the Italian States ; the Abbot Gondez was, in con-
VOL. iv·
G
t sequence, committed to the safe custody of the Officials, in order that he might undergo an examination, as to the many dreadful charges "which меге to be pre¬ ferred against him. Although the commitment of the Su¬ perior had been conducted with as much privacy as possible, the fact was, never¬ theless, spread abroad, and excited the greatest astonishment in the members of the Conclave, (where the name of Gon¬ dez was well known, on account of his intrigues for the first vacant Cardinals hat,) as well as in the minds of those persons M'ho had long been in the pay of the Abbot, and had used their utmost interest in his favour; Mİıich had, indeed, so far succeeded, tliat Gondez, instead of being escorted to Rome as a delin¬ quent, cognizable by the inquisitorial ju¬ dicature, had been sent for, and was, con¬ sequently, expected to reap the fruits of his unremitting pride and ambition.
After the lapse of some days, the hour of midnight being appointed for the first examination ofthe accused, the Inquisitor General, and the other officers of that dreadful tribunal, being assembled, and surrounded with the usual insígnias of terror, summoned the Abbot Gondez, who was brought before the tremendous table of office by two officials, masked ; when the Accuser General, from a secret part of the hall, where his person was quite concealed from the delinquent, re¬ capitulated, in a deep and terrific voice, the following charges against the Abbot ; — u That he was guilty of the damning crimes of HERESY, PARRICIDE, AND MURDER. These several charges having been de¬ livered with an aweful and penetrating accent, that struck to the soul of the Abbot, a profound silence, fbr some mo¬ ments, ensued; during which the delin* tiuent had recourse to every effort, in g û
order to rally his sinking spirits, when on a sudden, a hoHow deep-toned voice echoed through the hall pronouncing these words :— u Confess thy guilt, or plead thine in¬ nocence?" Gondez, aroused at this ap¬ peal, summoned up all his resolution, and exclaimed with boldness ;— " I deny the charges urged against me." *· Speak to each charge separately," resumed the same voice, in tones of thunder, " Art thou not an Heretic ^" " I deny the appellation," replied the Monk. " Art thou not a Parricide ?" " I disclaim the guilty title, й resumed the Abbot.
" Art thou not a murderer ?" reiterated the same mvsterious interrogator. " My hands are free from blood," re¬ turned Gondez. " Exhort the criminal," continued the accuser, in a louder and more threat- ning tone of voice., A few seconds having efrnscd, the chief Inquisitor raised the crucifix, and then crossing himself thus bespoke the Abbot Gondez :— 11 The attribute of Heaven is justi — ; and the doctrines of Christianity me brotherly love and charity to all men·, lhe votaries of Saint Dominic, therefore, ever anxious to pursue the paths-of re¬ ligion, aud administer relief to the pene- tential votary, are willing to extend their commiseration, even to the most hardened gui İt and contumacy; say, there- G 3
fore, Gondez, art thou guilty or not, ol' the crimes adduced ? Speak as the voice of truth shall dictate, for the fraternity of Saint Dominic, illumined by the Holy Spirit, can fathom the deepest recesses of the soul; but voluntary confession is the certain step to merit our pity and commiseration. " " I have answered in the negative, to eaeh separate allegation," replied the Abbot, with a degree of firmness. To this answer three separate exhor¬ tations ensued, to each of which a similar reply was delivered by Gondez; where¬ upon, instantaneously, the hall resound¬ ed with a discordant yell, and the lights were suddenly extinguished ; when several officers of the inquisition rushed into the chamber, clad iu sable habilii- ments, and wearing vizors of crimson hue, some bearing torches emitting a blood-red gleam, while others displayed
instruments of torture, which appalled the sick'ning soul of the enhorred delin¬ quent. " Art though not guilty ?'* once more demanded the Inquisitorial accuser. The Abbot was, for a few seconds, mute ; but, rallying all his resolution, he again replied :— ι " Innocent, by Heaven ! At that instant a terrific shriek resound¬ ed through the distant vaultings of the prison, even the officials themselves were mute, and stood astonished ; the judges arose from their seats at the holy table of office ; while the countenance of every auditor present was indicatory of the mingled sensations of fear and asto¬ nishment! On a sudden the distant portals were G 4
burst open, greeting with discordant am upon their iron hinges, while a shrieking voice was heard to exclaim;; - 4t Gondez, ï come !" The Abbot stood aghast,-*-the tremour of death ran through his veins,—for scarcely were the words pronounced ere the hideous spectre of the Little Red Woman, of Oronza s monastery, rushed into the inquisitorial chainber, and, darting a look of hellish malignity upon tiie shuddering delinquent, she thus con¬ tinued ,·-»- M Dost thou not remember me Gon^ dez? Dost thou not recai to mind the cloisters of Columha's monastery, aud that eventful night which gavo thee to captivity ?--Again, Gondez, İ revisit thee, for thou, with me, shalt share the consuming torments of tlu> damned."
During this adddress the Abbot sunk on his knees to earth, while the Inquisitor General, having assumed a sufficient de¬ gree of fortitude, seized the crucifix, which stood upon the table of office, and rearing it on high, thus exorcised the ghastly phantom of the Little Red Woman ;— " Behold this sacred symbol, perturb¬ ed spirit !—and let the power ofthe Om* nipotent confine thee to those regions from whence thou cam'st.— Go¿ or dread the sufferings that await thee*" At this address the spectre turned it» livid countenance towards the speaker, and, darting its terrific eyes upon the cross, shrieked horribly; at that junc¬ ture yells* again resounded, ami though unseen j the persecuting demon renewed his torments on the damned spirit, lash¬ ing it with scorpions to the realms be¬ low ι while the last words of tlie de-* G 5
parting spectre, in terrific accents, ex¬ claimed :—* " Come, Gondez, come ! thou soon shalt join the suffering spirit of Oronza s Witch, and in the realms of Erebus, re- cal to mind the yearly visitant of the cloisters of Saint Columba V A considerable time elapsed ere the in¬ quisitors and their officials were suffi¬ ciently collected to proceed, in the regu¬ lar course, with the delinquent; during which period the Abbot, yielding to the accumulation of horrors that assailed him, felt those torments almost realized, which had been so emphatically prognosticated by the late dreadful visitant.—Gondez was» however, aroused upon feeling him¬ self forcibly seized by several officials, who, heedless of his struggles, dragged him to the chamber of torture, where were displayed every insignia that was capable of appalling the human souk
When affixed to the rack, the inqui¬ sitor again exhorted Gondez to make an ample confession ; dwelling for a time on the late horrible appearance, which sufficiently indicated his guilt, and sealed him among the number ofthe accursed. Ί he Monk wavered for a period, hut guilty obduracy, seconded by shame, prompted him, once more, to deny the charges ; M'hen instantaneously, the or¬ der мач given, the cords were tightened bv the officials, and the suffering Abbot wreathed in agony from the anguish thus intheted on his body.—Nature exhausted, at length yielded to the pain, and a faint stupor numbed for a while the delin¬ quent's anguish; upon which, restora¬ tives меге administered, M'hen his length¬ ened groans gave token of returning life, which were answered by the hollow toll of the bell of midnight, that sounded dissoiiiintlv through the vaulted ave- nues. Γ.'β
Puring three successive nights, did the guilty Gondez endure the tortures, inflicted on his person ; in vain too, had every stratagem been put into effect during each day, by pretended commis- serAting friends, who visited him, to draw forth an unfeigned confession; nought availed ; the Abbot continued obdurate,, when, as thç last resource, an order was. given for the infliction of the extremes t torture. Under this, tlie pride and hard¬ ened contumacy ofthe Monk at length " gave way, and he professed himself dis¬ posed to make a full confession of every çrimç which had tainted hjs souk fpon tliis occasion, all the inquisitors assembled, as the charges adduced against the Abbot had excited an un¬ usual degree of curiosity ; in addition to which, the extraordinary appearance of the spectre, on the first night of his ex¬ amination, had given rise to the most horrible conjectures as to the extent of the^delinquenťs guilt
As éhe general confession thus extorted from the Abbots was vei;y closely con¬ nected with the most extraordinary facts appertaining to other, individuals before mentioned, in tliese volumes, we shall now proceed with the continuatiouof the story of the illustrious Count Ozimo, the fervent friend of the lost Duca Gon¬ zari, who under the lowly disguise of a pilgrim ofthe mendicant, fraternity ofthe Holy Cross, quitted the city of Rome ia pursuit of his much revered friend, and the equally 4 unfortunate object ofthe Du- ca'saffections, the lovely Rosanua Valenza, daughter of the poisoned Marquis Ste- phano Alveroni, ofthe city of Manfre¬ donia..
СНЛР. IV.
îx>ve is the fervid pation of the «юн!, which T>lazes iV>r n pe rif к1, and renders слегу opposition nujMtory; but tbere is in steady friendship « charm, which, though less potent, is far more durable ; the former like tine summer's burning ravs, aifords committed pain and delight, whereas the latter, calm and steady, yields tiiat placid gratification «hich the hunian mind enjoys, when, after a summer's sultry day, the silvVy moon imites us to the 4illy brene «f silent niüht.
lie that \vou4ì vie with Angel's bles.Mİ, Should tunc his soul to friendship trae; Friendship can sooth each care to rest, And all the ills of fate subdue.
SEQUEL COCXT OZIMO'S TALE. JT OR the space of eight successive months, did the indefatigable "Conat proceed in his research after the Duca
Gonzar! and his bride ; during which period, he had traversed every part of Tuscany, and the Venetian state, anıt had even penetrated into Piedmont and Savoy, from whence continuing along the coast or the Adriatic sea, he had passed by Manfredonia into Naples, and thence crossing to Messina, had explored ever}- part of Sicily. During this persevering and difficult journey, eveiy thing which gold or stra¬ tagem could effect, for the purpose of discovery, was put into practice, but without success. Sometimes it appeared as ifa clue presented itself* which tended to unravel the mvsterious fate of the Duca and his bride ; butaner bavins: had recourse to every expedient, the Count was again baffled, or found the whole affair to be unconnected with the objects of hie pursuit. Almost overpowered with despondency
øn account of his ill success, Ozimo>, quitting Sicily, returned to Naples, and journeyed thence to Rome ;. where, upon enquiry, the first intelligence that met his ear, wa& the death of Cardinal Ni¬ colo* the lost Duca's uncle, who had yielded up his spirit more than four months prior to the Counťs return to the capital of Italy.. His next enquiry was concerning the late Cardinal's eleve, Giovanni Maldi¬ ehini, with respect to whom the Count could not glean the smallest intelli¬ gence. Thus- frustrated in every en¬ deavour, the melancholy Ozimo gave himself up to the gloom of despondency, and feeling the religious garb he had adopted more consonant to the anguish of his mind than the assumption of his proper dignity,, as Count Ozimo, he, ia consequence, determined to remain in tlie same disguise, and to conceal his, real title from those nobles, who 'would:
have felt proud in the acquisition of hii» friendship and society. The Count Qzimo 3 in gloomy medi¬ tation, would frequently retire to the most lonely parts of the City of Itome> or stray beyond its towering M r alls inta the adjoining country. There often would he contemplate the siuking sun, gra¬ dually declining behind the M r estern bills ;-i-the silent period of twilight ;—and tlie теле solemn midnight hour; when to the silvery goddess of the night, he would thus address his mental contem» plations : " Pale queen of night Г how many soul-thrilling emotions dost thou not bring to my care-worn mjnd ? for thy chaste beams, if yet my friend exists, illumines him as well as. me; perhaps, e'en ηοΛν, he fixes on thy silvVy orb the tearful eye of retrospection, and waJU one anxious, thought towards, rao
his friend.— О ! couldst thou reveal the soul of him, \\ ho now addresses thee, and speak each anxious thought that swells my heart, the welcome truth, per¬ haps, wouhl dissipate the gloom that mantles o'er the bosom of my friend." Such was the melancholy of the Count, and such the gloomy train of ideas which unceasingly preyed upon his droughts, evincing most pointedly, the unextinguishable glow of pure and disinterested friendship, when sheltered in the uncontaminated bosom of virtue. u Friendship, like gold, fatt'*s hottest lire defies, Yielding its former lustre to the eyes.'' One evening, after the Count's re¬ turn to Rome, he proceeded with folded arms and downcast eyes along several grand colonnades of the city, when his steps, almost unconsciously, led him through the open portal of the church of the convent Dc/la Pieta, which was
the resort ofthe daughters of all the no¬ ble families of Rome, who were, for the most part, educated in that convent, dur¬ ing which period many of them imbibing a love for religious seel usimi, became afterwards nuns of the order Dvlla Pkta. The Count Ozimo, unmindful of the surrounding grandeur of this monastic edifice, proceeded along one of its prin cipal aisles, when, suddenly raising his eyes, a most sumptuous marble monu¬ ment met his regard, upon the inscrip¬ tion of which he had scarcely fixed his eyes, when the name of v CARDINAL NICOLO GONZARI appeared in letters of gokl, as being the mouldering occupant of that silent se¬ pulchre. For a few seconds an indescribable thrill struck to the'heart of Ozimo, who
continued awhile incapable of proceeding in the perusal of the monumental inscrip- tion, which, he at length found to blazon forth the noble family of the house of Gonzari; and, in a strain of laboured panegyric, to commemorate the piety and sanctified deeds of the defunct. Four lines particularly struck the pen¬ sive Count, as being peculiarly applica¬ ble to the generous cause in which he had embarked, and filled his soul with a degree of assurance which he had not for some time experienced. The subject ran as follows :— ** Death cannot chill th« Rrdor of the j usti The boul must live,, although the frame be dust. Jn Mercy's cauee no ills appall the good, For God, retiibutiw, yields blood for blood," Ozimo still remained with eyes rivetted on these recording lines, while the bright lays of evening gradually stealing o'er the face of nature had thrown a melaur
choly yellow tinge upon every object within the church ; at length heaving a heart-felt sigh, he exclaimed iu broken accents ;— €( And is there hope?" Scacely had the Count uttered those words, then a voice replied :«— " Is there not a God r" Struck with this unexpected reply, Ozimo directed his eye towards the whole length marble statue of the Cardinal Ni¬ colo, which adorned the pedestal of the monument, from which the words had apparently issued ; but what must have been the terror that struck the soul of Ozimo, on perceiving that the eyes of the figure were in motion, and bent full upon his person, expressive of mingled anguish and horror !
Petrified at the sight, the Count was scarcely able to credit the veracity of that which was so obvious to his senses, and remai ned for a time transfixed to the spot ; when the marble effigy suddenly resumed its wonted appearance, leaving Ozimo wrapped i u the most profound meditation. What can portend this singular inter¬ position of supernatural agency, thought the Count, Why that appeal to my faith ?—Yes, there is a mighty and in- scrutiblc providence, in whom I place implicit confidence ; who will not suffer the endeavours of virtue tobe frustrated» -—Why wanders thus, the spirit of the once sainted Cardinal Nicolo? If in the cause of virtue his phantom revisits this terrestrial sphere, let if once more ad* dress me, and make its erland known ; but, if perturbed, it would unhurthen its guilty actions, heaven must be the im- jinutable judge, and mortals must bend
Äubmissivclv to its decree.—I M'ould that I could pacify the workings of my breast, continued the Count Ozimo, with a deep-fetched sigh; yet, my mind tells me, that the spirit of Nicolo rests not in peace, for deccb long chronicled in fate's dread page, that doom him to tortures, which are never known on this side of futurity. Again Ozimo bent a steady gaze upon the sculptured marble; but the statue Mas mute and motionless, м- h i le the yel¬ low tinge of the setting sun darting its golden lustre full upon the stained glass of the opposite lofty arched casements displayed each lineament of the defunct Cardinal, to the gaze of the observant Couut, who could not but extol the art of the sculptor from his precise recollec¬ tion of every feature of Gonzari while living. A short period having elapsed İn thi»
scrutiny, the sound of a voice in a whis¬ per suddenly caught the ears of the Count, and on directing his regard to¬ wards the spot froni whence it came, he discerned that the black curtain on the inner side of the grating, through which the nuns were visible, in an adjoining chamber, during the hours of service^ was partly drawn aside, and that a sister appeared, who still repeated the word " Stranger" in a low tone ; and finding tliat Ozimo had caught her eye^ she beck¬ oned him ~to approach, which summons he immediately obeyed; when, thrusting a folded paper through the grating, she closed too the curtain ; upon which the Count, having placed the scroll in his bosom, quitted the church, though not without experiencing a momentary thrill of terror, as he passed by the cold in¬ animate statue of the Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari, which had so latclv assumed the extraordinary appearance of anima¬ tion.
Having gained the mansion wherein he intended to repose that night, he eagerly unfolded the mysterious paper wliich had been committed into his hands, and by the light of his lamp he read as follows :—* " Gentle stranger, as your habit be¬ speaks you a brother of the order of Holy Cross, in the name of that mercy which you profess, in imitation of the Redeemer ofthe world, whose cross you bear, attend to night at the gate of the cemetry of this convent, at the hour of twelve.—Fail not, as you seek to merit a crown immortal in the world to come." Having perused this laconic, but stre¬ nuous address, the Count, swayed by the strong impulse of philanthrophy whieh had ever held empori u m oer his heart, instantlv determined to act in concert with the ardent wishes of the writer ; and, after anxiously counting tlie iutcr- VOL, IV· M
veiling hours, he proceeded towards the appointed spot, where he arrived before the toll of midnight; at which time the solemn bell had scarcely sounded on the breeze, when tlie bolts of the gate lead¬ ing into the burying ground were heard to move, and, in a few seconds, the same nun who had, in the morning, com¬ mitted the paper to Ozimo's care, mo¬ tioned him to advance, which the Count did on the instant; when the sister, closing to the portal, led the way be¬ neath a cloistered avenue, against the Avails of which were seen numerous mo¬ numents of departed souls, while in the cemetry appeared innumerable mounds of earth, each adorned with a simple stone cross, which was the only orna¬ ment allowed to the graves of the de¬ funct sisterhood of the convent Delia Pieta. At the termination of this arclfd-way, the Nun, passing through a portal, en-
tered an angle of the cloisters ofthe mo¬ nastery, still beckoning the Count Ozimo to follow her ; then turning to the left she gently pushed open a loiv door, which instantly yielded to her touch, and they descended into a chamber illu¬ mined by a single lamp,, which rested on the pavement, near a small wicker basket, which the sister, with the most vi¬ sible signs of feeling, recommended to the care of the Count. After this, raising the crucifix, which was appendant to the strinq* of beads that hung from her girdle, she fell upon her knees, suppli¬ cating Ozimo to put himself in the same humiliating posture, which he immedi¬ ately acquiesced with; when the sister, scarcely able to articulate, from the flood of anguished tears that streamed from her uplifted eyes, thus delivered herself) with an emphasis which did not fail to rivet the attention of the Count, who repeated, audibly, every word she uttered, according to the sisters desire·— u 2
hi í swear bv the iminaetilatc C/od, who died for our transgressions, to foster and protect the charge now given to my keep¬ ing ! I swear it by the recollection of that mother's pangs v ho bore me, and by the retrospection of what must be n parent's tortures, who is at once bereft of the child to whom she has given ex¬ istence ! I swear it bv the Order of tlie Hoiv-Cross, and bv the Saviour μΊιο now registers my oath, and will requite me, as 1 act in unison with the tenor of this solemn obligation." The mm then rising, took the basket from the pavement, and throwing back the cover, produced, to the astonished gaze of the Count, a most lovely sleep¬ ing infant, which was carefully enfolded ifi the most costly garments, and which had not, apparently, been given to hght for a longer period than twelve hours.— While gazing on this little cherub, the eves of the mm, still bathed in a flood of
tears, were rivetted with a look of anxious inquiry upon the features of Ozimo, whose immediate conjecture was, that the babe before him must be the offspring of one of the unfortunate nuns of the convent, whose punishment for such an enormous trangression, if discovered, would in all probability have been per¬ petual confinement in a solitary dun¬ geon, if not a lingering and premature death. The Count, divining the anxious feel¬ ings of the sister, gave her immediate assurance of his fidelity in tiie following words ;— " I have a heart open to commisera¬ tion, and by the eternal ruler of Hea¬ ven, no mortal power shall wrench froin my protection this harmless babe." Ozi¬ mo then taking the hand of the nun, continued thus, in a softened tone of voice :— a 3
ťí Go, thou feeling Votary of religion, and bid the anxious mother of my charge dispel from her mind all dread as to the infant she is thus compelled to relinquish ! Tell her, as an alleviation to her yearning anguish, that I will teach her offspring to venerate her sorrows ; and, by his virtuous deeds, to render him¬ self worthy to re-join her in the man¬ sions of the blessed heVeafter.'* As the Count Ozimo concluded this address, the sudden chime of a bell was heard to vibrate on the blast of night, when the nun, starting, exclaimed, " Jesu Maria, let us speed hence, or we are lost for ever!" With the utmost precipitancy the sis¬ ter retraced her steps in silence, gazing with anxiety around her; and having arrived at the portal of the cemetry, she placed a casket in the hand of Ozimo, who would fain have returned the pre«
sent, but the nun, quickly waving her hand, pushed too the portal, leaving tlie Count Ozimo in possession of his lovely infant charge. Having returned with the utmost ala¬ crity to the place of his abode, Count Ozimo closed to the arras of his cham¬ ber, and upon inspecting the casket, found it to contain jeM T els of an immense value, together with a large packet, ad¬ dressed to the mendicant of the Order of the Holy Cross ; which being opened, contained a second sealed paper* the sub¬ ject matter of the envelope being as fol¬ lows :— " Merciful stranger, in the name of maternal affection, I conjure thee pre¬ serve the little innocent committed to thy charge; and for thy kindness accept, as earnest of thy future reward, the string of diamonds, and the gold, contained within the second parcel. The other lì 4
letter which that packet contains, must be delivered bv thee, into the hands of the noble Count Ozimo, of the city of Taranto, together with this sleeping che¬ rub. He will nobly repay thee for thy pains, and thou wilt thereby call down the fervent prayers of that unfortunate mo¬ ther, who, in yielding up her babe to thee, plants in her heart the thorn of death, which speedily must give her an¬ guished person to the grave.'* The Count hastily seizing the second parcel, and breaking open the paper addressed to himself^ read as follows :—, "mv 1-0 в d, " The sentiments of inviolable esteem towards you, M'hich unceasingly * issued from the lips of my adored, though now I fear for ever lost husband, the Duca Gonzari, have led an agonized mother to call forth your pity on the unprotected and innocent pledge of the unfortunate
marriage of your friend. Lest, however, the impulse of your generous feelings should lead you to rush into measures of too precipitate a nature, follow, I conjure you, in the name of my infant, the steps which I am now on the point of laying down for your adoption, or the cause of innocence will be frustrated for ever. " Let my dear boy, under your kind protection, be conveyed far from the shores of Italy. But, previous to that step, a trusty friend must be empowered to repair to the gate of the cemetry of the monastery, Della Pieta, at the hour of midnight, on the first Sabbath of every month, when such » written com- intínication$ s as are delivered to him^ must be forthwith forwarded Ло your, hands ; and dttheithne therein appointed foryour open procedure against the persecutor of your friend, and his distracted wife, prefer the charges at the * table огЧЬе h 5
Holy Office ; but on your life, await the epoch in silence; for he, whose murder¬ ous soul hath wrought my miseries, and those of my noble lord, holds mighty sway, and fills a post of eminence in that dreadful tribunal. To speak, therefore, at the present juncture, would be death to thee, and to my defenceless offspring, for whom I claim thy generous protection and inviolable secrecy. Rosanna Valenza, Duchessa Gonzari" Lost in admiration at this most extraor¬ dinary coincidence of circumstances, in which the wonder-working hand ofthe Di¬ vinity shone forth so conspicuously, the Count Ozimo instantly prepared to fol¬ low the measures so emphatically laid down by the unfortunate wife of his JHend. The Count having, on the ensuing
morning, procured the necessary persons. to superintend the lovely babe, set for¬ ward, with secrecy and dispatch, towards the city of Taranto, where he arrived in safety. Here having occupied himself two days in the arrangement of his plans,* Ozimo, at length, confided the eventful secret to an old steward, who had been the trusty attendant of his father. This confidential servant waa, therefore, dis¬ patched to Rome, with orders to attend punctually every succeeding month, at the cemetry of the Convent Della Pieta, from whence, any communications re¬ ceived, were to be forwarded to him on tlie instant, (by a vessel obtained ex¬ pressly for that purpose), to the city of Edinburgh, thç place appointed for the secretion of the Count Ozimo, and his infant charge. Every arrangement having been thus made, the generous Counts with the infant
heir of the noble house of Gonzari, em¬ barked for Scotland, where they arrived in perfect safety. While in the city of Edinburgh, the Count Ozimo, under the assumed title of Ferdinando Alzarro, became known to Sir Allan. Macdonald, as has already been stated in the history of AvinzoV infancy, when, after a long residence in that city, an express arrived from his steward in Italy, which demanded his immediate attendance at Rome; the con¬ tents of the packet were to the following effect:— " МУ LORD, " I have regularly attended at the ap¬ pointed periods at the gate of the ceme¬ try of the Convent Delia Pieta, but without having received any of the dis¬ patches which were to have been en¬ trusted to me there, until the present,
which I forward with ¿lie utmost expedi- tiom" The contents of the enclosed paper weie as follows: — ŕí MY LORD, " The hand of persecution is never to be withdrawn from the suffering inno- cent; and it is with infinite difficulty I can forward the present dispatch, by wdiich I am simply - enabled, to inform you, that the wretched Duchessa Gonzari has been suddenly removed from the Convent Della Pieta, and from the care of her whose endeavours, though ina¬ dequate to alleviate the anguish of her soul, were yet t always exerted to sooth, her sufferings. Heaven knows whither, slie has been.transported; but my ¿u'ejent prayers shall be unceasingly poured forth for herself and that hapless infant, who was, by my interference, rescued from
the inevitable death that would have aM r aited it. Marcaureta, Of the Sisterhood qf the Convent Della Pieta." This unsatisfactory communication prompted the Count's return to Italy, where* he was determined no longer to bury the fact in oblivion, but, if pos¬ sible, to discover, and to rescue the per¬ secuted wife of his friend, ' and also to learn the secret respecting the lost Duca Gonzari. For this purpose, having com¬ mitted Huberto Avinzo to the kind guar- dianship of Sir Allan Macdonald, he spee¬ dily embarked for, and arrived in safety ol), the Italian shore, where heimmediately committed to writing the full detail of every circumstance Telatili^ to the Duca Gonzari and his wife ; at the conclusion of which, he ventured to liazard his own
opinion respecting the horrid transaction that had taken place at Villa Seveta ; nor did he refrain from implicating the de¬ ceased Cardinal Nicolo. The statement finally demanding that the individuals still existing who were concerned in that dreadful persecution should he brought to light, and be made to suffer the pu¬ nishment so justly due to their enormous crimes. This paper being concluded, it was dis¬ patched, by the indignant Count, to the table of the Holy Office, as he was fully determined that his life and fortune should be openly staked in that cause wherein he had so nobly embarked. But Ozimo soon discovered the propriety of the caution contained in the letter re¬ ceived from the persecuted wife of his friend ; for the Count, on the very night after he had dispatched the foregoing memorial to tlie grand Inquisitor, was
himself forcibly seized by the officials of that tribunal, and dragged to one of those dungeons, whieh he had vainly flattered himself was, through his means, to have become the residence of the diabolical persecutors of his noble friend. In this dreadful seclusion the Count remained for the space of four years; lost to the world, and vainly endeavour¬ ing to claim a hearing before the judges of the Holy Office. A thousand times he called to his recollection the unpro¬ tected infant, so solemnly ' committed to his charge by the wife of his noble friend. He upbraided himself with having quit¬ ted the Scottish Realm, and found, when too late, the inutility of his weak en¬ deavours, in opposition to fhe tyrannical measures of the Inquisition ; which, in¬ stead of aiding the cause of* innocence and justice, tnigllt be converted into the most diabolical engine of ertrclty by any
of its members, whose hidden motives might originate in hatred, malice, or even mere caprice. It Mas on this account that Ozimo began to comprehend the caution which had characterized the communications he liad received from the Duchessa Ro¬ sanna Valenza, who had scrupulously avoided making mention of the name of her powerful persecutor, being well assured that the indignant Count would have openly accused him, which must have terminated in his own ruin. In this situation was the Count Ozimo, when a sealed paper was one day deli¬ vered into his hands, by the official usually attendant on his person, the con¬ tents of which, when opened, proved to he as follows :—
To the Count Ferdinando Ozimo. '* The rays of mercy ever characterize the operations of the Holy Office ; and that the Count Ozimo may profit by its lenity, is the hope of the judges ealled upon to fulfil the institutions of the thrice beatified Saint Dominic. 4t If, therefore, the Count Ozimo will affix hfe sign manual to the lines annexed, his freedom is attainable; if not, be his blood upon himself;—the due reward of his willing obduracy." Tlie oath which Ozimo was requested to enter into, ran as follows:—■ " I, Count Ferdinando Ozimo, a wretched supplicant at the table of the Holy Office of Home, do swear by the eternal God, and his immaculate son 5
Jesus, and by the sacred institutes ofthe glorious and thrice blessed Saint Domi¬ nic, that I will, by unceasing prayers, endeavour to mitigate the just wrath of Heaven, and the further cognizance of the grand Inquisitors; for that I did, heretically, maliciously, and damnably, endeavour to villify the revered name of the Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari, now fore¬ most among the blessed in Heaven. And I do further swear, that I will tor ever¬ more withhold from such an accursed sin, by maintaining a rigid silence, with respect to such abominable accusations, as M'ere formerly drawn out by the hand of impiety, and forwarded by me to the table of the Holy Office ; and, in case of default, I do hereby call dou*n upon myself the vengeance of this most mer¬ ciful and immaculate tribunal, before which I bend a miserable sinner, and the unworthy partaker of its sublime mercy."
Having perused this extraordinary oath, the strong impulse which took pos¬ session of the Count Ozimo's mind, was contempt, which prompted him, in the first instance, to dismiss the official, by returning the paper ţnto his possession, w 7 ith the silent disdan it so justly merited. A few moments, however, brought the more sober contemplations of the mind into action, which presented to Ozimo's reason the following striking facts :— That, in consequence of not signing the proffered oath, he being then a prisoner, might be kept in confinement during life, or else fall a sacrifice to some false charge wdiich wouid, most probably, be brought against him. That, by regaining his freedom he should, at all events, be enabled to return to Scotland, and there to take upon him-
self the charge of the offspring of his lost friend. That, although he bound himself by the oath ; to relinquish all further endea¬ vour, as to bringing the delinquent to justice, who had been the perpetrator of such abhorred persecutions, yet, that the obligation being compulsitor}*, he could, at any time, procure a dispensa¬ tion, if his evidence were called into effect" This chain of reasoning was further strengthened by the Counťs unfortunate conviction tliat his efforts had been pro¬ ductive of no benefit to the sufferers, and only brought upon himself a linger¬ ing confinement. Under all these con¬ siderations, and knoM'ing that he shoidd also be at liberty, when free, to proceed in a regular personal search after his lost frieml, Ozimo at length affixed his bign
manual to the paper; whereupon, being ordered by tlie official to be, that night, in readiness, he was, at the hour of twelve, led through many subterranean dungeons, (whieh were hung round with the instru¬ ments of torture, in order to impress his soul with fear), when a small gate being opened, the Co\int found himself freed from the hated Avails which had so long imprisoned him. The first step taken by Ozimo was to repair to his estates at Taranto; and having there arranged innumerable affairs with those individuals who had long since conceived him to be dead, he set sail for Scotland; where, upon his arrival, he soon gained intelligence of the un¬ timely deatli of the noble Sir Alan Mac* donald, and the demolition of his castle. In vain did the Count make inquiries concerning Sir Alan's unfortunate lady, and the orphan, Huberto Avinzo; some
accounts gave him to understand, that Lady Macdonald and the child had suffered by the murderous swords ofthe remorseless followers of King Edward ; others stated that they had fallen a prey to the devouring flames, wdiich hail re¬ duced the castle to ashes ; while some few persons conjectured that they had been made captives. In short, almost every account tended to confirm the death of Huberto, the noble heir of the estates of G onzari ; and thus oppressed with the most rooted melancholy, the Count Ozimo, having traversed through¬ out the realm of Scotland, returned once more to Italy, after the lapse of several months, in order to renew his search, as to the fate of the noble parents of that being, whom he supposed to be lost to him for ever. During four successive years was the Count occupied in this disinterested research, which was unattended with sue-
cess. At length, wearied with disappoint¬ ment, and disgusted with the soil that gave him birth, and had been productive of so much misery to himself and his friends, he once more determined on revisiting Scotland, having again yielded to the hope that fate might yet reward his persevering assiduity, by giving to his embrace the oifspring of his friend, who, he conceived, might be still in existence, notwithstanding the reports he had so generally heard, of his and the Lady Macdonald s death. This determination was speedily car¬ ried into effect ; but, after many months spent in this Unavailing enquiry the Count Ozimo became weary of that ex¬ istence which had proved of so little benefit to those whom he had for such a number of years toiled to preserve; and finding also, that his constitution had become impaired with the mental dis-
quietude which unceasingly assailed him, he at length yielded himself up to reli¬ gion, in the hope of experiencing, in its tranquilizing bosom, that source of men¬ tal quiet, which the events of busy life, and the recurrence to former scenes, tended only to destroy. Having formed this determination, the Count, actuated by the purest motives which religio* could implant in the human breast, did not seek to obtain that elevated eccle¬ siastical preferment, which his rank and fortune might have commanded; but, on the contrary, Under a feigned name he began his religious course of life in the retired monastery of St. Columba, in the island of Oronza, where he assumed the appellation of Father Anthony ; he being that very Monk for whom Huberto Avinzo had felt himself so much interested dur¬ ing the celebration of the mass ; when f with King Robert Bruce, and the noble fugitives, he was an inmate of that con¬ vent. vor., iv. t
Count O^imo,, after« remaining sonic time within the monastery, made ample discovery of the vicçş practised by the fraternity,, fţnd /р1)ипре4*,фед1 with alv horrcţice ; :< j r ieldipg; qnl^y to [ ţjliaţ rçguW course of religious, worship,wbich soothed his ,§9ul ji^ţo a state Qf pensive ţnejancholy, and Jed him to disregard the contempt heaped upon him by the rest*çtf the fra¬ terni t\;. , , , , x - „ ; * i Tlie appearance of Huberto at the monastery, had peculiarly interested the Count Ozimo, who traced, in the fine symetry of his person, a strong resenv hlance to that of the friend of his youtli, the Duca Gonzari; but the assumed name of Sir Edred Macarden, which Avinzo had adopted, by desire of the King, completely frustrated the discovery •which must otherwise have taken place; as the name of Huberto Avinzo had been giyen him, by the Count Ozimo, at tlie
moment, when an infant, he was placed under his protection. ; '' It was some time previous to the arrival of the King and his nobles at the island of Oronza, that the Monk/ John of Dunbar, became the bosom friend and companion pf the Abbot Gondez, who, prior to that epoch, had ever showered iiis favours on another member df thé' fraternity, named Dominico. This fa¬ ther, on finding himself neglected by the Abbot, had, f*om that time, endea¬ voured gradually to ingratiate himself in the esteem of Father Anthony, other¬ wise Count Ozimo ; for which purpose he was regular in his devotional duties, and estranged himself from the rest of the brotherhood, which in the end ope¬ rated upon *he soul of the Count. In the frequent conversations between Fa¬ ther Dominico and him, dark and myste¬ nous insinuations, relating to the Abbot Gondez, would often escape his lip.^ 1 1
but these never excited the attention of Father Anthony, who always placed them to the account of that dissatisfaction which h&,.conceived might actuate the proceedings of Dominico, on account of the change * in ithe Abboťs conduct to¬ wards him. On the arrival of King Robert Bruce, tlie persevering conduct of Dominico soon made him acquainted M'ith the mysterious measures then carrying on by the Abbot, as well as with the real cha¬ racter of King Robert Bruce, and his brother Sir Edward ; the rest of the fugitives being totally unknown to him. It was on this occasion that Dominico ventured to confide the secret to the breast of the Count ; who, scorning the Abboťs detestable measures, and feeling most peculiarly interested for the person of the supposed Sir Edred Macarden, at length , worked so effectually upon the feelings of the Monk Dominico, (who was per-
fectly conversant with all the mysteries appertaining to the monastery, from his long and close connection with the Abbot,) that he, in consequence, deter¬ mined to act in unison with the desires of Ozimo ; and on this account he sedulously \ratched the actions of Huberto, first giving him the mysterious caution in ťhe chapel, and afterwards communicating to him the secret method of escaping from the convent, tlirough the portal which led to the burial vault of the fa¬ thers. * On the return of Huberto Avinzo Jţ* the island of Oronza, in order to effeet the liberation of Ronilda, it was the same Father Dominico who seized Hu- berto's arm in the chapel ; forthat Monk, perfectly conversant with the machina¬ tions of the superior, on whose every movement he kept a watchful eye, had in consequence doubted the real death of the Father, John of Dunbar ; and had, 1 3
therefore, repaired to the burial vajujt, in prder to inspect t)\e corps, on one of those.nights when, Avinzo had traversed tiie caverns, in order to gain the cloisters. Alarmed at tlie approach of foot-steps, Dominico, concealed himself, and be¬ held, tohisgreat astonishment, the person of the supposed Sir Edred Macarden. Anxious to ascertain the cause of 1ш return to the island of Oronza, he repaired in diftguisc on the following evening to the straggling huts of the fi&hernien, where he ascertained with much difficulty the real name of Huberto Avinzo, with¬ out, however, unravelling the cause of his residence there, or of his nightly vUits ţo the monastery. This information Dominico confided.as usual to the Count Ozimo; who, on learning that in the person of Sir Edred Macarden he be¬ held, in all probability, the long lost Hu¬ berto Avinzo, displayed the most poig¬ nant emotions; and at length, with infinite difficulty, he was enabled to com¬ municate to the father his own story
the wonder öf- thè '· Count had : beéri thus powerfully excited^ bow nmch : ' nimè powerful must have been* the emotions which agitated the soul of Dominico \ who, 'j glorj4tíg "¿'in the knowledge of án heir's' being still -in- e îiiătence^ to -cliiiui theöónáarí estates, communicãtetl, wîtli evident marks of ; horror,* that intelli¬ gence which petrified Ozimo; who then discovered, that .in the person of Gon¬ dez, Abbot of the monasterv of Saint Columba, he beheld -Giovanni Maldi¬ ehini, the eleve of .the-defunct-Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari, in whose possession were the enormous revenues of the Ducal estate, 'which were then employed to pavehis way to the pontifical chair. After the first ebullition had subsided it was deemed most expedient to work in secret; in consequence of which, the Count Ozimo had refrained froni making himself known to Huberto, while on the ι 4
island; but, suhsequent to the seizure of the Abbot, and to thé sailing of the forces from Oronza, the Count Ozimo antl Father Dominico quited the monastery, and proceeded incognito to the city of Edinburgh, where they awaited the trial í»ť the Abbot, and then appeared, in dis¬ guise, to prefer their charges to the King; which annulled the proceedings in Scot¬ land, transferring the trial of Gondez to the inquisition at Rome, where the fol¬ lowing facta weie extorted by tho nick from the guilty bo&om óf the merciless Giovanni Maldiehini. It may be necessary to state that, pre¬ vious to the depositions being made by Count Ozimo before the judges of the Holy Tribunal, he was regularly absolved from the oath whereto he had subscribed his sift-nature, in order to effect his rescue from the inquisition; and, as such an elevated ecclesiastical character as the late Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari was im-
plicated, the examinations were carried on with the greatest secrecy and pre¬ caution; for the inquisitorial brethreu are ever tenacious of exposing the vicious conduct of any individuals wearing tbe clerical robes, or bearing any office in that Tribunal»
15
СЦАР. II.
----------------- ^Thy churlish spirit GovernM a wolf, who, hang'd for human slaughter; 1'veu from the gallows did his fell soul fleet, And, whilst thou lay'st in thy unhallow'd dam, Itrftis'd itself in thee; for thy desires Are wooifish, bloody, starv 'd and ravenous. SHAKSPEAHE.
THE Substance of the ¡several Confessions OF GIOVANNI MALDICHINI, OTHERWISE G O N D E Z ; Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Columba. Tuken before the Holy Dominician Fathers of the Imj uisit ion ot Rome JL HE ungovernable passions of the iate Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari, having been before alluded to iu the account of
-the Duca Gonzari, his nephew, it is be¬ come necessary now to state his impious connection with the Madre Aluzzo, Abbess of the Convent Della Pieta, at Rome. This woman was of menial ex¬ traction, but of lofty spirit; and her person having engaged the attention of the Cardinal, he by degrees procured for lier the exalted post of Superior of the monas ter ν above-mentioned, wherein every disgraceful scene was practiced by the viscious Cardinal ; who not con¬ tented with his incontinence with the Aladre Aluzzo, had abo recourse to mea¬ sures which tended to vitiate the minds of those nuns on whom he fixed his guilty eyes, and with whom he fre¬ quently followed the most abandoned courses, secure from the eye of publicity, and guarded from discovery by being himself the confessor of those very ob¬ jects, w ho might to another father, have discovered these heinous offences.
The fruit of the Cardinal's connec¬ tion with the Madre Aluzzo, was a male child; who reared in the midst of all that depravity which degraded not only the clerical profession, but would have constituted the height of guilt in any worldly individual, became habituated to these abominable practices, and with his years, acquired that turn of mind which made the commission of every crime familiar to him, This being was no other than the Car¬ dinal's supposed elwt Giovanni Maldl· chini ; who fired with the samt thirst of ambition as reigned within the bosom of his sire, adopted with avidity every scheme which Nicolo had recourse to> in order to become the possessor of the dukedom, and extensive domains ofthe Gonzari family. For this purpose, at the head of a ruffian band, did the abominable Gio¬ vanni make the daring attempt against
the Duca's life» within the forest of Villa Seveta; which had been the cause of his introduction to the lovely Rosanna Valenza» daughter of the Marquis Al- yeroni, to whom he afterwards became allied by the sacred bond of the Divi· liity. Frustrated in his first direful attempt, he at length instilled into his fathers breast the deep laid scheme of his pre¬ tended indisposition ; the secret of the Duca's marriage having been previously conveyed to the CardinalNicolo, by means of his son Giovanni, (who kept a watch¬ ful eye on every event which transpired at Manfredonia, and Villa Seveta,) and' , by which alliance, should the young- Duca Gonzari have any offspring, all further, hope of the Cardinal's possessing the ducal territories was at an end. Alarmed at this fa^ct, the guilty Nicolo gave iato the plans of his abominable
offspring, in which hé was further strengthened by the advice of> the cruel .-Madre ¿Aluzzo ; and in conséquence of their nefarious scheme, ¡the youitg Duca was seized on his way towards Rome, whither he was repairing, with the warm affection of a loving nephew, to atteud the last moments of his supposed dying uncle. The Duca having been thus insi¬ diously and treacherously made a pri¬ soner, was secretly conveyed by Father Dominico, then a creature of Giovanni's dark designs, to a dreary castle, si* tuated on one of the rugged mountains stretching from Restina to the city of Ascoli· While this villainous scheme was carry¬ ing into effect, with regard to the young Duca, the artful Giovanni Maldiehini, who had been for some dajs in the neighbourhood of Villa Seveta, pretend¬ ed to have come post from Rome, in order to expedite the Duca's departure,
well knowing that he had been previously seized by Dominico. —When at Villa Seveta, he found a proper opportunity to administer, in the beverage of the Mar¬ quis Alveroni, the fatal potion which so speedily caused his death. This done, he dispatched his murderous band, who forcibly seized on the person of the un¬ protected and lamenting Duchessa Gon¬ zari, who was the very object in whose cause the Count Ozimo had so nobly in¬ terfered within the Avails of the ruined castle. But although Giovanni was, on that occasion, unknown to the Count, yet the person of Ozimo was not con¬ cealed from him as he hád previously seen him at Rome, the constant companion and bosom friend of the noble Duca ; and consequently gloried internally on beholding the Count, lifeless, as he ima¬ gined, from the wounds inflicted on him by one of this abominable crew. From tlie ruined fortress, the almost
lifeless Rosanna Valenza, had been con-* veyed to the Convent Della Pieta ; where the Madre Aluzzo was, by the Cardinaľs orders, in readiness to receive the lovely sufferer. From that moment the Duca's uncle, concealing his real name, visited the pining captive, whom heat first hoped to persuade, by argument, that she had been guilty of a flagrant offence, in unit¬ ing herself to the noble Duca Gonzari : and by this means, if possible, to prevail upon the innocent Rosanna, to assume the veilof the sisterhood of Delia Pieta, and give the residue of her life up* to prayer, in order to atone for the al¬ ledged crime. Rut all those intentions were quickly frustrated in the mind of Nicolo, on beholding the lovely wife of his persecuted nephew, for whom his guilty mind dared to entertain the most abandoned desires. Ever accustomed to find his wishes gratified, he communi¬ cated his designs to his guilty paitner, the Madre Aluzzo, commanding that
shameful instrument of his pleasures, to follow such plans as would best conduce to the completion of his brutality. Pre-« vious, however, to this period, the no less unjustifiable passions of Giovanni Maldi¬ ehini had led him »to entertain a similar guilty propensity fot the unprotected Duchess, in consequence of which, on ascertaining the wishes of his shameless father, which were, as usual, confided to him by his abandoned mother, the ac¬ cursed Maldiehini, who was dead to every sense even of filial duty, planned and ef* fected, by aslow poison, the death of the Cardinal Nicolo his father ; the news of which event had met the ears of the Count Ozimo, on his return to Rome, after his indefatigable search for his lost friend the Duca Gonzari. From that period Giovanni Maldiehini, in conjunction with his mother, used every endeavour to procure the estates of the Duca Gonzari, supposed to be
dead, and which M^ould, in that cas^ have become the rightful domains, of the defunct Cardinal Nicolo, had there been no issue of the Duca in existence. In oulcr to effect these ambitious views, the miscreant Giovanni, being weil awkre.of the ром -er vested -in the inqpisttdiiat judges, .and having >previously, enlbted himself a votary of that horrid tribunal, he, in consequence, put every plan iu force which wealth and cunning could effect, iu older to assume an ascendancy in the councils of the Dominican frater¬ nity, which succeeded but !too well, for, through their power, Giovanni Maldiehi¬ ni shared with the Pope tlie rentals of the dukedom of'Gonzari, which th&holy father had annexed to-his own pos¬ sessions, by failure of any just claimant to the title. Another circumstance tending to frus¬ trate every endeavour of the Count Ozimo as to ascertaining the residence of
Giovanni Maldichitfi; whom he supposed to have been the Cardinal Nicolo's elevc 3 and on whom'his suspicions had fixed, was the change of liis name to that of Gondez; a step which the judges of the inquisition always adopt, and the myste¬ rious privacy with which they ever con¬ duct themselves after being initiated into the rules observed by that tyrannical and cruel societv· While tbese scenes were transacting, the unfortunate Duchessa Rosanna Va¬ lenza became unceasingly the object of Giovanni's hateful protestations and dar¬ ing attempts, which she uniformly re¬ pulsed with all the energy of disdainful chastity; in addition to-which, the firm assurance that she then bore the fruits of her beloved nuptials with the Duca Gon¬ zari, and must speedily become a mot her, gave ber redoubled strength in repulsing the hideous object of·her persecution,· who, with that barbarity to wliich he had
become inured, sometimes boasted that lier adored hiiăLand was within his power; at the same rime giving Rosanna unde¬ niable proofs of his dread authority, and informing her that tlie most trivial step taken to unravel his villainies must ulti¬ mately be productive of her own and her Lord's destruction. M'eary of existence, Rosanna would uladlv liave kissed the hand M'hich Imd (¡¡reeled the exterminating blow, but the idea of conducing to'the Duca's death, and yielding to the grave that in¬ nocent pledge of their affection, were contemplations that checked her indig* nant hatred, and in conjunction with Margareta, her allotted attendant, every measure was devised in order to conceal her pregnancy, and when delivered, to res¬ cue her babe from the inevitable fate that would have awaited it, had the event be* come known to the obdurate and fiend* like Giovanni Maldiehini.
During the eventful epoch of Rosan- lia's delivery, one circumstance conduced, in a great measure, to screen her from observation, and that was the demise of the wicked Madre Aluzzo, the mother of Giovanni ; who, although the cause of his father's death, had nevertheless some touch of feeling for his abominable mo¬ ther, to whose early practices he was in¬ debted for that chain of crimes which stamped him more a ¡fiend of darkness than the divine representative of his Al¬ mighty maker. By the kind attention of Margareta, the unprotected innocent became provi¬ dentially committed to the charge of the Count Ozimo ; shortly after which, Giovanni resumed his accustomed perse¬ cutions towards the indignant Duchessa Gonzarì, who was, after the lapse of a considerable period, removed by Maldi- chini's order to the castle which enclosed her adored Lord ; whither the frustrated
Giovanni would frequently repair, to witness the agonies* M'hich his barbarity occasioned. At the period when the Count Ozimo's depositions were forwarded to the inqui* sition, Giovanni was the individual who frustrated that nobleman's generous en¬ deavours, and caused his cruel incarce¬ ration, from which-his freedom v/as only affected on account of Maldiehini' s no¬ mination to the post of Abbot, ofthe mo¬ nastery of Saint Columba* This reli¬ gious house, King Baliol, and Edward pf England, had surrendered to the Pope, in order to procure his voice in sanction¬ ing the nomination of the British King, who had decided in favour of Baliol, on condition,of his becoming tributary to tlie'English Monarch for the sceptre of Scotland ; which,was afterwards so nobly wrenched» from his grasp, by the magna¬ nimous endeavours of King Robert Bruce, the rightful claimant.
Thus Maldiehini, who had never be¬ fore shrunk at the commission of mur¬ der, by the powerful operations of in¬ scrutable justice, spared the life of that individual who was to appear in dreadful judgment against him; while satisfied with the sacred bond, by which he had sealedthe lips of the honourable Count Ozimo, he gave Hiifn that liberty for which he had so 'long and ardently panted. Giovanni Maldiehini, having employed his secret emissaries at Rome¿ to forward his ambitious views in the conclave, during his absence from Italy, repaired to the castle which had so long confined the unfortunate Duca Gonzari and his pining wife, who had never been per- fruited 'ito enjoy an interview with hec Lotd,* though fully acquainted with his being also a resident within the walls in that gloomy fortress, Maldiehini, how¬ ever, on this occasion, found his mali-
cious and abominable hop&s frustrated, for the first intelligence communicated to him, on his arrival, by Dominico, to whom he had left the care of the cap¬ tives, was the death of the unfortunate Duchessa Rosanna Valenza^ who had long struggled against the effects of a melancholy, which had undermined her constitution, and m the end produced that hnal blow which consigned her ago¬ nized soul to the bosom of its maker. Fired with malignant raţge, the bloody Gioyanni Maldichini, anxious to termi- naie the existence of the amiable Duca Gonzari, whom he mortally hated, as hav¬ ing been the only rival of his hopes, with the deceased Kozanna Valensa, and fal¬ laciously imagining (from his being un¬ acquainted with the birth of that miaut who was rightful heir До the Ducal terri¬ tories of Gonzari), that in the person of his captive, he beheld the only individual whø could shakelum in his possession of
the Dtrcal estâtes, he detMrôttei! ifpőtt giving the full reitt to hfa vengeance, be¬ ing Still UtturaţÎâted with the ^âftfgttiaáry crimes whieh he had ¿dready eôrnmíttedf. During two successive days and nights, after his altival at the dismal fortress, the diabolical mind of the Monk rürnmkted on the bloody purpose he intended to effect against his moflfeíišivé arid un¬ guarded captive. By day, the mšíduôus villain would stalk with measured pace through the dreary chambers of the go¬ thic pile, and by night, unaccustomed to enjoy the cheering balm of sweet re- pose* he \vould'.$rite fmm his Couch, and repairing to the batélementš, pace, with folded arms, "along tlie platform, uflcdn- scious of the tranquil hour which lulls the breastof virtue and content tò balrny steep. In vain did the orb of night throw her chaste beams upon the bosom of ťjie procreative earth ; in^lfididthe multi· farious host of scmtiltatlhggems laee the vox., rv. к "' ' .
darkj expance ţ of .ethereal space ; nothing could, draw/ forth a genial thought from the, sanguinary *Briesţ f at whosç heart the gnawing canker-wqrm of guilt un¬ ceasingly preyed. ?' ! Ψ * 't ) , Upon the third night after the ar¬ rival of Giovanni Maldiehini at the castle, he was suddenly interrupted in one of his gloomy cogitations by^ the appear¬ ance of Dominico, who thus addressed him ;— " Six days having now transpired since the demise of the Duchessa Rosanna Valenza, I request to know your plea¬ sure respecting the disposal of the moul¬ dering corps of that noble lady." Giovanni frowned upon hearing the conclusive words of his creature, and pausing for a time, arose from his seat, when, after pacing the chamber several tiţnes, witifci folded arms, he thtts re¬ plied;- \ J ' ' .,
u Let her body be placed, by four in the morning, within the vault of the castle's chapel." u I shall obey your pleasure," replied Dominico, as he vas on the point of retiring from the chamber. " Hold," resumed Giovanni, " her re· mains now lie within the Arras chamber, in thé North Tower.—*Is it not so ?" ** 'Twas evein there that the Duchessa Valenza expired," returned Dominico. " Give me tibe key of that chamber/* resumed Gioyanni, wrapt in thought. Dominico, instantly taking a bunch of keys fron) his girdle, gave them into the hand of liis ездр1#уег. ; < , - I - 4< Attend at íny chamber door by two intiieinoriting," continued Maldichinj*
as he placed the keys beneath his robe, and motioned Dominico to quit his pre* sence. " You may rely on rny punctuality," answered the obedient Dominico, bowing with respect, and instantly retiring. Still absorbed in horrid meditations, Giovanm continued the gloomy occu¬ pant of his apartment ; hell glared in his eye, and murder was stamped in legible traits upon his downcast brow ; he ad¬ vanced to the casement, but the appear¬ ance of the night was in unison with his bloody contemplations ; all was darkness, and the howling wind forcibly waving the tufted wood beneath, roared in hol¬ low accents to the solemn silence that reigned around. At that rostan fc the cha¬ pel's bell gave aloud the lengthened toll of the eleventh hour. Aroused at tlie sound, and seeming to fally his wander¬ ing ideas, Maldkhiai instantly; took the
lamp from the table, and quitting the chamber, advanced with rapid stride» through numerous .avenues and apart¬ ments, which conducted him, at lengtb» to the northern turret of the castle« wbere, ascending the winding flight of stone steps, he soon gained th$ door of the apartment, wherein lay the cold and motionless remains ofthe once lovely and virtuous Rosanna Valenza. Having applied the key, th© masive holt gave way, and the heavy oaken* door moved with harsh grating on it$ iron hinges.—Advancing some paces, tha Moak raised the 1ашр г ga&ing around the chancer, while a thrill of indescriba-* Ые horro* pervaded his frame. In the dis* tanc&he, atlength, perceived thecquch» towbichhe advanced with faultering steps, when the ashy visage and the pale cold hands of the deceased appeared to view ; the rçst of the body being obscured by a black pall„ which Шщ t» the ground iu к *
àmpie folds. «í— 'Rivetting his eyes upon {his inanimate spectacle, a contrariety of ideas flashed upon the soul of Maldi¬ ehini, when a violent gust of wind rushing through the portal, forcibly waved the hangings of the couch, and dissipated, for a moment, every contemplation M'ith the-- thrill of fear, and conscious guilt that seized his heart. The Monk, star¬ ing aghast with bristling locks, thought to behold the injured spirit of the de¬ ceased stalk forth to blast his sight :— a few seconds,- however, convinced the fether of his error, who blushing at his own pusillanimity, defied the ром'ег of departed spirits, and felt his hatred rekindle towards the hapless Duca stiil living, in Mhom he beheld the rival that had enjoyed the bliss of being loved by her, who now was lost to his embraces fbr ever.. · Full of revenge, Maldiehini, left the arras chamber, and, repaired to that occupied by the living object of his fear
and hatred, the portal of wliich having speedily unlocked, he advanced to the spot M r here the Duca, in chains, lay stretched upon the pallet, whereon he had passed so many nights of anguish, hut which was, in the present instance, blessed with the potent influence of care- soothing sleep, M'hich rocked the an¬ guish of its unhappy occupant in the aims of sweet repose. As Giovanni eyed the sleeping object of his vindictive persecution, the rage of his spül encreased, thus to behold him blessed with that repose м hich was to himself denied ; when, stung to the heart, he thus addressed the Duca, ina harsh tone of voice, bursting asunder the bonds of peace which had, for a period, " Etisteeped his senses in forgetfulness. 1 * ; " Awake, Gonzari ! and behold thy bitter foe who comes to usher thee to rest eternal.'*
starteri from his humble pallet, and, bending a stern look upon the Monk, continued silent to this address. * Didst thou not hear me ?" resumed Maldiehini, eyeing his captive with an air of disdain. After a short pause, the Duca replied ; *' I heard thee, miscreant ! and thank thee that thou canst for once become the messenger of welcome tidings. Thô eternal rest, thou would'st imply, can exist only in the grave ; for while a mon¬ ster, similar to thee, exists in mortal form, there can be no peace for the representa¬ tive of the Gonzari race. Do thy worst ! 'Tis the drear hour of gloomy night ; a time befitting well thy bloody purpose. Here is my bosom ! strike, and extermi¬ nate, at once, that being who craws his death as the best gift which thou сщп bestow."
After a; frown of horrid import, the Monk, in a tone of exulting sarcasm, exclaimed,—" Thy wife, Gonzari, ---- M Touched with the recollection of his lost Rosanna Valenza, the Duca, in broken accents, arrested the words of Maldiehini, exclaiming :— " Oh ! speak, but of her ! Let me but hear that she too is prepared, like me, and I will court the cruel martyrdom of taints tojóin her iuthe realms of ever¬ lasting happiness." Maldiehini· with an insiduous scowl upon hi* brow, pointed towards the door of the chamber, and then slowly mar¬ shalling the way, invited* t&e Duca to follow hİMtepı, Having .proceeded to the northern turret, the Monk amended tiie wintling staircase, followed by the hapless Duca, к 5
whose hreast, from the agonizing suffer¬ ings he had so long sustained 5 was proof against the worst that could ensue.— On arriving at the portal of the arras chamber, Maldiehini commanded his noble captive to enter, who obeyed in silence, when the Monk, hearing the lamp in his outstretched hand, conduct¬ ed the expectant Duca to the ashy re¬ mains of his once beauteous Rosanna Valenza. - -, - On beholding the clay cold form of his adored wife, the Duca, striking his forehead vehemently with his hands, groaned aloud, and sunk upon the, life¬ less corpse ; while the Monk, placing the lamp upon the table, beheld, for a time, with folded arms, the struggling anguish of his unfortunate victim,—Having, for some minutes, continued this hellish scrutiny, the father turning towards the door of the chamber,- retired, carefully securing the portal after him.
r· During a considerable period, the wretched Duca remained immoveable; but returning reason gradually dispelled tho horrors which had scattered every sublunary consideration, and he awoke to learn the full extent of the wretched¬ ness which attended him,—Gazing in speechless agony on the form before him, the remembrance 4 of Maldiehini suddenly flashed upon his brain, and he bent around the chamber a look of the most anxious scrutiny; but finding that the Monk had disappeared, * lie moaned in convulsive accents. " Stili wiil I thank thee, most obdurate of mankind, for thus suffering me, in private, «to-give the feelings of my bosom vent,- -----O, God 1 -wilt thou not take me to thy fostering care?" vociferated the agonized Duca.— Ki Wilt thou not waft nieto tlie realms where, with her kin¬ dred spirits, ^dwells my sainted love ? к 6
Come, Death 4 ! and give me to Rosan¬ na'* longing arms.'* As the conclusive word» escaped Gon- lari 's lips, the hour of midnight sounded slowly from the chapeľs turret. — The Puca started, for, at that instant, a ra¬ diant light gleamed upon Ле spaerøus chamber, and a strain of clulcit music floated on the stilly breeze of night. Scarcely had the heavenly sound caught the Duca's ear, when, arrayed- in all the blooming charms of innocence and beau¬ ty, appeared the aerial form cf the de* parted Rosanna, from whom these words appeared to flow :— " A male of&pring of our loves exists* and fate shall wo*k its irøcrutibie pui^ poseş. —Come, my love! «re yet the bird of morn shall tune hb matin song, thou shahr enjoy eternal bliss with thy Rosanna."— The tovely phantom^
■■ . TÄ-B MONK. ßiriiling with Cherub sweetness, beckon* ed tlie awe-struck Duca, who, rushing forward, fell prostrate to the earth, over¬ come with pure devotion and an extacy of joy. On awaking from this transitory bliss, every surrounding object had assumed its wonted appearance;—no angelic form was visible;—and nought but the faint ray emitted from the lamp, illumined the dark arras that hung in folds around the M r alls of the apartment. On recalling to mind every occurrence, the Duca became Convinced that the late appearance could bè no illusion, but the spirit of his adored, who came ta fore¬ warn him of his approaching fate ; but when he recollected the assurance that an offspring of their loves was in éxisč- ance, a tumult of joy rushed upon his soul, and, sinking ori his knees, he gave full vent to the religious enthusiasm that
o'erwhelmed his grateful heart, and which found sanctuarv in the immutable re- gister of Heaven. While thus occupied, the door of the chamber was suddenly unbolted, wheu Maldiehini again entered, bearing in one hand a chalice, and in the other a poiuard, and, instantly advancing to the Duca Gonzari, he thus addressed him :*— " From hence I am called to a foreign land ; thy life, Gonzaii, is hateful to me, and can alone counteract my pur¬ poses, should thy escape be effected.— The noble mind disdains captivity, and her, for whom thy existence was alone valuable, now sleeps among the silent dead. Therefore, select the means of an¬ nihilation ; this dagger, or the poisoned chalice, will terminate thy woes, and screen thee from my further purposes. Be resolute ! for I liave decreed thy
death, and hope of life is lost to thee for ever." The Duca, with firm composure, took the chalice from the hand of Maldiehini, and, turning to the remains of h»s Ro¬ sanna, he exclaimed, with a smile;— " Here's to thee, angel of bliss ! I come, to laugh to scorn the ills of fate, and to see destruction dealt upon that fiend of darkness Ι-τ -ìlaving concluded this apos¬ trophe, the Duca leisurely drank off the loathsome potion, and then returned the chalice into the hand of Maldiehini ; after which, turning to the lifeless corpse of Rosanna, the D uca enfolded himself in his ample garments, and sunk beside the body ; while the Monk, willing, to turn from the torments attendant on the Duca!s dissolution, retired from the apartment, where the agonizing struggle of a premature death, soon gave into the hands of his Redeemer, the untainted soul of the noble Duca, which flew to
join the 'spirit of Rosanna, in the wel¬ come regions of eternal life, and never- fading happiness. On the very night of the Duca's de¬ mise, the bodies of himself and his Duchessa w T ere secretly interred by order of Maldiehini ; who, shortly after, em¬ barked for the island of Oronza, with his chosen friend Dominico, where he as¬ sumed the dignity of Abbot* of the mon¬ astery of Saint Columba.-
Besides these conclusive confessions which had been extorted from the hellish Gondez, it appeared that, unmindful of the brilliant rewards which had been promised by him to Dominico, the ser¬ vices of that individual were forgotten, (as ingratitude is* ever the concomitant of villany), and he was distnis^çd, for the more strenuous endeavours of the Monk, Johti of Dunbar; while the total afterac¬ tion of name and person, which the lapse
of years, and the effects of despondency had wrought in the realfigure of the Count Ozimo, rendered his residence in the monastery altogether unknown to the murderous Giovanni, who saw in him no other than the inconsequential person of thç melancholy Monki father Anthony· When tlie Abbot G ondes camç to that part of ths confession which related to the night on which Huberto Avinzo had dis¬ covered bim prostrate in the cloisters and thus obtained the keys, which were $o absolutely requisite, in ordef to effect tlie escape of the female captive - r the most dreadful emotions were conspicuous in his every gesture; the recital being ¡a the following terms ;-— " I had preremptorily determined on effecting the death of the Laird Donald, my captive, previous to my departure for Italy, whither I intended to convey his sister, the Lady Ronilda. Already
had I ga ined the cloisters; bearing in one band the flaming lamp, M'hile in the other, I grasped the poi nard which was to have effected my determination.—In an instant, the moon became blood red,— the thunders rolled,—the keen lightning blazed,—and dreadful shrieks resounded through the vaulted alleys ;—while in so¬ lemn tones the bell of the monastery sounded in my ears the hour of twelve. —I suddenly started back, for a form, hideous to the sight, appeared ;—it was a little haggard мотап, cloathed in red garments ; and in her rear, a demon, of tremendous size, ' with scorpion lashes* seemed gloryingîn the agonies which he inflicted on the miserable sufferer. On beholding me, the fiend belching forth flames, withheld his lacerating whip, while the beldam thus prognosticated in my ear :— ť% « Behold in menthe tortured, spirit of the Little Red Woman ;-r~thi$ night, as is
my annual custom, do I revisit this spot ; and fate hath so ordained, that I am to howl into thine ears the eternal tortures that await thee, thou bloody brother in iniquity !-*-Hear me, there¬ fore, .thou damned Monk !—The scene - of thy crimes is closed ! This night, in¬ stead of giving thee to the vessel that was to transport thee to ItahVs shores* shall waft thee to imprisonment. Never shalt thou again behold Ronilda ! nor shalt thou strike that steel into her bro¬ ther's heart ¡—The deliverer comes ! and thou, first doomed to racks and fire on earth, shalt taste, with me, the pangs of hell, hereafter.—The fiend-like woman screeched aloud ;—-again the demon waved his horrid lash, and yelling she rushed along the cloisters* while he, pursuing, with unrelenting blows* stiil added to her tortures.—Overcome with terror, I drop¬ ped to the pavement, in a state of annihi¬ lation, and only, woke to find the first prognostic verified, and that I was be
eome the captive of those persons whom I had strove to make subservient to ray purposes." When the full disolosure had been made at the holy table of office ; afrit ap¬ peared that Dominico had not been ac-« cessary to any positive murder, and ha being also one of the informants in tbe inquisition, he was sentenced to pass tha mnainder of hfe life in tbe Penite ntiary Convent *t Rome, But tbe g^Uty Giovanni Maldiehini w$s condemned, on the moat positive tnd iucrøtrovertiWte «vidence, and sentenced to be burned tø death by a alow fire. On account however of his ecclesiastical dignity, and of bia having been a member of the inquisition, that judgment was carried into effect within the walls of the prison, iu tha presence only of the judges^ thç sciait of that tribttimi, and of tiiose concerted in die prosecution.
ifi order to the further substantiation of tlie claims of Huberto Avinzo to the « Dukedom of his unfortunate parent,-*-the Nun Margareta, who was still living, was brought forward to prove the delivery of the ill-fated Duchessa Rosanna Valenza; and by the judgment of the fathers of Saint Dominic, it was decreed that Hu¬ berto Avinzo was the legal claimant of the dukedom and estates of the house of Gonzari, ae well as the rightful pos¬ sessor of the marquisite and lands of his murdered grandsire, the Marquis Alve- foni, in right of his-mother, theDutchessa Öorüeari, who was thç only surviving child of tht Alveroni race* Huberto Avinco, after being thus re¬ instated in hie extensive tmá noble pos¬ sessions, repaired, with the generous Count Ozimo, the protector of his infan¬ cy, to the castle which enclosed the «outdermg remains of his Itt-feied pa*
rents, from whence tliey were conveyed and deposited' iu the family mausoleum, within the chapel of the castle of Taranto· Having indulged, for a time, in that melancholy which such a dreadful suc¬ cession of events must have excited in the bosom of unaffected filial affection, the sage councils of the Count at length brought Avinzo to confess, that, to yield implicitly to the impulse of despair, was offensive to the Deity; and by this happy interference the Duca Huberto Gonzari was prevailed upon to change the dreary prospect, and to prepare/ once more, to revisit those scenes which had constituted the sources of his mental pleasures, as M f ell as excited the more glowing emanations of his heart. ' The Duca would fain have prevailed upon his guardian, the Count, to reas¬ sume his title, previous to their setting
sail for Scotland ; but with this request Ozimo declined to acquiesce, being de¬ sirous of continuing his monastic robes, as father Anthony, until he should him¬ self have celebrated those rites^ which were to bless with constancy, virtue and beauty, the noble descendant of the family of Gonzari.
CHAP. IV.
< | | Ч Ш 111*11 1 .1 1Щ К «Ľ . ι» ι|» » .,ιι 1 ., » ».p i m | | » j fj • a * -"*......< ! » . , . . . 0Ö yott lofé ine .* О heavens О earth, bear witness tó tUi*.SôU*d# And crown what I profess with kind event ! * ■ .. .., !■ ---------Fair encounter Of two roost rare affections !—Heaven rains grace On that which breeds between them. My mistress dearest, And I thus humble ever. - ........... —My husband then? Ay with a heart as willing As bondage e f er of freedom: here's my hand. And mine with my heart wi't. SHA К SPEAKE,
JiiVERY arrangement having taken place worthy of the dignity and splen¬ dour of the representative of the noble race of Gonzari, the young Duca and the Count embarked "with their retinue,
and after a prosperous voyage, arrived in safety on the shores of Scotland. A courier being immediately for¬ warded to Edinburgh, the several noble fiiends of Huberto Avinzo were in readiness to greet his return; and on his arrival at the capital» he found that the happiness of tlie noble Lord Walter had been made complete, by the cele¬ bration of his nuptials with the daunt¬ less Isabel ; whose brother, the Earl of Pembroke,was still a visitant at the Scot¬ tish court; while Maude, the Laird Douglas's daughter, was rendered su¬ premely blessed by the indissoluble bond, which had for ever united her fate with that of the generous Edwin, the Earl of Hereford's son. The fint step taken by the Count O/imo, was to enter into a full detail of all the heinous crimes of the executed (tondez; anu the extraordinary events V^L. IV. L
which* had occurred to restore to'his titles, and immense estates, the noble Huberto Avinzo, now Duca Gonzari. While the Count was thus occupied, the magnanimous Huberto, in the pre¬ sence of the kind Lady Dom>hb, re¬ newed to Ronilda, with energy, those unalterable vows of affection, which had ever held undiminished emporium over his fervid mind, since their first inter- View in the church of .Saint Columba. As it had been previously the desire of the Laird Donald of Finlagan, that his sister should be united to Huberto, on his return, at the castle of her an¬ cestors, .(whithear lie had journeyed ia order to re-establish hospitality, and to cause tlie necessary repairs to be made of those ravages which time liad effect¬ ed,) the requisiteintelli gence, was, there¬ fore, forwarded to the islami of Isla, whither the whole Court of Scotland
warf invited to witness the ceremony øf the marriage of the Duca Gonzari, with the fair Ronilda. As by the testamentary paper, left by the brave Sir Allan Macdonald, the pro¬ tector of Huberto's infancy, it was ap¬ parent that he was entitled to the estates of that staunch adherent to the cause of King Robert Bruce, the Duca Gonzari, immediately on his return from Italy to the City of Edinburgh, was invested by the King with the requisite insignia ; and the patent thereof was enrolled according to the custom of that realm. This further acquisition of territory, added to those of the ducal house of Gonzari, rendered Huberto Avinzo the posessor of a fortune more than equivalent to that of any existing prince in Europe; and, as if the benefits of fortune had only been witheid for a period, to be showered down in greater profusion, the Count Ozimo, formally bequeathed and vested τ о
in the Duca* and his heirs for ever, after his own demise, all those family estates, to which he had been entitled from his birth, and which he, having no children, was at liberty to bequeath at pleasure. Huberto Avinzo having received the unfeigned congratulations of the King, and the whole court, but more particu¬ larly, the heartfelt assurances of his noble friend, the Lord Walter; the Scottish monarch and his retinue, after the lapse of a few days, set forward on their way towards the coast, where the King and all the nobility, with their numerous fol¬ lowers, embarked in vessels dispatched for the purpose of receiving them, and, soon after, landed in safety on the island of Isla, where an escort of the vassals of Laird Donald awaited to usher the cavalcade to the castle of their chief. The second morning after their arrival being appointed for the solemnization of
the holy nuptials, the hall of the castle wits magniriciently ornamented with sump¬ tuously embroidered tapestry, allegorical of the hymeneal rites ; while the chapel was perfumed with the odour of richest incense, and spread with a display of all that grandeur so apparent in -the cere- mouies of the Catholic Church. Fes¬ toons of flowers adorned the altars, while a blaze of light issued from every chapel, proceeding from enormous waxen tapers, which were supported by candlesticks of massive silver. ' During the day preceding the mar¬ riage, all M r as mirth and «festivity, while the Old Minstrel of the castle, who had formerly related to Huberto Avinzo the melancholv narrative of the loss of Laird Donald and Ronilda, struck the vibrating string of his harp to the lively strain of merriment, M'hile from his re¬ verend lips flowed the ensuing stanzas, M'hich were, welcomed, by. the mirthful i. 3
shouts of the numerous vassals of Laird Donald, who enjoyed one unvarying scene of gaiety, and jocund revelry. No more shall sorrow's veil obscure, The beam of pleasures' gawdy виц ; Content and Peace shall now allure.— IÍÍ-ŕíUe ite stormy course hath run. No longer flows dejection's tear, For joy assumes the place of woe ;— Each lover claims his blushing dear, Bless'd with the dart from Cupid's bow, The torch hymenial sheds its ray, To gild the future scene of life; And soon the beamy God of Day Shall seat the raiid Gonzari's wife. Ves, fair Ronilda, beauty bright ! Shall more than mortal bliss impart. Resigning to her faithful knight, Their mutual gift*—a fervent heart. Come join with me the welcome strain, And let our notes with one accord, Hail Scotia's King, and courtly train, Aud bless Finlagan 9 · ngbie Lord.
The generous Laird Donald, who had not been unmindful of any circumstance that could enliven the heart, even of the most menial individual, had by the dint of assiduity discovered the residence of the honest fisherman, Walter Logan, who had wafted from Oronza, in. safety, the person of King Robert Bruce, and his nobles, in the hour of eminent danger; as well as the faithful mariner who had preserved, under his roof, the monk John of Dunbar, and his deliverer Hu¬ berto Avinzo. Neither was that penitent father unmindful of the salvation he had experienced, and the gratitude due to the Laird Donald ; as he continually tes¬ tified by every gesture, those glowing feelings which do honour to the human heart. Each of the poor fishermen on being introduced into the hall, received from the King, whom he had preserved, and the then unknown Duca Gonzari, whom
the* other had festeYed beneath his humble roof, those testimonials of grate¬ ful remembrance, whifch made them for ever bless the hour in which rate had ordained that they were to be the indi¬ viduals selected for its unsearchable purposes. The night preceding the long wished- for morning at length drew in, and the life invigorating bowl, having made full manv a circle round the board, the Mo- narch, ami the noble chieftains, each withdrew to his chamber of repose; while the 1')·μ \ч Gonzari, occupied with the bliss which v/as so-speedily to crown his future davs sought, but in vain, to lull his senses in the arms of sleep. At lengtii the chapel bea mounded to the breeze the hour of mió- light, at wliich instant the encircling drapery of his couch was suddenly drawn aside, and, to his astonish¬ ed sight, appeared the haggard forms of the two wierd sisters, who liad first prog-
nosticated to him so mysteriously, in the ruined castle, after his escape from Lon* don« Having eyed the Duca Gonzari for a time, whose gaze was bent upon their features, one of thâhags exclaimed : — " Sister, by the morrow*· iun, Wayward fate her glati will run." To which the other replied ;— « The rudder's found, The wind is fair, Anon we'll ride Tbe misty air. Come, sister, come !" As these extraordinary agents of mys¬ tic power continued for a time silent, iu the examination of the Duca Gonzari 's features, he thus addressed them : — " Am I to be for ever thus the object of your visitations ?"
To which the first hag replied :— " After our departure hence, thine еуез »hall never more behold us." " Say, what portends your purpose here tliivS night ?" resumed the Duca Gon¬ zari. " Doth it augur good or evil ?" " Good,"replied the second sister; " we told thee once that mystery hung over thee; thou wouldst then have questioned further, but fate would have its wi IL That secret time háth now unravelled, and our work is done." Upon uttering these conclusive words, the weird sisters wav'd aloft their ebon crutches, and in a moment vanished from the sight of the astonished Duca Gonzari ; in whose ears instantly resounded the most heavenly harmony, which gradually overpowered his senses, and he sunk into an undis¬ turbed and tranquil sleep. At the appointed time in the morning,
ťhe King and his courtiers having assembled in the hall of Finlagan, they proceeded from thence; accompanied by the sound of minstrelry,to the grand altar ofthe chapel, where the Duca Gonzari re¬ ceived the marriage blessing from the Count Ozimo, and from the hands of Laird Donald, that inestimable prize for whose preservation he had so nobly inter¬ fered. This joyful ceremony being con¬ cluded, Ozimo relinquished the monastic robes, and the day was spent in universal festivity. Atlength the hour of darkness once more summoned to the banquet the jovial guests. Between King Robert Bruce and the Laird of Finlagan, were seated the blooming pair, antl already had the strain of joy resounded from the harp ef íhe veteran minstrel, who bore the precedency of the other votaries of Apollo; when, lo! a sudden gleam of .radiant light beamed full upon the hall, while strains of heavenly harmony floated on the breeze,^—Not a motion was heard, and admiration was stamped
