Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gondez, the monk: a romance of the thirteenth century
GONDEZ, THE MONK. CHAP. I.
A sight that would appall the stoutest heart, And blanch the cheek with lilly paleness. Fierce as ten furies, terrible as hell, мг lion, — m ■ и., ■ sa 1 HE morning broke forth with unu¬ sual splendor, and the refreshing breezes filled the sail, tvhile Huberto, contem¬ plating the wonders of the foregoing night, was unconscious of the regards of his two attendants and the four fish¬ ermen, tvho reaei in his features some hidden secret, which they, of course, placed to the account of something he had witnessed during his absence ; butas they did not dare to obtrude upon his meditations, they kept their suggestions within their own breasts. vox. in. в
Having steered upon the bosom ofthe ocean for some time, Huberto, as if roused from a dream, desired to know the situation of the island of Ila, vvhich was instautly pointed out to him by one of the mariners ; whereupon after remaining a few seconds absorbed in thought, he requested that they would steer towards that island, vvith which desire they instantly acquiesced; the youtli, then relapsing into his former state of contemplative silence, remained with folded arms, and immoveable, till tbe bark drove on the land of Ila. Huberto, quitting the vessel, desired that his two attendants and the mari¬ ners vvould remain there until his return, and proceeding forward, he soon found hiniself at some distance from the mar¬ éin of the ocean, where the face of the island was very heathy and hilly; he at length arrived at a most extraordinary grotto; in the vicinity of vvhich were several subterranean caverns of immense
magnitude, the interior whereof were о ·* lost in utter elarkness. In vaiu elid Huberto endeavour to descry a human countenance, neither were the remains of Finlagan Castle perceptible in any direction ; however, the better to sur¬ vey the island, Huberto at length asccnd¬ eei a hill, on the summit of which were some very ancient stone monumental effigies; having examined these remains of antiquity, the youth cast his eyes arounel, when on the base of the accli¬ vity, on the opposite side to that by which he had ascended, he beheld a few straggling habitations, over which frowned the dismantled turrets ofa strong castle. In that direction Huberto bent his way, anel shortly gaining one of the huts, he was informed that the moun¬ tain, which he had desceneled, was calicei Losset, and that the caslle, at no great distance, was formerly the habita¬ tion of the Lairds of Finlagan. b2
Havingacquired the wish'd-for inform¬ ation, Avinzo, with a quick step, ad¬ vanced to the moat of the fortress, when finding the drawbridge lowered, he in¬ stantly passed tvithin the first court of the castle, anel having traverseel for a time its dreary chambers, quite fallen to decay, he was returning to the moat, tvhen, suddenly the sound of music caught his ear ; the youth listened at¬ tentively, and again the vibrations were wafted upon the gentle breeze. Proceed¬ ing in the direction from whence the sound issued, Avinzo quickly gained the ivy-twined watch tower that command¬ ed a view of the bridge and moat, into which he hatl no sooner entered, than his attention was arrested by the venera¬ ble figure of a minstrel, nearly blind with age, tvho was striking the string of his harp to some melancholy ditty. Touched with the appearance of the veteran, whose silver beard hung in grace¬ ful waves upon his breast, Huberto ad¬ dressed him as follows ;
" What pensive strain now occupies thy thoughts?" " It is the tale of woe/' answered the minstrel, raising his eyes, epiite dinťd with age, and examining as well as he was able, the person of Huberto. u Of whom dost thou sing ?" continued Av inzo. " My lamentations are unceasingly maele," resumed the old man, " in behalf of the best of Lairds and the most lovely of Ladies." " Hast thou been long an inmate of these desolate walls ?" resumed the youth. " Young stranger," replied the vete¬ ran, "within this castle I first drew my infant breath ; I was the oftspring ofthe harper of my iate Laird's grandsire, and upon my father's death I took his post, as minstrel of Finlagan, Ah ! woe is BS
me, I liv'd to behMd the noble hunter, Laird Guy brought mangled from the adjoining Isle of Jura; some у ев vs af¬ ter which, and ahvays pining for very grief of heart, died the элусч^ Eleanor, his луое-луогп ΛνίαοΛν; upon ΛνΙικΊι the Laird Donald his son, being then a youth, came into full possession of this noble estate; and with his sister the beauteous Ronilda, about four vears younger than himself, resided in this much-loved castle." At this juncture the minstrel ceased, his voice became broken witli constant sobs, Avhilst Hu¬ berto, agitated in a peculiar degree, felt in some measure tiic sorrow "of the ob¬ iect w ho had thus interested his feelings. After a lapse of some in inu tıs. the vete¬ ran proceeded as follows;— - "Scarcely луеге our tears dried for the loss ofthe loved Lady Kleanor, and the hopes of all again revived by the manly comliness of the Laird Donald, and the
beauty of his angel sister, лгЬеп all луаэ horror anel confusion. Since that dreadful epoch I have remained the solitary inmate of this once jocund cas¬ tle; having now луеаЙ1С1Ч^1 full ninety aud seven long years, to close at length, mv aged eves, in sorrow and in mourn- ins»*," " Have comfort good old man," re¬ plied Avinzo hastily, anel nearly choak- ed Avith agitation. " I am resigned to death," replied the minstrel, faintly grasping Avinvo's hand, " for hope has long been exiled from my thoughts,"—after a short pause he contiuued thus: "All that remains of this eventful tale, I луШ, in plain untu¬ tored poesy rehearse." The bard луаз for a moment silent, when striking the chords of his bar]) in a faint, but plaintive and melodious voice, he snng as follows:— B4
THE LEGEND OF TINLAGAN CASTLE. тшттттт»тштт Яттятттшлттв , PART I. ма»·*'. SLOW winds the stream round the towers of Finlagan, And hollow the waves dash against its high wall ; Chearless tlie wind whistles through drear Finlagan, And sad cries the bat in the dismantled hall. AU drear are its chambers, where minstrels light-hearted, With joy filled each damsel so peerless to view ; Ronilda, the fair, from Finlaizan's departed ; And lost is young Donald, its Laird bold and true. Shrill screams the owl in those chambers so dreary, As through the dun mist peeps the pale orb of mght; Aud dimmed is the gleam of the sun-beam so chcary,. Thaťs fovm'd to inspire with tiie thrill of del ight«*
Why slow winds the stream ; and why sad breaks the billow ? Against these high turrets, this castle so fair; Aud why moans the blast thro' the sad weeping willow ? And why screams the bat its shrill note of despair? Here dwelt bright Ronilda, the pride of Finlagan, Belov'd of her brother and vassals so bold ; Here dwelt fair llonilda the boast of Fmlagan, A rose and a lilly witli locks bright as gold» But what vvas her skin, of the snow-hued complexion, And what was her e'en, dipp'd in Heaven's own dye Ì The fairest will often feel silent dejection ; And virtue may bloom but to languish and sigh. The winds shook the forest, and torrents descended, Dark, dark was the Heaven, dread midnight was near; Tlie roar of the thunder, with shrill blasts was biendetî, And blue lightnings shot thro' the canopy drear, *>'* Ah ï why beats the storm?" quoth the lovely Ronilda, As stretched on her down bed so sleepless she lay ; v Some wanderer, perchance," sighed tlie gentle Ronilda, Through Fin lagan's forest, now bends his sad way/' b5
" Then ceas*; thou dread thunder, and husiul be tliy roaring, Nor thou vivid lightning with fire streak the dark; Ah! cense boisterous winds, and yc torrents fast pouring, Perhaps some poor traveller faints!—Mercy, hark!** A groan sadl^ swell'd on the nigìit blast so cheerless, A faultering tongue seemed sad accents to sigh ; They struck to the soul of the damsel so peerless, Again, mourned the voice—" Give relief or I die." In haste from her bed rose Ronilda affrighted, And tremblingly, straight to the lattice she fiew ; She look'd, but she saw not the stranger benighted, lier bosom was damp'd with the fast falling dew. Tiien swiftly the damsel, so tender, descended ; She sped to the warden so sturdy of heart ; She told all her fears, and her tale being ended : " I dare not," quoth he, ■*' from my post now departs u Thou know'st, gentle lady, my father before me, This portal and drawbridge witli vigilance kept; Thou know'st for these forty long v. inters so dreary, By mght I have watch'd, whilst all others have slept.
* ť Thou know'st, if this portal by me was neglected, That forfeit ol trust with my life must be paid; Then think it not hard that your boon ia rejected, Iwould, but I dare not, assiht thee, fair maul," ' Sir, warden/*' exclaimed fair Roui Ida in anguish, While fast from her eyne stole thi* glittering dew; <ť I would n*>t for worlds that in pain you should languish, Anti -neidin*;, thus prove to you honour untrue. " Yet, prythee, unbar now the gateway, Sir, warden, 1*11 give thee bright silver, ITI give thee bright gold; Unroll the link'd chain, I entreat thee, kind warden, Wliich uplifted now the strong drawbridge doth hold» " Alone let me pass to relieve the poor stranger; I heed not, Sir, warden, the thunder or rain ; I ne'er was appalľd at the thought of such tlanger; My heurt only sinks when another's in рат.* í* And why should I open the portal, fair lady; Aud wherefore should I the stout bridge chain unroll ? It is uot thy gold or thy silver fair lady, Shall brihe me to taint with dishonour my soul/* The warden was thoughtful, tiic maid still entreated; The warden though trusty was temler of heart : ****■ My purpose, fair lady, quoi h he, is defeated; From ľinlagaiťs cabile thou soon shalt denart." ii 6
THE LEGEND or FINLAGAN CASTLE. » *·**■■ -------- PART II.
AND now move the rollers, while slowly descending The ponderous drawbridge grates harshly around ; The clank of the chains with th* hollow blast blending, Sends o'er the wide heath a sad dismal sound. The gentle Ronilda, her soft bosom heaving, Exclaim'd, " good Sir Warden, ray thanks are thy due, Just Heaven will protect thee for kindly relieving The stranger, who'll owe his salvation to you." Ronilda then sprang o*er the drawbridge light hearted, Her locks floated carelessly on the night wind; And swift as her slim form amid the gloom darted, She heeded no damps nor the tempest unkind.
And still at the gate stood the old Warden, thinking, And still as he thought he grew heavy and sad ; , He felt in his bosom that trusty heart sinking, Which ever was used to be lightsome and glad. Hark ; hark ; whence that scream, whence that sound so appalling ì That dismally echos afar o'er the plain ; Hark; hark ; whence that voice for kind succour now call* ing ? Ah ! now 'tis repeated again and again. Hark ; hark ; whence the sound of those footsteps ap¬ proaching ! Now nearer they come; through the hall now they glide; Hark ; hark ; whence the sound of that voice so reproach· ing? *ris Donald, who stands at the old Warden's side. " Oh ï villain, base villain, thy trust thou hast broken. And death for this forfeit shall be thy sure fee* No sooner Laird Donald these harsh words had spoken, Than, lo ! the old Warden sunk down on his knee. '· Oh ! kill me, Laird Donald oh ! kill rae, kind master ; Twas pity, in troth, made me prove thus untrue, The rain from the heavens, dear Laird, fell not faster, Than from her bright eyne stole the pitying dew,
" She said that in merev for some woe-worn stranger, That mourn'd »neath her lattice, she wish'd to depart ; She sued, I rorgot evevy thought of niy dancer; I listen'd; she soon found away to my heart.'* " Oh God ! и cried Laird Donald, *·*■ fresh terrors appal me * It was then Ronilda whose screams struck mine car ; I ? Ii fly to her rescue tho'grim death befa! me; 1*11 bave lier, or die for Кош Ida my dear.'** Xo more spake young Donald, but danger defying, His tnisty bright weapon he wielded in air; Then swift as the leaf on autumnal blast flying; He sped to relieve bright llonilda, the fair. The Warden stood speechless, his wither'd form trembled, And pale turn'd his mien, as the mountains pure snow ; An oak, weather-beaten, his frame then resembled, When blasted by thunder's dread shivering blow. With hands high uplifted, and Je^u adoring, Tiie Warden pray'd loud on his bare bended knee; " llave mercy on one for his fault now deploring; My Laird and Ronilda оисе more let me see."
The ЛУа^еп uprose and the bugle blew sin illy, It echo'd through Finlagan's turrets so high, Ir rous'd e i ery vassal reposiiiiz; so stilly; " To arms for Laird Donald, to arms, was the cry. Three hundred bold yeomen with bright torchis Ьипшцг, With dirks and with falchions, froni ľinlagan hied ; They sought for our Laird, till Aurora' 4 returnin-j*, They sought fair Ronilda, all Fjilaj;an'*j pride. But griev'd was eaeh heart as the castle they enUr'd, For vain had they sought their bold Donald so true; That maiden was lost in whom every chai m ccuterVl, The spotless Honilda of lilly's fair hue. All mute sat the ЛУа1ч1<*п, he spake not for sighing, When, lo ! he exclaim'd as dim evening drew nigh, íť Forgive me. Lord Jesu, heart broken I'm dying;" Then sunk, and surn ndered his soul with α sigh. Now doleful let's mourn in the hall of Finlagan; Let's weep the sweet twain we shall ever deplore; For Donald, brave Donald, i> lott to Finlagan; And lovely Honilda we ne'er idutfl ьее more»
The Minstrel was mute, and the last chord hael sunk in silence on the distant breeze ere Huberto was aroused from the train of melancholy contemplations that hael taken possession of his thoughts; when, he suddenly exclaimed :— " Hotv wonderful and mysterious was the fate of thy loved laird and mistress ! And could no efforts then reclaim them ?" " From that eventful hour," resumed the bard, " their fates have been envel- loped in one dark cloud of mystery." " And you alone remain," continued Huberto, " the solitary inhabitant of tliis noble pile ?" " The spot that reared me;" answered the minstrel, " shall witness my depart¬ ing sigh.—Ah ! would I could see them once again, ere the shadow of death shall havedim'dmysightforever}·—But,whydo
I wander amid fancy's visionary scenes ? 'tis all a blank, desolate and drear/' Avinzo continued mute, when the harper thus resumed his speech ; ťt Young man, there is written in your aspect an expre;>sive language of the soul, that speaks you formed for sym¬ pathy ; such as you now appear was my young Laird, ere he was lost for ever to the vassals who adored him. If you feel for Donald," continued the minstrel, with a heavy sigh, and drawing a scroll from beneath his robe, " then let your eye, at some future period, over run the contents ofthis paper; for if the fateof the childrcu was unfortunate, that of their parent was not less terrific." Huberto gladly received the proffered manuscript from the minstrels hand; after wdiich he demanded whether his assistance could in any way afford
him relief,; at which the harper mourn¬ fully shook his white locks, w hen Avinzo, pressing his hand, and still endeavouring to inspire the venerable old man with a ray of hope; at length quitted the castle, and hastily bent liis steps towards the shore The long absence of Huberto had in some measure alarmed his attendants; who were overjoyed on beholding him again, Avinzo instantly sprang into the bark, and having ordered the mariners to steer in the direction of Oronza, (vvhich Island they informed him they should make hy dusk;) he drew from his bokorn the*manuscript presented to him bv the minstrel, anxious to learn its contents, when on opening it, the sub¬ ject proved to be poetical, and ran as follows :-—
LEGEND OF TUV. TALL WHITE MAN.
FAUT I.
THE morning was raw and leaves fell from each tre<?, The north blast blew shrilly and cold; Laird Guy straight uprose, a bold hunter was he, And left his bright Ellen ; a fairer than -¿he, Did never a laird's arms enfold, u Oh í btny, my lov'd Guy, wherefore thus --peed away? Why h nve me the deer to pursue? Oh ! cannot my kisses entice you to May? Will ntiihiny; compel you my priiv'r.·) r > obey ? Should [ phne thus cruel ю yuur" " 3ly o\e, oy dear Ellen, warm ib thy embrace, Like мс:*.1Г, the baim of thy kiss; 'Ihe rose and the ìiliy combinai >!чл\' thy face, To ihem, tb.uu^h as nought a re 11 ie joys of the chace, Ì et decaí aox i ít y huntin¿ uinub, 1 '
* ť Consider, Laird Guy, as the deer you pursue. Perchance evil fate may betide; Your ileet horse may stumble, too late then you'll rue, As dying you hid me and Donald adieu— That thus you abandoned my sitie." *" Consider Ronilda, our infant so fair, Should she never know her lov'd, Sire | Should bhe ne'er remember a father's fond care, \Vhat anguish she'll suffer, what heartfelt despair ;—~ Theh do not resist iny desire." '* Oh ! fear not sweet Ellen," exclaim'd the Laird Guy*, ' e O'er turf never cours'd surer steed ; O'er hillock, o'er hedge, ditch, and plain will he fly, And through the wood's mazes when hounds yelp and cry, Of hunters he always takes lead.'** Bold Guy press'd the lips of his well belov'd dear, He kiss'd his fair infant and boy; In Ellen's bright eye stood the gli*l'ning tear, As vainly stie strove, her sunk spirits to cheer; And fondled her babes, her heart's joy. And now wound the huntsman the shrill bugle horn, And loud yelp'd the dogs to be free; *" Come, busk ye, my merry inen, see 'tis high dawn," Quick mount and straight speed o'er the dew spangled ltr-wa, Midst woodlands anon we shall be.
" Ceme busk ye, come busk ye," Laird Guy loudly cried, *■*■ Yeho, ilhyeho, ilyeho;" He vaulted his courser, and thro' thp gate hied, And soon in the distance, the jocund sound died; Till echo alone sigh'd;—Yeho." And still Lady Ellen she fondled each child, And still kissed their lips coral dyed; But vain were her soothings, the boy never smiľd, n Oh! what ails my darling? w said Ellen half wild; " Oh ! why fades thy colour r" she cried. ** Now riddle, my riddle?" young Donald then said, All seated on fair Ellen's knee; rt For last night a strange dream came into my head, Whieh fill'd me, dear mother, with terror aud dread, I prithee, resolve it to me ?" " I dream'd that my father uprose with the sun, And vaulted his fleet going steed ; Methought, that I follow'd, for swift I cou'd run ; Methought, as he eyed me, he said pretty son, 1 never saw man thus proceed." *' Yet hard he kept galloping, galloping still : He traversal both dale, lawn, and wood ; He ran down dread steeps and he tore up each hill, Still I ran beside him, nor felt ought of ill; Thou flys't; quoth my Sire, by the rood.''
ťt Thus hard he kept riding till ел en drew nigh, Aly speed was as fleet as the wind; On me my lov'd parent would oft bend his eye, And as he survey'd me full oft did he ery, " Ыу boy, 1 sliall leave thee, behind." " But, lo ! as the grey hue eclipsM the bright red, Methought I turn'd sadut the heart; Toward thee, dearest mother, my fancy was Ieri, I pictured thy sorrow, the tears thou wouldst shed, And fancied 'twas cruel to part." * Iť Methought, from my swelling breast burst the big sigh, Methought 1 shed mnny a tear; And as my mind pictur'd, thy tonn to mine eye, Thv tears, thy complainings, and cheeks of pale dye, Encreas'd both my sorrow and fear,*'-' <v ' And could í thus leave thec? 1 then seem'd to say, And tou'd I forget all thy caie? Thy pangs when my infant form Iirst met the d.-", Thy fondness that kindled each morn wuh the ray, Ami taught me thy ьи A''rings to share." u And as I thus dream' d I ne'er heeded my Sire, When sudden I turn'd my sad mien, I look'd south, east and north, warm'd with filial desire, 1 look'd toward the west, the last tinge 'gun expire, But no where my father was seen.*'
<*■ And then I сса -ΛΙ running, all dread was my mind, I îiıion'd * but nought co Id í hear: N ) sound, ΐ nit the leaves π olin·* in the bleak wind, Where turn me, quod I, my io*-*! parent o> lind? 'j is night, und the wood':-. \cry drear.'' i£ Oh ! now I'll gantj; heme, to my mother, I cried.; T(> greet mc her anus will be spread, i ne'er wilt forsake her, but clini*; to hor side, bhe never will leave me to fate's cruel tide;-— With her there is nothing to dread. " But, Io ! as I turn'd l was fill'd with affright, Such a vision my fancy display'd ;—■ I saw a huge mountain, as snow purely white, ЛУЫсЬ still bore the form of a man to the s-ight, In robes pide as lilly array'd.** " And as I stood looking towards the hill's siile, What then was*my horror und fear? My father to view, as he onward did ride, And, to the dread mountain seem'd swiftly to glide, Each moment approaching more near.'* I ran, and I hollow'd, stay, stay, lo\M Sir Guy; Nor flee from your Donald, so fast ; I scream'd out, beware, of yon mountain so high, Oh! do not niy father, approach it too nigh, Or this hunt will, 1 fear, prove thy last,'*
·*' Yet though I kept crying, he heard not tlie sound, Or heeded not what I сом Id say ; When, lo ! as he seem'd to have gaiiľd the liigh ground, The mountain burst 'ope, with a terrible sound;— My father straight vanish'd away.*' *■*· EnhorrorM I 'woke, the cold dew damp'd my face; With lear every joint trembled sore ; I strove for awhile the dread vision to chace, The night still was dark, and I felt thy embrace; The sun I ne'er thought to see more. 1 *
\ İ.lî*0 О» PART TBE FIRST.
Here Avinzo paused ;—the pathetic appeal of the infant boy, had forcibly arrested his attention, and the maternal fondness of the Lady Ellen, created in his bosom that inexpressible thrill Mİıich can alone animate the bosom of sympa¬ thetic virtue. Ah ! thought Avinzo, Λνίίΐι a stifled groan, Avliile the big tear stood in his softened eve, " no fond mother ever caressed mv infant form ; It was indeed blessed ΛνΜι the tenderest of prorectors, but then, I never knew tlie authors of my being. Oh ! that I inav live to unravel the mvstery of my parenťs fate, that I may yet behold them in the period of their age ! then луонк! I breath the fervor ofmv soul, and claim the long >vished-for blessing, on my willing knee; Λνικιί transport ΛνοιιΜ o'erwhelm my heart, what extacy л\ т оик1 swell my bosom !—fond hope ; how tran¬ sient is thv comfort ! I cannot cherish thee : a cloud obscures thee from my vol. ín. с
eager fancy—and all is lost in mystery and impenetrable darkness."—After a few moments of melancholy contempla¬ tion, Huberto continued the Poem, which proceeded thus :
LEGEND OFTHE TALL WHITE MAN.
PART II.
TIIE heart of fair Ellen was palsied with dread, As Donald the vision 'gan tell ; Her soul grew more sick every word that he said, For well she remember'd her grundarn, then dead, Wou'd speak of the white mim so fell. And quickly the tears gush'd from out lier bright eye, They trickled by one, two, and three; They channeled her cheek of the lilly's pale dye, Tiiey damp'd her white bosom that vented the sigli ; While Donald still clung to her knee. Fair Ellen gaz'd wistfully on the sweet child, Then fondly her darling she press'd ; Sometimes she look'd ruefully, sometimes quite wild, Then sighing, her gaze would turn piteously mild;-* With mis'ry her heart was oppressa. că
** Oh ! Donald, im darling, uh! Donald, m) dear; Ohi Donuld hclo\ 41," Ellen cried: ís ľMy hearts blood is chill'd, my soul sickens w ith fear, No radiance now beams forth the sad gloom to cheer;- Why did he my council deride? v l( Alı ! why to tlie hunt wou'd Sir Guy, w end \пь way? Why follow the hound and the horn? tVh\ constantly ribe at the dawnin« of dn\ ? Wh·, speed o'er the Woodlands? Why gallop away? And lea\e me dejected, forlorn r'' " Ah ! trust me, my Donald, thy vision bodes ill ; Tis a dream fraught with horror, to me; Thuu saw'st the white spirit that prowls forth to kill, To think uf his cruelty turns my blood chill;—- Twas Heav'n sent this vision to thee," ■ ť Yes, yes, well I know, 'tis the White Man, so tali, The While ÜMan, so wicked and dire; Tis he, who my husband belov'd w ill enthrall;— Jli-i malice pursues and thy father must fall; 'Ere night my Laird Guy wiil expire/' L prose Lady Ellen, while quick throbb'd heV breast, Her wonted attire she forsook ; Her robe was of green, in her bonnet a crest, With fur was edg'd round both her mantle and vest; A spear and keen dagger she took,
Then down from her chamber descended the dame, Her vassals siie suiumon'd each one, Obedient before her, the serving mou came* No laddie but honoiM the sweet Ellen's name, So gen'rous tiic deeds were, she'd done. i( Come busk ye, come busk yc, my merry men all, Go saddle each horse for tine chace; For ili fate I fear, will my husband befall; The warden alone, shall remuin in the ludi ; No robbers will visit thi** place." " Let c /ry one brace on, his sharp catling glave, A dagger each girdle must hold, And o'er the left shoulder, a horn you must have, To sound forth, shou'd any one snatch from the grave, Your Laird, my lo/d husband, so bold." к " And thus arm'd and mounted, on gay gallant steed ; Each man must to green forest straight, And wiien arriv'd tiiere, ye must gallop with speed, Pursue ev'ry winding, for great is the meed : Laird Guv, is pursued by ili fate.'' a Alive should ye find him, then blithe let each horn, Thrice send forth a blast shnJI, and clear; But shou'd he prove dead, let the sound be forlorn, Oh 1 let it >peak truth, to my soul anguish toriig For tlie tidings at once I would hear." c3
" N tuv saddle and bridle my palfrey, black John, The steed wliich my Laird gave to mc ; And inro the court yard, than lead him ^non, From hence to the green wood, I fain would begone, ГегсЬапсе my belov'd I may see.'* 5 Thtib spake Lady Ellen, tlie vassals all hied. To obt'y her they cheerfully fled ,¬ Το please her the bebt, ev'ry serving man tried; Thus eor h wirb his fellow, most cheerfully vied; To Ellen young Donald then said;— " Oh 1 tell me my mither? Oh.' tell me I pray ? Aml w ıît thuu pro\e crnel to me? Λΐυ.ιο wilt thou i-peed, to the green wood away, Ah! canst thou neglect, all thy Donald can say ? tt ho fain would gang thither vvith thee." " Ah ! couldst thou but govern a swift going steed? Ah ! couldst thou his broad back bestride : Why then dearest Donald, with me thou shouldst speed, To Jca\c thee my bairn, makes thy mithcr's beart bleed j I'm jo)les*5 when thour't from my side." Oli! fear not my mother, Vii govern the rein, Nor from his broad back will I fall; Then do not the prayer, of your Donald, disdain, ГИ clear hedge and ditch, and I'll scour wood and plain, No terror my mind shall appall,"
Sweet Ellen was pensive, a teir graced her eye, It fell on her heart's darling joy ; It dropp'd on her cheek, as she said with a sigh, <r Thy boon, my lov'd Donald, I cannot deny, ¡bo thuu shall gang with me, my boy." Then straight to her cluunbcr the bright Ellen fled, ЛУЬегс sleeping Ronilda then lay; And *·*■ lullaby, lullaby," Barbara said ; « Oh! lullaby baby, I'll watch by thy bed, And, for thee, a rosary say/'' llonilda, the babe, lay in Barbaras ar ms, And smii'd like an angel of liglit ; She dreamt, but the vision was free from alarm, Her features display'd every innocent charm, To rivet the fond moű*er's sight. With tenderness Ellen the sweet infant took, w Sleep peaceful, my baby," she said ; She kiss' it, she press'd it, and cast a sad look, To Barbara gave it, the chamber forsook, And hung like tiie lily her head. And down to the court-yard, with Donald, slie hied, liiere placed on the comser was he ; (i Now speeri yc, my bonny men," sweet Ellen cried, Л\ т Ы1е proudly the steed pranc-M jómig Donald's beside; '* Yehoî for the green wood," qu »d ¡¿he. С 4
Veho; ill·/ho, hoys ľ tvas heard wide around; Veho ! ill-, ho ! was the cry ; Then sweetly the bugle, each serving man wound, Still fainter, and fainter, re-echoed the sound, Till nothing was heard but the sigh. And now having sped over holt, moor, and fen, And clear'd hedge and ditch, high and widej The lady and \ assais arriv'd at the glen, Then loud rang the bugle, again and again,. For, lo! they had gain'd the wood's side. Each serving man paus'd, as the sound died away, No bugle was heard to reply; When sighing aloud, wretched Ellen 'gan say, As Hope scenľd no longer to shed a bright ray, f * No answer returns from Laird Guy.'' <( So busk ye, my merry men, buşk ye with speed, All under the green spreading tree; Myself, and young Donald, I prythee ne'er heed, tVVll gallop as chance sliall our fleet horses lead ; May fate prove propitious to me." Then onward they gallop'd, each went at his will, In every direction they flew; When sudden Dame Ellen felt horror's dread chill, Ior, lo! as the sun set, she saw White Man's hill, Young Donald the mountain then knew,
And as tliey approach^ it, the night drew iu fast, Blood-red gleam'd the moon and each star; Then quickly tlic sky was with clouds overcast, The rain fell in torrents, loud whistled the blast, While thunder rolled on from afar. And sudden the White Man his pale form uprear'd, Gigantic eaeh limb was to view-; And wliite was his lank hair, and white was his beard, And all, save his eyes, pale and ghastly appear'd, Which beam'd lambent flames of light blue. And now mov'd on fast the White Man of the wood ; He mov'd on with horrible stride ; But Ellen's sure stay was the Lord's holy rood, In vain strove tlic fell fiend to seize on the good, •Twas tliey who liis malice defied. Fur such only suffer'd, who left for the chace Tiie worship to Heaven first due ; Wlio heeded not Mary, the mother of crace, Who left wife and babies, and such was the case, With Guy, who had prov'd so untrue. For, lo! round the White Man, of spectres so fell, A ltgion appear'd to the sight; Each phantom, so livid, loud sent forth its yell, While trickling the gore from its yawning wounds fell, Where -¿lutted the blood-sucking sprite. С О
And first; oí* the phalanx so horrid to view, Appear'd the bold hunter, Laird Guy , AU meaere his mieu was, fresh blood (lid bedcAr His limbs, which now wore a cadaverous hue, And horribly shrill was his cry, Λ skeleton courser the Laird Guy now rode; His joints flashed sulphurous ñame: And each coming moment his heel seem'd to goad, The lank fleshlcss steed which his pale limbs bestrode ;■— Aloml, Ellen scream'd forth his name ! He check'd the fell courser, and turn'd his grim mieii. But when his dear Ellen he knew; His looks, ray'd in sadness, were instautly seen, While tears 'gan to fiow fast from either sunk eyne, He yelľd fortli, " thy bodings were true." " Oh ! Ellen, why did I thy sage council scorn? Why fled I my sweet babies twain ? Oh ! had I uot left thee, my dearest, forlorn, My poor limbs the white fiend liad never thus toni, Nor should I now suffer keen pain. " But all is too late, for the past I may grieve, No bieast will compassion my woe" Then teach my sweet bairns, this plain truth to believe, Tbat pleasures of life an the e id will deceive, True joys from the Lord only flow.'*·
■îbeăe words spoke Laird Guy, when, more swift than the wmd, tVith a yell he was borne from her view·; lie left lo\eiy Ellen, and babies behind, And such be the meed, to all parents unkind ;-—· May fathers' from henceforth prove true. And now 'gan the bugle a slow mournful! swell, For stiff lay Sir Guy on the ground; *Twas the signal of death, 'twas a serving man's yell, For the corse he had found, which the white fiend so fell Had mangled with many a wountl. All woe-worn the dame to Finlagan return'd, Fell grief did her bosom controul * And there in the chapel the hones were inurn*d, Of him, who for hunting, his Saviour had spurn'd ; That God who may yet save his soul.
At the conclusion of this horible nar¬ rative Huberto tvao fullv convinced that the sjicctrc he had witnessed, in the cavern ofthe mountain of Jura, was the tortured spirit of the Laird Guy, whose soul was at length relieved by his kissing the crucifix which he had tendered to him ; and it was also evident, that the horrid and gigantic appearance tvhich followed, was the white fiend alluded to in the minstrel's poem. Yielding to the contemplations which this rapid suc¬ cession of events produced, Huberto became unconscious of the lapse of time, till informeel by the mariners that they tvere near the shore of Oronza's island, Avinzo, raising his eyes, beheld the land at no great distance; while, oer the tvcstern expanse, the bright crimson of the setting sun diffused the most radiant glow, which, as they made the shore, gradually diminished, and, on their de¬ barkation, the faintest tinges were alone perceptible.
On gaining the lints of tlic fivhermeu Huberto procured the best accommoda¬ tion tbc dwellings tvould afford for him¬ self and his attendants ; and, having agreed tvith the mariners that they slioukl conti uue at Oronza until his de¬ parture, the youth then turnee! in his thoughts the best method to be piu^ucd in order to the rescuing the object of his fervent adoration, tvhich л\а-> now the only contemplation that engrossed his animated mind.
СНЛР. I г.
- — ■ ...... —------------In vain the search; Fond expectation dies within my soul, While sick'nmg lo\ e yearns out despair. W. II. I.
JL HE first step pursued by Avinzo tvas to summon into his presence the fislier¬ man, under whose roof he had taken shelter, and from t\hose communica¬ tions he acquired the following informa¬ tion :— That after the departure of King Robert Bruce and his friends from the island, (whom the narrator denominated by the title of strangers) an escort of troops had suddenly aroused the inhabi¬ tants of the several huts, and made a
srenerai search, in the course of л'ЛнсЬ it was found that one of the fishermen was missing, Λνΐιο it λ\α$ immediatelv con- jectured had put to sea in his bark, and facilitated the flight of the strangers from the island ; thatin consequence ofthis a л -essél of some burthen, which it ap¬ peared had transported the soldiery to the island, put to sea, but returned by dawn, fearing to proceed from their want of knowledge, as to the coast, ţvhich, on account of its numerous shoals, Λναβ л г егу dangerous, and navigable only by those mariners λιΊιο лусгс bred up from childhood on that and the adjoining islands ofthe луезг,. The fisherman then proceeded to in¬ form Huberto, that an order from the Abbot Gondez, had arrived during the day, charging the inhabitants of the huts to secure the seaman on his re¬ turn, and conduct him a prisoner to the monastery of Saint Columba; but that
the poor fishermen, feeling for their fel¬ low mariner, on whose head the ven¬ geance of the Abbot tvould have fallen, deputeel Avinzo's then host to put to sea, with the wife and family of their comrade, which he effected; and meeting the prescribed Walter Logau, on his return towards Oronza, he fore¬ warned him of his danger ; and having placed his wife and children on board liis fishing bark, Logan, grateful for the service thus rendereel him, having in¬ formed his comrade that he had received gold sufficient to gratify his every desire, steered in another direction, since tvhich period lie had never been seen at Oronza. The narrator then informed Huberto that the vindictive spirit of the Abbot had been displayed to every poor inha- habitant of the island, and that they liad all suffered by the cruel persecutions of the monks of Saint Columba; he likewise stated, that the soldiery, after
three davs continuance at О ronza, nad again set sail, steering towards the Eng¬ lish coast, since which period no other than fishing barks had visited Oronza. Huberto then proceeded to make en¬ quiries as to the general opinion entertain¬ ed concerning the Abbot, which ques¬ tionings his host evaded for some time, tül the frankness of Avinzo emboldened him, and the youth then learned that his ' tyranny had rendered him obnoxious to all the inhabitants of the island ; in ad¬ dition to which information he also stated, that his chosen friend, John of Dunbar, had suddenly died, the preced¬ ing dav, and that he was that n i «-lit to be deposited in the vault of the monastery. The latter information was particular¬ ly grateful to Huberto, who was, by this means, freed from one of those mysterious beings who woukl have been most prompt in ^""^^ f he progress of
his intcnted plans. Avinzo having maele •some further enquiry, tvas given to un¬ derstand that the hour of burial was eleven that night, previously to the frater¬ nity's celebration of the midni ngt vespers, on which account, as Huberto hael to traverse the vault wherein the monk was to be depositeel, he thought it most ex¬ pedient to proceed to the chapel tvithout delay, as the presence of the fathers in the vault, at a later hour, would, otherwise, preclude the possibility of his passing to the cloisters unobserved.—Having İssueel strict orders that neither the fisherman nor his two attendants might suffer un¬ easiness on account of his absence, Avin¬ zo left the lowly habitation, anel took the path-way leading to the wood. A sable cloak hael now obscured the grey tinge of twilight, anel the pale л loon appeared at intervals, tvhen the slotv clouds, breaking, gave to the eye the chaste orb of silent night ; the wind
in sullen murmurs rustled through the leaves of the wood, along the skirt of which, Huberto having for some time advanced, at length founel himself ap¬ proaching the secret eloor by which he was to gain admittance into the mo¬ nastery. A sudden trepidation at that juncture took possession of Avinzo's breast, as he internally recollected that, should the portal have since been closeel in the interior, his pass into the convent tvould be thus rendered im¬ practicable, anel, in that case, every hope of effecting the rescue of the un¬ known wanderer of the chapel would be annihilated. Spurred onward with this dread incer¬ titude, Huberto speedily found himself at the portal, and, with a palpitating heart, applied his hand to the eloor, which at first resisted his pressure, buton a second effort, it burst open, and Aviu-
zo found himself in the passage, beneath the altar. Having pushed too the portal, he cau- tiouslv moved the bolts into their sockets, and then ascended to the vault wherein were depositeel the moulelering remains ofthe abbots of Saint Columba. —The utter darkness that enveloped every surrounding object rendered it very difficult for the youth to discover his way to the other chambers, appro¬ priated as the burial places of the frater¬ nity ; he, however, at length effected his purpose, and aelvanced with hasty strides along the passage, when, having ascended the flight of steps, he found himself in saftetv at the grated portal conducting to the cloisters, where he paused, to observe, if possible, t\ nether any of the monks were near; tvhen, having listened, a drear silence was a sufficient token of his safety, and Hu-
berto instantlv following the mode before adopted ; the bolts gave way, and he soon found himself on the pavement of the cloisters. Avinzo, with the utmost precipitancy, proceedeel to the church, and immediate¬ lv soimht concealment in one of the most remote chapels, where, having con¬ ti uucei for a length of time, at the same hour as before, the portal by which he had entered the church was unclosed, and he presently after beheld the form of the Abbot Gondez, unattended, tvho bent his steps with downcast look to the altar of the church, and, as formerly, disappeared instantaneously from his sight. Huberto continued in the most anxi¬ ous state of suspence, but no person ap¬ peareel ; he then quitted the place of his concealment, and approached the brass portals ofthe choir ; still all was silent as
the gîwe; the murky gloom being alone dissipated by the steady glare of light which beamed from the lamp, and re¬ flected its rays upon the massive crucifix that adorned the altar, * Minute succeeded minute, but avi th¬ out presenting the long wished-for ob¬ ject to the eager gaze of Avinzo, whose agitated minel conjured up a thousanel dreadful chimeras to appal his soul. Sometimes he fancied that she had fallen a prey to the mysterious seclusion which she had suffered ; at others that the machinations of the Abbot had worked their purpose, anel that she was lost for ever ; in vain eliel the voice of fame applaud his conduct to his sovereign and his friends. Huberto полу attri¬ buted the loss of all he prized in exist¬ ence, to his having left her, unprotected, in the monastery of Saint Columba. Yielding to the horrors which these con-
tcmplations gave birth to, the youth, with folded arms and a frantic demean¬ our, paced to and fro the nave of the chapel, till he was sudelenlv aroused to a sense of his danger, by hearing the ap¬ proach of footsteps; soon after whjch, the gate, lead ing to the clo is ters, tvas unbarreel, anel the monks appeared advancing to take their stations in the choir, in order to their performance of the midnight chant. It was with infinite difiiculty Avinzo escaped unobserved to a distant chapel, from whence, as he tvas fully assured, that the stranger form tvould not on that night appear, he instantly repaireel to the cloisters, and, passing through the grated doorway, soon descended into the dreary sepulchre of eleath. On advancing, the quick step of Hu¬ berto was suddenly checked, as he be¬ held in the distance the faint glimmering
of a light ; fearful of a discovery, he made a pause, anei stole forward tvith the utmost caution, tvhen he was enabled to perceive, that the newly depositeel form oí* a monk was stretched upon the pavement, which he conjectured must be the remains of John of Dunbar; but the cowl being drawn over the counte¬ nance, totally obscured it from observa¬ tion; beside the corps lay a plain black crucifix and rosary, near to which res teel on the stones, a small lamp formeel of clay, emitting a pale gleam which still added to the surrounding horrors of the vaults. Such was, ineleed, the regular ceremony adopted on the interment of a brother of Columba s monasterv: as in case a visitation of the saint should re¬ store réanimation to the defunct, he might be enabled to eţuit the scene of death ; for which purpose the quantity of oil contained in the vessel was sufiicient to afford a light during the period of
twenty-four hours from the ceremony of the interment* Hastily retiring from this disgusting Scene, Avinzo once more gained the wood without molestation, and ere the second hour of morning, found himself in safety under the roof òf the fisher¬ man s lowly el welling» Unconscious hotv to act, Huberto*» tortured imagination affrighted from hi* soul, the balmy spell of renovating sleep» One ray of comfort alone seemed left to him, (if comfort it might be called), which originated in the Abbot's visit to ťhe church the preceeding night, fbr if tìie lovely stranger were not then a resi¬ lient in the cells of the chapel, where¬ fore should the superior repair thither at the same juncture as during his former imprisonment tvith his friends in th*· monastery of Saint Columba.
VOL, III,
m
Hett ildered with doubts, Avinzo re¬ mained a prey to every agonizing thought to which fear gave birth, till his perturbed mind, unable to sustain these accumulated horrors of reflection, yield- eel at length to the powerful magic of sleep, which for a time dispelieel the goading thorn of care from his sickening soul, wafting him to the visionary re¬ gions of content and happiness. The ensuing day tvas spent in* con¬ templating various plans, which when formed, were as speedily relinquished as impracticable ; and again the night drew in without any thing decisive having been concluded upon by Huberto, who, therefore, once more repaired * to the chapel to behold the object of his ardent search, should she appear as for¬ merly. Actuateel tvith this idea, and yieleüng to the fond delusions of hope, Avinzo,
t? ithout interruption, arrived at the mo¬ nastery, anel traversing the vaults and cloisters, gaineel in safety the interior of the church where the form of the Abbot appeared as before; but in vain tvas Hu¬ bertos eye bent upon the choir, no lovely object was seen, anel frantic with disappointment, he tvas compelled to re¬ trace his »tops to the hut of the fisher¬ man, during the celebration ofthe nightly chant performed by the fraternity of Saint Columba, Roused to astate of desperation, Avinzo determined for a time on the most daring mode of proceed u re ; but the safety of the object he ado-eel, if still in existeuce, added to the remembrance of the Abbot's former conduct, ьооп convinced Huberto that to fall into the power of Gondez, would be to disable himself from render¬ ing the persecuted object of his love any further assistance ; sometimes he re¬ called to mind the form of father An-
d £
thoiiy, and at other moments recurred to that monk, vvho had so mysteriously been the cause of his own and his Monarch's prior escape; but thepossN bility of seeing and conversing with either of those personages, was altogether impracticable, and more particularly witb the latter, vvho was wholly un¬ known to the youth* Actuated vvith a thousand agonizing conjectures, the hours again dragged heavily away till the mist of evening once more stole upon the face of nature, and at tlie period of darkness Avinzo again ventured forth to revisit the mo·*· nastery, totally unconscious of the steps he should pursue on this trying occa¬ sion. Fully determined to have recourse to every expedient which stratagem and courage could devise, in order to attain the desired liberation of the object tbat
enchained his soul, Huberto dauntlessly pursued the former track, anel founel himself, after the usual caution, safely stationed within the church of the con¬ vent of Saint Columba,
» 3
СНЛР. ш.
From the dire food the snuer rais'd his head, And wiping from his mouth the clotted gore Of that foul pasture upon which he fed, He thus began ; ------------ Canti»
1 4 » i m « n i H4H ii i l U > in »
1 HE night was uncommonly boister¬ ous, the tvind roared hideously, and the rain beat hard against the casements of the chapel, even the flame of the lamp that burned before the great altar, tvas agitated by the howling blast that forced its way into this spacious edifice; en¬ shrouded in his plaid, Huberto remained totally unconscious of this conflict of tlie elements being occupied only in the expedient, most likely to produce the desired termination of his wishes.
Once more the portal was unbarreel, mid the detested form of the Abbot made its appearance, tvho with measureel stride bent his course totvards the choir, as the glare of the lamp tvhich he held, shone full upon his countenance, Avinzo tvas enabled to peruse its lineaments, which were fraught with gloomy horror and malignant crueltv; some muttered words also escaped his lips, but from the distance Huberto was not enabled to understand their meaning ; from the general deportment hotvever of tlic monk, a more than wonteel gloom had taken possession of his soul, ami a lower¬ ing glance of direst import shot at in¬ tervals from his piercing eye. In the course of the Abbot's march to the ibual place of his_ disappearance, he halted several times, frequently raising his finger to his brow, аэ if in the act of deepest meditation. At length Gondez gained the altar, i>4
and as before vanished from the sight of the observant Avinzo. Being undertermined as to any fixed plan, the youth rushed forwarel and had nearly gaineel the brass portal conducting to the choir, when a thought suddenly crossed his mind, and darting with pre·· cipitancy into a smaller chapel, he took from before its altar the lamp which burned tiiere whensoever the celebration of mass took place, and finding it ready trimmed and furnished tvith oil, he hastily aelvanced to the brass gates, which Avinzo had observed were not secured by the Abbot on the inside, anel passing his hand between the bars, he soon forced back the only bolt that fastened to the portal, and instantly founel himself within the choir. Huberto hastily advanced to the side of the Holy Table, where he looked in vain for a door-way, till the recollection
of the secret screen beside the Altar, in the burial vault of the Abbots of the monastery, sudeleniy recurred to his re¬ membrance; anel, on applying his hanel in the present instance, he round the same methoel hael been adopted, but with additional art, the screen being of real stone-work, within a strong frame of iron, so as to obviate all suspicion, anel total lv deceive every observer who was unacquainted with tbe fact. Avinzo having withdrawn this impeeliment to his course, found a narrow stone-staircase before him which was involved in impe¬ netrable gloom ; he immediately fletv to the spot where hung suspendeel the lamp that burned before the grand Altar, anel having from its flame illumined that which he had had the precaution to procure, he instantly rushed to the aperture, anel dratving to the screen-work, began to descend the steps before him. These cem- ducteel at length to a narrow passage, whose damp air produceel an instantane- D 5
ous effect on the light of the lamp he bore, affording but a sickly gleam that partially shed its rays upon the vaulted avenue along which he proceeded. Having gaineel at length the termina¬ tion of the passage, a small vault ap¬ peared, from whence three avenues branched off in different directions; unconscious which to pursue, Huberto placeel his ear to the pavement, in order to catch, if possible, the sound of the Abboťs retiring footsteps, but all in vain, a death-like stillness prevailed, and nought but chance remaineel to direct him in the wislfd-for track. Avinzo guided by no other monitor than Hope, struck into the avenue that faceei him, observing tvith caution whe¬ ther any chamber or door-way appeareel on either side, but nothing was visible, save the damp green walls of this subter¬ ranean spot. A second winding flight
of steps at length appeared, еюлуп which Huberto proceeded, anel then passed se- veral gloomy and horrid chambers, but Λπΐΐιοιιί any prospect of gaining а кполу- ledge as to the real object of his search. W r earied Vvitb this fruitless pursuit, the youth determined on retracing his steps лгкЬои! delay, in order to explore the other алтпиеь he had beheld, and being fixed iu the adoption of this plan, Hu¬ berto had already turned to measure back liis steps, лупеп the most agonized anel lengthened groan resounded through the vaultings, the echo of which л\**а$ so terrific as even to chill for a moment the dauntless heart of Avinzo, Λνΐιο stood aghast and petrified with horror. Several minutes elapsed, but no repeti¬ tion of the sound луаз heard, and as Hu¬ berto recalled his scattered senses, he began to harbouran opinion that fancy inight have conjured up the idea; but рб
this conjecture soon proved erroneous by the repetition of tlie same anguished tone, wdiich broke upon the stillness of this drear abode. Avinzo turned his attention towards tlie spot from whence the sound pro¬ ceeded, and anxious to afford relief to the sufferer., bent his steps in that direc¬ tion, when having traversed another vault, he found himself at the entrance of a cell, wherein he had scarcely ad¬ vanced two paces ere a human form ap¬ peared in the distance, being stretched at full length ирод the chilly pavement. Avinzo advancing, bad nearly been brought to the earth by a large iron ring that projected from the pavement of the dungeon, to which was affixed a strong chain that боод proved to be attached to the wrkts of the sufferer. The youth approached to* object, whose garb was tiw»* of the frate* nity qï Saint Columba,
while his countenance envelloped in his robe was not observable. Huberto call¬ ed aloud, when a groan was the reply, upon tvhich withdrawing the enshroud¬ ing garment from his fiľze, what tvas Avinzo's astonishment on viewing in the person before him the well-remem¬ bered countenance of tlie mysterious monk, John of Dunbar, notwithstanel- ing the cadaverous and meagre hue of starvation that was im prin teel on his pro¬ minent features. Huberto starting back, remained for some moments immoveable, agitated by the multifarious train of ideas that rushed upon his fancy; humanity at length pervaded his soul, and instantly prompted him to raise the form of the emaciated father, tvho bending his ghast¬ ly eyes on Avinzo, with difficulty pointed to another part of the dungeon, where the youth behekl food and water spread upon the pavement. Huberto instantly ran to the spot, and on presenting it to the monk, he grasped it tvith the utmost
rapacity, and Uien began to eat with the appearance of excessive hunger; fearful of the eifect u hich this might produce, Avinzo withdrew a portion of the nutri¬ ment, when the iather in a faint tone exclaimed, fi In mercy do not take it from me, for two long da^s and this third night have I been left to famish." ťť Бе resigned," continued Avinzo, " your craving if at once appeased may prove vour death, 'tis mv charitv, and not the voice of ciueltv, that now jirompts me to withliold this nutriment from vou/* The monk shook his head, løokin«* with ravenous eyes upon the wished-for food, while Huberto proceeded to in¬ spect the manner in which the manacles were affixed to the limbs of the father; when, to his great sorrow, he found that no human force, without the aid of some instrument, could wrench tliem off; neither was it possible to loosen the ring
within the pavement, which was rivetted firm as the stone itself. Having sparingly administered at in¬ tervals a portion of the food, tvhich was in plenty, the monk was enabled to in¬ form Avinzo that it was the Abbot Gon- elez tvho had caused his imprisonment, anel that to augment his sufferings, he had been left to famish with that very food in view, but placeel at such a dis¬ tance as to preclude the possibility of his touching it. Upon a further in¬ spection of the cell, Huberto found a lamp which had been originally left burn¬ ing, to afford the father a view of the means of'lengthening out his existence, which tvas thus diabolically placed to tantalize his sickening soul. As it was that night utterly impossible to release the emaciated John of Dunbar, Hu¬ berto proceeded to inform the father that he must remain a prisoner untili the en¬ suing night, when he woulel revisit the
cell and effect his liberty. Upon hearing this information, new terrors marked the eye of the captive, who grasping the arm of the vouth with all the arelour he was tO . capable of exerting, imploreel him with looks of speechless agony. " Be patient,*' resumed Huberto, " and by Him who dieel for our trans¬ gressions I will restore you agaiu to lifo and freedom." The monk groaned, elropped the arm of Avinzo, anel then sunk to the earth in seeming despair. " Speak, John of Dunbar/' continued Huberto, <ť know'st thou whether the female yet exists who once was wont to pace by night the church of this monas¬ tic pile?" Tlie father, tvith a look of wonder, eyed Avinzo's countenance, and thus re¬ plied :—
u She yet existed tvhen the hellish Gondez sealed my doom ; but Heaven alone can tell hotv long that life will be gran teel by her tormentor." " When thou art free canst thou effect her liberation ?" asked Huberto with energy. " I can effect Unanswered the monk, " and bring to the block her damned persecutor." " Swear thou wilt aiel my purpose, then," exclaimed the youth. il I swear by Jesu and revenge," an¬ swered the father, with a degree of energy he had not before assumed, while a look of fiery malignancy shot from his hollow eyes. Huberto again presented the food, of whicli the monk partook, tvhen he pro¬ ceeded to apportion out as much as would
GONDEZ, be conducive to the reno\'atiou of his луаяг^! strength and serve till the ensuing night, after which he cautiously left the residue луЬеге it had been originally placed, and secreting the portion which Λν -as intended for the monk ΛνΊ thi n the folds of his garment, Avinzo proceed¬ ed to supplicate that the father луоик! not hastily consume the food, but par¬ take of it at intervals only, to which the monk at length assented, \yhen the youth further cautioned him not suffer any part of the viands to appear near him, and also to assume, as much as possible, the resemblance of death, shouid the fiend-like Abbot revisit him to vitncss the effect of his infernal malice and de¬ termined cruelty. Huberto, by the desire of the terrified monk, again witli solemn accents swore to revisit hini the ensuing night and bear him from captivity ; after which, taking up the lamp, he was on the point of quit-
ting the cell, when John of Dunbar in a faint tone recalleel him, anel upon Avin¬ zo's near approach, the father thus ael- dressed him :— <f For mercy's sake, young man, be guided by the caution which I now im¬ part—Think not alone to compass the freedom of the maiel you seek. Return with caution by that inexplicable way which has leel you hither; 'tis I only can guide you to the place of her secretion, and work the purpose you so ardently desire. As there is a God, I do not now eleceive you; and let me if I can, atone for guilty actions past, by effecting the salvation of her who woulel become the certain sacrifice of your misguieled pre¬ cipitancy." The vouth continued silent, tvhich the monk construeel into doubt, and implor¬ ed availi with such a fervent accent, as flashed conviction on tho minel of Huberto,
who promised to obey the injunction of the father, and лукЬ this assurance he re¬ tired from the cell. Having once more traversed the ca* vernous abode of darkness, Huberto found himself beneath the grand Altar of the church, and as no sound of voices struck his ear, he лу -as fully assured that the fathers, were not yet assembled to perform the nocturnal hymn of praise; he consequently extinguished his lamp, and moving алуау the screen, passed through the aperture, and soon quitted the choir. Having carefully rebolted the brass portals, Huberto committed the lamp he had used to its original place, and луав then hastening to regain the cloisters, when, at that critical juncture, the approaching footsteps of the fathers arrested his attention, and scarcely had he concealed himself when the proces¬ sion as usual entered the chapel As soon as the fathers had taken theii
stations in the choir, Avinzo, unobserveef, passed from 'the place of his secretion, and using the utmost expedition, pre¬ sently gained the burial place of the fra¬ ternity, when curiosity prompted him to examine the features of the supposed corps of John of Dunbar, which he tvas just enabled to do by the decaying light ofthe lamp that burned beside the figure; but, on raising the cowl of the habit, tvhat was Avinzo's surprize on observing that instead of ahuman corps, the vest¬ ments tvere only stuffed for the purpose of representing the ñgure of the supposée! defunct father, John of Dunbar. Replacing the cowl, the youth speeel·* ily gained the exterior of the walls, when, animated tvith hope, and the train of contemplations which the late events gave rise to, he once more entereel in safety the humble dwelling of tlie fisb- crmam
CHAP. IV.
PresB thou the lonely pillow of liis head, And ask why bleep his languid lids has fled; Mark hit» dew'd temples, and hb half shut eye, Uis trembling nostrils and his deep drawn sigh, His itiuttVing moutli 7 contorted with despair, And say, if/rtwweisnot pictur'd there. \v. л. I,
Jh ROM the moment of Hubertos quit¬ ting the cell which confined the tvretch¬ ed monk, the soul of John of Dunbar was a prey to all the horrors of his situa¬ tion, and the constant prospect of Avin¬ zo's never returning to release him, filled his mind with the agonizing elread of being again left to linger out a fetv more - wretched hours, only to yield at length to the oppressive pangs of glov¬ ing famine.
Being fully conversant with the ma¬ chinations of Gondez, the monk felt a thorough conviction that the entrance of the youth into the monastery must have been accomplished by stratagem alone, and the knowledge which Hu¬ berto had acquired of the existence of some female**, also astounded the mind of the fathei, wbo conceived that no creature save himself, and the Abbot was acquainted tvith that circumstance. Filled with those ideas, the miserable monk entertained a thousand doubts as to the possibility of Avinzo's again obtaining admittance, as he had no idea whatsoever of the discoveries which the youth had made, and by tvhich his entrance into the convent tras rendered so easy. The prospect of hurling retribution on the head of the cruiltv Gondez, some- -** * CľJ v * ф times afforded a gleam of comfort to John of Dunbar, who, anxious to pro- long his existence, in order to effect the
completion of hw revenge, followed im* plicitly the orders of Huberto, relative to the partially eating ofthe food appor¬ tioned out by the youth, although the pangs of yearning hunger very freejuent·*· ly prompted the father to yield to those cravings of nature. Thus lagged on the dreary time of night from Avinzo's departure, when about the first hour of morning after the monks had sung their wonted strain, the wretched John of Dunbar heard the sound of footsteps, instantly stretching himself upon the pavement, anel closing tero his eyes, he awaited thus the arrival of the Abbot, or the return of Huberto, who, he conceived, might have some fresh communications to impart,, which thus leel him torevisit the cell; in the latter supposition he was, however, de¬ ceived, for when the figure entered the dungeon, it proved to be the Abbot; Gondez, who, bearing his lamp, ap*
proached with a look of savage pleasure the object of his barbarous vengeance. Having eyed awhile the ashy and mea¬ gre physiognomy of the father, Gondez concluded that the monk was no more, and then with savage ferocity ex¬ claimed ;— " I am too late, and my revenge is incomplete. Oh 1 that I had witnessed his agonizing torturcsi my soul tvould then have glutted on the sight, anel the full measure of my wishes had been ac¬ complished. Well, well, the reptile is no more who tvould have crossed me in my purposes. All however can be executed without him ; and shall be done to the full extent of my wishes. Cold blood¬ ed wretch, didst thou believe thou couldest escape me I Didst thou imagine Gondez frameel to foster those who fain woulel leave their business half unfinish¬ ed \ Such be the reward of pusillanimou VOL, lib E
souls," none are for me but those who •dare the worst, and tvould forfeit worlds to gratify the reigning desires of their hearts. The bloody minded Abbot, stiil mut¬ tering, turneel from the supposed corpse of the monk, and regarded with an ap¬ parent air of internal gratification the food which remaineel upon the pave¬ ment, after tvhich, casting another glance of unsatiateel malignity on the person of John of Dunbar, he slowly left the cell, when the gleam of the lamp graelually faded, as the sounel of his footsteps died upon the ear of the monk. " Infernal monster," internally exclaim¬ ed the captive father, " fate may, how¬ ever, yet preserve me to call down the wrath of offended justice and punish thy iniquity. Dare I fix my gaze on hea¬ ven," resumed the monk after a consider-
able pause, " Is there a ray of comfort jeft to eace the goadings of my consci¬ ence ? yes, the God of justice is the ra¬ tlier of ¡Mercy, nor is repentance barred against the guilty who claim its suc¬ cour/' ----. There was a degree of comfort in these contemplations, which in a great mea¬ sure reassured the desponding captive, and gave elasticity to the lagging pace of hoary time ; at intervals indeed, t hir chilling impulse of fear obtruded itself upon his soul, but the reanimation which his drooping spirit experienced in the contemplation of heavenly grace, taught the father to rely on that alone for suc¬ cour, nor was he deceived in his con¬ stant recurrence to this inspiring flame, which every moment redoubled the vi¬ gour of that hope which now dawned upon his soul. The virtuous Huberto, lost щ -şmaze* E 2
ment, as he contemplated the striking events of the night, gave full scope to those reanimating contemplations that pictureel the blissful termination of his arduous enterprize; yet, however pow¬ erfully these ieleas operatcel on his glow¬ ing imagination, the depraved mind of the Abbot Gondez tvould frequently strike to his soul, inspiring him tvith more than horror, as he at the same time felt assured, that some hidelen crimes of the blackest hue were yet concealed, which the confession of John of Dun¬ bar woulel in all probability bring to light. Having enjoyed but a small portion of sleep from the variety of contending thoughts which had crotvdeet on his brain, Huberto left his pallet by dawn of day, and immediately proceedeel to make the necessary arrangements for the liberation of John of Dunbar that night.
Having procured the implements re¬ quisite for лугепепи^ off the manacles of the monk, Avinzo's next contenu plation л\\18 the л\такакч1 state of the father, Λνΐιο would in all probability find it diliicult to quit the dreary dungeon that confined him ; full of this supposi¬ tion, the youth determined that his two attendants should accompany him till they arrived near the spot where he usu- ually entered the monastery, and there await his return \vith the captive ; but in case the monk was too emaciated to advance so far, Avinzo determined that his domestics should then return ΛνΜι him into the monastery, and convey the father from thence in their arms. The next step pursued by Huberto, was that of procuring a disguise for tlie captive, together ΛναΙι fresh aliments and cheering beverage to recruit his strength previously to their sallying from the cavern that confined him· £ 3
During the remainder of tlie day, Avinzo and his domestics continued as usual beneath tlie roof of the fisherman, that their appearance abroad might not excite wonder in the breasts of the poor inhabitants, wbo, without any intentional ill, might then have conveyed the news of their arrival to the monasterv, when the suspicious Abbot would have doubt¬ less dispatched his emissaries, anel frus¬ trated the plans of the cautious Hu¬ berto. As the sun declined totvards the wes¬ tern deep, Avinzo behekl from the lattice oftlie hut, the little barks of the fisher¬ men swiftly glieli ng o'er the spangleel expanse of water, sometimes a white sail spreading its bosom to the breeze, wafteel to shore the vessel, tvhile the busy mari- ners, joyful at having laden their bark with the finny tribe, sung merrily to the breeze, some strain, which erst their mothers had useel, when they were infants
on their laps, to soothe them to ¿-weet •Mumbers. There was a pleasing melancholy iu the dying sound, which combining tvith the stillness of evening, antl the faint dash of the waves, that broke at inter¬ vals on the distant shoals, реем liai iy agitated the contemplative Avinzo, tv hose fond recollection gradually retraced every event of his mysterious and busy life ; and as each successive change of thought occurred, the potent feelings whicli arose in consequence, produced in turn, their varied effects upon his soul; sometimes thrilling his breast with tendercst sympathy, and at others chilling him with horror, or spelling his bosom with nuutial arduur and tlie thirst of Fame. Love, potent Lote, however held its empire o'er his heart, and to that irrcMstable Divinity he resigned his soul tvith the thrill of glotving ex- tacw E 4
As misty twilight expanded o*er the deep, the fishing boats made rapidly to shore, when each busy crew enlivened still the fading beam of evening; by un¬ loading their stock of fish which was heir only fortune. Ahí little bought the mariners that the Lord of those Isles tvas then a resident among them, anel that under one of their humble roofs, reposed the fervent votary of their much-loved Monarch, the preserver and safeguard of King Robert Bruce. Night at length elrew her black ca¬ nopy o'er the western horizon ; the fisher¬ men were all retired to their respective huts, and stillness once more held its solitary sway o'er the wide expanse of exuberant nature. Huberto descendeeï, and summoned his attenelants tvhom he had previously ©relered to keep themselves in readiness. Having loaded their shoulders with the
several articles which had been procureel during the day, they sallyed from the hut, foliotved Avinzo, tvho, proceeding in the usual course, soon gained the um¬ brageous covert of the wood, advancing with quick but cautious steps towards the monastery of Saint Columba.
e 5
CHAP. V.
------ The famish'd culprit rearM his head ;—. AVhfjn, IVIcrcy stretch'd lu r. hand to save, And Trom th.e mansion of the dead Hedcem the tonmu υί Lhe grave. fc 'W. И. ϊ.
IIE moon in pale lustre broke tlirough the dark canopy of clouds, and gave at length to the eyes of Avinzo the gloomy walls of the convent, when having ad¬ vanced within an hundred paces of the usual place of entrance, the youth paus¬ ed, and ordered his atti ndants to await there his return, under tlic dark covert of the surrounding trees. Huberto then taking the instruments requisite for the release of John of Dunbar, together with the beverage and nutriment, and the disguise, left his wondering attendants,
and speedily found liimself within the vaults of the monastery. Avinzo had recourse to the usual pre¬ caution, previous to his passing the lat¬ ticed gate-way communicating with the cloisters ; no sound, however, was heard, and he glided swiftly into the church, proceeding as usual to his wonted place of concealment, until the Abbot Gon¬ dez should have descended into the vaults beneath the creat Altar. Huberto having safely deposited his load, seated himself upon the steps of the Altar, anxious for the moment which should enable him to relieve the captive father; with his right arm resting on his knee, and his hand placed o'er his brow, he gave himself up to meditation. A rustling sound suddenly caught the car of the youtli, when mstantiy raising his eyes, what vyas his fearful astou-Uu- e в
ment on beholding a monk of Saint Co¬ lumba rush from beside the opposite an. gle of the Altar and approach him with hasty pace î Huberto had scarcely arisen, when the hand of the intruder caught his arm, while from beneath the folds of his robe, which muffled up his countenance, a voice exclaimed, *· Fear not my pre¬ sence." The monk then drawing Avinzo to¬ wards the lamp that burned below the table, withdrew from his phisiognomy enough of his garments to render hi» eyes visible, anel having fixeel them for a few seconds on the features of Avinzo, he then exclaimed, " I know thee, proceed, and may Hea¬ ven protect thee!" Huberto in his tum prevented the re-
treat of the monk by seizing his gar¬ ments, and instantly demanding— " Who art thou?" * $i Peace, rash youth," resumed the father, " I am no foe, let that suffice thee ; but on thy soul afford me a quick retreat, or I am lost for ever." " Oh ! God, if thou betrayest me,'* cried the youth in agony. " By the Holy Trinity, I swear," re¬ torted the father. Avinzo instantly called to his recollec¬ tion the stern commands of the Abbot Gondez, as to no father's entering the church from the hour of curfew till the celebration of the midnight prayer, ad¬ deel to which, the father's mode of ut¬ terance re-assured him ; when, loosening his grasp, he exclaimed :—
íC As I confide in.'thee, so may'st thou prove thy gratitude V' The monk turning to Avinzo with em¬ phatic gesture replied, " I have sworn by Heaven Î" Then instantly rushing from the spot, he vanished in a few seconds from Hu¬ bertos sight. On the disappearance of this unknown, the youth began to call to mind the figure of father Anthom* as well as that of the monk by whose interference the e-seape of King Robert had been effected, yet owing to the sameness of the habit, and the tallness of stature,Avinzo was not able to satisfy his mind whether or not the same individual луЬо hatl so peculiarly interested him during the celebration of mass, was the very person лгЬо had thrice conducted himself so mysteriously to- wards him.
Absorbeel in these reflections, Huber¬ to'« apprehensions луеге sometimes roused, vet the manners of the stranger as often returned to banish all alarm from his soul; at length, as usual, appeared tiie Abbot, tvho, as bi fore, entered by the secret door beside the great Alear. Avinzo havino* allowed a sufficient о lapse of time for the superior to descend, speedily seize el the lamp, and e] uit ting the small chapel л\ herein he hael taken sanctuary, proceedca with his load to the choir, and having shifted the screen,. he soon found himself elcscendins: iuto that abode of horror. Having advanced along the same pas¬ sages anel traversed the several chambers, as before the vouth found himself within the gloomy cell of the expectant monk, who, at sight of Huberto, uttered the name of Jesu, and sunk o'ercome with conflicting sensations upon the chilly pavement.
Avinzo advancing, with much difficul¬ ty restored animation to the frame of the monk ; who having acquired a sufficient degree of strength received from the youth some invigorating beverage, after which Huberto spread the wholesome ali¬ ment before him. He next began to ex- amine the chains that held the captive, upon which he proceeded to usehisutmost endeavours with the implements he had procured, when, after great labour, he effected his purpose, and gave to liberty the wretched form of the emaciated John of Dunbar. The father would have arisen and knelt before his preserver, but weakness and mental derangement overpowered him, and he sunk into the arms of the youth, who a second time accomplished his recovery to Hfe and reason. Avinzo then requesting the father toj calm his emotions, represented to hiin
his weakened state and the length of wav he had to proceed ; he then conjured him, if possible, to assume the disguise which had been prepared, and with the assistance of Huberto, the monk was, after much difficulty, equipped and ready to depart from the place of his confine¬ ment. Supported on the right arm of the vouth, who held in his left, hand the friendly lamp, the tottering frame ofthe father proceeded but slowly, and it was vvith infinite exertion that Avinzo gained at length the secret screen, so well known to John of Dunbar, vvho sunk down upon the top step, overcome with sicken¬ ing lassitude. Huberto instantly presented the reno¬ vating juice, of vvhich the monk again partook, but still was unable to rise till after the lapse of many minutes, when the youth earnestly exhorted him to
summon his utmost strength,'after which, having listened and finding silence reign within the church, Avinzo shifted back the screen, and supported the monk down the middle of the choir; then having opened the brass portal, and finding the father droop, Huberto, conscious e>f the danger of delay, and assuming a more than natural strength, raiseel the monk ia his arms and bore him safely to tlie interior of the little chapel, which had so often served him for an asylum. In this instance, the will of fate was cer¬ tainly renderexl most evident, for hael a single minute more transpired, Avinzo anel the father must inevitably have fallen into the hands of the Abbot Gondez, tvho, at the head of the fraternity, en¬ tered the church at that critical juncture, and proceeding to the choir took their several stations, and began their usual chant to the Divinity. John of Dunbar having remained In
this sanctuary sufficient time to recruit his exhausted frame, still resting on the arm of his preserver, pas-'cd the portal of the church and gained the cloisters un- percenti, when the youth huny ing the father along, (as the only object then wa.s the gainhi-g the vaults unobserved) he O C***) ' soon arrived at the Λν -ished-for spot, and loosening the bolts by the usual method, he bore the father in his arms, and was speedily within the burial place of the fraternity of Saint Columba. Upon the last step of the stone stairs Avinzo rested his ponderous load, and by his assiduity, after a period of half an hour had elapsed, the monk was agaiu enabled to proceed, and Huberto soon arrived л -rithoiit the walls of the mona¬ stery, where, hailing his attendants and issuing his orders, the}' instantly took the speechless father in their arms, and, guided b ν their Lord, gained wiih some difficulty the fisherman's dwelling,
The potent impulse of charity alone was in itself sufficient to urge Hubertos utmost endeavours iu order to the re¬ covery ofthe father; in addition to which, the full conviction that much depended on him as to the rescuing the captive object of his love, spurred his generous endeavours, so that no eflbrt tvas left untrieel which the situation луоик! afford of restoring the famished frame of John of Dunbar, to its wonteel energy. The meagie form of the monk, on being divested of its covering, struck horror, mingled with pity, into the soul of each observer, the livery of death over¬ spread each limb, луЬПе the bones in many parts had already pierced the flesh, iu addition to which, the ΛνΓΐβίβ of the sufferer, galled by the iron manacles, presented the most loathsome sight. Being stretched upon a pallet, the form of the father was first cleansed from cor¬ rosive filth av i tli luke warm milk, whea
after many endeavours, re-animating warmth gradually took possession of his frame. Towards the middle of the en¬ suing day he Λν -as enabled to partake of some nutritive preparation wliich had been long iu readiness ; previously, how¬ ever, to this amendment, Avinzo sealed the lips of his host as to any mention of the пелу inmate of his dwelling, by liberal promises of гелуаге! ; and the at¬ tendants of the youth being fully con¬ versant with his лyontcd philanthropy, and bound to him by past faA*ours, had only to act his purposes in silence. During the remainder of the day a $1олу but apparent renovation took place, and, at the approach of night, John of Dunbar was enabled to speak, лгЬсп he requested that his preserver might be summoned into his presence. Avinzo instantly obeyed the mandate, when the father, by expressive looks
more than by language, spoke the grati¬ tude that was due to his deliverer, aftei which lie thus addressed Huberto; — " ît îs caution for thy preservation which has led me to desire thy presence, as thou perhaps would'st alone repair tliis niíiľht, in order to effect the rescue of tiie object of thy search ; know then, niy preserver, that by such a step thou mightest endanger thine own safety, but could'st not benefit her. I have be¬ fore assured thee ofthis fact, and thus, once more, do I repeat it ; call Patience to thine aid, the God of Justice will extend his healing hand towards me, for his mighty purposes, since I alone can serve thec." After the lapse of some moments, dur¬ ing which the Monk acquired fresh strength* he thus continued :— " Full well I know thec, young man ;
ves, in ťhee I behold the fugitive, who, under the title of Sir Edward Marcarelcn, formerly, with thy noble friends, sought sanctuary in the monastery of Saint Co¬ lumba. Thou art the mao-uauimous IIu- о berto Avinzo, but, for the present, let this theme be mute; the time is not vet ripe,—-Justice shall have her due. To thine unaccountable knowledge of the mysteries of Saint Columba am I indebt¬ ed for no less than life ; and, therefore, do I bless the unknown agent who for¬ merly instructed thee to save thyself and noble friends in arms.—As thou hast hope of rescuing an oppressed innocent, defer thy future visit to Saint Columba till health permits me to be partner in thine enterprize." u Are there no means of rescue without thy interference ?" demanded Avinzo. "None," replied the Monk, " but
if thou art discovered in the attempt» thyself and her, for whom thou bravest every danger, must inevitably perish." u Guided by thy superior knowledge, I yielel," resumed Avinzo; ** but may I not ask the name of her who pines in drear captivity?" u To me that secret never луаз im¬ parted," replied the father. " W T hat act could urge thy cruel per¬ secutor to withdraw his friendship from thee, and eloom thy form to pine upon the gnawing bed of famine?" " I had yet one glow of feeling left, anei that condemned me," answered the Monk; " but, of this, enough at present." John of Dunbar then made known the conduct of the Abbot on visiting the cell of his confinement, on the youth's having quitted it, the night previously
to Avinzo's effecting his escape, when the vindictive mind of Gondez filled the soul of the youth with horror and de¬ testation ; after this recital, John of Dunbar having paused алгЬИе, bespoke Avinzo to the folknving effect :— " The Abbot Gondez lïath more ad¬ vocates than thou conceivest; therefore Avinzo, I charge thee, instantly, dis*· patch an emissary to thy monarch, Robert Bruce, that guards may unex¬ pectedly arrive and seize his guilty per¬ son ; he кполуэ the thunder must break over his head, and avarice alone, the reigning passion of his soul, has hither¬ to pt^enteet him from sailing for Italia's shores—Be brief, Huberto, or all may yet fail of success." " What can he dread ?*' said Avinzo. " The Avrath of liis offended King," re¬ plied the Monk, " who now, freed from VOL. III. . F
the state of ţvarfare by King Edwareľs death, may call down retribution for his base duplicity. I л\ т Ш appear, yes, invili stand forth and crush him," concluded tlie Monk, with clenched teeth, and eyes tliat beamed internal satisfaction. Fearful least any longer conversation might prove detrimental to the father's recoverv, Huberto retired from his cham- her, having previously determined upon following the advice he had rccehed. This he shortly after effected by dis¬ patching one of his attendants with a packet to the Lord Walter, intimating his ardent desire that a strong body of men should instantly be dispatched to the island of Oronza, where they луоик! find himself ready to instruct them in the plans requisite to be pursued. During three successive days and nights, the Monk continued sknvly to recover from the emaciated state луЫсЬ
he hael euelured ; and by constant care, and unremitting assieluity, his wounds were healed, and he was enabled to quit the pallet, and receive, through the lattice of his chamber, the renovating breezes of the morn. During this lapse of time the anxiety of Huberto was heightened to a degree of frenzy, and it was with the utmost difficulty that the Monk John of Dunbar, tvas enableel to prevent the youtii from singly putting in practice his long intended endeavour to rescue the lovelv sufferer of the mo- nastery. The returning vigour of the father pro¬ mised, at length, the wished-for blessing; in conseepience of which, the seventh night from the liberation of the captive Monk, was fixeel upon as the epoch, when, accompanied by him, Avinzo was to proceed to the monastery of Saint Columba,
СНЛР. VI.
Expectancy's the rack of Lovers' souls; For passion, like a -whirlwind, sweeps mvay Cool Reason's calmer impulse.
lie that can physic the hot soul of Love May pour in Etna's yawning gulph The icy top of Caucasus. For Love's The* raging furnace of the &oul, and burns, tV ith everlasting blaze, Promethean.
J OHN of Dunbar being habited in the disguise which Huberto hael procured, anxiously awaited, tvith the youth, the hour that shoulel summon them to re¬ pair to the Avails of the monastery. By the advice of the Monk, Avinzo armed himself on this occasion ; the father also received from his hands a dirke, that, in case of attack, they might be jointly
enabled the better to defend their per¬ sons from the endeavours of any as¬ sailants. The hour of evening having elapsed, anel night once more obscuring the jo¬ cund beam of day, Huberto and the father cautiously stole from the hut ofthe fisherman, and proceeded, in silence, to the usual place of entrance, where they passeei into the vaults; at which the Monk betraved the most visible siims of astonishment ; for, although perfectly conversant with all the intricacies of the building, he had ever supposed that the portal was kept cautiously secured on the interior; but if this iirst mode of proceed ure excited his wonder, that feeling tvas augmented in a two-fold de¬ gree as he witnessed the hasty advance ofthe youth through these subterranean chambers of the elead, and the perfect ease tvith tvhich he touched the secret bar communicating with the bolts of tlie p 3
portal leading into the cloisters ; for al¬ though Huberto had previously led the father by this route, yet his then ex¬ hausted condition, and the almost wan¬ dering state of his intellects, had totally bereaved him of all recoliection as to the exact manner by tvhich his escape had been effected. Having, as usual, gaineel the interior of the church unobserved, Huberto con¬ ducted the father to his wonted place of concealment; where, having remained the accustomed space of time, the form of the Abbot Gondez, unaccompanied by any other monk of the convent, made its appearance. . At sight of this bated object the passionate agitation of John of Dunbar displayed itself by the most terrifying gesticulations ; the slight tinge of health which had revisiteelJiis cheek,faded on the instant, and a pale hue assumed its place
upon his countenance,, his eyes beaming with vengeance, seemeel anxious to strike, with deadly glare, the form on which they were immutably rivetteel ; his pale anel quivering lips, but half uncloseel, gave to the view his clenched teeth, while his right hand, graspeel with agi¬ tation, the handle of his poinard. Avinzo, observing the mental agitation that preyed upon the soul of the iather, caught his left arm in time to prevent any incautious mode of procedure ол his part, and had not such timely inter¬ ference taken place, John of Dunbar would, in all probability, have rushed for¬ warel, and given, at once, the extermi¬ nating blow to his abhorred persecutor. The Abbot speedily disappeared as he was wont to do, when the father, vent¬ ing a bitter grpan, relinquished the weapon he had hitherto held, aud mut¬ tering execrations on the head of Gon- F4
dex, made known, to Huberto his wil¬ lingness to act in every respect as he had promised, and concluded by assuring the youth, that his thirst of vengeance .should fto longer urge him to hazard the gloriems termination of the affair in which he had embarked. After remaining a short time conceal¬ ed, Avindo demanded of the father whe¬ ther it woulel not be most expedient to Seize the person of the Abbot iu the cells, and,, after effecting the rescue of Ыз captive, to make him secure, in order that the course of justice might doom hini to the fate his crimes so justly merited. In answer to these remarks of they ou tb, John of Dunbar proceeded to inform him that, ere the lapse of two hours, the Abbot Gondez woulel be expected, as usual, to accompany the monks to the hymn of midnight ; and that if he
were then missing, the vigilance of the fathers, devoted to his purposes, would infallibly throw their persons into the hands of the fraternity, and extermi¬ nate every hope of success. " I know this mansion and irs inha¬ bitants," concluded the Monk, " be guided, Avinzo, by my coupsels, or you will be irretrievably lost." John of Dunbar then proceeded to acquaint Huberto that, in his opinion, they ought to await the period when, by a different way, the Abbot should retire from the vaults ; and for that pur¬ pose he conceiveel it requisite that they ■should conceal themselves, after passing the secret screen, and attend the given time, with which the father stated him¬ self to be perfectly conversant. ■ Having, as usual, secured the lamp, they proceeded to the grand altar, and, F 5
passing on by the secret way, soon gained a vault, where it was deemed expedient to continue until the departure ofthe Abbot from the cells. A determined gloom mantled the brows of the father, who, envellopeel in his faving robe, paced this damp abode, with eyes fixed on the pavement ; ven- geance was his intent, and, to accomplish it compleatly was his only contemplation. Avinzo, on the contrary, actuated by love alone, recalled to his imagination those blissful moments he hael spent with the object whom he полу conceived him¬ self on the point of rescuing from hor¬ ror, and perhaps from death. Fervor and anxiety marked by turns the coun¬ tenance of the youth, луЬНе hope inces¬ santly arose to dispel the imaginary terrors that fancy conjured up to torture his glowing soul. In this state of mental agitation tliey
continued, until the Monk gave notice that it was time for them to proceed ; upon which, raising the lamp from tlie pavement, he motioned Avinzo to fol¬ low his foot-steps, who instantly obey¬ ed, and was led by the father down one of those avenues which he himself had left unexplored, on his first gaining admittance into this cavernous abode on the night of his discovery of John of Dunbar. Continuing to advance, they arrived at a flight of stone steps, which, having ascended, Avinzo found himself in a nar¬ row passage, on one side of whicli the Monk halted before a doorway, the por¬ tal of which was of oak, and half open. Uere John of Dunbar paused, and, hav¬ ing motioned Avinzo to silence, he re¬ mained for some minutes, listening with attention, when, pushing open the portal, he entered the chamber, beckoning the youth to advance. ъ б
108 CONDES Huberto folknved the steps of his conductor, who, having traversed the apartment, halted before a second dooiţ of the same dimensions as that луЫсЬ they had just passed, but on the opposite angle of the chamber, anel closed. The Monk tapped thrice against the oaken pannel, and the dull echo rever¬ berated through the interior chamber, but no other sounel struck the ears of Huberto and his conductor. After the lapse of some moments, the father again repeated the blows, but the same silence still reigned ; upon which, applying his haml to the portal, it speedily yielded to the strength ofthe Monk, when all within was found envellopcd in darkness. On advancing, Avinzo perceived that the cell contained a pallet, a chair, and a table, and that the walls were hung round with tapestry, representing the defeat of King Harold, at the ever memorable battle eif Hastings. But tvhile occupied
iıî this contemplation, Hubìertohad nofc observed the features of John of Dun*· bar, луЬо, resting his form against the open portal,, evinced hy his looks a mingled expression of horror anel con¬ sternation. On turning his regard upon the Monk, tlie youth approached him, and enquired the cause of his dismay ; but some moments transpired ere the father could sufficiently collect himself to reply, upon which he uttered M r itli a groan, "ТПд done! the monster hath effected his design, anel innocence полу sleeps in peace !" ťí Great God !" exclaimed Avinzo, tottering towards the father, and sup¬ porting his agonized frame on his arm, " and is she lost for ever ?" - " A gleam полу flashes on my mind," suddenly vociferated the Monk, " I know the malice ofthe hell-born fiend.—
Courage, Sir Knight," continued the father, ťC there yet is hope, although that hope exists in horror.—Reanimate your spirits, Avinzo, and follow me," " 111 follow thee to perdition V 9 cried the agonized Huberto, " so Γ may hope to catch a glimpse of all I prize on this side of futurity.—Lead on, suspence is of all earthly ills the most accursed. To know my fatç tvere to be blessed com¬ pared with what I now endure. Oh ! let me ejuickly learn if bliss or misery must be mv lot for ever." %> The Monk eyeel Avinzo with a look of struggling pity anel internal ven* geance, which had never before beamed from his countenance, anel then ex¬ claimed :— " I feel the potverful influence of vir¬ tue, which can attune the heart to com-
misseration ! Yes, I will lead on, and may that Heaven, I so long have spurned, take pity on thy sorrows, noble youth.— Follow, Avinzo, follow me; 'tis repen¬ tant obduracy that guides thee, which, forgetful of the prayers it owes Omni¬ potence in its own behalf, dares inter¬ cede for the happiness of its preserver/' Rushing from this subterraneous cell, the youth bearing the lamp in his hand, followed the precipitate march of John of Dunbar, who, desc-ending the flight of steps, struck into another avenue, tvhich, as they advanced, proved to go in a regular descent, terminating in a small dungeon, which conehictcd to a second still, more loathsome. Here the father, in vain, bent around his glaring eyes, obviously in pursuit of some ex¬ pected object, but nothing appeared, save a massive chain that lay upon the pavement, affixed to an enormous iron ring projecting from the wall.— On
HŽ · GÒNDÍBZ; beholding tliis scene,* a cadaverous line guíFuscd the cheeks of ¿he father, who, striking his forehead ΛνΜι \ r ehemence, groaned aloud, луЬПе the expectant Avinzo, trembling with apprehension, gazed on the horrible changes луЫсЬ successively took place on the expressrve visage of John of Dunbar. i (i Still frustrated, still defeated!" at length ΛΌαί^^Ι the father, with rol- ing eyes and ghastly countenance; " Why is this spot bereft of inhabitants? —Yet can I trace thy damned malice !— Still hast thou the'pursuing revenge of John of Dunbar ! Велуаге, Gondez, be- л\аге of my inveteracy !" Having uttered this threat, the father folding his snirments around him, turn- ed from the dungeon Avith slow step, while his hand placed o'er his lips, and liis regard bent (1олу г плуап1, spoke him in the act of deep meditation.
Having, for a length of time, retraced thei/steps, they found themselves at the three branching ал -enues which had ori¬ ginally met the gaze of Avinzo, At this juncture a sounel was.heard, anel, on listening attentively, it.proved to be the toll of the midnight bell that spoke in brazen accents the drear hour of mid¬ night. tť For this night луе must begone," exclaimed the Monk. if What ! tvithout accomplishing our desigu?" demanded Avinzo. u Necessity compels us," answered the father. " Cruel, cruel fate !" exclaimed Hu¬ berto, striking his forehead. John of Dunbar seizing the arm cf Huberto, hurried him up the stone stair-
case: when, not heanng the sound of the voices of the fraternity, the father hhifted the screen, and they precipitately fled down the choir to the usual place of secretion; where they had scarcely ar¬ rived when the monks, as usual, entered the church in procession, headed by their gloomy Abbot Gondez ; who, with folded arms, appeared absorbed in cogita¬ tions that accorded not with the prayers he was on the point of celebrating. The fathers being seated in their several stalls, on either side of the choir, the chaunt began as usual, when Avinzo and the Monk John of Dunbar, quitting the church, regained, in safety, the hut of tlie fisherman, being severally occu¬ pied with that train of reflections which naturally took possession of their agi¬ tated minds.
CHAP. VII.
is there a gleam of hope to banish care, And pluck from love the thorn oí deep despair?
X HE silence of John of Dunbar, and the dreadful state of incertitude луЫсЬ seemed to envelope the fate of Hubert o's beloved ипкполуп, filled the mind of the youth with the most agonizing forebod¬ ings during those silent hours луЬеп all- subduing sleep should have diffused its influence o'er it. But if the nocturnal contemplations of the youth were of a nature to dispel that balmy blessing, the cogitations of the monk were no less calculated to banish the renovating tor¬ por of forgetfulness. John of Dunbar, from a state of hardened depravity, had
on a sudden experienced the horrid ef¬ fects of superior cruelty ; from tvhich being rescued by the hand of virtue, his first idea had been revenue. But as the influence of good obtruded on his minel, that emanation hael engendered a degree eď reverence for the practitioner of philanthropy, which not only leel him to seek retribution on the head of his persecutor, but also to atone, as much as possible, for the eleeds of iniquity луЫсЬ had previously stained his otvn charac¬ ter. Actuateel by these prai se- tvor thy motives, a thousand ieleas recurred to the monk, tvhich Avinzo was wholly unable to penetrate, and which the father care¬ fully concealed; in order that his pre¬ sener niight not yield at once to those agonies which his statement tvo uld in all probability have given birth to. Filled with the most gloomy train of ideas, John of Dunbar found it equally impos¬ sible to taste the balm of stveet repose ; and thus Avinzo and the repentant father
spent the dreary hours of morning in an¬ guish and despair. AVhen the first beam of day tinged the horizon, Huberto quitted his pallet, un¬ able to bear the lingering torture of sus¬ pence, and proceedeii immediately to the chamber of the monk, whom he also found risen, and pacing his apartment with disordered step. Avinzo advancing towards the father, gently caught his arm, awakening him from a train of ideas which had render¬ ed him unconscious of the approach of the youth, who thus addressed him:— " Father, if thou canst, resolve my doubts ; the gloom that mantles o'er thy front forbodes but ill. Yet let me, I conjure thee, knovv the worst, nor lon¬ ger rack my soul with agony unutter· able." John of Dunbar fixed his regard upon
the anxious features of the vouth ; then ч ■* struggling to disengage his arm, averted from him his penetrating eyes, and re¬ mained silent to the ejuestionings of Avinzo. " Wilt thou not yielel to my entrea¬ ties then ? Canst thou behold me linger¬ ing in the anguish of incertitude ?" de* maneled Huberto. After a struggle, the Monk replied ; " once more, I conjure thëe, noble Avin¬ zo, to summon fortitude ; this night will terminate the horrid mystery, anel cither crown thy soul with extacy or bind the thorny wreath around thy brow for ever ; for well I know, thine heart partakes in this adventure, and mine too bleeds for thee !" " This night then shall terminate my bosom's dreadful bodings?" demanded the youtli.
xť I have pronounced it," replied tbe father, " this night must seal thy doom." u I am resigned", answereel Huberto, turning from the monk, anel quitting with melancholy pace his chamber. During the lingering day scarcely a word escaped the lips of Avinzo, or the monk ; anxiety alike characterized their countenances, while their bosoms were tortured tvith contending emotions, that made them sicken as they contem plateel the sequel of that night which they so anxiously expected. Hour succeeded hour, but tvith such lagging pace, that it appeared as if the glass of hoary time had forgotten to run with its accustomed velocity. As the period now approached tvhen the vessels of King Robert Bruce tvere
expccteel at Oronza 1 » Island. Avinzo during the evening kept his regard un- ceasinglv bent towards the bosom ofthe о · deep. Already had the sun veiled her form within the expanse of the Western Ocean, when some sails appeareel in sight, tvhich for a time seemed steering to¬ wards Oronza, but suddenly they les- seneel to the view, and ere the twilight of still evening spreael its misty veil around, the whole hael vanished in the elarkeneel distance. Again Avinzo satv the fishermen unloael their finn v stores, mf * and by degrees the strand tvas left by the laborious mariners. Huberto, conscious that the hour was now arrived, sum¬ moned the monk, who in silence pro¬ ceeded with the youth to the secret por¬ tal leading to the interior of the monas¬ tery. Having proceeded with the same cau¬ tion as had been adopted on every for¬ mer occasion, the Abbot, as usual, passed
into the vaults, and лгач soon after fol¬ lowed by Huberto and John of Dunbar, λ\Ίιο determined, on this occasion, to explore every recess of this subterranean abode. Leaving that avenue, down which Avinzo had originally proceeded, as well as the course which the monk had taken the preceeling night, he struck into ρ new direction, leading the astonished Huber¬ to througii the most intricate passages, dreary chambers, and narrow cells, fre¬ quently halting at the entrance of dun¬ geons the most dark anel loathsome. Still луаз the search in л'ат ; and in an agony of despair, John of Dunbar seem¬ ed to relinquish every i elea of success : when, after a pause of considerable length, he retraced the mazes through луЫсЬ he hael passed, anel on gaining the spot from л\ hence they hael originally began their research, he halted, telling Avinzo that every passage had been explored,and that vol. in. e;
hope seemed barred against them for ever. The father was silent, anel Huberto pe¬ trified at this dreadful information, had ncarh' sunk to the pavement bereft of ex¬ istence ; thus they continued for a length of time equally absorbed i u those pain¬ ful meelitations which hael taken possession of their minds ; when, suddenly, a distant hollow sounel broke upon the silence of the drearv cavern, */ The eyes of Avinzo and the monk un¬ consciously met each other, and tvere as speedily cast upon the three avenues branching from the dungeon where they then were stationed; stiil no form appear¬ ed, neither tvas the gleam of a light ap¬ parent, altiiough the echo again rever- in lated still louder through the hollow caverns. At length Huberto placing his car to the pavement perceived distinctly rhat the sound proceeded from approach-
ing footsteps, and that the echo** to his no small astonishment, resounded from beneath the pavement whereon they then stood. Avinzo having imparted this informa¬ tion to John of Dunbar, they instantly btole from the spot down one of the ave¬ nues, and having conveniently stationed themselves, they concealed the giov/ of the lamp and continued mute, awaiting with anxiety the termination of this ex¬ traordinary discovery. At length one of the large stones of the pavement of the cell they had so re¬ cently quitted tvas seen to move, and from below issued a faint gleam of Jight which growing stronger, speedily elisco¬ vered the form of the Abbot Gondez, as¬ cending to the dungeon, bearing in his hand a large bundle of keys. Having care¬ fully replacing the stone, he proceeded with slotv steps down the contrary avenue to that tvhich Avinzoand the monk had se*
#· <■*
lected for their secretion ; this road the father лгав perfectly convinced the Abbot would take, if he were still in the cells, as it wa*: that passage луЫсп conducted him by another route into the habitable part of the Monasterv. John of Dunbar astonished at this discovery, informed Huberto that the secret cavern from whence the Abbot had just issued, л^ав ne\ r er before кполуп to him; and glorying in this knowledge, he gaл τ e re-anination to the youth, who instantly proceeding with the monk, gamed the loose stone, which speedily vielded to their efforts., when thev found before them a steep and narrow flight of steps, down which they began to descend with tlie utmost alacrity. Having arrived at the bottom, they advanced along а пагголу arched passage, having no cell either to the right or left, and луЬюЬ terminated at length in a mas-
sive iron door, which the monk enelea- voured, but in vain, to open. Having struck against the plate with vehemence, the reverberation sounded through the narrow passage, producing the most harsh discordance; but scarcely had the echo ceased, tvhen the faint ex¬ clamation of a hum an voice was heard, and although indistinctly, the sufferer, in trembling accents, uttered the follow¬ ing words :— " Again he comes ! have mercy Hea ven." ťť Great God of Justice, 'tis she!" vociferated the monk, " 'tis the creature whom thou seek'st, Huberto !" Avinzo, rushing to the portal, in sil¬ very tones of pity exclaimed:— " 'Tis thy preserver, heavenly maid ! с 3
GONDEZ, tis thy faithful Huberto Avinzo, who comes to rescue thee from dire capti¬ vity /' " Oh! mercy, mercy !" instantly re* sounded from the interior, " preserve us, or we're lost for ever !" At that juncture a hollow groan from within cchoeel in the ears of the anxious youth and his companion; tvhen, Huberto in an agony exclaimed,— " Heavenly powers ! what mode must be pursued ? I bum with lovt* and despe¬ ration !" Avinzo and the father seizing the mas¬ sive hinges of the portal, in vain essay¬ ed to move the stubborn harrier, whieh, tv ith ib firm-set bolts, resisted their united force. In vain elid the monk, for a length of time, intreat Avinzo to quit, till the en-
suing night, this drear abode. All his arguments were alike unsuccessful, till conviction flashed upon the minel of the youth, that if eliscovered there, by the Abbot Gondez, his ruin would certainlv be effected, as well as that of the cap¬ tive. Feelinar also the necessitv of his consulting with the rather, as to the measures to be pursued, Huberto was prompted to listen with less passion to the reasonings of John of Dun¬ bar, who at length prevaileel on the youth to quit, for that night, the monas¬ terv of Saint Columba, in order that thev might, on the returning midnight, fully effect their design. Huberto, with an agonizeel mind, then proceedeel to state to the suffering inmate of the cell, tlu* plans which tvere to be put in execution the ensuing night, fervently exhorting her to place full confidence in his endea¬ vours ; to tvhich the maie! replied in mournful accents, imploring heaven to forward his attempts, as on that alone G 4
depended her existence, and that of ano¬ ther sufferer then lingering in agony. This latter information augmented still more the astonishment of Avinzo, who regarded the monk with a look of anxi¬ ous enquiry, to which the father replied in a whisper only, indicating that a few revolving hours would bring to light this inexplicable mystery, with which he was only in part acquainted. The fervid passions of Huberto would fain have breathed forth the unalterable passion that still held undiminished em¬ porium o'er his soul ; but the agonizing situation of the creature that enslaved his lieart prevented his speech ; and urged at length by the father's just and frequent .solicitations, the youth prepared to quit the spot ; when it was deemed expedient that the impeding barrier should under¬ go the most minute investigation, which accordingly took place, affording the anxious observers, however, but little
comfort, as the portal proved to be so constructed by art as almost to defy the united endeavours of any two human creatures to surmount, without being possessed of the keys, which, it appear¬ ed, were carefully preserved by the Ab¬ bot Gondez. Almost despairing of success, Avinzo tore himself from the spot, uttering the most heart-rending sigh, vvhich was fai u tiy returned by the captive within ; whose voice breathing blessings on Hu¬ bertos head, vvas at length lost to the cars of the youth, as he advanced to¬ ward the flight of steps, supported on the arm of John of Dunbar. On gaining the summit of the steps, they passed into the cavern above, when replacing the stone over the aperture, they once more ascended to the church of the monastery, and remaining for se? G 5
cretion tvithin the small chapel, as usual, they in due time made their escape to the cloisters, and from thence to their dwelling, on the shore of the island.
СНЛР. VIII.
'Tift now the very witching time of niiiht, When church-yards yawn and hell itself breathes out Contagi-an to tins world. SHAKEbľr -ЛГГ,
JYlUTUALLY tvearicd both in mind and body, Huberto and the father speedily retired to their respective pal¬ lets, determined to consult by times, the following day, on the future mode of procedure. Notwithstanding the agi¬ tation of Avinzo's soul, the impulse of sleep overwhelmed his senses, when fancy conjured up to his imagination an unconnected train of visions that some¬ times teneied to affright his soul and at
others to elevate his mind to the highest pinnacle of expectancy. Thus absorb¬ ed in sleep, tiie youth remained until the seventh hour of morning, when he was awakened by the expectant John of Dunbar, tvho appeared in order to acquaint Huberto that a vessel appeared in the distance, apparently bending its course towards the island. On hearing this information Huberto quitted his pallet, and beheld through the lattice the diminutive bark alluded to by the father, which Avinzo could not, however, conceive to be from the main¬ land of Scotland, as the troops then ex¬ pected wouid certainly occupy more than one vessel; in addition tc which, the present object of their attention seemed .steering from the south. Unable to form any conjecture on this topic, Huberto and the Monk proceeded to offer their opinions on the plan to be pursued that jiiiriit.
The father at first conceived that some wrenching instruments might force open the massive door ; but with this opinion Avinzo was far from coinciding from the observations he had been enabled to make, and they remained for a consi¬ derable perioel of time lost in painful meditations ; ňom this reverie the youth, however, was at length atvakened, when he thus addressed the thoughtful monk:— α To gain admission to the cell, re¬ quires the master key alone, which is in the custody of the Abbot Gondez, and that must be obtained. What is our individual safety, compared with the suflerings of injured virtue ? We must risk every thing. This night, there¬ fore, force must compel the villain to relinquish that tvhich can alone ensure success." The father, after a pause, exclaimed, "If we fail in that, every thing is lost."
ť< True," answered Avinzo, " but since this measure can alone u.-oduce the Avisiied-for end, лге must notshiink ap¬ palled, but boldly dare the worst." (i I am content," exclaimed the father ; " this night then, лге meet the villain face to face, am' 1 shall tell him that I live for vengeance and for justice ! 1i Having decided on this mode of pro¬ cedure, as no vessels from Scotia vet appeared in sight, (although the former bark gained gradually upon the sight) it was further agreed, that the captives, on their release should be safely conveyed by the secret л\*ау on board the vessel that had transported Avinzo to the island ; which was in consequence order¬ ed to be got in readiness by midnight : and that no alarm might be given by the Abbot, it was also thought expe¬ dient that his person should be secured, and conducted on board at the same
time, that so. луЬсп he arrived at Edin¬ burgh, he might undergo the trial anel punishment due for those enormous crimes луЫсп he hael committed under the sanctified mask of purity and religion. These points being fully aelj usted the time graelually stole алуау, till near mid¬ day, лупеп the bark луЫсЬ had appeared in the morning gaineel fast upon the shore, and seem eel by its form to be of foreign make. Anxious to learn the cause of the appearance of a ship of burthen near those sequestereel isles, Huberto dispatched the fisherman under Avhose roof Ue had taken sanctuary, to certify, it' possible, the reason of ¡ts approach to the shores of Oronza ; and towards the second hour from miel-dav, he returned witli information, that the vessel which had anchored at some little distance fromhis dwelling, was from Italia's coast, and that a boat had put in to shore with a messenger, who had been immediately
forwarded to the monastery of Saint Columba, with dispatches for the Abbot Gondez. Avinzo, upon hearing this information, requested to know луЬеЛег any such bark had before visited that island; лупеп, a momentary glance from the penetrating eyes of John of Dunbar, луЬо at that moment entered the chamber, fully con^ vinced the youth, that the father was better acquainted л\кЬ this circum¬ stance than his host ; in consequence of луЫсЬ, Huberto, луау^ the subject, dis- misseel the fisherman, anxious to be maele acquainted with any infoi mation, that he might be enabled to communicate. The monk immediately proceeded to inform Avinzo, that the vessel in ques¬ tion was most assuredly arrived in or¬ der to transport the Abbot Gondez and his луеакЬ from the island of Oronza, as his longer continuance in the monas--
tery might endanger his safety, on ac¬ count of his conduct towards King Ro¬ bert Bruce. The father also stated, that the Abbot had ample means of certifying every movement of the Scottish court ; îoûA that in all probability the force then on its way, was not a matter unknown to Gondez. In short, every circumstance tended to prove that some movement of consequence was on the eve of its ac¬ complishment ; and although the monk witheid that part of his suspicion from Avinzo, he could not divest himself of the idea, that his female captive луаэ to be made one of the companions of his voyage. On hearing this account from the father, Huberto Λν -as agonized beyond the power of description ; as the force then in the Italian vessel луаэ quite suf¬ ficient to frustrate any open attempts on his part, should Gondez endeavour to embark ; and after a consultation with
the father, it was deemed expedient that the fisherman should watch the opera¬ tions of the mariners in the vessel, while Huberto's remaining attendant, was dis¬ patched, in order to conceal himself near the skirts of the wooel, from whence he might perceive all persons tvho should issue from the monasterv ; when he was immediately to return and give every requisite information to his lord. The honest fisherman under whose humble roof Huberto hael so long re¬ posed, having experienced the lavish bounty of his guest, aud being well convinced that some affair of weighty import must urge his continuance there, fully eletermmed upon using every ex- peelient to gratify his munificent em¬ ployer. The fisherman, therefore, pre¬ vious to his quitting the hut, amply stored a basket with the choicest of his homely fare, consisting of dried fish.
eggs anel oaten cakes, with which he proceeded to the beach ; anel on the re¬ turn of the messenger from the monas¬ tery of Saint Columba, he was per¬ mitted to enter the boat and put off to the vessel tvith his little store of pro¬ visions. Some difiiculty arose from his being unable to comprehend the language of the mariners tvho managed the boat, but on gaining the vessel his offering was presented to the com¬ mander of the bark, who having ac¬ cepted the present, gave to the fisher- ч inan some dried Italian fruits in return; after tvhich he was sent to regale him¬ .self with the sailors of the vessel. Still anxious to gain the knotvledge tvhich Huberto rceprired, he with great diffi¬ culty was given to understand by the signs of the mariners, that they were to set sail for Italy the ensuing morning ; and a short time having transpired from the communication of this intelligence, the former messenger was again ordered
to shore with other dispatches from the commander to the Abbot Gondez; of whicli occasion the fisherman taking ad¬ vantage, he gladly re-entered the boat, and motioning an adieu to the Italian seamen, speedily found himself in safety on the shore of Oronza. The fisherman eager to communicate these tidings, instantly hastened to his hut, and there explained the information he had thus acquired, for tvhich he was duly rewarded. Huberto thence became more tranquil, since no very precipitate departure from the island, appeared to be meditated by the Abbot. Sometime after this information had been re¬ ceiveel, Huberto 's attendant arrived, and informed the youth, that the seamen of the Italian vessel, were conveying chests from the monastery ; tvhich, John of Dunbar instantly affirmed, tvere the boxes containing the wealth of the avaricious Gondez.
In this manner passed on the day; when towards the dusk of the evening, steering immediatelv from the Scottish shore, four large vessels appeared in view, making towards the coast of Oronza. Avinzo and the monk instantly con¬ jectured that they must contain the forces for луЫсЬ he had sent dispatches, by his attendant, several days before, to King Robert Bruce, through his friend the Lord High Steward; and under this conviction, it луаз deemed expedient that the fathers John of Dunbar, should re¬ main at the hut in order to conduct the troops by the secret way into the monas - ! tery, луЫЗе Avinzo луаз singly to enter the convent; луЬеге unawares, and by \ force, he was to rescue the keys from the | Abbot, л\ г 1и1е iu the cells, and also to | secure his person. The monk л\чшк1 have counselled Huberto to let his attendant accompany him ; but this the youth
peremptorily refused ; alledging, ťí That virtue in itself, was themost invulnerable armour ; anel that he eonseeiuently elefieel the impotent efforts ofthe guilty Abbot, and woulel singly work the great intent ot heaven." The fisherman was then summoned and received Avinzo's orders to hold himself in reaeliness to put off from shore, that he might escort the Scottish barks İn safety to the island ; least the numerous shoals should impede their course, as, night drew in apace, and danger tvas to be apprehended. From this period Huberto began to make every arrangement for his intended visit on that night to the monastery. A thousanel conflicting ideas by turns as¬ sumed an emporium o'er his breast; tvhile his whole thoughts were, rivetted on the fond idea of once more gazing on the unknown wanderer, to whom he had
sworn inviolable constancy, and the most fervent love. Neither eliel the ielea of rescuing her conduce, a little, to animate his spirits; tvhile, at the same time, the second object who was to experience a liberation from the dark designs of Gon¬ dez, filled his brain tvith disquietude and woneler. The bay wherein the Italian vessel hael anchored was open to the south ; but a cemicircular chain of rocks, ex¬ tending far into the ocean, on the op¬ posite side, completely screeneel the Scot¬ tish vessels, tvhich then made wav to- -* ^ tvards the island ; so that the crew were wholly unconscious of the force then approaching toOronza; otherwise,intima¬ tion would have been, in all probability, immediately communicateel to the Abbot Gondez, by the commander of the ves¬ sel. Thus situated, the mariners of the Italian bark remained in perfect security, and the commander having unlimited
orders from the Abbot, the sailors were of course carousing in the full expect¬ ancy that a fair wind would the ensuing morning, \vaft them towards their native shore. In this situation луеге the affair« on board the Italian ship, лу]1еп Huberto, having conferred whh John of Dunbar, armed' himself in order to confront any hostile attack that might be made agains this person ; and having put ел г егу other necessary arrangement in practice, he quitted the hut and bent his course Xvards the луе11 кполгп entrance into the monaster} 1, of Saint Columba. The morn of that day had broke forth Λπίΐι uncommon splendor, and the nu¬ merous occurrences tliat had transpired, were the only circumstances лгЫсЬ had prevented Avinzo from offering that praise to the beneficent father of nature, which was so justly his due. As the night
however drew in the general appearance of the heavens, became mantled o'er with sullen clouds, which seemed determined to obscure the partial gleam ofthe silvery goddess of the night. Swayeel by no transitory idea, Huberto paid no at¬ tention to the gloomy appearance of the atmosphere, but followed his usual tract imnierseel in eleepest contemplation, till he arrived at length before the portal destined to give him admission into the monastery. Having passeei as usual be¬ neath the stone altar, leading into the burial vault of the abbots, Huberto ad¬ vanced tvith firm step to the grated portal, through which he darted, unper¬ ceived, into the cloisters of Saint Co¬ lumba, and then repaired to the small chapel, in order to await the appearance of the Abbot Gonelez. The face of heaven was clad in solemn sable, and the hoarse winds which began to murmur in angry accents, bespoke a VOL. III. и
GOXOEZ, stormy night. Avinzo listened at inter¬ vals to the sound, while his contempla¬ tive mind, was for the most part occupied in recalling the form of her he loved to his fond fancy : or else Ín chiding the slow pace of time, wiiich still detained him from effecting the purpose of his soul. Still the war of elements increased-; and as the melancholy raven winged his way to the dusky wood, his harsh croak foreboded the approach of that solemn period when tormented spirits quit their silent graves, to yell their lamentations forth. As Avinzo h-^ ¥ his gaze upon the flitting flame of í ·- amp, wdiich had been that day illuminated in the small chapel where mass had been celebrated, it seemed to wear a pallid blue appear¬ ance, while the silver crucifix resting on the altar but faintly reflected the sickly gleam. There was an unaccountable something in the surrounding scenery which attracted Hubertos attention, not¬ withstanding his endeavours to shake off
every impulse of terror from his soul. AU was as mute as death, save the distant moaning of the blast, or the dull hoot¬ ing ofthe owl ; while, ever and anon, the screeching bat, with leathern wings dis¬ tended, sailed along the aisles of the building, or flitted by the lamp in the chapel, where the youth awaiteel tvith anxiety the coming of Gondez. Minute still succeeded minute, and yet no Abbot appeared ; when, on a suei- elen, a solemn sound tvas heard, which to Avinzo's astonishment proved to proceed from the clock of Columbas monas¬ tery, tvhich sullenly proclaimeel the eleventh hour of night. The period having transpired when Gondez луа& used to repair to the cells, Huberto's soul became a prey to the most agonizing sensations, and he began to conjecture that the Abbot луаз, perhaps, apprized of the coming of the Scottish force ; and had, in conseepience precipitately и Я
embarked, in order to escape the punish¬ ment which so justly awaited him. But if this idea filled Avinzo tvith anxiety, how indescribable was his anguish, tvhen ihe thought flashcel upon his brain that ilie creature for whose preservation his life had been freely staked, was probably made the partner of his retreat from Oronza. r lhiî» suggestion prompted Huberto, in ihe first instance, to íly the monastery, and establish the fact; but recollecting that every possible step had been taken to impede the departure of the Abbot, by the politic John of Dunbar; and being also well assured that the Scottish tre>ops must then be at no considerable dibtance from the island ; these united ideas in some measure tranquillized Avinzo, and he therefore determined still to continue within the place of his se¬ cretion. As midnight drew nigh, the storm increased, and the wind forcing a
passage into the church, moaned dole¬ fully along the vaultings of the stupen¬ duous edifice. At length the hour of twelve sounded to the hollotv blast, wiun the measured footsteps of the fraterni í ν tvere heard passing along the cloisters ; and in a few minutes the monks, as usual, asccndeei the steps leading into the church, and proceeded in procession towards the gates of the choir. Avinzo svitli a look of the most mi¬ nutes crutiny, observed the fathers as they passeei in the distance, but to lus great mortification, no Gondez appeareel ; which circumstance teneled in a great measure to strengthen the supposition he hael previously entertained of the Abbot"* departure from Saint Columba. Scarcely hael the fraternity taken their usual seats in the choir, when Huberto, burning with anxiety, rushed from the chapel, and darting through the cloisters, u 3
лооп gained the ilight ©f steps conduct¬ ing to the burial taults. Already had the touth traverseel the two subterranean chambers appropriated for the interment of the fraternity in general ; when on ap¬ proaching the vault wherein reposed the ashes of the Abbots of the monastery, a faint gleam of light seemed to ¡ilumine the damp green walls; this circumstance occasioned Avinzo to make a momentary pause, but soon forgetful of every peril, he rushed onward to the cell, but started at the threshold of the arched entrance ; for, within this dark abode shone forth a pale light, while kneeling before the stone aitar appeared a figure in the habilliments of an Abbot of Saint Columba, in the apparent act of fervent devotion. The first idea that struck Avinzo was, that in the form before him, he beheld that of the Abbot Gondez ; but in this supposi¬ tion, a second glance undeceived him, as the figure before him was obviously tall of stature, while that of Gondez
as diminutive, and in every respect de¬ void of symmetry. As soon as the first impulse of asto¬ nishment had subsided, Huberto finding tliat the monk had not noticed hi.s intru¬ sion, advanced a few paces towards the prostrate form, when an indescribable thrill of horror suddenly took pe)ssession of his frame ; his knees trembled, his hair stooel bristling upon his brow, anel the chill finger of torpor seemeel to freeze th e c u r ren t i n h i s y o u t h f u 1 ve i ns. S way cd by some secret power, Avinzo sunk upon his knee, tvhile o'er his pallici lips a prayer was offered up to the Divine source of immutable Justice. Thus occupied, a considerable period elapseel, tvithout Hu¬ berto s being either conscious of the apse of time, or able to banish tbe spell ivhich seemed to enchain him. On a sudden a hollow sound was heard, hen tlie youtii recognised the toll of n 4
Oronza's bell, that spoke the hour of one ; and scarcely had the last reverbera¬ tion of the stroke died on his car, ere a tremendous peal of thunder seemed to shake the very foundation of the monas¬ tery. Huberto started up, his eyes glar¬ ing wildly on the object before him ; at the same instant the figure arose, anel turning its countenance towards Avinzo, displaycel a ghastly physiognomy, stamp¬ ed with the ashy signet of death. Its eyes, tvhich -were sunken, bent a melan¬ choly glance upon the shrinking youth ; and raising its meagre hand, it pointed to the wall of the vault, where appeared one of the sculptured effigies of a de- ceaseel Abbot of Saint Columba. Hu¬ berto hael scarcely gazed upon the image, tvhen the wall seemed to open, and in¬ stantaneously the figure whicli hael so lately appeared to Avinzo vanished with¬ in the gloomy sepulchral chasm, after which the aperture closed, and, by the pale light, which still glared around, the youth beheld these words inscribed о cr V
the statue of the Abbot, in crimson cha¬ racters— 41 THE SPIIUT OF CERONTMO, ABBOT OF SAIN'T COLUMBA, STILL VAINLY PRAYS ГОН IHE SOUL OF THE I.H'ILERĽ*p WOMAN—MAY JESU REDEEM HER 10RTURED SOUL." A\ r inzohadno sooner read the inscrip¬ tion than the words disappeared, and the pale light as speedily vanished from the vault, leaving every snrrouneling object em^eloped in chaotic gloom. Having in a certain measure recalled his scattered ideas, Hubertos first deter¬ mination was, to quit on the instant, the confines of the monastery ; and for this purpose, he had already proceeded seve¬ ral paces, directing his course towards the altar by shifting the secret screen, of Avhich, he луаз ahvays enabled to effect his escape. In his course he луав how¬ ever suddenly impeded by a second terri¬ fic peal of thunder, луЫсЬ was immedi¬ ately followed by most horrid yells, луЫсп seemed to proceed from the sitie ot the cloisters. н 5
At that instant the recollection of the lovely captive struck the heart of Avin¬ zo; tvho, ever alive to the glotving im¬ pulse of pity, felt, in the present in¬ stance, redoubled energy. Unsheathing his trusty dirk, he retraverseel the vaults containing the moulelering bodies ofthe brotherhood of Saint Columba, and in a few seconds began to ascend the winding flight of stone steps;—the thunder conti¬ nued without intermission, seeming to form one continued f)eal ;—the blue light¬ ening shot its forked glare down the dark avenue ;—it seemeel indeed as if the wrath of heaven was poured on this sublunary globe, and that the world's annihilation was on the point of being effected. As Avinzo gaineel the grated portal leading into the cloisters, the most ter¬ rific shrieks met his ear, while a blood- red gleam illumined the vaulted alleys. Having removed the secret bar, the bolts gave way, and the youth found himself
within-the cloisters, on the opposite angle of which he was enableel to elescry a form clad in a red mantle, tvhile a hi¬ deous figure, with hissing snakes, was lashing the agonizeel sufferer. Huberto darteil round the cloisters ; when, suddenly, a horrid yell Λν -as heard, the forms vanished, and the terrific gleam disappeared луЫсЬ had before beamed on the walls. On hastening to the spot tvbere those objects hael so lately been visible, Avinzo found the person of a monk of Saint Columba, stretched out лупЬ Jiis face upon the pavement ; but Λν -liat луач the astonishment of the youth, on per¬ ceiving that in the object before him he beheld the figure of the Abbot Gondez, apparently struck tvith death ! On exa¬ mining further, a large bunch of keys lay upon the pavement, on one side of the father, with an extinguished lamp which hael obviously dropped from his hand ; while on the other side, the sh ud¬ ii 6
dering Huberto found a glittering poig¬ nard. Having secured the keys and the dagger, Avinzo suddenly heard a deep - groan issue from the lips of the Abbot, and in a few seconds, the mingled sound of footsteps and voices tvere heard ap¬ proaching towards the cloisters. Fearful of any intrusion, the youth rushed from the spot, and gaineel the portal leading into the church, which proved to be lock¬ ed ; having essayeel several of the keys procureel from Gondez, the bolts at length gave way, and Huberto shortly found himself within the edifice. Seiz¬ ing the lamp with tvhich he hael before descendeel into the vaults, he procured a light from the great silver lamp sus- pendeel before the grand Altar, and shift¬ ing back the screen, instantly desceneled ; directing his steps to the large stone tvhich covered the aperture leading to the cell of the wretched captives. After with¬ drawing this impediment, Huberto, with palpitating heart, glided dotvn the steps
and arrived at the iron door terminating the narrow passage. With trembling hand he tried several keys, and at length he found that tvhich commanded the bolts of this massive portal ; the impe¬ diment instantly gave way, and Avinzo, rushing forwarel, caught within his arms the lovely object of his adoration, the forlorn wanderer of the chapel of Saint Columba. For a considerable time no appearance of re-animation was visible; and the fond Huberto hung over the pallid cheek of his love with mingleel fervour and anxi¬ ety. At length the vermil tinge revisited the cheek of the sufferer, anel her palpi¬ tating heart spoke the return of life; tvhen, her blue eyes opening, gave to the youth the sublunary heaven he hael so long and ardently panted to behold. The lovely captive, with struggling ac¬ cents, and pointing with her hand to the
further end of the cell, supplicated the youth to effect the liberation of some fur¬ ther object oftlie Abboťs tyrşnny ; upon which Avinzo flew to the spot, луЬеге ano¬ ther door presenteei itself, being grated to- wards the summit. Seizing the keys, Hu¬ berto speedily opened this second portal ; лгЬеп a youthful male form appeared, in an upright position, chained to the wall of the narrow dungeon ; his head hung languidly upon his shoulder, and the re¬ mains of life seemed ebbing apace from this emaciated, sufferer. Upon inspec¬ tion, Huberto perceived that a lock se¬ cured this chain; and on applying, once more, the keys in his possession, he spee¬ dily liberated the wretched capth'e, and bearing the form in his arms, instantly placed it upon the pallet in the adjoining cell, when the beauteous female, shriek¬ ing лгкЬ agony, sunk beside the figure in a state of apparent annihilation. Huberto instantly proceeded to admi-
nister the little comfort vvhich the dun¬ geon afforded, and had already sprinkled some water, over the almost lifeless forms before him, when the confused din of approaching footsteps resounded in the distance. Fully determined to defend the captives to the last extremity, against any hostile interruption, Avinzo, un¬ sheathed his dirk, and placed himself at the entrance ofthe cell, in a posture of de¬ fence. The clangor soon grew louder, and a full burst of light darted in an instant- down the narrow flight of steps, at the summit of which Avinzo speedily recog¬ nized the person of John of Dunbar, who, with a numerous band of armed men, were descending into the vault. The monk in a few words proceeded to acquaint Huberto that the person of the Abbot Gondez had been secured ; that the Italian vessel, containing his treasures, had also been boarded by the Lord Walter, who commanded the Scottish Forces, and
that the ship was then in his possession. Unmindful of any other event but that лу1псп related to the sufferers, the youth instantly issued his orders, in consequence of луЫсЬ, the луге1е1^ victim of the Abbot's cruelty луаз borne алуау in the arms of the pitying guards, луЬПе the lovely female, having in some measure гесол^егеа, луав supported from the cell by the anxious and love-en tranced Avinzo. Having quitted these dreary dungeons, the cavalcade retired by torch light from the monastery of Saint Columba, and gained in safety the hut of the fisherman. Here Huberto took to his arms the firm friend of his soul, the Lord High βίεΛν- ard ; after which, елгегу effort was in¬ stantly put in practice to effect the recovery of the rescued youth, and for the perfect restoration of the exhausted object of Huberto's fervent adoration.
.·γΟ\*ϊ:
СНЛР. V ------------- _^ --------Who will believe thec? Ыу uusoil'd name, the austereness of my life .May vouch agaiibtyou : and my place i'the state Will so your accusation over-weigh, That you shall stille in your own report, And smell of calumny. srakspeare. ' ' — ;: W ITHIN the towering walls ofthe no¬ ble city of Manfredonia, in the kingdom of Naples, which seemed to frown upon the expansive gulf beneath, stood the sumptuous palace of the family of the Marquises of Alvaroni; tvhich hatl long been occupied by the gloomy Stephano Alvaroni, its noble possessor; tvho hav¬ ing, at an early period lost his wife, con¬ tinued with his beauteous daughter, Voienza, an inmate of this stately pile of building.
At the same period the lofty embat¬ tled turrets of the castle of Taranto, on the wide gulf of Gallipoli, was inha- »itcd bv the vouthful Duca Martini Jonzari; tvho, after paying the first tribute to the ashes of his departed mo¬ ther, and only remaining parent, deter¬ mined on quitting the estates of his fore¬ fathers; as they only reminded him ofthe loss he had sustained, tvhich very sensi¬ bly affected his noble soul For this purpose every preparation was made for his journey to Rome, tvhich was distant from Taranto about ttvo hundred and eighty miles. But, prior to his leaving the castle, a messenger was dispatched with a packet to the Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari, the Duca's uncie, signi¬ fying his intention, and soliciting that he would procure, for his accomodation, an appropriate mansion, and every ne¬ cessary requisite to his condition in lite.
ť rom the 'period of his boyish days the Duca had пелхг seen the Cardinal, liis uncle ; whose religious avocations at Home, and the perseverance with which he had conducted himself* aided by the power of noble relatives, hael at length procureel him the enviable station of Cardinal. Пе л\аэ thus prevented from leaving the capital of Italy, to pay a visit to the castle of Taranto, ţvhither he had been frequently i n vi teel by his deceased brother, whose луеакЬ and best endeavours had ever been employed in order to the advancement of Nicolo. The Cardinal, though a descendant ofthe uoble house of Gonzari, differed in every respect from his deceased bro¬ ther; whose mind was open to every generous impulse, and луЬоэе son, the Duca Martini, лгаэ his exact prototype. Cardinal Nicolo, on the contrary, waa of a suspicious and dark temper, his ambi¬ tion, луЫсЬ had very early betrayed it-
self, had acquired redoubled energy, as he gradually assumed the several digni¬ ties tvhich precedeel his elevation to a seat in the conclave. But scarcely had he arrived at that post of eminence when his to wer iiig spirit regarded tvith a wist¬ ful eye the pontifical scat ; and, in order to the procuring that dignity, he had recourse to every insidious endeavour; in the hope that, on the demise of the then Sovereign Pontiff, he might come next in nomination. In order to this his possession of the estates and dukedom of Taranto would have been of the utmost consequence; but the intervention of his brother's existing heir, frustrated all hope onthat ground; and he tvas, there¬ fore, compelleel to regard, with malig¬ nant hatred, that unsuspecting nephew whose existence barred him from the possession of those estates to tvhich he was the next heir. But, if the Cardinal Nicolo was am-
bi tious, there were also other character¬ istics attached to his mind, which ren¬ dered him eveu more detestable. His re¬ ligious avocations, his abstinence and his celibacy, луеге but so many pretended cloaks that concealed the depravity of his desires. Though apparently constant in his devotional duties, his soul л\^ hardened against every divine effusion, and lie laughed to scorn, internally, those ex¬ quisite maxims which it was so frequently his task to inculcate. His forbearance from all enjoyments of the appetite луа$ also practised on сл т егу occasion, лгЬеп the eye of publicity лгаа bent upon him ; at the same time that his aspect and de¬ meanour gave outward signs of the au¬ sterity of his character ; but when retired, he зпл -aribly made amends for the mo¬ mentary mortification, by indulging in all the luxuries of the table. As to his continence, it was as much con-
temned as the humble precepts of the faith he pretended to follow ; it being assumed only to cover the most libidi¬ nous courses which his unbridled lust could conjure up to pamper a debauched mind. Such was Cardinal Nicolo Gonzari, the supposed virtuous uncle to whom the young Duca Gonzari, had forwarded the most affectionate testimonies of duty and esteem, at the same time that he had made the request relative to an establish¬ ment, while he should continue a resident in the city of Rome. Upon receipt of the Duca's dispatch a thousand new ieleas flashed upon the brain of the Cardinal, who instantly pro¬ ceedeel to carry the desires of his nephew into eflect; tvhile a mysterious gloom o'er-clouded his soul, and whispered tlu most horrid machinations.
The suit of the Duca Gonzari being in readiness, the appointed morn arri veel when he was to bid adieu to the much- loved residence of his noble forefathers, tvhich he prepared to accomplish with an aching heart. On descending into the court-yard of the castle of Tarento, where every thing was in readiness, the sudden arrival of horsemen at the gate was heard, and, in a fetv seconds, the young Count Ferdi¬ nando Ozimo, tvho hael long been the bosom frienei of the Duca Gonzari, ap¬ peared ; who, advancing, maele him ac¬ quainted tvith his determination of ac¬ companying him in his journey to Rome, as he could not endure the idea of re¬ maining; in the vicinitv of Tarento, tvhen his friend tvas not the inhabitant of its castle. This testimony of regard on the part of the Count, tended, in some measure to
dissipate the melancholy which preyed upon Gonzarľs spirits; and the caval¬ cade being speedily in motion, the two youthful friends, followed by their at¬ tendants, took the route towards Matera, situated on the plain which stretches itself from the base ofthat tremendous chain of mountains, extending from the burning Vesuvius, near the gulf of, Naples, to the cxtremest point of Saint Leuca, on the Terra de Otranto. As mid-day approached the cloud- encircled summits of the mountains broke upon the eyes of the travellers, tvhile the resplendant sun threw a luxu¬ riant radiance on their tremendously bulky forms, affording a noble contrast to the shadowy sieles of thsoe stupendous eminences. Occupied in contemplating this grand display of Nature, the Duca and his friend proceeded on their route till the last tinge of light illumined the scene*, at tvhich period they entered the
gates of Matera, situated on the banks of the beautiful river Canapro. Having passeef the' night in this ro¬ mantic spot, they set forward, the en- sfiing morning, following the curve of the mountains, which reared themselves to the right in proud magnificence ; and, towards the close of the second day, they arrived at the city of Acerenza, whose bold and towering castle fro w r ed upon the habitations it was raised to preserve. At the ensuing dawn the Duca and his friend quitting the walls of Acerenza* passed the base of the first of that tre¬ mendous chain of mountains extending to Cape Spartivento, and, after a tedious journey, they, on the third night, came to the city of Salerno. From hence they proceeded, on the following day, to Naples. In this place, having continued during the space ofa week, they advanced vol. hi. 1.
to Capona, and from thence to Sezza, лупеге they remained during that night On the next morning they entered the луа!к of Sora» from луЬепсе they pro¬ ceeded to Albano, and from thence they reached in safety the stately portals of Rome, the former mistress of the world. The Duca Gonzari, after having re¬ freshed himself, bent his course Xvards the palace of the Cardinal, his uncle, where, accompanied by his friend, the count Ferdinando Ozimo, he was ushered into a sumptuous chamber, in order to await the entrance of the Cardinal Gonzari. In a few seconds ap¬ peared the uncle of the Duca, луЬо, with a mingled appearance of kindred affec¬ tion and monkish reserve, approached and embraced his youthful nephew ; after which, turning his enquiring gaze upon the Count, he demanded, ΛνΐΛ some de¬ gree of dissatisfaction, the name of his friend ; to which Martini speedily replied
by enumerating the good qualities of his companion, his estate in life, and the lapse of years tvhich had transpired from the commencement of their boyish friendship. The ardour with which the Duca Martini made mention of the Count, was sufficient to guard the wary Carili n al against expressing any further tokenofdislike; concealing, therefore, the real sentiments of his soul, he welcomeel the young Count; adding, that he thought the Duca might esteem himself peculiarly happy in the friendship of one »so truly deserving. From this period the conduct of the Cardinal Gonzari was characterized by every mark of fatherly attachment to¬ wards the Duca hls nephew, who resided in a sumptuous mansion, which had been prepared fbr his reception by his uncle. The Cardinal tvas, however, constant i u im attendance on his nephetv, keeping a wary ey-e upou his actions, and eternally
execrating the young Count Ozimo, who, it was apparent, possessed great sway over the mind of his friend. The Duca had not vet attained the age of twenty years, tvhile the Marquis Ozimo, tvas near his four and twentieth year. The Duca never having mingled with tlie world, was ill calculated to judge of the duplicity of mankind ; but the Count, on the otlier hand, having ac¬ quired a greater degree of experience, aeldeel to his more advanced age, was not so implicitly guided by external appear¬ ances as his friend. Ozimo, there¬ fore, speedily discovered that the un¬ ceasing atteiulances ofthe Cardinal,upon himself and his friend, did not originate in any real affection, but was merely the impulse of a prying disposition, added to the elesire of being esteemed the guar¬ ii ian of his nephew's actions. The lapse of a few weeks tended to
convince the Count on this subject, who distantly dropped some hints to the Duca, which луеге not, 1юлуе\*ег, pro¬ ductive of their effect. Gonzari s un* suspecting disposition was ill calculated to harbour a doubt as to the sinceritv of his uncle's actions, who, in addition to his years, bore the most sanctified cha¬ racter ; having, apparently, no views but those which the soul of religion pants for in a future state. Finding it impracticable to rouse the suspicion of the Duca, and the poiut being rather of a delicate nature, the Count Ozimo determined to ţvatch the conduct ofthe Cardinal Λνίτΐι the utmost scrutiny, as there луав a lurking antipa¬ thy Xvards him in the mind of Ozimo, луЫсп he е!^еал г ои^, in vain, to banish from his soul. The Duca and his fiiends луеге, of course, introduced to the first nobility ι 3
of the city ; and visited all the sublime remnants of ancient Rome. One evening the Duca and the Count having accom- panieel the Cardinal to an assembly of the greatest personages, a stranger, who had that morning arri veil from Manfre¬ donia, was presented to the Duca Gon¬ zari and his friend, by the title of tbe Marquis Stephano Alvaroni· The stranger was stricken in years, anel tall of stature ; his manner was cold, anel a mingled look of pride and melan¬ choly characterized his expressive phy¬ siognomy. On enquiry, the Duca was given to understand that he had, very shortly after his marriage with the most lovely of women, lost the object of his affection, who died immediately after having given him a daughter, tvho was then a resident of the palace of Manfre¬ donia, and in praise of whose beauty and accomplishments fame had spread the most fascinating account. In addition to
this, it was stated, that the Marquis had not appeared at Rome for the last six¬ teen years, and that affairs alone, of in¬ finite consequence, hael then compel leti him to quit, for a time, the territory of Manfredonia. While the Marquis remained in con¬ versation with the Duca, to whom he had not been presented through the means of his uncle, the Cardinal sudden¬ ly advanced, and, with infinite difficulty, suppressed the gloomy cogitations tvhich had taken possession of his mind in con- eequeuce of this event. After having joined, for a time, in the conversation^ the Carelinal withdrew, accompanied by the Marquis Alvaroni, while the Duca and the Count alscj retired to their mansion, conversing, as usual, on the occurences of the day. It was tvith infinite difficulty that the Count Ozimo was enableel to mask ha» 14
real feelings till the hour of repose ; fbr, having narrowly watched the actions of the Cardinal for some time, he was en¬ abled to solve, in some measure, the .secret spring of his conduct ; vvhich ori¬ ginated, he felt assured, in a secret de¬ sire of preventing any union that might probably present itself between the Duca and the heiress of some noble house; by which means, in case of any offspring, his hopes of possessing the Ducal estates of Taranto would be infal¬ libly frustrated. While the penetrating mind of the Count Ozimo was thus agitated, on ac¬ count of his friend, the ideas of the Duca were opposite in every respect; and he was tne easier led into such ideas from the conduct of his uncle, who seized every opportunity, during the absence ofthe Count, to express the disinterest¬ edness of his intentions, while he pre¬ tended to offer his advice, in the light of
a ghostly father, whose ideas, soaring above all worldly considerations, labour¬ ed only to raise the noble elescendaiit of the Dukes of Alvaroni to the most exalted state of piety, virtue, anel per¬ sonal magnanimity. Such were the ideas of the Duca and the Count Ozimo, and such the event« tvhich had ensued from their first arrival at Rome, tvhile the subtle minel of the Cardinal Nicolo, ever on the alert, looked forward, with anxious ex pec tauet', to that auspicious period tvhich should put him in possession ofthe Ducal territories <i>f the noble house of Gonzari,
ι 5
CHAP. XIII.
speechless the hero, and astonish'd. stood, And found an unknown temper in his blood r A painful pleasure seiz'd his beating heart, — And, in his breast, he felt and lov*d the smart ; The wand'ring fíame creeps thro' his wounded veins, And all the springs of life, the soft contagion gain«. bLAC&MORE Reason and love jend my divided Mrøl :— Love to his tune my jarring heart would bring, But reason over-winds, and cracks the string.
Rosanna valenza, the only daughter of the Marquis Stephano Alva¬ roni, луЬо was the sole mistress of the palace of her father, during his absence at Rome, being weary of the bustle луЫсЬ the city of Manfredonia constant¬ ly presented to her sight, and, anxious te> visit the sequestered villa which had for¬ merly been the favourite residence of he
departed mother, she gave the necessary orders, and, on the day succeeding that on which the Marquis had quitted the city- she repaired to the retired villa of Se¬ veta, situated near the mountain Saint Angelo, commanding, in the fore ground, a distant view of the Gulf of Venice, while in the rear, the majestic beauties of nature presented themselves in the most variegated forms and colours, ter¬ minating, at a distance, in the misty mountains of the Appcnines. The mind of Rosanna Valenza being awake to every thrilling sentiment that warms the breast of sympathy, felt, in this tranquil seclusion, the most roman¬ tic bliss that a melancholy pleasure can communicate to the heart. It soon be¬ came her custom, early in the morning, deviously to stray through this sequester¬ ed scene, wholly captivated tvith the verdant beauties that glittered in Auro¬ ra's golden rays, bespangled with the ία
translircent deлv. It was then that her soul felt animated with fervent adoration for that benificent and all-gracious Divinity, from whom alone, these multifarious blessings spring, which hourly arise to enliven the eye, animate the heart, and elevate the human soul to rapture. In the course of her morning tvalks it tvas the custom of Rosanna to visit a small chapel, dedicated to our Lady of Grace, tvhich hael been erected by one of the ancestors ofthe A It-aroni family, and tvhich reared its fret-worked spires in a remote anel tufteel wood of dark-green waving pines, whose aspiring heads were seen at some distance from the villa Seveta. To Rosanna this ancient chapel was peculiarly dear, it having been the spot where her mother tvas wont to offer up her fervent orizons, and the silent meditations of returning eve. The building tvas in the form of a
cross, and was decorated externally and internally with the most beautiful gothic ornaments; three lofty casements on either side, and one over the altar, at the extremity of the middle aisle, re¬ flected around a rich and chequered light from the gaudy colours of the emblazon¬ ed and highly ornamented glass. In the middle of the choir stood a sculptured monument of veined marble, whereon rested the effigies of Huberto Alvaroui, the founder of that edifice. The altar was of alabaster, most curiously wrought, representing, in baso relievo, the beatification of the blessed Virgin *o Mary ; anel round the walls of this sacred spot tvere placed carveel representations of the twelve apostles. To this peaceful and sequestered soli¬ tude did the lovely Rosanna frequently repair. It was in this sainted chapel that her fervent adoration was offered up to
the Throne of mercy*; and it was Ье* neath this vaulted roof that her trem¬ bling notes would oft times breath the anatra and the evening hymn of pi*aise„ Sometimes her elevated voice, in full tones, swelled upon the breeze, while, at other moments, the trembling cadence died in sweetest melody upon the ear. Frequently, as Rosanna passed the hal¬ lowed portal, fancy pictured to her ima¬ gination the mother she had lost in ten- derest infancy; the thought would sooth her into melancholy, white a tear, that sprang from the soul of fervent sensibi¬ lity, dropped to the memory ef that parent whom fate had snatched from the bosom of the most virtuous of chil¬ dren. Thus did the pious Rosanna Valenza pass her hours, nor ever yielded to a thought which would have stained the cheek of snowy chastity, with the blush of keen compunction.
Some days after the introduction of the Marquis Stephano Alvaroni, to the Биса and hi» friend, a messenger ai¬ rived post firom Taranto, with dispatches for the Count Ozimo* contaising tlie melancholy tidings of the dangerous in¬ disposition of his mother, and only re¬ maining parent, whom he hael left in apparent good health, on his departure with bis friend theDuea; but who had sudeleniy fallen? a prey to an infectious fever, which seemed to baffle ever en¬ deavour of medicinal art. Urged by the warm impulse of filial affection, the Count found that his im¬ mediate departure from Home was ne¬ cessary ; when tlie Duca Gonzeri, mind¬ ful of the warmth of friendship tvhich bad actuated the Count, determined on this occasion to testify has attachment to his friend, and he, in consequence, in¬ sisted oa becoming the partner of his journey; but with this desire the Count
would by no means acquiesce: in ad¬ dition to which the representations of the Cardinal to his nephew, tending to convince him that his presence could be of no avail, were attended tvith success, and the Duca Gonzari was, in the enei, prevailed upon to relinquish the inten¬ tion of,returning to Taranto; it being agreeel that he shoulel accompany the Count on his route as far as Naples, after tvhich it was his intention to retura to Rome. Every necessary arrangement being made, tvhich the urgency of the Count's departure required, he set out from Rome, accompanied by the Duca ; who, in order not to impede the tvishes of his friend, relinquished all idea of journeying with his regular suite of attendants, and was followed only by ttvo domestics. Having travelled expeditiously during that day and part of the night, they ar-
arrived totvards the second evening at the city of Naples; from whence the Count determined to set forwarel with¬ out any delay. Bidding, therefore, a mournful adieu to tlie Duca Gonzari, with promise of return as speedily as possible, he remounted his horse, after having partaken of a slight repast, and bent his way from the gates of Naples, totvards the city of Salerno. This unexpected summons for the Count Ozimo, and particularly the саиъс which gave rise to his departure, filled the breast of the Duca with the most painful reflections ; all scenes of gaiety tvere now hateful to his soul, and the busy scenes which presenteei themselves to his eyes at the city of Naples, tvere as inimical to his train of ideas, as would have been the more tumultuous societies of stately Rome. Yielding, therefore, to pensive meditation, the Duca determined on protracting his re*
turn to the capital of Italy; and for that purpose he ordered his attendants to be in readiness by times the ensuing day, лупеп he left the Λν -alls of Naples, in order to elude the pressing solicita¬ tions of his friends, which, he feared, луоиЫ delay his departure for some time from that city. Almost unconscious of the track he meant to pursue, the Duca Gonzari advanced several miles; when, ordering one of his attendants to make the necessary enquiries, he was given to understand that they M'ere then journey¬ ing towards the strongly fortified town of Troja, in Capitanata, луЫсЬ was im¬ mediately under the dominion of the Pope; and %vas most romantically situated on the River Chilaro, at the foot of the stupenduous appenine mountains. As it was immaterial to the Duca what route he pursued, he continued ad¬ vancing towards Troja; and halted in the evening at a small village about
midway from Naples to that town.— ľrom thence he proceeded the following day to Troja, where he remained, how¬ ever, for that night only; visiting Lu¬ cera the following day, from whence journeying onware! to Manfredonia, he inspected all the edefices of that city, erected by its noble founder Manfred, who had collected, on this spot, the re¬ maining inhabitants of ancient Sipon- tum, which fonnerly stood near the scite whereon rose tlie walls of Manfredonia. Having continued for some time at that city, it was the Duca's intention to set forwarel, the ensuing morning, on his return to Rome, but the day proved so intensely hot as to prevent him from put¬ ting that plan into execution ; in conse¬ quence of tvhich he remained at Man¬ fredonia till return of evening, and then quitted the gates of the city, fanned on his way by the refreshing breezes that tvere wafted from the bosom of the exr
pansive ocean. Already had the blazing orb of day bent its course totvards the western deep, and the still zephirs of the evening scarcely agitated the umbrage¬ ous foliage of the forest, under whose shade the Duca slowly advanced, follow¬ ed by his ttvo attendants, when, sudden¬ ly, an approaching sound was heard, and, ere the lapse of a few seconds, the Duca turning, beheld his domestics engaged in defending themselves against several assailants tvho had rushed from the sur¬ rounding thicket. The noble Gonzari, fired at this in¬ equality of mumbers, instantly drew his sword. At that moment an arrow, from a bow, pierced through the flowing mantle of the Duca, without injuring his person, and at the same time he be¬ held one of his attendants fall, groaning, from his horse, while the other, still struggling against his opponents, con¬ jured his Lord to seek for safety in im-*·
mediate flight. The Duca, unmindful of his personal danger, and feeling for the fate of his followers, was preparing to rush upon the assassins, tvhen, instan¬ taneously, four horsemen, masked tvith sable vizors, appeared in view, making towards the Duca at full speed, tvith an obvious intent of securing his person, if not taking his life. The force of reason, at this critical juncture, predominated o'er the Duca's mind, tvho, instantly set¬ ting spurs to his courser's sides, eiarted forward, amidst the thickest mazes of the forest, still heanng the distant echo, from the clattering hoofs of the steeds which bore the persons of his pursuers. The panting courser of the Duca at length halted ; tvhen the youthful Gon¬ zari, springing from the saddle, aelvanced tvith precipitancy towarels the portal of a chapel which appeared at some little distance.
The mellow radiance of the sinking sun tinged the wide expanse of the western horizon with the mingled hue of brightest gold and dye empyreal; all nature was serene, and her prolific bosom nought displayed but sweetest harmony. As the precipitate steps of the Duca led him over the threshold of the portal, a lovely female stranger, at that moment, arose from her prostrate position, before the altar, and alarmed at the intrusive sound, directed her regard towards the entrance of the chapel where she be¬ held the youthful person of the noble Duca; who, proceeding almost breath¬ less up the aisle, gained, in a few seconds, the step of the altar, whereon the beau¬ tiful female sîood, rivetted vvith a sen¬ sation of mingled fear and astonish¬ ment. On beholding the angel form before him, the Duca, for a moment, paused ;
then, starting back some paces, bowed to the pavement the unsheathed sword he helel within his grasp, exclaiming :— " Immortal form ! for such ineleed thy appearance should bespeak thee, shield from the malice of pursuing ruffians, a being that never tvould have fled from peril had not unequal numbers, dastard Hke, combined against this single arm ; or, if my presence here, thou most divine creature! gives thee cause of alarm, speak, and on the instant, borne upon the wings of speed, ΛνίΙΙ I forth again, and dare the murderous band ; for I can never crouch submissively the knee to any but the Deity.—No, Lady, for the salvation of my life, I would not meanly sue." The person of the Duca Gonzari tvas majestic, and upon his animated coun¬ tenance was stamped every trait of proud nobility; a fiery expression shot from
his fixed eyes, and every lineament dis¬ played undaunted courage, truth, and honour. A profusion of dark brown hair hung loosely o'er his temples, which tvere aelorned with a fur-edged cap, o'er the brim of tvhich, on one side, hung a black and tufted plumage. From his shoulders was suspeneled an ample man¬ tle ; and, on his breast and limbs he wore purple velvet vestments embroidered o'er with gold. Suspended by a rich chain, hung the broad scabbard of his trusty sword ; and within the girdle encircling his waist, appeareel a glittering poig¬ nard. Such was the general contour of the Duca's figure, on presenting himself before the unknown female, whose ra¬ diant charms seemeel to dispel from his minel the recollection of the late trans¬ action, and the danger that might every instant await him. The female stranger continued for some moments irresolute and unable to
reply to the noble and spiriteli address of the Duca, which so perfectly coincided tvith the dauntless, open appearance of his demeanour. A secret emotion of the soul sudelenlv dictated the reply ; for the bolel and energetic language of the Duca tvas ac¬ companied with a certam inexpressible fervor in his manner that belied baseness or deceit, and attested the veracity of his asseveration; in addition to which, the plea of mercy potverfully tvrought upon the feeling minel of the beauteous stranger, who thus made answer to the Duca's address :— " Whomsoever thou art, thy words and manners alike bespeak thee a stranger to deceit. To screen the innocent from the machinations of base villanv is a sacred duty, incumbent on every friend of virtue. I boast tliat glorious title ; and, vol in. к
since the will of Providence hath placed vour fate under mv guidance, I will, to » »/O'-' my utmost, guard the sacred deposit." The female then descended the steps ofthe altar, and, tvhile the Duca Gon¬ zari continued to gaze upon her Λνίίΐι mingled delight and admiration, she pro¬ ceeded thus :— " Least thy pursurers, Sir Knight, should chance to arrive, Ι ΛνίΙΙ instantly quit these walls anel make secure the portal ; if they should o'ertake my steps, and make enquiries concerning thee, I will·mislead them in their coursť, and instantly return to set thee once again at liberty." *'" Lovely, noble, and immaculate pro¬ tectress !" exclaimed the astonished and admiring youth. " Yet, ere you go, grant me one more request ! Reveal not, I conjure you, this adventure ; but let it
sleep л\ itliin your gentle breast till future events shall call the truth to light." The stranger female hesitated, for no action of her life had ever yet been kept a secret from her parenťs ear. Tiie Duca, observing this irresolution, im¬ mediately proceeded thus :— " Pardon, I beseech you, gentle crea¬ ture, the conduct of that man Λν -hose being your interposition иолг strives to rescue from impending* death.— Forgi л*е the late request ; nor let me, in any in¬ stance, urge you л\ г 1итс your compliance niight inflict a moment's pain. ВеПел'е me, I despise myself* that I should thus have dared to infringe on generosity so disinterested as thine/' The female bent a momentary glance upon the Duca, indicatory of applause; then Ьол\^ her head, she hastily pro- ceeded аолл т п the aisle, and, quickly k2,
closing too tlie massive portals, advanced лукЬ palpitating heart, along the shady path, yielding to a multiplicity of con¬ tending sensations that сгол\ч!ее1 on her fluttering bosom. Still was the form ofthe Duca present to her fancy ; still луаэ his every look and gesture pictured in her mind's eye; tvhile the fond recollection inspireel her with a glow of extatic delight.—The sounel öf his mellow, fine-toned voice, still vi b rateei on her ear, and the disin¬ terested sentiments tvhich bad flo weel from his lips, were still ripe in her re¬ membrance. " Gooel heavens !" thought the lovely creature, ťí and can I prove myself un¬ worthy such generous candour ? Shall I refuse to keep this incident a secret in mv own breast, when the last sentence from his lips, by leaving it at my option, challenges my faith? No, I will keep
pace with the glorious energies that fire his soul ; like him will I act disinterested¬ ly; his wish shall be obeyed;—the secret sleeps for ever here. The stranger fe¬ male had involuntarily raised her hand to her heart, when a distant clattering sound, fioin the trampling of horses hoofs, caught her attention; she instantly paused, and still the sound continued to advance. Already had the lady planned the answer requisite to be given on the approach of the horsemen, should the expected enquiries be made; when sud¬ denly, the sound took a different turn, and on her proceeding to another branch¬ ing path of the forest, she descried several horsemen at full speed ; they having taken their route in a contrary direction to that part of the wood where the 'chapel was situated. The generous stranger had advanced to some distance from the edifice; the radiant god of day had veiled his к 3
lustrous front, behind the western hills ; and the last bright saffron tinge, sur- lounded by an expansive sheet of ruby hue, still lingered on the cheek of heaven. Warned by the rapid approach of twi¬ light, slie immediately began to retrace her itcps ; and the alacrity tvith which she advanced speedily brought her again to the entrance of the chapel. As the trembling stranger prepared to open the portal, she felt a quick palpitation of the heart; her hand almost refused its office, and her limbs seemeel sinking beneath the lovely form they tvere meant to sup¬ port. After a pause of some minutes, during which she vainly endeavoured to assume her wonteel tranquility, she slowly passed into the chapel, and, with faultering steps, advanced along the pavement. On a sudden she paused, as she beheld the bewitching form of the Duca, who had fallen prostrate before the sacred
table, Wholly unconscious of his guar¬ dian's approach, Gonzari continued to offer up an internal prayer to the Omni¬ potent. Beside him lay liis glittering sword, and plumed cap; while, full upon the crucifix were bent his dark and pene¬ tratine: eves, whose bright lustre had as- sumed an expression almost supernatural; fired, as they were, by the divine glow that animated his uncontaminated soul. A profusion of hair clothed vvith negli¬ gent waving tresses his uncovered head ; upon the entablature of the altar rested his right hand, wliile the left arm was extended in an elevated direction. As the striking person of the Duca, thus rendered doubly prepossessing by the attitude into which he had thrown him¬ self) and the divine sensations that agi¬ tated his breast, caught the regard of the stranger, her eyes became riveted to his person with delight and admira" tion, к 4
" No,'* sai*} she, internally ; u I will not disturb the enraptured effusions of his soul, tvhich are now spontaneously poureel forth to the divinity. Here will I await the termination of his prayer, and gaze upon his graceful figure, unobserved/ 1 The conclusive idea suffused the cheek of the enchanting stranger tvith a blush ofgriinsou dye. tvhile her troubled bosom heaved tvith throbs unfelt before. Fain tvould she have divined the real source of this unwonted palpitation ; rain would she have read the secrets of her heart» She began the task, but did not dare proceeel in the scrutiny ; for her minel confessjgel, that this hitherto unfelt emo¬ tion constituted the heavenly thrill she then experienced, and alike gave rise to momentary pangs, which having sub¬ sided, encreased still more the exces sof delight. While the female stranger remained thus entranced in bliss, the Duca gave
vent to his spontaneous prayer; but, after a time, placing his right hand upon his breast, he bent his head \vtth submis¬ sive motion, and then slowlv arose from ** mf his prostrate position. Awakened by this action to a sense of her situation, the female instantly advanced; at that moment the Duca, sheathing his sword, turned towards his guardian, and, with a smile of gratitude depicted on his countenance, descended the steps of the altar. " Sir Knight," exclaimed the lovely stranger, rallying all her ţyonted magnani¬ mity, to coun teraet the real emo tions of her mind, " I have полу fulfilled the promise ъо lately made, aud anı come to set you ftee. No longer need you dread your miscreant pursuers ; from hence they bent their луау, full speed, and must, ere this, have passed the verge ofthe torest. "
к 5
" Generous guardian of my safety,'' replied the Duca, " how shall I express the effusion of gratitude that swells лукЫп my breast ! what words are ade¬ quate to speak my admiration of your transcendant magnanimity and majestic charms ! Never, till now, did mortal form so fix my gaze ; never did features so enchain my soul, and make my bosom gk^v Avith rapture !" " Stranger, I conjure you, cease this Аолу of praise, lavished on one so un¬ deserving," replied tlie blushing maid. " Trifling are my merits ; they accord but ill with admiration such as you ex¬ press. If aught be done to claim your good opinion, suffer, I beseech you, the remembrance to sleep ли thin your own bosom ; since commendations far from adding to a worthy deed, tend only tò diminish it, by over-rating the merits of the action,"
" Amiable creature !" bastily returned the Duca, " seek not to enslave the tongue which was never yet obedient to the fawning language of flattery. .Do not, I conjure you, curb the íirst effu¬ sions of admiration that tvere ever vet mf lavished on your gentle sex. Say, can I but feel enraptured, when beauty, ma¬ jesty, anel melting pity, in one form combine ? Can I but extol the glowing energies of that mind, anel speak my gratitude to that being tvho hath served me ? Speak, I intreat thee, fairest of thy sex ! breathe forth the name of my guar¬ dian angel; let me learu to whom I am thus signally indebted, anel the dear name shall be engraven on the tablet of my heart. A more than orelinary desire impels me to make this earliest request; do not then deny me the bliss of learn¬ ing, from thy-lips, the name of her tvho raises in my soul a tumult hitherto unfelt. Speak, I conjure thee !" кб
As each tyord escaped the lips ofthe inspired Duca, his manner sufliciently evinceei the sincerity of his language ; and the stranger, unable longer to sup¬ press her stifled feelings, experienced a conflict of emotions ; tvhile admiration for the noble youth was the predominant sentiment that displayed itself in her every action. Delicacy, for a time, struggled within her bieast ; yet, what tvas there repugnant in the demand of the Duca ; reared in the school of truth, she disdained a falsehood ; and to main¬ tain a rigid silence was inimical to the sentiments which then occupied her breast. Under these considerations, her minel,became regulated as to the line of conduct she thought it expedient to adopt, when, tvith some degree of com¬ posure, she thus made answr to the expectant Duca Gonzari ;—■» " I would that my name were gifted with a charm, to operate as forcibly as
your language would suggest. To con¬ ceal it, would be to raise within vour mind ieleas beyond what it may really possess ; know, therefore, Sir Knight, that I am daughter of the Marquis Alveroni." " Alveroni !" suddenly interrupted the Duca, on recollecting that it was to that very nobleman he had been presented at Kome ; " I am no stranger to thy noble lineage ; nor shall I ever cease to bear in mine! its present representative. No longer will I intrude upon your time, fair creature I the period shall come, when you shall better know the beimr tvho has thus intruded on your medita¬ tions." Ihe Duca then approaching the form of the lovely Rosanna, caught her lilly hand. It was a moment big tvith fate ;—she struggleel, but could not with¬ draw it The cord indeeei луаэ cracked ; and nought found sanction in her breast,
from that eventful moment, but thrilling tenderness and gentle love. Rosanna thrice endeavoured to address the Duca, but the tvo reis died upon her lips ere they founel utterance ; when the nob к Gonzari, gently elropping her hand, sighed forth a farewell, and, rushing to the portal of the chapel, instantly dis¬ appeared from the lovely heiress ofthe house of Alvaroni.
CHAP. VIL
Heaven is all love ; all joy in giving joy ; It never yet created, but to bios. And shall it then strike otľ tlie list of life, A being blest, or worthy so to be? Heaven starts at an annihilating God. νου so.
There's a mysterious something in his mien j— His words, and every action doth denote An hidden purpose. Yet, will I not fear, Nor bend my heart, nor blanch my manly cheek. —Fate, I defy thec î —
¡ЭОМЕ time elapsed after the Duca quitted the chapel, ere Rosanna Valenza could 'sufficiently collect her spirits to return to the villa Seveta; and as she retraced her steps thither, atrain of ideas involuntarily took possession of her minel,
wholly dissimilar to those calm emana¬ tions луЫсЬ had ever before swayed her contemplative soul. Нолу truly noble was his form, thought Rosanna; how expressive ел г егу lineament of his open countenance; tvhat fire, tvhat majesty, shot from his.eye ; how nervous his language; луЬИе his every луогекеИз- played the persuasive eloquence of truth, uttered in tones of sweetest harmony ! After a pause, Rosanna continued thus her internal train of ideas, Ah 1 wherefore flutters thus my heart ? why do I quaff rich draughts of plea» ure, as my minds eve continues to retrace his more than mortal form ?—Why melts my sout to sadness at the remembrance of his part¬ ing farewell? Why flies the roseat tinc¬ ture from my ch-sek ? wby chills the cur¬ rent in my veins, as the fear of never more beholding him flashes on my ЬгаДп? Perhaps, even полу, the detested mis¬ creants, retracing their steps, are closely
pursuing him. Peihaps, at this juncture, a murelerous weapon bathes in his heart's blood. He falls—he groans ! Ah ! in¬ supportable, horrid contemplation ! Unconscious of the action, the beau¬ teous Rosanna, having луогкее1 her mind up to a state of horror, turning hastily round, bent her wilel gaze upon the dark expanse of foliage that sullenly waved upon the breeze of dusky twilight. She listened ; but no sound was wafted on the wind, save the passing air that forced a passage through the rustling leaves of the embiwvning Avood. At night, луЬсп sleep came to renovate her spirits, Rosanna enjoyed not the sooth¬ ing balm ; her fancy conjuring up a thou¬ sand frightful images to rack her in* tranced soul. Sometimes she beheld the stranger in all the charms of blooming health ; but
soon the form would fade ; and breath¬ less, as when fiist he rushed along the aisle ofthe chapel, lie appeared to stand before her, with colourless cheeks, dishevelled locks, and sunken eyes ; while a stream of blood seemed issuing from his uncovered bosom. Then would ap¬ parently rush forward a band of remorse¬ less murderers, their blades yet had ged with his crimson blood, and preparing to inflict ne.w gashes. At such moment's, sleep affrighted, fled the pillow of the maid, who, starting from her couch, yielded, for a time, to mental agony; and, gazing round the chamber, sought to behold the objects pictured in her terrific dreams. While such ideas possessed the mind of Rosanna Valenza, the Duca Gonzari, on quitting the sainted edifice, which had ffiven to his view the creature that then enslaved his heart, instantly advanced to the spot where he had quitted his wearied
steed, tvhich had noi tran elered manv paces, and, on beholding his well-known lord, the jaeleel animal, proud to feel his rider's weight, once more, assuming ener¬ gy, bounded with speed upon the velvet sod. The Duca, alive to the calls of hu¬ manity, instantly directeel his course to the place where his attendants had been so gallantly engageel in his elefence, but no human form was perceptible ; and all thatremaineel was the congealed blooel of his wounded domestic, tvhich crimsoned o'er the verdure of the earth. Guided only by chance, the Duca Gonzari, spurring his steed, arrived by dark at the gates of ь the strong town of Saint Angelo, where, after many enqui¬ ries, he discovercel his two attendants, the one having receiveel some deep wounds, while the other, being but slightly hurt, hael conducted his companion thither.
From these domestics the Duca gained no other intelligence, than that the assail¬ ants, ivho were all masked, did not bear the resemblance of robbers, but appeared wholly intent upon taking the life oftheir lord. The Duca Gonzari, having given e\*ery requisite order respecting his woundet} attendants, and having also procured arı escort, quitted St. Angelo by dawn the. following morning, and, at the expiration, of two days, arrived, in safety, at his mansion in the city of Home, livre he лу -as speedily waited upon by his uncle, the Cardinal, wlio betrayed every out¬ ward testimony of anxiety at his long absence ; but, on hearing of the event which baci so nearly endangered the Duca's life, he vowed that the troops of the holy Pontiff should be dispatched in search of the renegadoes; and so per¬ emptory was Nicolo on this head, that it wqs with infinite difficulty the Duca
prevaileel upon him to suffer the whole affair to continue unnoticed. From this period the Duca Gonzari was indefatigable in his attentions to- warels the Marquis Stephano Alvaroni ; which created much uneasiness in the minel of the Cardinal, tvho, nevertheless, determined to watch in secret, and ob¬ serve with a scrutinizing regard, the conduct of his nephetv. The Marquis Alvaroni tvas ofa haughty disposition, and, since the loss of his tvife, his whole mind had been bent on a great alliance for his children ; in addition to tvhich, he was much tinctured tvith mo¬ nastic superstitipn. The virtues of the young Duca were, hotvever, so conspicu¬ ous, that, notwithstanding the disparity of their ages, he was the frequent com¬ panion of the Marquis's most retired mo¬ ments ; and, having gained such a pre¬ eminence over his mind, the sanguine
Gonzari did not doubt tbat on making- known the secret of his soul, he shouid be blessed with the object of his ardent passion, the lovely Rosanna Valenza, daughter of the Marquis Alvaroni. The romautic ieleas of the youthful Duca kel him lo in, urine that this would be the most effectual means of making liimself known to tke object of his love, tvhom he h&-J purposely left in the chapel a total stranger to his r»nk and title. And with regard to the Caroi-ial, he diel *T> ·** not harbour a suspicion respecting his acquiescence with the proposition of an union between hin. self and theheiiess of the Alvaroni family. For this purpose, the Duca took an opportunity of sound¬ ing his uncle Nicole), without, lvno ver, making mention of any particular object, but merely alluding to the connubial state in general. Upon this occasion, how great t\ as the Duca's astonishment at hearing a direct opposition made to
his ardent desire ; accompanied also with such force of language, as fully con- vinccd the youth, that any step of that kind tvould be decidedly against the wishes of his relative ; who had stated, in the coi:r*>< j of his ai gumen t, that it was absolutely es entiul for any nobleman, so exalted asthe 1);· r a Gonzari, to continue single for a scries ^t ^cirs, previous to his making any electì ; of that nature, in which the honour of his race was so materiali} 7 concerned. The mind ofthe Duca, being swayed by the dictates of nature, could not ex- *** actly comprehend these high-flown ieleas of family connections, in opposition to the warm impulse ofthe soul ; and, how¬ ever anxious he might be to proceed in his career throu srh life, tvith the Cardi- n als approbation, yet, in this instance, the ardor of youth surmounted-, every opposition, and Gonzari determined that, in au alliance of this nature, he would be
solely governed by himself ; and since the concurrence of Nicolo tvas not to be ob¬ tained, the Due^a conceived that it would be most expedient to pursue his ολπι measures in secret, until the Count Ozi- rao's return, tvhom he intended to put in full possession of all the facts that might have intervened. In this manner a month expired ; du¬ ring which period, one dispatch had been forwarded to the Duca from his friend Count Ozimo, containing an account of the declining state of his mother's health, whose only prajer consisted in request¬ ing that her son woulel remain at Taranto, until the shaft of death shoulel have ter¬ minated her earthly career. A few day.s subsequent to the receipt. of this packet, the Marquis Alvaroni, having arranged the affairs tvhich had unexpectedly demanded his attendance at Rome, prepared for his return to Man-
fredonia ; upon which occasion, the Duca Gonzari received an invitation to the pa¬ lace of the Marquis, with which he pro¬ mised to comply ere the lapse of many days ; and, under this assurance, the Marquis Alvaroni took his departure from the capital of Italy, to rejoin his lovely daughter Rosanna Vajenza, who had returned from the villa Seveta to the city of Manfredonia, in order'to be present at the palace on the arrival of her father. On the evening of the day on whicli the Marquis left the city, Cardinal Nicolo visited his перЬелу, accompanied by a young man, whom he introduced as one of his protegees, who was intended for a religious course of life, and txnvards whom the Canlinal requested that the Duca would extend his kind endeavours ; at the same time distantly hinting, that as the Count Ozimo was no longer his com¬ panion, the present youth might occupy vol. in. h
bis place in the good opinions of hi-i nephew. The Duca received this eleve of his uncle with every mark of distant civility ; for there tvas something in the external appearance of the young man, that warped at once every generous senti¬ ment towards him in the mind of the noble youth. Giovanni Maldachini was the name of the person thus presented by the Cardi¬ nal Nicolo, from whose general appear¬ ance, it seemed that he hael passed his twentieth year. He was diminutive of stature, and ill formed, tvhile his counte¬ nance displayed a cast of features repul¬ sive to the eye of the observer. His hair, which was short, was of a reddish hue, and in his small and close-set eyes lurked a thousand inexpressible passions that seemed repugnant to the mind of candour, truth, and integrity.
liis conduct towards the Duca Gon¬ zari was as contemptible as his general appearance. He had scarcely been in- troduced by the Cardinal, ere he pro¬ ceeded to pass the most lavish praises on the Duca's family, and by every servile art endeavoureel to ingratiate himself into his goexl opinion. The soul of Gonzari was not, however, so easily worked upon, for, ere the lapse of three days, he hael formeel in his minel a ele¬ deled opinion of Maldachini, tvhom he onlv endured on account of his uucle, the Cardinal ; but whose presence he despised as a mean pander, and a con- temptable sycophant. A tveek had elapseel from the depar¬ ture of the Marquis Alvaroni, during which period the Duca found himself unceasingly watched, either by his un¬ cle Nicolo, or by the despicable object of the Cardinal's attention, Giovanni Maldachini.
Ij л*
The noble Gonzari, ever mindful of the promise made to the Marquis, antl the soft passion which every hour as¬ sumed a greater emporium over his soul, began to grow weary of the pretended solicitude of the Carelinal and his eleve, nor could he altogether conceal his dis¬ gust from becoming frequently apparent to them, who, consequently, became less importunate in their attendance; thus leaving the Duca in a greater degree the master of his own actions. Conceiving himself in every respect secure from molestation, the Duca Gon¬ zari gave the requisite orders for his journey to Manfredonia ; and as nothing material intervened, he accordingly set out tvith a retinue, suitable to his dignity; among whom were his two faithful at¬ tenelants, who hael recovered from the wounds which they had receiveel in the daring attack made upon the person of the noble Gonzari.
It would be needless to. enter into a detail of the astonishment of the beauti¬ ful Rosanna Valenza, on being intro¬ duced by the Marquis, her father, to the Duca Gonzari, in tvhom she once more beheld the object that had reigned the despot of her soul, since that eventful evening which had presented the noble youth to her admiring eyes, in the small chapel in the forest, adjoining the tran¬ quil retirement of V T ilIa Seveta. Blessed in the presence of each other, tlic hours seemed to glide rapidly away ; nor had many days elapsed ere the Mar¬ quis Alvaroui was enabietl to discern the state ofthe Duca's affections, a circum¬ stance which lie had .internally panted for, as tending to tbe completion of his most ardent wishes ; but in the accom¬ plishment of which he had entertained many doubts, as the character of Cardi¬ nal Nicolo, however concealed from the young Duca, was not so completely ob- L 3
scured from the observation of many Italian noblemen at Rome, who had been rather free in communicating their conjectures on that head to the Marquis Alvaroni, during his residence in the capital. As the Duca Gonzari disdained every idea of concealing a passion tvhich he deemed conducive to the mutual happi¬ ness of himself and his adored Rosanna, he very frankly proposed himself to the Marquis Alvaroni ; and as he hael not at- taineel his one and twentieth year, he supplicateel the immediate accomplish¬ ment of his wishes, by the celebration of private nuptials ; after tvhich, at the ex¬ piration ofthat term, he was desirous of renewing the marriage, with all the pomp and ceremony becoming his Ducal dig¬ nity. As the intervention of Carelinal Nicolo had been the great impediment in the mind of the Marquis, this appli¬ cation of the noble Gonzari was inter-
nally receded by Rosannas parent tvith the greatest degree of satisfaction, al¬ though he at first appeareel inimical to the idea of adopting any measure with¬ out the Cardinal's being previously con¬ sul teel on the business. Those objections the ardent youth combated tvith the strenuous language of love, and, in the cud, the Marquis, though apparently re¬ luctant, tickled to his urgent entreaties. In order that the nuptials might be cele¬ brated with the greater privacy, the retir¬ ed chapel of Villa Seveta was the place appointed ; anel in that very spot which had fírbt presented the lovers to each other were thev united bv the indissolu- ble bond fór which they had panted with mutual ardour. Some clays after the completion of the Duca's wishes, he dispatched a messenger to the Count Ozimo, giving him an ample detail of every circumstance, and acquainting him with his then residence,
at Villa Seveta, with his bride and the Marquis Alvaroni, his father-in-law ; which information reached the hands of tlie Count two days after the demise of liis beloved mother; in consequence of which, he determined, after the solemn ceremony of his parent's interment, to quit Taranto, and seek, in the bosom of friendship, some alleviation of that an¬ guish which oppressed his soul, on ac¬ count ofthe loss-he hatl sustained. The morning subsequent to tiie de¬ parture of the Duca's communication to Ozimo, an express was brought him from Rome, demanding liis immediate pre¬ sence in that city, on account of the dangerous state of the Cardinal's health, vvhich had yielded, lie was given to un¬ derstand, by the contents of the packet, to the rapid effects of a dangerous fever, then prevalent in Rome and its envirous. However painful this summons might
THE MONK. 2 4 Л5 be to the newly married Duca, the claims of consanguinity anel of feeling, urged his immediate compliance with the Cardinal's demand; and he, in con- seqence made the speediest arrange¬ ments; tvhen, having bade adieu to his beloved Rosanna, and the Marquis, his father-in-law, he set forward, from the Villa Seveta, on his journey to the capi¬ tal of Italia. Notwithstanding every argument of the Duca Gonzari, previous to his quit¬ ting his bride, her soul became a prey to the most gloomy train of ideas ; and al¬ though the noble youth hael, apparently, borne the parting with a great degree of equanimity, yet his real sentiments tvere widely different from this external ap¬ pearance, tvhich he had only assumed in order to dispel the melancholy that mantled o'er the bosom of his love. With an aching heart Gonzari left the Villa, and as his form disappeared from
the sight of Rosanna, every sublunary blessing seemed banished from her mind for ever. As the feeľmgs of the beauteous maid yielded to the gloomy contemplations Avhich rushed upon her fancy, she i neon* sciously seized the harp, and, in melan¬ choly accents, gave to themidnight breeze tlie follo\ving stanzas, which she had poetized from the Legendary Tale ofa Scottish Pilgrim, Λνΐιο had some time be¬ fore recounted the fact, луЬеп, journey¬ ing towards Rome, he had halted at the gates of the Alveroni palace to solicit the charity due to religion's penitential votaries.
