Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gondez, the monk: a romance of the thirteenth century
GONDEŽ, THE MONK.
CHAP. I.
*r\\as there I leara'd the untun'd song of war; There cüuiáed the bristly-mane'd and foaming steed, U ith iire-spitting eye, and trampling hoofs; Upon whose back bestrode a Scottish knight, Unnumbcr'd were the valiant foes he slew Of England's hardy youths.—«- How many pedigrees and Cotes ď Armures, Beneath bis nerved arm were blotted out î Whilst foaming from his horse's flanks ran down The blood of all their proud nobility. HENRY И,
Vea, this man's brow, like to a title leaf, SHAKESPEARE»
JFortels tlie nature of a tragic volume.
IN 0\V raged on every side the direful battle's carnage : the reeking car of Mars scouťd swiftly oer the blood-stahťd tieid, while on his nodding crest en¬ voi,, i· в
throned, sat hungry death, who seemed triumphantly to animate the furious combatants on either side. But fortune smiled upon the English host, and all the valour of the Scottish clans was humbled by the fury of the British lion. The brave Sir Edward Bruce, borne on his foaming war-steed, strove on every side with unbridled valour; when sud¬ denly the young Lord Walter, accom¬ panied by Randolph Earl of Murray, rode furiously towards him, and exclaimed aloud ;— ** Spur, spur your courser, good Sir Edward, or your bold brother Robert, who enacts prodigies of valour, must fall into tlie hands of the victorious enemy/* RousVl at the call, Sir Edward instantly joined his friends, and spurring his horse
over the dead and dying, forced his way through the English ranks, and soon-ar¬ rived to be a wituess of his brother's iminent danger. Surrounded by a host of England's fiercest sons, the valiant and the good King Robert Bruce, nerv'd with the fury of a hunted tiger, opposed himself to death in every shape. Beside him fought sturdily the bold Laird Douglas, fearless of every surrounding peril, and anxious only to rescue his Monarch from the impending danger; at the right hand of this noble, the youthful Huberto Avinzo, displayed a valour almost supernatural. Thrice had he already rescued from the surrounding foe, the captive person of King Robert Bruce, and at the moment of Sir Edward's arrival, he rushed in front of the King's steed, and with heroic magnanimity received upon his upraised shield, the death-dooming falchion of the stout Earl of Pembroke, commander
of the English forces, which must have levelled with the earth the pride of Sco¬ tia, its much adored chief; whose arm was, at that critical juncture, opposed to the united efforts of three opponents. By the timely inteference of those no¬ bles, King Robert Bruce, Laird Douglas, and Huberto Avinzo, were happily res¬ cued from the impending danger; on every side, however, victory proclaimed itself in England's favour, the Scottish clans were put to flight in every direc¬ tion, and speeded from the field with the utmost precipitation; while their shrill bugles, mournfully sounded to the winds the unfortunate retreat. It was with the utmost difficulty that King Robert was prevailed upon tö seek for safety in immediate flight ; swayed, however, by the urgent council of his friends, he made with speed towards an adjoining forest; accompanied only by
those chosen leaders, who had so signally aided his cause in defiance of every danger, together with the magnanimous youth Huberto Avinzo, whose wayward fate now led him to become one of the principal supporters of the drooping cause of King Robert Bruce. Thus terminated the bloody and fatal battle of Methven, which seemed to blight for ever the hope of Scotia's hardy sons, by reducing to the most perilous and abject situation their noble King, Robert Bruce, the patron of merit, the friend of virtue, the pride of Mars, and the dar¬ ling idol of every Scottish soul. The dusky veil of evening began to obscure the last bright gleam of fading day, as the Monarch and his downcast friende, borne on the wings of flight, wound through the intricate mazes of the forest. Already had the clangor of the English trumpets, the shouts of tlœ в 3
pursuers, and the yells of the pursued faded on the listning ears of the fugi¬ tives; when, suddenly, King Robert checking the fleetness of his courser, ad¬ dressed his friends, as follows;— " Yoke-fellows in arms, and dearest friends, our struggles for the freedom of our native land, might perhaps, in the eyes of many, entitle us to better fortune. We have stoutly fought it, inch by inch ; we have bled, and freely too, in Scot¬ land's cause ; yet, such you see, my lords, is the adversé chance of war. But, I conjure ye, in the fond name of hope, which ever befriends the lowly and distressed; suffer not the gloom of un¬ availing despondency to counteract those glorious energies which still inhabit your untainted souls, 'Tis true that we are now become the veriest outcasts that ere inhaled the breath of life; yet still remember friends, the strife is glo¬ rious, for our cause is good, nor can I
doubt that ultimate succour from above, which, though for a time concealed, still works imperceptibly in virtue's cause.— To each here present I owe the preserva¬ tion of that life I now enjoy ; but more particularly unto thee, Huberto, whose personal safety has been so often staked for my preserving ; and trust me there¬ fore, while I yet can boast such friends, dejection shall not mar the vigour of the man.—No ; the dear liberty of my land I'll still maintain, and either permanently fix my Scotia's freedom, or, in the con¬ test, sacrifice that life which is in slavery, unworthy my enjoying. " Chance has compelled us thus to fly the field of Methven ; 'tis therefore, now befitting, that Ave should determine whi¬ ther 'twere most expedient for us to direct our course. —What say you lords ?— Speak, brother Edward; for now like wanderers on a trackless heath w r e stray, we know not whither.'* в 4
" In such an exigency," replied Sîf Edward, " concealment is the only plan to be adopted." " To this we must have immediate recourse," replied the Earl of Murray, " from which we may be enabled, by secret means, to apprize our friends and true adherents, of the measures necessary to be pursued, in order to our once more facing the hitherto victorious enemy." " Curses light upon the English crest ľ* exclaimed the Laird Douglas, with vehe* inence, " let not the name of victory be coupled with^the hateful race; it galls my very soul, when I recall to my re¬ membrance, that my two brothers were ignominiously butchered on the block, and that a wife, dear to me as existence, and a daughter, the pledge of our mutual affections, the safety of whom I prize as much as gloiy and my native laiul·, are still at haughty Edwards mercy.—»
Almighty God Ì that thus the wife and daughter of a Scottish Douglas should wear proud England's galling fetters, and within their London's walls pine away in melancholy captivity." " Calm, Laird Douglas, I intreat, this vehemence of temper/' said the young Lord Walter, " cease, I beseech you, for the present, this unavailing flow of pas¬ sion : in the name of friendship I conjure you to recollect, that it is your counsel, and not your rage, which is, in the.present instance, requisite.'* . . " I yield, I yield, my friend/' replied Laird Douglas; " but ah ! the shaft of hatred's heve : it rankles»'in my heart/' " If I may be permitted to/ hazaidban opinion ¿it this distressing juncture/' said the youthful Huberto, " \v& should for fri i- Avith speed, еА т еп in the very track which propitious fate seems purposely to have в 5
led us in· We now incline toward the Western Isles, and soon entangled in tlie intricate passes, may bid defiance to pursuit. let us then to the islands of the Hebrides, in one of which, safely concealed, we may confidently laugh to scorn tiie machinations of the foe, and plan such operations as must eventually frustrate their designs." *' Thanks, generous youth," replied the King, " thanks, Huberto, as sage in council as renowned in war; what say you friends? Can any here amend Avin¬ zo's jkind advice?" 41 We are agreed/' reiterated every tongue, 44 and owe our gratitude for Huberto's care." " To merit such a recompence/* replied the youth, " my life itself were scarcely a sufficient compensation." ι. 4 * We kHìDwthy truth," continued the
Monarch, " and all our loA r es are thine. Come friends, noAv speed we forward towards the west.—Be God our stav, and Hope the rallying word.—On friends, and let the termination of our journey he Oronza's secret isle." Scarcely had King Robert finished the concluding words, Avhen CA r ery courser's side felt the keen rowel of the goading spur, and laving the iron hit with foam, plunged forward with the rapidity of lightning. The bright lamp of jocund day was now extinguished, and the pale-eyed goddess of silent night broke in melan¬ choly majesty through the ebon dark, and shed around her partial light. The sullen winds arose, Avhich, gradually dispersing the murky canopy of clouds, left to the Avondering eye of contempla¬ tion, the countless beauties of immea¬ surable space. There Venus glittered
in brightest lustre, and all the dazzling host of Heaven shot forth their scin¬ tillating lights,' lacing the Avide expanse of dark ethereal blue Avith gemmy brightness.
'J?'
Various and contending were the ideas that took possession of the mind of eacri thoughtful fugitive ; yet, there Avas not an individual bosom but glowed with the god-like thirst of Fame, the love of Virtue, the freedom of their Sovereign, and the hope of giving liberty to Scot¬ land 's valiant clans. For two succçsii-ve days and nights King Robert Bruce and his folloAvers continued cm their route, scarcely mak¬ ing the necessary halt for the change of horses, and the taking that nutriment, of Avhich, from their harrassed state, they stood in só much need. At length, towards the decline of the third day, they arrived in safety on the shores of the
Sound of Jura, where, quitting horse, a bark transported them immediately to that island, which, having traversed, they again entered a vessel, and steered towards Oronza's Isle. , Day's jocund face no longer bearn'd in resplendent majesty upon tlie western horizon, the rays had sunk below the surface of the dťvp, and a threatning gloom overspread the î^aulted canopy of Heaven; loud howled the northern blast, the surge rose high its curling head, and dashed in foaming fury against the little bark, which wafted oer the angry flood.the luckless King of Scotland and his tried companions. In vaiti the boatmen strove against the fury of the overwhelming current: their strength availed them but little when opposed to the combined assaults of adverse winds and angry waves. One moment the vessel plunging into a vawn-
ing gulph, seerned lost for ever; then struggling with the billows, it rose again, to meet once more a watery tomb. Thus, every second seemed to threaten instantaneous death, till each exhausted, abandoned the bark to the rude sport of the tempestuous elements. The dauntless Monarch and his chosen friends, armed with blessed tranquillity of soul, the certain companion of con¬ scious rectitude, awaited in silence the dreadful behest of fate; when fostering Providence kindly wrought what every mortal effort combined, had vainly strove to accomplish. The angry surge, at Heaven's com¬ mand, xlrove to the shore the splitting vessel, restoring once more to land these. outcast children of misfortune.
Each, with true devotion, first paid tribute to the protecting hand of the Most High, and then stretched upon the turf his wearied frame, overcome by lassitude and the rude assaults of the pitiless winds and waves.
CHAP. II.
I ne Vr was superstitious, and defy All babbling augnrs, and till omens dire¿ That oit appui the human soul. Yt r* thei e's a heavy something at my heart, A secret summons that yt lis out— Betcure ! Well, weil, tat gri/zlv terror freeze this breast, Chill thewabii tide that rushes through my veins; Make dead this siiiht, and numb these pliant joints, Still all im malice doth my чои.1 de í y, Still ail his horr. rs shall îlot make me shrink, Nor urn for mortili life—when hy the change I gain a glorious iinnioUality. w, H. i.
IjORNE upon the hollow blast of night, a sound was heard that died in melancholy cadence on the listning ear. —It was the solenni, bell of Oronza's monastery that tolk d in melancholy accents the dreary hour of midnight. The knei I was grateful to the harrassed souls of Kim? Kobert and his trusty fol-
lowers, each of whom involuntarily arose, animated Avith the same desire of con¬ ducting the Monarch to some asylum Adiere he might receive the attentions that Avere consonant with his dignity, and also experience such succour as his then exhausted state, both mental and bodily, so much required* Each noble having tendered his best service to his adored Sovereign, the King arose, and reclining on the arms of the Lord Walter and the Earl of Murray, followed the other partners of his flight; who slowly bent their steps in that direction, from whence, at intervals, the brazen knell proceeded. After advancing for a short period, they found themselves on the skirt of a gloomy wood, which, OAving to the almost impenetrable darkness of the night, ap¬ peared to extend, its sable foliagf r #u. every direction. *$&**«''
Fearful lest tlie intricacies of the forest might mislead them, by the persuasion of Laird Douglas, the King and the remaining noblemen made a halt; while he, accompanied by the young Huberto Avinzo, entered the wood, to find out if possible any beaten track; but, after much labour, the research proved fruit¬ less: and, on rejoining King Robert, they were all compelled to submit to the alternative of forcing a passage through this unfrequented part of the forest. The rain, though much abated, con¬ tinued to fall plentifully; and the gusts of murmuring wind, forcing a passage through the umbrageous foliage, pro¬ duced at intervals a moaning sound,. which contributed to the horrors of the surrounding gloom. Avinzo, who, with the Laird Douglas, proceeded foremost of the party, at length descried, through an opening of the wood, a faint gleam of light, which
obviously proceeded from the lofty arched casement of some venerable mo· nasttc pile. This intelligence was joy¬ fully communicated to the Monarch, who, with the fatigued partners of his ill fortune, instantly bent their steps to¬ wards the edifice. On a nearer approach, the fabric proved to be a monastery, which, from the vast extent of ground it occupied, appeared to be a building of considerable conse¬ quence. On gaining the surrounding walls, the aperture from whence the dim gleam had issued, proved to be one of the numerous casements which gave light to the northern angle of the chapel, where the inmates of the monastery were then solemnizing the midnight vespers. The painted casement, through which but partially shot the blaze of innume¬ rable tapers burning within, contrasted finely with the ebon hue of the surround-
ing foliage, and produced an awful effect, which was in a great measure augmented by the imperfect sound of the baser notes of the religious chaunters, which gained at intervals the attentive ears of the for¬ lorn Sovereign and his fellow fugitives*, filling the pensive mind of every listner with an indescribable gloom, to which his soul had ever till then been estranged?. After slowly proceeding to the extre¬ mity of the chapel wall, another project¬ ing part of the main building presented itself, which was lost in the sombre dis¬ tance. Still guided by this angle, the party advanced ; and about midway ar· rived at the grand arched portal of the monastery, which had been screened from observation by the projecting bastions of the edifice. Sir Edward Bruce advancing, was upon the point of sounding at the gate for admittance, when the King, suddenly
loosening himself from the supporting arms of the young Lord Walter and the Earl of Murray, seized hastily that of Sir Edward, exclaiming— " Hold, my dear brother ! nor rashly think of craving succour here till von have received from me the counsel which I have to impart.—I know not wherefore, but something there is lies heavy on my soul ;—I pray you, therefore, remember each of you, that I your Monarch must not be thought the partner of your flight ; call me what name ye will, but let the tale be simply as follows :—That we are all true gentlemen and of note, who, upon the King's defeat at Methven, have hither fled for refuge and for safety ; as the Sovereign of England, even iu these our Scottish islands, hath secret friends and emissaries. I pray you, therefore, let us have recourse to caution, and sound the inhabitants of this vene-
rable pile ere we confide to them the se¬ cret of our real quality." Sir Edward and the rest all bowed assent ; Avhen instantly the massive knocker resounded on lhe brazen plate, sending forth a discordant din that harshly echoed through the lofty halls of the building. After the lapse of a few seconds, the slow and measured tread of footsteps were heard; and presently, through a small grating in the door, a surly voice addressed the fugitives to the following effect. " Who, and A^hat are ye that intrude at this untimely hour upon the sworn votaries of religion and their God?— Segone! 'tis noAvr mid vesper chaunt; and it is our Abbot's strict command that none be here admitted to break
unseasonably upon the worship of the Most High." " Good father," replied the Monarch, " we do not seek to break upon your holy purposes; for we would most gladly join our orisons with your's. What we desire is that which most gives satisfac¬ tion to the Divinity, when freely offered from the heart:—we only claim your charity." The .same harsh voice then gruffly answered from within— u You lose your labour; go and seek elsewhere, that comfort, of which you stand in need." At that moment the retiring sound of the monk's footsteps was heard ; when Sir Edward Bruce, advancing to the grating, cried aloud— 4i For mercy, holy father ! do not bar your doors upon us : we are no common
herd that claim your benison and protec¬ tion ; we are ali gentlemen of note, but now unhappy fugitives, that fought at Methvcn for our land and King, and shared like him the bitter fate of adverse fortune." The footsteps once more approached the portal, when thus bespoke the monk, " Speak ! what men are ye?" " Knights in the service of King Ro¬ bert Bruce," reiterated Sir Edward. All was silent during some seconds», -when the massive bolts were at length withdrawn, and the clank of chains echoed within ; the lofty portal then moving on its hinges, displayed an extensive hail, imperfectly illuminated with dimly burn-. ing lights, ranged at regular distances against the Avails ; upon the pavement rested a brass lamp, which the father first
reared above the level of his brow, and then proceeded to examine, by its glare, лЪе several persons of the fugitives.—The glance of the monk Avas scrutinizing, and r verv trait of severi tv characterized his » t/ gloomy physiognomy. Having concluded this cautious pe¬ rusal of their features, the monk, with the motiou of his hand alone, beckoned them to advance; and as the Monarch and his nobles followed the father's footsteps, they again heard the gate closed too by a second monk of the order, who had, till that moment, escaped all obser¬ vation. Нал -ïng traversed the hall, they en¬ tered a chamber still more dreary; where the monk, advancing to an oaken bench, motioned the Monarch and his follow¬ ers to he seated. Having complied in bilence, the rather retired bv another en- trance, at the opposite extremi í y oť the vol. ι. с
apartment, which, from the gleam that issued from the lamp he bore, appeared to communicate Avith a long suite of apart¬ ments, equally desolate with that Avhich Avas then occupied by the Monarch and his companions. As the palid ray faded in the distance, each sharer of his Sovereign's fate Avas most anxiously desirous to communicate his thoughts on the singularity of the reception they had experienced ; but the taciturnity of the King proved a sufficient check to their desire; but each men¬ tally exclaimed—" Can this be a symbol of religious charity ? Is this the balmy comfort which its votaries proffer to the abject children of misfortune? Instead of brotherly affection, a gloomy mistrust was graven on the frontof our conductor; and his manners were as cold, repulsive, and comfortless as the internal appearance of this sanctified abode·"
Tiie Monarch, it is true, experienced faut too deeply this train of thinking; yet that soon gave way to ideas more weighty. " If," thought he, " the Superior be the model from which his creatures frame their mode of conduct» this can be no safe asylum for me.—For where suspicion lurks, and seeks to hide her guilty head, there too, lies concealed the cankered heart : 'tis candour stamps indelibly the souľs integrity ; without it, premeditated villainy bars the access to smiling virtue, and crime but leads to crime." Once more the sound of footsteps broke upon the dreary silence; and, in a few seconds, the same father appeared, followed by another of the order. As they approached, the King and his nobles bent each a look of astonishment on the person of the new visitant. His ap¬ pearance was particularly meagre, and с S
his stature far above the common level ; the crown of his head, Avhich was bald, forcibly contrasted itself Avith the jet colour of his hair, which was cropped short behind, and searcely covered a third part of his forehead ; his features, though human, had iu them something so inexpressibly terrific as to appal the gaze of observation ; two eyes large and glaring, a thin aqualine nose, cheek- banes remarkably high, and a mouth, Avhose lips through paleness, seemed but a part of this petrifying countenance, the whole of whicli, overspread with the livid complexion of death, formed the charac¬ teristic features of this horrible figure. The drapery of this father consisted of a dark brown robe, that swept along the Avhite pavement, and hung in loose folds around his meagre limbs, Avhile a cord slightly encircled his loins, and a broad cross of white appeared upon his breast.------Such was the object that
made a halt within some few paces of his astonished observers. Having spoken in a whisper to the father who preceded him, the lamp was· placed upon thq pavement, and the lay friar, bowing with apparent humility, retired back some steps ; when the stranger, raising his right arm and press¬ ing the fore* finger upon his lip, advanced with slow and measured step, passing and re-passing before the King and his nobles, on whom he bent his scowling- eyes, as if with an intent.to read the workings of their inmost souls. This extraordinary ceremony con¬ cluded, he paused before the person of the King ; and, after a silence more ex¬ pressive than even language itself ad¬ dressed him thus: — <c You say, Sir Knight, from Methven hither you have steered your course, to с 3
seek a refuge from \Ы conquering foe.— King Bruce is then defeated?'' To whom the Sovereign firmly thus replied—" The Monarch, and we his followers, have shared the fate of battle. We fought; were conquered: but, I trust, shall soon retrieve those laurel* which we have not ingloriously lost." — « You love the King?" —" None better, I dare avouch : the calise of Robert Bruce boasts not a stur· dicrfiicnd than L" *—" How fares his Majesty V* —" Doubtless as other Monarchs fare, when transitory evils cross them. Op¬ posed to adverse fate, he has a kingly , spirit; and therefore, I suppose, will bear misfortune as befits such magna¬ nimity."
The Monk paused a while, with down* cast look; then suddenly raising his eyes, and fixing them full upon the King, exclaimed, with an elevated voice and ţnysterious inclination of the head— " And, wert thou the King, what course would'st thou pursue ?" — M Fight, till I regained my crown and Scotland's liberty." With eyes still fixed upon the Mo· narch, tbe father paused awhile, then slowly bent his steps towards the en¬ trance of the chamber· The lay-friar, at his approach, raised the lamp with intent to conduct him as before; but the Monk, with out-stretched arm, for¬ bad him, and his form soon disappeared in the surrounding gloom. King Robert, at this juncture, arose; and advancing to the father, requested с 4
to be made acquainted with the titular baţnt. of the monasterv, and the name of its superior. To which interrogatory, it was with, some difficulty the Monarch gained this answer ;~r The convent is dedicated to St. Co¬ lumba, and Gondez is the name of its Abbot. The King, farther expressing a desire to see the superior, the monk thus replied :—■ " Think you, Sir Knight, that the holy Abbot of Columbas monastery, will be led from his austere duties by the calls of a stranger? You mistake the person of the sanctiiied Gondez; the presence of a Monarch, would not actuate him to relax, for a moment, in his religious avo¬ cations. He must, indeed, be bold, that tiares intrude upon his meditations.— Even our holy brother, John of Dunbar, who but now retired, would shrink from
such procedure, tliough he is the bosom friend of our Abbot." H The bosom friend of the Abbot í re¬ iterated the King." The concluding words of the monk, had petrified the Monarch, who from the strong and impressive impulse of the moment, could not restrain the involun¬ tary exclamation; after which, lost in contemplation, he resumed his seat be¬ side the person of Laird Douglas. During some time they remained in this unpleasant state of suspence, when a third father entering the-chamber, ac¬ quainted them that food was spread upon the board ; after which, cells were ready for their repose. The wearied fu sriti ves arose and fol- lowed, in silence, the steps of their con¬ ductor, who ushered them into an> apart- c 5
ment where such provision as the mo* nastery afforded was spread for the unfortunate guests. In the course of the repast several monks entered and retired from the chamber, all uniformly maintaining a similar gloomy reserve, and every thing being conducted in the same inhos¬ pitable manner. Actuated by this conduct, the Sovereign and his friends, fearful of betraying themselves in the smallest degree to their observant at* tendants, followed a mode of procedure in some degree consonant with that of their hosts; and thus concluded the cheerless meal ; after which, every guest wač separately conducted to his bed of mat. Any endeavour to pourtray the mental feelings of each fugitive, when stretched upon his couch of rush, would prove inadequate; each felt alike, a strange
foreboding of something unaccountable, at which nature revolted. Huberto Avinzo, more particularly, experienced a repugnant horror; Avhich, notwithstanding the dauntless mind he inherently possessed, unnerved, in a great measure, his wonted magnanimity. " Whence arises," he exclaimed, as he reclined upon his mat, " this unac¬ countable horror? each object in this mansion, which should inspire my soul with thoughts of peace, is fraught with terrors that appals rne." As Avinzo spoke, the wind, as if in unison Avith his lugubre thoughts, moaned through the grated casement above. He remained for a length of time restless, and then arose weary of this continued sleepless state, and the gloomy contemplations that unceasingly pervaded his imagination.
As Huberto, traversed the vaulted apartment, the moon at intervals peeped through the watery clouds that swiftly sailed along, impelled by the current of the hollow rushing nyíikL On a minute inspection of the cham¬ ber, within a jiicb upon a small altaiv rested a crucifix, which seemed to pre¬ sent itself^ as a reproof for Avinzo's re- missuess, who instantly falling prostrate at the shrine, breathed the warm effusions oí' a virtuous soul; which not only dis^ sipated every appalling horror, but brought from heaven the chearing balm of gentle and renovating sleep, to sooth his care-worn rnind, and give new vigour to that natural bodily strength, which was nearly exhausted by the puissant arm of all-subduing fatigue.
CHAP. Ill
íly gráciou» Lord, that which I would discover, The huv of friendship bids me to conceal; But, when I call to mind your graciuus favours , Done to me, undeserving as I am;. Mv dutv pricii s mc øn to utter that Which ebe no worldly good should draw from me*,. . The Cherub, pv/ing in my face, Renewed past scenes to friendship dear; iMy mind recalled the father's grace, While pity shed the silent tear* w. H. I.
XX UBERTO Avinzo, who so signally aided the cause of Robert Bruce, King of Scotland, and so often preserved him from impending danger, was by birth an Italian ; but to his fate there was an¬ nexed so much mystery, as to render everv idea of tracing his family or con- nections utterly impossible.
In early infancy, Huberto had been brought to Scotland by a native of Rome, whose phisiognomy and manners stamped him above the common level, though his outward habillaments bv no means tended to strengthen such a suggestion. These latter however, were, in all pro¬ bability, assumed in order to disguise his real rank from the eye of observation ; and this opinion was further strength¬ ened by the profusion of riches he pos¬ sessed. This guardian of Avinzo bore the appellation of Alzano ; and scarcely appeared to have attained his thirtieth year. During the continuance of this stran¬ ger at Edinburgh, with the then infant Huberto Avinzo, his courteous manners, but more particularly the consideration of his being an absolute stranger in that city, endeared him to the family and kindred of Sir Alan Macdonald; who, notwithstanding, acquired not the smali-
est knowledge of the family or con¬ nections of Alzarro, or the infant Huberto Avinzo. This continued silence and reserve did not, however, tend to dimi¬ nish Sir Alan's predilection in his favour, which even led him to introduce Alzarro at the Court of Alexander the Third, the then reigning Monarch of Scotland, where every marked attention was, in consequence, paid to him. After a twelvemonth's continuance at Edinburgh, dispatches were suddenly received by Alzarro, from Rome; the contents of which seemed to operate most forcibly on his feelings, and an immediate gloom characterized his whole conduct This continued for some days ; when, one evening, after having evinced, by his every action, a more than ordinary restlessness of mind, he thus, in private, addressed himself to Sir Alan Alac* donald :-^
u The generosity of your conduct, Sir Alan, in having thus befriended a total stranger, shall remain for ever stamped upon the tablet of my souk—VVould to Heaven that I were now permitted to reveal the impenetrable mystery which shrouds tlie fate of the luckless infant Huberto Avinzo;—but that is impossible. I am bound to secresy, and cannot therefore, degrade myself in my own esteem, by forfeiting the confidence re¬ posed in me. As far, Sir Ala«, as I am üt liberty to speak, you shall command my confidence; for you, of all beings, have the most indisputable claim on my candour. Five years are now elapsed, since first Huberto breaiied the vital air; misfortune, ere that hour, attended on his hapless mother; and when she gave him to the world, it was but to strain him to her breaking heart, and bid her offspring an eternal adieu.—The noble vouth whom this dear child claims for his
fatlier, was the friend of my infant days, which dear constancy of attachment ripened with our manhood, and I became the partner of his pleasures, the sharer of his disquietudes, and the sad partaker of his. luckless fortune. Know then, Sir Allan, that Alzarro is not my name; that Huberto Avinzo is but an assumed appel¬ lation for the child, who, from either parent, boasts a noble lineage. Know also, that from impending and certain death I preserved this dear pledge of tlie most pure and sacred love ; and for its salvation fled my native country.—It was a tribute due to feeling, honour, and m ν friend." Here Alzarro concealing his face with one hand, and pressing with the other, that of Sir Alan Macdonald, shed a co¬ pious flood of tears, which liad almost stifled his voice, as lie gave utterance to the concluding words of his address. Having, for atime, yielded to this per-
turbatici! of the soul, he thus continued his harangue:— " I have now unbürthened to you, Sir Alan, as much as my integrity to my beloved friend will permit You are «ow, in some measure, enabled to judge of the secret which preys upon my soul; and nothing, but the conviction of your honour, and the friendship I have expe¬ rienced from you, could have drawn it from me. But, if I have already found you the generous friend, I have yet to trespass on your bounty ;—yes, I have still to sue for a continuance of your pro¬ tection towards the helpless infant Hu¬ berto Avinzo, since, by the late commu¬ nications received from Rome, imperious necessity demands my speedy return thi¬ ther: although painful the alternative,yet I am compelled to leave behind me this darling offspring of my beloved friend. My absence will not, I trust, prove of any very long duration ; but, as to the
precise period of my return it is impossi¬ ble for me to speak, as I shall be occu¬ pied ou affairs of no common nature. This, Sir Alan, is the request I have to make, in the name of the truest parental affection, in the name of unprotected innocence, and that unalterable regard whicli I entertain for vour character." Sir Alan Macdoüakl, pressing with warmth the hand of Alzarro, whose tears again stole copiously down his manly cheek, replied:-— " The Christian's duty is to afford relief to the necessitous, and extend the fostering hand to afflicted innocence; therefore, Alzarro, I not only receive this strong—this gentle pledge of your es¬ teem, with the warmest effusions of plea¬ sure, but also gratefully acknowledge the trust which Heaven so sacredly binds me to fulfil. I have long—very long, sighed for such a charge, since it
will give to me what fate has yet denied t —a lovely child, which I may rear and foster as my own»" Alzarro, having testified his warmest gratitude by every emotion that speaks. the feeling heart, quitted Sir Alan's pre¬ sence; and, on the ensuing day, every arrangement being completed in order to his departure, he retired in the evening to his chamber with the child IIuberto>. where, after closing too the arras, and stating himself* he placed the child upon his knee; and then, fixing his streaming eyes, with tenderness, on his infant features, he thus exclaimed ;— " Dear pledge of tenderest love, how every lineament now calls the blended sweetness of thy hapless parents to my aching recollection. Oh fate! kt me not arraign thy justice; and yet, what crime lias this dear innocent committed, that it should thus remain uncouseious,
of a father's and a mother's tenderness. Perhaps they sleep in death, and all their agonies at once are buried in the oblivion of the grave ! With me now r rests the agonizing task of braving all tbe woes they have endured, an(i learnirfg whether the hand of fate has severed them from life for ever: but there is a comfort still ; for thou, dear boy, in thy green infancy, d i splay est thy father's honour, gentle¬ ness, and truth: even in thine infant sports have I observed thee, when all thy mother's sweetness curbed the dawn¬ ing spirit in thy tender breast. " After imprinting on Huberto's lips a kiss of ecstacv, while the bov, intently gazing on Alzarro, caressed his hand, and watched his every motion, he thus con¬ tinued :— " Sweet child, I quit thee for a time ; yet, my Avinzo, remember well the les¬ sons I have taught thee. Be merciful to
all ; nor harm the creature that's beneatb thee. Spurn every action which thou canst not love ; and place no faith but in that power, to whom, both night and morn, thou raisest thy clasped hands, and offerest up the prayer of gratitude. Be to Sir Alan, as hitherto thou hast been to me, and he will prove himself a parent to thy unprotected innocence : let an unbounded love to all be ever fore¬ most in thy thoughts; nor even seek to harm the being that would wrong thee," The tears that had collected in Hu- herto's eyes burst forth as he further ex¬ claimed :— " Sure, you are my father ; for you have taught me so to love you, that I shall never feel what hatred is to any one." " I take thy promise, my dear boy/' exclaimed Alzarro, as he clasped Avm-
zo's little hands, at the same time raising his eyes to Heaven ;—" yes, I receive it as the type of thy inherent virtue." After once more pressing Huberto with fervor to his breast, he forthwith led the child to the chamber where Sir Alan and the Lady Macdonald attended his coming; and, having solemnly deli¬ vering up Avinzo to their care, Alzarro bad adieu to his generous friends ; then quitting the mansion, he retired by dusk, through the gates of Edinburgh, and taking Horse, he arrived the following day at Berwick, where a vessel being ready to transport him to his native land, he immediately embarked, and the wind being propitious, he instantly set sail for Italians shore«
CHAP. I\ r .
•---------What are the praj'i> of munteneer Death hetdij tht m not; but blind ш hi» ptHMUi, Tramples o'er mild commisscration's Ьгсаы, And sends th' extcrminqting arrow home, Wrecklt'bS of future griefs and misery. The hird in golden ence confín'«!, Stili pants to perch on freedom's tree; Wiio then, can blame the human mind, '¿'hal risks iti» i ıfe, for li hort v. w. и. t.
X WO years elapsed and still no tidings of Alzarro arrived from Italy. Alexan¬ der, King of Scotland, was dead, and several claimants appeared alledgingeach of them a prior right of succession to the Scottish crown. After very high disputes, the business was referred to the arbitration of King Edward the First of England, who, anxious to annex all
Scotland to his own dominions, awarded the sovereignty to Baliol, (who was the great grandson of David Earl of Hunt¬ ingdon, by his eldest daughter Margaret)* because he proffered, to the ambitious Edward, the most disgraceful terms ; for he received the Scottish Diadem upon conditions that he should owe fealty to* the English Crown ; by which ignomi¬ nious act, John Baliol sold the legitimate rights of his countrymen. But Scotia's hardy Clans, unwilling to barter thus their liberty, made head against their Monarch, and their country thus became one dreadful scene of bloodshed and de¬ vastation. Foremost of the party striving for the freedom of his native soil was seen the noble chief, Sir Alan Macdonald, as wise in council as he was dauntless in the hour of danger. Sir Alan proved for a time a dreadful vol. r. d
scourge to English Edward, who, with a numerous and well disciplined army, had invaded Scotland, to maintain in bis dependant though regal state, the person of John Baliol—But all Sir Alan's prowess could notturn aside the unerring shaft of death, and he expired in battle ; bravely fighting in the cause of freedom and his native land. The inveteracy which Sir Alan Mac- donald had uniformly displayed against the arms oť England, pointed him out as a fit object for the enemy's vengeance ; and his castle, being shortly after be- seiged, was razed to the ground by the troops of Edward ; when every inmate, (save only the Lady Macdonald and Huberto, who were with infinite diffi¬ culty rescued by the captain of the band and svnt prisoners to London), was inhumanly butchered by the soldiery with the most savage brutality ; amongst whom it was bclievtd, throughout Scot-
limd, that the Lady Macdonald and Avinzo had also suffered. It was when immured in the narrow- confines of a lonely dungeon, that the innate virtue of Huberto became so emi¬ nently conspicuous ; with each revolving year had the energies of his mind been gradually displayed, and at this eventful period the light of reason began to beam upon his active mind. Avinzo had al¬ ready learnt from Lady Macdonald the mystery that enveloped his fate ; which had been communicated to Sir Alan previous to the departure of the myste¬ rious Alzarro; nor was he incapable of ieeling acutely these emotions which would have arisen in the breast of one whom years had rendered more experi¬ enced. But every selfish contemplation wa? cancelled from his soul at the very mo¬ ment which widowed the Ladv Mac- 1> í
donald, and placed -her in the power of an insulting enemy.; all that contempt his boyish bosom »felt was boldly dis¬ played whenever the taunting soldiery brutally derided a woman's grief. At such moments would Huberto turn and mingle tears of tenderness with heťs ; then would he kiss her hands, and rest ìbis damp cold cheek цроп her burning arm, galled by the encircling manacles rude pressure.—At eve, it was Avinzo's care to range the straw that farmed her resting place: by lýght he would sing Jier into slumbers, and pray with fer¬ vour that all her visions might be dreams of peace ;—then, stretching himself by her side upon the pavement, he would cast one agonizing thought upon Alzarro and own his lost parents, pray for their souls, ,and sleep tilLearly Pawning. Ment-h succeeeded month, till the »constitution of the suffering Lady Mac- wdonald, unable longer to sustain the
accumulated ills that assailed, her, fell an easy prey to the corroding power of internal feveis which« visibly undermined the small portion of bodily strength she still continued to enjoy. Finding that her weakness- became daily more indicatory of approaching dissolution, she one evening, when Hu¬ berto was endeavouring as usual to allay her miseries, thus bespoke him :— " My child, my Avinzo, for such I feel myself entitled to call thee, I am conscious that the period is very near at hand, which, by terminating my heavy calamities, will leave thee a, friendless orphan, exposed to the rude buffets of the tempestuous sea of life ! Tis this thought alone, my Huberto, which ren¬ ders the approach of death appalling to me; 'tis only this contemplation that checks the smile of benignity which would orherwise gild the moment that d 3
surrendered my spirit into the hands of my Creator.—-Now listen, my Avinzo; the great career of life appears before you. I do not caution you from any apprehension of the instability of your virtue, but I tremble as I mentally gaze upon the machinations of those, whose purpose it is to sap the root of virtue m the unguarded and unsuspecting breast of inexperience. Beware, my Huberto í beware, my child ! for caution, is, alas! the only bequest which Sir Alan's wi- djw has to bestow.'* At this period of her address, the Lady Aiacdonald paused ; and drawing forth a tablet which she had ever kept con¬ cealed within lier bosom, and with it a ring, wherein was set a precious jewel, round the rim of which appeared most curiously wrought, the armourial bear¬ ings, crest and motto of the ancient family of the Macdonalds; she first pressetl to her lips this dear relic of her
departed Lord, and then presenting it to Avinzo, commanded him to Avear it when revolving years should stamp him man; after Avhich opening her tablets, she thu^ continued :— "The death of my husband, the brave Sir Alan, my dearest boy, has not, nor ever Avili I am sure, escape thy recollection. Thou art acquainted Avith the glorious cause in Avhich he bled—the cause for Avhich Ave suffer. Oh! my Huberto, if in thy breast should ripen that dear thirst of fame, Avhich even now shines forth in thy yet boyish bosom, do not abandon my dear country's cause, but be the friend of Robert Bruce, our Scotland 'sdarling pride ! and let thy sword be wţelded in endeavouring to overthrow ambitious Edward's tyranny. Receive too, this tablet, my Avinzo, and Avhen I am no more, let thy first step be, on the attain· ment of freedom, to fly this hateful soil and seek the land beloved,Avhich gave me D 4f
birth, and first placed thee under my protection ; there join the noble Robert Bruce, aöd all his brave adherents, amongst whom ranks foremost the youth¬ ful Lord Walter, who, if report speaks true, will be created by King Robert, the Lord High Steward of our land ; into 1iis hands deliver this same tablet, con« tain inii a concise narrative of everv cir- ctimstance attending thy mysterious fate, and which concludes in a manner that will not, my Huberto, tend to thy disadvantage. Annexed to this account is also, under the hand and seal of Sir Alan Macdonald, the bequest to thee of all that land which he could freely dispose of, forming an estate of considerable value, if ever the affairs of Scotland are so arranged as to admit thy claim.*—As to the recital of my woes, I leave the panful task to thee, Avinzo; my loved husband's fate they have, alas! long known and lamented. Tell the young- Lord Walter, that my latest prayer was
offered up for him and thee; for that nobleman, my Huberto, is the offspring of a sister still dear to my recollection, though years are now elapsed since death relentless blasted all her radiant beau». ties, consigning her to an early ¿rave." During this long address,Avhich greatly exhausted the feeble Lady Macdonald, Huberto's eyes remainded unceasingly rivetted on her face, from Avhich the dew of tenderness fell copiously ; his agonized bosom heaved Avith convulsive throbs, and, as if fearful of interrupting her discourse, he scarcely permitted thç breath to escape his trembling lips. As the last sound of the Lady Mac- donalďs voice died upon the ear of Avinzo, he caught her emaciated hand, and pressing it to his lips, Avould have breathed forth the sensations that Avholly engrossed his grateful soul; but the fast flowing tears that streamed from his up- D5
raised eyes prevented him, and broken sobs were the only testimonies he dis¬ played of those agonizing sensations, which had usurped unrivalled sway in his breast. As the dusky hue of twilight, spread its obscuring veil around, the internal fever, which had till that moment aug¬ mented to such a degree as nearly to de¬ prive the Lady Macdonald of reason, subsided almost instantaneously, and a chilİ3 r numbness succeeded ; the certain indication of approaching death. In vain were the fervent ejaculations of' Avinzo, offered up to the Throne of Mercy; in vain did he supplicate the interference of the callous wretch, who kept strict watch without the dungeon door ; the smallest emotion of pity, did not even actuate his hardned soul, for he continued his accustomed march to and
fro the dreary avenue, regardless alike, of sorroAv, sickness and death. In this torpid state, the Lady Mac- donald continued until the near approach of midnight, Avhen suddenly raising her form, she seized with an agonized grasp, the clasped hands of Avinzo, and press¬ ing them to her chill bosom, exclaimed: — " Father of Mercy, recei\ r e my soul, and guard Avith thy all fostering care, this child of innocence and virtue/' Her lips still moved, but utterance was gone ; her eyes, which continued uprais¬ ed, were noAv fixed in death; all pulsa¬ tion was frozen, and lier languid heart with difficulty beatone. —It Avas, indeed, the heavy signal, for at that instant life had fled its earthly tenement for ever. Stretched on the ashy corse of the Lady Macdonald, Huberto remained,
wliolly unconscious of every thing that passed around him, and the rays of morning which once more shot through the lofty grated chasm of the dungeon, still found him in this motionless condi¬ tion, which rhight, indeed, be deemed a state of bliss, since every sublunary idea was then buried in oblivion. On the entrance of tbe jailor with the scanty portion of food allotted the pri¬ soners, tlie lifeless body of the Lady Macdonald was conveyed from the dun¬ geon ; and it was with the utmost diffi¬ culty that Huberto was restored to that state of recollection, which at once placed before his imagination the irreparable loss he had sustained, and the unpro¬ tected situation in which he then found himself.—He wept;—but the gentle dew of commiseration was unavailing; he wrung his hands, and loudly breathed forth hiš heart-felt agony, but no com¬ passionating ear received the tale of woe;
he bent his tearful eyes around in search of that revered form, Avhich still, in death, Avould have afforded some degree of comfort to his affliction, yet naught ap¬ peared but the cold and comfortless flinty Avails of his desolate dungeon· In this distressing state, did Avinzo remain during the Avhole of that day ; when, Avorn at length with the excess of those agonies that oppressed his youthful mind, he stretched his Aveary frame upon the straw and sunk into a heavy sleep, which still presented to his entranced imagination the form of her, Avho, Avhile awake, had occupied his every thought. Huberto, during his sleep, imagined that the person of the Lady Macdonàld stood before him, 'm appearance even more prepossessing than he evçr remem* bered to have beheld it in happier times; with features arrayed with that sweet smile of content and beneficence which,
prior to the loss of Sir Alan Macdonald, they had ever been accustomed to dis¬ play. After having regarded him awhile, Huberto thought that the form thus be¬ spoke him. :— " Remember, my dear boy, that hea¬ ven's decrees are immutable and just, and that death is inevitable; weep not, therefore, my Avinzo, for my loss, it was the will of the Omnipotent which snatch¬ ed me from thee, and thou must yield, 'with due submission, to the behest of fate. Look, therefore, to thyself, my child, nor waste those precious hours in unavailing woe, which cannot be re¬ called, and which are due to God alone." The form then waved, with graceful motion, its outstretched arm, when in¬ stantly the figure of Sir Allan seemed to stand beside that of the Lady Macdonald, gazing with tenderness on the form of Huberto.— At length the visions appear*»
ed to dissolve into air, but Avinzo, still entranced in sleep, awoke not till the return of morning. Huberto rose from his pallet, the fore¬ going dream still dwelling on his glow¬ ing imagination, when actuated by the wholesome lesson it afforded, he knelt down and offered up his grateful orison to the Throne of Mercy. During the day he strove against the painful contemplations which very fre¬ quently obtruded themselves upon his mind, and though, in the first instance, his efforts were apparently ineffectual, perseverance at length wrought the de¬ sired effect, for, when the loss of his be¬ nign patroness and benefactor came to his recollection, the all-puissant will of fate opposed itself, and he instantly bowed with reverence to the decrees of heaven.
As the gloom gradually wore off from Huberto's mind, he imperceptibly began to recur to his own fate, Avhen the first idea that flashed upon his intellect Avas the ardent desire of compassing his lost liberty. Actuated by this sentiment, every other contemplation appeared as insignificant, and vanished from his mind. İt Avas then his youthful soul con¬ jured tip a thousand plans, Avhich, hoAv- e\ r er cautiously he proceeded in their execution, proved, in the end, equally abortive; at length chance, in some measure, accomplished the purpose Avhich he had so long and ardently sought to attain. It so happened, at this particular pe¬ riod, that a great influx of noble Scottish prisoners, taken by the victorious troops of King Edward the First, arrived in London ; so that the dungeons of every prison Avere even more than filled by the unfortunate, yet steady, partizans of the
brave Wallis, then commander of a Very powerful force in Scotland. Ambrose de Landabar, the keeper of the goal that contained Huberto, having been frequently assured by the lady Mac- donald, previous to her dissolution, that the young Avinzo was, by birth, a fo¬ reigner, and by no means interested in the internal broils of Scotland, (which it had always been supposed was the case, he having been taken prisoner with the Lady Macdonald, under a supposition that he was the legitimate son, and con¬ sequently heir to the estates and title of Sir Allan), of the truth of which com¬ munication of L?idy Macdonald, the goaler, from many concurring events, was convinced, this added to the youthful age of Avinzo, and his very prepossessing appearance, at length prompted him to allow a certain portion of freedom to Hu¬ berto ; who, on the arrival of these Scot¬ tish prisoners of note, was at once takea
under the immediate care of Ambrose de Landabar, and the dungeon wherein he had been confined was, in conse¬ quence, allotted to some miserable cap¬ tives, whose rank, and sturdy opposition to the cause of England, demanded their close imprisonment Avinzo, ever anxious to visit that dear- land which might almost be deemed his native soil; and burning, unceasingly, with the desire of avenging the cause of Scotland, and Sir Alan's misfortunes and death ; endeavoured, by every means he could devise, to free himself from the detested confines of the prison; for, although at liberty to traverse ail the dreary courts and avenues of the for* tress, he was, nevertheless, debarred from all egress beyond the circuit of theatre- mendous walls which environed it. Con¬ scious, therefore, that any open endeavour would be impracticable, Huberto, at length, had recourse to stratagem; a
measure repugnant to his soul, but which he conceived, to be justifiable under exist¬ ing circumstances; and in consequence of this determination, by his unremitting assiduities, he strove to endear himself to Ambrose, the keeper of the fortress ; but his endeavours, though attended with success, unfortunately rendered his bondage even more secure ; for the jailor became so habituated to a mode of action, till then a stranger to his mind, that Avinzo was scarcely for a moment permitted to leave his presence ; and even in those painful avocations, which his duty compelled him to fulfil, Huberto was made his constant companion* Thus we find Avinzo, at his birth, an helpless orphan, transported from his parents and his native land ; twice befriended, and then cruelly bereft of both his patrons; afterwards a prisoner, and witness of the miseries and death of her he reverenced as a mother ; and last·
ly, the corniamoti of a remorseless jailor. -—Such were the extraordinary vicis¬ situdes which had checquered the life of this youth, who, after three long year's continuance as the friend of the ob» durate Ambrose de Landabar, had jus-t attained the period of his sixteenth year. Every bright rty of flattering hope that hand gradually dawned upon the soul of Avinzo, as uniformly faded in his bo¬ som, and seemed, at length, to be alto* gethťr extinguished;— his only occupa* tion now was ta commiserate, as much as possible, the sufferings of those, for whom, in secret, his overflowing heart shed the gentle drops of pity. One night, previous to his retiring to rest, according to his wonted custom, he accompanied Ambrose de Landabar as he repaired to the dungeon of each un¬ happy prisoner; being armed, as was
usual. On passing the ceil of one of these unfortunates, the agonized groans of its inhabitant, most peculiarly arrested the attention of Huberto, at whose ar¬ dent intercession the keeper paused, when the voice -of the individual in con¬ finement supplicated* in the most impres¬ sive tone, for a draught of water, to allay the parching heat, which tbe violence of internal fever had kindled through every vein« * Ambrose, unmoved, was ©n the point of advancing along the avenue, when Avinzo again in treat ed; and by his per* suasion led the jailor to unbolt tlte dun¬ geon door, when, on entering by the gleam of the dim lamp, burning on the opposite wall, a figure appeared stretched upon the pavement, and writhing iu apparent agony. Huberto, instantly seizing the arm of Ambrose de Landabar, begged his per^
mission to procure the beverage requirefl by the unfortunate sufferer : with which request having complied with infinite reluctance, Avinzo, bearing the lamp, flew to the chamber which he occupied, adjoining to that of Ambrose, and having filled an horn, instantly returned to ad¬ minister the desired relief; but, on Hu¬ berto's re-entrance into the dungeon, what was his surprise and horror, on be¬ holding the figure of Ambrose de Lan¬ dabar stretched lifeless on the pavement, and the late apparently dying prisoner fled.—On a further examination Avinzo found a reeking dirke beside the corse, and on raising tbe lamp, the grating of the casement which was not lofty, had been broken down, through which it ap¬ peared evident that the prisoner had effected his escape. Huberto now surmised that the groans $f the! prisoner had been merely a pre- trace* ana the lfequest for beverage was
oiily made in the hope that one of the persons visiting the cell might be dis¬ patched to procure it, and that during his absence, by attacking the single re¬ maining keeper unawares, he might ef¬ fect his purpose, which would probably have been impracticable opposed to the combined force of two armed individuals. But this was not the only thought which now obtruded itself on Huberto's mind ; another idea operated still more forcibly on his brain, arising from a full conviction that the murder of Ambrose would be attributed to himself; to re¬ main, therefore, in the prison, under such a supposition, would have been madness» added to which, the hope of freedom, like* a resplendant ray, once mone shed its bright influence over his soul, and Hu¬ berto, without hesitation, following the course of fugitive, soon found himself on the brink of the casement; for a moment * he paused, as the darkness of the night,
by obscuring every object, prevented his perceiving the heighth from whence he had to spring ¿—dauntless at lengtli, he raised his eyes to heaven, and offering up one fervent ejaculation, sprung forth, giving himself at once into the hands of
CHAP. V.
Hou- now, you secret, black, and midnight hags? Whatis't you do? Λ deed without a name, SHAKESPEARE.
ÖTUNNED by the fall, it was some minutes ere Huberto recovered his scat¬ tered senses ; at length however, he arose, free from any material injury, but greatly weakened, owing to the force of the shock he had sustained. Immediate flight became absolutely necessary ; yet, how should he escape from London, sur¬ rounded as it was with walls and watch- turrets ; and thp gates of which were closely barred by night, as well upon its inhabitants, as against the stranger wko claimed admittance.
VOL. I.
τ
Avinzo, yielding to these appalling ideas, which had not before obtruded themselves upon his mind, continued ad¬ vancing for a length of time, equally un¬ conscious of the course he should adopt, as he was an utter stranger to the tract he was then pursuing. While occupied in this contemplation, lie placed his hand to his forehead, when the pressure of the ring, given to him by the Lady Macdonald, brought, instanta¬ neously, to his remembrance, the tablet which he had ever since concealed within his bosom ; and for which he immediately sought, but in vain· Agonized at the loss he had sustained, and wholly unmindful of every danger that was likely to accrue, Avinzo im¬ mediately began to re-trace his steps with the utmost caution; and, after some difficulty, found himself at the base of the turret from whence he had effected his escape. All around was buried in
solemn silence ; and, by the dim gleam, still issuing through the open casement, it appeared most probable that the alami had not yet been given, as the under- keepers of the fortress had not gone their usual midnight round, nor discovered the murdered body of Ambrose dç Landabar. Huberto soiight the tablet for a con¬ siderable time, but in vain ; when, almost despairing of success, he, at length, de¬ scried it ; and, seizing with rapture the much desired relic, he pressed it, with transport, to his lips. Just at that cri¬ tical moment, a strong blaze of light issued from the casement of the tower, and the confused sound of "voices, in a few seconds, gave the alarm. Shortly after, the prison bell began to toll 9 when every guard and inmate of the fortress was instantly in motion. At this trying juncture Huberto's
first thought was immediate flight; but a momentary consideration fully con¬ vinced him, that a place of concealment near the prison, Avould much less subject him to a discovery, as the search would, in all probability, be carried to some dis¬ tance from the walls. Under this assurance, Avinzo stole from the spot he then occupied, Avith the utmost precipitancy ; and after the most minute search, was, at length, for¬ tunate enough to discover a small cavity, Avorn by time, at the base of a projecting buttress of the prison Avail. It Avas with considerable difficulty that lìuberto forc¬ ed his Avay into this opening, which he, hoAvcA r er, effected ; Avhen, almost instanta¬ neously, several parties of the soldiery, issuing from the fortress, appeared in sight, branching off in every direction to pursue the fugitive whose hand had levelled to the earth the person of the keeper, Ambrose de Landabar..
In this horrible state of suspense, Avin¬ zo continued, till the sombre robe of night imperceptibly assumed a greyish tint, and soon the eastern horizon, crown¬ ed with Aurora's radiating front, pro¬ claimed the cheerful return of jocund day. Avinzo, gazing on the welcome light, forgot, in a great measure, the perilous situation in which he was then placed ; nor was he roused from contem¬ plating the blazing chariot of the day, till the guards, returning to the fortress, caught his attention; and as they passed near the place of his concealment, en¬ abled him to distinctly trace the person of the delinquent fugitive, whom they had secured, and were then conducting back in chains, in order that he might shortly suffer the punishment that awaited him, for the murder of his jailor, and the dar¬ ing escape which he had effected. As morning advanced Huberto con¬ ceived it most expedient to quit the spot *:3
which had afforded him a safe asylum, and endeavour, if possible, to escape the precincts of the city:—having first bent around a look of the most scru tinizin % enquiry, and not perceiving any indi¬ vidual near, Avinzo ventured forth, and Avith hasty stride bent his course towards the northern gate. In his way he over¬ took many wOrkmen, some bearing on their shoulders the implements of their trade, Avhile others were loaded Avith heavy planks of massy oak, Avinzo enquired of one of these la' bouring men, Avhose age almost incapa¬ citated him from supporting the heaA-y burthen on his shoulders, whither they were then going ? Upon Avhich interro¬ gatory, the old labouring man informed him, that they, with numerous other workmen, Avere employed in repairing some outAvorks of the city, adjoining to the northern postern, which, through age, Avere in a very mouldering condition.
Touched with the appearance of this venerable old man, whose hairs and bushy beard were silvered over by the hand of time, Huberto insisted on easing him of a portion of the load he carried ; with which desire, the other having re¬ luctantly complied, Avinzo, with this party of labouring men, arrived in safety at the northern extremity of the city of London, where, at the postern, was ranged a guard, which, on their approach, unbarred the gate, and, greeting them in the harsh language of the common herd, gave them free egress from the city; and thus Huberto providentially found himself at liberty ; for had he not escaped by this lucky chance he could not otherwise have effected it, as orders had been issued, the preceding even¬ ing, that no individual should pass the walls of London, without a prior examination by the captain of the guard, as the immense concourse of Scottish prisoners, then captive in the city, ren- e 4
dered such a precaution absolutely ne¬ cessary. Thus Avhat had been solely offered by Huberto, at the instigation of charity, became, unintentionally, the happy source of his deliverance; for stratagem Avould ncA r er have effected that Avhich chance had thus fortunately placed in his power. Having accompanied the labourers to the spot, Avhere they Avere then employ¬ ed, Avinzo quitted them, after first re¬ ceiving the hearty thanks of the old man, and the praises of his fellow Avorkmen, Avho, void of all suspicion, suffered Hu¬ berto to depart. Avinzo finding himself thus freed from all apprehension, as to the search which would, in all probability, be set on foot throughout the interior part of the city, instantly determined on continuing his
course with tlie utmost expedition, keep-. ing himself as much as possible from the eye of observation; he, therefore, im¬ mediately set forward with the greatest celerity, nor even once made a halt, though assailed by the keen pressure of hunger, till the ruddy streaks, crowning the western horizon, proclaimed the set¬ ting of day. Huberto having gained a lowly pea¬ sant's hut, on the skirts of a lofty wood, tapped at the door for admittance, when the hostess of the humble cottage ap¬ peared, of whom Avinzo had no sooner claimed a crust of bread and a draught of water; than with all the frankness of uncontaminated simplicity, the home¬ ly fare of the cottage. was instantly placed upon the board before him. Huberto, while partaking of tlie food, showered down blessings on his, kind hostess, who, together with a sprightly E 5
boy, seemed internally to experience that satisfaction which arises from a conviction of acting towards others as we would have them do in regard to ourselves. Scarcely had Avinzo concluded the repast, which was rendered exquisite by the hunger which had impelled it, when a ruddy peasant youth entered the hovel followed by an elderly labourer, both of them bending beneath the load they supported on their lusty shoulders.— These, Huberto was soon given to under¬ stand, were the husband and eldest son of his hostess, who were no sooner eased of their loads, than both, with rustic sim¬ plicity, and a cordial shake of the hand, welcomed their guest. After some conversation, from the tenor of which Avinzo was under the necessity of informing them that he had journeyed that very day from London, and
was then steering to join the forces of King Edward, on the Scottish borders; the old man first extolled the celeritv Avith which Avinzo had proceeded, and then gave him to understand that he Avas now more than forty miles from the capital; after which the peasant in- treated him to repose in their cottage for that night ; which invitation Huberto having gratefully accepted, his host soon began to lavish praises on the noble feats of arms atchieved by his dauntless Monarch, Edward ;,and concluded with a hearty prayer that he might tame the pride of the rebellious Scotchmen, as he termed them. Although such мш timen ts but ill ac¬ corded with those that actuated the soul of Avinzo, he was, notwithstanding, compelled to yield a tacit compliance to every thing advanced by his host, whom he perceived to be one of those charac¬ ters that would have proved equally inimical to him as he then Avas friendly,
had he but known the real sentiments of Huberto's mind. Ль tlie last misty hue of twilight still spread its grey mantle over every sub¬ lunary object this cottage family retired to rest, Huberto reposing with the pea¬ sant's son, who, in the course of the evening's conversation, had frequently expressed a desire of wielding a sword in his country's cause, would his fond mo¬ ther but give her consent. During the night Avinzo enjoyed an uninterrupted sleep; no dream, fraught with horror, arose to harrass his soul ; and when the shrill-gorge^ cock first tuned his matin note he quitted the rug, and, having partook of the morning's repast, bid his kind friends farewell; v»ho,'having di¬ rected him in the track he should pursue, sent forth a thousand fervent wishes for his success in arms; after which Huberto once more set out upon his adventurous journey.
For six successive days Avinzo con¬ tinued on his march, during which pe¬ riod he was twice benighted, and com¬ pelled to seek repose beneath the shade of some friendly tree, which canopied his weary head ; and towards the close of the seventh evening, having passed the river Tees> beyond Richmond, in Yorkshire, he soon found himself ad¬ vancing into the mazes of a dreary forest, that skirted on everv side the margin of the translucent stream. Huberto having bent around a look of enquiry, sought, hut in vain, for some friendly habitation that might screen him from approaching night, which seemed likely, from the unfavourable ap¬ pearance of the surrounding atmosphere, to prove very tempestuous :—dark sheets of clouds rolling onward from t he south, soon obscured the radiance of evening, and bespoke all the horrors of a tre- niendous storm.
As Huberto advanced, the last tinge of light faded to the eye, the dark ethere- ous blue of tranquil night was compleat- ly overcast, the glittering forms of the stars were obscured, and no friendly moon darted its watery beams on the bosom of nature ; the tempestuous wind soon arose, and forcibly agitated the lofty trees, whistling bleakly through the branches that spread around their umbrageous foliage» Avinzo still advanced, determined to brave the pitiless storm, and should any habitation present itself, request a shelter from the nighťs inclemency. As he proceeded onwards the wind grew still more boisterous, the rain began to fajl, and from afar the rattling thunder spoke to Huberto's ear, in the most tre¬ mendous peals; still no friendly hovel met his regard ; and, in this situation he found himself, having advanced into the most gloomy recesses of the forest, where
the faintest light alone was visible ; when at intervals the tremulous flash of the vivid lightning shot through the dark, still augmenting by its momentary glare, the horrors of every surrounding object. Avinzo torn by the brambles and wearied by the wet lank grass, that con¬ tinually twined about his ancles, im¬ peding his progress, reclined his weary frame against the huge trunk of a loftv and venerable oak, which seemed for a century to have defied the rude as¬ saults of ail the conflicting elements. Huberto had not long assumed this station, when a rustling sound suddenly caught his attention ; whicli as he listen¬ ed, evidently approached towards him, and in a few seconds something halted close beside him. Avinzo, reclining a little, stretched forth his hand, when to his great sur-
prise, he felt a poor half starved dog trembling with cold, and crouching at his feet. After caressing awhile the poor animal, whose bones appeared almost starting from its skin, the dog sprang forward in the action of delight, and wagging its tail, seemed almost, by dumb eloquence, to court Huberto to follow him ; whose first conjecture had been, on beholding the creature, that some habitation must of course be near to which the animal belonged. Swayed by this supposition, Avinzo quitted his resting place, while the dog barking, seemed to express pleasure at every advance he made. Still following his conductor, Huberto traversed through thickets, almost im¬ pénétrable; when suddenly arriving on a broad expanse of plain, he descried at no very great distance the dismantled turrets, of what appeared to have been once a fortified castle of vast extent ;
thither the animal instantlv directed its course, sometimes bounding forwards, and at others, stretching its lanky form upon the grass awaiting his approach. In this manner, Avinzo gained at length the dilapidated entrance of the castle, and passing through the court yard, hall, and other mouldering cham¬ bers, the dog at length made a halt at the commencement of a flight of stone steps, which to all appearance commu¬ nicated with the dungeons beneath this desolate building. Here Huberto paused full of thought, and for a few seconds yielded to the as- sailing impulse of fear ; but conscious in¬ tegrity re-animating his noble breast, he boldly proceeded onward to the flight of steps, on which was seated the dog, his watchful conductor. As Avinzo proceeded, the staircase seemed to wind beneath the pavement of
the chambers he had so lately traversed in a gradual descent. All was in an in¬ stant obscured in the darkness of the grave; a damp chill struck on every side, and the humidity rendered it difficult to descend the mouldering steps : At length, however, Huberto found himself at the bottom of the staircase; when the dog continuing to advance, led him through several avenues and vaulted dungeons, all buried alike in the same appalling darkness. Once more the youth made a halt, not that the impulse of terror unmaned his soul in the present instance; for on the contrary, it was the sober suggestion of reason, which instigated him in the a- doption of such conduct. " In what," said he mentally, " will this strange event terminate ; by the ap¬ pearance of every thing around me, no human being can possibly be the vu-
luntary inhabitant of these lonely ca¬ verns ; the very damps are petrifying to my frame, the air is stagnate and un· wholesome, and the darkness is that of a second chaos. Creatures of good, de· light not in such horrors ; nor would the murderous ruffian ever select a spot for his asylum so truly horrible as the present; yet whence the meagre hound that still is my conductor ? some human being must surely sojourn here ; and should plunder be his trade my poverty will doubtless seal my doom." Huberto for some moments stood ir¬ resolute, doubtful whether to advance, or seek for safety in immediate flight ; but a little consideration convinced him of the fruitlessness of the attempt; for thought he, mentally, " if plunder be the intent, my weary limbs will never bear me from the close pursuit of disap¬ pointed ruffians, and then the Avish to escape consigns me to immediate death."
—" No," continued Avinzo, aloud;— *' Fate marshals me into the lists, and I must follow its behest; into the hands of Omnipotence, therefore, I Avillingly re¬ sign my cause ; God never forsakes the true dependent on his Justice and Mercy." Having concluded this ejaculation, Avinzo moved forward Avith dauntless step and heroic mind, the animal still leading onward, Avhen after passing other vaults, he suddenty entered one^more lofty and spacious than any he had be¬ fore traA^ersed, Avhere by the sickly glim¬ mer of a blue flame, two forms appeared in the distance, towards whom the dog immediately proceeded, sending forth a loud yell, that shrilly echoed through the various subterraneous passages. As Huberto approached the extraordi¬ nary forms before him, a- chilling horror numbed his frame, he felt the Avarm
blood fly with precipitancy to his heart, and every joint became palsied with as¬ sailing terrors; for on advancing within a few paces, two hags appeared before him, more loathsome and ugly than ima¬ gination ever pictured to the mind, each with glaring and sunken eyes bent upon his person. Twined within the hair of each, which was lank, coarse, and of a raven black, was the shrivelled carcase of a poisonous adder; their visages were long, thin, loathsome and cadaverous, from each of which protruded a nose, skinny and pointed at the extremity ; their mouths from which projected sharp teeth, Avere hideously Avide ; their lips Avere thin and black, Avhile the grizzly hairs that grew around, produced the appear¬ ance of a masculine beard. Their breasts were totally bared and of a tawney hue, being but a loose shrivelled covering to their projecting bone*. Their arms Avere
uncovered, and their fingers peculiarly long, each nail of which was black and pointed like an eagle's talon. Around the loins of each was a filthy jagged covering, leaving from the knees down¬ ward, quite bare: their legs were but crooked bones, thinly covered, and their feet grimed and skinny. In the hand of the one was the branch of an vew, the other grasped a deadly cypress bough ; the seat of each hag, was a mound of dead men's bones. Between the persons of these appalling objects rose a pyramid of grinning sculls, on the summit of which was placed a brazen cauldron, from whence issued a blue lambent flame, which, cast¬ ing a sickly gleam in every direction, added still more to the surrounding horrors ; while the pavement was strewed with the reeking carcases and limbs of newly mangled reptiles, and others nailed
against the Avails, were in a state of pu¬ trefaction, exhaling the most nauseous stench. Huberto, as if spell-bound, remained gazing on this horrible spectacle; for although he Avas desirous of averting his regard, still his eyes were immutably fixed upon the dreadful scene before him, At length one of the hags turning her regard from Avinzo, and fixing her eyes upon the opposite form, exclaimed— " Sister, what should all this be, Tongs he unto thee or me ?" To Avhich interrogatory the other form replied— * ť Sister, in whatever state, He*s the child of mystic fate; Still oppredd with gulling wrong», Nor to thee nor me belongs; Some that smile the chance sh;dl rue,— Sister, then a deed he'll do!''
After which the first hag continued;— " The rudders lost, The vessel's tost, Upon the raging main ; Nighťs dark and drear, No pilot near;— Rude blasts and chilling rain." The second figure then replied,— " Parents lost and land ne'er known, Friends whom worms have left alone, Murder stalks, the dying groan, Blood drops sweat from yonder stone, í see, I see, I see." When the first hag continued thu* her mystic words ;— u Now on a sun-beam rides renown, Kow I behold dame Fortune frown, Findest blasts assail the crown, The course is run, All seems undone ; Yet mark the cauldron's ruddy hue, Still act on act is left to do. 17
Upon which the second form hastily replied-— w Aye, now die work is cross*d, And murder nipt i'the frost; The owls and ravens cease, All nature seems at peace." tfť Mum," quoth the first hag, angrily, " Hecate looks grimly» therefore sister *' Hold—nor further now explore, Mortal cars must hear no more." Every syllable of tliose mystic lines were firmly impressed upon the attentive ear of the astonished Avinzo, who, after continuing to regard these loathsome hags, for some moments assumed at length a degree of fortitude, which had been hitherto apparently banished from his breast ; and, still advancing forward some paces, he thus bespoke them :—► " Appalled I stand, nor know I whe¬ ther to address ye as creatures of this vol. r. F
earth, or beings of another region; still will I dare question ye, since something of the past and future seems committed to your keeping ; not that I desire a knowledge beyond the period past: I only seek to know the mysterious fate of those who gave me being; 'he fate of him who bore me from my native soil, and left me in a foreign land with full assurance of return, but hath not since been heard of.-—If by this interrogatory I am free from sin, then, I conjure ye, speak ; if not, keep, I charge ye, the mys¬ tery from mine ear, for tlie immutable decrees of Heaven must be obeyed." To whom the first sister thus re¬ plied ;— " Would'st thou nourish that within thy breast, which would not fail to torture thee with scorpion stings ?" " No sting could inflict on me such
galling pangs as dread uncertainty," an¬ swered Huberto with firmness ; " there¬ fore, if ye may, solve me at once the doubt that M r eighs upon my harrassed soul ;—live yet the authors of my wretch¬ ed life ? and lives Alzarro, guardian of my infant age?—Speak, I implore ye." cc It may not be," answered the second hag, with a slow shake of the head* " Then wherefore was I hither brought," continued Avinzo, " to be the witness of this terrific scene? Why speak of me with such mysterious emphasis? Why torture thus a helpless creature, aug¬ menting still more the burthen of wretchedness that almost bends the wan¬ dering sufferer to the earth?—In mercy answer me this İ" " We must not satisfy your doubt* ings," exclaimed both the sisters. f 2
" Stand I then the object of your de* rision ?" resumed Avindo. " Not so," was the immediate reply. " Then wherefore Avas I so strangely conducted into your presence ?" " To be the object of our wonder and secret contemplations ;" resumed the second sister. " What m there in a fugitive like me that should excite surprise in creatures who seem to contemplate the mazes of futurity, and to be gifted with more than mortal skill?—Satisfy me on this ground," said Avinzo, with firmness. *' Mystery, strange mystery ;" answer¬ ed both the hags· " In what does it consist?" resumed Huberto.
u In lineaments that indicate por¬ ten teous things, and manifest, at once, that ii idden destiny extends its arm, be¬ friending you by its mighty power, from the unsearchable behests of adverse fortune." Can ye satisfy my doubtings?" was still Avinzo's interrogatory, <ť We can, but we are forbidden ; an higher i>ower controuls our speech, therefore ask not Avhy or wherefore." iť Would ye aught more with me?'* continued Huberto. kí Be silent," was the reply. The two haes then arose from their horrid seats, and, after looking Avith a searching glance into the cauldron, mut¬ tered awhile some mystic words ; after which they slowly advanced towards F 3
Avinzo, who shrunk enhorrored at their approach. Having placed themselves on ¿he right and left side of Huberto, each of the forms raising its hand took a small ringlet of his flowing hair; from which, (still muttering inexplicable words) having each separated seven hairs, the sisters plucked them from his head ; and, after forming a circle round him with their crutches, they again ad¬ vanced to the cauldron, wherein they cast these small portions of Avinzo's hair, when immediately the flame subsided ; a loud yell was instantaneously heard, and Hu¬ berto found himself surrounded by the darkness of the grave. After continuing far some minutes lost in amazement, Avinzo began to think of retracing his way to the stair¬ case, when the recollection of the little dog, his former conductor, ob¬ truded itself upon his mind, and he listened with the utmost attention in the
fond h®pe of catching the sound of the animaľs approach, but all was silent as the drear sepulchre of death; when Huberto, turnim» in that direction by which he had entered the vault, began slowly to re¬ trace his way, and at length, with some difficulty, found himself at the bottom of the flight of stone steps; having as¬ cended these, he soon regained the upper chambers, which having traversed, he arrived in safety at the mouldering arched-way of this decayed structure, beneath the vaulted roofing of which, Avinzo having seated himself on a loose fragment of the building, gave way to that train of mental contemplations which would naturally arise in the sen¬ sati ve soul, after witnessing the late ex¬ traordinary scene so well calculated to work upon the imagination, and lead the mind into a labyrinth of conjectures, as inexplicable in themselves as the ob¬ jects were terrific who had given rise to them. f 4
CHAP. VI.
*Our fare is scant, but hospitality Reigns sovVeign of our feats. And though we lack The bodies dainty food, we still have store To fit the soul for that long journey hence, Which all must take on this side of the grave. A HE rude winds no longer waved in fury the foliage of the surrounding forest; the awful thunder no more re¬ sounded through the aegions of air, nor did the blaze of forked lightnings mark their fiery track upon the ebon mantle of night, the pattering rain liad altogether subsided, and sober Melan¬ choly held her pensive sway, the watry moon jusi darting forth its partiai lustre ирои the silent scene around. Huberto, tlioughtfully reclining his cheek upon his hand, beheld, with a miu-
gled emotion of sadness and delight, this tranquil sleep of nature, which so finely contrasted itself with the raging fury of the elements that had marked tiie close of evening, as well as the late ter¬ rific scene which he had witnessed. The present objects gradually com¬ municated their effects to the mind of Huberto; for, as it is with the tempests of the atmosphere, even so it is with the human passions in the bosom of the virtuous ; which, raging for an instant, spend themselves imperceptibly, and are then succeeded by the most perfect calm. The soul, unsliacklcd by the trammels of corrosive vice, is left at liberty to roam even amid those realms where the Great rather of beneficence dwells, be¬ yond the weak ken of human sight.—It is at such moments that the spotless bosom glories iu its own independence ; for, that individual must, indeed, expe- f5
rience the vilest bondage, whose unvary¬ ing rule has been the constant commis¬ sion of acts repugnant to the con¬ science. At the present juncture the rapt soul of Avinzo winged its way to heavenly regions ; for, never debased by vice, his unpolluted soul experienced no check, and his unfettered contemplations, there¬ fore, tended only to impress his mind with love and veneration towards that Being, who, seated on the throne of justice and everlasting peace, watched the acceptable workings of his breast. " Father of the universe !" exclaimed the entranced Avinzo, at the same time bending his knee to the earth, "my awe¬ struck soul owns thee for its omniscient guardian, and swells with warmest grati¬ tude for thy beneficent protection,—How shall I find language to give vent to the
effusions of my heart, to speak the rap¬ ture now kindling in my breast—Words are inefficient to the purposed prayer; my lips but half explain the thoughts that actuate my mind, Avhich OAves its being even to Omnipotence; for Avhat is the soul but a glorious emanation of the Divinity ? it is the immutable stamp set upon man, and seals him the belo\ed of heaA'en. For this most precious gift Avhat is the remuneration required, but virtue from those possessing it, and vir¬ tue must itself ensure eternal felicity.'* " What an idea of boundless mercy dues not this contemplation produce," con¬ tinued Huberto; " what an incitement is it to the frequent adoration it so justly claims of him who so beneficently dif¬ fuses it to all.—Did man but dwell upon this extatic thought, sin would sure grow out of date, and the Avhole Avorld enjoy a blessed tranquillity; then would the murderer pour healing balm into the
wound his knife had made ; then would compunction unnerve the dark machina¬ tions of revenge; hatred would yield to universal philanthropy, and man would live but for his brother man." Vice is destructive in a three-fold de¬ gree ; it destroys felicity here, contami¬ nates the mind, by whose operation hap* piness might have been ensured, and places us in the most perilous situation when we contemplate the mazes of futu¬ rity. May such never prove my lot on casting the eye of retrospection on past events; but may I await the hour of dissolution, devoid of every dread, вале only that sentiment of reverential awe which should always animate the soul, when occupied in the contemplation of rushing into the presence of him who is the sonile of justice and immutable truth. Huberto continued to indulge in this
mental train of ideas till eA r ery thought of the past Avas buried in oblivion, and naught but pure devotion animated his breast. At length sweet sleep diffused its benign influence over his harrassed senses; Avhen, folding himself in the loose mantle suspended from his shoulders, he found upon his flinty couch that sweet repose Avhich vice and pampered luxury seeks for but in vain, under the rich canopy, on the luxurious bed of down* As Huberto awoke, the ruddy hue of morning tinged the wide expanse of the eastern horizon; and every harmless songster, from his mossy bed, gave Avel- come, with swelling note, to the reful¬ gent beams of day. Avinzo quitting the place of his re¬ pose, cheerfully bent his steps from the castle's mouldering Avails, and soon en¬ tering again the confines of the Avood, found himself proceeding through its embowering mazes.
After having tarversed a considerable track of land, his gaze was at length at¬ tracted by tlie appearance of several foresters, who were occupied in felling to earth some venerable trees of the forest. Huberto advancing towards them, first made enquiry as to the course he was then pursuing, of which he was wholly ignorant, when he found by their an¬ swers that he had journeyed in a direct course towards Aldstone, and was then about seventy miles from tlie banks of the river Tweed. Having further re¬ quested to know whether any habitation was near, he was answered in the nega¬ tive, as the village to which these pea¬ sants belonged was upwards of four miles distant, and in a course diametri¬ cally opposite to that which it was re¬ quisite Avinvo should pursue. These labouring men, however, proffered him a part of the coarse fare which they had
brought with them to the forest that morning, Avhercof Huberto gratefully partook, and then returning them his un feigned thanks, he once more com- menced his journey. Avinzo for some time continued his march through the wood, Avhich at length terminated, when he found him¬ self verging on a wide expanse of Cham¬ paign country. In the distance to the riirht arose the misty spires of Durham cathedral, tinged by the effulgent beam of day ; to the left were seen the moated walls of a Baro¬ nial castle, skirted in the back ц round by the sombre foliage of tlxe forest whence Avinzo had just issued ; and in the front the expansive scene Avas variegated Avith hamlets and straggling villages, Avhile at some distance Avas perceptible the fretted spires of a monastic pile, Avhithcr Huberto had been directed by the
foresters to direct his course on quitting tlie wood. Avinzo proceeded onward with the utmost celeritv, and, at the close of dav, v' 1 v made a halt before the portal of tbe sanctified mansion, which was inhabited by several brothers of the order oť Holy Cross. At this place, Huberto having gained admission, was cordially welcomed by the reverend community, and by tlie charitable rules of their order, found at night the wished-for rug, whereon he gladjy stretched his exhausted frame. By the information of the brotherhootl he understood, that he had traversed nearly forty tedious miles, since the dawn, with¬ out any other sustenance than that which he had received from the labourera in the forest. On the ensuing morning, Huberto ris¬ ing from his pallet, repaired to the chapel to witness tlie celebration of mass ; after Inch the lathers led him to the refec-
tory, where he partook, with them, of a plenteous repast; in the course of which, he requested to know the present situa¬ tion of Edward's forces, which they in¬ formed him were spread in every direc¬ tion on the borders of Scotland, but more particularly on the line communicating with the county of Northumberland: as the main body of the army was then in the vicinity of Berwick-upon-Tweed. This knowledge instantlv determined Huberto on proceeding to the border that joined the county of Cumberland; as he might be the better able to pene¬ trate into Scotland by that route, aud thereby escape the observation of the English forces. Avinzo having been loaded by the good fraternity with provisions to keep him on Ins route, as they imagined that he was journeying to the army of Edward, and having abo received the
benison of the'superior-of the monastery, he took his departure as if directly for Berwick-upon-Tweed, according to the instructions given him by the fatli ers; but, shortly after quitting the convent gate Aviuzo turned again to the left, striking* off in the direction of Long- town, which adjoins the extremity of the county of Cumberland, and com¬ municates with Scotia's wished-for land. During the day Huberto continued liïs journey onwards, without the least interruption ; and, as the twilight once more shrouded eveiunir/s ruddy horizon, he distinctly heard, in the distance, the sound of martial music, some¬ times bursting* full upon the ear, and at others dying away in softest cadence, when the strain harmoniously floated on the still breezes of returning night Avinzo now paused, as it was obvious, fi >m this circumstance, that he was
at no great distance from the Eng¬ lish troops, Avho Avere then setting the evening watch previous to their encamp¬ ments for the night. The utmost caution now became ab¬ solutely expedient on Avinzo's part, and he wavered for a length of time, not knowing whether to venture on, aided by the darkness of the midnight hour, or remain concealed till the return of morning, and thence endeavour to effect a passage under an assumed frankness of manners, without having any apparent design in thus travelling the borders. Yet, to pass altogether unobserved, in the day time, avouUI be, he was fully as¬ sured, utterly impossible; and if then taken what plausible story could be framed to prevent his immediate imprisonment, or else being compelled to serve under Eng¬ lish Edward, against the cause of Scotland. On the other hand night did not only cloak him from immediate observation,
but, the watch being then few in number, and placed at stated distances from each other, undoubtedly afforded him a better opportunity of compassing his design. Swayed by this reasonable suggestion, Avinzo made towards an adjoining thicket, under whose obscuring boughs he anxiously awaited tlie dreary hour of inidnighr.
СНЛР. VII.
^—.---------------------- -And hark ! The hum of either army stilly souud , That the iix'd sentinels almost recebe Tlie secret whisper» of each other's watch; Steed threatens steed in high and boastful ncighings, Piercing the night*» duli ear. Hark î from the tents, The armourers accomplishing the Knights, With clink of hammers, closing rivets up, Give dreadful note of preparation. SHAKESPEARE. JJURING Huberto's continuance in the sequestered asylum he had chosen, his contemplative mind retraced, with astonishment, the wonderful vicissitudes of his eventful life. Every incident had been strongly characterized by the won¬ der-working hand of fate ; they were not to be ranked among the number of those common events which are the at¬ tendants of the generality of mankind ;
on the contrary, every page was stamped Avith something strikingly energetic, that seemed at once to single him out as the child of strange vicissitude. Avinzo having refreshed himself with the remaining food and beverage, Avhi'rh had been given him on quitting the con¬ vent, he disencumbered himself of the gourd and the leathern pouch that had contained them ; after which, con¬ cealing the ring and tablets (the last mournful bequest of the Lad y Macdonald ) Avithin his girdle, he braced it tightly round his loins, and, armed only Avith a sturdy oaken stick, Avhich he had ga¬ thered at the commencement of his journey, quitted the place of conceal¬ ment, and boldly bent his march toAvards the borders. The night, though perfectly serene, Avas almost obscured in darkness, Avhich
seemed to favour, in a great measure, the operations of the fugitive; who, after advancing some time, was enabled to discern, immediately iu fro.it of him, the numerous tents of the English soldier}". Turning towards the left he continued in their rear for a considerable time, when they became gradually more scat¬ tered over the plain, and were obviously detached from each other. Huberto halted, and, for a moment, his ears caught a distant sound, pro¬ ceeding from the encampment : he listened—It was the watch word «iven by the officer on posting every hardy soldier ; but soon again the silence reign¬ ed, when Avinzo ventured forward, and, passing on, escaped the line occupied by the encampment, without being observed or receiving the smallest interruption in his progress. Already, did he conceive himself free from apprehension; already
his heart beat with pleasurable emotion at the fond idea of treading Scotia's long wished-for soil ; when, on a sudden, a shrill cry broke on the reigning still¬ ness of the night, and, in a few seconds, a numerous band of soldiery poured in from every quarter; the clangor of the trumpet resounded upon the stilly breeze, and immediately Huberto found him¬ self a captive ; fully conscious oŕhis in¬ ability to withstand a force so dispro¬ portionate, he readily surrendered him¬ self into the hand of the surrounding English, a detachment of whom imme¬ diately escorted him from the spot, and conducting him back by the same route he had come, they struck into the thickest part of the camp, where they de¬ tained him for some minutes at the en¬ trance of a sumptuous tent, and then led him before the commander, whose duty it was that night to head the watch- guard in that quarter of the camp.
As Huberto approached, his mind as* s umed a greater degree of fortitude, and, on beholding his judge, he could not repel the pleasing emotion which invo¬ luntarily assailed him; for, on examining his features, from the appearance of which he scarcely seemed to have at¬ tained his one and twentieth year, not only manly beauty, but candour, gentle¬ ness, and philanthropy were happily conjoined. This youthful officer, whose habiili- amen ts bespoke him to be some gentle¬ man of note, having observed Huberto, for some time, with infinite complacency, at length addressed him to the following effect, in tlie most gentle accents :— " Speak, stranger, who and what ait thou r' 4 " My name is Huberto Avinzo, and Vol. i. g
my estate in life is that of a forlorn and dejected Avanderer," Avas the reply. " From your name it should appear that you arc no native of these isles r'' resumed the interrogator, " Sir 'twas in Italia," answered Avin¬ zo, " that I first dreAv my vital breath." " What chance first led you to the English camp r" resumed the officer. " I sought to pass the borders, and gain, in safety, the territory of Scot¬ land," answered Avinzo, " If thou art a forlorn wanderer/" said the officer, " how will Scotia prove more grateful to thee than the land thou journey est from ?" " There are ties/ 5 replied Avinzo, f£ which rivet our ideas everi to things
inanimate: it was Scotland which first received my infant form, when a forlorn outcast from my native home. I cannot, therefore, do other than reverence the land that fostered me." ** Who were thy parents ?'* said the questioner. " I know them not," resumed Huberto, with a sigh ; after which he proceeded to give, in a concise manner, the myste¬ rious relation of his being brought to Scotland, and Aizarro's departure from thence, while he was still an infant ; he also explained the generous guardiai ıslı ίρ of Sir Alan Macdonald, and proceeded to relate the death of that stout Scottish gentleman, and the Lady Macdonald, to which he attributed all the misfortunes his youth had since experienced ; and then, without giving a detail of his escape from London, he concluded by stating, that lie had recommendations to g й
the 3'oung Lord Walter, and the Laird Douglas, by Avhich he might be enabled to visit, once again, his native shore, could he but pass in safety the Scottish borders." On mentioning the name of Laird Douglas, the strongest emotions Avere perceptible in the young officer's features, and he continued so absorbed in thought that it Avas some moments ere he made the least reply to Huberto's confession; at length, bending his gaze upon Avinzo, he bespoke him to the following effect :—- " Young stranger, your air, your manner, and your words bear so much the characteristic stamp of integrity that I cannot for a moment, resist their per¬ suasive energy. Therefore, know young man, that I accord you a free pass to the land of England's most inveterate foes, for never shall it be said, that a Briton can wage Avar against the unfortunate and
defenceless wanderer." The officer then rising from his seat i\rcw forth some marks of gold from beneath his robe, which were by his order, instantly pre¬ sented to Huberto; and having atao armed him with a trusty sword, he gave orders for his immediate conduct through the English camp. Fain would Avinzo have warmly testi¬ fied the gratitude that swayed his soul upon this occasion, but the young officer perceiving his intention smiled on him with the utmost complacency, and by an inclination of the head waved him to retire; upon which Huberto was instant» ly conducted, by the guards, from his presence. As Avinzo proceeded on his way to the Scottish borders, he put some trivial questions to his conductors, and, among the rest, demanded the name of the young officer who had so signally be· о в
friended him ; when after hearing the warmest panegyrics bestowed upon him jy the guards, both for his valour, ge¬ nerosity and goodness of heart, Huberto learned that his name was Edwin, a'ud that he was the only son of the noble Earl of Hereford ; to this account was also added the assurance, that so strict were the orders of King Edward, rela¬ tive to strangers passing through the English camp, that had not good for* tune befriended him, he must have been made a close prisoner; as any other officer but Edwin would have ordered him into confinement, without even allowing him to make known the cause of his journey¬ ing thither. The guards having conducted Huberto for some time through the encampments, at length acquainted him that he was then advancing on Scottish ground, and was at liberty to proceed forward in awy di¬ rection; after which the soldiery bad
him farewell, wishing him a happy ter¬ mination to his journey. No sooner had Avinzo's conductors retired, than he enthusiastically pro¬ strated himself on the earth, and press¬ ing with his lips the soil he had so long and ardently desired to see, he breathed forth that prayer of gratitude to Omni¬ potence for his preservation, which ever swells the enraptured bosom of piety and virtue. Having concluded this spontaneous effusion of bis soul, he arose wholly unmindful of the constant fatigue, both mental and bodily, which he had for some days undergone ; and as tlie prisoner when freed from the dun¬ geon's gloom, thinks not that his safety is assured till far removed from those de¬ tested Avails, which so late entombed him ; even so it was with Huberto, who having long pictured the attainment of happiness in Scotland only, fled with precipitancy, the confines of that terri- G 4
tory, which had been to him, for so many tedious years, a hateful scene of bondage and unremitting sorrow. The soul oppressed with many poig¬ nant griefs is far more galling to the suf¬ ferer, than the ponderous load heaped on the robust shoulders of contentment ; the one like a slow but subtle poison, rankles through every vein, corrupts the warm stream of lire, and consequently checks the refined evnenations of the soul ; on the contrary, the other wearies only the corporeal being, and by the simple and efficient aid of renovating sleep, acquires again its wonted elasti¬ city. Such proved the case with Avinzo, who long had struggled with an accu¬ mulation of opposing calamities surii- cient in themselves, to bend the youth¬ ful sufferer to the ground ; but now the oppression being removed, every action
seemed to acquire redoubled energy, which resembled more the peculiar in¬ terposition of heaven, than the conse¬ quent operations of the human mind. By the return of ruddy Aurora, who •--------- TtearM her purple crest, And tiptoe stood, shaking hor golden hair, Eager to visit the busy йоПч oť men;— Avinzo found himself removed to a considerable distance from the English encampment. But the surrounding coun¬ try displayed a miserable picture of the horrid devastations, which are the con¬ sequent attendants on a state of war¬ fare. In every direction where the roving eye bent its gaze, were to be seen the cottages of the unhappy peasantry, who had fled for safety into the interior of the country; some were stripped to the bare walls, whilst others had been wantonly G 5
razed to the ground, or consumed by the devouring flames, during the fre¬ quent inscursions of the English soldiery. In vain did Huberto turn his regard around, not a human creature was to be seen, and with this desolate prospect sur¬ rounding him, he proceeded on his journey till after the mid-day hour, when he arrived at a few straggling ha¬ bitations, some of which were still oc¬ cupied by the aged or defenceless fe¬ males; whose husbands, sons, or bro¬ thers, had voluntarily enlisted themselves under the banners of King Robert Bruce, to repel the invading army. Huberto instantly proclaimed aloud, the sentiments of love he bore to the rights and liberties of Scotland ; upon which he was cordially welcomed by the suffering inhabitants, and treated with the warmest affection.
After partaking of the proffered viands which were placed before him, and there reposing till the hour of curfew, he bade fare wel to those homely peasants bendino* his course in that direction о which would ultimately lead him to the main body of the Scottish army. In the course of the ni «'lit Huberto •io tight tlie necessary repose beneath tlie shady covert of a friendly oak, and during the succeeding day, still con¬ tinued on his march with unabating* alaci ity ; and with such promptitude did he advance on his journey, that ere the e venino; of the fourth dav. from its com- mencement, he descried, in the distance, the extended line of encampment which was occupied by the adherents of the noble King Robert Bruce. It was at this moment that the soul of Avinzo might first he said to have felt that ardent and glowing emenation which
characterises the breast of true heroism ; it was then he grasped with a noble enthu¬ siasm, the Aveapon Avhich graced his sitie, and unsheathing its glittering blade, he reared it to heaven, exclaiming aloud :·— " God of justice ! whom I revere, if to befriend the cause of the oppressed and hurl destruction on the oppressor's head, be acceptable in thy sight ; if to enlist beneath the bannere of persecuted in¬ nocence, can insure the impenetrable armour of thy all-fostering protection, receive then the efforts ofthat being, who will struggle in the cause of an oppressed people, yielding to the superior force of a lawless ruffian band, Avho seek to dis¬ unite the tender bond of brotherly amity, and barter the dear liberty of Scotia and her hardy sons, for the most despicable bondage. Inspire me, great God of Arms Avith thy determined valour ; let me amid the battle's raging fury, still rush on to scenes of glorious danger ; give to
my breast the hunted tigers fury, and nerve my arm with the lion's resistless strength ; so shall I act with courage in the field, and gain that honour I aspire to emulate ; for then my approving con¬ science will avow, that I have indelibly stamped myself the friend of virtue, in¬ nocence and truth 1" Having ended this fervent ejaculation, Huberto again advanced, and as tlie golden gleam of evening tinged the wide circle of the western heaven, he arrived in safety at the out-post of the Scottish army; when having been conducted, by his desire, before the officer then on duty, he demanded of him to be imme¬ diately led to that part of the en¬ campment, where the Lord Walter had command, which request.was instantly complied with, when it was known that Huberto had journeyed from the English camp ; as it was supposed, that he had tidings of importance to communicate,
which would prove serviceable to the Scottish cause* Avinzo being conducted through the camp, Avith an escort, was informed by the captain, that the youthful Lord Walter, hail some time since been created Lord High Steward of Scotland, by King Robert Bruce. On their arrival at the tent, Huberto, after a few moments attendance, was ushered into the pre¬ sence of the Lord Waiter, who Avas· seated in the lent, Avith several other noblemen of the Scottish army. Avinzo's business being demanded, he instantly produced the tablet be¬ queathed to him by the deceased lady Macdonald, together with the ring of the stout Sir Alan. As the Lord Walter perused the contents of the scroll, vari¬ ous emotions displayed themselves by each change in the linéaments of his pre¬ possessing countenance; for he could not
but remember the sufferings of the de¬ ceased Sir Alan, and the untimely death of her, M'ho was sister to that being, who, in giving him life, had forfeited her own. At the conclusion of the manuscript, the Lord Walter wiped away the tears· that bedewed his uianlv countenance, and, after some conversation with the surrounding officers, in a low tone of voice, he bade Avinzo to be beated, before whom provisions were instantly placed ; of which having partaken, lie was requested to relate every thing cir¬ cumstantially, which had the smallest reference to the deceased Sir Alan ami his lady, and also the manner in which his escape from the custody of the Eng¬ lish had been effected ; with which re¬ quests Huberto complied, by giving a full narrative of every extraordinary event that had befallen him, from' Sir Alan's death, to his then arrival at the Scottish camp.
The tale of Avinzo was frequently in¬ terrupted by the involuntary exclama¬ tions of his astonished auditors, Avho, upon its conclusion, were found to consist of the persons of King Robert Bruce, together with his brother Sir Ed¬ ward ; Randolph, Earl of Murray, and the Lord Douglas ; л\1ю very frequently expressed his inveterate hatred to the English, in language the most contemp¬ tuous and defying. At the termination of Huberto's storv, in the course of Avhich his firm attach¬ ment to the rightful cause of King Ro¬ bert Bruce had been sufficiently ex¬ plained, he was immediately taken inte* high favour by the Monarch, Avho as¬ signed him a post of honour near his per¬ son; he was also invested with the Scot¬ tish raiments, as a mark of peculiar fa¬ vour conferred upon a foreigner. For a length a time Avinzo's deter-
THE iMON'K. Ì37 mined valour became so eminently con¬ spicuous, that it was the general theme of conversation throughout the Scottish army ; in every skirmish he came oft* vic¬ tor; he Avas adored by the soldiery, whose greatest pride consisted in follow¬ ing him to the field of battle ; he be¬ came every day more distinguished by the Scottish Monarch, and was alike the bosom friend of the Lords Walter and Douglas. Thus did Huberto, from the ab¬ ject condition of a dejected and friendless wanderer, suddenly attain to the highest state of preferment, enjoying the good opinion of the King aud bis confidential friends. The Monarch esteemed him for his fidelity. Laird Douglas loved him for his dauntless courage and determined hatred to the English, while tbe youth¬ ful Lord Walter, as susceptible of feeling as he was fearless in the hour of iminent danger, gradually imbibed the most rooted friendship towards Avinzo^
w ho soon became his bosom friend, and the partner of his every pleasure, his every disquietude. Thus did the radiating sun of for¬ tune beam full upon the fate of Hu¬ berto ; no transient cloud appeared to tarnish the bright ray that seemed to gild his every prospect in life. Tate seemed to have exhausted its malice, and to stamp Avinzo at once the child of fortune and of fame, till at the fatal battle of Methven, which seemed to blight the prospects of the noble Robert Bruce, he once more became with his adored Monarch and chosen adherents, a wretched outcast, an unfortunate wan* derer, and with them an inmate of the gloomy Monastery of St. Columba.
СНЛР. VIII.
When confidence is lost, farewell to peace, For then suspicion clouds the noble mind ; Nor can the force of conscious wrtue steel And ann the soul against its subtle poner. It will unnerve tlie stoutest heart, and chao© From canrlour*s open front the sinile serene Of sweet placidity.
IJ У dawn of day Huberto was awakened by the lugubre sound of the chapel bell, which summoned the fraternity of St. Columba to celebrate the matin service. He instantly quitted !ш rug, and on descending to the comfortless chamber wherein tbcy had taken their repast the preceding night, he found the King and his nobles already assembled there. As as no monk oť the convent was then presen^ they were all occupied in deep
conversation; and on Avinzo's entrance, he was immediately informed that King Kobcrt had positively determined that eat h of his companions, as well as him¬ self, should assume a fictitious appella¬ tion. This second injunction of the Mo¬ narch, and which was construed by his friends to be the effect of caution, had its source in a circumstance which still more potently actuated him : for dur¬ ing the preceding night his broken slumbers had been constantly assailed by visions the most portentous and appalling, and which, though not positively definable, seemed, notwith¬ standing, to bear a strong allusion to the monastery, wherein they had sought refuge, and of the inmates of which, from his horrid dreams, he was most pointedly cautioned to beware. As the soul of King Robert Bruce,
liad been superior on every occasion to the superstitious ideas, which so frequently tend to unnerve the mind of true he¬ roism, the phantasms of his wanderi ng imagination, must indeed have wrought powerfully on his soul to have led him even for a moment, to lend an attentive ear to these fictions of the brain, which did not only prompt him to this cautious mode of procedure, but also diffused a degree of melancholy, over his general demeanour that instantly became ap¬ parent to his observant friends, whose attachment to their leader, prompted them to share in a certain degree, the melancholy they observed in their King. Having each of them fixed upon his respective title, the monarch assumed that of Sir Alexander, of Roxborough, and the appellation of Avinzo was changed to that of Sir Edred Macarden; the other fugitives having equally dis¬ guised their real appellations, the cham*
ber vas shoitly after entered by oue öf the monks who came to escort them to the chapel, in order that they might hear the celebration of mass. The Monarch and his trusty fiiends РЛюм cd the father in silence, who con¬ ti uctení them through several apart¬ ments, afid after making the circuit of the cloisters, he led them to a lofty Go¬ thic arched way, through which having passed, they ascended a flight of steps, at tlie summit whereof appeared, the inteiior of the magnificent chapel of Saint Columbas convent, which they immediately entered by one of the side portals. After traversing the spacious aisle and passing the lofty pillars which supported the fret-worked roofing, they advanced up to the grand altar by the Nave, which aflbuled К ng Robert Lruce and his friends, an opportunity of contemplating
lhe beauty of this sanctified structure, as well as the regularity with whicli the Abbot and fraternity arranged them¬ selves around the choir, where every thing like pomp and ceremony was apparent to enchain tbe mind as well as to rivet the eve of the adm ¡rim»; and awe-struck gazer. To the right of the magnificent altaron an elevated chair, which resembled more a gaudy throne, than a monkish seat, re¬ clined the person of the Abbot ; before whom stood two lively boys in scarlet robes, waving to and fro large massive silver censors, that diffused the most odoriferous perfumes : beside the supe¬ rior of the monastery, stííod erect the tall forbidding form of his chosen friend, John of Dunbar. The numerous stalls меге each occupied by a brother of tlie order, who seemed to have acquired this preferment, by his long and tried adher¬ ence to the rules of the community of
Saint ScorTrid, as the countenance of each of these fathers bore the marks of extreme age, mingled with a look of austerity and sullen reserve. >> At the foot of each stall on the cold pavement, knelt three monks abreast, in the act of telling their beads with down- east eyes, and the semblance of humi¬ lity. On the flight of steps leading to the altar were ranged numerous youths ar* rayed in white flowing vestments, each bearing frankincense, and forming a kind of avenue down the middle of the choir to the large brass portals that sepa¬ rated it from the rest of the church. Around two silver stands representing eagles with expanded wings, and on which were placed several large missels, stood numerous chaunters, forming the tenor part of the harmony, while in their
their rear, with arms crossed upon their breasts, appeared the monks, who sung in turn the baser parts of the service. Upon the altar stood the blessed cruci¬ fix of purest virgin gold ; and on either side blazed double rows of lofty tapers casting a dazzling gleam upon the en¬ shrined relicks that decorated the holy table. From the unaccountable reception the fugitives had experienced the preceding night, each was alike anxious to behold the Abbot of the monastery; and in consequence of this reciprocal desire, the eyes of each noble were instinctively fix¬ ed upon the form of the superior Gon¬ dez ; yet, in whatsoever inauspicious light their fancies had been led to pic¬ ture him, the reality exceeded even their ideas; for in the person of the Ab¬ bot, every trait combined at once to vot. г. н
enhorror the gaze of the beholders, and inspire them with mistrust His person, which was arrayed in the sumptuous embroidered trappings with which he was invested from his ele¬ vated station, became, from this circum¬ stance, even more conspicuously repug¬ nant, ač his stature was considerably be¬ low the common standard, and his air diametrically opposite to every motion which characterized dignity and ele¬ gance of deportment. Vet, notwith¬ standing this insignificance of stature, his features were strikingly prominent, and marked with every line that pour- trays internal craft, malice, cruelty and revenge. His small piercing eyes emit- ing a look of malign enquiry, were bent, by turns on each of the nobles, but fixed at length on the person of the Monarch himself the lineaments of whose manly visage he proceeded to scan with the most determined effronté-
ry ; his nose, though short, was pecu¬ liarly acquiline, and gave to his general appearance an air of ferocity, which was in a great measure heightened by the ca¬ daverous complexion of his countenance and the falling in of his cheeks, added to which, his mouth was hideously wide, round the falling extremities of which forever seemed to play the smile of min¬ gled deceit and ineffable contempt His chin was -thickly covered with a beard short and bushy, the dye of which coin¬ cided well with the red complexion of the hair which surrounded that portion of his head, which by the rules of the or¬ der of Saint Columba, he was constant¬ ly obliged to keep closely shaven. In short, every feature of the Abbot Gon¬ dez, seemed alone framed to harrow up the soul of the observer, and present to the contemplative mind some dreadful picture, replete with sin and horror· This forbidding figure was of course h ä
little calculated to give a favourable turn to the train of thoughts which engrossed the mind of the Monarch, whose faithful adherents, as if conversant with the in¬ most workings of his soul, turned upon the countenance of King Robert Bruce, their enquiring looks, to dive, if possible, into the cogitations of his brain. While engaged in this silent contemplation the solemn ceremony commenced, when the holy strain swept in full cadence through the high vaulted avenues of the building, and at the termination of this pathetic exordium, the Abbot Gondez rising from his seat, with a constrained air of dignity, advanced slowly to the steps of the holy table, before which, af¬ ter bending his knee, and crossing him¬ self, he ascended the steps of the altar and began the celebration of the mass, during which, the choral sound some¬ times issuing from the lips of the youth¬ ful performers, breathed with pathetic sweetness on the stilly breeze, and at
others joined by the baser notes of the father's, formed a full swell of the most rapturous harmony. Huberto whose soul was now occupied only with the emotion of reverence to the Supreme Author of his existence, which the solemnity of the surrounding scene inspired, was really unconscious of every object that presented itself, ami consequents paid no attention to the fixed regard of an emaciated fa¬ ther, who knelt at the entrance of the stall near which he had placed himself, till a deep and heavy sigli from this ob¬ servant monk at length aroused him; when turning his regard, he instantly felt a thrilling emotion pervade his whole frame, in contemplating the per¬ son of the prostrate figure beside him. The person of the father on whom Huberto rivetted his eyes, was from his general appearance stricken in years ; a h 3
few white hairs yet silvered his head, and a flowing beard of snowy tint fell in graceful waves upon his breast. His stature was tall but wasted, and his features displayed that irresista¬ ble something, which although inex¬ pressible, never fails to rivet the atten¬ tion, and forcibly act upon the gener¬ ous and sympathetic soul of virtue. It was altogether that species of figure and physiognomy, which seemed to in¬ dicate, not only the oppressive weight of bodily infirmity, which is the consequent attendant of old age, but the more poig¬ nant suffering which arises from a rooted malady of the mind. On observing that Avinzo's gaze was intently fixed upon his features, the monk immediately averted from him his regard, while Huberto, prompted by an irresistable impulse, still continued the scrutinising perusal of the fathers pa-
thetic and impressive countenance, dur¬ ing which, the monk frequently bent a momentary glance upon Avinzo, but as instantaneously averted from him his eyes, on perceiving that he himself still -continued to be the object of the youtlťs enquiring attention. Thus occupied, Huberto suffered for a time that devotion to subside, which was due to heaven alone, and with which his entranced soul had been so recently inspired : but the divine enthusiasm again revived, and he continued his orisons with the same unaffected arden¬ cy till the termination of the matin ser¬ vice, when his eyes once more met in contact with those of the monk, who from his embarrassed manner on this occasion, had been to all appearance occupied for a length of time in the con¬ templation of his features. The fathers arose and sung together u 4
the concluding anthem, and then with slow and measured* steps quitted the chapel, forming a procession, in the midst of which passed on the Abbot Gondez, immediately followed by his adopted friend John of Dunbar, Avhile the youthful choristers, still joining their melting tones, brought up the rear, singing in solemn chorus. Beside the Scottish Monarch and Ы$ friends, still continued the lay father, who had previously conducted them in¬ to the chapel ; an irresistable impulse ac¬ tuated the mind of Huberto at the pre¬ cise moment Avhen the monk passed him who had so peculiarly arrested his at¬ tention during the celebration of the service ; and turning to the father who attended them, he requested to be made acquainted with the name ofthat monk ; to which the lay friar replied Avith some reluctance* acquainting Huberto that his name was father Anthony, adding,
with a look of malign contempt— " And he is the outcast of the whole frater¬ nity." Avinzo felt indignant at the friar's conclusive observation; the blood for an instant tinged his open countenance, and he measured with a disdamful eye the person of the communicant ; he was on the pornt of making a replication to the father» which would have been at¬ tended with all the acrimony of Avinzo's soul; but fortunately, prudence with her steady hand checked him in this pas¬ sionate career, and he therefore content¬ ed himself with indicating by his *оок$, the full force of his feelings, which foiled not in their effects upon the mind of the monk ; who abashed, immediately with¬ drew his regard, and bending his scowl¬ ing eyes to earth, felt in the bitterness of his soul, both rage and hatred, to¬ wards the object who had so reproved his meanness and malignity. Hå
The procession having passed into the cloisters, the lay father descended the steps of the choir, and in silence led the Monarch and his friends into the mo¬ nastery, Avho Avere shortly after ushered into a large anti-room, adjoining to the refectory, Avhere the monks Avere already seated, in order to partake of the morn¬ ing's repast. Into this chamber was shortly after brought the provision for the strangers, of Avhich King Robert Bruce, and his friends partook in silence, being restrained from conversing by the constant attend¬ ance of some one of the fraternity, who appeared to present themselves only as spies upon the Avoids and actions of their guests. After having concluded this comfort¬ less meal, just as they were on the point of rising from the board, in order to consider in private Avhat Avere the mea-
sures most expedient to be adopted at this most critical juncture, they were suddenly frustrated in their intention by the entrance of the monk John of Dunbar, who immediately advancing to King Robert Bruce, desired that he would accompany him to the chamber of the Abbot; with this request the Monarch silently acquiesced, and with a slight inclination of the head, in¬ stantly followed the steps of the father, while the mind of each friend of the King, experienced an unaccountable de¬ jection, at this address of the monk being so particularly made to the King him¬ self, when there was nothing in his ge¬ neral appearance to authorize this pointed conduct towards him. While his friends were individually oc¬ cupied with the conjectures which thisidca gave birth to, the noble Sovereign of Scot¬ land, was conducted through numerous chambers, and damp cold avenues, by the
monk John of Dunbar ; who at length halted at a door-way, when sounding a small brass bell, a voice from within bade him enter, upon which the portal was thrown open and the Monarch in¬ stantly found himself in the presence of the Superior, Gondez. The Abbot was seated directly oppo¬ site the entrance of the chamber, on a cushion of crimson velvet, while his right elbow rested on the arm of the chair, with his cheek reclined upon his hand and his eyes stedfastly fixed on the form before him. Having thus eyed the King for some seconds, the Superior at length, very abruptly, broke silence, by putting the following interrogatory to the ex¬ pectant Monarch : 11 What is thy name?"
—" Iam a knight, and Sir Alexander of Roxborough, is my name ;" replied the King sternly. " If I mistake not, yourself and com¬ panions here Avere defeated by King Ed- Avard at Methven fight, Avere ye not ?" continued the Abbot, Avith a look that would fain have read the inmost workings of King Robert's soul/ ,ť We Avere, most reverend Sir," answer¬ ed the King. " And to Oranza's Isle, ye steered for safety and concealment, is it not so ?*' re¬ sumed the Superior. " We did most holy father ;" Avas the reply· "Then have ye done Avrong," inter¬ rupted the Abbot, Avith extreme acri¬ mony, his countenance assuming at the
same moment a hellish scowl, which after a few seconds, gradually changed to a grin of malignant contempt, when he proceeded in his harangue, as follows :— " Where could have been the love, duty, respect, and loyalty which was due to the magnanimous and renowned King Robert Bruce, that thus ye aban¬ doned him iu the hour of necessity ? Where was vour love to the rights of Scotland, and its persecuted clans ? If such be a specimen of your loyalty, Scotland may shortly own King Edward for its lord ; and its wretched inhabitants groan beneath the English yoke. I fc therefore tell ye, Sir Knight, 'twere better ye had sought some other than Oronza's Isle, to shelter your renegade persons» Think vou that we convert our house of sanctity, into the vile receptacle of fugi¬ tive and disloyal knights. The very thought alone harrows up my soul, it sa* vo urs so of profaneness.
The Abbot Avould have still proceeded in his harangue, but the indignant Mo¬ narch, stung to the A 7 ery soul at this flagrant and unjust rebuke, reiterated Avith vehemence, " Dislo}'al and rene¬ gades ! that ever I should live to hear such an accusation, and from a mortal tongue.—Sir Abbot, learn to understand us better; Ave scorn your taunt, being no renegades, but men of tried integrity ; men of loyalty and soldiers, that have stoutly fought it inch by inch, against the cursed oppression of the English Chief." " Where is your King ?" interrupted the Superioi, in a dissonant tone of voice, rendered inarticulate by rage ; and partly rising from his seat while vivid light¬ nings seemed to dart from his magiig- nant eyes. To which interrogation the Monarch, Avith a calm air of dignity which had in it something almost super¬ natural, and which he had, at that mo-
ment assumed, in opposition to the splenetic rage of the Monk, thus re¬ plied :— " The King; Sir Abbot y is under the protection of the Most High ; and we his loyal followers, encouraged by a bright emanation of that all-fostering power, contemn alike the taunt unme¬ rited, as we have incan testi bly proved that we defy the shafts of death, in sup¬ port of him, whose rightful claims to Scotland's crown, we have espoused." The Monarch, after a pause of some few seconds, with his eye stedfastly fixed upon the Superior's features, and assuming a look of conscious self- superiority, mingled with ineffable con¬ tempt, thus continued :— " Unbar your portals, most reverend Sir, we ask not the covert of your mo¬ nastery's roof; let us go forth and meet
the warring of conflicting elements ; for, what were the bolted thunder or the lightning's blast, with deluging torrents poured from the surcharged clouds upon our heads, when put in competition with the contumely you have undeservedly heaped upon us." As the Monarch spoke, the features of the Abbot gradually re laxedthek sternness, assuming a constrained air of placidity, and, rising from his chair at the conclusion of the King's reply, he slowly advanced towards the Monarch, when, first streching forth hia right hand, he proceeded to bestow upon him a benediction ; after which he thus bespoke him :— " Yourself, Sir Knight, and each of your gallant comrades, I greet with fatherly cordiality ; for now, indeed, I know ye to be men of valour and tried loyalty; cancel, therefore, from this.
moment, I conjure you, the assumed anger which was so lately manifest in me ; fór trust me, Sir Knight, I did it but to solve the mystery of your presence here, and now I know ye well for what ve are." King Robert Bruce bowed his head in silence as the Abbot pronounced these conciliatory words, which were, however, delivered with such a peculiar em¬ phasis as rather tended to augment than cancel the mistrust he harboured respect¬ ing the character and secret intentions of the Superior, Gondez, who again spoke .to the following effect :— " I conjure you be as our brothers here; command,and ye shall be obeyed in every thing this monastery can afford ye; and when the forces of King Robert Bruce shall once more rally round his unfurled banner, and make head against the invading Edward's arms; then, Sir
Knight, ye shall have safe escort hence, with fatherly counsel, and our holy benediction." - The Superior having thus expressed himself, King Robert, in a laconic re¬ ply, returned thanks conjointly for him¬ self and his friends, for the profferred good wishes of the Abbot Gondez, and then retired from the Superior's presence, leaving the Abbot with his confidential friend, John of Dunbar, to ruminate on the manners of the Scottish King ; who felt himself secure under the assumed title of Sir Alexander of Roxborough. As the Monarch slowly retraced his steps, the train of his ideas led him to form several conclusions by no means favourable to the Abbot, or gratifying to the generous soul of the Scottish King. ť< No,'* said he, internally, " it was
but the assumed air of affability practised to entrap me into some intended snare ; but I will not be lulled by specious friendship into self-security, nor pass away my hours within these Avails in conscious surety. No, for on my soul hypocrisy lurked beneath those transient smiles, and I must, therefore, ward in secret against the worst that may befall me. Circumspection becomes absolutely essential, and I am compelled to counter¬ act his deceit, by wearing myself the de¬ tested mask of hypocrisy ; or else to escape these wails, will, I fear, prove utterly impracticable.—Yet, why detain us?—What purpose can it answer? un¬ less, indeed, my proper rank be known, and treason is at work :"—The Monarch started at the supposition ; and, agonized with the conflicting thoughts it had awakened in his breast, rejoined in me¬ ditating his expectant friends, who felt eased of a burthen that had individually oppressed them since their Monarch's departure
King Robert Bruce immediately re- rired with his trusty adherents into the cloisters of the monastery, where, free from all observation, he recapitulated the context of the late discourse which had taken place between himself and the Abbot Gondez.—The information much suprised his attentive auditors, who be¬ came impressed with the same ideas as the King himself had been, immediately after his interview with the Superior. Having requested that they would severally deliver their opinions on the subject, each made known the apprehen¬ sion that arose in his mind, so precisely accordant with thoseof the Sovereign, and concluded by advising that some endea¬ vours should be speedily made to escape the island of Oronza, wherein the person of the beloved Robert Bruce, did not appear to them to be secure from the secret machination of the Abbot and his creatures.
The King then desired that each of his friends would keep a watchful eye upon the inmates of the convent, but more especially on any proceedings which they might notice in the monk John of Dunbar ; he next particulary requested that they would appear as little as possible to confer together; and the Monarch concluded by stating, that the better to mask any intentions they might have, it would be judicious in them to remain separated as much as possible. In this request of the King's they all cheerfully acquiesced, when the conversa¬ tion broke up, and they severally strolled through different avenues of the building, except the Scottish Monarch, and his brother Sir Edward Bruce, who continued for some time occupied in interesting conversation, relative to the then situa¬ tion of the kingdom, and the plans that should be adopted to procure the neces¬ sary information relati ve to the assembling
of his adherents, and the fixing on some point where they might once more rally in order to try the hazardous chance of wan Having come to a détermination on many very material points, they parted ; and following the plan adopted by their friends, severally bent their lonely steps through the chambers or garden of tbe convent.
CHAP. IX.
«----------------------------- Ifit be so, Let grandams tales be chronicled as true, For none will dare dispute them. What sophistry is this, that would unman My'loyalty unto the best of Kings, Write traitor on my heart, and make my soul The fawning bondsman of my perfidy ? Deceiver hence j thy labour is but vain; I soar above thy paltry artifice. w. и. I»
AVINZO, during the morning bent his thoughtful steps through the wind¬ ing avenues of the garden, луЫсп were completely environed on every side with lofty walls; yet, although the serenity of the day rendered the air peculiarly inviting, still not a monk appeared to enjoy the calm scene which procreative nature displayedon every side; frequently would the form of father Anthony obtrude
itself upon Huberto's creative fancy, and as often diti he wish for that father's pre¬ sence Avho, he had led himself to believe, was the only sincere votary at the shrine of Saint Columba. How strange, thought Avinzo, that any set of indivi¬ duals should yield to this state of mis- anthrophy ; as if the expansive page of the universe, the system of Avorlds, and the knowledge of these, of themselves, and of their maker, Avas not preferable to the cogitations of the gloomy cell. Why does man boast the possession of a mind, when he every day voluntarily neglects its cultivation; instead of arro¬ gating to himself any peculiar benefit· that might arise írom thence, he ratner strives to render himself ridiculous by making boast of that which he rarely car¬ ries into execution. Our continued prac¬ tice is the arraignment of Providence for evils of our OAvn creating, and Avhich too vol. ι. ι
frequently arises trom the neglect of our intellectual endowments. No pursuit, continued Avinzo, can possibly afford satisfaction, which has not its source in the mind; and per¬ fectly to enjoy monastic seclusion, the mind must be at ease, which very rarely is the case ; as the soul of those avIio are termed religion's votaries, are, generally speaking, either sAvayed by ambition, bigotry, or selfish desires ; and, in such cases, the mind is warped, and its free¬ dom bartered for the most disgraceful. pursuits. In this train of ideas did Avinzo spend the hours, sincerely hoping to meet the monk Anthony ; but the morning passed on without presenting to his eyes that reverend father. During the evening Huberto bent his wandering steps through the interor of
the monastery, when he became asto¬ nished at its extent; sometimes he tra- vesed lofty chambers, \vhich communi¬ cated with others of the same magnitude; and at other times he entered long corri¬ dors, from whence branched off a mul¬ tiplicity of rooms, most of Avhich were wholly unoccupied ; at length he found himself in that chamber Avhich was appropriated for the reception of the numerous charters, deeds, and manu¬ scripts belonging to the convent. Here Huberto paused, and, after look¬ ing at several parchment rolls and an¬ cient emblazoned folios, the beauty of which greatly interested him, he was just on the point of retiring from the chamber, when, almost obscured by the collected dust that covered it, a vellum roll caught his attention, which avus suspended by a tarnished chain of gold, Avithin a narrow dark niche in the Aval I of the chamber. i <¿
Prompted by curiosity, Huberto un¬ hooked the manuscript, which proved, upon inspection, to be poetical, and very curiously emblazoned down the margin, while at the top appeared a very extra¬ ordinary illumination, the subject of which consisted of two figures, the one bearing the appearance of a most hideous demon, and the other that of an af¬ frighted old woman, in a red mantle, who, struggling with the fiend, seemed anxiously endeavouring to disengage herself from its forked talons. This unaccountable drawing aroused Avinzo's curiosity, who, in consequence, determined on the immediate perusal of the poem ; having, therefore, cleansed the manuscript from its dust, and seated himself near the lofty casement, through which the declining sun darted with peculiar lustre, he bent his eyes upon the inscription, which appeared in large characters at the head of the poem, and ran as follows :—
LEGEND OF 1HE LITTLE RED WOMAN, WRITTEN BY THE MONK INGUL.PHUS, AT THE Instigation ofthat Holy Father and Ghostly Confessor, GERONIMO, Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Columba, in the bland of Oronza; Wheiteii) was displayed this Bloody Tragedy, in the Year óf Grace 1152»
PART TIIE FIRST. THE little Old Woman, was cioathed in red, Ou a three-legged stool she sat ; She mutterM, and something this old woman said ; She mumbled, and mumbled, and thrice sliook her heai^ Aud look'd on her ugly black cut. 13
This Little Rpd Woman, was gvim to heliokl, Älore ugly, than sin in a rage ; Her face was ail wrinkled, for she was quite old, İler skin hung about her, in many a fold ; Full ninety and nine was her age. Tlie meagre black çat, had a ravenous eye, The ribs through tlie skin did appear ; And piercing and strange was this animal's cry, As it squatted, the little red woman hard by; The like, mortal never did hear. From under lier cloak this old woman then drew Her hand, that was skinny and brown ; And blood did the old woman's fingers bedew, T For hellish the «teeds were this beldam would do, Aud terribly grim was her frown. Her hand the p .Ле head of a dead infant horo, 1 hic . bl»od from the neck clotted fell; Twas the head uf a Lube, which at midnight she tore. Fruii; щ 1 1 hre, dreary, slie lovM 'oj explore; Her soul she liad given to hell. And now from tbe sockets sac tqre forth the eyes, And gíTľ'd on the damp livid skin; And dreadful it then was ю hear the cat's cries, Till the old woman threw it, the half devouiM prize She ate, yet was ugly aiid thiu.
Thi· Little Red Woman suck'd infants* pure blood, And, living, she'd steal them away; Hearts, livers, and eyes, was this old woman's food, And those she lov'd best, which had " long'd to the good:'' The devil she thu& did obey. But now came the time that her bond did expire, Which, with her own blood, she had sign'd ; The Little Red Woman still felt some desire To live free from torments, and helľs parching fire, And dread now 'gan seize on her mind. To pray was in vain, for her God she denied, To convent she mudi fear'd to go, For Jesu, this Little Red Woman defied ; And Mary the Virgin, all Christian souľs pride .- Now what must this old woman do? She thought, and she thought, while her cat ey*d her well, The old woman felt much affright; For Vinegar Tom could her inmost thoughts tell, Though cat to the eye, 'twas a foul fiend of hell That watch'd her, by day and by night. From her three-legged stool the Red Woman uprose, The cat trotted on at her side ; Twas evening, and forth to the lone wood she goes, Aud oft on the black cat a side glance she throws And curses what late was her pride» 14
That night, and next day, was the old beldam free, The after-midnight sealed her fate ; For aged one hundred this woman would be, And such the agreement was sign'd on her knee, 'Fore Beelzebub, seated in state. And now Saint Columbas rich turrets appear, The convent was grand to behold ; But the nearer she саше encreas T d was her fear, Her eyes the Red Woman scarce dar'd to uprear^ Her terrors encreased seven-fold. And now to the lofty old gate-way she came, When, lo ! there she halted awhile; As when ague fit seizes, so trembled her frame. She felt all the terrors of guilt and of shame; So feel they whom guilt do defile. The little tted Woman knock 'd once, but in vaiti ; lit r 4.HIİ **;an wit!» horror tf» 'ţuuke : lier heart if ihrohbM quirk, bur ниш hot washer bruin, The blow î>!»e repeated »sum, and again; The loft) arch'ti portal did shake. At U-njith came a fat he r, he peep'd through the «rate, *' W lut wouM'iSt thou old woman," quod her ■*» Г pry t he**, good fatiier, str tight open the uate, ľd *.pcak vití» the abbor, for hard is my iaiv.' Y» ut hölj superior i 41 sec."
And now tiie monk open'd the portal full wide; She, tremblingly, entered therein ; The meagre black cat still kept close at her eide, And into the covent thus quickly did glide, AVhich ne'er had contain'd so much sin, " And wilt thou conduct me? n the old woman said ; " And wilt thou striiight lead me the way;" u Oh! yes, little woman, all cioathed in red, So light thro* the charniers thy footsteps thou'lt tread, Thy wibhes anon I'll obey.'* .So soft thro* the porter's small chamber they creep, And there in an old elbow chair, A father was laying absorbM in sound sleep; Sometimes he suo r*d sonorous, ami sometimes full deep; Ile fett neither sorrow or care. They traverse die cloisters, they traverse the hall, And \глч$ thro' the chambers frill high? And there many monks rested 'gainst the cold wall, Jľor sleep did the senses of each man enthrall ; ľ.v:h monk snor'd aloud, " Lullaby." *3rD OF 'ΠΙΕ FIRST Ι'ΛΡ,Ι,-
ï 5
LEGEND OP THE LITTLE RED WOMAN. M m9 ß ι PART THE SECOND. AND now they arriv'd at the good Abbot's cell; The Father knock'd once at the ring; l'hcn thrice pulľd tlie cimili of tlie little brass bell» The clapper thrice beat, and thrice sounded the knell, Quod the Abbot " what new s da'si thou bring Γ * Tis I, Falber Jerome,* tbe porter then said, ·« An «Id жотяш Jam wtm'å come m f Quoth tb? Abbot " my foul seks witb terror and dread, Say, is mit tbe penitent cioathed in red? And wrinkled and swarthy ber »kin r* Quod Jerome, '* good Abbot, « saint yeti must be The truth, without seeing tuteli; For red is the mantle es tow äs hťr knee, And red it her kittle» and ugly is ibr; ï never saw »ortalf© fisti,*
" Go hence, trusty Jerome," the Abbot then cried, u This sinner III straightway confess ;*' The porter obey'd, while the r«d woman tried To banish her terrors, but this was denied, She felt not her horrors the less. And now the old Abbot his chamber pac'd rounds He stalked it about and about; Hie arras they were folded, his eyes bent to ground, And something he mutte/d, but faint was the sound; The old woman naught could make out. Anon to the door did the Abbot advance, He op*d it, and în man h'd the dame; She first ey*d the fatlier, and then fook'd askance, Beside her siili Vinegar Torø met her glance; She trembled with terror and shame. The Abbot then sat himself down in his chair ; " Approach now, old woman/' said lie ; ** Come, kneel down beside roe, confess ali yottr care, Tour cruelty, witchcraft» each sin straight declare; Your soul is in åteaå jeopardy." The Hed Woman trembled, «ltd faultered awhile, ' At length she began ι > impart, flow often sweet babies »he used to beguile, How every commandment of Gud ibe'd defile, How $aun was lord of ber heart.
The Abbot look^i grimly, the sinner turti'd white» The father bent cm her lıîs eye; She trembled, and pal»ied, s&c shrunk from his sight, Each glance every hope of her soul seem'd to blight, And toid her that fate cast the dye. u Aud must I not pray, Father Abbot r n »he ьан!, To .It 4t and blessed Marie? No, no," cried the Abbot, thrice shaking Ыь head, *· 'ľisí, little woman, must pray in your btend, J or u^ekbís thy praying %*outd be/* Anon íoíľd the cui Éew, and then drew in uiftht, (^uod the Datne " pmà Sir Abbut I pni) ; í ih, speak ! should I not tell tht beads in your *»jght, M\ >ouî İh aH horror, Гт palsied with fright f ** Хо prayer,'* ípiod the Monk, ** niav y«u >u)." Now loudly And ¡»lowly the convint bel! beat ì "* Tıs deven, u the oíd woman cr*ed ; For urørt» Sir Abbot, pray ou I entrt-iit, That so î mı%v Satan'» fri! purpose defeat;" Siili closer she enpt tu his ?*di. Now &Ы <m die miuutc* by w*e t two, and tlvee î Tltey bX€Ú on fey »x, MW», rød eight; Пл Hid W«man ţi^abied, UU к iá cm a tree» While nt'art^· ûœ drew u* tk? old Abbots k$m* 9 For greatly sbc 4гсадЫ ber fete.
The quarter, the half hour, the three-quarter's toll, The mom< nt's glide bwiftly an ay; No longer the Abbot her tongue cou'd eontrrml; Mìe fried, *' merry, Jesu, redeem by lo*>t soul» Or foid fiend» will snatch it away.** And now the bell sends forth a loud bra/en knell; It tolľd four tiracfi, one, two, and three ; It wam'd the- red dame that 4w*ws midnight м> feJ^ The hoar when her vile ыш\ was scntcne'd to hell; ·* Oh! mercy, bir Abbot Г fţuod&be. Oh ï yes, I'll have mert y í" the Abbot replied, As quickly he sprang from the seat ; "'Пюи fain wouhfìst haie strove thy dre«ul Lord to deride, And -htm thine own patron, but thi* was denied; I knew and pretentat the cheat." *' Ves, beldame, no longer my power yoıı'lf defy, Your msvH f now stands in ymt bight ; Twa-» I cİKiniHİ the monk», awl they ътп-\1 lullaby ; A fiend «-я·» thy porter, the devil am I, I*r» pare lur tiur regions oť night, 'J1r>€ word*· starce were ended, wlw r> down <|r«>ppMit the etiwl, Tlw» vedimeli** ?ttl vanitimi nwav, And Vincer Ton* nctit а Ы4к'№4» biwl, And sträubt »a» traïHtormVI to a fiend фш and foul, Frt píür*d hi* dread lord %q «b^y.
Slow faded tlie form, which the devil had ta'en, When, Io î in its stead did appear, The figure of Satan, with long tail and mane, Sharp claws were his hands, to inflict hellish pain, And slowly his form læ 'gan rear. His colour was black, and his eyes globes of fire, His mouťn sent forth sulphur and smoke; His teeth red hot spikes, grinning ghastly and dire, His stature was high as the convent's rich spire, like thunder his voice, when he spoke. His middle a girdle of snakes did entwine, From whose jaws ran brimstone and blood ; Red blotches, like meteors upon him did shine, Each foot had sharp claws to the number of шие, Wherewith he oft tortured the good. Then forth from his girdle the parchment he drew, He raised it, and cried " prythee see ! Here's the bond stain'd with blood, the àeed sign'd you;" The Ked Woman screecli'd, for the signet she knew, u So come, little woman with me.'' She screamed, and she ran, but the devil so fell I lis claw stuck within her crook'd back; He rais'd her, he whirľd her, and then with a yell Vlung'd down, fathoms deep, in the regions of hell; She's tortur'd with scorpions and rack.
And now being ended the devil's dire charm, Each monk from his trance did arise; They felt nought of terror, they knew nought of harm, But sung midnight vespers quite free from alarm ; 'Tis thus with the good and the wise. Thus ended the old woman cioathed in red ; Again on her stool she ne'er sat ; Nor mumbled her cuises, nor shook lier bald head, For since on her entrails the demon hatlı fed, That once was her ugly black cat.
Know, pious reader, that once in every year the tortured spirit of the Little Red Woman revisits Oronza's monastery, at thehourofmidninght; and, yelling, flies around the cloisters from the pursuing fiend; Good Christians ! pray for her souľs repose.
Thus terminated the terrifying legend of the Little red woman, which so com¬ pletely entranced the mind of Avinzo, that he paid no attention to any thing that occurred in the chamber; and in this state of mental astonishment, did lie continue till the movement of some¬ thing near him aroused his attention : \\ hen elevating his regard from off the manuscript a\ hereon his eyes had been intently fixed, he beheld before him the tall and forbidding form of the Monk John of Dunbar; a mysterious gloom clouded his prominent features, his dark e} T es rolled, emitting an ex¬ pression fraught with horror, and his arms partly enshrouded in the folds of his drapery, Avere crossed upon his breast. Huberto gazed upon the Monk, but his look did not tend to abash the fa¬ ther, who still continued to contem¬ plate the features of Avinzo's, Avho, at length arose, and winding up the parch«
ment scroll, proceeded to replace it in the niche from whence he had taken it. Huberto, Avithout noticing the father, Avas upon the point of quitting the chamber, but the deep toned voice of the monk suddenly arrested him in his course, and thus bespoke him :— "Young man, thy solitary steps haA*e led thee into that part of the monastery, Avhich is sacred to its votaries alone. Thy curiosity calls forth a rebuke, since in this chamber, are deposited those do¬ cuments Avhich concern our rules and ordinances, many of Avhich, it Avere a sacrilege for temporal eyes to inspect."' Huberto Avith becoming diffidence, re¬ plied. " If I have offended reverend Sir, I crave your pardon for the error; as my steps were hitherward bent, Avithout the smallest intention of prying into those documents to Avhich you allude;
neither have I aught perused, save the contents of that vellum scroll, whereon you must have observed me occupied on your entrance into the chamber." The monk after a pause of some mo¬ ments, replied:— "'Tis enough, I admit of the excuse; but let this, I charge you, be the last intrusion here/* "I shall remember the injunction," answered Avinzo, who, with an incli¬ nation of the head, was passing the form of the father, when, on a sudden, he found his arm seized by the monk, who thus bespoke him. " I would confer with thee, young man, for there is something so prepossess¬ ing in thy person and manners that prompts me to befriend thy inexperien¬ ced years with my good wishes, and fatherly council." " I own the obligation thus conferred
upon me/' answered Avinzo, in a tone of reserve. " Thy youthful age" resumed the father," is but ill calculated to meet the rude assaults of war. Has religion no charm to rivet thy souľs attachment? Has the contemplation of certain happi¬ ness in the world to come, no talisman to wean thee from temporal affairs, ami make thee live for heaven alone ?" " I reverence the Deity, and the religious code which must insure that happiness, which you contemplate," re¬ turned Avinzo ; " but fate has called me into active life, and it is therefore incumbent on me as rigidly to fulfil my avocations, as it is your pride to act up to the duties of Christianity." " Thou hast befriended the cause of King Robert Bruce," answered the monk, and he is now become an outcast with¬ out a hope of retrieve; where is then
thy loyalty ? what avails thy individual efforts, in a struggle where ill fate has already cast the die ?" As the monk thus expressed himself, he bent on Avinzo a glance accompanied with a sneer, on alluding to the misfortunes of King Robert Bruce ; the action was not unob¬ served by Huberto, whose indignant soul spurned the base suggestions of the father; though the voice of pru¬ dence happily expanded her influence over his breast, and he consequently replied:— " The necessity to which the Monarch is reduced, wheresoever he may be, к in itself a sufficient reason for me to remain true to my integrity, and the cause I have espoused." ** Suppose," interrupted John 'of Dun¬ bar, " that high preferment were given thee in the church, would it not com¬ pensate for thy relinquishment of that
cause where all thy endeavours are unat¬ tended with success ?" " Never," answered Avinzo hastily; <ť the whole world combined, should not lead me to swerve from the interests of the unfortunate King, or induce me to act in any way unbecoming of that line of conduct which it has hitherto been my pride to adopt." The features of John of Dunbar, assumed a dissatisfied air as Avinzo concluded the last sentence ; he bent for a time a scowling look upon his person, but Huberto bowing, bade the father farewell. The monk again folded his arms across, and averting his gaze to earth, proceeded with thoughtful steps to pace the chamber, while Avinzo, hap¬ py to be released from <\ conversation so truly disgusting to him, quickly left the library, and bent his steps towards the cloisters.
CHAP. X.
Prognosticks still, and tales mysterious ; With actions that appal the soul ; arise, To damıt my manhood.
>« ----------- *Tis a bird foreboding death. Havens in flight will bcent the luincs of blood, They are the ministers of midnight hags That oft against the sick mail's casement ñap : Sure token of his doom. w\ H.I,
1 HE intrusion of the monk John of Dunbar, and the extraordinary confer¬ ence which took place between Avinzo and the father, absorbed for a time every other consideration in the mind of Huberto, till the recollection of the Legend of the Little Red Woman, again forcibly rivetted his thoughts, nor could he repress a secret desire to be himself
a witness of the annual appearance of the condemned spirit and pursuing fiend, though from the neglectful man¬ ner in which the Legend was obviously preserved, Huberto rather conjectured that the information conveyed in the sequel of the poem, was but a new chimera of the brain, originating in the poeťs fancy ; who, to add more horror to the relation, had consequently con¬ cluded it with the assertion alluded to ; as, from the date of the performance, up- Avards of a century had transpired, for the greater part of which, it appeared very probable, that the Legend had remained altogether unnoticed ; which, Avinzo conceived, would not have been the case, had the spirit regularly revisit¬ ed the cloisters annually, according to the poeťs assertion. Still ruminating on the strange rela¬ tion, Huberto became wholly uncon¬ scious of the lapse of time, till the last
radiance of evening having vanished gave place to the embrowning hue of twilight, which just began to spread its misty mantle over the still bosom of the earth· Avinzo warned by this of the quick approach of night, rose from the stone seat in the cloisters whereon he had placed himself j and with folded amis, unconsciously ascended the flight of steps, and passed the portal communi¬ cating with the interior of the church, which he immediately entered, and ad¬ vanced along the aisle with slow and measured step. There are seasons when the human intellect soaring above the level of common ideas, wings its ærial flight through the expanded regions of fancy, and seems for a time removed from every sublunary thought; it is not the studied endeavour on our parts that
can produce'this extraordinary transi¬ tion; tor the very actions and words which have at one moment given rise to it, will wholly fail in their effect, when put a second time in force. Huberto's mind was by no means cast in the com¬ mon mould of nature ; she had not been partially lavish in her gifts, for the noble lineaments of his countenance, and the symmetry of his shape were the indexes of a soul framed for honour, virtue, and immutable truth. The strange vicissitudes of Avinzo's youthful life, and the constant scene of action in which he had been engaged, only tended to inspire him with re¬ doubled energy when he found his mental qualifications called into action. It was, therefore, this contrariety of events that might \vell be supposed to raise in his brain those chimeras, which vol. г. к
never disturb the man who plods con¬ tentedly in the common paths of life; he may, indeed, be said to enjoy tran¬ quility, but it is that species of pleasure which never soars above a certain specific medium ; it is the mind of fire that can alone kindle into rapturous enthusiasm, engendering phantasies, which never occur to the worldlv individual. In the present instance, the mind of Avinzo was assailed with many contend¬ ing emotions. His thoughts being alter¬ nately occupied in forming schemes that might prove beneficial to his Monarch ; in contemplating the past vicissitudes of his extraordinary life, and in some¬ times yielding to fear, from existing circumstances; while at others, his mind was elevated by soothing hope to augur the speedy termination of every surround¬ ing difficulty. ït was this contrariety of ideas, added
to the warm glow of esteem he had im¬ bibed towards father Anthony, and the effect of the late appalling legend, Avhich imperceptibly presented itself to his mind's eye, as he paced along the vaulted avenues of this sainted edifice. Huberto at length passed through the gateway which conducted to one of the smaller chaptls, of which, there Avere several in each aile, and seating himself on the flight of steps leading to the altar, he re¬ clined his cheek upon his hand, and then fixed his pensive gaze full upon the lofty painted casement before him. The solemn silence that reigned around the hallowed sanctuary which Avinzo had chosen for his awful medita¬ tions, together Anth the dingy hue of twilight Avhich had now succeeded the last bright gleam of sinking day, giving a kind of dim lustre to the trembling flame, that burned in the sih^er lamp hanging before the crucifix; all those к 2
objects conspired at once to fill the me* dilative Huberto with the most lugubre ideas, to which, he imperceptibly yield¬ ed, till an exertion of reason suddenly dispelled the gloom : when rising from the step, he ascended to the altar, and prostrating himself before the shrine, offered up a fervent prayer to heaven > but when Avinzo began in particular to address the Divinity, in behalf of the unfortunate Scottish Monarch, so truly revered, he could not refrain from pausing,, and casting his eyes towards the casement, he saw, on one of the iron bars, a melancholy owl, which had at that precise juncture took its station there, while, at the same moment, a death por* tending raven screamed aloud its ominous song. " For *tztus the very witching time of night, When church-yards yawn, and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world. 4 These objects for a few moments*
broke Huberto's regular chain of ideas, and diffused a chilling horror over the workings of his mind, but calling reli¬ gion to his aid, he once more fixed his eyes upon the brazen representation of the world's dying Redeemer, and thus continued his devout prayer. " Who but thou is omniscient ? from whom but thee all gracious Father of Mercy proceed the multifarious blessings we enjoy ? who but thee can bring to light the hidden scene of death, con¬ found the villain and reward the just? who save, thee, can shield the churl beneath his humble thatch, and guard him from the machinations of canopied oppression ? Tis thou canst raise the Monarch to his throne, or hurl him to destruction. In thy all fostering hand therefore, now rests the cause of him I serve; the right¬ ful claim of Scotia's Monarch, w"ho к 3
seeks his dear country's freedom to guard his people from lawless oppression ; and whose thirst is to act up to thy divine precepts, and lÌA>e in all good men's hearts—shield then, О ! shield the King, omniscient Father." As Huberto uttered the conclusive exclamation, his extended right hand rested upon the entablature, directly beneath the crucifix, when, instantane¬ ously, something damp, heavy, and icy cold, dropped upon it from above, which thrilled the Avarm pulses of his heart. On raising his regard to the cross, the lamp before it appeared to burn stea¬ dily, but it cast a sickly, blueish ğleaın around, by Avhich the enhorroťd Avinzo Avas able to discern a stream of blood, that gushed from the indented avouiuI in the side of the brass figure, of the crucified Redeemer; three large drops of which had fallen upon and stained his hanţl; the owl at that moment more
dismally hooted, and the black raven rung a screeching peal that reverberated through every aile of the spacious edifice» Huberto started from his prostrate position; he felt the warm current of his youthful blood flow with im¬ petuosity to his heaving heart; his knees trembled beneath his petrified frame, which they with difficulty supported ; and his locks stood bristling round his brow, no longer shading those eyes which now rolled with all the expression of ghastly horror. After a few seconds, Avinzo's eyes were once more raised to the cross, but all appearance of the streaming blood was vanished, and to his utter astonish¬ ment, that hand so lately tinged with gore was now quite free from stain. Huberto remained for some minutes collecting his scattered senses. He at
first conceived that all the preceding scene might have been only an imaginary coinage of the brain ; but the more he recurred to each particular incident, the more he became assured that the whole was a reality, and from its particular ap¬ pearance at the very moment when his intercession was so strenuously offered at the Throne of Mercy, for King Ro¬ bert Bruce, Huberto was compelled, however painful the suggestion might be to his soul, to allow that it obviously portended something dreadful towards the Monarch, which idea had no sooner taken possession of his mind, than as if to yield assent to the supposition, the owl and raven once more joined their dis¬ mal peal, and instantly flapping to and fro their hoaiy wings, made a way towards the dusky shade of the adjoining wood. The horrible sound aoain attracted the regard of Avinzo, who fixing his eyes upon the casement, immediately started
back some paces, for through the storied glass of the window, he beheld the very countenance of one of the ugly hag* who had so mystically prognosticated to him in the ruined cells of the castle, while journeying from London to the Scottish borders. The visage of this hag apr^ared, if possible, more loathsome than at his first rencontre with her ; Avhile the knob of the black crutch which she grasped with¬ in her bony fingers Avas pressed upon her skinny, bloodless lips; her haggard, sunken eyes being all the time immuta¬ bly rivetted on those of the terror-struck youth. Huberto at length assuming sufficient fortitude ari vaneed to the very base of the altar, without once averting his look from that of the dreadful object before him, when in a solemn tone of voice he thus bespoke the mystic intruder;—
u In the name of that Almighty Power I reverence, answer me to what I shall demand,— Why are thy steps thus bent on pursuing me ; wherefore comest thou to me at this strange season to break upon m v meditations ; from whence proceeded the strange and horrid sight which did of late appal my senses.— Speak to me, I conjure thee,and if thou canst, resolve this mystery, and confide to me what ail these sights portend ?" Avinzo ceased to speak, and for some seconds the hag continued silent, when she at length in a shrill tone of voice an¬ swered simply thus:—" Blood, blood, Huberto, nought but blood !" Night came on with rapid pace, for the last dubious gleam of light lingered in misty majesty on the expansive hori¬ zon of the Western Ocean ; while the sable goddess already reigning o'er the eastern hemisphere, came on with horrid
stride, and 'rayed in ebon robe, proudly strove to hold her still and dismal em¬ pire over the nice of sleeping nature. It was some time ere Avinzo thought of quitting the chapel, when warned by the rapid approach of darkness, he prepared to retrace his steps into the cloisters, and passing through the brazen portals by which he had entered this small sanctu¬ ary, he found himself in the aile, down which he was slowly proceeding, when, upon gaining one of the huge and mas¬ sive pillars which supported the roofing of the building, and which concealed the nave of the chapel from observation, he paused for a few seconds in deep me¬ ditation, but again advancing, the tread of footsteps suddenly struck upon his ear, and, at the same moment, a monk darted from behind the pillar with the utmost precipitation ; on perceiving Huberto, the intruder made a sudden halt, and after eyeing him for a few se¬ conds with the most scrutinizing atten-
tion, the fatlier seized Avinzo's arm, ex¬ claiming emphatically as he did it " Mur¬ tier and Treason;" then loosening his hold, the monk fled with the utmost speed, and ere theastonished youth could collect himself, vanished from his sight with the rapidity of lightning. The form of the stranger, which was tall, was completely enveloped in the empie monastiek garments that flowed loosely around him ; his countenance be¬ ing altogether obscured from the eye of observation in consequence of the cowl being cast over his brow. There was an obvious perturbation in the whole de¬ meanour of the intruder which was in¬ stantly apparent to Avinzo, and the tre¬ mulous manner with which he had seized his arm, coincided but too well with the mystic and dreadful words which had escaped his lips with so much energetic expression. END OF VOb U
