Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ariel: or, The invisible monitor
???????????????????
? JR I ? JL,
■■«lftet'flfr#ttt»'
CHAP. I.
*« Harfei the fprightly voice of Pleafure « f Calk to yonder rofy bower I ·♦ There mefcatters all her treafure— *· There exerts her magic power ! ** LiUen to tlie pLeaGng call l " Follow, mortals—follow aH ï ** Lead the dance, and fpread the teaft, ** Crown with rofcs e¥«ry gueft 1 «· Now the fprightly minthrtPs found, €f PIeafure Y s voice is heard around | *« And PleaforeV fprightly v©fce « The hills and dak* rdbund ?* Miss Bow d ler» ON a bright moonli^it night, towards the latter end of May, as Sir Edward Mortimer, a Baronet of large eftate in one of the vox*· i. ? northern
northern counties, was travelling on bufi nefs into Wales, he unfortunately miffed his way ; but as the uncommon beauty of the evening afforded fufficient light to guide him, he hoped ihortly to recover his loft road* Fond of contemplating the beauties of nature at this filent hour, he had been tempted to difmount, and enter a large wood, which appeared to be of agreat many miles' extent. Concluding it wound by the ikle ofthe road, he had determined to walk by a path that feemed to wind along its fkirts, whence, he imagined, he Ihould again come out into the road at its termination, preferring the folitude of the foreft, and the gentle light, whkh the reflection of the moon's bright rays caft through the thick branches of the trees, to the more frequented horfe-way. His fervant followed, leading the two horíès, the path being juft wide enough to admit them, Sir Edward not thinking it per¬ fectly fafe to ventum alone, at that time of night, in fo retired a place, which feemed to be exactly calculated for the haunt of ban- dittii
ditti í and, though poffeíTed of great nataral courage, he knew neither that, nor the competent İbare of ftrength and activity he had rvoeived from nature, wouìd avail him, if attacked by one of thofe lawlefs parties, without arms, or any external m^ans of defence. It was now near eleven o'clock, when he began to fear that the path they had taken, inftead of continuing by the fide ofthe read, wound into the more interior parts of the wood. As tliis fear was ilrengthcned by obferving the frequent windings of the path, and the moon beginning to go down, he told Philip he thought tliey had better return the way they came, than run the hazard of being bewildered in the intricacies of the foreft, when, not having t heir prefent light to guide them, they might wander about all night, without beingableto find their way out. Philip, who had long remonftrated in vain on their continuing in the wood, joy¬ fully heard his mafter's determination s but ? % his
his pleafure was very foon converted into difappointment, when, notwithftanding their endeavours to extricate thcmfelvcs. thev found it impofiible to regain the path by which they had firft entered it ; and, after wandering about for near an hour, the moon funk beneath the horizon, leaving the travellers f 1 ï li t raverfing each intricate wind¬ ing, in the vain hope of regaining their loft road. At length, quite wearied with un¬ availing: efforts, Sir Edward felt himfelf com- pelled to remain where he was, till they fliould be enabled, by the affiftance of the daylight, to profecute their fearch with greater probability of fuccefs. He had formed this forced re folu t ion, when, with an exclamation of joy, Philip faid he defcried a diftant light ; and, on cafting his eyes whither his fervant directed them, Sir Edward faw a fmall glimmering, which appeared at a great diftance, and as they tried to approach it, fometimes difappeared, and then they again faintly perceived it through the wide-fpreading foliage. At
At kn^ùh after a walk, during which Sir Edward's patience ^as nearly exhaufted, they difcovered, with itiexpreilibïc delight, th.\t they had attained tac boundaries of t ?? ibreli» aiul were* arrived at a fort of plain» 1 he light ihey had before feen w¿s now plainly ddlm^uifhable ; and haftcnuig with as much t^ecd as poilible t ? ? -ards ic, they found it proceeded from a little hut (for İt could fcarcely be dignified by the name of a cottage), apparently the abode of poverty and w reiche Jnefs. Thhkin¿ tc poílible, however, that they miglit aer* outam inform¬ ation oi" what Uidance they were from the town where diey had propofed to ipetid the night, they kiiockea at the door. It was immediata ly opened, and an elderly man appeared, who, on Sir Edward s telìi.ij hím they were travellers who had loit their road» and begging he would inform tae-n the neareic way to any p ??? where tiiey could procure a bJ^mg for the night, anfwered, rhey were neaily twenty miles from any town, and that as ?? tiie road, he did
net cxaûly know it; but if they would walk in for ? few minutes, he would confult his fom They readily accepted the cot¬ tager's invitation, and ^cre not forry to fee a comfoitabic wood-flic blazing on the hearth. His fori, a yoimg man about twenty, arofe on their entrance, and invited litem to be feated. Sir Edward, then addrefling him, afked the fame queftion he had before put to his father, to which he received the fame anfwer. The next vil¬ lage, he laid, was fo poor, that there was not one habitation fo good as their's in it i and that the neareft town, where it was pro¬ bable they could procure accommodation for the night, was nearly twenty miles diftant. « But I think, father,*' added the lad, u that as the gentleman is fo near the Hall, it is a pity he fhould go any further to¬ night; be would be fure to be made wel¬ come there." " Why," replied the man, " I thought the
the gentleman muft have known that, and that he had fome particular reafon for not going there, or Cue he would be fure to find a bed, and every thing elk at the Hali, efpecially at this time." Sir Edward now enquired of what place they were fpeaking. *« Why, the great houfe yonder ; but I fee you arc a ftranger in thefe parts, or you would know that you are within a quarter of a mile of Edgecumbe Hall. Sir Walter is our landlord, and is famous ail over the country for his hofpitality· There are great doings to-night at the Hall, to celebrate his eldeft fon's marriage, and open houfe kept forali comers. ïfyou have a mind togo, you have only to let Sir Waiter know who you are, and you will certainly be hof- pitably received. I was there till late, and did not mean to go back again to-night, for there will be the fame open houfe kept ? 4 all
a'l the week ; but if you, Sir, would like to go, n») ten and I will fhew you the way/* Sir Edward readily accepted the offers he remembered, when very young, that he lid k;j'jwnS*ir Walter Edsecumbe, and had fince heard ot the chara&er of univerfal phiLiUlrcf y he was generally allowed to bear, Frum t.ìfc long lapfe of years which h«d imer vea* d fince their former acquaint¬ ance, he nought it very probable that Sir Walter rnfeht not retain a.iv recollection of him; but, from his hofpiuaty of temper, doubted not he ihcukl be well received in the character of a diftreffed traveller. The lady he had afterwards married, he alfo åcmembered to have had fome flight know· kàgz of, and the recollection brought a ci'.aia of melancholy ??????? to his mind, widen filed bis heart ^ith fadnefs during their waik, though it did not prevent his attending to tue eulo^imn witii which the poor cottagers entertained hirn, on tne virtues and benevolence of their landlord. P.« >
He was» however, completely arou&d from the reverie into which the Lite incident, having recalled many bitter reflections and misfortunes long pall, to liis memory, had thrown him, by arriving at the long avenue which led to the iront ofthe manfion. It was a noble buikbrg, of great extent, not of modern architecture, but buik with all the heavv Gothic magnificence of former times· The large ir. ι gates were thrown open, and the court, a> wea as every window in the houfe, was illuminated, fo that it appeared a blaze ef light, reflecting to a great dif· tancc on the furrounding trees. The manhon feemed the feat of gaiety and mirth» and longhefere they reached the great gates, they diftinguiihed the dancing and mufic· On entering the folding doors, they were accofted by a fervant, whom Sir Edward informed of his name, defiring he would acquaint Sir Walter with it, and fay that, having had the misfortune to lofe his way, as he was travelling to a diftant part of % ? 5 Wales,
Wales, and hearing the fame of his hofpita¬ lity and benevolence, he had tiken the liberty to requeft the favour of an atylum tor the night. The fervant in a few minutes returned, with orders to introduce him immediately to his mafter. He wab con¬ ducted through a fuite of rooms, all illu¬ minated, and furniilied in a ftyle of gran¬ deur he had fcarcely ever feen equalled, to a fort of antiroom, where, he was told, Sir Walter would wait upon him. When left alone, Sir Edward was almoft tempted to fancy himfelf in a dream, and that all he had feen was an illufion, fo great a fimilitude did his prefent fituation bear to thofe deicribed in Fairy Tales and Romances; and he began to think the times of chi¬ valry were returned, and himfelf a Kuight, juft entering an enchanted caftle, where the Fairies were holding their nocturnal revels. The illufion his imagination had formed was, hoAe*er, very ihortly difpelîed by the entrance of the owner of the manfion. He was
was pretty far advanced in life j but though he had loft the vivacity of youth, he retained that cheerfulnefs of manner whkh, Sii Edward remembered, had formerly dtf- tifiguiíhcd him. His mien and air were fo uncommonly engaging, that his prefence could not fail of infpiring refpeék and efteem t and every virtue he was reputed fo emi¬ nently to poflèfs, beamed from his bene¬ volent countenance· He advanced with politenefs, weicoming him to his houfe, and defiring him to confider himfelf at home while he honoured his manfion with his prefence. He rejoiced, he faid, to have it in his power to enter tain a gentleman he had formerly knovvn, and for whom he Ihould ever retain the fmcereft refpeft. He then invited him tojóin the reft of the guefts, a^d firft took him into a large faloon, where lie found a numerous company, formed into parties of cards, converfation, &c. in dif¬ ferent parts cf it. Here Sir Walter pre¬ fented him io his Lady, whofe mild fweet- neis of afpeft impreffed him with reverence and love for her character. Sir Walter, ? 6 being
being Ihortly afterwards called away, left Sir Edward with a party of his friends, to whom he had introduced him, and by whom he was invred to accompany them to take a view of the dancers. The ball u as held in the great hall, w ? hich was in the centre of the man¬ fion : it was lofty and fpacious, and fup¬ ported on each fide by marble pillars, round which were hung variegated lamps. The other parts of this magnificent apart¬ ment were fitted up in a ftyle of equal fplen¬ dour. Rich fofas were placed around for thofe who did not chufe to join in the arnufements ; and, having feated themfeives on one of theie, a gentleman, who fat next to Sir Edward, pointed out to him the dif¬ ferent perfons of the dancers. * u That gentleman," faid he, " you feeyon- der flinging himieif on that fofa, is the eldeft fon of Sir Walter, who was yefterday united to the lady, whofe tall mafculine figure and lofty mien make her fo confpicuous, as with ftately
ftatcly ftep (lie goes down the dance. Thofe four young ladies who arc entering írom the refrefhment-rooni, with tha! y^ung i.an in regimeniab, are ail the family of Sir Walter. His your ger fon, who îs with his fifters, is juft returned from having made the tour of Europe, and has entered tiie army—a profeilion in which, from his great courage and abilities, he will doubtlefs make a dii- tinguiihed figure." While the gentleman was giving him! his account, the attention of Sir Edward was principally attraded by one of the youn^ ladies that had been pointed out to him, whoie remarkable elegance of figure, and graceiul fweetnefs of manner, were equalled by the uncommon loveUnels of her coun¬ tenance. Her ^hoie form was indeed fo peculiarly interefting and attractive, that Sir Edward furveyed her with looks of won¬ der. As ihe moved down the dance, with the young man who had been ihewn to him as the Baronets younger fon, Sir Edward found
foynd he wm not the only one whofe admi¬ ration nie exuted. An univerfal filence immediately enfued, and all the beholders feemed intent on Viewing the graceful eafe of her movements, as the joined in the mazy dance. Sir Edward could not help expreli- ing the admiration with which Che infpired him, to the gentleman he had before been converting with, adding-— ff Sir Walter muft be very happy in his daughters, if their minds at all correfpond with the beauty of their perfons." «* The daughters of the Baronet," replied his companion, " are certainly very fine young women, though fhe you fo much admire, is not one of them. I included her in the family, becaufe Ibe has, from her infancy, refided with them ; but flie is one ofthe many it ftances 1 could give you of that uncommon benevolence of difpofition, for which my friend, Sir Waiter, is juftly celebrated. This young lady is the daughter ot a Clergyman j and, by the early death of both
both her parents, was left an orphan before íh¿ was of an age to be feniible ofthe lots, which the worthy Baronet has never rrr· mitted her to feel. He has educated her with his three daughters, and amply f fup* pîİed to her the place of the parents İh* was early deprived of ¿ and, I believe, feels for her an affection nearly equal to that he has for his own children, which noue can wonder at, as her amiable difpofition and fweetnefs of temper are as much to be admired as the perfection of her form. You are not, therefore, particular in your admiration of Mils Melvan, a?, wherever ihe appears, all ftrangers are as much ftruck with her per· fonal attraäions as yourfeif. A report once prevailed ihat ihe was to be united to Sir Walter's younger fon, with whom, you iee, ihe is dancing ; but I believe it was without foundation/* A general movement of the company broke up the converfation, and Sir Edward mixed with the crowd, who preØed into a 6 , fuite
fuiîe of room*, where a collation, confiti* røg of t* e choiceft luxuries, were prepared in a ftyle of fplendour equal to the reft of the entertaimrert. The dancing was renewed %vfen the collation ended, and the company difperfed at a late hour, to prepare them¬ fclves, by reft, for renewing the fcene ot mirth and gaiety on the following day ; when parties of walking, to view the peafants, who, imitating their fuperiors, led up the fprightly dance in different parts of the park, where the beautiful lawns and woods on the extenfive domain of the Ibr, net, formed a variety of central fpots, moft of them enlivened by one or more of thefe ruftic parties, filled up the time till the evening, «hen a grand concert was formed in the great hall, in which the \ounger part ofthe familv exhibited their mufical talents. Mifs 4 Mch^n pla} ed on the harp, the attitude (hewing to adv ¿mage th^ elegance ot her form, a::d the gricetuinefs oi her manner. She oil e n accompanied it with her voice, and, ? hile İte charmed the cars, penetrated the
the hearts of her auditors with its melody* Thenight was concluded with a grand exhibi¬ tion of fire-works, illuminations, and bonfires. The third day was fpent in parties on the lake, fituated at the diftance of about amile from the Hail, for which open and covered boats had been erected, varioufly ornamented* Theatrical repreientatioiis pafied away the evening. The fame fcene of feftivity was kept up through the whole week : a new amufement was planned for every day, all equally fplendid and magnificent. The laft night concluded with a grand ball and fupper, like the firft. Sir Edward, who» on his arrival, had only propofed to ftay one night, had been prevailed on by the Baronet to remain there during the week of re¬ joicing, and, at his entreaty, had promifed to fpend a few days with them alter it was concluded. He couid not help feeling ? delire to know more oí this amiable tàuiilv, whole private characters, engaged, as they weie, during this ieafon of feftivity, he had little opportunity of becoming acquainted with*
with. Tlie beautiful orphan alfo, who had fo forcibly attracted his attention on the evening of his arrival, he could not help feeling greatly interede d for. He had feve¬ ral times, when accidentally feated. by her, entered into converfation with her on the topics of the day, and was as much charmed with the peculiar fweetnefs of her man¬ ners, as he had, at firft fight, been ftruck by her external lovelinefs of form. Sir Edward was not a man to be fafcinated by mere perfonal beauty* he was now entering the decline of a life, which, by family mif- fortunes, had been rendered far from happy. Though formed for domeftic felicity, he had never experienced its delights, owing to his marriage with a lady of a temper and difpo- .fition totally diflimilar to his own. A fon and åi u¿hter were their only offspring :— the fole happinefs cf their father centered in them, and ihey repaid his cares by pro¬ mifing to be all his parental fondnefs could wifli ; and in fome degree compenfated, by their duty and attention, for that want of feeling
feeling and affection in their mother, which had evercauied him fuch poignant uneafinefs. Taking advantage of the beauty of the-wea¬ ther, he had quitted his family on fome bufi¬ nefs relative to the fettling of the affairs of a friend, for whom he had undertaken the orlice of executor, fome of whofe eftates were fitu¬ ated in an obfcure part of Wales. On the evening when the nuptial re* joicings were concluded, the company retired at an earlier hour than uiua!, as oa the following day the numerous guefts were to quit the Hall,and return to their refpecttve homes. Soon after midnight, therefore, they retired to their chambers, and a pro¬ found ftillnelš reigned through the manfion before the great clock over the gateway had founded the fucceeding hour. Sir Edward was amongft the laft of thofe who quitted the mirthful fcene ¿ and when he entered his apartment, not feeling inclined to ileep, he ftood for fome minutes at the open cafement : it looked into a plantation
plantation of firs, on one fide of a lawn that in part fronted the Hail. The moon was juft rifen ; and as the charms of nature had ever for him the moft forcible attractions, he flood for fome time at the window in intent contemplation, when he fuddenlv thought be heard, through the ililJnefs ofthe night, the found of foft mufic. He iiilened a;ten* tively, and fliìl more plainly heard it; but it was cither fo cautiouily played, or at fo great a diftance, that the foft notes were but juft diftinguiihable. It foon after ceafed; and, as he continued Iiftening, in hopes of again hearing it, he obferved a form ifiuo from round an angle of the building, ánd¿ gliding between-the firs belo.v, ddappe^r among their thick branches. 4 His curiofity was now ftrongly excited, and be continued to watchthe figure he had teen, till it again appeared from among the ever¬ greens,and winding, as before,round rhe weft angle of the manfion, returned the way it came. The muhe was immediately afterwards renewed 4
renewed, and continued in the fame plain¬ tive ftrain, till, his curiofity being ftrongly awakened, Sir Edward formed a fudden refolution to take a nearer view ofthe myfte¬ rious mufician, which he eafily accom¬ plished, as from the door of his apart¬ ment a private ftaircafe defcended to a paflage, from which a door opened imme¬ diately into the plantation. He proceeded cautiouily down the ftairs, and opening foftly the entrance to the lawn, concealed hy the thick firs, he ventured round to that fide ofthe edifice from whence he thought the founds iílued. They became more diftin¬ guiihable as he advanced· At length he came within fight of that fuite of apartments .which formed the weft angle ofthe Hali, and thought he perceived a faint glimmering light from a window, under which he could juft difcern the fame ligure he had before feen, from whom it was now evident the mufic proceeded. It continued for fome time, and was at length accompanied by a foft low voice ; but the diftance would not allow
allow iiim to diftinguifh the words, Th¿ long was fcarcely concluded, when the win¬ dow above was thrown open, and a female fonn appeared, who fee ned, for fome minutes, to hold converfation with the noc¬ turnal mufician, aid then, clofing the cafe¬ ment, difappeared : and the light being immediately removed, the nightly Orpheus fkd precipitately towards the f : ct, where Sir Edward, availing himfcif of îhe thick branches of the tree«, which rendered it quite impervious to the rays of the mcon, felt fecure oi remaining ur/een. The ftran¬ ger pafied very near him ; but the velocity í fhis motion, together vu t h the Iliade ofthe trees, prevented his feeing more of him, than that he was tail, but too much muffled up for his perfon to be known» After watching till he had loft all traces of him, Sir Edward returned to his chamber, unabic to develop the myllery that feemed to hang over the late adventure.
CHAP.
¡????????????????
v^tli\i * li. ** Where fho«f<J tlns muftc W > *« In air Qt earth ? ** It found« no m<are !— smd fare it waits «« U|kí» fotne Gckİ oí the Illand ?* Shaki' »PEAR!. ÍR Edward Mortimer vvas not the only perfon to whom Sleep, that night, denied his kindly influence. The fair orphan, who had fo much interefted his attention, was kept long awake by the variety of her reflections, after all the other inhabitants of the man¬ fion were retired; and, difmifling her attendant, flie fat for fome time, revolving in
in her mind the events ofthe few laft days, íbme of wbich had been productive of con¬ fequences that gave her abundant fubject for meditation. Her reverie was, however^ difturbed, in a manner that at once ftartled and alarmed her. She fuddenly thought Ihe diftinguiihed mufic, that feemed to be near her chamber, She caft a fearful look round the room, and, Iiftening with the profoundeft attention, felt convinced it was under the window of a clofet adjoining her bedcham. lier, wiiich looked into the plantation of firs, m the weft front of the Hall. Impelled by a curiofity ilie coukl not ca* tirely repreis, flie opened thedoor oí theclolet, and, leavi ng the light m her room, approached the window, under which ihe perceived the figure of a man, who, when he had concluded the air he was playing, fung one, in which flie heard her own name more than once repeated. The voice was quite unknown to her; and, though from its uncommon melody, ihe could have liftened to it for hours
boors with pleafure § Ihe feît ftich a dread left the ferenade ihouki be heard by the reft of the family, that Ihe at length fum· rnoncd refolutton lø throw opea the cafe» ment, and enquire who at that late hour had come to difturb her repofe· " Alas, fair lady!" repKed the voice t * one, who having loft it hîmfelÇ forgets he may prevent others enjoying tt t while he fooths, or perhaps adds to hii own uneafinefs l* <c Whoever you arc," replied Rofeline, " I muft beg you will immediately depart ; and remember, ftranger, that (hould you be difcovered by any of the family, I will not anfwer for the difpleafure your intrufion at this unfeafonable hour may incur !" " Ah, may I not, with truth, ave/ mth Romeo/* repKed the unknown» quickly, ** that « there tt more perii ìa thint eye, 4« Thin twenty of their fword» j look then but fweet, ** Ami 1 tm proof apina their enmity I ** vol. i» ? «* Romanik
"Romantic quotations," (aid Roia* line, with more than her accuftomed feverity, ft will not, I aifiire you, tend to make me think you lefs affuming! If, therefore, you do not immediately inform me ivlio you are, what is your bufinefs, and how you came within the walls, I muft be nccefiitated to alarm the family."
a
By Love," returned he, * c I came; that, « n. ...... ι κ- ι ? firft ¿? prompt me to ««Quire | *' He lent me counfel, ami I lent him eyes, * f I hare Nïglirs cloak to hide røe from tlieir fight : " And, but thou love me, let them find me here I * * My life were better ended by their hate, ** Than death prorogue, wanting of thy love l* * f Stranger !" faid Rofaline, in a deter¬ mined tone, " I can no longer hold converfe with you j if therefore, by your immediate abfence, you do not prevent me, I ihall feek other
other means than thofe I have ineffectually tried to procure it." Saying this, flie refolutely clofed the cafe¬ ment, and her unknown vifitor inftantly fled, as Sir Edward had witneffed, while Rofaline retired to bed, ruminating on her recent adventure. Who it could be, fhe could not conjecture, nor could fhe recollect any one, among the numerous guefts who had thronged the Hall the preceding week, that it was probable would take fo ftrangely romantic a mode of avowing their attach* ment. Wearied by the fatigues of com¬ pany, fieep at length overpowered her, and chafed, for nine hours, from her pillow every intrufivc thought. The morning fun, Aiming brightly into his chamber, awakened Sir Edward at an early hour ; and having heard from the Baronet, the preceding night, the time they generally affembled to breakfaft, he defcended to the parlour, where he met the whoie ? ? family,
family, with whom he became every hour more charmed. He accompanied Sir Walter in a ride over part of his eftates, during which, in the ccurfe of converfation, he took an opportunity to mention Mifs Melvan, complimenting hmi on the benevolence whichhad refcued ivat lovely young woman from a ftate of poverty and dependance. €C Rofaline,* 1 replied the Baronet, * f is certainly truly beautiful, becaufe her innate excellency is, if poflible, fuperior to her external attractions ; and perhaps you will wonder when I fay that it is that very beauty which fills me with fears for her future deftiny, fmce juftice to my own children will not allow me to make for her an equal provifion, though fuch as will fet her above want, I undoubtedly mean to feçure to her. When I firft took her into my houfe, it was far from my intention to retain her in my own family ; but her en¬ gaging manners and fweetnefs of temper, though then quite a child, fo won all our hearts.
hearts, that we found it impoffibic to part with her: and the friendfliip ihe has fincc formed with my daughters, particularly th¿ youngeft, who is of her own age, has made them fa unwilling ihe ihould quit them, that ihe continues to be regarded by Lady Edgecumbe and myfelf as one of our own t hildret». You have, I conclude, heard from report the idea which wa* generally entertained of her being the daughter of a neighbouring Clergyman : that, however, Is quite erroneous, though I wiih it to be be¬ lieved, as a knowledge of the truth might fubject her to the curbfity of the i ^pertinent, and the contempt ofthe proud. There is, however, an ur.fwlunate mjtlcry attending her birth, which, it is too pro¬ bable, will ever remain involved in obfeurity. This circumftance ihe is, as yet, herielf ignorant of; and, from the extreme acutenefs of her feelings, I own 1 dread the making her acquainted with it; but, painful as it muft be, it is a tafk I propofe ihortly to impofe on myfelf, as íhe is now of an age
fo learn her real fituation. I truft I have difcharged the duty of a guardian to her hitherto, with the ccnfcioufncfs her deferted ftate, and the awful, yet myfterious manner in which I was called on to be her protector, reqir red fi oni me." 4 ' I know not why," faid Sir Edward, " but í never before felt io interefted for the fate ci one who is an entire ftiangcr s but 1 account for it by the ftriking refém- bîancc fiie bears to a beloved friend, who 1ms been long fince in the bofom of the grave !" When they returned home, they again met the remainder of the family at dinner; and three days, after the departure of the guefts, were paflcd by Sir Edward in a man* ner fo confortant to his tafte, that hefelt much reluctance when bufinefs, at tbe end of that period, obliged him to quit them. During this time frequent opportunities occurred of feeing and converfing with Rofaline, which only ferved to convince him oi the juftice of the
the character he had heard of her from the partial opinion of the Baronet i while ihe was equally pleafed with Sir Edward, whofe openneís of manner,and amufing, yet inftruc- tive converfation, induced her, involuntarily, to íhew hím a greater degree of attention and reípeét than íhe had ever before paid to any of her patron's vifitors : and whea he quitted the Hall, he told her what iincere pleafure it would give him to introduce her to his daughter at Mortimer Houfe» Till this period, the life of Rofaline had been an uninterrupted feries of tranquillity« At íix years old fhe loft the good old Clergy * man, her reputed father, whofe wife had died two years before* Finding himfelf on his death-bed, he fent to Sir Walter Edgecumbe, earneftly entreating to fee him. The requeft was readily complied with, and he was ihut up alone with the dying man for near an hour, foon after which lie breathed his laft ; and Sir Walter took the little orphan home with him, fmce which period the had remained a conftant inhabitant at the Hall, creating, by e 4 the
the fweetnefs of her difpofition, friends in every member of the family, particular^ in the Baronets youngeft daughter. Hen¬ rietta Edgecumbe, though ihe poffeffed not thofe ftriking advantages of perfon which made her friend fo generally admired, was by no means deficient in other perfonal or mental endowments ; and, with a competent íhare of fenfe and vivacity, there was a good- natured iivelinefs in her manner,and an open- neii in her temper and countenance, that could not fail of pleafing. Her exceffive fondnefs for Rofaline was .eturned by her with mu¬ tual friendíhip ; and though flie felta fincere affection for Mifs Edgecumbe and Maria, (the Baronet's other two daughters), for Henrietta £he had the love of a fond fifter. Anna, the elder, had, in early life, formed an attachment with a gentleman, who being diupproved by her father, íhe had refufed his addreffes, and he went abroad, where he died fliortly afterwards. This affair had given to her manner a tincture of melan« choìy,
choly, and had fpread over her fine features an air of gravity not natural to them. Maria, the ftçpnd, was more of a romp than either of her fifters ; but her vivacity was more affected than real, and, through her overacted Hvelinefs, might fometimes be difcerned an inclination to fatire, and a turn for ridicule, which her father ftrongly difap- proved of, and early endeavoured to eradicate from her mind. In his elder fon, Sir Walter was not fo happy as in his daughters. This young man, with weak talents and no abi¬ lities, had imbibed a love for diffipation and gaiety, while the fetting off his own perfon, and the ftudy of drefs, were his principal arnufements. When he firft came from the Univerfity, he had profeffed a violent paffion for Roiahne, who receiving his addreffes with difguft, he had quietly given up the purfuit, not having perfeverance to go on with any thing that required an exertion of his uative indolence of temper. In town, where he had fpent the preceding winter, he ? 5 had
had met at a ball the lady to whom he vvas now united. She was the only daughter and hetrefs cf a man of immenfe fortune, \^ho, knowing young Edgecumbe was İti poíleífion of a good eftate, left him by an uncle, independent of his father, who was alio immenfely rich, readily gave his confent to the match, ar.d came himfelf into Walet, to be prefent at its celebration. Proud, hi¿h-fpirited, and arrogant, Mrs. Edge- cuxbewas univerfally difliked by the iamily at the Hall, except Maria, with waom fhe feon became very intimate, %ι.ύ had already perfuaded Sir Walter and his Lady to give their permiffion for her fpending the next winter in town with them. Adolphus Edgecumbe, their younger íbn, was, in every reípjct, the very reverfe of his brother. To an elegant figure, and a fine, manly, ofen countenance, he joined the virtues of his father, vuth more ftriking talents, and more ihiningabdities. He had been educated under the eye of his parents till he was of an age togo to the Univerfity— a time
a time much dreaded by his fifters, of whom he was paftionately fond, particularly the two youngeft, as he aUvays termed Rofaline and Henrietta, with whom he walked, read, and played, in preference to either of the others. Sir Walter long obferved the par¬ tiality of Adolphus for the fociety of the two younger girls, without any fear of the confequences of retaining in his family fuch a dangerous object as Rofaline on an equa¬ lity with his daughters ; and even when it occurred to him, he knew the time of his foits going to Co lege was fo near, that he felt no alarm frolli their prefent intimacy. But when he faw that, w biLe at Oxford, Adolphus flew with avidity to the Hall at every vacation, nor could be detained in town by the invitation of any of his friends, when¬ ever he could get leave to be abfent, he felt more ferioufly alarmed, and began to fear, that his eagemefs to vifit home, was more on account of his fair ward, than to fee either his mother, his lifters, or himfelf. This determined the Baronet to propofe to ? 6 hins
him making the tour of Europe with his tutor, as foon as he quitted the Univerfity* This propofal was received, not with delight or pleaiuie, but with a perfect acquiefcence in the wifhes of his father. A*ter every neceflary preparation had been made, he ftill lingered at the Hall, till reminded by Sir Walter that he was lofing time, which ought, at his age, to be dedicated to improvement. Hurt by this reproof, he immediately let out for the Continent, where he continued three years. His abfence was deeply regretted by his fifters, and hh> return impatiently awaited, it was haftened by his receiving intelligence of his brother's propofed marriage. He inftantly wrote to beg permifîion of his father to return, and be prelent at the nuptials. It was no *ot>ner granted* than he fet forward with audity for the beloved refidence of his childhood. The ftriking improvement which had taken piace in his perfon and manners fince his refidence abroad, was* not more
more furprifing to his family, or gratifying to his father, than the alteration he found in his two favourite fifters. Henrietta and Rofaline, when he left England» were fine lovely girls of feventeen i but after an abfence of three years, (which makes, perhaps» a greater difference then than at any other period of life), he found them, at his return» two of the moft lovely young women he had ever beheld. The gtrìifh fprightlmefs of Henrietta was refined into a more cheerful vivacity, while the elegant Lrm and fea¬ tures of Rofaline, though they had loft none of their beauty, were become infinitely more interefting* He had arrived in Wales only a few days before his brother's nuptials * took place 5 and during that feafon of feftivity, Sir Walter had no time to obferve the effect of thofe mature charms, which, while yet in the bud, he had reafon to fear h .J fo pow¬ erfully attracted the lieart of Auo*phus· After the departure ofthe guefts, however, he determined to watch, without appearing to
to do it î and fliould there feem any pro¬ bability that his fears would be realized, to take fome immediate method to avoid the impending evil. The elder Mr. Edgecumbe and his Lady quitted the Hall a few days after Sir Edward Mortimer, and prevailed on the Baronet to agree to Maria** accompan) ing them, whofe tafte for gaiety was highly gra· titled by being allowed to vifit the metro¬ polis» Henrietta and Rofaline did not at all regret the lofs of their vifitors, nor the being, by their departure, once more ieft to purfue their accuftomed quiet amufemcnt?, in which they were now joined by Adolphu?, who, though he had entered the Army, was not to join his regiment till the enfuing winter. Reading, work, drawing, and Diufic were their ufual occupations when the weather would not allow them to leave the houfe ; and when it did, they rode or walked
walked out every morning* attended by Adolphus, who, as they were both learning to ride on horfeback, laughingly called him* felf their mitru&or. Thus happily was the fummer pafled| but, towards the latter end of autumn» the cahn that had fo long reigned at the Hall, was threatened with an interruption. This was caufed by a letter to Sir Walter from ?? cldeft fon, informing htm that his Lady, Maria, and himfelf» accompanied by a par¬ ticular friend of Mrs. Edgecumbe, and her brother» would have the pleafure of paying them a vifit at the Hall the following week» before they took up their refidence in town for the winter· This intelligence was received with no great joy by any of the family, aad by the younger part was fince rcíy regretted. It was followed in a few days by the arrival of the whole party· Henrietta and Rofaline were in the library with Adolphus, who was reading
reading to them, when two elegant curricles drove into the courtyard, frbm one of which Mr. and Mrs. Edgecumbe alighted ι while in the other, a lady, (from whofe mafculine appearance they at firft fuppofed her to bc a gentleman) drove Maria. They were alfo ac¬ companied by a gentleman on horfeback. On their entrance into the faloon, whither they defcended to meet them» Mrs. Edgecumbe, with her accuftomed hauteur^ introduced to the family Colonel and Mifs Otway* The former was, in appearance, quite a man of the ion ; dreífed in the extreme of the mode» his perfon and manners were fo ceremonial» that the rifibility of Rofaline was almoft excited as he was prefented to her* His fifter was quite the reverie of him in every refpeft ;— íhe was tall and mafculine, her voice was loud and dilagreeabie, and íhe feemed to affect to defpife thofe proper attentions to drefs» which females ought to preferve. f It was very toon evident to her fifters that the
theCoJonelwas aprofefled lover of Marta, who ivas greatly altered by her late introduction to faihionable life. Without lofing any of her natural vanity, ihe had acquired a greater degree of affectation, and feemed to have become, by her clofe imitation of Mrs·, Edgecumbe, a finiihed fine lady· The tranquillity which had reigned at the Hail previous to their arrivai, was now com¬ pletely interrupted. Mrs. Edgecumbe could not exift without cards, and fhe could not endure the fatigue of walking· A party was, therefore, to be made for her every evening. Henrietta and Rofaline had, one morning, ftolen from the company to take a quiet walk in the plantations, where they were joined by Adolphus, who united in regret* ting the arrival of their guefts, and waa hoping they would ihortly leave them» when a fervant came from the houfe to inform him that Sir Waiter defired to fee him in his ftudy. He immediately obeyed the lummons, telling them he would come and meet
meet them when he left his father. He returned, however, no more, and they did not again fee him till dinner, when the extreme perturbation of his manner alarmed and amazed them. They obferved Sir Walter watch him with looks of difpleafure and anxiety, After dinner he fuddenly dif¬ appeared ; and when they took their accuftomed walk in the evening, they per¬ ceived him, with his arms folded, as if ab¬ forbed in deep meditation, advancing with a now pace towards them. They eagerly approached him ; but at fight of them he ftarted, and, turning into another path, was in a moment out of fight. They united in wondering what ftrange caufe could have made fueh an alteration in him, who was, in general, all gaiety and cheerfulnefs. Whea he joined the company, the diftra&ion in his looks and manner had a little fubfided; but be ftill feemed embarraifed and dejected· In the evening the whole party were to walk to the lake, where a boat waited for them
them to take the air on the water;—but what were the feelings of Rofalir", when flie beheld Adolphus, who had not fpoken to her fince the morning, inftead of walking with her and his fifter, as he had always been accuftomed to do, now, without noticing them, offer his arm to Mits Otway, and attach himfelf wholly to her during the walk ! A ftrange fenfation, hitherto unknown to her, feemed to fill the bofom of Rofaline ; and when they camero the fide oi the water, flie would gladly have declined going on it, but ftie feared ic would appear particular, and be remarked by the company. She could not help obferving the looks of anxiety which Sir Walter frequently caft towards his fon, whofe attentions to Mifs Otway feemed forced and conftrained, whiie flie appeared to be delighted, and talked and laughed without ceafing. Rofa¬ line had always difliked her mafculine manners, but on this evening ihe thought her more than commonly dilagreeabie. She had felt far from well ail day, and the motion
motion of the boat made her fo faint and giddy, that Lady Edgecumbe, obferving her look pale, faid— ** Rofaline, my dear, I am afraid you are not well p* She anfwered that ihe was rather faint ; and as ihe feared it was the eífeét of the boat, if they would have the goodnefs to fet her on ihore, ihe would return home· The rowers were immediately ordered to put back to the land, and Rofaline, accom· panied by Henrietta, left the party, and turned towards the Hall. When her return was propofed by Lady Edgecumbe, Adolphus had ftarted from his feat, as if to attend her j but a look from his iather at once filenced him, and obliged him to refeat himfelf by Mifs Otway, who caft a fatirical glance at Mrs. Edgecumbe» which was returned by one equally malig¬ nant
nant from that lady. Rofaline had before remarked that Mrs. Edgecumbe had treated her with a fort of filent contempt and marked neglect, ever fince her entrance into the family* The air, foon after flie left the boat, guite recovered her from her giddineis, and ihe walked flowly towards the Hall, where, when flie arrived, flie retired to her apart¬ ment, attended by her friemd, who promifed to ftay by her while fhe laid down, to reco¬ ver from a violent head-ache, which had fuc¬ ceeded the giddinefs. It grew better towards night, and when the party returned from their excurfion, Lady Edgecumbe came, with her ufual affectionate folicitude, to enquire after her ; and, finding her ftill far from well, promifed to excufe her joiniog the company. Anna alfo vifited her -, and, when again left alone with Henrietta, fhe arofe, and, as ft was a remarkably fine evening, fat on a fofa at the window, where they wers ( together admiiyng the rifing moon,
moon, when a gentle rap being heard at the chamber-door, Henrietta, on opening it, to the furprife of both, admitted Adolplius. " May I be permitted to enquire after Rofaline ?" faid he, haftily. <c Certainly," faid Henrietta, " and you will be glad to find her better.*' cc One moment," faid he, as he ap¬ proached her, <ς is all I dare allow myfelf for what, did not cruel neceffity compel me to abridge it, how willingly would I not dedi¬ cate the whole evening !'* Rofaline, affecting perfect compofure, only anfwered to his anxious enquiries, that fhe was quite recovered ; and he very foon left them, evidently much hurt at the cold- neíš of her manner. On the following morning, Rofaline again joined tlie company at breakfaft, after which, Hei rietta being engaged with her mother, (he retired alone to the library, where
fwhere flie took up a book, tn order to d!f- pel the gloomy thoughts which, for the laft two days/had involuntarily intruded them- felves upon her mind; but fhe was not inclined to read, and, after vainly trying to attend to the fubject it treated of, flie was again laying it down, when Henrietta, with looks more than commonly dejected, entered the library. Rofaline, inftantly perceiving fomething had interrupted her natural .evennefs of temper, eagerly enquired what had happened. Henrietta, at length, told her that her father, at the fuggeftion of her elder brother, had propofed to Adolphus a iarriage with Mifs Otway, The former had, at firft, heard it with lorror, declaring the only fentiments with rhich Mils Otway had hitherto infpired »m, were difguft and diflike. The extreme lifpleafure of Sir Walter had, however, lduced him, at length, to behave towards ter with a greater degree of attention, though It was evidently againft his own inclination. This
This circumftance had at once opened the eyes of Sir Walter, and he now, too late, difcovered the error he had been guilty of, in allowing Adolphus to refide fo much at the Hall, where, he too plainly faw, he had imbibed and cheriihed an attachment, which, he had many reafons tp believe, was mutual. This fufpicion was ftrengthened by the behaviour of Adolphus the preceding evening, who, when Rofaline was obliged to leave the party, had arifen to offer his aflift· ance in conduding her home. Sir Walter had alfo obferved that he was not the only perion by whom this fufpicion was enter¬ tained, as the fignificant looks which paffed between Mrs. Edgecumbe, Colonel Otway, his fifler, and Maria convinced him his fon's partiality was too obvious to ??? unnoticed. In this he was the next morning con* firmed by his elder fon, who expatiated to his father on the many advantages which 4 would
would accrue to Adolphus from a marriage wich Mifs Otway. He was anfwered by Sir Waiter, that he fnould be truly rejoiced were it to take place, provided Adolphus could by any means be perfuaded to change the difadvan- tageous opinion he had conceived of her. At this young Edgecumbe, with a fati¬ rical ímüe, faid— 4É His inattention and rudeneis to Mifs Otway, a woman of the firft fafliion, are certainly as evident as his prediledion in favour of Roialine, who, for the fake ofthe family honour, I think ought immediately to be removed," Though Sir Walter had not a very high opinion of his elder foil's judgment, yet in this inftance ic coincided fo exactly with his own opinion (family pride being vol. i» d the
the only failing lie poftcfied in an eminent degree), that, when left alone, he began ferioufly to reflect on tlie means of removing from his fon an obied ac once lo dangerous and fo attråd i ve.
CHA?. III.
*' ?.??!> me to footh the he!^4.*; or;•':m'; priet, ** With trui*v ??? rhe ^ ïcîoiv'* woesaifuagc, ft To Mifery** meting cry afford relief, ft And b«the lure lUuurcc ol droo|itrg age : " So, u li?n the gcniii iptìrgr of lift indi fade, ** And ilnki^g juiti 1 , e uw n- ihe dread ilecay, ** Some foul con génül ther. may lend its aid, ** And gild the cío, e ut" Uì^'ì eventful day/* t L EGY TO Pi T ?
JL HE intelligence communicated by Hen¬ rietta, ftruck on the heart of Rofaline a fen¬ fation as new as it was terrible. In the manner
manner of Sir Waiter towards her, fhe had obferved a referve which furprifed ana alarmed her. She hid ever revered him as her father, and Lived him with the trueíl filial affection j flie had always tried, bo¬ iler reipect and attention, to evince the gra¬ titude with which her heart overflowed, wh.cn flie reflected on his unccafing kindnefs to her from her infancy ; and the dreadful remembiance that, fliould he forfake her, ihe had not one friend in the world to look up to for pity and protection, filled her heart with fãdr.cib, ?? flic indulged her melancholy meditations in a ionel v walk in the evening, when iht rell ot the company were engaged at cards. Henrietta having been obliged to make up a party, flie ft rolled out alone to a Gothic temple in the plantations, which had been newly decorated for young Edge¬ cumbe' s marriage. It contained an inner room, where ihe had been accuftomed to repair with Henrietta, and while they worked or drew, Adolphus played or read to them. A melancholy foreboding feemed to tell he/, υ 1 as
as İlie entered, that thofe were icenes of happinefs İlie was never agii n deftined r» experience ; and the ferious hour of a iercm; evening contributing to aflht her reverie, ihe placed herfelf on a fofa that ftood near one of the cafements, and, rec'ining her head on the fide of it, remained loft m meditai ion. A fudden exclamation, pronounced clofe to her, arouicd her ; fhe ftarted up, and beheld Adolphus ftanding at the entrance from the outer room, in appearance as much abforbed by reflection as herfelf. Trying to conceal the embarraifment he felt, he approached her, and, with a forced gaiety, enquired why ihe was there alone, and where flie had left Henrietta.—He then aíked if ihe was quite recovered from her yefterday's indifpofition ; and, on her replying that ilie was nowperfedly well, he paufed a moment, and then exclaimed—
"Oh
·« Oh Rofaline! what muft yoia have thought of him you have hitherto honoured by calling àr$tãer % when I bit night fuffered you to return alone to the Hal!, without even oficring my affiftance, at a time you fa evidently ftood in need of it * But, believe mc, your tuficlings were fmall indeed, when coi»4<aud vvUh \. hac 1 interualiy endured at *ik ι: ?* by fad neceffity, compelled to iurbcar ¿ttteoah.g you/* ** Theie i;ccuä not any apology, Sir/* returned RcLUnc, ** nor was mere the fmalleft occafion for giving you any trouble." " Am 1 then to conclude," exclaimed he, dejectedly, u by the cold diftance ot your manner, tiiat though 1 have involuntarily given you offence, (Heaven knows now un* ¡ùingly !} I am to be quite discarded your friendfhip ? Oi. ! could'you know the miiery I have for theie two days endured, you would not thus refent what fatal necef¬ fity could alone have pievaüed on tne with reluctance to confent to. From Henrietta a 3 you
you have doubtlefs heard the horrid propo· Cd that has been made me b/ my father—a propofal which fiom no lips but his could I have retained lufiicient patience to liften to for a moment, without rtkclíng it with the difguft with which it infpired me ! But this," added he* ftarting up with vehemence, ° is not all \ another, an infinitely more painful facnfice is required of me !—Your friendfliip, your efteem, Rofaline, 1 ;ruft refign for ever ! Never more muft I call you by the endearing name of fifter —never more indulge the delightful id^a of being efteemed by ycu as a brother. The ftruggles of my mind to impoie upon itfelf a tafk fo hard, you muft have perceived ; and if, in making the vain attempt, 1 have loft your regard, my wretchedneis will be complete !" *' Why, Adolphus," fJ.d Rofaline, fof- tened by the extreme dejeâion in his look and minner, tc fliould you form fuch an opinion, or doubt my retaining that elicerà for
for you, which, as a brother, you are entitled tor * t Ah, Ronfine l* replied he, fi I muft not now confider ni) felf as related tö you by mere fraternal tits. Happy 'm the uninterrupted enjoyment of your fociety, 1 never examined my own heat t , or thought you polii Oed a greater íhare of it than, as a filler, I fancied I might, without fear of danger, grant you. Hut the events of )efterday taught me my error, and fulîy revealed to ine the Li* iu-.y oí the k.f-dclufivm 1 have to long *udu:geu ! Rofafne, now much confufed, arofe, and m Ipue of his efforts to detain her, would have left him ; but he would not fuffer her to go rill ihe had heard ail he wifiied to fay, adding, dejeâediy — " You furely wil! not refufe to hear me* when this may, perhaps, be the laft and only opportunity 1 ihail have of feeing yuu unnoticed, fince, huwever this affair may o 4 conclude*
conclude, within a very fliort time I muft jinn the regiment, where a final period may, perhaps, be put to an cxiftence I can never value, unlefs you deign to take feme intereft İn it. Tell me then, Rofaline, how am î to ad ? Your advice muit be falutary." f *Oley your father l* replied Rofaline, in as firm a voice as flic could command. ** Confult your own heart, Adolphus, and it v.ill tell you that that alone will ¿?^?? you feif-approbation ; and, fince my ill fate has made me the inftrument to prompt you to difobedience, forget you ever beheld me !" ** How happy you are!" iaid he, re¬ proachfully, u to be able to advife with fuch indifference !" " Do not reproach me with, indifference l* replied fhe, almoft thrown off her guard by h;s melancholy air, and the dejected tone of his voice : ** perhaps^-—" fhe recollected herfelf, and flopped·— u perhaps," thought flie, " it would have been better ior me, lud I indeed poffeiTeJ it !" « Perhaps
« Perhaps what !" exclaimed Adolphus, wildly throwing himfelf on his knees* * f Oh beloved Rofaline I do not hefitate to conclude what you would have faid/* He had not time for more.—Rofaline, alarmed at the paiTionate vehemence of his manner, and confeious how improper it was for her to have heard what he had already faid, was ftruggling to withdraw the hand he had forcibly íèized, when, happening to caft her eyes towards the entrance of the temple, her ftrength, and ahnoft her lèníês, iorfook her at beholding Sir Walter himfelf, ftand¬ ing as if petrified with amazement at what he beheld. His eyes were caft, with a look of anger and indignation, towards his fon, who, totally unconfeious of his father's pretence, continued to detain her, uttering the moft frantic expreffions, till, perceiving the terror depiäed on the features of Roia¬ line, he ftarted up, and beheld his father. The latter, without advancing nearer, faid, in a fterner voice than they had ever heard him fpeak*— p j <f When
4 * When you are at kifure to attend to the commands of your father. Adolphus, I would fpeak with you ¡n my ftudy l' and, with a bafty ftep, le turned from them to\\ard> the houle, Lining Rofaline ftupificd with terror and mortification, and deprived of all power to move. As foon, however, as ilie recovered fufii· cient p.efencc of mind, perceiving Adol¬ phus ftood hefitating and irrefolute, íhe exclaimed— "Oh, follow your father! D:lay not a moment to mitigate his juftly incenfed anger, to tell him that from me he ihall r,ever moie have caufe of uneafinefs ! Alas I how unfortunate n.uft I ever deem myielf, in being now the unvrilîing cauie of it !" So fai ing, that he might have no pretence for not obeying the commands of his father, ihe inftantly quitted the temple, and returned, as tjuick'y as her trembling limbs would con ve> her, to the Hall· In no humour to
to join the company, ihe retired to her chamber, where ihe was followed by the moft bitter reflections. The late unfortu¬ nate rencontre had at once diiclofed to her view aH the dangers of her fituation, and convinced her that, unknown to herfelf, Ihe had naurilhed in her bofom an attacliment wakh, it was too probable* would imbittcr evtrv mtrre hour of her life, and which Ibe was ? died on, by every tie of duty and gratitude, to fupprefs. Slie dreaded the anger ei her beiu fact ors; now (he fancied it would induce them to banifh her from their family and protection for ever, and return her to the indigence irom which their bounty refcued her ; and ???' (he thought that, as the native benevolence of Sir Waiter and Lady Edgecumbe would prevent their dis¬ carding her wholly, íhe fliould be fu ife. ed to remain where lhe was, though deprived of that fond parental affi tt ¡on which flie had hitherto experienced from them. This idea was more painful than the other ; and while the ? as tormenting herfelf with a variety of ? 6 meiancnoly
melancholy fuggeftions, Henrietta entered, and, perceiving by the dejedion i:nj rinted on the countenance of her friend, that fomething had happened to create in her unuiual uneafinefs Ihe eagerly begged to be informed ot its caute, Rofaline immediately, with her accuf¬ tomed frauknefs, related the interview with her brother, and Sir Walter's diicoveiy. " You wiîi perhaps wonder," faid Hen* rietta, in anfwer, " when 1 inform you I am not ίο much furprifed as grieved at uhat you tell me» Alas, Rofaline, who couid live with you, and not love you ?" « Oh Henrietta !" faid Rcfaline, " I fear 1 have been, and am deftined to be, the fatal caufe of much anxiety to thofe to whom I am indebted perhaps even for the prefervation of my exiftence ; and I will endeavour to picpare foi being ibr everdif- c. 3 rded their efteem, though, in pity to my deierted fituation, they may ftill aftbrd me their protection : but if I am to lofe that affeftion,
a'ffection, chicli it has hitherto been my principal ftudy to merit, the hrc they have p*eferved will be no bnger cf value, and I had hetter return, ior the miferable remain¬ der of it, to t4at obicurky from whence tlieir benevolence drew me !" " Your fears, my beloied Roialine," faid i íenrietra, *« are, believe me, wholly groundlcfs. My father's j υ fiice will not, I a.n fore, fufilr him to chfeontinue fas pro¬ tecting care oi you, and my mother loves you too well to part with you io eafily. But you had now better return to the drawing room ; our abience may perhaps be remarked.** Aware it .might be right to affeft indif¬ ference fhe could not feel, Rofaline agreed, and defcended to fupper. The Baronet was gloomy and referved^ and Adolphus, who did not make his appearance till they were feated at table, wore fuch an air of chagi in and embai rafil- ment»
ment, that it coukl not but excite the at¬ tention of the company. Rofaline felt greatly relieved when tiie hour of retiring arrried ; but flie in vain fought repofe : for the íbft time in her life, it long fled from her pi low, and when, at length, Ihe was vifited b\ fteep, it was fhort and difturbed. She arofe earl·/, and defcended to break- 4 * fails with the want of reft vifibly impreficd on her counienai.ee. Immediately after- # wards, Henrietta being engaged with her elder fü\er y (lie retired alone to her apart¬ ment, u here flie had only been a few mo¬ ments, n hen a lervant came to inform her Sir Walter waited her attendance in his ftudy. The íbund feemed to flrike a damp on the heart of Roialine, W' ith trembling fteps flic obeyed the fummons, md 9 on entering the ftudy, found the Baronet fitting thoughtfully at a table. He aroiè, and having c«ofed the door, and defired that íhe would be feated, faid—
" After
fl After what palila hft night, Rofaline, voucaniut be iurpitûd ar rcceivttig from me the iinmnom 1 juft now lent you ι but, beiieve me, I mean not lo wo^nd }ou by reproaviies, or diftrefs you by unavailing cu-ijfity. The lirft, I am wdl aware, iny OA-n i.tiprudence i;as merited, and the Litter is amply gratified. My prefent bufinefs with you is to difcLiê a circumftance refpecting your birth, which it is now neccf¬ firy you ftiould know, it is ? painful talk to be neceifitated to wound feelings 1 know to be naturally acute ; but as î a fo know you to pnflvfs a fortitude far above your years, 1 lhad truft to }our native rectitude of princìj le, which will, I have no doubt, teach you to endure it with becoming firninefs. *' You have frequently heard from me that Mr. Mel χ an, the worthy man you have hitherto thought was your father, com¬ mitted you, on his death-bed, to my care* Finding himfelf near the awful period that would terminate his exiftence, he fent for mc, and defired a private conference : I readiîy
readily granted it, for I revered his character, and honouitd Im virtues. When we were left alone, he addreflcd me in t lie following words: * Fr m a perfid knowledge of the genini humanity for which your cha¬ racter is Ic juftly celebrated, I have, Sir, entreated this interview, to difclofe to vou a fecret which, for more than fix v ears, 4 j * I have preferved inviolable, h relates to my poor orphan, Rofdine, who will be fo very foon di veiled of the only friend of her unprc teci cd inta; ??. She has been hitherto regai ded, by the world in general, as my own daughter ; but this packet, which wik inform you oi tne au fu! and myfterious man¬ ner in which ihe was committed to my care, will, at the fame time, .acquaint you that (he bears no degree of affinity to mc. W hen I entreat you, Sir, to fupply to her ihat parent, which I meant, had Heaven thought proper to have prolonged my days, to have reprefented to her, 1 know I am addrefilng one who will confeientioufly difcharge the facred truft, to wiiich you wiil fee you were nominated
nominated by one who had a right to difoofe of her.* ** Saying this, he put into my hands this paper, which J have carefully preferred, begging me to keep it till you were of an age to be informed of the niyfte* rious circumftances attending your birth. This paper you İhaîl yourfeif perme i it is in Mr. Mclvaits own hand «writ ing, tand will explain to you »'very neceffary circumftance. 1 * Willi a trembling hand, Rofaline opened ¿t, and read as follows ;—
TO AOïAt.INE MELVAN. " Long ere thefe lines reach you, beloved child of my care, the hand wnicii pens them, and the now feeble fiume of which it is 4 part, will be delcended m peace to u.e quiet grave. ììju before mete e^es ^*e ciciai in long obdvion from the world» I Eiuftrehte ? tale, which will fill your gentle bofom widi fadiicf, and will i..fotni you that he, whom vou luve been tauiht to regard
regard as your father, has no right to the title from vou. * f ït is new neariy fix years fince 1 undertook a journey, on bufmefs, to the north of England 9 and, being obliged to ileep on the road, 1 had one evening entered late at an mn, where I propofed to fjKrnd the night, and was retiring to my chamber, when, ?? l j,aífed along a paílàge that led to it, a h w iound, like ioiwe one in lament¬ at ion, iuddeUv icachtd m\ ear* I ftopped, and faw a door in part opea, clofe ? me. 1 involuntarily uppruaclicd it, and pirn'md a tall young woman, in deep mourning, knesiing by a bed, on which lay an infant aileep, to whom íhe appeared to be addrefl¬ ing her melancholy ioliloquy. * Alas, f* cet innocent !' faid flic, * how en¬ viable are thy balmy ilumbers 1 Unconfeious of the miiery endured by thy wretched parent, or of thy own calamitous birth, thy deep is unintenupted by any of thoie woes, thofe racking anxieties that tear the boíbm of thy forrowing mother l She
tê She reclined her head on the bed as fhe Ipoke, and, in a few minutes, itemed to try to rife ¿ bnt from extreme weaknefs lhe was fo unable to fuppori herfelf, that it was with difficulty ihe tottered to a chair, on which íhe fat down î and, leaning her arms on a table, rcfted her bead on ι hem* apparently abforbed by grief. From the tranfient view I had gained of her face, íhe appeared to have been very beau¬ tiful. Her countenance was pale and ema* dated, and the vifibîe dcfpondence in her loaks interefted me fo,that, had Înot feared I ihould alarm her, 1 would have entered to en¬ quire if I could have been of any fervicelo her. 46 After I reached my chamber, the image of the interefting ftranger foi lowed me to my pillow, and 1 determined to make fome enquiry concerning her on the follow* ing morning. Much fatigued by travelling, í had juít íaiíen into a ilumber, when í was again awakened by a loud rapping at my chamber-door. I luftened to opea it, and perceived tlie landlady of the inn, who*
who, with looks of diftrefs, and a voice oi terror, told me a lady was dying in the houfe, who, hearing there was a Divine in it, had entreated to fee him 9 but added that if I did not haften, it would be of no ufe, as the phvfician had laid ilie had a very ihort time to live. " I complied inftantly with the re¬ queft, and followed her to the fame chamber, where a few hours before I had witneifed the fcene I have defcribed· But how greatly was I fliocked to find, as I approached the bed, that the object of my vifit was no other than the young woman who had then fo interefted my attention 1 At her requeft I read the office for the fick, after which ihe defired to be left alone with mc j and, as foon as every one had quitted the room, İhc faid, in a feeble voice— f Heaven has heard my ardent prayers, and fent one who will prove a protector to ihe helplefs innocence of my haplefs infant, when, by the hand of Death, I am fevered from her for ever. Perhaps/ added íhe, € you are a father : ii ycu are, 1 conjure you, as you hope
hope for the divine mercy to ihed its influence over your own offspring* take the care of this deierted babe, and be to her a ^father and a friend l —As íhe faid this, Ibe pointed to ihe child I had before feen, who dill lay ileepingby her.—* ] feel,* continued riie fair fufferer, 'that a few—a very few minutes wiil terminate the hfe and woes of lier who now a Id reifes you, to whom time will not be granted to reveal her woeful fitua« «ion, wl'ich, by a long and calamitous ftory, vou could alone be made acquainted with. İ crhaps, had its wretched purent furvived, it would have been fated to be reared in obfeurity, though of illuftrious birth/ " Her breath now became fo ihort, it was u ith difBculty flie could articulate ; and fearing her laft moment was approaching, after pro¬ mifing to protect and be a.parent to her child, 1 would have called in the attendants, but fhe prevented me.—^ One thing more I would fay,* added ihe : * never till flie has attained the age of maturity, (ftiould fhe be permitted by the Being, who has already 6 preferved
preferved her infant life, through innume¬ rable hardships, to furvive fo long) nevei till then let her know her birth, which I would haften, while time İs lent me, İn fome meafure to elucidate.* "She flopped, fell intoa ibrt of con vul fîon, and, for fome hours afterwards, was deprived of fpeech. Being, however, again a little re¬ vived, flie once more, in a very taint voice, ad * drefled me, faying—* You have, perhaps, heard of Sir Walter Edgecumbe ?*—I replied in the affirmative.— i To him, had I lived longer, 1 intended to have applied for pity and protection. Though in no degree related to me, his benevolence and philanthropy would have induced him to aftbrd it/— Then fuddenly feeling herfelf, as I fuppofe, woife, flie clafped to her dying bofom the babe befide her, exclaiming—* Adieu ! fweet image of him your little form inceifantly recais to my memory ! Ah, fliould you be ever deftined to behold him, perhaps you may remind him, by a perfonal refemblance, of his loft, his doubtlefs lamented Rofaline l " She
<c She had fcarcely concluded thefe words, when, before fhe had time to enter on a recital of her wo^s, (he (udder*ly fell into violent convnlficns, in which, in lefs than an hour, (lie expired. All I could learn of her at the inn was, that me had arrived there in a poft chaife two days before, with her child, apparently very ill at that time ; but that fhe had fmce appeared better till the middle ofthe night on which I was called to her : and, exprefhng an eager defire to have a Clergyman lent for, was told by the landlady tliere was one in the houfe, and at her defire 1 was fum- moned to her, as 1 have related. All the luggage íhe had with her, was a fmall trunk, containing a few necefiary articles of clothes for herfelf and infant, and a fmall cafket of jewels, which, in the hope that they may hereafter tend to a difcovery of your birth, my deareft Rofaline, you will receive when this is delivered to you. <c There now only remains to add, that I took you home with me, where your infantine
infantine fweetnefs, and peculiar fituation, created in Mrs. Melvan the affection of a fond mother for you. As foon as 1 could, I made enquiries after Sir Walter Edgecumbe; but, though many knew his character, few were acquainted with his refidence, which I never difcovered till 1 was preiented to -a living a few miles from Edgecumbe Hall.— This, my beloved ward, is the tale İ had to relate to you, which 1 propofe committing to the care of him, wdio, 1 doubt not, will prove a father to you, when I am he refe of the power of protecting you. That the Being, whofe providence conducted me to your unfortunate mother, to relieve her ma¬ ternal anxiety for your future welfare, may ever watch over and guard you from fimilar mifery, and that, by a perfeverance in the path of rectitude, you may ever merit his mercies, is the firft, and will be the laft and ardent prayer of Cf FRANCIS MELVAN.'*
Such
Such was the paper which, with the cafket of jewels found in the trunk of her ill- fa:ed mother, Sir Water now put into the hands of Rosine. Her tears fell plentifully as íhe perufed İt, an J a little relieved hsr full i.eart. When ihe uad İn fome degree recovered the firft Ihock, which the recent ditcovcry had given to her feel¬ ings, Sir Walter continued his difcourfe. " 1 need not lay with what read inefs 1 complied with the requeft ofthe worthy Mr. Alehan; and I hope, Rofa*ine, you have c\cr ibu.. d in me the friend 1 have wiihed to piove my Lltl* Ile ctaíld · ? but, overcome with a variety ot emotions, Rofaline could not aniwer, raid he continued— <c The difcovery of laft night 1 have long fecrctly anticipatevi; but \ v an ung refolution, or rather not wiftimg to give credit to it, I have deferred all enquiry, till it became too VOL. Ι, E COnfpicuOUS
confpicuous to pafs unnoticed, brom a knowledge of your friendfliip for my daughter, I am forry to be tinder the necef¬ fity of giving pain to both by a feparation ; but the honour of my family, and the peace of my fon require it, and it has been my ftudy to feek out for you an afylum, at once fafe and agreeable." " Oh, do not, Sir !" exclaimed Rofaiine, " caft away a thought on me ! When depr ved ofthat favour and cfleem which have hitherto compoied the chief happinefs of my life, it is of little confequence where the wretched remainder of it is fpent." " My efteem, Rofaline," replied Sir Walter, <c you will ever retain, and this ready acquiefcence in my wiihes convinces me I had formed a right judgment of your difpofition : but, to fhorten a converfation I fie it is painful to you to fupport, I muft men¬ tion that I think we have difcovered a proper and, I hope, a pleafant afylum for you with .my fifter Lady Delford. She has no daughter or female companion ; her fon is abroad, and flie
ihe will be happy to receive you for as long a time as you find a refidence with her agreeable to you. Your own good fenfe 9 Rofaline, I am weil aware, will point out to you the neceffity of adopting fome plan ; and, after revolving the fubject; in our minds, Lady Edgecumbe and I have fixed on this as much the m'jft eligible, provided it meets with no oppofition from you. Lord Deîford's houfe cannot fail of being a plea¬ fant refidence to a young perfon, as they are in the higheft ftyle of life, and keep company of the firft rank. I will now, therefore, releafe you, and truft to your own honour to conceal from my ton the place cf your intended removal ; and 1 will take cure that, previous to it, you fhall experience no uneafinefs from him. He \ull quit the Hall in a few days, and need not know that you are to leave it." Then, defiring her to reflect on what he had faid, and as foon as fhe had determined whether it were confonant to her wifhes, to e 2 give
70* ARIEL. give him an anfwer, he left the room; and Rofaline, melancholy and difconlblate, re¬ turned to her ajiartment, where a frcfli and little lefs painful leene awai: cd her. Henrietta had been, for fome time, in fearch of her, and hearing flic was with her father in the Rudy, hc<\ awaited, with trem¬ bling expectation, the event of their con¬ ference. Her foreboding heart feemed to predict it was the harbinger of an approach¬ ing feparation from her beloved friend, which, on Rofaline's return, fhe was con¬ firmed in. The indulgence of their mutual gi'^ei was interrupted by a fummons for Henrietta to attend her mother. Left alone, the feverely humbled Rofaline tiied to collect her icattered thoughts; but the more ibe reflected on what had paiTec!, the more plainly (lie faw it was a long con¬ ce, tea fcheme, which, till ripe for execution, L id not been opened to her. She faw " our^ Edgecumbe and his Lady confidered her
her as a bar to their ambitious projects of aggrandizing the family by Mifs Otway's ipkndid fortune ; and hearing the whole party were to quit the i lall the following day, flie determined to confine herielf to her chamber, that ihe might not nik ieeing Adolphus, except when the family was prefent*.
\
CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
*« Dtaî ItìKtìy hm\*n cf ?? etince an I ????, «' Peats of thy }?>??| «br« ever) ίμοη cevìd pkbít î '* How «fim have l putd e^ every eh^rm— fI iliç (Leitern coi, the cultivated larm I 11 Guotiikav^ns ? what fun owe gbomVI that jtfirtsr.g " Thsî caìiM türm from their native walks away : «* When the pot,r exiles, every plrafurc ??(1, «· Hung ????? the bowers,and fo«>iiy !????1 the« bft !** C'ObDSMtTH, # ADOLPHUS, in the meantime» had had wiih Î1İ.Î father a full explanation. He had rclbli.tvly declared his fixed attachment to llcfaline, which nothing, he addv*d, coukl ever induce him to transfer to another, aud to
to her muft his heart be ever fondly devoted, even if his parents perfifted in forcing him to accept the hand of Mib Otwav. Ytnduig all rcafoning or expoíblatíon at this time vain, Sìr Walter was obliged to give up the point for the prelent ; but this ????????, he told hmi, was ordy on condi¬ tion that he (hould immediately join his regiment, which was Rationed in the north of England. To this arrangement Adolphus was obliged to confent ; and on the morning they iet out, Rofaline retired to her room the moment íhe had breakfalbd, that the uggiti not be prefent at the ceremonial of taking kave, Henrietta came to her as foon as they were gone. A melancholy parting, ihe faid, had taken place with Adolphus who bade his father and mother farewel m Lady e 4 Edgecumbe's
Edgecombe's dreßing*rocm. He came down ftairs with affcüed cheerfulnefs, aot!» after he had aßcäionatcly taken leave ol her, he fakl, ¡n a low voice—> ct Tell your fr. cet friend, Hcnrietta,-#.at if I daad Lope ihc iliîl retains for me anv porción of efteem, aîitr the uneatiuciš 1 ftrr.r î havr ciufed her, İ w-yj.d leave with you my a,dent wiihes that ihe may ever experience the felicity ilie merits,'* Then, afraid of being obferved by his father or brother, he haftily left her, ar.d mounted his horfe. ?o~m after the departure of their guefts, Roialine was again fummoned îo attend Sir Walter, who enquired if ihe had thought of what he had propofed, and whether it met with 1er approbation. On heranfwerins in the affirmative, he faid he had j nil received a lett ?* from bs filler, to
to inform fcîm fhe íhould be ?η Wales the foliou ing week, to fpend a fovdays; ma if Mifs Melvan thought flie fhould ? pre¬ pared by that time for her journey, would be happy with her company back to town. The tears of Rofaline were her only anfver, and flie retired deprediti to her chamber, to commence the melancholy preparations for quitting the happy refidence of her childhood. When alone, a native pride, whicli con¬ feious reäitude infpired, determined her to difpel, by exertion, the weight of woe on her mind. The Hall had hitherto been ? fcene oi domeftic happinefs and focul com· fort—but how bitter was now the reverfe ! Clouds fat on every brow, and tears feemed to ftart from every e)e, when that of any one ofthe family met the dejected countenance of Rofaline. Lady Edgecumbe loved her as a daughter j but lhe was compelled to acquiefce in the plan that had been formed E 5 to
to part from her, though her own inclina* tion would have mad¿ her objeft to it, had not the high idea fhe entertained of Sir Walter's fuperior judgment determined her to be guided wholly by him. Anna felt as her mother did i and Henrietta, whofe fond¬ nefs for Roialine was rather increafed than diminiihcd fince their feparation had been refolved on, tnccflantiy lamented her ap¬ proaching departure. They were regretting the fad neceffity there was to part, in one of iheir evening walks, when a fenant fummoned them to the drawing room, where they were by Sir Waiter inttoduccd to Lady Delford. She was a fine woman, about forty, elegantly habited, and of the moft faihionable man· ners. She received Rofaline with greai polite¬ nefs, telling her the hope of making fo pleafant an addition to their family had induced
induced her to take a journey into Wales, where ilie had not been for many years. She wa c the only filler of Sir Waker, and had been united, at an early period, to Lord Deiford, who, much ftruck by her perfonal charms, had made propofals to her father. The old Baronet, greatly flattered by the profpect of an alliance ίο noble for his daughter, readily yielded his confent j and Lady Delford had, for rmny )ears, been one ofthe moft confpicuous and admired figures in the circles of fathion» They had one fon, who was at prefent abroad on his travels 9 and his mother, whofe lifi was pafled in a round of faihionable gaiety, had felt no objection to having fuch a young perfon, as Sir Walter had deicribed Rofaline to be, to aifociate with during thoie hours in the country which bad weather or indiipofition obliged her to ipend alone. She had fo great an averfion to every place except town, that had not fome very urgent bufi¬ nefs required Lord Delíords preience within ? 6 twenty
twenty miles of the Hail, Rofaline would not, probably, have hai lhe honour of being fetched by her Ladyihip, who had not feen her brother for ionic ytars. She ridi¬ culed his partiality to his ??? tamil y fe¿t, and laughed at the domdtic education he and Lady Edgecumbe had given their daughters; but notwithftanding their difference of opinion, a correfpoi dence had been regularly kept up betwcxn them : and as it was determined that Rolline ihcud become one of their family, ihe at length agreed to her Lord*s proposal of paying a long-promifed vifit to her brother. Three days were the utmoft ihe could be prevailed on to ftay. On the third Lord Dtlford arrived to dinner. He was quite a man of faíhíon, but fome years older than his Ladv. Out of refpect to their guefts, Rofaline could not leave tlie drawing-room all the day, which was to be the laft of her refidence at
at the Ha!! j and wms obliged to preferve an appearance < f compofure, while her heait was aching with grief When ihe retired f *r the night, the feît fo litt'e ir.iiincd to fleep, that, atter having fpent a melancholy hour with I lennetta m her dr-v Iti :*g»room, flie r.-ibived to venture in:o the pi mations, to pay a fare.\el v»ilt to thofe İpoî?, in which fhe had pafied fo many h-ppy hours. It was a quiet ferene night ; the iky was richly fpang!ed with ftars, and lhe fiiver rays of the moon glittered between the flirubs, as flie walked pen lively towards the Gothic temple, which had once been her favourite refort, when with Henrietta Ihe had been accuftomed to fpend there a great part of their time. As ihe entered it, the foreboding vvhich, when íhe laft vifited it, had ftruck on her heart, now recurred to her; and flie fighed deeply on refiecUng that this might, perhaps, be the laft time ilie 6 fhould
fliou-d ever enter the loved retreat, which had witnefled ίο ??; ? hour* of ïeücity,- — Sle pLictd lieifelî »ή tl e lame Lfa, where a few evenings before flv; l ad been turprifed Hv Adolphus. ? flood ly the wìihIow, \.h'Cii commanded an extenfive profjrt-Ci, beau¬ tifully divei filled with eve. y object tiiat coukl enrich the landfcape. Immediately under the cafement wasa thick plantation of evergreens, from which a narro* winding path led to a tree, with a feat ???? it, where flie had been frequently ufed to fit with Henrietta, and iketeh with their pencils the romantic views that might be feea from it. As flie now furveyed every well-known object for the laft time, her fad heart too plainly told her that the ha; pineis flic bad there experienced, had fled from lier for ever. ** Beloved retreat of my childhood ! fweet feenes of my earlieft infancy l* laid flie, as ihe mournfully lum yed the profpect before
before her, ** to-morrow I muft bid you an eternal adieu ! Ahb ! who can tell whe¬ ther 1 Ih ;1I ever again e^j^y tînt frli ity your peaceful pleaturcs have au rdeOl — felicity uninterrupted by die ad *f ine pre- fent, or iears for the future. Bjt now, difcarded by thofe by whom 1 have hithtrto been fupported, to whom ihall I look up for pity—to whom apply ibr protection ?** * r Fit tne ts its own prete flor % and mmceme ¡sever the peculiar care ofthe Deity /* laid a voice near her. She ftarted from her feat, and caft her eyes round the budding, but no one ap¬ peared; and before ihe could move from the fpot, where furprife and alarm had rivetted her, foft mufic, which appeared at no great diftance, played a ftrain fo fweetly foothing, that it feemed to calm every dif· cordant thought, and quiet every wounded feeling·
After
After it bad ceaf.d, (he remained in the fame attitude ot filent attention fortorne minutes b r p:n^ it v.oJxl return ; but it w r b heard no more, and had íhe been fuj er- ftit'.ous cr romantic enough to have indulged the idea, ibe could have fancied her gardian G:*n»i had defcendcd to calm ι c r mind, 2nd rendir i: afigntd to the approach- ir. g iepara: ??. Such were her refîefticns a 5 flie tra varied the winding path through the plantations in her return to the houfe ; but recollecting a favourite feat that ft, cd in a recefs formed by a fmall fquare cet out of the thicktft part of the wocd, fix fiepj ed from the path to take a Lift lo ,k ?. t it : but what was her difm -?* to diicover, by the bright ra\s of the moon, a figure reclining upon it !—She ftopped ; but the ruftling of her clothes a·* ongit the branches of the flirubs had already reached the ears of the perfon, ttfn, immediately ftarting, plunged into the thickeft
thickeft part oí the wood, and clilappcared. Fear made her now wiíh to haften back ;o her chamber, and, with as much (need as ihe could, ihe returned to the houie, which ihe reached without receiving any additional alarm. The melancholy reded ton that it would perhaps be the laft ιιιφι ihc ihould ever fpee.d un 'er the hoi] it. VU roef which, hai proved a fate and happy allium fro η help· lefs infancy to the prefent moment, would not allow her to get much fleep ; and ibe arofe early in the morning, after a reftlefs and difturbed night, to prepare for her journey. When Henrietta entered her chamber, flic found her up, and equipped for tra¬ velling, fitting, in a melancholy attitude, at the cafement, and indulging herfelf witli once more viewing the beloved profpect, bcfolv flic was torn from it for ever. The eves ef both, ?? the; met, filled wah tea's, Their
Their extreme grief would not allow them M converfe with compofure, and in a few minutes Lid ν Edeecumbe's woman came to inform Rofaline her Ladv defired to fee her. She inftantly obeyed the iummons ano found lur Lr.d\ ihip alone in her drelîîng- room, who told her ihe had lent to fpeak to her before brcaklaíl, a? fhe underftood Lady Delford intended letting out ¡mtr.e- duiclv aftcrAards. • " I wiih, my ? -ear Roulinc," faid Lady Edgecumbe, fi before you leave us, to give }cu ionjc iittb remembrance, wiiich may remind you, amidft the hfe of gaiuy you are gr.ing to ieaci, of ycur íl end* at tnc Hni." Saying this, ?^? p\it into :ht hands ofthe weeping Ro,aline a Pnuii caie, adding— " 1 flairer myfelf it vvill not be lefs acceptable for bcir«g a reiemblance of }our friend." Roiahne
Rofaline opened it, and found a beautiful locket, with the miniature of Henrietta on one fide, and on the other the hairs of the three fitters, plaited with that of her Lady¬ ihip. She endeavoured to exprefs her gra¬ titude, but the words died away on her lips ere her full heart would allow her to utter them.—Perceiving her diftrefs, her Lady¬ ihip laid— M You muft not, Rofiiîinc, increafe the forrow we iliall all feel at iofing you, by witneflmg your grief* for, believe mc, my fweet young friend, were 1 not certain that in Lady Dei! *d you will find one who vvill love you as 1 do, worlds (hould not iorce me topart with you. Nor muft you fuller yourfeif to believe the icparatbn is to be lafting 5 1 truft it wiil be merely temporary, and that, when fornQ unfortunate domeftic occurrences are once moie arranged, 1 ihan, I am iure with pleaiure, again receive my deareft Rolaíine, n ? lefs dear to me ior what her own cxcehcnco has c-uicd. Adieu,
Adieu, my fweet friend ! 1 well kilt ? the native rectitude of your principles, and can have no iears in committing to yourfeif the future guidance of your conduct; and in any thing material ihould you wifli for advice cr afliitance, remember that in Sir Walter and myfelf you will ever fìnd friends, to vvhom you may apply with a certainty of our fincere wiihes for your welfare, and our earneft defire to contribute, as much as is in our power, to your happi¬ nefs and comfort." The agonized heart of Roialine with difnculty allowed her to exprefs the grati¬ tude ftie felt, and (lie attended Lady Edge¬ cumbe to the breakfaft*room with a coun¬ tenance that betokened the anguifih of her mind. Sir Walter would not permit any formal parting between her and Henrietta; but as foon as their repaft was concluded, hurried her after Lady Delford to the carriage, which had
?» avl proceeded fome miles before flie began to recover the firft fhock of leaving the place where lhe had ίο happily ipent her earlieft ν ears. 4 Lord Delford rallied her on her love oi retirement, and his Lady laughingly told her Ihe would very foon wonder, when flie had íeen a little more of the world, how flie could ever find any charms in a place fo diftant from town·. Rofaiine, however, could not eafily credit t lie afluiance thev «ave her, that (he would ihortly regret having pafied fo much of her time in ieckifion, or tirat t he company flie would be introduced to would recompenfe herfor the lofs of Henrietta's fociety; nor could their united exertions avail to relieve ihe extreme depreffion that preyed on her ipirits for the firft two days ol lier journey.
????.
CHAP. V.
** The dom« w here PJta.ure ?<?? her n.Urîgl.î re-gi?, ** Here, ricliîy deck M, atímits the gorgeous train, " Tumuhutius grandeur crowds the bhzbg Ic,uate, " The rattìing chariots cSafh, ihe torches glare ; " Siire, feenes like tht!« no troubles e'er annoy— '* Sure, i\itd denote ??? unh erial jcy ! GOLDSMITH. JLiATE, on a gloomy evening in the be¬ ginning of November, they entered Lon¬ don. The noife and buz of the metro¬ polis, the rattling oí carriage?, the glare of lamps, and the thronging crowds Ín the ftreets, were to Rofaline fights as new as wonderful ; and it was no finali diverfion to Lord and Lady
Lady Delford to perceive with what eager- nes lhe gazed frotn the window of tbe carriage at every fleeting object, as they drove to an eleaant houfe in Grofvenor- fquare, where they alighted about tea oV*ock. The fatigues of her journey made Roialine glad to retire early to her chamber 5 but for lome hours ihe could not fieep for Iiftening to the various noifes in the ftreets. Weari- neis, liowever, at length overcame her, and flie clokd her eves in refreihing ilumbers till late in the morning. She accompanied Lady Delford after breakfaft in ? drive over great part ofthe town, to make purchafes, and view nev faíhions ; after which her Ladyihip faid they would juft call on a par¬ ticular friend in Cavendi fli- fquare, and return home to drefs for dinner. They were accordingly fet down at a large hand¬ fome houfe, where, on enquiring if Lady Aiundel was at home, they were uíhered up ftairs into a fplendid drawing-room, where they
they found her Ladyihip, who received them with the greateft pohtenefs. They were in a few minutes joined by her daughter, a fine lively girl, to whom Lady Delford introduced Rofaline, faying (he was a young fiiend whom flic had brought with her from the country. Cecilia Arundel was a genteel, fhewy figure ; and though ihe had few pretentions to beauty, the extreme good-nature im¬ printed on her countenance, and the taly elegance of her manners, greatly pleafed Rofaline. Educated in fiihionable lir*, a;.d living in an unceafing round of din-pacicn, her ideas of happinefs were bounded by the enjoyment of that fplendour and mag'iifi- cence which, flic had been taught to believe, were the firft requiíitcs to felicity. Her brother entered juft as they were departing, and attended them to the carriage. It had no íooner driven from the door, than her Ladyihip a&ed Rofaline how ilie hked Mifs Arundel, <c From
f * From what I have yet icen of her," replied Rofaline, « íhe appears to be ex* tremely pleafant." <e Oh, you will think her much more fo when you become better acquainted with her," faid Lady Delford ; «« Cecilia is a charming girl, and I flatter myfelf you will be very intimate with her* She is to be with us to-night, and then you will alfo fee more of her brother. He is a good- natured young man ; it is a pity he is fo elownifli in his manners, but he is at prefent very young, and will get oif that rufticity as he becomes more initiated into faihionable life." Rofaline now aiked if İlie expected com« pany that night. She anfwered in the affirmative, adding, they ihould only have a very fmall parly, whom they were afterwards to accompan} to Ranelagh«
VOL. I.
F
On
On entering the drawing-room juft before dinner, Roialine found, befides Lord and Lady Delford, a tall thin young man, who was introduced to her by the name of Warford. His manners were remarkably elegant and fenfibie, but grave and referved, and his whole converfation was tinged with the keeneft feverity of fatire. She iound, from the converfation at table, he was to be of the party in the evening, Befides Lady Arundel, her fon, and daughter, it confifted of feveral other friends of her Ladyihip, who were foon all engaged at cards, except Rofaline i İlie fat by, and towards the latter end of the evening was joined by Mifs Arundel. " Do you never play cards, Mifs Mel¬ van?" faid ihe. " Never," replied Rofaline ; " I know fo little of them, befides a natural diflike to the amufement, that I ihould only expofe my own
own want of Ikill, without deriving any entertainment from them.*' " I am fure, then/* returned Cecilia, " you are quite in the right not to play; but I fear you have then had a very ftupid evening. The latter part of it, however, you will be better amufed. Ranelagh is a charming place, and if you have never fecn it, you wiil be delighted with it.** *' î have no doubt of ¡t," faid Roialine, " but I am fo unaccuftomed to late hours, that Lady Delford will, I hope, excufe my attendance to-night.** " No, that I am fure, 1 * faid Mifs Arundel, €ζ flie will not. Befides, í fliall be ex- ceflively difappointed if you refufe togo." Lady Delford now approached, and on hearing the fubjeâ: of their converfation from Cecilia, faid— " Oh, you have miftaken Mifs Melvan ¿ flie could not furely be ferious !" f 2 " Indeed
** Indeed I am ferious,** faid Rofaline, " in not wiihing to go out fo late." " Oh my dear Rofaline,** faid her Lady- fnip, laughing, " we fhall foon modernize thofe pretty ruftic ideas of your*s ; imbibed at that fweet rural place, Edgecumbe Hail- Young Arundel now advanced towards them, and his fifter calling to him, faid— " Frank, come and help us to perfuade Mifs Melvan to relinquifti her refolution of not going with usto Ranelagh to-night." «* It certainly is not poffible flie can deli¬ berately have formed fo very cruel a deter¬ mination," faid he, approaching tbem, ** Oh, I could tell you fomething much more wonderful than that," faid Lord Del¬ ford, " that there is a young lady in the world wiio could, for two whole days, pre¬ ferve the traces of forrow on her counte¬ nance, at quitting an old country feat to vifit townJ' « There
« There may be attractions at that old country feat, as your Lordfhip terms it,'* laid Mr. Warford, ironically, «< which you are not aware of. Who, indeed, can difpute the charms of the country, and what car» be more delightful than the defcriptions we read, in fome of our modern Novels, of green meadows and (had y groves, enamelled with daifies, primrofes, and violets, and watered by a purling ftream or meandering rivulet ! and, to complete the charming defcription, the laft, though not the lead interefting- object in the landfcape—a gentle iwain finging, to the foft notes of his pipe, fome plaintive verfes he has compofed, to celebrate his kind or cruel fliepherdefs !" ci An admirable picture of Arcadi ? indeed i" faid Lord Delford, " And one," cried young Arundel, " that if it fuit Mifs Melvan's tafte, fbe can eafily realize. Where will you find finer mea* dows, more beautifully enamelled* than St. James's and the Green Park ? Or if you prefer fliady groves, they are in abundance f 3 ?
in Kenfington Gardens ; and as for a rural fwain, I can beat any Strcphon, Colin, or Da¬ mon of them all, at a fonnet or a love elegy !" <f You would have little merit in that with fuch a fubjeâ: for your Mufe!" faid Warford. *' Your fcheme of paftoral feli¬ city is, however, admirably contrived i and the figure with which you concluded the piece, certainly renders it quite enchanting l' The laugh was now raifed againft Arundel à and Rofaline, finding íhe could not get excufed, was obliged to attend them. She went in the carriage with Mifs Arundel, her brother, and Warford, and was laughed at by ell of them during îheir ride, for her un- wilingnefs to be of their party. On their arrival at Ranelagh, the novelty of the fcene, the crowds of company, and variety of dreifes, were to Rofaline fuch a copious fource of amufement, that her eye had fufficient employment ; and without 'attending to the converfation of her party, was
was fo occupied with ali íhe faw, that her abfence excited the raillery of Lord Delford. « Well, Mifs Melvan/' faid he, « may we hope you like Ranelagh well enough not to repent having been prevailed on to accompany us? or are you comparing it with the rural feenes round Edgecumbe Hail ?" « Perhaps," faid Mr. Warford, " Mifs Melvan is too much occupied in ideally realizing the blifsfui fcheme of rural felicity Mr. Arundel planned for her, to attend to the pieafures to be enjoyed in an aftemblage of the beau-monde by thofe who, never having experienced the happineís attending a paftoral retreat, if any, prefer the gaudy feenes of high life, to the calm peace and retirement of the country." " Rather believe," faid Rofaline, « that the ignorance I have hitherto lived in, is the reafon of my abfence· I find, indeed, fuch f 4 full
full employment for my eyes, that I fear I am even rudely inattentive to all that is faid/* " In a very fliort time," faid Lord Del¬ ford, * c you will wonder you could ever have made fuch a fpeech, as well as at the charms you once found in the country." Rofaline fmiled, and Mifs Arundel faid— u But are you really ferious, Mifs Mel¬ van, in preferring the country to town ?" " I ought not to form any judgment of London till I have feen more of it," replied Rofaline ; " but at prefent I think I can never be fo partial to any other place as I am to Wales.** " Well," faid Cecilia, " if you are at all of my difpofition, you will very foon change your opinion. It is the greateft puniftiment I can have to go into the country even for a few months in the fummer, and I dread the
the arrival of the time when we are dragged down to my uncle's feat, to pay him our annual vifit at Arundel Park." " 1 fear," anfwered Roialine, " I fliall be never refined enough to be of a fim ilar tafte," " If refinement," faid Warford, in a low voice, " is to diveft you of feeling for the truly fublime beauties of Nature, and give you a tafte for the falfe ones of Art, I hope—■ I fincerely hope, you will never attain it 1" Rofaline, much aftonifhed at the ferious folemn tone in which thefe words were delivered, fo different from his ufual fatirical manner, turned round with furprife, and, with equal amazement,perceived the general ironical look of his countenance was changed to a deep dejedion j but, as it fuddenly recoileding himfelf, he haftily turned from her, and entered into converfa¬ tion with Lord Delford. Though the could not account for it, Rofaline involuntarily felt interefted by the very particular τ 5 appearance
appearance of this young man. She had obferved that his converfation chiefly con· fined of fatirical obfervations and ironical ren; ark". How much then was ihe fur- priicd to hear the fentiment he had juft uttered, in a tone of voice divefied of its gè: crai drynefs, and expreifive only of me¬ lancholy, while his countenance was for a moment overfpread with the deepeft de¬ jection. He did not again addrefs her the remainder ofthe evening, and fhe determined to take the earlieft opportunity to aik Lady Deiford fome queftions concerning him," Lord Dclford entered his Lady's dreífing- room the next morning, while her Ladyihip and Rofaline weru at breakfaft; and after telling the latter he hoped ihe had not yet felt any ill effects from the town air, proceeded to afk her how ihe liked her new acquaint¬ ance, Mifs Arundel ? " You have not, I hope," added he, laughing,
laughing, " loft your heart to her brother ?" «« I dare fay," faid Lady Delford, <f Mifs Melvan thinks of him as I do, that it is a pity he was not kept ac fchool a year or two longer, though even then, I fear, he would never have refembled his elder brother. For him, Rofaline, 1 defire you will referve your heart. Sir George Arundel would indeed be a conqueft worth coming out of Wales for, and even relinquifhing all the dear delights of Edgecumbe Hall to obtain. He is quite a man of the haut-ton^ and I believe has had more ladies in love with him than any other young man about towm." <ζ Is he more agreeable than Mr. War¬ ford ?" faid Rofaline. * c Warford !" exclaimed Lady Delford ; " you furely do not think him agreeable ?" ** Indeed I do," replied Rofaline j " he appeared to me to be extremely fenfibie and clever." " Well, in my opinion," faid her Lady¬ ihip, " the only recommendation he has, is f 6. his
his being fuch an oddity ; but you will quite agree with my Lord, for he is amazingly fond of him.** " I am rather furprifed to hear your opinion of him, Mifs Melvan," faid his Lordfhip, " and I believe you are the only young lady who ever expreffed a fimilar one j for though I really believe he has an excellent heart, he is certainly in manners a perfect cynic, and the bitternefs of his fatire makes him generally feared. It was one of your fex, I fancy, who firft wrought fuch a change in hiin ; fur 1 once remember him not only one of the gayeft, but one of the moft admired young men in the circles of fafliion. To yoif he was particularly polite ; for in general he is at war with the ladies, who, if they could, would, I really believe, unite in banifliing him their fociety ; and I own he is fometimes very fevere in his remarks on them. Mifs Arundel was here uíhered in : flie came
came to aik them to accompany her mother, herielf, and a large party to an auction« The evening was fpent at a crowded rout, and in the fame courfe of arnufements the two fucceeding weeks fled rapidly away.** The time was ib entirely occupied in diffipation, that Rotatine never ieemed to have a moment ihe coukl call her own ; yet ihe could not help acknowledging that fhe did not feel that innate fatisfaction at retiring, from an evening pafied in a crowd of company, to her chamber, Ihe had been accuftomed to experience at Edgecuaibe Hall, after a day fpent in quiet arnufements and peaceful pieafures ·> and ihe very foon began to wilb once more for the taLa ie* tirementof the country· She became daily more intimate with the Arundel family, and feldom paifed a day without fome part of it being fpent with Cecilia.
Cecilia. She frequentíy heard her mention her elder brother, Sir George, whom Rofa¬ line had never yet feen, he being at prefent gone on a tour into the country·
CHAP. Vi. ** He took me by the ham!, and htld me ??? , 41 Then goes he to th* length of aü his arm, «« Acd with his other üaritî, thus o'er hts brow, *« He filli ta âith percfal of n y face» ** As he would draw ît. Long fiar M he fo î " At laft, a línie fhaking of my arm» " And thrice his he*d, thus waving up and down, «« He rab'd a %h, fu piteous and pro! - „iJ, ** As it did fttm bihaner ali hti bulk· ** And end his beiiig I** Shakespeare, A HEY were one evening at a private party, when Lady Deiford being engaged at cards, Rofaline, as ufual, was fitting and amufing hericif with looking at a üne paint· ing that hung oppofite her, when ihe fud¬ denly
denly heard the words—" Who the devii can ihe be ? ** pronounced İn no very gentle voice fo near her, that ihe turned her heatl, and beheld a gentleman, dreífed in the very extreme of the mode, barring moil faihionabiy over the back of a chair oppofite,and flaring at her through an opera- glafs which he held to his eye. She was extremely difconcerted at the difcovery, and ftill more fo when fhe found the attention of this modiih gentleman rendered her a lubjecl of obfervation to the company in general, particularly a party of young ladies, who had fuddenly ceated the converfation, »which had iucceeded the game they had juft broken up at the appeal ance of this votary of fafliion $ and, iurveying Rofaline with envious eyes, feemed difappointed at his bellowing on her the attention they had themfeives failed in attracting, while Rofa¬ line, unaccuftomed to the faihionable ftare of impertinence, and diftreifed at being made fo confpicuous, would have changed her feat, but that flie feared it wou!d oniy betray her own
own confufion, without proving a remedy for the evil. Several minutes had paifed in this unplea¬ fant fituation, when ihe faw Mr. Warford coming towards her. He ftopped before he came c:ofe to her, at perceiving her evident embarraifment · 9 and having difcovered the fource from whence it proceeded, with the moft perfect compofure he advanced ilowly on, and placing himfelf exactly between her and the gentleman who had caufed her confufion, he returned the ftare, which his faihionable adverfary intended for Rofaline, and then, continuing to preferve the moflí inviolable filence, he made him a profound bow. His air cf gravity as he did it, ex¬ cited the rifibility of the company in general; and Rofaline could not help feeling fecretij pka r ed at the mortification of the fine gentleman, who, on receiving the filent reprcof oí Warfoid, very coolly turned, with an air of affected nonchalance ',οη his heel, and walked off. Warford
Warford then approached Rofaline. ·« You have been in an agreeable fituation, Mifs Melvan," faid he, « I fancy, this evening?" with his ufual drynefs. " So agreeable/' replied íhe, ·* that I was meditating how to change it» when you lo fortunately arrived to my relief." " Have you long finiihed your game,** faid he, " that you are here alone ?" " I have been alone," anfwered Rofaline» «< almoft the whole evening. I never play cards, and would gladly have declined being ofthe party ; but Lady Delford is fo unwil¬ ling to leave me at home, that I am obliged to comply." 4t It is very fortunate for you, ,r faid Warford, <c that only I, who am as nobody in the world of faíhíon, hear you make fuch a declaration, or you would certainly be efteemed, like me, a modern difciple of the ancient cynic philofophers. Though not abfolutely excluded all modiih circles, I have been long ridiculed by thofe who move in
in them, as only wanting a tub to be a per¬ fect Diogenes, and as merely differing from a certain animal of the brute creation, called a bear, by happening to go on two legs inftead of four. You fee, therefore, the rifk you run by not joining in the bufinefs (one would not give it fo haríh a term as folly) of faihionable life, of which cards is fo principal a part, and, unlike moil: other profeffions, it is the pleafure as well as the fuppcrt of their exiftence.'* u I at leaft, during mine," faid Rofaline* t( am never, I believe, deftined to experience that (hare of felicity to be derived from them, and muft therefore be content to excite the ridicule of thofe who ihall think me worth the trouble of laughing at for my ruftic ideas." " Well," replied Warford, " if you will perfift in preferring rational amufements, and, in fpite of my advice, and the example of thoufands, will perfevere in your antique notions, that fuperior minds can find better entertainment than at the card-table, I fhall give
give you up, as incorrigible, to the tuition of one I fee approaching, who is much more in the habit than I aai of making faihionable converts, and who, awed by my terrific appearance, may, perhaps, if I re¬ main near you, afk you if yoi have con¬ tracted an acquaintance with the famed Arabian favage. I will therefore depart before I fubject you to the enquiry." Saying this, he moved off, and Roialine, looking fonvard, perceived Lady Delford approaching, followed by a gentleman, whom flie introduced to her as Sir George Arundel, and in whom, to her furprife, the recognifed the ftranger, from whofe rude- nefs Warford's oddity of charader had refcued her. As foon as he was introduced to her, he threw himfelf on a chair next to her, and faid—
" What
** What a wretched evening you muft have had, not to play cards, and to be fubjcft to the converfation of that creature ! Pray has he been giving you a fermon ?" " Oh," cried Lady Delford, « I affure you Mils Melvan is not at all to be pitied, for flie quite admires Mr, Warford,*' "To you," continued her new acquaint¬ ance, «« he may probably foften the native brutality of his manners ; but, for my part, his appearance alone is fufficient to .give me the horrors for the whole day." He then paid her fome very extrava¬ gant compliments on her perfonal charms, which were heard by Rofaline with difguft, while Lady Delford feemed to liften to them with evident pleafure ; and interlarded his difcourfe with a variety of faihionable terms, of the meaning of which Rofaline was totally ignorant. She was not forry when Lady Delford's carriage was an¬ nounced. Sir George handed them to it, and
and had hardly taken his leave, and the coach driven off, before her Ladyihip faid— " Well, Rofaline, you are quite fortu¬ nate -, I really think you have captivated Sir George already. He very feldom, I aflare you, pays fuch attention to any one as he did to you to-night.** «* If his attention is always to be fiiewn in a manner fo very far from píeaíant,** faid Rofaline, € * I ihall, I am fure, be very well contented to difpenfe with any of it for the future," She then related how he had ftared her out of countenance, till Ihe was reheved from her embarraflment by the whimflcal interpofition of Warford. <c Why, my dear Mifs Melvan,** faid Lord Delford, " if you are to be offended with every man who peeps at you through a glafs, you muft never pretend, with that form and face, to go into public, without a rifk of being as much difconcerted as you were
were to-night ; and, though it fo diftreffed you, I wcu, l venture a good wager it ex¬ cited th. envy of all the ladies in the ???? r.) !" " I was far from being an object of it," faid Rofa'ine ; 4i to an) one ; their pity, indeed, might be raifed at the cruel embar- raflirent 1 was thrown into." " That verv embarraifment was the cauie of their envy ! '* reiurned Lord Delford; ** it iride you look handfomer, and of courfe kept the Baronet's attention awake: and beheve me, Rofaline, thofe very ladies who weie fo ready to join İn the laugh, when W.uford ίο ridiculoufly prevented Sir Geo ige 's further admiration of you, would have iorfeited forne oí their deareft privi¬ leges to have been in your place." " Well," faid Rofaline, laughing, « I find I muft give up the point, though I cannot help adding, it ib a pity that one lefs infen¬ fible oi the honour done her, and more grateful for it, had not been in my fituation, which
which I would with joy have refigned to any one." Lady Delford laughed, and told her ihe could not think fhe was fo wholly devoid of tafte as to credit her difiiké of Sir George, who, (lie had no doubt, would foon make her change her opinion. Every fucceeding meeting, however, only contributed more forcibly to confirm the idea fhe had at firft formed of him, that he was a diffipated young man, who went to the extreme of the reigning mode in every thing, and whofe good qualities if he ever poffeffed any, were fwallov\ed up b¿ felf- conceit, and a habit of indulging himfelf in every faihionable vice. Whenever he met her İn company, Rofaline was always the object to whom his attentions were directed. Mifs Arundel often told her fbe had made a con- queft of her brother ; and Frank, when he faw Sir George approaching her, always made way for him, or if he happened to 4 occupy
occupy a feat near her, refigned it when the Baronet advanced towards her. The latter, however, notwithftanding the evident pains betook to make himfelf agreeable toher, became daily more an object of diflike ¿ and fhe preferred Iiftening to the boyifli nonfenfe of his brother, who, though a great rattle, was very good-natured and pleafant, to attending to the fet fpeeches and ftudied compliments with which the more modifli Baronet entertained her. He perfevered in this ftyle of behaviour for feveral weeks, till it began to give her ferious uneafinefs. She found he was in general regarded as an admirer ; and the particularity of his manner towards her in public was fufficient to confirm the report. She was one morning alone, when a letter \ias delivered to her, which fhe was informed was brought by Sir George Arundel's foot¬ man. She guefled its contents, and was not deceived y for in this epifile, vvhich, by its high-
high-fl iwn ftyle, it appeared ts if he had taken inri nite pain- to indite, after iiimy profeíltO: ? of unbounded ad· titration, and a declaration of the t afinn he had at firft Í: ;1 1 imbibed for her, he ma Je her» in ter.i:s the m:íl obfequious, an offer ot lib înnd and fortune. She hefitated not a moment in returning an "te, ? »idly ι hanking him for the honour he had ime;. dvd lier, but poíitivcíy declining to accept it. She was aware I: ~>w much this ftep would hedifipprovcd by Lady De'·ford j but every feeling of her heart revolted at the idea cf an union with Sir George, infinitely fuperior as it was to anv her unfortunate fituation en- 4 titled her to expect. Weaith, however, had no at traci ions ior her : the tilt too certain it could never purcha-e her the peace of mind íhe had loft, nor had tne continued diftipa- tion flie lived in yet had power to obliterate vol. i. ? the
the recollection of her loft happinefs from her bofom. She had juft ñnífned her anfwer to Sir George, when Lady Dclford entered her apartment, to afk her if flie would accom¬ pany her into Hyde Park. Rofaline imme¬ diately fhewed her the epifite fhe had juft received. Her Ladjfhip could not contain the fatisfaction it gave her; but her joy was converted into amazement when flie read the anfwer flie had juft written. She could fcarcely believe it poflible that a young woman in Rofaline's fituation fhould, for a moment, think ferioufly of rejecting an oner which half the young ladies of fafhion in town would have rejoiced to accept. She attempted to expoflulate with her, and to perfuade her co give İt, at leaft, a little more confederation. Rofaline, however, affured her that her diflike to Sir George was fo fixed, that fhould flie take years to confider of it, her anfwer would be the fame
" Well,
** Well, you are certainly to do as you pleafe,** faid her Ladyihip ; ** but I own I ihould have imagined it was not an offer to be lightly rejected. But come, make hafte — ï have ordered the carriage to go into Hyde Park ; and if you like to go, you muft be as expeditious as poflible. The Edge- cumbes, I hear, came to town laft night—- perhaps we may meet them.** Rofaline excufed herfelf from attending her till the evening, when they were to go to a large ball, given by a friend of her Ladyihip. She then fat down to reflect on the intel¬ ligence fhe had juft heard, and derived no fatisfaction from the arrival of the Edg¿- curnbes in town, as, fiom their fo conftantly frequenting places of public refort,flie feared they fhould be often liable to meet them : and íhe had no reafon to expect from any individual of their party, that fort of treat¬ ment which would induce her to wifh for g a frequent
frequent meetings. She had long begun to wifli it was in her power to return to the country ; and ilie looked forward with plea¬ fure to a fcheme ihe found was in agitation, and was to be put in execution when the fummer was a little more advanced. This was to accompany, with Lord and Lady Deiford, Lady Arundel and her family on their annual vifit to Arundel Park, where a brother ofthe late Sir George refided, whofe ample fortune induced his gay relations to pay him the attention of a yearly vifit. Rofaline difpatched her anfwer to Sir George's propofal as foon as Lady Delford left her, and continued alone the remainder ofthe morning. In the evening íhe proceeded to the ball with Lady Delford, Mifs Arundel, and her younger brother, hoping the incident of the morning woukl prevent her being troubled with the folicitations of Sir George. She was
V/as therefore greatly furprifed at his ap¬ proaching her in his ufual languiftiing man* jier, which he feemed to fancy every one muft think quite irrefiftible, foon after their arrival, and aik her hand for the even¬ ing with as great an apparent certainty of its being granted with pleafure, as if ihe had encouraged, inftead of totally rejected, his fuit. Knowing her refufal to dance would not induce him to feek another partner, but that he would continue to fit by her, and teaze her with his converfation, fhe was rifing to join the fet, whea Lady Deiford whifpered her to look who had juft entered the room ι and cafting her eyes towards the door, ihe perceived Mrs. Edgecumbe aud «.Viaria 1|>*??- didly dreífed, attended by Colonei Οι way. They advanced to Lady Deiford, and auer the firft compliments, Maria nodded to Pvofaline; but Mrs. Edgtcumbe, nightly and ftifrly curtfying, paffed her.
? 3 The
The fight of Maria brought many pain¬ ful recollections to her mind, and her emo¬ tion was vifibly depicted on her counte¬ nance. She was relieved by Sir George, who reminded her that the dance would be begun ; and in a very ill humour for par¬ taking in the amufement, fhe accompanied him to the fet, while her heart had flown from the gay fcene ihe was engaged in, to retrace paft days of Happinefs : and after having gone wrong, and put her partner out feveral times, ihe had juft recollecled herfelf, and determined to be lefs abfent, when her refolution was again broken, and ihe was rendered quite incapable of proceeding by a fight flie was not prepared to expect.—- This was no other than Adolphus ! whom, as ihe moved down the dance, fhe perceived {landing alone, away from the reft of the fpectaiors, Waning ina melancholy attitude c v r the arm of a iofa. Surpriíê at fo unex- ρ ctedly beholding him- cuite overpowered her; ;.i:d, quitting the dancer?, flie fprang forvvaid to a icat tefere Sir George could prevent
prevent her, or enquire the caufe of her fud¬ den emotion. He immediately fohowed her, entreating to know if ihe were not well. She replied, (lie was oniy a little faint from ihe heat of the room ; and, without attend¬ ing to the polite offers of ihe Baronet to get her iome afiiftance, or to inform Lady Dcl¬ ford, her eyu were involuntarily turned towards tlie place where fhe had feen Adel* phus.—He did not difcover her till her fo fuddenly qui img the Jet had txeued the curiofity of the company in genera·, wh-j concluded (he was not well : snd i.j ;, hearing a lady was taken ill, he accidenti / caft his eyes towards her, as Le fauntead down the room j bat till he came exactly oppofite to her, had no idea liai it wab ha' for whofe fake he had quitted his fauulv, and, unknown to any of them, had arrived that day in town juft after his fifter and Mrs. Edgecumbe were gone out for the even η ζ. Hearing from his brother where he mould fiúd them, he followed them to tne bad, and had entered the room a few minutes ? 4 be ???
bifore he had excited the attention of Rofa¬ line, where the firft object he beheld was her whom he leaft expected to meet, and oí whofe departure from the Hail he was yet ignorant. At the fame moment he was defcried by Mrs. Edgecumbe, who, calling to him, pre¬ vented his approaching Rofaline. The latter foon recovei ed the firft effects of her furprife ; but dreading again feeing Adol¬ phus, fhe told Lady Delford ihe found her¬ felf too unwell to dance, and would there¬ fore, if ihe would allow her, return home, as f\)c had no doubt her faintnefs had been caufed by the heat of theroom. Sir George infifted on being permitted to attend her ; and as it was improbable ihe ihould be allowed to go alone, ihe could not refufe him, though flie forefaw he would take the opportunity to try to make her alter the iefolution ihe had fo pofuively informed him fl»c had taken in the morning. She
She, however, avoided hearing him, by lay* ing íhe was really at prefent fo much indif¬ pofed, that ftie muft beg he would difpenfe with her converfation on any fubject. The mortified Baronet was fo offended by this concife reply to a very ftudied, and, as he thought, a very eloquent fpeech, which he had compofed purpofely to move her in his favour, that he fpoke no more during their ride to G rofvenor-fquare; and when he took leave of her, it was with the air of a man who thought himfelf highly injured. Rofaline retired immediately to her apartment, where, difcarding from her thoughts all recollection of Sir George and his propofals, flie gave herfelf up to reflect¬ ing on the ftrange appearance or Adolphus, who, lhe knew, had gone to j «in his reg. · nient. Son etimes lhe imagined that, having repented the refiftance he had made to the w.thes of his iather at the Had, he had avowed his error, and was conic tu town ? 5 to
f o proceed in forwarding his marriage with Mi ? Otway; but, from the tranfient view íhe h*id caught ot him, he appeared to wear the farre ?- ? of mela, c^oly his counte- m ce had affumed at Edgccum u e Hall, fo d.fferent from the gay, e hee ful Adolphus, w Lo was o.xe the hfe of the faniiy. This evening's rencontre had íhew n her ho* liable íhe was to have herfeelm£$ wounded in the fame manner they had been that n ; ght, and had determined her to decline, for the future, going fo much into company, and to fpeud a little more time alone. Having formed this refolution, flie retired to reft, and rofe earlier in the morning than, from the late hours fhe had been accuftomed to keep, Oie had latterly been able to do. She ff ent fome time in reading before (he weLt down to breakfaft, and then excufed herielf from attending LoJy Deif< rd in a round of morning vifits ; and would have retired
retired to her chamber, butwas ftopped by aloud rapping at the door· « € I dare fay that is Sir George,'* faid her Lad} ihip. " Rofaiine, you muft notg>, fur you cannot reafonably expect, lie ihould be fo eafily repulfed, as to be faustied with the note you wrote yefterday." Recolìeeiing it might perhaps be better to take this ορροί tunity to aflure him oí her unaherable rf iolution, Rofaline conienred to ftav. Ihey foon however heard, bv the loud talkirgand laughing on the ftairs, that they were female vifitors · 9 and in a fe.v 1:0- ments Mrs. Edgecumbe, Matta, and Iva lis Oivvay were uilieed in. " You fee, L·· J y Delford/' faid *he former, ** \\eba\e taken tue earìuft o { por- tu.dty of fe ing \oii ;" tiiLii lligiuiy t i*t· iving to Re faun , with %i Good ιικ.ι nr to ycu, Mifs Meivan !" íhe ¡biicu tv,· Aìq otber end of the room. G ? Τ\: ,
Maria, vith her ufual afice! ed fpright- 3in^.fs ; advanced, faying— * c Am I not a very dutiful niece, to vifit yo; r La'hlhip the very m rning after my ar¡i al in tovvn ?—- Ah, R. faune, how do you do ? You were quite in the right to lea e Edgecumbe Hail ; it muft have been nr.ibly ftupid work there all this dreary winter l' Then taking a feat, flic began her accuf¬ tomed rattle wiíh Lord Delford, t.li turn¬ ing fuddei ly to Roialine, as if juft recol¬ lecting herfelf— ° So, Rofaline," faid flie, *« you have been very expeditious, and done great rxe- cutiufi during the ihort time you have been in the world î Pray may we very foon con¬ gratulate you on becoming Lady Arundel ? Every body fays it is to be very fliortly concluded.' 1 " Every body then, I can affure you," faid
faid Rn r aline, " is4ery much miftaken, and the report q ite erroneous." » H'iw is this, Lily Delford ?' faid Maria. <k R-.»t : iine is denying what /*e all heard aíie¡tci laft ni¿ht as a fact uucontra- dicled by ycu, who were there." " i thought you knew ycurown fex bet- ter," faiei Lord Dehurd, u than to fu; pofe Mils Melvan would own what young ladies, you know, make it a principle to deny pub¬ licly to the laft moment ; and on fuch occa- fions little evafnns are excufable. 1 * 4t Never, in my opinion, can they be excufable, ' laid Rofaline, " nor fliould. I think mylelf juftifkd ia having recourfe to one." She was, however, only laughed at for treating with fuch gravity a fubject which, had Maria been in her place, would rather have been matter of triumph j andj after a vifit of near an hour, they departed·
As
As foon as they were gone, Lady Dclford, who had an engagement for the reft ofthe morning, went out, bit, at the entreaty of Rofaline, left her at home ·, ai d being alone, ihe continued to fit on the lofa where her Ladyihip had left her, and, with her head reclined on her hand, was deep in thought, when the door was fuddenly opened, and flarting from her reverie, fhe bei cid ÎVIr. Warford enter. The melancholy reflections ihe had been inducing, had overfpread her countenance with a more than common gravity ; and tears had involuntarily filcd her eyes as the drcarii efs of her own fitua¬ tion, deftitute of parents or a y -kí own .da¬ tions, had occurred to her. Warfo'd h^d advanced tow aids her, and began to apolo¬ gize fir hisabru t t ct.tr. ncc, by :a. mg he hud uncerttood Loru Deitord w;.s tLtre \ wlui, on a neaier a} | roaJi, \ cicciving h.r cv d^nt dejection, he flapped, and after regau ing her uh fixed ?\?? for a mom<n', ht tuüitd av\ay hib head, CACiaiudn¿ — M Ί Lis
«« This is too much ! It furely muft be herfeii Γ , Then, after a moment's hefitation, a^ain coming towards her, as if the violence of his emotions were too great for fpeech, he took her hand in fdence 9 while, with a diílracled air, he feemed to examine her features. Not knowing to wbat to impute bis ftrange behaviour, the confufion of Rofaline was equal to his own. After a few minutes* profound filence, he iaid— *« ï grieve to give you pain, or to alarm you; but your countenance, a¿ lentered, brought to my memory recolLdijns io agonizing, t hat, unable to repre t s my emo¬ tions, I vas compelled to betray the wretch¬ ed nefs 1 feit· You, I iee, though poifeill-d cf youth, beauty, and what much oet ter entitles you toop^d it, ijn-cence, are yet not happy· How then can 1, who nave 6 foifeiud
fo* feîted every claim, prefume to hope ît Vil. be granted to me ?" As he pronounced thefe words, Lord Del- ford enured the mo n. Amazed at what he beheld, he flopped, while Warford, with a wildnefs of countenance ami manner that Unified Rotatine, ftill retailed her hand j but at fight ot Lord Dedord he ftarted, and, without fpeaking, ruíhed by him,and difap¬ peared, leaving his Lcrdihip lo utterly fur- priíed, that it was fome minutes before he could enquire the meaning or what be faw. At length, however, he faid, half laughing— ·' I am afraid I interrupted a very intereft¬ ing tête ù tete ; but it wab fortunate that it was me mftead of Sir George, w Iiom, ima¬ gining you were from home, I have this moment told you w re go-.e out with Lady Delford, or you wouid perhaps have had a duel enfued." Rofaline now related the ftrange behaviour of
cf Warford, which his Lordfhip faid he could no otherwife account for than from his general oddity of temper. Rofaline, how¬ ever, could not help thinking there w^s mere than he fuppofed in it ¿ and, com¬ paring the late myfterious conduci of Warford with what Lady Delford had formei !y told her of him, İhc fek fo gicatly interefted for him, that íhe could never entirely drive the fubjeft from her thoughts«
CHAP.
becaufe fhe feared her accompanying his family on their excurfion would confirm every report which, notwithftanding her endeavours to contradict them, continued to be circulated, ot her engagement to him. There was, however, no alternative, as ihe was obliged to attend Lady Delford wherever flie went ; and (lie hoped that, as their party would probably be fo numerous, flie fliould be able to efcape, unobierved, to enjoy her own reflections alone, as even from Cecilia's account, ftie was convinced Arundel Park would be infinitely more to her tafte than all the fplendour and diffipa¬ tion flie had for the laft few months been an unwilling actor in. She had never feen or heard of Adolphus, fmce the night ofthe ball, nor had his name been mentioned in her hearing by his fifter, whom they frequently met in public with Mrs. Edgecumbe, and with w! om Lady Delford frequently talked ofthe fau.lj at the HalL
Hall. She therefore concluded he had re¬ joined his regiment ; but in the feveral letters lhe had received from Henrietta, his name did not once occur. The day now arrival when they were to commence their journey to Arundel. Lidy Delford travelled with Lady Arundel in her chariot, and Rofaline accompanied Cecilia and her attendant in Lord Del ford's poft- coach. The fourth place was occupied by Frank Arundel, who often left hb horfe, and got into the carriage to theni, ar.d at other times rode with his brother and Lord Del¬ ford. He gave Rofaline a moil laughable deicription ofthe latnuy they were going to vifit, which confifted, befides their uncle, of Ins maiden fifter, Mis. Gertrude Arundel. This lady, who had now nearly attained the age of ieventy, yet remained unmarried. Prim and formal in her appearance, her greateft delight was in giving long hiftories oí the former great perfonages of her own family,
family, which, to all but herfelf, were tedious and uninterefting ; and comparing their manners and dreis with thofe of the prefent period, particularly the latter, which flie reprobated in the fevereft terms, and never herfelf deviated fro*n that ftyle which was the reigning fafliion in her youth. Another, and a very principal amufement of JVlrs. Gertrude, was İn relating anecdotes, and giving the genealogy of her favourite cats, the large И ock dog who conftantly attended her, and the feveral birds, monkeys, and fquirreîs, an attendance on whom was her confiant occupation. " Now you would not perhaps think it/* faid yourg Arundel, c< but I am an amazing favourite of the old lady. The Baronet is too much of a buck to pleafe her, and Ceci· lia too great a belle j fo I hardly know how, but 1 have, by fome means or other, con¬ trived toget fo much into her good graces, that when I was laft at Arundel, ibe fet me, by way of doing me a very great honour, to write
write an epitaph on the death of a young kitten ; and I pleafed her fo well with the execution of her commiffion, that I expect î fliall have two or three more of tfie fame fort as foon as I fee her again. I dare fay, Mifs Melvan, you will be as great a favourite as I am, becaufe you are í ? grave ; and my revered aunt is quite fiiocked at the beha¬ viour of the giggling girls of the prefent a»e I" " Her love of gravity then," faid Rofa¬ line, laughing " is, 1 fuppofe, the reafon that you enjoy fo much of her favour?" "Ofcourie," returned he, " and you will fee me give my opinion of any cafual indifpofition that happens to any of my dumb rivals with an air of as profound fo¬ lemnity as though I w ere one ofthe College of Phyficians. As flie is aware of our approach, I fuppofe we fhall find her in all her glory, feated in the old gilt family great chair, with a tabby cat, the infignia of her order, at her feet, and furrounded by various other living emblems of it ; and if none
none of them have met with any accident to-day (which never fails to difcompofe my good aunt's temper), we fluii perhaps find herin a good humour. I generally get into her favour at firft, by wondering to fee how well the old pufs and Shock carry their years,and praifing the growth and improve¬ ment of thoie I left puppies and kittens laft year; and, except now and then when I happen to tread on the favourite cat's tail, or tumble over the dog in affifting her to make tea, or put on her cloak, I contrive to preferve it tolerably while I ftay.'* Roialine could not forbear laughing at this ridiculous account. The portrait was, however, very little exaggerated.—On their arrival, towards the evening, at Arundel Park, they were introduced, with much íòrm and ceremony, into a fpacious old- faihioned drawing-room, richly ornamented in the antique ftyle with carving arid gild¬ ing, and every article ofthe furniture heavily laden, as "in former times, with maffy gold ornaments.
Wiameàjrs. The manfion was fituated in the midft t>f afpaciqut park, where nume¬ rous deer were kept, the excellent veni¬ fon. which it produced being one of the chief boafts of Mr. Arundel, who furveyed with pride the cóuntry-feat of his anceftors, and boafted of never having fuffered it to be in any refpect altered from the ftyle it was in when inhabited by his great-great-grand¬ father. They found this gentleman and his fifter waiting their arrival, and were received by them with the utmoft hofpitality ι but Rofaline could with difficulty reprefs aimi.le at being introduced to them both, habited in the fame ftyle a$ their numerous ancef¬ tors, whofe portraits lined the walls of the apartment, and Slewing, by the contempt with which they furveyed the drefs of their more faihionable rdations, how much they defpifed the flimiy attire of the prefent day. VOL. ι. Η The
The firft evening Cecilia took Rofaline ever part of the houfe : it was fpacious and magnificent, and the lofty apartments were ad preferved in their prilline ftate of Gothic giarsdeur. The chamber appointed for Kofaline was divided from that of Cecilia by a long paffage, from which the great ftair¬ cafe defcended to the lower rooms. When fhe entered her apartment for the n ¿ht, perceiving the fmall cafement in the immenfe Gothic arched window ftood open, ihe approached it, and found it looked into the gardens. Beyond a ñve lawn, which was oppofite the back front of the manfion, was a large piece of water/ at the top of which ftood a pav.hon, whofe Lfty dome refleded on the furface, while the moon¬ beams glittered on it, and prefented a fcene fo beautiful and pidurefque, that for fome moments (lie furveyed it in filence. The many delightful walks by moonlight ihe had taken at Edgecumbe Hall with her beloved Henrietta recurred to her recolledion, and brought
brought with them a train of reflections to which any thing that reminded her of the happy days oi her childhood gave birth ; and flie fighed at remembering they were paft never to return. tf Yet how ungrateful am I to repine,** faid fhe, " while I enjoy numberlefs bleff- ings, to which thofe whofe birth is not, like mine, involved Ín obícurity, are ftrangers ! Alas ! to what perils might Ì not have been expofed, had not he, whofe providence has fo evidently guarded me from infancy,reared me up a benefactor, to whom, under him, I am indebted for every thing; and how, deferted by thofe to whofe protection I have a natural claim, fhould I have preferved an exiftence, never perhaps deftined to be ren¬ dered happy by a knowledge of thofe from whom I received it !" " God tempers the wind to theßorn iamb ; and he 9 whofe attribute is mercj\ will never> bitt for purpofes 4dfe> though infcrtitable>ftffer ir 2 tie
the prayers ofthe innocent to be offeredin vain l* fuá a voice fo near her, that fhe ftarted round; but perceiving no one in her cham¬ ber, (he again caft her eyes fearfully into the garden, expecting to fee the perfon who had uttered them ; but, though ftill no one appeared, the fame dead filence no longer prevailed, for in a moment mufic fo foftly fweet itole on her ear, that it feemed to lull to reft every murmuring thought, and hufh to repofe every repining reflection. It con¬ tinued for a few minutes, and then fuddenly ceafed, while Rofaline, fcarcely believing fhe was awake, remained for fome time im* moveable at the window. The founds had entirely ceafed, and every thing was again buried in a profound filence. The mufic, flie felt certain, was the fame flie had twice before heard, once on the night which concluded the rejoicings at Edgecumbe Hallon the marriage of young Edgecumbe, when fhe had held a converfa¬ tion with the unknown mufician under her window,
window', and again the evening before íhe quitted Wales, in the temple in the planta¬ tions. She was fometimes tempted to think that her mind, having been at thofe times particularly wrought upon, was ren¬ dered more alive to the fuggeftions of fancy, which might have raifed imaginary founds, to footh her ruffled mind : yet the mufic was fo diftinct, and every note fo plainly to be heard, exciufive of her having formerly held converfe with the ftranger, who had owned to her it was he whole harmony had difturbed her ilumbers, that flie was com¬ pelled to beiieve it muft be real ; and even were the mufic an illufion, was it probable that the voice, and the words which ftill vibrated on her ear, ihould be alfo imagi¬ nary ? Long irrefolute and fearful, fiie remained at the cafement, not knowing on what to determine, and forgetting, in her various conjectures on the recent incident, that it was paft the hour of midnight, till ihe was h 3 routed
roufed from her reverie by the moon finking behind the trees, and all the garden below being involved in darknefs. Striving to diveft herfelf of fear, which, in fpite of her utmoft efforts, would caft a ihade of its terrifying influence over her mind, ihe prepared to retire to reft ; and had enjoyed for fome time a calm flumber, when ilie fuddenly awoke, and perceived a light in her chamber. The confufion of firft waking would not for fome minutes allow her to recoiled herfelf, till, convinced the light proceeded from a candle, and that it was not yet daylight, ilie liftened, and heard fteps clofe by her bed. An i m pu Ife of fear would not at firft let her move ; but, re¬ proaching herfelf for ib readily giving way to alarm, and hearing the fteps continue, Ihe at length puihed afide the curtain, and beheld a female figure, in a long white wrapping gown, ftanding at alitile diftance from the bed, holding a lamp in her hand, and flaring wildly round the room. At length
length íhe approached the door of a clofet which ftood open, and after looking into it, was retiring, when her eye caught the coun·* tenance of Rofaline, who, holding back the curtain with her hand, though deprived by amazement ofthe power of fpeech, watched in filence the motions of her midnight vititor. At fight of her face the ftranger ftarted, and foran inftant ftopfed, but again huriied on, and precipitately left the chamber. She was no fooner gone, than Rofaline, whofe firft intention was to run to M;fs Arundel's room, and alarm her by a recital of her late adventure, havmg arifen as fpeedily as poflible, went towards the d or, which was left open, from which the faw her unknown vifitor leaning over the high baiuf- trades of the great fta ireale. On looking back, fhe again efpied Roialine, and imme¬ diately defcending the ftairs, flie difappeared, though the reflection of her light was long vifible on the high painted ceiling and walls of the ftaircafe.. η 4 As
As foon as Rofaline felt certain fhe was quite gone, ftie relinquiíhed the idea of alarming Cecilia 9 and taking the precaution to faften her door, which ilie had not before done, fhe liftened a confiderable time, but no noife was heard 9 and the fame filence appearing to reign through the houfe after near an hour had paifed, during which ilie had fat in fearful expectation of the fteps returning, ilie at length took courage to retire once more, and try if ihe could procure fome undifturbed reft. Certain that no one could a fécond time enter her apartment without giving her notice of their approach, fhe sgain funk toilccp, which, uninterrupted by any fui ther alarm, continued till the morning. When ihe recollected the events of the night, ihe could not at firft help thinking it was all a dream 9 but her perfect recollec¬ tion of every circumftance at length con* vinced her they were real : and anxious to know who it was that had caufed her fuch terror,
terror, ihe haftened, as foon as fhe was dreíf¬ ed, to Cecilia's chamber, but finding her ftill aileep, as it was yet very early, without awakening her, ihe left the room, and de¬ termined to take a lonely ftroli before break¬ faft in the gardens, whofe beautiful appear¬ ance by moonlight had fo charmed her. It was a fine clear morning, in the begin ning of June ; the lovely appearance of the face of Nature, and u the fhrill matin fong of birds on every bough," feemed to impart to her mind that fweet ferenity with which the calm beauties of Nature muft ever infpire an admirer of them. In filent admiration flie purfued a path by the fide of the ftream that watered the gardens, which at length brought her to the pavilion at the top of the bafon that fronted the houle. She faw the door was not clofed, and ran up the fteps ; and enter¬ ing a large odagon room, into which it opened, had advanced to the centre before h 5 íhe
íhe perceived, leaning on a fofa in a recefs oppofite, the form of a tall thin young woman. A few minutes fufficed to convince her it was the fame by whom ihe had been fo alarmed the preceding night, though fhe was now differently dreífed. Her long hair hung diihevelied over her ihoulders, and concealed part of her face, which was pale and thin. Her large dark eyes evinced the deepeft melancholy, though robbed of that air of wildnefs and diftraction which had fo terrified Roialine the evening before. They were now quite fixed $ and, as if wholly ab¬ forbed by reflection, ihe lay with her head reclined on the arm of the fofa, without appearing to have heard her enter. Her figure was tall and elegant, and the deadly livid hue of her emaciated arm, as it hung lifelefs by her fide, betokened, illnefs and languor* After having ftood a few moments a filent fpectatrefs of the fad remains of the fair form before her, fearing to alarm her ihould
fliould ihe be roufed from her reverie, flic left the building, greatly fliocked by the melancholy fight flie had juft beheld. She had not proceeded far towards the houfe when flie faw Frank Arundel coming to meet her. As he approached her, he exclaimed— " It is fortunate I have met you, Mils Melvan ; there has been fuch an outcry for you, and fo many different fuppofitions about the caufe of your abfence !" ** Is breakfaft ready then t* faid Ro¬ faline. " Oh yes," replied he, ** we have been all affembled this half hour in the breakfaft- room, and waiting for you ; and you would have laughed to have heard the various con¬ jectures on the caule of your difappearance. My uncle faid, he would venture a good wager that you had gone into th^ Park, and been frightened by the fine red deer he is fo proud of. Lady Delford and Cecilia H 6 agreed,
agreed, as it has proved, that it was moft probable you were gone to wander among the rural íhades. Sir George thought, ennuyé a la mort by what you had yet feen of this horrid antique place, you had taken advantage ofthe night, and had eloped back to town ; and Lord Delford advanced an opinion that fet us all up in arms, and had noti prevented him, would have difpatched the Baronet poft to London, where, winged by his tendreffe % he would doubtlefs by this time have been arrived—it was indeed no lefs than that fome one ofthe numerous dif¬ appointed adorers you have left behind, had purfued }??, and Quixote-like, entered under the covert of the night, and carried you off. My good aunt Gertrude faid this might very poflibiy be the cafe, for ihe re^ membered an Lftance, even in her time, when the age was not arrived at that height of profligacy it was at prefent, in a very beautiful damfel of her own family, who was forcibly carried off by a gentleman of great eftate in the norths but ihe was happily refcued
refcued from him, after a very defperate engagement, by a noble Earl, whom fhe afterwards married.—Dreadful as this idea was, it feemed to meet with fuch univerfal credit, that Sir George actually arofe, and was about to order his milk-white fteed, to fpeed on the wings of Love to your fuccour, when I entreated him to be compofed till my efforts had been exerted to find you ¿ and as they have been thus happily fuccefT- ful, I fhall have the pleafure of acquainting the Baronet that at prefent his knight- errantry need not be difplayed for your ielie£ M Rofaline laughed, and he added— " But you have not yet heard my opinion on the fubjeel: : it was, that you had been run away with, or alarmed, by no earthly being, but by a fair fpectre, who, it is faid, frequents this manfion and gardens, and wanders at night through the different apart¬ ments of the houfe !" They
They arrived at the hall-door as he con¬ cluded thefe words, and Rofaline had turned to aik an explanation, when they were met by Sir George, whom they accompanied to the breakfaft-room. Rofaline was rallied by the party there on her early walk. Her adventure in the pavilion, and that of the night before correfponding with what Arundel had faid, determined her to relate both to Cecilia, whom flie followed into her drefling-room after breakfaft, and recited to her the myfterious vifit of the night, and her morning rencontre. Cecilia told her in anfwer, that ftie did not wonder at the terror ihe had experienced, and added— * c That unfortunate young perfon is a diftant relation of my mother ; and the wild¬ nefs of manner and look which alarmed you-, is caufed by a temporary derangement, to which ilie has for many years been fubject", the reafon of which I never knew, but I rather think it was owing originally to an early
early difappointment. She has no mother, and is very foon going abroad with her father, the Baron St. Älvars, a foreign Nobleman, who is by marriage diftantly con¬ nected with our family. I was juft going to fee her ; fo if you have a mind for a me¬ lancholy vifit, I will introduce you.** Rofaline, who could not help feeling in¬ wardly much interefted about the beautiful fliadow (for fuch flie almoft appeared'to be), readily accepted the propofal, and they immediately proceeded to the dreffing-room of Mademoifelle St. Älvars»
????.
9
CHAP. VIH.
*< How few, like thee 3 enquire the wretched out, " And court the offices of foft humanity, <* Or mix their pitying tears with thofe who weep l* Rowr» xJN their entrance, they found the object of their vifit fitting at a table, with a book. before her, refting her head on her hand. c< I have brought Mifs Melvan to fee you, Angelina," iaid Mifs Arundel, as fhe entered. She raifed her languid eyes as Cecilia fpoke, and fixing them on Rofaline, with a forced
forced and faint fmile, faid fomething in a very low voice, which Rofaline could not underftand. И?? countenance had loft alíthat wildneís which had been diffufed over it the night before, and a melancholy fo deep was now fpread over her whole form and manner, that it feemed to be doing her¬ felf violence when, in the courfe of con- veifation, flie attempted to fmile. She fpoke very little, and what ibe did fay was uttered in fo very low a voice, that it could be fcarcely heard. On Cecilia's afking her if flie would join the party below in a morn¬ ing ride, flie only faintly (hook her head, and added-— " Not for woilds ! I have long bid adieu to gaiety, and fhould only imbitter that of others by my prefence !" As ihe pronounced thefe words, (he caft a look on her own perfon, as if ihe alluded to her emaciated appearance.
« Well,
" Well then/' faid Cecilia, rifing, « if you will not go, I muft bid you good m^rn» ing, for 1 believe they are waiting for tnc below; but pci haps, if you Lave no objec¬ tion to company, Mus Melvan, who has declined going, will ftay with you longer/* " Mils Meh an," replied the, " is very good ; but my fociety will, 1 fear, be an ill fubftitute/· Rofaline, whofe intereft in the lovely Angelina every moment increafed, (hid with her new acquaintance the remainder of the morning, and found in her fenfibie, though melancholy converfation, charms fo fuperior í ? any that had yet attracted her in the circles of failli on, that flie hoped to en¬ joy it frequently during her ftay at Arundel. The manners of Mifs St. Älvars were elegant and interefting 5 and though bad health and extreme depreffion of fpirits had robbed her form ofthe dazzling beauty it once pofteffed, ilie itili retained a fweetnefs ίο fafcinating in her deportment, that Rofa- lme*
line, as fiie gazed at her, could not help, with real forrow, deploring the internal wretchedntfs íhe appeared to be ftruggling with* On Lady DelfortPs return from her morning excurfion, Rofaline vifited her in her d re fling-room, and toid. her Ladyihip how her time had been occupied during her abfence. ** Poor Angelina !" faid Lady Delford ; " you fee in her, Rofaline, a melancholy pic¬ ture of infanity, which no art or medicine has been able to remove. She generally re- fides at an eftate of her father's a few miles from hence, but is now waiting the Baron's return from town, where he is gone to tranf- ad bufinefs neceflary to be fettled previous to his quitting England, to accompany him to his family caftle in Switzerland. You vvill hardly credit, from her prefent dreadful appearance, that Mifs St. Älvars was once one ofthe moft lively girls I ever faw. When Iwas
I was firft introduced to you at Edgecumbe Hall, you ftruck me as greatly refembling her, and 1 find the likenefs has been ob* ferved by all this family. Her increafing weaknefs and dejeftion have fo alarmed her father, who perfectly dotes on her, that by the advice of the phyficians, he is going to take her abroad. His fondnefs for her indeed cannot be wondered at ¡ for, befides that íhe is very amiable, the Baron has not been more fortunate with his fon, who, I underftand, is a melancholy young man, and afflifted at times with a fort of derange· ment, which I fancy is peculiar to the family, for the Barou himfelf is a very eccen¬ tric character. I have alfo heard that his fon offended him in very early life, and has never fince been admitted to his prefence, but lives in fome part of Switzerland, with¬ out ever being allowed to fee his father. This, however, I only know from the voice of report j for the Baron is fo very referved in all that concerns his own family, that not even
even to the Arundels has he ever men¬ tioned this circumftance." " And is Mifs St. Älvars to go abroad alone?'* faid Rofaline. " I find as the time draws nearer, and poor Angelina grows worfe inftead of bet¬ ter/* replied her Ladyihip, u that the Baron begins to wiíh for fome female friend to accompany her j but he will find few who will like to undertake the oflice· Mils Arundel had an invitation, but Die had no inclination to be buried in the Alps ; ihe therefore contrived to get excufed, and I now know not how it is to be fettled/' The melancholy fituation of this intereft¬ ing young woman was to Rofaline fuch a fubject oí regret, that it was fcarcely ever abfent from her thoughts ; and every mo¬ ment flie couid fpend from the reft of the party was devoted to the unfortunate Ange¬ lina, who foon began to lofe the referve fhe had worn at being firft introduced to her, and to íhew fuch figns of fatisfaction when- 4. ever
ever Rofaline retired from the company, and emtered her apartment, that the comfort íhe found it afforded her depreffed mind, made Rofaline more anxious than ever to give her as much of her fociety as fhe could. This new way of paffing many of thofe hours which muft otherwife have been fpent în trifling and uninterefting converfa¬ tion, had alfo another good effect, as it fo completely filled up her time, that no op¬ portunity was given to Sir George to renew his folicitations. In the name of the whole family, Lady Dclford had been commif- fioned by Lady Arundel, the day after their arrival at the Park, to affure her ofthe hap¬ pinefs it would afford them all, could fhe be prevailed on to accept the Baronet's offer ; but fhe gave as deci five a reply as before, and the fubject was no more mentioned. Sir George, however, more fanguine, had twice attempted in perfon to gain a hearing ; but (lie fo calmly and determinately declined liftening to him, that he was under the neceffity
neceffity of fubmitting with patience to his fate. Delighted to have thus put an end to his farther periecution, ibe now gave up the principal part of every clay to the taik of foothing the depreffed fpirits of Angelina, and amufing her wounded mind by a variety of expedients. A fortnight had almoft elapfed, during which moft of her time had been paffed with her new friend, when the regularity of her vifits was threatened with an interruption by the arrival of Colonel and Mrs. Otway (for fuch Maria Edgecumbe was now become), the fifter of the former, with Mr. and Mrs. Edgecumbe, and a large party of their friends, at Woodville. Parties were now formed for every day, and notice was iflued of a grand fete champêtre to be given at Woodville, in honour of the Colonels marriage.
Rofaline
Rofaline received this intelligence from Cecilia, who entered with her accuftomed gaiety to inform her of it, into tbe apartment of Mifs St. Älvars, where flie had fpent the morning, in preference to joining a riding party to Woodville. <c You never knew any thing fo elegant," faid Cecilia, " as the defigns are for fitting up the gardens for the entertainment. Every thing is to be in the moft fplendid ftyle you can conceive; and there are to be maiks,and every thing that is charming. It is to be quite a fort of rural, uncommon thing, and ail of Mrs. Edgecumbe's and Mrs. and Mifs, Otway*s contrivance. I dare fay there will be half the people in this county and the next there. But really, Rofaline, it is quite tireiome to tell you any thing, for you look juilas fedate as though I had told you fome¬ thing very difmal. I do think I ihall fend Frank fome day, in the midft of one of your grave converfations, to fetch you and Angelina down
down into the drawing-room; for I ara convinced you will fit and look at each other here till you are fit for no other company." ** Oh, you are very much miftaken/* faid Rofaline, laughing, cc if you think what you have juft mentioned has no charms for me. It feems, by your defcription, to have at leaft that of novelty to recommend it ; but at the moment you fpoke, I was thinking how very great a reverfe of fituation Mrs· Otway has lately undergone, and how little idea, a twelvemonth ago, fhe had of fo foon emerging from the retirement of the Hall into the gaiety and fplendour of high life.** * c She is a charming elegant woman," faid Cecilia -, cc it is a pity (he (hould have been immured fo long. But I wifh, An» gelina, as Mifs Melvan will agree to go, that we could perfuade you to be ofthe party—- it would revive your fpirits, and be of great fer vice to you." " I am fenfibie of your good intentions,** returned ihe, " but, alas ! were I to vol. 1, 1 acquiefcc»
acquieice, how ill would they be requited, to fee that, fo far from enlivening me, the feenes you mention would only, by recalling to my memory happinefs gone for ever, and time paft never to be recalleil, bring afrcfli to my already agonized heart the bitter rccol- ledion that fur me Fate has no felicity in ftore, and that peace is only to be fought or expefted where all miferies are forgotten !" Saying this, íhe arofe from her feat, and with an agitared ftep paffed to her chamber. The iolemn tone in which ihe fpuke,and the fad allufion in her words, impreffed fuch an awe on the mind of Rofaline, that ihe could not follow, or attempt to detain her. She had all day obferved that Angelina was more abfent than ufual. Her eyes at times were wild, and her looks frequently abftraded. From thefe appearances, ihe feared the approach of one of thofe tempo¬ rary alienations of reafon to which ihe was fubjed. While they lafted, Cecilia told her
her they always left her alone, as flie would remain filent while the fit continued, and never attempted any injury to herfelf, or any one elfe. Rofaline therefore quitted the apartment, with a determination to return to it in the evening. Part of the company from Woodville dined with them, and foon afterwards Rofaline efcaped to Angelina's apartment. She was not however vifible ; but Agatha, her attendant, told her ihe ftill continued in the fame fit of filent dejection· She added that her Lady had now been fo long fubject to them, that ihe was never alarmed by them, and that ilie had not, for many years, known her fo long free from them as ihe had been fince her acquaintance with her, which (he attributed to Mifs Melvan's having fa- %*oured her fo much with her company. This young woman was a foreigner, and had attended Angelina from a child. The 1 % latter
latter bad told Rofaline that fhe brought her when very young from Switzerland. Rofaline afked her feveral queftions con¬ cerning the health of her Lady, but found her very guarded in heranfwers. She only faid flie dreaded going alone with her into Switzerland, as the chateau of the Baron was fo large and dreary, that flie feared the total folitude in which flie would live, would add ftill more to the depreffion already on her ipirits. Rofaline agreed in this fear ; and as fbe quitted the houfe, and ftrolled towards the pavilion, flie revolved in her mind a fcheme which had more than once occurred to her. It was no other than herfelf to accompany the Baron and his daughter into Switzerland. Her piefent fituation was far from being what ihe v\ould exprefsly have chofen. Her health was not lo good as when at Edge¬ cumbe Hall ; flie had no ties that parti¬ cularly
cularly attached her to England ; and ihe thought the fight of other countries might tend to relieve the depreffion which, fince ihe quitted Wales, had at times preyed on her fpirits. She fancied it would be in her power to be ferviceable to the unfortunate Angelina ; and her humanity revolted at the thought of her going alone into a foreign country, with only a fervant to attend her, in the prefent difordered ftate of her intel* leas. Her father was expected at Arundel in a few days, and till his arrival nothing could be done in forwarding her plan. The dreadful ftate of his unhappy daugh¬ ter had fo fliocked the humane mind of Rofaline, that flie relieved the weight on her heart by tears, as flie ftood near one of the windows ofthe pavilion. It was a ftill, gloomy evening, and " Twi¬ light grey had in her fober livery all things ι 3 clad l*
clad Ρ* Not a leaf moved, or a breeze was to be heard among the furrounding trees. Every thing was perfectly quiet, except at intervals, when the founds of gaiety and laughter were heard iffuing from the manfion* A few minutes had paffed thus, when, as her tears continued unreftrainedly toflow, fhe fuddenly thought fhe heard fomething move near her j and ftarting, the fame voice íhe had before heard, faid— " It is for guilt to weep \ yours are white* robed innocence^ and the /weet plaudits of an approving confeience ! You are entitled to the blifs they givey for having inf ufed the balm of comfort into the lacerated bofom ofthe afflicted. Enjoy the innat e felicity they enfure \ liften lo the fili) foft voice of that inward monitor ¿ follow its dictates) and be ever worthy the protection ofhim> who will afuredly reward virtue^ and defend the innocent l*
Thefe
Thefe words were no fooner pronounced, than» as before, mufic fo foothingly fweet floated on the air, that, while it continued, the idea that it was her guardian angel defcended to footh her troubled fancy, again occurred to her, lb romantic and iliufive it appeared. After nearly half an hour fpent at the cafement, ihe returned to the houfe, where flie found a large party at cards., Uniti- clined to join them, íhe again went to Angelinas apartment. She rapped, but no anfwer was returned ; and on opening the door, fne beheld the iweet formol Mils St. Älvars kneeling before the fofa, with her bands clafped, and her eyes caft upwards ; but the horror and defpondence her look betokened, made Rofaline fli udder. She ftood a few moments immoveable, till Angelina, fuddenly perceiving her, ftarted up, and, wildly itaring at her, flew with violence to her chamber. Rofaline returned 1 4 for
for the remainder of the evening to the company. This derangement lafted for fome days ; but when ilie was again recovered from it, Rofaline renewed her vifits, and was at length fucceísful in her efforts to divert the woe- worn mind of Angelina from dwelling too intentlyon its own forrows. When the reft of the party were abfent, and ihe was fure of not meeting any one, flie more than once pre¬ vailed on her to walk in the park and gardens, which were both very extenfive. Finding flie was partial to mufic, Rofaline perfuaded her to play on the harp, and to liften to her while fhe played and fung, When more than ufu¬ ally collected, Angelina would fometimes hear her read. Hearing her fay ihe was paf- fionate T y fond of poetry, Rofaline feledted fome poems from the library, which, though antique, was very large, and furniilied with books in feveral languages. Her gratitude for the attention (hewn her was unbounded ; it
it appeared in her hollow eyes and wan countenance whenever Rofaline approached her, and for a moment would at times reftore a ray of animation to her face. The comfort ihe feemed to derive from her fociety confirmed Rofaline in her deter¬ mination to try, at leaft, if the fcheme flie had before thought of could not be put in execution, and only deferred making men* tion of it till the arrival of the Baron.
1 $ CHAP.
S
CHAP. IX. " Spirits, when they pleafe, can either fex aílume» '< Or both j ib foft and uncompounded is their eflence pure ï ** Not tyM or manacled vnth joint or limb, " Nor founded on the brittle ftrength of bones, ** Like cumbrous fieih ; but in what ihape they chuíè, u Dilated or condensed, bright or obfcure, * f Can execute their any purpofes, " And works of love or enmity fulfill" JL HE day of the grand fête at Woodville now arrived, to the great joy of all the inha¬ bitants of Arundel, except Rofaline, who was forry to be under the neceffity of giving up the fociety of Angelina, to join company ihe
flie difliked, and mix in gaiety her feelings did not correfpond with. Mafks were to be admitted, and a ball to be held in one part of the gardens, on an extenfive and beautiful lawn. Cecilia, her two brothers, and a large party, were to go in characters ; but from Roialine's total ignorance of this fpecies of entertainment, ftie declined being fo diftinguiflied. The firft view of the grounds on their arrival was to her fo new and furprifing, that ihe was almoft tempted to fancy herfelf in fairy-land. Buildings of alcoves, temples, and pavilions were erected in different parts i trees were ornamented with variegated lamps, forming different devices 5 and tranf- parencits were placed in the walks, giving an appearance fo novel and picturefque to the whole, that Rofaline, who had no idea of any thing of the kind, was wrapped in wonder and amazement. Groups of com¬ pany were in every part of the plantations, and muficians were placed in different 1 6 receffcs
receflès of the garden. Great numbers were in mafks, exhibiting variety of charac¬ ters, among whom the figure of an Ariel particularly attracted the attention of Rofa¬ line. He was habited in a pale blue veft, and had wings of a dazzling whitenefs affixed to his flioulders. His form, like his dre s» -was light, elegant, and airy, and the uncommobnefs of the character foon made him an ????? of general notice. He carried in his hand a luie, and was fo remarkably eafy ¿nd aclive in his motions, that, as he paik İ her, Rofaline thought he feemed more like the ethereal fpirit he reprefented, than a terreftrial being. She was ftmding with Lady Delford and Cecilia, and admiring his uncommon acti¬ vity, when a group approached them, amongft ? horn, habited as a Turkifh Sultana, they difcovered Maria, now Mrs. Otway, acco.npan*ed by Mils Otway as Diana, and Mrs. Edgecumbe as Juno. The parties mixed, and Rofaline was foon 4 divided
divided from thofe ihe knew. But íhe was not long left alone : Frank Arundel, in the charader of Mercury, foon joined her ; and as her chief amufement was derived from obferving the various figures and drefíès that compofed the motley group, íhe mixed as little with them as flie could avoid, placing herfelf fo as to be able to fee them, without being herfelf particularly noticed» Cecilia, who was in the drefs of a Wood- nymph, foon approached her; and after aiking her how íhe liked the entertainment, told her the ball was juft beginning. " We are all dying," faid flie, " to know who that beautiful Ariel is, and I can find nobody that has the leaft idea. I long to know who he will take out to dance.— But come, Rofaline, make hafte, or you will be too late to begin with the firft fet.** Though flie had no intention to join in the amufement, Rofaline accompanied her to
to the dancers, and placing herfelf amongft thofe who were ftanding by to fee them begin, an univerfal frence reigned, when the band ftruck up ; and Colonel Otway, in the habit ofthe Grand Seignor, called on Ariel, who darted from one of the walks in the wood, to begin. Without anfwering (for he had not yet been heard to fpeak) with his accuftomed activity he flew towards the group, and fingling out Rofaline, with a peculiar elegance, he flung his lute to his ihoulder ; and taking her hand, while he ftill preierved the fame inviolable filence, he whirled her to the top ofthe fet. Deprived by amazement of all power of refiftance, flie was obliged to open the ball, though flie felt at firft not a little confufed to be thus pub¬ licly pointed out to obiervation. She feemed in one moment to have become an object of envy, as every Jady there had fecretly wifhed flie might be the object of the elegant Ariel's chuce. The fingular grace with wliich her partner conducted her down the dance, excited general attention, fo
fo that a crowd was gathered round to view them ; and Rofaline felt not a little relieved, when the firft two dances being concluded, ihe exprefled a wiih to fit down, and was inftantly conducted, with an air of the moft profound reverence, by her mute partner to a feat, where Cecilia and a large party foon joined her, anxious to know if ihe had dif¬ covered who he was. Ariel, who had juft placed himfelf by her, fuddenly at their approach difappeared. She was now teazed by feveral other gentlemen (who, till the active fpirit had rendered her fo confpicuous by his choice, had not noticed her) to dance again ¿ but İhe had juft overheard Maria exclaim to Mrs. Edgecumbe—" Surely, my dear, this Ariel cannot be Adolphus V' —It had lèverai times occurred to Roialine, in the courfe of the evening, that his figure refembled that of Adolphus i and the idea oi its being really him ftruck her with fuch alarm, that fo far from feeling inclined to accept the hand of Sir
Sir George, or thofe of feveral "other gen¬ tlemen who offered themfclves, íhe took the earlieft opportunity to glide unperceived away from them, intending to ftroli to fome of the moft unfrequented parts of the garden, while the reft of the company were engaged. Through feveral narrow winding paths in the wood, ihe came to an open part of the garden, at fome diftance from that where the company chiefly affembled. On the top of a high mount ftood a ruin, overgrown with mois and ivy. Rofaline afcended to it ; and delighted with the view (for it overlooked the whole garden), ihe fat down on a mofs feat near the entrance, it was a bright moonlight night, and the murmuring founds of mirth and gaiety, with the diftant notes of the mufic as it floated on the air, and reached her in that fequeftered fpot, made the whole fcene appear fo romantic, that ihe could fcarcely believe ihe was awake. She longed for her beloved Henrietta,
Henrietta, in whofe fociety pleafure had ever double eharms for her. The profpect from the ruin reminded her of a view to be feen from her favourite temple in the plantations at Edge¬ cumbe Hall, where, in company with Hen¬ rietta and Adolphus, fome of her happieft hours had been fpent. She trembled when ihe recollected that the latter was perhaps even now near her. She knew how greatly Sir Walter would be difpleafed, ihould he, through his elder fon or Maria, hear he was at Woodville, and fhe had no doubt their malevolence to her would induce them to inform his family. r While thefe reflections occupied her mind, fhe was fuddenly ftartled by a ruftling in the wood, and in a moment perceived her aerial partner fpring from among the thick trees that grew round the top of the mount, and almoft furrounded the ruin. Rofaline, alarmed by the fudden violence of his motion as he darted towards her, arofe ; but he waved his hand, as if to requeft fhe would
would again be feated, and, for the firft time during the evening unclofing his lips., faid— ** Vainly have I fought you through every intricate walk, through every winding path with which thefe grounds abound, not imagining you would chufe to retire from yon fcene of feftive gaiety, to indulge con¬ templation alone ; and, well as your difpo¬ fition is known to me, î yet thought the novelty ofthe fcene would have induced you to continue in it." " Whoever you are," faid Rofaline, who immediately was convinced the voice was not that of Adolphus, " who profefs to be fo well acquainted with my difpofition, pardon me if I fay that, as I had chofen this fpot purpofely to view, uninterruptedly, the beauties of the night, I ihould have been as well fatisfied if I had been ftill left to enjoy them alone !" " I readily own," replied Ariel, " my approach
approach was abrupt enough to alarm you ; and I have now infinitely more to reproach myfelf for, fmce my imprudence has forced from your lips a feverity which I well know is not natural to you." Perceiving her ready to move, he detained her, adding, in a voice totally different from that he had before fpoken in, and which it inftantly occurred to Rofaiine ihe had heard before— c£ You muft not yet go : I have much to fay j and as I am not always permitted to appear perfonaliy, 1 muft feize on given opportunities. My voice, I think, may be recollected, as you have more than once heard it, and from it have more than once, I fear, experienced alarm. Long have 1 watched over your fafety—long been the guardian of your welfare ! Who I am is expreffed in the words of one of your fa· vourite authors— *' A watchful fpritc, and Arid is my name Γ
Each
Each lady, from that fame author we are taught, has a guardian fylph ; and though that poem is in general looked on as a mere fiction, 1 am permitted to inform you of the fallacy of that opinion. Being allowed to make choice of an object to hover over, I fixed on you, and have ever fince prefided, with unremitting attention, over your every ad ion. The firft night I ever ventured to addrefs you, it was in a mortal ftrain, to try your prudence : it revolted at the ferenade by which I drew you to your window, and I was again com¬ pelled to have recourfe to thofe methods for making myfelf known to you, which I feared would alarm you. The night before you quitted Edgecumbe Hall, I again addreffed you, in hopes of foothing the perturbation of your mind, caufed by the idea of quitting a place which a long and happy refidence has endeared to you. The effay, I have reafon to believe, had the defired effect, and you returned to the houfe much calmed and tranquillized. It was I who taught you to
to truft in him who can alone defend you, the firft evening of your arrival at Arundel ; and by me w r as your humane conduct to the fair, but unhappy Angelina applauded a few evenings fince, when the tears of pity were ftreaming from your eyes. Permitted, by a fuperior Power, to mix to-night in the mot¬ ley group, I am unwilling to delay longer the information concerning myielf I have now given you, that you may not hereafter be alarmed by my invifible inftruCtions ór reproofs. I fought your hand in the dance, that the many fops who were fee king it unworthily might be difappointed, and I infpired the party who approached you, as I difappeared, with a curiofity to know who I really am 5 becauie ï was certain that, dif¬ gufted with their idle converfe, you would feize the firft moment to efcape from them to fome fpot, where alone it would be in my power to difcourfe with you. The moft inviolable filence concerning myfelf 1 muft require, but 1 exact no promife of fecrecy ; in your own onfullied honour do I truft for my
my concealment, affured that the ftricteft rules of integrity have, from your infancy to the prefent hour, guided your conduct. Thus far has my plan fucceeded ; but if in its execution I have given you alarm, fay how íhall I teach you to believe, that it is as far from my wifli and intention as my nature !" iC Your words and appearance," anfwered Rofaline, ** are fo very myfterious, that I cannot feel inclined to place a confidence in any one who preferves fuch a myftery over their actions !" " You muft not," replied her aerial friend, c< accufe me of myftery, fince though to others I am not permitted to difclofe myfelf, to you, over whofe deftiny I prefide, I have candidly communicated who I am. But I perceive an inmate in your bofom baneful to that confidence which, as your guardian fylph, 1 wifli you to repofe with me—it is diftruft. But I am aware of the frailty of mortality, and that it will need cool reflection on,and undifturbed confideration of, what
what 1 have imparted to you, to give to your mind a full conviction of its truth." He then added— *' A fage there is, of great renown in antiquity, who like me has to night tought entrance here. His figure, that of a vene¬ rable hermit, you have perhaps feen with the lame indifference as you have viewed the other nuniiu-rlefs characters who compofed the various groups, and knew not that the facred garo he wears, conceals a heart on which is imprinted the image of a mortal. His precepts you may perhaps receive with more pleafure than mine. Follow to his cell ; fo fair a form cannot fail of being grateful to his eyes. Though difgufted with the vanities of life, and difappointed in expectations from the world, he has long fought only for happinefs or beauty where both are eternally to be found."
Rofaline
Rofaline knew he alluded to a maik in the drefs of a hermit, whom in the courfe oí the evening ihe recollected to have feen among the other characters. When Ariel had concluded his myfterious addrefs, he beckoned her to follow him, and turned into a narrow path that wound through a thick plantation by the fide ofthe ruin. Hefitating whether ihe ihould follow him, Rofaline ftood for fome moments irrefolute; but Ariel turning, and perceiving her, faid— " Do you then fear me ?'* " No !** replied Rofaline, who recol· lecting he was leading her nearer to the light and company, imagined there could be no ill intended her. She proceeded after him ; and they traverfed feveral winding paths, till the founds of mirth and laughter, which reached
reached their ears, convinced her they were not út from fome part of the company. " Thofe founds,** faiil her guide, ' ζ pro¬ ceed from the retreat of the fage, who to-night is vifited by tlie votaries of fafliion. Anxious to explore their future deftiny, thev refort, for the firft time, to the abode of Wifdom, to unravel the myfteries oi futu¬ rity, and to difcover the feci ets concealed in the dark volume of fate. Follow, and let him for you unravel the myftic web I ? Saying this, he walked on, and Rofaline filentiy followed him, till by a fudden turn they arrived near a ruftic hermitage, fitu¬ ated in a recefs cut out of the wood, the out- fide covered with mofs, and furroimded, ex¬ cept clofe to the entrance, by thick trees. At the farther end on a mofs-feat fat the venerable hermir, with a party round him, to whom he was imparting their future fortune, whiie loud burfts of laughter were frequently heard as Rofaline and her ethereal guide vol. ι* ? approached
approached the litîle retreat. They flood for a few minutes within the entrance, t Π the company with who ^ the Father wa^ encaaed, had taken their leave. Ariel then, takmg the hand of Rofaline, led her towards the fage, and as he prefented her to him, faid-— " Behold, venerable Father, in one of the handmaids of virtue, a youthiul difciple, who, with the enthufiafm of early yean, wiihes to have thofe feenes of happinefs or miiery, thofe events of good or ill, which areto mark her future life, unfolded to her view í Deign then, Oh Father ! to impart to her vvhat you, who are read in the book of fate, know ; and teach her, by your falu¬ tary advice, to avoid thofe rocks and quick- fands on which the frail veffels of mortality are ib often wrecked !" The Hermit ftood as if immoveable while Ariel fpoke. He waved his hand to Rofaline
Rofaline to bc feated. She obeyed, aad placed herfelf on one of the ruftic feats with vvhich the hermitage was furnifhed, when hap¬ pening to turn towards the place where Ariel had ftood, fhe fu inL.to her utter am iztment, that the active ft "» had again difappeared ! She caft a look of enquiry towards the fage, who, w it hout appearing to notice her fur- pri'e, faid, in a low, and evidently in a feigned voice— " Is it poflible that, though fo young, you are already aware of the dangers to be avoided, and are come to be inilrucled how to guard againft them ? Or is İt only a va ; n curicfily that leads you to willi to pry inu futurity ?" <t I luve no wifli of this fort," faid Rofa¬ line ; " fo far from it, that had I not been conducted hither, I fliould ftill have re¬ mained in ignorance of your power !" <c And whence is it,'* returned the iage, " that you are thus incurious ?" ? 2 ** Becaufe,"
" Becaufe," replied Rofaline, <e I have little reafon to imagine my deftiny will ever be happier than it is—how much worfe, remains to be difcovered." " 1 perceive, then," faid the pretended Hermit, ** that you defpife my power, and are amongft the number of thofe who, dif- believing my ability, look with contempt on my endeavour? to fet before them the evils to which they are expofed, and the means ?? which they are to be avoided. Liften, however, while 1 declare that it is in your own power to form your future fortune !" The laft words, pronounced in the well- known voice of Adolphus, made Rofaline fliriek aloud. All power of articulation was denied her, and fhe remained motionlefs from excefs of fear left he fhould be dif¬ covered, only waving her hand, as if defiring him to go ; but Adolphus, who had fcarcely dared to hope that an opportunity to converfe with her unfeen would i occur, continued
continued to implore her to fpeak, and to look lefs terrified, till feeing her a little reco¬ vered from her firft alarm, he faid—· <c What can there be fo very dreadful in my appearance to caufe you fuch terror ?" * k Your father," faid Rofaline, <c does he—does Lady Edgecumbe know you are here ?" * c No one, yourfeif excepted," replied he, " is informed of it ; and I am aware that, were it difcovered, I ihould riík all the anger of my father, the difpleafure of my mother, as well as the malevolence of my brother and his family ; yet all this, or ten thoufand times more, were it poffible, I ihould prefer hazarding, rather than con· tinue in the torturing fufpenfe 1 have for the laft few months endured 1" He then told her that» after fo unexpect¬ edly ieeing her ia uwn, he had enquired of his lifter and Mrs, Lugecumbe concerning ? 3 hei;
herj but they were fo guarded in their anfwer?, that from them he could procure no fat h facte ry intelligence : and ? -rt meet¬ ing her again, though during Lib ftay in town he frequented every place of public refort, in the van hope of feeing her, he was tempted to believe it was not her he had feen, but fome one wlu greatly refembícd her. Refolving, however, to be convinced ofthe truth of a fufpicion which he had for fome tane entertained, that (lie had quitted the Hall, he obtains d a íhort leave of abfence, and fet off for Wales, where find¬ ing her actually gone, and not dariùg to afk after her of .is father, he had recourfe to Henrietta, who toîd him íhe was enjoined to fecrecy, and he was obliged ro return as ignorant about the object of his vifit as he went. Convinced, however, that the lady who was taken ill at the ball was in the party of Lady Delford, he made enquiries in town, and found trut a young lady refided with her cf the name of Melvan. Certain it could be no other than Roialine, he was endea¬ vouring I
vouring to form fome fcheme for feeing her, when a ktter from his b r other informed hitn of tVlaria's marriage, the intended fè:e ck.im* petre at Woodville, and their propofed excutfion to Edgecumbe Hail afterwards, inviting him to meet them at the latter place. This more than ever convinced Adolphus that Rofaline was with Lady Delford, as his brother gave him no invitation to Woodvùle, w hither, however, he determined immediately to go, as Edgecumbe, in fus Liter, men¬ tioned Lord Deiford's family being at Arundel, " í arrived here," continued Adolphus, ** only this atternoon, and obtained admif¬ fion to the gardens with almoft the firft party tiiat came, not doubting that my habit would effectually conceal me. I have, however, iome reafon to fear í am dilcovcred, as the fame maik who conducted you hither, met me in a different part of the K 4 garden
garden an hour fince, and by fome myfte- rious words he uttered, gave me caufe to fuppofe he knew me. He it was who directed me to thi> hermitage, which I con¬ fented he fhould guide me to, in order to get rid of him ; and he took leave ofme, faying, he would by-and-hy pay me a more welcome vifit, but I faw him no more till he entered, accompanied by\ou. M The ftrange words of Ariel concerning the Hermit now occurred to Rofaline. u Good heavens Î" exclaimed flie, " and do you not know him r" *« No !" replied Adolphus ; " but be he who he will, I fhall ever confider him as my good angel, fince he has thus kindly afforded me an opportunity of fpeaking to you." " Who then can he be ?" faid Rofaline. iC I can have no idea," returned he ; <c but furely we can have no caufe for alarm, fince his conduct befpeaks him no enemy. Let us then difmifs the fubject for one far nearer
nearer my heart. I have been almoft driven to diftraction by hearing from report of your propofed marriage* with Sir George Arundel i and previous to my coming hither, I determined that, fhould I find you contented ajíd happy, I would not difclofe myfelf to you. I ftood purpofely near the great gates where all the company entered, and had been there a very ihort time, when you appeared with Lord and Lady Delford and the Arundels ; but how greatly was I fliocked to fee that the bloom your countenance wore at Edgecumbe Hall was almoft entirely gone, and that fo far from mixing with the other parties, you feemed to derive the greateft part of your amufement from retiringfrom the crowd, and contemplating them at a diftance* Your friend Ariel had already accofted me feveral times, and with fecret pleafure I beheld you fingled out by him to open the ball ; but with what anguiih did I obferve how ill your looks correfponded with the general gaiety around you, and how different was ? 5 your
your manner, as you went down the dance, to what it ufed to be in former happy times at Edgecumbe Hall !" " Oh, do not mention thcfc times l* faid Rofaline, "for my own peace let me try to forget them !" " Would I could forget them too !" iaid Adolphus, " you have perhaps heard that niy father pcrfifts in his wifh for me to marry Mifs Otway ; but I have declared my unal¬ terable refolution, which I here repeat !" * c Oh, form no fuch rafti refolutions, 1 conjure you !" iaid Rofaline, " rememoer whofe commands you are difobeying while you remain here, and do not any longer detain me !" ** I have yet much to fay," anfwered Adolphus, " much on which my future happinefs or mifery depends. Hear me, therefore, Rofaline, tieclare on what terms I can confent to prolong an exiftence become irkfome to me, and more particularly fo fince I have been the unfortunate means of depriving
depriving you of happinefs, for whom I would wiilingly refign it !'* He then told her he had long revolved the fubject in his mind, and had confidered that he was now in pofleffton of a fmall eftate bequeathed him by an uncle, inde¬ pendent ot his father, wiiich, though inade¬ quate to his wifhes, as it would not allow him to offer her the affluence ihe merited, was yet more than a competency. lf^ then, flie would agree ro a private union, they might retirr thither till it received the fanction of his parerts, which, he added, he had not the fmalleft doubt u ould be a very íhort time delayed, as they were io weil con¬ vinced of her excellence, and were only influenced b) the tyranny of pride, in not yielding their approbation when firft in¬ formed of their mutual attachment. Rofoline now, with an offended air, arofe, and iaid gravely ihe fliould have hoped he knew her dilpofitiou too weil to ima rine ihe ? 6 could
could ever hear fuch an offer without fup¬ pofing it to be meant as an infult to her unprotected fituation ; and would have left him, but he conjured her fo wildly to ftay> that (he was obliged to confent. He then vehemently proteftetl that, as his life was of no value to him but as flie was interefted in its prefervation, he only waited her decifion to make an exchange, which he had now an opportunity to do, into another regiment that was going abroad, where he might perhaps find a refuge from all fu bl unary forrow. Softened by the diftraction of his looks, and the dejection in his manner, Rofaline confented to hear him ; and then caknty,. though determinately, declared her fixed refolution never to be guilty of fuch mani- feft ingratitude, as to be the voluntary means of inducing him to commit an act of entire difobedience to his parents, nor even to enter the family in oppofition to the wifhes of
of thofe to whom flie owed every blefiing ihe enjoyed. It was in vain to attempt a concealment of her attachment. Too little accuftomed to difiimulation, to fucceed in trying to hide it, it had been plainly perceived at Edge¬ cumbe Hall ; buc deterring the idea of feeking her own happinefs at the expence of thofe to whom ihe was indebted for her fup¬ port, and well convinced that, whatever might be her own felicity in the partiality and unremitting attention of Adolphus, it muft be yet far from peried, if imbittered by a confcioufnefs of having aded wrongly, her native redit ude of principle would not fuffer her to err againft that gratitude which ihe felt ihe ought ever to cherifh towards Sir Walter and Lady Edgecumbe. As well as the confufion of her mind would allow her, fhe explained her reafons, and entreated him to leave her now, and the next morning to join his regiment. 5 Adolphus
Adolphus was beginning again to expof- tulate with her, when the founds of com¬ pany approaching the herr.uta^e, made her ftart up ; and beg^in^ ?) ? to recollect what flie had faid, and to leave Woodville the next morning, fhe precipitately quitted him 5 and had walked a confiderable diftance without any recollection of \\ hither fhe was bending her fteps, when Ariel appeared. He informed her that he had heard her en¬ quired for by fome of the party fhe came with, and would, if fhe would allow him, conduct her to Lady Delford, who was waiting for her. <( Before I take my leave," faid he, tf let me conjure you to reflect on what I have this night imparted to you ; and, however myfterious it may appear, to recollect that every thing is poffible with the Moft High ! My invifible guardianfhip may be of the moft fericus import to you, if my fecret be preferved ; but if once it be known, from that moment my protection ceafe* ?' Rofaline
Rofaline had no time to reply : they were met by Lady Delford and the whole pirty, who we re juft going to their carriages. It vas very near the dawn of morning. Ariel led her to the carriage, and as foon as he had feen her feated in it, he difappeared. She was queftioned by all the party if rhe had difcovered who he was, and was fur¬ prifed to hear that no one had been able to prevail with him to unmafk once the whole evening.
CHAP.
chap. χ. <* Ah me f for aught that ever I could read— ** Could ever hear by tale or hifrøry, *' The courfe of true îove never did run finouth : ** But either it was dirltrent in blood, *' Or elfe mifgrafîed in reipect of years j fî Or elfe it írooü upon the choice of friends 5 " Or if there was a fympathy in choice, «* War,de&th, or ficknefs did lay.fiegeto it, '^ (t Making İt momentary as a found I" Shakespeare. wN their arrival at Arundel, Rofaline retired to her room, with abundant fubject for meditation ; but fatigued in body, and haraíled in mind, ihe tried to difcard the various thoughts which agitated her, and fought
fought for fome hours to find reft after the fatigues ofthe night. When fhe arofe towards noon, fhe would have gone to Angelina's apartments but wiihing to reflect on the events of the laft night, fhe ftrolled out to take a folitary ramble in the park. When (he recollected the adventures of the preceding evening, they appeared like thofe in a dream. She could not form the , moft diftant conjecture that approached probability concerning the Ariel who had profefled himfelf fo interefted for her. She had been taught toput no faith in fuperna- tural appearances ; yet if he were mortal, it feemed fcarcely poffible that he fliould have fpoken to her more than once before, at places fo diftant as Edgecumbe Hall and Arundel ; but, bewildered in uncertainty, flie felt compelled to give up the vain attempt of trying to difcover him. She had a fubjed much nearer her heart to meditate
meditate on, in the propofal that had been made to her bv Adolphus at their unex¬ pected meeting; apd íhe felt not a liite gratified with the relied ion that fhe had fi. fficient piefence of mind wholly to decline it. Slie longed, yet dreaded to k.-ow whether he nad gorn» immc- v-- diately back, or had made himfelf knuwn at Woodvide ; and was more than ever con¬ firmed in her determiivuion to offer to accompany the unhap; y A; g-dina to Swit- zeilaiid, at once to extinguifn cvejy vifionary hepe Ado!; hus mi;ju have formed of her ????? yielding to his plan, founded on her known partiality to Inm, and to convince her benefactors at the Hall t hac íhe was aeluated foicly by that gratitude wliich fhe felt woukl not, wiihout the fevere it felf- rcp'oaeh, allow her to err araioft its didates. After a lonely melancholy walk, fhe returned rather more calm to the houfe 9 and hearing dinner was ready, w r ent imme* diately
diately to the dining-room, where flie found, befides the rural party, a ftranger, a man of íLni countenance and con, manding afpect, who was introduced to her by Lady Arundel as the Baron St, Älvars. He fixed his penetrating eye^ on her as fhe entered ; and as he gazed filemly at her, his looks betrayed figns of the greateft agitation and embarrafiment ; burimmedateí) lecoileCHng himself, he luddeniy turned fiom her, aud continued a converfation he wis engaged in when flie enie'td the room. He appeared about fifty j his figure was ull and majeftic, but there was a darknefb and feverity on his ????', which, when he poke, were more con¬ fpicuous. His eyes were dark and pene¬ trating, and his manner fevere and gloomy. Immediately after dinner-, Rofaline retired to the apartment of Angelina, who had been ari dayexpecììng her. Slie eagerly told her that the next week was appointed for them to commence their journey into Switzerland.
" A few
*$, A few weeks ago," continued Angelinas " all countries an J nations would have been alike to me, if accompanied by my father; but fince my knowledge of my admired Mifs Melvan, 1 can no longer with truth make the avowal : arid I feel compelled to own that the unhappy iate I thought marked out for me, has not been without fome relief. Till I knew you, my mind was involved in a horrid darknefs, on which no gleam of light ever fliot its kindly influence, to difpel, in any meafure, the weight of woe that has fo long preyed on my heart ; and the fame gloom wiil again pervade it when, far diftant from you, I fliall be left alone in a foreign land to bewail the calamities 1 muft ever lament, and probably to terminate an exiftence long fince made miferable by a confcioufnefs of error/* As the mind of Angelina feemed more than ufually colleded, Rofaline ventured to hint her wiih to know the fource of that forrow
forrow which feemed 10 prey on her ipirits· Angelina readily compreh * ded her mean¬ ing, and iaid ihe would willingly at fome future perioa entruft her with the recital of her forrows 9 but a 3 flie could never fum* mon courage to relate ι hem, íhe was trying to write a fliort narrative oí them when Ihe was tolerably compoíèd, wdiich, flie added, ii ever ihe attained fufficient fteadineis of mind to finifli it, flie would get conveyed to he». When Rofaline left her interefting friend, ilie went immediately to Lady Deirord's dreffing-room, who had told her flie wiflied to ipeak with her there in the evening. She found her Ladyihip, and related toher the converfation flie had juft had with Mifs St. Älvars, expreíiln^ in lively terms the regret flie ihould teel to part from her.
It
» tc It is on this fubject," faid Lady Deb ford, " that i wiíh you to lend me your attention for a few minutes. 1 am commif- fioned to make a propofal to you, which, I affure you, I fincerely wifh you may not comply with, as your confent will deprive mc of the pleaiure I have of late enjoyed in your fociety.*' She then added that the Baron St. Alvan had been lamenting the nectffity there was for his daughter to go alone into Switzer¬ land,or without any female companion, ex- cept her woman ; and as ibe and Lad ι Arundel had more than once heard Rofalino ¡ exprefs a wiíh to travel, and were aware oi her partiality to refirement, flie had been induced, by various motives, to aik her ifit would be perfectly agreeable to her wiihes to accompany the Baron and Angelina into Switzerland till the enfuing fpring, when j they would probably return to England.. ¡ and when flie ihould with much joy again j receive her. I Rofaline I
Rofaline readily acquiefced in this pro¬ pofal ; and thanking Lady Delford for the friendfliip fhe profefled for her, faid ihe would inftantly commence preparations for her journey. The delighted Angelina received > with unfeigned joy, the intelligence communi¬ cated to her by Rofaline ; and an early day in the following week was fixed on for their departure by the Baron, who, with his accuftomed referve, expreffed his obligations to Rofaline for contenting to give his daughter her company. Sir George, who now faw every hope of her yielding to his fuit finally deftroyed, could not conceal his chagrin - y and the reft ofthe family teftified their forrow to lofe her, politely expreffing the pleafure it would have afforded them if, inftead of this plan, (lie had accepted the propofals ofthe Baronet.
In
In a letter to Henrietta, flie informed the inhabitants ofthe Hall of her intended vifit to Switzerland i —and now there only remained the moft difficult tafk of all to a mind acutely fufceptible hke her's, and this was to bring herfelf to bear* without re¬ pining, a ftep, which flie felt would for ever banifh from her fight the fair profpect of happinefs flie had once ideally indulged. But though her difpofition was gentle, yet had ftie a fortitude far beyond her years, when neceffity compelled its exertions ; nor did flie fuffer herfelf to betray the fmalleft portion of that internal regret, which, fpite of her endeavours, would at times rife in her breaft* The evening before they were to depart from Arundel, the reft of the party being gone on an excurfion to Woodville, fhe ftrolled out alone, having- completed every preparation for her journey j and leaving Angelina, who was not inclined to walk, to amufe
amufe herfelf on the harp, İlie turned her fteps towards a Chinefe temple, to arrive at which ihe was obliged to pafs a bridge that crofted a fmall ftream which watered the garden. The moon was juft rifen, and reflected its bright rays on the urface ofthe water. Impelled by her natural inclination to contemplate the face of Nature at this fober hour, flie ftopped, and leaning over the rails of the bridge, ftood, with her eyes fixed on the current beneath, wrapped in meditation on fubjects which her prefent fituation amply fuppiied her with. She was on the eve of taking, perhaps, a long leave of her native ifland, and of dividing herfelf, by immeafurable diftance, from all thofe fhe loved. The Hall, where every aítection of her heart was centered, it was too probable ilie ftiould never again vifit ; and a figh to the remembrance of thoie hours paffed with happinefs and Henrietta, had juft efcaped her lips, when the found of a foot- ftep reached her ear. She ftarted, and looking forward, thought flie could difcern vol. ï. h afigure
augure emerre from the Chinefc building» at the finit ef the bridge. It difappeared again immediately, and from an emotion of kar that now afiai'cd her, flie felt difinclined to enter the temple; but having come purpofely to feek a book flie had left there in the morning, and thinking it probable that the gloomy images with which her fancy was impreíled, might have conjured up the vifionary form flie thought fhe had t beheld, flie walked tOAarJs it. Adolphus came toher mind as ihc traverfed the turf. ] le knew not how near ihe was to quitting, perhaps for ever, her native kingdom, and how great ? probability there was that flie might never again behold him. As thefe reflections recurred, with full force, to her memory, ihe entered the building. The moon İh on e fuil on its many coloured pillar:·, and ihe had proceeded almoft to the further end, when flie difco¬ vered the fame figure flic had before tran¬ fient. ?
ficntly feen ; and at the fame moment an exclamation burft on her aftonifhed ear—it was the voice of Adolphus !—the objecl: of her meditations ftood before her í Ere íhe could recover from the furprife and agitation this unexpected meeting caufed, he had begun to apologize to her, in a hurried manner, for alarming her; but : *: was fome time before flie was fufficiently compofed to anfwer him. At length ihe exclaimed —" Why, Mr. Edgecumbe, would you come hither?—why give to both fuch unneceffary pain ?" " Call it not unneceffary !" exclaimed he, " for I yefterday received intelligence, which from no lips can I give credit to unk is con¬ firmed bv yourfeif : I was told that you are going abroad immediately." Rofaline affured him it was true, adding— fic I cannot imagine why you ihould not believe it, and what you ihould have fop- L 2 poled
pofed poíTeifed attraction in England fuffi¬ cient to make me for a moment hefitate in quitting it." <e Alas, it is too true !" faid he, mourn¬ fully ; " yet if my father ihould relent, (and we know his innate goodnefs of heart) fliould he, uninfluenced by my brother or his wife, reflect that it is in your power alone to con- ftitute the felicity of his fon ------" " Oh do not," faid Rofaline, interrupting him, " indulge a hope which there is not the imalleft probability will be ever realized ; rather let us feek confoiation in the applaufe of our own confciences, by acting fo as to enfure it, than in forming vifionary fchemes, which there is not a doubt w hi never prove more than mere phantoms to lure us into error. Believe me, I have not finally deter¬ mined on the ftep I am going to take with¬ out giving it due confideration ; and the refult is a refolution to accompany the Baron St. Aîvars and his daughter to their chateau in Switzerland. It is not a plan fuddenly
fuddenly formed, that pleafes from its no¬ velty, but the confequence of long reflection and mature deliberation. Do not, there¬ fore, by oppofing reafons which I too plainly feel I am doing wrong to liften to, endeavour to ihake a determination it has coft me many bitter pangs to form ; but let us both, infpired by that gratitude we owe to the beft of parents and guardians, try to forget we ever beheld each other l* · While ihe fpoke, Adolphus was pacing the room in agitation too great for Ipeeclu and for fome moments after fhe had ceafed, he ftood, unable, from the violence of his emotions, to combat arguments he too well knew were what he ought to abide by ; and finding her refolution was too firmly fixed to admit of any periuafion to change it, he gave way to the anguiih with which the idea of never again beholding her fiked his heart ; but Rofaline would not fuffer him to pro¬ ceed, and having fucceeded in gaining a greater degree of calmnefs herielf, ihe per- L 3 fuaded
fuaded him to íhew alfo more fortitude ^ and as (lie knew the family would not beat home till late, flie fuifered hi;n to accompany her almoft to rhe houfe, where, <rivms him a commiffion to Henrietta, as he had told her he íliouíd vifit the'Hall uVrtly, without trufting herfelf to hear the folemn fare ? el he was gdng to take of her, ihe haftily bade him adieu, and hurried into the houfe, to -ce^cesi il·? emetica which, when the actual moment of feparation arrived, ftie could not entirely fuppreis. So completely had this unexpected meet¬ ing interrupted the compofure flie had before argued herfelf into, that ihe could not fum¬ mon refolution to go down to fupper; but fending her excufe by Cecilia, who vifited her when fiie came home, İlie juft called at Angelina's dreffing-room, and having paifed half an hour with her, retired to her cham¬ ber, where, bitter as was the reflection that flie had for ever parted with all thofe to whom ftie was fondly attached, flie yet felt the
the approving plaudits of her inward moni¬ tor for having rejected propoials too confo¬ nant to her willies not to have coft her much to refufe. Her native rectitude of principle told her ihe had aeled r:;!it, and fo as, if Sir Walter or her uveiti Lady Edgecumbe could have known h, tlu v would have approved ; and lhe f mk to ileep in the happy conlcioufneis of having obeyed the dictates of duty, though ilie facrificed in pari her own happinefs. She arofe with the dawn, and was fcarcely equipped for 1er journey, when flie was in¬ formed that rhe Baron and his daughter waited her attendance* She joined them at break¬ faft, and immediately afterwards they iet forwards to Dover. As they journied ??, Rofaline had ample opportunity for reflection and obfervation, as the party flie was with feemed not at all inclined to interrupt either. Angelina never converfed much, and the Baron's manner L 4 vvas
was fo gtoomy and referved, tiiat it feemed to forb ; 1 converfe. Except, therefore, a I afiing rematk by Roiahne, the journey to Dover was completed in almoft total ffcnce. What ihe yet knew of the Baron had not greatly prepoflefled her in his favour, in company his gravity and referve were as remarkable as when there was only his daughter or her friend to converfe with ¿ and when induced to join in converfation, his obfervations were harfli and uncharitable, and his ftrict ures gloomy and fevere. His daughter's difpofition partook not at all of his own. From what Rofaline yet knew of her, her fentiments appeared to be mild and benevolent;'but fhe had imbibed the moft romantic ideas, which gave an eccentric turn to all flie uttered. They travelled with as much fpeed as the ill health of Angelina would admit, and arrived
arrived at a late hour on the fucceeding evening at Dover. They were detained here two days, during which Rofaline wrote to Lady Delford and Cecilia, giving an account of ι heir journey fo far, and returning her thanks for the kind¬ nefs and hofpitality flie had experienced. Their voyage by fea was fafe and expedi¬ tbus ; and as the Ihores of Britain were loft to view, the heart of Rofaline fighed to the remembrance of thofe friends flie left within its hofpitable boundaries. To it, as well as to the world in general, fhe bade a long adieu» Buried in the folitude ofthe Alps, fhe feared ihe fliould never find there the happinefs fhe had experienced in her native ifland, and reflected, with bitter regret, that the wide unfathomable ocean would, in a few hours, be bet a een her and the friend of her heart, the loved retreat of her early days. With her eyes fixed on her native land, flie ftood till all traces of it were loft, and the white L 5 cliffs
cliffs of Albion were no longer diftinguifh* able from the clouds that rofe on the horizon. Tears filled her eyes when flie couid no more behold the fmalleft fpot of the dear country that gave her birth, and flic returned to the cabin to Angelina, who, to her furprife, difcovered not the fmalleft emotion at leavirg England, but preferved the fame fort o* infenfibility as was obfervable in her general manner. It could not be termed calmneís r as her ????????? features fometimes betrayed to a narrow obferver, that the feelings of her heart id correfponded with the torpid indifference flie wore in her countenance. The Baron at times, during his voyage, feemed difturbed and agitated, though he oftener maintained his general gravity and referve. He had not vifited his chateau fince the death of the ? .roneis, during whofe lifetime tney cenftantly refided there.
When
When they landed at Calais, the fatigues of the journey proved too much for the weak frame of Angelina, and they were obliged to remain there fome days to recruit her ftrength before they proceeded. Atthe end or nearly a week they again fet forward on their expedition ; and atter having tra¬ velled through part of France, arrived at the foot ofthe Alps, in the midft of which was fituated the Chateau St. Älvars. The beauties of Nature, in the lefs awful and fublime, though more cultivated and fertile face of her native country, had ever for Rofaline attractions the moít powerful ; but now, when flie contemplated objects and views ihe could have formed no idea of, her attention was fo kept awake, that every fenfe feemed to be abforbed by that of beholding. As they approached the refi¬ dence where Angelina mournfully told Rofaline flie had fpent in happy innocence many or her early years, ihe grew more melancholy and deprcilcd. Tiie Baron L ? fometimes
fometimes appeared greatly agitated ; but through the whole journey the gloom in his countenance and manner feemed to increafe, and the fmall degree of cheerfubefs he had aflumed at Arundel wore entirely oiF. An incurable gravity fat on his brow, and, as he fometimes contracted it as he fpoke to his fervants, his look was fo dreadful, that Rofa¬ line fhuddered at the idea of being under his difpleafure. To her he behaved with polite¬ nefs, and often, when he thought himfelf tmobfer*;ed, gazed at her with the moft fixed attention ; but this, as well as many more irregularities, íhe accounted fur by his< general eccentricity of character»
CHAP.
????^ XI. «« Hîgb o'er the pines, that with their dark*ning (hade «« Surround yon craggy bank, the caftîe rears <* Its crumbling turrets i ftill its tow'ry head <« A warlike mien, a fu lien grandeur bears I" Mickle. -¿"^FTER three days' journey over the fnow-topped Alps, they arrived, late in the evening, on a high eminence ; and as they defcended its fteep declivity, faw the num¬ berlefs turrets and Gothic windows of St. Älvars rifing from behind a neighbouring ^mountain. It was fituated in an obfcure part of the Canton of G lar is, adjoining the Grifons, with whom, in former times, the inhabitants
inhabitants of this province had frequent fkirmiíhes, in which this caftle had withftood many formidable fieges. it vas a fortrefs of immenfe ftrength, and ftill retained its cannon and intrench ments, though there was now no danger of their aid being wanted for its defence. It ftood on one of the fteepeft parts of the cliff, fecurely moated round, accefs being only to be gained to it by two drawbridges, one on the north, the other on the fouth fide of the chateau. The romantic appearance, vaft fize, and ftrength of the building ftruck Rofaline with aftonifhrnent. It feemed indeed more like a town than one manfion, but like a town without inhabitants ¿ for fuch a dreary filence prevailed, after having crofted a bridge, and alighted from the carriages, as they pafied through two paved courts, that the iound of their fteps feemed an intrufion on it. Between the large fiat ftones with* which the courts were paved, the grafs and weeds were grown high, and in fome places quite
quite obfcured the pavement. By large folding doors they entered the great hall. It was of amazing fize, and fupported by lofty pillars. Angelina feemed greatly agitated as they entered the hall, which the Baron obferved, and haftened them to an apartment, where they found fupper prepared. Angelina, however, feemed fo eager to retire, that her woman was fummoned; and flie werçt to her chamber, leaving her friend with the Baron, who maintained the fame coldneis and referve. He fpoke not during fupperl Immediately after, Rofaline begged to retires and the Baron, turning toa fervant, ordered him to delire -the houiekeeper to attend and íhew Mils Melvan to her apartment. She came in a few f minutes, and prefented, to the amazement of Rofaline, an old woman, who, from age, was fo infirm flie couid with difficulty walk. She conducted her up a ftaircafe of dark-brown wood, through
through a long fuite of lofty apartments, and numberlefs long paffages, to a fpacious chamber, hung with tapeftry, which repre¬ fented the moft hideous figures, Wiihing to know at what diftance flie was from the chamber of Angelina, flie addreffed her old guide, and aíked if Mifs St. Alvars's apart¬ ment was near her's ; but old Martha was fo deaf, that it was not till ihe had raifed her voice, and repeated the queftion feveral times, that flie learned fbe was quite in another part of the manfion, for it was not , convenient to prepare any room nearer to ner's than the one ihe had, becaufe, during laft winter, a great many rooms on that fide of the chateau had fallen in, and there was only the Baron's own chamber, befides Angelina's, which it w ? as deemed fafe to inhabit. When ihe had difmiffed the old woman, ihe could not help feeling a degree of fear at recollecting how far flie was from the jr«eft of the family, when ihe furveyed bet apartment,
apartment, which confifted of a high cham¬ ber and a large clofet, both hung with tapeftry, and in the clofet as well as the bed-room was an immenfe Gothic arched window. The furniture was very antique, and the tapeftry in many places quite decayed. After having furveyed it round, flie went to the cafement, which ihe with fome difficulty opened : it looked on the moat, and beyond were faintly to be feen^ by the glimmering light of the ftars, the fnow-crowned Alps. Fatigued with her journey, ihe at length retired to reft. She arofe early, and ieft her apartment, with an intention of enquiring after Angelina ; but on going through a fort of antiroom that joined her's, there were two paffages, and having come by candle¬ light, ihe couid not recollect which was the one that led her to the galleries. She ftood for fome minutes to confider; but not being able to remember, ilie at length proceeded down one which terminated in a room, totally
totally di veiled of furniture. Certain ili ? had not come this wav the n İ edit before, fho was hefitating whether ihe ihould proceed, when ihe difcovered, at the end of another paffage that led from this room, an iron» grated door. Stimulated by curiofity, and recollecting it was yet very early, ihe at¬ tempted to open İt : it gave way to her hand, and difcovered a night of ftairs, whicli defcended .immediately from the grated door, and another afcended to the top oi the building. The upper ftairs ieemed quite dark, but the lower ones were lighted by an antique arched window, of immenfe fîze. Curious to know where they ended, ihe defcended a confiderable time wdthout beiiig able to difcover whither it led. A fécond arched window, on a wide landing- place, looked towards a lower part of the mountain. The fun was juft rifen, and his bright beams reflecting on her as flie flood irrefolute, animated her to continue her wav, at leaft till flie difcovered where the ftaircafe would lead her to. Ac
At length ilie arrived at the bottom, and faw two large folding doors, faftened by heavy iron bars. A fmall narrow ftone paf¬ fage alfo led from the foot of the ftaircafe. She could not help wiihing to know into what place the folding doors opened; but as fhe had no means of diicovering, the maify bars by which they were faftened forbidding all entrance, flie determined to proceed along the paflage. She had gone a very few paces, when fhe faw a fmall low door, which on attempting to open it, gave way, and ditclufed a lofty fpacious place, paved with ftone, and hung with armour and warlike inftruments. Vaft coats of mail were placed around, and a figure, armed cap-a-pie, ftood in the centre* Its appearance bore fo exact a refemblance to life, that at firft fight Rofaline ftarted back with difmay ; but almoft immediately perceiving it was a ftatue of black marble, ihe advanced, and iurveyed the hail (for fuch it appeared to be) in which it flood· Above
Above the different pieces of armour placed around, were fpears, javelins, and every fort of weapon. There were feveral doors around it ; hut anxious to fee Angelina, íhe would not at prefent explore farther; therefore clof¬ ing the door again, İlie afcended the ftaircafe, and by the iron door was proceeding to the paifage beyond, when, juft as ihe was open¬ ing it, a fort of low moan reached her ear—a convulfive figh followed, and was fucceeded by feveral more. She was at firft tempted to think the upper ftaircafe led to Angelina's apartment, but thought the voice did not refembie her's, and was hefitating whether ihe ihould not afcend, when the old houfe¬ keeper appeared at the end of the paifage. She feemed furprifed at the fight of Rofa¬ line, who immediately enquired if that ftair¬ cafe led to Mifs St. Alvars's room. " No, no, my Lady," replied the old woman, " it only leads to one of the unin¬ habited turrets* Mademoifelle St, Alvars's apartment
apartment is quite in another part of the chateau." " What then," faid Rofaline, " could the noife be 1 this moment heard, like fome one in lamentation ?-" " Oh, my Lady," anfwered old Martha, looking fearfully around, u nobody can pretend to account for all the noifes you will hear in thefe old rooms ; fo you muft not wonder if you hear that crying and groaning whenever you come near this part of the houfe. For my part, I fay nothing, but I never come here, if 1 can help it, by myfelf; and I could tell that there is good reafon to be afraid !" Agatha, Angelinas woman, now appeared coming towards them ; and the old houfe- keeper, putting her finger on her lip, as if to enjoin filence, directed her to Mifs St. Alvars's apartment. Agatha delivered a meffage from her mif¬ trefs, intimating her wiíh to fee her imme¬ diately.
diately. Rofaline obeyed the fummons, and found her with the Baron waiting her arrival at the break Gift- table. The latter fpcke not once during the repaft, and Ange¬ lina's looks too plainly betokened the rapid approach of one of thofe temporary fits of delirium fhe had fo long been fubject to. Rofaline, in expectation of this melancholy confequence, had beheld the gradual decline of her fpirits as fhe drew near the chateau ; and as fhe entered it, her general infenfibi¬ lity had given way to fuch violent agitation, that it had almoft overcome the extreme delicacy of her frame. As flie was always ieft alone with her woman during the continuance of her unhappy malady, Rofaline, haung feen her conducted to her apartment, retired to her own, where in arranging her books and clothes for the time of her refidence at St* Älvars, fhe paffed the morning.
She
She cfaed alone with the Baron, whofe gloomineis "and referve feemed every hour to increafe -, and in the evening, finding ihat Angelina was unfit to fee her, fhe deter¬ mined to ftroli out for an evening walk. She had at firft fome difliculty in finding her way to the great hall fhe had paflcd through the preceding night, where flie met the old houfekeeper, oi whom flie enquired which way ilie could get from the Caftle to take a walk among the mountains ; but was furprifed to hear the bridges were kept drawn up, and without previous permiffion from the Baron, no one could enter or leave the chateau. Difappointed in her intentions, fhe novv again turned her fteps towards her ??'? apartment. The only place where flie could take the air, was on the ramparts of the Caftle i and flie was deliberating whether fhe fliould not go there, when the incident of the morning came to her ^recollection, and (he refolved 4
refolved-once more to vifit the places (he had then accidentally explored. She defcendcd the flairs from the iron door, and entered by the fame entrance as before. The ftatue in the middle was a very fine one of a man in complete armour, and feveral finaller ones were placed in receffes round the room, between which were painted panels to reprefent doors, fome of which really opened, while others were painted for mere uniformity. It was fpa- cious and lofry, and numberlefs crevices in the roof freely admitted the air. It began to grow dufk ; flie would not, therefore, at prefent, ex; lore farther, having fatisfied her curiofity about this place, by learning that it had formerly been the armoury of the Calile. The lamentations and cries fhe had heard in the morning occurred to her ; and unable to repreis the curiofity they excited, fhe afcended
afcended the ftaircafe, and ftood fome minutes at the iron door, but heard no founds like thofe which had reached her ears in the morning. Thinking it poffible they might have been merely imaginary, flie began to afcend the turret ftairs. At the top was a landing-place, on which were two doors. She opened one, and difcovered a fmall cir¬ cular room, without furniture, and pre¬ fenting fuch a picture of deflation, that flie haftily quitted it, and was juft reclofing the door, when the fame murmuring founds íhe had before heard reached her ear. For fome moments it feemed like violent fobs, and then as if fome one was complaining in a melancholy moaning voice ; but the words could not, from the low tone they were pronounced in, be diftinguifliable. Convinced that what Martha had told her in the morning could not be true, of the t urre t being uninhabited, flie determined to enter, and fee if it were in her power to give comfort to the unknown mourner. She vol. ι, m accordingly
accordingly applied her hand to the lock, but it was faftened within^ and the moment ilie attempted to open it, the founds fud¬ denly ceafed, and a loud fhrill feream broke on her affrighted ear. She ftarted, and not knowing whether to defcend, or remain where ihe was, liftened attentively for a few minutes, but all was profoundly filent ; and finding her intention of entering the room, whence the myfterious founds proceeded, quite fruftrated, fhe retired to her chamber, andfeating herfelf at thecafement, furveyed, with mingled awe and admiration, the fcene flie beheld from it. The fyn had juft fimk behind the lofty fummits of the Alps, and gilded the tops of a long ridge of rocks, which extended a length of way till the eye could no longer difcern them. The upper parts of fome of the higheft mountains were ?И covered with fiiow. It w r as now the middle of July, and Rofaline fhuddered to thinkj^>vv dreary would be the profpect in winter, if, even in the
the midft of fummer, flie could difcern whole tracts of fnow. She could not help contrafting the barren dreary fcene abroad, and the no lefs melancholy and deferted appearance of the chateau within, with the beautiful fertile views round Edgecumbe Hall, and that comfortable manfion itfelf, once to her the feat of happinefs. Her own fituation, without frienii or companion fave Angelina, whofe periodical derangement kept her whiie wich her in a perpetual alarm, and whofe converfation, when moft collected, was frequently wild and inco¬ herent, flie reflected on with a decree of terror flie had never beiore feìt. A volun¬ tary alien from her native land, fhe lud perhaps only left it to witnefs the death or irrecoverable derangement of the unhnppy Angelina. Her heart bled when fiie thought on this fad fubject, on which, in fpite of her endeavours, flie could not help feeling the moil melancholv forebodings.
m 1
bhe
She was indulging thefe reflections, when Agatha came to tell her the Baron defired to fee her. Surprifed, and wondering at what could be the caufe of this fummons, ihe immediately obeyed it ; and on entering his apartment, found him fitting at a table with papers and books before him. He apologized to her, with his accuf¬ tomed gravity, for the melancholy manner in which he feared, he faid, ihe muft have. paffed the day, adding, he had juft been informed that ihe had an intention of walking without the Caftle gates ; but could fhe find any amufement within, he owmedit would meet his approbation in preference to venturing beyond the limits of the chateau, as the windings of the mountains were not only fo intricate as to be very difficult, if any one loft their way, to be able to regain İt, but were not unfrequently the haunts of banditti, which rendered it very unfafe to walk alone, or indeed with any one, unlefs well
Well armed and guarded. Fearful, however, he faid, that ihe might be in want of amufement, he delivered to her the keys of the library, in which, though it was ancient, flie might perhaps find fome¬ thing that would amufe her 3 and as he feldom frequented it himfelf, having his own ftudy contiguous to his apartment, and the library being in a different part of the building, flie might keep the keys, and whenever ihe felt inclined to vifit it, the houfekeeper would direct her to it. This was a real acquifition to Rofaline, though ihe did not for fome days avail her¬ felf of it. ,Her harp, which Sir Walter had prefented her with, ihe had brought with her, and had placed it in one of the lighteft and pleafanteft rooms on the fide of the cha¬ teau that was inhabited, whicb, ilie under¬ ftood, in the lifetime of the Baronefs St· Älvars* that lady and her daughter were accuftomed to fit in ; and hither did ihe repair and fpend almoft the whole day, as m 3 th«
the weather, for near a fortnight after her m riva', would ι ot allow her to walk even on the Kimparts for air. Slie was fometimes tempied to vent ire again up the turret ftairs, ar.d try to difcover ihe real caufe of the ftrange fout vN ¡he had heard, on relating whit h to Agatha, lhe had from her received ihe fame anu\er o s l.vMii the old houfekeeper, that the turrvi hac' K<rg fince been ih c t up, and wab reputed to b¿ Launted. Some¬ times fhe am nú d herú If with wandering through a vaft e^cnt of the chateau, and often loft hei felf a.nong'l its numeious and extenfive apartments, moft of which were unfurnifhed, though they all bore teftimony that they had formerly been fitted up in a ft} le of fuperior magnificence.
????.
?? ??. ?И. *t Thar ftrain aga'n 1 ît hatl a dying Li! î «* Oh t it cîmeo'eî my ear, iikc ihc íwcct íouth «' Thai bieathcs upan a bank, of violets, ** Stealing, and giving odour ?* Shakespeare. ANGELINA, at length, began to recover from that intellectual derangement, which, for nearly t lì ree weeks after their arrival at the chr.teau, deprived Roialine of her fociety. By degrees ihc was again reftored to as great a íhare of rcafon as flic had of late years ebioved ; and Rofaline, now devoting her whoie time to footh and amufe her, fcarcely ever left ber, except when íhe m 4 was
was remarkably well and in tolerable fpirits. Ange'ina would perfuade her to take the air, while ihe wrote or played in her abience. Thus pafled almoft fix weeks ; and begin¬ ning to be familiarized with the dreary lonelinefs of the edifice, Rofaline foon felt IliUCri tllll reconciled to that want t f fociety, which at her firft arrival ilie hau to feverely felt. She had one evening retired late from Angelina's dreffing-room, whither after fupper flie had accompanied her, and, on entering her clofet, net feeling inclined to retire immediately to reft, flie fat down by the antique arched window, which almoft extended over one fide cf it. Exactly oppefite hung an old portrait of a warrior; and as flic fa£ with her eyes fixed on it, flie thought ihe perceived the canvas waved backwards and forwards by the wind, which * blew with great force, and whiftled through the
the room ; and ihe fometimes ftarted with alarm as it milled, and then ruíhed in vio¬ lent gufts through the long galleries of the Caftle. Perceiving the picture continue to be very much agitated by the air, fhe arofe, and imagining there muft be fome opening under it, endeavoured to puih it on one fide; but its weight, being heavily gilt, would not for fome time allow her to ftirr it. At length, with much difliculty, fhe removed it fufficiently to dif¬ cover the hinges of a door ; and after fome further exertion, lhe obferved a door half broken away. Having, however, * at laft leaned it againft a large cheft which ftood clofe to it, fhe took the light in her hand, and looking through the door¬ way, which was covered over with cobwebs, fhe perceived a fmall unfurniflied room, the ceilingand wallsof which were almoft decayed. She proceeded through it, and difcerned a narrow winding paffage. Led on by curio¬ fity, fhe went down it, and at the end difco¬ vered two or three fteps, which led, by m 5 ä low
a low door, into a dark vaulted apartment ; its only furniture was an old chair and table, which ftood before it. The appear¬ ance of this room was fo gloomy, and İt ftruck fuch a danipnefb on her as íhe entered it, that flie was not forry to quit it · 3 but refolved to take a iecond view of it, when ihe could obtain an opportunity, by day¬ light. With fome difficulty ihe again clofed the fecret door, and, replacing the pidure, ftill feeling difinc'ined to retire, ihe went to her cafement. Meditating on her late dif¬ covery, flie ftood there for f;me tíme, indulging a numerous train cf refledions which crowded on her mind. The ftrange charader of the Baron every day gave her new caufe for wonder. That gloomineis and referve fhe had always obferud in him continued to increafe rather than diminuii ; and fince the day on which he had given her permiffion to frequent his library, he had fcarcely ever fpoken to her, Angelina evidently
evidently grew daily weaker, and her ema¬ ciated flame appeared to the aft righted Rofaline to be haftening to its final habita¬ tion. The dread of this awful period was, on this night, more powerful on the heart of Rofaline than it had ever before been, as in the courfe of the day ftie had obferved, with forrow, that her health was worfe than ufual, though her fpirits were better. The melancholy ideas thefe reflections fuggefted made her more than commonly thoughtful ; and flie was plunged in a pro¬ found reverie, when ihe was fuddenly routed by the mufic ihe had not fo long heard, which, in ? foft, low ftrain firft ftole on her ear, then became louder by degrees, and at length iuddenly ceafed. She looked care¬ fully around her chamber, below on the ramparts, and beyond tiie moat whicli fur- rounded them. Determining to try what would be the rciult, ihe faid, in a loud voice—" Is any one below ?" M ? " There
" There is," replied the fame voice flie had before heard. " Who are you ?" faid Rofaline. " Have you fo foon forgotten our conver¬ fation at Woodville," faid the voice, " that Ariel is obliged again to announce him¬ felf V 9 " I perfectly recollect the voice," iaid Ro¬ faline, " but how can I help wondering to he? r it in this part of the world ?" ít Are you then itili fo incredulous/' re¬ turned the unknown, " as not to believe that one of my nature could traverfe the vaft regions oi air in as fhort a period of time as you could make a voyage by fea ? and that it would not have been equally eafy to me to have tranfported myfelf to the moft diftant wilds of America, or the burning fands of Arabia, with the fame fpeed as, to hover over, and preferve you from danger, I have winged my way from Albion, and placed ?? abode amidit the inow-crowned Alps ?'*
* Whether
« Whether you be what you fay, or an inhabitant of the earth," replied Rofaline, « if fuch be your motives, I am doubtlefs greatly indebted to you," " To atlift and advife you," added her aerial friend, c< have I followed you hither. If, therefore, you have any doubts to folve^ or counfel to aik, behold me ready to pro¬ mote every thing that can tend to your welfare." " At prefent,** faid Rofaline, c ' I have neither." " Is confinement, then," returned the voice, ** in fo íhort a time become habitual to you, that you wiih not to exceed in your walks the limits of the chateau ? or are you actuated by a wifli to comply with the delires ofthe Baron, in not feeking for means to explore the romantic intricacies of the Alps ?" " If I thought," replied Rofaline, " there was really no danger of being bewildered among them, I own I ihould like to view nearer 4 the
the feenes which the windows ofthe chateau prefent to my view." " Whenever," returned her monitor, " you are inclined to venture, there is a door in the armoury of the Caftle, which, or I am miftaken, you have more than once vifited, that by a flight of itone fteps leads to a fubterranean paffagej from which you will find it eafy to explore your way to the mountain. Secrecy, as to the difcovery I now make, is all that is required of you. The Baron, though fole pofíeflor of this domain, is himfelf ignorant of this commu¬ nication ; and from him, believe me, your future fafety may too probably require a concealment of it." With thefe myfterious words, her nightly vifitor told Rofaline he muft bid her adieu ; and as foon as he had ceafed fpeaking, another ftrain of the fame foft mufic was played, and then fuddenly ceafing, all was again filent j and after a few more minutes fpent
fpent at the window, during which no found reached her ear, ihe retired to reft, more perplexed than ever on the fubject of her aerial monitor. She was fcarcely arifen in the morning, when Agatha came to her chamber, who told her that her fears for her young Lady had emboldened her to take the liberty of begging her interference. The great alter¬ ation, ihe faid, which had taken place in Mifs St. Älvars lately, had much alarmed her j and ihe thought it might in fome mea¬ fure be owing to her fitting up very late to write, and to her employing herfeif too much in it during the day. Rofalinereadily promifed to fpeak to Ange lina on the fubject ; and when ihe defcended to breakfaft, took an opportunity of hmting to her that íhe tiiought fo much feden· tary application would prove injurious to her health j but Angelina only faintly fmiled,
ARIEL*" fmiled, and immediately turned the con¬ verfation. She'fpent the whole day with her, but at the clofe of it Angelina retired to her apartment , and as the evening was delight¬ fully fine, and Rofaline knew the Baron was engaged in his ftudy, ihe determined to attempt exploring the way that her fylph had told her led to the mountains from the armoury. She accordingly defcended thither, and opened feveral of the doors before fhe came to one from which a narrow dark ftaircafe feemed to wind a confiderable way below the ground. Its appearance was io gloomy, that flie at firft feared to proceed $ but at length refolving to difcover whit her it led, ihe defcended for fome time, till by a faint glimmering light, which ihot acrofs the cavern, ftie L;.?id its termination in what appeared to be a vault. She ftopped for a ???????^
moment, hefitating whether to return or pro¬ ceed 5 but, impelled by a wifh to difcover if ivhat the pretended fpirit had told her were true, flie continued along it, till ihe arrived at a fmall low door in the wall. A gentle puih fuflked to open it, and flie now difco¬ vered a long narrow paffage, faintly illumined by fmall crevices in its almoft decayed roof. it terminated in a ftaircafe, exactly fimilar to that flie had defcended from the armoury. She afcflídfd i'* ^r ?. confiderable time before flie could difcover whether it had any ending, and was at length conducted by it into a cave of great extent, at the mouth of which, with delight, flie perceived the light of day. She ftood for fome time at the entrance to admire the wild and romantic fcenery around her. Embofomed amid ft the moft remote intricacies ofthe Alps, the entrance to the cavern was concealed by the point of a rock, which projected out fo as to entirely prevent its being obferved. Every
Every object that now met the eyes of Rofaline was new as wonderful, and ihe gazed in fpeechlefs aftonifhment at the majeftic and fublime views around her. Vaft piles of rocks, with the tops of towering moun¬ tains, fome at a diftance ftill crowned with perpetual fnows, were the more ftriking features in the fcene ; while a folitary tree here and there, and the few wild ftivubs and flowers fcattered on the mountain, and in fome places a narrow ftream winding its way among the rocks, ferved to enliven the profpect, though they could not diveft it of that folitary appearance which it wore for many miles around. Unvaried with the flighteft trace of any human habitation, fave the gloomy pile flie was herfelf an inmate of, her eye ranged ovc t* wide profpect before her, without b*':ag i^e to diicern any but inanimate objects. At this feafon of the year it was, however, more cheerful than at any other, and fome fpots were particularly picturefque and
and beautiful, and prefented ample fubjects for her pencil, which fhe delighted to employ in copying that firft of artifts, Nature. Fearful of bewildering herfelf amidft the vail intricacies of the rocks, fhe dared not proceed further than to the fummit of one at a fmall diftance from the cave, which commanded a wide view around. She admired it for a confiderable time, and then, afraid left her abfence ihould be noticed, was returning to the cavern, when, almoft clofe to its entrance, and ftill further be¬ hind the projection of rock, ihe fuddenly thought fhe perceived an object move behind fome wild fhrubs that grew thickly around. She paufed a moment, but heard no found j and concluding it was only the leaves waved by the wind, flie advanced towards them, to take a nearer view of the many coloured flirubs, when flie difcerned a very narrow opening among them to a clofe walk, which appeared to be cut out of the wood, She, with iome difficulty, paffed the
the thick ftirubs, and followed the little path, which, after feveral windings, brought her to a fort of fquare, that appeared to be cut out ofthe felid rock ; but her aftonifh¬ ment was ftrongly excited to perceive, on one fide of it, a ruftic tomb erected î It was fcreened from the inclemencies of the weather by the vaft maifes of rock which every where furrounded and overhung it. Tbe monument was of plain black marble, without plate or infcription, fave that, exactly in the center, was rudely carved, " Stranger / weep here a mothers woe!* 9 Willow and cyprefs trees were planted fo as for their melan¬ choly branches to unite in waving over the tomb, which, thus romantically fituated, prefented a more wonderful object to the fenfes of Rofaline than any flie had beheld fince flie came to the chateau. She knew it could not be any of the St. Älvars family, as the rîiins of the chapel were itili remain¬ ing, and the vault where the remains of his anceftors
anceftors were interred, the Baron had told her was under it. She could have remained much longer to contemplate this memento of mortality ; but fearing a difcovery of her excurfion, and more anxious than before, from the recent adventure, to repeat İt, íhe haftened to return by the cave to the fubterranean paf¬ fage, from which ihe hurried through the armoury, and arrived at her apartment with¬ out feeing any one of the family. She had, however, remained there a very ihort time, when Agatha came from Ange¬ lina to requeft her prefence. She imme¬ diately obeyed the fummons, and found her alone in her chamber. <c I fent for you, my dear Rofaline," faid ilie, " to make a requeft, which, if granted, will be an additional fivour to the many you have conferred on me.—It is," added ihe, " that, unknown to my father, you wiil
will write for me to my brother. He is now in Italy, and from having fatally offended the Baron, is never allowed to vifit the chateau when he is here. It is now more than fix years fince 'I faw hitn, but the attachment I have ever felt tor him can never end but with my exiftence ; and as í am now well convinced it will not be of long duration, I would fain fee him before I refign a life, that has been long, very long painful to me to fupport." " I will certainly with pleafure," faid Rofaline, Ci comply with your requeft of writing to him, though I truft, and indeed have no doubt, that your fears are quite void of foundation." <c I am now," faid Angelina, fmiling faintly, wc paft all deception ; nor is it pof¬ fible for hope of earthly happinefs ever again to be an inmate of my bofom. I once indulged-the flatterer, and gave it free accefs to mybreaft j but I have long baniihed ir, and fubftituted what can never fail, and what, when reafon is partially lent me, I chcrilh
cherifh with ardour. My pains have been rewarded, and every wavering thought, every doubtful fear, has been long oblite¬ rated from my mind by this heavenly gueft. 'Tis celeftial hope, my dear Rofaline—hope of eternal felicity that has thus wonderfully reconciled me to myfelf, and produced that internal calm I once thought I was deftined to try in vain to procure. As my pains of mind have gradually fubfided^ thofe of my body are increafed ; yet not one murmur will you hear from me. Every additional agony I confider as an harbinger of nearer approaching felicity, and I fiibmit, not merely with patience, but with joy I" Seeing how greatly Rofaline was af¬ fected, flie ceafed, adding— <e I will not teaze you longer, but I own I was very earneft to convince you how much I fincerely wifh what muft very foon happen, that you may not have one fource of grief, lave that which a knowledge of fuffering
fuffering humanity muft give to a mind like your's. For me, you may now fee, you will have no caufe to mourn, and for yourfeif furely you may rejoice, fince my fociety can only give an additional wound to your feelings every time you behold this frame, brought by ficknefs and forrow to the brink of that grave I ihall fo ihortly enter." She now changed the fubjeci:, telling Roialine İlie had nearly completed the manufcript, which was meant folely for her infpeciion. " There is," added fhe, " an injunction in it, which 1 would requeft you folemnly to promife me you will grant. It is a mere exercife to your native humanity of difpofition ; and I require it becauie, for the amiable offices of fympathy and atten* tion, 1 know no one that equals you. To that am I indebted for the laft months of my exiftence being paifed with more com¬ pofure,
pofure, and I may fay comfort, than for years before I have known." With read i nefs Rofaline gave the promife flie reqmred, and at a late hour was fuf¬ fered by Angelina to leave her, promifing her to write as flie requefted the next day co her brother in Italy. From Lady Dei¬ ford and Mifs Arundel ihe had more than once heard of this brother ; but there was a myftery that feemed to envelope the family which fhe had not yet been able to penetrate. After ilie had quitted Angelina, with her mind too deeply wounded to allow her at prefent tojóin the Baron, fhe retired ?? her cloiet, and fearing herfelf by the window, continued to ruminate on the converfation ihe had juft had. The dreadful idea ofthe melancholy event that Angelina had pre¬ dicted would fo foon happen, fii icd her heart with fad nefs ; yet, as her journey to Switzerland was voluntary, flie determined VOL. I. ~N tO
to exert all her fortitude to her aid, and to act the trying part affigned her, fo that flie might hereafter look back en it with fatif- faction. The courfe of thefe forrowful reflections was interrupted by the found of a ftep near the clofet ; and concluding it was a fummons to fupper with the Baron, (lie arofe, but on entering the bedchamber, found no one there ι and, fuppofing flie muft have been miftaken, again returning to the clofet, flie refeat ed herfelf by the cafement. The moon had been long rifen, and though flie had no candle, the apartment was rendered quite light by its rays. The old portrait, which the evening before flie had removed, and difcovered the broken and concealed door, hung oppofite ; and while ihe was looking at it, ilie again heard the found of a ftep, and a noife fucceeded that appeared to be clofe to' her in her clofet. Something like fear aifailed her, and
and ilie fat quite ftil!, when, to her inex- preilible aftoniíhment, the portrait was piirlied afide, and a perfon appeared be¬ hind it from the old door. She ftarted up , but on perceiving her, the pic¬ ture was inftantly replaced, and tiie figure again difappearing, every thing in a mo¬ ment remained as ic was before. She was now quite overcome by terror, and í at quiei, without power to move or ipeak, and almoit immediately perceived a light in her cham¬ ber, and heard iome one approaching. It was Agatha, who was fent by the Laron to inform her lupper was ready j buc feeing by her palenefs that fomething had alarmed her, íhe enquired the caufe of it. Rofaiine anfwered by relating what had juft happened, at which Agatha ieemed much iurprifed s but cautioning her not to mention it to the Baron, only İh 00k her head, as if ihe knew more than fiie dared to reveal.
n ?
At
At fupper the Baron was gloomv and referred ; lie fpoke little, and (cerned, as he had done for two or thr^e days preceding, more than uiually occupied in thought. Rofaline attributed it wholly to his fears for his daughter, whicli (he was affured were too we 1 founded. When die retired to her chamber. Hie felt at firft net very happy in tbe thought of going there alone, after what ihe had feen, or fancied íhe liad ken \ but having no one to whom íiie could apply, fhe was neccfli- tated to a-'Viit fdeiiîly the chance of again ieeing the fame appearance behind the con* coaled door. Recoiled ing, "however, fhe mmht fecure herfelf aaainíl nocturnal vifi- tors bv faftening the clofet door on the outf.de, ibe determined not to go into it ; but ilie was not a little difappointed to find ti ere were only the remains of a broken lock to it. She was thercfoie compelled, by phcing furniture againft it, to make it as fecure as íhe coulJ, though ihe feared it wc u ld
would prove of little avail in preventing the entrance of any one who would take the trouble to remove it. For fome thr.e uneafy thoughts would .-Jilovv her no reft, till at length, having for iin; e hours remained awake, and hearing no founds of any lui ther alarm, íhe funk to repofe. Her firft care in the morning was to fulfil to Angelina her promife of writing to her brother, which flie did according to her directions, intimating her wifli that he would give them his company at the chateau, as her health growing daily worfe, flie thought an interview with him would tend to com- pofe her mind. After havmg concluded it, and received the approbation of Angelina, Rofaline addreffed it to the Chevalier St. Älvars, at the houfe of a gentleman at Venice, where he fpent much of his time; and then Angelina retiring to her apart¬ ment, fhe determined to vifit the library, n 3 and
and endeavour to find a book to amufe her leiiure hours, not having yet availed herfelf of the Baron's permifhori to go there. She was conducted by old Martha, who pointed out to her the large folding doors at the end of the gallery, and left her. The library, quite in ? different part of the building from any ihe had before been into, was at lhe fartheft end of the earl wing of ihe Caule · 7 and che high cafement?, with fæall panes of glafs, fcarcely afforded light fufficient for the gloominefs and extent of the apartment. It contained vaft quan¬ tities of books in different languages, inclofed in cafes, carved and gilt with ail the magni¬ ficence of former times, but now betraying only, in places here and there, the famt glitter of a piece of gold cornice or maffy ornament. The windows were of painted glafs, and old velvet fofas were placed under them. Here ihe for fonie time amufed her¬ felf with feledi ng fome of the moft modem productions in French and Italian, and returned
returned with them to her apartment, de¬ lighted with having found fome means to enjoy her moft favourite amufement. In town the perpetual fucceffion of entertainments which had filled her time, had left her little leifure for reading j nor had the ftate of her mind been fuch while in the great world, as to allow her to purfue with compofure thofe occupations which once were her principal delight«
? 4 CHAP.
s- «n
CHAP. XIII. ff EíheríaÍ power ! whcfe Ttnile st noon of night RecaU the far-fied fpirits of dtüght j <c Inftiìs that mufing, meîancholy mood, " Which charms the wife, and cievates the good— « ßlcä Memory, hail !" . Rogers. F'H" ^ Jl HUS paifed three more fucceifive weeks. The behaviour öf the Baron was uniformlv the fame to Rofaline ;—referved and gloomy during their meals, the only time at whicli ilie faw him, ihe had few opportunities of feeing his real temper. The fituation of Angelina grew daily more critical and alarming ;
alarming ; her fenfes were perfectly reftoredj nor had they been for fome weeks at all deranged : but her whole frame, emaciated by long illnefs and worn by forrow, gave every day freth proofs how ihort would be the period ere it would be wholly annihi¬ lated. Her ftrength of mind ieemed to increafe as the decay of her form became daily more vifible; and ihe often held' long converfations with Rofaline, who, whiie flie adminiftered comfort and confòla- tion to her wounded mind, was irrefiitibly led to admire the talents and endowments ίο long obfcured by a fatal intellectual de¬ rangement, and which the world would now be lo foon deprived of. Her reading, her fecret rambles in the mountains, all were neglected, that ihe might wholly devote her time to Angelina, who, when unoccupied by writing, preferred her converfation to an/ thing. Mufic ihe w ?? ft i iL fond of, and wou. d niuke Roialine, almoit every evening, play and iing to her; and fometimes ihe would herielf touch the tirinas ot her harp, n S and
and accompany it with her voice intones fo melancholy, that Rofaline liftened till flie almoft thought her a being of another world. She had often related to Angelina the myfterious circumftances attending her birth ; and, to amufe her, had one day brought from her apartment the cafket left by her unfortunate met her, for her infpection. It contained many very valuable jewels : among the reft was a locket, curioufly fet, containing two locks of hair, forming a beautiful device, and in fmall letters round it w 7 ere thefe words—" Sacred to Friendfliip and Reconciliation /" Rofaline, who had only before taken a curfory view of them, was aftonifhed to find of how great value they were ; and after Angelina had examined and admired them, flie agreed with a propofal or Roialine to accompany her in a walk on the ramparts, fupported by her friend and Agatha.
During
During their walk, Angelina remarked a part of the roof of the building that in one place appeared to have fallen in very lately. On examination, Rofaline found it muft be near her apartment, and immediately recol¬ lected it muft be over fome of thofe rooms to which the concealed door under the por¬ trait in her clofet led. She related the cir¬ cumftance to Angelina, who eagerly lif¬ tened to every word fhe uttered ; and when ihe had concluded, fuddenly flopping, ihe put her trembling hand on the arm of Roialine, and in a voice almoft inarticulate through excels of emotion—** Lead me inftantly thither !" faid fhe¿ but perceiving the fur¬ prife of Rofaline at the fudden vehemence of her manner, added—" You know not of what confequence it may be to my mind, of wiiat import— i conjure you to conduct me there immediately 1" Then trying to calm the agitation in which fhe had fpoken, ihe again ftopped as they were filentiy leading her forwards. " Yet wherefore this anxiety?" faid íhe. " is aught mow in my n 6 power
power to remedy woes long fince paft — crimes long committed and forgotten, lave by the doer 1 Yet let me go on." They led her to the apartment of Rofa¬ line. Every ftep they drew nearer to it, flic caft wild and terrified looks around her ; then feeing heralarm in the affrighted coun¬ tenance oi Rofaline, flie faid— 4i Be not, my beft loved friend, alarmed at my incoherency. Alas ! it is many long years fince 1 have been in this part of the chateau 9 and want¬ ing refolution to truft my eyes with objects once fo dear to them, I fancied they were deftined to clofe wil hout agaia beholding what, in former happy times, yielded me fuch pleafure." They now arrived at Rofaline's chamber, where Angelina fat down to recover the fatigue of her walk, while, with the affiftance of Agatha, Rofaline removed the portrait ; and Angelina rifing, accompanied her thiough tae deíerUd room into the paffage
paflage beyond, and from thence to the dark vaulted room, where Rofaline had before been alone. They had now no light, and the apartment was entirely dark, except from the faint glimmering that darted through the cracks of lome broken and ? decayed window-ftiutters. Tneie, with fome troubîe, Agatha unfaftened, and dis¬ covered the windows to be grated with ftrong iron bars. They had now a more perfect view of this difmal abode : ic was a hi>h vaulted room, the old wainicoc of which was in many parts quite decayed, and without any furniture, except one large old- faditoned arm-chair, vrithatable before it. On a minute examination, it appeared to Rofaline to have been rendered thus fecure ior the purpole of confinement, particularly as they obferved the door, which now ftood open, was on the outiide loaded with ftrong bars of iron, and numerous bolts and locks.
While
While Rofaline was gratifying her curio¬ fity, Angelina fat as if quite motionlefs on the chair where they had placed her at their entrance ; but on obferving the ftrong faftcn- ings which Roialine pointed out to her, ihe fuddenly clafped her hands, and exclaimed— tf Poor unfortunate victim of tyranny and cruelty ! here were thy forrows long hidden from the world by the author of them, on whom, doubtlefs, thy wrongs will be feverely avenged !" Then turning to Rofaline, (he added—" For many years of my life, I knew there was this apartment in the Caftle, but till this hour was never able to diicover in what part it was fituated. A dreadful myftery hangs over it, which may perhaps hereafter be explained ; but far from me be the fad talk #f expofing the errors of a parent* Let us now leave this place ; my head is not we.l ; and were I to remain here. longer, my brain would be quite bewildered with the \arieiy of fad images that prefs on my imagination."
Afliftcd
Affifted by Agatha, Rofaline now con· ducted her back to her apartment, won¬ dering at the ftrange fcene ftie had juft beheld, and wholly unable to account, in any manner, for the myfterious expreffions that had burft from the lips of Angelina in the dark vaulted room. The remainder of the day was fpent by Angelina in her own apartment; and on Rofaiine's enquiring after her, Agatha faid flie was employed in writing, but was very compofed^ Finding, therefore, no hindrance, fhe determined once more to avail herfelf of her knowledge of the fubterranean paflage, and take a ftroli among the mountains. She defcended to the armoury, and eafily found her way, as before, to the cavern. The fun was declining to the weft, after a fultry day, and the top of every high moun¬ tain within view was tinged with its en¬ riching rays. From the point of a pro¬ jecting rock, a few paces from the cavern's ? mouth,
mouth, Rofaline contemplated in filence the glorious urofpects. Her heart flew from the dreary fpot ??? inhabited, to tie loved friends (he had left behind her on her native ihore. It hovered with fondnefs over every well-known fpot furrounding the dear refi¬ dence of her childhood, and retraced with bitternefs each well-remembered fcene, flown ?*??? for ever on the fwift wing of Time. B'Jiv, faithful memorv wafted her 3t * J ideally back to thofe happy times of early feiLitv. She loneed to receive intelligence from Edgecumbe Hall : only once fince her refidence in Switzerland had ike heard from Henrietta, and then nothing material had tranipired. She mentioned Sir Walter's approbation of her choice to accompany the Baron and hu daughter, and dwelt with enthufiafm on the delight flie ihould feel üt again beholding her.— <4 Ala* !" thought Rofaline, as íhe iorrowfully funejed the profpect belure her, " when ? that likely to be,and may 1 r.ct bedeim.cd to bc for e\cr denied
denied the pleafure of once more beholding the fweet ihores of Albion r" Such were her meditations, when ihe fuddenly thought ilie heard voices borne on the wind to her ear. She liftened, and fancied they were in or near the cavern. It inftantly occurred to her that the Baron had difcovered her excurfions, and had fent fome of the domeftics, or perhaps come himfelf, to feek her. She dreaded his anger, and involuntarily retreated further among the rocks to conceal herfelf. She again liftened, but no found reached her; and ihe began to fancy ftie had miftaken the hollow founds of the wind among the rocks for human voices, when they again aifailed her ear ; and fuddenly turning, ilie perceived the figures of two men at fome diftance. She immediately retreated with precipitation, and fied fwifcly for ionie time, till at length, out ot breath, ihe ilackened her pace, and iound herfelf quite bewildered
bewildered in the intricacies of the mou: - tain. She could diftinguifh no found, and ftood for fome moments in breathlefs terror> leit fhe fhould not be able to find her wav back to the chateau ; fhe t wandered about for fome time, but could nná no path that led to the cavern, and every different way ihe explored cniy ferved to increafe her alarm and perplexity. Quite fpent with running, and overcome with heat and terror, flic at length fat down on a tuft of mois that grew beneath the overlhadowmg height of a ftupendous rock, to ieft herfelf before flie extended he: fearch. She was fcaicely feated, when the fame voices reached her ear, and appeared to proceed from perfons who were paffing the other fide of the rock. She plainly diftinguiihed thefe words :— " Are you quite fure," faid one, " that you faw herr" « Oh,
cc Oh, yes," replied the other, " I am certain of it : ilie was ftanding on the pro¬ jection yonder." €< It is very extraordinary then," replied the firft, rc that if ihe had loft her way, flie did not come to us, inftead of flying away with the fwiftnefs you defcribe." '* Ob," anfwered the other, " you need not be alarmed ¿ we fliall undoubtedly find her with the hermit·" " Well, then," faid the firft, 4< it will be better to go there with all fpeed, if thai is your opinion, though I can hardly think, as the way to the cell is fo intricate, that ihe would be able to find it." " The old man is always walking about," added the other, u and makes a practice of taking all travellers to his hut ; fo you may depend on it ihe has met with him." Their voices were now loft in the air, and Rofaline, with trembling feety rofe to renew her fearch for a path that led to the cavern. She was convinced the perfons ihe had heard,
heard, were not belonging to the chateau 5 but a more dreadful idea occurred to her, that they mi^ht probably be banditti. That the female they had- mentioned being in fearch of, was herfelf, ihe could not doubt, as it was certainly her they had íèen ; and the redoubled her efforts to ex¬ plore the way to the chateau be:ore their return from fruirle fsly feeking her where they had propoíêd. Long die wandered about, in vain feeking her loft path, till a very fmall opening in fome thick bulhes gave her a tranfient view of fomething that glittered. At the hazard of tearing her clothes, but glad to difcover any glimmering of a new path, flie puihed through them, and to her furprife found herfelf at the monument ihe had before feen. With joy fiie difcovered where flie was, as fhe now with eafe found her way to the cavern, and liurried with the utmoft fpeed to her chamber, fearful left her abfence ihould have been noticed* A fliort
A fliort ti ne before the penerai hour of fupper, flie defcendcd to the no.th parlour ; but hearing the found of bud voices in converfation with the ?????, íhe turned hack, and was proceeding to Angelina's anartment, when flie was met by Agatha, who told her that two gentlemen, friends of the Baron, were juft arrived, and that her Lad}' requefted to fee her· On entering her room, flie found her walking; about it with the allí ítance of an attendant, but perieetly compofed. She told Rofaline ihe had lent for her to beg flie would defire her father to difpenfe with her attendance at fupper, —" My motives," added ilie, tc for the requeft are various. The Chevalier de Polloni, who accompanies his father, once did me the honour to regard me with a partiality I ill deferved ; and as I know his hc;rt to be actuated by principles of the warmeft huma¬ nity, I ihould be forry to give fo great a ihock to his feelings, as I am too well convinced
convinced my wan appearance would bc, befides that the fight of him would recai to my remembrance feenes which, for my prefent, and perhaps for my eternal peace, fliould be baniihed from it during the fliort fpan that memory is allowed me." She bad fcarcely finifhed fpeaking, when a fervant came to inform them the Baron waited fupper. Roialine immediately obeyed the fum¬ mons ; and, on et.·tering the parlour, was introduced by the Baron to the Count and Chevalier de Polloni. The former appeared about the age ofthe Baron. He was tall and ftrongly made ; his countenance expreffed deep lines of artifice and cunning, and his dark overhanging brows betokened to a penetrating obierver deep thought, and a genius fertile in contrivances. When Rofa¬ line was prefented to him by the Baron, he contracted his features; and feeming to col¬ led every art, and all the penetration he was
%vas mafter of, furveyed her with eyes fo fcrutinizing, that involuntarily íhe fhrunk abaíhed from his regards. The young Chevalier, his fon, was totaUy different : with a good figure, his countenance was open and manly, and his air polite and inge¬ nuous ; but over his whole perfon and man¬ ner was diffufed a melancholy gravity that greatly interefted Roialine. He feemed to feel her diftrefs when his father's addreis fo evidently wounded her delicacy ; and as foon as they were feated, entered into con¬ verfation with her on indifferent fubjects, purpolely to give her an opportunity to recover her accuftomed compofure. He enquired with fome emotion after Mifs St* Älvars ; and the anxiety vifible in his looks while he made the enquiry, betokened the deep intereft he took in whatever related to her. The fupper pafled with little general comerfatïon. The Baron did not relax from his accuftomed taciturnity, and imme¬ diately
dİatelv afterwards Rofaline retired. Slie called at Angelina's dreffing-room, but fhe was al ready r,one to her chamber ; (lie therefore proceeded to her own apartment. A circumftance fo unexpected as the arri¬ val of vihtors at St. Älvars could not fail of awakening furprife and curiofity concerning the motives of their vifit. She could not help feeling prejudiced in favour of the Chevalier, and for the Count ihe had con¬ ceived an intolerable diflike. There was a darknefs in his countenance, and -a fome¬ thing fo defigning in his brow, that v flie always felt relieved when from him lhe caft her eyes on the opennefs and ingenuouinefs portrayed in the perfon of his fon. Revolving this fubject in her mind, flic had pafled up flairs, and through the two firft galleries, when, as flie walked filentiy along» ilie thought fhe heard the echo of fteps. She fuddenly ftopped, and more diftinctiy heard the noife. She was now arrived
arrived at the entrance of the third gallery, and the fteps founded as if they were in fome of the paffages that led to it. She recollected it might probably be one of the Count's domeftics, whofe chambers might be in that part of the chateau, as file knew none of the family, herfelf excepted, inhabited any of thofe apartments. As this occurred to her, ihe palled on with light quick fteps, till, as fhe crofted the end ofthe paffage, at the bottom of which was the iron-grated door, a fudden gufi: of wind extinguiihed her lamp, and left her in dark¬ nefs. This was truly diftreffing, as fhe had to find her way quite to the other part of the building to procure a light. There was, however, no alternative, and ihe was preparing to grope her way back through the gallery, when a glimmering light fud¬ denly fiafhed at the ent? of the paffage, as if forne one wav afcending the ftairs from the armoury ; but the grated door being clofed, ihe could not diftinguifti the perfon, who feemed to flop at the top of the ftairs, while vol* 1. ? Rofaline,
Rofaline, fuppofing it to be one of the ftran¬ gers, had retreated; however, reclíectincr that even ifit were, fhe might have an op¬ portunity of lighting her lamp, flie was again advancing, but the faint illumin tion was lefs vifible than before, and as flie pafied a few paces down the paffage, flie heard dif- tinctly the milling of clothes, and faw fome¬ thing that appeared like a perfon in black afcending the turret ftaircafe towards the room whence flie had formerly heard groans proceed. The light grew fainter by degrees, and at length entirely difappeared» The milling noife ceafed, and the fame dead filence prevailed as before, except that the faint echo of a clofing door gave her reafon to fuppofe the figure fhe had feen, had entered one ofthe upper rooms ofthe turret. She now with fome difficulty explored her way in the dark, through the two gal¬ leries, and had entered what flie fancied was a paffage, from which fhe knew a ftair¬ cafe defcended to the houfekeeper's apart- 1 ments,
ments s when fuddenly voices in difcourfe reached her ear. One of them fhe imme¬ diately recognifed to be that of the Baron, and his companion fhe concluded to be the Count. She now feared fhe had miffed her way, and paufing to confider, íhe heard the Baron fay— " Thus, you fee, every thing agrees ; in fliort, I am too well convinced of what I tell you—for my peace I am too certain of it. We muft therefore now confider what is to be done : I couid not be eafy till I had confulted you on the fubject.'* * c True/' replied the Count, " we muft confider, and fpeedily determine. You are certain we are not overheard ?" <c Quite certain," replied the Baron ; " who indeed is there to overhear us ? But we muft notrefoive haftily; we muft weigh and confider ere we decree." " Her name, you fay, is Rofaline," re¬ turned the Count, " and your authority is of courfe. undoubted ?" ? a " Before
" Before we proceed, I will fecure a door in the paffage," faid the Baron, rifing 5 and Rofaline, terrified, though fbe knew not why, at what fhe had heard, flew with pre¬ cipitation farther down the paflage, and in a moment faw the Baron open a door, and iffue from a room on one fide. He had a lamp in his hand, and looked cautiouily around ; but Rofaline had fecreted herielf behind the open door of a room at fome diftance, and efcaped his obfervation. After having, with care, bolted and locked a door between them, he returned to the Count j and defpairing of being able to find her way to the fervants'apartments, íhe determined to try to regain her chamber, and lay down with her clothes on ; for what fiie had been an unfeen witnefs of, had taken from her all inclination to fieep. She had juft formed this refolution, when a light from below illumined the ftaircafe near
???? her; and haftening towards it, ihe perceived one of the female domeftics, who at fight of her ftarted and fcreamed ; buc Rofaline, begging her not to be alarmed, told her fhe had accidentally put out her lamp, and in trying to find her way to the other part of the chateau, had loft herfelf. The young woman, who had lately come into the family, knew little more of the manfion than ihe did. Roialine at length found her way to her apartment, and, dif¬ miffmg her, retired to bed. It was fome time before ihe could clofe'her eyes, for reflecting on the converfation ihe had been an unfufpected hearer of. Why at that late hour of the night they fhould fit up to difcourfe, appeared very ftrange * % but why fhe fliould be the fubject of their midnight councils was ftill more wonderful. The Count, whom, from the firft momenfe ilie beheld, fhe had felt prejudiced againft, flie now more than ever difliked, and dcter- o 3. minedj
mined, the next day, to watch narrowly his behaviour, as well as that of the ????? ? towards herfelf.
CHAP. XIV.
" Beneath a mountain's brow, the moil remoie- «' And inacceíEbie, by fhepherds trod, « In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand, *' A hermit liv*d¡ a melancholy man, ** Who was ihe wonder of our wandering fwains ?* Home» XvOSALINE had no opportunity to put her refolution in practice, for the three gen¬ tlemen code out immediately after breakfaft, and did not return till late in the evening. Angelina was engaged in writing ; and being left alone, Rofaline ftole to the armoury to indulge
indulge herfelf once more with a folitary ramble among the mountains. After having paffed the fubterranean paffage, fhe reached the cavern ; and as Ibe approached its entrance, and beheld tbe wild, though beautiful feenes of nature around, her heart bounded with delight, like that of a prifoner releafed from confinement, and once more permitted to view the clear light of day. Wrapped in filent contemplation, ftie flood for fome moments at the mouth of the cavern. It was a calm evening in the latter end of Auguft ; and though the profpect before her had nov/ more in it of the rocky, barren, and wild, than the beautiful or cultivated, to her who was ¡nclofed within thick walls, and prevented from enjoying any ofthe beauties of nature, except the top of a few high mountains, which the view from her window diiclofed, it appeared more enchanting than any ihe had ever beheld. She wandered amidit ? 4 the
the immenfe chafms of rocks, and leaned on their overhanging projections, while ili? contemplated the fudden fall of a fmall ftream from an adjoining eminence, or paufed to examine the wild herbs and flowers that grew on their fummits and declivities. In tbe latter amufement Ihe was employed, when fuddenly the f .veet notes of a flut^ ftruck on her ear. She ftarted, and looked around, but no one appeared near her. It feemed at no great diftance, and ihe doubted not that the muilcian was concealed behind fome of the rocky crags around her. She feated herfelf on a moffy itone, and liftened to the tuneful harmony, till Ìli e fuddenly obferved fome dark clouds gather on the horizon, that feemed to.portend a ftorm \ and a very few moments verified her alarm : a loud clap of thunder burning over her head, made her ftart in terror from her feat -, and before ihe could determine which was the neareft way to the chateau, a little fpaniel came barking towards her, and at the
projection of rock, appeared a yourig man,, holding in one hand the flute which had fo beguiled the fenfes of Rofaline, as to detain her till ftie was overtaken by the ftorm, and calling in vain to the dog to return. Unac¬ cuftomed to meet ftrangers İn that obfcure place, he continued to bark with violence at Rofaline, who, from the exceffive heat and alarm left flie fliould not be able to find her way to the cavern, had funk again, almoft overcome with affright, on her mofs feat. The aftoniíhment of the young ftranger at fight of her, plainly appeared in a counte¬ nance where Nature,-with a ftrong'hand, had engraved the characters of open nefs and integrity. He at firft hefitated, as if fearful of alarming her by his too fudden approach ; butas fhe attempted to rife, and again funk back on the ftone, he perceived fomeafiift«- ance was neceffary. He advanced, and 'm- a . voice at once manly and gentle, faid— "Will you, Madam, pardon the addrefs o J df -
oí a ftranger, and allow me to offer you any affiftance in my power ?" Reviving at the polite diffidence with which he fpoke, Rofaline, recovering a little from her alarm, thanked him, but faid flie was better, and would proceed before the ftorm became too violent. As ihe fpoke, feveral vivid flafhes of light - ning darted acrofs the lofty fümmiè of an oppofite rock, and a dreadful peal of thunder immediately fucceeding, feemed to fhake the mountains to their bafe. The rain began to fall in torrents, and Rofaline and her new acquaintance were compelled to take refuge under a lofty crag that iffue d from an overíhadowing rock. Here, however^ they found little íhelter. The wind blew dreadfully, and whiffling through the arches ofthe mountain, beat againft them fo vio- lently,that the young ftranger,again addreff¬ ing her, faid—
« Might
" Might I be allowed to offer advice, Γ would recommend you to feek a temporary íhelter in the hermit's cell, which, cf courfe, you know is a very fhort diftance from hence." On Rofaline replying fhe was ignorant of his meaning, he told her there was a hermit refided amongft the mountains, who was famed all over the Canton for his hofpitality and benevolence^ and indeed for the many virtues he both taught and practifed in that obfcure place, where he had refided upwards of twenty years.— u If," added he, " you entertain any fears, and will allow me to attend you, I ihall think myfelf honoured by the permiffion ; or if, on the contrary, there is any other place to which you wifli to b& conveyed, my fervices I fliall be moft ready to yield. For my own part, I am inured tar¬ ihe fudden viciffitudes of weather, to which, thefe mountainous regions are fubject, and fhall derive no inconvenience whatever from expofing myfelf to its utmoft fury ; o 6 but
300 ARIEL·' but pardon me if I add, your form appears foill calculated to brave the violence ofthe tempeft, that it is furely highly improper not to feek a timely afylum." A fécond fiafli of lightning, with a clap of thunder more tremendous than the laft, here interrupted him, and the alarm of Rofaline left her abfence from the chateau fliould bc difcovered, together with the extreme heat, brought on a return of her faintnefs, and flie was compelled to reft againft the wet fide of the rock that ihel- tered them. Voices were now fuddenly heard amidft the ftorm, and the dread of Rofaline left they fliould be fome of the Baron's people, every moment increafed. The young ftranger, already greatly inte¬ refted in her diftrefs, was now going again to prefs her compliance with his propofal to feek the cell of the hermit, when he perceived flie had fainted ; and for a few moments Rofaline loft in infenfibility all fenfations of terror and alarm. On
On reviving, flie wms aftoniihed to find herfelf feated by a cheerful wood fire blazing on the hearth, fupported by the young ftranger flie had met on the moun¬ tain, and attended by an old man, whofe long beard,.venerable filver locks, cowl, and cao declared him to be the hermit fhe had heard mentioned. At firft flie could not fufficiently colled her thoughts to remember where ihe \*as ; and when flie looked around, and beheld the wails covered with mofs, and the ceiling of brown wood, it increafed her perplexity. A few words from her conductor fufficed for explanation ; but her venerable hoft, with a look of benignity, and a voice whofe mild benevo-. lence penetrated the heart ofRofaline, com¬ manded fdence till (lie had drank a reftora- tivehe offered her» Being at length by their united endea¬ vours iufficiently recovered, fhe requefted permiffion to depart, with reiterated thanks for the affi'ftance and kindnefs flie had received»
received. The Father, however, firft defired to knew whence flie came; and s unaccuftomed to utter aught but truth, though unwilling, from the circum flancos that attended her leaving the chateau, to reveal who flie really was, flie was compelled to acknowledge that fhe was a vifitor at the Chateau St. Älvars, and having wandered farther than fhe intended, had been over¬ taken by the ftorm. This confeflion was, however, only made to the old man, the young ftranger hav¬ ing gone our to fee if the norm was abated ; and though uncertain whether fhe might confide in him, fhe added, flie had particular reafons for wiihing to conceal whence flie came } and therefore begged her refidence might not be mentioned in the prefence of the perfon who brought her there. The hermit promifed her injunction ihould be obeyed, and hoped, he faid, his acquiefcence.
acquiefccnce, without enquiring her reafons, would induce her -to pay him a iecond vifit. At parting he mildly gave her his benediction j and directing her to the monument, from whence flie faid ibe could find her way home alone, the young man, whom he called Edmund, accompanied her to the narrow path that led to the tomb* where he took his leave. Dreading left her abfence fliould have been noticed, with trembling fteps flie pro¬ ceeded to the cavern. As íhe paifed the fub¬ terranean paiLige, flie thought ihe heard fteps in the armoury above, and pauied a few moments ; but all was again filent, and flie proceeded up the narrow ftaircafe. Paufing at the door, no found reached her ear, an J íhe entered ; but a ruft! ing noife was immediately heard. One ofthe oppofite doors was opened by a perfon, whom the gloom of evening, and the duikinefs of
of the place would not allow her to fee clif- tinclly, and who, immediately difappearing, clofed it. She u as at firfl almoft afraid to proceed ; but recollecting there was no time to be loft, fhe haftened to her chamber. She had been· there but a few minutes, when hearing fome one in a paflage near her room, ibe ftepped out to enquire if the Baron and his company were returned* It was the fame young woman flie had met the preceding night, when fhe had loft her way in the 'ïark. "Oh Mademoifclle,. is it you!" faid fhe, when fhe faw Rofaline ; " I have been fent every where to look for you ; Made- moifelle St. Älvars wifhes to fpeak to you. I have been twice to your room, and you was not there, and to the ramparts and the galleries." (í 1 have been walking in the armoury," faid Rofaline. Ια
" In the armoury !" exclaimed the girl. " Holy Father ! Mademoifelle, I wonder you dare go there ; 1 am iure I would not for the world l* " Why» Magdelina?" faid Rofaline* cc What is the reaion you are fo particularly fearful of going there ?" " Oh dear me, Mademoifelle !" replied Magdelina, " I have heard the fervants fay fuch dreadful things about that place, and my Lord himfelf never goes near it, nor ever has been near that part of the chateau for many years." " And did you ever hear the reafon of it ?'* faid Roialine. " No, Mademoifelle, not exactly the very reafon," replied Magdelina, " but I know it is becaufe fomething very bad has been feen there ; and I once overheard old Martha tell Agatha that nie once faw a great black marble ftatue, that they fay is in the middle or it, march all round ir, and come into its place again with a great groan !" " Somebody
" Somebody has been telling you thefe idle tales purpofely to frighten you," faid Rofaline ; " and if you liften fo readily to them, I fliould not wonder if you are foon afraid to go into any apartment of the Caille." *' f am almoft afraid already, Mademoi- felle," faid Magdelina, " for old Martha is always talking uf the fliocking noifes and ftrange things that have been heard and feen in different parts of it; and flie hints that there is more reafon for it than people think cf, though I never know what flie means; and Mrs. Agathaisfo referved to the ether fervants, that though every body fays flie knows a grcal deal, flie never makes any aniwer when fhe hears them talking about it ; and for my part I have been here fuch a fliort time, that I hardly know any thing ahout the family." <c How long is it fmce you came, then ? ,? íaid Rofaline. " ]uft before ycu arrived, Mademoifelle. My Lord, the Baron, has not lived here fmce
fmce my Lady's death, and fo a good many of the fervants were difcharged ; but when he íent word he was coming again, and was to bring you, Mademoifelle, and his daughter with him, there was occafion for fomebody to help old Martha, novv flie is fo old and deaf, and almoft blind ; and fo as my father is one oí my Lord's vaflals, and has a cottage fome miles diftant among the lowlands, and I knew the houfekeeper, ihe took me to aflift ; but if I had known what an old place it İs, I ihould never have dared to come to live in it." Rcfaline advifed her to reprefs her fears, which flie affured her there was no real found¬ ation for ; and then difmifling her, ilie went to Angelina's apartment. She did not find her there, but was told by Agatha that flie was gone into the weft faloon to amufe herfeif on the harp, and had defired that when Mifs Melvan returned, fhe might be informed of her wiih to fee her there.
there. This room wa3 the one that, being of more modern architecture than the others, had been chofen by Rofaline to fit in to work, read, or. draw, and hither her harp was brought,, as well as an old fpinet, and feveral other, inftruments fhe had found in different parts of the chateau. It was a lofty, fpacious apartment, with a high painted ceiling,, and hung with tapeftry, which, though very antique, was much lefs decayed than that in moft other parts of the chateau. It had two large Gothic windows on one fide, which looked towards an open part ofthe mountain, and prefented to the eye a profpect enriched with every object that could diverfify the land·* icape. Here, as Rofaline approached the door 3 which ftood open, flie beheld the emaciated, though ftill interefting form of Angelina, on a heavy velvet fofa that ftood before one of the open cafements, tuning an old lute to an air fo melancholy, that it almoft drew tears
tears from her eyes as fhe fftened to the foft notes. There was no light, lave what tbe bright beams of the moon, which was juft rifen, reflected through the arches of the lofty window. It fell on the fweet forni of Mifs St. Älvars, who, as Rofaline ftood forrow fully furveying her, appeared to her creative fancy more like fome fair fpirit, than an inhabitant of the earth. Her fõft, ycr piercing dark eyes were caft upwards, whh luchan expreffion of piety and refig¬ nation, as fne played an evening addrefs to that Deity on whom her whole thoughts were evidently fixed, that fhe might with propriety have fat for the portrait of fome martyred faint. At intervals the fweet, but faint melody of her voice was diftinguifliable as fhe accompanied her lute 5 while at other times, from too great exertion, flie was obliged to difcontinue the ftrain, and the foft harmony of her inftrument only could be heard#
On
On an objeit fo interefting, yet fo fad, Rofaline ftood in contemplation, loft in forrow, till Angelina having finifhed, fir, approached, telling her that fhe hoped, from ñndlng her thus engaged, flie found herfei:" better. She faintly fmiled, and faid fhe wai indeed better, and hoped flie ihould be every day more fo. Rofaline could only figh. Her heart was too full to anf -??? ; ihe knew fhe alluded to the fatal period fhe thought fo fait ap« proaching ; but as Angelina faw how greatly it alw3\ s affected her friend when flie talked on the fubject, fhe almoft immediately changed it, and mentioned her brother, who, ibe addid, fhe had flattered herfeii would liave arrived before. She converfed for feme time on indifferent fubjects, then com} dai ned of increafing we., ? neis, and at length owned flie had in the courie of the day feveral
feveral times felt uncommon faintneís, which flie could not defcribe. Rofaline could not help being greatly alarmed, and determined to take an imme¬ diate opportunity of fpeaking to the Baron, wdio ilie imagined was not fufficiently aware of his daughter's danger. On her complaining of fatigue, Rofaline advifed her to retire, and at Angelina's requeft, fummoned Agatha. They conveyed her to her chamber, where Roialine left her, determined to fee her again before íhe herfelf retired to reft. Returning alone to the faloon, her thoughts itili dwelt on the famç melancholy fubjed. That a very fliort time would be the period of Angelina's life, flie could not doubt, and ilie dreaded to think how flie ihould fupport the awful trial. Her for¬ titude almoft forfook her when flie refleded that flie was alone in a foreign country, without one female friend to apply to, and obliged
obliged to witnefs the daily decay, and too probably at laft the final termination, of the haplefs Angelina's exiftence. Yet flie had the confoiing reflection of having had it in her power to render her laft hours com¬ fortable to her j and melancholy and deierted as her own fituation w r ould be, flie determined to apply for confoiation to the only true fource ; and recommending herfelf to that Being, under whofe protection every country is equally fafe, flie endeavoured to compofeher mind, anddìverther thoughts to ether and more pleafing fubjecls. While thus trying to reafon herfelf into a calmer tempei , flie fancied fhe heard a ftep, and immediately faw fome one enter the room, though it was too dark to diftinguifh the perfon who had ? roached, and who be¬ gan a fort of apology for intruding on her foli¬ tude, when fhe ddcoverecl the Chevalier de Polloni. He begged her pardon for thus entering uninvited j but hearing fhe was alone, he added, he came to implore her to give
give bim fome information refpecting the health of Mademoifelle St. A ! vars.—" It Ís a Aiojea:," continued he, u which, from the difpleafure íhe has already experienced from her Either on my account, I cannot fpeak of to the Baron j but from your looks and manner, Madam, when I laft night made the enquiry, I fear there is every reafon to apprehend the worft." Unwilling to deceive him on a point which Ine feared fo íhort a time would decide, with gentlenefs, but fincerity, ftie imparted to him her real ientiments on the fubject, and mentioned her intention of fpeaking that night, if poffible, to the Baron. He prailed with warmth her friendfliip to the unhappy Angelina, adding—" Oh» why was fhe not equally fortunate at a time when íhe moft wanted counfl, anc! when ihe plunged into an error which has imbtttered» and will finally deftroy, a life ίο valuable !" vol. ι. p He
He then enquired if ihe were greatly altered in perfon. Rofaline replied that İhe had known her but a very few months before ilie accompa¬ nied her into Switzerland ; but from her pre¬ fent emaciated ftate, believed ihe muft be greatly changed. " Shall I not tire you with queftions, and will you not think me impertinent," con¬ tinued he, " if I aik whether you are related to her r'* Rofaline replied in the negative. "The very ftriking perfonal refemblance there is between you/' added he, " was my motive for afking, which the moment í beheld you ftruck rne fo forcibly, that 1 could almoft have fancied it had been my Jong- loft Angelina reftored to her former bloom !" This
This refemblance had been often marked at Arundel, though at prefent the fallen features of Angelina retained only their expreffive fweetnefs, divefied of that native bloom and cheerful animation difplayed in the lovely countenance ofRofaline. They converfed for fome time on the fame fubjed ; and the fentiments of the Chevalier were fo replete with benevolence, gentlenefs, and humanity, that Rofiline was charmed with his converfa:ion, and forry when a fervane came to inform them fupper was ready. She accompanied the Chevalier to tlvz north parìour, where they found the Baron and Count in earneft converfarion., It ceafed at their entrance, and the flipper paifed almoit in total filence. Immediately afterwards the Baron rofe, and Rcf. ine, inftead of retiring, begged to be allowed a few moments' conversion, p 2 He
CHAP. XV. ** Höft* many ftand '* Around îhedeath-bal of iheir dearcíl fritndi, ** ??? poim ihe parting angiuíh 1" TiiOMSoS, ^-^N entering her apartment, ftrange fore· bciJircs feemed to nil the mind of Rofaline, and an unufual depreffion to weigh on her fp ; rks. She tried to difpel the many dif- cuittine t'.ou^htc that came to her recol- lection, but it was in vain ; and unable to fieep, fhe fat down by the open cafement in her clofet, and endeavoured to calm her anxiety by bbf-rving the filent fice of Nature at th.it fober hour. The hermit occuired
occurred to her memory, and fhe felt a ftrong inclination to vifit him again at his cell ; but the critical fituation of Angelina would not at prefent allow her to leave the chateau, and ihe trembled to think how defolaíe ihe fliould feel, fliould the hand of Providence Rİeaie her iuifenng friend, and leave her alone at the Cattle. Suddenly, as thefe corroding reflections occupied her thoughts, foft mutic itole on the air. ? was at firft faint, and appealsd diftanS but in a few moments it drew nearer ; and as it fwelled into a (train of the moft enchanting meludy, ihe recognifed the weil-known harmony of her guardian i)lph. She immediately rofe from her feat, and furveyed the proípect from her window with feminizing eyes ; but no human be ng a^p^ared, and all was itnl, filent, and 0 ??>?? as before, it ceafed tir a tew moments and then played a lively air, uh.c.j Roiahne was wdi acquainted with ; and as u brou^nt forcibly back to her memory a recollection p 4 of
of paft happineis, the leaned her bead for¬ ward from the ?? enient, and joined her vtke with the inftrument of the unfeen mufician· It wa> fcarcely concluded, when íhe was addrcfed by the fame voice as before— * c May I hope the honour you have juft confer, ed on me. is an omen that I am not receive! with chpleafure, after an abience tibt fas bten unavoidably lengthened ?'* • fc How on 1 te difpleafed," faid Rofa¬ line, " if }our care, as you profefs, is to guard and counfel me ?" ** Do you then at prefent particularly need either ?" laid the f) Iph. ** Were you as well acquainted with my real fituation as you fay you are," faid Rofaline, ** that quefticn would furely not be neceifary." " J mean in your own opinion," replied her counfelîor. ** Mortals frequently fancy themfclves fecure, and advice totally unne* CeÛàry,
ceiTary, at a time when perhaps they moft want both." « That at leaft is not my cafe at prefent,** faid Rofaiine : ** I am pereftlv conico js of my own inability to aft up to vvhat is right in every inftance ; but well as I know, I truft lam not very deficieiu" ** You will judge how far I am from thinking fo," returned her unknown advi'èr, ** when 1 tell you that to applaud and encourage you is my prelent er; and. Not merely with approbation, but with delight, muft innocence and goodne.s hke your*s be ever beheld That it may remain to the end of time un mpeached, is all that can be wiflied. Be it your care to preferve it uníudied ; mine Ihall be to warn you of the evils 1 fee you expofed to. Severe trials, I fear, await you ; h ppy will you be it you efcape unhurt. P;e«erve )Our wonted lleadinefi» ot mind, and let no tair or in¬ viting profpeds tempt you one moment to deviate from what your own heart tells ρ 5 you
you is righi ; fo íhall ; ou be regarded by your inwaid ?????? fur every acrion of }our life, as well as fcr what will hereafter prove to you a greater fource of comiort than at [;reíei.t — 1 mean your conduct to the fair Lfferer, whofe mental and corporeal angulfh ,- i 1 íhoit y fubfide, and whcm, eie a iew ill' rt hours are pa fled over }Our head, you w ili fie an inhabitant of tí T he houfe appointed for all living l* Let then eveiy murmurirg thought be huflitd, ? Lile you reflect that (lie is where you may hereafter be a¡fo —that the hand who directed the awLl blow is omnipotent j and learn finally to fubm.t betimes to his awful, his myfterious providence !" The voice here ceafed, the nvilc was renewed, and for a few minutes a fwcetly fo.'ern π ftrain was \ layed ; and then dyirg away, its faint echoes for a moment were heard, and all was again loft in the filence of night. Rofaline
Rofaline now retired'to reft. Her mind was more compofed fince her nocturnal con¬ versation with her myfterious counfellor; and finking into a profound ilumber, it conti¬ nued undifturbed till the morninj, when Agatha came to her chamber, with a requeft from Angeli*. a to fee her. She immediately obeyed the fummons, a'nd found her already rifen i but was fenfibly fiiocked to obferve the alteration that had within a few hours taken place, and feared the deadly livid hue of her complexion too plainly betokened how near ihe was r ? the deftined goal. She told Rolaíine, with a look of cheerfulnefs, that lu-r manufcripc was concluded, and that now ihe had but one wiih, which was to iee once more her brother, whom flie had every day anxioufiy expected. She talked with compofure for fome time till a mcitage came irom the ELr^n, rcqucft- P 0 ing
ïng to be admitted; and as Rofaline concluded the vifit was in confequence of her laft night's convention with him, (lie withdrew to walk on the ramparts before breakfaft. Here flie was joined by the Count and Chevaler, who perceived her from the windows of the eaft fal ??, oliere the) generally bn ak failed. ?1?? ta ked on various íubjecis, admired the grandeur of the profpect aiounJ, and the beautdul effect of the morning fun on the diftant hi.ls. The Chevalier was enthuftaftic on the fubjict ; he poinrtd out with animati n the beaut es of t, e fcene, and recommended to her adn.¡ration the moft ftriking objects in th¿ landfcape. While his un was converting with Rofa¬ line, rie Count ftood with his evrs intently fix il on her face, till they fuddenly met her's j he withdrew trem, and feemed to re* over from his levcrie : then addreffmg her, he enquired how ilie liked Switzcrlat d. She
She replied that, from what ihe had yet feen of it, the country appeared to be beau¬ tiful and fublime, though the p.olpecb around had more oi the awt^i tliaa the cultivated. " Are voua lover offoÜtude, Mifs Mel¬ van?" fiid the Chevalier; " or d » \οα* piefer the gaiety ot London to the lone inefs oí the Al r s ?" fc * I am fond of retirement," f vid Rofaline, " but I cannot fiy t.iat total folitude would be my elio ce ; and this clinteau, though cer¬ tainly very gnnd, and his no d ¿übt for¬ merly beenvciy magnificent, s, I think, too Vaft ana dreary, and the majorit« of th. apart¬ ments have fo forlorn ? look, tint it muft inlpire melancholy to en; er them." " You fpeak exactly my fentiments," faid the Chevalier. ** Our m re modern buildings are certainly better calculated to raife cheerfulnefs, and of ourfo pleafanter to inhaoit," " May we flatter ourfelves, then/' faid 6 the
the Count, " fincc fuch is your opinion, that \ou will honour my villa with your prefence ? Tuough not exactly in the mo¬ dern tafte, Poloni is ¿n a 0 reeabL· mediu.n between the a ti^u.i cd tui rets and towers of Sl. Aha;s, and tiie ii ó ht airiucis ot our modern arciiittciure." Rofdine only bowed to this invitation, and he added— " The ????? will, I hope, fhortlygivc us his conij.any there; and k t me, at leaft, indulge the hope that you wiil be ot the party· Never, allo.v me to fay, has it received, or can it receive a more lovely gutft P' As he pronounced thefe words, he feized her hand, and preflld it to his lips, while Rofaline, Harring with fur; rife at this unex- peâed- compliment, haftily fnatched it awav ; and at the fame moment a 3* * fe. fervant
fervant came towards them, io inform them the Baron waited breaktaft. The fudden gallantry of the Counts fo different irom Lis general n anncr to her, had paffwd u- obUrved by the Chevalier, who was walking alone at fome diftance from them. It L.d ίο complexly aftonifhed Ruf.isne, that ihe auid icaraiy bdieve fhe had η a miftaken his mention ; but flie pcitcth lccoi.ected the impufiioned tone of v. ice in w L Lb he f t ,oke, fo dif¬ ferent ttom 1rs arcuilo .,ed gravity and gloommch of behaviour, tliat the couid not but acknowledge it to bc real, while flie felt amazed tn»t he ihould not liave tiiought it toogruat a cundvfeeniio.i to one ίο much younger than him'e.f, particularly as he had hitherto ticated her with the utmoft indifference. When they joined the Baron at breakfaft, he, as ufual, was grave and referved ; his accuftomed gloominefs feemed increafed, and
andat times he appeared with difficulty to reprefs the agitation he felt. As foon as poffible Rofaline retired to Angelina, whom fhe found evidently worle. In partial fits of derangement«, and then intervals of rea on, the day was ipent ; butas the night drew near, Rofiiiine,» ho never for a moment left her during the <\hole day, felt a dread fhe could n t conquer, hfl ihe fatal termi¬ nation of all her hopes and fears on the haplefs Angehna's account ihould that night take place, which appealed fo> pro¬ bable, for her to leave her. Attended by Agatha, therefore, flie determined to remain with her, and fhould Ihe fall into a ilumber, which was not Lkely fhe could, then* if (he four d herielf fatigued, repofe for a few hours. Late in the evening, to the furprife of her attendants, Angelina funk into a calm fieep ; and after having watched b\ her ior near an hour, and found fhe teemed likely to continue in it, Reatine } aided to the entreaty
entreaty of Agatha to leave, for a ihort time, the chamber of ficknefs, and take iome refreíhment. She had not feen the Baron fince the morning, and ihe thong t it ri^ht again to hint to him her iears of the event that might tranfpire ere the night was paifed. She therefore defcended a out the hour of fupper to the parlour. Here ilie fund the Baron alone. H e was w a! k ing abou t theroom, and at the unexpected fight of her, ftarted from a deep revene he appeared to be imrrerged in at her entrance. She told him, in anfwer to his enquiry of how ihe had kft his daughter, that ihe had faden into a flumber, but that her appearance during the day had too plainly predicted what they muft ihortly expect. He feemed affected, and for a moment turned away, and paced the room 9 then igain coming towards her, he laid, in a norc ioftencd voice than ihe had ever heard him
him fpeak—" Poor Angelina ! But we muft not, Mifs Melvan, let you fuffer from your too great attention to your friend. Take care of your own health, and do not attempt to fit up with her." " Pardon me, my Lord," faid Rofaline, " but indeed I cannot poffibly leave her ; my health is of little confequence compared to what I ihould hereafter feel, were I to leave her when ilie moft needs the exertions of friendíhip." " It is of greater confequence than you may perhaps think," returned the Baron ; u ad for the fake of others^ as well as your¬ feif, be careful of it." Rofaline then afked if he would not fee Angelina a^ain that night. ce Do you think it neceflary ?" faid he. " I think it too probable/' returned Rofaline, with an emotion flie could not iupprefc, "that to-morrow it maybe too late!"
11 Let me then fee h^r now/' faid he 5 u when fhe awakes fhe may iv·: be fenfibie, and 1 cannot bear the fidi t of her fîrug£ies." Taking the light in hU hand, he pro¬ ceeded up flairs in filence, fjlWed by Rofaline. Angelina was itili in a profound ikep y but from her emaciated t jrm and deathlike countenance Rofaline, as flie furveyed her, could have fancied hie had already fled i:s once lovely manfion. The Baron for fome mc ments contemplated her iu filence, and then ftriking his forehead with his hand, as it fonie dreadful thought had juft occurred to him, he exclaimed— * £ This is too much l' and precipitaiely ruíhed cut of the room. Every feature feemed contracted, and to expreß in his agonized countenance the inward workings of i)is foul. D* ead mg what violence he might be guilty of fiom the ddlraction of his looks and manner, Roia tne followed him. He defcended 5 but i.utcad of returning
returning to the parlour, croíled the north hall to his own atartment. She purfued his fteps unknown to him j and as he hurried, with a wildnefs in his air that terri¬ fied her, through the great nortn gallery, be fuddenly fet down the lamp, and clappirg both his hands to his head, exc'aimed, in ? voice of horror—* 4 J t is already begun! Oh Edcar i fufficiently are you avenged P' Then fìamping violently, in a few moments he aga n feized the li¿ht, and flew rather than talked towards his own room. The coor of his flucly, adjoining his chamber, ftood open t timber be inftantly went, nnd without looking behind him, or clofing the door, gave vent to expreffions of agony, uttered in accentsand terms of the blackeft defpair. Then ftarting υρ, as if fuddenly recolieäingíomeihJng, he went toa writing- rìefk in one corner of the room, and taking from it a fmah picture, he heid it for fome time in bis hand, as if contemplating it ; then throwing it back, cried—" Once that countenance had power to calm every turbulent
turbulent paffion of my foul, and fink its native violence into the moft abject humi¬ lity ; but now in every lovely feature I read reproach, and e\ery look í ileal at it gives added remorfe toa confeience already loaded with------with vvhat ? With guilt! It muft be fo: why then ihould I feek to extenuate ?" This foliloquy was uttered in a manner ib wild and eccentric, that Rofaline, know¬ ing he thought himfejf unperceived, felt airaid to incur his difpleafure by difcover- ing herfeif j and as ihe faw no danger of immediate violence to his pjrfon, (lie deter¬ mined on fpeaking to his fervant, and returned unfeen to the great hall, whence flie fent Magdelina, whom ihe met, to fummon the Baron*s man. He came i m med atcly ; and telling him that the violence of his Lord's grief on Mils St. Alvars's account made her almoft fear for his lenfes, begged he would keep a watch,
watch, without, if pofiible, letting the Baron perceive him. ile wás at prefent, ihe told him, in his own apartment, where (he defired he wculd attend him, and inform him fupper was ready. Rodendo obevcd her commands, and fhe proceeded to the north parlour, where, overcome by fitigue and anxiety, fhe t hre. ν herfelf on a f >£? and for iome moments relieved her full heart by tears. In this fituation flie was found by the Count a.id his ion, who had been fummoned fr m the fake n to fupper, and who had heard fiom t!* s fervants the melancholy ftate of Angelina. The Count fpoke fome words of confoiation, but the Chevalier feemed to ft and in as much need of it as Rofahne ; and their meal was taken almoft untouched from the table, the Baron having fent by his fervant to defire to be exculed attending them.
When
When Rofaline retired, the Chevalier followed her to the great hall, where, with much emotion, he aíked if he might not be allowed a laft interview with Angelina. She advifed him with earneftnefs to defift from wiihing it, as ic would be oniy giving ufelefs diftrefs to the feelings of both, i le at length acquiefced in her wiihes, and fl»r- rowfully bade her good night. She found Angelina ftill aileep ; and not inclined herfelf to repofe, flie retired to the window. It was a clear moonlight night, and having been all day confined by the tick bed of her friend, the thought the air woukl give fome relief to the extreme prefíure on her mind. There was a ftaircafe in the paffage leading from Angelina's chamber, at the top of which was a door that opened on the fouthern rampart. The family were all retired, and from lib fervant lhe had heard that the Baron was more compofed. Proceeding, therefore, up the ftaircafe, ihe opened the fmall door, and took feveral turns
turns on the ramparts. The freflinefs of the air a little revived her, but it had no power to remove the weight that oppreffed her heart. She looked at the moon, and reflected how often, on a clear night, íhe had contemplated its beauties, while the happy inmate of Edgecumbe Hall, with her beloved Henrietta.— u It may now, perhaps," thought flie, " be ihedding it» bright beams on her fweet countenance, while fhe furveys, as we were wont, the loved feenes around. Ah, little does ihe imagine the diftiefsof her once-loved Rofa¬ line, while (lie herielf is enjoying all the feli¬ city to be deri ved from t he fociety ofthe moft affectionate of parents, brothei s, and fifters." Adolphus, too, had a (hare in her thoughts ; ihe longed to know how he was fituated, and judging by her own, doubted not that his regard for her remained unfliaken by time, or the entreaties of his friends. Every former fcene in which they were both acìors, came with force to her memory, and imagination once more made her
her an inhabitant of that fweet abode of health, peace, and innocence. But how iad the contraft when, recovering from the ideal vifion her fertile fancy had formed, ftie caft her eyes on the immenfe mafs of building before her, where throughout the whole pile no ray of light appeared, except the faint glimmering of the taper that illumin¬ ated the chamber of the dying Angelina, Aiming through the decayed and half- broken window-fliutters, ferving only to Tender the appearance of the edifice more dreary. She fighed deeply at the profpect, and was turning up the rampart to re-enter the houfe, and take once more her ftation for the night by the bed of her friend, when a fort of con- vuifive fob reached her ea^ and at the fame moment a figure crofied the end of the ram¬ parts, and difappeared inftantly. She ftopped, and remained for forne moments with her eyes fixed on the place where it aad appeared. She liftened, but could vol, ι. 0^ Lear
hear no further found to alarm her ; and at length fearing Angelina would awake, ftie determined to return immediately to her. The large clock over the arched gateway ^of the eaftem court ftruck the hour of mid¬ night as fhe unclofed the ftaircafe door, and left the beautiful fcene without to return to one how much the contrary î She lift¬ ened on the ftairs, but all was fûent in Angelina's chamber -, and fhe had proceeded almoft to the door before flie beheld a perfon kneeling by the bed, and hanging over the decayed form of Angelina as ihe flept, apparently intent on contemplating thofe features which, notwithftanding they bore the livid hue of death, ftill retained fomething of their wonted animation. She at firft concluded it to be the Baron, and had advanced to the foot of the bed be¬ fore fhe difcovered her miftake j for the perfon, hearing her ¿ ftep, raifed his head, and ihewed to her a countenance as pale, and
ARIEL. 339 and almoft as emaciated as the dying fufferer's before him. He was a tall thin young man, and his hair hanging diihevelied over his ihoulders, gave him fuch a look of wildnefs and diforder, that Rofaline, almoft petrified with amazement, involuntarily ftood ftill, without power to move. She had left Agatha to watch over Angelina in her abfence , but the former, feeing no pro¬ bability of her awaking immediately, had deputed Magdelina to fit by her while ihe went to partake of fome refreíhment, with a ftrict charge, ftiould there be any change in her miftrefs, to fummon her immediately. The poor young woman, who had watched all the preceding night, lulled by the profound filence around her, had funk into as calm a flumber as that which at prefent locked up the expiring faculties of her dying miftrefs. When Rofaline, therefore, caft her eyes around, ihe was aftoniihed to find Agatha abfent, Magdelina aileep, and the figure of a ftranger on the oppofite fide ofthe bed ! The latter, how- <t 2 ever,
ever, retained his ftation no longer, for on perceiving her, he ftarted up, and darting paft her, was out of fight in a moment. She had fcarcely recovered her furprife, and awakened Magdelina, when the en¬ trance of Agatha explained the feeming myftery. From her fbe learned that the young man íhe had juft feen was the Cheva¬ lier St. Älvars, brother to Angelina, who was juft arrived ; and having heard from the fervants the melancholy fituation of his fifter, w f as fo very earneft to İee her, that he came immediately to her apartment as foon as Agatha had quitted it. Finding her there with only her fleeping attendant, he had Jei fure to obferve the ravages which ficknefs and forrow, thofe foes to beauty, had made on the once blooming form ofthe unhappy Angelina ; and, overcome by the grief it occafioned, he had abruptly retired, as Roialine had witneffed.
CHAP.
CHAP. XVI. " By flow and filent, but refiftlefs fap " In his pale progrefs gently gaining ground, '« Death urg'd his deadly fiege, in fpite of art, " Of all the baimy blefiings Natur* lends *' To fuccour frail humanity l'* YOUNC. SEVERAL hours had elapfed, during which Rofaline maintained her melancholy ftation by her dying friend, when fhe awoke from her flumber, and gave fuch evident figns of approaching diffolution, that the almoft heart-broken Roialine. remained in momentary expectation of the fad event that muft inevitably fucceed. At intervals rational, but generally eidier in a profound 0.3 ftupor,
ftupor, or wild and incoherent, all fhe did was to fit by her, and watch the rapid advances of death on her al ready worn-out frame. Towards morning íhe again funk into a flumber j and Rofaline, as ihe took her eyes for a moment from her deadly countenance, perceived the bright beams of the morning fun rifing from behind a fteep and lofty mountain oppofite the window. She retired for a few moments to the cafement j and as ihe beheld the beautiful dawn of day, con- trafted the cheerful face of Nature with the melancholy fituation of her own mind. Tears, which ihe dared not give vent to in the prefence of Angelina, a little relieved her full heart j and fhe returned once more to the bed of death to refume her melan¬ choly ftation,which ihe maintained till feeing Angelina again in a profound fleep, ihe with¬ drew to join the Baron at breakfaft. He, however, did not appear ; and while flie was taking alone her folitary meal, for the Count and
and Chevalier had gone out early, Agatha came to inform her that Monfieur St. Älvars had a particular defire to be again admitted to fee his fifter, intimating a wiih not to intrude on her forrows, as at fuch a time fhe was doubtlefs unfit to fee ftrangers. This mefíage was a great relief to Rofa¬ line. She had dreaded her own want of fortitude, and fhe knew nothing would fo feverely try it as to behold the woes of others, which it was out of her power to alleviate or redrefs -, ihe therefore returned for anfwer, how greatly fiie thought herfelf obliged by his regard to her prefent melan¬ choly ftate of mind, affuring him he Ihould be informed when his unhappy fifter would be in a fituation to fee him. This happened contrary to every expect¬ ation as foon as fiie awoke. Rofaline was fitting by her, and was delighted to hear ihe was quite rational. Angelina enquired affectionately after her health, and, preffing 0, 4 her
her hand, fervently entreated her not to be herfelf a fufferer from too clofe an attend¬ ance on her. She remarked how pale flie looked, and begged her to retire, and try to get fome repofe > but Rofaline, fearing the crifis was fail approaching, would not be prevailed on to leave her : and while ilie was revolving in her mind the beft and gentleft manner to inform her ofthe arrival of her brother, Angelina herfelf led to the fubjedt, and expreffed her furprife that the had not heard from him. Her eyes were fixed on the countenance of Rofaline as ihe fpoke, and perceivmg an immediate change in it, ftie faid—" Perhaps you have heard of him ; my head has been a good deal deranged, I believe, and it may be as well that he has not been here." Then per¬ ceiving Rofaline hefitated, flie added—" I am fure you have heard of him ; perhaps he is arrived. Oh, if he were, I ihould have nothing left to wilb for !" " He is indeed arrived," faid Rofaline, " and anxioufly wifhes to fee you." "Let
<e Let him come inftantly !" exclaimed flie. Then paufing—" Poor Bertrand 1" faid fhe, " how will he be fhocked at this alteration ! But I hope fome one will have the goodnefs to prepare him to expect it, and I fear, my beloved Rofaline, the fad tafk. muft be your's. Alas ! I dare not hope my father will take it on himfelf!" Aware no time fliould be loft, Rofaline. faid flie would immediately go and give orders for his admiffion, and Angelina requefted the interview might be unheard by her attendants. Convinced there was fome dreadful myflery attending the fate of Angelina,. Rofaline determined to be abfent alfo, as flie was an entire ftranger to the brother of her friend. Saying, therefore, when Ange^ lina defired ihe wou i d not leave the room, that ihe would be within a moment's fummons, , ihe retired to an adjoining apartment, while ; the Chevalier was admitted. ?~5 Uq
He remained in converfation with his fifter near two hours, when Rofaline was again called to Angelina, who told her that ihe felt more compofed and calm than flie had been for fome time, and was fure this. almoft unhoped-for interview had. contri¬ buted greatly towards it. In the fame ftate of mind fhe remained all day ; but as night drew on, the terrors of Rofaline were renewed, though Angelina, did not appear worfe than on the preceding evening. On this confideration, fhe in¬ fifted on Agatha*s retiring to reft, who for, two nights had watched, without intermif- fion, by hex Lady, and refolved to fit up alone with her friend. The chamber of Agatha was adjoining, and fhe might attend at a moment's notice. She faw the Baron for a few minutes in the evening, but his air and manner weie fo wild, he quite terrified her j and fhe found ??? lus fervants he had not quitted his own apa· t ments
apartments the whole day, but had remained ihut up with the. Count ever fmce the morning. As ihe crofted the hall on her return to Angelina, ihe met the Chevalier de Polloni^ with the deepeft melancholy in his coun¬ tenance. He took her hand, and feemed as though he would have made fome en-» quiry 9 but obfervirîg the fixed forrow on the fpeaking features of Rofaline, he turned away, unable to fpeak, and letting her hand go, in filent grief paifed on,. On entering her friend's chamber, .fhe difrniifed Agatha fór the night, and took the fame ftation as on the preceding. She had refumed it buta few minutes > when Angelina, railing her head, delivered to her a key, telling her it belonged to a- CAbinet in her dreffing-room, and deliri ng l her to keep it, becaufe in a very ihort time* ihe would want it. Q 6. She
She foon afterwards fell into a doze, which continued for nearly four hours. The turret-clock had founded three as Rofaline, who had ñve times counted its melancholy vibrations, fat filentiy by the dying object of her care. A deathlike filence prevailed throughout the manfion; no murmuring found was heard, and the faint refpiration of the fair fufferer before her, was all that difturbed the dreadful folemnity of the hour. Unaccuftomed to feenes like thefe, the heart of Rofaline was not proof againft; the terrific fenfations fuch a fituation infpired ; and for the firft time flie repented having confented to accompany the Baron and Angelina to Switzerland* She caft her eyes round the vaft extent of the gloomy chamber, and almoft fancieo fhe faw ideal forms gliding acrofs that part which was involved in fhadovv ; then calling to her aid every fentiment of courage ihe poffeffed, (berried to difpel tfie melancholy prefages whicb haunted her imagination.
Another
Another hour had almoft elapfed, when fuddenly the gentle unclofing of a door in a diftant part of the building, broke in on the dreary filence that had fo long prevailed. It was fucceeded by the found of fteps, which feemed approaching. To Rofaline it was a found of horror. Her fancy, im¬ preffed with terrific images, and aiive to every fenfation of alarm, made her, in each murmur that came to her ear, dread fome new caufe of terror. The fteps feemed to draw nearer j they afcended a ftaircafe, and entering by a fmall door at the top of the paffage that led immediately to the cham¬ ber, appeared to approach the apartment· Confeious that every inhabitant of the Caftle, herfelf excepted, was long fmce retired to reft, ihe could form no idea who, «t that unfeafonable hour, could be coining to behold the termination of a fcene fo melancholy* The perfons (for there feemed to be more than one) were now at the door $ and unable 3 longer
longer to fupport the various terrors that ruflied on her mind, fhe involuntarily funk on her knees by the bed fide, though at the moment wholly unconfcious of the action, or her intention in doing it. She had not continued a minute in this attitude, when the door was opened, and two figures entered the chamber. At that moment Angelina awoke, caft her eyes wildly round the room, and funk again into infenfibility. This motion entirely drew the attention of Rofaline to her friend, who had now loft all power of knowing her¿ and only retained the mere faculty of breathing. A very vifible alteration had. taken place, in her looks; and fearing fhe was actually in her laft moments, regardlefs of the prefence of ftrangers, whom the diftraction of her mind had not yet fuffered her to contemplate > fbe would have rifen to call. Agatha, but, overcome by fatigue, terror, and anxiety> (be again funk on her knees, unable to fup¬ port, herfelf; and now, for the firft time, meeting the eyes of an old man, who ftood leaning
leaning his folded arms on a ftaff he held in his hand, at the foot of the bed, ihe feemed to recognife the hermit whofe cell fhe had vifited, but her ideas were confufed, and fhe no longer remembered any thing diftinctly. Finding herfelf totally unable to move, flie involuntarily exclaimed— ct Heaven, pre¬ ier ve her V' At this moment Agatha entered the room. Alarmed at hearing the fteps of perfons in her miftrefs's chamber, fhe feared fhe was worfe, and had arifen, thinking it probable the ftrength and fpirits of Rofa-? line, which flie had hitherto fo wonderfully. fupported, might fail her. The fcattered fenfes of the latter were fliortly recalled by ? motion of Angelina, who, reaching out her dying hand, feized the almoft equally Ufelefs. one ofRofaline, and grafping it with fervour, uttered a faint figh, and joining it with that of fome perfon who krielt on the oppofite fide of the bed, eaft her eyes upward, and expired ! The
The revived fenfes of Rofaline now once more forfook her, and falling in total infenfi¬ bility on the bed, flie was with difficulty conveyed by the furrounders to her own apartment, where for many hours flie loft all fenfe of her forrows in a violent delirium. A fever fucceeded, which for two days feemed to threaten her life. On the third fhe gave figns of recovery, and towards evening funk into a profound ileep, which lafted for fome hours -, and when ihe awoke^ Agatha, who was w T eeping by her, was delighted to hear her fpeak rationally. She aíked her to take fomething, but made no mention of the fad event that had fo recently happened. When Rofaline began to recollect herfelf fbe recalled to her memory the fituation ihe had lately been in, which now appeared like a dreadful dream j but too well convinced, from the melancholy looks of Agatha, of the reality, the faint return of rcafon again almoft funk under the recollection. By the care
care and attention of Agatha, joined to her own exertion*, fhe was on the fourth day well enough to leave her chamber, though her pallid countenance and trembling frame ftill wore the marks of illnefs and languor. The Count and Chevalier de Polloni had quitted the chateau, flie found, the morning after the fatal event, and the Chevalier St. Älvars had ihut himfelf up in his apartment, and feen no one but his fervant fince his arrival at the Caftle. He had once peti¬ tioned, by his fervant, to be admitted to the prefence of his father j but having re¬ ceived a pofitive refufal, and a reproof for wiihing to intrude on his griefs, he had forbore any further entreaty» Thefe particulars Rofaline heard from Agatha, as alfo that the Chevalier had fent almoft every hour to enquire after her, and the Baron had been very frequent in his meffages to her apartment -, and hearing, in anfwer to his laft, that fhe was much better, had
had intimated his expectation of feeing her ■* to dinner. She accordingly defcended at the ufual hour, in hopes, as the Baron would appear in the dining-room, that ?? Chevalier would be there alfo : but ihe was miftaken ; the Baron was alone, and had loft much of his accuftomed aufterity, when he enquired after her health with a greater degree of politenefs than he had ever before addreffed her with. He feemed to have almoft recovered his grief for the lofs of his daughter, and betrayed little emotion at firft beholding her, though he had not feen. her fince the fad event. All the anguiih fhe had endured came with renewed force to the mind of Roialine when ihe met him, and it was fome minutes before fhe could fuf¬ ficiently recover her voice to anfwer his ???» gratulations on her recovery. Several times in the courfe of the dinner he attempted to begin a converfations but the fpirits ofRofa¬ line were fo depreffed, that ihe could with difficulty.
difficulty exert herfelf to anfwer him on the general fubjects he ftarted j and lhe retired immediately after dinner to her apartment, glad to be alone, and feeling it a relief to withdraw to indulge in retirement the extreme melancholy that weighed on her mind. The lingular alteration in the behaviour of the Baron could not fail of furprifing heri but unwilling to attribute it to any more myfterious caufe, ihe concluded the inclination he had manifefted at dinner to enter into converfation, fo different from his ufual manner, arofe from obferving her dejection, and a wifh to enliven her. Agatha entered her chamber, and put a nop to the courfe of her reflections. From her fhe learned that' the funeral obfequies of the haplefs Angelina were to be per¬ formed that night, when her remains were to be depofited in the vault beneath the chapel of the Caftle, Agonizing as would be
be the taik, Rofaline determined to be pre* lent at the awful ceremony, and to pay this laft tribute of refpect to the memory of her friend. The Baron, (be found, was not to be there, but the Chevalier, Agatha told her, was-expected to attend as mourner. Late in the evening ftie received notice that the mourning train was advancing to¬ wards the receptacle of the dead. Attended by Agatha, ibe defcended from her apart¬ ment to meet them j and joining the pro- ceftion, followed it through numerous winding paffages, and long galleries and apartments, that for many years had been uninhabited, to a flight of ftone fteps that led into tbe vaults. The hollow founds that reverberated through thefe caverns of death, with the gloom and damps that ftruck on them as they entered, infpired Rofaline with a horror ihe could not fup¬ prefs ; and as ihe funded the humid wails, dropping with damp, and heard the deep echo which refounded the fteps of the fable
fable train, as it proceeded filentiy along this final habitation of mortality, ihe caft a terrified look around, and was fometimes tempted to think it a dreadful illufion, and that it was impofiible flie, who was once fo happy and beloved, ihould be ex¬ pofed to feenes like theie. When they arrived at the grave, and the fervice for the dead began, every fentiment ofhorror vanilhed, and a reverential awe fucceeded, as flie liftened to the venerable man who performed the ceremony, that feemed to reproach her for the reflections íhe had indulged on entering this repofitory of death. He was far advanced in hfe -, but the mild benevolence of his countenance, and the clear fole mn tone of voice in which he fpoke, were calculated to infpire love and admiration İn his beholders, yet mixed with a vifible emotion and apparent forrow. She liftened with calmnefs to the whole fervice, for though depieffed beyond the power of fpeech, in tears ihe could find no relief; they refufed her affiftance, raid flie was com* pelled
pelled to endure a weight on her heart, that every moment feemed to prefs heavier. The whole audience were not affected in the fame manner, for the audible fobs of fome one near her were eafily diftinguiflied by Rofaline during the whole ceremony. The brother of Angelina was prefent : he wore a long mourning robe, and walked alone next to the bier. In the vault, while the fervice was performed, his face was con¬ cealed in his robe, but no iound of com¬ plaint proceeded from his lips, nor was his voice at any time diftinguiihable, though the deep and agonizing grief that appeared on his faddened countenance when he raifed his head, betokened the excefs of anguifli he felt. When it was concluded, and Rofaline turned from the grave, ihe beheld kneeling, at fome diftance from the fpot where the reft of the auditors ftood, a female figure in black, covered with a long mourning veil. On the moving of the proceifion ihe arofe in
in hafte, and Rofaline loft fight of her in a dark part of the vault. When ihe reached her chamber, the turret-clock founded ten ; and concluding the Baron would not expeci ner attendance at fupper when he knew how fhe had been engaged, flie determined to decline leaving her room any more that night : and yielding to the entreaties of Agatha, who begged flic would allow her to fetch her fonie refrefh- ment, flie fat down by the cafement in her clofet, revolving in her mind the events of the few laft days, END OF VOL. U
ΙΛ N t, M JK ER V ? P H ESI, HADIN ??И.-«?1*1?.
