Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ariel: or, The invisible monitor
А Ж I JE L. CHAP. L <« Ishave a Faint cold fear thrills thro* my veins, « That almoft freezes up the heat of life.'* Shakespeare, AHE whole day Rofaline was confined to her folitary chamber, nor was old Martha, or any one except Magdelina, accom¬ panied by Roderigo, who overheard their converfation! fuffered to approach her.— What all this rigour was jCQ f produce ihe could not imagine ¿anď, iå a kind of vol. uu в ftupor,
ftupor, fhe fat waiting the approach of evening, when fome ftrange foreboding feemed to predid the crifis of her fate would arrive. When Magdelina brought her fupper, which was an hour later than ufual, Rode¬ rigo followed her into the room, and ad¬ dreifing Rofaline, faid he had orders from the Baron to defire ihe would not retire at prefent. Á chilly dread came over her as he fpoke, and íhe could only bow in acquiefcence.— He then left her, and Magdelina was obliged to follow him. As ihe quitted the room, flie turned back, and with a look of terror pointed to Roderigo, as if to warn her that ihe had fomething horrid to exped. When they were gone, and had left her to her own terrifying refledions, the fear of what
what that night might produce almoft over¬ came the weaknefs of her fpirits, and in a fort of torpid melancholy (lie fat aione by her window, and counted the turret clock, foon after Magdelina and Roderigo had quitted her. In a fliort time the Caftle feemed perfedly quiet; every found of mirth and revelry was huihed, and even the diftant ihutting of the doors, as the guefts retired to their refpedive cham¬ bers, had ceafed. She alone of aU the houfe was ftill unprepared for repofe; but, Magdelina was not yet come, and fhe ftill fat waiting, but no one made their appear¬ ance. The turret clock now founded one. The heart of Rofaline beat quick with appre¬ henfion. She thought ihe heard fteps in the gallery. They appeared to approach, but they were not the fteps of Magdelina. A low rapping at her door fucceeded* She with difliculty arofe, and, opening it, dif¬ covered Roderigo and Marcus» ô a The
The former, addreffing her, faid ihe wai defired to follow them. « By whom?" aiked Rofaline. " You muft aik tio queftions, Lady," faid Roderigo, " but follow us without delay." Rofaline fighed, and, cafting a look of fear at them, begged to be allowed a few minutes. " They muft be very few then, Lady, for we are direded to convey you as fpeedily as poflible." " They ihall," faid Rofaline, who, again retiring within her chamber, threw heifelf on her knees, and uttered a fervent prayer to him who had never yet forfaken her, that he would aflift and fupport her through the trials ihe was going to encounter; then, bearing the men begin to grow impatient, fhe arofe, and prepared to follow them.
" I know
cc I know not where, or fbr what pür* pofe I am going," faid lhe, addreifing her¬ felf to Roderigo, with a look of anguifli that would have penetrated the moil obdu¬ rate heart; c< but I commit myfelf to your care, and doubt not that he who prefides equally over your deftiny and mine, will pu¬ niih or reward you accordingly." " You are going to no harm, Lady, I dare affure you," replied Roderigo. " I am fure/* faid Marcus, who had not yet fpoken, and feemed moved with her terror, " you ihall not, ifl can helpit. But my Lord Baron ------ '* " Silence!" laid Roderigo, interrupting him. He ftopped, and though flie feveral times afterwards addrefled them both, fhe could learn nothing from them.— They conduded her through a vaft ex¬ tent of the Caftle by private paffages and uninhabited apartments, till, to her great в 3 furprife,
furprife, fhe perceived they were ap¬ proaching the folding doors of the library. Here they ftopped, and Roderigo, taking a mafly key from his girdle, applied it to the lock, which inftantly gave way. " Here we reft, Lady," faid Roderigo.' " You had better fit down—you look fa¬ tigued." Involuntarily íhe took his advice, and feated herfeif on the firft fofa íhe reached. Roderigo and Marcus ftationed themfelves by her, and feveral minutes elapfed in thb fituation*: at length a fmall door at fome diftance opened, and the Baron en¬ tered. ** Withdraw I" faid he to the fervants, ki a ftern voice. He was inftantly obeyed, and left alone with Rofaline, who had involuntarily arifen at
at his entrance. He approached her with a firm ftep and unbending brow. " You are now," faid he, " to decide your own fate: this hour, this place are chofen ibr the purpofe; fay, then, do you confent to accept the hand of the Count ? ,f " M ever!" faid Rofaline. She could add no more; the fury that darted from the dreaded countenance of the Baron awed her into filence, and ihe turned away difmayed. * f I will give you your choice," faid he; " either inftantly confent that the ceremony fliall be performed before to-morrow's dawn, or prepare to meet a dreadful fate. Be¬ neath the eaft tower," continued he, ' c whi¬ ther that door," pointing to the one men¬ tioned by Angelina in her manufcript, '* leads, there is a dark and noifome dungeon, where the fun never penetrates, and the cheerful light of day is totally excluded; thither в 4 İhall
ihall you inftantly be conveyed, and there fliall you remain till the feeble fpark of life is extinguiíhed by tortures you can form no idea of. This is the fate that awaits a perfeverance in obftinacy; but if, on the contrary, you agree to the united wiflies of thofe who only confult your welfare, to¬ morrow fhall yo^rbe conduded to the Cha¬ teau de Polloni, and introduced to a fa¬ mily who will joyfully receive you, when you will be empowered to gratify every wíüi of your heart, and when you may vie with Princeffes in magniftceπce. ,, * c For my fake chufe the latter, I con¬ jure you," exclaimed the Count, iffuing from an adjoining apartment, and throwing himfelf at her feet, while he feized her hand with affeded tranfport. cf Oh never, never !" cried ihe, break¬ ing from him with indignation. " You know your alternative !" faid the Baron, fternly. ** Then welcome, death !" exclaimed ibe, wildly throwing herfelf on her knees. « //
" It come*) but not to the innocent ľ 9 faid a voice, that made Rofaline tremble, and fixed the Baron with terror to the fpot where he ftood. The Count looked aghaft, and remained motionlefs. In a moment a violent noife was heard—the doors in the apartment flew open—a loud and difmal groan fucceeded— a fecond filled up the paufe that followed— and while the vibrations of a third, more deep and hollow than the two preceding, ftill echoed from the vaulted roof, every light in the chandelier was extinguifhed, and the library left in total darknefs. In an awful horror Rofaline remained kneeling, till ihe fuddenly felt her hand forcibly feized. " Fly, Rofaline, fwiftly!" faid a whif¬ pering voice; " follow the light you will fee in the gallery, and your fafety is en* fured. Fear not—it is Ariel who conduds you !" * $ It
It ceafed, and Rofaline involuntarily flew towards the gallery. She had no fooner entered it, than a glimmering light appeared at the other end. She followed it, but it retreated as fhe advanced, and when fhe attained the end of the gallery, fhe perceived it at the door of an adjoining apartment : me ftill followed it through a tong fuit of rooms, always as flie entered one door plainly difcerning it gliding out at another. She had purfued it for near a quarter of an hour, when flie fuddenly found herfelf at the top of a ftaircafe : flie looked down it, and perceived the fame light at fome diftance, glimmering from an abrupt turning in the ftairs. She now paufed, almoft exhaufted, and the light flopping as ihe did, remained in the fame place. Suddenly flie thought fhe beard diftant voices, and her dread left the Baron fliould be in purfuit of her, impelled her to go on. The ftaircafe was an amaz¬ ing length, and as the light retreated before her,
her, fhe difcovered that its windings were numerous and intricate, and ihe often ftop¬ ped, irrefoiute whether to proceed or re¬ turn. Her perplexity was rather inereafed than diminiihed when ihe arrived at the bottom; and by the faint illumination which now appeared at a confiderable diftance, flie concluded the place flie was in to be fome fubterranean cavern beneath the Caftle. She ftill followed the light, which in a few moments fuddenly vaniflied, and in¬ stead of it ihe beheld the bright rays ofthe moon refleding on the ground. She ap¬ proached the fpot, and, to her utter amaze¬ ment, found herfelf at the entrance of the cave that opened to the mountains. * The moon flione with uncommon fplen¬ dour, and by its light flie difcovered two perfons at a fmall diftance from the cavern. She now hefitated, and fear again began to affaii her; but it was quickly difpelled by the approach of one of them, in whom flie recognifed Magdelina, в 6 «Oh
" Oh Mademoifellel" exclaimed flie, " are you come at laft ?" " Good Heavens! Magdelina!" cried fhe, " can it be you ?" But her furprife was not to end here, for an exclamation that burft from the lips of Magdelina's companion difcovered to the wondering Rofaline her unfortunate friend Madame St. Lucia! The latter did not at all join in the amazement of Rofaline, but rather appeared to wonder at her fur¬ prife, and enquired if fhe had not expeded to meet her there» Rofaline replied in the negative, adding —" Since we are here, by what myfterious caufe remains to be difcovered, 'let us profit by the unexpeded opportunity, and endea¬ vour to explore our way through the moun¬ tain to fome place of fafeţy." Madame readily agreed to the propofal, and
and Magdelina entreated they would be direded by her, and ihe would Jead them to her father's cot, which, if they ufed great fpeed, they might perhaps be able to reach before the morning dawned· It was now near two o'clock, and, guided by Magdelina, they plunged into fome of the moft fecret paffes of the Alps, which their condudrefs was well acquainted with, having been reared a^midft their nioft re¬ mote intricacies· Rofaline wiihed to call at the cell of the hermit; but Madame diffuaded her, obferving that there they wouid be moft liable to a difcovery, there being little doubt that every place within many miles round would be fearched. As they purfued their folitary way, Ro¬ faline learned from her fellow-travellers the means by which they met in the cavern. Madame had all day been in expedation of another vifit from her young friend, and had
had felt greatly hurt at not feeing her ac¬ cording to her promife. Towards evening jhe began to grow uneafy at her abfence, and, fearing her amiable benevolence of difpofition had incurred Ihe difpleafure of the Baron, ihe dreaded left a difcovery had been made. While this idea alarmed her, fome perfon knocked foftly at the door, and concluding it to be the fubjed of her thoughts, ihe immediately opened it; but how was flie furprifed to perceive, inftead ©f her, a ^figure fo muffled up in a long cloak, that only the head was vifible. The ftranger idid not fpeak, but held out to her a paper, folded like a letter, which ihe took; and the perfon inftantly difappeared in filence, holding up his hand/as if to caution her againft fpeaking. On opening the billet, fhe found a few lines from Rofaline, informing her that ihe was confined, by order of the Baron, to
her chamber, but had bribed the bearer to convey this letter to her, to entreat Ma¬ dame would meet her at midnight in a fub- terranean cavern of the Caftle, the way to which was minutely defcribed in the note; where, flie alfo added, ihe had found means to efcape to, and did not doubt their en¬ largement would be accompliihed without fear of a difcovery. In compliance with this requeft, ihe had put up a fmall packet, containing every thing flie valued, and foon after midnight left her apartment. She was well ac¬ quainted with the part of the chateau ihe muft of neceffity pafs through, and had arrived at the mouth ofthe cavern, when ihe deferied a female, whom íhe concluded was Rofaline, walking about as ifin expedation of her arrival; but íhe had no fooner ap. proached her than íhe diicovered it was a ftranger. It was Magdelina, who, finding that Madame was alfo waiting for Rofaline, agreed to remain there with her till flie joined
joined them. They had both feen the myfterious light by which Rofaline had been conduded; but it vaniflied near the entrance of the cavern, and immediately afterwards Roialine appeared. The manner in which Magdelina had been fummoned was not lefs furprifing. She had juft finiihed her fupper in the hall, and all the fervants being retired, ihe was direded by Roderigo to remain where flie was till flie received further orders from the Baron. With all her native fimplicity, Mag¬ delina had difcernment fufficient to difcover that fomething more than common was in agitation concerning Rofaline ; and the af¬ fedion ihe could hot help feeling for her, fuggefted that there was fomething very tragical going to happen to her. While her fancy was impreffed with thefe images, as flie fat alone in the fervants* hall, long after every domeftic, except herfelf and thofe that attended the Baron, was retired, over
ARIEL.' over the dying embers of a wood fire, ihe fcarcely dared to turn her head, or look round the fpacious hall, when fuddenly ilie heard a fmall door, that opened through an old portico into one of the inner courts, creak on its hinges, and, ftarting round, ihe perceived a perfon, muffled up as Ma« dame had defcribed the ftranger that vifited her, enter it. He approached her with a fmall lighted torch in his hand, and while íhe remained motionleis with terror, told her, in a low voice, to fear nothing; that he was fent by Mils Melvan, and defired ihe would immediately follow him, and he would lead her to her Lady. Magdelina obeyed him without fpeak¬ ing, and he conveyed her, through by-ways, to a ftaircafe, by which they defcended into the cavern, where her condudor left her, telling her íhe muft go to the entrance, and wait the arrival of Rofaline.
With
Wîţji unfpeakable aftonifliment the latter heard the recital of Magdelina, nor could fhe by any means account for the manner in which ihe was conveyed from the Caftle. The night wore faft away, and the ex¬ haufted travellers had yet a great diftance to go. Rofaline and Magdelina fupported the almoft fainting Madame St. Lucia be¬ tween them, and as faft as their trembling feet would permit them, did they purfue theirrugged road, till the day began to dawn, when Magdelina, looking round her, de* clared fhe knew perfedly well where flie was, and that they were not more than a quarter of a league from her father's cot¬ tage. Infpired by the hope of fliortly having reft and refrefhment, they again fet for¬ ward, after having for fome time fat down on a loofe ftone to reft, and in another half hour difcovered, through a tuft of thick trees.
trees, the chimney of a fmall hut, at fight of which Magdelina danced about for joy, declaring flie had never been fo happy fince fhe quitted it. They foon arrived at the fmall door, and on opening it, found the old parents of Mag¬ delina at breakfaft with their children.— They received their daughter with delight ; and no fooner heard from her the rank and fituation of their guefts, than they invited them to be feated, and partake fome of their refrefliment; but the unhappy Madame, exhaufted by the fatigue of walking fo far, together with the hafte in which fhe had fo unexpededly quitted St. Aivars, found herfelf fo ill, that ihe was under the neceffity of going immediately to bed, whither Rofa¬ line herfelf, almoft finking with fatigue, at¬ tended her. They now confulted on what was moft proper and advifable to be done to elude the purfuit of the Baron, who would, doubt¬ lefs,
lefs, feek them at the cottage, as foon as it was known that Magdelina had attended them in their flight: İt was, therefore, agreed that as foon as Madame was in fome meafure recovered from her fatigue, they ihould endeavour to «procure horfes to con¬ vey them, under cover of the following night, to the monaftery, where they might remain in fafety. This being determined, Madame was per¬ fuaded to try to take fo.ne repofe; and Ro* faline having watched by her friend till ihe faw her fall into a quiet flumber, ihe herfelf fought reft, which extreme wearinefs foon procured her, and after a refreihing ileep fhe arofe. Madame was not yet awake; and Rofa¬ line, feating herfelf at the window of the cottage chamber, was furprifed to behold from it a profped which at once aftoniihed and delighted her. It was fituated at the feet of the Alps, whofe towering fummits rofe
rofe majeftically behind it to the clouds, while in front a fertile and romantic country prefented a wonderful contraft to the eye. Even the anxious and perturbed ftate of her own mind could not prevent thofe emo¬ tions which ever arofe in her heart when ihe coni empiiteci the awful fubiimtty of Alpine fcenery :—here ftie beheld the won¬ ders of nature expofed to the view of all her children alike; and as ihe furveyed the bleak and barren mountains that reared their uncultivated heads to the ikies, and at the fame moment heard the loud laugh and cheerful fong of their inhabitants as the mingled founds rofe from below to the chamber, while the fimple cottagers en¬ joyed their humble meal, ihe internally re¬ peated— ** Turn we to furvey " Where rougher climes a nobler race difplay j *' Where the bleak Üwils their ftormy manfion tread, " And force a churlhh foil for icanty bread : " Yet ftill e*enhere Content can fpread a charm, ' «* Kedrefs the clime, and all its rage difarm. Tho*
«« Tho* poor the peafant's hut # his feaft lho* fmaíl, »* Ke zees lus little lot the bt of all. * c Cheerful at morn he wakes from ihort repofe, «« Breathes the keen air, and carols as he goes. < c At night returning, ev'ry labour fj»ed, ** He fits him <lo"wn the monarch of his íhed j « Smiles by his cheerful fire, and round furveys *» His children's looks that brighten at the blaze, < l While his lov'd partner, boaftful of her hoard, «' Diiplays her cleanly platter on the board ; *' And haply too fome pilgrim, thither lea, *< With many a tale repays the nightly bed.** Magdelina interrupted her by entering her room, and enquiring if flie wouid not take fome refrefliment. Madame foon af* ter awoke, revived by a calm fleep of fome hours, and ready to continue their expedi¬ tion to the monaftery. The whole day pafled, and no enquiries were made at the cottage Concerning them; though, had any meffengers from the Baron arrived, they were prepared, by the aifift¬ anee of the old cottagers, to elude their fearch, by fecreting themfelves in an a unknown
unknown cavity of the mountain, each in¬ tricacy and cavern around being well knovvn to the honeft mountaineers, who, reared amidft Alpine rocks and precipices, knew neither hopes nor wiflies beyond them·
CHAP. II. *' Things that love night ** LoVe not fuch nights as this; thc wrathful ikies l( G allow the very wanderers of the. dark, *« And make them keep their caves :—'fmce I was a man «' Such iheets of fire, fuch hvirfts of horrid thunder, ** Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I nevtr " Remember to have heard ľ* Shakespeare. AHE friendly veil of night was no fooner fpread over the earth than* accom¬ panied
panied by the brother of Magdelina, who had procured horfes for them, they fet out towards the monaftery. Their way lay chiefly among the fteepeft parts of thc mountain, and they were frequently obliged to difmount, and traverfe on foot iònie of the moft rugged and leaft acceflible paffes. Soon after midnight, to the terror of the already wearied travellers, the elements gave figns of an approaching ftorm : the loud thunder rolled in horrid peals over their heads, and tbe vivid lightnings darted along the rocks, difciofing more plainly to their view the drearinefs of the road they had to travel. It was now that the ipirits of Rofaline be¬ gan to fink. She felt her ftrength fail her, and dreaded left Madame fhould not be able to fupport the fury of the tempeft· With difficulty they had near an hour con¬ tinued their way in this terrifying fituation, when Madame declared her inability to proceed, and the feelings of Rofaline too plainly
plainly ptedicled they fliould both fall vic¬ tims to misfortune. Encouraged, how¬ ever, by their guide, a hardy Swift pea¬ fant, vvho faid he was lure the Convent coukl not be more than half a league diftant, and the violence of thc norm beginning to abate, they again proceeded, till the tempeft being luddenly renewed with more violence than before, all their fears were revived. The long and dreadful peals of thunder were now more violent than ever, and feemed to ihake the rocks and precipices around to their bafe. To add to their diftrefs, their young conductor, looking round him, de¬ clared he was afraid they had ftrayed from. their path, and had wandered among fome of the unknown intricacies of the moun¬ tain. Madame, who had for fome time ap¬ peared almoil ftupified, heard this intelli¬ gence with a dreadful compofure that ihocked Roialine. To her it was a blow flie had not been prepared to expect, and vol, in, c her
her ftrength, which was before almoft ex¬ haufted, was now fo near forfaking her, that it was with difliculty flie kept her feat. Se¬ veral times were they obliged to paufe, from the increafing horrors around them. Now' the rattling thunder rolled above their heads, and now the vivid lightning, emit¬ ting a partial gleam, difciofed to their view a yawning precipice, which, but for this for¬ tunate intervention, they muft have plunged headlong down. While Rofaline was exerting herfelf to cheer the drooping fpirits of her friend, fhe fuddenly thought flie deferied a light at a diftance, and inftantly communicated the joyful tidings. They immediately endea¬ voured ro explore their way to it, but this they did not without infinite difficulty ac¬ compiifh. After various turnings, and be¬ ing feveral times obliged to difmount, to avoid being precipitated down fome of the rugged fteeps, they at length, by a fud¬ den turn in the mountain, found themfelves # much
much nearer the light, though it ftill ap¬ peared a confiderable way below them,— They defcended with as much fpeed as po£ fible towards it, and found, to their un¬ fpeakable pleafure, it proceeded from the window of a houfe fituated at the feet of the mountain. It was in part furrounded by a wall ; and, glad of any flielter from the ftorm, which continued to rage with greater violence than ever, they hefitated not in defiring their guide to knock at the gates. It required the utmoft efforts of Rofa line to keep life in the exhaufted frame cf Madame, whom flie fupported on her arm, having been both obliged to difmount from their fteeds in the defcent, which was too fteep to admit of their going down it on horfeback wkh fafety. It was a confider¬ able time before any one appeared. At lengtii a voice from within enquired who was there, and was anfwered by the young peafant that they were travellers who had с г left
lofl their way in the ftorm, and begged a flielter. No anfwer was returned for a ihort fpace of time, till at length the gates were ua- faftened, and a fervant appeared, accompa¬ nied by a venerable old man, # who wore the facred habit. They both furveyed the ftran¬ gers with looks of apprehenfion and dif¬ truft, which immediately vaniflied from their countenances on perceiving of whom the party confifted, and they no fooner be¬ held the apparently dying form of Madame, and the pallid haggard countenance of Ro¬ faline, than their doubts feemed to be ba¬ niflied, and both affifted in fupporting Ma¬ dame into the manfion, while Rofaline, whom excefs of fatigue and terror had quite overcome, followed in a kind of ftupor, and no fooner reached a comfortable room, into which they were immediately conduded, than llie funk fenfelefs on a feat. Every reftorative was immediately applied, and on recovering, flie found herfelf feated ,by a cheerful
cheerful fire with Madame, and furrounded by the venerable figure ihe had feen at her entrance, feveral fervants, and a fweet female form, who, aflifted bya young man, were endeavouring, by their affiduities, to recai her to life. She no fooner unclofed her eyes than ex¬ preffions of joy burft from every mouth, and, to her aftonifliment, flie difcovered in the two young perfons the accidental ac¬ quaintance flie had made among the moun¬ tains, in her fecret excurfions from the Caftle. She had been, while infenfible, imme¬ diately recognifed by them. They had long before retired to reft, but, roufed by the knocking at the gates, had arifen to aflift in reviving the diftreffed travellers, and entered the room juft as Rofaline had fainted. The latter was perfuaded to re¬ tire immediately, and the amiable Rofa in¬ fifted on giving up her bed to the diftreffed с 3 ftrangers ¿
ftrangers; but it was long ere Rofaline could compofe herfelf fufficiently to fleep. In the good Le Vere fhe had difcovered the venerable prieft who had perfoimed the fu¬ neral ceremony at the interment of the unfortunate Angelina j and by reviving that melancholy fcene in her memory, re¬ fledions fo uneafy crowded on her mind, that it was daylight ere ihe had clofed her eyes. Madame had been fome time in a pro¬ found fleep, and Rofaline at length, over¬ come by wearinefs, enjoyed for fome hours a calm repofe. They were vifited about noon by Mademoifelle Le Vere, who en¬ quired wkh mueh fweetnefs how they had refted. Rofaline was arifen, and whiie Madame dreffed? being greatly recovered from the fetigue of the preceding day, flie accompanied Rofa to the breakfaft- room. Her father, ihe faid, was. gone to. the neighbouring Convent, and Edmund ± had
had early taken out his gun, which was a favourite amufement. Le Vere entered the room before they had concluded their repaft, and their guefts having now in fome meafure recovered the fatigue of their fudden flight, Madame informed him of their mutual intention, and of her particu.ar defire to enter the Convent as a boarder. His anfwer informed her he could procure her immediate admittance, but entreated ihe vvould remain under his roof as long as ihe found it agreeable and convenient. In the affairs of Rofaline he feemed to take a deeper intereft : he affured her of his protedion from the power of the Baron, and perfuaded her to remain with his daugh¬ ter in preference to gciag with Madame to the*Convent, the confinement of whicii in her prefent ftate of health, might prove very injurious. с 4 Madame
Madame St. Lucia joined with the ve- rerable Le Vere in this opinion, and Rofa¬ line was at length prevailed on to give up her fcheme of going to refide at the mo¬ naftery, where, if fiie chofe it, ihe might vifit her friend every day. Madame remained with them till the fol¬ lowing evening, when La Vere accompa¬ nied her to the Convent, and Rofaline wa3 left alone with her new friend. The man¬ ners of the unafluming Rofa every hour more forcibly attraded the regard of Ro¬ faline; but, though artlefs and inexperi¬ enced, flie was well-informed and intelli¬ gent. Her underftanding was naturally good, and Le Vere had early taken infinite pains to form her mind to the pradice of every virtue he taught, and well had fhe repaid his cares. Nor was Edmund, the adopted child of his fond affedion, lefs worthy his parental regard. This
This young man, now entering histwenty- fecond year, was in perfon handfome and in* terefting: his manners were rather pleafing than elegant, for, reared amidft the wildeft beauties of nature, his turn of mind was enthufiaftically romantic, and it gave a tinge of intereft to his general deportment which, though it rendered him unlike the generality of the world, irrefiftibly attraded the efteem, and won the regard of every one. It required infinitely lefs penetration than Rofaline poffeffed, to difcern the attachment which fubfifted between her fair friend and the ward of her father; nor could ihe ima¬ gine there was any barrier to their union, though, from a dejedion flie obferved at times in Rofa, ihe was led to believe tha,t one certainly exifted. In the fociety of thefe interefting young perfons Rofaline found her fituation fo tranquil, that at times flie could fcarcely think it was not a mere illufion, that flie с 5 fhould
fhould at length be quietly fettled in a re* tirement fo congenial to the prefent tem¬ per of her mind, after having for fo many months been expofed to fuch a variety of terrors. But though external circumftances fo well contributed to calm and tranquillise her mind, there was ftill that within which no effort of philofophy could yet wholiy fub¬ due. The worm that preyed on her peace ftill exifted, and in- filence and folitude was eheriíhed by involuntary meditation and unfeen woe. But as the fource of dejedion was unknown to the friends who furrounded' her, from them it eould receive no allevia¬ tion ; and fo induftrious was ftie ta hide it, «ven if poflible from herfelf, that flie in general wore the maik of content, if noL of cheerfulnefs. Whenever the idea of her native coun- 4 try crofled her mind, ihe fliuddered, and tried to divert her thoughts from that fpot
fpot where every affedion of her heart was centered ; for there too had that heart been deeply wounded, and its peace finally de¬ ftroyed. She, felt compelled, however, to juftify herielf for quitting St. Aivars, not knowing to what motive the Baron might publicly think proper to a tribute it : ihe therefore wrote to Lady Delford, relating every circumftance which had induced her to leave the protedion of the» Baron, and earneftly entreated ihe would favour her with an anfwer. She alfo addreffed a letter to Mifs Arundel, from whom flie hoped to hear every particular of the Edgecumbe family. No enquiries had been made after the fugitives at the monaftery, but from Mag¬ delina, who paid her a vifit, Rofaline learn¬ ed that fome emiffaries of the Baron had been at the cottage, Magdelina, however, being concealed from their view, . and not being able to learn any tidings from the old peafants, they had again quitted it, с 6 without
Зб ARIEL." without hearing any thing of the obječls of their fearch. Rofaline had often in vain en¬ deavoured to develop the myftery attend¬ ing her efcape from the chateau. It was evidently accompliihed by an unfeen hand, who, under the title of Ariel, or her fylph, had fo long given her his advice and inftruč¬ tions. Who this'invifible friend could be ihe had long fince ceafed to try to difcover, refolving to wait patiently till time íhould unravel the fecret. Though fo deeply involved in the veil of myfterv, ihe had, from her firft fingular meeting with him, felt irrefiftibly impelled to confide fo ur in his aiTertions as to believe he was really interefted in her welfare. His tone of voice and language were both marked with the fame fingula¬ rity which attended his introdudion to her; and the extreme melody of his voice in finding, with the enchanting tones of his inftrument, always gave her an idea of what fhe fuppofed to be the fublime thoughts
thoughts of Milton, when he faid the angels— te Their golden harps now took, u Harps ever tun'd, that, glittering by their fide, " Like quivers hung, and w ith preamble fweet <f Of charming fymphony, they introduce *' Their ftcred fong, and waken raptures high, 1 "
CHAP.
CHAP. HL
** Bat, hark ! what more than mortal fourni " Steals on Attention's raptur'd ear î M The voice of Harmony around *« Swells iß wüd w hí ι pers foft and clear* ♦ e Can human hand a tone fo rine " Sweep from the firing wjţh touch profane? «* Caa human lip with breath divine ** Fonr on the gale fo fweet a árain Γ* Cartwrîght,
HE link romantic cottage of Le Vere (which was the ame Ro,aiine had noticed in her journey from Ро1юш) ftood in a fort
fort of glen, formed by Nature y in the cen¬ ter of one of the moft mountainous parts of the Alps; yet, wild and rocky as was the fituation, the hand of Art rendered the ground about it cultivated and fertile. By care and attention, a barren fpot» lead¬ ing to a long ridge of inacceífible rocks, had been converted into a fort of garden and íhrubbery. An avenue of trees of the mountain's growth, confifting of pine, lau¬ rel, and chefnut, waved their fpreading branches to the paffing breeze, and afforded a delightful flielter from the noonday fun» A variety of low fhrubs, planted by the hands of Edmund and Rofà, adorned this charming folitude» and the flowers that an¬ nually bloomed and died away in the gar¬ den were aU of their fetting. On the fum¬ mit of the rock beyond the garden, Ed¬ mund had ereded a ruftic feat, and by la¬ bour had formed a path to it. From this fpot the eye commanded a view of the vaft extent of the mountain. The
The grey fpires of the adjacent monaftery reared their awful heads at a fmall diftance, and the Gothic windows of painted glafs, illumined by the laft beams of the fetting fun, were often contemplated here by the young and enthufiaftic Edmund. Often did he with Rofa linger in this retired fpot till the Convent bell reminded them of the latenefs of the hour; and often were they guided to their home by the bright rays of the pale planet of night. Thus reared in romantic feclufion, early were the hearts of Edmund and Rofa at¬ tached to each other by a tie which every fucceeding year as it flew rapidly by more ftrongly cemented. The origin of Edmund was unknown to himfelf: he had only heard from Le Vere that he was in infancy placed under his guardianfliip ; and as the parental and pious care of the good paftor had never allowed him to feei the lofs of the parents he had never known, he had not fought to develop the myftery which
which, as he grew in years, he every day became more fenfible hung over his birth* At length, when reafon began to expand in his mind, and he became feniible of the nature of the regard which attached him to the daughter of his benefador, he no longer hefitated to declare it to Le Vere, and to implore him to unite his fate with that of Rofa. The only anfwer he received to this re¬ queft was a defire' not to be importuned again on a fubjed which muft no more be thought of. The effed this reply had on the youthful pair was fuch as to determine Le Vere to relate to them what he knew relative to Edmund. On thofe evenings when his duty did not call the good ecclefiaftic to the monaftery, it was often his cuftom to de¬ vote the time to the improvement of his two eleves; for this purpofe he gave them leffons on their different ftudies, and after their
their frugal fupper, was wont to read theta ledures on the religious and moral duties. It was one of thefe evenings that Le Vere feleded for the difclofure of the event which had placed Edmund under his care ; and after a fliort preface, to prepare both for the intended development, he pro¬ ceeded as follows :— u Know, my children, that it was in one of thofe drea;y feafons when the Al¬ pine ftorms roared with unceafing fury round this humble dwelling, and fliook to its foundation this quiet retreat, then the happy abode of felicity. Laura, the ever- regretted mother of my then infant Rofa, at that time rendered my days one conftaot fcene of domeftic peace. I was returned from the monaftery, apd bad taken my fupper. Laura fat by my fick with you, my Rofa, in her lap, and we were both too much engaged \n watching your little playful countenance, and tracing in уощ features
features thofe lineaments of fenfe and vir¬ tue we hoped hereafter to fee you poifefs, to heed the tempeft that roared vvithout, when, through the deep and hollow fighing of the blaft, the groans of a human voice ieemed to meet our ears. I haftily arofe, and, lighting a torch, called to Bernardo to accompany me j and, unclofing the gates, beheld a human figure ftretched beneath the rocks yonder to the right. On raifing it, we found it was a man in an Italian habit. He wore a maik on his face, and a long cloak enveloped his figure, beneath which, to our amazement, we found con¬ cealed a maje infant. f " The perfon foon recovered his fenfes by the warmth of a good fire. He feemed very anxious about the child, and would not be prevailed on to take off his maik. # " We all retired to reft, and on the fol¬ lowing morning I vifited early the apart¬ ment of my gueft, who, to my aftoniih¬ ment,
ment, had difappeared, and the infant alone remained. It was extended on the bed that had been afligned to the ftranger, and by its fide lay a purfe with a paper, on which were written thefe words— * The hofpitable Le Vere is entreated to take the care of the infant which his humanity has made an inmare of his dwell¬ ing. A combination of circumftances, which cannot here be enumerated, have confpired to throw İt on the protedion of ftrangers. Time may yet develop the myftery, and the now deferted child may¬ be enabled to reward with wealth and ho¬ nours thoíè whofe benevolent care he is now compelled to folicit.' " I took you in my arms, Edmund, and carried you to Laura, who was then giving nouriíhment to Rofa; you partook of it, and from that hour became equally dear
dear to both. The ftranger I found had arifen at an early hour, and telling Bernardo that he would return fliortly, had departed, and we faw him no more. u Such, Edmund, was the circumftance that placed you under my protedion. The hint contained in the paper left by the ftranger, that your birth is illuftrious, de¬ termines me to await the elucidation of a myftery which I yet hope I fliall live to fee unravelled ere 1 give my daughter to one whofe family may rejed her, and for her fake fpurn from them an heir who would not otherwife difgrace a regal fcep¬ tre." In vain were the endeavours of Edmund to controvert the arguments of Le Vere; the venerable man had formed a determi¬ nation which not even his ardent wifli for the felicity of Rofa couid fliake, and the young pair were compelled to fubmit to the decree of their parent and guardian. To
To Rofaline, whom a further knowledge foon endeared to the ingenuous Rofa, did the latter relate her little tale ; nor was the regard of the former for her fweet young friend inferior to that Rofa profeffed for her. Rofaline, with delight and gratitude, was included in the evening ledures which Le Vere gave to his young friends; and their days were fpent in fedentary amufe¬ ments, or in long walks in thofe parts of the mountains moft acceflible to the foot of the traveller. Sometimes they accom¬ panied Edmund when he purfued the wild game with his gun; and while he followed the fport, they fketched with their pencils the fublime landfcapes in the mountainous regions around· The mind of Roialine, while thus occu¬ pied, infenfibly began to regain its wonted tranquillity. Tbe wound moft deeply im¬ preffed on her feelings, time had not yet completely healed ; but, fave on one fubjed, her
her mind was tranquil and compofed, and that one ihe would not allow herfelf to dwell upon. To complete her felf con¬ queft, flie found it was abfolutely necefľary to be very little alone ¿ ilie therefore con¬ fiant!)' attended Rofa, and when domeftic occupations took the latter from her, ihe paid Madame St. Lucia a vifit, and thus com.letely baniihed Solitude, that nurfe of woe. The inhabitants of the monaftery all knew and loved the innocent Rofa, and many of her early days were fpent there after the death of her mother. The Su¬ perior was a pious and amiable charader, and, from her friendihip to Le Vere, loved his child-as a daughter. A rich Nun, who had been in habits of intimacy with Rofa, one evening fent for her to the monaftery. Rofaline had fpent the morning with Madame, and there·
therefore did not accompany her friend. She was engaged in reading a French au¬ thor, whom Le Vere had recommended ; and after having finiihed her book, finding Rofa and her father were not returned, and Edmund being ftill abfent on fome of his mountainous excurfions, flie walked to¬ vvards the feat in the rock, whither ihe was often accuftomed to accompany Rofa. The duiky hue of evening in its mantle of fober grey was already diffufed over the face of nature, and very foon the landfcape around faded from her fight in the mi ft of evening. The dark towers of the monaf¬ tery were ftill vifible, and the vefper bell fummoning its pious inmates to the evening prayer, juft reached her ear. She placed herfelf on the ruftic feat, and her mind 3 ever difpofed to meditation, reverted to thoie feenes on which it loved to dwell, till a fudden ftrain of mufic feemed to pafs her in the air, and in foft cadences died away on her
her ear. She liftened attentively, and in a few minutes the following lines were fung to the fweet tones of a lute :— «« Now Evening, in her fober grey. « Succeeds the laft faint tints of day ; " Now Contemplation's hour draws near, * ( And Meditation fixes herej « £ Amidft thefe rocks and mountains wild *' She courts deep thought, fell Sorrow's child; < ( Tho' lulľd by tlie foft evening breeze, ** In vain her bofom feeks for eafe. ** Shemufes, penfively reclin'd, «* While faithful memory to her mind <* Scenes of paft blifs would faîn renew, " And paint them to her mental view; " Slie pays the tribute of a tear, 4t Nor knows, vvhile filľd with hoft ant ** That Ariel or her fylph draws near.
nàfear, >
At the laft line Rofaline looked around ier. No human being or animated form met her view. She paufed a moment, and vol. in, d then,
then, imitating the dulcet tones of her fylph, flie fung— ** Tho* a victim ftill to hope and fear, «* Yet Ariel's ever welcome here.'* *' Moil gratefully does he thank you for a welcome fo fweet," cried the aerial voice of her i)lph, " though rather would he have feen your countenance dreffed in its wonted fmiles, than thus arrayed in hidden fadnefs. Long have 1 noticed the tranfient cheerfulnefs, which illumines your features in the company of your friends, give way in folitude to the fallow hue of defpondency, and much have 1 wiflied to counfel you on the fubjed; but unavoidable delays have hitherto prevented me, and you are now fo feldom alone, that it is a rarity to me?t you unattended." " If you be as well acquainted with my heart, as you would have me believe," returned Rofaline, " you muft already know that
that î have long wifhed for this opportunity to acknowledge my obligations for your affiftance in my efcape from St. Aivars, and from dangers I even now ihudder to think of." " Thanks be to a higher Power," replied f Ariel, cc thofe dangers are now, í truft, no more. Safely arrived at an afylum where you may with comfort remain at leaft for the prefent, you have now only to feek for happinefs where it is ever feated. Jn the mind alone is this invaluable gem to be found* and the unerring guides to it are Reafon and Religion. Thus armed, let terreftrial ftorms roar around you un¬ heeded. Proteded by thefe divine guards, you are fli ielded from harm, and fafe | from all injury: the counfels of the one I will repel the arrows of misfortune, and the precepts of thc other will affurediy fupport you under it. Well do I know that the fting of ingratitude is deep and wounding i perfedly am I affured that the p 2 poifon
poifon of the adder is not more bitter to the åuman frame, than is the voice of con¬ tumely, or the air of negled, from thofe we once loved, to the Auman heart. Yet even thefe potions, unpalatable as they are to the tafte, will thefe monitors teach us to fwaliow, and by infufing the fweet balm of content in the mixture, will caufe us to drink the cup of mifery to the dregs; unhurt. And how grateful ought we to be, v\hen we refled that thefe divine counfellors are ready to fly to the affift¬ ance of all, if fought after by proper means ! " Learn, Oh innocent and inexperienced Rofaline, to contemn thofe evils which no confcioufneís of guilt imbkters, and feek, in the pure plaudits of a monitor, whofe filent voice no flattery ever iuilies, for the peace · a pitilefs world refufes to beftow. A guileleíš heart is youťs^ —a precious jewel which no bafe invader can deprive you of; and while this talifman remains 'm your pofleflion,
poffeffion, the firft of blifs is your own. Learn to appretiate the ineftimable bleffing in liumble thankfulnefs, and repine not at the deprivation of aught the wayward opi¬ nion of mortality may have told you would be good. The Power whkh invifibly con¬ ducts thofe trivial incidents tlmt unite to form the great and wondrous fcale of events/ views this jewel within the fecret recefles of your boiom, where, hidden from every eye fave his, it is fecreted: he knows and ap¬ proves the motives which govern your con¬ dud, and he deputes me to reprove and corred the only fpot to be deferied in it, that one of his moft perfed works may retain its native purity till time itfelf fliali be no more. *« Behoid, Oh Rofaline! the facred taik delegated to me. Say, ihall my embafly becrovsntd with fuccets?** ** I truft it will,** repiied Rofaline, in a voice of emorion, deeply affeded by the words of the fylph, " and Heaven in irs d з infinite
infinite mercy will, I humbly hope, reftore in time to my heart the peace which has been long eftranged ftom it." " Doubtlefs it will," continued Ariel, " To your own exertions let a firm confi* dence in the immutable decrees of Provi¬ dence be added, and finally peace, if not happinefs, will be your's. But I muft now depart. У on pious veftal, to whofe death¬ bed your friend was this evening fummoned, has juft breathed her iaft, and even now the requiem is chanting by the holy train.— Fai ewel, fweet Rofaline! and in the words of your native Bard— " Do not Ccck to take your change upon yo», *« To bear your griefs yourfelf, and leave me out j *' For by this Heaven, now at our forrows pale, ·* Say what thou canft, I'll go along with thee V* Ere Rofaline could reply, the farewel ftrain floated on the air, and made the rocks around re-echo its melody; but foon the fofc
foft founds died away on her ear, and a profound filence fucceeded. She now arofe from her feat, and purfued her way to the houfe. Le Vere met her at the gates, and on her enquiring after Rofa, he replied íhe was returned from the monaftery, and had retired to her apartment. " Her friend, the holy Sifter Laurina," faid he, " is no more; ihe breathed her laft figh in the arms of Rofa an hour fince, and my cbild is deeply affeded by her lofs. Follow her, my good Rofaline, and comfort her wounded mind." With alacrity Rofaline obeyed his wifhes, and flew to the apartment of Rofa. Ed¬ mund had juft folicited admiffion; but, ab¬ forbed by grief, Rola had declined feeing him, Rofaline did not leave her again that night. Rofa defcribed to her the pious d 4 end
end of the good Nun, who had for many years been an ornament to the fifterhood, and had died with the fame piety which had ever marked her life and adions. On the following day they attended at the monaftery, to be preíent at the funeral obfequies of the good Laurina; and Rofa, with grief, iaw the remains of her friend depofited in the vaults of the monaftery.—· They then accompanied Le Vere home, where he ftrove, by pious inftrudions and advice, to cheer the hearts of his young auditors and divert their minds from dwelling on the melancholy fubjed that had lately occupied them.
CHAP.
CHAP. IV.
** But me, not deílin'd fuclì delights to fhare, *' My prime of life in wandering fpent, and carej ** Impelľd, with fteps unceafing, to pui fue *' Some fleeting good, that mocks me wiih the view j ' c That, hke the cìrcìe bounding earth and ikies, *< Allureţ. from far, yet as I follow, flies} «* My fortune leads to travel realms unknown, *' And find no fpot of all the world my own." Goldsmith.
OSAL1NE had one morning been to fpend part of it with Madame St. Lucia, as the frequently did when Roía was en¬ gaged in domeftic affairs, and was return- d 5 «g»
ing, when a carriage drove through the great gates, and entered the firft court of the monaftery. A ladv put her head from the window, whofe face fhe fancied was not unknown to her; and (he had fcarcely paffed her when ihe recolieded it to be Madame M tivtni, whofe manners and convention had fo charmed her at Polloni. She faw her alight, antl was convinced íhe was not miftaken in her conjedures. She mufed on what it was probable couid have brought her there, and wiflied fhe might be come to board foine time at the Convent, that the might have an opportu¬ nity of renewing her acquaintance wirh one fhe fo much admired. On the following morning, as flie was walking with Rofa in the fmall garden that furrounded the** houfe, they were furprifed by the fight of a carriage at the gates, and Rofaline was in a few minutes fummoned to the houfe, to a lady who had enquired for her. She flew to the parlour, where, with no fmall pleafure, ihe
file found Madame Malvini. The latter embraced Rofaline with much affe&ion, teftifying the pleafure it gave her at ίο un- expečliedíy meeting her. She had thought ilie knew her on the preceding day; but the traniient view was not fufficient to make her quite certain. On enquiry at the Con¬ vent, where íhe had come to vifi.t the Ab- befs, whom (he had formerly known* fhe found (he was right y and as íhe defigned to quit it on the following day, ilie loft no time in paying her a vifit. She feemed anxious to know what motives had induced her to quit St. Aivars ; and impelled by the uncommon fweetnefs of her manners, Ro¬ faline unrefervedly communicated her real fituation. When (he mentioned Madame St. Lu¬ cia having been" the companion of her ftight, Madame Malvini, with marks of amazement in her countenance, and the noil violent emotion in her manner, re¬ peated the name .of'."St. Lucía in accents V 6 of
of wonder, and entreated her to tell her whether flie had heard aright. When Rofaline had confirmed her firft affertion—" Wonder nor,*' laid flie, " my fu eet Mifs Melva , at my furprife.—* Madame St. Lucia was one of my firft, my earlieft frk nds.—Dear haplefs Antoi¬ netta! little did I imagine, when I was laft night an inmate of the monaftery, that, after all your long-concealed woes, you repofed beneath the fame roof. I will fly to her, my dear Rofaline, and fur¬ prife her with a view of her long-baniflied friend." Sa\*ing this flie arofe, and Rofaline, at¬ tending her to the carriage, iaw it again drive towards the Convent. She related to Le Vere* and Rofa the vifit flie had juft received, and from them learned that Ma¬ dame Malvini poiìefleJ a fmall eftate, fitu¬ ated a few leagues further towards Italy, 4 which,
which fhe fometimes vifited, but that her general refidence was at Malvini, an an¬ cient chateau in Italy, the feat of the late Signor Malvinťs family. Her charader was celebrated for its many virtues, and for benevolence and fortitude ihe was juftly efteemed. The latter had lately been exem¬ plified by the refignation with which flie bore the lofs of an only and beloved daugh¬ ter, fince whofe death ihe had quitted her chateau in Italy by the advice of her friends, and vifited her other eftate, in order to try if change of fcene would alle¬ viate the depreffion of her fpirits. It was late in the evening when a fum¬ mons arrived from the Convent, defiring Ro· fal ne's attendance. She accompaned the meffenger back, and found Madame Mal¬ vini vvith her late difcovered friend. The former apologized for the hafty manner in which ihe had quitted her in the morn¬ ing. "The
5 V The unexpected difcovery of my long and deeply regretted friend," added Madame Malvini, " totally banifhed from my mind every idea that related not to herfelf. One unformed planywhich then wavered in my imagination, íbe has, however, brought to maturity, and determined me to requeft your compliance with it. As much of your own hiftory as remained untold, our good Madame St. Lucia has related. I know your fituation, nor are ypur friends in England unknown to me. The revered name of Sir Walter Edgecumbe is familiar to my ear, and in my early youth I was in¬ timate with his family. u You are not, my ilveet Mifs Melvan, unacquainted with the fevere and heavy misfortune it has pleafed the Almighty -tö ìhft\€t on nie. It has deprived me ofthe only compamon of my declining years, and the laft hope of my family. From my fìrft introduction to you, I longed to call you by the endearing appellation of daughter. . ■■■;,'■"·.■ "-My
My heart felt for you a regard even mater¬ nal, and from no one elfe could I derive the comfort your fociety would yield me. Confent then, my dear Rofaline, to fupply the place of my loft child, and gladly will I convey you with me to Mal¬ vini, whither, in a very fliort time, I mean to go." Rofaline exprefled, in lively terms, her gratitude for an offer fo accordant with her wiihes, but lamented the neceflity there would be, ih mid flie accept it, to quit Madame St. Lucia. That amiable woman entreated her tq lay adde every confideration of that fort, afluring her that nothing would fo mate¬ rially contribute to her happinefs as to know that ihe was comfortably fettled under the protedion of Madame Mal¬ vini.
¡t
It was therefore agreed that Rofaline ihould prepare for her departure, and ac¬ quaint the good Le Vere and his amiable family with her intention to quit them in a few days. This intelligence was received with the utmoft forrow by Rofa, who had juft fum¬ moned courage to repofe a full confidence in Rofaline as ihe was torn from her; and the latter could not leave the fweet retire¬ ment, where ftie had fpent fo many weeks İn tranquillity, without fenfations of the liveiieft regret ; but, exciufive of her grati¬ tude to Madame Malvini, and her admira¬ tion of that lady's charader, there was another powerful inducement for her to accept her offered protedion. Madame Malvini was of Englifli ext radion, and had relations refiding there ftill ; and a profped, though ever fo diftant and re¬ mote, of once more revifiting her native country, had charms for her which flie found it impoflible to withftand. The
The evening preceding her departure ihe accompanied Rofa to their favourite feat on the rock. It was a fine cahn evening ; the fun had not yet begun to fer, but its de¬ clining beams darted over the tali fpires of the monaftery, and glittered on the falling waters of a natural cafcade, that flowed from a rocky eminence to the right, and tumbled, with an awful found, into a narrow dell below, from whence it wound its way through tiie rocks, till it was no^ longer diicernible. Rofaline and her friend, affeded by the idea of their approaching feparation, were neither of ihem inclined for con erfation, but both ftood mufing on the mountainous profped before them. At length the vef- per bell from the Convent ftruck on their ears, and Rofa, with an involuntary figh, broke the filence. " When next I hear that bell, my dear Rofaline," laid ihe, * you will be far from me,
me, and I fliall again be left to filence and folitude." " Not quite to folitude," faid Rofaline, fmiling, to cheer the fpirits of her friend ; " I fliall have a very good fubftitute, who will not, 1 am fure, leave you too much alone." Rofa blufhed with confeioufnefs that ihe alluded to Edmund, and waving the fub¬ jed, propofed that they fliould extend their walk. It was agreed to on the part of Rofaline, and they ftrolled forward, till reaching the point of a projeding eminence, they feated themfelves on a tuft of mofs, and had renewed the fubjed of their fepa¬ ration, when, on a fudden, a ftrain of foft mufic ñfuted their ears. Rofa looked .round, and at length pointed out the mufi¬ cian to Rofaline in a deep dell at a great diftance below them, at the bottom of an enormous precipice which divided them. « By
u By his long waving hair and fhepherd's crook," faid Rofa, «* it is fome mountain fwain; and if we liften, we fhall perhaps hear a love elegy to fome Delia or Daphne of the rocks." The figure was extended on the moffy carpet, and feemed to hold a mufical inftrument in his hand. They liftened at¬ tentively, and heard thefe words— " Sweet Friendihip's power, I thee invoke Thy kindly aid to lend, And eafe me of the galling yoke f Beneath whofe weight I bend. M Two parting votaries at thy (brine Here bid a long adieu ţ Oh aid them with thy power divine, And prove their paffion true í " Far from their breafts each doubt remove, Which you can bid to ceafe ¡ Each anxious hope and joy improve, And huíh their cares to peace.
"The
·' The wounds of difappointed love With friendihip's balfam heal, And from the heart all pain remove Which love has made it feel. ** And when each great event is o'er In life's uncertain round, May they then meet to part no more, With blifs eiernal crown'd !" The voice was too well known to Rofa* line to leave a doubt in her mind that it was her friend Ariel himfelf, and flie would fain have obtained a more perfed view of him ; but no fooner was his ftrain con¬ cluded, than the form they had faintly de¬ feried difappeared among the mazy wind¬ ings of the mountain, Rofa ftill drew her former conclufion, that it was fome moun¬ tain fwain, and wondered that the lianzas he fung fhould be fo fingularly apropos. They returned late to the houfe, and early in the morning Rofaline was to com¬ mence her journey. When ihe retired for the
the night, a variety of refledions kept her long awake. Once more ihe was to change her place of refidence, and to remove ftill further from thofe friends whom an unfa¬ thomable diftance of ocean divided her from; and ere ihe funk to repofe, as Adolphus and Henrietta came to her mind, fhe couid not help defcribing to herfelf her own feelings by thofe beautiful and expref¬ five lines of Goldfmith— *K Where'er I roam, whatever realms I íèe, * f My heart, untravelľd, fondly turns to thee : «' Still to my friends it turns, with ceafelefs pain, *' And drags at each remove a lengthening chain.** She could have proceeded with the fol¬ lowing lines, but Sleep, with its kindly influence, interfered, and baniflied for a time from her memory all recolledion of the paft, and huihed her fears for the future in a temporary oblivion. The worthy Le Vere, for whom flie felt all
all the affedion of a daughter, parted from her in the morning with the kindeft pater¬ nal advice, and the eyes of Rofaline fwam with uncontrouîed emotion, as ihe bade adieu to his hofpitable little retirement. From Edmund, for whom íhe could not help feeling the friendlhip of a fifter, ihe parted with lefs regret; becaufe, having lately taken arms by his own particular de¬ fire, he had reafon to imagine he ihould accompany his regiment into Italy, where he promifed, fliould that be the cafe, to make a point of vifiting her at Malvini. She took an affeding farewel of Madame St. Lucia at the Convent ; and, by the defire of Madame Malvini, Rofaline fent for Magdelina to attend on her. The fummons was joyfully received, and immediately obeyed, by the delighted Magdelina, from whom fhe heard that enquiries had been extended all over the Canton
Canton by the Baron and Count, to endea¬ vour to trace the flight ofthe fugitives ; but not being able to difcover it, they concluded they were departed for England, whither it was reported the Count had followed them, but the Baron remained at St. Aivars.
CHAP.
ß
CHAP. V. " The quality of mercy is not drained j * c It droppeth, as the gentle rain from heaven " Upon the place beneath. It is twice blefs'd— <( It bleffeth him that gives, and him that takes* «* 'Tis mightieft in the mightieft j it becomes «' The throned Monarch better than his crown î " His fceptre (hews the force of temporal power, *' The attribute to awe and majefty, <* Wheťein doth út the dread and fear of Kings; ** But mercy is above the fcepterM fway : « It is enthroned in the hearts of Kings j «« It is an attribute to God hirnfejf j *' And earthly power doth then ihew likeft God's, «* When mercy feaf»ns junice." Shakespeare· AT was early in the fpring when Madame Malvini, accompanied by Rofaline and her attendants, fet out on their journey to the chateau
Chateati de wiaîvinî. Aş t^ey had to erou a rugged and dreary part of the Alps, their travelling was of courfe tedious; though on the third day after their departure from the Convent, it was threatened with a more ferious interruption by one of their male attendants being obliged, from illnefs, brought on by cold caught in that moun¬ tainous region, to ftop at a miferable cot¬ tage fituated at the feet of the Alps. Hav¬ ing, however, paffed the worft part of it, rather than fubmit to a delay, Madame determined on leaving him there, and pro¬ ceeding, attended by only one male fervant the remainder of their way. They ac¬ cordingly recommenced their journey, pro¬ pofing in two more days to reach Malvini By Rofaline, to whom every thing fhe beheld was new, it would have been much enjoyed, had her raind been perfedly at eafe; but there was a wound there wbich no external objed had power to beai: and vol. ш« б though
though the charms of novelty had the tem¬ porary power to baniih from her recollée-· tion her internal forrows, they recurred with ftill greater force when refledion fuc¬ ceeded. Her gratitude to her new bene¬ fadrefs, however, - determined her to en¬ deavour at conquering every painful re- hiembrance, and ihe refolved to devote her whole time to iooth and allay the recent wound her maternal feelings had fuftained. Late in the evening on the fourth day they arrived on the borders of a foreft on the confines of Italy, near which, at a houfe appointed for the reception of travellers, they propofed to fpend the night. It was nearly dark, and Madame, as they entered the foreft, expreffed her apprehenfions of being bewildered in its intricacies. They had gone through a veiy fmall part of it, when, as the carriage was proceeding flowly, from the tinevennefs of the road, loud voices at a diftance ibuek on their ears, and gave them a hope that they were near the place of their
their deftination. This idea was, how¬ ever, only momentary, and gave way to one that filled them with horror and,alarm. The carriage in a few minutes ftopped; and on looking from the window to enquire the motive, its inmates perceived a party öf men fitting under a flied ata fmall diftance, whofe ftrange drefles and figures gave them reafon to fear they were banditti, and the driver, who had obferved them, flopped» not knowing whether it was beft to proceed, or remain quiet. It was, however, too late to deliberate ; they were already difcovered, and in a moment the carriage was fur¬ rounded by a fet of men, whofe ferocious countenances and hard features proclaimed them to be divefted of every trait of mercy* or humanity· The terror of Rofaline, great asit was, flie endeavoured, with her accuftomed fortitude, to reprefs, while lhe attended to Madame Malvini, who, overcome with fatigue and е г alarm,
alarm, fainted in her arms. She fupported her, while a violent fkirmifli enfued with the domeftics, who were very foon over¬ come by fuperior numbers; and the carriage door being opened, a man leaped in, and fearing himfelf, they were for fome minutes driven along with the moft frightful velo¬ city. The facuUy of fpeech had totally for- ftken Rofaline, and before they cea'ed from the rapidity of their motion, ihe was as Hfeleis as the inanimate form ihe fup¬ ported. She was reftored to fife, though not to recolledion, by being dragged from the vehicle, and conveyed, between two of their affalants, into an old building, whtch the confuiion of her ideas would not allow her to ukr a per f d view of, and through feveral paffages, to a room, whrre, having bolted her in, they left her. For fome time flie remained in a fort of llu^o:, till ut length, reftored to fome degree
degree of recolledion, ihe caft her eyes round the room, whofe bare walls and fcanty fur¬ niture prefented a pidure of drearinefs and defolation flie had never feen equalled. The roof appeared to be falling in, and the few wretched moveables there were, feemed to be tumbling to pieces. An old mifenŕjle couch, on which hercondudors had placed her, was the only feat it afforded, and that was almoft devoured by moths and vermin. But the interior of her apartment, difmal as it was, did not infpire her with more hor¬ ror than the noifes that reached her from without. Dreadful oaths, reiterated with violence by the banditti, intermixed witli piercing ihrieks and fcreams in female voices, amongft which ihe could difcover thofe of Magdelina and Madame Malvinľs woman, fiequently affailed her ear; and her dread of what was already become of Madame fo entirely overpowered her fenfes,. that fhe remained motionlefs. ж 3 Gradualljr
Gradually every thing grew calmer, the fcreams ceafed, the voices of the wretches were huíhed, and by degrees the clamour entirely fubfided ; but the dreary filence that now pervaded the place feerhed not lefs terrible. ' The glimmering light of a taper, which the men who brought her there had left on the table, was all that illuminated her apartment; and after İhe had remained near an hour transfixed to the couch where they had left her, ihe fummoned courage to rife, and perceived the faint beams of the moon through a fmall grated window at one end of the room. She approached it» and found it looked to the foreft, but could difcern no human being, or fign bf any ha¬ bitation near. Not a murmur reaehed her ear, and every tumult in which the man¬ fion had fo htely been involved, was hufhed completely to repofe. She faw no means of efcape, and turned in defpair from the window, when her eye fuddenly caught fomething on the floor near her. She ftooped
ftooped to examine it, and to her furprife found it to be tablets. f< Perhaps," thought flie, as flie fur¬ veyed them, " the property of fome un¬ fortunate being confined like myfelf a pri¬ foner in this wretched placet* She perceived there was writing on the leaves, and took them to the light; but what words can paint her amazement when on the firft page flie faw written, in a legible hand, " Rofaline Melvan!" She turned over to the next, and read, with inereafed aftonifliment, thefe lines infcribed to the fame name ;— V ·' Thro* woods and thro* wilds I have wander'd forlorn fi Care and Sorrow attended my wayj 11 Fair Hope, who onc€ kindly foibade meto mourn, ** Now has left me their victim and prey I <« Ah, beautiful Hope ! with thy treffes of gold <* Deign again to revifit my heart j «* It is fi amM out of Nature's moil fenfible mould, *' And from Sympathy ne'er can depart. E 4. ««As
** As Γ wander foi lorn thro' my journty of woe» " One image cekftial divine w Puďues my fond foul whtrtfoever I go, *' And reftftlefa İ bow at the íhrbe. ·* tt is not a countenance form'd to delight, # * Thoíe fmiles whľch play over her face, " Thofe eyes which at once are ίο mild, yet fo bright* «* Nor any pecunar grsce—· 44 It h not ber perfon enílavts my fond heart, ·* Though there we all excellence find $ ** Ah no ! ------ 'us the virtaea and grace« that dart ** Γτοίϊί the heaven-form'd fphere of her mind. w From the foft voice of Confeience lhe feiks her reward» " By ks mufic 0h;*s hu&M to repofe - P * # The angel of purity, ever her guards " Encounters or foftens her woes. « While chafing away from hereje the big tear, " The wifdom of Providence fees ; " And learn», whb a patience unequall'd, to beta ·< Whatever its juftice decrees.** Τ ' She could fcarcely credit the evidence of her
her fenfes as fhe perufed the above.— « Still," thought íhe, " this Ariel pur¬ fues me wherever I gol" for to him alone could ihe afcribe what ihe had juft read. Sometimes flie was tempted to think the hand-writing not unknown to her ·> but thc next moment ihe rejeded the idea, as in almoft every page the hand was different. While thus, filled vv'th furprife, fhe en¬ deavoured in vain to elucidate the feeming myftery of the tablets, flie heard fteps approaching the room. The door was flowly unlocked, and as ihe ftood almoft immoveable, ihe perceived the hideous form of one of the bandiţii, who, aft~r furveying her for a few minutes, offered her, in a furly tone,, fbme refreih ments» Inftead of anfwering, íhe eniFeatcd^ in a tone of iupf Lcation, to know uhat vvas» become of the lady and her attendants who came wiih her. The man replied, it was no part of his £ 5 bufinei»
bufinefs to anfwer queftions; but perceiv¬ ing by his countenance that he feemed moved by the piteous entreaty of her man¬ ner, fhe renewed her prayers with fuch ea¬ gernefs, that heat length told her that the lady was in a room alone in another part of the building, but refufed to fay any more; and then leaving the provifions he brought with him, went away; but Rofaline obferved when he quitted the room, 'he only clofed the door without locking it after him. She liftened eagerly to the found of his fteps, and when flie could no longer hear them, ihe applied her hand to the lock—it gave way, and difcovered a long paffage ^illumined by a fingle lamp. She paufed, but heard no found ; all feemed quiet, and fhe felt an irrefiftible defire to endeavour to explore her way to the apartment where Madame was confined, who flie dreaded to think might be languiihing alone without affiftance or comfort. Infpired by the idea that flièT might reftore her to life, ihe paffed 4 with
with flow and cautious fteps down the paf¬ fage; it croffed another, into which ihe turned, though uncertain whether it was the way ihe came. She had proceeded but a few fteps further, when ihe heard voices in difcourfe. They were not talking loudly, and feemed to proceed from a room at no great diftance. The door ftood half open, and difcovered to her view a table plentifully fpread with provifions, round which was feated a party of men, whofe fierce air and drefs declared them to be fome of the chiefs of the ban¬ ditti. They feemed in confultation over their repaft, and at the head fat one whofe form and countenance were much lefs fero¬ cious than the others, though his command* ing manner, ancj the high plume in his hat befpoke him one of the fuperiors. His figure was tall and majeftic ; and though he fpoke in a tone of authority, his manners were gentle and even elegant, compared to thofe of his affociates, who feemed to e 6 have
have been afking his opinion on fome fub¬ jeft which he had not yet declared himfelf upon* Silence was ordered;, and as Rofaline, trembling and half ftupified with terror, maintained her ftation in the paffage, íhe heard him fay— " I perfedly agree in your fentiments % but as they are females, and confequently have it not in their power to make any re»* fiftance, I recommend you all to mercy." <c Ah, Captain!" exclaimed one of his adherents, " that is your old plea, and fometimes 1 tbink you fhew rather too much of it." ·* No, my friends," replied he r to whom this fpeech was addreffed, in a voice of ftrong emotion, " I have now been your leader for more than two years, and if,, dur¬ ing that period, you can recai one tranfac- tion to your minds in which you can with juftice fligažatize me with weaknefs or pufillanimity,
pufillanimity, I will bare my breaft to receive your juft revenge 1" *« No, no, no," exclaimed the rough voice of every wretch that encircled the board. " Then," faid fhe firft, « why, good An* fel mo, am I to be accufed of ihe wing more indulgence than I ought? Recoiled, my friends, my firft maxim, that though we fubfift by plunder, the lives ot thoie we pillage are ever facred, and to females that kind of pity which the world terms huma¬ nity, is ever to be extended; therefore I pofitively give my decided vote againft ill treatment to thofe who have this day fallen inn our hands. Is this· agreed to on your parts?" A murmuring approbation was given·, and he arofe. " At prefent then," faid he, « we will fay no more on the fubjed; the day's fa- tiguçs and hazard require fome repofe." 5 They
They all immediately followed the exam¬ ple of their leader, and feemed to move towards the door. Terrified at the thought of being difcovered, Rofaline now fied to¬ wards the apartment (he had juft before quitted, where flie felt compelled to relin¬ quiíh the fcheme of endeavouring to find out the prifon of Madame, at leaft for the prefent, as it could not be accomplifhed without tne hazard of encountering fome 'of the robbers. She now once more feated herfelf on the old couch in her dreary apartment, liften¬ ing to every found, and dreading, in every noife, the ftep of fome of the banditti. She heard them traverfing the paffages, as if retiring to their places of reft, and thè diftant ihutting of doors confirmed the idea. ïn a íhort time all was quiet, and the moft deathlike filence feemed to per¬ vade the whole building. The melancholy tones of a clock, which proclaimed mid¬ night
night and its fucceeding hour, were the only interruptions ; and fo complete an awe did it ftrike on the almoft benumbed fenfes of Roialine, that, though íhe wiihed once more to examine the tablets fhe had found, fhe could not fummon courage to take them from her pocket, but remained as if ftupified where lhe had firft placed herfelf. Soon after fhe hud a fecond time counted thc hour, the dreary ftillnefs of the fcene was interrupted by the found of approach¬ ing fteps. Rofaline fliuddered, but had no power te move. They drew nearer, and her prifon- door was opened. The tall figure of one of the banditti was all ihe faw. She invo¬ luntarily turned away her head, and co¬ vered her face with her hands. The figure approached the couch, and a low but gentle voice faid-*- u Be not alarmed, lady—from me you have nothing to fear."
Ai
î At thefe words íhe affumed courage to> raife her eyes, and beheld, to her no filiali furprife, the fame man who had fi ftre¬ nuoufly recommended herfelf and Madame to the mercy of his companions. The open benevolence of his countenance, and the looks of pity with which he feemed to re¬ gard her, infpired her with hope ; and un¬ confcious of what flie was doing, ihe funk on her knees, and clafped her hands, as,if imploring his compaifion» He raifed her without fpeaking, and feemed greatly affeded. In a moment, taking her hand—" We have no time to loie," faid he; " 1 come purpofely to liberate you; your friends are waiting for you, but we muft be quick, and cau¬ tious." He led her out of the room as he fpoke, and the ftrange delight of this unhoped-for deliverance would not allow her to fpeak* After
After conduding her through feveral paf» fages and unfurniihed rooms, they reached a fort of hall, from whence a fmall low door admitted them to one of the inner courts. Paifing through this with the fame fpeed and filence, they came to a fecond, the key of which Rofaline's condudor was poíľeíTed of. A long paflage led from it, at the end of which they found themfelves oppofite the front of the building, and clofe to a pair of large folding gates, one of which ftood open, and difcovered to the delighted Ro· faline Madame Malvini's carriage waiting. Her guide ftopped when they came within fight of it. '* You are now, I hope," faid he, « « con· vinced of the truth of what I before told you, that 1 came to deliver you from im- pritbnment. In ihat carriage are your friend and her fervants. Here then we part.*' " Oh take with you my acknowledg* ments I"!
ments!" faid Rofaline. " The gratitude I feel I have no power to exprefs." " You have İt in your power to evince it," returned her condudor, eagerly : " it is oniy to give a folemn promife never to reveal to any one your adventure in this foreft." ' * " Willingly," faid Rofaline, « do I pledge my honour never to do it." " You wili perhaps be furprifed," faid her guide, "when I tell you that though I never before beheld you, I am no ftranger to your name and charader ; both are well known to me, nor am I difinterefted in thc little ferviee 1 now do yeu, as in ferving Mifs Melvan, I am obliging my beß friend* With unfeigned aftonifliment Rofaline turned towards him as he fpoke, but he had led her to the carriage from which Madame Malvini now addreffed her. She was handed in, the ftranger difappeared, and the coach drove off. Enquiries
Enquiries were now made on all fides of what had been her fate with the robbers. Madame had been confined alone, till, from fatigue, alarm, and weaknefs, iht was fo ill, * that Magdelina and her own woman were allowed to come to her, and remain with her during the night. A very fmall part of it had elapfed when one of the banditti entered their prifon, and ordered them to follow him. - They obeyed, and Madame, fupported by two attendants, was conveyed to the outer gates, where, to their aftoniihment, they found the carriage and fervants waiting. Here they were de* fired to remain till Rofaline joined them. The latter from infancy had been fur¬ rounded by myftery, and the fame dark veil was thrown over fo many of the events of her life, that fhe had almoft given up all hope of their ever tjeing unravelled. She fometimes thought the ftranger, by whofe means they were liberated from the power of the banditti, had the air of her pre¬ tended
tended fylph ; but his perfon was fo differ¬ ent, it was ioipuifible it could be him. The countenance of her ethereal friend flie J^ad never beheld, but his thin adive fonu did not at all refemble the tall majeftic figure of her late deliverer; ye¿ that her prefent efcape, and that fhe had effeded by fimilar myfterious means from St. Ai¬ vars, had fome connedion, ihe could not help fufpeding. They now travelled with the utmoft ipeed* from the dread of being overtaken by the banditti before they had reached the bounds of the foreft, which was of an amazing extent. Relations of what had happened to each amufed them till the morning be¬ gan tq dawn, when, ţo their inexpreflible joy, they found they had attained the boun¬ daries of the wood, and hoped they wera now fafe from purfuit» They journied without flopping,, bot ţp> refreíh themfelves and horfe¿» ali (the fue* 'I ceeding
ceeding day, at the clofe of which they ar¬ rived at the long avenue of ancient trees that led up to the gales of the Chateau de Malvini. They, wilh no ft.all pleafure, found thèmfJves at ti.e termination of theii journey ; and Rofaline, haraffed and fatigued, foon retired to the apartment prepared for he**, and endeavoured by fleep to recruit her exhaufted ftrength and fpirits. f
CHAP.
WBSÊBBsssssasasssB^Bssm
CHAP. VI. t ** Deep in the bofom of a wood, " Where Art had form'd tbe moated Ше, t( An antique caftle towering ftood, <* In Gothic grandeur rofe the pile." CARTWRldHT* HP JL HE Chateau de Malvini, though an ancient fabric, wore ftill an air of grandeur and magnificence; it was embofomed in trees, whole wide-fpreading branches al¬ moft conceaľd -the cluftering towers and high walls of the edifice itfelf, and gave to the
the interior of the building a gioomineís and folemnity that well fuited the tafte of the prefent poffeffor. Wounded deeply by misfortunes which had purfued her through life, the mind of Madame Malvini, fubdued by afflidion, fought comfort in retirement from the bufy feenes of the gay world. This feat of her anceftors had once been her favourite refi¬ dence ; but after the death of her daughter, in whofe beloved fociety many tranquil years had been fpent there, ihe quitted it, and would never have been able to revifit it, had not the profped of refiding there with a companion fo fuited to her tafte as Rofaline, been too inviting to be rejeded, and ihe once moré returned to the Caftle with a hope of enjoying the beauties around it. The apartments dedicated to the ufe of Rofaline, v had been formerly inhabited by the daughter of Madame Malvini : they confifted
confifted of a bedchamber and dreffing- room, with a fmall library adjoining, de- § lightfuily fituated on the pleafautefl fide of the chnteau, the windows commanding a beautiful and extenfive view of the diftant country* It was the delight of Rofaline to fit at her caicment till a Jare hour of the even¬ ing, and watch the fading landfcape till it w&s loft in the gloom of night, while ihe liftened to the evening lerenadé of the nightingales that inhabited numerous trees around, or to the lefs melodious founds of the rocks retiring to their leafy beds.— There was a rookery oppofite the windows ofthe drill· g room; and the murmuring founds that reached lier from its feathered inhabitants exadly fuited her prefent dilpo- fition for folitude. The family of Madame Malvini confifted, befides herielf and Roialine, of another member; this was a venerable old man, who
who conftantly refided at the chateau, and had for many years been Chaplain and Con¬ feffor to the family. He was a man of auftere countenance and rigid feverity of manners, but much revered by Madame for the benevolence of his heart and unerring reditude of condud ; and though Rofaline could not feel for him the filial affedion with which the good Le Vere had infpired her, ihe admired his charader, and ho¬ noured his virtues. When Madame Malvini firft prefented Rofaline to him, ihe faid— <c Уои íèe here, my dear chiid, the wor¬ thy De Rochefort, for whom, when you know more of him, you will feel the value I do.—And to you, my good friend," add¬ ed ihe, turning to him, " I need fay no¬ thing to recommend this fweet girl to your fiiendfliip, but that íhe is an adopted daugh¬ ter of mine, and will, 1 truft, fupply to .me the place oi my darling Carlina. Her vol. Ш* f countenance
countenance will fufllciently intereft you for her." After contemplating her features, with inflexible gravity, for fome tíme — u She reminds, me," faid he, " of former times." *' I knew fhe would," exclaimed Ma¬ dame, eagerly. " I was fure you would be ftruck with the refemblance, as î was." Rofaline did not underftand their mean¬ ing, b'it ihe had fre ¡uently been furprifed at the looks of eagernefs with which Ma¬ dame Malvini fometimes gazed at her. That excellent woman ftrongly recom¬ mended to her, uh n alone, to cultivate the friendlhip of De Rochefort, whofe con- verfatio г, the t 11 her, was an inexhaufti¬ ble fund of entei tainment and ufeful know¬ ledge, and whole extenfive reading and profound
profound ftudy would enable her to derive much benefit from it. The more fhe faw of him, the better flie every day liked him; that aufterity of man- nets which had at firft ftruck her, feemed to wear off*, and to be more the refult of long habit, imbibed from a religious zeal, than any native feverity.of difpofition. He feemed much attached to Rofaline, and frequently gave her his advice and in¬ ftrudions. He conftantly propofed her patronefs as an example of every virtue, and expatiated largely on the fortitude ihe had manifefted in the moil trying events of her life. Rofaline bluflied, and felt embarraffed, whenever this fubjed was ftarted : flie felt too confeious that there were ftill in her own heart many bitter remembrances which even the fociety of Madame failed to extir¬ pate, and which had baniihed from her f 2 manner
manner and countenance much of tha artlefs gaiety and innocent cheerfulnefs thai it had once been the dehght of her bene· fidors at Edgecumbe Hall to admire and cherifh. Had the heart of Rofaline been at eafe, her fituation was now exadly what flie could have wiihed. Loved by Madame Malvini as a daughter, her wiflies were an¬ ticipate ', and the domefl.es feemed to try .to vie with each oilier in fliewing her every mark of refped and aitention. To drive from her thoughts other and more baneful fubjeds, ihe endeavou.ed to a >j ly herfelf to bi oks. Her reading was guided by the good De Rechefort, and flie flattered her¬ feif that this new re.ource would effedutdly anfwer the pir ρ fe fov which her applica¬ tion to ftudy was defigned. She abri 'ged heifeif of her walh.t, and put limits to thtir br^th, that ihe might not be too long alone.
This
This was the fevereft punifliment of all, as the country round Malvini afforded feenes the moil pidurefque and beautiful. M wood, near a mile from the chateau, was one of her favourite reforts. It v/as on the declivity of an eminence, whofe fides were richly clothed with high overhanging cedars. Beyond, in a dell, were feveral fcat¬ tered cottages, amongft which was one that particularly attraded the attention of Ro¬ faline, as it differed from the others in the peculiar beauty of the fituation, as well as in external neatnefs of appearance. Though ignorant who were· its owners, flie had cften foimed a fcheme of walking to it, concluding its inhabitants were like thofe of the furrounding huts, only peafants. De Rochefort had, however, warned her of ex'ending her walks to too great a length, and h /J .jfien leproved herfor wandering. out alone at a late hour of the evening. But il.b was а luxury ñie foi ir. d Ч d'ffiV-dï to> deny nei leli, and o*: eu n.«uigeu .... aie «i- * i titi „ S
tations till increafing darknefs warned her to return home. Madame Malvini long and filently ob·* ferved ihe penfivenefs of Rofaline, and began to fear there was foaie more latent caufe for her evident melancholy than any flie was acqminted with. This turn of mind flie was well aware the folitude of Malvini was only calculated to encourage,, and ftie determined to propofe to her to take Magdelina with her in her walks, by way of companion, as well as guard. it With an intention of making this pro¬ pofal, lhe entered the dreifing-room of Rofaline one niorning, and fouwd her fit¬ ting thoughtfully at the window* Perceiv¬ ing ihe had been weeping, İhe afildion- ately enquired if ihe were well. Rofaline faintly anfwered in the affirma¬ tive. " Yo·*
" You are then," faid ihe, " unhappy. This folitary chateau, mydear Rofaline, is too lonely for you." " Oh no! no!" exclaimed Rofaline, ihocked at the ungrateful idea of appearing diffatisfied with her fituation. «« What then, my fweet friend," aiked Madame, " can be the reafon of that de¬ preffion of fpirits which I have with pain; obferved you indulge ?" Tears were the only anfwer of Rofalinev Perceiving ihe was greatly aff¿ded r Madame forbore to prefs her avowal of what íhe faw íhe fo anxioufly wifhed to conceal, and added—**· Though, frora your peculiar fituation, and feelings un¬ commonly fufceptible, I will allovv yoa have fome caufe to repine,, look around you, my dear Rofaline,, and compare your fate with that of thoufundt, of your fellow-creatures, and it will appear в 4 cunpanuiva
comparative felicity, Ceafe, then, to re¬ pine at misfortunes not incurred by your own fault, and in that felfrapproving idea you will find the comfort you feek. 1 am myfelf an example of this truth." She ceafed; but obferving the fixed attention with which Rofaline liftened to her, ihe continued— (i Born, as you well know, of an ancient Englifh family, one brother and myfelf ihared the united af· fedion of parents whofe happinefs was centered in their children. The early death of а revered mother was the firft forrow I ever felt; and» in confequence of bving left without any maternal friend, and my father being gone abroad in a public charader, I was fent, with a be¬ loved female friend of my own age, to finifh my education in a Convent in France. Here I remained till í was fent for to Ve¬ nice by my father, to be united to Signor Malvini. " Contrary
* сс Contrary to my own inclination, f was forced into a marriage totally repug¬ nant to my wiihes, an unfortunate attach¬ ment I had imbibed during my rcűdence in France having taken from me the power of beftowing- my heart where I gave my hand,—Thus compeľed to meet at the altar a man I had fcarcely ever fe^n, I endeavoured to refign* myfelf to- my defliny, and accompanied him, whom ît was then become my duty to obey,, to this Cattle. * ť The treatment I for many years en¬ dured I wiil pafs over in file псе, аз he by whole hand it was infiided, has long fince been called to anfwer for İl; but my do¬ med ic m il cry was much increafed by the misfortunes and, final'y, the ea lv death of the beloved companion of my youth, who í mentioned accompanied me to* France.- " At the death of Signor Malvini Ï fet¬ tled entirely here· During his lifetime С f 5 had
had been frequently obliged to accompany him to Venice, where he poffeffed a houfe and eflate ; but I now fondly hoped years of tranquillity were in flore for me, with that daughter who was the only offspring of my ill-fated marriage: but this alio was denied me, and a year fmce I configned her, blooming in youth and beauty, to an early grave. Yet, Heaven is my witnefs, not a murmur has arifen in my heart againft that decree which robbed me, in my lovçd Carlina, of every hope I had fo falla- cioufly formed. With fubmiffion I bowed to the bitter mandate, and yielded fór ever my only earthly treafure to the pcffeflion of him who gave it j ncr do I now wifh her return was poflible. Like me, file might, had ihe furvived, have been fated to have early in. youth every cheriflied hope de¬ ftroyed, every ideal felicity crufhed.. And can I then repine that flie is fpared years of fuffering? that, while yet innocent as fhe was lovely, ihe was recalled to the bofom of her Creator,, and fecured eternally againft
ágaínft all thofe feenes of anguifli whicb through this vale of woe have been the bitter portion of her mother? " No, my deareft Rofa n% I can dwell with fond delight on thole infantine grace 0 ,. that childifh fweetne's, and that more mature virtue which rendered tb * laft few years of my life more interefting ıhan any preceding one, without even a half for» cd- wifh to have her reftored to me: To- уош do I look up to fupply to me a· lofs whirh- till 1 met wilh you 1 deemed irreparable,— Oh let me not, my fweet Rofahne, ^xpe-~ rience a fecond difappointment!" Roftiline, with rrntiy tears thanked- Madame for this recital, and faithfully promifed to endeavour to overeo ,.e tae- melancholy that at times oppreffed her. Every day the charader oï Madame Malvini ι ofe in her efti»nation, ln ner example flie faw the noble conqueft of true religion and unbüfled геаюп over F 6 the;
the mind oppreffed by forrow; flie faw the fuccefs of their united efforts, and flie ftrove to emulate a condud which fo forcibly excited her admira¬ tion* In one of her converfations with De Rochefort on this fubjed, he told her the deatii of the young and beautiful Carlina had been attended with every circumftance that could aggravate the grief of her mo¬ ther for her lofs. She was fcarcely feven¬ teen when fhe attraded the attention, of a young Venetian Nobleman, who accident¬ ally beheld her at the Carnival, the only time flie ever appeared in public. Her fond mother had been prevailed on by a near relation of the late Signor, to go to' Venice, that her daughter might be grati¬ fied by a fight of this fplendid fliew. He was greatly ftruck by her perfonal charms, and not lefs delighted with her mental qualifications, which, on a more intimate acquaintance,
acquaintance, proved equal to her external attradions. He was a young Signor of unexception¬ able charader, and of family and fortune fuperior to her own. Thus there appeared no obftacie totheir mutual happinefs, which was to have been completed in a few weeks, when a fudden and violent illneís carried oflf the youthful Carlina, in the midft of that- anticipated felicity her fertile fancy had been bufy in planning. " Thus, Rofaline î ,f faid De Rochefort, €ζ you fee the futility of all fublunary plans. Poor Carlina thought her happinefs enfured beyond a poflibility of prevention; yet, in a few fliort hours, from the height of health and beauty flie was reduced to her original duft, · Let the awful leffon teach us to - corred the repinings of difcontent at thofe wayward e vents, which in the end will doubt¬ lefs work together for the accomplifiiment 5 of
of thofe mferutable ends we are not per¬ mitted to know." RofaUne retired to reft, with this conver¬ fation deeply imprinted on her mind ; and as flie entered the dreffing-room, whicb had once been the refort of the haplefs fubjed of it r fhe fighed deeply, and feat¬ ing herfelf by the cafement, recalled the difcourfe of De Rochefort to her mind.— The ftory of thc fair Garlina was deeply imprefled on her fancy, and taking her- pencils out, íhe threw the ideas it in*- fpired on paper in this form.· ELEGY. Front each fond fi iend for ever rorn^ To yon blefs'd manfion fled, Ah ! ihall we ever ceafe to mour» ¿ That fair Carlina' s dead? Ah 5 yes, when time has worn away,, And bid our forrows ceafe, And fympathy, that fweet allay, Has chai m' d the heart to peace. Bat*
Fate fnatcb*d her from this vale of woe, While blefâ'd with grace and truth j, Ere grief had taught her tear to-fiovr Or cloud her morn of youth. And fee—flie glides before my fight í She beckons me away To regions of eternal light And realms of endlefs day 1-
Thus far flie had written, when, drop*- ping the paper,, her mind deeply im¬ preffed with ideal images, and her fpirits deprefled,. ihe looked fearfully round her; but the faint light of her lamp, whidi glimmered in the focket, threw great part of the room into fliadow. Aihamed of her own weaknefs, ihe roufed.her fcattered cou* rage, and retired to reft. In fleep the fame images purfued her, and flie had fcarcely clofed her eyes ere ihe fancied a dazzling light broke through the gloom of night, and in the midft. a beautiful female figure prefented itfelf to her view. Long auburn ringlets flowed down her neck, and an azure veil
veil depended from her head over a robe of ethereal whitenefs. She gazed on Ro¬ faline, and then fpoke. « f Behold, Oh Rofaline!" faid fhe, « that Carlina, whofe memory, though unknown, is dear to'you. To you is delegated the facred taik of foothing the forrows of that be¬ loved mother from whom an eternal Judge has feparated me. Perform, I conjure you;, the facred office, and let the voice of Sym¬ pathy convey comfort· to her maternal bo¬ fom ; *fo ihall the felicity I now enjoy be,, in good time, your own." The voice ceaied, and the figure difap¬ peared, while a ftrain of celeftial melody founded on her fleeping ear. She awoke,. and ftarted up ; the mufic was ftiil heard-— it fwelled into a folemn ftrain, and then died away in the air. Sleep again over¬ powered her, and flie awoke no more till: the morning dawned, when the vifion of the night came to her recolledion,. as well as
as the mufic flie had heard fo diftindly on awaking. The latter íhe felt convinced was lhat of her friend Ariel, and from this circumftance concluded flie fhould foor* have fome of his invifible inftrudions. She had become fo inured to think of him as a monitor, that it would have giv^n her real uneafinefs had ihe been informed lhe never again ihould converfe with hirn, and ihe rejoiced m the idea that he was probably even now hovering near her*
CHAP·
CHAP. VII. «· Angut! 1 end hoary, o'er lhe floping dale '« The Gothic Abbey ι ears it» fculpturM tower ъ « ©uU through the roofs rcfounJs thé whiftling gale^- ** Dark ioltmde among the pillais lower." Mickle*. JTäT the diftance of about half a mile from íhe chufan flood th« ruins of an *Abbey; like the former, it was almoft fur¬ rounded vvith trees, but the fo'emn air of defolation it weie, and the hollow echo that reverberated back the found of her fteps on the ahnoft decayed pavements fkuck.
ftruck an awe on the heart of Rofaline which ihe wiflied not to reprefs. She loved to wander round the mouldering walls, and furvey the fallen graiideur of this once. magnificent edifice, whi.e fancy was bufy in ideally piduring to her imagination, former feenes of íeítivity which their now dreary apartments might once have wit¬ nefled. Here too had the tear of peni¬ tence once flowed, and the dread monaf¬ tic vow oft iffued from the hps of the feir votary at Religion's Ihrine. The re- mans of the high altar, at the upper end of the chapel, were ftill vilibe. Rofaline often paufed to contemplate the mementos of Monkiih fuperftttion which had once adorned i.u . " In this fpot," thought flie r " fome- £air Ophelia has perhaps pronounced thofe irrevocable vows which for ever baniflied her from a too-alluring world, Here may ihe have renounced for ever objeds aad fcjenes. which yet clung to her heait, and purfued
purfued her even to the dreary cell, where her dJly oriíons weie offered from a mind not yet abftraded fiom thofe endearing ties oí life which unite to form focial comfort, fufficiently to allow or that warm devotion that ought to animate the votary of Reli¬ gion." The imagina 1 ion of Rofaline was wrought upon by the picture her fancy had drawn» an the ideally iaw~ ** The t™ in of youths array'd in pureft white, ** a Who fcatter'd myrtle? as ihe pals'd along} <* Ί ht thoi'land lamps, that p iur'd a ftood of light, *' Ti e kiíV of peace from «ül the veííai throng j *< The gulden cer<(e.*¡> tofs'd with graceful hand, " Whofe fragrant brtaih Asabian odour ihed; w Cf mcik-ey'd unviee» the cu cling bund, «' With blooming chaplets wove around their bead.'* 4 From thefe fancied feenes flie would turn to the int r.ui of the Abbe ; and here the winged race, who had iormed their nefts in almoil
almoft every part of it, feemed to confider her as an intruder on territories of vvhich they had long held exciufive poffeflion. A traditional record, that it was the nightly haunt of unquiet fpints, had for m <ny years given them unmolefted permiflion to fre¬ quent it. No domeftic from the Caibe, or any peafant for many miles around, would go near it a'ter it was dark; but, deterred by no fuperftitious fears, Roialine frequently paffed it on her relurn from her evening*s ftroll, long after the decline of the fun, and often paufed to obfeive its pidu efque appearance, vvhen the moon had arisen, and d rted its pale beams over the defolated building. She had one evening, in the hour of twilight, entered what had formerly been the wà' îs fun ou nding the outer court of the Abbey, and refting on a fmall monu¬ mental ftone wh ch feemed to have been ert ded to perpetuate the memory of foaie former inhabitant of the edifice, though its
its infcription was quite effaced, and tht Tvild thorn had almoil overgrown İt, flie indulged the courfe, of a melancholy train of refledions, which the filence and folitude of the fpot infpired. Her heart h.d flown far from the dreary view be¬ fore her to one far different ! The be¬ loved feenes of Edoecumbe Hall vvere re- traced by memory, and every pleafure flic had there experienced came with added re¬ gret to her recolledion. " It is now," thought flie, " no longer the fame. Adolphus, though loft to the fentiments he once profefled, and perhaps happy in his new ftate of life, can never traverfe thofe well-remembered walks with¬ out recolleding her who was once the com¬ panion of them—her, for whom he would once have renounced family, friendi·, and fortune; but, having for a ihort time exiled herielf írom her native land, forgetful of every vow, regardlefs of every proteftation, he has baniihed her from his remembrance, and
дапЗ feeks with another the "happinefs he had once fancied he could only experience with îıer." A deep figh efcaped her, and fhe was fo 'completely loft in giving way to the powers of fancy, that, unconfcious of lier fitua¬ tion, flie liftened to a fweetly folemn ftrain that ftoîe by her, and feemed wafted on the air to her ear, without confidering it u as any thing more than common, tiil it was a third time repeated ίο near her, that it feem¬ ed to recai her fcattered thoughts, and lhe reco! leded, with lome iurprife, and more pleafure, the well-known melody of her guardian fylph. She determined not to incur, as formerly, the reproach írom him of confidering his j refence as an in¬ trufion: the ftrain had, therefore, no iouner -ceaied, than, looking round her, flie faid in a 'ia: ed voice— " May I hope the foothing melody to whicii
which ï have been liftening, announces the approach of my kind monitor?" " In what words,** returned the fame voice, v< * ihall I exprefs the emotion an appellation fo gratifying, yet fo unhoped for, gives to a mind, whofe firmnefs no mortal but yourfelf has power to dif¬ compofe." " Alas!" faid Rofaline, « I fear I have appeared very ungrateful to one to whom I am under obligations for which I muft ever retain in my heart the trueft gratitude, however infenfible I may feemj for am 1 not led to conclude that my efcape from the power of the banditti was effected by the fame hand who happily conducted me from St. Aivars? 1 ' " To that Power to whom we owe all," returned the fylph, " be your thanks given·; his wili it was that you fliould efcape the fnares laid for you, and 1 was fixed on to be the means of aciually extricating you from danger· Ahl who, fc* fuch a ¡ecompence as the
the confeioufnefs of having faved you from ill, wouid notencounter, if poifible, hazards infinitely worfe!" " Immortal as you profefs yourfelf," faid Rofaline, fmiling, 6ζ I find you are not divefted of every mortal propenfity, at leaft if flattery be peculiar to humanity; but though the two efcapes I have lately experienced were wonderfully efľeded, I cannot yet perfuade myfelf they were ac¬ compliihed by fupernatural means." " Incredulity," faid Ariel, " 1 find I am ftill deftined to meet; you almoft force meto regret that excellence of judgment and na¬ tive reditude of heart which, in fpite of terrific appearances and myfterious alarms, will not yield to the terrors of fuperftition, I will not, however, take merit to myfelf that I have no claim to. Your deliverance from the banditti, though through my means, was not efľeded by me, of which you might .be convinced, if you had zny recolledion of my perfon." " Not," feid Rofaline, " if your claim to immortality be fuch as you reprefent. I voL.in. c íhouíd
fliould imagine your ethereal charader would enable you to aflume any fhape you chufe/' u I find,'* replied her fylph, " I muft not argue wi h you ; and wete I to remain here much longer, fa cmated by that votce, I fl-ou'd bieak through every refolution | have formed, and perhaps become in one hour deteftable to my own heart forever." " Oh do not then/' laid Rofaline, rifing fiom her feat, " let me have the ielf- r epioach of fuch a heart to af.lwer for; nor, if I give you any uneafinefs by it, wiii í ever agaia mention the wiih I flill muft feci, to know to whom 1 am indebted for benefits I can never refled on but with the trueft grati¬ tude to their unknown author/' " To withftand eloquence like your's," returned the fylph, "I muft indeed be ihe immortal I vvould feem ; for, ala 1 »! my с aim to the tit ! e is no greater than yi. - o\n, thougb I muft ever, in one refped, confider myfelt fuperior to mofl other created beings the having proft if.diy undei my invifible guardianfliip one whofe form, like her mind, is
îs fo nearly allied to her kindred feraph. But tell me, has my laft advice been regar ied, and is that conqueft over the mind yet obtained, which I know is neceffary to enfure your felicity ?" Rofaline was filen t. " I fear," added Ariel, " much yet re¬ mains to be done. Oh could I but convey tranquillity to your heart—could 1 but illumine your countenance with f niles that once were wont to dwell there, how gladly would I rcfign each hope of earthly good to myielf! Every night fmce your refidence at Malvini have I hovered over your flumoers, and attuned my lute to airs oí the moft foothing melody, in the hope that they might help to reliare the compoiureof your mind. Bur adieu fo; to-niglit ; dov.ger awaits me, and 1 muft hallen." He ceafed, and commenced the farewel ftrain, when Rofaline faid-— g z "Will
" AVill you allow me to detain you while I aik when 1 may again be favoured with your converfation^ I will not hey prefence? Though do not ftay to hear me, if, as you fay, dan¬ ger of any fort awaits you." " Alas !" anfwered the voice, " how blind are you to your own attradions ! The dan¬ ger 1 hinted at awaits me herei İt lurks in every foft wortl you utter, mâ fortunately for me I do net behold you, or'tis probable one fmile vvould effedually be my ruin." u I find it is I who muft fiy," faid Rofaline, " if I be not impregnable to the attacks of vanity ι and perhaps if you coun¬ fel for adulation, our future meetings may as well be avoided." " How juftly do you reprove me !" return¬ ed the fylph; " and I hope fome not very diftant opportunity will offer to convince you how far, how very far I am from wifh ing to offend you. This place will 1 think be a favourite fpot of your's, and hcre^ perhaps, I may fometimes have a chance of converfing with you. Suffer me now, ere I depart, to affure
affure you, once more, that the chief and favounte objcd of my life is to guard you from ill, to warn you frorn impending clan¬ ger, and teach you how to avoid it. My perfon, were you to behold it, would not, I am convinced, make your fentiments towards me more favourable, though I here repeat what I once before avowed, a time may come when it may be prefented to your view; till when I muft remain invifible : but what¬ ever be my external form, the predominant fentiments of the heart it enclofes, till it ceafes to beat, muft ever be the moil un¬ feigned anxiety for your happinefs, and the fincereftand moft difinterefted determination to promote it at every hazard that threatens my own/ 1 The voice here ceafed—the mufic was renewed, and again was quiet, before Ro¬ faline perceived that it was much later than ftie was accuftomed to walk, and that the moon had been fome time arifen. She now turned her fteps towards the chateau, and before ihe reached it, met two of the fer- G 3 vants,
vants 5 who were fent by Madame to feck her. De Rcchffort had oi ien hinted his difa; probation of her ilrolling vt fo late an hour among the ruins oi the Abbey, which, though it was too near the chateau to be a convenient haunt for banditti, was yet a fit refuge for the rambling wanderers with which the country abounded. She determined to excuie her late return, by faying ihe had wandered further than ihe intended. The fecret of her fylph had been hitherto preferved facred, and her word had been given to herfelf that it fhould continue fo till time developed the myftery in which he wrapped himfelf. That he was an earthly lover, ftie no longer doubted ; yet how he fhould be enabled to perfevere in a conftant attendance upon her, flie could not com¬ prehend. On entering the faloon, on her return» fhe was furprifed by the appearance of a ftranger*
ftranger, a youn» lady who flie was in¬ formed by Madame was a niece of De Rocheforťs írom Venice, vvho was come to payan annual vifit to her uncle at Mai- vii.i. She was a fprightly Italian, of gay manners, and herned charmed at ihe fight of Rofahne, whom (lie contrived to tell in a- whifper, unheard by Madame or her uncle, that ihe was enchanted to find one rational human being iu that difmal abode. « Ah!" faid fhe, " do you not truly pity me? From all the pleafures of life am í conftrained for a whole m mth every year to abfent myfelf, and be fecluded in this dreary Caftle with the rigid Ma lame Malvini, and my more auftere uncle!" Rofaline fmiled, but faid that the con¬ verfation of Madame and De R« chefort was to her fo entert ining, that fhe never yet had found the chateau dreary, or had been led to regret the lofs of gayer parties. о 4 She
She now difcovered that this vifit of Signora De Rocheforťs to Malvini was a great conftraint on her inclination, which would have led her to refide always at fome place of refort for the gay world. She had betn . seated at Paris, where ihe firft im- bibvf» ideas of gaiety and diffipation, and frotn thence came to refide at Venice, without a mother, and with a iather, the elder brother of De Rochefort, who was too old and too fond of her to check her youthful gaiety. Their dependance on the fortune of De Rochefort made them, how¬ ever, court his favour, though he much difapproved the education his niece had re¬ ceived, as well as the levity of her man¬ ners. The aufterity of her uncle was ill reliíhed by the young Signora, and lhe always re* joiced when the term of her ftay at Malvini was expired·
Before
Before the entrance of Rofaline, flie had been informed by Madame of her refidence there, and by her uncle was told flie was a model b) which fhe would do well to cor¬ red her manners, and guide her condud : flie therefore regvrded Rofaline rather with eyes of envious fear than pleafure, little expeding from fuch perfedion to be treated on terms of equality, and was not a little furprifed at the fweetnefs of her man¬ ners, and the unaffeded elegance of her ad¬ drefs. Naturally herfelf of a good temper and difpofition, but filled with ideas of her own beauty and wit, which a train of acU mirers had told her were irrefiftible, her deportment was rather too volatile for the prefent unfettled ftate of Rofaline's fpirits, and her converfation ran too much on the pleafures of Paris and Venice to intereft her who preferred the folitude of Malvini to all the gay delights they offered. She liftened, however, with good hu¬ mour to all her defcriptions of the galas, с 5 regattas,
regattas, and ferenades given by her nu¬ merous lovers, of the fplendour of the Ve¬ netian entertainments, and the unceafing round of pleafure they afforded, without feeling one wifli to participate in them,. and rejoiced at her arrival, becaufe flie . could now renew her walks without fear of being reproved for going alone, though Mademoifelle De Rochefort vvas not exadly the companion fuited to her tafte; —ftie wanted a relifh for thofe beauties in their rambles which Rofaline loved to contem¬ plate, and only fpoke of them, to contraft them with the elegances flie had been com¬ pelled to leave behind her. Rofaline was fometimes almoft tempted to envy her thoughtlefs companion that want of refledion which had apparently fe¬ cured her from thofe attacks on her peace her own too fufceptible dilpofition had fubjeded her to; but a moment's recol¬ ledion recalled the half- formed repining, and reminded her of that beautiful fenti- 4 ment
ment of the fublime rnd pious. Poet of her own countiy— " A foul whhout reflection, like a pile u Without inhabitants, to ruin runs.'* Signora De Rochefort was fatigued by her journey or the preceding day, and the evening after her arrival Rofaline walked out alone. Returning after funfet from a walk in the wood, where parties of the peafants were dancing and amufing them¬ felves after the fatigues and heat of the day, ihe entered the Abbey, to fetch from one of the upper turrets that was ftill left whole, her drawing utenfils, having left them there the morning before, when ihe had fketched a romantic view from one of the windows. As flie afcended the ruined ftaircafe, flie fancied fhe heard fteps over her head. She pauied, but the found ceafed, and flie entered the turret. Having gathered her implements toge¬ ther, ihe was again dctccnding the ftairs, g ò when
when İhe diftindly heard fome perfon walk¬ ing in an adjoining apartment. De Roche- fort's warnings came to her recolledion, and fhe was making the beft of her way home, when the remembered it might per¬ haps be her aeriai fnend, who was waiting her arrival, and ihe returned to the room, and placed herfelf at the window. She ftood for fome minutes, but no mu¬ fic reached her ear—all was fii ent, aod flie wailed İn vain til! the increafing darknefs warned her to depart. As ihe was once more about to defcend, the fame found reached her, accompanied by a deep figh reiterated near her. Her courage again failed, and ihe re¬ turned to the turret. She had icarceiy re¬ entered it, when fome perfon came out of an adjacent room, and defcended the flairs. She ftood at the difmantled cafe¬ ment, and in a moment beheld the figure of a maa iffue from the bottom of the turret,
turret, and, paffing the broken walls, dif¬ appear among the trees. She now haftened with all the fpeed in her power to the chateau, where ihe was cautious of relatins; what ihe had г сеп> left íhe fliould be prohibited walking fo late again.
CHAP.
CHAP. VIII.
* '< Patience and Sorrow ftrove Which ihould exprefs her goo<!lie(t. You huve feer. Sunmine and rain at once í her fmiles and tears Wete like a bettei' May: thofe happy fmiles That play'd on ner ripe lip, feern'd noi to know What guefts were İn her eyes, which parted thence^ As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In bi ief, Sorrow would be a rarity moft belov'd, if all Cculo ib become ir,'* Shakespeare,
İT was fome time before Rofaline could prevail on her ne^v companion to enter with her the wails of the ruined Abbey, which, frequent
frequent and long as had been her vifits to Malvini, ñie had never vifited, nor, when ftie could avoid it, even paffed in the day¬ time, from the fears which the fuperfti¬ tious tales oí the fervants concerning it had impreffed on her mind. She wondered, flie faid, at the prefumption of Miis Melvan, in daring to explore apartments which it was fo well known were tlie haunts of un¬ quiet fpirits; and as they one night ap¬ proached it, in returning from their even¬ ing ramble, repeated a number of ftories of different appearances, which had been feen there. Not all the terrific defcriptions flie gave were, however, of fufficient weight to deter Rofaline from entering to view the effed of the fetting fun on a favourite landfcape, which one of the upper windows pre¬ fented to the eye. The Signora in vain remonftrated, and declared flie dared not accompany her. Fear, which her reafon told
told her there wøs not any real foundation for, Rofaline would willingly have yielded to ; but telling her, with a laugh, (lie would then go and encounter the ghofts alone, ihe turned towards the mouldering remains ofa portico, from which a door opened to the cloifters. Still more afraid of being left alone, Mademoifelle De Rochefort fol¬ lowed in trembling filence. Every ftep they took through the cloifters flie looked fearfully round, and held faft by the arm of Rofaline, till they reached the ftaircafe by which they were to afcend to the room ftie wiflied to vifit. Here, while Rofaline ftood at the window, viewing, with new delight, the glorious proiped of the declining fun, flie fat down on a heap of old lumber in one corner of the room, expoftu- atı ng on the folly of being out fo late, wandering in fuch a dangerous place, and every moment ex¬ claiming—
« Did
" Did not you hear a noife?—There!— I am furc I heaid a door open 1" Rofaline liftened not to her foiiloquy^ noi noticed the many queftions and enqui¬ ries addrefled to her. She never beheld the beautiful objed now prefent to her view, but it brought Henrietta to her mind, with all the regret ibr her fociety her ideas ever gave birth to; flie was not, however, left long to enjoy her refledions—her compa¬ nion foon interrupted her by rifing, and crying in a louder voice— " Come, Mifs Melvan, are not you ready to go? I wifli we were out of this horrible place.—Oh holy Mary ! what's that ?" Rofaline ftarted too, and felt fomething like fear at hearing the loud clofing of a door in the Jower part of the building, fucceeded by fteps. They feemed to approach,
approach, and Mademoifelle De Rochefort, chngingto Rola. ine, cried— " I knew how it wou 'd end ! í have no doubt we (lull hi th be muidcredl—Oh holy Vi gi*,| here it со.пеП" * c P¡ay aíľuiix more iortitude!" faid Rofahne j *« I unit there is nuthing tobe fo much alarmed at." " Oh, don't tell me fo 1" cried her ter¬ rified friend. " Do you not hear it ap¬ proaching?** The fteps were now afcending the flairs ; fometimes they flopped, as if the perfon were liftening, and then again proceeded till they at length reached the door. The Signora had now funk with her head on the ihoulder of Rofaline, who, though fhe had no dread of beholding a fupernatural being, was not a little alarmed at the idea of meet¬ ing a ftranger in a place fo folitary.
While,
While, fufpended by fear, flie ftood irre¬ foiute, fupporting on one arm her frightened companion, the door was flowly opened, and gave admitt mce to the fime figure fne had leen iflue from ihe turret on a former night.—She had now calk d all her courage and reib! ut ion to her aid, in cafe oi that aififtanee beins wanted ; but ere a word had iffued from her lips her own name was re¬ iterated, in a tone of amazement, by the ftranger whom (he had íurveved fome mo- ments before. In her turn, ihe recognifed with no fmall aftoniihment the perfon of Mr. Warford. With furprife equal to his own, fhe re¬ peated his name in accents of amazements and when the firft mutual wonder had Ceafed, he enquired if fhe were a refident at the Caftle of Malvini. She replied in the affirmative, and Mademoifelle, who had flood by in mute amazement, now reminded herit was very late, and nearly dark. Warford
Warford aiked if he might be allowed to attend them home; and, anxioufly wirhing to learn fome tidings of her Englifli friends, fhe readily accepted his offer. In anfwer to her enquiries concerning Lord and Lady Delford, he faid that his Lordfhip had been for fome time in a declining ftate of health, and when he quitted town, fix months be¬ fore, they were gone into Wales, to be prefent, as was generally believed,at the mar¬ riage of Sir Walter Edgecumbe's younger fon. Fortunately for Rofaline, it was too dark for either Warford or her young friend to difcern in her countenance the emotions this intelligence gave birth to. It paffed without comment, for flie was wholly un¬ able to make any, or to aik farther refped¬ ing England. With no fmall furprife, ihe heard from Warford that he was an inha¬ bitant or the little cottage flie had fo much admired in the dell beneath the wood, hav¬ ing
ing been advifed to vifit Italy for the benefit of his health. " And do vou refide there alone?" aiked Rofaline. 54 Ah, nol" returned he; " an oniy and beloved fifter, who, like me, is the vidim of misfortune, has, with an infant family, quitted her native country. For the fake of my affedionate Eliza, who was born to expedations far different, I regret the total folitude to which we are condemn¬ ed ; but her ovvn woes have taught her to bear, without repining, the hard lot to which ihe feems deftined." iC If fociety will in any degree tend to alleviate thoie forrows," faid Rofaline, ť< may I hope my endeavours will be ac¬ cepted by your fifter to enliven her retire¬ ment ?" In terms of lively gratitude Warford ex¬ preifed his thankfulnefs for the oñer, and declared the pleafure it would give him to be
be allowed to introduce his fifter to her. He accompanied them to the end of the cedar avenue, and after receiving from Ro¬ faline a promife to vifit the cottage on the following day, he quitted them. Their adventure was recounted by the Signora to Madame Malvini with all its attendant circumftances; and when the former underftood this acquaintance of Rofaline was a young man, ihe interro¬ gated her concerning him. Rofaline readily replied to her enquiries, and related the manner in which he firft became known to her. She added, that ftie feared fome additional misfortunes had befälen hiui ünce fhe left England, from tir inereafed gloom on his countenance, and rddtd dejeâion of his looks, though even 1 1 en his cynical manners were pro¬ verbial in the ciicles he frequented. Even her tnnfent knowledge of him during the ilioit time lhe had fpent in the great world, had
had given her an intereft in hini ihe had never felt for any indifferent perfon before; and this accidental meeting m a foreign eli.nate had revived the wiih (he had for¬ mei ly felt to pierce thiough the ni) fiery that Ieemed to envelope his fate. The adive mind of Rofaline loved to have fome fubjed to intereft it; and, en- grofled by her recent encounter with War- ford, it occupied her thoughts long after flie retired to reft, and drove from thú.u lefs pleafing ideas. She hoped to have it in her power to footh the forrows of his fifter, and in her's to alleviate his ovvn. With theie refledions, (lie arofe on the following morning, and havin« imparted lo Madame her intention to vilit the cottage, a fervant was о dered io attend her. It was too iar to walk alone, and Roialine knew thc Sgnora would iiad fo little pleaiure in the excuifion, that the lorboie to invite her. The
The beauties of a fine fpring morning were ever fuflicient attradion to Rofaline to induce her to quit her repofe at an early hour, and frequently had ihe taken long rambles ere the Signora had quitted her apartment. Both Madame and De Rochefort were early ri fers ; but the former employed that time in general in regulating her domeftic concerns, and the latter in profound ftudy. The venerable ecclefiaftic, however, had greatly commended Rofaline for devoting the time to the promotion of health ; and fometimes had met her on her return, and explained to her the nature and properties of the wild plants which fhe had gathered in her walk. Hewas an adept in the ftudy of botany; it had for years, he faid, been a relaxation to his mind when opprefled by other and deeper ftudies. He perceived the genius of Rofaline to be quick and extenfive, and took great delight in exer¬ cifmg it. She
She had informed him of the motive of her prefent vifit, ancl he had gravely praifed the humane intention by which flie was aduated. As ihe paffed the Caftle gates he met her, and accompanied her part of the w ay to the cottage. He enquired further refpeding the objeds of her pre¬ fent vifit; and when íhe mentioned her fufpicion that fome great though unknown calamity had driven Warford and his fifter from the haunts of men—** Some author of your own country," faid De Roche- fort, " has faid that * benevolence is the firft great duty of man ;* and if that charity which merely relieves pecuniary diftrefs, and extends no further than to bodily comforts, be fo highly to be rated, how fluii *ле eftimate that godlike quality which tends to footh the lacerated mind, and to infufe the precious balm of fym¬ pathy into the bofom where the fell íhaf t of Ingratitude, that marble-hearted fiend, may have pierctd, or where the fatal hand of vol. ш. h Death,
Death, by tearing for ever from it the dar¬ ling objeds of its fondeft regard, has fixed a curelefs wound ! Go, my good cbild," added he, paufirg, " I muft iow leave you; go, and may the voice of unfit- Hed innocence, the confolation of a pure, uüfpotted mind pour comfort into the heait of yon haplefs mourners, and may he who infpired the divine idea, aid you in the faci ed uíkľ' Saying this, he gently turned from her, and purfued his way back to the chateau, while, deeply affeded with the parting fpeech of De Rochefort, Rofaline walked flowly ¿»wards, meditating on the excellence oi a charader which every day v/as raifed in her eftimation. She had fcarcely entered the wond when flie beheld Warford, vvho was taking his morning ramble. Difmiffing the fervant, therefore, flie advanced to meet hitn. He feemed delighted to behold her, and agiin avowed
avowed the gratitude he felt at her amiable readinefs to footh the forrows of thc afflided· As they walked towards the cottage, by a romantic narrow path leading from the wood by a gentle afcent down the emi¬ nence, a fweet boy of five years old came running from the houfe to meet them. " This dear child," faid Warford, taking his hand, * c is my eldeft nephew, who, with three younger, have accompanied their mother and myfelf hither." Rofaline, who was paflionately fond of children, was delighted with the fweet boy. <c Have they then,** faid flie, u no fa¬ ther?" She almoft immediately repented having aiked the queftion, fcr the countenance of h % Warford
"Warford was overfpread whh a deep gloom* He fliook his head expre fli vedy. Ci Ah, Mifs Melvan!" faid he, " may -you never know half the forrow endured by the mother of thefe poor innocent babes! Young, rich, and lovely, Eliza ieemed once to have the whole world at her feet; yet in a few fliort years we fee her, while yet blooming in beauty, configned to folitude and forrow, a prey to heart-rending woe and never-ceafing regret. But though wretchednefs feems to have peculiarly mark¬ ed her for its own, not a murmur ever meets my ear. Patience and refignation do not more ftrongly charaderize her countenance than aduate her condud; and while her in¬ fants are round her, and ihe fees them in health, unconicious of the fufferings of her wiio gave them birth, ihe learna to appre¬ ciate the bleflings íhe yet retains, and hum¬ bly repines not at others wrefted from her, though in the brother, who ought to fet her the example, lhe beholds all the ago¬ nizing
nizing pangs of the keeneft niifery daily ηκ their envenimed flings in his heart—never, On never to be eradicated İ" Rofaline glanced her eyes on his counte¬ nance as he fpoke,and faw all that wildnefsand anguifh in his looks which flie had formerly* once before obferved in hi n. They were, fortunately, juft arrived at the termination of their walk. The fcene which prefented 1 itfelf on her entrance into the cottage, fur¬ prifed and penetrated the heart of Roia¬ line. A boy, younger than the one fhe had feen, was playing on the floor with a little girl who fat at the feet of their mo¬ ther, while their beautiful parent, with an infant in her arms, fat in a melancholy atti· tude by a table. She would have arifen at her entrance, but Rofaline prevented her. The latter gazed with aftoniihment and admiration at the fifler of Warford, whofe form anď h 3 coun-
countenance were more captivating than any flie had ever before beheld. She ap¬ peared to be not more than tvvo or three- and-twenty; the dazzling luttre of her fine eyes was dimmed by forrow, and the beau· tiful tint of her complexion changed to a pallid hue, which, though it deprived her of the bloom fhe had once pofleffed, had rendered her uncommonly interefting. Her face feemed the emblem of woe and de¬ jedion, and the unbidden tear would fink to her eye, though checked by the philofo- phic voice of Reafon. Nature had implant¬ ed in the breaft of the youthful EUza every noble principle; and though flie had not been exempt from error, it was of that fort which could not call in queftion the goodnefs of the heart, but rather was the refult of a negieded education. Now, fevereiy humbled by misfortune, ihe meekly fubmitted with perfed refignation to her deftiny, and oniy for her children's fake lamented its bitteraefs, Warford
Warford took the hand of Rofaline, and joining it with that of his fifler —" In Mifs Melvan, my Eliza," faid he, " you behold the young lady I mentioned to you yefterday—one who, uncontamirated by the world of faihion, can quit its plea¬ fures at the «all of humanity, to footh ths woes of the mourner, or to obey the divine call of benevolence." Eliza could not reply; flie only faintly attempted to articulate fome fentence, which died away unpronounced on her lips, and gently preffed the hand flic held. Warford placed a feat for her next that of Eliza, and then Jeft them together.— The uncommon affability and fweetnefs of Rofaline could not fail of infpiring admira* tion and confidence, and the reftraint whicii at firft appeared in the behaviour of the young and lovely Mrs, Manv iile foon be¬ gan to wear off. Siie lamented the ill health h 4 of
of her brother, wliich, united with other motives, had induced them, ihe faid, to leave England fix months iince, immedi¬ ately after the birth of her youngeft chiid. Eager, for various reafons, for thc jour¬ ney, ihe had undertaken it before ilie had fufficiently regained her ftrengih ; and over¬ come with the fatigue of travelling fo far with a young family, her own health and fpirits had funk under it. " The folitude in which we live," conti¬ nued flie, " though certainly givi g me lei¬ fure to refled muft add to my internal mifery9 is yet better fuited to my preient fituation than any other place would be; and in my brother's prefence I endeavour to afluiré a fortitude which, when alone with my children, whofe infantine forms recai paft feenes to my memory, is very near for!aking me." In Warforďs praife flie was enihufiaftic. « Oh
«* Oh Mifs Melvan! 0 fail ihe, " hfe has the nobleft heart that ever adorned the* breaft of humanity. It is fo med to be¬ nefit mankind, and yet an early acquaint¬ ance with calan. ity has driven him from the haunts of men, and baniihed him from his native country;—for never, Oh nev -г! can he again know happinefs but by name, and the f;te of his fifter feems drawn by Providence in colours equally gloomy." Rofaline endeavoured to comfort her, and faving tbat when better knowu to her, fhe flattered herfelf ihe fliould be entitled to her confidence, ihe arofe to take her leave. Her new friend thanked her warmly for- her vifit, and entreated, if not too gieat an intrufion ön her time* an eariy repeti¬ tion of it. She returned to the chateau, charmed H 5 vrith
with the haplefs Mrs. Manvilie, and much interefted in her fate.
CHAP. IX. '« Then go, fallacious Hope! aJíeu í '« The fiattering proípeíl I refign j ** And bear from my deluded view " The blifs that iitvtr muft be mine." CARTWRrcllT. * URING their evening ramble on the fame day in which Rofaline paid her firft vifit to the cottage, Mademoifelle de Rochefort rallied her on her late difco¬ vered fwain, aa ihe termed Warford — , ;
D
« Not,"
" Not," added fhe, " but I am ex¬ ceffively partial to the Englifli—much more fo, indeed, than to my own nation." " That is furely very extraordinary," re¬ plied Rofaline, " particularly as I think E have heard you fay you have known very few natives of England." c * Very few indeed," anfwered the Sig¬ nora, " for till I beheld you, I was never on any terms of intimacy with more than* one Englifli perion." " And has an individual then," faid Ro¬ faline, " given you fuch an opinion of our nation in general?" " Oh!" exclaimed the Signora, in ar voice of enthufiafm, while her large dark eyes fparkled with animation, "ifl thought all the Englifli were like him and you, with delight, and wiiliout one figh of regrets would I quit Italy for ever, to refide amongft them." " It is ornale friend then," faid .Rofaline, fmiling, " who has given you fo favourable an idea of his countrymen!" . h 6 The
The Signora bluflied, and was filent a few moments; at length—" I have been I hardly know how,° faid íhe, * c led una¬ wares to mention the fubjed, and will there¬ fore explain the whole, though on no ac¬ count muft it be known to my uncle or to Madame Malvini," She then added that flie became ac¬ quainted with the Englifli Chevalier who· had fo ingratiated himfeif into her favour by means of her brother, who was a diifi¬ pated young man, and had nearly broken the heart of her father by his libertine condud. Having ruined himfeif by gam¬ bling, he had been thrown into prifon, where he muft ftill have languifhed, had not this generous Engliíhman reieaíed him, and difcharged his debts. In confequence of having thus liberated her brother, he had viiited her father, and flie had befides met him ac the houfe of
of a rela4ion, where fhe was a frequent vifitor. u And is he now at Venice?*' afked Ro¬ faline. " Oh no ľ* replied Emilia, " he has left Italy nearly two years fmce, and I be¬ gin now to be afraid I fliall never again fee him; but never—Oh never will he be ob¬ literated from my memory ! Oh couid I deferibe how amiable, How fafcinating he was, how far fuperior to any one I ever be¬ fore or fince beheld, you would be en¬ chanted as 1 was I Alas, Mifs Melvan ! you iittle imagine how much I have felt on his account ; but I have now quite bid adieu to hope, and difcarded it from my bofom, for too furely I ihall never more behold hirm'* Rofaline, from the flighty manners of the gay Emilia, had little fuppofed that in one refped tiieir fituations were fo fimilar; and fhe internally reproached herfelf for having foraieriy
formerly accufed the Signora of an indif¬ ference of difpofition lhe now found flie had not poifeffed. They were juft arrived at the ruined Abbey, and having fatigued themfelves by a long walk, Rofahne propofed they ihould reft there. Though never very wihing to enter it, Mademoifelle de Rochefort did not objed, as it was yet daylight, and flie was aihamed to incur again the ridicule of Rofaline by betraying her fears, though (he caft many a terrified look aroimd as they traverfed the cloifters. In a finali room at the top of a ftaircafe at one end öf them, they fat down; and Mademoi¬ felle had revived the fubjed of her Englifli friend, when the opening of a door appa¬ rently cLfe to them, interrupted her. " It is probably Mr. Warford,*' faid Rofaline.
She
She had fcarcely pronounced the word& when the door of the room they were in> was gently opened 5 they did not fee by whom, for the perfon inftantly retreated. Rofaline was furprifed, but flill thoughb it muft be Warford, who had not recog¬ nifed them, and had retreated, imagining them to be ftrangers. lt was, however,. fome time before fhe could prevail on the Signora to move from her feat till it began to grow duik, when flie gave her the alterna¬ tive of returning to the chateau, or remain¬ ing there alone. She now arofe,; and Rofaline was clofing the door, and preparing to follow her down the ftaircafe, vvhen flie fuddenly heard a confufed noife over her head, and a folded paper immediately fell from above at her feet. She caft her eyes towards the upper ftaircafe, which afcended to the t^p of the building from whetice the pape ι ieemed to kll, but could fee nothing. Hearing the 3 voice
Vjoice of her companion below calling to ber, fhe haftened on, and taking up the paper,, found it addreffed to herfelf. Surprifed and confufed, íhe hurried down the ftairs, half wifliing to ftay, and not doubting but it was the fylpn, who, not having been able to ipeak to her, had taken this method of conveying to her his fenriments. She had no fooner reached the chateau than flie haftened to her apaitment, where, on opening the paper, flie íound it contained the following words;— " Beware, Oh Rofaline ! of venturing (йопе л for the prefent, to any diftance from the chateau; particularly avoid the wood, and the dark avenue on the north fide of it ; they are both replete with danger. Till· further notice, therelore, forbear to wander unattended." Startled at the intelligence the myftic note conveyed, £he could form no idea, whence
whence could be the danger hinted at : from the Baron or Count it muft proceed', and from violence ihe thought herfelf fe¬ cure, refolving never to go out alone, but, when fiie went to the cottage, to take a- fervant always with her. She had promifed to fpend the following , afternoon with Warford and his fifter, and ihe could not excufe herfelf without alledge ing fome reafon for it to them as well- as to' Madame Malvini. After fonie confidera¬ tion, flie determined to avoid the places mentioned, and inftead of going through* the dark avenue, to pals by another fide of the wood. She fulfilled her engagement, attended* by one of the domeftics, who came in the evening to fetch her, accompanied by the Signoia. Withouc afligi. ing any particu¬ lar reatou, flie avoided the interior of the wood and the cedar avenue, and reached the chateau in iafety v more than, ever- delighted
delighted vvith the interefting filler of War¬ ford, from whom fhe had learned that an unhappy marriage was the origin of ali lier fucceeding misfortunes. Her gentfenels v. f manners» and the franknefs with wliich Hie avowed her own errors had been gre- 1 in uniting herfelf contrary to the advice and entreaty of her fnend:, charmed the inge¬ nuous nature of Rofaline, and ftrongly at¬ tached her to the amiable Eliza and her familj'. Οα the following day Mademoifelle de Rochefort Lad a cold, which confined her to the houie; and late in theevening, Rofa¬ line iiaving been walking in a í mall planta¬ tion in the front of the manfion, from which a wicker, opened to the oak avenue, flie paffed through it, vvith an intention of ftrolling as far as the end ot the walk. Her favourite dog. which Madame had given her, who always attended her in her rambles, having run forward, flie loft fight of him amongft fome thick bullies that grew at a diftance,
a diftance, and unwilling to return with¬ out him, ihe waikcd forward, hoping to iec 4 him, but he did not appe-ir, t Lough ine repeatedly called fo him; and alarmed left he fliould be loft, ihe had thou^htleifly continued to follow him, till flie found her¬ feif within fight of the dark avenue. Its fingularly gloomy appearance, from whence it derived its name, fuddenly recalled to her mind the warning ilie had received. She was turning back, when fhe beheld her little favourite barking violently a confider¬ able v\ay down the avenue. It was now quite duik, and the branches of the tall trees uniting, formed a gioom fo profound, that it rendered tbis waik quite impervious to the rays of the fun. The evening was cloudy, and, joined to the fo¬ litary appearance of ihe fpot, feemed to ftrike a damp on the fpints of Roialine :— it was in vain ihe called to the dog; re* gardieis of her criés, hc ftill continued to, bark with violence. Shq
She now turned back, but had fcarcely proceeded ten fteps, when her arms were forcibly feized by fome perfon behind her. The fudden violence of the adion made her feream aloud; and before fhe could re¬ cover the alarm it caufed, íhe found herfelf dragged back. In a moment the was fur¬ rounded by three men, who affifted tlie one behind her to carry her along with fuch ra¬ pidity, that in a few minutes íhe found herfelf in one of the thickeft parts of the foreft· The wretches by whom flie was carried, had their faces concealed by maiks; and, while exhaufted by ftruggling, they irrefift¬ ibly forced her on. They arrived at an open¬ ing in the wood to a path that İhe knew led to the road. Here flie beheld feveral horíês, on one of whkh was another man, behind whom his confederates endeavoured to feat her. №r extreme terror feemed to lend her new ftrength, inftead of di veiling her of it; and the violent refiftance ihc made rendered
rendered it very diftuult to heraffa'lants to effed their intention. All her ftruggles, however, appeared vain; the folitude and lonelinefs of the plate made it peculiarly proper for purpofes of horror, and, almoft fpent with the ftruggles (he. had already in- effedually made, flie felt compelled to ceafe, and yield to fuperior force, when a vioient noife reached her affrighted ears, and three men appeared galloping towards them through the open part of the wood. " Haften, haften I" faid he, who fat on the horfe ; but revived hope feemed to give frefli vigour to the before aimoft exhaufted ftrength of Rofaline, and, renewing her cries with greater violence than ever, before they could accompliih their purpofe, the men were come up to them. Fear feemed now luddenly to ftizeon thofe who held her, while the man on horfeback, who appeared to dired them, enraged at their delay, leaped
leaped from his need, and was immediately engaged by one of the· ftrangers. All was now confuiion; two of thoie who had affifted in bringing Rofaline, were obliged to quit their hold, and the other two voluntarily left her to go to the aid of their comrades: but ihe was fo weakened by her exertion, that (he funk to the ground on their leaving her. Reco¬ vered by the hope of efcape from their hands, the at length arofe, and endeavoured to fly from the fcene of combat; but had fcarcely arrived at the avenue when thc found of a horfe in puriuit reached her ear. Overcome again by alarm, (he now refted her head againft a tree, unable to proceed. The horfeman in a moment overtook her, and haíiily alighting, approached her. She remained tpeechleis and immoveable till a voice, not unknown to her, faid—
" Be
*< Be not alarmed, Madam; I truft you are now in peifed fafety." His eyes met her's as he fpoke, and hè fuddenly exclaimed— " Can it be poffible !·—and have I indeed been fo fortunate as to afiift İn refcuing Mifs Melvan?" Rofaline, who had, with inexpreffible delight, recognifed the voice and features of Edmund Le Vere, now felt all her courage reuve. She enquired what had become of the áreteles who had affailed ber, and learned that their principal was wourded, and that the reft had placed him on liis horfe, and rode off with him. He now aiked how far they were ftom Malvini, and how flie came to be alone at fi) late an hour in that folitary fureft. She readily ieplied to his queftions, and find¬ ing they were near a mile from Malvini, Edmund
Edmund propofed íhe fhould mount hib horfe. The fervant foon came up to them, and Rofaline being feated behind Edmund, they proceeded towards the cha¬ teau. Iii purfuance of his promife, having ac¬ companied his regiment into Italy, Ed¬ mund had obtained ieave of abfence to vifit Malvini; and in paifing the wood, had been furprifed by the appearance of a man on horfeback, who, riding up tohim, enquired if he did not hear fcreams iffue from the interior of the foreft. They liftened, and diftindly heard the founds of diftrefs. Led on by the ftranger, Edmund and his at¬ tendant plunged into the thickeft part of the wood, and coming to a more open fpot,* arrived juft as the ruffians were endeavour¬ ing forcibly to feat Rofaline on the horfe. The latter had obferved there were three of her deliverers, and lamented flie had not leen the geneious ftranger, to thank him
hirn for his timely aid. She learned from Edmund that he had galloped oíf as foon as the wretches by whom flie had been at¬ tacked, were difperfed. " Who knows," thought Rofaline, *'but this aâive friend was Ariel himfelf!" and his evident evafion of meeting her con¬ firmed the idea. " Thus," continued fhe mentally, " am I perpetually conftrained to be under obligations to him, yet am never fated, perhaps, to know to whom ï am in¬ debted. I difregarded his advice, and threw myfelf in the way of danger, yet did he not forfake his charge, but kindly de¬ fended me from ill, and faved me from worfe than death—too probably from the Count de Polloni." On their arrival at the chateau, they found it one fcene of confufion. The fervants had all been difpatched different ways in leardi of Roialine, and Madame, in the voj., πι. 1 utmoft
utmoft anxiety, was awaiting the event of their enquiries. The return of Mifs Melvan inftantly refounded through the houfe, and Madame and De Rochefort both eagerly, and with anxious fondnefs, came out to meet her. When thc firft furprife was over, Roialine introduced Edmund to her protedrefs, paint¬ ing in lively terms the danger he had en¬ countered to deliver her. He received the warmeft acknowledgments from Madame, aiiid an earneft invitation to continue at the chateau. The good Le Vere was well known to Madame, and flie had feen and admired the innocent Rofa; for their fake, there¬ fore, as well as for the effential ferviee he had rendered to her darling Rofaline, flie ihe wed towards him every polite and friendly attention. Rofaline, fatigued and exhauft¬ ed, was glad to retire. She had not a doubt
doubt that the late attack had been an at¬ tempt of the Baron or Count, and with the .trueft thankfulnefs for having efcaped their fnares, flie retired to reft. She fincereiy repented not having paid greater regard to the warnings of Ariel, who had evidently been informed of the intended violence, and had endeavoured to put her on her guard; and flie felt the comfort of having a friend who fhewed ivmfeif really fuch in the hour of diftrefs, and was ever ready in emergency to fly to her fuccour, and not more anxious to put her on her guard from iniei nal foes, than to defend her from exter¬ nal enemies to her repofe«
ι a CHAB.
■ίί ,»■ "i ..... .»и,Ч|11 - I l щя !
CHAP. Χ.
If Have I then notears for thee, my father? '« Can I forget thy cares, from helplefs years u Thy tendernefs for roe? An eye ftill beamM '* With love ? A brow tliat never knew a frown ? " Nor a har flt word thy tongue ? ShaU I for thefe " Repay thy ftooptng venerable age »« With ihame, difquier, anguifti, and diíhonour ?" Thomson.
x\T the entreaty of Madame, Edmund confented to prolong his vifit at the cha¬ teau. He joined Rofaline and the Signora in their walks, and loved to talk to the former
former of Rofa and the little retirement in the Alps. To amufe her guefts, Madame frequently had riding parties; but no plea¬ fure made Rofaline unmindful of her friends at the cottage, which ihe almoft daily vifit¬ ed. Returning from thence one morning, flie found Madame alone in the library read¬ ing a letter. Perceiving her fo engaged, (he would have withdrawn; but Madame, de¬ firing her to return, iaid, pointing to the letter before her— " I have juft received intimation of the approach of another vifitor. I know not whether it be owing to your magnetic powers, my dear Rofaline, but it is long fince Malvini has received fo many guefts." She added, that the epiftle flie had juft received was from England, and written by her brother, Sir Edward Mortimer, whofe only fon being in the Army, and having been advifed to travel in confequence of a wound he huul received in a late engage- i 3 ment,
ment, propofed vifitirg Italy, and would fliortly be at Malvini. Struck with the name, Rofaline made fome enquiries; and from the anfwers of Madame difcovered, to her no fmall fur¬ prife, that the brother flie had fo often heard Madame mention as being her only remaining relative, was the fame Sir Edward Mortimer whom in her early days of hap¬ pinefs fhe remembered to have feen at Edge¬ cumbe Hall. She recolieded the particu¬ lar notice with whiclrhe had honoured her, as well as the favourable impreffion the be¬ nignity of his countenance and manners had left on her mind, and felt much rejoiced at a circumftance that would introduce lier to a part of his family. " My nephew will be a great acquifi¬ tion to our party," faid Madame, iC as far as gaiety will go to render us more happy. He is very much altered fince he made the grand
grand tour, if he have not a very unco:ii- mon flow of fpirits." She paufed, and then added, fmiling— " But I vvould have both you and Emilia guard your hearts againft this young fol* dier, for I find from this letter he has been fome time eniraied to the daughter of a Nobleman of his own country. The ge¬ neral gallantry of a red coat, therefore, is all you muft exped to experience from him." Mademoifelle de Rochefort entered, and the converfation ceafed. Her new friend Mrs. Manvilie became daily a greater fa¬ vourite with Rofaline. Eliza at length told her, İn one of her vifits, that ihe was every day more alarmed for her brother, whofe health and fpirits grew vifibly worfe :— " And ihould I lofe him," exclaimed flie, while tears ftreamed from her eyes, " what 1 4 would
would become of my helplefs infants and their wretched mother?" " Oh, do not look forward to a profped fo melancholy 1" faid Rofaline; " let us hope better days are in flore for you and thefe fweet babes. Have you no friend or relations in the country you have left to apply to on fuch an emergency ?" " Ah, no ľ' replied Mrs. Manvilie, with renewed emotion; " he who ought to pro¬ ted and flielter them from the ftorm, has left them to brave alone its utmoil fury !" " Js it poflible?" cried Rofaline. "'Tis, alas! too true," cried the forrow- ing Eliza, " and ftill greater would be your .wonder, could you behold the fource from whence my forrows flow—him who # having won my firft affedions, has left me to la¬ ment the lofs of their early poffeffor.— Formed to fafcinate the female heart, Man- ville found mine too eafy a conqueft. Con¬ vinced of my father's repugnance to the match, their confent was unfoîicited,, and ere
ere I had attained my fixteenth year, I fled with him to the north, where our deftinies were for ever united. Aware of my father's irritable temper, fcarcely dared I entreat a pardon, which was immediately and pofi¬ tively refufed ; and I had the fevere pangs of felf-reproach added to a confeioufnefs of having burthened Manvilie with a family, for whom he had no means of fubfiftence. Such was and ever muft be the confequence of ading wrongly. Refledion brought with it, too late, a convidion of my error, and increaied the mifery that preyed on my peace. To me my father had ever been a moft kind and indulgent parent, and thus 1 requited his early fondnefs. He was proud and high-fpirited, but much attached to his children; their very wiihes had been an¬ ticipated, and it was doubtlefs from a know¬ ledge oi Manvilie's imprudence, which had difiipated a imali fortune, that he ever evinced a diflike to his vifits. " Thus 1 was completely baniihed the paternal roof, and, to add to our diftrefs* 1 S * my
my brother was at this time abroad. Our flender finances became daily worfe, and the horrors of poverty feemed to await us. To endeavour to improve them, Manvilie, with a fatal hope of fuccefs, was induced to hazard our little allat a gaming-table; and that deftrudive vice growing on him, foured his temper, and completed my wretched¬ nefs. Sometimes, when a tranfient gleam of good fortune had enlivened him, his ani¬ mated features wore for a fliort time their former cheerfulnefs ; but too often an im¬ penetrable gloom overclouded them, which I too well knevv how to account for. "Thus paffed the Erft four years of my marriage, in ftnall inconvenient lodgings, where I „gave birth to three of the little fuffercrs you behold. At the end of that time my brother returned to England. His own forrows made him a bad comforter to me; yet he vifited and tried to cheer me. Manvilie, who was inwardly confeious of the wrong fae was daily doing his innocent family by his fatal inclination to play, avoided
avoided him ; and happy it was they never met. Warforďs refentment on account of my injuries, and the high impetuous tem¬ per of Manvilie, would doubtlefs have been produdive of the moft dreadful confe¬ quences, and I always encouraged the difin- clination each manifefted to meeting. " I had led this life but a few weeks after my brother's return, when I was one even¬ ing, my brother having left me, fittmg alone by my folitary fire till Manvilie came home, and had juft heard the clock ftrike three, when (though its two fucceeding hours frequently pafled before he appeared) I was at once furprifed and delighted to hear hk tap at the door. I fprung to open it; but how was I difmayed by the hoťŕor that ap¬ peared on his countenance ? Without fpeaking, he feized my hand, and gazing earneftly at me, fuddenly let it go, and darting down ftairs, was out of the houle ere it was in thy power to prevent him. Uncertain of what might be his intention*, 1 6 the
the night was paffed in a ftate of mind I have no power to deferibe; and in the morn¬ ing 1 received a melancholy letter, informing me that, being irretrievably ruined, he had determined to go abroad, not doubting my brot her's, if not my father's, protedion would be extended to me and my children in his abfence. " Warford, with a generofity I always knew him poffeffed of, infifted on my removing immediately with my family to bis houfe, where I brought into the world another fharer in its mother's mifery. My father died fuddenly at this period, and his pof¬ feffions of courfe devolved to my brother, who having now no ties in England, deter¬ mined on leaving it ; and being well ac¬ quainted with Italy, he fixed on this fpot for our retirement. " Such, my dear Mifs Melvan, is my jnelancholy tale. Of Manvilie's fate 1 am ignorant, nor do I even know whether he The
The humanity of Rofaline was fliocked at this recital, and ihe grieved that the wound which her hufband's defertion had given to the heart of Mrs. Man ville, was incurable by the exertions of friendfliip. A week had elapfed imce tbe arrival of Edmund Le Vere at the Caftle» which had been paffed in different amufements deviled by Madame to entertain her guefts; when having accompanied the Signora and Ed¬ mund on a fiíbing party, about half a mile from the Caftle, Rofaline, being tired with the fport, left her companions to pur¬ fue* it, and returned to the manfion alone· Madame was gone to a neighbouring cot¬ tage, to vifit the family of a fick peafant* and finding (hc was not yet returned, Roía- line fat down аюпе in the mufic-room. She touched the chords of her lute, witli* out attending to it. She had not heard the voice of her fylph fince the aflàult flie had received from the ruffians, and feared that, oflended |>y her having difregarded his admonitions,
admonitions, he had withdrawn his protec¬ tion. This idea gave her real pain, and íhe had for feveral fucceffive evenings watched till a late hour at her open cafement, in the vain hope of hearing the fignal of his approach. With this hope ihe called at the ruined Abbey, in her way home ; but all was pro¬ foundly filent, and the echo of her fteps was the only found its falling walls rever* berated. She returned home, with a con¬ vidion that fhe had at leaft offended him, if not induced him to forfake her. She ferioufly lamented his defertion, and felt as if íhe had loft a friend whofe counfels were dear to her. Frequent opportunities had lately occur¬ red of his fpeaking to her, had he been in¬ clined; for often, when the Signora chofe to walk, or fiíb, Rofaline, more inclined to enjoy the folitude of the Abbey, had left Edmund to attend her, and roamed through the
the deferted walls, where İhe could at leaft enjoy her own meditations. No onc fave Warford and herfelf ever intruded here ; and fince he had known it was frequented by the inhabitants of the chateau, he had for¬ bore to vifit it, except at hours when all, but thofe whom mifery keeps waking, were wrapped in the arms of Sleep. An inftance of the wretchednefs of his mind had occurred on this evening. On a rude ftone, which perhaps had formerly been part of a fuperb column that had adorned the fculptured walls of the chapel, flie had obferved fomc lines in pencil; and knowing they were the effeds of that me¬ lancholy in which the haplefe Warford was evidently abforbed, ihe copied them into her pocket-book, and perufed them as ilie walked towards the chateau. It feemed defigned as an invocation to Melancholy.
« Come,
Come» Melancholy, wretched maid ! I aik thy kind, thy fort owing aid» Thou foother of dillrefs ! Come wiih thy loofely flowing hair, Difotder'd robe, and bofom bare, Thy votary deign to blefs. With fober mien and downcaft eye, From thee no wild, no piercing ciy Salates the ľiiťnmg ear í Silence and folitude vou love j With thee Oh let me ever rove, And daily meet thee here ! I court not Hope with eyes fo fair, The fyren look, the winning a.r, Allure me now no more ¡ From that delufive, fiatťring maid I a(k no vifionary aid, Nor feek her tranfient povver. Thefe mouldering walls, this chapeľs gl Methinks difplay the fable plume, Thy attribute uf woej
ín íèencà liks this thou Iov* ň to dwell, This awful filence fuits thee well— Thytearsuníèen may flow, This folemn gloom, the/e horrors drear, In tne infpire no pallid fear, But oft at midnight's hour I dread to meet no fleeting form, But liften to the coming ftorm As clouds around me iow'r, EncompafsM by the tempeft's roar, The war of elements no more My wonftded mind affright; Firmly aflTur*d the flowing tear» The figh unheard by mortal ear, Shall reach the throne of Ught.
The Innate wretchednefs thefe lines indi¬ cated fliocked the mind of Roialine; and fhe was trying, by the foothing powers of her lute, to diffipate the gloom they had diffufed over her thoughts^, when hearing fome perfon enter the room, fhe turned her head,
head, and, to her utter amazement, behekl a young man in a military uniform at the door. It was neariy dark, and the figure of Rofaline in her white dreis, attuning her lute at the open caiement, feen ed to be a fight he was not prepared to behold : he, however, immediately advanced, and ex¬ claimed, in a tone of gaiety— " Ah ! my fair De Rochefort, what can fo much have altered the nat upe of things as to induce you to be mufing alone at this folitary hour of the evening ?" He had approached, and feized her hand as he fpoke; but the moonbeams refleding on her face, he fuddenly retreated, begging pardon with the utmoft politenefi, adding, as a fervant entered the room with candles— " You ought in juftice to grant it me, fmcè whatever was the compliment to you, I paid my
my own difcernment a much worfe in tht error 1 involuntarily committed." Smiling ät his compliment, Rofaline en¬ quired of the fervant concerning Madame, and heard ihe was not yet returned from her walk. She difpatched one of the do¬ meftics to inform her of the arrival of her nephew, Captain Mortimer, for fuch, as (he had imagined, he proved to be, and in a ihort time their tétc-à-téte was interrupted by the arrival of Madame, attended by the Signora and Edmund. The former was charmed to fee her nephew, and pre¬ fented Rofaline to htm in «, manner the moil Battering and gratifying. He had a good figure, elegant addrefs, and all the fprightlinefs and vivacity pecu¬ liar to men of his profeffion in his manners and converfation. This addition to thek party quite changed the fcene at Malvini» whkh was now as gay as it had before been filent and retired. The Signora no longer complained
complained of dulnefs, but joined witii avidity in every propofed party which, for the fake of amufing her nephew, Madame was anxious to promote. Rofaline had now no leifure for being alone, and Madame feemed glad of the excufe to draw her from feclufion. She was, againft her inclination, forced into gaiety. Mortimer would agree to no party 1 without her. He flirted and romped with the young Signora, but his manner was totally difierent when he addreffed Ro* faline. " How little did I conceive,'* faid he, one day, as they were talking of Sir Ed¬ ward, " tbat the Mifs Melvan, of whom my father fpoke with fuch warmth, on his return from that journey in which he acci¬ dentally vifited.Edgecumbe Hall, wouid be ever known to me ! much lefs did I exped to fee her» fuch as I find her. Well do I recoiled the apathy with which I liftened to a fervour
a fervour of praife from Sir Edward which he feldom beftows qn any one—for few does he find who merit it. Ah ! it would furely have been reftrained, couid he have forefeen t- that the Iovelinefs which excited fuch emo¬ tions in the bofom of the father, would in¬ fluence, in proportion, the mind of the ion. 0 Fortunately the entrance of the Signora prevented the further continuance of Mor¬ timer, and relieved the embarraíTment of Rofaline, to whom his charader foon de¬ veloped itfelf. He was an only fon, and from an infant had been idolized by his family. The dar¬ ling of his mother, a woman of a haughty and imperious temper, he was by her looked up to as the honour and fupport of her houfe. She beheld him poíľefíed of every perfonal and mental accompliihment, and ilie fancied the whole world bound to adore aad do him homage ¿ but worthy as be was, in
in many refpeds, of her maternal tender¬ nefs, his temper too nearly refembied her own to be really termed amiable. He was proud and high-spirited, and, rendered, by early indulgence, impatient of all control, he could bear no contradidion; yet his heart was open and ingenuous, and he pof¬ fefled undaunted courage. His fpirit and vivacity much enlivened the party at Malvini, and by turns he laughed with the Signora, fung or played with Roialine, converfed gravely with Ma¬ dame Malvini, and read with De Roche- fort. He foon became an univerfai favour¬ ite, and anxious to make himfelf agree¬ able. They all acknowledged he was the fpirit and fupport of the party. Her friends at the cottage ftill engroffed as much of the time and attention of Ro¬ faline as flie could fteal from the party at the Caftle; and many of her hours were fpent in the fociety of Warford and his amiable
amiable fifler. A fettled gloom had diffufed itfelf over the air and manner of the for ner, which nothing now teemed to poffefs the power to difpel. Rofaline, in purfuance of a promife (lie had the preceding morning made to Mrs. Manvilie, quitted the company one day immediately alter dinner, in fpite of the entreaties of Mortimer and the raillery of the Signora, who inceffantly teazed her about Warford, to fpend the afternoon at the cottage. Warford was abfent, and her company was therefore doubly grateíul to Eliza, by whom flie was received with a dehght which never failed to manifeft itfelf in her dejeded countenance, when the ap¬ peared. Towards the evening flie was furprifed by the arrival of Mortimer, who came to condud her home; and iuimed.ately taking leave of her friend, they (et forward on their walk. è « That
« That cottage," faid he, « muft furely contain very powerful attradions, to induce you to fpend fo much of your time there. î underftand your friend Mrs. Manvilie has a brother, who refides with her?" " And he," faid Rofaline, without ap¬ pearing to underftand the allufion, " is, like her, fo unfortunate, that the vifits of a friend are the only comforts they are capable of receiving." " Andwhat," exclaimed Mortimer, with energy, " muft be the forrows fuch a com¬ forter cannot alleviate ?" Haftily withdrawing her hand, which he had grafped as he fpoke, and almoft ftar¬ tled at his impaflioned manner, Rofaline only coolly anfwered, ihe feared their woes were far beyond her power of condolence, and changed the fubjed. The remarkable attention ihewn to her by Mortimer ihe had at firft attributed to the gallantry natural to men of his profeffion, and had liftened to his converfation without its leaving on her mind
mind any impreffion when he had ceafed; but within the laft few days there had been a particularity in his manner towards her, which, while it excited the attention and laughter of Mademoifelle de Rochefort, determined her to be more circumfpečl in her deportment, particularly as ihe was not ignorant of his prefent engagements in England.
VOL. III.
ft
CHAP.
СНЛР. XI.
" WouM you r.ot deem it breathed, and ihat tloie veins did ver ily bear biood ? i( Maltei ly dn;ie! " The vtry hie fcenns warm upon her lips, " The fixtme oí her eye has motion in't, ** As vve weje mock'd with art.'* Shakespeare.
OSALÎNE loft no time in putting in pradice her refolution with regard to Mor¬ timer; and to avoid him, lhe always walked or converfed in preference vvith Edmund, who
who now began to think of leaving them very foon. Various were the methods do vifed by each of the party for beguiling the time. At length an amufement was difco- vered which found fufficient employment for them all. Madame Malvini 4d a hr¿e and curious colledion of (hells, which ihe was one day fliewing to her young friends, when Rofaline, whofe tafle for the wo*ks of fancy was natural and elegant, remarked that there were enough to ornament a grotto. " Well, take them, my dear," faid Ma¬ dame, " and if Emilia and ycu have pa¬ tience and perfeverance to ered one, it will ferve to amufe and employ your t*vo fwains.*' Rofaline eagerly caught at any new occu¬ pation which was likely to drive away thought, and immediately commenced their nevv tuik. Mortimer and Edmund gladly к г aflifted,
afľifted, but Rofaline was thc archited vvho planned the whole. The grotto was ereded beneath a fmall natural eminence, and furrounded by a clump of chefnut trees. It was covered with mofs, and the fliells difpofed fo as to pive a beautiful and brilliant effed to the о whole. Madame undertook to furnifh it vrith ruftic ftools, and the floor was paved with curiou* pebbles. She beheld, with in- uard fatisfadion, the ind u Ury and perfe¬ verance of Roialine, and flattered herfelf it would be the means of aiding her reftoration to tranquillity. *' This, my deareft Rofaline," faid íhe, one day, a^ ilie was furveying them, while occupied in the performance of their daily talk, " will be a delightful retreat from the heats of the mid day fun; and here, when our other tvvo vifitors, who talk of foon leavingus, are gone, we will make our vo¬ latile George read to us every morning." " Ah !
<f Ah ! with what pleafure will he not un¬ dertake a taik fo charming!" replied her nephew. " Well, we will give you credit for your gallantry," replied Madame, laughing, u be¬ cauie it ís the general attribute of a foldier; but 1 fear when you had repeated this very charming taik a few times, it would Ысоте a mere penance for former follies." * ç Do me not fuch inj uit tee, I conjure you," exclaimed Mortimer gravdy j ' c and believe me, though it may be an unfold it :- like declaration, I would gladly bid adieu to martial achievements and the world of war for ever, to devote my life to retirement, provided I might at this moment feleft the companion of it." He glanced his eyes towards Rofaline as he fpoke, whofe cheeks were fuffufed with red. Madame noticed her confufion, and turning again toward the grotto, remarked it would be ftill incomplete till it had a poetical infcription. КЗ « That
** That taik," faid Mortimer gaily, tť I mean to undertake, and to be hailed by you ail as the Poet of the Grotto of Malvini," " Well, then," faid Madame, « fet to work, and let us fee it completed İn three days ; for in that time 1 fliall give you all a ruftic entertainment, to celebrate Rofaline's completion of her taik." The grotto was now foon finifhed : fo expeditious had her affiliants been, and fo indefatigable in their labours, that Rofa¬ line found it much eafier than fhe had ex¬ peded. The Signora liked the novelty and fport of it; Edmund loved any fcene that reminded him of that beloved fpot in the Alps, where, in the poffeflion of Rofa, he had depofited every affedion of his heart i and Mortimer was rejoiced to have iuch frequent opportunities of complimenting the tafte of Rofaline, and fuch a conftant pretence for being near her. He would never fuffer her to carry either the mofs or fhell·', and often obliged her to reft, and, while
while they partook oi the fruits and refreíh- ments Madame fent them from the cha¬ teau, to give them an air on her lute, and accompany it with her voice. The days flew rapidly on while thus oc¬ cupied, and the grotto was at length com¬ pleted. Mortimer wrote the infcription, and with the aid of Edmund engraved it on a fmooth ftone over the ruftic entrance.
INSCRIPTION FOR THE GROTTO. Paufc, traveller, here, and contemplate this fpot, Which no ftep of* the guilty profanes : If forrow opprefs thee, repofe in the grot, As thou journicft over the plains. * Ti s facred to Frien d /lii p, to Mirth, am! to Love, By Beauty and Innocence rearM i United with Tafte, they created a grove Where erft Delblation appear'd. К 4 Here
ïïere fportive De Rochefort may frolic and fing, Here the thoughts of Malvini may flow} Here Edmund his Mule elegiac may bring, Here Warford may utter hts woe, Here Religion's ftern champion his leflbns may pour ? And the charms of devotion may prove j Here haplefs Eliza her forrows deplore, And Mortimer figh out his love. E'en the arcblteB lovely her lyre too ihall bring, And fweetly recline o'er her lute j While the woods and the rocka to hear Rofaline fing, And e'en Echo heifelf (hall be mute» Here Virtue and Gaiety ever unite, Here Senfe and Vivacity join \ Here Beauty and Wit to their reveit invite, Where the wretched ihall ceafe to repine. The lively Emilia the woeful will cheer, Her wit Ihall bid mifery eeafe \ Wiiile Rohïme, ever to fympathy dear, ShaU huíh all their forrows to peace.
.
Hail, elegant grotto ! delightful retreat t Oh, mayft thou unceafingly prove The temple of wifdom—Simplicity's feat— The altar of Virtue an J Love I
In performance of her promife, Madame now gave notice that the next day a ruftic fête would be given at the grotto, and all the young peafants on the domain of Mal¬ vini were invited, to enliven the party, and join in the feftive dance. Rofaline and Emilia, habited as peafant girls, mixed in the rural group, and Mortimer claimed the hand of the former for the evening. He was all gaiety and cheerfulnefs, and joined in the jovial fong of the peafantry, or the more refined but lively airs of the Signora, with equal glee; but when Rofaline, in her к 5 turn,
turn, warbled to the found of the ruftic guitar, Ыз voice was mute, but his eyes declared the emotions of his foul ; he feemed to liften even with a painful eager- nefc, left he fliould lofe a note of her tune¬ ful melody. WiUingly would fhe have dif¬ penfed with his attentions, but (lie would not damp the univerfai hilarity that pre¬ vailed by any unneceiTary referve, though flie was confeious that, for the fake of both, the evident hopes of Mortimer íhould be checked ere they made too great encroach¬ ments on his peace. As flie was one morning mufing on this fubjed İn the breakfaft room, after the reft of the party had quitted it, having de¬ clined accompanying them in a walk, Mor¬ timer, fuddenly entering, enquired if they were not to be favoured with her com¬ pany. She replied in the negative, and would have
have withdrawn, but he prevented her; and clofing the door, advanced to her, and faid, in a tone of refentment— " I have for fome t i inex obferved a cold¬ nefs in the manner of Mifs Melvan which alarms and ihocks me. Can it be poifible that I have without my knowledge offended her? If I have been fo unhappy, fur Hea¬ ven's fake 1er me know, that I may endeavour to atone for the involuntary offence !" " I am fo utterly ignorant of your meaning, Sir," faid Rofaline, when ihe recovered the firft furprife his impetuous manner had thrown her into, <f that I muft really decline anfvvering a queftion 1 do not at all underftand." She would have paffed him, and quitted the room; but eagerly feizing her hand, he detained her, exclaiming— " Nor will it avail for me to endeavour к 6 to
to elucidate if you are voluntarily deaf; yet can I (without concluding you have fome latent reafon for it) daily obferve that you avoid me, and prefer the company of the whining Warford, or the romantic Ed¬ mund." ** Can you wonder," faid Rofaline, " at a preference authorized by long acquaint¬ ance with the one, and the gratitude I owe to the other as my deliverer from danger?" " Happy Le Vere 1" cried Mortimer ; *· ah, why was it not my better fate to ar¬ rive at that fortunate moment ?" Rofaline, confufed and perplexed, again attempted to leave him, but he prevented her, faying-— " Why are you fo determined on not hearing me? Ah! at leaft let meteli you that the firft moment 1 beheld you was baneful to my peace, and every fucceeding hour, whether abfent or prefent, your image 4 has
has been impreffed on my imagination.— Beloved Rofaline!" added he, dropping on his knees before her, tc let me not adore you in vain 1" The abrupt entrance of a fervant here interrupted him ; and eagerly feizing the opportunity, Rofaline, haftily difengaging her hand, fled with fwiftnefs, before the door was again clofed, to the hall, from whence flie ran to her own room, where íhe had leifure to reflect on the confeflion flie had juft heard. Far from furprifing her, flie was aware it was only what the condud of Mortimer had for fome time given her reafon to exped j but (he foreiaw a freih perfecution from it, which flie knew but of one method to prevent. TV After revolving it fome time in her mind, ihe at length determined to relate to Ma¬ dame the late interview with her nephew, and folicit her interference. With this intention,
МЫащеу und not finding her in her dre^ ing-ropm, crofled it to a clofet where (he lometimesiat. Here, however, íhe was not to be found. There was a door in this clo¬ fet which, from its fitiaation (though fl^ had never ieen it opened), Roíaline ima¬ gined led to a paflage that communicated with the library» where íhe knew, when the young people were engaged in walking, or in any other amufemerit, Madame frequently ípent the morning. Suppofi щ (he might now be there. Rodine refblved to go to her, that íhe might hot İple the pp nity of her^ being alonpj but, on opeuing the pri vate door, fhe was ama^ed to fi nd it only covered a finali receís for a cabinet;-r— She caft her eyes^ rpund it> They tefted on the portrait of a remale^ whofe¡fine form and ftriki ng cou nţenance it inftaatly oc¬ curred to fet; ώ^ ^ ínprnenťs Щсс her both bore a ftrikin
thofe of the lovely piduťe at St. Aivars, a duplicate of vvhich ihe had feen in the gal¬ lery at Pelloni : though in a different at- titude, every interefting feature was the fame. She gazed on the fpeaking face and finely formed figure till flie almoft thought the canvas animated, and fancied the expreflive eyes refled on her own countenance vvith intereft and dejedion. Deeply engaged in contemplating features which involuntarily feemed to attråd her veneration, the en¬ trance of Madame was unnoticed till an exclamation from the latter recalled Ro¬ faline to recolledion, and flie inftantly apo¬ logized for the liberty flie had taken by opening the unknown door, and added, that having once beheld that interefting portrait, ihe had been unable to refufe herfelf the pleafure of contemplating it. f< Have you," afked Madame, in a voice
who at all refembles it ?" Rofaline anfwered by a defcription of the piece at St. Älvars, the principal figure in which bore fo exad a fimiiitude to it. " And is that pidure," exclaimed Ma¬ dame, " ftill in prefervation ?" She paufed ; the tear ftole down her cheek, and for a moment íhe was filent j then turning towards Rofaline— " You are," faid (he, " right in the re¬ femblance, for both were drawn from the fame ill-fated original. She was an inti¬ mate and moft beloved friend of mine, and a member .of the St. Alvar* family ; but great as is the reíèmblance between her portraits, lookin that mirror, my Rofaline, and you will fee one infinitely more ftriking of hcrfelf." « Ah !"
«· Ah!" fighed Rofaline, u is it pofli¬ ble?" " Even this moment," continued Ma¬ dame, " when with that look of eager en¬ quiry you turned towards me at my en¬ trance, I could have fancied I beheld» in renovated youth, my lamented friend. But let us cloie this door—it recaís fenfa¬ tions too bitter to my mind, and by reviv¬ ing long paft feenes, almoft difperfes the little fortitude I can command." Saying this, íhe led Rofaline from the ciofet, and being feated in the drefling· room» the latter recolieded the purpofe for which ihe came, and immediately related the converfation which had juft pafled with Mortimer. Afttr a paufe—" I am forry," faid Madame, " for my nephew's impetuous çondud, both on your account and his own, my dear Roialine; though 1 will not add I am greatly furprifed at whaţ you
you tell me. I know the ardour of Mor¬ timer's paffions too well not to forefee what was likely to be the confequence of his introdudion to you. I before mentioned to you that my brother, İn his laft letter, fells me of George's engagement to a lady of good family and fortune,—a match in which I find Lady Mortimer's inclinations are rather confulted than either thofe of Sir Edward or his fon. Prom the immenfe fortune flie brought into the family, ihe imagines flie has a right to rule it with an abfolute fway ; and fo ftrenuoufly infifted on this marriage, that Lfind it was determined On with the friends of the lady before George's return from his laft campaign.-— The wound he there received, and his con¬ fequent ill health, however, have poftponed iţ for the prefent ; and I have fome reafon to think this exfciirfion to Italy a mereftrata* gem to gain time, rather than from any 'material benefit his health will receive from itV His honour, I fear, is too much en- gaged to allow him to retrad; and ihould he
he again teaze you with his folicitations, I ihall make a point of interfering.» -£·** " ■ >, ~* - , < ~ - > Satisfied with this affuranee, Rofaline thanked her, and retired to her chamber, where the fame fubječl dwelt on her mind, and corroded her peace. Had Mortimer been difengaged, and ať liberty to offer her his hand, íhe felt her revolting heart would unhefitatingly reject him. He was young, rich, handfome, and accompliihed, but he was not Adolphus Edgecumbe, nor did he refemble him İn thofe qualities which- firft won the fond regard öf Rofaline. Still devoted to a firft, though unfortunate, attachment, her whole foul revolted at the idea of giving her hand fo one for whom fhe could never feel attached by a ftronger tie than that of friendihip; and infinitely would fhe have preferred ferviťude and vits attendant numi- liations, had it bee ή thè only alternative. < ■ί CHAP.
^Д||^С^ЗСПД»^^1^35ЯК?Е^Г355»»ЯДК^^Г
ν^«ΓΐΛ.*Γ Γ φ ,, jVll*
*' What magìe chains thee fo tbe f ťounď ** What fta»· malignant rule« the hour— !« That thui» in fù v à dcUrtum tlrownty «' Each ГепГе, entranc4i, hathloft iu power ?
" The ţranftent colour went and came, « The ft niggling bofom funk and roíè | <« The trembling tumults of her frame « The llroeg conflicting fool difclofe·*' , . . · Ca«.twrïort #
ŕ' 1 "\' 'ŕ * Αϊ * Я К ■*"*"!
WET evening having confined the party at Malvini to the houfe, a concert was, by the defire of Madame, formed in the
i the mufic-room. Mortimer played the flute, and Edmund the violincello; the Signora touched the harpfichord, and Rofa¬ line ftruck the chords of her harp. When flie fung, all liftened in filent admiration; and Mortimer, unable to accompany her, dropped his inftrument, and remained in mute attention to her melody, while his eyes were rivetted on her face. Rofaline did not obferve this circumftance ; her looks were direded from the cafement at which flie fat, and ihe perfevered in the air íhe was finging till ihe was fuddenly interrupted by obferving a fuperb equipage, which drove down the great avenue, and ftopped before the gates of the chateau. She difcerned the arms of Polloni on the carriage. Her voice failed, the inftrument fell from her hold, and fpringing acrofs the room, fhe funk on her knees before Madame, and had only power to exclaim— a The Count!—Oh lave, proteft me from him !" " Fear
i " Fear not, my beloved Rofaline," faid Madame, who faw from the window the caufe of her fudden alarm ; " I will próted you : aflure yourfelf you are fafe here from all attacks." The extreme terror of Rofaline would fcarcely allow her to hear the kind aflur¬ ances of Madame ; and Mortimer, who feemed at firft ftruck dumb with amaze¬ ment, now fprang acrofs the room, crying— u Proted and fave you i Who will dare—who will attempt ------" " You are too violent, George," faid Madame, interrupting him.— <c Retire, my deareft Rofaline, to your chamber, and leave to me the event of this vifit." r ŕ- Rofaline obeyed, and, attended Ъу Sig* nora de Rochefort, retired to her apart- Τ t-i ■■ -n -'- *- v * ·■ ■■ ψ ment. Here, in fearful expedation,* flie awaited the confequences of this unex- ι - *■ ì peded arrival. Unable to obtain her by * force,
force, flie concluded he was come to de¬ mand her in the name of the Baron, or, perhaps, the Baron might in perfon be come to condud her back to St, Aivars. She ihrunk with horror from the idea of feeing either of them, and, loft in terrify¬ ing refledions, fat in meditation till flie was relieved by hearing the vifitors depart, and Madame in a few minutes entered the room. The Count (for he was alone) had en¬ quired for Madame Malvini; and having related his pretenfions to Rofaline, which he faid had been authorized by his friend, her guardian, the Baron St. Aivars, he entreated that Madame would folicit her to grant him an interview. cc I am greatly fliocked, Madam,'* faid he, "to find, on an inveftigation of the affair, that fome harfh expreffions, which my friend, the Baron (who, though a man of the niceft honour, is perhaps too fevere in bis manners)
manners) unguardedly let fall in his refent¬ ment, mould have induced Miß Melvan to withdraw from die Chateau St. Älvars. She doubtlefs miiconffmed words which were merely the effed of friend fliip for me, and will, I have the premmption to hope, acquit me of any defign to interrupt her peace, and allow me in perfca to plead my innocence." Obferving the extreme gravity in the countenance of Madame, with his ac¬ cuftomed art he added— ** At preient I can háve ño doubt of the difpleafure Mifs Melvan may feel againft me, and till that is fubfided, and ibe is convinced how very far I am from wifliing to put any conftraint on her inclinations, I will not intrude on her prefence ; but allow me, Madam, to entreat flbe will receive this bilfet from your hands, and ťo-morrôw morning I will again wait on you, and hope for a more favourable reception/* Saying
Saying this, he gave a letter into the hands of Madame, and took his leave. The billet, which ihe now delivered to Rofaline, contained only a repetition of his former propoiàìs, and a defence of his own condud, couched in the moft obfequious uylc of adulation. : After advifing with Madame, fhe wrote a fliort and concife anfwer, exprefling her un¬ alterable refolution to decline his offers, which Madame promifed to give to him when he cailed, as he intended, on the fol* lowing day. He came according to appointment, and received Roiåline's billet, which he read with an air of haughty mortification; and then, turning towards Madame, told her his regard for Mifs Melvan would not fuffer him to refl: fatisfied uníeis he heard from her own lips the harfli, anfwer ihe had given, tp nis propqfalsj and therefore vol, ш. L entreated
entreated her intercefîîon to procure him an interview, that he might be convinced the fentiments flie had profeffed were her own, unbiaffed by advifers. Offended by his words as well as manner, Madame replied, Mifs Melvan was thc miftrefs of her own adions, nor had any one attempted to advife or influence her in this affair. Then, ringing the bell, fhe or¬ dered a fervant to carry to Rofaline the Count's requeft that flie would, indulge him with an interview, if only for five minutes. Rofaline was in her own apartment, and tremblingly expeding the iffue of the Counťs fecond vifit, when Magdelina came to acquaint her he requefted the honour of feeing her in the faloon. RefcJved to adhere to her determination, İhe fent for anfwer that ihe begged to de- dine-feeing him , but having conveyed to him
him her reply by Madame Malvini, trufted he would regard it as definitive. He received her reply in füllen filence, and after a momenťs paufe, arifing, he haughtily bade Madame a good morning, and went to his carriage. Convinced, from his manner, that hef fair ward wouid not be fafe from his machina¬ tions, Madame revolved in her mind the moft effedual method to fecure her from his attempts· Rofaline herfelf was equally unable to think or ad; her dread of again falling into the power of the Baron or Count was too great to allow her fuflicient compofure of mind för refledion. In Madame, how¬ ever, ihe had a friend zealous for her wel- % fare, and determined to preferve her againft the united force of her enemies* She at length told Rofaline that the only plan ihe could devife to enfure hér fafety, was to take L г her
her immediately to England, where, at tlie houfe of her brother, Sir Edward Mortimer, ihe would find a fafe afylum, till from Sir Waker Edgecumbe ihe could obtain the right, as her guardian, to defend herfrom the power of the Baron. This plan was not finally arranged, when a feftival of the peafants induced the party from the Caftle to walk-and view their ruftic revelry. Parties of the younger cottagers were dancing beneath the fhade of thc lofty cedars, while others were playing to them on rural inftruments, Rofaline was much beloved by the fur¬ rounding pea&ntry, from the affability and fweetnefs of her manners ; and fmce, her refidence with Madame, the bounty of, „the latter had generally been conveyed to them by the hands of her young friend. No fooner did they behold the party approach, than the mufic and dancing ceafed till 3 the company had placed theojfelveş on the turf,
turf, when, after a paufe of a few minutes, three young female peafants, habited in white jackets, with fmall hats ornamented with wreaths of natural flowers, two of them holding between them a rich garland of thc moft beautiful of the produdions of Flora, and the third with a fmali bafket in her hand, containing the choiceft fruits the feaibn and clime produced, approached towards the group. The attention of the party was attraded, and .their iurprife agree¬ ably excited when, advancing with light airy fteps, the firft, who held the fruits, bent her knee gracefully before Rofaline, and as íhe prefented her offering,, fung thefe words, accompanied by the fprightly guitar and merry tambourine :— « Accept, hit votary of Truth», ; ** The fimple oftering of youth j « ( Accept the modeft, humble lay, '* The o»ly tribute wc can pay u To her whofe charity divine, *' Whofe virtues fo iraniceiident fliine. I» 3 «Our
** Our ferrent prayer G h deign to hear f u Vouchfafe to fendi a M*nmg ear, ** That He, ftrorø w horu sül ^od muft Ôow, ** HU choiceft buffing v?ìU beftow—» ** That He, who »^«r it^tÄs the fuppuaaťe cry, ** Will fbp the tfküiiig tear» and waft the %h ** Ftî from that bm& wh«n nrtwi mr rfign*i <* Frtaia ber who ŕxith» the haj»Mf (^ST«f** psitt*-«· «* Who patient Mens to &d Mìfery*s voice, * f And makes e*ea Wretchednefs itfelf rejoice· *« Our artkfs lay Oh deign to hear, ** Oh ťbaa who wipes the failing tear» « Wbo paîleât liftens to hå MisVy's foke, <* Aud make* e*ea Wretchedraefs itiêîf rejoice.** Ťhetwoíaft lines were repeated ia full choros by all the affembled peafants, after which tbe other two girls advanced, and, entwining the garland round the luxuriant hair of Roiklme, fung alternately as they did it. rmST PlAf AST. « Our ciimaie4 produaion Oh let tts entwine <* Round the bnwrs of the good and the fair î <* Oh unim* mf содарашош, your voice* with sitae, « To baniih all forrow and caret SEC0K&
SECOS» PEASANT* š* The role and the lily combined here difpenfe ** Their fragrance united around ¡ ** Emblematic of Innocence, Virtue, and Senfe, ** With the produce ©f Flora ?ouVe eruWd* BOTH* ** Deign, frm& of mortal«, mt wreath to receives " *Tis a tribute of gratitude due} " And while it encircle« your brow, Oh believe ** Our hearts are devoted to той 1
э»
The laft ftanza was loudly re-echoed by every voice, whiie Rofaline, confufed and blufhing, arofe, and returned her thanks for the diftindion* Madame was pleafed by this unexpeded entertainment, and Mortimer, with the moft lively emotions of pleafure, was a deiighted fpedator of the whole. It occurred to both Madame and Rofaline that to him they were indebted for it, nor were they miftaken i he had projeded and executed L 4 the
the plan with that promptitude natural to him when any favourite fcheme occupied Ш$ imagination.. They were now folicited to join in the dance, and the Signora, ever an advocate for gaiety, readily accepted thc invitation, calling to Rofaline to follow her example ; but not difpofed to mirth, ihe would have declined it, had not Madame, in hopes of exhilarating her fpirits (which the event of the morning and preceding evening feemed to have cruelly deprefled), joined in the requeft, and Mortimer had the fatisfadion cf leading her to the dancers· The innocent gaiety and heartfelt plea¬ fure whieh reigned in this rural fociety, infpired in the heart of Rofaline a tran¬ quillity flie was before far from feeling $ and ihe had not long engaged in the exer¬ cife, before fhe felt fo enlivened, that Ma¬ dame was charmed at perceiving her reftored vivacity*
tavacíty» ща .Mortimer enchanted at her affability and condefcenfion towards him. She was refting a few minutes from the fatigue of the dance, when, happening ac* cidentally to caft her eyes from the dancers, her attention, was attraded by the figure of a young man, not in the habit of a peafant, leaning, in a penfive attitude,, ag^inft a tree at fome diítance*. " There," fighed íhe to herfelÇ as fhe furveyed the Uranger, " is one who per¬ haps, like mechas joined this innocent ruftic party without being able to derive any real amufement from the fcene, and, like me too perhaps, in the midft of: feeming m&th and feftivity, his heart aches with refiedions which no gaiety, no diifipation can ban i İh from his mind." The face of the dranger was turned from her as this mental fbliloquy paifed through her mind j but fcarcely was it concluded j ere*
taffing liis head, and fuddenly turn&ig it towards her, Rofaline faw, or fancied íhe fâw, the countenance, the form of Adol¬ phus! She was transfixed by amazement, and for a moment feemed motionlefs; at length fhe ftaggered, with fome difficulty, to a turf feat at fome diftance, where the ftrange and immediate change ία her coun¬ tenance inftantly brought Mortimer, who had been talking wkh Edmund. He ea¬ gerly enquired if any thing had happened; but without waiting to receive an anfwer* flew for fome water, which, imaginmg her iadifpofitioii proceeded tmm £*tigue> he forced her to lake. She looked round, when a little revived, towards the place where the phantom had flood» but it had difappeared; and Ma¬ dame, alarmed by the palenefs of her coun¬ tenance, and univerfai tremor of her frame, infifted fbe fhould return with her tö the cfhateau» whither they were immediately at¬ tended by Mortimer. Tranfient
Traníient as had been her view of him, fhe felt convinced ihe had feen the well- known features of Adolphus; too deeply vvere they rivetted on her mind to be mif¬ taken, and fhe paced her room (inftead of laying down, as Madame had recommend· ed) in an agitation not to be repreffed. The fhock her feelings had fuftained by bis defertion was yet fevereiy felt, and the wound it had caufed far from being healed. She knew he was married, and the idea of feeing him was agony fhe could not.fup^ PP 1 "*· All the compofure of mind the mufic and dancing had wrought her into, was now completely interrupted, and flie was trying in fome degree to recover it, and appear at fupper, when her door was fuddenly thrown open, and the Signora appeared.. She entered with a countenance illumined by. joy, exclaiming, in a tone of delight— jl 6 ^ I haver
" I have feen him, my dear Mifs Mel¬ van í He is here—he is going to Venice ľ* ** Who? M faid Rofaline, ftarting at the vehemence of her manner—»" of whom are you fpeaking?'* ** Of the Chevalier—»the dear, enchant¬ ing Chevalier -Edgecumbe !" replied flie, ** the friend of my brother, whom you have fb often heard me mention Γ ' **· Ah, gracious Heaven í is it poflible ?" cried Roialine, furprifed off her guard; but^ recolleding herfelÇ íhe endeavoured to add¿. in as calm a voice as flie could affume—·. " Is he at the chateau ?" ** Ah> no! would he were!*' returned fhe. * f I met him accidentally in the wood after I left the peafants, and fortunately was alone» having ftolen off unperceived toen* quire after you. 1 was fb charmed to fee him, that I fcarcely knovv what I faid. I alked him to come to the chateau, but he áeclined it, (aying he was going to Venice* and hoped he fliould fee me there; and he fhall
İhaîl fee me there, for I fliall immediately begin to prepare for my journey. Little did I imagine when Γ quitted it, I íhõuíd have fo delightful a motive for returning^ fooner than 1 intended." She was leaving the room as flie fpoke, but, fuddenly turning back, fhe added— " Oh I had almoft forgotten, my dear Rofaline, to beg you will not mention this fubjed before my uncle or Madame Mal- vini, for he particularly begged I would not name having feen him to any one; and really I am not now juft in a humour for a* gfave led ure on prudence and propriety* and fo on, which I fliould be very fure to have from Madame or my uncle, did they know my reafon for leaving them." " But do you think," faid Rofaline, in an embarraffed tone, " it is not rather im¬ proper to make an appointment with-one you- know (o little off Really, Emilia,'* added
added fhe, endeavouring to force a fmile, " Ithink the ledure on prudence which you feem to dread ίο much, would not be very ill-timed." " Now pray, Rofaline," faid the thought¬ lefs Signora, " do not diftrefs me by any of thofe fententious obfervations which you well know are my averfion. I am fure my uncle and Madame may well be partial to you, for you are the exad refemblance of both; and if you had one of thofe horrible gowns and caps on, I am convinced you could not be diftinguiihed from De Roche- fort¿—- But adieu II muft go and compofe røy features, to prepare the partie below for щу departure, which I can, no longer defer." Saying this, fhe,quitted the room, »leav¬ ing poor Rofaline in no ftate of mind to join the company: fhe,however, fummoned courage to go down to fupper, where her pallid looks attraded the attention of every one, and flie retked immediately after- watdsj
wards, glad to enjoy her meditations alon& and undiftuibed. í шфЕшвШЕШШ ЕЕтЕт тшллтттт* , im^ÉfcM^^HfcÉ.^ щ^т— ч^*^>^ ιι ■ ■ н и м* -"- ■■ ■ «л~™—
Ci-jHAJr* Älli. . *< Sorrow-breaks feafons and repofing hour?, ««Makes the night morning, and the noontide night.** Shakespeare. . ROSALINE retired to reft, but ileep fled far from her eyes· She found a mind at eafe was requifite to entice it, and ihe faid, with the,immortal Bard— *« It feldom viâts forro w j whep it doth, , 41 Jt is-a cornforler.' 1 The
. The image of Adolphus, and his unex¬ peded appearance, filled her mtnd,. and oc¬ cupied her whole thoughts; and after a reft¬ lefs and difturbed night, ihe arofe, little refreflied. Want of fleep, added to the fatigue and agitation of the preceding evening, had given to her looks a pale¬ nefs and dejedion that alarmed Madame when ihe met her at breakfaft. Glad of the pretence of indifpofition, to be excuièd from joining in a riding party with the gen¬ tlemen, they were gone without her. To divert her thoughts, İhe haď taken her lute, while the Signora, who had ftaid at home alfo, under pretence of preparing for her journey, was ftanding at the win*. dow, and had juft feen Mortimer and-Ed- mtfnd ride out of the gates, when Emilia exclaimed there was a carriage ftopped at the bottom ofthe avenue, but added it was not that of the Сойди Rofaline
Rofaline was much relieved by this affur¬ anee. The door of the brcakfaft-rooni opened tô a paffage that led from the great hall. Imagining it might probably be com¬ pany, and bot inclined to fee any, Roia- line was rifing, with an intention of going to her own apartment, when fhe beheld, with mixed emotions of furprife and ter¬ ror, the Baron St. Älvars advancing down the paffage. She ftarted back. He ap¬ proached her with his accuftomed folem¬ nity, and flie felt at the fame moment a little relieved by the entrance of Madame. TheBaron firft broke the iiience, and in a tone of peremptory haughtineß faid, he came to demand from Madame Malvini a young lady whom, having been placed under his care by her friends in England, he con· ceived ihe had no right to detain from hirn. Madame, with her wonted prefence of mind, repHed, the treatment that young ladv
lady had received from him, had certainly authorized her to kek with others the pro· tedion he refufed her, but on terms íhe could not, witbout the utmoft violence to her inclination, have complied with. The wrath of the Baron being excited by this anfwer» he faid, raifing bis voice, that, did Che perfevere in her refufal to refign his ward, force fliould compel her to com* ply. « You had better, my Lord," faid Ma· dame, ** be cautious of the language you ufe, fince there are perhaps thofe in this manfion whom intereft ihould prompt you to be careful of offending." She had fcarcely uttered thefe words whea the countenance of the Baron fell. Before diftorted with rage and indignation, it feemed now covered with a füllen difmay, as hk eye furveyed fomething at the fartheft fué of tbe room i *в4 tujraing her head, to difcover
difcover the caufe of his agitation, fhe perceived De Rochefort enter from the hall. He furveyed the Baron with contemptu* ous filence, till at length, in á dry, fevere tone of voice, he &id— fi Your Lordihip, I believe, little cx» peded to behold me here·'* * c True, ,ş replied the Baron, extending his hand, and endeavouring to foften his afped, "'tis many years fince we met.' 1 €ţ And had it been many years longer,** faid De Rochefort, fternly rejeding his proffered hand, ** the forrow would not have been on my part. Your Lordihip once, in derifion, fty led me the champion of oppreffed innocence^ and again you be¬ hold me appear before you in that charac¬ ter, though not I hope, as formerly, in vain. Qur facred and holy religion teaches us tQ forgive, and therefore think not I can eyer
ever regard your Lordfhip with hatred, thougli you are fully known tóme: ìio, 1 pity, and would teach you to repent" He pronounced thè laft word with a jpaiied voice and ftrong emphafia* Thé qut* vering lip and pallid countenance of tlu Baron declared his mind the feat of guilt i bxt endeavouring to aflume more campo* fur*—" Suffer mie^^ uid he r <f fiftce we are meti to requeft foine private converfation with you." «* Certainly»" faid De Rochefort— H your Lordfliip wШifoUôwímet и , With thefe words» he led the way to another apartment» and was followed by the Baron· Rofaline retted wrøl Madame* The totter feemed abforbed by ^flediorijŕ and Rofaline in the dread of being ftill given lip to tie Jkron¿ mainteiued a raelaneholy â ;- ' filenes
Ште* At length the Baron*s departure* was announced; and,Ilie heard, with delight. inexpreffible, from De Rochefort, that flie need entertain no further apprehenfions of him. Ξ. The myftery of De Rocheforťs behaviour to the Baron fhe could not folve, nor did Madame feem inclined to explain it.— Mufing on the event of the morning, íhe left the; party, after tea, to fiih in the ri vu· let, and wandered on to the ruined Abbey· Her, thoughts involuntarily ftrayed from the Baron to Adolphus, who fe benevolence to the young De Rochefort flie appîaùded,^ and wondered íhe had never heard him mention a* circumftance which muft have happened during his firft travels.—-*' Per- hapsj,"] thought ibe, *' the fifler might have, fome íhare in his benefits to the brother.**— The ľ idea niade her íhudder, and flie tried to drive it from her mind· í il· sr % ' .* ' ' . -. ч - ţ - f -, '- 'ν , , , „ L. ,-,ι . ч , - * ς - i ¿ŕ * ŕ * Лу -..- ~ ^ -- - - ■ ч У - r . Emilia*
Emilia, it was evident, knëWriot that he was married; and though fhe had wiihed to hear more of their meeting, ffie had not been able to fummon courage to lead to the fubjed. Abforbed by her refledions, lhe entered the upper part of a turned tower over the high arched gateway, and had proceeded alrrioft to the window before flie perceived itwas already occupied í Ä figüre, leaning iïgamft the ancient wall, raifed its head át her approach, and the well-known voice of Adóŕphiis сфее more vibrated on ber ear." - ! - ' '- -ŕ A fainry Ihrill fcrcÄm efcäped'heť líps, v^hiíe the -mòte aftoniihed Adolphus re- thaincd get rified with ama^emeiit J At lengt h -~" Arri i- : î awake»" exclaimed' he; 4 €f òr is f. it only to deceive my fenfes that ä vifion, fòlongjfo ardently fought afters is prefented to my view?-—Oh Rofaline! am Г once % more
ARIEL· 139 more permitted to contemplate thofe fea¬ tures, that well-remembered form ?" Overcome by emotions ihe found herfelf unable to fupprefs, ihe had funk on the only feat the room afforded, apparently motionlefs, but recalled to recolledion by the attitude of Adolphus, who, thawing himfeif on his knees before her, had feized her unrefifting hand: his marriage fuddenly occurred to her, and, haftily withdrawing it, ihe attempted to flammer out fomething of furprife at his appearance. " I wonder not at your furprife," faicf he, " for nothing a very ihort time fince was further from my thoughts than leaving England ; but I was perfuaded to join in a family party to the Continent, and parting with the reft of the company in France, I croffed the Alps to vifit the Count Lor¬ raine, with whom I was formerly intimate, whofe
whofe^ chateau Is only a ^w leagues from hence.*' She attempted to enquire after his fa¬ mily, but her voice faltered, and fhe could only pronounce, " Henrietta.** ** She is well,** faid he, " and with fome difliculty we have prevailed on her to ac¬ company Mrs. Edgecumbe in this tour, on whofe account it was planned·" The heart of Roialine funk as he pro- nounced the lait name : not doubting İt was that of his Lady, it completely de¬ prived her of the little fortitude ihe had hitherto preferved. She exet ted herfelf, however, fufficiently to ri fe» He perceived her emotion* and ', exelainied--- y * Good Heavens! are then the reports I have heaid deafly true? TCes, Roûline, I fee Jiow % from being reciprocal is the . delight
delight with which I behold you, after an abfence that has bkßed my peace for ever? Why, Oh why," added he, in a feeming agony of paffion, c< did I allovv myielf to be perfuaded to what my feelings, my rea* uneven then revolted at?" Knowing he alluded to his niarriage, Rofaline new colleded courage from her pride, and faying—" Σ ent rea you, Mr. Edgecumbe, to let me go-^fuch conver- fation is ηοτν very improper for us both," ilie diiengaged herielf, when fuddenly flie heard voices from beiow, and faw the Sig¬ nora, with Mortimer and Edmund, com¬ ing to ieek. her at the Abbey. Xi I muft go," faid me, moving towarJs the door, yet faltering, as if attraded by a tie too powerful to the fpot where Adoi* phus 1У11 in unutterable agitation ftood. u This at leaft ? " exclaimed he, ^ let me, ere ypu depart, requeft, * fince that fatal VOL, lib M noiff
mw confirms every fear, fmce з г ои muft never more remember me with the fenti¬ ments I once fondly hoped you wouid ever feci towards nie, let me, 1 conjure you, be. eternally baniflied your remembrance—for Oh Rofaline! by you I can never bear to be recolieded with indifference. " Great God!" cried he, after a mo¬ ment's paufe, ** that I ihould ever feel com¬ pelled to folicit that I may be forgotten by Rofaline Melvan—her to whom my eariy years were dedicated, in whom every fond affedion of my heart was centered ! But it is no more to her—1 am no longer the fame Adolphus, and flie regards me with the mou chilling apathy !" " Apathy!" exclaimed Rofaline. " Oh heavens, Adolphus Г* and flie leaned againft the broken remains of the turret door. ** Yes," repeated he, " apathy! But though you, Roialine, may fo eafily find the Lethean cup, front me it flies with never-ceafing rapidity, and ever bufy me* пщгу inccflantly haunts me with fond ideas of
ARIÊÍí.' of bappinefs irretrievably loft. But adieu, Madam 1 I will no longer detain you, for happier engagements doubtlefs await yoa than to liften to the wild ravings of a wretch like mei" He paufed, and Rofaline, turning to* wards him, and colleding all her courage to her aid, faid— " I know not to what you allude, of wherefore I am accufed of an indifference it would have been far happier ibr me had í reallv felt. I fliali make no comment on words I well know I ought not to have heard. My own heart tells me that my condud towards you, Sir, has ever been irreproachable ; and, would I preferve the fame blamelefs confeience, I muft not fub¬ jed myfelf to a fecond interview, or pro¬ long the firft, which, if I am to be thus liable to infult, where 1 ought only to find fympathy and friendihip, my inclination, m 2 not
not fefs than my duty, will prompt me to avoid. l ' Saying this, flie would precipitately have retreated, and, fupported by that laudable and virtuous pride which the unmerited re¬ proaches of Adolphus had fo bitterly roufed, fhe was leaving the room ; but, ftung by lier fpeech, he darted after her, and, feiz* ing her hand, would have led her back. At that moment the voice of the Signora was heard calling to her. She ftaid no longer, but, terrified at the idea of a difcovery, haftily obeyed the fum· mons, and at the bottom of the ftairs met theparty. The raillery with which they affailed her on her evening vifits to the Abbej ghoßs, was all unheard by Rofaline : the late in¬ terview io wholly engaged her thoughts, that fhe neither heard nor attended to what was faid,
faiď, but retiring to her apartment when? shey reached the chateau, fhe gave way, to all the fadnefs of her heart. í " Adolphus, then," thought fhe, " is really married, and my doom is finally fixed. His own words declared his con¬ trition already begun, and lamented hav¬ ing conceded to perfuafion. He reproached me with indifference,'* added ihe mentally j " he accufed me of fo eafily forgetting him-. Ah, Adolphus 1 you know not that the waters of oblivion have not yet exiled you from the heart of Rofaline, nor has any Lethean ftream the power to erafe youi» image from. }ier memory." The refolutions flie had formed at the cot-» =1 tage of Le Vere, and the fuccefs that flie had. deluded herfelf with believing had attended them, were now no more; one interview had fliewn her the frailty of her mind, and difciofed at once to her view the principal fentiment that had hitherto ani> m 3 mated
mated her exiftence. She coukl not bear the retrofp^d, and her pure mind ihrunk fiom the fcif-cxamination. A fummons to fupper interrupted her reverie; and, in no humour lor com-» pany or refrefliment, ihe joined the party below. Madame perceived the depreffion of her fpirits; but, attributing it to indifpofiiion, it, pafled unnoticed. At feparating, Ma¬ dame faid— " Before you retire to reft, Rofaline,, attend me for a few minutes in my dreffing- room." She complied, and on entering it, found her friend waiting her attendance. " I have been obliged to promife Morti¬ mer, my dear Rolàline," faid Madame, " to fpeak to you on a fubjed I would fain have
have declined interfering in. He declares he cannot regard the engagement he was forced into in England as binding, and protefts he will immediately apply for my brother's approbation of his choice, if ho be fa happy as to intereft your affedions. Ignorant mvfelf of the particulars of the affair in queftion, I told hiai he muft refer it to his father, who he is fanguine enough to doubt not will be propitious to his wiíhes." Roialine, who, from the event of the evening, was never kfs diipofed than at piefent to liften to the addreiies of Mor¬ timer, only replied that, were every ohr jedion on his fide obviated, ι here would on her*s remain infurmountable obftacles. She found herfelf, the added, quite unable to return the regard with which he honoured her, and implored Madame, with gentle¬ nefs and a regard to his feelings, to m fonn him fo, and to entreat hini to deiift from rendering himfelf and her miferable, which M 4 would \
would affurediy be the inevitable confer quence of a fruitlefs perfecution. Madame Malvini, who paflionately loved her nephew, paufed. *' He is," faid flie, at length, (i a va¬ luable young man. How much then is it to be regretted that he has fo little influ¬ ence over his paffions, and ever precipi¬ tately ads from the impulfe of the mo¬ ment 1 I fervently pray that he may not* by his impetuofity of temper, enfure his own mifery, and imbitter the laft years of his good father's life. It would be a means of rendering mé very wretched, were my dear Edward, after all his anxious care concerning them, to be unhappy in his children. " Charlotte, I underftand, is defigned by her mother for a young man of fafhion, who has addreffed her ; but 1 fear, iike tlie projeded marriage of Mortimer, wealth and ambition are more confulted thaa domeftic
domeftic comfort, or the qualities necefiary to enfure it. But I will not trouble you», my fweet young friend, with our family un- eafmcfics; we all have our anxieties, and it is impious to murmur at the decree which inflids them. I am fure I need not fivy, for my condud I hope has evinced it, that to fee Mortimer bíefíčd with a partner íb formed for focial happinefs as my dear Ro¬ faline, would be the firft wifli of my heart -, but convinced as I am bv obfervation that he is not deftined to infpire that attachment neceffary to form connubial conifort, I fup¬ prefs the anxiety I feel for the felicity ofmy nephew,.in the confideration,that it would be to deftroy your's. " For to-night, my love,, adieu İ I wifli this impetuous boy would not thus wound our feelmgs by his raih violence. Retire, and compofe yourfelf. L fliali de¬ liver jour meffage to Mortimer- to-mor¬ row, though I own 1 am not fang, uine 'w СД enough to hope it will entirely prevent his perfeverance." m $ Rofaline
Roialine left her much afľcčled. Her tears had filently and involuntarily flowed while Madame fpoke. She was hurt by her unexampled kindnefs, and reproached herfelf for the want of confidence flie had ihewn; but the conviciion of the entire hopeleffhefs of her own fituation aflured her flie did right in fuppreifing a wifli to converfe on the, fubječl with any one. She adored Madame Malvini, and felt it now to be her moft anxious wifli to remain with heras long as flie continued to exift. Her defire to revifit England was no more ; that happy land of univerfai fiberty to her had loft the magnetic attradion which had once irrefiftibly drawn her heart within its happy confines. She knew not that it now con¬ tained one human being who was interefted in her welfare, and flie fighed for the tran¬ quillity flie believed would reign at the chateau when their prefent guefts had taken their departure. On the following morning Madame gave the
the anfwer of Rofaline to Mortimer. She was right in the conjedure fliej^ad formed, that he vvould not fo eafily be difcouraged ; for, with the impetuofity natural to his cha¬ rader, he declared his determination to try by perfeverance to conquer her indifference, which his confeioufnefs of his own perfonal perfedion fometimes taught him ťo fancy was affeded. Rofaline was forry for the felf-delufion he indulged, and hoped time would difciofe tc*> him his error.
m fi CHAP,
CHAP. XIV.
" Amid the fecret windings of the wood, «« W' ith foiemn Meditation let me ftray :, * ( This ia the hour when to the wife and good u The heavenly maid repays the toil of day." Micklh* JnLN early day was now fixed for the de¬ parture of the Signora, and Edmund de¬ clared his intention to quit the Caftle at the fame time. Roialine faw them depart with different emotions : for Edmund the felt thefe of regret and ie&ard, and as the çhaife.
chaife which conveyed Mademoifelle de Rochefort went down the great avenue, ihe followed it vvith her eyes till the waving branches of the trees concealed it from her view» " She is going to Venice," fighed flie» as foon as ihe had loft fight of it* "Ahl who is it flie will meet there Γ' Determined againft remaining alone with Mortimer, flie returned to the houfe, with an intention to pais the morning with Ma¬ dame; but hearing from her woman that flie had retired to perufe fome letters juft. arrived from England, flie went to her own apartment, where ihe remained till Magde¬ lina brought hera fummons toastend Man¬ darne* On entering the dreifmg-room, fhe found her friend* ftill occupied in reading her dif¬ patches, fome of which lay open on the table before her* « I feat
« I fent for you, my dear Rofaline," iaid ihe, " to impart to you the intelligence I have this moment received frum my bro· ther in England. It acquaints me with thc fudden and unexpeded deatii of Lady Mortimer, who was feized, two months fmce, with a violent fever, which carried her oíf in a few davs. " I have juft related this information to Mortimer, and delivered to him a letter rrom his father, which accompanied mine. In death there muft ever be fomething aw¬ ful, but that of poor Lady Mortimer will probably excite as little grief as any one ,* her extreme virulence of temper* has ren¬ dered Sir Edward's life a fcene of difquiet for many years :—it cannot, therefore, be fuppofed that her lofs wiil be a fubjed of much forrow in the family, though Morti¬ mer, in whom flie certainly doted, feels ihe was his mother. " My niece's marriage, which was very near a conclufion, is delayed by this un¬ forefeen event, and my brother writes pur* 6 pofely
pofely to requeft to fee me once more in my native country. Charlotte, he favs, muft foon quit him, and rny fociety will be the greateft con'o'ation he can poffibly at this time receive.—I have not beheld him fince the death of Signor Malvini, when he generoufly undertook a journey hither pur¬ pofely to aflift mein fettling my affairs, and would then have perfuaded me to return with him, and end my days in the country that gave me being; but though always on good terms with his Lady, I well knew her difpofition, and was aflured that, though from him I fliould experience every affec¬ tionate attention, I fliould ill brook the want of it in any of his family: I there¬ fore declined the propofal; but now that no fuch motives exift, I own 1 feei anxious once more to behold a brother fo beloved. You, my dear Rofaline, are folicited to be of the party, and will meet as fincereiy welcome a reception as myfelf»
The heart of Rofaline beat quickly at the idea of revifiting her native country, and the remembrance it brought to her mind diflufed a glow over her countenance which ever exprefled each varying emotion of the heart, to wiiich it was an index. She anfwered to Madame's addrefs, that under her protedion every country was alike, nor could ihe ever form a wifh grati* tude did nokbind her to make her own. " From you, my Rofaline, I expeded this reply," faid Madame* " nor fliali one of your's, if known to me, remain ungra¬ tified while I have the. power to grant it. " .She then gave her Sir Edward's lettet to perufe, and declared her intention to make immediate preparations for the jour* ney. This intelligence was received by Mor¬ timer with the utmoft delight he was at prefent
prefent capable of feeling. He had writ¬ ten, as he informed Madame, to his fatheF, fupplicating him to terminate his engage¬ ments with the lady his mother had pro¬ vided for him, affuring him that the fupe¬ rior charms of Mils Melvan had made an entire conqueft of a heart that muft ever remain devoted to her* This information had not, however, reach¬ ed Sir Edward when the fudden determi¬ nation of Madame to vifit England was formed. Mortimer now thought himfeif fecure of the happinefs he fo ardently defired. He preferved in his manner to Rofaline the moil inviolable refped; and, deceived by his behaviour, flie hoped that, convinced of her indifference, he had refolved to defift from his vain purfuit. Every preparation for the journey was now commenced with avidity, and it was determined;
determined they were firft to vifit fome eftates of Madame on the borders of France. Roialine, with unfeigned regret, took leave of Warford and Eliza. The ami¬ able, but unfortunate Mrs. Manvilie wept with bitterneís when they parted, and feemed only to look forward to a conti¬ nuance of the mifery her few laft years had been marked with. Rofaline, more fan¬ guine, bade her hope for better days, when they fliould again meet in happinefs, and left her with repeated aflurances of her. un¬ alterable friendihip and regard. Another taik yet remained to be done, and this was to pay a farewel vifit to thofe feenes vvhich had affbrded her fuch real p'eafure fmce flie had refided at Malvini*. The evening preceding their departure Mortimer being engaged, as ihe thought, with Pe Rochefort, flie ftole out unper¬ ceived
ceived by him, and leaving Madame to make her final domeftic arrangements, fhe walked firft to the dell, which commanded a view of Warford's cottage. She fighed deeply as the fate of its wretched inhabit¬ ants croffed her mind. The little hut, fuperior in neatnefs to thofe dwellings of poverty and wretchednefs which furrounded it, was nearly encompafled by the noiiy ragged children of the pealan try, who were playing their evening gambols on the fmooth turf. The fetting fun darted its declinino: beams on the humble roof, and tinged it with a golden hue: the thick fo¬ liage which furrounded it now began to wear the yellow tinge of Autumn, and Nati; г lud already put oa her richeft livery. From the dell (lie paffed to the fide of the litde river, where, with Emilia and Edmund, ihe had fpent fo many hours of late in fifh- ing. The partial funbeams glittered on its pure unruffled furface, and fhe purfued her way by the margin till ihe reached the Abbey*
Abbey, which, with fenfations of forrow to leave it, flie entered by the cloifters, and from thence pafled to the chapel. The dim light of evening duikily refleded on every objed, and the faint remains of thofe mafly ornaments which had once decorated the high altar, were juft diftinguiibable by the retiring beams of the fun which illu¬ mined them· Often had this ancient chapel been thz feene oí her folitary meditations fince her refidence at Malvini, and here had ihe frequently indulged thofe refiedions which bufy Memory infpired. The folemn gloom of the fpot was peculiarly adapted for the purpofe of contemplation*; and to drive more painful thoughts from her mind, íbe bad often amufed herielf by ideally pictur¬ ing to her imagination the former feenes j that might have been aded in their holy « tmduary.. Ì The
The penitent Nun, the pious Abbefs, the trembling Novice, and the holy Father, were in their turn all preient to her mental view, and the fliades of nighi had often overtaken her ere the vifions ot fancy had fa ied fr^m her eye. Once, in the enthufiafm of the moment, (he had with a pencil written theie lines on the remains of a once magnificent monument at one end of the chapel, which appeared as though it had been ereded to commemorate the grave of fome former Abbefs of the monaftery.
In twilights grey and folemn liom^ As mufmg here I ftands InipťtíVd by Fancy's magic power, Who waves tiťíilufive vvandj Methinks From yonder fhrine I hear The penitential figh, I fee the fwift! y falling tear, And vievv the downcaft eye» Down
*
Down yonder аШе, with movement fiuw^ In íable Veft аггауЧ!, With pendant veil, and face of vvoe^ Comes Ella, foi rowing maid! As yonder ihrine appears în view, She flops in wild affright ţ 'Twas there, aîas! her forrows grew**· $he ihudders at the fight! v Twas there, while yet în youth's gay b!oo% She made the fatal vow* Winch doom'd her to a Hving tomb, And taught her knee to bow» On that fad morn, when Ella^fate Affli mM a fable hue, When, (hut within the cloifter'd grate> She bade the world adieu j Her forŕh in robes of white was cîad> Her eyes were dim with caie, And o'er her face, with forrow fad,. Still ftream'd Iwr flowing hair*
As near the dreaded íhríne íhe drevr» . Her throbbing bofom glow'd, The tear, as yet conceaľd from view, ISfow down her pale cheek flow'd* Thofe ringlets, once her boaft and pnde, Now yield to bigot fway ; ** The facrifiee h made," ihe cryM—* <tf To wretchednefs a prey ! <ζ Prom him who caus'd thofe tears to Ôow, fi Avert Misfortune's rodj ** Sad EÌIa^s fate may he ne'er know-* « Devoted now to God 4 * c Then ftop thofe fighs, unhappy maid ! " Soon flmll thy miferies ceafe} * c Great Nature's debt ere long be paid, ťl And thou be laid in peace i n
On this laft vifit, as Rofaline once morc read over the lmes her fertile fancy had didated, flie perceived, with aftoniihment, that they had, Ъу fome ftrange hand, been traced over again with a pencil, as if to render them more legible, and had thefe verfes added to them. She ceas'd;—.when, from thè thronging crowd, A voke now reached her carj A well-known voice İn accents ìoud*-* It calľd on Elia dear. She heard no mcre> but fainting fell ţ The cloiiteťd train attend, And bear her to tlie lonely cell, Where nö\V her life muft end* *« Ah, Edgar! haplefs ^outh! no more t€ Shall Ella meet ihy view; ** A prey to iler n monaftic powV, <* She lives no more for you î v
«
'Thefe
ÌThefe lines, by fome domeftic bornej To Edgar were convey'd, As filent, woeful, and forlorn, The foreft wilds he ftray'd. At morning's dawn a ufelefs corfe Young Edgar's form was found-** Conviciion fad of Ella's lofs Had daih'd him to tbe ground« Unerring aim the weapon took, Directed by his hand-, The yet warm heart, the ghaftly lookj» Now fad memorials ftand· Sila his fate, with frantic cries, Bewails in yon drear cell, Where penitent (be fits» and fighs With grief flie dare not tell« tn fad devotions offer'd there, Poor Edgar's name íhe lends; For mercy from his God in prayer » Her lowly knee ihe bends» vol. иь n The
The charaders were not unknown to Rofeline, and a minute's confideration convinced her they were thofe of Adol¬ phus. She fliuddered when flie reperuied the additional lines, and their import.-— They were probably written after his laft interview with her, and the gloomy ideas which muft then have pofleflTed his mind inexpreflibly ihocked her. She quitted the chapel, and vifited the towers. It was at the ihattered cafement of one of the latter, which commanded a view of the whole pile of ruins, that flie fketched, in poetic fadnefs, AN ADIEU TO MALVINI. Farewel, ye gloomy ibiemn feenes, Where oft Tve rov'd at eve and morn, Indulg'd in vifionary dreams, While vrand'ring here alose förlora* " " - 1 bia
ï bid ye aH a long adieu ! Yt air-hung towVs, ye falling wall, Ye mould'ring tombs now wet vvith dew Perhaps a laft farewel to all ! Within thefe gloomy precincts drear, How oft Tve mus'd at evening's hour I Ideal fabrics wouid I rear, And bow to Fancy's magic pow'r· 'Tis paft, and now no more I ftray Beneath the chapeľs hallow'd dome; To other climes I bend my way, And feek my long-forfaken home. Shall I within fweet Albion's iile Tranquillity and comfort find ? Will fweet Conte, t, with humble fmiie, Extend her infiuence o'er my mind ? This wayward heart rejects the thought, And nourishes in black defpair Each boding ficar with mis'ry fraught, Nor riewt fweet M Hope vfith eyes fo fair·" N % Where'er
Where'er my deftiny may lead f And whethet marked with blifs or \vo% Whether for happinefs decreed, Or Itili the path of grief tP kiiövv^ Thy feenes, Maivînî, oft refracM By Menťry's true, unerring hand* Never, hy time or place erased, Shall on life's tablet ever ftands And ever prefent to my mind, RevivM hefore my menial view, And when alone to nlufe inclin'd, My grateful thoughts will fly to youi Scarcely had ihe concluded when (he fancied flie heard footfteps in the lower part of the building, and imagining it might be Warford, flie defcended again to the chapel, where íhe was; furprifed by the appearance of Mortimer, who, leaning penfively over the broken^ tomb, was engaged
engaged in reading the lines which Rofaline had compofed on the imaginary fate of the haplefs Ella. As foon as he faw her— CCi I am perufing, the effeds of that melancholy with which the relics of this gloomy manfion ever feem to infpire you, Mifs Melvan,** faid he; " but I perceive it is not all in your own hand-writing; I prefume we are indebted to Mr. Warford's mufe for thofe additional. lmes." Rofaline made no reply, for flie was in reality glad of the miftake;: and at that moment the poetical adieu fhe had been writing, which ihe ftill held in her hand, caught the attenlion of Mortimer. He eagerly feized and perufed it.. " Since additions are allowable, and fo much in faihion at Malvini," he exclaimed, " why may I not be permitted to make one N 3 tO
to this pathetic farewel, which I here do;"- and, taking a pencil from his pocket-book, he wrote thefe lines beneath her's with the precipitation fo natural to him, and then threw them to Rofaline, who, endea¬ vouring to turn the whole into a |eft x and affeding a laugh, read them. Thus Rofaîiue mus'd» as penfive ihe rov'd Thro* thc mouldering Abbey 1 * remains, The fcene Time's devouring influence prQV*d, And her Iing'ring fteps here detains. Fit haunt for tbie wretched, whom penury dire: Or murder obliges to rove j It may ferve as a fhelter from juftice's ire A An afylum for fugitive love.. But, Rofaline, hauen from feenes iuch as thefe To the beauties of that lovely ifle Where affluence, fplendour, good-fortune, and eaft, Await but your favouring fmile, AUi
AH f truft to the Mufe, that all this will you prove* When you kindly revifit that land j But paufe, while you hear the petition of Love— - Beceive with it Mortimer's hand. Still affeding to treat it as the mere effb- fion of gallantry, flie laughingly faid it was really fuch a very beautiful extempore per¬ formance, that íhe. thought flie muft pre¬ ferve it for the perufal and amufement of Madame. "You will do with it as you pleafe," faid Mortimer, afluming a look of gravity:; <c but whatever become of the lines them¬ felves, their purport I hope will not be forgotten. Such,!' added he* " are my hopes, and I truft Mifs Mel van's uniform fweetnefs of difpofition», which ever rifes fu* perior to coquetry and affedation, wiU, ere long, allow me to realize them." " The reply, Sir/' faid Rofaline, who now felt compelled to enter on a fubjed flie would fain have avoided, " with which n 4 I troubled
I troubled Madame Malvini, was expreffive of my fentiments towards you, anckl hop, of my gratitude for the far too flattering opinion you profefs; and allow me to add that, though the former can never chanee, the iatter will affurediy be lafting." As flie uttered thefe words, flie moved towards the chapel door, Mortimer looked proudly difappointed, and did not attempt to follow her. She reached the chateau, and remained ia her room tiil fupper, when Mortimer met her with a look of reftraint he vainly endeavoured to ihake oif; his natural viva¬ city was for once obfeured by involuntary abfence, and De Rochefort more than once aroufed him from a deep reverie by a fati- ricai hint at the caufe of it. The whole party retired early, that they might be ready with the dawn to com¬ mence their journey; and Rofaline, with mixed
mixed emotions of pleafure and pain, re¬ tired to reft. De Rochefort was entrufted by Madame with the care of the chateau and family diirins: her abfence. He beftowed his be- nedidion on them at parting, and fervently. invoked bleflings on both. " Thou art going, my child,*** feid he to Rofaline, " into that vortex of folly and diffipation, the great world. I ardently pray that thy unfullied mind may retain its native purity amidft all the temptations of vanity, and that the innocence of heart which charaderizes thee, may uttend thee through the weary pilgrimage of life j then be thy paths ever fo thorny, be thy way ever fo perplexed by unfought mifery, thou wilt retain that ineftimable jewel ľ/hich Kings may envy thee—a blamelefs con¬ feience. Remember, too, that though it be the.wifli of a Monk in his cell, it is a H 5 truth
truth which experience will affurediy teach thee. Adieu I" He led them to the carriage as lie fpoke ; and Rofaline, as (he took a laft look at the manfion from the carriage window, faw his venerable figure ftill ftanding at the great gates, following it with his eyes as it drove down the oak avenue.
CHAI *
тшшшшшшшЕшш ■j ■ ■* I, ...... li » ■ !■> « ■!■ Ш
CHAP. XV·
** Far to ihc right, where Apennine arcencis, ** Bright as the fummer, Italy extends} € * Its uplands flopïng deck, the mountains lide, €r \Vbods over Woods în gay theatric pride, <* While oft fome temples* mould'ring tops between, ** With venerable grandeur mark the fcene ι f * Could Nature's bounty fatisfy the breaft» $t Tbe fon$ of Italy were furely bleft ť* Goldsmith*
OS ALINE travelled witl· Madame and their two attendants in the coach, accom¬ panied by Mortimer and two fervants oa n 6 horfeback.
horfeback. They firft vifited thofe eftates of Madame which required her prefence, and having fettled her affairs fo as to leave them without inconvenience, they pro¬ ceeded towards the Alps, through a coun¬ try enriched with every objed that could diverfify the landfcape, and enchant the eye of the traveller. For many leagues their road lay along a way which wound round the declivity of a ridge of mountains overtopped with pines and cedars, and a variety of rich trees of the mountains* growth :—to the right a moil beautiful and exteafive view níet the eye; rich overhanging woods and the ftupen¬ dous dome of a caftle, or the ruined re¬ mains of a magnificent Gothic temple peeping forth its head from the thick, fo¬ liage, frequently appeared ·> and fometimes the cluftering towers of an ancient mo* j-niftery, its high walls, and antiquated fpires, towering in monaftic grandeur over 3 the
the banks of the river, which meandered through the country, were diftinguiibable. " Well, indeed," thought Rofaline, " may Italy be termed * the garden ofthe world;* for fuch an affemblage of native beauties furely feîdom meet in any other dime." As they one morning entered a lovely val¬ ley, íhaclçd by rows of pine-trees, among which were feveral fcattered cottages, ilie entreated Madame to allow her to alight from the carriage. The requeft was readily granted ; and, ordering it to drive flowly on, they both defcended, and for fome mo¬ ments wandered under the ihade of the pines, while their eyes were too highly gratified to allow of converfation. At length, perceiving at the door of one of the cottages, which were all uncom- monly neat, and very fuperior to the ge¬ nerality in Italy, a woman giving their humble breakfaft to feveral children, who lat
fat on turf feats at the door, they ap¬ proached her, and accepted forne milk and fruit, which were immediately offered them by, the young peafant*. They were as much furprifed with the order and regularity of ever)' thing within the little building, as with the peculiar beauty of the exterior. Madame praifed the nicenefs of this humble habitation, as well as the clean appearance of its owner and her chudren.. €t We have little merit in that¿ Signora/* faid the peafant; " with fuch a good Lord, who has fitted up our cottage fo nicely, it would be hard indeed if we could not keep it neat," " Who then is your Lord ?" aiked Ma¬ dame. u You muft be very great ftrangers ia this country, Signora," replied the young woman, " if you do not know that all the inhabitants of this valley are vaflals to the
the good Count Lorraine, The Abbey Lorraine ftands a few leagues farther, among the pine-woods." While Madame replied flie did not re* colled having ever heard of this Noble* man before, Rofaline remembered it was the Count Lorraine whom Adolphus, ia their laft embarraffed interview, had told. her he had croffed the Alps to vifit. The peafant continued :— " Such a Lord I believe few countries can boaft. He is a bleffing to the whole province as. well as to his own family*" She then related how he had relieved her huiband and herfelf from the extremeft mifery and diftrefs, and fettled them in this cottage, where he ftill continued his bounty to them· After
After having liftened» for fome rime to the praifes of the Count, Madame and Roia¬ line took their leave, and vifited feveral of thc other habitations in the valley. They all vied with the firft in neatnefs, and the poor inhabitants of each feemed equally eager with their neighbours to refound the praifes of their Lord. Leaving fome marks of their bounty with the poor children who crowded round them, they returned to the carriage, charm¬ ed with the charader of the. Count Lor¬ raine, and wondering the fame of» his be¬ nevolence had not extended beyond the limits of liis own province. On enquiry ac the inn where they were to fleep concerning him, they heard from every mouth a con¬ firmation of his wonderful humanity of dif¬ pofition, and univerfai philanthropy of cha¬ rader : they alfo were informed that he was a young man, and had only lately fuc¬ ceeded to his title and eftate by the deatii of an uncle. The
The houfe provided for the reception of travellers was poor and miferable, and its inhabitants were fuch as might be expeded from the external appearance of their dwell¬ ing; but, bad as vvere the accommodations, the fituation was fo uncommonly beautiful and pidurefque, that Madame yielded to Rofaline's folicitations to remain there one day, and, to gratify her, with her wonted kindnefs put up with the numerous incon*. veniences they had to encounter. The houfe, or rather hut,, for it was little better, ftood on a ífoping turf at the entrance of an enchanting and romantic vale, through which a fmall winding rivu¬ let made its way : the banks were lined with a double row of willows, between which a fmall footpath had been trodden by the pea¬ fantry. Madame was not difpofed to explore the beauties of the valley, from the fatigue of the preceding day : Rofaline was therefore obliged
obliged to accept the attendance of Morti- Bier only in her ramble before they retired for the night. They purfued the path by the fide of the rivulet till it left the confines of the valley, juft beyond which, on a high green bank, grew a round clump of chefnut-trees, and beneath their İpreading branches ftood a finali low cottage. The trees being now in full leaf, tbe hut was fcarcely diftinguiftv· able through the thick foliage. Rofaline paufed to remark the romantic feclufion of the fpot, when ihe was furprifed to defcry at the door a lady of genteel appearance, from whofe habit íhe fancied her to be EngUftu She was engaged in netting, and fo bufily occupied by her work, that ihe noticed, not the attention flbe had excited. Fearful of incurring the cenfure of rude- neis, Rofaline and Mortimer paffed on. A narrow winding footpath, through a rude md thorny wild, now caught the eye of Rofaline;
Rofaline i it feemed to wind through innu-» merable furzes up the green eminence, oa which the cot they hâd remarked ftood. u Shall we venture up this wild path ?" faid Rofaline, hefitating, from its defert appearance* *« If you wifli to explore its intricacies,'* faid Mortimer, " I apprehend no danger." " It looks fo briary and unfrequented," returned flie, " that though I myfelf fliould like to go, I am unwilling to take you a ramble which may perhaps yield us no plea? fure at its termi nat ion." " In your fociety," exclaimed Morti· mer, with hiş wonted enthufiafm, " no path, however thorny, but muft be de* lightful. Even that through life, could I behold it mentally hke this dreary wild^ would, in my eftimation, be a paradife, were iţ ţo be traverfed, in the fame com¬ pany," Roialine.
Rofaline, forry fhe had excited this reply> made no anfwer, and walked haftily on : the path foon widened, and Mortimer walked by her ñáe in a fort of proud filence. When lhe made a paffing remark on the feenes around them, . he fcarcely anfvered, but ieemed abforbed by Ins own refledion. The path ended in a continuance of thc green eminence, planted in rows of pines and cedars, the fummit of which com¬ manded a view of the vale they had left, and a vaft extent of country, beyond which appeared, as far as the eye could reach, one beautiful garden. Turning from a fur¬ vey of the noble profped before them, they deferied a narrow pathway, which feemed to lead down the other fide of the fteep. *« We will purfue it," faid Rofaline ι tt perhaps, by a little circuitous round, it wiil brum us to the valley again." They
They followed its windings, till their way was obftruded by the numerous thickets which they found it almoft impoffible to pafs, Rofaline, however, perfevered, till flie arrived at a fmall green plat, in the centre of which one dark yew reared its foi i tary head. The wide fpreading branches waved over a finali toaib, upon which ap¬ peared an obied that drew at once the whole wonder and attention of Roialine and her companion. This was a female figure, who, clad in a white robe, fat upon the tomb ; dark waving hair, of an amaz¬ ing length, ftreamed over her ihoulders, and round it was entwined a long branch of the yew that, hung over her. A wreath of the. fame mournful plant encircled her wai ft and each arm, and ihe held a bough of it in her hand. Her countenance was partly concealed from obfervation by the dark boughs of the tree. A very few minutes had elapfed, when, taking up an old guitar that lay by her on the
the tomb) and ftiil contemplating the bkìc- ful plant, in a fweet, though very faint voice, thefollowing lines, in Englıİh, reached the ears of her aíloniOied auditors, ac* companied by the plaintive tones of the guitar, < f At motn and cVe my courfe í takŕ, «* Thro 4 buíhy briar and tangled brake* ** To this lone tomb f where Edwin lies ** Conceaľd from curious human eyes> ** Save her*s> who, kd by misery drear, <* Has centered aH her comfort here ! ** When the wan moon* whh crefcent bi ight> <* Sheds round her trembling filver light» ** When gentle gales of evening breathe ** Their Ьз1гоу fragrance o'er the heath/* ** Poor Adila ftrolls here alone, u And refts her head on that cold ftone ** Within whofe flinty marble breaft « The Form of Edwin lies at reft*"
She ceafed, and rifing, fevered the branch of yew fhe held in her hand, and dividing it
it into four parts, ftuck a bough at each corner of the tomb, and then, once more reclining her arm on the cold receptacle of mortality, ihe again fung, in a voice ftiii f л eet, though apparency exhaufted by weaknefs
" Ah ! Edwin belov"d, hear thy A?Uia*s voice, " As mournful ihe decks tby lov'd tombj " No longer, alas I am I doom'd to rejoice, *« But in misYy deftin'd to roam. ** By the light of yen orb, which now áarts its pate beams *' On this wan and emaciated frame, " I pluck the dark yew, and by the faint gleams « I call on thy evelMov'd name. '« But no anfwer's received, for Edwin has flown ** To the concave of yon ftarry fphere j " He is fled, and yet Adila's ftill left to moan-^ «« He is gone, and Itili AdiU's here ľ* She fighed deeply, and in a voice faint, and almoft inarticulate, repeated— « He is gone, and ftill Aitila*« heie î** Mortimer,
Mortimer, like Rofaline, feemed mo« tionlefs with furpriie at the fcene before them, Involuntarily the latter advanced nearer to the yew-tree. The fair fufferer 'obfesved them not: abforbed In her one caufe of grief, flie heeded not what paffed around her, but emphatically imprinting a filent kifs on the cold marble which en- fhrined the torm of Edwin, íhe turned, with flow and folemn fteps, from the monument, and, raifing her eyes towards heaven, paufed, while again flie fervently repeated— л " He is gone, and (till AdikTs here IV Then Hopping a moment, flie glided round the other fide of the tree. Her long White dreis rendered her diftinguifh a ble, as it waved among the thorny wild; but ihe was quickly out oi fight, and Rofaline, re¬ marking it was nearly dark, haftened home«· wards. Their
Theif converfation, on their return, %as wholly engrofled by their recent adventure^ and Rofaline declared her refolution to make enquiries concerning the objed who had fo forcibly excited her wonder. She eagerly related the circumftance to Ma¬ dame, as they took their fupper at the win¬ dow of the little inn ; and it being a beau* tiful moonlight night, the cafement ftill flood open. Poor Adila and her woes dwelt on the mind of Rofaline. Madame knew the keennefs of her feelings, and, to divert her mind from a fubjed which feemed to have renewed her own griefs, remarked how un¬ commonly beautiful the planet of night appeared. " I think, Rofaline," faid fhe, « it feems to fhine brighter here than at Mal¬ vini." vol» iii # o Rofaline
Jlofaline;rofe to furvey it from,the cafe- nienţ, but dp fooner; had fhe glanced her ^ye from it^than itŕrefted.on the form of a female^ who feemed to be kneeling a few paces from the window. A fecond glance fufliced to affure her it was the objed of her prefent meditations. Motioning to Madame to be filent, fl)e beckoned her to the window, frcm whence they ftill beheld the figure in a kneeling attitude. At Let us go, to the door, and fpeak to her," faid Madame. t ** « h ' Jn paffing through the outer room, they met fqme of the family belonging to the houfe, to whom they related what had engaged their attention. ** Ah!" faid the woman to whom they fpoke, " it is only poor Adila in fome of her nightly rambles.'; «And
<4
,y* And wha is poor Adib?" enquired Madame. <€ Ah, Signora!" anfwered the woman, u her's is a fad ftory. Poor thing Γ íhe is gone out of her mind, and roves all day and night about the valley." t They had now reached the door, neariy oppofite to which knelt poor Adiia,- as the woman had termed her. The moonbeams refleded full on her face, and fliewed a countenance much emaciated* but ftill*in¬ terefting. Her penfive blue eyes,, fliaded by long dark laflies, were caft upwards; her eyebrows and hair were very dark, and the latter ftill hung diihevelled over her ihoulders. She had taken the wreath of yew from her hair, and fubftituted a tliin black veil, which depended from/ her head. Her long thin arms were bare, and croffed over her bofom, from which hung, a. fmall crucifix. Tí « ц J 02 The
The wonlÄR, who had follawéd them out, cried— * ■ ■»«■ Poor 'thing! íhe is at fomc of her prayers.' 1 ч The voice feemed to recai her from hér meditations, and ftie flowly aròfe, and, wrapping the veil round her» looked wildly at the group before her. Madame advanced towards her, and, with à töne of miïdttefs, faid— : ««Do not be alarmedi we wiihed not to difrurb youš* She gažed for a moment on the tace of Madame : with â vacant ftare j arid then, ut¬ tering à deep and long-drawn figh, in a f&ëet. but mournful tone of voice, ihe fung— « H« is gone, and^ftill Adib*» here!'* « Who,"
·< Who," faid Madame, ** is gone?" " Know ye not," faid ilie, with fo¬ lemnity, " for whom I mourn ì Then learn that beyond the -' concave of yon ftarry fphere," pointing emphatically to the firmament, *'■ with, ftar-wreathed luftre crowned," dwells Edwin,, the good, the amiable* While he retained the frail vet· tiges of mortality, he had two; dwellings : one was in that happy ifle which I (baU fee no more—the other; in poor Adila'« heart ! The., former he has quitted for ever, but the latter he will continue to inhabit till this vaft globe fliall fail, and time itfelf fliali be no more. He was young, .beautiful* and good, but it- is overi" And then, again fighing, ihe added— , « He is gone, and ftill Adila*s here!" The tears iprung into the eyes of Roía- e at this wild but pathetie addrefs. o^ $ Adila -д
Adila perceived it. " Ah!" faid flie, ** do you weep for Adila? Once fhe wept too; but one dreadful j one mental earthquake tutned her heart to adamant, and it has ever fince remained an impenetrable petrifadion, with the darling image of Edwin frozen fo hard within it, that neither cruelty nor tetidernefs has been able to diffolve it;— but í muft go home, or my good Ellen will be alarmed. Adieu i-^-Good night, Edwin!" added fhe, looking up to the iky. " He hears me from his ftarry cha¬ riot, Ivhich conveys him to the repofe of the bieffed, and fays—* Good night, Adila! If thy poor aching head can ever more find reft, go home, poor wanderer, and feek it ľ " Ah!" added flie, fliaking her head, " it will not be, for—i" and'again flie fung— . ' " 'l'i ' . ' ... " lie is gone, and ftill Adila4 here ľ* As
As flie pronounced the Iaft/ words, with a motion fo rapid as to render all· attempts to prevent her vain,, flie darted* out of fight. " And where," faid Madame, " is flie now gone to ?" * c * Oh Signora!" faid the?woman, "the good Count Lorraine has taken care that flie íhalP have a very comfortable dwelling, and a good lady, who has the charge of her, lives with her," " But her intelleds feem fb difordered,"' anfwered Madame, "that I fliould appre¬ hend there is much danger in her roving about alone." " Olí nol" replied the woman, "íhe has done the fame for feveral years, and no harm ever comes to her, for, poor child!* flie is only mad on one fubjed; but I dare fay, Signora, if you would wifli to know her ftory, that Mrs. Morland,, the perfon j* who
who har the charge of Ьег> will give you all the information you defire, and ihe lives but juft beyond the valley^ yon¬ der." Bjr the defcription, Rofaline felt affured that the „little cot ihe had re- marked unde^ : the clump of éhèfnuts, . was the, refidence of poor Ad ila; and the lady flie ì had noţicede, who had ftrucfc her as being Eogliíh, e ihe f np longer doubted was the guardian of the ž hapleís , : maf· v niaC.< ' \^;,' : ^;-; у -,-.· .;,-... ,··-ν «I Well, my? Ro%Haeï," fiid Madame, ■« we will retire, and try to forget ppo^r Adila ^nd'-her-^foiä^^.: and ч tomorrow early we will walk r *to her^habitation, and endeavour, to. gratify the curioiity r ihe has raifed." ;-' ·.:;-- :·',,.;- -.. 4 1 * ■ „ * * f ΐ . " - Γ - " -' ■ ^ ' ' ; У ч *■■* - 1 " ■ А « - " ·. * " ' -> " - * ' ·* s -' ŕ ' Ťt - л " " ľJ * Е ' ' +■ ■**■ ' , They now- retired tO! v reft; and Rofa- , .. . ■ - ' , ·#. ' line's · · . , IH 1 " ΐ
line's fancy was fo deeply impreffed by the fcene fhe had witneffed, that in her dreams İhe yet few the poor infane Adila, and heard her call on the cheriflied name of her loft Edwin.
1KB OF VOL. HI.
t ANI, MIj(£tVA>?lEIS, tXADINK AlL -вТИИТ.
;*
