Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ariel: or, The invisible monitor
Α Ε Ι Ε JL
CHAP. ?. * ?? what a noble mind is here o'erthrown I <' Now iee that noble and moft fovereign reaion, ** Like fweet bells jangled, out of tune and harfti | « That unmatcltd form and feature of blown youth <* Blafted with ecftacy P* Shakespeare.
И? 4 JlLARLY on the following morning Madame, guided by Rofaline, and at¬ tended by Mortimer, fet out on her walk to the cottage of the hapkfs maniac. The dew yet glittered on the turf, and the vol* iv. ? yellow
yellow hue of autumn tinged the trees with its golden tints. As they afcended the flopmg banks to the clump of chefnuts whkh overftadowed the hut, they defcrkd a middle-aged female who Roküne recollected was the fame fte had feen tbe preceding day. She was en¬ gaged in arranging the furniture of a fmall outer room into which the door opened, and ? no fooner perceived the approach of vifitors, than fte advanced to meet them. Madame related the motive of their vifit, being, fte added, very anxious to know if aught were ín her power to adminifter to the comfort of the poor i uffe rer fte had ken, by whofe language and manner they hád dfcovered her to be Englifli. 44 You are very good and compaffionate, Madam," anfwered Mrs. Morkr.d, " and in poor Adila's name, as well as my own» I thank you. But, alas ! her woes are far beyond all human aid. When fte returned bft night, by ber rambling incoherent converiation»
converfation, I found fte had met with føtne perfon or circumftance which had reminded her of Engknd, and nov V can account for it. Allow me," added fte, opening a door whicii led into an inner apartment, c< to offer you a feat after your walk; and if you wift to know the circum¬ ftances which have difordered the intellefts of my poor charge, I will endeavour to relate the fad tale to you." They now took feats in a finali but neat room, the furniture of which was far fuperior to the dwelling. Poor Adda's gutar kid on a chair, which Mrs. Morland removed, and calling to an old female domeftic, de¬ livered it to hér, bidding her give it to Adila when fte called for it. She offered her guefts fruit and milk, which they readily partook of, and then feating herfelf by Madame, Mrs. Morknd thus addreffed her. ' ** Adila de Sevigny, the unfortunate young perfon in whofe fate you fo kindly ? 2 intereft
intereft yourfelf, Madam, is the defcendant of an ancient French family of diftinftion, and her parents were included amongft thofe refugees who fought an afylum in England. They died ere Adik was fen¬ fible of their lofs, and their orphan child was taken by an Engliffi lady who knew her unfortunate parents, and adopted her as her own. 4t Reared in the family of Lady Mel- worth, Adik knew no other mother. She was the widow of a Baronet with a fmall fortune, and one only fon, who was edu¬ cated under her own roof, and early was taught to love Adik as a lifter. Lady Melworth had fome Italian conneftions which brought her to Venice, where, in the childhood of Edwin and Adik, ihe refided for fome years, and there I firft became known to her ; for, though of Engliffi birth, I had accompanied an Italian family to Venice, where I refided many years. Lady Melworth wiflied to difeover a perfon
a perfon who would perfeft Adik in the French and Italian languages^ and affift her in the taik of education. I was difengaged, and agreed to accept the office. I accord¬ ingly returned with her to England, and continued for fome years the preceptrefs of Adila, who every day grew more lovely and accompliihed. Edwin was two years older, and claüy as they grew in years was I more convinced of the attachment which was ever the predominant fentiment in the mind of each. ic Lady Melworth, though a woman of good natural fenfe, pofleffed not thofe very keen feelings which marked the tem* per of her fon, nor did flie appear to apprehend any da ger from the intercourfe between them ; but with me it was differ¬ ent, and aware of the difapprobation it would meet from fome part of Edwin's family, from whom he had great expeft- ations, I difcouraged any appearance of partiality, ? 3 ** Early
" Early was the difpofition of Adik marked by that acute fufceptibility which has finally deftroyed her intellects. Her attacbment to Edwin was interwoven with her exiftence, and very foon, too foon, alas ! I difcovered that ffie only feemed happy when his prefence enlivened the fcene. " At length the Eari of Orland, uncle to Edwin's late father, whofe title and im¬ menfe wealth were expefted to defcend to his nephew, propofed a match between Edwin and a lady of rank, whom he had felected for him. Starting like one awak¬ ened from a dream, Edwin declared an attachment to the orphan unportioned Adik. " Lord Orland, a man of unbounded pride and arrogance, fcarcely believed the evidence of his fenfes. He fought hk fifter, and informed her what had pafled, declaring his refolution to defert her and his
his nephew for ever if he perfevered in fuch a degrading connection. 44 Lady Melworth, alarmed for the in¬ tereft of her fon, undertook to talk to Edwin; but, young and enthufiaftic, he would liften to no argument that tended to perfuade him to give up Adik. Now vainly regretting that fhe had ever adopted the young and beautiful girl, one only alternative remained. ** Edwin, after vowing to the hapkfs orphan never to yield her up ro the unrea¬ fonable wiihes of his family, left town on bufinefs with his unck. Lady Melworth, as foon as he was gone, fent for Adik. * Often have I liftened,* faid fte, c to thofe fervent declarations of grateful affec¬ tion you have ever profefled for me. May I flatter myfelf you continue to be actuated by the fame fentiments l * Ah, Madam!' crkd Adik, 4 be * 4 aflured
aflured I muft ceafe to breathe ere augbt but gratitude to you can be the fource of every aftion/ * Prove it then!* iaid her Ladyfhip; 4 now ? the time. Lord Orland has refolved to fpurn Edwin for ever if he refufe the kdy he has provided for him, in which cafe poverty and wretchednefs will be his loti Bdwin, while he has hopes of you, will think of no other. His duty to his mother, the honour and intereft of his family» ?? are forgotten. Confent then, dear Adila, to withdraw for a time, and you will pre¬ ferve Edwin, and enfure hk fond mother's eternal gratitude V ** Boor Adila ftood rnotionlek; fte nei* ther ipoke nor wept. « iky, Adila/ continued Lady Melworth* * will you be the preferver or the dejroyer « Adik
44 Adila hefitated no longer. With a fort of defperate refolution fte put her fate into the hands of Lady Melworth, who entreated her to make immediate prepa¬ ration for her departure from England. Iwas entrufted with'the care of this poor victim to ambition, and Italy was to be the place of our deftination. When I began to talk on the fubjeft to Adila, fte only íaid -?- * Ah, my dear, kind Mrs. Morknd, I dare not truft myfelf on the fubjeft. For myfelf I care not ; I ftall fave Edwin, and from the moment I quit the ft ores of England, I doom myfelf to eternal fiknce reipect ing him l 44 I was to take her to a diftant relation of Lady Melworth at Venice, with whom we were for the prefent to refide. I have fince gathered that Adik, never doubting the conftancy of Edwin, and ever fanguine» ftill believed the day wouid come when her faith would be rewarded. * S f 1 Ere
** Ere Edwin's return we bade a final adieu to Engknd, and reached Venice in fafety. Adila preferved her refolution, and never mentioned a name which ftill dwelt in her heart. 44 We had not been long refident at Venice ere Adila attrafted the notice of a Nobleman, who was accidentally there at the time of the Carnival. The Count de Polloni was greatly ftruck with her beauty $ he learned her orphan fituation, and en¬ deavoured to procure an interview. I knew his charafter, and took meafures to prevent ît, but my affiduities proved vain: he found means to fee her in my abfence, and made fiér offers which her reftitude of mind convinced * her were an infult to her unprotefted fituation. She flew to me on my return, and entreated me to remove from Venice, when I told her I would confider r of fome method to free her from the perfe¬ cution of the Count. « At * ??;** - ν;, *
44 At this time we received a letter which informed us of the death of Lady Mel¬ worth. Adila's heart palpitated. Alas ! ihe had died with the fecret of our retreat hidden within her own breaft! We heard no more from England, till accidentally, in an Englifli newfpaper, we read the death of Lord Orland. This indeed was a trial for my poor Adila I Edwin was releafed from every tie which kept him from her, but he knew not the place of her refidence. I wrote to a frknd in England, and found that the young Lord Orland, convinced Adik was fomewhere on the Continent, had refolved to make the tour of France and Italy, and was aftuaily fet out in the hope of finding his loft Adila : but her good Genius flumbered ; he came not, and the Count de Polloni, more than ever refolved to perfecute her, made an attempt to carry her off". It was rendered abortive, and Adila was refcued from his power by that phi¬ lanthropic charafter whom you have doubt- kk heard of, the godlike Count Lorraine. ? 6 " Ever
** Ever in fearch of opportunities to do good, he paffed at the moment when Polloni and his fervants were forcing Adila into his carriage. The Count Lorraine reftored her to me ; and now a more fright¬ ful misfortune threatened poor Adila than any that had yet affaikd her—this was poverty and all ¡ts train of evils. Lady Mel¬ worth had died fuddenly, and left no pro¬ vifion for her : the old relation, under whofe roof we had hitherto lived, was fuddenly taken off, and all her wealth went to enrich 3 monaftery flie had founded. %n thk diftrefs the generous Lorraine was again our guardian angel. This little cot on his domain was unoccupied ; he gave it, with an ampje provifion to fopport us above want, till thP-'Count de Polloni had ceafed lik perfecution s afluring us his own houfe #'puld haye been a welcome afylum for us» Jiad not h|s yputb been an objection, which ^oiild Jhave íubjéfted Adik to the ftriftures t çf tbc mM* « Here
* 4 Here then we came, and now, I come to the crifis of poor Adik's mifery,— a crifis which for ever unfettled her reafon, and left her what you now fee her. Adila liked the retirement of the cottage ; it foiled her prefent penfive turn of mind, and fte amufed herfelf and me with deco¬ rating it. She had entrufted the good Count Lorraine with the whole of her ftory, and he had promifed to feek out Edwin immediately on his arrival at Venice, and make him acquainted with her prefent abode. * 44 Satisfied with this affurance, and led on by hope, we were now fettled in our fecluded but romantic dwelling, when one ftormy evening at a late hour, as we were fitting alone by the fire, a knock¬ ing was heard at the door. I arofe to open it, but Adila prevented my intentions and ere I could defcry wh entered, I beheld her fall motionlefs into the arms of a cavalier, who a few minutes ferved 4 to
to convince mc was our longdoft Edwin. He feated Adik on a chair, and ffie foon revived. f< Exceffive joy had overpowered her reafon; alas! fhe knew not how quickly it was to be fucceeded by ever-d u ring grief ! When a little compofed, he told us he was come purpofely to make Adila his own; that he was in poffeffion of a noble fortune, and love and happinefs he hoped awaited them : but, notwithftanding the purport of his words, there was a diforder in his looks I did not like, and he frequently feemed abfent, and loft in thought. 44 At lesgth ftarting up, he faid he was under the neceffity of returning to Venice within a fliort time, but that we might rely on feeing him in a few days, to part from us, he hoped, no more. 44 Adik feemed difappointed at his kav- ing her again fo foon; and when in a hurried
hurried manner he quitted her, flic turned from the door, after having watched his progrefs through the valley, and burfting into a torrent of tears, exclaimed—* Ah, Mrs. Morland! fliall I ever fee him more ?' * Certainly, my Adik l faid I ; * will he not return in a few days ?* 4 Misfortune,* faid ihe, fmiling through her tears, * has taught me to be fo fearful. I know not how it is, but as he parted from me, I fancied his features were changed, and his complexion affurned a ghaftly hue.' 44 I endeavoured to ridicule her fears as the timorous fuggeftions of love, and two days paffed heavily on. The third evening after he left us, a meffenger rode up to the door of the cottage, and prefented a letter. Never can I forget that moment ! It was addreffed to me, and contained an en- clofure for Adik from the hand of the ill- fated Edwin. I have mine by me, and a copy
copy of Adik's : the original wkh a lock of hk hair, fte always wears round her neck." Mrs. Modand delivered the letter to Rofaline, who read aloud as follows; mm 44 Ah» my dear maternal friend ! beloved proteftrefs of iny adored Adik! ftart not when Iteli you that ftould this ever reach your hands, it will be when the writer is no more! His life will have been taken by a villain ! But I haften to illuftrate the horrible aifertion. I arrived at Venice, as I told you, a weak fince, and on the firft evening, at a public fupper, fell into company with the Count de Folloni. Amongft fome general converfa¬ tion, I overheard a young Italian Signor áík him if he had yet fucceeded with the pretty little Adila? The name pierced to my heart, and liftening attentively, I heard
heard the Count, with the bittereft exe¬ crations, declare his refolution to^perfevere till he obtained her by force ! I could hear no more, but demanded what Adik he talked of; and too foon learned it was her in whom all my happinefs was centered. My unguarded warmth betrayed me ; the Count ridiculed my idea of marrying her; and at length incenfed me fo, that I be¬ lieve I challenged bim. The wary Italiaa took me at my word ; but 1 refolved once again to fee my Adik, and hence that Holen and nighdy vifit to your cottage. Should my adverfary conquer, thk will be the harbinger of my death to you 1 Ok dear, much-regarded Mrs. Morland ! fue*· £??? my Adik, preferve her from a mer> cikk world, and the more mercilefs Polloni ! and if the body of the wretched Edwin be granted you, I well know you will embalm mith your maternal tears the mortal frame ofyour « Ever grateful « Orlando Rofaliner
Rofaline, with a faltering voice and tear¬ ful eyes, now read the epiftles to Adik. ¿ l*«|t-HÍ s " Grieve not, my adored Adik, at this laft addrefs of your Edwin ! Mrs, Morland's ktter will explain to you ? that, in. vindicating the caule of her far dearer to me than exiftence, your Edwin's life is facrificed ! It is hard, at the mo¬ ment I have found you after .fo long a fearch, to be at once, by the hand of a villain, fevered from you for ever! But the ways of Providence, though dark and myftical, are ever juft and wife. Let us, darling objeft of thy Edwin's lateft prayers, let us endeavour to think fo, and to believe tbat in thofe climes where no vik Polloni can ever more feparate us, we ffiall affuredly be eternally united. I go, perhaps to punifh—perhaps to die ! May Heaven in mercy avert a blow fo fevere, and carry me in lafety to ber who, ihould my life fiül -a t kcrifice,
facrifice, will be the kit thougjit, the laft fond idea that will occupy the mind of her " Edwin."
" The whole letter,*' faid Mrs. Morland, ** poor Adik never perufed ; for, ere 1 had read half of mine, with a horrid and fear¬ ful ffirkk ffie fell inanimate by me ! To life ffie was foon reftored ; but, alas ! reafon, Hke a bird frightened from its home, fled to return no more ! * * The body of Edwin was granted, through the intereft of the Count Lorraine, by whofe interference it was brought from Venice, and interred in yonder del!. ^ c The fixed delirium of Adik has never varied. The Count frequently vifits, and ever laments not having reached Venice in time to prevent the fatal duel. Every comfort
comfort and indulgence he can procure foi the poor maniac he fends her; but her only confolation has long confifted in vifiting the tomb of Edwin, and finging fome lines fte has compofed there every morning and evening : íhe decks it with frefli ever¬ green, and often ftrews it with flowers* i'or whole days fte wanders round the pre¬ cinfts of the valky, but never ftrays far¬ ther. She is now gone out on her morning vifit to the tomb.** 44 I Ibould üke to fee her there," faid Madame. 44 We will walk that way then/* faid Mrs. Morknd; "it will not difturb ber, air r- " " "· "'' r ' for Ihe iiever otgefts to feeing any one." As the^všraverfed the biifty path Rofaline and Mortimer had gone through the pre¬ ceding day, Madame enquired wheiber the Count de PoBoni bad ever made any .enquiry concerning Adik Ance the death Edwin. «He
44 He heard from the good Counf Lor¬ raine," faid Mrs. Morland, " her lament¬ able flate, and offered any reparation in his power, but it is now too late." As fte fpoke, they came within fight of the tomb. Adik was kneeling by it ; a wreath of willow encircled the diftevelled treffes ofher hair, and fhe had ftrewed long branches of it over the tomb, in the midft of which flie had laid a withered rofe broken from its ftalk. At their approach fte raifed her head. 44 Adik, my love !" faid Mrs. Morland, 44 thefe ladies are from England, and wift to fee you." " England !" exclaimed her hapiefs charge ; «« ah, happy England ! it was there poor Adik made a depofit which no prayers or entreaties could ever get back, for it was there fte left her happinefs> which, truant-like, fled from her beating bofom as the Chores of Engknd receded from
from her view, and never, never more could the wanderer be lured back to its home." Then rifing, fte advanced, and looking piteoufly at them, fte took the hand of Rofaline, and pointing to the faded rofe — 44 Look at that poor withered flower !" fte cried; 4€ I have placed it in the centre of poor Edwin's tomb, as an emblem of the forlorn Adila, who once, like that rofe, was blooming and gay I" She paufed, then looking again at Ro¬ faline—" This," kid fte, * c is my daily em¬ ployment ; and well may I fay, in the words ofa poeteis ofyour own country-— ** I have pausM o'er the grave where fome lover was laid, «« I have torn the mie weeds from his breaft l f ' I have decked it with flowVets, and oft have I faid, « How I envy thy paliet or reft l* Ah, Edwin ! I do indeed envy thy pallet of reft í for never more can the rude ftorm of mifery,
' r, f mifery, the bitter gales of wretchednefs, roar round thv head ! Thou art eternally fecure from their violence in a bleifed afylum, where poor Adila would fain join thee!" " Come, Adila," faid Mrs. Morknd, '* you will now walk back with us ?" " Stay a moment," faid flie j and fnatch¬ ing up her guitar, fte fang the fame air as flie did the preceding evening, ending with the line— " He is gone, and ftill Adila's here l* Then rifing, fte took the offered arm of Rofaiine, and quietly returned with them to the cottage. She fpoke, however, no more - 9 for, fince her infanity Mrs. Morknd faid, if it were not on the fubjeft which occupied her whok mind, fte never fpoke at all, nor had fhe ever fhed a tear. They ftaid fome time at the cottage, and then,
then, with many acknowledgments to Mrs· Morland^ took their leave. Rofaline's mind was fo engrofled by the ftory of the hapkfs Adila, that her mourn¬ ful but interefting voice yet vibrated in her ears as fte fo pathetically fung her fimple lay to the memory of Edwin. Even in the vifions of night it echoed around her in thofe foft tones with which flie warbled out the melancholy line— ** He ís gone, and ftill Adila's here V\
CHAP.
?????????????????? ??? ???????
V^Jrl-iYa * 11*
* f His heart no felfiih cares confined, " He felt for all that feel diftrefs 5 ** And, ftill benevolent and kind, <* He b!ef$*d them, or he wiih'd to blefs." Cartwright.
AS the travellers proceeded on their journey the following day, poor Adik and her for¬ rows were the whole fubjeft of their con¬ verfation; and Rofaline fliuddered vvhen ffie reflefted that it was the murderer of the hapkfs Edwin from whom flie had fo nar¬ rowly efcaped. A cold, which Madame vol. iv. ? caught
caught from being expofed ? late to the night air in travelling, detained thera leverai days on the road; it was, however, attended with no farther ill confequence* than a detention from purfuing their jour* ncy, which win continued as foon as ihe again found herfelf able to iravcl. Towards the clofe ofthe firft evening, a thkk wood by ihc fide oi the road caught the attention of Roialine; and as the car¬ riage moved (lowly on, thc founds of mufic and revelry frequently refounded through the thick foliage. Ikiceiving her inclina¬ tion to be informell of iheir caufe, Madame propoied ihey ihould alight, and, attended by Mortimer and a fervant, cuter the wood» Rofaline with pkafoie agreed, and they bad no foont r pafled the boundaries which divided it from the road, than thc founds were more difltnftly to be bearti ; and direct¬ ing their ftep» to the place from whence they proceeded, they found in feveral re- celles cut in the wood, groups of peaknts dancing
(dancing and finging to the ruftic inftnf· j ments of their companions, while others t were amufing themfeives with different Idi verfions under the fhade of the lofty trees ¡around. They feemed all habited in a fort fof uniform; and by the mirth and gaiety | in the countenances of all, they imagined j it mufl be fomc public feafon of rejoicing. [ Approaching one of thefe rural parties, : Mortimer addreffed a young man who ι hatl juft ceafed dancing, and aiked what ί lefii vai ihey were celebrating. i " Is it pofiible, Signor," replied the pea- Ktnt, € * that you can be ignorant ? We pre aflembled to commemorate the happy Becovery of our good Lord, the Count, from the dangerous iilnefs he has lately been ¡Hiheted with. The day he is reftored to ps, is a day of rejoicing to the whole pro· fri nee !" " What Count is this?" aiked Mor¬ timer. *' Ah !" returned the peafant, 44 I fear ? ? there
there, ¡a but one that anfwers the de¬ fcription, for who could ever yet be put in competition with the great and good Count Lorraine ?" 44 Surely," faicl Rofaline, " we are deftined to hear the praifes of this famous Count Lorraine. I almoft wilh it were poffible to procure a fight of fo extra¬ ordinary a man." " ifyou chufe to go to the Abbey, Lady," faid the peafant, " your wiih ma} be gra¬ tified. There is to-night to be a fump¬ tuous entertainment given there for all the, friends of the Count to join in celebrating his reftoration to health ; but if you, Signor," tuining to Mortimer, «« and thefe kdies will pic afe to feat y ourfelves a few minutes, you will ke the whok of the fports, for tbe proceflion is juft entering the wood yonder." They accepted the peafant's invitation, and ftationing themfeives beneath the fpiead- ing branches of a lofty palm-tree, the dancing
dancing fuddenly ceak d, inda group of poor children, who had bee. .^d and clothed by the bounty of the Count, appeared in view. They were followed by ten young peafant girls, each fupporting on lier arm an aged parent or relation, whofe laft years were rendered happy by this excellent Noble¬ man's benevolence. A long train of the lame and the blind fucceeded, for whom a vaft eftabliflimcnt on his own eftate had been founded by this young philanthropift. The proceffion moved, and firmed a large cìicle, and the ten young pealants advancing into the centre, fung in chorus this hymn to Gratitude, accompanied by every voice prefent :— « Our grateful voices let us raifc « In adoration, prayer, and praife, ** To that ? .-gracious PowY, " Who, by a mortals bounteous hand, " Has fhower'd down bleffings on the laai, " And blefsM each rifing hour I c 3 « Ah,
" Ah, Gratitude ! enchanting maid 1 ° Qh, lend us thy reviving aid, *' To praife the hand of Heaven ! " That be t whofe fweet benevolence «' Does happinefs to all difpenfe, " Has to our prayers been given. *' He lives not for himfelf alone, *« The cairn of confcience is his own î " He hears that fmall ftill voice, *« Which never-ceafing plaudits rends, " Which comfort to the troubled lends, ** And makes e'en woe rejoice I " Health's choiceft bleffings may he know, ·· Nor ever feel the pang of woe, ·· Qr forrow's pointed dart I «'Ah, far remove all mifery rude, " «And may no fell ingratitude ** E'er wound his gen*rous heart Ì u But may each ibui-rcviving joy, " Which nought has influence to deftroy, " Its happieft comforts pour 1 "- And when a life ίο good (halí ceaie, M By angela borne to realms of peace, ?! Be blefs'd for evermore !"
After having for fome time ftaid to wit¬ nefs the grateful mirth of the cottagers, the party returned to their carriage, with an anxious defire to behold the extraordinary being to whom this feftival was dedicated. It was now growing duik; and fearful of being out kte in the evening, Madame defired the poftillions to haften to the inn where they were to fpend the night. In converiation on the fcene they had juft witneifed, they paifed nearly an hour, till the moon rifing, gave Rofaline a partial but beautiful view of a woody country, and the high battlements of a lofty building, which rofe over the tops of fome waving pine-woods at a fmall diftance. The firft beams of the rifing moon ftot their pale rays acrofs the cluftering turrets, and difcovered them to be dark and numerous ; and the filver light as it faintly illumined the fmall windows, feemed to refleft a ? 4 variety
variety of colours. She had fcarcely a moment admired in fiknce the effeft of thc moonbeams on thofe lofty towers, when fuddenly, with a violent craft, the carriage broke down, and one door flying open, Rofaline was thrown out ; but as fte fell on the turf, flie received no other injury than the alarm. Mortimer inftantly daned from his horfe, and flying to her afliftance, found her unhurt, but faint and terrified. He raifed her from the ground ; but fte aflured him fte was quite fafe, and entreated hini to go to the relief of Madame, who, however, was fo fortunate as to have efcaped with equal fafety. The accident had been feen by a fervant in a rich livery, who was ftanding at the entrance of the avenue that apparently led to the building Rofaline had a few minutes before obíèrved. Hk exclamations alarmed feveral others at a little diftance, all of whom Mortimer and Rofaline found bufy in
in extricating Madame and her attendants from the carriage, They were entreated to go into the manfion, which, to their furprife, they learned was the Abbey Lorraine. A very few minutes had elapfed when íê veral more fervants came towards them. One of them, whofe appearance wasfuperior to the reft, delivered a meífage from hk Lord, the Count, defiring the ftrangers wouid take flielter in the Abbey, which they would find a welcome afylum. The carriage, on examination, proved to be much injured; and Madame, find¬ ing it would be impracticable to at* tempt to. proceed at prefent, accepted the hofpitable invitation, and they were condufted to the noble edifice before them by the fervants. " Chance, you fee, my dear Rolaíme," faid Madame, " has gratified the wift you c J expreíkd
exprcfled this mornmg to behold this won* derful Count !" Rokline fcarcely heard her. They were juft come within fight of the Abbey : the folding doors were thrown open into an outer hall, which was illumined in all parts. It was fupported by pillars of variegated marble, forming a long foite of arches, which, by the refieftion of the lamps, were diftinguiftable long ere they entered tbe building. Tbe founds of gaiety and rejoicing reached their ears as they paffed the outer gates into a paved court ; they ?????? louder as they approached, and when they entered tbe marble hall, they found it was only divided by an arched pâflàge from the kloon where the ball was held. If was a fuperb room, though of ancient ftrufture; and though furniflied and ornamented in the Gothic ftyk, its magnifitence exceeded every idea Rofaline bad ever formed of grar*deur, A high gallery
galkry fupported on gilt columns, for the fpeftators, furrounded it, to one part of which the Count's fervant who condufted them, pointing, faid-—« 4 There is my Lord, the Count !" Rofaline raifed her eyes, and perceived a crowd of gentlemen furrounding one who appeared to be feated higher than the reft ι but from the diftance, and the numbers around him, they could gain but a very imperfect view of him. They remained near the door ofthe faioon tili a middle-aged woman, who the fervant informed them was fuperintendent of the Count's houfehold, approached to conduft them to an apartment, which they found enlivened by a cheerful fire. Here they were fupplied with refreftments ; and having in feme meafure recovered their fatigue and alarm, were converfing on the accident which had thus led them to the refidence of a man they had both felt fo anxious ? 6 to
tobehold, when a meffage was brought to them from the Count, expreffmg a hope that they would, for that night at leaft, accept fuch accommodation as the Abbey afforded ; and that, if not too much fa¬ tigued by travelling, they would join the company below when it was agreeable to them. Rofaline, whofe wiffi to fee the Count became momentarily ftronger, expreffing an inclination to accept the invitation, Madame confented, and they were reconducted to the faioon. Here they found Mortimer, who had met with feveral gentlemen he knew, amongft whom Rofaline, with furprife, recognifed the Marquis de Bernon. He no fooner recollected her, than with a countenance expreffive of amazement and delight, he approached, and addreffed her in his accuftomed ftyle of adulation. Rofa¬ line anfwered with coldnefs to the many compliments he paid her on his unexpefted good fortune in meeting her, and turning
to Mortimer, fte enquired if he had yet feen the Count; but how was fte dif¬ appointed to hear that a few minutes before their entrance he had been feized with a fudden indifpofition, which had obliged him to retire to his own apartment, from whence he had fent an excufe to tbe company for leaving them ; but as it was caufed by a violent faintnefs, he hoped it would allow him to join them again before the clofe of the entertainment : in the meantime he had deputed his particular friend to do the honours of his houie in his ftead, who, he doubted not, would attend with equal pkafure to the company. Rofaline no fooner beheld this friend of the Count, who now advanced to be intro¬ duced to the ftrangers, than flie recognifed the Chevalier de Polloni. He politely teftified his pleafure and furprife at the meeting, and Roialine was glad to perceive that much of that weight of woe which had
had feemed to prefs on his ípirits at St. Aivars, was now removed. He entered into converfation with her on her recent efcape from St. Aivars, re¬ ports of which he faid had reached his ears, though the particulars he had reafon to believe had been feduloufly kept from his knowledge. He expreifed the forrow he felt on hearing the perfecution and ill- treatment fte had endured. He had been for iome time a conftant refident at Lor¬ raine with his friend, and was there during her vifit to Polloni, which he had not till very lately heard of. He attended her and Madame as they walked round the faioon, and took a lurvey of the company. An arcade of poliflied marble divided an orcheftra, where feveral muficians were feated, from the body of the faioon. Many of the company were mafked, and reprefented grotefque figures, and all in parties
parties were diverting themfeives with a variety, of amufements. * Rofaline was now earneftly folicited by Mortimer to dance, and as fhe knew he would not quit her if ffie refufed, ffie was obliged to comply ; but fte had fcarcely gone down one, ere by an incident wholly unexpefted, ihe repented having yielded to his perfuafions. The perfons of whom the fet confifted, being total ftrangers, fte fcarcely regarded them feparately, till fuddenly hearing her own name repeated by the partner of a cavalier, who in the courfe of the dance had juft taken her hand, ffie turned round, and beheld with much furprife Signora de Rochefort. Both, however, being engaged in the dance, Rofaline could only teftify her recolkftion of her by a nod ; but what words can paint the different and various emotions which agitated her whole frame, when at the fame moment flie perceived that
that the band which grafped her's was that of Adolphus. Her eyes fixed on his coun¬ tenance ; it was overfpread with a deadly palenefs, while her own too plainly difclofed the antation ofher mind. A ludden faint¬ nefs came over her; fortunately they were at the end of the dance, and clofe to a door which opened into an apartment appropriated for refreftments. Almoft unconfcious of what fte did, Roialine fprang forward, and funk on the firit kat within it, followed by Mortimer, wbo had obferved her emotion. 44 Good Heavens l' exclaimed he, *' what can be the matter ?" 44 Nothing but the heat, I believe,** faid fte faintly, " the room is very warm;" and attempting to rife, flie again funk back on the feat without fpeaking. Mortimer flew for affiftance, and was met by Madame, who, as fte fat by at fome diftance,
diftance, had obferved Rofaline's precipi¬ tate retreat. A few moments in the air revived hcr. " You had better not dance any more, my love," iaid Madame; " accompany me to the gallery; it will be cooler, and we ffiall have a better view of the company.*' Rofaline confented in filence, and at· tended by Mortimer and the Marquis, whom her fudden iilnefs had attracted, they afcended to the gallery. It command¬ ed a view ofthe faioon ; but Rofaline fcarcely dared turn her eyes towards it, left ffie ftould again behold Adolphus. He however did not appear ; and Mortimer being en¬ gaged in converfation with a young Italian Nobleman whom he knew, the Marquis took this opportunity to apologize for the terror he had caufed her by his midnight entrance into her apartment at St. Älvars, adding,
adding, that fte muft attribute it wholly to that paffion which yet confumed him, and which would have impelled him to make another attempt to refcue her from the Baron and the Count, had he not heard of her fudden departure from the chateau, fincc which he had fpent the greateft part of his time in making fruitlefs enquiries concerning her. As he was fpeaking, the whole aflem-· ?? became fuddenly filent, while the band played a grand piece of mufic, after which feveral airs were fung; but what were the wonder and emotion of Rofaline when a voice from the orcheftra, which, as it vibrated in melodious tones on her ear, flie perfeftly recollected to be that of her friend Ariel, fung the following lively air:— « Ve votaries of pleafure and vanity, fay, " As gaily ye flutter around, « Who in laughter and mirth feek Content's gentle ray, " Ah, have you the wanderer found ï ti Content»
·« Content, fweeteft maiden I ah, where doft thou dwell ? '« In the cottage or palace ? ah, fay— ** Or doft thou refide in the anchorite's cell, «« And fiy from the mirthful and gay-? 11 The vifion Tve fought in each country and clime, «< But each effort provM futile and vain ι ** It eluded my grafp, it e'er fled from my mind, 4( And left me to forrovr and pain* « Ah faireft illufion 1 moft beautiful made i " Diffufe thy fweet calm o'er my breaft ) » Ere the firft bloom of youth it beginning to ??, « Witb thee may I ever be bleft. « Thou art not» I know, to be fearch'd for in wealth, «' Nor yet in ud Poverty*· cell} " Nor yet art thou alwaya attendant on Health, " Nor for ever with Mirth doft thou dwell. u In the heart whence all ibrrow or happinefs flows, << I'll feek thee, Oh goddefs divine f 61 A friend to that bofom where innocence glows, ** Thy abode is alone in the mtnd/* ""~"~~ The
The voice evi' lently iffued from amongft the group of muficians, but in vain did the eye of Rofaline feek Ariel there. " What an enchanting voice!" faid Madame ; " I never heard any thing fo charming i'' 44 The Count Lorraine," faid the Mar¬ quis, " is celebrated for keeping a band of the choiceft muficians Italy can produce. He is an enthufiaft in mufic, though he never plays or fings himfelf; but, for the entertainment of himfelf and his friends, felefts the fineft voices for vocal performers in the concert, wbich is performed every evening at the Abbey, whether he be pre¬ fent or not." A dance, compofed of mafks, now drew the attention of the party ; and while the eye of Rofaline roved through the kloon in fearch of Adolphus, whom ilie could not help wifliing to fee again, ihe fuddenly detened
defcried the light aerial form of her fylph, fuch as it had appeared at Woodville, habited in the fame blue veft, with his wings extended, dart from beneath the arcade into the centre of the company, and join with his wonted agility in the mazes ofthe dance; and while yet her eyes in wonder followed his ethereal figure, with the fame rapidity of motion it darted out of fight, and was loft in the gloom which . enveloped the long fuite of arches that kd to the marble hall; but foon were Ariel and his myfteries, interefting as the fubjeft ever was to her, eflaced from her memory by another objeft, for which the artlefs bofom of Rofaline, while exiftence animated her heart, was deftined to beat with anxious in¬ quietude. This was Adolphus himfelf, who was leading Emilia de Rochefort ? join the dancers ; but happening to raife his eyes to the balcony, they met thofe of Rofaline : he ftarted, and dropping the hand of hk fair partner, fuddenly retreated. Poor Rofaline's heart palpitated with uncontroukd
uncontroukd emotion ; flie no longer faw or heard what paflfed around her, and fte fat almoft ftupified for feveral minutes till, fuddenly aroufed from her reverie, fte perceived Madame had left the gallery. Concluding that, fatigued by travelling and company, fte had retired to her chamber, fte formed a refolution to follow her ; and feizing an opportunity when the Marquis had turned from her to addrefs Mortimer and a party of Signors with him, fte glided out of the gallery, and taking the firft paffage fte faw, ran down it, uncon¬ fcious whether it led to tbe room they were before in. Fearful of being purfued by Mortimer or the Marquis, fte flew with avidity through feveral rooms till fte arrived at a long paflage fte had not feen before, when fte paufed to confider which way fte fliould turn. The paflage was illumined by a large chandelier, and had feveral doors on each fide. She opened one of them, and advanced
advanced a few paces, but it was totally dark ; and ffie , was retreating, when the door fliut with violence, leaving her in darknefs. Her utmoft efforts could not unclofe it again, and ffie groped her way through what appeared to be an open door« way along another paffage or room, ihe could not difeover which ; nor was there a ray of light to guide her fteps, till flie was revived by a gleam from under a door at fome çHftance. She approached, but paufed ere ffie dared to open it ; no found reached her, and thinking it probable it led to fome of the light paflages, ffie •without farther hefitation put her hand ?n the lock ; it gave way, and difclofed a bng matted gallery of an amazing extent, imly illumined by lamps. About the [centre of the apartment ffie obferved Jthe tall figure of a man in a long wrap¬ ping gown pacing the gallery with his arms fokkd. At the found ofher entrance he ftarted round, and difplayed a pallid emaciated countenance, rendered more fallow and fickly by the faint glimmering of
of the tapers around. At fight of her he inftantly retreated, and in a faint hollow voice faid,—" Who is it tkat thus intrudes on my privacy ?" 44 A ftranger," replied Rofaline, "who has accidentally bewildered herfelf in thefe apartments." No anfwer was made, but a bell was rung with violence, while the perfon foe had thus difturbed retreated to the farther end ofthe gallery. The fervant who had conduftcd them into the manfion now appeared ; he re¬ ceived his orders in a low voice, and then approached Rofaline, who had retired with¬ out the door. He defired to know to what part of the Abbey fte wifted to be direfted. She begged to be fhewn to the room where fte concluded Madame to be, and where, according to her expeftation, fte found her. She
She ventured to aik the domeitic whether the perfon fte kd been fo unfor¬ tunate as to intrude on, was not the good s Count; but was anfwered in the negative; it was, he faid, a relation of the family of Lorraine w T ho always lived at the Abbey. She found Madame extremely fatigued, and refolved to return no more to the com¬ pany; and in no humour herfelf to rejoin it, (lie determined to remain with her friend. They were very foon vifited by Emilia, who flying into the room with her ufual gaiety, told them flie had come from Venice a few days before with a fnend, whofe chateau was contkuous to the Abbev. She did nqt mention Adolphus before Ma¬ dame, and Rofaline had no opportunity of fpeaking ro her unheard. Emilia appeared in high fpirits, and would fain have per¬ fuaded Rofaline to return with her to the faioon, but in vain; and finding her en¬ treaties ineffectual, fte excufed herielf from vol. ιν. n remaining
, remaining longer with them, by faying her partner waited her return. A deep figh efcaped the bofom of Rofa¬ line ; but turning haftily away, it pafled unobferved by Madame. When the young Signora had left them— 44 I wonder who this partner that Emilia feems, fo pleafed with, can be ?" faid Ma¬ dame. Ci I underftand it is an Engliffi ad¬ mirer ffie has met with. I hope it is no impru¬ dent acquaintance ; but her natural vola¬ tility of manners makes me ever apprehen¬ five for her difcretion in affairs of this fort." Rofaline made no reply, for her heart was too deeply interefted in the fubjeft to fuffer her to converfe on its and her referve paffed unnoticed from the entrance of Mortimer, who having heard the refo¬ lution of Rofaline from the Signora, came with a hope to prevail on her to change it; but his eloquence proved ineffectual, and he quitted her evidently mortified.
Finding Madame greatly fatigued, Rofa¬ line ibon left her, and retired to the chamber allotted for herfelf.
CHAP. III. Cl Tho 1 fainter raptures my cold breaft infpîre- ζζ Yet let me oft frequent this folemn fcene; ** Oft to the Abbey's /hatterM walls retire, α What time the moonililne dimly gleams between/* MlCKLE- JL HE apartment appropriated for the chamber of Rofaline was fpacious, and had a dark folitary appearance. The events of the evening had taken from her all difpo¬ fition to fleep ; and feating herfelf on a couch near the window, flie remained abforbed by the many ideas that crowded on her 22 mind.
mind. Adolphus, though in the midft of pkafure and gaiety, looked far from happy ; and fhe wondered he couid thus quit his lady and fitter to pais his time in diflipation at a diftance from thern. His agitation at íhe fight of her ihewed he coukl not behold her without emotion, and ihe yet felt the tremor his hand had betrayed when it held fc hcr's. To divert her thoughts from this iubject, ffie arofe and took a furvey of her chamber, and her attention was arrefted by a fmall door on one fide : it opened to a fort of landing-place, from whence led a narrow winding ftaircafe ; ihe felt a ftrong defire to afcend it, and taking her lamp, followed its turnings till it ended in a trap-door in the ceiling faftened by a fingle bolt. It now ftruck her that it opened on the battlements ; and on withdrawing the bolt, fhe found her conjefture realized. She leaned over the lofty heights, and fur¬ veyed by the faint light of the moon the waving woods below. The hour and the fcene were caicukted to imprefs the mind with
with awe : a folemn filence prevailed over the whole face of nature, and the only founds flie could diftinguifh, arofe from the interior of the Abbey, and were the echoes of revelry. As flie ftood with one arm reclined on the battlement, the tranfient view flie had that evening gained of her fylph crofled her memory, and fte wiflied he were prefent, that ihe might confult him on more than one topic vvhich juft then occurred to her. " But Ariel," fighed flie aloud, (4 has quite forfaken me l r " Be not, I conjure you, fo unjuft to him," cried his well-known voice; " firmly as ever attached to your intereft, behold him ready to do his utmoft towards accele¬ rating your wifhes; and if he has been longer abfent from you than he could wifh, it has been becaufe necefiity compelled him, But why is it that, in this region of d 3 pkafure,
pleafure, you chufe to abfent yourfelf from yon Icllivc fcene, to court iolttudc amidft thefe dreary towers?" " For me," replied Rofaline, " almoft all gaiety has long fince 1 ft its relifh even where 1 am known, much more then where all are ftrangers, and confequently unin¬ terefting to ??." '* Rather fay," replied Ariel, <f that had the company of this evening been all really ftrangers to you, your tranquillity would not have been interrupted, nor your mind dipofed to baniih fleep, and court meditation at this unfeafonable hour; and fancy not that you alone are the victim ofa fentiment natural to the mind of man : you have this evening beheld a melancholy inftance of it. The perion you to-night encoun¬ tered in the matted gallery in the eaftern divificn of the Abbey, is a member of the Lorraine family, and an early victim to a romani ic pauten, which has conquered his reafon, and left him a prey to infanity." *< And if happinefs bo for ever beyond his
bis reach," faid Rofaline, ÍC perhaps the deprivation of reafon may be rather con¬ fidered as a mercy than a misfortune." " Alas !" faid Ariel, 4< he has, I believe, his lucid intervals, though the generality of the world will not allow it ; his aftions, fuch as they feem in the public eye, pro¬ claim him a maniac," He then added an enquiry how flie liked tlie entertainment in general that evening. " I have been fo completely difap¬ pointed," anfwered Rofaline, " by the abfence of the Count Lorraine, that the company and amufements had no charms for me. The extraordinary charafter I have heard of him has, I own, raifed the moit ardent curiofity to behold him." <c And in him>" faid Ariel, " you would only fee an inftance of the inability of riches and fplendour to procure happinefs. Reftlefs on his bed of down, and unable to ileep beneath the fuperb canopy under which he in vain feeks repofe, he is d 4 compelled
compelled to acknowledge that power cannot defend him from fkknefs, nor wealth pur¬ chafe him peace of mind ; and perhaps at this moment, enviable as his fituation may appear, he woukl gladly exchange it with the moit bumble of his vaffals, who, though expofed to the bitternefs of penury, is yet admitted a partaker of the banquet of heath, where not all his greatly coveted riches can procure him admiffion." " Alasi who then can hope for peace of mind," faid Rofaline, " if he who poffeffes fuch univerfal philanthropy, and practifes every virtuous precept, has miffed it?" " There are circumftances in the life of the Count Lorraine," replied Ariel, " which are only known to the few who are admitted to his confidence,' and which, were they difclofed to you, his fecret anxieties would no longer be wonderful. This inftance only teaches us more plainly that this is not the place where virtue is to expeft its final reward. The whole life of the Count Lorraine»
Lorraine, to my knowledge, has been, and itili continues to be, fpent in an inde¬ fatigable fearch after objefts to whom his fortune and counfels can be fervieeable. No difficulties ever deter his perfeverance, no ingratitude ever prevents his continuance in the fame path of active good ; and yet his mind is not that feat of tranquillity, that placid temple of peace you would expeft to find it, but confined within his own breaft is every fource of forrow, and in pri* vacy and folitude are they nourifted. But let me, ere I depart, aik you if I were obferved by you to-night amongft the throng of company in the faioon ?" " Yes indeed you was," anfwered Rofa* line, 44 nor can I exprefs my pleafure when your voice reached my ears from the or¬ cheftra; I knew it inftantly, and liftened to it with delight." « And ftall I," faid Ariel» « tell you my motive for joining in the concert ? Like the fource of every other action, it originated with you. I had' noted your countenance, n 5 and
and knew what pafled in your heart, there¬ fore fung that ftrain to irj if the well-known voice of your fylph would recai you to recoheftion ; but left the night air fhould prove injurious to you, I will now advife you to retire to your chamber : ere long I may agati find an opportunity to addrefs you, probably before you reach England." " Allow me firft," faid Rofaline, " to attempt to excufe the inattention I ihewed to the warning you fo kindly gave me at Malvini." 44 We will not talk of it," faid Ariel ; 44 it was amply puniflied by the terror you were thrown into; and now for to-night adieu: one only requeft I will add—the laft thing before you retire to reft, con¬ template for a few minutes the old por¬ trait of the warrior over the chimney- piece in your chamber, and for one moment ι. thkk of Ariel. Good night, iweet Rofa¬ line !—May the God of mercies guard your flumbers !" A faint
A faint light flafted along the battle¬ ments, glimmered for a minute, and then difappeared, leaving Rofaline pondering on the laft words of her fylph. The wind began to rife, and blowing cold round her, warned her to retire to her apartment. She had no fooner reached it, than without fetting down the light, flie held it to furvey the portrait whicii Ariel had pointed out to her obfervation. It reprefented a man of noble mien, in a war¬ like habit, mounted on a fiery courier. Jt immediately ftruck Rofaline that.the whole pifture feemed familiar to her, and at length ihe recollected that there was one exactly refembling it in one of the galleries at St. Aivars. The import of Ariel's words con¬ cerning it, flie in vain tried to develop; and feeling greatly fatigued, (he now refolved to retire to reft. Involuntarily her truant thoughts would ftray to Adolphus, and exclude all difpofition to fleep; and fte d 6 was
was obliged t^cx rt h r *mo q endeavours to difcard this fatal fubje;t fr jai her mind. Juft bef ire flie retired, Ariel's requeft again recurred to her. She once more furveyed the countenance of the hero the portrait reprefented, and thought fhe could difeover, through the martial ardour which feemed to glow in it, a melancholy gravity that greatly interefted her. She had contem¬ plated it for a few moments when foft mufic ftole on her ear, and ihe recognifed the enchanting melody of Ariel; it played one of thofe foothing ftrains which never failed to calm the difcordant paffions pf Rofaline. After having liftened till it ceafed» and the ftillneis of night fucceeded, ihe took a laft look at the portrait, as the fylph had requefted, and retired to reft. Hei fleep was uneafy and difturbed; horrid dreams and vifions of the fancy tormented her
her flumbers, anel flie arofe at an early hour of the morning, long ere Magdelina had recovered the fatigue of the preceding day fufficiently to allow her attendance. She fto.e foftly to the apartment of Madame; but findkg her ftill in a calm fleep, ffie returned to her own, and obferving the beauty of the morning from her window, flie refolved to try to explore her way from the Abbey to the woody plantations, which from her cafement (he faw it was furrounded by. The paffage which led from her charm- ber, condufted her through feveral apart¬ ments, which ffie remembered to have paffed through the night before to the great gallery that furrounded the faioon. That magnificent room was now deferted ; and the d) ing lamps, yet fcarcely extinguifhed, glimmered partially around. Rofaline for a moment leaned over the fide of the bal¬ cony to lurvey the grandeur of this apart¬ ment; and then recollecting its vicinity to the hall by which tliey had entered, 6 defcended
defcended the ftaircafe, from whence fte foon reached the grand entrance. Here, however, ihe could find no door that feemed to lead to the outer courts ; flie gained one, from which feveral fteps defcended to a ftone paffage, and at the end were large folding doors. She approached with no expeftation of finding them unfaftened, but here fte was miftaken; one of them was already open, which fte difcovered led into an ancient chapel. She defcended into it by feveral fteps, and difcerned numberlcfs monuments with glittering infcriptions. She approached one that appeared to have been erected more recently than the reft, and read with fome furprife— To the Memory of CHARLOTTE LORRAINE, afterwards BARONESS DE ST. ÄLVARS. a It
It now occurred to her that Angelina had told her the kte Baronefs was a daughter of the Lorraine family, and (he doubled not it was the monument of that excellent and unfortunate woman fhe beheld. She fighed to the fad remembrances it brought to her mind, and paffed on towards the other end of the chapel. She had nearly reached it when fhe difcovered that flie had difturbed fome perfon. A figure in black kneeling before the altar, at her approach ftarted up, and difappeared. This circum¬ ftance made her hefitate whether flie ftould proceed, when, aš flie advanced, fte dif¬ cerned a fmall door on each fide this end of the building, through one of which fhe concluded the perfon had retreated. The other ftood half open into an inner paved court; ihe paifed it to an outer one, from whence a finail wicket admitted her to one of thofe woods (he had fo much ad¬ mired from the battlements the evening ? before. She followed the narrow windings \ 0*
ofthe path that led from it, till it gradually widened into a fort of fquare, on one üde of which, through the fpreading branches of an oak, feated on a gentle eminence, there appeared a fmall building which feemed to be compofed of different co¬ loured ftones. The fpreading ivy had grown almoft all over the exterior, and given it a molt romantic appearance : the perfeft feclufion of the fpot, and the matin fong of the birds that fung around her, charmed Rofaline, She paffed the oak- tree, and afcended the green bank and feveral fleps that led to this little retreat, and was about to enter it by a glafs door which opened to an inner room from a fmall outer porch, when fuddenly cafting her eyes on a panel above the door-way, flie read the following ftrange înfeription ;.—
Thai
The STONE TEMPLE, ???<5? in 17 Dedicated to a Heart pure as the Celestial Mansion from whence it fprung. Let none but the firm Step of Rectituds Intrade on thefe hallowed Precincts. If innate Peace, Oh Stranger ! Be tby own—if, howe'er fubdued by Afflictiok, In thy inmoil Heart there yet remain No Source of Self-reproach, No Sting of vile Remorfe, Fear not to enter here : The unerring Form of VIRTUE Dwells within, and to her Counterpart On Earth This humble Edifice is confecrated»
Twice had Rofaline perufed this finguiar iafcription, when as fhe ftill ftood contem¬ plating it, ihe was ftartied by the voice of her fylph, who exclaimed—" Does the perufal of thofe lines make you hefitate? Alas ! if unfpotied innocence like your's is deterred by it from entering, who elfe can ever d »re to prcfane the hallowed abode of virtue ?** tt Unconfcious of intentional evil," faid Rofaline, " I certainly am; but utterly void of error who can pronounce themfeives?" 44 This little retreat," continued the fylph, 4ς is a frequent refort of the great Count Lorraine himfeif, but ftill more is it frequented by the poor maniac whom you laft night beheld 5 and within will you find many memorials of the fatal infanity which fways every action of diat unhappy being. But I muft change the fubjeft to one I ftould have introduced in our laft night's interview, had not your midnight fituation in the open air prevented me from pro- ????? our converfation. What I would
ky, rektes to one who has lately enrolled himfelf a volunteer in the corps of your admirers. By your journey to England, he doubtlefs hopes to enfure the happinefs he has hitherto in vain folicited, forgetful that while an object fo fafcinating detains him within the circle of her attraction, there is a fair forlorn one in his native country kft to experience all the mortifica¬ tion of his defertion and unmerited neg· left. Won himfelf by fuperior charms, he no longer remembers her, who, thinking herfelf fecure in his honour and affection, is even now, perhaps, fondly planning fchemes of happinefs which ihe will too foon for her own peace be convinced will never exift but in her own deceived ima* gination. The mifery whkh muft then be her lot, you, whofe foul is formed of every foft material, will, I am fure, be anxious to fave her, by your total difcouragement of one who has alreadv violated the bond he ought to hold facred as his word," 44 What
" What a fcene have you pictured!" faid Rofaline; «« and great as the uneafinefs has been which the fubjeft has given me, I have yet the fatisfaftion to know that,. fo far from ever having encouraged the regard which Captain Mortimer has pro¬ fefled for me, I have already exerted every endeavour to convince him how vain wilt be his perfeverance. What farther I can do, I own 1 know not ; but if you will favour me with inftruftions, I will readily promife to abide by them." 44 Apply to his father," faid Ariel, 44 if, on your arrival in Engknd, you find he continues to perfecute you. ? know Sir Edward Mortimer well; he is a man o£ the moft punctilious honour, and nieeft rectitude of conduft ; nor need )?? hefitate in addrefling him, when you confider that not only yourfelf will be more at eafe from his ceafing to perfecute you, but that the happinefs, the peace of another depend on it.'* ** How
« How forcibly do you reprefent it!'* kid Rofaline; " and, believe me, your counfel ftall not be unworthily beftowed. Never willingly did I for any gratification, hovvever great, for a moment wound the feelings of another ; how much more then would í do to fecure happinefs to any one when my own quiet will alfo be the con¬ fequence : but, aksl" added fte, fighing, 44 too often already has it been my fate to be the caufe, the involuntary caufe of uneafinefs to others l' " We will drop this fubjeft," cried Ariel, " and if we cannot look forward with pleafure, let us contemplate the paft, and we ftall find we have already enjoyed an infinitely greater ihare of happinefs than our merits entitled us to. í will now bid you, perhaps, a long adieu. Till your prefent journey is accomplifhed, I ftall not cer¬ tainly converfe with you again; and it is probable that when next we meet, the period I formerly predicted may be arrived, when a full difclofure ftall be made, and the perfon, thoughts, and aftions of Ariel ftall
fliall pafs in review before you ; till when, if you follow implicitly the guidance öf your o n heart, and aft according to its diftates alone, you will ftand in no need of my admonitions. And now, fweeteft Rofaline, adieu ! May Heaven's choiceit bleflings attend you, and may the heart of Ariel, though in a diftant land, be cheered with the happy tidings pf your feliciry I May favourable gales fwiftly waft you to Albion's happy ifle, and propitious winds land you in fafety on its coafts ; and, re¬ turned to the bofom of your friends, may you continue to enjoy the permanent fweets of a pure confcience, and be each evening lulled to repofe by that mofl enchanting of all melody, " the mufic ofthe mind !" Ariel ceafed ; his farewel ftrain was played, and all again was filent: but Rofa¬ line flood immoveable. His laft folemn words had affefted her, and fte remained in the fame fpot ior a few minutes, till, fancying fte heard a ftep approaching, (he entered
entered the temple, and beheld a fmall circular room. In the middle was a white marbk ftatue reprefenting Virtue. S nail fofas were ranged round, and before one ftood a table ; a lute and guitar laid upon ir, and fome fcattered papers on the fofa. She took up one, and as flie perufed a poetical fragment, flie concluded, from the melancholy tendency of the words, it was from the pen of the poor infane whom Ariel bad mentioned. The words were thefe :—
·'« Oh gentleft Solitude ! fair, piacid Queen I ¡, " I woo thee in this filem lonely fcene. " At this dark hour, when weary mortals reft, t( While the poor labourer with fleep is bleft, « I wander thro' thefe folemn, awful (hades, «« And vent my griefs amid thefe graiTy glades. «« Thefe darkfome trees admit no cheerful ray, * ( Excluding e*en the brighteft tints of day ; « Thy dwelling here, Oh Solitude ! I find, ** Meet gueft for this perturbed, imfocia! mind* *' *Tis here alone I know the calm of peace, ** 'Tis thou alone who bidtt my forrovvs ceafe* « A pleafing
*' A pleafing awe thy prtfence can diffufe, *« An<l here alone 1 court ihe ptnfive Mufe. €i In pity to my fadnefs ihe attends* ** And oft her fympathetic aid flie lends. ** To (both my Joitows, and allay my grief* u And give the woe*worn fufferer relief, il That kind relief which poefy can give, %i Which bids the drooping, forrowing wanderer live/* ??????????^???????? She read the efforts of the melancholy flranger's Mufe vrith filent pity, and then ftruck the chords of the lute ; the found vibrated back from the walls of the little edifice as flie played a favourite air, which ffie had fcarcely finiihed, when the Che¬ valier de Polloni appeared at the door of the temple. After the compliments.of the morning— " Have you really," faid he, fmiling, " had the temerity to venture within the walls of this myitic temple?" Rofaline
Rofaline rifing, and laying down the inftrument, related the furprife fte had felt on reading the infcription without the door. 44 It is indeed," faid he, 44 as Angular as the charafter of its owner. This build¬ ing was erected I underftand, by one of the Count's anceftors; but by whom the lines were penned, or to what imaginary eleity the edifice is confecrated, I know not. Its pifturefque fituation renders it a favourite retreat of my friend, who is a great lover of the romantic. But I forget that I came purpofely to feek you, and to inform you that Madame Malvini waits your attend- ance." As they walked towards the manfion, the Chevalier told her there was a public break¬ faft in the grand faioon for fuch of the company as chofe to affemble there ; and to thofe who, from choice or indifpofition, preferred retirement, it was ferved in their own apartment. vol. iv. e 4i The
" The rule of this houfe," added he, 44 is, that every one ffiould follow his own inclination. The Count himfelf, without ceremony, does exactly, when his manfion is filled with guefts, as he would if he were alone, and either joins them, or retires as it fuits his humour. Acquainted with his fingularity of charafter, his friends wonder at none of his actions, as his goodnefs of heart, and true benevolence of lemper, are too well known to doubt there being a fufficient motive for every aft of his life. The moment he enters into company he is furrounded by a crowd ; and his fociety is fo ardently fought, that, did he not preferve the privilege of retiring at his pleafure, he would be conftantly fur¬ rounded by a multitude. He is indeed fuch an inexhauftible fund of knowledge and learning, that the charms of his con¬ verfation alone are forcible enough to attract the greateft Utermi of the age to his houfe." Rofaline,
Rofaline, in lively terms, lamented her difappointment in not feeing hirn. * f I have been to his apartment thk morning," faid the Chevalier, " but he has paflfed a fleeplefs night, and I fear will not be able to appear in the faioon to¬ day. Indeed, his anxiety to gratify his fervants and vaifals in a public rejoicing for his recovery, has, I fejar, induced him to exert himfelf before the ftrength of his con~ ftitution was fufficiently reftored, to enable him to endure the fatigue of company." They now entered the hall, and Rofaline haftened to the apartment of Madame, whom ihe found rifen, and determined to recommence their journey immediately after breakfaft. They joined the party in the faioon, which confifted of part of the company of the preceding evening. The Marquis de Bernon immediately approached them, and ? 2 feating
feating himfelf by Rofaline, enquired if ffie left Lorraine that day ;—flie anfwered coldly in the affirmative, and he requefted ftie would honour him with a few moments* private converfation previous to her depar¬ ture. This, however, ihe declined ; and notwithftanding his remonftrances, turned a deaf ear to all he could urge on the fubjeft, only adding that, as he was acquaint¬ ed with her fentiments, all farther per¬ fecution would be vain. He entreated to know to what part of England ffie was going, hinting an intention of following her ; but ffie evaded his queftion, and íòon after contrived to change her feat. Here, whiîe converfing with Madame, ftie over¬ heard aSignor who fat near her, aik another whether the Chevalier Edgecumbe was gone; to which tbe other replied, that he had quitted the Abbey at an early hour of the morning for Venice, whither he had faid he was obliged to go on particular bufinefs. " What bufinefs?" replied the other, " is it
ît poffible he, who is travelling for pleafure, can have fo very urgent as to oblige him to fet off after dancing all night ?" 44 Nay," anfwered the firft, laughing, " I believe, if the truth w f ere difclofed, it is only an affair of gallantry with the pretty De Rochefort, for he is gone I underftand in her train." The reft of the converfition was in fo io w a tone, that fte could hear no more. Fortunately the company were in general too much engaged to obferve her embar¬ raifment ; but it did not pafs unnoticed by Mortimer, though he was ignorant of its caufe, Madame Ma!vini*s carriage was ftortìy after announced, and as flie arofe to depart, the Chevalier Polloni advanced.— c< I am commiflioned by my friend," faid he, ** to avow his forrow that he has not been able to do the honou s of his houfe himfelf, and to beg you will accept two of his fervants £ j as
as guides to conduft you over the paffes of the Alps." The offer was gratefully accepted, and the Chevalier, faying he intended to vifit England himfelf in the courfe of a few months, was warmly invited by Madame to Mortimer Houfe, wliich he promifed to vifit during his ftav in that kingdom. The Marquis de Bernon faw them depart with expreffions of the deepeft chagrin ; and forcibly feizing the hand of Rofaline, im¬ plored her to relent of her cruelty to him before ffie quitted Italy. She was gravely endeavouring to draw away her hand, when Mortimer, with refentment in his coun¬ tenance, advanced, and fnatching it from the impaffioned grafp of the Marquis, haftily bowed, and feating her by Ma¬ dame in the carriage, it immediately drove away, leaving the difappointed Marquis to Utter his defpair to the woods around. Their *r
Their journey acrofs thofe natural bar¬ riers between France and Icaly was effected without danger or difficulty under the guidance ofthe Count's fervants; and after flopping at another of Madame's cftates, and having difpatched their guides back to Lorraine, they fet forwards for thc feaporc where they were to embark for England. d ?
* 4 CHAP.
??????????????????* ? ? »?? ?????
v^ ?. i TX a * A\
4i Bui then, Oh Hope ! wïïh eyes ?? f ? i r , áf What was thy delighted meafure ? ** Still it whifper W promised pleafure, ** And bade the lovely feenes at diftance hail Ì *< Still would her touch the ftrain prolong, u And from the rocks, the woods, the vale " She calfd on Echo ilill ι hro' all the fong j * f And where her fweetetf theme flie chefir, 4i A foft refponfive voice was heard at every clofe, *t And Hope enchanted fmild, and waved her golden hair,'* Collins*
cr
JL HE deportment of Mortimer durin the journey convinceel Rofaline that he ftill harboured the hopes Ariel had mentioned, and
and die was itili more firmly determined to quell them on her an i vai in England. Of A loiphus flie thought with mmgled grief and indignation ; fiie feared he was entan¬ gled in fome attachment vvith Signora De Rochefort, which could not fail of being produftive of confequences the moit un¬ happy. Greatly as ilie had always difliked the woman he had chofen, ffie yet pitied her for beins: united to one who, it was evident, felt not a reciprocal affection; but, more than all, ihe deplored that fatal alteration which mufl. have taken place in the dif¬ pofition and principles of Adolphus, ere, after uniting himlelf (though to a woman he defpifed), he could leave her for other. connections, and purfue diffipated amufe¬ ments at a diftance from his iriends and famdy, while his attentions vvere devoted to one fo inferior in every refpect as the trifling Signora De Rochefort, who, igno¬ rant of hh marriage, and from fur uvu Ε ς paitiaüy
partiality inclined to favour him, icnt a willing car to his add.el's. Reflections like thefe bv no means con- tributed to the tranquillity of Rofaline. She had rea oned wilh her own heart till fhe fancied herleif reconciled to the mar¬ riage of Adolphus, but that depravity of fentiment which flie now feared had fuc¬ ceeded it, ffie had not been prepared to expect; and its effeft was ib vifible in her countenance and manner, that it could not pafs unobferved by Madame, who attri¬ buted it to her emotion on returning to her native country, wink Mortimer, igno¬ rant of her former L owl edge of Adolphus, fancied it proceeded from an attachment to the Marquis, and perpetually teazed her with hints of his fufpic ons, which ffie was contented fliould reft on any caufe but the right. As the fliores r f France receded from her view, flie turned her eyes towards England; and
and when its white cliffs became difcern¬ ible, the recollection of all that had paffed fince fhe laft b held them,'drew the fad tear of remembrance from her eye. Ma¬ dame faw pVmîy the various and violent emotions which agitated her mind ;—fhe well knew there was fome latent, fome myfterious caufe which depreffed the fpirits ofher fair charge; but fhe had fuch an opinion of the judgment and principles of Rofaline, that ffie could not doubt there were fufficient motives to juftify the con¬ cealment of it. She therefore with care forbore from giving her ????? to lutpcct flie had formed fuch a conjefture, and feduloufly endeavoured to *amufe her mind by talking of her projects on reaching England. That on ¡which ffie üxed y was to proceed immediately to Sir Edward Mor¬ timer's houfe i.i town, where he had promifed to attend them, and conduct them to his country feat as foon as he ffiould be informed of their arrival. A knowledge of l6 her
her brother's diflike to London, however, determined Madame not to give him this unneceffary trouble, particukrly as they only propofed to remain a few days in town, from whence they were to proceed immediately to Mortimer Houfe. The emotions of Rofaline became ftronger as they drew near the ffiores of Albion; and when they landed, fo many and various were the ideas that crowded on her mind, that to ail the enquiñes and converfation of her fellow-travellers, flie feemed mute, and unable to reply. Her anxiety to reach town was fo great, that ffie prevaikd on Madame to reft only one night, and proceed the next morning to the metropolis. She longed, yet dreaded to hear intelligence of the Edgecumbe family, and determined on paying an early vifit to Lady Delford and Mifs Arundel, for both of whom ihe retained the fincereft efteem. M
At a late hour of the evening they reached London, and even when they had entered it, and the* various noifes in the ftreets, and rattling of carriages aflailed their ears, fo ftrange did it feem to Rofaline to be once more in England, that fte could fcarcely credit the evidence of her fenfes, but was frequently tempted to believe that the lamps, carriages, company, and buftling crowds were transformed into the high walls, moat, drawbridge, and vaulted- rooms at St. Aivars; and inftead ofthe good Madame and their two attendants, that ffie beheld only her wide folitary chamber, with no companion except Mag- delina, who brought her food at ftated hours. She rejoiced ftill more in the con¬ traft when they alighted at a handfome houfe in Seymour Place. The fervants had already received orders from Sir Edward ; they therefore found it prepared for their reception. Mortimer, after handing them from the carriage, quitted them till fupper,
fupper, and Rofaline pafled the evening with Madame. Fatigued by ber journey, and agitated in mind, the former retired early to her apart¬ ment; and notwithftanding the many re¬ fleftions which flie fcarcely dared permit herfelf to indulge, fte enjoyed refrefhing fleep till the morning, when fte arofe quite recovered from the weannefs of the pre¬ ceding day. Mortimer, when he met her at breakfaft, congratulated. her on her amended looks. She received his compliments with her accuftomed fweetnefs, but preferved to¬ wards bim that coldnefs fte had found it neceffary to affume ever fince he had declared his refolution to perfevere in his addreffes. Madame Malvini * having bufinefs to tranfaft in the morning, propofed to fet * Rokline
Rofaline down at Lady Delford**, and call for her again on her return. This plan wis adopted, and they proceeded to Grofvenor Square. Scarcely waiting for an anfwer when the fervant had rapped, fo eager was Rofaline to behold her Lady¬ ffiip, that flie attempted to open the door of the carriage herfelf; but how was ffie difappointed when flie was informed the family were in the country, and not ex¬ pected in town for fome days ! Unprepared for this difappointment, fhe refeated herfelf in the carriage in fiience ? and they drove to Lady Arundels, hoping there to be recompenfed by Cecilia, who, ffie doubted not, would give her every information ffie required. Here, however, flie was again difappointed; neither Lady Arundel nor her daughter wus at home. Vexed to be thus unfuccefsful in her nrSk effay towards renewing her former acquaint¬ ance, ihe was now obliged to accompany Madame, who, perceiving her fpirits begin é tO
to lower, which had been raifed by the idea of meeting her friends, propofe«! they fliould, after Madame had finiihed the bufinefs flie was going on, accede to a propofal Mortimer had made at breakfaft, to take a ftroll in Kenfington-Gardens before dinner. This was agreed to, aud being joined by Mortimer, they proceeded thither. The gardens were uncommonly full, and the beauty òf the weather and crowds of company, feemed to revive Rofaline, who between Madame and her nephew, had walked half way along the grand pro¬ menade, when a party of kdies approached, amongft; whom Rofaline with pleafure per¬ ceived Mifs Arundel. She looked thin and pale, but Rofaline no fooner recognifed her, than darting from Madame, who held her by her arm, fhe flew forward vvith delight to meet her ; but what was her amazement when fhe kw Cecilia draw back, and after curtfying diftantly, prepare to pafs her ! Mortified
Mortified at this unexpefted repuife, Rok¬ line ftood almoft motionlefs, till a feream from one of Mifs Arundels party, after they had pafled, caufing her to look back, flie faw Cecilia had fallen, fainting, into the arms of one of the ladies who were with her. They had no gentleman with them ; and Rofaline, at once forgetting all her cold¬ nefs and referve, turned haftily towards Mortimer to entreat him to alTord them affiftance, but he had difappeared. Cecilia was conveyed to her carriage by her fer¬ vants, who were immediately fummoned. This incident gave Rofaline a new fubjeft: for reflection. She could not conceive from what fource the difdainful behaviour of Cecilia could proceed, till flie recolkfted it was very probable that the manner and caufe of her quitting St. Aivars had been reprefented to her friends in England by the Baron in the moft difadvantageous light ; and more anxioufly than ever did ihe wifli to fee Lady Delford, who, from her intimate knowledge of her, fte could
could not think would fo eafily give credit to aliénions to her prejudice. Mortimer did not join them again till they arrived at home, when he brought two friends with him, and apologized for his defertion, as he had met thofe gentlemen, who had detained him. Thty dined with them, and the gentlemen propofed after¬ wards that they ihould all vifit the theatre. In the hope of raifing the fpirits of Rofaiine, whicii in fpite of every endeavour would manifeft her innate feelings, Madame agreed to the propofal, and they accordingly pro¬ ceeded to Drury Lane, to fee a new and celebrated performance. The houfe was much crowded, and the heart of Rofaline received a fevere fliock at her entrance, when fte reflefted on the laft time flie had vifited it, juft previous to her excurfion to Arundel ; when, confiding in that fenti¬ ment which had been the ultimate ruin of her peace, fte had, with ianguine and delufive hopes of happinefs, believed the time
time would furely arrive when íhe fliould fpend her life with him, to whofe care, in the enthufiafm of early youth, flie had en¬ trufted her earthly felicity. The emotions of her mind fprang to her countenance, and after a livid palenefs whkh overfpread her face, a brighter tinge was diftufed over it, and the unbidden tear of fond regret ruihed to her fpeaking eye. She turned away her head, and feating her¬ felf next to Madame, tried to diffipate her anxious refleftions. The performance was novel and- enter¬ taining, and fte had been attending to the remarks of Madame, which were ever guided by judgment, and marked by impar¬ tiality, when her feelings received a fecond fliock by the entrance of Mrs. Otway and a large party* into an adjoining box. Maria ftiil retained her wonted levity of manners, and was rattling away with feveral fafliion¬ able men, Rofaline,
Roafline, with penfive attention, was meditating on fubjefts which Maria's ap¬ pearance had brought to her mind, when a voice ftie" feemed to recollect, exclaimed— " Surely I cannot be deceived, and it muft be the fair Rofaline, who once more comes to grace the hemilphere of faihion ?" She raifed her eyes at thefe words, and beheld Frank Arundel. She recognifed, and with pleafure greeted him. * 44 And how long has England been bleifed with your prefence ?" faid he, with his accuftomed vivacity. " I affure you your defpairing adorers have long fince given up all hope of ever more beholding you, and unitedly began to apprehend that the brilliant planet, which they once hoped would ever prefide over their own deftiny, would no more flied her benign influence over this cold inhopitable clime." iC When you will look ferioufly," faid Rofaline, fmiling, " I wifh to enquire after
after your family. I waited on Lady Arundel this morning, and was not a little difappointed to find her from home." " And affuredly if flie feel as her fon does," anfwered he, 44 flie will not experi¬ ence lefs regret." Rofaline now enquired after Lady Del¬ ford. 44 She was perfectly well a few days fince," kid he, " but I believe the family are in the country. I have been out of town myfelf for fome days, and on my return this afternoon I found packages in the hall, and various preparations for m mother and fifter to quit it to-morrow." Rofaline would have expreffed her for¬ row that fte ihould not fee them ; but the repulfive manner of Cecilia in the morning convinced her flie muft have unknowingly offended them. " And
94 ARIEL. ** And how long is the world of gaiety to be adorned by your prefence V 9 aiked Arundel, in his accuftomed rattling manner. " The ornament/* replied fte, laughing, 44 will be very ftort-lived 5 for one or two days more will be the extent of my ftay in town." <c But not," crkd he, " as when you left Arundel Park, will you leave thofe who figh for your prefence behind you ; for fuch," added he, glancing a fignificant look at Mortimer, " I perceive there are \ and by the looks of deipair I behold, I am led to apprehend that even the* warm funs of Italy have not foftened the obduracy of that heart which fo long refifted the attacks of the all-conquering Sir George Arundel." A lady from the next box now addrefied Arundel, when, bidding Rofaline good night, he quitted her. Mortimer now approached, and taking Arundels place, left her no more
more the whole evening. They returned home early, and fupped alone. The mind of Rofaline was haraffed and uneafy ; fte had not been able to fummon courage to aik intelligence ofthe Edgecumbe family from Arundel, though her heart panted with anxiety to hear all that had occurred in her abfence: and flie refolved, ftiould Lady Delford not return to town before ihe herielf quitted it, flie would write a letter, which her own vindication certainly required, containing a full rela¬ tion of all that had happened fmce ihe left England, and leave it in Grofvenor Square. This intention was, however, fruftrated ; for on the following morning, as ihe was pre¬ paring to go out with Madame to pay morning vifits, a fervant came to her apart¬ ment, and informed her that Lord Delford was in the drawing-room, and requefted the honour of îeeing her. Delighted and furprifed, fte fcarcely ftaid to hear the meffage delivered, but haftily begging .Madame
Madame not to wait for her, as the car¬ riage was at the door, flie flew down ftairs ; but what was her amazement, on entering r the drawing-room, to fee, inftead of Lord Delford, a young man in deep mourning. Perceiving her furprife, he advanced, and politely informed ber he was commiflioned by his mother to wait on her, and exprefs her forrow that fte was from home when Mifs Melvan had honoured her by calling the preceding day, where they had returned the fame evening, Rofaline, who at firft had not been able to comprehend the ftranger's meaning, now feemed to recolleft herfelf; and his fable habit confirming her in her fufpicion of Lord Delfords death, and that it was his fon fte beheld, fte uttered fome confufed apologies for the furprife fte had betrayed. 44 I perceive," faid the young man, « you are unacquainted with the events which have lately tranfpired in our family, and
and fuflfer me to àpologke for thus intru¬ ding on you ere you were previoufly in* formed of them." " I was indeed quite ignorant," laid Rofaline^ 44 that my dear. Lady Delford had fuftained a lofs fo fevere, and own I felt not a little (hocked at the diiappoint¬ ment of thofe expeft at io s í had formed before I entered the room/* She now learned that Lord Delford had been dead fome months, and only lived to rejoice a few weeks in his fon's return to his native country, when he was attacked by a fùdden and violent relapfe that carried him off in a few days. His mothets anxiety to fee her young friend, his Lord¬ ihip added, had induced her to fend him to entreat that Rofaline would vifit her as foon as flie could with convenience. Un* willing to delay an interview ihe fo anxioufly wifted for, ihe agreed with Lord Del¬ fords propofal to return with him * to vol. iv. f Grofvenor
Grofvenor Square, where hér Ladyfhip, he "added, would joyfully receive her. Her reception from Lady Delford was fuch as ffie had expefted ; ffie kindly bade her welcome to England, and expreffed her pleafure at again beholding her. Far different were the fenfations of Rofa¬ line ; ffie wept filently for fome time, and then ventured tö enquire after her brother's family, who flie had the happinefs to hear were all well. 44 And my beloved Henrietta?" faid flie. 44 Is well," anfwered herLadyfiiip, "and flill retains the name of Edgecumbe, though, if the entreaties of her friends can avail, flie will ere long refign it for another." τ - She then added that her fon, greatly ftruck by the charms of Henrietta in a vifit he had made into Wales with his ! mother
mother on the death of her Lord, had made propoials to Sir Walter, which were accepted. Rofaline now introduced * the fubjeft of her meeting Mifs Arundel, for whofe cold¬ nefs ffie faid ffie could not account, and had felt greatly fliocked by the repuife ffie had met from her. i. 44 I perceive," returned her Ladyffiip with a fmile, " you are utterly ignorant i. of your offence ; for a very ferious ne you have given, I affure you, and perhaps you will be more iurprifed when I tell you that her fainting yefterday in Kenfington Gar¬ dens, was in confequence of meeting you, and from the fame caufe ffie is this morning gqne very ill into the country." * " Pray relieve me from this fufpenfe," cried Rofaline, 44 for at prefent I have not the moil diftant idea of your Ladyfliip's ^meaning." ι · 44 Why, my dear Mifs Melvan," anfwered ? α Lady
Lady Delford, 44 is it poffible you have not been informed that your admirer, Captain Mortimer, was abfolutely engaged to Cecilia Arundel before he went abroad?—and his defertion of hér lias been the talk of the town for fome time, though the fair foreigner who was the caufe of it, remained unknown till ffie yefterday made her appearance with him in Kenfington Gardens, and fliocked poor Cecilia fo, that ilie inftantly fainted. For my own part, much as I have joined in abufing Mortimer for his infidelity, I feel half inclined to forgive Eim, now that I knotf the magnet whofe fuperior attraction has drawn him aftray." Rofaline aflured Lady Delford that in her Mifs Arundel would never find a rival ; for though Mortimer had certainly pro- feffed a regard for her ffie was unable to return, ffie had abfolutely rejefted his fuit, and was now more than ever delighted that ffie had been fo peremptory in her rejection. ....:. This
' ^ ? This information fufliclently explained every myftery that had perplexed ber, and fte returned to dinner with Madame Malvini, after having paflfed a pleafant morning with Lady Delford. She imparted to herfriend the intelligence ihe had juft heard refpecting Mortimer and Mifs Arundel, entreating Madame with ardour to put a final period to the hopes of her nephew. This fte promifed -to do on their arrival at Mortimer Houfe, and in the meantime Rokline per- feVered in bet coidnefs and referve towards him. Piqued at her behaviour, he wore an air of chagrin arid refentment. The next morning, wbich was to be the laft of their ftay in town, Rolaline, as flie was drefling, received a note whicii had been Jeft by Lady Delford's fervant.. It contained only a few words from her Lady¬ íhip, requefting, if difengaged, flie would fpend the evening in Grofvenor Square, where (he would meet no company. f 3 She
-4
She readily accepted the invitation; aná< having; made an excufe to Madame, wha was to vifit a particular friend that nights fhe proceeded at an early hour to Grofvenor Square. She enquired for Lady Delford,. who, ffie was informed, was alone in her dreffing-room. She haftily ran up ftairs but found the dreffing-room empty, and paflêd it to that flie had occupied during her refidence in Lord Delford's faniiiy. Here, however, ffie found no Lady Delford \, ayoungkdy* elegantly habited, was adjuft¬ ing her hak at thé glafs; flie lurried her head at the found öf a ftep, arid dífefofeé to the aftoniflied Rofaline the well-known form of her Henrietta. Neither imme- diately, but both at the fame moment fprang forward, andrån into each other's alms. , s ƒ Henrietta firft found utterance. 44 Oh Rofaline 'P' cried (he, « do I ín- deed once more behold you, or fe it çnly ¿delightful dream ?" Tim
The tear of joy which rufted from the heart to the eyes of Rofaline, would not allow her to reply. At length fte articulated— 4i Your father, your mother, Anna—-" "All are well," faid Henrietta, 44 and u love you, my Roialine, with the farne fond aifeftion as ever, notwithftanding the ftrange report* we have heard of you.'* Thefe reports Rofaline knew from Lady Çelford were thofe the Baron St. Aivars had propagated of her having refufed the offers of the Count de Polloni, treated himfeif with the utmoft. ingratitude, and afterwards quitted the chateau ckndeitinely with one of hk fervants whom fte bribed to attend her. * I J İ .·.'■ The anxiety I have felt for your fyte % Rofaline,' ' cpntinued Henrietta, « is greater than! have power to exprefs, and I own it was oné of my mouyes for contenting t$ y 4 accompany
accompany Mrs. Edgecumbe to France^ where' ffie was. ordered for the recovery of her health ; but though we applied to fome friends of the Baron, we could learn no tidings of you, and I returned a few weeks fince into Wales, as uneafy as ever on your account. 'My father having bufinefs in town* wiffied me to attend him, and we arrived here, unexpefted by my aunt, this morning, little imagining whom I ffiould meet. But there is another, my clear Rofa* line, whom you have not enquired after, though I will hope Adolphus ftiil retains a place in your memory. 9 * ri " Your brother, I underftand," faid Rofaline, colouring, '* is abroad." ; « We left him there," faid Henrietta; 44 and when we fet out on our return İ6 England, he croffed the Alps to vifit forrib friends at Venice." 44 Is his Lady then in* England V* afked Rofaline with ftudied cornpofure. " His Lady !—Qf whom are you talk¬ ing?** cried tìenrietta. « Of
44 Of your brother Adolphus," replied Rofaiine, 4i who I thought—I underftood was married." Henrietta looked all amazement, while fte exclaimed-^-" And who, is it poffible» can have; impofed oh you an untruth fo palpable ? Ah no, Rofaline, fo far from being united to another,* the fad Jieart of Adolphus frill deplores your lofs with a grief which time, inftead of diminiihing, daily increafes; and the reai motive of his journey to Italy, I am well convinced» was not one he dared to avow, but in reality to make enquiries concerning her who ftill reigns with defpotic íway in his heart*" When fte had recovered her firft furprife» Rofaline re.ated her meeting with Adolphus at Malvini and at Lorraine, and Henrietta joined her in wondering at the ruy Ltenous diftance of his beliaviour. The entrance of Lady Delford here inter¬ rupted the converiation. , f 5 Willing
Willing to give an agreeable furprife to her niece as well as to Rofaline, ffie had imparted to neither the arrival ofthe other; but her defign of witneffing their mutual aftoniftment had been anticipated by their meeting in Henrietta's dreffing-room, hav¬ ing quitted her own a few minutes before Rokline came in. Sir Walter was abfent on the bufinefs that had brought him to town, and the evening 1* was fpent in delightful converiation with her friends. A correfpondence was agreed on between her and Henrietta during the vifit of Rofa¬ line to Mortimer Houfe ; and fte returned to Madame with fpirits fo elevated, that Mortimer, who called in Grofvenor Square to attend her home, was aftoniflied at the alteration in her manner. She now felt fomewhat forry to quit town, though the idea of again enjoying the
*ihe friendfhip and correfpondence of Hen¬ rietta, (which fte flattered herfelf was theonly motive for her-revived fpirits), infpired her with her former gaiety as they travelled the following day to Mortimer Houfe, uncon¬ fcious that the difcovery of Adolphus being ftill unmarried, had any ftare in it, though this circumftance, in fpite of all herreafoning^ had once more raifed the flatterer Hope— ,f Who ever íkilld to wear the form we love, *' And bid the íhapes of fear and grief depart,** had whifpered a faint idea of coming happi* nefs to her heart, and a ftill remaining poflibility that felicity might yet be her's ; and the certainty that Adolphus was ftill at liberty, and continued to regard her as formerly, had, in a few ftort hours, re¬ ftored the native brilliancy of her eyes, and given an added vivacity to her appearance» which, though ignorant of the caufe ofthe alteration, gave fincere pkafure to the F ? mind
mind of the good Madame Malvini, wh# loved her with an affeftion little ihort of that ffie had felt for her hapiefs Carlina.
*?11*??*1??????????*??????»???
CHAP. V.
'* Yef failing life, yet fading fame* ** Compared to what his heart annoy* ** Who cheriihes a hopelefs flame, €( Are terms of happinefe and joy·" Cartwright*
JL HE travellers arrived to a late dinner at the refidence of Sir Edward Mortimer. It flood in an extenfive and well·fituated park, full of wood, and varied by the con¬ traft of hill and dak. The benevolent owner,
owner, as they drove towards the manfion, was walking under the ihade of the lofty chefnuts that fronted it. When the car¬ riage flopped, be approached it, and by turns welcomed his fifler and her young friend; the latter he received with even paternal affection, and conducting them into the hou.e, introduced them to bis daughter. Habited in the moft elegant ftyle, Mifs Mortimer anfwered to her father's intro¬ duction oi Rofaline with kthbnable negli- gence, carelefsly ??? Tying to her, and replying to the affeftionate expreffions" of joy her aunt uttered, without manifeiting any reciprocal delight at the meeting. The reception Sir Edward gave them was far different. After the firit compliments, he fixed his eyes on the countenance of Rolaline ; then fervently graiping the hand of Madame, exclaimed— 4C Oh lifter, how faithfully has the hand of Nature retraced every well- known
known feature ! It ftrikes me now even more forcibly than before." The beauty of Rofaline fince he had laft feen her, was matured into the nioft refined lovelinefs of form and face; and her recent introduction into the fafliionable world had given an elegance to her manners, which, thougii it took from her appear¬ ance none of that artlefs fimplicity which marked her charafter, had rendered her ftill more interefting. í t Mifs Mortimer, though íhe affefted to- take little notice of her, frequently glanced her eyes towards her, as if, flattering as had been her father's reprefentation, fhe had not allowed herfelf, either from envy or fome latent caufe, to expeft her to be fuch as fte proved* For the firft two or three days fte behaved towards Rofaiine with a fort of ftudied indifference ; and when, as it fometimes
fometimes happened, they were left alone together, ffie either went to her piano, or, without particukrly addreffing her, com¬ plained/of the badnefs of the weather, and dulnefs of the country. She fpent almoft the whole day at the window, as if in expeft- ation of company, and was unceafingly lamenting the extreme ftupidity of every thing around her. Rude as this appeared, Rofaline confidered her as ffie really was, fpoiled by the indulgence of a fond father, and eager to render herfelf ridiculous by an adoption of faffiionable manners. "í Rofaline remarked with regret the ex- treme difappointment of Madame in find¬ ing her niece fo different from what might have been expefted from the daughter of Sir Edward Mortimer. The fubject was however, too delicate for either to mention, though the evident mortification ffie felt was betrayed by occafional looks from Ma¬ dame,' which Rofaline, accuftomed to obferve her, eafily underftood. Amply
Amply was Rofaline recompenfed by the kindnefs -and attention o Si- Edvtard for the unpleafant manners of his daughter,; and that reverence'and refpect ffie remem¬ bered to have felt for him at Edgecumbe- Hall,, daily increafed as ffie became better * acquainted with the ftrength of his under¬ ftanding, and the benevolence of his heart. Fortunately for Rokline, fbe had refources within herfelf which rendered the negligence of Charlotte Mortimer of little confequence. n' J- Madame, after their firft arrival, was a good deal occupied by affifting Sir Edward in arranging fome affairs neceffary to be fettled after the death of his Lady : Rofaline was therefore left very much to herfelf. She often roved over the extenfive planta¬ tions which ikirted the park, alone; for Mils Mortimer was not a companion tliat fuited her tafte, nor was Rofaline adapted for the gay faffiionable converfation which alone pleafed that young lady : but flie was obliged to take thoie times for thefe folitary • walks
walks when fte knew Mortimer was abfent, or engaged with his father and aunt ; for, deter¬ mined to perfevere in her rejection of him, flie refolved to allow him no opportunity of fpeaking to her alone. He feerned to obferve the affiduity with which flie avoided him, and his.father.and fifter, particukrly the latter, perpetually remarked that hk wonted vivacity was totally fled ; and when¬ ever this obfervation was made, he generally left the company, and returned to it with a countenance, on which pride and paifion feemed evidently depicted. Rofaline internally grieved at this deter¬ mined and fruitlefs perfeverance. A ferene evening drew her fteps to a romantic part of the park : her thoughts were engroffed by Mortimer's unfortunate prepoffefllon» which feemed to increafe inftead of dirøiniih by difcouragement ; and flie mufed on thk embarrafling fubjeft till, raifing her eyes» flie beheld the blue expanfe of ether illumined
illumined by the laft beam of the fetting fun, and the top of every tree within fight enriched by the glowing tinge, ffie took her pencil from her pocket-book, a/nd threw the fentiments a fight fo glorious raifed in her mind, on paper in the fol* kwiiigform:—·.···
J i w J J
L : The lift ??! fingt: of bloçmijig % Now dart· it» golden glowing ray, ??? the expanfe of ether raild ; The clouds of evening we behold, Tmg'd with an edge of fhimng gold, And hov'ring o'cl tbeiè rocks and woodfand* wild. * ' Λ Meek twilight grave, and fombre pow'r, Now mantle thro 1 the fober hour, And in the mind reflections fiient raife, Which lead the thoughts to thu Great Caule Who form'd this calm and awful paufe, To whom the grateful heart o'erSowt in pray'r and praHe. ■ .' . ««Tht
The filver regent of the night · f Now fheds her trembling filver light, O'er the thick foliage of the wood ; The world of planets in her train, Now glimmering o'er th' extenfive plain, Infpire the calm and folitary mood* Thue tn the mental world we fee The fame unerring firm decrees— To infancy, fweet peaceful ftate î Childhood fucceed« t ah happy morn İ The mind, while yet in early dawn, Serene remains, unconfcious of it· fate. Youth is all thoughtlefs, gay, and fair» Maturity replete with care ; A train of latent unfeen woe Succeeds our ha ppier early years, Perpetual doubts, continual fears, Aad each dread grief humanity muft know» i Thus in fedentary amufements pafled the firft week of Rofaline's refidence at Mor¬ timer Houfe. She had hitherto been fo torturate
fortunate as completely tö avoid all oppor¬ tunities for an interview with Mortimer alone ; but at the end ofthat period fhe was no longer deftined to efcipe fowell, for as fte Was one evening playing an air to Sir Edward on her harp, which his daughter, who had been all day extremely^ out of humour, had declined, and was now ftand¬ ing fullenly by the fire reading a Novel— her father, who had walked to the window, fuddenly uttered an exclamation which drew every eye to the court-yard, into which had driven an elegant curricle, and Rofaline, tò het infinite furprife, faw alight¬ ing from it her rejefted àdnïirer, Sir George -Arundel. ■· ' :_l; ; """ •■•" , - *'■■ '
, *
Mifs Mortimer; with a countenance only expreifive of pleafure, flew to her dreffing- room to adjuft her drtfs ; and Rofaiine,, unwilling to be prefent at the entrance of Sk George, feized, an opportunity, fn »the ^cøerali; b|ift!c his arrival occafioned, to retire to, liet: · chamber, which fte left as foon
foon as flie knew the guefts had entered the hòufe, and induked herfelf with a foHtary ramble in the park. İt was now evident from what caufe the apparent inquietude of Mif. Mortimer had proceeded ; and for the behaviour of that young kdy to herfelf, Rofaline was no longer at a lofs to account, fince the had difcovered that the expected lover was Sir George Arundel. Mifs Mortimer, from her knowledge of her brother's attachment, which he took no pains to. conceal, regaided her as the caufe of ra probable breach on Cecilia's account between her own family, and that flie hoped to be allied to. ? Accuftomed to an unbounded indulgence of all her wiflies, arid unufed to contra- diction, foe had been prepared to diflike Mifs Melvan ; and prepofleffing as was her appearance, ffie could not fo wholly d i ve ft herfelf
If lierfeîf of prejudice, às to bebave towards "her with the friendffiip and refpeft flie was entitled to. Madame Malvini had remarked the inattention of her niece with fome refent¬ ment; and had not her penetration dif¬ covered thé real motive from whence it proceeded, her partiality for Rofaline would have induced her to ihew it. Rofaline, delighted to have efcaped alone without fear of purfuit, Mortimer having gone out with his father· to receive Sir George, wandered to the extremity of the park, a nd on an em i ne noè, wh ich com- nianded a fine profpeft of the country around, fat down on a feat placed under ■th.e íhade of an old oak^ which appeared as though many generations had witneffed its exiftence. The trunk was now verging to decay, and the withering branches hung almoft leaflefs around. Engrofled by her own reflections, and in no bafte to return, ? ffie
íhe fat in this fequeftered fpot till the fun had funk into the weft, and twilight had already begun to encroach on the day, when the found of approaching footfteps awakened her from her reverie, and fte had arifen from her feat, when fhe beheld Morti¬ mer advancing towards her. On his rejoicing he had found her, fte haftily replied ihe had riot been aware how late it was, and had walked fome paces from the tree, when, åiaftily following her, lie caught her hand, and entreated her, in a tone of fupplication, to hear him for one moment. She in vain begged he would not detain her. 44 At leaft," cried he in a tone of re- proach, "· fuffer me to aik you whetherT have given you any freih caufe for offence, or whether the fentiment I fo fatally im¬ bibed át Malvini, ftill continues thus to call 4 forth your indignation?" " Indignation," kid Rofaline, mildly, 44 is a term I think my behaviour has not merited. I will candidly acknowledge that I have
■? I have endeavoured to avoid giving you the opportunity you have now found. For your own fake as well as mine, I would not give pain to both by converfing on a fubjeft that can never yield pleafure tp either." 44 Lovely and cruel as you are," ex¬ claimed Mortimer, " I cannot, 1 will not give up the hopes I have formed ! Oh that I could difeover the rival by whom my remembrance is rendered hateful to you !" 44 I am grieved, Mr* Mortimer, to fee you fo violent," faid ffie; 4t but. as my fentiments on this unpleafant fubjeft will affuredly remain fuch as I have avowed, your own underftanding;, when the firft effervefcence of paifion is over, will, I truft, reprefent to,you the inefficacy of this perfe¬ cution, and teach you mote what is due to yourfelf and nie, than thus fruitiefsly to render both miferable by a conduft which can never be productive' of fatisfaftion to either." She
She waited not for a reply, but Mortimer having releafed her hand in thé violence of his paffion, flie feizèd the opportunity, and fled down the eminence, at the bottom of which, in a grove of chefnuts that led from it, perceiving Sir Edward and Madame, ffie haftily approached them, and returned with them to the houfe. On her entrance into the drawing-room ihe was introduced to Sir George Arundel, who, apprized of her being there, fcarcely vouchfafed her a diftant bow. The figbt of tier evidently recalled to his mind her rejection of his addreffes, and lie behaved towards her with the haughtinefs of one who pitied her want of difcernmcnt. Mortimer did not appear at tea; and when Rofaline retired to her apartment afterwards, ffie faw liim from a window, as fte- afcended the ftairs, walking flowly along fhe park, where he had been wander¬ ing ever fince ffie left him. His melancholy vol. iv. g air
air and dejefted look raifed all thofe emo¬ tions of pity to which her heart was ever feelingly alive; and that he might no longer cheriih hopes, thc falkicy of which ffie had long, though vainly, endeavoured to con¬ vince him of, íhe determined to apply immediately to Madame for the perform¬ ance of i:er promife to fpeak to Sir Edward. For this purpofe, before they retired for the night, ffie begged a few minutes' con¬ verfation with Madame in her dreffing- room, which being readily granted, ihe proceeded to inform her of all that had paffed during the evening with Mortimer, concluding with conjuring her to beg Sir Edward would interfere, and put a final period to lhe vain hopes of his fon. This Madame faithfully promifed to do the next morning, and Rofaline retired fomewhat relieved from her anxiety by the kind affur¬ ances of her friend. Early in the morning Madame fought an interview with Sir Edward in his fludy, where
where flie reprefented to him the cafe £s it had been ftated to her by Rofaline, adding, that even if he had no objection to the choice of his fan, and could Mortimer's engagements with Mils Arundel be cancelled, there yet remained an infurmountable obftacle in the heart of Mifs Melvan, whicii ihe had been long convinced cheriihed fome fecret attachment. Sir Edward in his anfwer owned the un¬ eafinefs of his mind on this fubjeft ever fince his fon's arrival, aš his partiality to Rofaline was but too obvious to him, had he not a few days previous to their arrival received the letter wliich Mortimer wrote from Malvini. Hé had, he faid, already had one con¬ ference with his fon, in which he had repre¬ fented to htm that his honour was fo far concerned in the fulfilment of Ins engage¬ ments with Mifs Arundel, that its forfeiture ? 2 in
in the eye of the World muft be the inevitable confequence of his refufal. The paffion of Mortimer, however, re¬ fufed any control, and he pofitiveiy declared he would never unite himfelf to Mifs Arundel or to any other than Rofaline. After mature deliberation, Sir Edward now determined to infift either on his joining bis regiment immediately, or preparing to renew bis addrefles to Cecilia, as he valued his favour and affeftion. Immediately after breakfaft, Mortimer was fummoned to attend his father, who had no fooner declared his commands» than he coolly avowed an intention he had already förmed, to quit them, and endeavour, by abfence, to conquer the attachment he had no hopes of finally banifli ing from, liis heart. Violent and impetuous in his nature, he could
could nöt endure the idea of noi being able to infpire a mutual partiality in the objeft of his choice ; and on the preceding evening, after ihe had left him in the park, had formed the refolution he now declared to his father, who heard it with no frnaU pkafure ; and after Mortimer had left him,, he repaired to the dreffing-room of his fitter, where he found her with his daugh* ter, and communicated to them what had paffed. Rofaline was informed of it by* Madame, and heard it with real pkafure. Her vanity had not been gratified by having deprived a human being of peace, nor had ffie in her difpofirion any of that harrow felfifli paffion which too often diígraees tht f femak heart, and incurs a cenfure on the fex in general. She was neither wholly unconfcious of, nor infenfible to her own perfection of form ; but this confcioufnefs in a heart rightly turned like her's, only ftimukted her to render the beauties ofher mind equally worthy of admiration. g 3 Mortimer's
Mortimer's departure was deferred for a few days, that he might accompany Sir George to town, who was to return fhortly to Mortimer Houfe, when it was hinted that the marriage of Mifs Monimer was to be concluded. The ill-humour of that young lady re¬ turned after the departure of their gueft ; and complaints of the dulnefs and ftupidity of every thing about her were renewed. She had been greatly provoked at the effects of her brother's hopelefs attachment to Rofaline, and had exhaufted all her rhetoric in vain to prevail on him to relin¬ quifli his fcheme of going tojóin his regi¬ ment, and to renew» without delay, his addreffes to Cecilia. Her advice and remonftrances were accompanied by many fatirical remarks on her whp had fupplanted Mifs Arundel in his affection, and enraged at the fmalleft refieftion
reflection on Rokline, Mortimer, in his paffion told her that, had not Sir George Arundel been rejected by the Mifs Melvan ffie thought proper to defpife, he would not now have been fighing at her feet. Mortified at this aifertion, which, though ffie had heard it before, ffie had affefted to give no credit to, ffie quitted her bro¬ ther in a rage, without attempting farther to diffuade him from his intention. Mortimer and Sir George had been gone more tban a week, when Rofaline, who had been long in expeftation of a letter from Henrietta, in anfwer ,to one ffie had written to her immediately ón her arrival at Mortimer Houfe, received the expefted packet. It contained intelligence ihe had little 4 expefted to hear. It informed her ofthe fudden death of the elder Edgecumbe by a fall from his phaeton, whkh, as it had been a fubjeft of much concern to the family, had prevented her writing fooner. g 4 She
She added, that the cftates of her bro* ther, which he had inherited from his uncle,, devolving immediately to Adolphus, ?? he had left no heir, the ktter had been fummoned to England» and waa then with them at the Halk For Sir Walter and Lady Edgecumbe* who were ever the fondfft and tendereft of parents, Rofaline was truly grkved. She well knew their parental feelings, and was aware of the forrow in which, for a> time, it would involve the whole family. She wrote a letter of condolence to Henrietta, in which, though ffie lamented, for t he fake of them all, the lofs they had fuftained in thek brother, the could not help adding that fte rejoiced in the good fortune of Adolphus, who from his own heart fo well knew fhe true ufe of wealth, and from hk native benevolence of difpofition, waa fo w*tl inclined to ufe it properiy. She begged to be moft refpeâfuliy commended- to her revered
revered parents, and affectionately to the fv\ eet gentle Auna. Freed from theperfecuti ms of Mortimer, and the uneafinefs ol mint! the Iubject hao£ coft her, Rokline began to feci more trin- quil than ffie had done for Ionic t i ne», tud traits of her former cjieertalnels were ev^a fomcti es vifible in tur manner S e faw very little oí Mils Mortimer,. who r bufied in pr -piring for iier approaching change of litua ion, ipent the whole m rnia* ? ? always iu her Ov*n apartment» but fro.u Sir Edward and Madame Ihc ????.????? the fame Kind attention that had Ver marked the behaviour ot both towards hex mace ner knowledge of tnenu
* Si CHAP.
55?????????=???????
CHAP. VI,
** He fald, and on the ground his eyes *< Were fixed aba/li'd ; th' attentive maid, *' Loft in thc tumult of furpriie, ** The well-remember'd youth furvey'd." ' r ' >' Cartwäight,
evening, as Rofaline vas amufing herfelf at the piano, Sir Edward and Madame, en¬ gaged in converfation, had not yet left the dining parlour, and Mifs Mortimer, who had juft, as ufual, declared fte wasdevoured with emui, was reclining indolently on the fofa
fofa by the fire, a fudden trampling of horfes was heard in the court-yard. The drawing-room where they fat was in the back of the houfe. Mifs Mortimer, enchanted at the found, flew into the next - room to fee the caufe from the window, exclaiming—" Thank God ! I hope rhat is fomebody come to relieve us from this dreadful ftate of ftupidity. I am fure it makes me fo nervous I can hardly fupport myfelf." Saying this, fte quitted the room ; and Rofaline, concluding it to-be Sir G orge, for whofe abfence or prefence (he felt nei¬ ther; wift nor anxiety, continued her mufic without farther interruption. She was pkying a favourite air which Adolphus had compofed in their early days, to fuit, as he expreffed it, tie fweet. and plaintive tones of her voice. She had ©6 oftea
Henrietta, and ? was endeared to her by the pleafant ideas it always recalled to her mind. The words were thefe-—
mm
AS ibtne lone wanderer of night, unfriended by the moon's pale lights By chance conduced, led aftray, No voice to cheer the dreary way, Sees from arar lòme daaxlrng beam, And hatlens to tbe welcome gleam, Which lures him on till, faint and weak, . Thro* many »huu» ? briar and brake, He finks exhaufted on tbe ground, Anå cafts bit weary eye» around««. Tbe flattering phantoms di&ppear, And leave bebind diftrefs and ftars- So does delufive Hopt poor mortals lead, And makes them fancy blifs thats ne'er decreed.
Tht concluding line made her figh.
r. ·· Ah," faid ffie, in a low voice, " how delufively have I fancied blifs that was, ne'er decreed I Little did he ever imagine thofe lines woukl be fo applicable to her for whom they were compofed !" Again ffie iighed deeply. The figh wa» re-echoed behind her; ffie ftarted, and turned her head :—it was a mark of fympa¬ thy feldom ffiewn by Miis Mo timer, but ffie beheld no Mifs Mortimer. There a figure ftood as if motionlefs behind ber chair, on whom ber eyes no fooner refted, than they feemed to recognife the countenance of Adolphus, ??? with contending- emo¬ tions. A faint fliriek efcaped her ere front furprife flie was fenfible ffie hati uttered it* and attempting to rife, ffie trembled vio- lently, and again feated herfelf« Adolphus now advanced, and when be had recovered iome cornpofure of manner» faid-*** 1 ought to apologise for thk fuddea
entrance, but------" He paufed, arid feemed unable fo proceed At length, '* I cannot," faid he, «* fay, as at our kft meeting, that my aftoniftment is equal to your own, because 1 muft oa n that you alone, Madam, are the caute of my vifit here. I am uell known to Sir Edward Mortimer; but u ith yourfelf, Rofaiine, if I may once more be allowed to call you fo, is my prefent bufinefs." The recollection of Signora de Rochefort, as he recurred to their former meeting, came to her mind ; and fhe replied in con¬ fufion, that Sir Edward Mortimer was at home, and fte doubted not would be happy to receive him." « I will not," faid Adolphus, " Chocked and mortified as I feel at your coldnefs, cxpeft a warmer reception till you have perufed tbe credentials I bring. But kt me hope that this," prefenting a ktter, the hand-writing of which Rofaline knew to be that of Henrietta/ ** wih eradicate from your mind
mind every ill impreffion it may have im- J bibed of him who only lives in that hope." The entrance of Sir Edward, who had been juft informed by the fervants of Adolphus's arrival, here prevented hk further continuance. The good Baronet wekomed him with the utmoft cordiality, expreffing the happi¬ nefs he felt to have any of the family of his efteemed friend Sir Walter beneath hk roof. Rofaline fêized the firft opportunity to leave the room, and Tetire to her chamber. It was fortunately too dark fcr Sir Edward to difeover in her countenance the emotions Adolphus's fudden arrival had railed in her mind; and with the entrance ofthe fervant with candles flie difappeared. With eagernefs unfolding tbe letter from Henrietta, the moment ffie reached with trembling
trembling feet her own apartment, flie read.· as follows— *??????????????**** TO MISS MELVAN. 44 in my laft baity cîif- patches, my deareft Rofdine, I bnefiy informed you ofthe 1 te rpíílancholy event, which, though an afflict io, ì deep and griev¬ ous Ín itfelf, may be, I flauer myfelf, pro¬ ductive in its coniequences of happineis to us all—happinefs whkh wit, I truft, ex¬ tend its influence to ber who has fii well borne the hiuernefs of adverie fortune. My firft and much-kved tomja-ion— -jes» Rofahne, rvt-r the deareft friend of my heart, 1 now hope the felicity of calling you flßer may yet be mine. 44 In the letter 1 fohaftily wrote you after the death of my poor brother, 1 behe\e I told you that Adol) bus being, by the will t f my late uncle» hek to ihe krge citate* his brother 'pofleiled»
poffeffed, was recalled to England. He is now put into pofleflion of his recent acqui- fition of fortune; and can you wonder, Rofaline, that he afpires to fhare it with her who alone ever held his affection ? I have had from himlelf a full explanation of his behaviour in Italy, which I find was wholly the refult of the reports he heard refpecting Mortimer and yourfelf from that Signora de Rochefort, vvho confidently afferted that you were going to England pur¬ pofely tobe united to him ; and the atten¬ tions he witneffed from Mortimer to you at Lorraine confirmed it to him. You may imagine I haftened to convince him of his error in this refpeft ; and the refult of his difcovering that you are itili the fame Roialine he left at Edgecumbe Hal), is a refolution» by perfonal applicati ^n, to make his peace wuh you. Ah, Roialine, if he have formed hopes ftill more prefumptuous». which the enclofure will explain, will you not allow him to realize them? Will you Sût, now that he has independence to offer
you, at once confent to form the happineft of him by whom you are fo juft!y adored, and at the fame time that of ê< Your ever fondly attached c * KÊNiUËTfA LSOfeCt/MBB*"
With á palpitating heart ffie now unclofed the addreis from Adolphus, which contained thefe words-— ??????????? TO MISS MELVAN. '«In the fond hope this moment moil happily confirmed, that the writer of this retains that place in the pure heart of Mifs Melvan ffie once fweetly acknowledged he pofleffed, he prefumes to addrefs her. Ah, Rofaline, deareft com¬ panion of my earlieft youth ! beloved frknd of my maturer year£ 1 liften, I conjure you, to the hopes 1 bave dared to form. By a; recent
recent lofs in my family, I have it now moft unexpeftedly in my power to offer you that affluence which can never be valued by me, but as it renders me more worthy the acceptance of her who, in poverty or fplen¬ dour, in any time or circumftances, muft be the firft requifite to my felicity. Rejeft not, I implore you, on one confideration, thc petition of him who lives but in the hope he has dared to avow—the only *ne that can be urged againft an immediate union. The approbation of Sir Walter and Lady Edgecumbe I have not folicited, nor do I intend it; their value for you 1 am well convinced, when you are once irrevocably mine, will not fuifer them to withhold their favour, Refleft, ere you give me your determination, tbat the peace and happinefs of him for whom you have nobly avowed a preference, is at ftake ; and do not, by one raíh reíolution, make him m.ferable for ever ! Hope fweetly whiipers to my heart that your anfwer will be pro- pitious to my prayers. Fondly vw ill I cheriih
cherifli the thought, nor fuffer an idea to enter my mind that ?? for whom I would willingly yield up my life, will hefitate to crown it with felicity, by giving the greateft treafure the world has in ftore for him to hcr " Ever grateful " ADOLPHUS BDOECtfMBE,**
The whole tenor of this letter convinced Rofaiine that, hurried on by his paflion» Adolphus had formed a romantic fcheme of happinefs» v/hich his cooler reafon and recti¬ tude of principle, had he allowed himfeif to reafon againft it, would have condemned. The agitation of hcr mind on a fubjeft fo interefting and important to her future life, baniihed all inclination to repofe; and for that night fleep entirely forfook her pillow. Many and violent we/e the internal ftruggles between her inclination and her, duty;,
iduty; but the unerring principles in which ffie had been educated at length obtained κι the victory, and determined againft Adoi- phus's propofal. Too well aware, Jiowever, that her fatal partiality was known to him, and not daring to combat arguments he was prepared to urge and enforce, ffie refolved to open her heart to Madame, and requeft her to in¬ form Adolphus ofher refolution. At an early hour ffie entered the apart- ment of Madame, who was riiing. Her pallid countenance denoted the fleeplefs night flie had pafled ; and, alarmed at her palenefs and dejection, her patronefs kindly entreated to know what had happened, thougii flie already in part gueíièd the caufe. Rofaline could not at firft articulate; but when flie attempted to fpeak, the words faltered unpronounced on her lips. She íhcd
íhed no tear, but her eyes were heavy and funk, and her frame feverift and trem¬ bling. At length with as much cornpofure as ihe could affume, flie related every circumftance that had attended the unhappy attachment of Adolphus, and her deter¬ mination on the propofal fte had received the preceding evening, concluding with entreating Madame to undertake the taik of making Adolphus acquainted with it. This fhe at length promifed, after having obtained the permiifion of her young friend to admit Sir Edward into her confidence, whofe cool, difpaflionate mode of reafoning might, flie thought, have more weight with Adolphus, warm and fanguine as the latter was. To this plan Rofaline agreed ; and Madame, whofe opinion of her was raifed higher than ever, tenderly embracing her, confented to her petition, to be allowed to breakfaft in her own apartment. Here flie had full leifure to refleft on the facrifice ihe
flie had made, and ffie determined to write to Henrietta, and ftate tho motives of her conduft, which, as ffie well knew the high ideas her friend entertained pf filial duty, ffie was aware ffie could not but approve, however the fervency of her affeftion for her brother might have blinded her judg¬ ment to the impropriety of the flep by which flie thought his happinefs would be enfured. This taik ffie accordingly exe¬ cuted in thefe words— TO MISS H. EDGECUMBE, « With a heart depreffed beyond all power of defcription, and eyes overflowing with tears of involuntary re¬ gret, I prepare, my ever loved Henrietta, to reply to your affeftionate but mif¬ taken letter. Ah, Henrietta, how flat¬ tering, yet v how delufive are the profpefts you offer me—profpefts*which, from mo¬ tives of duty oppofed to inclination» I feel
feel compelled to relinquifli for ever. You know the heart which I will dare to fay is the counterpart of your own, and will therefcre -imagine the real anguifli with which I refign a plan fo confonant to my wiffies; but believe me, Henrietta, no fcheme of felicity, however vaft, can long fubfift, if not fixed on the firm and immu¬ table bafis of honour and rectitude ; nor could I ever yet, with any degree of internal comfort, yield my acquiefcence to an action \vhich my own ideas of right did not approve. You know by whom thofe ideas were formed; and I think 1 need ufe no ftronger argument to convince you of th« fallacy of any hopes of happinefs, even with Adolphus himfelf, if |t violation of that cjuty we owe to the authors of our exiftence be neceffary to attain it. And in this light may noti, as well as yourfelf and Adolph us, regard Sir Walter ànd Lady Edgecumbe ? for had not their paternal care received and cheriihed rre, might nöt the feeble fpark of life haye Ipng fince been extinguiffied 5 by
by the cruelty of indifference, or the inhu¬ manity of a mercilefs world ? The fame fate wbich has purfued me through my yet ihort life, Continues to attend mé; but while I retain the felf approbation I have yet mercifully preferved, ought I to complain of its rigour, and by one raffi aft ffiall I bafely forfeit a treafure, which, if not volun¬ tarily yielded, no force can wreft from me ? No, my loved, but mifguided friend—mif¬ guided by a too great fraternal affeftion— your Rofaline, if ffie mean to preferve her integrity unfullied, muft refign ait preten¬ fions to happinefs. I pretend not to the heroifm which can at once yield it without a murmur, nor do I envy the apathy which could effeft an end fo defirable : I covet not the Lethean cup which would banifli from my memory all recollection of the paft. Hitherto I have been able to look back with felf-applaufe, if not with uri- alloyed pleaiure ; and never while exiftence animates my frame, call the heart it con¬ tains recolleft thöfe days of early happinefs vol, iv. h without
without renovated delight. To me obli¬ vion would be wretchednefs, for having nothing to look forward to, a retrofpeftion of the paft is my greateft comfort ; yet have I much to be thankful for. In the good Sir Edward Mortimer and the amiable Madame Malvini, I have found a fecond Sir Walter and Lady Edgecumbe ; and my days pafs in a tenor fo equal and undif* turbed, that tranquillity, if not perfeft felicity, I may hope for. ♦ "The arguments I have here adduced, and thofe urged by Sir Edward Mortimer will, I ardently hope, have a due effeft on the mind of your brother in his cooler unim- paflioned moments. I well know his heart, and am affured that he could find no per¬ manent happinefs if fought in oppofition to the laws of rectitude. I will here clofe this epiftie. If my determination inflict a pain I would willingly avert on the feelings of you both, remember, I conjure you, that you do not fuffer alone, and recolleft alfo a precept
a precept of your honoured mother» which, I truft, will ever be as freih in my memory as at this moment—" Were our duty always accordant with our inclinations, where would be the teft of integrity ?" Thefe were her words: I will make no comment on them, for furely they require none. They are adapted to every under¬ ftanding; and to every heart that has a proper fenfe of right, they certainly carry conviftion with them. 44 Continue to love your Rofaline Ì The fentiments her heart early imbibed, and has ever fince fondly cheriihed, will affuredly live in her aching bofom fo long as fte retains the power to acknowledge herfelf 44 Your ever ardently attached " ROSALINE MELVAN.** ψ ________
Madame entering juft as fte had con¬ cluded her ktter» fte prefented it to her Η 2 with.
wjth a requeft that flie would give it open to Adolphus, tbat he might fee her reai fentiments from her own hand. Madame read it with eyes fparkling with pkafure. 44 This ? indeed a noble conqueft, my loved child," faid fte, t4 and only ferves tp increafe my admiration of you." <c Ah.do .not praife me, Madami" faid f Rofaline, 'mournfully; " the facrifice is yet only half complete,- and the moft dif¬ ficult part yet remains to be clone. To fubdue the »emotions which will ftill rife when I refleft on this fubjeft, requires a greater ftare of philofophy than I have hitherto been able to attain ¿ but infpired by your example, and animated by your precepts, time, I truft, will effect it/'. Madame affectionately bade her not fear but all would yet be well, and haftened with the letter to Sir Edward. No
No fooner had Madame quitted her, than the depreffed heart of Rofaline funk. AIL her affurned heroifm vanished, and the un¬ bidden tear rufli ed from her eye.. The forprife of the preceding evening, and the neceflity there was for an imme¬ diate refolution on her part, had hitherto checked her apparent diftrefs, aid almoft benumbed her faculties; but now that the mandate was gone forth, her own defpair, the anguifli of Adolphus, and the forrow of Henrietta, all ruihed at once on her mind, and almoft overpowered her. She threw herfelf in her firft emotion on the bed, and gave way to the extréméit agonks of defpotidency : but wich recolkftion- came revived refolution; fhe felt afliamed of the involuntary weaknefs, and though alone, a blufh coloured her pale cheek as memory prefented her in the aftion of deipair. She arofe, and paced the room; her apartment was in a diftant part of the building frorn the breakfaft-room, and no h 3 found
found met her ean She feated herfelf again by the deferted breakfaft-table, and forcing niore cornpofure, flie endeavoured in a never-failing refource (her own blamelefs confcience) to feek confolation. It pre¬ fented to her mental view that fweet and pkcid reward the " mufic of the mind" muft ever beftow; and flie awaited with more calmnefs the iffue of Sir Eclwarcle confer» ence with Adolphus.
/
CHAP.
CHAP. VII.
*<· And therefore vrert thou bred to virmou* knowledge, " And wifdom early planted in thy foul, « That thou mightft know to rule thy fiery paffiont t 44 To bind their rage, and ftay their headlong courte ; < ( To bear with accidents, and every change « Of various life j to ftruggle with adverfity ; " To wait the leifure of the righteous Gods, « TiU they, in tbeir own good appointed hour, " Shall bid thy better days come forth at once— «* A long and mining train ; till thou, well pleafed, «< Shalt bow, and blefs thy fate, and fay the Gods are juft." R owe, ___ ^^ # W HILE Rofaline alone in her chamber comforted herfelf with her own approving refleftions, Sir Edward had a difficult taik ? 4 to
to perform below. Adolphus could not conceal his chagrin vvhen he found Rofaline did not intend to appear at breakfaft, and all his fanguine hopes feemed at once to be crufhed. The repaft was no fooner concluded, than Madame and Mifs Mortimer quitting the room, Sir Edward entered on his com¬ miffion, which, as it met his entire appro¬ bation, he without preface began. He fet before his auditor, in as forcible terms as poffible, the breach of duty he was about to commit, as well as the mifery the con¬ fcioufnefs of wilful error would undoubtedly entail on himfelf, and tbe amiable young creature who would then be bound to ftare his deftiny. In ipeaking of Rofaline, '* She is cer¬ tainly/* added Sir Edward, " a moft ex* traordinary young woman. Her principles and judgment are alike excellent and incor¬ ruptible ; and this ktter, which ffie tequefts *. ???
you will deliver to your fifter from herfelf, will convince you of her unalterable refo¬ lution." Adolphus, with an agitated hand, took the letter, and read it. His whole frame fhook with contending emotions. * " Ah barbarous Rofaline V* exclaimed' he, wildly, " why—Oh why do you compel me to admire, almoft to adore you, for the very mandate that- configns me to wretchedneis ?" Sir Edward, much pleafed to perceive the effeft of the letter, endeavoured to * render it ftill more complete by adducing every argument he couid fuggeft, to prove. the wifdom and virtue ffie had equally ex¬ emplified in her decifion. All his reafon* îng, as hç couid not fail of feeing and acknowledging its jiiftice, was acceded to on the part of Adolphus, though with ari? ill grace;, but as he found Rofaline was h 5 refolutely
refolutely determined to adhere to this decifion, hè dec.kred he would hear it from no lips but her own. " Pardon me, Sir Edwards' faid he, " and allow, I entreat you, for the anguiih of a heart devoted to your fafcinating charge. I revere your charafter, and re* ipeft you even for the earneftnefs with which you oppofe my happinefs, becaufe you are, doubtlefs, actuated by motives I ought to applaud; but if I am deftined to be wretched, at leaft let me receive my doom from herfelf. She cannot furely imagine I can fo calmly leave this place without a hope of again beholding lies! Implore hex, I conjure you, to, admit me for five minutes to her prefence, alone. Surely ffie will not refufe me tliis poor gratification ?" " It would certainly be far better not to requeft it," faid Sir Edward with gentie- iiefs and gravity; " but fince you are fo very anxious, I will carry her your requeft
requeft myfeif: but allow me to add, it muft be on condition you have more com* mand over yourfelf, than to wound her by unavailing reproaches,, or diftrefs her. by ufelefs repining !" This was agreed to by Adolphus, and Sir Edward went to the apartment of Rofaline, whom he perfuaded to accom¬ pany hini to tbe parlour, which Adolphus was pacing in an agony of rage. It fub¬ fided at« fight of Rofaline, whofe dejefted countenance and trembling frame feemed to change it into grief. Sir Edward left them ; and at length gaining more courage, Rofaline exerted ail her refolution to her aid, and finally pre¬ vailed on him to be more compofed, and fubmit to what their duty exacted. Adolphus heard her with a calm but gloomy fiknce. His eyes were fixed in anxious gaze on her countenance, while h 6 her's
her's were caft in reprefled agitation on the ground. - c< Surely," exclaimed he at length, " it cannot be from any continued doubts that I. meet this rejection from · you, Rofaline? The ftrange idea you imbibed in Italy 'refpefting Signora de Rochefort", cannot yet fubfift ? A chimera fo wild could furely never gain entrance into a heart fo well acquainted with mine ?" ** No," kid Rofaline, with as much cornpofure as flie could affume, " I have no longer any doubts. Γ have given the fubjeft ample confideration, and my deter- minai ion is irrevocably fixed. Leave fhis place then, I conjure you, and do not a fecond time oblige me to quit my native kingdom, which, if you infift on impor¬ tuning me on this head, I ftall certainly think myfelf under a neceffity to do." Adolphus made no reply ; but the an¬ guiih of his mind was evident in his dif¬ trafted countenance. Sir
Sir Edward and Madame now entered,, and a general converfation took place, which lafted till dinner, though İt was evident the thoughts of their youthful auditors were little attentive to it # At dinner Mifs Mortimer joined^ them. She underftood Adolphus was profeffedly devoted to Rofaline, and therefore fcarcely vouchfafed him her notice. .As for Adolphus, he nppeared hardly to know there was fuch a perfon prefent ; and he evidently only lingered in the hope of another interview with Rofaline, though from her behaviour he had every reafon to fear ffie remained * immoveable. r ' ï s Madame enquired of him concerning his friend, the great Count Lorraine, whofe extraordinary philanthropy of charafter he confirmed. She alfo aiked if he had feen the family of De Rochefort at Venice; adding, ihe was not unacquainted with the obligations he had conferred on them. He 3 replied
replied in the affirmative, faying that the fervice which he had fortunately had it in his power to render the young De Rochefort, had been amply repaid by an introduction through his means to an inti* macy with the good Count Lorraine. At the requeft of Madame he related the following particulars^. Being one evening, during his firft travels through Italy, with a paity of young men, he was prevailed on to accompany them to a celebrated gaming^houfe, where he faw a young man of genteel appearance lofe a large fum pf money, for which, he heard, a few days afterwards, he had been thrown into prifon. He alfo learned at the fame time that his, name was De Rpchefort, and that he was fon to a gentleman fo called, whom he had frequently met with his daughter at the houfe of an Italian Signor where he vifited. Shocked at the mifery this unhappy young man had brought on
oa> his family, he vifited him in prifon.; and finding him in appearance penitent,. and determined no more te indulge in the fatal vice whkh» had already reduced him- to the horrors of a^prifon, he paid the. fum for which he was confined, and had tha fatisfaftion to fee him liberated, and to bear the united bleffings of his father and fifter invoked on his head. A ffiort time after this traníâftion,. Adolphus continued his. tour ; and as he was one evening travelling through an unfre¬ quented part of an, extenfive foreft, attended by only one fervant, he was attacked by three armed ruffians, and threatened with immediate death, unkfs he inftantly gave thecn a fpecified fum of money which lcy : knew he had about him. Through an attempted difguife of figure and voice, Adolphus, with horror, recognifed in. one of thefe wretches the vile De Rochefort, who, with a drawn dagger ftood over bim, while his confederates fecured the fervant. At
At this critical juncture a cavalier with feveral attendants approached ; and after a Conteit refcued him from the hands öf the ruffnns, and conveyed him to the Abbey Lorraine, within a few leagues of which he had been attacked. *' I need not, I think, add," continued Adolphus, "■ that my deliverer proved to be the prefent Count Lorraine, though the kte Count being at that time living, Γ knew him then firft as^he Chevalier Sc. Aivars." ," The Chevalier St. Aivars!" exclaimed Rofaline, in a tone of furprife. It was repeated by Madame with equal amazement. 44 Why, is it poflible?" faid Adolphus, " that you can be ignorant that the prefent Count Lorraine is fon of the Baron St. Aivars ? He was adopted when very young by the old Count, his maternal uncle, who left
left him the whole of his vaft wealth, and with it his title of Lorraine." The regret of Rofaline at not having fcen the Count was greater than before, now that ihe knew he was the brother of her lamented Angelina, whom ffie had been twice on the point of meeting, and for whom, on his fifter's account, exclufive of his own reported excellence, ffie could nofe help feeling greatly interefted. From this period, Adolphus added, an intimacy had commenced between himfelf and the Count, who introduced him to hk unck at the Abbey, where he fpent fome months« Since that time the prelent Count had fought out the poor mifguided De Rochefort, convinced him of the crime he had been guilty of, and finally procured for him a commiffion in the Army, where he had retrieved his charafter» and gained great military credit.
This rektion gave great pkafure to the mind of Rofaline. She rejoiced in the benevolence of Adolphus, and admired that of the Count ; and her tearful eye was a mark of applaufe more gratifying to the feelings of Edgecumbe, than the united plaudits of an admiring world couid have beftowed. When they feparatcd for the night, he declared his intention cf quitung Mortimer Houfe the next morning early, and en¬ treated a few moments' converfation with her before his departure. She faintly articulated her acquiefcence in tbis requeft, and retired to her chamber. This night, ¡ike the preceding* was paffed almoft without fleep. It was devoted to medi¬ tation ι and the more deeply fte confidered the fubjeft, the more plainly her reafon told ber fte could not, with fatisfaftion to herfelf, have afted otherwife. Yet, in fpite of the philofophy which her aftions had denoted, her wayward mind would at times draw
draw a- comparifon between her fate and that ofthe more fortunate but trifling Mifs Mortimer, who was on the eve of marriage with the objeft of her choice, without one obftacle to intervene, and apparently with every requifite to enfure happineís. In a fliort unquiet flumber towards the morning, ibe forgot every fubjeft of for¬ row; tut awoke early from a dream, in which ihe beheld berfelf on a high pinnacle at the top of Edgecumbe Hall, from whence ihe beheld Sir Waiter and Lady Edgecumbe below her in the court-yard, wbo, pointing towards her, told her fte was condemned to remain there for ever, to witnefs the happinefs fte would have pre¬ vented ; and at the lame moment fte be¬ held Adolphus iflue ftom the manfion» gaily habited, condufting a young and beautiful kdy» who, fte was told, was his bride. In an agony of grief flie fcreamed aioqd, and 4
and awoke. It was yet early ; but recol¬ lecting her appointment, ffie arofe, and find¬ ing Adolphus was already in the breakfaft parlour^ flie defeended. His countenance was haggard and difordered; fleep feemed not to have vifited his eyelids, and his whoie frame was itili agitated by anxiety. Eagerly he revived the fubject of his vifit to Mortimer Houfe, declaring hk refolution to go immediately to the Halk - and openly folicit his father's approbation. E " That alone," faid Rofaline, in a voice of itronp: emotion, " will ever now induce me to be your's; and be aflured, unleíš I enter the family with the full approbation of the principal members of ii % I can never confent to he one of them I Call it pride- give it any appellation you pleafe, fuch is, my unalterable determination." 44 Wliat firmnefs I" cried Adolphus; 44 and yet you would declare you regard me with the fame fentiments as formerly ! Oh ? is impoffible, if ? ? it felt as Ido, that you could be thus obdurate I" 44 Alas l'
' 4t Aksl" faid Rofalino, fighing deeply, 44 thofe fentiments are as unalterable as mý refolution ; but why, Mr, Edgecumbe, will you force me to repeat what will only in¬ creafe your own regret and my uneafinefs? Leave me now, and return to your family : in their affeftion and attention you will y find, I truft, the happinefs it is denied me to ffiare with you ; and let iis both endea¬ vour, by this mental exertion, to fecure the comfort of knowing that we have afted according to thole precepts in which we have been alike educated. For what end were we early taught to curb our paffions, but that they might be made fubfervientto reafon when they would hurry us on to aft in oppofition to our judgment and honour ?" " Great Godi" cried Adolphus, as he paced the room, M what ftokifm ! Has a few months' refidence in a foreign clitñate taught you fuch philofophy, that you can thus coolly argue on a fubjeft which but to think of drives me to diftraftion ?" " I would
44 I would not wiffi," faid Rofaline, 44 to recur to paft times, did you not oblige me to remind you that the kme propofal was made by you previous to my quitting England, and that the fame anfwer, from the fame motives, was then given. í de¬ clined it not becauie you had a mere com¬ petency to offer rne, but becaufe I thought it a principle of duty. And could you then, or my dear mifguided Henrietta, ever imagine that only becaufe pecuniary cir¬ cumftances were more favourable, I could be prevailed oh to alter my refolution? No, Adolphus," added ilie, her voice faltering with the anguiih of her mind, " I would not be romantic or imprudent ; but had every other circumftance favoured us, I fhould not have had the heart-rending tafk of reply ine as I then did to the offer you made me. From my own unfortunate fituation I have no right to expeft affluence; and from my difpofition, I am totally indifferent to it. Had fate been propitious to
to our united wiflies, I could have found felicity, though unbkffed by the gifts of Fortune; but as it is—" She could fay no more. She had exerted herfelf to the utmoft, and every moment her courage and refolution feemed to give way. Adolphus in an agony haftily told her he would obey her, but ihe would foon fee him return to conduft her to his family. 44 The effort at kaft ftall be made," faid he ; " and ihould they continue in¬ flexible, Γ ftall inform tbem of my determin* ation. And now, Rofaline, adieu ! Expeft me ihortly back; and remember, life is only valuable to me as it is fweetened by the knowledge of your continued regard." He haftily releafed the hand he had feized as he concluded thefe words, and tufted out of the room. In
r' ??8 . ARIEL. In the hall he was met by Sir Edward, of whom he took a hurried and confufed leave ; and leaving with him his compli¬ ments for Madame Malvini, mounted his horfe, which his fervant waited with in the ^court*yard, and rode off* He was no fooner out of fight, than Rofaline, who had watched him from the window ride through the Park, funk on a chair, and all her refolution forfaking her with his prefence, fte gave way to the fad neis that opprefíèd her. Madame, who entered at this moment, thought it beft aot to appear to notice it ; and when fte was a little recovered, fte arofe with an intention to go to her own room. * Sir Edward, who had attended Adolphus to the door, met her, and perceiving her emotion, he took her hand. 44 Amiable
4< Amiable Mifs Melvan/· faid he» 44 how highly do I applaud your conduft, and how happy are you in having thus nobly enfured your own approbation í Let that fupport your fpirits, and infpire you to aft ever with the fame generous» difinterefted fortitude." The pleafure his applaufe gave her glowed on her pale cheek ; and fte attempted to anfwer r but her voice died on her lips, and flie retired in filence to her apartment, where fte endeavoured to apply for confolation to her own conicious rectitude, and to that fource from whence only it can flow. Acquainted with the true reafon of that * dejeftion fte had always noticed in Rokline, Madame now applied herfelf to footh her agitated fpirits, and by every means fhe could devife, to amufe and enliven her. Rofaline, grateful for her efforts, endea* voured to prove herfelf not unworthy of vol. iv. 1 tbem.
them. Sir George was not arrived, nor did any further intelligence of Adolphus reach tliem»
*■ ι
ic
?*0?—+*?*?????—?*?^??*
CHAP, VIH. ** The ???? that open'd on her face ** * ζ Well fecnid the emblem of her mind, « Where fnowy innocence we trace, " With bîufliiiig modefty combined* u Unhappy youtlT! he funk oppreft ; " For much he laboured to conceal « That gentleft paffion of the breaft, «* Which al! cari feign, but few can feel." Cartwîlïghtî A. PERFECT calm fucceeded the late ftorm at Mortimer Houfe, and feveral weeks elapfed in ferene tranquillity. The mind
mind of Rofaline, fubdued by forrow, had recourfe to thofe proper and rational re¬ fources for which her education and dif¬ pofition peculiarly adapted her; and ffie felt the benign influence of praftical virtue in the felf-fatisfaftion ihe now experienced.. She did not, as at Malvini, court folitude, and feek comfort in meditation; but by employment and fociety fte fought to expel from her bofom the fentiment which had deftroyed it's peace, and fubftitute the calin and tranquil thoughts which a life of ra¬ tional occupation arid gentle friendffiip offered. She attended Madame in hér morning vifits in the neighbourhood, and regularly mixed in the feleft company which fometimes affembled at Morrimer Houfe. She worked, read, and drew, and in conftant occupation " the deadly ruft of indolence," fo fatal to the kuman mind, was unknown to her. The marriage of Mifs Mortimer wis obliged tö be poftponed on account of the fottkments, wliich were not ýet ready. 12 Sir
Sir George again vifited them for a few days, and brought a preffing invitation from Cecilia for Mifs Mortimer to fpend fome time with her in Cavendift Square. The permiifion of her father and aunt was obtained ; and with no regret for her lofs, Roialine faw her depart in high fpirits. She was now left alone with Sir Edward and Madame Malvini; the former had a ktter from his fon foon after the departure of his daughter, written in a calmer temper of miftd, but fignifying no intention to jcnew his addrefles to Cecilia. The fond regard of Sir Edward for Rofa¬ line feemed daily to increafe ; but the evi¬ dent melancholy with whkh he regarded Jier, couid not pafs unnoticed by her. As fte was one day talking of him to Madame, that amiable woman faid— 4i Ah, Rofaline ! my brother has» in* thc courfe of his
hts life, fuflcred much from a fenfibility of temper which early marked his charafter. It is not a fubjeft I ever fpeak on for many reafons ; but you, my fweet child, are the friend of my heart, the fucceifor of my loved Carlina, and to you I fcruple not to relate my brother's early difappointment, becaufe it will account for that fudden and permanent regard by wbich he was attached to you from the firft moment he beheld you at Edgecumbe Hall. In thc fhort iketch I gave you of my own life, I men¬ tioned a beloved frknd who accompanied me to the Convent where I was educated. That frknd was Rofaline Sr. Aivars ; her father was a defcendant of the St Aivars family, who having degraded himfelf in the eyes of his relations by an inferior marriage, had been difinherited by bis father, and refided/on a fmall income, within a few miles of Mortimer rfoufe till his deceafe, whicli happened when his only child was at an early age. His Lady had been removed from this world fome years before. Their ι 3 daughter,
daughter, as flie bore the nâme of Sr. Aivars, (though her patents had received no kvour from his family), was taken under the immediate protection of the late Baron, father of the prefent Lord. At', the death of her laft parent fte came to Mortimer Houfe. ! 44 From earlieft infancy flie had been my nioft beloved friend; and when L was -fent to a monaftery, for education, the Baron¿ who had never feen his young rektion, being informed of this circumftance from my father, and of the ftrong friendfliip that iubfifted between us, requefted that Rokline might accompany me. " To France we were both condufted ; previous to which my brother had avowed an attachment for my fweet friend, which I vainly hoped would have proved mutual. For my fake as well as his, fhe t pften lament¬ ed her inability to return it, which fte declared to me flie found quite imppflibk. Had
ARIEL. I7£ Hád you known the objeft of it, you would not wonder at my brother's partiality. I cannot better deferibe her, than by faying her form was exactly the counterpart oi your own—you faw her portrait at Mal¬ vini in my dole t ; and her mind was the region 'of every virtue and accomplifhment which could adorn humanity. " Long had my brother endeavoured to conceal an attachment I had perceived ere he was confcious of it himfelf; and from the moment he became convinced it was hopelefs, he confined it within his own breaft, and only by the deep dejeftion of his countenance could it be known he ftiil harboured it. 44 He ? poffeffed of great ftrength of mind, and much firmnefs of refolution; yet, unfubdued by the grief that internally preyed on his peace, he preferved an appearance of outward cornpofure, and law us quit the kingdom with a fortitude I 14 . hardly
hardly had dared, from a knowledge of the extreme acutenefs of his feelings, to expect. 44 In purfuance of the refolution he had formed, he adhered to a determination, dictated by reafon, to refrain from feeing tis, and therefore never vifited us at the Convent, though my father frequently came thither. 44 When Rofaline had attained the age of eighteen, ffie was fummoned to the Chateau St. Aivars by her uncle and guardian, and the Baron. She received it with ? ???- timent very different from joy. She looked forward with no pleafure to a refidence at the Chateau St. Aivars. The charafter of the Baron was reported to be marked with arrogance, and a haughty contempt for all whom fortune or rank had.placed beneath him. He had two fons, but there was no female in the family but herfelf; and the infukted fituation of the chateau prefented her no profpeft of fociety to enliven her retirement. " Never
ARIEL. I77 α Never can I forget the eve of her de¬ parture from the Convent, when ihe took an affecting farewel of all the Nuns, and then retired with me to our apartment. The anguiih of unavoidable feparation was acutely felt by both. 4 Ah, Louifa I* faid ihe, < fliall I within the high ftuccoed walls of St. Aivars feel the fweet innate peace that I have felt in your fociety and that of the pure devotees who inhabit the Monaftery of St. Mary ? Ah no, too furely I feel that happinefs and you will forfake your poor Rofaline at the fame moment ?' 44 Dear injured Saint I Little did flie then know that her words were indeed but too prophetic. " We wandered together round the «arrow confines of the gardens belonging to the monaftery i and on a marble pillar fupporting an alcove, where we had fpent ' 1 5 many
many happy hours together, fte wrote the lines I will now ihew you,: they are de- fcriptive of her feelings, ^nd charafteriftk ofthe affeftionate turn ofher guilelefs mind, which, though artlefs as the unfpotted breaft of infancy, was active and animated, as this little fpecimen of her poetical genius will evince. The poetry is itfelf nothing re¬ markable ; but it fliews her itrong attach¬ ment to the fpot where fte had been edu¬ cated, and her ideas of friendfliip and female affeftion." Madame drew a paper ftom her pocket- book, and gave it to Rofaiine :—-it con*· tained this tAREWELL TO THE MONASTERY OP ST, MARY'. To thefe lone towers, this folemn cloiflerM fcene, I bid perhaps a lad, a laft adieu I Long .months and year* perchance may intervene* Ere ©net again tbcy meet my anxious view 1 ■? r. , - Within ψ * ; , ι 4f
Within thefe walls where quiet ever reigns, And cairn devotion marks each fitei ing hour; Tranquillity her gentle fway maintains, For here no bigotry exerts its power. In calm religion's holy joys they live I No wounding ibrrow their meek boloms know ;. With that pure blifs true piety can give, Their humble faintlike minds in praife overflow I Can yon high dome, whofe walls with colours bright, The rich polTetøon's vaunted wealth difplay«— Can it e'er yield that pure, \inmix*d delight, Tho* rich with ornaments, with gilding gay, Which theíè m*;ft fes) when their meek ibtils they raife, To Htm in rapture who their minds fuftains i In humble adoration, pray'r, and praife, Their voices join the organ's pealing drains ? Ah, dear Lonîfa î friend of this iad heart í Ah f muft I lofe thy gentle converfe mild—· And learn the mournful leílon how to part From her, who long the fleeting hours beguild ? l ? Η ovr
How oft beneath yón widely branching oak, While the pale moon her trembling radiance threw, Would we the Mufes* tuneful aid invoke, And watch each flow'ret ting'd with filvery hue ? Together have we trac'd the gardens round— Together here have touch'd the warbling lyre With mild content and gentle friendihip crown'd, Nor heeded gaudy, hope or vain defire ! But now to all I bid a long adieu Ì No more the holy chqjr in tones fub! ime— Ko more the iofty altar meets my view-— bio mor« I hear the folemn chanted rhyme ! To thefe, to Friendihip' s felf a long farewell In gloomy grandeur, pomp, and proud parade, Perhaps I'm now for ever doom'd to dwell, While thefe monaftic icenes in diftance fade. Yet Riem'ry faithful, ftill ihall oft retrace Theíè bappy hours of calm, ferene delight ! In mental view each dear« each well-known face Shall oft be pretest to my aching figbt t
ARİ EX·' lít Ili Fancy*« eye 1*11 fee the façred chotr, I'll hear each voice ?, holy concert jota, And in thofe orifons good thought* infpire, Mingle the much-lov'd name of Rofaline I Ah friend« for ever dear I my hovVing foul Will wander near this hallow'd, pure abode, Until it reach the lad appointed goal, Where no rude cares opprefs, no griefs corrode!
When Rofaline had perufed them, and returned the lines to Madame, tbe latter continued—" I will pafs over our fepa· ration. It was, as you may imagine, pain¬ ful in the extreme to both ; nor was there, I believe, a fingle heart in the Convent that did not moft truly fympathize in our for. row:. My brother, who had a ftort time before joined my father in France, was appointed by him to conduft Rofaline to St. Aivars ; he forced her from my arms with a heart breaking with grief. Her fub- fequent fate was a hard one ; ihe only 4 furvived
furvived a few years after herdeparture from the Convent, and, I believe, fell a viftim to the pride and arrogance of her haughty relations. The few particulars I am ac¬ quainted with, I am not at liberty to relate. What happened to me after this period you know. My brother, finding his hopes of Rofaline over, fubmitted to his kte, and at laft acquiefced with the wiihes of his father, and united himfelf to a lady for whom he felt a perfeft indifference. The ftriking refemblance there certainly is be¬ tween you and our poor loft frknd, accounts for that agitation which Edward fometimes betrays as he contemplates your features, and renders his fudden and violent regard for Jrou not at all wonderful.** Rofaline fincerely lamented with Madame that one forøiecj to render ail around him happy, ftould fail of being fo himfelf; but there was a thorn flill rankkd in hk bofom which art hW np power to extraft, though time and philofophy, aided by reafon and religion,
religion, had aflifted in fobduing the acute pain it had once caufed. ? The knowledge of the keen difappoint· ment Sír Edward had endured, had the defired effeft on the mind of Rofaline. She behekl the fortitude with Which he had fupported it, and fte fav/ the good effefts of this command over himfelf. Every day fte feemed by her own exer¬ tions to acquire more refignation and ftrength of mind; and the efforts fte had made to avoid folitude, feemed as though they would fliortly be crowned with fuccefs, by a complete viftory over every fentiment flie «rifted expelled from her bofom.- A fmall romantic hermitage ftood in a fequeftered part ofthe plantations^ it was a gloomy retired fpot; and often had the inclinations of Rokline* led hér to wifli to fpend
fpend many of her hours there ; but this prudence forbade, and fte refolutely denied herfelf the dangerous indulgence. One evening, hpwever, Madame liaving been fent for to vifit a fick lady, who was Jn habits of intimacy with the family, and Sir Edward having gone out to dine with a neighbour- ing gentleman, fte was left accidentally alone to purfue her evening walk. It was cloudy and dark ; the path ihe had taken kd her to tbe hermitage, and fte had reached it in deep and filent medi- tation ere fte was confcious of her own intentions. ? ?? feat invited her to reft; and fte feated herfelf in one of thofe thoughtful moods, wben the mind, abforbed by itfelf, feems unconfcious of aught paffing around. It was long fince fte bad been at liberty to indulge unreftrained refieftion. Her ideas, foftençd by recent woe, took apoetica! turn;
turn ; and in the wild enthufiafm of her mind, her pencil recorded the fentiments fte felt in the form of AN ADDRESS TO CALAMITY. Dire, frowning Goddefs, whofe terrific mien No mortal unappaíld could e'er behold—· At me who throweft all thy arrows keen, With frigid look, with afpect Oem and Cold, I fet thy form in fable veftments clad, No fmile to make the weeping mourner glad ; With face all gloom, and in thy iron hand, The vengeful rod is borne at thy command. The wave* of m«*ry gather round my head, And fill my foul with fotrow, awe« and dread* Thy fifter, Difappointment, too appears, ■í Mother of Woe, with cheek of pallid hue | Looks back with trembling at the long paft year·, Starts with affright, and (hud der» at the view 1 Her gloomy fport too bave I been, The wreck of all ray hopes Tve feen ι The clouds of woe i η vol »'d me in their gloom, And early was I taught my forrowing doom. Vet will I not repine, Oh rigid Pow'r I Tho* thy dark feature* ftili around rne lowV. What
What form is that," of manners grave, yet mud, Wiïh brow ferene in robes, of white arrayed, Whofe looks betray no raging paffions wild— Cora'ft thon to roe, fweet, gentle, lovely maid ? Her accent^&ft break on my wondVing ear \ She comes to ftop the fwiftly falling tear 1 *TÌ8 Patience, lovely Goddefs, whofe mild voice In tones melodious makes the wretch rejoice, Brings to the woe-worn fufferer relief, And ftops the torrent of impetuous grief 1 Dire Goddefs of the frowning brow 1 No more will I thy arrows fear, By Patience arm'd, and taught to know. How Heav'ns award we muß revere. No more will I my rigid fate lament t I know that ibrrows are in mercy fent To teach to erring mortals here below, Leffons of wifdom in the guife of woe s Thou from above art delegated here, Then will I blefs thy rod, though juft, fevere. ~? J. ■6 She had concluded her poetical effufion, and was f abfotbe4 fo çontempktion, when
flie was found by Sir Edward, who* ftartied at her thoughtful attitude, paufed a mo* %ment, and then advancing, enquired for his fifter. Rofaline fold him the melancholy caufe ofher abfence. He made np reply, but calling his eyes on one of the ruftic ftools with which the hermitage was fur¬ niflied, he read aloud the title of the τ little poem which had juft efcaped her pen— " An Addrefs to Calamity !—Ah Rofa¬ line ! is it thus your folitary hours are em¬ ployed?" He looked in her face, which was covered with every mark of confufion ; and the involuntary tear had by force rafted to her eye. Sk Edward again paufed; then fuddenly lofing all his wonted firmnefs, he ex- ckimedr-" Ah too-ftrikipg refemblance! fte too wrote thus, and thus ever did the fentiments ofher heart flow to her pent" He
He ceafed, and a moment was filent. " But I am wrong," added he, after a {kufe of a few minutes, " and you alfo, Rofaline, by indulging this penfive humour, are lofing that native energy of mind I thought you pofleffed of. No, my child, . - * do not give way to ideas fo corrofive to your peace. Happinefs is not in our own power, but tranquillity we rjmy always enfure, by exerting thofe powers of the mind which were given us to correct that acute fenfe of woe which predominates in fotoe tempers. Rofaline's tears flowed /aft, She could make no reply ; but filently rifing, and taking his offered arm, fte returned to the houfe, feverely felf-reproved for having given way for a moment to the temporary indulgence of melancholy, that had drawn úpon her thé reproof of her worthy friend* She
She now began to wonder that no in¬ telligence had reached her of Adolphusj but her thoughts were foon called off from this fubjeft to one ftili-more interefting to her, by an incident not lefs furprifing than unexpefted.
%*£%!%&*
*????}????????????????????
^ml^^SS^^ZSSSSSma^i^SSSIffSSmSSStSSSS^^S
CHAP. IX,
*« Great was tlieîr ftrife, which hourly was renewed, *' Till each with mortal hate his rival view'd ; f *. Now fnends no more, nor walking hand tn hand, u But when they met, tliey made a furly ftand j u And glared like angry lions as they paft, ** Aad wiA*d that every look might be their laft·'* Dryden» A PACKET ?? klto *, „ne evening from Italy for Madame, fte re¬ tired to read them, faying, as fte left the room, tbat fte knew the fuperfcrip- tion was De Rochefort's. Rofaline hoped it brought them intelligence of the health ^Madame St. Lucia, to whom fte, as well
well as Madame, had written on their arrival in England. Sir Edward was in a few minutes fum¬ moned from thedreifing-roorri to his fifter's apartment, and Roialine began to fear fomething of importance had happened, particularly as more than an hour elapfed, and neither returned. At kngth Sir Edward appeared; his countenance was pale and agitated. Rofaline looked anxioufly at him , he took her hand in filence. 44 Is Madame Malvini well, Sir ?" fte aiked. ** She is at prefent a little hurried by fome extraordinary intelligence fte has re¬ ceived from Italy, and would fpcak to you in her apartment," faid he. He gazed earneftly at her as he ipoke» and the tear of angutft feemed to tremble in his eye. His hand ftook violently as he took her's to lead her to Madame, and Rofalinct
Rofaline in wondering filence accompanied him to his filler's dreffing-room. They found Madame in tears. She no fooner bejield Rofaline, than ftarting up, fte gazed at her for a moment, and then ex¬ claimed-^" Alas, Edward, ? there any confirmation wanting? Does not that countenance folve every doubt ?" 44 It does, indeed it does l'* replied Sir Edward, " but pray, Louifa, be compofed ; you alarm Mifs MelvanJ and make her fear when fte, I hope, will have real reafon to rejoice." Rofaline all this time ftood wondering, without power to fpeak, " Ah, my fweet girl !" continued Madame, throwing herfelf into her arms, " the myf¬ tery that has fo long obfcured your birth fe removed. Yes, my Rofaline, all is dif¬ covered ; and you have the fatisfaftion to know that one parent, however injured, yet furvives. 44 Ah
44 Ab, Madám," faid Rofaline, " may I indeed credit you—may I dare to hope^—-" Her voice failed, and flie fat down by Madame, who affuming more cornpofure, faid—" Strange events have happened, my dear child, fince we left Malvini. The good De Rochefort tells me he has been fummoned to the Chateau St. Aivars to attend the Baron, in whofe family he was formerly Chaplain and Confeflbr, and who, on his death-bed, requefted to fee hini. He obeyed the fummons, ahd found the Baron in hourly expeftation of that death he was fo ill prepared to meet. His fon, the excel- lent Count Lorraine, who has fo long been baniihed his prefence, was with him; and to him and De Rpchefort did he recount every event of his paft life, which lays open a fcene of the darkeft treachery. From his confefiiori and corroborating circumftances, De Rochefort has tranfmltted to me a memoir of the family ot St. Aivars, which you, my Rofaline, who are now the principal perfon concerned in it, may yourfelf perufe." vol» iv. ? Saying
Saying this, ftè deliveted it into thehands bf Rofaline, adding—" In this manufcript, which we will together perufe, we ftall find thofe fucceeding events which followed the incidents I have already related to you in the life of my beloved friend. Rokline St. Aivars. Her time of exiftence was fliort and tranfitory, but it was fingularly marked by fuffering and forrow." Rofaline opened* the manufcript with a trembling hand and palpitating beartv and read as follows :—
A MEMOIR OF ??? FAMILY OF ST.ALVARS. 44 The late Baron St, Aivars, to whofe care his niece was configned, was a rhan of a haughty and violent temper. He had been married early in lite, but his Lady, in giving birth to het iecond child, quitted a life mibutered by the ? treatment ofher
Lord, whofe folien gloominefs of temper made him hated by the furrounding Chiefs, with whom he had frequent wars. His family, when his orphan niece became one of it, confifted of two fons, whofe difpo¬ fitions were totally oppofite. Edgar, the elder, was remarkable for a miidnefs of temper and fweetnefs'of difpofition which endeared him to his vaffals, though not to his father, who early (hewed a partiality to Rhodolpho, his younger fon. 44 Rhodolpho, with his name, inherited the temper and manners of the Baron. Artful and malicious, he was early chkrved to have greater influence than any other human being over the mind of his iather. 44 On the arrival of their fair coufin at St. Aivars, the attention of both the young Chevaliers was attracted by her beauty. Her elegant form was animated by a coun¬ tenance fo lovely, that none could behold without admiring it ; and the hearts of both ? 2 her
her èöufins fell vtftims to the charms of the amiable Rofaline. " For Edgar fte foon felt à fentiment of regard fte had never before experienced ; but the haughty manners of Rhodolpho infpired her only with diflike. Thk was increafed into averfibn by his love of war ; he alone being frequently the caufe of thofe fbuds which fo often raged between hk father and the neighbouring Chieftains. ** The Baron ever teftified a conde¬ fcenfion and affeftion towards his niece very uncommon for hirh tó (hew towards any ,'Oiie : ; and the probability that either of his fons ftould think on one for their wife who was wholly Without poífeífioíis, and dependant on hitn for her fubfiftence, never occurred to him. ■**. Too foon, however, was he undeceived by the animofity which began to fubfift between the brothers. It arofe at length to
to fuch a height, that, on Rofaline's ihew¬ ing fome trifling mark of preference to Edgar, he was challenged by Rhodolpho, who had been mitigated by his intimate friend and confidant, the prefent Count de Polloni, to feek his brother's life. "They fought on the ramparts; and, from the known bravery of both, it is too probable the combat would have proved fatal at kaft to one, bad not the lovely caufe of their difíèiifion luddenly ruffied on them, and throwing herfelf between the combatants, fufpend í d their rage, and for the time diverted their thoughts from every objeft but herfelf. ï^ J ' a :■■.; _ ' lf ** The fword dropped from the hand of Edgar, who had been only provoked to lift his hand againft his brother by the moft abufi ve and opprobrious language ; and eyen that of the furious Rhodolpho was withheld from purfuing hk murderous - Kj purpofe,
purpofe, as, kneeling between them, flie implored them, in frantic accents, to defili. 44 The Baron at this moment arrived, and ordering his fons to retire in peace, he was fo ftruck with the attitude of Rofaline, her fupplicating look, and pofture, that he ordered a painting to be taken from the fcene." ' '- [It was a copy of the ftme pifture which had raifed fuch emotions in the heart of Rofaline, at Polloni, and the original after* wards at St. Älvars.] ---- * .-.'.. " Retiring from the fcene of action, Edgar, who had been wounded in the arm, fented froth loß öf blood ; and his wound bleeding pröfuftîy» Rofalihe, almoft unøiii * fcious what fte dM, töök off her vèih and applied it to the wound. This again i rri- tated the jealous Rhòdolpho; and the l do* râfeftics beinjg fummonied, Edgar was conveyed
conveyed to his apartments, and Rofaline retired to her's« 'r 44 Long had fte owned to herfelf her attachment to Edgar, and her averfion for the deteftable Rhodolpho. Both liad avowed an afleftion ? for her, but to the profeffions of neither had flie liftened. (I 44 From this period the hatred of Rhodol¬ pho knew no bounds; he took every opportunity to prejudice the Baron againft hir brotheiy and very foon alienated the affé&ion of his father from the unfortunate Edgár. ? ". ^ , - ' <■ *> < ' - t 4* TTie latter, whofe paffion for hk fair coufin daily increafed j at length obtained from her a, confefliom that it was mutual. ìrèrharil the ill treatment ffie faw him hourly endure from ?? father and brother, created him a ftill deeper intereft in her bofom, and fte no longer put a reftraitit on her behaviour towards him. ? 4 *» A twelve*
44 A twelvemonth had not elapfed after the affair I have related, before fte was prevaikd on to unite their deftinies for ever; and in a lucklefs hour for both, fte met hini in the dead of night af the altar, where theirhands were joined by De Rochefort, the family Confeflbr, in the chapel of the Caíllç. ** A few weeks after this midnight marriage had been folemnized, war was declared by the Baron againft St. Lucia« a great and powerful Chief, whofe Caille, ä .Pi.. ' í- ' ' ______ ? fituated in the midft of almoft inacceífible mountains, was a few leagues from St. Aivars. A fcheme was planned to befiege it, at whick the baron, an^ his two fons j^ejfe inpejrfon.tb affine-i . ..l-, ; w ^ 1, r,; · ,?/ . >, ¡ h .¿.~.. ? - " ; 'V > - « ■ *í**fr ^ c < > 4 i ''.r-i- r f -^ ?Ί^ -ri. ^ i l > ,?, .??'?.'? „¿^ -> ? 1 £ '" Η ν. .í'--. ""*' ', ,.■ ' ï>y Rofaiine in 4 ftate qf theptmpft anxiety ¿pd ??????. # Shey^readed . tøft. . ; fomg #^1 ?????? Äould ;?*1^?^8И?·-^^^ already repented having' ?\$^$?0&?$ . .-;'■···'' -■ ckndeftine
ckndeftine engagement. Her breaft was the refidence of every foft amiable quality that can adorn the female; and her mind had been early ftored with thofe firm prin¬ ciples of religion which will not. fuffer thek pofleflbr to deviate from tbeir unerring rules without the fevereft compunftion» Now that fte was left alone» and the prefence of Edgar no longer illumined the fcène, reflection brought to her mind a conviction of the imprudence fte had been guilty of in the precipitancy with which fte had agreed to a ckndeftine union. " While I record this part of her ftort but eventful life, methinks I now view her light» fylph^M form as, during the abfence Ír ' ^^ of the fam^y, fte daily wandered round the deferted apartments with flow and agitated fteps. Now I behold her afcend the vaulted ftaircafe, and pace the^ battlements thé Caftle while fte caft many a fad ?. 5 and
and weary look towards that párt of the mountain from whence flie hoped to fee the loved form of Edgar returning to her. 44 At all hours would flie walk on the ram¬ parts with her eyes ever fadly turned İn anxious expectation in the fame direction ; and with only the thin black veil ffie generally Wore wrapped round her ilender figure to' güatd ¡t from the inclemency of the Alpine ftorms, would flie fometimes wander round thé battlements till the ancient monitor of time had proclaimed the midnight paffed. r - r '· t 44 The deep arid"intenfe anxiety whkh agitated her gentle bofom, and the mental conflict; which during this eventful period reigned there» are beft defcribed by her own words in fomè lines which arc yet extant in the Cattle. They were written in an hour of deep and filent dejection» as, from the
the higheft pinnacle of the chateau, fte purfued her daily occupation of watching her Lords return.
At that ione hour when care is loft In fweet forgetfulnefs and /leep, The woe-worn wretch by forrowi croft, Retires abne to-wake and weep ι The fearful horrors of the ftorm and wind Are fmall compared to thofe in hh fad fm/td í Beyond thefe battlements on high I view yon mountain's lofty bafe 5 The tear, fucceeded by the ßgh* Will rulh adown my pallid facej * As thus in melancholy mood reclinM, I vent the anguiih hid in this fad mindt Oblivion's ftream Γ ve oft been ??? Has power to calm tho fenfe of woe,^ The fenfes of the wretch enfold. And bid his forrows ceafe to flow ; But no Lethean cup can I e'er fød, For Mifery holds ber feat '?? ?$ fad mivdI K.S What
What founds of horror do I hear ! The owl's ftirill feream» the raven's wing ? In murmurs reach my frightened ear, j And to this heart convi&ióti bi in^ That, tho' to Virtue*« path inclin'd, Sweet peace is far from me and thisyW mind I At evening's lone and quiet hour, The droning bat wheeld (lowly by— Adtve to Superftition's power, ; Th' unbidden, tear, ruihed from my eye,. And as the weikrn fun declin'd, Freih fears and horrors rofe in úxisfad mindi * ■ Ah ! mould this prefage of my heart, - *■ , - , Which fills my foul with throbbing woe, Be foon ful filld, and Death's fure dart Have laid my darling Edgar low ; The (ame dread power with Hand fo kind, Shall peace andjoy reftore to this fad mind l· Witli him I'll fly to that bíefe'd fltore- Where joy immortal ever reigns--» Where pain and forrow are no more, And love divine thé foul fuftains— Wbere mortal films no longer blind, And grief* and care's expell'd from Úúsfadmindt
44 Every
î 44 Every found the hapkfs Rofaline heard, ffie liftened to, in the anxious hope that ? proclaimed the return of the Baron and his family. -? 44 Several days pafled, and no tidings reach¬ ed her. At kngth from the ramparts ffie beheld a party of foIdkrs,who entered the Caftle, and gave warning of the approach of their Lord crowned with viftory. The gates were thrown open, and the proud victor entered in triumph with the dead body of the conquered St. Lucia borne before his chariot, in which fat the Baron and his younger^fon. In vain did Rofaline, who beheld the triumphal entry from the battlements, look aroundin fearch of Edgars- her eye was no where gratified by his image ; and fliocked at the murdered form of fbe unhappy Chief, witb his difconfolate widow and her train of vaffals, now pri foners, fol¬ lowing their Lady, flie turned with horror from thè fcene of woe, and retired to her chamber, .??* Shortly
" Shortly was flie fummoned by the Báron to view the prifoners from the balcony as they paflfed through the great hall. Fluflied with conqueft, and elate with newly- acquired glory, he met her; and condufted between the Baron and Rhodolpho, ilie en¬ tered the gallery, from which fte beheld a fight which made her guiitlefs foui ihrink with horror. ** The wretched widowed Madame St. Lucia, with her infant fon in her arms» pafled with a flow aad agonized ftep through the north, hall. Her woe*worn countenance was overfpread with a ghaftly palenefs, and her hollow funk eyes were caft upwards,.ás if praying for refignation to fupport the magnitude of her grief : but what were the fenktfons of Rolaline when, on a fecond review of her perfon, fte re¬ cogniied in this bapleis viftim of war and ambition, an early friend, who had been educated in the fame Convent with herfelf. Shuddering with grief and tenor, flie retired baftüy f
haftily, notwithftanding the entreaties of Rhodolpho to ftay. 44 A fumptuous banquet fucceeded, pre¬ vious to which Rofaline, who had not dared to afk concernine Edgar of his father or brother, applied privately to a foldier, from whom fhe learned that he had been kft to command a chofen troop who remained in poffeffion of the Caftle St. Luck. " Scarcely had fte obtained the welcome intelligence that he was well, ere fte was fummoned to the banquet. Her fpirits were ill in unifon with the general joy; and as the haughty Rhodolpho handed her to the feftive board, and feated himfelf by her, fte fancied fte faw a malicious fmile on his countenance. ** The Baron, exulting in his viftory, was eager in promoting gaiety; but Rofaline, at an eariy hour* feized a favöurabk oppor*» tunity to retire. Scarcely
" Scarcely had ffie reached* her apart¬ ment, when ffie was followed thither by Rhodolpho. Fluflied with victory and wire, he feized her hand, entreating ber to return to the kloon ; and upon her refufal, added with vehemence—" You would not thus early have quitted it, had Edgar, the favoured Edgar, been there ! Ah, lovelieft Rofaline! why will you not transfer your affeftion from that cold heart to one beating with love and truth to you ?* 44 Provoked at his language and manner, fte infifted on his leaving her, which, he refolutely refufed, adding—* Believe me, haughty beauty ! your attachment to Edgar is well known, as well as ypur private enquiries after Iiîs kfety, which doubtiefs your anxiety will eri fure from danger.*--· " Thefe words were uttered in a tone fo malicious» that Rofaline would : longer ilay to hear him ; bût forcingherfeit η?φ 'hini» ran into her chamber, and locking the door, was fecure from hk intrufion* "Here
11 Here ffie had remained but a ftort time in all the terror which her anxiety for Edgar had raifed in her bofom, when a murmur reached her ear from the faioon ; loud voices were diflinguiffiable, and all below feemed confufion. ** In terror and expeftation of fte knew not what, fte waited for near an hour, when from an attendant fte learned that the Baron had been fuddenly feized with a violent diibrder after fte had quitted the banquet¬ ing-room, and having been .conveyed to his apartment, his phyficians had declared it to be occafioned by poifon adminiftered in his food or wine; but rcftoratives having ???? applied^ it w^s ?? hoped he would recover. .- . . '-^,>? : , i * * , 'S "' V I '" " ^Rhodolpho, who conftantly attended him, and kept every one elfe from bim, gave frequent hints that Edgar was the perpetrator pf the deed, r and foon found means to perfuade the Baron of it, accounting for
for his wift to take away the life of b?s father, from the oppofition his defire of marryirg his coufin Rofaline had met from the Baron; hinting that by this method he hoped to have lucceeded tp the eftate of hk father, which he immediately meant to ftare with Rofaiine, -'"- . ^ *ί .*,;*. . ρ t j - t. : _, ι ρ : Ρ - * i '* ; **:This intelligence ttìè deeply hypocritical Rhodolpho afterwards bribed fome foldkrs, creatures of his own, to confirm, and tö cönfefs that they were employed by Edgar tö admtnîfter the poifon which hád been infufed into the wine^ the ? aron ?? draiík at thè banquet; f'* 1 ' : s ' ? <' 1 · lV;/% - ? ? " .-Α*- ' ^ , ^ h- „ c , *; < -*^, ,-,τ %. 4„ „ ■ á r --Vi. ^ ■; ^ - ^t#v ¥ sr,- Baron at firft denounced vengeance òá^ma innocent fon, ordering that he ftould inftantly be put to deathV but the de- ceitfof Rhodolpho entreated that ?? fen· jtèncè feigbt be tóitígálrcd tú päpctual niftment, arid on ? fojfewlög day it ?* cojáveyèd to the unfufpefting Edgar, *« Rofaline,
" Rofaline, in the meantime, was a prey to the moit dreadful agony of mind. She learned with horror the crime of which Edgar was accufed, and which ihe j uftly doubted not had been committed by his brother. " In fpeechkfs. grief fte paffed the day* endeavouring to alleviate her own mifery by vifiting the wretched Madame St. Lucia in her prifon privately, and conveying to her as many comforts and neceifaries as her own limited power would allow her. 7' ■ - 44 Two more days elapfed, when, on the third* the Baron's diforder returned, and after raging all night with violence, he expired 1? agonies early the fucceeding morning,-; n%m\ tig bk younger fon as hk fucceffor, and leaving to bim all his eftate* and pofleflions, whik the hapiefs Edgar was deprived of his juft inheritance, and for ever exiled from his native home by the horrid and fuccefsful artifices of a trea¬ cherous brother* <« More
"More than once bad Rofaline implored the obdurate Rhodolpho to allow her to attend her dying benefactor ; and once, in fpite of the attendants who would have prevented her, ihe prefented herfelf at the door of his chamber ; but by the orders of Rhodolpho, who wouid not fuffer her to behold the Baron, flie was condufted back to her apartment. 44 With well-diffembkd cornpofure be faid he had too great a regard for the delicacy of her feelings to allow ber to behold a fight fo ffiocking as the dying agonks of his father ; and under ? pretext of not having him difturbed, all but himfelf and the con¬ fidential fervant and partner of his iniquities, Roderigo, were kept fiom him to his kft moment·
■of CHAP»
CHAP. Χ.
,f Better be with ?? dead, «' Whom we, to gain onr place, have lent to peace, 44 Than on tlie torture of the mind to lie " Iri refilefs ecftacy/ 1 Shakespeare.
THE MEMOIR CONTINUED. v * ■îr. , u L HE fituation of thé u nfortunate Rofa· lme was now more agonizing than ever. She was confined to her apartment by order of the new Baron, and never fuffered to leave it unattended. Sleep forfook her eyes, and repofe was a ftranger to her frame« She ipént almoft the whole night at
at the window, watching the warring elements which feemed to be in unilon wkh her feelings. 44 A loud and dreadful tempeft broke on her ear, and the whole firmament at times Í' r>cd a temporary fteet of living fire; then in a moment a black and horrible cloud filled the atmofphere, and hid every objeft in the pbicurity of impenetrable darknefs. , ** It was paft midnight ; the awfulnefs of the fcene, and the drearinefs of the night } impreffed her with a terror flic could not difpel from her mind, when fuddenly ftie few a figure flowly move on the rainparb below» it walked with an apparently cautious ftep towards her cafement, and at kit ftopped oppofite to it. ** She was retreating from her ftation, whea her own name, pronounced in a low tone of voke» but in accents that made every nerve S
nerve 'flier heart vibrate, reached her ear. Sbe ftarted and 'iftened : it was repeated. 4 Who is below?* faid ffie, in a raifed voice. * Alas, Rofaline!' replied the fame welhknown voice, * need I announce a profcribed wretch who only lives ih the hope ofyour affeftion l * Ah, Edgar,' kid Roialine, c why have you ventured hither ? Danger lurks around, and ffiould your revengeful brother difeover you, fatal to us both may be the confequence.' * Let him difeover met' returned he; 4 if deprived of you, Rofaline, life is nO longer öf value. My father I underftand is no more, and I am declared his mur¬ derer ! Can you then any longer refleft with one fentiment of regard on one io loft as I am ?' f I have already reflefted,' anfwered Rofaline, * and am determined to feize the firft opportunity to eicape tne vigilance of the tyrant, and fly with you to fome place
place of fafety. Are we not united by ties whicii it is not jn his ??? er, or that of any but Death to fever i'k ? * c Come then, adorable Rofaline Ρ cried Edgar, * now is,the moment of efcape ! Endeavour to defcend, unfeen, frpm your r. 'T' f 1 ' ~ apartment, and who knows but happineís and peace may await usi' *' Scarcely had he uttered thefe words^ when Rofaline exclaiming— τ 4 I come !' turned from thi* cifeme nt, and was encircled in the arms of the dreaded and equally bated Rhodolpho, who had entered her apart¬ ment unheard during her conference with his brother, and malignantly waited with a favage delight till it was concluded, ? he difcovered himfelf. « Come then, beautiful coufin l faid İ' he in an ironical tone, * come! but not to the arms of your expeftingiover-r-bebold him conveyed ito the proper receptacle for parricides JV ,· , He
ι *< He direfted her eyes to the window» from whence fte beheld the, unfortunate Edgar, loaded with manacles by the do¬ meftics of the Baron, and conveyed to one of the dungeons of the Caftle. Her fenfes forfook her at the ßght, and Che fell motion¬ lefs at the feet of the Baron, who ordering her to be carried to a cell prepared for her, left the apartment. -. ». y ■ ■■ f 44 She was conveyed to a fmall vaulted room formed out of a part ofthe wall, and left to her fate. Here a fucceflion of fits of infanity followed each other, till at length» left alone almoft in darknefs atid total folitude, her fenfes by degrees returned» and fte revived to a recolkftion of all the horrors of her fituation. She doubted not that now her marriage with Edgar was difcovered, the rancorous heart of Rhodolpho would only be fatisfied with the lives of both ι to her» death would bave been a wiihed-for relief, vol. iv. l hadi
bad not a latent motive induced her to wiffi for life. * ! €t Her extreme weaknefs and inceffant faintings had at kngtkmpved the Baron to allow her a femak attendant, whom flie i' , f informed of her fituation, having no other human being tó apply to in her emergency. ** In this lonely cell, ffiut out from every frknd, and debarred the common cornforts c£.exij$gJKS* ignorant of the fate of Edgar, ??! oppreffed hy a load of mifery> the pre* matute bkth òf a mak and female infant a^ded to; her wretchednefs, and the firft mjcernaj embrace was given in tears of smgutfh md defpair* r ? 44 *Tifâ Baron was no fooner informed of iju;s circuwiftance from the attendant he had placed about the hapkfs viftim of his tyranny, «^ha> was a creature of'his own, than be p^ted the children to4>e taken ¡?? their mother. ., Her prayers, her bitter
bitter agonies were of nò avail for fome" time, till at length he yielded iri part td her entreaties, and allowed her to retain her daughter, while her new-born fori was torn from her arms almoft as foon as he beheld the light-l y 44 Impelled by a new motive to wiffi fof life > Roialine now endeavoured io preferve* her own for the fake of her bábe. 44 Ruminating one evening ón the probable deftiny öf her beloved Lord, ffie accidentally kt a book fall from the table which ffie had happened to have in her pocket at the time of her confinement, and with which ffie had tried to beguile her forrows while her infant ïkpt. As it ftruck on the floor, fomething relotínded like iron ; ffie ftamped her foot, and the found was repeated* Her child was afleep on the couch, and well knowing'there were many concealed doors and hidden avenues in the Caftle, ffie ftooped down in anxious hope, and faw a - i La very
very narrow divifion in the floor. She preif¬ ed it hard ; the fecret fpring flew open, and difcovered a trapdoor : fte raifed it, and defcending a flight of fteps, found they led into a fubterraneous cavern whicii fte was well acquainted with. It kd to an opening «n the mountain; anddelighted at this difcovery, fte again afcended, and clofed the door and the hidden ipring before the return of the attendant. By this door flie was enabled to vifit the apartment of Madame St. Lucia, from whom, with agonizing horror, fte learned the reputed death of Edgar, who, fome fcrupled not to fay, had been privately murdered in his dungeon, while others believed he had effefted his efcape from the chateau, but that, in the hope of regain¬ ing his piey, the Baron forbore to make it known. " Hearing a confirmation of the latter report from the female who attended her, the firft wifli of her heart became an anxious
anxious defire to efcape alfo from the power of the tyrant. She fancied Edgar, if he were aftuaily at liberty, had, in all probability, gone to England : thither, there¬ fore, ffie alfo refolved to fly. Indeed, where elfe could ffie have flown ? Her friend, Madame Malvini was married in Italy to a jealous tyrant, from whom ffie deipaired of finding proteftion. Sir Walter Edge¬ cumbe had been the early friend of Edgar St. Älvars, who was educated in England ; and ihe had often heard Edgar fay that, if driven from the Caftle by a prema¬ ture difcovery of thek marriage, they would certainly fly to England to their early and generous friend. " Sir Edward Mortimer was married ; and the attachment he had once profeffed for her¬ felf, made her unwilling to riik an interrup¬ tion of his domeftic happinefs by her prefence. " To Madame St. Lucia ^alone did ffie eonfide the fcheme of her flight, wild L 3 was
was prevented being her companion by the vigilance with which ihe was guarded, thougii Rofaline had the addrefs to vifit her every day, 44 Her projected elopement ffie effefted wonderfully well ; nor was it difcovered for many hours afterwards. Every fearch was made by order of the enraged Baron, but to no purpofe; nor did he ever again find the devoted victim of his villany, ** After fome months' fruitlefs fearch, dur¬ ing which Edgar, notwithftanding the various reports propagated, flill exifted in bonds and in mifery, the Baron was compelled to give up the enquiry, concluding flie had either died on the road, or retired into a Convent. 44 A fumptuous funeral was folemnized under a pretence that ffie had been brought back, and was dead with grief; and the ikron, who had not for many months beheld
beheld his unhappy brother, defcended alone to his dungeon. % 4 Frown not at my approach/ faid he, with a fmile of triumph ; 4 I come to give you pleafure. You have often implored a knowledge of the fate Pf Rofaline ; raife your eyes to that grate, ^and you may behold her for whom you facrificed à parent I* 4 44 Edgar, though unconfcious of his mean¬ ing, wanted no farther direftion; but haftily raifing himfelf on the wretched couch which ferved him for a bed, he looked through the narrow grating, which. admitted a faint glimmering df light into his cell : bui whafr #ere his agonies when he beheld the fable train attending on the funeral proceflion of his Rofaline ! " The fortitude he had hitherto preferved forfook him at this refinement on cruelty, and he fell back in agonies that even L 4 feemed
;.. ■ ■ ■ i.· : ■ . ... ■ '.- ■ feemed to move the hlrdëned foul of ,. ; .:;Rhodol||io*;-'.f ■ ;
Thetlàtter i nftar|^!qipted the dungeon, "-upbraiding himfelf with hot having fooner put an epd to the JffeT of hk brother, whofe exijl|îiçe renclereit him daiiýftkbk to be jdeprifed of &fe titles and rklics he had ???|||??^ deteft- ■ ajle^buäianity.- ■ -.." ''?:^?- ? ??--: ? Summoning Roderigo, his cÄfidant, he ??^? him immecli|tely to difpatch Edgar; btit ?????, though in the flill con- fidence of ?? %orçIv % nd with a heart as ' \;.!4. _. :"■ >^-- γ :^' :? ' .'"V - : ^ '' ' Iktk Warned by the principles of honour and virtue, Shad never yet imbrued his bkndsAn^d .^ful¬ fil I i ng thè qrders^bf ^? Sàron, he rgrcmded İE|gar witli-tSe rneans of ??^??^?????-· geaflfse' of ? brother, havíhg:Ä?o1itaihed írom the uriliapjy fogitive a promife; that lie would reti^lto íbmé unfre^úétited part of the : ^oi^t$0S-. b u ry in obl i vion the ?1?<;?????^?1 his eicape. .-' .«■peprived
at reft in the maufoleum óf her anceftors» and ftigmatized g^Äj murderer, it^was in¬ different to ths^İ^Rred Edgaf^where he paffed the remnfiit of his days á . " He at lengtrr fixed on the diíguife of a^ hermit, which he foon procured, and fettled in a fmall cell hewji out of the folid rock irr the bofofttbf the Alps, which, byhh own induftry, he improved into a warm dwelling, while hts^brother exulted in his treachery, and believed himfelf bsyond the reach of difcovery. The fon of the unhappy Edgar he had condemnedltb the fame fate as his garent, but, like him, he had aiföWcaped. ? Configned 1 to thtLgffe °f Aodèrigo, with» orders to deftroy him privately, he was ?§?$??1?????? faithful Änettic urîder ? çaA^o^the good Le ??» whofwat leftjS ignorance of his reÖbifth, but who, with the benèvolenco pequliar to his cha-
4 m
k $7*
\
*
ψ
44 Several years fïipfed ?? the Bardn, to promote his own/4ntereft, united himfelf with a daughter of the^f|pufe of Lorraine ; but elevated as was^i#^|nk, furrounded as he was by vaffals and adherents, peace was a ftranger to Jiis^eaft, and repofe feldoal vifited his ftarøé>f The hours de¬ dicated by the reft of tite world to* fleep, wer^often fpent in midnight wanderings, and offer* would he ftart fem á; ffiort aad confufed flumber in all the agpnks of á wounded confcience. 44 Impreffed with an unfavourable idea of his father's, charafter, his fon early kft the Ci^teaSpk. Aivars to refide witli the Coun| Lorraine, hk mother's j ?????? ; and tfe tínfoítuoaèbf^ngel^^ by a* premature death, teçalM U> the'agonized fnind oí Ber father igfeopfcioufiiek ^????..£? fervWf lhe ^iminent alrea%^ / «.Atlh^n^i^teof his ftrMhéoducliiGn ^^ ^^??1 ? tnë
the îlî-fâted angel he fiad once adored, inftantly ftruck him ; and on hearing frorù the Arundel family thè particulars of her ftory, he no logger entertained a doubt that ihe was the^fefcendant of hk btother. ** Delighted' at heir ready acquiefqence to attend his daughter to Switzerland, hé refolved there to' confult the Count de Pöllöni, who had always been iri his con¬ fidence, and who, on hearing the Baron's account, promifed to fecure him from every' fear of a difcovery if he would agree to give him Rofalke herielf as a** recom¬ pence, whoije origin, hé addécj^ vi Countefs dé Polloni, would no loiger fought after.**
'$????&& the confeffion made bv\the~ {jénitenf Bfiton on his dèath-becfto hiVfori and to De Rochefort, wl^^rA^dge^ of many of tkeîfir events hieSfl^^e Baron, his vtiit at Malvini, ?? ?·*/ ????
The Count Lorraine, to wbomRo^erigo had confeifed tbat the brother of the,Baron Was ftill in. exiftence» that day vifited nis friend, the ancient hermit of the Alps, whom, in. early life,, he had become acquainted with in hk rambles among the mountains ; and to him he now imparted the fituation of thø dying Baron, adding that he had juft, learned from Roderigo that Edgar, who 0d t fo,long been foppofed to be dead» ftill Jived. 44 And is Rhodolpbo· St. Aivars de- fírous,f faid the hermit,," to behold that ;oyb|other ?" it be doubted," faid * the Count, «that- be Will be glad to atone, though late, forhfs iiftMefw^bat unhappy man ; or that î fta^^BéJiappy to ???? hinß could he oe^found,. thofe poke^^s and title! a brother^ mjufticfc t fp|^éprived / 4 < 11?^4??|^ ?? to^r^rø»P ? faid thp hmØ '?^^???? figure, Arne down M mifery»
mifery, you view that Edgar whom he has deprived of more than life, for it wás the bieffing which alone could fweeten exift 4 · ence I—But kt me hatten to give confo¬ lation to the unhappy heart of Rhodolpho in his kit moments." With traniport did the generous Lorraine conduft him to the bedfide of the dying Baron, who was prepared for Ijis reception. But what were the fenfations of Edgar tø hear that his children, the offspring of his hapkfs Rofaline, had furvived their lek fortunate mother ! and the wretched Baron died with the fatisfaftion of knowing he had notj jn realiti', committed the crimes he. had projefted.. » ? A few hours before headed, he called for pen, ?!? and paper; and^wrote a billet, which he defired mig|t be delivered to Rofaline, immediately after his .deceafe, and «hich l^ptow enclofedilt^ fifer. by De Rochefort.^* ^ *% The
The remainder of De Rocheforts "dif* patches contained only a defcription of the meeting between the newly-found Baron St. Aivars, and hk recently difcovered fon, hitherto« called Edmund Le Vere ; and the impatience of the former to behold his daughter, to whom a letter was enclofed from her father* The various fenfations which filled the bofom of Rofaline for fome moments pre¬ vented her opening k. She fervently kiffed the feal, and having broken it, read, with delight unutterable, his intention " of vifiting England immediately to behold hk daughter, andato return his thanks fe^perfoffc to Sir Walter Edgecumbe and to-Madame Malvini fcrtheåf rokfting care of her.
%*
\ %"~
, The idea of beholding a father feemel too delightful to^e real; ffie repemfed his kt§er twenty times to bb f certain it was miiy^fêtï% biâ, îül^Pteffed ? herfelf# -* ^ - Thaa
That Edmund ffiould be her brother* alfo feemed Ctuite incredible. The fudden tranfition in her fortune took from her all inclination to fleep ; and great part of the night had elapfed before ffie feparated from Madame and Sir Edward ι and the remainder was fpent in ruminating, on the late difcovery, and ? perufing atten¬ tively the pofthumous epiftie of her wretchecb uncle, whkh was as follows—*,
" Fam would I, ere I bid adieu to the World and its miferies, endeayour to make fome r Separat ion to thofe I have moit in¬ jured, and avow fome of |ho|b motives, by which I was inftigatedlb-a conduft that ? fear hasinpreffed you with hatred for one* oÊwrhofe alfcity to you,.you were ignorant. " Th^ÄÄ moment you were prefented tp me at ?????^ \?? deftructive - of my peace,
peace. Your ftriking refemblance to your injured mother gave fuch a ftock to my feelings, that 1 feared its effects were too vifible in my countenance.. * 4 From Lady Arundel I learned the myftery attending your birth ; and not a doubt afterwards remained on my mind that you were the offspring of the ill-fated Roialine. Frequently in your manner as well as form, you fo forcibly reminded me of her, that my foul was conftantly torn with ali the agonies of remorfe. 44 From the fatal period when, led en bjr dîkppointcd love and overruling ambition, Τ perpetrated crimes that ever afterwards filled '?? breaft with 'lhe never-ceafing anguiih W felf-reproaclt the balm of peace was a faranger to my mind. In bufinefs and í crowds I had for many years eáèeavoóred' to flifle the voice of conference ; bpt when once mp|e alone ín the ^?^?(|?1 ???. Älvars, with Ûê living image of bff 1 had moft* deeply
deeply injured conftantly before my eyes, and in my daughter, my poor Angelina* faw daily the melancholy viftim to tyranny and ambition, the agonizing terror of my inward tormentor became every day more dreadful. ** The fufpicions I had fo long enter¬ tained of your rektionlhip to me was confirmed foon alter our arrival at the Cattle by your one day leaving a cafket of jewels on the table in my daughter's dreff¬ ing-room, where they had been brought, 1 found, for her infpeftion, cc I entered the room in a few minutes after you had quitted it with her. It immediately occurred to roe tbat I had before feen the cafe in which the trinkets were contained; ant, on examination, I found a locket am >ngrt them, which at once brought conviftion to my foul. Yoa doubtlefs røuember that it confifts of two locks
locks ©f hak entwined» witb die motto around ?— f Seurtdto Frkndßap má ?????????? it was executed by your unfortunate mo* ther afoer the rencounter between Edgar mid myfelf, and worn bf hcr in memory of the ta^ciktion effected by ker angel· * Mo footer had Ae «#1?? ^eft ??? my view» tkm I ??? aghaft wkfc deep remorfe, I tœoiedktek éupstdàeé am emííLtlf to my friend, the Cernai dePoII-nd^ wfc>, when be had owee ieen ?^?, fotel ? expodìrst; ^o prevent the fcin 1 cftter- to ned trom being ? eaiìxed by a propc4c4 marnage *itlt ??», m Urged b]- dread, I confented, tbcrøgb, froui ι lie ??&????? you fe«*x toyour tairued mother, ? wm iibt »ithc.ujt ???1? ffriìggbs and
md exertion that I treated you with a forced feverity. " The anguiih of my mind after cur return fiom Polloni, on that mght you were alarmed by the Mirquk de Bernon, in- ipired me with thoughts fo tormenting, that my fleepmg fancy was impreffed by a terrifying viikiflu Met bought tha% unable to fleep, I traverfed my afmrtmeat, when a fhnll ajid dicaiiai lekarn a^îkd my eirs; tht door new open, and I beheld the in¬ jured Rotarne fuch as iß her blooming j math ibe appeared to my charmed fight. Soe fel on her knees at my feet* and m ncems of fupplîcaïîoa implored me to kve her chiti, and to proteft hcr from Pulloni* ** Deaf to her entreaties, I turned from hcr, when thc earth feemed to open under æs feet* and not in the fweet v*ice of Rotable* but m harfo aod d*cadfkl accent?, the words—" Metnèmim m 4i kand!" broke ?? ?? arreted car. i ftäfted round« and
md perceived Edgar, who, with Rofaline in his ???, and the foow-wbite wings of angels aflixed to his fhoulders, was afcending m high, while I felt myfelf drafted down by an mvifibk hmå towards the yawning ckám under my feet. ** Tke ??? ei ?? ??! awoke me, and, fo remver tke agitation ? wb.ch I found myleif, I arofe ? but icarcely had I linee tûaes tmwrfed tht mmmx* me the v«y íame feream I bad beard m mf dream, aflki ? my ear, aad a dead we ight feemed to fall ????? at my door, «teck I bad no tkan 1 fancied i beheld the fweet form of ??? haf ?? parent ; aBd, be wilckiÎd by the tv ander mgs of m v ideas, I uttered fome inco- Tou to 1 tft, t hough not to weÊ&mu ? that iollowcd vou know fi'om mv Ik, I *?? ?? ?? ? ?^ ??- ?^? ? . w mmm/m »*???»? ?? ?&???? ??? ^ ■???-???? ?- ????? acquamted «ich the m ans by ^hich you efcaped fn ?? §L AJvars, and I feel sratefui te lie Bckg 1 had already lm& muck offend ed %
offended, that I was kved additional guilt mod remorfe. ** When you condufted me through the concealed door under the portsait, how little did I imagine yon were leading me to the immediate fcene of your unhappy m >ther*$ ????????? ! Yoti ???? recollect the agi- mim í betrayed then, as well as my emmom on the night the Count de Polloni afrked at St. Atvars» ween, to detain you ? hk arrival* I a&ed yon m pky an ak on your ???. ** Your atritude, as yon leaned over the înârmacat, recalled fo e»ftly to røy mind the fotely %??? of tb kft Roktìae, tbl« I could mm difguife the anguiih ? gave birth to· * ?? attempt made to carry yem off from ???? mm fekly cf Polionls con- ttkaiice* Hftrafted by hk paffion, he could mt tamely beat to put up ?? the fofs of yoa;
you; but happily the attempt proved à$ unfuccefsful a* his former plans, and he was again neceffitated to apply to me. ** For my word's fake I wat obliged to interfere ; but the fight of De Rochefort effectually ftopped my proceeding» and fecured your fakty» whkh by me will be never more endangered. The angel of death hover« over me, and a few ftort boors œili convey nie, where I truft fincere repentance will procure the final pardon of the wretched 44 St. Alvari l* How little did Rofaline imagine, during her refidence with the Baron» that he bad been the ruin of both ber parents, and was meditating hcr own ! The Divine vengeance, however, feemed $o have purfued him through every lucceediug
fucceeding event of bk life. Ignorant of Edgar's marriage with hk fair coufin, he had falkcioufly believed hk father's death and brother's enik would at once have given to his arms the form he adored, and placed htm in that rank hk ambitious tem¬ per longed to move in- He had no doubt that Edgar would hover round the chateau m the hope of feeing R* ¿ialine, and emiaarks wem fecretly planted in every avenue to watch his approach, that he might by death, or eternal imprifonment, be fecund» But ulut were the feelings of Rhodutpho when, at the moment Edgar was delivered up to his murderous wiihes, »he diicove^y of tiieir marriage placed an infuperabk bar between bim and the objeft whom he liad already perpetrated the molt dreadful crimes to obtain. In her father's ktter to Roİalîne, he mentioned having already written to his early
cariy friend» Sir Waiter Edgecumbe, ac¬ quainting htm with the events whkh had ktcly tranfpired at St. Aivars. The tumult¬ uous joy Roialine felt on & reviewal of the paft events oi her life» and a comparifon with thc happinefs that feemed to await ber ? a reftoration to ber family, was almoft too much for her fpirits; md when (he appeared at breakfaft on the following mofntng, Sir Edward good-humouredly tokt her flie muft recover her healthy looks before the arrival of the Baron and ber brother, who, the former had kid, would attend bim to England.
CHAP.
*?***1??*?*?**?
CHAP. XL * f Juft Hearen, man4 fortitude to prwe, ** Fermwíí diro* life at lauge to rofe ** Th« tribes of heil-bom wae : « Vet the Cune Power that wtlêîy fends <* Life*s fierceâ ills, isáu : gtnt lends 11 Religion** golden ihielJ ?? break th* embattled fbe." WääToís. A HE arrival of the Italian party was now a conftant fubjeft of converfation at Mor¬ timer Houfe, and employed thc thoughts of moft of its inhabitants. The Barou in his fetter had mentioned the Count Lor¬ raine's intention to be of the party to voi*, ιν. m England,
England, being impatient to be introduced to his fair relation, of whom, from her behaviour to his filter, he had already formed fo favourable an opinion», Rofaline was much delighted to hear he would attend the Baron. She longed to behold the brother of Angelina, and the man whole greatnefs of mind and philan¬ thropy of charafter had raifed fuch fervent admiration in the world in general. At every found of a carriage fte flew to the window; apd the flighted knock at the great gates made hcr flo-t, and tremble with anxiety. A week paffed, and no further intelligence arrived. Rofaline enjoyed in anticipation the delight of Adolphus os a dtfeovcry of her biith, and wondered be had not akcady appeared there. They were one evening furprifed fay tbe ttturn of Mifs Mortimer from town wkh .Sir
Sir George» who» to the inexpreffible amazement of Rofdine,entered the drawing- room, accompanied by the Marquis de Bernon. He introduced him to Sir Edward m a particular friend ; and sifter the cuftomary compliments, tlie Marquis, with the fame eafy air of afiuranee as ever, approached Rofatine, whom he appeared not at ail f furprifed at meeting there, and in a very ftort time it became obvious to every one that fte wás the objeft of his vifit. The very firft opportunity he could find, he told her he had followed her m Engfand from Lorraine with all the expedition in his power, and ffiould have arrived much fooner, had not unavoidable dekys detained him. The caufe of this journey, he ftid, ffie muft be well aware was to endeavour to fbfoeh the cruelty «foe had hitherto ffiewn towards hirn. Rofaline only coolly anfwer¬ ed, that fte was forry he had given himfelf fo muda unneceffary and unavailing trouble. ? a Nothing
Nothing could exceed hk aftoniftment when, on aJd:effing Sk Edward on the fubjeft, mid entreating bim to ufe hk in- fluence with Rokline in hk foour, be was informed by that gentleman he had no power o\et MA St. Älvars, nm did fte conceive berle If at prefent at hcr own difpofal. He them informed bim of her recently difeoreiti' birth, whkh only fervei to increafe thc nnxkty of the fanguine Marquk for me promotion rf hk fuit. Mifs Mortimer, fince fte bad heard the change in Roklînes fituation,had kid afide íbroewbat of that exceffive ????? which before lud narked her behaviour; but it was not in ber mture to fot%et that Rofa¬ line had firft attracted the attention of Sir George Araidéi* nor could fte wholly diveft herfelf of the cUffikc ffie felt to hcr oa this fubject. Engroffed by htr thoughts, and tbe anticipated
anticipated delight of meeting a long- loft father, Routine, after the fi ft in¬ terview, forgot that their ne ν vWtors ???? arrived. Stie travertcd tbe park and plantations abforbed by her ow^ medi* t at io iss» 2ïor couid the Marquk poffibly find a kiÎure hour to prefer lus luit ; he ?? therefore» much 2gainft bk iadimtbn, obliged to irak the arrival of the Baron St. Älvars. The impatience of Rokline and hcr friends had at kngth a profpeft of being fpecdEy gratified. A fervant arrived to warn tbem of the approach of bis Lord the Baron. The agitai ?? of Rofaline became now fb violent, tbat Sir Edward and Madame feared the confequences of an introduction to her father ; they perfuaded ber to retire, and compofe berfelf while Sk Edward went out to welcome the Biron. He conducted him with his fon into the drawing-room, where thc ktter could only exclaim—■*· My daughter—niy Rofaline?" m 2 " She
44 She ? well," returned Sk Edward, f * and waiting with anxiety for your Lord¬ fliip's arrivai" fi Oh kt me fee her inftant!}*—kt me," added he, * f clafp to this agonized heart the reprefetitative of my loft Rofaline !** Sk Edward's counteoaoce changed to a ghaftly palenefs. He could not command hk feelings, and leaving his fifter wkh the Baron, he rufted out of the room. After a few minutes fpenl in endeavouring to regain die cornpofure the name ofher ever dear to hk heart had banifted» be went to the apartment of Rofaline, wbere he found her foothed by the advke and reafoning of Madame into a calmer temper of mind* He took her hand* and kd hep trembling to thc prefence of her fether. No fooner bad fte entered the room, than, darting forward, fte funk on her knees before the Baron, who fondly raifing her»
her, and clafping her to his bofom, ex¬ claimed—" Sweet image of my lofi Rofa¬ line I—lovely refemblance of your dear modier I this treafure at leaft Fare has mercifully reftored to my widowed arms !" R^falke could not fpeak. Her full heart refuted her tongue utterance, and ffie could only fob out her joy. The delighted Baron gazed at her in filence, and feemed to think bis lamented Lady ftill in exiftence, while he contem¬ plated the beautiful form of bis daughter. Edmund alfo embraced her with affection ; he whifpered the love and congratulation he had brought from Roià, to whom he had fiown from St. Älvars, where he håd been fummoned on a difcovery of his birth* Thc happinefs Rofaline now felt was fo fuperior to any ihe had experienced fmce ihe quitted Edgecumbe Hall, that flie could have fancied herfelf fome other being. m 4 The
The Count Lorraine, the Baron told her, had been, by unexpefted bufinefs, prevented attending him ; but, anxious t> be introduced to his fair coufin, he pro¬ pofed to join them very ihortly. Sir Edward and Madame Malvini, with their ufual benevolence, rejoiced in the late difcovery as though they had themfeives found a loft daughter. Mifi Mortimer was become almoft polite ; nor was the Marquis de Bernon the leaft happy of the party, though his fatisfaction was but of ffiort duration. He feized an early opportunity to mention his propofals to the Baron, by whom he was told that, fo far from attempting to bias the inclinations of his daughter, he ffiould refer him wholly to her for the decifion. To Rofaline, there¬ fore, the unfortunate Marquis was again obliged to apply, and from her very foon received his final difmiffion, though he de¬ clared his refolution to hope for ? ? hinge in her fentiments as long as ffie remained in her prefent fituation. The
The furprife of Rofaline that flie had received no intelligence of Adolphus, be¬ came daily greater, and fhe coukl attribute his filence oniy to the failure of his appli¬ cation to his iather and mother. As fhe was one morning fitting alone in her dreffing-room, ruminating on the fub¬ ject, a fervant informed her that a gentle¬ man below defired to be allowed to fpeak to her. She (tarred, and a tranfient hope arofe in her mind that it might be Adolphus; but, on enquiry of the attendant, flie found it was a ftranger, who had declined fending up his name. She hefitated a minute, and then defcended to the breakfaft parlour, where flie found the ftranger waiting her arrival. He ivas a tall majeftic figure; and though at firft fight fiie feemed not to know his perfon, on a fecond review his form and features feemed familiar to her. She paufed at the door, while her vifitor, advancing, apologized for this .unintro- duftorv intrufion, adding— 44 From the dif. :*. . . M 5, " ? fet ence
ference of my prefent fituation and appear¬ ance from thofe in which I had hit the honour of beholding Mifs Melvan, I can fcarcely dare to hope I retain a place in her recol¬ kftion." 44 You do, and ever affuredly will, retain a place in my memory, as well as poffefs a large portion of my gratitude," returned Rofahne; who, the moment he fpoke, remembered her adventure with the banditti in her way to Malvini, and that this ftranger *as no other than that one of the robbers who had delivered them from their confinement. 44 From me," replied the ftranger, « b gratitude due more than I have power to exprefs. Littk did I then imagine what I owed to ?? Melvan, though not in my ©wn perfon were her favours conferred ; and thk fte will lefs wonder at when fte is informed that my name is Manviile." ** Is it pofllble," cried Roialine» «* that I can behold tbe huiband of my dear Mrs. Manvilk ?" " Yes, Madam," repikd Manviile; a ** m
<* în me you behold the wretch who, infatuated by gaming, and driven to the verge of deftruftion, deferted my poor Elka and her guiitlefs b*bes to feek my fafety in a foreign land. Made defperate by my misfortunes, or rather farai impru¬ dence, I joined a party of banditti who infefted the foreils and mountains of Italy : they created me their leader, though, irt my own defence, let me add that the influence I poffeffed as their captain, I employed as much as was in my power to alleviate and foften the evils my lawlek companions brought on thofe whom we captured, it would ffiock a mind fo upright and fo deli¬ cate as your's, Madam, were I to attempt a defcription of our general mode of life, or the cnormitks daily praftifed by thefe unprivileged invaders. For my own part, my bittereft and moft fevere enemy need not have wiffied me a more dreadful punifh¬ ment than tliat which was the natural con¬ fequence of my own unwarrantable conduct:· The poignant flings of a wounded confcience» m g and
and the fenfe of confcious guilt, arc fen¬ fations which thofe alone who are fo wretched as to experience them, can only form tie remoteft core ption of. The comforts of a felf-appro\ in 0 mind forfook mein the hour I voluntarily efl ranged myfelf from the lovely and innocent being whom I had taken from tbe bofom of a fond family, and reduced to penury, and in their place had left all the agonks of the bittereft remoííe. Often at the dreary hour oí mid¬ night, when my drowfy adherents, overcome by the fatigues of the day, and the quantity of liquor they had drank, vvere wrapped in the arms of Sleep, have I traverfed the difmal apartments of the gloomy relics ofthe manfion we inhabited, and vented to the . folitary» walk, the effufions of my anguift and ielf-reproach : fleep feldom vifited my pilow, and reft was a ftranger to my ex¬ haufted frame. In this ftate of remorfe and inquietude 1 ftould perhaps have con¬ tinued till this time, had not my good angel, in the perfon of an intimate friend I had formerly
formerly known, been amongft thofe whom our troop affaikd, and brought home pri¬ foners, 1 liberated hini in the dead of night; and in return, fome months afterwards I was by his means reftored to my Eliza. He fupplied me with the pecuniary means of returning tß my native country, and bas put it in my power to atone to my injured wife for my defertion of her and our inno¬ cent children." 44 And is Mrs. Manviile then in Eng¬ knd ?" laid Rofahne. " She is now in town," anfwered he, ** where we arrived a week fince, with the aíliítance of my valued friend, the Count Lori aine," , " And is it the Count Lorraine to whpm you are indebted for your reftoration to your family l* aiked Rofaline. 44 Not only fur that, Madam, but for every blefling 1 enjoy," anfwered Manviile. " I became known to him early in fife in a tour
tour I made through Italy With the fon of an Engl4h Nobleman, though till my late rencounter with him in the cave of the banditti, I had not for many years beheld him, In his philanthropic rambles» which are very extenfive, he difcovered the cot to wbich Eliza and my children had retired ; though perfonally a ftranger, his conciliating and amiable manners foon won their efteem, and he no fooner difcovered who they were, than he placed them in fafety in a Convent, and by that means was enabled to guide me to them." 44 And is Mr. Warford alfo returned to England ?" aiked Rofaline, . " Ah no," returned Manvilk; " my unhappy brother has at length found an end to the .misfortunes that have fo long preyed on his peace, I had foarcely regained the fociety of Eliza, ere the joy we mutually feit was converted into grief for the lois of poor Warford. The Count Lorraine, per¬ ceiving hk dccfining* ftate, and imagining he
he could not long furvive, bad perfuaded him to remove Mrs. Manvilk and the children to a monaftery near Lorraine, while, with his accuftomed benevolence, he received my unhappy brother liimfelf at the Abbey Lorraine, where, notwithftand¬ ing, by the entreaties of the Count, he had the firft medical advice, he lingered only a few.weeks, and then paid the great debt * of nature. A few hours before be clofed his eyes, he gave this letter to Eliza in my prefence, with an earneft defire that it might be delivered to you immediately after our return to England," Manviile, as he faid thk, prefented it to Rofaline with one from Eliza, who would not rlf: tül fae had conveyed the epiftie of her ill fated brother to the hands of Mifs Melvan. The addrei of thegrateftrl andafleftfonate Eliza,
Eliza, written vvith her native artleffnefs, was in the following words :—
TO MISS MELVAN. " My deareft Mifs Melvan will, I am fure, participate in the joy I feel to be once more reftored to Manvilk and my native country. I feize the earlieft opportunity that prefents itfelf, to tranfmit to you the. pofthumous addrefs of my dear unfortunate brother, and to beg you will accept the thanks of a bofom overflowing with gratitude for that kind and friendly attention 1 experienced from you, at a period when my heart, overcharged with anguifh, and oppreffed ?? forro wj was nearly broken ! To your fweet fociety, and amiable fympa¬ thetic difpofition, ami indebted for the fmall Ihare of fortitude and philofophy with which I bore my grisk | for in your company , : ' «bey
they feemed to vaniih, and Manviile will j«in his prayers with mine that you may never need the comforts you beftowed. " In the monaftery where our benevolent fiiend, the great and good Count Lorraine, conveyed us, I met with a young perfon who kindly affifted me in my taík of attending my young ones, and who, when I left Italy, offered to accompany me: I gladly accepted her offer, for, exclufive of her own merit, I was charmed with the manner in which ihe fpoke of you. Her name is Agatha St. Laurin, and flie was, I find, the con¬ fidential attendant of, your poor friend Angelina. * Slie has; endeared herfelf to me by het friendly intereft in my concerns, and has undertaken to affift me in the taik of education, which now becomes neceflary. We mean, as foon as Manvilk has dif¬ charged all accounts in town, and quite fettled his affairs, to retire to the country feat of my late brother. A comfortable independence has devolved to us by his death,
death, and we intend in future to devote our days to domeftic comfort and the care of our darhngs.—Need 1 add what true, what heartfelt joy the favour ofa vifit from my ever dear Mifs Melvan would afford to the whole family, but more particularly to her 44 Gratefully affeftionate " 1L1ZA MANVILLE."
Rofaline juft read the affectionate letter ©f her frknd be/or* fte was fummoned to dinner. Manvilk complied witb her earneft entreaty to dine with them, and was intro¬ duced to the Baron and Sk Edward, to whom fte related the finguiar fervke he hào\ rendered her ; and he received from both the thanks due to his fikndfliip. In the evening Manvilk took his leave; and Rofaline, retiring to her apartment, unfolded
unfolded the fetter of the unhappy Warford, and to hcr indefcribable amazement read as follows :—
TO MISS MELVAN. 44 Confcious that a very few weeks will elapfe ere he who now prefumes to addre/s you will be mingled with the duft from wheinse he fprung, I own myfeif anxious to deckte to Mifs Melvan what perfonally I could never fummon courage. to reveal. How would her pure mind have been Éhockcd-^-how would ber gentle nature have been wounded, could fte have been told, while converfing with Warford, that ffie beheld the fatal caufe of thofe misfor¬ tunes by which the hapiefs Angelina was brought to an early grave? The ftrong refemblance, Madam, you bear to that lojt an Sel> g av e a fevere ftock to my wounded feelings the firft evening I beheld you at Loid
Lord Dclforcls in Grofvenor Square, and afterwards occafioned thofe involuntary ex¬ clamations which once I fear was caufe of alarm to you :—yes, Madam, in me you viewed the wretched Horatio, the murderer of the guiitlefs St. Lucia!—From that fatal period peace has been an alien to my bofom ; and had not thofe principles of religion, in which happily I was educated, interfered, often, from excels of mifer}% would this erring hand have been raifed againit the image of him who created it : but this additional crime Providence in mercy fpared me ; and if feven years of the fevereft penitence can aught atone, I may merely hope they will be admitted as fome •expiation. I fliall quit this world of woe with greater fatisfaftion, now that I fee my beloved Eliza reftored to a huiband who is at length, I truit, fenfible of her worth and his own errors, I alfo leave them bieifed with the friendihip of two beings, whofe equals in this vale of mifery I believe are feidom to be met with,—the kdy I . . have
have now the honour of addreffmg, and the brother of the fainted Angelina. That you, Madam, may ever enjoy the pure blifs an inward monitor alone can beftow, is the ardent prayer of him who, authorized by the friendfhip with which you have honoured him, prefumes to fubfcribe himfelf, 44 Madam, ct Your gratefully oblg d and devoted " HORATIO WARFORD."
The pitying heart of Rofaline was deeply wounded by this melancholy epiftie. lt revived many bitter remembrances : all the wretchednefs and eccentricities of Warford were now accounted for; and in the midft ofher own happinefs ffie paid the tribute of many tears to the memories of Warford and Angelina.
CHAP.
sar
chap. ??.
<* I am fo blefs'd, I- fear 'tis all a dream I <* Fortune, thou now haft made amends for all « Thy paft unkindnefs." Addison,
.OSALINE was interrupted from the purfuit of thofe forrowful reflections which the pofthumous ktter of Warford had raifed in her mind, by a fummons to the drawing- room. She inftantly endeavoured to obli¬ terate the traces of forrow from her coun¬ tenance, and obeyed the fummons. ^ . At
At the bottom of the ftaircafe fte was met by tbe Baron. A fmile illumined hk face, and as he took her hand, he faid—" Will )ou be very much furprifed, my Rofaline, if I introduce you to ? particular friend of mine who is juft arrived f* " Any friend of your Lordftip," faid Rofaline, iC muft be ever received by me with pìeafure. Is it any one I know, to whom I am to be prefented ?" A thought at firft ftruck her that it might be Ado'phus, v but her father flie knew was unacquainted with him. It then occurred to her tliat it was her coufin, the Count Lorraine, whom fte knew the Baron im* patiently and daily expefted. Elated with this hope, fte endeavoured to difmifs all appearance of fadneíš from her countenance, and entered the drawing- room with the Baron ; but what words can do juftice t& her emotions when fte beheld her. firft and revered benefàftòr; Sk Walter * * Edgecumbe !
Edgecumbe! She fprang forward, and involuntarily funk on ber knees before hun. He affectionately raifed ber with many con¬ gratulations on her happinefs, which, he faid, he had not been able to withftand the temptation of making in perfon to his old and long-loft friend, and his adopted daughter. 44 And my daughter in reality," added he, " I find, my dear Rofaline, you were likely to become, had not the recent happy difcovery taken place ?" The colour of Rofaline rofe high as he fpokç, but the Baron was wholly a ftranger to his meaning. » Adolphus had been as good ?? his Word, and flown immediately from Rofajine to the Halh where he had openly declared to his father bis recent propofals to Rofaline, and her refufabto accede to thera unkfs they were fanltiq^ed^tiy^his parents. .-.:,.. ' . ? Your
if 44 Your approbation, Sir," faid Adol¬ phus, *' I implore you no longer to with¬ hold. I attempt not to diíguife that, could I have brought her over to my opinion, our union would already have been folemnized ; but though baniihed the family only becaufe (lie was too lovely and too amiable far the peace of one of its members, and unnoticed ever fince by any part of it, fhe yet retains fuch reverence and refpect for thofe who have rendered her miferable, that fhe re- fufes to aft fo as to merit their reproach, though her own happinefs would be fecured by it. Surely fuch exalted generofity and difintereftedneis ought to be rewarded; and if a whoie life devoted to her fervice alone can repay her in any meafure for what lhe has fuftered, (he fliall be rewarded to the extent of my limited power." Adolphus, with more hafte and paffion than was natural to him, had uttered thefe words. VOL. IV, N Sir
Sir Walter paufed a few minutes. He had j ι ft before h s on*s arrival rt ceived the letter from his old friend the Buon St. Aivars, acquainting him with his reftora¬ tion to his eftates and titles, and warmly thanking him for his guardianftip of his daughter. The amazement this epiftie had raifed was fcarcely fubfided when Adolphus made his appearance, and with precipitation de¬ clared what had juft tranfpired with Rofaline. Sir Walter, after fome deliberation, re¬ lated to him the whole ftory of the Baron, only concealing the name of Rofaline ; adding— k4 Now, my dear Adolphus, till you have feen the daughter of the Baron St. Aivars, I conjure you to think no more of Mifs Melvan. You have often heard me mention the early and permanent friendfliip which fubfifted at College ~ between
between the good Baron and myfelf; and from every circumftance, therefore, a marriage into his family would be not only advantageous, but particukrly gratifying to your mother and myfelf· Never again will i attempt to put any con· ftraint on your inclinations : if, therefore, after your introduction to Mifs St. Aivars, your predilection for Mifs Melvan con- dnues unabated, no longer will I oppofe your wiihes ; but this ftort delay I truft you will oblige me by agreeing to. I pur· pofe fetting out immediately for town; and if my friend be not there, I fliall proceed to the country feat of my old acquaintance, Sir Edward Mortimer, where from his ktter I find he will be in a ftort time; and I hope I fliall be able to prevail on the Baron and his daughter to accompany me back to the Hall. Your fufpenfe therefore, my fon, will be but of ftort duration ; and I truft if the charms of Mifs St. Aivars have the influence I wifli, we fliall all be n 2 amply
amply recompenfed for the uneafinefs wc have endured.' 1 Adolphus would have declared it wns* impoffible" that any but Rofaline coukl ever ffiare any portion of his affections ; but Sir Walter flopped his procedure by aiking if he would confent to oblige him by the delay he had propoied. Adolphus readily anfwered in the affirma¬ tive, though he could not help adding that neither the charms of this Mifs St. Alvan, nor thole of any other woman, however lovely, would avail to eftrange him from his firft attachment. Sir Walter, though he felt internally a perfeft conviction of the truth of his fon's aifertion, laughingly bade him not be tco certain, and left him to make preparation for his journey. The heart of Rofaline beat quickly as this
this intelligence was imparted to her by Sir Walter, who requefted a privatw inter¬ view with her for that purpofe. " My fon's attachment, my dear Rofa¬ line/ 4 laid he, " has remained uníhaken by time and abfence ; and knowing your return to England, it was no difficult tafk for either Lady Edgecumbe or myfelf to guefs whither Adolphus was gone on his acceffion to his late brother's fortune, in preference to remaining with us at the Hall : yet fuch perfeft reliance had we on your known rectitude of hearr, that never for a moment did we doubt your ftrict adherence to its precepts ; and finding the unchange¬ able heart of Adolphus had remained proof againft every aflãult, we had determined no longer to oppofe his wifties. What 1 then told Adolphus was merely a little trial of his patience, whicli I truft will be amply rewarded, ifyou, my ever dear child (for fo I muft ftill call you), will give your aflenting voice to become our daughter iiuked. Our n 3 motives,
motives, you muft be fenfible, for formerly oppofing this ftep, originated in a miitaken pride, and falfe ideas of propriety. Adolphus, both in perfonal and mental qualifications I had long been accuftomed to confider as the firft hope of the family from whence he fprung; and from his infancy 1 had ever looked up to him as to the one deftined to ennoble it, and fupport its ancient honours with glory and advantage. This fond and early hope I thought was threatened to be deftroyed by an improper alliance, aad 1 took meafures to prevent it. At kngth I faw the error I had been guilty of, and had'determined, ere too kte, to retrieve it, when I difcovered that fte whom I had rejefted, was as much ennobled by birth as by virtue; and that inftead of degrading, fte will every way give additional honours to the family fte enters !" The worthy Baronet ceafed ; and the joy, furprife, and gratitude of Roialine could for fome time only find vent m tears, till at
gl length, afler much friendly converfation with the good Sir Walter, fte was luffcred to retire. Now indeed did her happinefs feem ap¬ proaching to a climax. That flic: itnuld ever be thc wife of Adolphus, with the full approbation of his parents, was an idea fte had never dared to entertain. In thankful humility her pious heart ejaculated her gratitude to that Power who had in fakty guided her through the intri¬ cate maze of deftiny. She couki not ilet· p, and in wakeful rumination the hours paffed on. The moon ihed her filver íi¿ht into her apartment; ihe arofe, and fro, n her cafement furveyed tbe filent face of nature till the pale beams of Luna were baniihed by the firft tints of early dawn. Her wniow faced the eaft, and prefented a v'.ew of the fi. ft ftreaks of the morning gilding the horizon with its faint light. Her mind was romantically turned ; ? 4 and
änd the effufions of gratitude and unexpected happinefs were difplayed in the following knes :— l rövM thro 1 * early life's fad fcene, Alone, forlorn, and weary j And tho' my mind was ftiil ferene, The profyeél round was dreary î for forrow and grief are by Providence fent, And I heald their deep wounds with the balm of contenti Aurora's vivid ftreaks of light Difclofe the early morning \ They break upon the dazzled fight. The hemî fphere adorning j And thither thefe eyes are gratefully bent, WhUe my heart is reviv'd by the balm tf contint i So Fortune's fudden favours fmile, The night of fovrow banim j And while they dazile and beguile, Our griefs, our cares all vaniih ; The great hght of Reafon in mercy is lent, To moderate woe with the balm of contenti
A: ilarfully I look'd around, The g'oomy piofpeft br.^hî n'd g I heai d a glad, a joyful found— My heait of grief was ligluen'd : The veil that conceald me nom knowledge was rent, And my mind ftill retain'd the fweet balm of content ! In gratitude this knee ihall bow, To that All-gracious Pow'r, Who kindly ftemirTd each fource of woe— The clouds all ceas'd to lowY 5 As trials of courage, affiiciions are meant, And our forrow is footh'd by the balm of content ! İTope, lovely maid ! with fmiles appears, And rofy cheek, advancing; Her form ead diooping mortal cheers, With Pleafure ever dancing î '* The rigours of Fate have begun to relent, *' And I bring you," ihe fays, « the fweet halm of contint V s Ye powVs on high who wiíèly guide. The wanderer's path of forrow j Let not fair Hope our griefs derìde, Nor vaniih ere tomorrow s Her illufions delight us, and ever are meant To cheer human hearts with the bahn of content ! * n 5 Breakfaft
Breakfaft was announced juft as the fertile vifions of ???? had concluded the laft verfe. Rofaiine haftened to attend the party be¬ low, whom ilie found all aflembled as on the preceding day. Thé happinefs of the Baron appeared in his wan faded cheek ; and the good humour of the worthy Sir Walter glowed on his open countenance. The Baron, rejoicing in his daughter's approaching happinefs, jo}'fuíly confented to return-with Sir Walter to Edgecumbe Hall, whither Sir Edward and M&dame were ftrongly invited to accompany them ; but Mifs Mortimer's near approaching marriage obliged them to decline it. A tranfient cloud of regret appeared in the face of Madame at the thought of feparating from her young friend on the following day, which was fixed on for the journey to Edgecumbe Hall; and gladly would fte have accompanied the party thi¬ ther, but refpeft to her brother obliged ?, hcr
her to be prefent at the marriage of her niece. Rofaline however promifed foon to fee her again, and the day was fpent in calm and rational converfation· In the evening fte attended Madame in a ramble through the park. They ftrolled to thc fpot where poor Mortimer had made his kit unfuccefsful attempt to move Rofa¬ line in his favour:—he natura'ly recurred to the minds of both, though neither, from a fear of wounding the feelings of the other, would mention the fubjeft, till, on a part of the bark of the ancient oak which the ruftic feat encircled, they both at the fame time defcried thefe lines rudely carved in the fame ftyk as we may fuppofe thofe were recorded, which Shakeipeare tells us cele¬ brated the namefake of our heroine in hk famed Comedy of " As You Like it." When evening gales their fweets difpenfe, And fober thought ablorbs each fenfe—* When zephyrs flutter o'er the heath, And fragrant ihrubs their odours bre;4he— N 6 I wander
I wander here in penfive mood, Retir'd ftom Folly's noify brood, And thus İn fecret dare to pine, O'er lhe lov'd name of Rofaline 1 Each daring hope for ever crufli'd The flatterer's voice too furely hufliM— The thought «f blifs no longer lives» Nor to this bofom comfort gives : No happinefs tins heart pervades, But fiom my view the vifion fades—» Array 'd in gaudy colours fine, Hope bade me wiih for Rofaline. But ah, deceitful phantom, fly I For ever vaniih from my eye I No more her luring voice I hear, But, in her ftead, pale doubt and fear Diftract this foul by woe opprefs'd, And fill tbis anxious, troub ed breaft.' Ah ! would kind Heav'n but make her mine 3 I'd live alone for Rofaline I The ciuftVing trees, in hollow moan. Murmur a fad and fearful groan, As thro' their foliage thickly twin'd, Paflès the hoarfcly lufliing wind ;
The bird of night with frightful feream, The bat, as by the pale moon's beam, He flits along the radiant line, Teils me that loll, ie Rofaline. Avaunt, ye omens dire and drear, Nor bear your gloomy bod í ngs hf re ! For by yon trembling ftream of light Which breaks upon my dazzled fight- By yon vaft firmament on high, Whofe glories meet my wondVmg eye, My paflion will 1 ne'er refign, Tiil hope is loft of Rofaline. Then to fome lonely fcreil wild, Where never more that voice fo mild Shali breaic upon tliis once-charmM ear, And nought but ravens croaking drear, Or ruíhhlg cataracts around, Which horrors waft în ev'ry found Are loudly heard*—I'll there repine | I'll weep, and die for Rofaline ! «m«MW* The effufions of a wounded fpirit were ferufed by both Rofaline and Madame with
with the pity their author merited from both. " Poor George!" fighed Madame, i4 he paid dearly for his Continental excurfion, by the lofs of his peace, which I fear he is not likely to regain. His paffions I am afraid are far ftronger than his reafon ; and the former have fo long had the mattery, that he will now find it a hard tafk to fubdue tbem to his fate." " I grieve moit fincerely," faki Rofaline, 44 that I have been the means of putting him to the trial. But I ftill hope time and reflection will gain the victory." " I ardently pray that they may," faid Madame. c< I have experienced a cruel diiappointment in my niece, and I would fain fee my nephew worthy the father from whom he fprung." This was the firft time Madame had ever been tempted to utter her difapprobation of her niece, though Rofaline had long beea
been aware that the haughtinefs and affefta¬ tion of Mifs Mortimer were very difpleafing to her aunt. They returned late to the houfe ; and on the following morning Sir Walter, the Baron, and Roialine commenced their journey to Edgecumbe Hall. Sir Edward and Madame parted from them with much regret; and juft before they fet out, a packet arrived from the Count Lorraine, acquainting the Baron that be ftould be in England in a few days, and begged he would direft a line to an hotel in town, to inform him whether he continued at Mor- timer Houfe; and concluded with remem* brances of friendfhip to his fair, but unknown relation.
CHAP.
SSSESESSSÑE
•**^-^***-~**??1~4*?*1?*+*—????????~^?**?*
CHAP. XIII.
u Ah happy hills ! Ah pleafmg íhade I " Ah fields beIov*d in valn I ** Where once my carelefs childhood ftray *å 9 u A Oranger yet to pain I €t I itti the gales that from you blow u A momentary blifs beftow j lf As waving frefli their gladfome wing, ** My weary foui they feem to footh, <* And^ redolent of joy and youth, ** To breathe a fecond Spring*"
Gray,
ALTERNATE hope and fear agitated the mind of Rofaline as they journied towards the happy abode of her early years ; and tears of joy often ftok from her eyes as
as flie contemplated in idea the approaching meeting with its beloved inhabitants. Every mile as they drew nearer tbe ter¬ mination of their journey, ihe remembered with gratitude her feelings when laft ihe traverfed that road to town with Lady Delford. Exceffive grief and extreme joy had on her the fame effect ; and if then fhe was grave from forrow at having parted from her friends, fte was now as filent from delight at the thought of having them reftored to her, As they approached the Hall, fte viewed each well-known fcene from the carriage with almoft painful eagernefs. Every fpot within feveral miles of the Hall brought fome occurrence of her early years freih to her memory. Along that vale foe had walked with Adolphus and Henrietta ; this road had been a favourite ride on horfe¬ back ; and in that rivulet they were accuf¬ tomed to fift» The lofty hills of Wales had
had often been marked by running down them in her childhood, when Adolphus, in their vacations, was their confiant com¬ panion; and the poor inhabitants of the wretched huts fcattered on the Weich mountains had even at that early age been objefts of her bounty. The falubrious breezes fte inhaled from the well-remembered hills, feemed to in¬ fpire her with new life;, and though fiie felt too realiy happy to be talkative, the pleafure that reigned in her mind beamed from her fpeaking eyes. They now drew near the manfion. Rofa¬ line's beart palpitated with violence; and as they drove down the great avenue front¬ ing the edifice, fte was incapable of an¬ fwering to the pkafure the good Baronet exprcfled, that fte would once more bea part of their family. Leaping eagerly from the coach, fte ran into
into, the hall, where Henrietta, wbh a joyful countenance, met hcr; and after affectionately embracing her, led her to the drawing-room, where Lady Edgecumbe and Anna waited her arrival. Rofaline flew to the former, who fondly preifed her to her bofom, welcoming her return to the Hall. Ladv Delford and her fon were alfo there, the latter having accompanied his mother in the hope of condufting Henrietta back to town ttith them as Lady Delford, their union having been protraft ed by the fudden death of young Edgecumbe : by all Rofaline was received vvith joy bordering on tranfport, but ftill the circle was incom¬ plete, for Adolphus did not appear. Apprized by his mother of the expefted arrival of his father with his friends, and totally indifferent whether he were prefent when they arrived, he had ftrolled out after breakfaft among thofe feenes- where he was formerly wont to ramble with Rofaline, who»
who, he hoped, would be foon once more reftored to them. He anxiouflv w ; ffied his introduction to the Baron St. Aivars was over, that he might be at liberty to renew his addrefles where only the feelings of his heart would allow him to direft them, little imagining that in the kdy his father had mentioned to him, he ffiould behold her to whom he had been early attached. Frpm this walk he was not returned when Sir Walter and his friends arrived; and the former, on finding his fon was abfent, gave orders that, on his return, he fliould be defired to attend his father in his ftudy. Adolphus very foon appeared ; and his father, after the firft compii nents, told him that his frknd, the Baron St. Aivars, and his daughter were arrived; adding— u I think I need not remind you, Adolphus, of the refpeft I ftall expeft to be paid to my friends, even if the attraftions of this young
young lady ftould not prove fufficiently powerful to erafe the remembrance of any former attachment." " That, Sir," faid Adolphus, " is quite impoflìble." 44 Well," cried Sir Walter, " we will at leaft try ; Mifs ¡Vldvan I iear will Mad her a powerful competitor." Adofphus would have expoftulated far¬ ther, but S«r Walter quitted the room, and led to the library, where they f imd the Baron St. Aivars and his ion, Rofaline having retired with Lady Edgecumbe to her d reft¬ ing* room ; Henrietta and Anna were alfo with them, and Rofaline recounted to them every minute circumftance which had hap» pened fince they laft parted. They fliuddered at the efcapes flie had had, and wept at the unmerited fufferings ihe had endured from the tyranny of her unknown relation, the Baron. Though
Though impatient to gratify his fon, Sir Walter would not interrupt the narrative of Rofaline till the hour of dinner, when on a fummons from Sir Walter, tbe kdies de¬ fcended to the library. Sir Walter, the Baron, hk fon, and Adolphus were there. The latter, as they entered the room, fur¬ veyed them carelefsly, though not without fome degree of curiofity ; but no fooner had his eyes met thofe of Rofaline, than he ftarted as thougii he had beheld a fpectre : his countenance inftantly changed ; and while Rofaline was covered with confufion, he feemed ftrpck mute with amazement. The Baronet, to relieve them both, took the hand of his fon, and leading him to Rokline, faid—" In this young lady, Adolphus, you behold the long-loft daugh¬ ter of my frknd, the Baron St* Älvars." ** Is it poffible ?" cried Adolphus ; 44 am I awake, and do I really hear aright ?" '* It is true indeed, Adolphus," faid Lady
Lady Edgecumbe; ** and much as we always kved Rofaiine Mei van, Mifs St. Aivars at leaft rivals her in our affeftions, as I doubt not flie will in your's." Sir Walter and the Baron could not help enjoying the amazement of Adolphus, who feemed almoft wild vvith tranfport ; whiie the emotions of Rofaline being perceived by lady Edgecumbe, fbe faid—" Retire, my dear Rofaline, and compofe yourfelf before dinner." She eagerly accepted the permiflìon, and accompanied Henrietta to her dreffing- roum, where they were followed by Adol- pl-us, who was there made acquainted with every event which yet remained untold ; and amply was he repaid by the happinefs he now experienced for the temporary diiappoint¬ ment he had felt from Rofaline's peremp¬ tory ι ejection at Mortimer Houfe. They joined the party at dinner, when mirth and hilarity in general prevaikd. The
The felicity of Rofaline feemed now fo great, that, as ilie traverfed the u ell known apartments, ffie almoft fancied it was all a vifion. It was rendered more perfect by liaving heard from Henrietta that her own marriage, which Lord Delford became fo urgent to have folemnized, fliould be pQÍlponed till the, felicity of Adolphus could be enfured by his receiving the hand of Rofa.ine at the fame time. After a day of happinefs, fuch as fiie had never known fince the melancholy period ofher quitting the friends to whom ffie was now returned, Roíahne retired for the night to the apartment ffie had formerly occupied, Henrietta remained an hour with her, and they then feparated ; but Rofaline could not fleep: the tranfition in her fituation was too fudden and too joyful to permit Morpheus to baniih the re¬ flections it had railed; and her mind dif- *** pofed only for meditation, ihe did not even
tven attempt to undrefs, but for fome time after Henrietta had left her, fte remained reclined on the fofa in an attitude of contem- plation. A profound filence pervaded every part ofthe manfion, and her contemplative mood had continued till her light, burning dimly, was nearly extinguifted. This cir¬ cumftance, however, would not have recalled her from her reverie, had not a foft, low ftrain of mufic fuddenly broke on the fiknce of night. She ftarted, and in a moment recolkfted they were the very feif-fame founds with which Ariel had firft approached her. The window in her clofet occurred to her, and leaving the light in her chamber» ihe opened the cafement, and defcried be¬ neath the window the fame figure flie remembered then to have beheld. The gloom of night enveloped his form, and fhe could barely difcern it was that of a human beinff, ? At her appearance the mufic inftantly ceafed. vol; iv, ? " Have
44 Have I difturbed your meditation 'r" íâld the voice of the fylph ; " and can you fteal a few ftort moments from the con- . templation of your prefent and approaching happinefs to attend to the farewel vifit of }our guardian fylph ?" Rofaline eagerly aiked what he meant by a farewel vifit. 44 My meaning is expreffed by my words," returned he ; " the period I pre¬ dicted in roy laft converfation is arrived ; all myfteries muft now vaniih, and to-night I bid adieu for ever to the fictitious cha- rafter of Ariel. In this fpot I firft ventured to addrefs you; and here I own it was -my wift to take my final leave of you. I muft now appear to you in my own cha¬ rafter; and ere to-morrow's fun declines into tbe weft, the perfon, thoughts, and actions of Ariel ftall, as I once before told you, pals in review before you. I need not bid you regard them with a lenient eye; the tablet
^ tablet of my heart will be expofed to your view, and on it the prominent figure you will perceive, will be your own image en¬ graven in indelible charafters. Your fitua¬ tion is now different from any ouo in which I have hitherto addreffed you ; and there arc probably thofe to whom you may wiffi to communicate the adventures of your hitherto unknown fylph. If this be the Cafe, 1 invert you with power to make them known to fuch as you wiffi to truft with them. No longer will the counfels of Ariel be wanted ; new feenes open to your view, and a wide, extenfive, and permanent profpeft of happinefs I truft is before you. May it not be delufive, but equal to your innocence be your felicity, and firm as your Own principles, the bafis on which it is founded 1 And now for ever adieu ! I dare not prélong this interview ; nor ffiould 1 have fought it, had I not thought it right to warn you of what to-morrow you may expeft." " Will you not ftay to accept my thanks ? 2 for
for the numberlcfs fervices you have ren¬ dered me?" faid Rofaline. 44 Xou would not aik it," replied Ariel, 44 w^re you aware of the danger I am already in. Once more then a long adieu î To¬ morrow every myftery fliall be explained, and your curiofity, if any yet remain, fliall be amply gratified." The mufic was renewed ; and after the folemn and.fublime ftrain with which he r generally left her, and, which, now played for the kit time, feemed more awful than ufual, the figure diiappeared, and gliding between the thick firs, was almoft imme¬ diately out of fight. ■- ■ k^ r Rofaline now retired, and endeavoured to gain fome repofe, which the t umuft of ber thoughts long prevented her finding» The promifed difclofure on the following day ffie had fo long and vainly Wiffied to have elucidated» exçi tedi her. curiofity till it
it became quite painful. She refolved to avail herfelf of the permiifion Ariel had accorded her, to reveal her adventure with him to Adolphus and Henrietta on the following morning. From the former. flie wiíhed to conceal nothing, and Hen¬ rietta flie had ever confidered as her fecond. felf. After a night which the ftàte of her mind rendered reftlefs, flie arofe early, and repaired to the apartment· of Henrietta, who, like herfelf, was too happy to fleep. To her friend Rofaline. related, after fome little preface; the particulars of her fihgukr* acquaintance, with her myfterious fylph. Henrietta, was,however, like herfelf, quite unable to develop the myftery in which he had wrapped himfelf, and advifed her to impart the whole to Adolphus the foft opportunity. Thé party affembled at breakfaft; after which Adolphus and Rofaline, with Lord 03 Delford
Delford and Henrietta, fet out on a walk ; and now was the former made acquainted by Rofaline with the long attendance of her guardian fylph. He could fcarcely for¬ bear laughing at the grave air with which fhe recounted her tale, and told her: with a fmik it was evidently fonje rejected adorer. The morning was fpent in revifiting thofe fpots in the gardens and plantations which had formerly been their raoft favourite reforts; nor was the Temple, marked by Adolphus's firft difclofure of his attachment to Rokline, and afterwards by her noftumal meeting with her fylph, forgotten. Grateful to the minds of each were tbe fenfations they now felt as they contem¬ plated the Gothic pile, and compared tbem with thofe which had filled their bofoms when kft they were within its fculpturtd walls. They returned home to dinner, but no intelligence from her fylph reached Roialine. Immediately
immediately afterwards ffie ftok from the dining-room, thinking it poffible that Ariel would feek her in fome of thofe fpots he knew flie was wont to refort to, and which it was evident he was well acquainted with*. With this idea ffie again repaired to the Temple. The evening had begun to clofe in, and ffie had juft given up the hope of Ariel's promifed difclofure, when Henrietta- joined her. cc You muft prepare for another intro'· duction, my dear Rofaline," faid ffie : 4i the Count Lorraine and his fuite, accompanied, by hk friend, the Chevalier de Polloni, are juft arrived."' This inteiligencequite banifhed Ariel and his myfteries from the mind of Rofaline. The ardent defire (he had to be prefented to the Count was now about to be gratified. Boor Angelina and her woes came afreih to her memory, and brought with them the regret which ever filled the mind ef ? 4 Rolaline
Rofaline when fte reflefted on her pre« mature death. It- was a calm, forene evening ; and as they ftood at the Gothic window of the Temple, while Rofaline was relating poor Angelina's forrows to her friend, they were joined by Adolphus, who confirmed the intelligence of the Counts arrival, and warmly entreated Rofaline to return to the Hall, telling her the Count had expreifed great eagernefs to fee her. Juft a$ he ceafed fpeaking, the Baron A accompanied by Sir Walter and the Count, came within fight of the Ternple. When they perceived Rofaline at the window, they approached, and the Baron motioning to ber with his hand to meet them, fte flew to the door» of the building. The gentlemen were afcending the fteps that kd to it, and the Baron, taking the hand of his daughter, prefented her to the Count
Count» who, taking it from him, exclaim- ed-^i* May I hope to retain in tiie friend* fliip of my lovely coufin a place which* though ignorant of my affinity to.her, flie once did me the honour to inflate me in as; the brother of,the hapiefs Angelina I" This fpeech took from: Röfidirieatl power - of utterance, not from its purport, but the voice in which it*was ipoken had nö fooner vibrated on her ear» than flie > recognifed,, with unutterable aftoniflimebt»,, the,. well^ known accents with which ffie had been fo often greeted by her guardian lylph, t he., myftedous Ariel., She ftarted» and almoft fcreamed with amazement, while the Count, who ftill retained her hand» added^·" And kt mè hope that» as *tl|e brother of yput friend, I ffiall pbtaini the pardon of Ariel for all his flightsmnd incorffiftencieSà" " Ypu muft allow me to recover my furprife," faid Rofaline, " ere I can grant. 05 eiuitri
cither; for indeed I am at prefeot fo much amazed, I can fcarcely Credit; thé evidenc* of my fenfes,'* "Let this then," faid the Count, pre¬ fenting a packet, "plead for me; and I will dare to prefent it even in your prefence^ my happy friend," added he,, addreffing Adolphus ; " for yoq are aware of its contents." " I am indeed,'- replied Adolphus; " thougklittle did ? imagine to*whom they were addreffed." a* While they ?? fpeafckg,, Roftîme ???? tempkted the perfon of the Count» which fte felt certain was the fante flie had in¬ truded on at Lorraine iii the matted gallery, though the tranfient view the had had of him then,, arid by the bedfide of his dying fifter, had giyeri? her a ; very erroneous idea of his figure : -Ait was tallà and remarkably thin; and hk countenance,: ïtliöugh over¬ fpread with an l^abitual melancholy, was cxpreffive of the moft exalted benqvolence, ■■ <■.> His
His manners were elegant and interefting, and there was a refined enthufiafm in his mode of fpeaking which gave additional intereft to his appearance. On their ret urn to the manfion the Cheva* lier de Polloni, advancing to Roialine, con¬ gratulated her on the recent change in her fituation. She received, hk compliments with her accuftomed fweetnefs, and her eyes meeting thofe ofthe Count, the latter were immediately averted, and with a coun¬ tenance of- ftrong emotion he withdrew. She was obliged: to defer tbe perufal of his packet till fte retired to ber apartment, eager as flie was to learn his motives for a. conduct fo extraordinary. She repaired with Henrietta after tea to the drefling-room of the ktter, whera they opened ? together,. and read the following addrefs.
? 6 CHAP.
^
????????
CHAP. XIV.
u His words are bonds, his oaths aœoj ades ; 4i His love ßncere> his thoughts immaculate j < € His tears* pure meffengers fent from his henrt \ f * His heart as for from fraud* as heaven from earth;" -,. *, - ' ""'.-'■■ Shakespeare,
THE ELUCIDATIOMS OF ARI£L.
« -I HE charm is diffolved, the period pf difcovery is arrived, and all myfteries muft be now revealed. The aerial character of Ariel is no more, and all that remains ? to elucidate the perplexities he has caufed» * i4 You
44 Tou have been informed, Madam, I b&lieve, that I was educated under the care and guidance of my u nek,, the kte-¡ Count Lorraine. Hk charafter was that of a perfeft miíaothrope *.,—difgufted with mankind, he had for many years re¬ figned all fociety vvith the world ; and an early difappointment having given him a diflike to women, he conceived an averfion fbr the whole fex in general. It was natural for me to îmbibe his opinions ; and avoiding all commerce with the world, I gave myfelf up to literary purfuits. Fondly attached to my own family,. I however fometimes vifited the Chateau St. Älvars ; but the early and dreadful misfortune of lofing the only friend my heart had ever yet felefted in the hapkfs St. Lucia, with all the horrid y-t* confequences that enfued, increafed that mifanthropical difpofition my uncle had encouraged. * <c The fludy of nature was one of my moil favourite amufements; and I have # fpent
ipent whole days together wandering alone among the mountains. In thefe folitary rambles I difcovered the retreat of the hermit of the Akps % as he was then called, who affifted me in the itudy of natural philofophy ; and finding my turn in this refpecb fo fimilar to his own, we grew very fond of each other's company. Erom him I, firft heard fome. particulars of my father's charafter, which greatly íhocked me, and at the fame, timé convinced me there was ? myftery in the ftory of the hermit, who appeared to be perfeftly acquainted with every circumftance relating to my father's family. ** After- the dreadful event juft men¬ tioned, my mother's death, and the de»· rangement of poor Angelina's intellects, the chateau, once the feat of focial happi¬ nefs, feemed now the. gloomy, abode of mifery. From that period I lived con¬ ftantly at Lorraine, feldom quitted the Abbey, and gave up my whole time to tb$
the ftudy of philofophy and literature. The* mifanthropical leflbns and exauipk of my uncle had not fo far prevailed over my natural difpofition, but that I longed for a, confident ial friend, fuch as, had poor St. Luck furvived, 1 doubt not he-would bave proved to me. Such was my fituation, and fuch my fentiments when 1 became happily inftrumental ? refcuing the Che¬ valier Edgecumbe from.the hands of ruf¬ fians. I condufted him to the Abbey, introduced him to my uncle, and, charmed with his manners, fo eagerly prefied his knger refidence with us, tliat he confented to oblige me. We foon grew extremely inti¬ mate, and in fpite of the ill opinion I had been taught, to entertain of mankind, he involuntarily gained my friendfliip and affeftion.., 44 In our frequent converfations I found that one of bis moit favourite fubjefts was the friends he had left in his native country. His father and mother he deferibcd as
as beings of a fuperior order, and his fifters as worthy fuch parents. Mifs Melvan too he often mentioned; but of her he fpoke with fuch enthufiafm, that it foon excited my. curiofity, unfavourably as I thought of the fex İn general. His deícription of her form bore more a refemblance to a celeftial than a human being; and her innate excellence he would often add was worthy an exterior ίο lovely. 44 On my one day rallying him on his enthufiafm, when flie was the fubjeft of converfation, and adding I thought I muit undertake a journey to England purpofely to behold this miracle of nature, (little then imagining I ftould really ful fit what was fpoken in jeft), he ihewed me her por¬ trait which, with the miniatures of his mother and fifter, he kid were drawn by her own hand. I will attempt no defcrip¬ tion of the -fenfations, equally new and ftrange, whicii this pifture gave birth to in my bofom : and after borrowing it frequently
frequently under various pretences, but in reality, merely for the pleafure of contem¬ plating it alone, I felt a fudden and írre- fiítible defire to behold the original of this fafcinating portrait· 44 I was one day alone revolving this fubjeft in my mind, when Edgecumbe entered my apartment with fome letters open in his hand ; -they were juft arrived from England, and contained a fummons to attend the marriage of his brother. One was written by his father, and another by his favourite Henrietta. At the bottom of the latter was a poftfcript figned, " Rofaline Melvan;" it only confifted of a few line?, expreffive of the joy they ihould all feel on his return to his native country, I perufed this poftfcript till every word was engraven on my memory ; and no fooner heard tbe refolution of my friend to fct off imme¬ diately for England, than an impulfe, which I could fcarcely define, induced me to propofe
propofe being the companion of his journey* but, accuftomed to kveftigate the motive for every aftion, I foon difcovered that the real incentive to this wiffi was merely a defire to fee the fair object who, though unknown, I fecretly admired. Should I, therefore, attend Edgecumbe to the Hall, and confirm the fentiment already begun in my bofom, unufed to conceal my feel¬ ings, I might betray myfelf to him, and a total breach of friendfliip enfue.. " After much reafoning with myfelf, I few him depart alone; but no fooner was he gone, than a fcheme fuggefted itfelf which, wild ajid romantic as it may appear, I inibaptly« and almoit involuntarily, pre¬ pared to put in practice. This was nothing kis than to go privately to Wales, and be prefent at the public rejoicings at the Hal!, where, unknown tp any one, I might have an opportunity, to gratify the violence of my curiofity. My objeft was^to fee, not to
to be feen. I hated all ceremonv, and could not endure the idea of a formal introduction to the family of my frknd. 44 The Baron and Angelina were then İn England, and I refolved firft to go into the neighbourhood of my father's eftate, near Arundel, to enquire after my fifter, of whofe heakh I had long been anxious to hear; and having been for ever baniihed the prefence of the Baron fince his difcovery of my friendihip and partiality for St. Lucia, I dared not openly vifit tbem. " Accompanied by a faithful fervant, who had been reared from infancy with me, I commenced my journey. We arri, ed fafely in England ; and I travelled with as much ípeed as poffible to Arundel, wiiere I iieard, from thc voice of report, that Angelina was in the fame melancholy ftate as that in which you, Madam, firtt faw her. 'f Too weff awars. of the implacable temper
temper of the Baron, I forbore tõ incur his difpleafure by foliating an interview, great as would have been the fatisfaftion I ftould have derived from being rcftored to his favour, and fet out for Edgecombe Hall, where I arrived towards the evening of the firft day's celebration of Mr. Edgecumbe's nuptials. " Under a feigned name I procured tolerable accommodation at à cottage on the confines of the park,.Which for privacy I preferred to an inn; and hearing that the dpors of the Hall, were open to all guefts, I difguifed myfeif fo as not to be recognifed by Edgecuttibe, the only one from whom ?, feared a, dí í covery, and entered the folding gates which opened inte the plantations. I perceived parties fcat¬ tered in different partsland from öne of thefe learned 'that' moft of the. company were at prefent at thè Gothic Temple» wliere a concert was now held. Thither I proceeded, and thç founds which then ^ ftruck;
ftruck on my ravifhed fenfes, ftill vibrate on my ear. A voice, I couid fcarcely fancy was human, rofe in tones celeftial to the dome ofthe building; and, motionlefs with indefcribable fenfations, I ftood as if en* tranced on the fteps leading up to it. 44 A gentleman near the entrance made room for me within. The voice had for a moment ceafed ; but ere I had gained a feat, the melody was recommenced. My eyes infenfibly wandered to that part of the building from whence it proceeded, and refted in a form and face, which I had no fooner contemplated a moment, than I felt affured their poffeffor couid be no other than the original of the beautiful miniature* She was playing on the harp, while Adol¬ phus, the happy Adolphus, accompanied her on the flute. " Scarcely had my charmed eyes fur* veyed thk lovejy vifion, ere fte ceafed finging, and the name of Melvan with refcunding
refouncling plaudits was echoed by the Gothic walls, m * 4 After this firft effay I found no dif¬ ficulty in getting accefs to the gardens every fucceeding day of the rejoicings. I always contrived to mix in fome party or other to avoid fufpicion from being too frequenta¬ rceli alone, and prevented a difcovery by fliunning Adolphus. Thus contented to fee and admire, the week paffed fwiftly away. 44 On the kit evening I found it im¬ poffible to refift the temptation of giving a midnight ferenade under the window of her who, unknowingly, held my heart in cap¬ tivity. I need not add the repulle I met with ; but from that time I continued my abode at the cottage, contenting myfelf with purfuing her fteps, fometimes alone, but oftener with Edgecumbe and his fifters. ** Frequently when I have obferved her in the former fituation, I have been tempted
. tempted fo approach her ; but the dignity of confcious virtue which appeared İn her whole demeanour, together with an innate feeling which told me I might be led 'on to rival my friend, deterred me ; and, wild with my romantic paffion, I fancied myíelf happy in being able to watch her fteps : but foon was this imaginary felicity rieilroyeJ. Sir Waiter's difcovery of his ion's attach¬ ment fucceeded ; and ffie for whom I would willingly have ri iked a life I longed to devote to her fervice, was to quit, perhaps for ever, the feenes of her early happinefs. 44 On that memorable night, when, over¬ come by the agonizing idea of lofing the vifionary felicity I had lately enjoyed, by means of a falfe key, I paid a farewel vifit to that Temple where I firft beheld her, ignorant whether that bliíš was again in referve for me. " Her retreat was not publicly known, though the motives for her leaving the Hall were
were rumoured in whifpers among the fer¬ vants and tenants. " Penfive and filent, Ì placed myfelf in a recefs of lhe Temple at that awful hour when the face of Nature, half veiled by the cloud of night, is partially feen by the faint gleams of the moon ; and throwing my lute from me, which, till this eventful period of my life, had ever power to charm n.y mind to peace, I admitted a gloomy fadnefs to my heart vvhich had taken full poffeffion oi it. 44 One oniy objeft had occupied my nightly vifions fince my arrival in England : to her was every idea at that moment dedicated, when fuddenly the found of light fteps approaching reached my ear, and interrupted the deathlike filence around me. I darted my eyes forwards; but who can exprefs the various and violent emotions which agitated my foul, when I beheld that form, ever prefent to my imagination,
¡magination, advancing with faltering fteps, and that countenance which no endeavours Imd been able to erafe from my memory from the firft moment I beheld it, overcaft with fad and baleful melancholy. Every feature was expreffive of internal fadnefs. 44 Unaccuftomed to fear, ffie placed her¬ felf at a window ; and after a few minutes contemplating the fcene it prefented, ffie uttered a foliloquy fo feelingly, yet fo dif¬ tinftiy^ that I was irrefiftibly led to reply to her : but left flie might be induced to examine the building, and to give it an air of greater myftery, I ftruck the chords of my lute, which, in unifon with the feelings of its mafter, fent forth only fad and plaintive founds. I quitted the Temple unper¬ ceived, and repaired to a favourite feat in the plantations. Here giving way to re¬ flection, I had nearly been difcovered by the fame fweet form, but by a precipitate retreat I eluded her. VOL, IV. p « On
, «' On the following day I purfued Lord Delford's carriage to town, where I re¬ mained as long as that family continued there, conftantly frequenting all public places", where I often met her for whofe íàke I had quitted my native country, and was a wanderer in a foreign clime. I beheld her furrounded by adulation and flattery, yet unchanged in manners, and.preferving the fame fimplicity and native elegance of appearance in the midft of pride and often¬ tation, as when flie graced the modeft re¬ tirement of Edgecumbe Hall. * c At Arundel I again ventured to addrefs her; and there I formed the romantic fcheme, (for fuch I am well aware it may be juftly termed), which I afterwards put in praftice, and at thè fame time, led on by enthufiafm of friendfhip, I made a folemn vow never voluntarily to behold Mifs Melvan, or fuffer her ίο know me in my real charafter whik ihe retained that name. " Charmed
44 Changed at the felf-conqueft I had obtained, I now concluded I might inno¬ cently devote my whole life to her fervice. An opportunity offered at the maiked fête at Woodville to enter on my feigned cha· rafter of Ariel ; I eafily obtained admit¬ tance, and having penetrated through the difguife of Adolphus in his hermits drefs, by an effort of difintereftedneis I then congratulated myfelf on having fufficient command over my paffions to make, I condufted you to him. *- 44 When you, Madam, quitted Engknd, I alfo took my leave of it. I well knew my father's difpofition, and ï dreaded fome latent defign from his ready acqui¬ efcence in Angelina's wift of having a com· panion to the chateau : this was confirmed by his frequent private conferences with the Count de Polloni after his arrival at St, Aivars, which I reached a few days before the Baron and his fuite. pa « By
44 By my knowledge of the many fub¬ terranean avenues to the mountain, I was enabled to vifit the chateau whenever I chöfe. I almoft conftantly took up my abode with the hermit, whom I had left but a few days to pafs a ftort time with my uncle, when a letter was one day de¬ livered tp me at the Abbey, which came from Venice, where it was direfted to me İn a hand I thought I had fomewhere feen before ; .but guefs—-ah, if it be poffible !— guefs my fenfations on readingthe fignature of Rofaline Melvan :—it was, as you may recolleft, to beg my attendance on my dying fifter, who anxioufly wifted to be¬ hold me. I loft not a moment, but fet off for the chateau, where I arrived late in the evening, and contrived, in my aerial cha¬ rafter, to converfe with my fair correfpond¬ ent from her window. The idea of feeing Angelina reftored to reafbn after fuch an eftrangement, and the recolkftion
ARTEL." 3TJ recolkftion that it would only be to bid her adieu for ever, was too much for me; and after quitting the ramparts, where I * walked till a late hour, I returned to the cell of my friend, the hermit, who infifted on my fpending the whole of the next day with him before I attempted an interview with my fitter^ I did fo;. and on the following evening my arrival was publicly announced at the chateau. " Finding Mifs Melvan was abfent from her chamber, I vifited her alone; alíthat followed 1 need not repeat. My final converfation with the dying fufferer con¬ vinced me the high opinion I had formed ofher friend was not fallacious; and more deeply than ever imprinted on my heart the paffion that had fo long fwayed it. " On that night which, from the danger of her fituation, İt was fo probable would be the laft of poor Angelina's exiftence, the hermit, to my infinite furprife, propofed ρ 3 to
to pay her a vifit at midnight in company with me. Little imagining who had undertaken the painful and fatiguing • talk of watching her through the night, I confented, and we proceeded through a fubterranean partage to the Caftle. We reached it unmolefted ; and Father Francis, as we traverfed the paflages and gal¬ leries of the manfion, feemed extremely agitated. I led him to the fcene of death 1 A figure I took for Agatha knelt by the bed. I had moved to the other fide of it ere a faint feream attracted my attention, and I difcovered the objeft before me was her I had vowed to avoid ; but no longer could 1 contemplate her—the laft moment of Angelina was approaching! I faw I had arrived jult in time to witnefs her laft ftruggle ; and, overcome by grief, I hid my face in the bed-clothes, when fuddenly looking round, my hapiefs fifter feized my hand, and, as ffie refigned a life of lorrow, joined it with that of fome one oppofite me I 44 Scarcely
44 Scarcely had I felt the preffure, ere I difcovered that it was the hand of Miis Melvan I held in mine. Starting aghaft and terrified, I inftantly relinquiihed it, and perceived that fenfe and motion had forfaken her. She was Conveyed by hsr attendants from her now lifelefs friend, while I accompanied Father Francis back to his cell. There I remained fome weeks after I publicly quitted the chateau; and it was with me the good hermit was engaged when Mifs Melvan, attended by Edmund and the daughter of Le Vere, vifited him. * c By a private door from the cell I avoided meeting her ; and now my whole thoughts were bent on difcovering the Baron's defigns on the object of my guar- dianffiip, which I foon did, and hap¬ pily prevented, by affording her the means of efcape from St. Aivars. It was effefted by Antonio's waiting in the old gallery that led from the library after I had alarmed the Baron and Count by fpeaking in a Ρ 4 feigned
feigned hojlpw voice, and extinguifhed thc lamp by a chemical procefs, which at the fame, time made a hollow fearful noife. He held in his hand a Jamp which he bore before you, fo conftrufted that, if carried in a particular direction, its beams were reflefted to a confiderable diftance, without difcovering the perfon by whom it was borne. This, Madam, was the myftical light hy which you were guided to the fub¬ terranean cavern. 1 it was who, watch¬ ing the fteps of the Marquis de Bernon, was tbe fortunate inftrument of fruftrating his violent intentions. ** As foon as I beheld you fafe under thc care of the good Le Vere, whom I had known, from infancy, I returned to Lor¬ raine. My uncle was in a very bad ftate ot health ; and after one interview with you, I determined to fend Antonio, who knew every fecret of my heart, to the Alps, where all my happinefs was centered, and remain myfelf at the Abbey. " Ια
44 In my journey into Italy I was attacked by the fame banditti who afterwards af* faulted Madame Malvini and her adopted daughter ; but fortunately in their leader recognifing Manvilk, .whonr^had formerly known, begave me liberty,-and I efcaped with the lofs of a trifling fum of money* and thofe tablets which, I have reafon to believe, afterwards fell into the handsrof her whofe name, was recorded-on every page*. c * From Antonio I ? learned her intended journey to Malvini : it inftantly ftruck me that, in travelling through the foretts, they might probably encounter the fame party of banditti ? had- done, who were famous for infefting that part of the country* I loft not a moment in informing Manvtlie whom he might expeft, and deferi bed the travellers minutely, fo that he might know. them. - a I had previoufly fixed on a method ©f writing;to him under a feigned namer p 5 the
the letters were left at the neareft poft-town» from whence, in a fit diíguife, he had agreed to fetch them. cc I had determined to refcue him from thk infamous mode of living, and had projefted this plan with him to effeft my purpofe. 44 It fo happened that my uncle requefted me at this time to vifit an eftate of hk within a few leagues of "Le Yere's hoùfe* I was only in that part of the country a few days, ??? dared not prolong my abfence, becaufe I had left the Count in a very dangerous fituation ; but one of the days I obtained a view of her ever deareft to my heart as ffie walked Q.ijit with Rofe. I had been wandering within, a (horit :diitancc of her habitation, and courting the Mufe in fome trifling lines, whkh I have reafon to believe fte heard me fing as ffie kt on a point of the rock above me.; My icheme to enfure her fafety fucceeded as I wiffied. 3 * Manviile
Manvilk obeyed my commands ; and thus 4 , Madam, was your efcape from the robbers accompliihed. 44 I had fcarcely feen you fettled at Mai· vini, and obtained one converfation with you, when my uncle was fuddenly feized with a paroxyfm of his complaint, and fur¬ vived only three days., 44 Twas now involved in bufinefs, 1 whkh 4 T: was under the neceffity of tranfafting myfelf ; and hardly had I fettled the affairs of the late Count, ere 1 was feized with á long and lingering iilnefs. This circum¬ ftance will account for the length of time which elapfed without Ariel's intruding himfelf on you. I¿ however, fent Antonio to St. Älvars, with a requeft to fee my father, for I then thought my kit hour approaching. He came, and brought his ftknd the Count de Polloni with him. T now learned (by means of Antonio; who p 6 overheard
overheard their converfation), thè pian formed by the Count for carrying you off. 44 Unable from indifpofition to warn you jn perfon, I fent Antonio with a.few lines tq the ruined Abbey, which he contrived tQdeliýer to you, at the fame time ordering him for fome days to ride conftantly near the dark avenue, in cafe the warning ftould not prove fufficient. He did fo moft fortu- Hately, though it is probable he would not .have been able to have effefted your refcue, hadice not providentially met with your then junknpwn brother, by whom you were con- dufted back to Malvini. " After this attempt, and the vifit of the Baron to Malvini, Andine that you were at length; fecure from their artifices, and my malady, though no logger da;ngerçus, having reduced me to a ftate of gr^at debility, Antonio feldom left me. The firft ufe I int^ped to make of my perfeft recovery, vvas to fly to Malvirii; but how was I furprifed
furprifed about thb time by a vifit from» the Chevalier Edgecumbe ! " No longer, however, was he the fame Adolphus I had formerly known. Grave and referved in his manners, it was not till I had reproached him with a breach of friendfhip, that he would communicate to nié what I- already knew. In, return I related to him the adventures of Ariel, concealing only the name of her I prefided over*,, and him for whofe fake I, had at-? tempted the felf-conqueft. He promifed to remain with me till the re-eilabliftment of my healths which ibon was. fo.much improved, that I yielded to the entreaties of my friends and vaffals, and allowed them to celebrate my recovery. In unufual fpirits, I had determined to throw afide, my confti¬ tutional melancholy for that night, and appear the whole evening in the faioon. <c Intelligence was brought to me that a coach
fcó'acli liad broken down near the gates of the avenue, 44 Far from fuppofing who were its in¬ mates, Lgave orders to have them imme¬ diately condufted to the Abbey, and every afliftance rendered them their fituation re¬ quired ; but kl what terms adequate to my feelings fliall I deferibe the fenfations of my heart, when.I beheld from the gallery the ftrangers (alas I to me they were nots fo) enter the faioon? I was obliged to feign fudden iilnefs,. and retired to my. apartment. The forfeiture of my vow was at. ftake >? and I. had no other alter¬ native. 44 In my own chamberí endeavoured to gain more compòfiirè of mind ; and this Ihad flattered myfelf I was accömplifting, when Edgecumbe fuddenly rufted into my apart¬ ment in an emotion that too well convinced menait he would %. "¿'' ■« - "-In
44 Γ11 the full conviction that Captain Mortimer was deftined, on your return to England, to receive the hand he had folicited- in vain, he was nearly diftrafted; and it, was with the utmoft difficulty I prevailed on him to be more compofed; and toreturn- to the company. When he had quitted; me, 1 threw oif the robesth which I had appeared in the faioon ; and as I took a. morning gown from the wardrobe, the. habit of Ariel, made for my appearance at, Woodville, met my fight. " I ardently longed to have a view once more of Mifs Melvan, A fudden idea fuggefted itfelf: I threw on the drefs* and; repaired to the orcheftra with, niy lute,, where, as a ftrange mufician was nothing remarkable, I pafled for one fent thither by my Lord the Count, and afterwards mixed with the maiks: and at length, having accompliihed the defign with whicii I left my chamber,. I returned to it;;and throwing afide my aerial, habit to prevent all further
further intrufion, and to have opportunity for reflection, .1 quitted my own apart¬ ments, and repaired to the matted gallery* r* .** Lpaced it in indefcribable agitation, trying to calm the commotion within t it was fituated in a remote part of the Abbey, feldom frequented by v t he fervants, and little known to vifitors* 44 Tovhave,by a ftrange concurrence of circumftances, under my roof her who had, from my firft knowledge of her, been the principal objeft for whom I was interefted* though unknown to herfelf, appeared fo won¬ derful, that hardly, could I imagine myfelf awake : but very ftortly wasl roufed from this reverie in à manner that raifed every latent emotion I was trying to conceal from myfelf. 44 I heard ftéps^ approach j the-door was opened, and conceiving it to proceed from the officious friendihip of Antonio, I ftarted round
round with difpleafure, and faw not Antonio, not Edgecumbe, but a beauteous vifion, which put every idea but of herfelf to flight; and my firft impulfe was to rufli forward, and throw myfelf at her feet : but the folemn vow I had made, at that critical moment occurred to my recollection ; and recovering my prefence of mind, I rung for Antonio, and fpeaking in a feigned voice, avoided a difcovery. Yes, Madam, it was,, I own, no other than myfelf, whom I afterwards defcribed as a poor maniac, for fuch, alas J 1 confidered myfelf. 44 By my orders, Antonio told you it was not the Count you had ken ; and at parting that night t I entreated you to con¬ template for a moment the portrait over your chimpey-piece :—it reprefented one of my anceftors, but was always faid to bear a itrong refemblance to myfeli ; and I felt a melancholy pleafure in reflefting that, thougii I no longer beheldyou,your eyes were probably contemplating
contemplating my image on canvas : whiie I took my lute, and from an adjoining apart¬ ment played the ftrain you had fo often admired. * c In my converfation the fucceeding morning, you may remember I pre d ¡ft ed the period now arrived. I forefaw that Adolphus would follow you to England, where I doubted not every thing would be cleared up, and a reconciliation would take place, little conceiving the difcovery which has fince happened, or that I bore any affinity to you. There only remains to add, that the Temple, whofe myfterious dedication you perufed with wonder, was confecrated to her who then ho* noured it with ber prefence. It was done in a moment of enthufiafm after my firft return from England, and had been ever fince my favourite refort. ** The very lute with which I bad fo often
. ■ ■.' ????. '. ■ often approached yöu, lay on the tablei you ftruck the chord sy vibrated deeply on my heart, as I was concealed &om you by an inner recefs in the wall, which I had enters you le ft the chapel, where_ t alfo was on your entrance. Unable to ileep, and hoping you would find your way to the Temp at an early hour, and repaired to the chapel, which I was juft preparing to quit as you> ■entered it. c< I will attempt no defcription of what I felt on hearing the narrative related by my dyihg f ither, and how eager, how anxious I was to hail you as my relation, as the daughter of my revered Mend, Father Francis ; but I reiolved to deny myfelf the pleafure of beholding that form and kce which had fo Ion g jnfat ua ted my fentes, tili, by knowing you were finally engaged to him who only can merit you,
I ffiould be enabled to fee you with fome cornpofure. I waited in town till a letter reached me from Adolphus, who only knew I was there, informing me that his father had propofed to him the daughter of my uncle, the Baron St. Älvars. 1 found it had been concealed from him whom ihe really was ; and hoping I could now divert my heart of every felfiih feeling, I refolved inftantly to participate^ in the happinefs of my friends. I had not,.however,, philofophy fufficient to deny myfelf a parting inter¬ view in my aerial charafter. My vow is no longer in force ; the,- name of Melvan is loit in that of St. Aivars ; and both I hope—yes, 1 will fincerely fay, I hope—will ffiortly be forgotten in the happier, far happier of Edgecumbe ! 44 After this- candid confeffion, may Ariel dare to hope that Bertrand St. Älvars will be admitted to fliare your friendihip? Believe
Beîieve me if every heartfelt widi for your felicity, every difinterefted prayer for your Jiappinefs can avail, he furely merits it. (Signed) u Bertrand St. Älvars, " Count of Lorraine.**
CHAP.
???????????????????????????????+??? ^???*?????9?1?????1????1&???»?**?1?^****??***?*?**???&^?1??
CHAP. XV. ** Joy, Gmimât, and Wonder ihed 4t Uaited tears e'er Hymen's reign, ** And Nature her beil triumph kd, (i F«i Leve and Vinue jom'd her train." Cartwaight*
A HE amazement of Rofaline as fte perufed the extraordinary recital of Ariel, every line increafed, particukrly when ihe reflected that the great Count Lorraine, whofe virtues and philanthropy fte had fo long admired, though perfonally unknown, was the fame perfon whofe enthufiaftic admiration
admiration of her had induced him to aft a part fo uncommon and fo eccentric. The narrative of Ariel was communicated to Adolphus, who, alarmed at their long abfence, vifited them in Henrietta's drefs- ing-room. Every myfterious circumftance that had once fo perplexed her, was now unravelled. The figure, by whom fhe had been fo ter¬ rified at St. Älvars, from its fudden appear¬ ance from behind the concealed door under the portrait in her clofet, was no other than her pretended fylph, who, ignorant of her being there, attempted to fecrete himfelf in her apartment, to obtain a con¬ ference before ffie retired to reft; but per¬ ceiving her, he was obliged to make a pre* cipitate retreat. Many noifesin the armoury and in different parts of the chateau he had frequented, flie could now account for, though they had
had at the time alarmed her beyond ???* preflion. Angelina's exclamations on vifiting the vaulted room were alfo now to be accounted for. Often had fte from Madame St, Luck heard the fad tale of Rofaline St. Aivars; but the place where foe had been confined by order of Rhodolpho, was fituated in a part of tiie fabric fo remote, that Madame St. Luck only knew it from the report of her unfortunate friend; and Angelina had never been able to difeover it till Rofaline accidentally led her to it. Strange and romantic as had been tlie conduft of the Count Lorraine, his good¬ nefs of heart had throughout been vifible. He was now one of thofe who moft eagerly promoted the* fpeedy nuptials of Adolphus and Rofaline. Every obftacle which had oppofed their happinefs, was now removedi and unable to refift the united .. -» ■ foiicitations
foikttations ofher friends, Roialine yielded to the earneft entreaty of Adolphus, and Henri¬ etta at the fame time agreed to give her band to Lord Delford. Both were accordingly on the fame morning given by their re¬ fpeft ive fathers at the altar in the chapel of Edgecumbe Hall to the early poffeflbrs of their hearts. Immediately after their marriages the whole party vifited the feat of Lord Delford, and from thence went to that of Sir Edward Mortimer, where it is almoft needlefs to add they were received with every demonftration of joy by the worthy Baronet and hk fifter, who were both juft returned from town, where they had been to witnefs the nuptials of Mifs Mortimer, now Lady Arundel. The gay Sir George and bis Lady, irnme* diately after the ceremony, had fet off in great ftyle on a tour through part of England, and commenced, thek career of . y,çL. iv. q^ diflipation
diflipation with every fafliionable extra* vagance. Neither Sir Edward nor Madame Malvini had been folicited to be of the party; and neither was forry to quit their tonifh rela¬ tions, to witnefs the more rational and confequently more pei manent, Jiappinefs of Rofaline and Adolphus. .It Was tlie particular requeft of the Baron that Rofaline ihould vifit Switzer¬ land with him. On her part it was readily agreed to ; and, unwilling to be fo foon feparated from ber friend Henrietta, per¬ fuaded Lord Delford to accompany them. Here they ftíll found the good De Roche* fort, and here Rofaline beheld Edmund happy in the poffeffion of Roía before they lefttlie, country· •fir She r Vifited the-good Le Vere, who, at the entreaty of Edmund and his daughter, took
took up hk abode almoft conftantly at the chateau. Madame St. Lucia, on hearing the eluci¬ dation which had recently taken place, was prevailed on to «quit the Convent, and refide with her early fiiend, Madame Malvini; and both regularly paid their darling Rofaline an annual vifit of fome months. The Chevalier Polloni by the aid of time conquered the violence of his grief and diiappointment at the lofs of Angelina; and the gentle virtues and amiable manners of Anna Edgecumbe, the Baronet's elder daughter, having forcibly attracted his regard during his vifit to Edgecumbe Hall, flie was prevailed on to accept his hand, much to the fitbfaftion oí her family, who were all well aware of the merit of the Chevalier. α % The
The left worthy Count de Polloni, his father, being, from bis intimacy with the late Baron St. Aivars, fufpefted as an accomplice in his crimes, was obliged to retire from his villa at Polloni to a remote province with his fifter, where he fliortly terminated his exiftence, not lefs miferably, or with lefs remorfe than his equally guilty frknd. The Marquis de Bernon, mortified st hh ill fuccefs with Rofaline, quitted England in defpair, and returned to Italy, where he conveyed to the Signora de Rochefort the firil intelligence of Adolphus's mar¬ riage. Sorrow feldom retained any long refidence in the bofom of that young lady; and-the ekgant Marquis foon prevailed on her to confole herfelf with him for their mutual diiappointment. She
Slie returned with him to France; and tn the annals of the day the M.irqus and .Marchionefs de Bernon are mentioned, if not as the happieft, at leaft as one of the moft faffiionable couples in Paris. Mr. and Mrs. Manvilk conftantly refided at the feat of the hapkfs War- ford ; Rofaiine continued her corre¬ fpondence with Eliza.; and the .two families made each other occafional vifits. .Agatha lived with them, to affift Mrs. Manvilk ia the taik of educating her children. Sir Edward Mortimer ever preferved fox «Rofaline and Adolphus his early friendffiip .and efteem.; and his fon, when he found hope entirely extinguiffied, after fome rime repented his defertion of Mifs Arundel, and folicited lier iòrgi venéis. She was too much attached to him to retain
* retain her refentment jong; and ffiortly after their marriage, Cecilia renewed her friendffiip with Rofaline, who readily met her advances to a reconciliation. The happinefs of Adolphus and Rofaline was as perfeft as mortality is doomed to experience.; it was enfured by their union, and though not exempt from the evils incident to humanity, they bore trifling ills with refignation, devoting their lives to filial duty, and to forming the minds of their infant offspring. ! They refided in general at Woodville, the eftate which fell to Adolphus on the death of his brother.; but fpent part of every year at the fcene of tiieir early happinefs, Edgecumbe Hall. To the kit moment of his exiftence did the amiable Count Lorraine preferve that inviolable friendihip and fincere devotion to Rofaline
> Rofaline he had ever profeffed. His life was fpent in afts of benevolence, and a diffufion of his philanthropy to the worid in general ; and in the perfon of the fecond fon of Adolbhus and Rofaline, whofe education he entreated to Kave the foper- intendence of, and whom he adopted as his own, did he delight to contemplate* the virtues of his mother, and perfonal graces of his father. The Baron St. Aivars furvived the reco¬ very of his dignities, and hk reftoration to his children fix years ; in the latter blefling he endeavoured to forget the lofs of his Rofaline, and felt the retributive juftice' of Heaven in difcovering to the world, though in the decline of his life, the injuftice of his brother in accufing him of parricide. Refigned and compofed to hk laft hour, he relinquiihed life in tbe arms of his daughter, looking forward with fervent & hope
Kope for pardon of hk errors, and- ac¬ knowledging that theyears hè hád paffed iti folitude and mifery he now confidered as ä happinefs, remembering that u < Gold in the* fire »is try M— accepted ???. If- - '■ - r i ' K ■* > i f í - , ' " - t ^ "- -ν - ? "ν ' * Λ ^ " "" · ' " <| sli^rth« íha» furnace ο? aci verfity/* - ^ f ^ „- - . -jib,*' í.f .T.
BEN:I5í*.
* #
İAKE, MINEUVA-MESS, LETENJI ALL-ÍTREÍTr'
