Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Glenarvon
GLENARVON.
CHAPTER 1.
Ln the town of Belfont, in Ireland, lived a learned physician of the name of Eve¬ rard St. Clare. He had a brother who, misled bv a fine but wild imagination, which raised him too far above the in¬ terests of common life, had squandered away his small inheritance; and had long roved through the world, rapt in poetic visions, foretelling, as he pretend¬ ed, to those vvho would hear him, that which futurity would more fully develop. — Camioli was the name he had as¬ sumed. lt was many years since Sir Everard last beheld his brother, when one night Camioli, bearing in his arms Elinor his vol, ï. в
child, about five years of age, returned, after long absence, to his native town, and knocked at Sir Everard's door. The doctor was at the castle hard by, and his lady refused admittance to the mean- looking stranger. Without informing her of his name, Camioli departed, and resolved to seek his sister the Abbess of Glenaa. The way to the convent was long and dreary : he climbed, therefore, with his lovely burthen to the topmost heights of Inis Tara, and sought tempo¬ rary shelter in a cleft of the mountain known by the name of the ** Wizard's Glen." Bright shone the stars that night, and to the imagination of the aged seer, it seemed in sleep, that the spirits of de¬ parted heroes and countrymen, freed from the bonds of mortality, were ascending in solemn grandeur hefore his eyes;— Glenarvon's form appeared before him— his patron î his benefactor !—he spoke of times long past, of scenes by all forgot, pointed with a look of despondency to
bis infant son !—" Who sball protect the orplian that is destitute?" he cried— " who shall restore bim to the house of his fathers!" From visions so wild and terrible, the soft sweet voice of his child avvoke Ca¬ mioli—" How cold and dreary it is, dear father ; how lone these hills. I am weary unto death, yet I fear to sleep."—" My comforter, my delight, my little black- eyed darling," said the Bard, (enveloping her in his long dark mantle,) " I will soon take you to a place of safety. My sister, the Abbess of Glenaa, lives in the valley beneath the mountain : she will protect my Elinor ; and, in her mansion, my child shall find an asylum. I shall leave you but for a short time ; we shall meet again, Elinor;—yes, we shall meet again.—Continue to live with St. Clara, your aunt: obey her in all things, for she is good : and may the God of Mercy avert from you the heaviest of all my calamities, the power of looking into в 2
futurity."—He spoke, and descending the rugged mountain path, placed his Elinor under the protection of his sister the Abbess of Glenaa, and bidding her farewell, walked hastily away. The morning sun, when it arose, shone bright and brilliant upon the valley of Altamonte—its gay castle, and its lake. But a threatening cloud obscured the sky r , as Camioli raised his eyes, and turned them mournfully upon the ruined priory of St. A İvin, and the deserted halls of Bel¬ font.—" Woe to the house of Gienar¬ von !" he saicl. " Woe to the house of my patron and benefactor ! Desolation and sorrow have fallen upon the mighty. —Mourn for the hero vvho is slain in battle. Mourn for the orphan vvho is left destitute and in trouble.... Bright shone the sun upon thy battlements, О Belfont, on the mom when the hero bade thec a last adieu. Cold are thy waters, Killarney ; and manv a tree has been hewn from thy rocky bosom, thou fair
mountain Glenaa, since the hour in which he parted. But not so cold, nor so barren is thv bosom, as is that of the widow vvho is bereft of everv joy... Mourn for the house of Gienarvon, and theorphan who is destitute!—No mo¬ ther—no companion of boyish sports and pleasures yet lives to greet him with one cheering smile.—There is not left one tongue to welcome him to his native land ; or, should he fall, one friend to shed a tear upon his grave!" Thus sung the Bard, while the red deer were browsing upon the hills, and the wind whistled through the arches and colonnades ofthe Castle of Belfont, as if in hollow murmurs for times which were long past.— u Woe to the house of our patron," said the frenzied old man, as vvith bitter tears he departed:—" even in this moment of time, the fairest star of Belfont sets forever: the widowed Coun¬ tess of Gienarvon is dead—dead in a fo¬ reign country ; and stranger hands alone
perform her obsequies." He spoke, and looked, for the last time, upon the land that he loved, then turned from it as if for ever....Previous, however, to his de¬ parture from Ireland, Cambii again sought his brother, (who was then an inmate in the family of the Duke of Al¬ tamonte.) for the purpose of commending Elinor to his eare. Castle Delaval, the property of that nobleman, was situated in a vallev shel- tered from every keen blast by a dark wood of beach and fir. The river Elle, taking its rise amidst the Dartiand Hills, flowed through the park, losing by de¬ grees the character ofa mountain torrent, as it spread itself between rich and varied banks in front ofthe castle, till it joined the sea beyond the Wizard's Glen. The tovvn of Belfont stands close upon the harbour, and from one of the highest cliffs, the ruins of the convent of St. Alary, and a modern chapel may yet be seen, whilst Heremon and luis Tara,
raising their lofty summits, capped with snow, soar above the clouds. The abbey of Belfont, and the priory of St. Alvin, both the property of the Gienarvon familv. were now, in conse- quence of the forfeiture of the Lue Earl of that name, transferred to Lord de Ruthven, a distant relation. The deserted priory had fallen into ruin, end Belfont abbey, as vet unclaimed bv it* vouthful master, and pillaged by the griping hand of its present owner, exhibited a melan¬ choly picture of neglect and oppression. —No cheerful fires blaze in its ancient halls; no peasants and vassals feast u^der its vaulted roofs.—Gienarvon, the hero, the lord of the demesne is dead : he fell on the bloody field of Culloden : his son perished in exile : and Clarence de Ruth- ven, his grandson, an orphan, in a foreign iand, had never yet appeared to petition fir his attainted titles and forfeited estates.·—Of relations and of friends he had never heard.
Where are thev vvho claim kindred with the unfortunate? Where are thev who boast of friendship for the orphan that i;> destitute and in trouble? Yet the Duke of Altamonte, w hose domains were contiguous, and vvhose attachment ex- tendrd to the son of his ancient friend, had ofttimes written to his sister enquir¬ ing into the fate of the c^ild ; but Lady- Margaret had answered her brother's let¬ ters with coldness and indifference.
CHAPTER li. It is the common tailing oťan ambitious mind to over-rate itself—to imagine that it has, by the caprices of fortune, been defrauded ofthe high honours due to its supposed superiority. It conceives itself to have been iniured—to have fallen from its destination ; nnd these unfounded elaims become the source of endless dis¬ content. The mind, thus disappointed, preys upon itself, and compares it* pre¬ sent iowliness vvith the imaginary heights for which it fancies itself to have been designed. С nder the influence of these reflections, the character crows sullen and reserved, detaches itseh from all social enjoyments, and professes to de¬ spise the honours for which it seeret Iv pines. Mediocrity and a common lot, a man of this disposition cannot brine him· :1 >
self to endure ; and he wilfully reject« the little granted, because all cannot be obtained to which he had aspired. In this temper, the Duke of Altamonte had retired from public affairs, and quit¬ ted the splendour and gaiety ofthe court, to seek in retirement that repose which, of all men, he was the least calculated to appreciate or enjoy. He had married Into a Roman Catholic family. In the society of the Duchess, he had found all that could sooth his wounded spirit : in Mrs. Seymour, the duchess's sister, he also welcomed a mild and unobtrusive guest ; while the project of uniting the Lady r Calantha Delaval, his only daugh¬ ter, to her cousin William Buchanan, heir presumptive to the Dukedom of Al¬ tamonte, and son of his sister Lady Mar¬ garet Buchanan, (the titles descending in the female line,) occupied his thoughts, and engrossed his attention. To forward this favourite object, he communicated to them both, that they
were destined for each other; and, by employing them in the same occupations, causing them to be instructed in the same*studies, and in every way conrriv* ing that they should be continually to¬ gether, he hoped that early habits, and the first affections of childhood, might unite their hearts in indissoluble bonds. But how short-sighted, hovv little found¬ ed in a right knowledge of human nature, was this project I Habituated to the in- timacv which subsists between near re- lations, was it probable that love, when the age ofthat passion arrived, would be content vvith objects thus familiar ; and that the feelings of the heart would quietly acquiesce i n an arrangement which, had been previously formed upon the calén lations of interest ami family pride?—On the contrary, the system pur¬ sued in their education, accustomed them in their intercourse with each other, to give vvay to their violent tempers, with¬ out restraint; and the frequent recurrence
of petty quarrels, soon produced senti¬ ments, which bordered on dislike; so that at the moment when the Duke hoped to exult in the success, he had to contemplate the failure, ofhis project. Happily,a most important event occur¬ red at this time in his family, which turned his thoughts into another channel.—The Duchess, after a long period of ill health, was pronounced by her physicians to be once more in a situation to realize her husband's most sanguine hopes.—" If I have a hoy," he cried, '* from the hour of his birth, all 1 possess shall be his. Give me but a son, ye powers who rule over destiny, and I consent to yield up every other claim, privilege and posses¬ sion."— The wish was heard, and at the appointed time, the Duchess of Alta¬ monte, after a few hours' illness, was de¬ livered ofa son and heir, lt was in vain for the Duke, that until this event he said to himself daily as he arose from his stately bed, that none other was his rival
in wealth or power ;—it was in vain that friends surrounded him, and flatterers attended upon his least commands:— until this unexpected, and almost un¬ hoped for, event, he could not be said to have enjoyed one hour of felicity, so un¬ wisely did he blind himself to every other blessing vvhich he possessed ; and so ar¬ dently solicitous did he suffer his mind to become, for that one boon which alone had been refused to his prayers. But since the birth of his son, he looked around him, and he had notbing left to vvish for upon earth ; his heart became agitated wiih its own satisfaction; and the terror of losing the idol upon vvhich every feeling and affection was fixed, rendered him more miserable than he was even before the fulfilment of his wishes. The education of the Lady Calantha, and William Buchanan was now entirely laid aside ; the feuds and tumults in the adjacent countries were disregarded ; and
he míeht be said to live alone in those apartments vvhere, robed in state, and cradled in luxury, the little infant lay helpless, and unconscious of its honours and importance. Not a breath of air was suffered to blow too rudely upon the most noble and illustrious Sidnev Albert, Marquis of Delaval. The tenants and peasantry flocked, from far and near, to do him homage, gazing in stupid wonder on their future Lord. The Duchess feebly resisted the general voice, which encouraged an excess of care, hurtful to the health of him, whom all vvere but too solicitous to preserve. Yet the boy flourished, unaffected by this adulation, the endless theme of discussion, the constant object of still increasing ido¬ latry. Without delay, the Duke resolved to intimate to his sister, Lady Margaret Buchanan, vvho was at Naples, the change wnicu had taKen piace m ner son's ex¬ pectations. He felt the necessitv of soft-
ening the disclosure by every soothing expression ; and, as he loved her most sincereiv, he wrote to urge her immediate return, with all the warmth of fraternal affection ;—informing her at the same time of the circumstance which at once occasioned his delight, and her disap¬ pointment. With vvhat fond overweening vanitv did he then flatter himself, that she, who was the next dearest object of his affections, would share his present joy ; and forgetful of the entire ruin of her fondest hope, doat like him upon the child who had deprived her son of all his expectations ! He knew not Lady Mar¬ garet :—less than any other, he knew that fierce spirit which never yet had been controled — which deemed itself born Jo command, and would have perished sooner than have endured re¬ straint. * At this very period of time, having bade adieu to brighter climes and more polished manners, with all the gaiety of
apparent innocence, and all the brilliancy of wit which helona to spirits light as air, and a refined and tne Μ ν cultivated genius, she was sailing in the prosecu¬ tion of her accused designs, accompa¬ nied by a train of admirers, selected from the flower oť Italy, once uir · ι n to visit her n uive country. Wtth their voices and soft guitars, thev chased awav the lingering hours ; and after a fur and pro¬ sperous voyage, proceeded, with their equipages and attendants to Castle De¬ lava!. Ladv Margaret was received with de- bght at the house of her father, in her native land. A burst ot applause hailed her first appearance before the wondering crowd assembled to behold her. Fond of admiration, even from the lowest, she lingered on the terrace, which command¬ ed the magnificent scenery of vvhich Castle Delaval was the central object— leaning upon the arm of the Duke, and bow ing gracefully to the people, as if ш
thanks for their flattering reception, Bu¬ chanan alone nitt his mother without one mark of joy. Cold and reserved, from earliest childhood, he bad m ver yet felt attachment for any other being than himself; and fullv engrossed bv ihc splendour with which he was at all times surrounded, he looked w»th iudifft rence on every event vv hich did not promote or prevent his own personal amusements. He saw manv new quests arrive wiihout experiencing the slightest accession of pleasure: and when those departed vvhom he had been in the habit of seeing around him, it seldom cost him even a momen¬ tarv regret. He had so loua: and so fre- »tv? С? quently been informed that he was heir of the immense possessions belonging to Ins uncle, that he was overpowered by the sense of his greatness ; nor did the commiseration of liis attend -mts, ou his disappointed hopes, awaken bun to the conviction of the great change vvhich had occurred since the birth of the Marquis
of Delaval. Indeed he seemed as indif¬ ferent on th*s occasion as on all others. Yet whatever his errors, he was at least in person and manner all that Lady Mar¬ garet could vv'sîı. She was also much pleased with Caiani In, and thought she traced, in her radiant countenance, some resemblance to her own. The Duchess of Altamonte won the affections of all who approached her. She had а countenance in which languor and delicacy added sensibility nnd grace to beauty,—an air of melancholy half veiled in smiles of sweetness,—and a form soft and fragile as the bright fic¬ tions of a poeťs dream ; yet a visible sadness had fallen upon her spirits, and whilst she appeared alone to sooth and bless every other heart, she seemed her¬ self in need of consolation. Lady Mar¬ garet's beauty irresistibly attracted ; her wit enlivened ; and her manners fasci¬ nated—but the dreadful secrets of her heart appalled !
-* Lady Margaret was not much liked by Mrs. Seymour, nor by many other of the guests who frequented the castfe. Her foreign domestics, her splendid attire, her crafty smites and highly polished manners,—all were in turn criticised and condemned. Rut neither prejudice nor vulgarity received from her lips the slightest censure, She did not even ap¬ pear to see the ill wHl shewn to her. Yet manv thought the discord* and dis- asters which occurred after her arrival in Ireland, were the fruits of her intriguing spirit* and all soon or late regretted her presence at the castle, till then, the seat of uninterrupted harmony and almost slumberous repose.
vii.'vrihft ill. Lady Margaret Delaval, only surviving sister of the Duke of Altamonte, was born in Ireland, vvhere she remained until her marriage with Captain Buchanan. She then established herself at Naples ; the fleet in vvhich her husband served being sUtioned in the Mediterranean Sea. After the birth of her son William, she immediately sent him to Ireland, there to receive, under her brother's tuition, an education more fitting the heir of Al¬ tamonte, and the future husband of Lady Calantha Délavai. Freed trom the last tie vvhich had bound her to one feel ins: of honour or of virtue, she, without remorse, gave vvay during the absence of her child and hus¬ band (who accompanied the boy to Ire¬ land) to a life of extravagance and vice, •
ensnaring the inexperienced by her art, ond fascinating the most wary by her beauty and her talents. The charms of her person and the endowments of her mind were worthy of a hetter fate than that which she was preparing for herself. But, under the semblance of youthful gaiety, she concealed a dark intriguing spirit, which could neither remain at rest, nor satisfy itself in the pursuit of gieat and noble oijo^ts. She had been hurried on by the evil activity ot her own mind, until the habit of crime had overcome every scruple, and rendered her insen¬ sible to repentance, and almost to re¬ morse. In this career, she had improved to such a degree her natural talent of dis- simulation, that, under its impenetrable veil, she was able to carry on securely her darkest machinations; and her un¬ derstanding had so adapted itself to her passions, that it was in her power to give, in her own eyes, a character of grandeur to the vice and mali^nitv, which aflorded
an inexplicable delight to her depraved imagination. While she was thus iudulg'mg her dis¬ graceful inclinations, her heart became attached with all her characteristic vio¬ lence to Lord Dartford, a young English nobleman, vvho had accompanied the Countess of Gienarvon to Naples, and who, after passing some months in her society, had already made her the offer of his hand. He no sooner, however, be¬ held Lady Margaret than he left that ob¬ ject of his first attachment ; and the short-lived happiness of guilty passion was thus enhanced bv a momentarv triumph over a beautiful and unfortunate rival. — Lady Gienarvon lived not to lament if: the blow vvhich was given by the hand she loved, went straight as it was aimed ; it pierced her heart ; she did not long survive. Her son, already advancing towards manhood, she committed to the care of the Count Gondimar, the only being
who, atnougst the numerous attendants in the hours of her prosperity, had re¬ mained with her in this last trying scene, and received her dying wishes,— u He has no father," she said, weeping in re¬ membrance of the gallant husband she had lost; "but to you 1 consign this jewel of my heart, the dear and only pledge of my true and loyal love.— Whatever crime I have committed since the loss of Gienarvon, my only protector, let not a shade of it be cast upon my son, or sully the bright splendor of his father's fame ! Promise a dying mother to pro¬ tect her child, should he be restored to his grandfather's titles and fortunes. To you, to you I entrust him. Ah ! see that he be safelv conducted to his ovvn countrv." The Italian Count promised all that Lady Gienarvon desired ; and wept as he kissed the faded cheek of the English boy. But no sooner was the momentary interest vvhich he had conceived for the
noble family of the Chevalier preserved a faithful silence concerning that trans¬ action. Glenarvon's youth prevented any suspicion from falling upvn him; and the death of Giardini vvas ascribed to another, and a more dangerous hand. Strange rumours vvere also circulated in Ireland, after this event ; it was every vvhere affirmed that Gienarvon had been secretly murdered ; and Lady Margaret, then at Naples, had even written to ap¬ prize her brother of the report.
CHAPTER ÍV. About the time of the disappearance of Gienarvon, Captain Buchanan died; Lady Margaret then expected that Lord Dartford vvould immediatelv fulfil his engagement, and reward her long and devoted attachment to himself by the Offer of his hand. Count Gondimar was vvith her at the time. In all companies, in all societies, the marriage was con¬ sidered certain. One alone seemed easrer to hear this report contradicted—one vvho, dazzled by the charms and beauty of Lady Margaret, had devoted himself, from the first hour in which he had be¬ held her, entirelv to her service. The name of the young enthusiast was Vi¬ viani. A deep melancholy preyed upon his spirits ; a dark mystery enveloped his fate. Gondimar had, vvith some coldness, с 2
introduced him to Lady Margaret. He was the friend ofthe lost Gienarvon, he said, and on that account alone he had strong claims upon his affection. Lady Margaret received the stranger with more than common civility: his ill state of health, his youth, his beauty, were powerful attractions. He confided bis sorrows to her bosom; and soon he dared to inform her that he loved. Lady Margaret was now more than usually attentive to Lord Dartford : the day even for her intended nuptials was supposed to be fixed. " Oh give not that hand to one wdio values not the prize," said the young Count Viviani, throwing himself before her: " let not Dartford call himself vour lord ; his love and mine must never be compared."— " Go, foolish boy," said Lady Margaret, smilmg on her new victim: " I can be vour friend, as readiiv when I am Lord Dartford's wife as now." Her young admirer shuddered, and rose from the
earth : u You must be mine alone ;— none other shall approach you. 5 * «* The disparity ofour ages." " What of that r" 41 Enough, enough. I will give my hand to Dartford ; my heart, you know, will still be at your disposal." A deep blush covered the pale cheek of Viviani, he uttered one convulsive sigh, and left her to ruminate on his hopeless fate ; for every thing, he was informed, was pre¬ pared for the approaching nuptials. But they knew little of the nature of man, who could conceive that Lord Dart¬ ford had one serious thought of uniting himself to Lady Margaret by any lasting ties. On the contrary, he suddenly and secretly, without even taking leave of her, departed for ngland ; and the first letter which she received irom him, to inform her of his absence, announced to her, likewise, his marriage и »th ,♦ la iy of fortune and rank in bis native muntry. Lady Margaret was at dinner with a numerous company, and amongst them
the young count, when the letters from England were placed before her. The quivering of her lip and the rolling of her dark eye might have betrayed, lo a keen observer, the anguish of a disordered spi¬ rit; but, recovering herself vvith that self- command which years of crime and deep dissimulation had taught her, she con¬ versed as usual, till it was time for her to depart; nor till alone in her own apartment did she suffer herself to give vent to the fury which opprest her. For some moments she paced the room in silent anguish ; then kneeling down and calling upon those powers, vvhose very existence she had so often doubted : " Curse him! curse himl" she exclaim¬ ed. " О may the curse of a bitter and deeply injured heart, blast every promise of his happiness ; pursue him through life ; and follow him to the grave !— May he live to bc the scorn of his ene¬ mies, the derision of the world, without one friend to soften his afflictions! —
May those, whom he has cherished, for¬ sake him in the hour of need; and the companion he has chosen, prove a ser¬ pent to betray him î —May the tear of agony, vvhich his falsehood has drawn from these eves, fall with tenfold bitter- ness from his own !—And may r this blooming innocent, this rival, vvho has supplanted me in his affections, live to feel the pangs she has inflicted on my soul ; or perish in the pride of her youth, vvith a heart as injured, a« lacerated as mine !—Oh, if there are cur^ syt un¬ named, prepared by an angry God, against offendili!? man, may they fall upon the head of this false, this cold- hearted Dartford !" She arose, and gasped for breath. She threw up the sash of the window; but the cool air, the distant lashing of the waves, the rising moon and the fine scene before her, had no power to calm, even for one morr.cnt, a heart torn by guilt 4iid tortured by self-reproach. A knock
at the door roused her from her medita¬ tions. It was the fair Italian boy ; he bad followed her ; for, at a glance, he had penetrated her secret, With a smile of scorn he upbraided her for her weak¬ ness.—" What! in tears lady I" he said: " is it possible? can a marriage, a disap¬ pointment in love, overpower you thus!" Lady Margaret, affecting a calmness she could not feel, and opposing art to art, endeavoured to repel his taunting expres¬ sions. But he knew her thoughts, he at once saw through the smiles and assumed manners which blinded others ; and at this moment he watched her countenance with malignant delight. It was the face of an angel, distorted by the passions of a dæmon ; and he liked it not the less for the frailty it betrayed. It happened, however, that he had just attained the means of turning the tide of her resentment from its present channel, and by awakening her ambition —her ruling paeftion, of at once quench-
ing every softer feeling. " You have read I perceive," be said, " but one of the epistles with which you have been favoured; and I am already beforehand with you, in heanng news of far greater importance than the loss of a lover—The Duchess of Altamonte,"—" What of her?" " After a few hours illness," continued Vi viani, drawing one of the English papers from his pocket, " the Duchess of Altamonte is safely delivered of a son and heir." The blood forsook Lady Margaret's lips: " I am lost then !" she said : " the vengeance of Heaven has overtaken me ! where shall I turn tor succour? Is there none upon earth to vvhom I can apply for assistance? Will no one of all those who profess so much assist me? Shall Dartford triumph, and my son be supplanted ? Revenge—re¬ venge me, and I will be your slave." If the name of love must be given alike to the noblest and most depraved of feelings, the young Viviani loved Lady с 5
Margaret with all the fervor of whicli his heart was capable. She had made him the weak instrument of her arts ; and knowing him too well to ulace her- self in his povver, she had detained him near her, by all the varying stratagems of which her sex is sometimes mistress. —He now knelt before her, and, reading in her fierce countenance her dreadful wishes, 4i I will revenge thee," he said : " yes it shall be done !" " Bknxl— blood is the prieel" said Lady Margaret. " My jon must be Duke of Altamonte," returned Lady Margaret, deeply agitat¬ ed.—*' He shall."—" Swear it, my love¬ liest, my yOungest friend !"—" By r the living God of Heaven, I swear it."— " Ah ! but your courace vviil fail at the moment: your heart, intrepid as I thiuk it, will shudder and misgive you,—Say where, and how, it can be done with safety," * ς Leave that to me : keep your own counsel ; I will do the rest. He spoke, t and left her.
When they met again, the following day, not one vvord was uttered upon the dreadful subject of their former dis¬ course : the compact between them was considered as made : and when once again the Count Viviaoi spoke of his passion, and his hopes, Lady Margaret reminded him of his vow ; and a fearful silence ensued. Revenge and ambition had urged her to a determination, vvhich a sentiment of prudence inclined her to retract. Viviani, unconscious of her wa¬ vering resolution, enjoyefi a momentary triumph. "Is not" this extacy?" he exclaimed, as he viewed the woman he now considered as entirely bound to him. " Is it not rapture thus to love?" " Re¬ venge is sweet," she answered. " Will you give yourseif to me, Margaret? ShaH 1 indeed press you to my burning heart! say—can you love?" "Aye, and hate too," she replied, as, convulsed with agony, she shrunk from the caresses of her importunate admirer.
From that hour he courted her with unremitting assiduity : he was the slave of every new caprice, which long indul¬ gence of every selfish feeling could awaken. But the promised hour of his happiness was delayed ; and his passion thus continually fed by hope, and yK disappointed, overcame in his bosom every feeling of humanity, till he no longer cherished a thought that did not tend to facilitate the immediate gratifi¬ cation of his wishes.
CHAPTER V. It was not long after Lady Margaret's arrival at the castle that Count Gondi¬ mar proposed returning to Italy.. Pre¬ vious to his departure, he sought his friend Viviani, who was at this time con¬ cealed in the town of Belfont, and who, in order to promote his designs, had never openly appeared at the castle. " How strong must be rhe love," said Gondimar, addressing him, "which can thus lead you to endure concealment, straits and difficulty î Return with me : there are others as fair : your youthful heart pictures to itself strange fancies ; but in reality this woman is not worthy of you. You love her not, and it is but imagination which thus deceives you." " I will not leave her—I cannot go," said Viviani impatiently : " one burning pas-
sion annihilates in me evert other con- sideration î Ah ! can it merit the name of passion—the phrenzy vvhich rages within me î Gondimar, if ί worshipped the splendid star, that flashed along my course, and dazzled me vvith its meteor blaze, even in Italian climes, imagine what she novv appears to me, in these cold northern regions. I too can some¬ times pause to think whether the sacri¬ fice I have made is not too great. But I have drained the poisoned cup to the dregs. I have prest the burning fire¬ brand to my heart, till it has consun»ed me—and come vvhat may, now, 1 am resolved she shall be mine, though the price exacted vvere blood," Gondimar shuddered. It was soon after this that he returned to Italy, ľhe evening before he depart¬ ed, he once more in secret affectionately embraced his friend. £< She has deceived me," cried Viviani ; " Months iiave glided bv, and she still evades mv suit. о * ' **
But the hour of success approaches :— to-morrow:— nav, perhaps, to-night.... If ihou, Gondimar—-oh! if tliou couiü^t bt»liev»>: yet wherefore should I betray myself, or slievv, to living man, one thought belonging to the darkest of hu¬ man hearts. This alone know—1 darti do every thing : and 1 viill possess her. See, she appears—that form of majesty— that brow of refulgent brightness. The very air 1 breathe speaks to me of her charms. What matters it to me, whilst 1 gaze entranced upou her, if the earth shake to its foundations, and rivers of blood were streaming around mel — Pity me, Gondimar.—Pardon me.—■Fare¬ well!" Hurried on by mad passion, Viviani, vvho constantly visited Lady Margaret, was novv upon the eve of fulfilling Iter wishes. Yet once, in the hope of dis¬ suading his savage mistress from her bloody purpose, he placed the infant in her arms, and bade her take pity on its
helpless innocence. " See thy own— thy brother's image in those eyes—that smile," he whispered ; " ah ! can you have the heart ?" But Lady Margaret turned from the child in haughty dis¬ pleasure, thrusting it from her as if afraid to look on it ; and, for many days, would not vouchsafe to speak to the weak in¬ strument of her criminal ambition, Yet he, even he, vvhose life had been one continued course of profligacy, vvho had misused his superior talents to the per¬ version of the innocence of others, and the gratification of his own ungoverned passions, shuddered at the thought of the fearful crime which he had engaged himself to commit! His knowledge of human nature, and particuiariy of the worst part of it, was too profound to depend upon any per¬ sonal or immediate aid from Lady Mar¬ garet : he, therefore, conceived a project which, by any one but himself, would, in every view of it, have been considered
as altogether desperate and impracticable. It was, however, a maxim witli Viviani, which his practice and experience had justified, that nothing is impossible to a firmly united league of time, money, and resolution. Alone, he could have ac¬ complished nothing ; but he had a sa¬ tellite long trained in his service, who possessed every quality vvhich fitted him to assist tbe designs of such a master. The name of this man was La Crusca. In spite of a seeming wish to conceal himself, in conformity, perhaps, with his master's designs, this man was known at the castle to be a servant to the Count, and, by his flattery and the versatility of his genius, had become familiar with a few of its inhabitants; but shortly after his arrival, he had been dismissed, and it was now three months and more since his departure. One evening, according to custom, Viviani having secretly entered the castle, sought Lady Margaret in her own apart-
ment; his face vvas fearfully pale; his hand trembled : he approached her, and wliispered vows of ardour and tenderness in the ears ofhis mistress, and urged his suit with every argument he could de¬ viselo overcome her remaining scruples. But when he had looked, in expectation ot a favourable answer, he sprung back with terror from her ; for it seemed as if the fiends of hell were struggling in her tyc4 and hps for looks and words with which to express their horrid desire, al¬ ready, without the aid of words, but too sufficiently manifest ! At length, break¬ ing silence, and rising in scorn from her scat: " Have I not promised myself to you?" she whispered indignantly, "that you thus persecute me for the perform¬ ance ofa voluntary vow ? Do you think your protestations can move, and your arguments persuade? Am I a timid girl, vvho turns from your suit bashful and alarmed? Or am I one grown old in crime, and utterly insensible to its ecu-
sequence?—Nothing, you well know, can make me yours but my ovvn free will ; and never shall that will consign me to such fate, till the *icktv weed i* destroyed, and the fair and flourishing plant restored to its wonted vigour and due honors. " Lady, the dec J ь already done ! This night,'* said the Italian, trembliníľ in every limb, "yes, on th*s fearful nigiu, I claim the performance of thy vow !" He spoke with an emotion she could not mistake.— "Isıt possible?'' *hc said, " mv beautiful, mv beloved friend :" and his hand trembled as ht gave ii her, in token oí hi«s assent,— Fen'·ng to utter another word, dreading even the sound of tlieir ovvn voices, after such a disclosure, shr soon retired. Was it to rest that Lady Alargarei re¬ tired ?—No—to the tortures of suspense, of dread,ofagony unutterable. A thousand times she started from her bed :■— she fancied that voices approached the door — that shrieks rent the air ; and, if she elosed her eves, visions ot murder floated
betore her distracted mind, and pictured dreams too horrible for words. Haif suf¬ focated by the fever and delirium of her troubled imagination, she threw up the sash of her window, and listened at¬ tentively to every distant sound. The moon had risen in silvery brightness ; и lighted, with its beams, the deep clear waters of Elle. The wind blew loud at times, and sounded mourn¬ fully, as it swept through the whis¬ pering branches of the pines, over the dark forest and distant moors. A light appeared for one moment, near the wood, and then was lost. Lady Margaret, as if palsied by terror, remained fixed and breathless on the spot ;— a stef) approach¬ ed ttie door ;—it was the step of one stealing along, as if anxious no one should hear it pass. Again, all was si¬ lent :—so silent, that the grave itself had not been more tranquil, and the dead could not have looked more pale, more calm, more still, than Lady Margaret ! But how was that silence broken? and
how that calm disturbed ?—By the shrieks of an agonized parent—by the burning tears of a heart-broken father—by the loud unrestrained clamours of the me¬ nial train ; and that proud mansion, so lately the seat of gaiety, vvhose lighted porches and festive halls had echoed to the song of joy and revelry, presented now a scene of lamentation, terror, and despair.,..The heir of Altamonte was dead—-the hope so fondly cherished was cut off—the idol, upon whose existence so manv hearts were fixed, lav in his gilded cradle and costiy attire, affording a lesson impressive, although every day repeated, yet unheeded, although impres¬ sive—that it is the nature of man to rest his most s inguine expectations upon the most frail and uncertain of ail his possessions. The women who had been employed to attend upon him vvere weeping around him. His nurse alone appeared utterly insensible to his fate—her eves vvere
fixed— her lips motionless—she obeyed- every command that was given ; but, when left to herself, she contmued in the same sullen mood. Some called her hard and unfeeling, as in loud accents thev bewailed the dire calamitv that had fallen on their master's house; but there were, others who knew that this apparent insensibility was the effect of a deeper feeling—ofa heart that could not recover its loss—ofa mind tnţallv overthrown. She had arisen - ;at morning at her ac¬ customed hcur, to take to her breast t ле little infant vvho slept in the cradle beside her. But lifeless was that form vvhich, a few hours before, she had laid on its pillow, in the full enjoyment of health. Spasms, it was supposed, had seized the child in his sleep ; for his face was black and dreadfu 11 v disfigured. All efforts to recover him were fruitless. Physician nor medicine could avail—the hand of dealh had struck the flower—the vital spark was extinguished.
It was in vain that a distracted mother, pressing his cold lips to hers, declared, in the íLonv oŕho,»e, that thev std! retained a living warmth.-—It was in vam that «die watched him till her eves, deceived, fan- eied they savv a change imperceptible to others—a breath of life restored to that lifeless breathless form. It was in vain : —and floods of grief, with the sad rites ofa pompous funeral, were all which the afflicted Duke and his sorrowing familv had to bestow. The tenan ts and peasantry were, accord¬ ing to ancient custom, admitted to sing the song of sorrow over the bodv of the child: but no hired mourners were re¬ quired on this occasion ; for the hearts of all deeply shared in the affliction of their master's house, and wept, in bitter woe, the untimely loss of their infant Lord.— it was thus thev sung, ever repeating the same monotonous and melancholv strain.
Oh loudly sing the Pillalu, And many a tear of sorrow shed ; O^h ôrro, orro, Olat* ; Mourn, for the master's child is dead. At mom, along the eastern sky, We marked an owl, vmh heavy wing 1 ; At eve, we beard the beashees cry ; And «ow the song of death we sing ; Ock orro, urro, Otalu. Ah ! wherefore, wherefore would ye die ; Why would ye leave your parents dear: Why leave your sorrowing kinsmen here, Nor listen to your people's cry î How will thy mother bear to part Wiih one so tender, fair, and sweet ! Tbou wast the jewel of her heait, The puise, the life that made it beat. How sad it is to leave Uer bov, * That tender flow Ve t aii alone : To see no more his face of joy, And soothe no more his infant moan ï But see along tbe mountain's side, And by the pleasant banks of Laru^y, Straight o'er the plai us, and woodlands wide, By Casti« Ига«, and Lock Macharne? :
:?tL how the sorrowing neighbours throng, With haggard looks and laulttitog' breath ; And as they slowly wind along» They sing the mournful sou¿ of death О loudly 5>mg the Pillata» And many a tear of sorrow shed ; Och orro, оггд) Oiuiu $ Mourn, for the master's child is dead. Thus singing, they approached the castle, and thus, amidst cries and lamen¬ tations, was Sidney Albert, Marquis of Delaval, borne for ever from its gates, and entombed with his ancestors in the vault of the ancient church, vvhich, foe manv hundred vears, had received be- neath its pavement the successive genera¬ tions of the family of Altamonte. Heart¬ felt tears, more honourable to the dead than all the grandeur vvhich his rank de¬ manded, were shed over his unttmelv grave; while a long mourning and entire seclusion from the world, proved that the sorrow thus felt was not momentary, but lasting as the cause which had occasioned it was great. vol. i. D
CHAPTER VL As sickness falls heaviest on those who are in the full enjoyment of health, so grief is most severe, when it comes unex¬ pectedly, in the midst of happiness.—It was from this cause, that the Duke, more than any one in his family, gave vent to the sorrows of his heart ; and murmured at the irrecoverable loss, by vvhich he had been afflicted. The Duch¬ ess in vain attempted to share and lessen the regret of her husband :—he had that haughtiness of mind vvhich disdains all confidence, and flies from all consolation. But cf her far keener suffering, for the loss she had sustained, little shew was made ; for real miserv delights not in reproaches and complaints. It is like charity and love—silent, long suflering, and mild.
There are virtues vvhich admit of no description—vvhich inspire on the first mention of them but little interest. Great faults, and heroic qualities, may be pour¬ trayed ; but those milder merits, vvhich contribute so much to the comfort and happiness oflife—that sweetness of dis¬ position, to vvhich every hour that passes by bears an approving testimony, can be only felt, enjoyed, and regretted. Bene¬ volence that never fails, patience under the heaviest calamities, firmness in friend¬ ship, under everv trvine change—these l * » ν, CT are among its characteristic features: and these were alt possessed by the Duchess of Altamonte. who seemed to live for no other purpose than to endear herself to those who surrounded her. With this consideration for others, and forgetfulness of self, she had apparently endured the loss of her son with greater fortitude, than had been expected : in¬ deed she sustained it vvith a decree of firmness vvhich religion alone could have d 2
inspired: she murmured not; but sub¬ mitted to the trial with the meek spirit of pious resignation,—" My dear, dear boy, my pretty Albert" vvould sometimes escape her, and a iew tears would wait upon the exclamation ; but her whole study was to lighten the sorrows of her husband ; as well as to check the intem¬ perate complaints, and soothe the more violent agitations of Lady Margaret, But while her soul rose superior to the ills of life, her constitution, weakened by a long period of ill health, and by the agitations of extreme sensibility, was uot in a state to resist so ereat a shock ; and though she lingered upwards of a year, the real cause of her death could not be mistaken: — an inward melancholy preyed upon hf г spirits, vvhich she com¬ bated in vain.—** Many" have smiled in adversity," she vvould say; "butit is left for me to weep in prosperity.—Such is the will of Heaven, and I resign mvself as becomes me, to that power, vvhich
knows when to give, and when to take awav." On her death-bed. she said to the Duke ; " This is a hard trial for you to bear: but God, who, when he sends trials. can send strength also, will, 1 trust, sup¬ port you. You wiU pursue your career vvith that honour and dignity, which has hitherto distinguished it—nor would mv feeble aid assist you in it. But I. on the contrary, like a weak unsupported plant, must have drooped and pined away, had I lived to survive the tender and faithful friend, vvho has e u ided and sust lined me. It is far better as it is. You will be a guardian and protector to my Calan¬ tha, whose quickness and vivacity make me tremble for her. I could not have watched over her, and directed her ns I ought. But to vou, while she smiles and plays around you, and fills the space which 1 so soon must leave—to you. she will prove a dear and constant interest. Never, mv dearest Altamente, ah î never
suflet lier to be absent, if possible, from your guidmg care, her spirits, her pas¬ sions, arc ofa nature to prove a blessing, or the reverse, accordi nj to the direction rhey arc 'lerinitted to take. Watch over and preserve her—these are my last words to you.—IV protect and save her from all evil—is also tlte last prayer I offer to my G od, before I enter into his presence." Calahth., I unhoppy child, whom not cvtn the panas of death could tear from г о the love, and remembrance of thy mother, —what hours ofagony vvere thine, when a father's hand first tore thee from that lifeless bosom—when piercing shrieks declared the terror of thy mind, oppress¬ ed, astonished at the first calamitv, bv vvhich it had been tried—when thy lips tremblingly pronounced for the last time, the name of mother—a name so dear, so sacred and beloved, that its very sound awakens in the heart, all that it can feel of tenderness and aflection ! YV^bat is left that shall replace her ? What friend, what
tie, shall make up for her eternal absence ? What even are the present sufferings of the orphan child, to the dreary void, the irreparable loss she will feel through all her future vears. It was on that bosom, she had sought for comfort, when pas¬ sion and inadvertence had led her into error. It was that gentle, that dear voice, vvhich had recalled her, even when severity had failed.—There is, in every r breast, some one affection that predo¬ minates over the rest—there is still to all some one object, to which the heart is rivetted beyond all other :— in Calantha's bosom, the love of her mother prevailed over every other feeling, A long and violent illness succeeded, in Calantha ; a torpor which astonish¬ ment and terror at her loss had produced ; and from this state, she recovered only to give way to a dejection of mind not less alarming. But even her grief was to be envied, when compared with the disorder of Lady Margaret's mind, — Remorse
preyed upon her heart, the pride and hardness of vvhich. disdained the humili¬ ty of acknowledging Uer о fft nees in the presence of her Creator. The great eflort of Lady Margaret was to crush the struggles of passion : and when, at times, the agony ofher mind was bevond endurance, she found it some relief to upbraid the wretch who had hú* filled her ovvn guiltv wishes.— u Mon- ster !" she would exclaim, t4 vvithout one tender or honourable feeling, take these detested and bloody hands from my sight: —thev have destroved the loveliest inno- cent that was ever born to bless a mo¬ ther's wishes :—that mother now appears in awful judgment against thee :—out, out, perfidious wretch !—come not near —ga2e not upon me."— Viviani marked the wild expression ofher eye—the look of horror w bĺch she cast upon him ; and a deep and lasting resentment combated in his breast every feeling of attachment. Prizing her hand, which he wrung in
scorn : " What mean vou bv this mockers of tardy penitence:" he fiercely cried. " Woman, beware how vou trifle with tiie deep pangs of an injured heart : Not upon me—not upon me, be the blood of the innocent :—it was this hand, white nnd spotless as it appears, vvhich sealed his doom, I should have shewn mercy; but an unrelenting tygress urged me on. —On thee—on thine, be the guilt, till it harrow up thy soul to acts of phrenzy and despair :—hope not for pardon from man —seek not for mercy from God.—Away vvith those proud looks which once sub¬ dued me :—I can hate—I have learned of thee to bate ; and m v heart, released from thy bonds, is free at last. Spurn me— what art thou now Ì —a creature so wretch¬ ed and so fallen, that 1 can almost pity thee,—Farewell.—For the bst time, 1 lookon thee with one sentiment of love,— And, when we meet again, tremble;— yes—proud as thou art, tremble ; for, however protracted, thou shalt find the D ά
vengeance of Viviani as certain as it is terrible, " Is it possible," said Lady Margaret, gazing upon that beautiful and youthful countenance — upon that form vvhich scarcely had attained to manhood^—" is it within the compass of possibility that one so voting should be so utteriv hard- ened? Viviani smiled on her, and left her. Very shortly after this interview, he quitted Ireland, vainly endeavouring in the hour ofhis departure to conceal the deep emotion by which he was agitated at thus tearing himselt frora one who appeared utterly indifferent to his ha¬ tred, his menaces, or his love.
CHAPTER VII.
The habit of years, though broken and interrupted by violent affliction or sudden prosperity, fails not in the end toréenme its influence over the mind ; and the course that was once pursued with satis¬ faction, though the tempest of our pas¬ sions may have hurried us out of it. will be a^ain resumed, when the dark clouds that gathered over us, have spent their fury. Even he vvho is too proud to bow his mind to the inevitable decrees of an all- wise Creator—vvho seeks not to be con¬ soled, and turns away from the voice of piety—-even he loses sight at length of the affliction, upon vvhich his memory has so continually dwelt :—it lessens to his view, os he journies onward adown the vale of lite, and the bright beam of
hope rises at last upon his clouded spint and exhausted frame. From a state of despondency and vain regret, in vvhicli more than a vear md been passed, the inhabitants of Castle Délavai, by slow degrees, revived; and the Duke, wearied ofa life so gloomvand solitary, summoned, as before, his friends sround him. Lady Margaret, however, was no longer the gay companion of liis morning walks, the life and amusement ofhis evening; assemblies. The absence of Viviani filled her with anxietv ; and the remembrance of her crimes embitter¬ ed every hour of her existence. If she turned her eyes upon Calantha, the de¬ jected expression of that countenance reproached her for the mother vvhose Ше she had shortened, and whose place she vainly v xerted iierself to fill : if upon the Duke, in that care-worn cheek and brow of discontent, she was more painfully re¬ minded ofher crime and ingratitude ; and even the son for whom so much had been Sacrificed, afforded her no consolation.
Buchanan estranged himseif from her confidence, and appeared jealous of her •uithority,—He refused to aid her in the sole remaining vvish of her heart ; and absolutely declined accepting tiie hand of Calantha. ** Shall only one will/* he said, 4 * be studied and followed : shall Calantha's caprices and desires be daily attended to ; and shall I see the best years of my life pass without plea¬ sure or profit for me ? I know—I see your intention ; and, pardon rae. dearest mother, if 1 already bitterly lament it. Is Calantha a companion fitted for one of my character ; and, even if here¬ after it is vour resolve to unite me to her, must I novv be condemned to л ears of inactivity on her account. Give me mv libertv ; send me to college, there to finish my education ; aud permit me to remain in England for some vears. Lady Margaret saw, in the cool deter¬ mined language of her son, that he had long meditated this escape from her thral-
dom. She immediately appeared to ap¬ prove his intention :—she said that a noble ambition, and all the highest qua¬ lities ofthe heart and mind were shewn in his present desire ; but one promise she must exact in return for the readi¬ ness vvith vvhich she intended instantly to accede to his request ;—provided he were left at liberty till a maturer age, would he promise to take no decisive step of himself, until he had once more seen Calantha after this separation? To this Buchanan willingly acceded. Ilis plans were soon arranged ; and his departure was fixed for no very distant period. The morning before he left the castle, Lady Margaret called him to her room ; and taking him and Calantha by the hand, she led them to the windows of the great gallery. Thence pointing to the vast prospect of woods and hills, vvhich extended to a distance the eye couid scarcely ieach, " all are yours my chil¬ dren," she said, " if, obedient to parents
who have only your welfare at heart, you persevere in your intention of being one day united to each other. Ah ! let no dis¬ putes, no absence, no fancies have power to divert you from the fulfilment of thb, my hearťs most fervent wish :—let this moment of parting obliterate every un¬ kind feeling, and bind you more than ever to each other. Here, Buchanan," she continued, iC is a bracelet with your hair:—place ityourselfaround Calantha's arm :—she shall wear it till you meet." The bracelet was of gold, adorned with diamonds, and upon the clasp, under the initial letters of their names, were en¬ graved these words : u Stesso sangue, Stessa sorte" " Take it," said Bucha¬ nan, fastening it upon the arm of Calan¬ tha, and remember that, for my sake, you are to wear it ever." At this moment, even he was touched, as he pressed her to his heart, and re¬ membered her as associated with all the scenes of his happ : °st days. Her vio-
lence, her caprices, her mad frolics» were forgotten ; and as her tears streamed upon his bosom, he turned away, least liis mother should witness his emotion. Yet Calantha's tears were occasioned solely by the thought of parting from one, who had hitherto dwelt ahvays be¬ neath the same roof with hen ; and to whom long habit had accustomed, rather than attached, her,—In youth the mind is so tender, and so alive to sudden and vivid impressions, that in the moment of separation it feels regret and melancholy at estransdnsf itself even from those for whom before it had never felt any warmth of affection.— Stillat the earliest age the difference is distinctly marked between the transient tear, wdiich falls for imagi¬ nary woe, and the real misery vvhich at¬ tends upon the loss oť those vvho have been closelv united to the affections bv ties, stronger and dearer than those of habit.
CHAPTER VIII. The accomplishment of her tavouMe views being thus disappointed, or at kast deferred, Lady Margaret resolved то return to Italv, ami there to stek λ ι- viani. Her brother, hov ever, entreated her to remain with him. lie inv,t*d hts friends, his relations, his neighbours. Bails and festivities once more enbvemd the castle : it seemed his desire to ra.-t everv trace of sorrow from tiic numorv of his chdd ; and to conceal the ravages of deuh under tiie appearance at lea^t t»: wild and unceasing gaiety. Til· briiìiaLt fîtes* and tl^e magnificence oı tiıe Düke of Altamonte and his sister, became tlie constant theme of admiration ; Mid from far, froin ne tr, Lismou an J foily poured forth their victims to giace and lo en¬ joy them : Lord and Lady Dartfod n.i-
turally found tbeir place amidst the va¬ rious and general assemblage. To see Lord Dartford again, to triumph over his falsehood, to win him from an innocent confiding wife, and then betray him at the moment in vvhich he fancied himself secure—this vengeance was yet wanting to sitisfv the restless fever of Lady Mar¬ garet's mind ; and the contemplation of its accomplishment gave a new object, a new hope to her existence ; for Lady Margarel had preferred even the tortures of remorse to the listless insipidity of stag¬ nant life, vvhere the passions of her heart were without excitement, and those ta¬ lents of which she telt the power, useless атк* obscured. What indeed would she not have preferred to the society of Mrs. Seymour and her daughters? The Duchess of Altamonte had pos¬ sessed a mind, as cultivated as her own, and a certain refinement of manner vvhicli is sometimes acquired by long intercourse with the most polished societies, but is
more frequently the gift of nature, and, ifit be not the constant attendant upon nobilitv of blood, is very rare! ν found in those vvho are not distinguished by that adventitious and accidental circumstance. Mrs, Seymour had many ofthe excel¬ lent qualities, but none of the rare en¬ dowments possessed by the Duchess : she was a strict follower of the paths of custom and authority : in the steps which had been marked by others, she studiously walked, nor thought it allow¬ able to turn aside for any object however desirable. She might be said to delight in prejudice—to enjoy herself in the ob¬ scure and narrow prison to vvhich she had voluntarilv confined her intellects— to look upon the impenetrable walls around her as bulwarks against the hos¬ tile attacks bv which so many had b^en overcome. She was a Roman Catholic, and all vvho differed from that persuasion were, in her opinion, utterly lost. The daughters were strictly trained in the
opinions of their mother. S1 Tiie season of youth*' she would say, is th·* season of instruction ;"—and consequently every hour hod its allotted task ; and every ac¬ tion was directed according to some es¬ tablished regulation. By these means, Sophia and Frances vvere already highly accomplished ; their manners vvere formed ; their opinions fixed, and any contradiction of those opinious, instead of raising doubt, or ur¬ ging to inquiry, only excited in their minds astonishment at the hardihood and contempt for the folly vvhich thus oppo¬ sed itself to tbe final determination of the majority, and ventured to disturb the settled empire and hereditary right of their sentiments and manners.—" These are 1/очг pupils," Lady Margaret would often exultingly cry, addressing the mild Mrs. Seymour: " these paragons of pro¬ priety—these sober minded steady auto¬ matons. Well, I mean no harm to them ov vou, 1 onlv vvish 1 could shake Ы\
a little of that cold formality vvhich pe¬ trifies me. Novv see how differently my Calantha shall appear, when I have opened her mind, and formed her accord¬ ing to my system of education—the sys¬ tem which nature dictates and every feeling ofthe heart willingly accedes to. Observe well the difference between a child of an acute understanding, before her mind has been disturbed by the ab¬ surd opinions of others, and after she has learned their hackneyed jargon : note her answers—her reflections ; and you will find in them, all that philosophy can teach, and all to which science and wis¬ dom must again return. But, in your girls and in most of those whom vve meet, hovv narrow are the views, hovv little the motives, by which they are impelled ! Even granting that they act rightly, that by blindly following, vvhere others lead, they pursue the safest course, is there any thing noble, any thing superior in the character from which such actions
spring ? ƒ am ambitious for Calantha. 1 wish her not only to be virtuous ; I will acknowledge it—I wish her to be distinguished and great. Mrs. Seymour, when thus attacked, alwavs permitted Ladv Margaret to eai n the victory of words, and to triumph over her as much as the former thought it within the bounds of good breeding to allow herself; but she never varied, in consequence,one step in her daily course, or deviated in the slightest degree from the line of conduct which she had before laid down. Sometimes, however, she would re¬ monstrate vvitli her niece, when she savv her living wav to the violence of her J CJ V temper, or acting, as she thought, ab¬ surdly or erroneously ; and Calantha, when thus admonished, would acknow¬ ledge her errors, and, for a time at least, endeavour to amend them ; for her heart was accessible to kindness, and kindness she at all times met vvith from Mrs. Sey¬ mour and her daughters.
It was indeed Calantha's misfortune to meet with too much kindness, or rather too much indulgence from almost all vvho surrounded her. The Duke, attentive solely to her health, watched her with the fondest solicitude, and the wildest wishes her fancy could invent were heard vvith the most scrupulous attention, and gratified with the most unbounded compliance. Yet, if affection, amount¬ ing to idolatry, could in any degree atone for the pain the errors of his child too often occasioned him, that affection was felt by Calantha for her father. Her feelings indeed swelled vvith a tide too powerful for the unequal resis¬ tance ofher understanding :—her motives appeared the very best, but the actions which resulted from them were absurd and exaggerated. Thoughts, swift as lightning, hurried through her brain :— projects, seducing, but visionary crowded upon her view : without a curb she fol¬ lowed the impulse of her feelings ; and
those feelings varied with every vary mg interest and impression, Such character is not uncommon, though rarely seeu amongst the higher ranks of society. Early and constant intercourse vvith the world, and that po¬ lished sameness vvhich results from it, smooths away all peculiarities ; and whilst it assimilates individuals to each other, corrects many faults, and represses manv virtues. Some indeed there are who affect to differ from others: but the verv affecta- tion proves that, in fact, they resemble the ordinary mass ; and in general this assumption of singularity is found in low and common minds, who think that the reputation of talent ancl superiority be¬ longs to those very defects and absurdi¬ ties vvhich alone have too often cast a shade upon the splendid light of genius, and degraded the hero and the poet, to the level of their imitators. Lovely indeed is that grace of manner,
that perfect ease and refinement which so many attempt to acquire, and for whicii it is to be feared so much îs too often renounced—the native vigour of mind, the blush of indignant and offended in¬ tegrity, the open candour of truth, and all the long list of modest unassuming virtues, known onlv to a new and unsul- lied heart. Calantha turned with disgust from the slavish followers of prejudice. She dis¬ dained the beaten track, and she thought that vďtue would be for her a safe, a sufficient guide; that noble views, and pure intentions would conduct her in a higher sphere ; and that it was left to her to set a bright example of unshaken rectitude, undoubted truth, and honour¬ able fame. AH that was base or mean, she, from her soul, despised : a fearless spirit raised her, as she fondly imagined, above the vulgar herd: self-confident, she scarcelv deigned to bow the knee before her God : and man, as she had VOL. i. E
re vid of him in history, appeared too weak, too trivial, to inspire either alarm or admiration. It was thus, with bright prospects, strong love of virtue, high ideas of ho¬ nour, that she entered upon hfe. No expense, no trouble had been spared in her education: masters, professors, and governesses surrounded her. She seemed to have a decided turn for every thing it was necessarv for her to learn : instruc- tion was scarcelv necessarv, so readiiv did her nature bend itself to every att, science and accomplishment. Y"et never did she attain excellence, or make pro¬ ficiency in anv ; and when the vanitv of a parait fondly expected to see her а proficient in ail acquirements suited to her sex and age, he had the mortification of fuming her more than usually ignorant, backward and uninstructcd. With an ear the most sensible and accurate, she could neither dance nor play ; with an eye acute and exact, she could not draw ; at
the same time, with a spirit that bounded within her from excess oi joyous happi¬ ness, she was bashful and unsocial in societv ; and vvith the cernis ot everv vir- tue that commands esteem and praise, she was alreadv the theme of discussion, observation and censure. Yet was Calantha loved—dearlv end fondly loved ; nor could Mrs. Seymour, though constantly discovering new errors in her favourite, pi even t her from being the very idol of her heart. CalaLth.i savv it through all her assumed coidhess ; and she triumphed in the influence she possessed. But Sophia and Frances were not as cordially her friends :—they hid not reached that age, at w f hich lenity and indulgence take place of severer feelings, and the world appears in all its redity before us. To them, the follies tid frail¬ ties of others carried with them no ex¬ cuse, and everv course which they thv-m- kr -»г selves did not adopt, was assuredly er¬ roneous, e e
Calantha passed her time as much as possible by herself: the general society at the castle was uninteresting to her. The only being for whom she felt regard, was Sir Everard St. Clare, brother to Ca- mioli the bard, and late physician to her mother, and he was the usual object of ridicule to almost all his acquaintance. Lady St. Clare in pearls and silver; Lau- riana and Jessica, more fine if possible, and more absurd than their mother; Mrs. Emmet, a lady from Cork, plaintive and reclining in white sattin and drapery; and all the young gentlemen of large pro¬ perty and fortune, whom all the young ladies were daily and hourly endeavour¬ ing to please, had no attraction foca mind like Calantha's. Coldly she therefore withdrew from the amusements natural to her age ; yet it was from embarrass¬ ment, and not from coldness, that she avoided their society. Some favorites she already had : the Abbess of Glenaa, St. Clara her niece, and above all Alice
Mac Allain, a beautiful little girl of vvhom her mother had been fond :— these had already deeply interested her affections. In the company of one or other of these, Calantha would pass her morn¬ ings ; and sometimes she would stand alone upon the summit ofthe cliff, hour after hour, to behold the immense ocean, watching its waves, as they swelled to the size of mountains, and dashed vvith impetuous force against the rocks below : or she would climb the mountain's side, and gaze on the lofty summits of Here¬ mon and Inis Tara, lost in idle and vi¬ sionary thought. At other times joyous, and vvithout fear, like a fairy riding on a sun-beam through the air, chasing the gay images of fancy, she would join in every active amusement, and suffer her spirits to lead her into tlie most extra¬ vagant excess.
CHAPijûd Χ. Loye, it might be conjectured, would early shew itself in a character such as Calantha's ; and love, with all its ardour and all its wildness had already subdued her heart. What, though Mrs. Seymour had laid it down as a maxim, that no one, before attaining their fourteenth year, could possibly be in love ï What, though Lady Margaret indignantly as¬ serted, that Calantha could not, ancl should not, look even at any other than him for whom her hand was destined ! She had looked ; she had seen ; and what is more, she believed the impression at this time made upon her heart was as durable as itwas violent. Sophia Seymour, Airs. Seymour's eldest daughter, in a month, nay in a week, had discovered Calantha's secret :
the same feeling for the same object had given her an acuteness in this instance, with which she was not at all times gifted :—she herself loved, and, therefore, perceived her cousin's passion. Calan¬ tha's manner immediately confirmed her in her supposition. She entered one morning into her room :—she saw the unfinished drawing;—she could not mis¬ take it — that commanding air—that beaming eye—there was but one whom it could resemble, and that one was Henry Mowbrey, Earl of Avondale. She taxed Calantha with her partiality: "But he thinks uot of you," she said, and haughtily left the room. Admiral Sir Richard Mowbrey was an old and valued friend of the Duke of Al¬ tamonte. iie had served with Sir George Buchanan, brother-in-law to Lady Mar¬ garet. He had no children; but his ne¬ phew, the young Earl of Avoudale was, next to his country, the strongest and dearest interest of his heart. What happi-
nes must the Admiral then have felt when he beheld him; and found that, in mind лпа person, he was distinguished by every fair endowment. Lord Avon- dale had entered the armv vounir: he fc % V. now commanded a regiment : with a spirit natural to his age and character, he had embraced his father's profession ; and like him, he had early merited the honours conferred upon him. He had sought distinction at the hazard of his life ; but happily for all who knew him well, he had not, like his gallant father, perished in the hour of danger; but, having seen hard service, had returned to enjoy, in his own country, the ease, the happiness, and the reputation he so well deserved. ^Lord Avondale's military occupations had not, however, prevented bis cultivat¬ ing his mind and talents in no ordinarv degree; and the real distinctions he had obtained, seemed by no means to have lessened the natural modesty of his cha-
racter. Hewas admired, flattered, sought after; and the strong temptations to which his youth had thus early been ex¬ posed, had, in some теазиге, shaken his principles, and inflamed his imagination. Happily a noble mind and a warm un¬ corrupted heart soon led him from scenes of profligacy to a course of life more manly and useful :—deep anxiety for a bleeding country, and affection for his uncle, restored him to himself. He quit¬ ted London, where, upon his first return from abroad, he had for the most part re¬ sided, and his regiment being ordered to Ireland, on account of the growing dis¬ affection in that country, he returned thither to fulfil the new duties w hich his profession might require. Allanwater and Monteith, his father's estates, had en settled upon him : but he was more uian liberal in the arrangements he made for his uncle and the other branches of his family. Many an humbler mind had escaped e 5
the danger to which Lord Avondale had, early in life been exposed :—many a less op n character had disguised the too dar¬ ing opinions he had once ventured to cht'rish ! But, with an utter contempt for all hvpocrisy and art—with a frank¬ ness and simplicity of character, some¬ times observed in men of extraordinary abilities, but never attendant on the or¬ dinary or the corrupted mind, he appear¬ ed to the world as he really felt, and neither thought nor studied whether such opinions and character were agreeable to his ovvn vanity, or the taste of his com¬ panions ; for whom, however, he was* at all times, ready to sacrifice his time, his money, and all on earth but his honour and integrity. Such was the character of Lord Avon- dale, imperfectly sketched—but true to nature.—He, in his twenty-first year, now appeared at Castle Delaval —the admiration of the large and various com¬ pany then assembled there. Flattered,
perhaps, by the interest shewn him, but reserved and distant to every too appa¬ rent mark of it, he viewed the motley groupe before him, as from a superior height; and he smiled with something of disdain, at times, as he marked the affectation, the meanness, the conceit, and, most of all, the heartlessness, and cowardice of many of those around him. Of a morning, he vvould not unfrequently join Calantha and Sophia in their walks ; and of an evening, he would read to the former, or make her his partner at bil¬ liards, or at cards. At such times, So¬ phia would work at a little distance ; and as her needle monotonously passed the silken thread through the frame to vvhich her embroidery was fixed, her eyes vvould involuntarilv turn whither her thoughts, *** О ' in spite of her endeavours, too often strayed. Calantha listened to the oft- repeated stones of the admiral ; and heard ofhis battles, his escapes and his dangers, when others were weary of the
well-known topics; but he was Lord Avondale's uncle, and that thought made every thing he uttered interesting to her. " Y"ou love," said Alice Mac Allain one day to her mistress, as they wandered in silence along the banks of the riv τ Elle ; " and he who made you alone can tell to what these maddening fires may drive a heart like yours. Remember your bracelet — remember your promises to Buchanan ; and learn, before it is too late, in some measure to control your¬ self, and disguise your feelings." Ca¬ lantha started from Alice ; for love, when it first exists, is so timid, so sacred, that it fears the least breath of observation, and disguises itself under every borrowed name, " You are wrong," said Calan¬ tha : u I would not bend my free spirit to tbe weakness of w hich you would ac¬ cus, ше, for all the world can offer: your Cdantha will never acknowledge a mas¬ ter ;~will in v er v idd her soul's free and immortal hopes to any earthly affection.
Fear not, my counsellor, that I vviil for¬ sake my virgin vows, or bow my un¬ broken spirit to that stern despot, vvhose only object is power and command. As Calantha spoke, Lord Avondale approached, and joined them. The deep blush that crimsoned over her cheek was a truer answer to her friend's accusation than the one she had just uttered,— u Heremon and Inis Tara have charms for both of you," he said, smiling:—you are always wandering either to or from them." " They are our ovvn native mountains," said Calantha, timidly;—- ;t the land-marks we have been taught to reverence from our earliest youth," " And could you not admire the black mountains of Morne as well," he said, fixing his eyes on Calantha,—" my na¬ tive mountains?—They are higher far than these, and soar above the clouds that would obscure them." They are too lofty and too rugged for such as we are," said Calantha. " We may gaze at
their height and wonder; but more vvould be dangerous." " The roses and myrtles blossom under their shade," said Lord Avondale with a smile ; " and Al¬ lanwater, to my mind, is as pleasant to dwell in as Castle Delaval." " Shall you soon return thither, my lord ?" en¬ quired Calantha. " Perhaps never," he said, mournfully; and a tear filled his eye as he turned away, and sought to change the subject of conversation. Lady Margaret had spoken to Lord Avondale :—perhaps another had engag¬ ed his affections :—at all events, it seem¬ ed certain to Calantha that she was not the object of his hope or his grief. To have seen him—to have admired him, was enough for her: she wished not for more than that privilege; but she felt that every affection of her heart was en¬ gaged, even though those affections were unreturned.
CHAPTER XI.
To suffer the pangs of unrequited love was not, however in the present instance, the destiny of Calantha. That dark eye, the lustre of whose gaze she durst not meet, was, at all times fixed upon her ; and the quick mantling blush and beam¬ ing smile, which lighted the counte¬ nance of Lord Avondale, whenever her name was pronounced before him, soon betrayed, to all but himself and Calantha, how much and hovv entirely his affec¬ tions were engaged. He was of a na¬ ture not easily to be flattered into admi¬ ration of others—not readily attracted, or lightly won ; but, once having fixed his affections, hewas firm, confiding and incapable of change, through any change of fortune. He was, besides, of that af¬ fectionate and independent character,
that as neither bribe nor power could have moved him to one act contrary to his principles of integrity, so neither danger, fatigue, nor any personal con¬ sideration could have deterred him from that which he considered as the business and duty of his life. He possessed a happy and cheerful disposition, a frank and winning manner, and that hilarity of heart and countenance which rendered him the charm and sunshine of every society. When Lord Avondale addressed Ca¬ lantha, she answered him in a cold or sullen manner, and, if he endeavoured to approach her, she fled unconscious ofthe feeling which occasioned her em¬ barrassment. Her cousins, Sophia and Frances, secure of applause, s;nd con¬ scious of their own power of pleasing, had entered the world neither absurdly timid, nor vainly presuming: — they knew the place they were called upon to fill in society ; and they sought not to
outstep the bounds vvhich good sense had prescribed. Calantha, on the other hand, scarce could overcome her terror and confusion when addressed by those vvith vvhom she was little acquainted. But how far less dangerous was this reserve than the easy confidence vvhich a few short years afterwards produced ! and how little did the haughty Lady Marga¬ ret imagine, as she chid her niece for this excess of timidity, that the day would, perhaps, soon arrive, when careless of the presence of hundreds, Calantha might strive to attract their attention, by the very arts which she novv despised, or pass thoughtlessly along, hardened and utterly insensible to their censure or their praise ! To a lover's eves such timiditv was not unpleasing ; and Lord Avondale liked not the girl he admired the less, for that crimson blush—that timid look, which scarcely dared encounter his ardent gaze, To him it seemed to disclose a heart new
to the world-—unspoiled and guileless. Calantha's mind, bethought, might now receive the impression which should be given it; and while yet free, yet un¬ tainted, would it not be happiness to secure her as his own—to mould her according to his fancy—to be her guide and protector through life ! SLch were uis feelings, as he watched her shunning even the eyes ofhim, whom alone she wished to please :—such were his thoughts, when, flying from the amusements and gaiety natural to her age, she listened with attention, while he read to her, or conquered her fear of en¬ tering into conversation with him. He seemed to imagine her to be possessed of every quality which he most admired ; and tbe delusive cbarm of believing that he w as not indifferent to her heart, threw a beauty and grace over all her actions, which blinded him to every error. Thus then they both acknowledged, and sur¬ rendered themselves to the power of love.
Calantha for the first time yielded up her heart entirely to its enchantment ; and Lord Avondale, for the last. It is said there is no happiness, and no love to be compared to that which is felt for the first time. Most persons errone¬ ously think so ; but love, like other arts, requires experience, and terror and igno¬ rance, on its first approach, prevent our feeling it as strongly as at a later period. Passion mingles not vvith a sentiment so pure, so refined as that which Calantha then conceived, and the excess ofa lover's attachment terrified and overpowered the feelings of a child. Storms of fury kindled in the eye of Lady Margaret, when she first observed this mutual r gard. Words could not express her indignation ;—to deeds she had recourse. Absence was the only remedy to apply ; and an hour, a mo¬ ment's delay, by opening Calantha's mind to a consciousness of her lover's sentiments and wishes, might render
even this ineffectual. She saw that the flame had been kindled in a heart too sus¬ ceptible, and in which opposition would increase its force:—she upbraided her broth/ * for his blindness, and reproached herself for ner folly. There was but one way left y which was to communicate the Duke's surmises and intentions to the Admiral in terms so positive, that he could not mistake them, and instantly to send for Buchanan. In pursuance of this purpose, she wrote to inform him of every thing which had taken place, and to request him without loss of time to meet her at Castle Delaval, Mrs. Sevmour alone folded Calantha to her bo- som without one reproach, and, consign¬ ing her vvith trembling anxiety to a fa¬ ther's care, reminded him continually, that she was his only remaining child, and that force, in a circumstance of such moment, would be absolute cruelty.
CHAPTER ХИ.
Lady Margaret insisted upon removing Calantha immediately to London ; but Lord Avondale having heard from the Admiral the cause of her intended depar¬ ture, immediately declared his intention of quitting Ireland. Every thing was now in readiness for his departure ; the day fixed ; the hour at hand. It was not perhaps till Lord Avondale felt that he was going to leave Calantha for ever, that he was fully sensible how much, and hovv entirely his affections were en¬ gaged. On the morning previous to his depar¬ ture, Calantha threw the bracelet, which Lady Margaret and her cousin had given her, from her arm ; and, weeping upon the bosom of Alice, bitterly lamented her fate, and informed her friend that she
never, never would belong to Buchanan. —Lord Avondale had in vain sought an opportunity of seeing her one moment alone. He now perceived the bracelet on the floor of the room she had just quitted : and looking upon it, read, vvithout being able to comprehend the application of the inscription, " Stesso sangue, Stessa sorte" — He saw her at that moment:— she was alone :—he followed her :—-she fled from him, embarrassed and agitated ; but he soon approached her:—they fly so slowly, who fly from what they love. Lord Avondale thought he had much to say—many things to ask :—he wished to explain the feelings of his heart-^-to tell Calantha, once at least before he quitted her, how deeply—how dearly he had loved—how, though unworthy in his ovvn estimation of aspiring to her hand, the remembrance of her should stimulate him to every noble exertion, and raise him to a reputation which, without her influeace, he never could
attain :—he thought that he could have clasped her to his bosom, and pressed upon her lips the first kiss of Jove—the dearest, the truest pledge of fondness and devotion. But, scarcely able to speak, confused and faultering, he dared not approach her:—he saw one before him robed in purity, and more than ves¬ tal innocence — one timidly fearful of even a look, or thought, that breathed aught against that virtue which alone it worshipped. " 1 am come," he said, at length, " forgive my rashness, to restore this bracelet, and myself to place it around your arm. Permit me to say—farewell, before I leave you, perhaps for ever." As he spoke, he endeavoured to clasp the diamond lock ;— his hand trembled ; Calantha started from him. " Oh!" she said, cc you know not vvhat you do :—I am enough his already :—be not you the person to devote me to him more com¬ pletely:—do not render me utterly mi-
serable. Though not entirely under¬ standing her he scarcely could command himself. Her look, her manner—all told him too certainly that which over¬ came his heart vvith delight,—" She loves røe," he thought, " and I will die sooner than yield her to auy human being:— she loves me ; and, regardless of fears— of prudence—of every other feeling, he pressed her one moment to his bosom. " Oh, love me, Calantha," was all he had time to say ; for she broke from him, and fled, too much agitated to reply. That he had presumed too far, he feared; but that she was not indifferent to him, he had heard and seen. The thought filled him with hope, and rendered him careless of all that might befall him. The Duke entered the room as Calan¬ tha quitted it.—" Avondale," he said, offering himhis hand, " speak to me, for I wish much to converse with you before w r e part:—all 1 ask is, that you will not deceive me. Something more than com-
mon engrosses your thoughts:—even now I observed you vvith my child." —" I must indeed speak with you," said Lord Avondale firmly, but with considerable agitation. " Every thing I hold dear—my life—my happiness— depend on vvhat I have to say." He then informed the Duke with sincerity of his attachment for Calantha—proud and eager to acknowledge it, even though he feared that his hopes might never be L realized. " I am surprised and grieved," said the Duke, " that a young man of your high rank, fortune, and rising fame, should thus madly throw away your af¬ fections upon the only being perhaps vvho never must, never ought, to return them. My daughter's hand is promised lo another. When I confess this, do not mistake me:—No force will ever be made use of towards her; her inclinations will at all times be consulted, even though she should forget those ofher parent ; but vol. i, f
she is now a mere child, and more infan¬ tine and volatile withal, than it is pos¬ sible for you to conceive. There can be no necessity for her being now called upon to make a decided choice. Bucha¬ nan is my nephew, and since the loss of my son, I have centered all my hopes in him. He is heir to my name, as she is to my fortune ; and surely then an union between them, would be an event the most desirable for me and for my family. But such considerations alone would not influence me. I will tell you those then which operate in a stronger manner: —I have given my solemn promise to my sister, that I will do all in my power to assist in bringing about an event upon which her heart is fixed. Judge then, if, during her son's absence, I can dispose of Calantha*s hand, or permit her to see more of one, who has already, I fear, made some impression upon her heart/* Lord Avondale appeared much agi¬ tated.—The Duke paused—then conti- nued—·" Granting that your attachment
for my child is as strong as you would have me believe — granting, my dear young friend, that, captivated by your very superior abilities, manners, and amiable disposition, she has in part re¬ turned the sentiments you acknowledge in her favour—cannot you make her the sacrifice 1 require of you?—* Yes.— Though you now think otherwise, you can do it. So short an acquaintance with each other authorizes the term I use:—this is but a mere fancy, which absence and strength of mind wili soon overcome. Lord Avondale was proud even to a fault. He had listened to the Duke without interrupting him ; and the Duke continued to speak, because he was afraid of hearing the answer, vvhich he con¬ cluded vvould be made. For protesta¬ tions, menaces, entreaties, he was pre¬ pared ; but the respectful silence which continued when Jie ceased, disconcerted him.—" You are not angry?" he said: p S
" let us part in friendship:—do not go from me thus:—you must forgive a fa¬ ther:—remember she is my child, and bound to me by still dearer ties—she is my only one." His voice faultered, as he said this :■—he thought of the son who had once divided his affections, and of whom he seldom made mention since his loss. Lord Avondale, touched by his man¬ ner and by his kindness, accepted his hand, and struggling with pride^—with love,—" I will obey your commands," he at length said, " and fly from her pre¬ sence, if it be for her happiness :—her 'happiness is the dearest object ofmy life. - Vet let me see her before I leave her."— " No," said the Duke, " it is too dan¬ gerous." " If this must not be," said Lord Avondale, " at least tell her, that for her sake, I have conquered even my own nature in relinquishing her hand, and with it every hope, but soo strongly cherished by me. Tell her, that if 1 do
this, it is not because I do not feel for her the most passionate and most unalterable attachment. 1 renounce her only, as I trust, to consign her to a happier fate. Y T ou are her father:—you best know the affection she deserves:—if she casts away a thought sometimes on me, let her not suffer for the generosity and goodness of her heart :—let her not"—He would have said more, but he was too deeply affected to continue :—he could not act, or dissemble :—he felt strongly, and he shewed it.
%
CHAPTER ХШ. Apter this conversation, Calantha saw no more of her lover : yet he was very anxious to see her once again, and much and violently agitated before he went. A few words which he had written to her he gave into Mrs. Seymour's own hands; and this letter, though it was such as to justify the high opinion some had formed ofhis character, was but little calculated to satisfy the expectations of Calantha's absurdly romantic mind; or to realize the hopes she had cherished. It was not more expressive of his deep regret at their necessary separation, than of his anxiety that she should not suffer her spirits to be depressed, or irritate her father by r an opposition which would prove fruitless.—" He does not love you,Calantha," said Lady Margaret, with
a malicious smile, as soon as she had read the letter—(and every one vvould read it):—" when men begin to speak of duty, they have ceased to love." This remark gave Calantha but little consolation. Lord Avondale had quitted her too, without even bidding her fare¬ well; and her thoughts continually dwelt on this disappointment. Calantha knew not then that her mi¬ sery was more than shared—that Lord Avondale, though too proud to acknow¬ ledge it, was a prey to the deepest grief upon her account—that he lived but in the hope of possessing the only being upon earth to whom he had attached himself—and that the sentence pro¬ nounced against both, was a death stroke to his happiness, as well as to her own. When strong love awakes for the first time in an inexperienced heart it is so diffident, so tremblingly fearful, that it dares scarcely hope even for a return : and our own demerits appear before us,
in such exaggerated colours, and the su¬ perior excellence of the object we wor¬ ship arises so often to our view, that it seems but the natural consequence of our own presumption, that we should be neglected and forgotten. Of Admiral Sir Jt. Movvbrey, Calan? tha novv took leave without beingable to utter one word : she wept as children weep in early days, the heart's convul¬ sive sob free and unrestrained. He was as much affected as herself, and seeking Lady Margaret, before he left the castle, and followed his nephew, who had gone straight to England, began an eager at¬ tack upon her, vvith all the blunt asperity of his nature. Indeed he bitterly re¬ proached himself, and all those who had influenced him, in what he termed his harsh unfeeling conduct in this affair. —" And as to you, madam," he cried, addressing Lady Margaret, " you make tvvo young people wretched, to gratify the vanity of your son, and acquire
a fortune, which I would willingly yield to you, provided the dear children might marry, and go home with me to Allanwater, a place as pretty, and far more peaceful than any in these parts : there, I warrant, they would live happy, and die innocent—vvhich is more than most folks can say in these great palaces and splendid castles. A smile of contempt was the only an¬ swer Lady Margaret deigned to give.— Sir Richard continued, " you are all a mighty ñne set of people, no doubt, and vour assemblies, and vour balls are thronged and admired ; but none of these things will make the dear child happy, if her mind is set upon my ne¬ phew. I am the last in the world to disparage any one; hut my nephew is just as proper a man, in every point of view, as your son ; aye, or any body's son iu the whole world; and so there is my mind giveu free and hearty ; for there is not a nobler iellow, and there never к 5
can be, than Henry Avondale :—he is as brave a soldier as ever fought for his country ; and in what is he deficient ?" Lady Margaret's lips and cheeks ivere now become livid and pale—^a fatal symptom, as anger of that description, in all ages, has led to evil deeds ; whereas the scarlet effusion has, from the most ancient times been accounted harmless. " Take Lady Calantha then," exclaimed Lady Margaret, with assumed calmness, while every furious passion shook her frame ; " and may she prove a serpent to your bosom, and blast the peace of your whole family." " She is an angel !" exclaimed the Admiral, tť and she will be our pride, and our comfort." She is a woman," returned Lady Margaret with a malicious sneer ; " and, by one means or other, she will work her calling." Calantha's tears checked Sir Richard's anger ; and, his carriage being in readi¬ ness, he left the castle immediately after this conversation.
CHAPTER XIV. It may be easily supposed that Lady Margaret Buchanan and Mrs. Seymour had a most cordial dislike for each other. Happily, at present, they agreed in one point: they were both desirous of rousing Calantha from the state of despondency into which Lord Avondale's departure had thrown her. By both, she was ad¬ monished to look happy, and to restrain her excessive grief. Mrs. Seymour spoke to her of duty and self-control. Lady Margaret sought to excite her ambition and desire of distinction. One only sub¬ ject was entirely excluded from conver¬ sation: Lord Avondale's name was for¬ bidden to be mentioned in her presence, and every allusion to the past was to bc studiously avoided. Lady Margaret, however, well aware
that whosoever transgressed this regula¬ tion would obtain full power over her niece's heart, lost no opportunity of thus gaining her confidence and affection. Having won, by this artifice, an easy and lavorable audience, after two or three conversations upon the subject most interesting to Calantha, she began, by degrees, to introduce the name, and with the name such a representation of the feelings of her son, as she well knew to be best calculated to work upon the weakness of a female heart. Far different were his real feelings, -and far different his real conduct from that wbich was described to her niece by Lady Margaret. She had written to him a full account of all that had taken place; but his answer, which arrived tardily, and, after much delay, had served only to increase that lady's ill humour, and add to her disap¬ pointment, in the letter which he sent to his mother, he openly derided her ad¬ vice ; professed entire indifference to-
wards Calantha; and said that, indubi¬ tably, he vvould not waste his thoughts or time in humouring the absurd fancies of a capricious girl ;—that Lord Avon- dale, or any other, were alike welcome to her hand;—that, as for himself, tlie world was wide, and contained women enough for him ; he could range amongst those frail and fickle charmers vvithout sub¬ jecting his honour and his liberty to their pleasure; and, since the lady had already dispensed vvith the vows given and re¬ ceived at an age when the heart was pure, he augured ill of her future con¬ duct, and envied not the happiness ofthe man it was her present fancy to select:— he professed his intention of joining the armv on the continent : talked of leaden hail, giory and death! and seemed re¬ solved not to lessen the merit of any exploits he might achieve, by any want of brilliancy in the colouring and descrip¬ tion of them. Enraged at this answer, and sickening
at his conceit, Lady Margaret sent imme¬ diately to entreat, or rather to command, hts return. In the mean time, she talked much to Calantha of his sufferings and despair; and soon perceiving hovv greatly the circumstance of Lord Avondale's consenting to part from her had wounded her feelings, and how perpetually she recurred to it, she endeavoured, by the most artful interpretations ofhis conduct, to lower him in her estimation. Sarcas¬ tically contrasting his coldness wdth Bu¬ chanan's enthusiasm: "Your lover," shesaid, " is, without doubt, most dis¬ interested!—His eager desire for your happiness is shown in every part of his conduct !~Such warmth—such delicacy ! How happy would a girl like my Calan¬ tha be with such a hushand !—What filial piety distinguishes the whole of his be¬ haviour!—" Obey your father," is the burthen of his creed! He seems even to dread the warmth of your affection !— He trembles when he thinks into what
imprudence it may carry you !~-Why he is a perfect model, is he not ? But let me ask you, my dear niece, is love, accord¬ ing to your notions and feelings, thus cool and considerate ?—does it pause to weigh right and duty ?—is it so very ra¬ tional and contemplative ?...." Yes/' replied Calantha, somewhat picqued. " Virtuous love can make sacrifices ; but, when love is united with guilt, it becomes selfish and thinks only of the present moment." u And how, my lit¬ tle philosopher, did you acquire so pre¬ maturely this wonderful insight into the nature of love?" ίς By feeling it," said Calantha, triumphantly ; ct and by com¬ paring my own feelings with what I have heard called by that name in others." As she said this, her colour rose, and she fixed her quick blue eyes full upon í Lady Margaret's face ; but vainly did she endeavour to raise emotion there ; that countenance, steady and unruffled, betrayed not even a momentary flash of
anger : her large orbs rolled securely, as she returned the glance, with a look of proud and scornful superiority. "My little niece," she said, tapping her gently on the head, and taking from her cluster¬ ing locks the comb that confined them, " my little friend is grown quite a sati¬ rist, and all who have not had, like her, every advantage of education, are to be severely lashed, I find, for the errors they may, inadvertently, have committed. " As she spoke, tears started from her eyes. Calantha threw herself upon her bosom, " O, my dear aunt," she said, " my dear¬ est aunt, forgive me, I entreat you. God knows I have faults enough myself, and it is not for me to judge of others, whose situation may have been very different from mine. ís it possible that I should have caused your tears? My words, must indeed, have been very bitter ; pray for¬ give me." " Calantha," said Lady Mar¬ garet, " you are already more than for¬ given ; but the tears I shed w r ere not
occasioned by your last speech ; though it is true, censure from one's chiidren, or those one has ever treated as such, is more galling than from others, But. indeed, my spirits are much shaken. 1 have had letters from my son, and he seems more hurt at your conduct than I expected:—he talks of renouncing his country and his expectations ; he says that if indeed his Calantha, who has been the constant object of his thoughts in ab- зсепсе, can have already renounced her vows and him, he will never intrude his griefs upon her, nor ever seek to bias her inclinations: yet it is vvith deep and last¬ ing regret that he consents to tear you from his remembrance and consign you to another," Calantha sighed deeply at this unex¬ pected information, to condemn any one to the pangs of unrequited love was hard : she had already felt that it w r as no light suffering ; and Lady Margaret, see¬ ing how her false and artful representa-
tions had worked upon the best feelings of an inexperienced heart, lost no oppor¬ tunity of improving and increasing their effect. These repeated attempts to move Ca- lantha to a determination, which was held out to her as a virtuous and ho¬ nourable sacrifice made to duty and to justice, were not long before they were attended with success. Urged on all sides continually, and worked upon by those she loved, she at last yielded with becoming inconsistency ; and one eve¬ ning, when she saw her father somewhat indisposed, she approached him, and whispered in his ear, that she had thoughtbetter of her conduct, and would be most happy in fulfilling his commands ¿n every respect. " Now you are a he¬ roine, indeed," said Lady Margaret, who had overheard the promise: " you have shewn that true courage which í ex¬ pected from you—you have gained a victory over yourself, and í cannot but
feel proud of you." <f Aye," thought Calantha, *' flattery is the chain that will bind me ; gild it but bright enough, and be secure of its strength : you have found, at last, the clue ; now make use of it to my ruin." " She consents," said Lady Margaret ; " it is sufficient ; let there be no delay ; let us dazzle her imagination, awaken her ambition, and gratify her vanity by the most splendid presents and prepa¬ rations I"
CHAPTER XV.
Calantha's jewels and costly attire— her equipages and attendants, were now the constant topic of conversation. Every rich gift was ostentatiously exhi¬ bited ; while congratulations, were on all sides, poured forth on the youthful bride. Lady Margaret, eagerly dis¬ playing the splendid store, asked her if she were not happy.—" Do not," she replied, addressing her aunt, " do not fancy that I am weak enough to value these baubles : — My heart is at least free from a folly like this : 1 de¬ spise this mockery of riches." ς * You despise it !" repeated Lady Marga¬ ret, with an incredulous smile:—"you despise grandeur and vanity î Child be¬ lieve one who knows y r ou well, y r ou wor¬ ship them : they are your idols ; and
w bile your simple voice sings forth ro¬ mantic praises of simplicity and retire¬ ment, vou have been cradled in luxurv, and vou cannot exist without it." Buchanan was novv daily, nay even hourlyexpected:—Lady Margaret awaited him vvith anxious hope; Calantha, with increasing fear. Having one morning ridden out to divert her mind from the dreadful suspense under which she la¬ boured, and meeting with Sir Everard, she enquired ofhim respecting her former favourite: " Miss Elinor," said the doc¬ tor, " is still with her aunt, the abbess of G Janaa; and, her noviciate being over, she will soon, I fancy, take the veil. Ybu cannot see her ; but if your Ladyship will step from your horse, and enter into my humble abode, I will shew you a por¬ trait of St. Clara, for so we now call her, she being indeed a saint; and sure you will admire it." Calantha accompanied the doctor, and was struck with the sin¬ gular beauty of the portrait. " Happy
St. Clara," she said, and sighed :—"your heart, dedicated thus early to Heaven, will escape the struggles and temptations to which mine is already exposed. Oh! that I too, might fbllow your example ; and, far from a world for which I am not formed, pass my days in piety and peace." Thatevening, as theDuke of Altamonte Jed his daughter through the crowded apartments, presenting her to every one previous to her marriage, she was sud¬ denly informed that Buchanan was ar¬ rived. Her forced spirits and assumed courage at once forsook her ; she fled to her room ; and there giving vent to her real feelings, wept bitterly.—" Yet why should 1 grieve thus?" she said:— : " What though he be here to claim me? my hand is yet free:—I will not give it against the feelings ofmy heart." Mrs. Seymour had observed her precipitate flight, and following, insisted upon being admitted. She endeavoured to calm her ; but it was too late.
From that day, Calantha sickened :—. the aid ofthe physician, and the care öf her friends were vain :—an alarming ill¬ ness seized upon her mind, and affected her whoie frame. In the paroxysm ofher fever, she called repeatedly upon Lord Avondale's name, which confirmed those n«*ound her in the opinion they enter¬ tained, that her maladv had been occa- sioned by the violent effort she had made, and the continual dread under which she Shad existed for some time past, of Bu¬ chanan's return. Her father bitterly reproached himself for his conduct ; watched by her bed in anxious suspence; and under the impression of the deepest alarm, wrote to his old friend the admiral, informing him of his daughter's danger, and imploring him to urge Lord Avon- dale to forget what had passed, and to hasten again to Castle Délavai.— Hestated that, to satisfy his sister's ambition, the greater part of his fortune should be set¬ tled upon Buchanan, to whom his title
descended; and if, after this arrangement, Lord Avondale still continued the same as when he had parted from Calantha, he only requested his forgiveness ofhis former apparent harshness, and earnestly besought his return without a moment's loss of time. His sister he strove in vain to ap¬ pease:—Lady Margaret was in no temper of mind to admit of his excuses. Her son had arrived and again left the castle, without even seeing Calantha; and when the Duke attempted to pacify Lady Mar¬ garet, she turned indignantly from him, declaring, that, if he had the weakness to yield to the arts and stratagems of a spoiled and wayward child, she would instantly depart from under his roof, and never see him more. No one event could have grieved him so much, as this open rupture with his sister. Yet his child's continued danger turned his thoughts from this and every other con¬ sideration :—he yielded to her wishes :—
he could not endure the sight of her mi¬ sery :-—he had from her infancy never refused her slightest request :—and could he now, on so momentous an occasion, could he novv force her inclinations and constrain her choice. The kind intentions of the Duke were, hovvever, defeated. Stung to the soul, Calantha wouid not hear of marriage with Lord Avondale :-—pride, a far stronger feeling than love, at that early period, disdained to receive concessions even from a father : and a certain moroseness began to mark her character, as she slowly recovered from her illness, which never had been observed in it before. She be¬ came austere and ï ¿served ; read nothing but books of theology and controversy ; seemed even to indulge an inclination for a monastic life ; was often with Miss St. Clare ; and estranged herself from all other society. " Let her have her will," said Lady Margaret, " it is the only means of curing VOL. Î. β
her of this new fancy."—The Duke, however, thought otherwise: he was greatly alarmed at the turn her disposi¬ tion seemed to have taken, and tried every means in his power to remedy and coun¬ teract it. A year passed thus away ; and the names of Buchanan and Lord Avon- dale were never or rarely mentioned at tiie castle ; when one evening, suddenly and unexpectedly, the latter appeared there to answer in person, a message which the Duke had addressed to him, by means of the Admiral, during his daughter's illness. Lord Avondale had been abroad since last he had parted from Calantha ; he had gained the approbation ofthe army in which he served ; and, what was bet¬ ter, he knew that he deserved it. His uncle's letter had reached him when still upon service. He had acted upon the staff: he now returned to join his own regiment, vvhich was quartered at Lei¬ trim ; and his first care, before he pro¬ ceeded upon the duties of his profession,
was, to see the Duke, and to claim, with diminished fortune and expectations, the bride his early fancy had chosen.·—*" I will not marry him—I will not see him:" —These were the only words Calantha pronounced, as they led her into the room where he was conversing with her father. When she saw him, however, her feel- iags changed. Every heart vvhich has known what it is to meet, after a dong estrangement, the object of its first, of its sole, of its entire devotion, ean picture to itself the scene vvhich followed. Neither pride, nor monastic vows, nor natural bashfulness, repressed the full flow of her happiness at the moment when Lord Avondale rushed forward to embrace her, and, calling her his own Calantha, mingled his tears vvith hers.— The Duke, greatly affected, looked upon them both. u Take her," he said, ad¬ dressing Lord Avondale^ " and be as¬ sured, whatever her faults, she is my g ä
heart's pride—my treasure. Be kind to her:—that I know you will be, whilst the enthusiasm of passion lasts : but ever be kind to her, even when it has subsided: remember, she has yet to learn what it is to be controuled. " She shall never learn it," said Lord Avondale, again embracing her : "by day—by night, I have lived but in this hope: she shall never repent her choice." " The God of Heaven vouchsafe his blessing upon you," said the Duke.—" My sister may call this weakness ; but the smile on my child's countenance is a sufficient re¬ ward."
CHAPTER XVI. What Lord Avondale had said was true, -—One image had pursued him in every change of situation, since he had parted from Calantha ; and though he had scarcely permitted his mind to dwell on hope ; yet he felt that, without her, there was no happiness for him on earth ; and he thought that once united to her, he was beyond the power of sorrow or mis¬ fortune. So chaste, even in thought, she seemed—so frank and so affectionate, could he be otherwise than happy with such a companion ? How then was he astonished, when, as soon as they were alone, she informed him that, although she adored him, she was averse to the fetters he was so eager to impose. How was he struck to find that all the chime¬ rical, romantic absurdities,vvhich he most
despised, vvere tenaciously cherished by her; to be told that dear as he was, her freedom was even dearer ; that she thought it a crime to renounce her vows, her virgin vows ; and that she never vvould become a slave and a wife ;—he must not expect it. Unhappy Avondale î even such an avowal did not open his eyes, or deter him from his pursuit. Love blinds the wisest : and fierce passion domii eers over reason. The dread of another sepa¬ ration inspired him vvith alarm. Agitated —furious—he now combatted every ob¬ jection, ventured every promise, and loved even with greater fondness from the in¬ creasing dread of again losing what he had hoped was already his own.— u Men ofthe world are without religion," said Calantha with tears; " Women of the world are without principle. Truth is regarded by none. I love and honor my God, even more than I love you ; and truth is dearer to me than life. I am
not like those 1 see :—my education, my habits, my feelings are different ; I am like one uncivilized and savage ; and if you place me in society, you will have to blush every hour for the faults I shall involuntarily commit. Besides this ob¬ jection, my temper—I am more violent —Oh that it were not so ! but can I, ought I, to deceive you ?" You are all that is noble, frank, and generous : you shall guide me," said Lord Avondale, "and I will protect you. Be mine: fear me not: your principles I venerate: your religion I will study, will learn, will believe in. What raore ?" Lord Avondale sought and won that strange uncertain being, fbr whom he was about to sacrifice so much. He con¬ sidered not the lengthened journey of life—the varied scenes through vvhich they were to pass ; where all the quali¬ ties in which she was wholly deficient would be so often and so absolutely required—discretion, prudence, firm and
steady principle, obedience, humility. But to all her confessions and remon¬ strances he repHed : *' I love, and you return my passion : can we be otherwise than blest ! You are the dearest object of my affection, my life, my hope, my joy. Ifyou can live without me, which I do not believe, I cannot without you, and that is sufficient. Sorrows must come on all, but united together we can brave them. My Calantha, you torture me but to try me. * Were I to renounce you, were I to take you at your word, you, you would be the first to regret and to reproach me." ·* It is but the name of wife I hate," replied the spoiled and wayward child. " I muet command : my will—" " Your will shall be my law," said Lord Avondale, as he knelt before her : " you shall be my mistress, my guide, my monitress, and I a willing slave." So spoke the man, who, like the girl he addressed, had died sooner than have yielded up bis freedom or his
independence to another ; vvho, high and proud, had no conception of even the slightest interference with his conduct or opposition to his wishes ; and, vvho, at the very moment that in words he yielded up his liberty, sought only the fulfilment of his own desire, and the attainment of an object upon which he had fixed his mind. The day arrived. A trembling bride, and an impassioned lover faintly articu¬ lated the awful vow. Lord Avondale thought himself the happiest of men ; and Calantha, though miserable at the moment, felt that, on earth, she loved but him, In the presence of her assem¬ bled family, they uttered the solemn en¬ gagement, which bound them through existence to each other ; and though Calantha was deeply affected, she did not regret the sacred promise she had made. When Lord Avondale, hovvever, ap¬ proached to take her from her lather's arms—when she heard that the carriages О 5
awaited which were to bear them to another residence, nor love, nor force prevailed. " This is my home," she cried: " these are my parents. Share all I have—dwell with me where I have ever dwelt ; but think not that I can quit them thus." No spirit of coquetry, no petty airs, learned or imagined, suggested this violent and reiterated exclamation : " I will not go," I will not, was suffi¬ cient, as she imagined, to change the most determined character; and when she found that force was opposed to her vio¬ lence, terror, nay, abhorrence took posses¬ sion of her mind ; and it was witb shrieks of despair she was torn from her father's bosom. " Unhappy Avondale!" said Sophia, as she saw her ihus borne away, " may that violent spirit grow tame and tract¬ able, and may Calantha at length prove worthy of such a husband !" This ex¬ clamation was uttered with a feeling which mere interest for her cousin could
not have created. In very truth, Sophia loved Lord Avondale. And Alice Mac Allain, who heard the prayer with sur¬ prise and indignation, added fervently: " that he may make her happy ; that he may know the value ofthe treasure he possesses ; this is all I ask of Heaven. Oh ! my mistress—my protectress—my Calantha—vvhat is there left me on earth to love, now thou art gone ? Whatever they may say of thy errors, even those errors are dearer to my heart than all the virtues thou hast left behind."
CHAPTER XVH. It was at Allanwater, a small villa amidst the mountains, in the county of Leitrim, that Lord and Lady Avondale passed the first months of their marriage. This estate had been settled upon Sir Richard Mowbrey, during his life time, by his brother, the late Earl of Avondale. It was cheerful, though retired ; and to Calantha's enchanted eyes appeared all that was most romantic and beautiful upon earth. What indeed had not ap¬ peared beautiful to her in the company of the man she loved ! Everyone fancies that there exists in the object of their peculiar admiration a superiority over others. Calantha, perhaps, was fully justified in this opinion. Lord Avondale displayed even in his countenance the sensibility of a warm, ardent, and generous character.
He had a distinguished and prepossessing manner, entirely free from all affectation. ft is seldom that this can be said of any man, and more seldom of one possessed of such singular beauty of person. He appeared indeed wholly to forget himself; and was ever more eager in the interests of others than his own. Many there are, who, though endowed with the best un¬ derstandings, have yet an inertness, an insensibility to all that is brilliant and accomplished ; and who, though correct in their observations, yet fatigue in the long intercourse of life by the sameness ofthe»r thoughts. Lord Avondale's un¬ derstanding, however, fraught as it was with knowledge, was illumined by the splendid light of genius, yet not over¬ thrown by its force. In his mind, it might be truly said, that he did not cherish one base, one doubtful or worldly feeling. He was so sincere that, even in conversation, he never mis-stated, or ex¬ aggerated a fact. He saw at a giance the
faults of others ; but his extreme good nature and benevolence prevented his taking umbrage at them. He was, it is true, of a hot and passionate temper, and if once justly offended, firm in his re¬ solve, and not very readily appeased ; but he was too generous to injure or to hate even those who might deserve it. When he loved, and he never really loved but one, it was with so violent, so blind a passion, that he might be said to doat upon the very errors of the girl to whom he was thus attached. To the society of women he had been early ac¬ customed ; but had suffered too much from their arts, and felt too often the effects of their caprices, to be easily made again their dupe and instrument. Of beauty he had ofttimes been the wil¬ ling slave. Strong passion, opportunity, and entire liberty of conduct, had, at an early period, thrown him into its power. His profession, and the general laxity of morals, prevented his viewing his former
conduet in the light in which it appeared to his astonished bride; but when she sighed, because she feared that she was not the first who had subdued his affec¬ tions, he smilingly assured her, that she should be the last—that no other should ever bo dear to him again. Calantha, in manner, in appearance, in every feeling, was but a child. At one hour, she vvould look entranced upon Avondale, and breathe vows of love and tenderness ; at another, hide from his gaze, and weep for the home she had left. At one time she would talk with him and laugh from the excess of gaiety she felt ; at another, she would stamp her foot upon the groimd in a fit of childish impatience, and exclaiming, " You must not contradict me in any thing," she would menace to return to her father, and never see him more. If Lord Avondale had a defect, it was too great good nature, so that he suffered his vain and frivolous partner, to com-
mand, and guide, and arrange all things around him, as she pleased, nor foresaw the consequence of her imprudence, though too often carried to excess. With all his knowledge, he knew not how to restrain ; and he had not the ex¬ perience necessary to guide one of her character :—he could only idolize ; he left it to others to censure and admonish, it was also for Calantha's misfortune, that Lord Avondale's religious opinions were different from those in vvhich she had been early educated. She, as has been heretofore related, was a Roman Catholic, and had adopted with that ex¬ cess and exaggeration,* which belonged to her character, the most enthusiastic devotion to that captivating and delusive worship. It was perhaps to shew him the necessity of stricter doctrines, and observances, that heaven permitted one so good and noble, as he was, to be united vvith one so frail and weak. Those doc¬ trines which he loved to discuss, an.
support in speculation, she eagerly seized upon, and carried into practice ; thus proving to him clearly, and fatally, their dangerous and pernicious tendency. Eager to oppose and conquer those opi¬ nions in his wife, which savoured as he thought of bigotry and rigour, he tore the veil at once from her eyes, and opened hastily her wondering mind to a world before unknown. He foresaw not the peril to which he exposed her:—he heeded not the rapid progress of her thoughts—the boundless views of an over-heated imagination. At first she shrunk with pain and horror, from every feeling which to her mind appeared less rigid, less pure, than those to which she had long been accustomed ; but when her principles, or rather her preju¬ dices, yielded to the power of love, she broke from a restraint too severe, into a liberty the most dangerous from its no¬ velty, its wildness and its uncertainty. The monastic severity which she had
imposed upon herself, from exaggerated sentiments of piety and devotion, gave vvay with the rest of her former maxims —She knew not vvhere to pause, or rest ; her eyes were dazzled, her understanding bewildered ; and she viewed the world, and the new form which it wore before her, with strange and unknown feelings, which she could neither define, nor com¬ mand. Before this period, her eyes had never even glanced upon the numerous pages which have unfortunately been traced by the hand of unrestrained enquiry, and daring speculation ; even the more inno¬ cent fictions of' romance had been with¬ held from her ; and her mother's precepts had, in this respect, been attended to by her with sacred care. Books of every description, the works of Historians, Philosophers, and Metaphysicians, were now eagerly devoured by her ; horror and astonishment at first retarded the course of curiosity and interest :—and soon the
surprise of innocence was converted into admiration of the wit and beautv with vvhich some of these works abounded. Care is taken when the blind are cured, that the strong light of day should not fall too suddenly upon the eye; but of what avail was caution to Calantha— ever in extremes, she threw off at once the shackles, the superstition, the re¬ strictions, vvhich, perhaps, overstrained notions of purity and piety had im¬ posed. Calantha's lover had become her mas¬ ter; and he could not tear himself one moment from his pupil. He laughed at every artless or shrewd remark, and pleased himself vvith contemplating the first workings of a mind, not unapt in learning, though till then exclusively wrapt up in the mysteries oí religion, the feats of heroes, the poetry of classic bards, and the history of nations the most ancient and the most removed.—" Where have you existed, my Calantha?" he
continually said:— >" vvho have been your companions?" "I had none," she re¬ plied ; "but wherever I heard of cruelty, vice, or irréligion, I turned away." <ς Ah, do so still, my best beloved," said Lord Avondale, vvith a sigh. " Be ever as chaste, as frank, as innocent, as now." " I cannot," saicl Calantha, confused and grieved, α I thought it the greatest of all crimes to love :—no ceremony of marriage—no doctrines men have invent¬ ed, can quiet my conscience :—I know no longer what to believe, or what to doubt:—hide me in your bosom:—let us live far from a world which you say is full of evil:—and never part from my side ; for you are—Henry you are, all that is left me now. 1 look no more for the protection of Heaven, or the guidance of parents;—you are my only hope:— do you preserve and bless me ; for I have left every thing for you." Such is the transient nature of en¬ thusiasm ; such the instability of over
zeal ; and so short the adherence to the firmest, and tnost austere deter¬ minations, which are not founded in right principle, and accompanied by a tranquil and humble spirit. To a mind so ardent, and so irregular as Ca¬ lantha's, knowledge and information are full of danger and hazard. It is impos¬ sible to foresee the impressions vvhich may be made, or in any degree to regu¬ late the course which may be taken by such an imagination. Some mistaken conclusion is eagerly seized upon, some false interpretation is easily seized upon, and tenaciously maintained, and reason labours in vain to counteract and remedy the mischief. The productions of such a soil are all strange, new, uncertain ; and the cultivator sees with astonish¬ ment a plant arise, entirely different from the usual result of the seed vvhich has been sown, mocking his toil, and frustrating his expectations.
CHAPTER XVIII.
There is nothing so difficult to describe as happiness. Whether some feeling of envy enters into the mind upon hearing of it, or whether it is so calm, so unas¬ suming, so little ostentatious in itself, that words give an imperfect idea of it, who can say ? It is easier to enjoy it than to define it. It springs in the heart, and shews itself on the countenance; but it shuns all display; and is oftener fbund at home, when home has not been embittered by dissensions, suspicions, and guilt, than any where else upon earth. Yes, it is in home, and in those who watch there for us. Miserable is the being who turns elsewhere for conso¬ lation ! Desolate is the heart which has broken the ties that bound it there, Calantha was bappy ; her home was
blessed ; and in Lord Avondale's societv every hour brought her joy. Perhaps the feelings which at this time united them were too violent—too tumultuous. Few can bear to be thus loved—thus indulged : very few minds are strong enough to resist it. Calantha was ut¬ terly enervated by it ; and when the cares oflife first aroused Lord Avondale, and called hitn from her, she found herself unfit for tbe new situation she was immediatey required to fill. When for a few hours he left her, she waited vvith trembling anxiety for his return ; and though she murmured not at the necessary change, her days vvere spent in tears, and ner nights in restless a<nta- tion He more than shared in her dis¬ tress : he even encouraged the excess of sensibility which gave rise to it ; for men, whilst they love, think every new caprice and weakness in the object of it but a new charm ; and whilst Calantha could make him grave or merry—or angry or pleased,
just as it suited her, he pardoned every omission—he forgave every fault. Used to be indulged and obeyed, she was not surprised to find him a willing slave; but she had no conception that the chains he now permitted to be Iaid upon him, vvere ever to be broken ; and tears and smiles, she thought, must, at all times, have t he power over his heart vvhich they now possessed. She was not mis¬ taken :—Lord Avondale was of too fine a character to trifle with the affections he had won ; and Calantha had too much sense and spirit to wroľ:<g him. He looked to his home therefore for comfort and enjoyment. He folded to his bosom the only being upon earth, for whom he felt one sentiment of passion or of love. Calantha had not a thought that he did not know, and share : his heart was as entirely open as her own. Was it possible to be more happy? It was : and that blessing too, was granted. Lady Avondale became a mother :—She
gave to Avondale, the dearest gift a wife can offer—a boy, lovely in all the grace of childhood— vvhose rosy smiles, and whose infant caresses, seemed even more than ever to unite them together. He was dear to both ; but they were far dearer to each other. At Allanwater, in the fine evenings of summer, they wandered out upon the mountains, and saw not in the countenance of the vil¬ lagers half the tenderness and happiness they felt themselves. They uttered, there¬ fbre, no exclamations upon the superior joy of honest industry:—a cottage of¬ fered nothing to their view, which could excite either envy or regret : they gave to all, and were loved by all ; but in all respects they felt themselves as innocent, and more happy than those vvho sur¬ rounded them. In truth, the greater refinement, the greater polish the mind and manner receive, the more exquisite must be the enjoyment of which the hea** ; s capable. VOL. 1. H
Few know how to love:—it is a word which many misuse; but they who have felt it, know that there is nothing to compare vvith it upon earth. It cannot however exist in union vvith guilt. If ever it does spring up in a perverted heart, it constitutes the misery that heart deserves:—it consumes and tortures till it expires. Even, however, when lawful and virtuous, it may be too violent:—it may reuder 'hose who are subject to it negligent of other duties, and careless of other affections : this in some measure was the case of Lord and Lady Avondale. From A lían water, Lord and Lady Avon- dale proceeded to Monteith, an estate of Lord Avondale's, where his aunt, Lady Mowbrey, and his only sister, Lady Eli¬ zabeth Movvbrey resided. Sir Richard and Lady Mowbrey had never had any chil¬ dren, but Elizabeth and Lord Avondale vvere as dear to them, and perhaps dearer, than if thev had been their own. The society at Monteith was large. There pleasure and gaiety and talent were
chiefly prized and sought after, while a strong party spirit prevailed. Lady Mon¬ teith, a woman of an acute and penetrat¬ ing mind, had warmly espoused tiie cause ofthe ministry of the day. Possessed of every quality that could most delight in society—brilliant, beautiful, and of a truly masculine understanding, she was accurate in judgment, and at a glance could penetrate the secrets of others; yet was she easilv herself deceived. She had a nobleness of mind, which the inter¬ course vvith the world, and exposure to every temptation had not been able to destroy. Bigotted and prejudiced in opinions vvhich early habit had conse¬ crated, she was sometimes too severe i u her censures of others ; but her heart, too warm, too kind, repented even any mo¬ mentary severity she might have shewn. At Castle Delaval, the society was even too refined ; and a slight tinge of affec¬ tation might, by those who were inclined to censure, be imputed to it. Though ii 2
ease was not wanting, there wasa polish in manner, perhaps in thought, which removed the general tone somewhat too far from the simplicity of nature ; senti¬ ment, and all the romance of virtue, was encouraged. At Monteith, on the contrary, this over refinement was the constant topic of ri¬ dicule. Every thought was there uttered, and every feeling expressed :—there was neither shyness, nor reserve, nor affecta¬ tion. Talent opposed itself to talent with all the force of argument. The loud laugh that pointed out any new foliy, or hailed any new occasion of mirth, was different from the subdued smile, and gentle hint to which Calantha had been accustomed. Opinions were there liberally discussed ; characters stripped of their pretences ; and satire mingled with the good humour, and jovial mirth, which on every side abounded. Lady Avondale heard and saw every thing with surprise ; and though she loved and admired the individuals, she
felt herself unfit to live among them. There was a liberality of opinion and a satiric turn which she could not at crr^e comprehend ; and she said to herself, daily, as she considered those around her, " They are different from me. I can never assimilate myself to them. I was every thing in my own family, and I am nothing here." What talents she had were ofa sort they could not appreciate; and all her defects were those which they most despised. The refinement, the romance, the sentiment she bad imbibed, appeared in their eyes assumed and un¬ natural ; her strict opinions, perfectly ridiculous ; her enthusiasm;, absolute in¬ sanity ; and the violence of her temper, if contradicted or opposed, tbe pettish¬ ness of a spoiled and waywarH child. Yet too indulgent, loo kind to reject her, they loved her, they caressed her, they bore with her petulance and mistakes. Tt was, however, as a child they consi¬ dered her r —they treated her as one not arrived at maturity of judgment.
Her reason by degrees became con- Yinced by the arguments which she con¬ tinually heard ; and all that was spoken at random, she treasured up as truth : even whilst vehemently contending and disputing in defence of her favourite tenets, she became of another opinion. So dangerous is a little knowledge—so unstable is violence. Her soul's immor¬ tal hopes seemed to be shaken by the unguarded jests of some who casually visited at Monteith, or whom she met with elsewhere :—she read till she con¬ founded truth and falsehood, nor knew any longer what to believe: she heard folly censured, till she took it to be cri¬ minal ; but crime she saw tolerated, if well concealed. The names she had set η her very heart as pure and spotless, she heard traduced and ridiculed: indig¬ nantly she defended them with all the warmth of ardent youth :—they were proved guiity ; she wept iu agony, she loved them not less, but she tiiought
less favourably of those vvho had unde¬ ceived her, The change in Calantha's mind was constant, was daily ; it never ce ised, it never paused; and none market.; as pro¬ gress, or checked her career. In «man- cipating * ersel f from much that was no doubt useless, she stripped herself by degrees of all, till she neither feared, nor cared, nor knew any longer vvhat was, from vvhat vvas not. Nothing gives greater umbrage than a misconception and mistaken application of tenets and opinions vvhich were never meant to be thus understood and acted upon. Lady Mowbrey, a strict adherent to all customs and etiquettes, saw with astonishment in Calantha a total disre¬ gard of them ; and her high temper could ill brook such defect. Accus¬ tomed to the gentleuess åi Elizabeth, she saw vvith indignation the liberty her niece had assumed. It was not for her to check her ; but rigidity, vehemence in
dispute, and harsh truths, at times too bitterly expressed on both sides, gave an appearance of disunion between them, which happily was very far from being real, as Calantha loved and admired Lady Movvbrey vvith the warmest affec¬ tion. Lord Avondale, in the mean time, solely devoted to his wife, blinded him¬ seif to her danger. He saw not the change a few months had made, or he imputed it alone to her enthusiasm for himself. He thought others harsh to what he regarded as the mere thought¬ lessness of youth; and, surrendering him¬ self wholly to her guidance, he chided^ caressed, and laughed, with her in turn» " 1 see how it is, Henry," said Sir Richard, before he left Ireland, α you are a lost man ; I shall leave you another year to amuse yourself ; and I fancy by that time all this nonsense will be over. 1 love you tlie better for it, however, my dear boy; a soldier never looks so well,
to my mind, as when kneeling to a pretty woman, provided he does his duty abroad as weli as at home, and that praise every one must give you.
H y>
CHAPTER XIX. The threatening storm of rebellion novv darkened around. Acts of daily rapine and outrage alarmed the inhabitants of Ireland, both in the capital and in the country : ail the military posts were reinforced ; Lord Avondale's regiment, then at Leitrim, was ordered out on actual service j and the business of his profession employed every moment ofhis time. The vigorous measures pursued, soon produced a favorable change; tran¬ quillity was apparently restored; and the face of things resumed its former appear¬ ance; but the minds which had been aroused to action were not as easily qui¬ eted, and the charms of an active life were not as readiiv laid aside. Lord Avondale was still much abroad; much occupied j and the time hanging heavy
upon Calantha's hands, she was not sorry to hear that they vvere going to pass the ensuing winter in London. In the autumn, previous to their depar¬ ture for England, they passed a few weeks at Castle Délavai, chiefly for the purpose of meeting Lady Margaret Buchanan, vvho had, till then, studiously avoided every occasion of meeting Lady Avondale. Buchanan had neither seen her nor sent her one soothing message since her mar¬ riage, so angry he affected to be, at vvhat, in reality, gave him the sincerest delight. Count Gondimar had returned from Italy, and was now at the castle. He had brought letters from Viviani to Lady Margaret, who said at once when she had read them : " You vvish to deceive me. These letters are dated from Naples, but our young friend is here—here even in Ireland." " And his vengeance," said Gondimar, laughing. Lady Margaret affected, also, to smile : " Oh, his ven¬ geance 1" she said, " is yet to come:—·
save me from his love now ; and I will defend myseif from the rest." Lord and Lady Dartford were, like¬ wise, at the castle. He appeared cold and careless. In his pretty inoffensive wife, he found not those attractions, those splendid talents which had en¬ thralled him for so long a period with Lady Margaret. He still pined for the tyranny of caprice, provided the load of re¬ sponsibility and exertion were removed : and the price of his slavery were that ex¬ emption from the petty cares of life, for which he felt an insurmountable disgust. From indoleuce, it seemed he had fallen again into the snare which was spread for his ruin ; and having, a second time, submitted to the chain, he had lost all desire of ever again attempting to shake it off. Lady Dartford, too innocent to see her danger, lamented the coldness of her husband, and loved him with even fond¬ er attachment, for the doubt she enter¬ tained of his affection. She was spoken
of by all with pity and praise: her con¬ duct was considered as exemplary, when in fact it was purely the effect of nature ; for every hope of her heart was centered in one object, and the fervent constancy of her affection arose, perhaps, in some measure from the uncertainty of its being returned. Lady Margaret continued to see the young Count Viviani in secret :— he had now been in Ireland for some months :—-his manner to Lady Margaret was, however, totally changed :—he had accosted her upon his arrival, with the most distant civility, the most studied coldness :—he affected ever that marked indifference which proved him but still too much in her power ; and, while his heart burned with the scorching flames of jealousy, he waited for some oppor¬ tunity of vengeance, which might, by its magnitude, effectually satisfy his rage. Lord Dartford saw him once as he was retiring in haste from Lady Margaret's apartment ; and he enquired of her ea-
gerly who he was.— 4t A young musi¬ cian, a friend of Gondimar's, an Italian," said Lady Margaret. " He has not an Italian countenance," said Lord Dart¬ ford, thoughtfully. " I vvish I had not seen him :—it is a face vvhich makes a deep and even an unpleasant impression. You call him Viviani, do you?—whilst I live, I never shall forget Viviani !" Cards, billiards and music, were the usual nightly occupations. Sir Everard St. Clare and the Count Gondimar en¬ tered into the most tedious and vehe¬ ment political disputes, an evil which Calantha endeavoured to avert as often as she could, by inducing the latter to sing, vvhich he did in an agreeable, though not in an unaffected manner. At these times, Mrs. Seymour, vvith So¬ phia and Frances, heeding neither the noise nor the gaiety, eternally embroi¬ dered fancy muslins, or, with persevering- industry, painted upon velvet. Calan¬ tha mocked at these innocent recreations.
" Unlike music, drawing and reading, which fill the mind," she said ;—" un¬ like even to dancing which, though ac¬ counted an absurd mode of passing away time, is active, and appears natural to the human form and constitution." " Tell me Avondale," Calantha would say, " can any thing be more tedious than that incessant irritation of the fin¬ gers—that plebeian, thrifty and useless mode of increasing in women a love of dress—a selfish desire of adorning their own persons ?—I ever loathed it.—There is a sort of self-satisfaction about these ingenious working ladies, vvhich is per¬ fectly disgusting. It gratifies all the little errors of a narrow mind, under the appearance of a notable and domestic turn. At times, when every feeling of the heart should have been called fortb, I have seen Sophia examining the pat¬ terns of a new gown, and curiously noting every fold of a stranger's dress. Because a womau who, like a mechanic,
has turned her understanding, and hopes, and energies, into this course, remains uninjured by the storms around her, is she to be admired ?—must she be ex¬ tolled?" "It isnot their occupation, but their character, you censure :—I fear, Calantha, it is their very virtue you de¬ spise." " Oh no !" she replied indig¬ nantly : " when real virtue, struggling with temptations of which these sense¬ less, passionless creatures have no con¬ ception, clinging for support to Heaven, yet preserves itself uncorrupted amidst the vicious and the base, it deserves a crown of glory, and the praise and admi¬ ration of every heart. Not so these spiritless immaculate prejudiced stick¬ lers for propriety. I do not love Sophia : no, though she ever affords me a cold extenuation for my faults — though through life she considers me as a sort of friend whom fate has imposed upon her through the ties of consanguinity. I did not—could not—cannot love her; but
there are some, far better tban herself, noble ardent characters, unsullied bv a taint of evil ; and I think, Avondale, without flattery, you are in the list whom I would die to save ; whom I would bear every torture and ignominy, to support and render happy."—" Try then my Calantha, " said Lord Avon- dale, *' to render them so ; for, believe me, there is no agony so great as to re¬ member that we have caused one mo¬ menťs pang to such as have been kind and good to us." 4i You are right," said Calantha, looking upon him with affection. Oh ! if there be a pang of heart too terrible to endure and to imagine, it would be the consideration that we have returned unexampled kindness by in¬ gratitude, and betrayed the generous noble confidence that trustu! ^very thing to our honour and our love. Cakntha had not, however, this heavy charge to answer for at the time in which she
spoke, and her thoughts were gay, and all those around seenied to share in the happiness she felt. Lord Avondale one day reproved Ca¬ lantha for her excessive love of music.— ťť You have censured work," he said, " and imputed to it every evil, the cold and the passionless can fall into™I novv retort your satire upon music." Some may smile at this ; but had not Lord Avondale's observation more weight than at first it may appear. Lady Avondale often rode to Glenaa to hear Miss St, Clare sing, Gondimar sung not like her; and his love-breathing ditties went not to the heart, like the hymns of the lovely recluse. But for the deep flushes vvhich now and then overspread St. Clara's cheeks, and the fire vvhich at times animated her bright dark eye, some might have fancied her a being ofa purer nature than our own—one incapable of feeling any of the fierce passions that disturb mankind ; but her voice was
such as to shake every fibre of the heart, and might soon have betrayed to an ex¬ perienced observer the impassioned vio¬ lence of her real character. Sir Everard, who had one day accom¬ panied Calantha to the convent, asked his niece in a half serious, half jesting manner, concerning her gift of prophecy. ** Have not all this praying and fasting, cured you of it, my little Sybil?" he said.—" No,'* replied the girl ; " but that which you are so proud of, makes me sad:—it is this alone which keeps me from the sports vvhich delight rny companions :—it is this vvhich makes me weep when the sun shines bright in the clear heavens, and the bosom of the sea is calm."—" Will you shew us a speci¬ men of your art ?" said Sir Everard, eagerly.—Miss St. Clare coloured, and smiling archly at him, " The inspiration is not on tne now uncle," she said ; u when it is, I will send and let you
know/'— Calantha embraced her, and returned from her visit more and more enchanted with her singular acquaint¬ ance.
CHAPTER XX, As soon as Lord and Lady Avondale had quitted Castle Delaval, they returned to Allanwater, previous to their departure for England. Buchanan, as if to mark his still continued resentment against Calantha arrived at Castle Delaval, ac¬ companied by some of his London ac¬ quaintance, almost as soon as she had quitted it. He soon distinguished him¬ self in that circle bv Ins bold libertine manners, his daring opinions, and his overbearing temper. Ife declared him¬ self at utter enmity with all refinement, and professed his distaste for vvhat is termed good society. It was not long, however, hefore Lady Margaret observed a stranerò and sudden alteration in her son's manners and deportment :—he en¬ tered iuto every amusement proposed ;
he became more than usually conde¬ scending; and Alice Mac Allain, it was supposed, was the sole cause of his re¬ form. Alice was credulous; and when she was first told that she was fair as tlie opening rose, and soft and balmy as the summer breeze, she listened with delight to the flattering strain, and looked in tho mii ror to see if all she heard were true. She beheld there a face, lovely as youth and glowing health could paint it, dimp¬ ling vvith ever-vary ing smiles, while hair, like threads of gold, curled in untaught ringlets over eyes of the lightest blue ; and when she heard that she was loved, sbe could not bring herself to mistrust those vows which her ovvn bosom was but too well prepared to receive. She had, perhaps, been won by the first who had attempted to gain her affections ; but she fell into hands where falsehood bad twined itself around the very heart's core:—-she learned to love in no common
school, and one by one every principle and every thought was perverted ; but it was not Buchanan who had to answer for her fall ! She sunk into infamy, it is true, and ruin irreparable; but she passed through all the glowing course of passion and romance ; nor avvoke, till too late, from the dream vvhich had deluded her. Her old father, Gerald Mac Allain, had, vvith the Duke's permission, pro¬ mised her hand in marriage to a young man in the neighbourhood, much es¬ teemed for his good character. Linden had long considered himself as an ap¬ proved suitor. When, therefore, he was first informed of the change vvhich had occurred in her sentiments, and, more than all, when he w ? as told with every aggravation of her misconduct and du¬ plicity, he listened to the charge with in¬ credulity, until the report of it was con¬ firmed from her own lips, by an avowal, that she thought herself no longer worthy of accepting his generous offer—that to
be plain, slie loved another, and wished never more to see him, or to hear the re¬ proaches wdiich she acknowledged were her due. " 1 will ofler you no reproaches," said Linden, in the only interview he had with her ; " but remember, Miss Mac Allain, when I am far away, that if ever those, who, under the name of friends, have beguiled and misled you, should'prove false and fail you—remem¬ ber, that, whilst Linden lives, there is one left vvho will gladly lay down his life to defend and preserve you ; and who, being forced to quit you, never will re¬ proach you : no, Alice—never î " Gerald," said Lady Margaret, on the morning when Alice was sent in disgrace from the castle, " I will have no private communication between yourself and your daughter. She will be placed at present ¡n a respectable family; and her future conduct will decide in what man¬ ner she will be disposed of hereafter." The old man bent to the ground in silent
grief; for the sins of children rise up in judgment against their parents. " Oh let me not be sent from hence in dis¬ grace," said the weeping girl ; " drive me not to the commission of crime. I am yet innocent. Pardon a first offence." —" TaJk not of innocence," said Lady Margaret, sternly : " those guilty looks betray you. Your nocturnal rambles, your daily visits to the western cliff, your altered manner—all have beea observed by me and Buchanan"—"Oh, say not, at least, that he accuses me. Whatever my crime, I am guiltless, at least, towards him."—" Guiltless or not, you must quit our family immediately; and to-morrow, at an early hour, see that you are pre¬ pared." It was to Sir Everard's house that Alice was conveyed. There were many rea¬ sons which rendered this abode more convenient to Lady Margaret than any other. The Doctor was timid and sub¬ servient, and Count Gondimar was al- VOL. I. I
ready a great favourite of the youngest daughter's, so that the whole family were, in some measure, in Lady Margaret's power. Her ladyship accordingly in¬ sisted upon conveying Alice, herself, to Lady St. Clare's house; and having safely lodged her in her new apartment, re¬ turned to the castle, i n haste, and appeared at dinner, pleased with her morning's adventure ;—her beauty more radiant from success. It is said that nothing gives a brighter glow to the complexion, or makes the eyes ofa beautiful woman sparkle so in¬ tensely, as triumph over another. Is this, however, the case with respect to women alone ? Buchanan's florid cheek was dimpled with smiles ; no sleepless night had dimmed the lustre of his eye ; he talked incessantly, and with unusual af¬ fability addressed himself to all, except to his mother ; while a look of gratified vanity was observable whenever the ab¬ sence of Alice was alluded to. He had
been pleased with being the cause of ruin to any woman ; but his next dearest gra¬ tification was the having it supposed that he was so. He was much attacked upon this occasion, and much laughing and whispering was heard. The sufferings of love are esteemed lightly till they are felt : and there were, on this occasion, few at the Duke's table, if any, who had ever really known them.
ι 2
CHAPTER XXL Time, which passes swiftly and thought¬ lessly for the rich and the gay, treads ever with leaden foot, for those who are miserable and deserted. Bright pro¬ spects carry the thoughts onward ; but for the mourning heart, it is the direct reverse : it lives on the memory of the past: traces ever the same dull round; and loses itself in vain regret and useless retrospections. No joyous morn now rose to break the slumbers of the once innocent and happy Alice: peace of mind was gone, like the lover who had first won her affections, only it seemed to abandon her to shame and remorse. At Sir Everard's, Alice was treated with impertinent curiosity, tedious ad¬ vice, and unwise severity. " I hate peo¬ ple in the clouds," cried the Doctor, as
he led her to her new apartment. « Who vvould walk in a stubble field with their eyes gazing upon the stars ? You would, perhaps ; and then, let me say, nobody would pity you, Miss, if you tumbled into the mire."—" But kind people would help me up again, and the unkind alone would mock at me, and pass on."-— " There are so many misfortunes in this life, Miss Mac Allain, which come unex¬ pectedly upon us, that, for my life, I have not a tear to spare for those who bring them on themselves." — " Yet, perbaps, Sir, they are, of all others, the most unfortunate."—" Miss Alice, mark пае, 1 cannot enter into arguments, or rather, shall not, for we do not always think proper to do what we can. Con¬ scious rectitude is certainly a valuable feeling, and I am anxious to preserve it now : therefore, as I have taken charge of you, Miss, which is not what I am particularly fond of doing, I must exe¬ cute what I think my duty. Please^ then,
to give over weeping, as iţ is a thing in a woman which never excites commise¬ ration in me. Women and children cry out of spite: I have noticed them by the hour : therefore, dry your eyes ; think less of love, more of your duty ; and re¬ collect, that people who step out of their sphere are apt to tumble downwards till the end of their days, as nothing is so disagreeable as presumption in a woman. I hate presumption, do I not Lady St. Clare? So no more heroics, young Miss," continued he, smiling triumphantly, and shaking his head : " no more heroics, if you value my opinion. I hate romance and fooleries in women, do I not, Lady St. Clare ? and heaven be praised, since the absence of my poor mad brother, we have not a grain of it in our house. We are all downright people ; not afraid of being called vulgar, because we are of the old school : and when you have lived a little time with us, Miss, we shall, I hope, teach you a little sound common
sense—a very valuable commodity let me tell you, though your fine people hold it in disrepute," In this manner Miss Mac Allain's mornings were spent, and her evenings even more tediously; for the Doctor, alarmed at the republican principles which he observed fast spreading, was constantly employed in writing pam¬ phlets in favour of government, which he read aloud to his family, when not at the castle, before he committed them to the Dublin press. Two weeks were thus passed by Alice with resignation ; a third, it seems, was beyond her endurance ; for one morning Sir Everard's daughters en¬ tering in haste, informed their father and mother that she was gone. " Gone !" cried Lady St, Clare—" the thing is im¬ possible."—"Gone!" cried Sir Everard —" and where? apd how ?"~-The maids were cailed, and one Charley Wright, vvho served for footman, coachman, and every thing else upou occasion, was dis-
patched to seek her, while the doctor, without waiting to hear his wife's sur¬ mises or his daughter's lamentations, seized his hat and stick and walked in haste to the castle. His body erect, his cane still under his arm, the brogue stronger than ever, from inward agitation, he immediately ad¬ dressed himself io the Duke and Lady Margaret, and soon converted their smiles into fear and anger, by informing them that Alice Mac Allain had eloped. Orders were given, that eveiy enquiry should be made for the fugitive ; and the company at the castle being informed one by one of the event, lost themselves in conjectures upon İt. Lady Margaret had no doubt herself, that her son was deeply implicated in the affair, and, in consequence, every search was set on foot, but, as it proved in the event, with¬ out the least success. Mr. Buchanan had left Castle Delaval the week before, which confirmed the suspicions already entertained on his account.
Lady Avondale was in London when she was informed of this event. Her grief for Alice's fate was very sincere, and her anxiety for her even greater ; but Lord Avondale participated in her sorrow—he endeavoured to sooth her agitation ; and how conid he fail in his attempt : even misery is lightened, if it is shared ; and one look, one word, from a heart which seems to comprehend our suffering, alleviates the bitterness. Though Lady Avondale had not seen Buchanan since her marriage, and had heard that he was offended with her, she wrote to him immediately upon hearing of Alice's fate, and urged him by every tie she thought most sacred and dear—by every impression most likely to awaken his compassion, to restore the unfortu¬ nate girl to her suffering father, or at least to confide her to her care, that she might if possible protect and save her from further misfortune. To her ex¬ treme astonishment, she received an an- i õ
swer to this letter, with a positive assur¬ ance from him, that he had no concern whatever in Miss Mac Allain's departure; that he was as ignorant as herself whither she could be gone ; and that it might be recollected he had left Castle Delaval some days previous to that event. Lady Dartford, who had returned to London, and sometimes corresponded with Sophia, now corroborated Bucha¬ nan's statement, and assured her that she had no reason to believe Buchanan con¬ cerned in this dark affair, as she had seen him several times and he utterly denied it. Lady Dartford was, however, too inno¬ cent and inexperienced to know hovv men of the world can deceive ; she was even ignorant of her husband's conduct ; and though she liked not Lady Margaret, she doubted not that she was her friend :— who indeed doubts till they learn by bit¬ ter experience the weakness of confiding!
CHAPTER XXII. Тле whole party at Castle Delaval now proceeded to London for the winter, where Lord and Lady Avondale were al¬ ready established in the Duke's mansion in ......Square. A slight cold and fever, added to the anxiety and grief Lady Avondale had felt for her unhappy friend, had confined her entirely to her own apartment ; and since her arrival in tovvn, Count Gondi¬ mar was almost the only person who had been hitherto admitted to her pre¬ sence. He and Viviani now lodged in the same house; but the latter still concealed himself, and never was admitted to Lady Margaret's presence, except secretly, and with caution. He often enquired after Calantha ; and one evening the following
conversation took place respecting her between himself and the Count : " You remember her," said Gondi¬ mar, " a wild and wayward girl. Is she less, do you suppose, an object of attraction now in the more endearing character of mother and of wife ? So gentle, so young she seems, so pure, and yet so passionately attached to her hus¬ band and infant boy, that I think even you, Viviani, would feel convinced of her integrity. She seems, indeed, one born alone to love, and to be loved, if love itself might exist in a creature whom purity and every modest feeling веещ continually to surround." Viviani smiled in scorn. " Gondimar T this Calantha, this fair and spotless flower İs a woman, and, as such, she must be frail. Besides, I know that she is so in a thousand instances, though as yet too innocent to see herdanger or to mistrust our sex. You have often described to me her excessive fondness for music. What
think you of it ? She does not hear it as the Miss Seymours hear it, you tell me. She does not admire it, as one of the lovers of harmony might. Oh no ; she feels it in her very soul—it awakens every sensibility—it plays upon the chords of her overheated imagination— it fills her eyes with tears, and strengthens and excites the passions which it appears to soothe and to compose. There is no¬ thing which the power of music cannot effect, when it is thus heard. Your Calantha feels it to a dangerous excess. Let me see herland I will sing to her till the chaste veil of every modest feeling is thrown aside. Oh, I would trust every thing to the power of melody ! Calantha iş fond of dancing, too, I hear ; and dancing is the order of the night. This is well ; and once, though she saw me not, amidst the crowd, I marked her, as she lightly bounded the gayest in the circle, from the mere excess of the ani¬ mal spirit» of youth. Now Miss Sey-
mour dances ; but it is vvith modest dig¬ nitv : her sister Frances dances also, and it İs with much skill and grace, her side¬ long glance searching for admiration as she passes by; but Calantha sees not, thinks not, when she dances : her heart beats with joyous pleasure—her counte¬ nance irradiates—and almost wild with delight, she forgets every thing but the moment she enjoys. Let Viviani but for one night be her partner, and you shall see how pure is this Cakntha. She boasts, too, of the most unclouded hap¬ piness, you tell me, and of the most per¬ fect state of security and bliss ; but they vvho soar above others, on the wings of romance, wiH fall. Oh, surely they will fail! Let her continue in her present illusion only a few short years—let her but take the common chances of the life she will be called upon to lead ; and you, or I, or any man, may possess her affec¬ tions, nor boast greatly of the conquest. In one word, she is now in London.
Give but Viviani one opportunity of beholding her: it is all I ask." Gondimar listened to his young friend with regret. " There are womer^enough, Viviani," he said mournfully ; " spare this one. I have an interest in her safety." " I shall not seek her," replied Viviani proudly : " please your own fancy : I care not for these trifïers —not 1."
CHAPTER XXIIL To that heartless mass of affectation, to that compound of every new and every old absurdity, to that subservient, spirit¬ less, world of fashion, Lady Avondale was now for the first time introduced. It burst at once upon her delighted view, like a new paradise of unenjoyed sweets —like a fairy kingdom peopled with ideal inhabitants. Whilst she resided at Monteith and Castle Delaval, she had felt an eager desire to improve her mind; study of every sort was her delight, for he who instructed her was her lover— her husband : one smile from him could awaken every energy ; one frown repress every feeling of gaiety ; for eveiy word he uttered amused and pleased : she learned with more aptness than a school-boy; and he who wondered at the quickness
ofhis pupil, forgot to ascribe her exer¬ tions and success to the povver which alone occasioned them—a power which conquers every difficulty and endures every trial. Arrived in that gay city, that fair mart where pleasure and amusement gather around their votaries, where incessant hurry after novelty employs every energy, and desire of gaiety fills every hour, every feeling, and every thought, Calantha hailed every new acquaintance, every new amusement, and her mind, unpo¬ lished and ignorant, opened with admi¬ ration and wonder upon so new, so diver¬ sified a scene. To the language of praise and affection she had been usetl ; to un¬ limited indulgence and liberty, she was accustomed ; but the soft breathing voice of flattery sounded to her ear far sweeter than any other more familiar strain ; though often, in the midst of its blan¬ dishments, she turned away to seek for Lord Avondale's approbation.
Calantha was happy before; but now it vvas like a dream of enchantment -, and her only regret was that her husband seemed not to partake as much as she could have wished in her delight. Yet he knew the innocence ofher heart, the austerity with which she shrunk from the bare thought of evil, and he had trusted her even in the lion's den, so certain was he of her virtue and attachment. Indeed, Lord Avondale, though neither puffed with vanity, nor overbearing with pride, could not but be conscious, as he looked around, that both in beauty of person, in nobility of parentage, and more than these, in the impassioned feelings of an uncorrupted heart, and the rich gifts of a miud enlightened by wisdom and study, none were his superiors, and very few his equals ; and if his Calantha could have preferred the effeminate and frivo¬ lous beings who surrounded her, to his sincere and strong attachment, would she be worthy, in such case, ofa single
sigh of regret, or the smallest struggle to retain herl—No:—he was convinced that she would not ; and, as in word and deed he was faithful to her, he fear¬ ed not to let her take the course which others trod, or enjoy the smiles of for¬ tune, while youth and happiness were in her possession. The steed that never has felt the curb, as İt fiies lightly and wildly, proud of its liberty among its native hills ancl valleys, may toss its head and plunge as it snuffs the air and rejoices in its existence, while the tame and goaded hack trots along the beaten road, starting from the lash under which it trembles, and stumbling and falling, if not constantly upheld.— Now see the goal before her. Calantha starts for the race. Nor curb, nor rein, have ever fettered the pupil of nature— the proud, the daring votress of liberty and love. What though she quit the common path, if honour and praise ac¬ company her steps, and crown her with
Success, shall he who owns her despise her? or must he, can he, mistrust her? He did not ; and the high spirits of un¬ curbed youth were in future her only guide^—the gayest therefore, where all were gay—the kindest, for excess of happiness renders every heart kind. In a few months after Lady Avondale's ar¬ rival in London, she was surrounded, as it appeared, by friends who would have sacrificed their lives and fortunes to give her pleasure. Friends !—it was a name she was in the habit of giving to the first who happened to please her fancy. This even was not required : the frowns of the world were sufficient to endear the objects of its censure to her affection ; and they who had not a friend, and de¬ served not to have one, were sure, with¬ out other recommendation, to find one in Calantha. All looked fresh, beautiful and new to her eyes ; every person she met appeared kind, honourable, and sin¬ cere ; and every party brilliant ; for her
heart, blest in itself, reflected its own sunshine around. Mrs. Seymour, after her arrival in town, was pleased to see Calantha so happy. No gloomy fear obtruded itself; she saw all things with the unclouded eye of virtue ; yet when she considered how many faults, how many imprudences, her thoughtless spirits might Jead her to commit, she trembled for her ; and once, when Calantha boasted of the extacy she enjoyed—" long may that innocent heart feel thus," she said, " my oniy, my be¬ loved niece; but whilst the little bark is decked with flowers, and sails gaily in a tranquil sea, steer it steadily, remember ing that rough gales raay come, and we should ever be prepared." She spoke with an air of melancholy : she had, per¬ haps, herself, suffered from the goodness and openness of her heart ; but whatever the faults and sorrows into which she had fallen, no purer mind ever existed than her's—no heart ever felt more strongly.
The affectation of generosity is com¬ mon ; the reality is so rare, that its con¬ stant and silent course passes along un¬ perceived, whilst prodigality and osten¬ tation bear away the praise of mankind. Calantha was esteemed generous; yet indifference for what others valued, and thoughtless profusion were the only qualities she possessed. It is true that the sufferings of others melted a young and ardent heart into the performance of many actions which would never have occurred to those of a colder and more prudent nature. But was there any self- denial practised ; and was not she who bestowed possessed of every luxury and comfort her varying and fanciful caprices could desire ! Never did she resist the smallest impulse or temptation. If to give had been a crime, she had commit¬ ted it ; for it gave her pain to refuse, and she knew not hovv to deprive herself of any gratification. She lavished, there¬ fbre, all she had, regardless of every con-
sequence; but, happily for her, she was placed in a situation which prevented her from suffering as severely for her faults as probably she deserved. Two friends novv appeared to bless her further, as she thought, by their affection and confidence—Lady Mandeville and Lady Augusta Selwyn. The former she loved ; the latter she admired. Lord .Avondale observed her intimacy with Lady Mandeville with regret ; and once, though with much gentleness, reproved her for it. " Henry," she replied, " say not one wordagainst my beautiful, though perhaps unfortunate friend : spare Lady Mandeville ; and I will give you up Lady Augusta Selwyn ; but remember the formeris unprotected and unhappy." Mrs. Seymour was present when Lord Avondale had thus ventured to hint his disapprobation of Calantha's new ac¬ quaintance.— ts Say at once, that Calan¬ tha shall not see any more of one whom you disapprove :—her own character is
not established. Grace and manner are prepossessing qualities; but it is decorum and a rational adherence to propriety vvhich alone can secure esteem. TeU me not of misfortunes," continued Mrs. Seymour, with increasing zeal in the good cause, and turning from Lord Avon- dale to Calantha, 4t a woman who breaks through the lesser rules which custom and public opinion have esta¬ blished, deserves to lose all claim to re¬ spect ; and they who shriuk not at your age from even the appearance of guilt, because they dread being called severe and prudish, too generally follow the steps of the victims which their faise sentiments of pity have induced them to support. Lord Avondale," continued she, with more of warmth than it was her custom to shew—" you will lament, when it is too late, the ruin of this child. Those who now smile at Calantha's rol¬ lies will soon be the first to frown upon her faults. She is on the road to perdi-
tion ; and now is the moment, the only moment perhaps, in which to check her course. You advise:—I command. My girls at least shall not associate with Lady Mandeville, whom no one visits. Lady Avondale of course is her own mistress." Piqued at Mrs. Seymour's manner, Calantha appealed to her husband : " and shall I give up my friend, because she has none but mc to defend her? Shall my friendship—" Alas, Calantha," said Lord Avondale, " you treat the noblest sentiment ofthe heart as a toy, vvhich is to be purchased to-day, and thrown aside to-morrow. Believe me, friendship is not to be acquired by a few morning visits; nor is it to be found, though I fear it is too often lost, in the crowd of fa¬ shion." He spoke this mournfully. The ready tears trembled in Lady Avondale's eves.—" I will see no more of her, if it gives you pain. 1 will never visit her vol. i. к
again."—Lord Avondale could not bear to grieve her. Ä servant entered with a note, whilst they were yet together:—a crimson blush suffused Calantha's cheeks. " I see," said Lord Avondale smiling, as if fearful of losing her confidence, " it is from your new friend." It was so :—she had sent her carriage, with a request that Lady Avondale would immediately call upon her.^—She hesitated ; looked eagerly for a permission, which was too soon granted; and without making any excuse, for she had not learned the art, she hastened from the lowering eyes of the deeply of¬ fended Mrs. Seymour.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Long as she had now been known to Lady Mandeville, she had only once be¬ fore seen her at her own house. She now found her reclining upon a sofa in an apartment more prettily than magnifi¬ cently ornamented:—a shawl was thrown gracefully over her; and her hair, in dark auburn ringlets, half concealed her languishing blue eyes. Lady Mandeville was at this time no longer in the very prime of youth. Her air and manner had not that high polish, which at first sight seduces and wins. On the contrary, it rather was the reverse, and a certain pedantry took off much from the charm of her conversation. Yet something there was about her, which attracted. She seemed sincere too, and had less of that studied self-satisfied air, than most
women, who affect to be well informed. " I am glad you are come, my beloved friend," she said, extending her hand to Calantha when she entered. " I have just been translating an Ode of Pindar: his poetry is sublime : it nerves the soul and raises it above vulgar cares ;—but you do not understand Greek, do you ? Indeed to you it would be a superfluous acquisition, married as you are, and to such a man."—Lady Avondale, rather puzzled as to the connection between domestic happiness, and the Greek lan¬ guage, listened for further explanation ; —but wdth a deep sigh, her lovely ac¬ quaintance talked of her fate, and re¬ ferred to scenes and times long passed, and utterly unknown to her. She talked much too of injured innocence, of the malignity of the world, of contempt for her own sex, and ofthe superiority of men. Children as fair, and more innocent than tlieir mother, entered whilst she
was yet venting her complaints. A husband she had not ;—but lovers. What man was there vvho could see her, and not, at all events vvish himself of the number! Yet she assured Lady Avon- dafe, who believed her, that she despised them all ; that moreover she was mise¬ rable, but not vicious ; that her very openness and frankness ought to prove that there was nothing to conceal. The thought of guift entered notat that time into Calantha's heart; and when indeed a women affirmed that she was innocent, it excited in her no other surprise, than thatshe should, fbr one moment, sup¬ pose her so barbarous, and so nialeveĽnt as to think her otherwise. Indeed there seemed to her as great a gulph between those she loved, and vice, as that which separates the two extremes of wickedness and virtue ; nor had she yet learned to comprehend the language of hypocrisy and deceit. Though the presence of the children
had not made any difference, the entrance of three gentlemen, whom Lady Man¬ deville introduced to Lady Avondale, as her lovers, gave a new turn to the con¬ versation ; and here it should be ex¬ plained, that the term lover, when Lady Mandeville used it, was intended to convey no other idea than that of an humble attendant—^a bearer of shawls, a writer of sonnets, and a caller of car¬ riages. " With Lord Dallas you are already acquainted," she said, sighing gently. " I wish now to introduce Mr. Clarendon to you, a poet : and Mr. Fre¬ more, what are you ? speak for yourself; for I hardly know in what manner to describe you." " I am anything, and everything that Lady Mandeville plea¬ ses," said Mr. Fremore, bowing to the ground, and smiling languidly upon her. Mr. Fremore was one of the most un¬ sightly lovers that ever aspired to bear the name. He was of a huge circumfe¬ rence, and what is unusual in persons of
that make, he was a mass of rancour and malevolence—gifted however with a wit so keen and deadly, that with its razor edge, he cut to the heart most of his enemies, and all his friends. Lord Dal¬ las, diminutive and conceited, had a brilliant wit, spoke seldom, and studied deeply every sentence which he uttered. He affected to be absent ; but in fact no one ever forgot himself so seldom. His voice, untuned and harsh, repeated with a forced emphasis certain jests and bon mots which had been previously made, and adapted for certain conversa* tions. Mr. Clarendon alone seemed gifted with every kind of merit : he had an open ingenuous countenance, expres¬ sive eyes, and a strong and powerful mind. The conversation alternately touched upon the nature of love, the use and beauty of' the Greek language, the plea¬ sures of maternal affection, and the insi¬ pidity of all English society. It was
rather metaphorical at times :—there was generally in it a want of nature—an at¬ tempt at display : but to Calantha it ap¬ peared too singular, and too attractive to vvish it otherwise. She had been used, however, to a manner rather more re¬ fined—more highly polished than any she found out of her own circle and fa¬ mily. A thousand things shocked her at first, which afterwards she not only tolerated but adopted. There was a want of ease, too, in many societies, to vvhich she could not yet accustom her¬ self; and she knew not exactly wdiat it vvaswhich chilled and depressed her when in the presence of many who were, upon a nearer acquaintance, amiable and agree¬ able. Perhaps too anxious a desire to please, too great a regard for trifles, a sort of selfishness, which never loses sight of its own identity, occasions this coldness among these votaries of fashion. The dread of not having that air, that dress, that refinement which they value
so much, prevents their obtaining it; and a degree of vulgarity steals unper¬ ceived amidst the higher classes in En¬ gland, from the very apprehension they feel of falling into it. Even those, who are natural, do not entirely appear so. Calantha's life was like a feverish dream :—so crowded, so varied, so swift in its transitions, thatshe had little time to reflect ; and when she did, the me¬ mory of the past was so agreeable and so brilliant, that it gave her pleasure to think of it again and again. If Lord Avondale was with her, every place appeared even more than usually delightfui ; but, when absent, her letters, no longer filled vvith lamentations on her lonely situation, breathed from a vain heart, the lightness and satisfaction it enjoyed. It may be supposed that one so frivo¬ lous and so thoughtless, committed every possible fault and folly which opportu¬ nity and time allowed. It may also be supposed, that such imprudence met к ô
with its just reward ; and that every tongue was busy in itscensure, and every gossip in exaggerating the extraordinary feats of such a trifler. Yet Calantha, upon the whole, was treated with only too much kindness ; and the world, though sometimes called severe, seemed willing to pause ere it would condemn, and was intent alone to spare or to re¬ claim a young offender. When the World is spoken ofin these volumes, it means alone that frivolous part of the community who dwell with delight upon the busy scene before them, and take interest in the momentary di¬ versions which every little novelty and every little event occasions.
CHAPTER XXV. How different from the animated dis¬ cussion at Lady Mandeville's, was the loud laugh and boisterous tone of Lady Augusta Selwyn, vvhom Calantha found, on her return, at that very moment step¬ ping from her carriage, and enquiring for her. " Ah, my dear sweet friend," she cried, flying towards Calantha, and shaking her painfully by the hand, " this fortuitous concurrence of atoms, fills my soul with rapture. But I was resolved to see you. I have promised and vowed three things in your name ; therefore, consider me as your sponsor, and indeed I am old enough to besuch. In the first place, you must cometo me to-night, for I have a little supper, and all my guests attend only in the hope of meeting you. You are the bribe 1 have held out—you
are to stand me in lieu ofa good house, good cook, agreeable husband, and pretty face—in all of which I am most unfortunately deficient. Having con¬ fessed thus much, it would be barbarous, it would be inhuman you know to refuse me. Now for the second favour," con¬ tinued this energetic lady : -— " come alone ; for though I have a great respect for Mrs. and Miss Seymour, yet I never know what I am about when their very sensible eyes are fixed upon ше." —" Oh you need not fear, Sophia would not come if I wished it ; and Mrs. Seymour"—- " I have soniething else to suggest," in¬ terrupted Lady Augusta: " introduce me immediately to your husband: he is divine, I hear—perfectly divine 1" " I cannot at this moment; but"—" By the bye, why were you not at the ball last night. I can tell you there were some who expected you there. Yes, I assure you, a pair of languid blue eyes watching for you—a fascinating new friend waiting
to take you home to a petit souper très bien assorti. I went myself. It was monstrously dull at the ball : insupport¬ able, I assure you ; perfectly so. Mrs. Turner and her nine daughters ! It is quite a public calamity, Mrs. Turner being so very prolific—the produce so frightful. Amongst other animals when they commit such blunders, the brood is drowned ; but we christians are suffered to grow up till the land is overrun." " Heieho " " What is the matter? You look so triste to-day, not even my wit can enliven you. — Is'nt it well, love? or has its husband been plaguing it ? Now I have it : you have, perchance, been translating an Ode of Pindar. í was there myseif this morning ; and it gave me the vapours for ten minutes; but I am used to these things you know child, and you are a novice. By the bye, where is your cousin, le beau capi' tai?ie> le chef des brigands P I was quite frappé with his appearance," " You
may think it strange," said Calantha, 4t but I have not seen him these eight years—not since he was quite a child." c ' Ob, what an interview tiiere will be then," said Lady Augusta: "be is a perfect ruffian." " Now areyou aware that we have three sets of men much in request ?—There are these ruffians, who affect to be des¬ perate, who game, who drink, who fight, who will captivate you, I am sure of it ; for they are always just going to be de¬ stroyed, or rather talk as if they were; and every thing they da they must do it to desperation. Then come the exquisites. Lord Dallas is one, a sort of refined petit maitre, quite thorough bred though, and yet full of conceit. As to the third set, your useful men, who know how to read and write, in which clasL cri tics, reviewers, politicians and poets stand, you may always know them by their slovenly ap¬ pearance. But you are freezing, mon enfant. What can be the matter ? I
will release you in a moment from my visitation ; yet I have ten thousand things to say.—Will you come to my opera box Tuesday ? Are you going to the masked ball Thursday ? Has Mrs. Churchill sent to you for her déjeûné paré. I know she wishes, more than I can express, to have you. Perhaps you will let me drive you there. My ponies are beautiful arabians : have you seen them ? Oh, by the bye, why were you not at your aunt Lady Margaret's con¬ cert ? I believe it was a concert : there was a melancholy noise in one of the rooms ; but I did not attend to it.—Do you not like music?"-—" O yes 1 do; but I must own I am not one who profess to be all enchantment at the scraping of a fiddle, because some old philharmonic plays on it ; nor can I admire the gurgling and groaning of a number of foreigners, because it is called singéig, .. .As to you, they tell me you think of nothing but love and poetry. I dare say you
write sonnets to the moon—the chaste moon, and your husband. How senti¬ mental !" " And vou,"—" No, mv dear, I thank heaven, I never could make a rhyme in my life.—Farewell—adieu— remember to-night—bring Lord Avon- dale—that divine Henry : though be¬ ware too ; for many a lady has to mourn the loss of her husband, as soon as she has introduced him into the society of fascinating friends." " He is out of town/' " Then so much the better. After all, a wife is only pleasant when her husband is out of the way. She must either be in love, or out of love with him. If the latter, they wrangle ; and if the former, it is ten times worse. Lovers are at ail times insufferable; but when the holy laws of matrimony give them a law¬ ful right to be so amazingly fond and af¬ fectionate, it makes one sick." t; Which are you, in love or out of love with Mr. Selwyn?" — Si Neither, child, neither. He never molests me, never intrudes his
dear dull personage on my society ; and 1 leave him entirely to himself in return; for he is the best of his race, and only married me out of pure benevolence. Vve were fourteen raw Scotch girls—all hide¬ ous, and no chance of being got rid of, either by marriage or death—so healthy and ugly. I believe vve are all alive and flourishing some where or other novv. Think then of dear good Mr. Selwyn, who took me for his mate, because I let him play at cards whenever he pleased. and he is so fond of cheating, he never can get any one but me to play with him. Farewell.— A revoir. —I shall expect you at ten.— Adieu, chère petite." Saying which Lady Augusta descended the stairs, her voice murmuring on to herself as she re-entered her carriage, and drove from the door.
CHAPTER XXVI. Calantha now imagined, and was re¬ peatedly assured, that her husband ne¬ glected her : the thought gave her pain : she contrasted his apparent coldness and gravity vvith the kindness and flattery of others. Even Count Gondimar was more interested for ber welfare, and latterly she observed that he watched her with in¬ creasing solicitude. At a masked ball, in particular, the Italian Count followed her till she was half offended. ** Why do you thus persecute me as to the frivolity and vanity ofmy manner? Why do you seem so i.i fin itely more solicitous con¬ cerning me than my husband and my relations ?" she said, suddenly turnings and looking earnestly at him. u What is it to you with whom I may chance to converse ? How is it possible that you
can see imperfections in me, when others tell me I am faultless and delightful?" " And do you believe that the gay troop of flatterers who now follow you," said a mask who was standing near the Count, " do you believe that they feel any other sentiment for you than indifference ?"— " Indifference !" repeated Calantha, " what can you mean ? I am secure of their affection ; and I have found more friends in London since I first arrived there, than I have made in the whole previous course of my iife." ** You are their jest aud their derision," said the same mask. " Am I," she said, turning eagerly round to her partner, Lord Trelaw- ny, "am I your jest and your derision?" " You are all that is amiable and ador¬ able," he whispered. u Speak louder," said Lady Avondale, " tell this Italian Count, and his discourteous fri* ml. what you thiuk of me, or will they wait to hear what we all think of them ?" Gon¬ dimar, offended, left her ; and she passed
the night at the ball, but felt uneasy at vvhat she had said. Monteagle House, at which the mas¬ querade was given, was large and magni¬ ficent. The folding doors opened into fine apartments, each decorated with flowers, and filled with masks. Her young friends, Sophia and Lady Dart¬ ford, in the first bloom and freshness of youth, attracted much admiration. Their dress was alike, and while seeming sim¬ plicity was its greatest charm, every fold, every turn, was adapted to exhibit their figure, and add to their natural grace. If vanity can give happiness to the heart, how must theirs have exulted ; for enco¬ mium and flattery was the only language they heard. Lady Avondale, in the mean time, fa¬ tigued with the ceremonious insipidity of their conversation, and delighted at hav¬ ing for once escaped from Count Gondi¬ mar, sought in vain to draw her compa¬ nions into the illuminated gardens, and
not succeeding, wandered into them alone, followed by some masks in the disguise of gipsies, by whom she was soon surrounded; and one of them vvhom she recognized to be the same vvho had spoken to her with Gondimar, under the pretence of telling her fortune, said to her every thing that was most severe. " What, said he, turning to one of his companions, " do you think of the line in this lady's hand ? It is a very strange one : I augur no good from it." The dress ofthe mask who spoke was that of a friar, his voice was soft and mournful. " Caprice," said the young man, whom he addressed : " I read no worse fault. Come, I will tell her fortune.—" Lady, you were born under a favoured planet," —"Aaron," interrupted the Friar, " you are a flatterer, and it is my privilege to speak without disguise. Give me the hand, and 1 will slievv herdestinv. After pausing a moment, he fixed his dark eyes upon Calantha, the rest of his face being
covered by a cowl, and in a voice like music, so soft and plaintive, begun— The task to tell thy fate be mine, To guard against its ills be thiue ; For heavy treads the foot of Care On those who are so young and fair. The star, that on thy birth shone bright, Now casts a dim uncertain light : A threatening sky obscures its rays. And shadows o'er thy future days. In fashion's magic circle bound, Tby steps shall tread her mazy round, While pleasure, flattery, and art, ¡Shall captivate thy fickle heart. Insatiate vanity shall pine, As honour, and as health decline, The transient favorite of a day, Of folly and of fools the prey ; Till reft of fame, without a friend, Thou'lt meet, unwept, an early end. Lady Avondale coloured; and the young man who had accused her of ca-
price, watching her countenance, and seeing the pain these acrimonious lines had given her, reproved the friar—" No, no," he cried, " if she must hear her des¬ tiny, let me reveal it," The task to teU thy fate be mine, And every bliss I wish thee, thine. So heavenly fair, so pare, so blest. Admired by aU, by all carest. The ills of life thou ne'er shalt know, Or weep alone for others' woe ; Nor malice shall, with veüom'd dart. Have power to reach thy spotless heart. " For the honour of our tribe cease, Aaron," said a female gipsey advancing; " positively I will not hear any more of this flat parody. Thefriar's malice I could endure; but this will mar all."—Yet, whatever the female gipsey might say, Aaron had a certain figure and counte¬ nance, which were sufficiently command¬ ing and attractive. He had disengaged himself from his companions; and now approached Calantha, and asked her to allow him to take care of hér through
the crowd. " This is abominable trea¬ chery," said the female gipsey: this con¬ duct is unpardonable : good faith and good fellowship vvere ever our characte¬ ristics."—" You should not exert your power,"answered theyoungman, "against those who seem so little willing to use the same weapons in return. I will an¬ swer for it, that, though under a thousand masks, the lady the friar has attacked, vvould never say an ill-natured thing."— " Take care of her good-nature then," said the gipsey archly; " it may be more fatal." The gipsey and friar then went off, with the rest of their party; but Aaron remain¬ ed, and, as if much pleased with the gentle¬ ness of Lady Avondale's behaviour, fol¬ lowed her. " Who are you ?" she said. 1 will not take the arm of one who is ashamed of his name."—" And yet it is only thus unknown, I can hope to find fa¬ vour."—"Did I ever see you before?"·— " I have often had the happiness of seeing you : but api I then really so altered ?"
said he, turning to her, and looking full in her face, £t that you cannot even guess my name ?"— <c Had I ever beheld you before," answered Lady Avondale, " 1 could not have forgotten it." He bowed with a look of conceit, and Lady Avondale coloured at his comprehending the compliment, she had sufficiently in¬ tended to make. Smiling at her confu¬ sion, he assured her he had a right to her atten tion— u Stesso sangue, Stessa sorte," he said in a low voice. Calantha could hardly believe it pos¬ sible : the words he pronounced were those inscribed on her bracelet. " And are you my cousin?" shesaid; " is it in¬ deed so? no: I cannot believe it." Bu¬ chanan bowed again. " Yes," he said ; iC and a pretty cousin you have proved yourself to me. ï had vowed never to for¬ give you ; but you arc much too lovely and too dear for me to wish to keep my ocitli." A thousand remembrances now crowded on her mind—the days of her VOL. I. L
infancy—the amusements and occupa¬ tions of her childhood : and she looked vainly in Buchanan's face for the smallest traces of the boy she had known so well. Delighted with her evening's adventure^ and solely occupied vvith her companion, the masquerade, the heat and all other annoyances were forgotten, till Lady Dartford being fatigued, entreated her to retire. She had conversed, during the greater part ofthe evening, with Lord Dartford, The female gipsey to whose party he be¬ longed, and vvho had attacked Lady Avondale, was Lady Margaret Buchanan. He had asked Lady Dartford many ques¬ tions about himself, to all of which she had answered with a reserve that had pleased him, and vvith a praise so unaf¬ fected, so heartfelt, and so little deserved, that he could not but deeply feel his own demerit. He did not make himself known, but suffered Lady Margaret to rally and torment his unoffending wife ;
asking her repeatedly, why so pretty, and so young, Lord Dartford permitted her to go to a masquerade vvithout a protec¬ tor. " It is," replied Lady Dartford in¬ nocently, " that he dislikes this sort of amusement, and knows well, that those who appear unprotected, are sure offind¬ ing friends." At this speech Lady Mar¬ garet laughed prodigiously ; and turning to her companion, who,much disguisedjStill followed her, asked him if he had never seen Lord Dartford ata masquerade, giv¬ ing it as her opinion, that he was very fond of this sort of amusement, and was probably there at that very moment. in the mean time, Calantha continued to talk vvith Buchanan, and eagerly en¬ quired ofhim who it was vvho, in ihe dress ofa friar, had vvith so much acrimony at¬ tacked her, tC I do not know the young man," he answered : ίς my mother calls him Viviani :—he is much with her; but he ever wears a disguise, I think ; for no one sees him: and, except Gondimar, ho ι о
seems not to have another acquaintance in England." It has been said that the weak-minded are alone attracted by the eye ; and they who say this best know what they mean. To Calantha it appeared, that the eye was given to her for no other purpose. than to admire all that was fair and beau¬ tiful. Certain it is, she made that use of hers ; and whether the object of such admiration was man, woman, or child, horse or flower, if excellent in its kind, she ever gave them the trifling homage of her approbation. Her new-found cousin was, therefore, hailed by her with the most encouraging smile ; and how long she might have listened to the ac¬ count he was giving her of his exploits, is unknown, had not Frances approached her in a hasty manner, and said, " Do come away :—the strangest thing possible has happened to mc: Lord Trelawney has proposed to me, and I—I have ac¬ cepted his offer."—"Accepted his offer!"
Calantha exclaimed, vvith a look of hor¬ ror.—" Oh, pray keep my secret till vve get home," said Frances. " I dare not tell Sophia ; but you must break it to my mother." Lord Trelawney was a silly florid young man, who laug heil very heartily and good humouredly, vvithout the least reason. He wore the dress, and had been received in that class of men, whom Lady Au¬ gusta called the exquisites. He had professed the most extravagant adoration for Lady Avondale, so that she was quite astonished at his having attached himself so suddenly to Frances; but not being of a jealous turn, she wished her joy most cordially, and when she did the same by him—" Could not help what I've done," he said, looking tenderly at her through a spying-glass : " total dearth of some¬ thing else to say:—can never iffection her much :—but she's your cousin, you know :"—and then he laughed. Lady Avondale prevailed on Frances
to keep this important secret from her mother thnt night, as that good lady had been long in bed, and to arouse her with such unexpected news at three o'clock had been cruel and useless. The next morning, long before Lady Avondale had arisen, every one knew the secret ; and very soon after, preparations for the marriage were made. The young bride received presents and congratulations : her spirits were exuberant ; and her lover, perfect and delightful. Even Lady Avon- dale beheld him with new eyes, and the whole family, whenever he was men¬ tioned, spoke of him as a remarkably sensible young man, extremely well in¬ formed, and possessed of every quality best adapted to ensure the happiness of domestic life.
CHAPTER XXVII.
Fr o m the night ofthe masquerade. Lady Avondale dared hardly confess to herself, how entirely she found her thoughts en¬ grossed by Buchanan. She met him again at a ball. He entreated her to let him call on her the ensuing day :—he said he hid much to tell her:—his man¬ ner was peculiar ; and his eyes, though not full of meaning in general, had a cer¬ tain look of interest tliat gratified the vainest of human hearts. " 1 shall be at home till two," said Calantha.— u 1 shall be with you at twelve," he answered. Late as the hour of rest might appear to some, Calantha was up, and attired with no ordinary care to receive him at the time he had appointed. Yet no Bucha¬ nan came. Oh ! could the petty triflers in vanity and vice, know the power they
gain, and the effect they produce by these arts, they would contemn the fa¬ cility of their own triumph. It is ridicu¬ lous to acknowledge it, but this disap¬ pointment increased Calantha's anxiety to see him to the greatest possible degree : she scarce could disguise the interest it created. Gondimar unfortunately called at the moment when Calantha was most impa¬ tient aiid irritable. " You expected an¬ other," be said sarcastically; " but I care not. I came not here in the hope of pleasing Lady Avondale. I came to in¬ form her—" " I cannot attend now."— tc Read this letter," said Gondimar. Ca¬ lantha looked carelessly upon it—it was from himself: it contained an avowal of attachment and of interest for her; in proof of vvhich he asked permission to offer her a gift, which he said he was com¬ missioned to bring her from Italy, Lady Avondale returned the letter coidly, and with a little affectation of dignity, de-
clined the intended present, it is so easy to behave well, when it is our pleasure to do so as well as our duty. Gondimar, hovvever, gave her but little credit for her conduct. " Лой like me not ?" he said. " Do you doubt my virtue ?" she replied eagerly. " Aye, Lady ; or, at all events, your povver of preserving it," Whilst Gondimar yet spoke, Buchanan gallopped by the window, and stopped at the door of the house. His hands vvere decorated with rings, and a gold chain and half-concealed picture hung around his neck : his height, his mustachios, the hussar trappings of his horse, the high colour in his cheek, and his dark flowing locks, gave an air of savage wild¬ ness to his countenance and figure, vvhich much delighted Calantha. He entered with familiar ease ; talked much of him¬ self, and more of some or his military friends ; stared at Gondimar, and then shook hands with him. After vvhich, he began a vehement explanation of his con- L ó
duct respecting Alice; assuring Calantha upon his honour—upon his soul, that he had no hand in her elopement, lie then talked of Ireland ; described the dread¬ ful, the exaggerated accounts of vvhat had occurred there ; and ended by assuring Gondimar, that the young Gienarvon was not dead, but was at this time at Belfont, concealed there with no other view than that of heading the rebels. The accounts which the Duke of Altamonte had re¬ ceived in part corroborated Buchanan's statement. Calantha listened, however, with more interest to the accounts Buchanan now gave: and, as he said 'he was but just returned from Dublin, even Gondimar thought the news which he brought wor¬ thy of some attention. " Send that damned Italian away," said Buchanan in a loud whisper: "I have a million of things to tell you. Ifyou keep him here, I shall go :—my remaining will be of no use." Unaccustomed to curb herself in
the least wish, Calantha now whispered to Gondimar, that she wished him to leave her, as she had something very particular to say to her cousin ; but he only smiled contemptuously upon him, and sternly asking her, since when this amazing in¬ timacy had arisen ? —placed himself at the piano-forte, and struck its chords with accompaniments till the annoyance was past bearing, Buchanan consoled himself by talking ofhis dogs and horses; and having given Calantha a list of the names of each, be¬ gan enumerating to her the invitations he had received for the ensuing week. Fortunately,at this moment, a servant en¬ tered with a note for Gondimar. " Does the bearer wait ?" he exclaimed vvith much agitation upon reading it; and im¬ mediately left the room. Upon returning home, Cou ntCondimar perceived with surprise, in the place of the person he had expected, one ofthe at-
tendantsofthelateCountessof Gienarvon —a man whose countenance and person he well remembered from its peculiarly harsh and unpleasant expression,—" Is my young Lord alive ?" said the man in a stern manner. Count Gondimar replied in the negative." " Then, Sir, I must trouble you with those affairs which most nearly concern him." ίς Your name, I think, is Macpherson?" said Count Gon¬ dimar. u You lived with the Countess of Gienarvon." The man bowed, and giving a letter into the hands ofthe Count, <c I am come from Italy at this time," he replied, " in search of my late master— La Crusca aud myself." ťt Is La Crusca with you ?" said Gondimar, starting. " The letter will inform you of every particular," replied the man vvith some gravity, <c I shall stay with the child for your farther orders." Saying this, he left the Counťs apartment; and returned into the anti-chamber, where a beautiful little boy was waiting for him.
On that very evening, after a long con¬ versation with Macpherson, Count Gon¬ dimar again sought Calantha at her fa¬ ther's house, where, upon enquiring for her, he was immediately admitted. After some little hesitation, he told her that he had brought her the present of vvhich he had made mention in his letter ; that if she had the unkindness to refuse it, some other perhaps would take charge of it :— yet it was a gift which, however unworthy he was to offer it, he thought would be dearer in her estimation than the finest jewels, and the most costly apparel :—it was a fair young boy, he said, fitted to be a lady's page, and trained in every cunninsr art his tender vears could learn. " He will he a play-mate," he said, smil¬ ing, for your son, and when, Ki added he in a lower voice, ' ς the little Movvbrey can speak, he will learn to lisp in that language which alone expresses all that the heart would utter—all that in a barba¬ rous dialect it dares not—must not sav."
As he yet spoke, he took the hat from off Zerbellinľs head, and gently pushing him towards Calantha, asked him to sue for her protection. The chihl immediately approached, hiding himself vvith singu¬ lar fear from the caresses of the Count. " Zerbellini/* said Gondimar in Italian, 44 will you love that lady?" " In my heart," replied the boy, shrinking back to Calantha, as if to a late found, but only friend. Sophia was called, and joined in the general interest and admiration the child excited. Frances shewed him to Lord Trelawney, who laughed exces¬ sively at beholding him. Lady Margaret, who was present, looking upon him sted¬ fastly, shrunk as if she had seen a serpent in her way, and then recovering iierself, held her hand out towards him. Zerbel- lini fixed his eyes on Calantha, as if watching in her countenance for the only commands vvhich he was to obey ; and when she drew him towards her aunt, iie knelt to her, and kissed her hand
with the customary grace and courtesy of an Italian. From that day, Calantha thought of nothing hut Zerbellini. He was a new object of interest: — to dress him, to amuse him, to shew him about, was her great delight. Wherever she went he must accompany her: in whatever she did or said, Zerbellini must bear a part. The Duke of Myrtlegrove advised her to make him her page ; and for this pur¬ pose he ordered him the dress of an Eastern slave. Buchanan gave him a chain with a large turquoise heart ; and as he placed it around the boy, he glanced his eye on Calantha. Presents, how¬ ever, even more magnificent, were in re¬ turn immediately dispatched by her to the Duke and to Buchanan. Count Gondimar read the letters Ca¬ lantha had written vvith the gifts ; for she had left them, as was her custom, open upon the table. All she wrote, or re¬ ceived, were thus left ; not from osten-
tation, but indifference or vanity.— " Are vou mad,'' said the Italian, " or worse than mad ?" "I affect it not," replied Lady Avondale. " I conclude, therefore, that it is real/* Indeed, there was a strange compound in Calantha's mind. She felt but little accountable for her actions ; and she often had ob¬ served, that if ever she had had the mis¬ fortune to reflv ct, a.id consequently to resolve against any particular mode of conduct, the result was, that she ever fell into the error she had determined to avoid. She might, indeed, have said, that the spirit was willing, bui the flesh was weak ; for whatever she resolved, on the slightest temptation to the con¬ trary, she failed to execute. ,
CHAPTER XXVIII. ;ί ] am astonished, my dear Gondimar," said Viviani one day, addressing him, u at the description which you gave me of Lady Avondale. I have seen her since we conversed about her, more than once; and there is not, I think, much trace leit of that excessive timidity of manner—that monastic rigidity in her opinions and conduct, of which you made mention in one of your letters from Castle Délavai." " I was wrong, utterly wrong," said Gondimar, " and you may now rank this model of purity, this para¬ gon of wives, this pupil of nature, whom I have so often praised to you, on a level vvith the rest of her fellow mortals," " Not ou a level—not on a level," re¬ plied Viviani with gravity ;" but falling far beneath it."
The Count then repeated, in a solemn tone, the description of Rome, which Inician has placed in the mouth of Ni- grinus, applying the enumeration of vices, temptHtions, and corruptions, attributed to the fairest capital of the world, to London ; and then asked of Gondimar, if it Vv ere possible for one like Calantha, to sojourn long amidst such scenes, with¬ out iii some misure .ìcquirinp; the man¬ ners, if not falling into the errors to vvhich the eyes and ears vvere every hour accustomed ? He spoke ofher with regret, as he thus pronounced her on the verge of ruin : — " a prey," he said indig¬ nantly, *' for the spoiler—the weak and willing victim of vanity." "The courts of her father are overrun with petitioners and mendicants," said Gondimar: " her apartments are filled vvith flatterers, who feed upon her credulity : she is in love with ruin : it stalks about in every pos¬ sible shape, and in every shape she hails
it : —woos it, alas ! the willing victim of prosperity, luxury, and self-indulgence." "And Avondale," said Viviani/' Lord Avondale," replied the Count, " knows not, thinks not, comprehends not her danger or his own. But the hour of per¬ dition approaches; the first years of peace and love are past; folly succeeds; and vice is the after ffame. These are tho о three stages in woman's life. Calantha is swiftly passing íhrough the second :-— the third vviil succeed. The davs and months once glided away in a dream of joy, dangerous and illusive —in a dream, I repeat ; for all that depends on the ex¬ cess and durability of any violent passion must be called a dream. Such passion, even though sanctioned by the most sa¬ cred ties, ifit engrosses every thought, is not innocent—cannot be lawful, lt plants the seeds of corruption, which flourish and gain strength hereafter. This is the climate in vvhich they will soonest ripei! .
—this is the garden and soil where о they iake the most rapid, and the deepest loot. And think you that Calantha and Avondale are already weary of each other ? that the warm and vivid imagina¬ tion of youthful iove is satiated with ex¬ cess ? or that disappointment has follow¬ ed upon a nearer view?" " All passion," leplied Gondimar, falling back, and im¬ pressively raising his hand—" all passion is founded on............ " friend," said Viviani, " thy prate is unmercifully tedious."—" I half believe that thou art thyself in love with this Calantha; but for an explanation and detail of that master passion, 1 know not vvhy I ap¬ plied to vou—Calantha is the object of your pursuit, not miue." " Ofmy pur¬ suit! in truth 1 believe you feel more interest in her conduct than I do ; I am old and weary of these follies ; life is just opening upon yon ; Calantha is your idol." " No," replied Viviani, with a smile of scorn, " it is not that party-co-
loured butterfly, which ranges ever from flower to flower, spreading its light pi- nior.s in the summer breeze, or basking in the smiles of fortune, for vvhich mv life is consumed. Wild fancy, stimu¬ lated bv keen sensibilitv and restless acti- vity of mind, vvithout employment, ren¬ der her easy to be approached, and easy to be influenced and worked upon. Love is the nature of these favourites of for¬ tune: from earliest infancy, they feel its pow T er 1 and their souls, enervated, live but upon its honied vows. " Yet Lady Margaret, you say, is un¬ moved." " What of Lady .Margaret?" interrupted Viviani, while bitter smiles quivered upon his lip. " Do you mark the pavement of stone upon vvhich vou tread? Do you see the steel of which this sabre is composed—once heated by the flames, now hard and insensible?— so cold—so petrified is the heart, when il has once given full vent to passion. Marble is that heart, vvhich only beats
for my destruction. The time is not yet arrived, bur I vviil dash the cup of joy r from her lips; then drink the dregs my¬ self, and die." u Mere jealous threats," said Gondimar. " The curse of innocent blood is on her," replied Viviani, as his livid cheeks and lips resumed a purpie dye. " Name her no more." " Explain yourself," cried his astonished friend. " You frequently allude to scenes of deeper guilt and horror, than I dare even suffer myself to imagine possible." " The heart of man is unfathomable," replied Viviani ;— u that which seems, is not ί¬ ί hat vvhich is, seems uot: we shouid neither trust our eyes nor ears in a world like this. But time, which ripens all things, shall disclose the secrets even of the dead," A short time after this conversation vvith Gondimar, Viviani took leave of him. He informed him fully of his pro¬ jects ; and Lady Margaret was also con¬ sulted upon the occasion. " What is
become of your menaced vengeance?" she said, smiling upon him, in their last parting interview. He laughed at the remembrance of his words. t4 ^m 1 the object now of your abhorrence ?" she said, placing her white hand carelessly upon his head. u Not absolutely," re¬ plied the young Count, shrinking, how¬ ever, from the pressure of that h?.nd. 4ť Touch me not," he whispered more earnestly, " it thrills through my soul.— Keep those endearments for Dartford : leave me in peace." Immediately after this he left London ; and by the first letter Lady Margaret received from him, she found that he was preparing to em¬ bark.
CHAPTER XXIX. Frances Seymour's marriage with Lord Trelawney was novv celebrated, after which the whole family left London for Ireland, Sophia, previous to her departure, re¬ proved Calantha for her obstinacy, as she called it, in remaining in tovvn. ίς İ leave you with pain," she said : " forgive me if 1 say it, for I see you have no con¬ ception of the folly of your conduct. Ever in extremes, you have acted as 1 iittie expected from the wife of Lord Avondale; but f blame him equally for giving you such unbounded freedom :— only the very wise and the very good know hovv to use it." " Sophia," re¬ plied Calantha, 4i I vvish not for re¬ proaches:—have confidence iu me:—wc cannot all be exactly alike. You arc a
nattern of propriety and virtue, and verily you have your reward : I act otherwise, and am prepared for censures :—even yours cannot offend me. Lord Avondale talks of soon returning to Ireland: I shall then leave this dear delightful London vvithout regret ; and you shall find me when we all meet for the spring at Castle Delaval, just the same, as when I quitted it. Never the same, tbought Sophia, who marked, with astonishment, the change a few months had made. They were yet speaking, and taking a cold farewell of each other, when a thun¬ dering rap at the door interrupted them, aad before Sophia could retreat, Mr. Fremore, Count Gondimar and Lady Mandeviile were ushered in. A frozen courtesy, and an austere frown, were the only signs of animation Sophia gave, as she vanished from their view. " You have been ill," said Lady Man¬ deviile, accosting Calantha, " It is a week since I have seen you. Think not, vol. i. m
however, that I am come to intrude upon your time : I only called as I passed your door, to enquire after you. Mr. Fre¬ more tells me you are about to visit the Princess of Madagascar. Is this true? for I never believe any thing I hear? <c For once," said Calantha, " you may do so ; and on this very evening, my in¬ troduction is to take place." " It is with regret I hear it," said Lady Man¬ deville with a sigh : " we shall never more see any thing of you. Besides, she is not my friend." Calantha assured Lady Mandeville her attachment could endure all sorts of trials ; and laughingly enquired of her respecting her lovers, Apollonius, and the Greek Lexicon she was employed in translating. Lady Man¬ deville answered her with some indiffe¬ rence on these subjects ; and having said all that she could in order to dissuade her against visiting the Princess, took her leave. That evening, at tbe hour of ten, Lord
Avondale and Mr. Fremore being in rea¬ diness, Calantha drove according to ap¬ pointment to visit the wife of the great Nabob, the Princess of Madagascar. Novv who is so ignorant as not to know that this Lady resides in an old-fashioned gothic building, called Barbary House, three miles beyond the turnpike ? and who is so ignorant as not to be aware that her highness would not have fa¬ voured Lady Avondale with an audience, liad she been otherwise than extremelv well with the world, as the phrase is—for she was no patroness of the fallen ! the caresses and petits mots obligeantes which dropt from her during this her first interview, raised Lady Avondale in her own opinion ; but that was unneces¬ sary. What was more to the purpose, it won her entirely towards the Princess. Calantha now, for the first time, con¬ versed with the learned of the land:— she heard new opinions started, and old ones refuted—and she gazed unhurt, but m í
not unawed, upon reviewers, poets, critics, and politicians. At the end ofa long gallery, two thick wax tapers ren¬ dering 4i darkness visible," the princess was seated. Few events, if any, were ever known to move her from her posi¬ tion. Her pages—her foreign attire, but genuine English manners, voice and com¬ plexion, attracted universal admiration. She was beautiful too, and bad a smile it was difficult to learn to hate or to mis¬ trust. She spoke of her own country with contempt ; and, even in her dress, which was magnificent, attempted to prove the superiority of every other over it. Her morals were simple and uncor- rupt, and in matters of religious faith she entirely surrendered herself to the gui¬ dance of Hoiaouskim. She inclined her head a little upon seeing Lady Avondale, and Hoiaouskim, her high priest, cast his eyes, with unassuming civility, upon Calantha, thus welcoming her to Bar¬ bary House.
The princess then spoke a little sen¬ tence—just enough to shew how T much she intended to protect Lady Avondale. She addressed herself, besides, in many dialects, to an outlandish set of menials ; appointing every one in the room some trifling task, which was performed in a moment by young and old, with sur¬ prising alacrity. Such is the force of fa¬ shion and power, when skilfully applied. After this, she called Calantha : a slight exordium followed—then a wily pointed catechism ; her Highness nodding at in¬ tervals, and dropping short epigrammatu sentences, when necessary, to such ar were in attendance around her. " Is she acting ?" said Calantha, at length, in ά whisper addressing Mr. Fremore, who stood sneering and simpering behind her t hair. * ς Is she acting, or is this reality?" li lt is the only reality you will ever find π the Princess," returned her friend. She acts the Princess of Madagascar trom morning till nigbt, and from nighi
till morning. You may fall from favor, but you are now at the height : no one ever advanced further—none ever con¬ tinued there long/' " But why," said Lady Avondale, " do the great Nabob, and all the other Lords in waiting, with that black horde of sa¬ vages"—" Reviewers, you mean, and men of talents." Well, whatever they are, tell me quickly why they wear col¬ lars, and chains around their necks at Barbary House ? " It is the fashion/ ! said Mr. Fremore. tť This fashion is un¬ becoming your race," said Lady Avon- dale : " I would die sooner than be thus enchained." u The great Nabob," quoth Mr. Fremore, " is the best, the kindest, the cleverest man I know; but like some philosophers, he would sacrifice much for a peaceable life. The Princess is fond of inflicting these lesser tyrannies ; she is so helplessly attached to these trifles— so overweaningly fond of exerting her powers, it vvere a pity to thwart her.
For my own part I could willingly bend to the yoke, provided the duration were not eternal ; for observe that the chains are well gilded ; that the tables are well stored ; and those who bend the lowest are ever the best received." ** And if I also bow my neck," said Calantha, will she be grateful? May I depend upon her seeming kindness ?" Mr. Fremore's naturally pale complexion turned to a bluish green at this enquiry. Cold Princess î where are your boasted professions now ? You taught Calantha to love you, by every petty art of vvhich your sex is mistress. She heard, fro^n your lips, the sugared poisons yoti vvere pleased to lavish upon her. You laughed at her follies, courted her confidence, and flattered her into a belief that you loved her.—Loved her !—it is a feeling you aviver felt. She fell into the mire ; the arrows of your precious crew were sho? at her—like hissing snakes hot and sharpened with malice and venomed
fire; and you, yes —you were the first to scorn her: you, by whom she had stood faithfully and firmly amidst a host of foes—aye, amidst the fawning rabble, who still crowd your doors, and laugh at and despise you. Thanks for the helping hand of friendship in the time of need— the mud and the mire have been washed from Calantha ; the arrows have been drawn from a bleeding bosonqi ; the heart is still sound, anc} beats to disdain you. The sun may shine fairly again upon her ; but never, whilst existence is prolonged, will she set foot within the gates of the Palace ofthe great Nabob, or trust to the smiles and professions of the Princess of Madagascar,
CHAPTER XXX.
" And vvhat detains you in town ?" said Gondimar, on the eve of Mrs, Seymour and Sophia's departure. " Will this love of gaiety never subside. Tell me, Lady Avondale, do you believe all that the Duke of Myrtlegrove, and your more warlike cousin have said to vou ?—What means the blush on your indignant cheek ! The young duke is more enamoured of the lustre ofhis diamond ring and brooch, i han of the brightest eyes that ever gazed on him; and though the words glory and renown drop from the mouth of Bu¬ chanan, love, I think, has lost his time in aiming arrows at his heart. Has he one?—I tbink not?"—" But who has one in London ?"—"You have not assuredly," said the Count : "and, ifyou knew the censures that are every where passed upon you, I think, for Lord Avondale's m 5
sake, you would regret it."—" I do ; but indeed—I know enough. I have friends, have 1 not? and who, that has friends, is ignorant of what is said ? it is the office of a friend, I believe," said Lady Avondale, smiling, " to say to us what a foe w r ould not." The entrance of Buchanan put a stop to this conversation. "Areyou ready?" he cried. "Ready! I have waited for you three hours : it is five, and you pro¬ mised to come before two." — "You would excuse me, I am sure, ifyou knew how excessively ill I have been. I am but this moment out of bed. That ac¬ cursed hazard kept me up till ten this morning. Once, I sat two days and nights at it : but it's no matter."—" You take no care of yourself. I wish for my sake you would." The manner in which Ca¬ lantha said this, was most particularly flattering and kind : it was 9 indeed, ever ^o ; but the return she met with (like the lady who loved the swine); "Honey,"
quoth she, " thou shalt in silver salvers dine :" " Humph," quoth he, was most uncourteous.—" Truly I care not if I am knocked on the head to-morrow," replied Buchanan. " There is nothing worth living for : every thing annoys me : I am sick of all society—love, sentiment, is my abhorrence."—" But driving, dearest Buchanan—riding—your mother—your —your cousin."— u Oh, d,..n it; don't talk about it. It's all a great bore." " And can Lady Avondale endure this jargon ?"—" What is that Italian here again ?" whispered Buchanan. " But come, let's go. My horses must not wait, they are quite unbroke ; and the boy can't hold them. Little Jem yesterday had his ribs broke ; and this youngster 's no hand. Where shall we drive?"—^"To perdition," whispered Gond i mar. " Can't wait," said Buchanan, impatiently : and Calantha hurried away. The curricle was beautiful ; the horses fiery; Buchanan in high spirits; and
Calantha— ah 1 must it be confessed ?— more elated with this exhibition through the crowded streets, than she could have been at the most glorious achievement. " Drive faster-—faster still," she conti¬ nually said to shew her courage. Alas 1 real courage delights not in parade ; but any thing that had the appearance of risk or danger, delighted Calantha. " Damn it, how Alice pulls."—" Alice !" said Calantha. "Oh hang it; do'nt talk of that. Here's Will Rattle, let me speak to him ; and Dick, the boxer's son. Do you mind stopping ?"—" Not in the least." Saying which they pulled in, as Buchanan termed it : and a con¬ versation ensued, which amused Calan¬ tha extremely. "How soon shall you be off?" said Will Rattle, as they pre¬ pared to drive on.—'* Iťs a devilish bore staying in London now," replied Bucha¬ nan : " only I've been commanded to stay," saying which he smiled, and turned to Lady Avondale, " or I should have
been with my regiment before this. The moment I am released, however, I shall go there. Hope to see you to-night. Will. Mind and bring Charles Turner, There's a new play. Oh, I forgot:— perhaps I shan't be let off; shall I ?— " No," replied Calantha, extremely pleas¬ ed at this flattering appeal. Will bowed with conceit, and off they galloped, Buchanan repeating as they went, " A damned strange fellow that — cleverer than half the people though, who make such a noise. I saved his life once in an engagement. Poor Will! he's so grate¬ ful, he would give all he has for me— V)\ be d.....d if he would not."—Let this suffice. The drive was not very long ; and, the danger of being overturned ex¬ cepted, utterly devoid of interest. Lady Dartford had returned to town. Perhaps no one ever heard that she had left it : like the rose leaf upon the glass full of water, her innocent presence made not the slightest difference, nor was her
absence at any time observed. She, how¬ ever called upon Calantha, a few mo¬ ments after Buchanan had taken her home. Lady Avondale was with her lord in the library, when she came. * ; Why did you let her in ?" she said rather crossly to tbe servant ; when ano¬ ther loud rap at the door announced Lady Mandeville and Lady Augusta Selwyn. Calantha was writing a letter ; and Lord Avondale was talking to her of the ar¬ rangements for their departure. " I wish I could ever see you one moment alone," he said.—"Say I am coming—or shall not come," she replied; and during the time she remained to finish the conver· sation with her husband, she could not help amusing herself with the thought of Lady Dartford's alarm at finding herself in the presence of Lady Mandeville, whom she did not visit. *'You do not attend at all," said Lord Avondale. Alas·! he had already found, that the mistress of his momentary passion, was not the
friend and companion of his more serious thoughts. Eager to amuse Lady Dartford, Lady Augusta, who knew her well, entertained her till Lady Avondale joined them, vvith a variety of anecdotes of all that had taken place since her departure; and, having soon exhausted other subjects, began upon Calantha herself. c 'She ís posi¬ tively in love vvith Captain Buchanan," she said. " At every ball he dances with her ; at every supper he is by her side ; all London is talking of it. Only think too how strange, just as it is said that he has proposed to Miss Macvicker—a for¬ tune—twenty thousand a year—a nice girl, who really looks unhappy. Poor thing ! it is very hard on her. I always feel for girls.—" Come," said Lady Man¬ deville, " last night you know, they did not interchange a word : he talked the whole evening to that young lady with the singular name. How I detest gos¬ siping and scandal, Calantha deserves aot this."—" Bless us! how innocent
we are all of a sudden !" interrupted Lady A ugusta ;—" have you any preten¬ sions, dearest lady, to that innoxious quality? Now are you not aware that this is the very perfection of the art of making love—this not speaking? But this is what always comes of those who are so mighty fond of their husbands. Heavens ! how sick I have been of all tbe stories of their romantic attachment. There is nothing, my dear, like Miss Seymour for making one sick. She al¬ ways gives me the vapours." " Where do you go to-night ?" said · Lady Dartford, wishing to interrupt a conversation which gave her but little pleasure. " Oh, to fifty places ; but I came here partly too in the hope of en¬ gaging Lady Avondale to come to me to¬ night. She is a dear soul, and I do not Hke her the worse for shewing á little spirit."—" I cannot," said Lady Mande¬ ville, " think there is much in this ; a mere caprice, founded on both sides in a little vanity. After seeing Lord Avon-
dale, I cannot believe there is the small¬ est danger for her. Good heavens ! ifl had possessed such a husband !"—" Oh, now for sentiment," said Lady Augusta : " and God knows, if I had possessed a dozen such, 1 shouid have felt as I do at this moment. Variety—variety ! Better change for the worse than always see the same object."—" Well, if you do not allow the merit of Henry Avondale to outweigh this love of variety, what say you to Mr. Buchanan, being her cousin, brought up with her from a child ?"— " Thanks for the hint ; you remember the song of i( Nous nous aimions dès ľevfance Tite-à-tèu à chaque instant." and I am certain, my dear sentimental friend, that , ------—------- ,<* J notre place Vous en auriez fait autant" Then going up to the glass, Lady Au¬ gusta bitterly inveighed against perverse mi t u re, who vvith such a warm heart had •jiven her such an ugly face. u Do yov
know," she said, still gazing upon her uncouth features, addressing herself to Lady Dartford— u do you know that I have fallen in love myself since I saw you ;—and with whom do you think ?" " I think I can guess, andshall take great credit to myself if I am right. Is not the happy man an author?" said Lady Dartford.— u You have him, upon my honour—Mr. Clarendon, by all that is wonderful:—he is positively the clever¬ ist man about tovvn.—Well, I am glad to see my affairs also make some little noise hi the world."—" I can tell you however," said Lady Mandeville, " that be is already engaged;—and Lady Moun- Eeagle occupies every thought of his heart." " Good gracious, my dear, living and loving have done but little for you ; and the dead languages prevent your judging of living objects—Engaged! you talk of falling in love as if it vvere a matri¬ monial contract for life. Now don't you know that every thing in nature is sub«
ject to change:-— i t rains to-day—it shines to-morrow ;—we laugh, we cry ;—and the thermometer of love rises and falls, like the weather glass, from the state of the atmosphere:—one while it is at freez¬ ing point;—another it is at fever heat. —How then should the only imaginary thing in the whole affair—the object I mean which is always purely ideal —how should that remain the same ?" " Lady Mandeville smiled a little, and turning her languid blue eyes upon Lady Dartford, asked her if she were of the Christian persuasion? Lady Dartford was perfectly confounded :—she hesitat¬ ingly answered in the affirmative. Upon which, Lady Augusta fell back in her chair, and laughed immoderately ; but fearful of offending her newly made ac¬ quaintance, observed to her, that she wore the prettiest hat she had everseen, • k Where did you get it?" said she.— Tiu question was a master key to Lady Dart ford's thoughts:—caps, hats, and work oi every description were as much π so
lace to her, in tbe absence of her hus¬ band, as the Greek language, or the pa¬ gan philosophy couid have ever been to Lady Mandeville, under any ofher mis¬ fortunes.— 4t I got it," she said, <k bright¬ ening up vvith a grateful look, at the only enquiry she had heard, that was at all adapted to her understanding, at Madame de la Roche's :—it is the cheapest thing you can conceive:—I only gave twenty guineas for it:—and you know I am not reckoned very clever at making—bar¬ gains." " I should think not," answered Lady Augusta, adverting only to the first part ofthe sentence. Calantha entered at this moment.— α Oh, my sweet soul," said Lady Au- gugusta, embracing her, '* I began to despair of seeing you.—But what was the matter with you last night ? 1 had just been saying thatyou looked so very grave. Notwithstanding which, Lord Dallas could think, and talk only of you. He says your chevelure is perfectly Gre¬ cian—the black rinsrlets unon the white
skin ; but I never listen to any compli¬ ment that is not paid directly or indi¬ rectly to myself. He is quite adorable: —do you not think so, hey?—No—I see he is too full of admiration for you— too refined. Ladv Avondale's heart must be won in a far different manner :—insult —rudeness—is the way to it. What ! blush so deeply ! Is the affair, then, too serious for a jest? Why, mon enfant, you look like Miss Macvicker this morning. —A.nd is it true she will soon be united to you by the ties of blood, as she now seems to be by those of sympathy and congeniality of soul ?" The eternal Count Gondimar, and af¬ terwards Buchanan, interrupted Lady Augusta's attack. New topics of dis¬ course were discussed :—it will be need¬ less to detail them :—time presses. Balis, assemblies, follow:—every day exhibited a new scene of frivolity and extrava¬ gance ; every night was passed in the same vortex of fashionable dissipation.
CHAPTER XXXI.
The spring was far advanced. Calan¬ tha's health required the sea air ; but her situation rendered a long journey hazar¬ dous. Lord Avondale resolved to await her confinement in England. The birth of a daughter was an additional source of happiness : Anabel was the name given to the little infant. Harry Mowbrey was now in his second vear. The accounts from Ireland were more satisfactory. Mrs. Seymour wrote constantly to Ca¬ lantha, regretting her absence. Weeks, however, flew by in the same thoughtless vanities: months passed away without regret or care. Autuma was gone;— winteragainapproached. London,thougli deserted by the crowd, was still gay. Calantha iived much with her aunt Mar¬ garet, Lady Mandeville, and the Princess
of Madagascar. The parks and streets, but lately so thronged with carriages, were novv comparatively lonely and de¬ serted. Like the swallows at the ap¬ pointed hour, the gay tribe of fashionable idlers had vanished ; and a new set of people appeared in their place:—whence, or why, nobody could guess. One day Zerbellini, Calantha's little page, had just returned with a note from Buchanan ; a French hair dresser was cut¬ ting her hair ; milliners and jewellers were displaying upon every table new dresses- caps, chains, rings, for the ensuing win¬ ter; and Calantha's eye was dazzled—-her ear was charmed—when her aunt Mar¬ garet entered.—" God bless your Lady¬ ship, God preserve you," said a woman half starved, who was waiting for an an¬ swer to her petition,—" Mi Lady; ne prendra- t-elle pas ce petit bonnet?" said Madame la Roche. " Yes, every thing, my thiug," she answered impatiently, ts she got up to receive her aunt,—She
was unusually grave. Calantha tmmbled ; for she thought she was prepared to speak to her about Buchanan. She was ex¬ tremely relieved when she found that her ^ensures turned solely upon her page, v * Why keep that little foreign minion?" she said, indignantly. 4t Is the Count Viviani so very dear, that any present of his must be thus treasured up and va¬ lued ?" u The Count Viviani," said Ca¬ lantha astonished: who is he ?"—" Weli* rhen, Gondimar," replied Lady Margaret. ** Calantha—as a favour, 1 request you to send back that boy."—Lady Avondale's prayers were at first her sole reply ; and Ike Titania in her second, when Oberon demanded the trusty Henchman, she boldly refused. Lady Margaret left her immediately:—she was calm, but offend¬ ed. She was then going toCastle Delavai. Calantha told her they should join her there in the course of the next month. She only smiled with a look of incredu¬ lity and contempt, asking her, if her bc-
lu. cd Henry would reaiiy be so cruel as io tear her awav at last from London ? *■ and saying this she took leave. Lord Avondale and Calantha had been conversing on this very subject in the morning. He was surprised at her ready acquiescence in his wish to return to Ire¬ land. " You are then still the same," he said affectionately.—" 1 am the same," she replied, rather fretfully, but you are changed :—every one tells me you neg¬ lect me." " And have they who tell you so," said he with a sigh, any very good motive in thus endeavouring to injure me in your opinion ? If I attended to vvhat every one said, Calantha, perhaps 1 mo should have some reason to complain. —Business of importance has alone en¬ gaged my attention. You know I am uot one who assume much ; and if I sav that I have been employed, you may de¬ pend on its being the case. I hope, then, I am not wrong when 1 have confided myself, and every thing that is dearest to me, to your honour and your love."— V PL. 1. N
GLENARVON.
" Ah, no :—you are not wrong," she an¬ swered ; but perhaps ifyou confided less, and saw more of me, it would be better. Before marriage, a woman has her daily occupations: she looks for the approving smile of her parents: — she ha» friends "who cheer her—who take interest in her affairs. But when we marry, Henry, we detach ourselves from all, to follow one guide. For the first years, we are the constant object of your solicitude:—you watch over us with even a tenderer care than those whom we have left, and then you leave us—leave us too among the amiable and agreeable, yet reprove us, if we confide in tbem, or love them. Mar¬ riage is the annihilation of love." " The error is in human nature," said Lord Avondale smiling—" We always see perfection in that which we cannot approach :—there is a majesty in distance and rarity, which every day's intercourse wears off. Besides, love delights in gaz¬ ing upon that which is superior :—whilst we believe you angels, we kneel to you,
we are vour slaves ;—we awake and find v' ' you women, and expect obedience:—and is it not what you vvere made for?"— <ς Henry, vve are made your idols too —too long, to bear this sad reverse :— vou should speak to us in the language jf truth from the first, or never. Obey, is a fearful word to those who have lived without hearing it ; and truth from lips which have accustomed us to a dearer language, sounds harsh and discordant. ľ Wc have renounced society, and all the dear ties of early friendship, to form one strong engagment, and if that fails, what are we in the world—beings without hope or interest—dependants—encum¬ brances—shadows of former joys—soli¬ tary wanderers in quest of false pleasures —or lonely recluses, unblessing and un¬ blest." Calantha had talked herself into tears, at the conclusion of this sentence ; and Lord Avondale, smiling at a description я1ч had given, so little according with N Я
the gay being who stood before him, pressed her fondly to his bosom ; and said he would positively hear no more. " You treat me like a child, a fool," she said :—" you forget that I am a reason¬ able creature." "I do, indeed, Calantha: you so seldom do any thing to remind me of it." " Well, Henry, one day you shall find your error, I feel that within, vvhich tells me that I could be superior, aye, very superior to those who cavil at my faults, and first encourage and theu ridicule me for them, 1 love, 1 honour you, Henry. You never flatter me. Even ifyou neglect me, you have con¬ fidence in me—and, thank God, my heart is still worthy of some affection.—It is yet time to amend." Calantha thought it had been—as she took in haste a re¬ view of her former conduct—of time, how neglected!—friends, how estranged!— money lavished in vain !— and health im¬ paired by the excess of late hours, and endless, ceaseless dissipation. London had still attractions for her
but the thought of fresh air, and green fields recurring, she was soon prepared for the journey. She passed the in¬ tervening days before her depart tire in taking leave ofher friends. Lady Man¬ deville, in bidding adieu to her, affirmed that the interchange of ideas between congenial souls vvould never be lessened, nor interrupted by absence. She would write to her, she said, and she would think of her; and, seeing Calantha was ideally sorry to part with her, Ci You have. none of the philosophy," she said, 44 which your cousin and your aunt pos¬ sess, and every trifle, therefore, has power to afflict you :—you scarcely know me, .ind yet you are grieved to leave me. Promise ever to judge of me by what yott see yourself, and not through the me¬ dium of others ; for the world, which I despise from my soul, has long sought to crush me, because 1 had pride of cha¬ racter enough to think for myself." If any thing had been wanting to strengthen Calantha's regard, this bous.
had been sure of its effect ; for it was one of her favourite opinions, not indeed that the world should be despised, but that persons shouid dare to think, and act for themselves, even though against its judg¬ ments. She was not then aware how this cant phrase is ever in the mouths of the veriest slaves to prejudice,—how little real independence of character is found amongst those who have lost sight of virtue. Like spendthrifts vvho boast of liberality, they are forced to stoop to arts and means, which those whom they affect to contemn would blush even to think of. Virtue alone can hope to stand firm and unawed above the multitude. When vice assumes this fearless character, it is either unblushing effrontery and callous indif¬ ference to the opinion of the wise and good, or at best but overweening pride, which supports the culprit, and conceals from the eyes of others, the gnawing tor¬ tures he endures—the bitter agonizing consciousness of self-reproach.
CHAPTER XXXII.
Lord Avondale was desirous of pass¬ ing the winter with his family at Mon¬ teith, and in the spring he had promised the Duke of Altamonte to accompany Lady Avondale to Castle Delaval. Lady Mandeville and Lady Augusta Selwyn vvere invited to meet thern there at that time. The wish of pleasing Calantha, of indulging even her very weaknesses, seemed to be the general failing of all who surrounded her :—yet what return did she make ?—each day new follies en¬ grossed her thoughts;—her levity and extravagance continually increased; and whilst, with all the ostentation of gene¬ rosity, she wasted the fortune of her hoa* band upon the worthless and the bas^ he denied himself every amusement, se¬ cretly and kindly to repair the ruin, the
misery, the injustice her imprudence and wanton prodigality had caused. During a long and melancholy jour- пеу э and after her arrival at Monteith, Calantha, with some astonishment, con¬ sidered the difference of Lord Avondale's views, character, and even talents for so¬ ciety and conversation, as compared with those of her former companions. Lord Avondale had no love of ostentation—no effort—a perfect manliness of' conduct and character, a real, and not feigned,.in¬ difference to the opinion and applause of the vain and the foolish ; yet with all this, he was happy, cheerful, ready to enter into every amusement or occupa¬ tion wdiich gave others pleasure. He had not one selfish feeling. It was im¬ possible not to be forcibly struck with the comparison. Calantha, wdth her usual inconsist¬ ency, now made all those sensible and judicious remarks, which people always make when they have lived a life of folly,
and fiuddenly return to a more tranquil course. She compared the false gaiety which arises from incessant hurry and vanity vvith that vvhich is produced by nature and health. She looked upon the blue sky and the green fields ; watched the first peeping snow-drop and crocus ; nnd entered with delight into all the little innocent pleasures of a rural life: nor did even a slight restlessness prevail, nor any erring thoughts steal back to re¬ visit the gay scenes she had left. In very truth, she was more adapted, she said, to her present course of life than to any other ; and, however guilty of im¬ prudence, she thanked God she had not heavier sins to answer for; nor was there a thought of her Iieart she would not have wished her husband to know, unless from the fear of either giving him pain, or betraying others. At length, however, and by degrees, something of disquiet began to steal in upon the serenity of her thoughts ~~ her N 5
mind became agitated, and sought an ob¬ ject: study, nay, labour, she had preferred io this total want of interest. While politics and military movements engaged Lord Avondale almost wholly, and the rest ofthe family seemed to exist happily enough in the usual course, she longed for she knew not what. There was a change in her sentiments, but she could not define it. It was not as it had been once : yet there was no cause for com¬ plaint. She was happy, but her heart seemed not to partake of her happiness ; and regret mingled at times with her en¬ joyments. Lady Movvbrey spoke with some as¬ perity of her late conduct ; Lady Eliza¬ beth enquired laughİDgly., ifall she heard were true: for every folly,every fault, ex¬ aggerated and misrepresented, had flown before her : she found that all which she had ctinsidrred as merely harmless, now appeared in a new and more unpleasing light, Censures at home and flattery
abroad are a severe trial to the vain and the proud. She thought her real friends austere; and cast one longing glance back upon the scene which had been so lately illumined by the gaiety, the smiles, the kindness and courtesy of her new ac¬ quaintance. Whilst the first and only care of Lord Avondale, every place was alike delight¬ ful to Calantha; for in his society sheen- joyed all that she desired : but now that he was often absent, and appeared to be involved in deeper interests, she consi¬ dered, with some feelings of alarm, the loneliness of her own situation. In the midst of hundreds she had no real friends: those of her childhood were estranged from her by her marriage ; and those her marriage had united her with, seemed to perceive only her faults, nor appreciated the merits she possessed. To dress well, to talk well, to write with ease and per¬ spicuity, had never been her turn. Un¬ used to the arts and amusements of so¬ cial intercourse, she had formerly felt
interest in poetry, in music, in vvhat had ceased to be, or never had existed ; but now the same amusements, the same books, had lost their charm : she knew more ofthe world, and saw and felt their emptiness and fallacy. In the society of the generality of women and men she could find amusement when any amuse¬ ment was to be found ; but, day after day, to hear sentiments she could not think just, and to lose sight of all for which she once had felt reverence and enthusiasm, was hard. If she named one she loved, that one was instantly consi¬ dered as worthless: if she expressed much eagerness for the success of any project, that eagerness was the subject of ridi¬ cule; and even at home, with Lady Elizabeth and Lady Mowbrey, she felt that she had conducted herself in a man¬ ner they could not approve; she re¬ ceived a thousand proofs of their kind¬ ness and affection, but she pined also for their esteem. Oh I am changed 3 she continually
thought: ì have repressed and conquered every warm and eager feeling; I love and admire nothing: yet am I not heartless and cold enough for the world in which í live. What is it that makes me mise¬ rable ? There is a fire burns within my soul ; and all those vvhom I see and hear are insensible. Avondale alone feels as 1 do ; but, alas ! it is no longer for me. Were I dead, vvhat difference would it make to any one ? I am the object of momentary amusement or censure to thousands ; but of love, to none. I am as a child, as a mistress to my husband; but never his friend, his companion. Oh for a hearťs friend, in vvhom I could confide every thought and feeling ! vvho would share and sympathize vvith my joy or sorrow í to whom I could say, " you love ше —you require my presence ;" and for whom, in return, I would give up every other enjoyment. Such friend was once Lord Avondale. By what means have I lost him ?
Often when in tears she thus expressed herself. Her husband would suddenly enter; laugh with her without penetrat¬ ing her feelings ; or, deeply interested in the cares of business, seek her only as a momentary solace and amusement. Such, however, he seldom now found her ; for she cherished a discontented spirit within her: and though too proud and stubborn to complain, she lived but on the me¬ mory of the past. Her principles had received a shock, the force and effect of which was greatly augmented by a year of vanity and folly : her health too was impaired from late hours and an enervating life ; she could not walk or ride as formerly ; and her great occupation was the indul¬ gence ofa useless and visionary train of thinking. She imagined that which was not, and lost sight of reality ;—pictured ideal virtues, and saw not the world as it is. Her heart beat with all the fervour of enthusiasm ; but the turn it took was
erroneous. She heard the conversation of others ; took a mistaken survey of so¬ ciety ; and withdrew herself impercepti¬ bly from all just and reasonable views. Ill motives were imputed to her, for what she considered harmless imprudence :—- she felt the injustice of these opinions ; and, instead of endeavouring to correct those appearances which had caused such severe animadversion, in absolute disgust she steeled herself against all remon¬ strances. Every one smiles on me and seems to love me, yet I am censured and misrepresented. Convinced of this, sbe became lonely. She had thoughts which once she would have mentioned as they occurred, but which she novv concealed and kept solely to herself. She became dearer in her ovvn estimation, as she detached herself from others, and began to feel coldly, even towards those whom she had once loved.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
ί τ is dangerous to begin life by surren¬ dering every feeling of the mind and the beart to any violent passion. Calantha had loved and been loved to such an ex¬ cess, that all which followed it appeared «osi pid. Vanity might fill the space for a moment—or friendship, or charity, or benevolence ; but still there was some¬ thing gone, which, had it never existed, had never been missed and required. Lord Avondale was perhaps more indul¬ gent and more affectionate now, than at first ; for a lover ever plays the tyrant ; but even this indulgence was different ; and that look of adoration—that blind devotion—that ardent, constant solici¬ tude, when, without a single profession, one may feel certain of being the first ob-
ject in liie to the person thus attached- all this was past. Such love is not depravity^. To have felt it, and to feel it no more, is like being deprived of the light of the sun, and seeing the same scenes, which we once viewed brilliant beneath its beams, dark, clouded, and cheerless. Calantha had given up her heart too entirely to its povver, ever more to endure existence without it. Her home was a desert ; her thoughts were heavy and dull ; her spirits and her health were gone ; and even the desire of pleasing, so natural to the vain, had ceased. Whom was she to wish to please, since Avondale was in¬ different ? or, what to her was the same, absent and pre-occupied. Such depression continued during the gloomy wintry months ; but with the first warm breeze of spring, they left her: and in the month of May, she prepared to join the splendid party vvhich was ex-
pected at Castle Delaval— as gay in heart herself as if she had never mo¬ ralized upon the perishable character of aH human happiness. Upon a cool and somewhat dreary morning, they left Monteith, and sleep¬ ing one night at Allanwater, hastened to Castle Delaval, vvhere blazing hearths and joyous countenances, gave them a cheering welcome. Lady Mandeville лт\ Lady Augusta had, according to promise, arrived there a week before, to the utter consternation of Mrs. Sey¬ mour. Calantha perceived in one mo¬ ment that she was not extremely well with her or with her cousins upon this account. Indeed the former scarcely offered her her hand, such a long detail of petty offences had been registered against her since they had last parted. A stately dignity was therefore assumed by Sophia and Mrs. Seymour on this occasion ; they scarce permitted theni-
selves to smile during the whole time Lady Mandeville remained, for fear, it may be supposed, that Satan, taking ad¬ vantage of a moment of 'evity, should lead thetn into further evil. The being compelled to live in company with one of her character, was more than enough. " I am enraptured at your arrival," said Lady Augusta, flying towards Ca¬ lantha the moment she perceived her. " You are come at the happiest time : yon will be diverted here in no ordinary manner : the days of romance are once again displayed to our wondering view. " Yes," said Lady Trelawney, " not a day passes vvithout an adventure." Be¬ fore Calantha enquired into the meaning of this, she advanced to Lady Mandeviile, who, languidly reclining upon a couch, smiled sweetly on seeing her. Secure of the impression she had made, she waited to be sought, and throwing her arm around her, gave her kisses so soft and
so tender, that she could not immedi¬ ately extricate herself from her embrace. Lady Augusta, eager to talk, ex¬ claimed—" Did you meet any of the patrole?" " Possibly—but I was read¬ ing the address to the United Irishmen, and could see, therefore, and think of nothing else." " Are you aware who is the author ?" " No ; but it is so eloquent, so animated, I was quite alarm¬ ed when I thought how it must affect the people." " You shock me, Calan¬ tha," said Mrs. Seymour. " The absurd rhapsody you mean, is neither eloquent nor animating: it is a despicable attempt to subvert the government, a libel upon the English, and a poor piece of flattery to delude the infatuated malcontents in Ireland. Lady Augusta winked at Calan¬ tha, as if informing her that she touched upon a sore subject. t¿ The author," said Lady Trelawney, who affected to be лп enthusiast, iC Is Lord Gienarvon."
*t ι/
" I wish, Frances," said Mrs,Seymour, " you wouid call people by their right names. The young man you call Lord Gienarvon has no claim to that title ; his grandfather was a traitor; his father was a poor miserable exile, who was obliged to enter the navy by way of gaining a livelihood ; his mother w r as a woman of very doubtful character (as she said this she looked towards Lady Mandeville) ; and this young man, educated nobody knows hovv, having passed his time in a foreign country, nobody knows where, from whence he was driven it seems by his crimes, is novv unfortunately arrived here to pervert and mislead others, to disseminate his wicked doctrines amongst an innocent but weak people, and to spread the flames of rebellion, already kindled in other parts ofthe island. Oh, he is a dishonour to his sex , and it makes me mad to see how you all run after him, and forget both dignity and modesty, to catch a glimpse of him."
" What sort of looking man is he, dear aunt? said Calantha. "Frightful—mean," said Mrs. Seymour. " His stature is small," said Lady Mandeville; " but his eye is keen and his voice is sweet and tunable. Ladv Avondale believe me, he is possessed of that persuasive language, which never fails to gain upon its hear¬ ers. Take heed to your heart : remem¬ ber my words—beware of the younq Gienarvon. Gondimar, after the first salutation upon entering the room, joined in the conversation ; but he spoke with bitterness of the young Lord ; and upon Lady Trelawney's attempting to say a few words in his favor, " Hear Sir Everard on this subject," said theCotuu —" only hear vvhat he thinks ofhim.*' " I fear," said Sophia, " that all these animadversions will prevent our going to-morrow, as we proposed, to see the Priory." Nothing shall prevent me," replied Lady Augusta. " I only beg," said Mrs. Seymour " that I may not Ы
ofthe party, as the tales ofhorror I have heard concerning the inhabitants of St. Alvin Priory, from old Lord de Ruthven, at Belfònt Abbey, preven* my having the smallest wish or curiosity to enter its gates." Count Gondimar, now coming to¬ wards Calantha, enquired after Zerbellini. At the request of every one present, he was sent for. Calantha savv a visible change in Lady Margaret's countenance, as he entered the room. " He is the living image"—she murmured, in a low hollow tone—" Of vvhom ?" said Calan¬ tha eagerly.—She seemed agitated and retired. Gondimar in the evening took Calantha apart arid said these extraor¬ dinary words to her, " Zerbellini is Lady Margaret and Lord Dartford's son : treat him according to his birth ; but remem¬ ber, she would see him a slave sooner than betray herself: she abhors, yet loves him. Mark her ; but never disclose the secret with vvhich 1 entrust you." As-
tonished, confounded, Calantha uovv looked upon the boy with different eyes. Immediately his resemblance to the fa¬ mily of Delavaì struck her—his likeness to herself— h is mariner so superior to that of a child in his situation. The long concealed truth, at once flashed upon her. A thousand times she was tempted to speak upon the subject. She had not promised to conceal it from Lord Avondale: she was in the habit of telling him <_>vpry thing: however she was now for the first time silent, and there is no more fatal sympton than when an open communicative disposi¬ tio:] grows reserved.
ΕΝΏ OF VOL. Ϊ.
:. Gjllrt» Fruiter, Ciown Court, >i«4t Ъ.пч, ϊ οηύοη.
