Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Italian mysteries: or, More secrets than one: a romance
ITALIAN MYSTERIES. ?** *+++* * ■*+**■ Φ***·**** ****+*+++**■*'*********■■*>*■****·*'**■+#+**■***
CHAPTER L
?*?*?**+
Then, oh, vuü blessed ministers above ! Keep me in patience ; imd, in ripened tíme, Unfold the evi! which is liera wrapt np In countenance. Shakespiubfo İN the afternoon, excusing herself for re¬ tiring to her apartment upon the plea ofa headache and slight indisposition, Valeria hastened to peruse the manuscript which she had received from Julio, and found the contents to be as follows :— " The first circumstance of my life of whieh I have any recollection, is that of having been constantly attended by an aged female, of the middle rank of Hfe, from vol. ii. ? who$e
whose side it was with the greatest diffi¬ culty that any other person could for a moment tempt me. " We lived in a neat little dwelling, in the front of ivhich lay a garden, where most of my infantine hours not devoted to sleep ivere passed, and wbere my female friend constantly exerted herself, with the assiduity of a parent, to entertain and to delight me. " Oh, thrice-happy day of childhood \ how unconscious are we whilst in their enjoyment, that every step by ivhich we advance towards maturity, weakens the charm of life, and tbat in our progress to¬ wards tbe perspective of existence, new features are momentarily arising to our view to disfigure the scene of joy 1 " The person who appeared most anx¬ ious to share mv attention with my nurse Hi nalda, was a man about the midway of life, of a pleasing and benignant coun¬ tenance, in the habit of a friar; his garb was for a considerable time an obstacle to my
my giving myself willingly into his arms, but gradually his caresses and his presents dissipated my fears, and I would even ex¬ press regret when he quitted our abode, at which he was the only frequent visitor whom I observed Ilinalda to possess. "In reading, and other minor rudi¬ ments of learning, my nurse instructed me, and the padre Antonio, which was the name of the monk of whom I have alrea¬ dy spoken, occasionally questioned me upon my knowledge, and investigated my progress. " When I bad nearly attained my. se¬ venth year, I experienced tbe first anx¬ iety of mind under which I had yet la¬ boured, in being taken from Rinalda, and placed in a seminary, at the distance of many leagues from tbe only habitation in which I was conscious of ever having ex¬ isted, ï parted from her with tears ; and the novel scenes to which I was now intro¬ duced, though they supplied new ideas to
my imagination, did not obliterate the af¬ fection í bore my nurse. " ?? residence among my fellow-be* ings opened my mind, young as I was, to a train of reflections, by which I had never before been affected. As my schoolfel¬ lows spoke of their relations, especially of their parents, I began to wonder who were mine, and why ï had never beheld them ; and this idea having entered my breast, I awaited with incredible impatience the ar¬ rival of Antonio, who occasionally made a journey to visit me, that I might pro¬ pose to him those questions to ivhich my ovvn mind could furnish me with no reply. " In ansiver to my inquiries, the padre said—* My dear Julio, you are as yet too young to be entrusted with your own story ; meanwhile rely upon this, that in me you possess a friend, a protector, and a parent united; and should it be the will of Heaven to snatch me from you, let it be your satisfaction that you are amply pro¬ vided
vided with the means of procuring your¬ self a safe and happy passage through life/ More he at that period refused to commu¬ ti ¡cate. ** Time passed on unchequered, except by a change of studies, and enlivened by youthful pastimes and exercises, till î .had completed my fifteenth year, when I re¬ ceived a letter from my friend Antonio, informing me that I might expect to see him in tiie course of a few elays, as it was his intention to remove me from my pre¬ sent abode to a situation nearer bis own person. I received the information with pleasure, for the inexperienced raind is ahvays eager for change ; and at the ap¬ pointed time Antonio arrived. " After bidding farewell to my compa¬ nions, and casting a last ??? at the scene of my boyish labours and delights, I en¬ tered a carriage, in which the padre had already taken his seat» We had not heen many minutes on our journey, ere my «companion addressed me, by saying-™-* We ? 3 are
are proceeding, Julio, towards the city of Padua, in ivhich I reside. You have seen that citv, though vou have doubtless tf ' O tf forgotten that you ever did so. It was within halfa league of its walls that your infant years were passed with your nurse Rinalda/ " At the memory of Rinalda a tear started into my eye j , fbr that amiable fe¬ male had lung since paid the debt of na¬ ture. * The time is come/ Antonio, after a pause, proceeded to say, ' at ivhich í am prepared to give you that information re* specting yourself, ivhich I at a past period refused you. But before I unfold to you your own little history, it is necessary that I should communicate a few words to you concerning myself. * An only brother and myself were the sole descendants from a respectable line of ancestors, from whom we each inherited an ample fortune. My inclinations from early youth led to the service of the church ;
cliurch ; I accordingly entered tbe holy profession, and became the private priest and confessor ofa family of distinction, 4 My brother was considerably younger than myself; and about the time that lie arrived at the age of manhood, tbe bead of the family in which I fiad placed myself expiring, and tbe establishment in which I had lived breaking up, I fixed my resi¬ dents in a monastery in the city of Padua, where I could enjoy religious solitude at my pleasure, without being compelled to pronounce a vow of seclusion from the world. * My brother, whose passions were oí* the most fervid nature, had been wound¬ ed, past all cure, by tîie fascinating smiles of a rustic maid, greatly his inferior in rank and birth ; but love, that greatest le¬ veller of distinctions, rendered him re¬ gardless of every feeling but that of calling lur his own ; they were consequently married ; and as affection, carried to the pitch of idolatry, is never so perfectly ? 4 blest
blest as in retirement from the world, they iUed tiieir residence in the romantic little dwelling ivhere your days of childhood ivere passed, under tbe inspecting eye of the worthy R inalda. * 1 ii the due course of time the wife of my brother became pregnant ; but such is tbe uncertainty of human affairs, that the very cause from ivhich be flattered him- u'if with an amplification of his joys, prov¬ eni a source of misery fatal to his peaee and his existence. The hour ivhich made him a father bereaved him of his adored wife ; and the infant pledge of her affection, whieh .she had bestowed on him, and in which. us Ids only solace for herkes, he had hoped to behold her image revived, quickly fol¬ lowed its parent to an untimely grave. To describe the state of my brother's mind is impossible ; it ean only be estimated by those who are capable of entering into the feelings whieh such a privation is calcu¬ lated to produce in the heart of love and sensibility. « At
4 At this melancholv juncture vou were first introduced to my knowledge. One morning about this time, as I was descend¬ ing the stairs leading from my ceil in the monastery in whieh 1 had fixitt my abode, to the lower parts of the building. 1 was met by an inferior member of the commu¬ nity, who informed me that the abbate re¬ quested to see me immediately in his own apartment. AVith this superior İ had, ihr a considerable time, been upon tenus ot the greatest intimacy, and had frequently been called upon by him for my adviee in matters wiiere he elid not feel confident of his own opinion. * On entering Ids presence, I found him steadfastly regarding an infant, which lay upon a table before him, nestled in various folds of huen, within a small wicker pan¬ nier, ivhich, he informed me, had that morning been found in the porch of the monastery, with a direction attached to it, bearing his name. The infant was your¬ self. ? 5 * With'm
* Within the basket was a letter like¬ wise, superscribed to the superior of the house. He tore it open, mid read aloud these words:—
" Holy father, the motíve by which the wretched parent who now ad¬ dresses to vou these lines is actuated, in beseeching your protection for tliat child. of whom he is himself compelled to aban¬ don the charge, arises not ?> mueh out of the knowledge that your exalted situa¬ tion enables you to bestow aetive compas¬ sion on those who seek your benevolence. üs from a conviction that tlie nobler qvudi- ties ofthe lieart an; in yours pre-eminent. Bestow, therefore, oh holy iather! a por¬ tion ofyour humanity on an unfurirnate being, who will never know the blessing of a parents hand to guide his faltering fteps through the labyrinths of vice antl misery, ín which his unfriended wander¬ ings through life could not fail to entangle him.
him. Ile is neither the outcast of shame, nor the offspring of beggary, though way¬ ward ly born to a life of sorrow and mys¬ tery. Trusting then the fate of my boy to Heaven, and to you, prime agent of its will on earth, 1 have only one admonition to give, and one other petition to urge. The first, that, should he reach the age of man¬ hood, he may be cautioned not to enter the state of wedlock, without a thorougU knowledge of her with whom he mav te desirous of forming that bond of union, as he has a sister in existence, whom it is more than probable that he will never know by that name. The second, that the brooch, whicli will be found iu the folds of the linen in which he is now wrap¬ ped,, may, on his attaining the vears of ado¬ lescence, be constantly worn İn his bosom, *· 1 have done. May the angels of hea¬ ven shower clown blessings on you and on him, commensurate with the prayers of* fered up for your happiness by the heart- ? 6 broken
broken sufferer who now bids vou fare- well for ever !"
* Before I proceed in my narrative/ saiel Antonio, * let us obew the request made ( f us relative to the brooch/ " He took a small case out of his pocket as he spoke, and drew from it the trinket in question. It was a remarkably beauti¬ ful cameo ; in shape an octagon ; upon wiiich ivas represented the catastrophe of the fatal dart, from the fable of Cephahw and Procris, in thc Metamorphoses of Ovid, It was set in a rim of gold, of exquisite imd remarkable workmanship ; and at eaeh am/le of the cameo was introduced a ? ruby. *' Having granted me permission to ex¬ amine it. and having placed it in the neck of mv shirt. Antonio was resuming his re¬ iat km—* Pardon me/ I cried, * for inter¬ rupting you, but I eannot forbear to im¬ part
part to you a circumstance of whicb I ne¬ ver thought with any degree of interest till this moment. ' About eight or nine months ago, a company of pilgrims, on their way to Ix>- retto, atte Ad by their minstrels, request- ed a nights lodging at the seminary from which you have this day brought me. It was granted ; and after thcy had partaken ofa repast provided forthem, they came out upon the lawn, where my fellow-students and myself were engaged in various ex¬ ercises, in which we usually closed the day. ' One of these pilgrims, who was a man tall of stature, with a profusion of black hair, and eyes ofa most penetrating ex¬ pression, I observed to stand stiverai dif¬ ferent times gazing upon me, as if my fea¬ tures brought to his mind some recollec¬ tion ivhich gave him pleasure ; and w hen the hour for retiring to rest came, and we were all entering the house together, the same pilgrim, movng along hy my ¡»ide, said—* Are you not cold with ycu» neck Unii
thus exposed to the evening air ?*— t Not in the least/ I repHed.— ( But you should protect yourself agamst thc damps of night/ he returned ; and as ho did so, he closed the neck of my shirt with his hand. * The circumstance then passed by me without refiection ; but it now appears to me, from the earnestness with which Γ observed him to fix his eyes on my coun¬ tenance» that he believed himself to have some acquaintance with my person, and that he closed the neck of my shirt as a pretext for investigating whether the trin¬ ket which you have just put into my pos¬ session were worn by me/ 4 ' Antonio coincided with me in my supposition, but he was not more able thau myself to decide how lar our opinion misiht be erroneous or correct. " The padre continued his narrative thus—'The superior ofthe monastery was a man to whose feelings an appeal ivas sek dom made in vain. Having perused the letter, he said—" Whoever the parents of this
this child, or whatever may be their rea¬ sons for abandoning their offspring to the mercy of strangers, the innocent babe be¬ comes, from the very desertion of its na¬ tural protectors, a greater object of com¬ passion." í applauded his benevolent sentiments, which were congenial with my oivn, and inquired of him in what manner he judged it best to dispose of you ? " I am considerably at a k>ss how to act for the best/ he replied, " and wish your advice to that effect." * At this instant you uttered a faint cry. —*" Our decision/' f said, " must be spee* dily formed, for the unfortunate object of our compassion, whose extreme youth must unqualify it to endure a long priva¬ tion of its little comforts, may perish from being unattended by a female acquainted how to administer to its necessities/'— " But where is such an one to be found ?" returned the abbate.—" Let some person be sought in the neighbourhood, who will take
take charge of it for a couple of hours," I replied, "and I will go immediately to røy brother's villa, and in the course of the time I have mentioned, will return with the nurse who was provided to take the care ofhis deceased infant, and who is still residing in his bouse." ' The superior highly approved my plan, and I set out in quest of Ilinalda. On ar¬ riving at my brother's house, and commu¬ nicating to him the occasion of my visit, Ilinalda was immediately admitted to our confidence, and requested to undertake the charge. She readily complied with my wish, and I directed her to proceed to the monastery ivithout delay, whither I promised, in a short time, to follow her. * On being left alone w ith my brother, Ì recounted to him the particulars ofyour extraordinal y fate, and concluded by ad¬ vising him to suffer you to he brought home to his own house^—" This child," I said, "may, in the progress of time, grow up to repair to you the loss of him whom you so
so severely lament."—** Alas !" be replied, ** can í ever believe a strangers infant tn be my own Julio, the offspring of her on whom alone my soul doted ?"—" You can¬ not," I returned, " indeed be supposed to believe him your own in birth, but you may render him your own in aflection. If you extend tenderness towards his forlorn state, your kindness will naturally engender for you gratitude in his heart ; and his pre¬ sence may keep alive in you feelings, to which a silent absorption in grief would but deaden your capacities. The mind of man must have somethin« to rest upon, something to draw forth its sympathy, its energies ; if not a human being, an ani¬ mal, a plant, a book, there must be some object to which it can turn from the in¬ ward contemplation of itself. Be guided hy the advice of a brother ivho tenderly loves you,and earnestly desires your happiness; make the experiment of devoting your cares to the little foundling of whom I have spoken, and prove whether your ex¬ ertions
ertions will not Ij rewarded by the even¬ tual restoration ? tranquillity to your mind." * My brother listened to mc attentively ; and when I had concluded, he assented to my proposal ; but it ivas an affirmative which appeared rather a sufferance of what it acquiesced in, than a warm accordane» from the heart. You consequently be¬ came a member ot his family; 11 inalda was retained to attend upon you ; and as we were unacquainted what your real name was, if one had yet been given to you, you were baptized by that of Julio. which had been the one borne by the de¬ ceased infant of my brother, 6 As time moved on, I perceived ivith pleasure that my brother's attentions were insensibly drawn towards you ; and 1 am of opinion that you would gradually have succeeded in replacing to him the loss of his infant, could he have forgotten the mother who had given tbat infant birth ; but a settled melancholy had taken pos¬ session
session of his features and his mind ; bis existence withered under its influenae; and you bad for little more than one yem* enjoyed bis protection, when he sunk to the tomb, the victim ofhis feelings. * As my brother and myself ivere with¬ out relatives, at his dece" ^ I anticipated to find that he had placed you above de¬ pendence on the world ; but my expecta¬ tions ivere most agreeably exceeded, wiien, on examining bis papers, which w r ere in- divisibly consigned to my care and execu¬ tion, I found that, with the exception ofa handsome legacy to myself, and an annui¬ ty for life to Rinalda, on condition that she should never quit you, while you desired her to remain with you, he had consti¬ tuted you his sole heir, * From that period little more concern¬ ing yourself remains to be said, but that no elucidation of your history had taken place ; and, for myself, I have nothing to add, but that I shail ñx a higher value upon your society, as my esteemed friend, the
the abbate, to whose care vou ????? ori*» i- Rally consigned, has paid the debt of na¬ ture; and thc formation of new friend¬ ships is not congenial to my mind, since 1 lhTve passed thc meridian of life/ ** I must have been deficient in every feeling ivhich marks the distinction be¬ tween the phlegmatic and the grateful mind, could I liave forborne to declare my veneration of that benefactor of my early days, whom I was fated never again to be¬ hold, or to express my obligations to him wdio ?? -as at this moment fulfilling to me the promise which he had long since made, of proving himself my friend, my protector, and my paresi t united. " On arriving fit Padua, I was taken by the padre to the house of an acquaintance, wbere, after I had passed a few days, I was placed in an academy, conducted by a set of ecclesiastics of superior talents, under whose auspices the sons of the nobility, and of families of public distinction, were completing their education, previously to their
their entrance upon the busy stage of life. tS During my residence in this semina¬ ry, I formed many acquaintance, but few- intimacies, nnd still fewer friends. The enlightened conversation of Antonio had a greater charm for me than that of any of my younger associates ; and most of my leisure time was spent in walking with him to the villa, at a short distance from the city, of which I have already spoken, and which had formed a part of his de- eeaseel brother's bequest to me. *' Not to dwell upon immaterial circum¬ stances, but to confine myself to those events of moment, for the purpose of de¬ tailing ivhich I have committed the nar¬ rative of my life to writing^—on my emit¬ ting the academy in Padua, at which time 1 was entering into my twenty-first year, my abode was fixed at my favourite villa, for so it was, from a combination of re¬ flections, truly become to me. A mode¬ rate establishment, more adapted to the comforts
comforts than the splendour of hfe, was provided for me, and the padre was my daily visitor. *' Tbis was a season of happiness ; but the charm was quickly dissolved by that intrusive power which neither obeys the call of mortals, nor withholds his fatal dart in comphance with their prayers. I bad been scarcely six months a resi ient at the villa, ivhen the unrelenting hand of death snatched from me my friend, my protec¬ tor, my parent. ** The most impressive of 1rs lessons had taught me to consider resignation to the will of a First Cause, as one of the noblest exertions of the human r^nd. I acknowledged the virtue of bis lesson, but felt it insufficient to the task of enabling rne to support bis loss without displaying my regret at the privation ivhich I had sustained ; 'still his precepts tended to for¬ tify my mind against the indulgence of a grief ivhich I could not utterly vanquish ; and I endeavoured to restore peace to my own
oivn mind, by reflecting on tbe beatifica¬ tion with whieh his immortal being was crowned.
CHAP-
CHAPTER II.
'J be time for tender thoughts ami ??? ??^???????* L· Û\.i\ íiuav ¡nul ????; jov h¡is tU^keu us, Our bt'íuts ¡«of now anot ht r |mî t to (??? ; 'Hifv must ttf Mpcld with ???? ? iiücoiniinm fortíttuie, TLat, ftíMcit"! 1 ·, wc ??? t reati the pallia uf' hor/or. N. Ííowf. t4 My amusements were now chiefly con¬ centrated in my library and in my gar¬ den ; sometimes relieved and varied by¬ the conversation ofa few individuels whom Antonio had ranked amongst the number of his friends, and by the exchanging of occasional visits with some young men who had been my fellow-students in the college at Padua. " One evening, a few months after the death of Antonio, as î was returning home¬ ward from the city, I was accosted by the voice
voice of a female, with the address of— * Happily met, signor Julio !' " The beams of day were rapidly de¬ clining, and the faint crescent ofan infant moon, whieh shone with silvery lustre in the firmament, added but slenderly to the illu¬ mination of the scene ; i eould, however;, perceive tiiat the person who had accosted me was in the dress of a woman, and close¬ ly veiled; and as I did not immediately reply, she repeated her salute—* Happily met, signor Julio l and as she spoke for the second time, I remarked that her tones were those of mumbling ohi age. ? ' As I liave not thc pleasure ofyour ac¬ quaintance,' I replied, * you must inform me wherein that happiness consists/— * First/ was her answer, * in my having obtained this encounter with you, signor ; and next in what you may obtain if you accept an invitation with wbicb I am charged to you/—* From whom? 1 I ask- ed. — * Ah,' replied the old woman» * that is a secret, which only time and temeve* vol. ?. ? ranee
ranee can disclose to you. For the pre¬ sent, let this content you ; though 1 am old myself^ my employer is not so ; and more¬ over, ohe has beauty and wealth for your acceptance, if you choose to become the possessor/— c Have 1 ever beheld your mistress ? 1 asked,—* No, thai 1 can vouch you never have/ returned the old ivoman ; ' but she has seen you, or 1 had not been here upon the errand whieh introduces us to eaeh other/—* Where does she reride, and bow am í to know the lady who thus honours me T I inquired.— ( Tbere are a great many ivords to that bargain, signor/ ivas the reply ; * access to the lady is not so easy as you may imagine. All that ts required of you just now is to say, whe¬ ther at a future time you will accept her invitation to visit her l " I did not immediately reply, for being a novice in the practice of gallantry, I felt at a loss how it became me to ansiver this enigmatical ambassadress ; and as I did not 'speaks she continued— s What, hesitate to visit
visit a lady who condescends to ??? your presence as a favour ? A young cavalier^ and a handsome cavalier, and a simde ca- valier, and not grasp at an offered courtesy like this ? V\ cll-a-dav ! well-a-dav, site- tf « ? nor! it İs high time your maiden blushcb ???? put to Hight, Jùxense my langh¬ ing, signor ; Γηι a merry ohi woman, and caitt help it. Well, then/ she added, by ing her hand uith a significant pres¬ sure on my arm as she spoke, * 111 say youll come/—* lîiit if my eonduct shouhl prove you mistaken/ 1 rejoined.—*! should not he the loser/ she answered. * Mis¬ taken indeed Γ and she twice or thrice re¬ peated the word ; * vvhat isthe man afraid of? The lady in question neither inha¬ bits an enchanted castle, nor is protected by a fiery dragon ; youll neither be swal¬ lowed up alive by the one, nor he conjured into a marble statue to ornament the other» Onlv satisfv vourself that 1 have not de- ceived you ; voull stiil be the master of your inclinations ; we liave no charnu ? 2 about
about us to force you into love or mar- riage/—* But you refuse to tell me where it is that I am expected/ I said.— t Peremp¬ torily/ she ansivered ; * but that does not prevent my either pointing out the way to you myself, or deputing another person to elo so lor me. In a few ivords, signor, you know the knot of cypress-trees, a lit¬ tle to the left ofthe high road, on this side of tlie city gates?'—I replied in the affir¬ mative.— 4 Very well/ rejoined the olel woman ; ' be there to-morrow evening, about an hour after this time. AVhen a person addresses to you the word "??- crccy" answer, "aml silence" nnd you will be known to be the signor Julio. Do you comprehend me, signor ?'— t I do/ was my ansiver.—'Well then/ returned the old woman, ' all preliminaries are settled ; and so, signor, good evening till í have the happiness of seeing you again, and against that time let me advise you to dis¬ pel your maiden blushes, and pluck up the heart of a hero for your adventure ; though
though truly it needs little courage to encounter ; for I repeat to you, that my mistress has no magical coadjutors but a pair e>f enchanting eyes. Excuse my laughing, signor ; I am a merry old wo¬ man, and can't help it. A good-night and pleasant dreams lo you, signor !' and with these words she turned her steps to¬ wards the city, " I have already hinted that an adven¬ ture of this kinel was to me a novelty, and it consequently occupied a deeper share of my reflections than it would have done of those of a man more conversant with the code of gallantry. The old ivoman hael spoken of marriage, and from this I concluded that the affair ivore more the appearance of romantic love, than of pre- meditated intrigue. She had asserted that her mistress was young, hanelsome, and rich ; if, in addition to these qualifica¬ tions, she proved alike amiable, I consi- tlered that a happy chance might be pro¬ viding for me in the impression ivhich I ? 3 had
had made on her heart. Her ambassa¬ dress had also implied, that I could but behold her, and still make m v inclinations the rule of my conduct I reflected again and again, and ultimately resolved to ac¬ cept the imitation which had been given me. " A few minutes before thc appointed hour I was on the spot of assignation. I had not wandered long under the shelter of the thick foliage with which fhe trees were clothed, when I saw a dusky figure advancing towards me, ivhich, on its nearer approach, I perceived to be a friar, and was turning aivay from the path in which he was moving, ivhen he quickened his steps ; anel closely encountering me, he articulately whispered— 4 Secrecy.' Thus called upon, although by far a difíerent object to the one I had expected to meet, notwithstanding the old ivoman had hint¬ ed that she might depute another person to be my guide to my unknoivn admirer, I instantly replied—' And silence.' " The
C1 The monk stopped, and said— t You are known to me, signor Julio. It was only in order to grant you proof that I was the person whom you was taught to expect, tbat I addressed to you the word by which I accosted you.' He paused a moment, then added—-* I judge, signor, by finding you here, that youare prepared to visit the lady who has already convey¬ ed to you her wish for your acquaintance ?" —I replied—* That í coukl not but enter¬ tain a reciprocal wish to gaina knowledge of one by whom I was so highly flattered, and that í was prepared to attend him/— * There is one restraint, then, signor/ said the monk, t to which you must submit iti your progress to her abode; you must consent to wear a monastic habit like my own, and to suffer the cowl to beso placed as to prevent your observing whitiier it is that I conduct you.'—* What should you fear,* I inquired, * from my becoming ac¬ quainted with the spot to vvhich you take mc?*— s Pardon me, signor/ replied the ? 4 friar;
friar ; * you cannot be permitted a know¬ ledge of it at present ; from me, at all event s, you must not obtain that knowledge. I can only obey the commission which is placed in my hands ; it then rests with her who requests your presence to make to you any disclosure which she believes that she may with safety repose in your confi¬ dence.'—* What can she apprehend from my acquaintance with the spot of her re¬ sidence?' I asked.—* Can it require to lie pointed out to you, signor,' rejoined the monk, t what danger the reputation of a female incurs from becoming herself the inviter ofa strangers conversation ? Love¬ ly as she is, you may notjudge her so; en¬ gaging as I know her to be, she may strike you in an opposite point of view. If your expectations are disappointed, and your heart remains untouched at your introduc¬ tion to her, you may vaunt ofyour con¬ quest, and of your nicer taste, and render her, who has submitted herself to vour judgment, from the purity of her affec¬ tion»
tion, a mark of reproach to her own sex, and an object for the ridicule of yours.— No, signor, such a contingency must not he suffered to exist; you must know r nei¬ ther her abode nor her name, unless your lieart meets hers upon the mutual terms of love and friendship/ " I inwardly acknowledged the propri¬ ety of his arguments ; my r character was unknown to him, anel therefore I consi¬ dered him justified in acting upon the secure plan ivhich he ivas pursuing. * 1 approve your cautions,* I answered, " hut with me I assure you they are useless/— * Excuse me, signor/ he answered, t but I have only your own worels to vouch lor their being so/ " I must, I perceived, either altogether decline the adventure, or prosecute it ac¬ cording to the rules prescribed by my conductor; I accordingly expressed my¬ self willing to be guieleel by him. He drew me into the thickest shade ivhich the grove afforded, and loosing the band ? 5 with
with which his vestments were confined round his waist, and from which hisrosarv depended, a few moments displayed to me that he was provided with a monastic robe, similar to his own, for my disguise, wiiich he had hitherto worn above the one which formed his own dress. u Having equipped me in my novel at¬ tire, he proceeded to bind down the cowl over my eyes, as he had promised to me that he should do ; and whilst thus en¬ gaged, he said— k Vou must not repine. signor, at being for a short time deprived ofthe useof your eyesight, when you con¬ sider that the god of love, whose votary you arc at this moment, is condemned to perpetual darkness/ "The adjustment being made, he placed one of my arms througli his, and said— * Now then, come on, signor ; a quarter oí an hour will bring us to the spot of your destination ; walk fearlessly, and depend upon it that I am not your enemy, uor is any evil intended you/ " My
** My companion having requested me to maintain silence, ive moved along at an evui pace ; and in a sliort time, froni the pavement over wiiich ive were passing, I discovered tliat we had entered the chy. At length we stopped. The friar drew forth a key, and unlocked a door; he led me within it ; and having done so, iie again closed and locked it. ¿ Whatever sounds you may chance to hear, speak not at present, I conjure you,' said my conductor. " Hut we proceeded in silence, till hav¬ ing ascended a considerable flight of>teps, the iioating notes of music si ruck mv car ; and these appeared mingled with adhtant but tumultuous laugh. I u a few second* unbroken silence again prevailed ; and having ascended a second staircase, í heard behind me the loud clap ofa closing door. The friar disengaged my arm from his, and finally removed the eo*vl from be¬ fore my eyes. " The glare of light to wiiich my eyes ? 6 opened,
opened, rendered me for a while incapable of distinguishing objects. After a time í perceived that I was in an elegant apart¬ ment, brilliantly lighted with wax tapers, in massy silver branches; the curtains and sofas by which the room was surrounded were of embroidered silk, and the ceiling and cornices of a light fretwork in white and gold. From marble jars placed on t ri nod stands, everv flower that could re- t. y gale the sense, or please the admiring eye. Sent forth its ^piev perfume; and the walls were enriched with paintings (»fthe most exquisite ivork mansh ip. " The friar requested me to he seated, and with rt gentle inclination ofhis head, retired. In the course of a few minutes the door was again opened, and my ve¬ nerable acquaintance of the prt ceding evening appeared before me-; and ??.? -ly nipping together the folds of her veil with one hand, and ektendin** the other to- wards rne es a siui of welcome to her presence, she ejaculated—' Well, signor, 1 give
ï uive you joy that your resolution ha*? stood vour friend, and tempted vou hither. Well-a-day ! ivhat strange things some of vou menare! I warrant now you could sooner ílív^ the mouth ofa cannon than a beautiful signora. Ah, ha ! in my days 1 have seen many a one who, after a short acquaintance with Cupid's calendar, has heen loath enough to quit his mistress and faee his enemy's cannon. Excuse my laughing, Hgnor; I am an old ivoman, and can t help it/ " I was beginning to rep\s\ when 1 wa? interrupted by the gentle tinkling of u beil on the outside of the door. At Ihe sound the old woman retreated from my hide, and exclaiming—' Xow, signor, pre¬ pare y ou rself with your best address, formy lady comes/ she darted out ofthe motu. ς * A few seconds only elapsed ere the door was once more thrown open, and three females entered the apartment. The one who appeared ei idently the supeiior ad- vaneed towards me, whilst the other two retired
retired toa music-desk, by the side of which itood a harp. The dress of her who ap¬ proached me, and whom I naturally con¬ cluded to be the signora from whom 1 had received my invitation, was not less ele¬ gant than it was simply beautiful; it was composed of a robe of the whitest silk, which fell in playful folds to her feet, and artfully displayed the exquisite symmetry of her limbs beneath; a zone of emeralds bound her waist, and corresponding brace¬ lets encircled her wrists; a diamond comb confined her luxuriant auburn ringlets, and a veil of the thinnest texture was thrown over her head. " Continuing to advance towards me, with a step of equal grace and dignity* which added fresh charms to the elegance of her form, she im ited me to place mysell on a sofa, near to which she had found me standing, and after I had done so, she seat¬ ed herself by ray side.·—■' I know Lot, sig¬ nor/ she said, * in what words to express my gratitude to you for your kindness and
ud condescension, in dedicating a part of your time to an isolated being like my¬ self, when tîie world, in whieh you are at liberty to rove freely, must Ix» hourly pre¬ senting you with so much more agreeable pursuits/—-' Hut with none ofa more re¬ compensing' nature/ f replied, * than that of bei ie ving myself capable of contribut¬ ing to the happiness of a superior being like vourself/—' You are doing so at the tf C' present moment/ she answered ; * your society giies me happiness, and if you really wish to act towards the promotion of mv felicity, as you haie ¡ust said ??? do—-but you men are all flatterers, and î know not how to believe yon—you will very frequently reptai yo u r visit hither/ ( " I bowed in reply to her invitation, and she returned mea smile eloquently ex¬ pressive of thanks and pleasure; for whilst speaking, she had partially removed her veil, and eli.sco\ creel to me enough of her countenance for me to ascertain that it was of extreme loveliness, although she had evidently
evidently passed the glowing days of vouth. ' Give me your hand along with yf «'C? your promise,' she said. I obeyed, and a gentle pressure of friendship having been reciprocally communicated, she continued — t I believe you, signor, for ï have long since predicted that the smile upon your lips was th.e prototype ofa heart incapable of a disobliging action.*—* I understand, signora,' I replied, t that you have seen me before, but I cannot imagine ivhere/ — e Like all other riddles/ she said, * this one is very easy of solution, if you only chance to guess aright, and when it is once explained to you, you will only won¬ der that you did not find it out before.' .— t My perceptions' I replied, * are very dull ; have the goodness to solve it to me l —* Xot now,' she 1 replied.—* Why not now T ?' I asked.— 4 What impatient crea¬ tures are you men l she ejaculated. ' How long have 1 wished for this interview, and been compelled to check my inclinations í I am resolved, therefore, to enjoy the in¬ nocent
nocent retaliation of keeping you a while in suspense/— s But how long is my pe¬ nance to endure ?' î exclaimed.—' Till you visit me again/ she replied.—* When shall I !>e permitted to do so?' I asked. —* Oh, we will speak of that by anel by/ she ansivered. ' To talk of our next meeting appears as if we were this mo¬ ment going to separate, and 1 do not in¬ tend to part with you for three or four hours at least/ Turning to her compa¬ nions at the other end of the apartment, she said·—' Come, my dear friends, do me the favour of indulging the signor with one of my favourite strains ?' Then ad¬ dressing me, she added, * I am certain you love music/—' Indeed I am passion¬ ately fond of it/ I answered.—* Your eyes hespuik you so/ she replied; ' they are the index of a soul attuned to har¬ mony, and------' '* A half-smothered sigh rendered the remaining syllable which she uttered in¬ audible,
audible, and instantlv raising her voice to a higher tone than that in which she hael pronounced the la>t sentence, she desired her friends to ?????. ? The firmales, who ivere both young and handsome, but greatly inferior in personal charms to my entertainer, returned her re¬ quest with smiles of pleasure; and ivhilst one of them struck the chords of the harp, with a finger of exquisite skill, the other, with a voie^e of equal sweetness, sung the following ? ÁLLAD. Tht snow to the cromiti wít;> 1:1 ???? flakes deíceruu 11 .;, The h'Hir-tro-t uji 4 » iiîjijii:^ t'uoli tmd ou the sprav ; On a wild uunon heath í found it ???? baby, All shiv'riii£ and cr\iii£r ? lutîorM array ; Poor liuíe h.t.iN hny ! afi, wcll-a-day ! I Umi. the child home, and J u. nn'd Inni ¡aui diesi lum ; Í5t l q'iifkiv revu'ii, aud ??.? í mo a rrw.tr î ; Λίι, would tliat «.omo uord-, t >u iìt r · nrcìdi» ha 1 bjjoken. H.id^knuHv ¡mt ?? MÍiv ¡?' trt on ]t·^ LV'aid, For the baby was Cupid î bìy htly Ct.j)ul ! Yts, he was thc bab\ \?\ ! ah, well-a-day!
'tíir
Tht: u inter paU<l oil'; he uikVi not of \U pur* f z t But stii' ?? m_> n. 'İt·, Uure í went he would g >; ? trieH io riiiì 1? ïü him, but ho ^n** too tratty; Ι ,ν k'd hrr to 1":<?»??, ho ·4ι-.«ογ'<1 no, no; 8!v í 'trio ???> boy! ah, \\*-ll-ft-ilny ! 'lo bui me adieu then he civpt to mv bosoni, h.Hti ' l'rcss me, »itar ???!, im ??? .TiT'- t €Γν· ν,ν {.ut.' Sîbpf rtiiiit no no-Uní f, 1 Π n iiy tMubiMc'd him, Ant] one ofiii*· arrow·» he iefi in my huait ; lor the b?hy \?\? ('upul î bîy little tiiju'l ! Yc-», he wa- the hain hoy f an, udl-a-'íay í " When they had concluded tbeir me¬ lody, and í had expressed my admiration of their skill, my entertainer said—* You perceive, signor, that though immured İn a solitary prison, we have some enjoyment to cheer our hearts/—* A prison !' I echoed, looking round upon the apart¬ ment as- í spoke.—* Ah, signor/ she re* turned, * volumes eould not so eloquently have explained your unuccjuaintanco with the irkFomeness of restraint as these two simple words. It 'n a Jiappiness for you. that you have yet to learn that a few days of privation from those scenes in which
which it would give us happiness to mix, render it ìndi fièrent to the enthralled captive, whether he contemplates the gaudy splendour of a decorated apart¬ ment, or thc uniform gloom of a dun- geon's sable ivalls. It is not recreation for the eye, but the mind, for which the soul of feeling pants / and as she ut¬ tered these words, she moved a few paces apart from me, struggling, as it ap¬ peared, to subdue some unpleasant emo¬ tion which she experienced difficulty in repressing. tí During the fcH r moments of silenese which succeeded, I was engaged in endea¬ vouring to analyse her character. Had intrigue been the object of her invitation to me, it appeared much more than pro- liable that she ivould have received me alone; the presence of her friends seemed to vouch for the purity of her intentions; still the expression of her eye, and the ac¬ cidental confusion of her manner, stood forth as weighty opponents against this opinion,
opinion, whilst the decided difference of our ages appeared to render it unlikely that she should propose herself to me as a wife. That she should declare herself a prisoner, shut from the world, and debar¬ red the pleasures of society at the very moment when 1 bcheid her in the enjoy¬ ment e>! all the luxuries of life, and mis¬ tress, as it appeared, of a sumptuous esta¬ blishment, wits so irreconcilable a contra¬ diction, that it bade defiance even to the powers of surmise. That one of her emis¬ saries had appeared as a monk, was a tri¬ fling consideration : the habit might have beeu assumed, to obviate equally a know- ledge of his accustomary garb and his countenance. Returning towards me, with reassumed composure, she saiel—* As you have promised to ι isit me frequently, the less formality ive practise at our meetings, the greater portion of happi¬ ness we may expect to derive from eaeh othets society ; I shall therefore only ad* dress you by the simple appellation oC Julio;
Julio; have I your permission to use this freedom with you ?'—* I believe I should find it very difficult/ 1 replied, * to return a negative to any request of yours; much more so to any one ivhich appears to in¬ crease our intimacy/—* You are, I per¬ ceive/ she answered, * what 1 already told vou all men are, a flatterer; but I must allow you the merit of being a pleasing one: well then you shall be my Julio, and I will, if you please, be your Anto¬ nia/ ** This arrangement was followed by some playful rejoinders on either side, and having resumed our seats upon the sofa, Antonia said—* I am aware that all inti¬ macies are considerably strengthened by our acquiring some little insight into the history of those vvith whom our friend¬ ships are formed ; and although I am not at this moment at liberty to tell you either ivho 1 am, what I am, or ivhere I am, if you think that my tale will not weary you, I ivill recount to you some of the princi¬ pal
pal circumstances of my life, ivhich has in¬ deed been an eventful öîie/ " Declaring that nothing could give me greater satisfaction than to listen to the detail whieh she offered, I besought her t# begin her relation. ' Julio/ she emphatically pronounced, * you will learn from my narrative that all my joys and all my griefs have sprung from that fatal passion ivhich ensnares every sex and every age/ She had placed her hand upon my shoulder whilst speak¬ ing, and after a short pause she added— • But í am sure that you possess a heart sufficiently compassionate to look with mildness on the weakness of a frail wo¬ man ; have you not, Julio l and as she ut¬ tered these words, she bent forward her head towards me, as it appeared desirous of concealing the blushes with which iier cheeks were suffused upon my breast, when her eye suddenly rested on the brooch ivhich confined the neck of my durt She gazeei upon it fbr a few se« conds
concis in speechless astonishment ; her lips quivered; the blood flew from her cheeks; she uttered a convulsive shriek, and sunk fainting on the floor. " The females hastened to her assist¬ ance, and at their call the old ivoman and the friar entered the apartment. Ite- storatives being applied, Antonia in a short time began to revive; she gazed wildly around her, and her eyes ultimati - ly fixing upon me, she uttered a second shriek, which was folloived by the excla¬ mation of—' Take him from my sight, tear him, drag him hence, I command you. 1, and having thus spoken, she relapsed into insensibility. " My senses were floating in a chaos of doubts, apprehensions, and conjectures; my utterance was chained, and almost as insensible as the mysterious being who occupied my thoughts, I was hurried out of the apartment by the old ivoman and the friar. tl The room into whieh they conducted me
me was handsene, but by no means so elegantly furnished as that whicli I had just quitted; they requested me to sit down and compose myself, and promised to return to me in the course of a few mi» nutes. Scarcely conscious of my own ac¬ tions, I suffered myself to sink into a chair, and they hastily retired from my presence. The confusion of my thoughts rendered me incapable of reflection, and almost of action ; and at the return of the friar, the period of whose absence was short, I start¬ ed as from a dream. He presented me with a silver cup, whicb, he said, contain¬ ed a cordial that would be efficacious in reviving my spirits from the shock which they had sustained—' Taste it, I beseech you,* he said, * and you shall shortly have explained to you what now astonishes and affects you/ I complied with his request, for my limbs trembled, and a faint sick¬ ness oppressed my heart. I returned the cup info his hands, and in the course ofa few minutes a lethargic sensation, similar VOL. n. D to
to the heaviest encroachments of sleep, and against which I struggled in vain, op¬ pressed me ; and quickly after, all sense of recollection fled from me,
CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
Ah, me î for ought that ever I could read, Could ever hear, by tale or history, The course of true iove never did run smooth; But cither it was different in blood, Or else misgrafted, in respect of years ; t)r elso it stood upon the choice of friends: Or, if there were a sympathy in choice, War, death, or sickness, adì lay siege to it, Muking it momentary as a sound, Swift as a shadow, short as any dream. if then true lovers have been ever cross'd, It stands as au edict in ilestiny *. 1 hen let us teach our trial patience, Because iv is a customary cross ; As due to love as thoughts, and dreams, and sighs, Wishes, and tears, poor Fancy's followers, A Midaummtr Night's Drtum. " On awaking from the trance into which I had fallen, I found myself r xtended on a straw couch in a pavilion at thc foot of my own garden, where during the sum- ? 2 mer,
røer, which was at that time the season of the year, I was accustomed to retire in an afternoon from the heat of the day. It was already morning, the beams of the rising sun ivere beginning to gild the earth, and the birds ivere carolling their hymns to the opening day. For a few minutes the past appeared to me like a vision; but as my senses regained their wonted powers, I became convinced that the recollections registered in my mind had been produced by facts ; and my asto¬ nish ment increased with every moment that I continued to revolve them in my mind. " When 1 became in some measure able to abstract my ideas, my attention was ar¬ rested by a gold chain which I found sus¬ pended round my neck, and to which hung a heavy substance, folded in an en¬ velope of paper. I hastily tore open the object of my curiosity, and beheld a most striking miniature resemblance of the mysterious female to whom I had on the preceding
preceding evening been introduced, richly set in brifiiants. In removing the enve¬ lope, some words of writing, traced upon the paper, had caught my eye, and after a feiv moments' gaze at the portrait, I eagerly perused the lines in ivhich it had been en¬ cased. They were these :—" Signor Julie, the female to whose society you were yesterday evening admitted has discover¬ ed in you her son : it is your mother who addresses you, through the medium of those words which you are at this moment perusing. For the first anel last time you have beheld her. Every endeavour which you can make to discover her abode, or her situation in life, mus prove fruitless ; she is concealed from thc knowledge of the world by an impenetrable veil; boune! to her seclusion hy a spell ivhich mortal means can neither penetrate nor dissolve. Knowing the independence with which you are blest, she oilers you only one gift at her liands, the resemblance of her who gave you birth; she believes and trusts ? 3 that
that you will receive it with the same sa¬ tisfaction and love with which it is eon- signed to your possession. Wear it next your heart ; and oh î may that heart some¬ times heave a sigh of tenderness for her ivho gave its vital powers the spark of life l 4t I was lost in wonder, and as m v asto- nishment increased, my desire augmented to solve the mystery in whicli my parent was enfolded. Days, weeks, and months, ivere passed by me in unavailing plans, fruitless stratagems, and unsuccessful at¬ tempts of every description, to gain the knowledge for which my beart so eagerly panted—a period whieh, although it could not fail to weary the peruser by a minute detail of all the circumstances attendant on its progress, was to me ofa highly-interest¬ ing nature, as every new effbrt which I projected or pursued for the accomplish¬ ment of my wish, kept alive within mo the sustaining essence of hope, ivithout which my powers, enervated by disap¬ pointment,
pointment, must have sunk into the torpi- tude of despair. te Nearly a year had elapsed, and not a single ray of light had beamed upon my ignorance of my mother's fate, ivhen I was prevailed on by two of my friends, na¬ tives of Tadua, who were now students of St. Petets at Rome, but who had been fellow-disciples with me in the seminary where I had completed my education, to accompany them to the carnival of Venice; and it was not so much from the expec¬ tation of deriving that excess of pleasure ivhich my companions anticipated from tiieir visit to that celebrated scene of mirth, as from a desire of pursuing some plan which might partially wean my mind from that subject on which it had, both for the strength of my health and spirits, been of late too forcibly bent, tbat I con¬ sented to accompany them. Heaven was propitious to my wish ; it vouchsafed to me the boon for which I had prayed—the relief from incessant inquietude of thought ? 4 for
for ivhich I had panted. It was there, at the carnival of Venice, that the benig¬ nant band of Providence leel me to behold the matchless, the fascinating, the amiable Valeria dì Cavetti ; I saw her, I gained her acquaintance, and found in her smiles the blessing for ivhich I had prayed. Her conversation was a magic antidote to the pangs ofan unsettled mind ; the elegance of her graceful form challenged the admi¬ ration which her silver voice hael claimed, and her smiles communicated an electric touch of joy to the senses, which left the heart without a wish ungratified. " Should fate ever permit the enchant¬ ing Valeria to peruse the lines which this trembling hand is now employed in tra¬ cing, she cannot fail to remember her last interview with Julio. It ivas at that mo¬ ment., when Julio was on the point of con¬ fessing to her ivho was thc female repre¬ sented by the miniature suspended round his neck, and at that critical moment, hy the confusion created in the ball-room, at the
the alarm of fire, they were separated from each other, and met no more. And shouki Valeria peruse the lines here written, will she not naturally inquire, why during the lapse of so many months, Julio has nei¬ ther written to her, sent to her, nor visitée! her ? For her reply to this question let her revert to the early part of Julio's nar¬ rative of his life, and she will recollect, that in the letter which accompanied him on his introduction into the monastery at Padua, was contained the information that he possessed a sister, whom it ivas not likely that he could ever know to he sueh, and was consequently enjoined hy his un¬ known parent not to marry any ivoman of whose birth he was not positively assured. Ofthe origin of Valeria di Cavetti there could be no doubt in the mind of Julio; but Julio had made a promise on his death¬ bed to his friend, his protector, and his parent, Antonio, who nad in many in¬ stances witnessed the ill effects of mar¬ riage contracted in too great precipitancy D ã oí
of passion, and at too thoughtless an age of life, not to become a husband, till he had attained his twenty-fifth year ; and even then, not to enter into wedlock with any woman whom he had not knoivn for the space of twice twelve months. " To break through a line of conduct to which he had solemnly and voluntarily bound himself to his dying friend to ad¬ here, Julio was convinced to be a step to which he coukl never conform with ho¬ nour or happiness to his own mind. " At the period of his introduction to Valeria, he had, according to the computa¬ tion made ofhis age by Antonio, ivhen he was first cast upon the benevolence of the abbate of the monastery, just attained his twenty-third year; accordingly, in the course of two revolving seasons, he would have attained his twenty-fifth year, and have known the mistress ofhis soul twice twelve months; and for this period accord¬ ingly he resolved to quit the presence of his idolized Valeria, distrusting, whilst hc sunned
sunned himself beneath her dazzling charms, how far the lures of present joy might tempt him to disregard that sacred bond, wiiich, by the force of principle and truth, man's two most holy ties on earth, whispered him not to break hb engage¬ ment with the dead. " Oh Valeria ! Valeria ! sainted maid ! celestial being, submitted to the earth, a rare example of the race beyond the skies ! sweet practiser of virtue's harmonizing code ! possessor of each charm that lulls the soul to heavenly repose í blessed with all joys, all attributes, and all felicities, save only one, ill-fated maid ! thy kno «v ledge ofthe wretched, wretched Julio!" Here followed a chasm in tiie manu¬ script, ivhere several sentences had been blotted out by the pen, and subsequent to these appeared some lines through ivhich the marks of erasure had been faintly drawn; and from those lines which re¬ mained legible, Valeria eould gather that they had contained the description of a ? δ struggle
struggle between love and honour in the breast of Julio ; and concluded by his in¬ voking Heaven, with almost frantic ear¬ nestness, to prove his innocence; but of what act tliere appeared no elucidation. The narrative was continued thus :— '* At the expiration of the carnival, at the entreaty of my friends, I returned with them to Home, ivhere I passed a month in a round of pleasures oí* ivhich my mind partook not ; my heart, my senses, my soul, ivere with Valeria in Ve¬ nice. But I must not omit to state, that in the course of my journey back to Pa¬ dua, ivhen my visit to my friends at Home ivas completed, an extraordinary circumstance occurred to me, ivhich, for a ivhile, left an impression on my mind, which divideel my thoughts with the image of mv adored mistress. O tf " í had been about a couple of hours in the inn where I had resolved to pass the night, at the end of my second day's tra¬ velling, ivhen my servant, to whom a long
long and faithful service had accorded some degree of familiarity in addressing me, entered the apartment ivhere I was sitting.— ' Pray, signor/ he said, * did you observe a stranger, when you ivere taking a stroll just noiv round the garden, by the side of the bouse, leaning against the pa¬ lisades uhich divide it from the road, and eyeing you very attentively ?'—' No ; ivhy so?' I inquired.—* Recause, signor/ replied my servant, t I observed what I have been mentioning to you. The per¬ son I speak of is well drest and well mounted, for I saw him ride into the inn- yard about halfan hour after we arrived here/— t There ís nothing verv u neom- mon/ I said, t in one stranger looking with some degree of curiosity at anot her/— * But indeed, signor/ rejoined my servant, * tbere was something very pointed in his manner of doing so ; and when you had retired into the bouse, be came up to me, and asked if you ?\*??? my master? To ivhich
ivhich question, ivhen I had replied in the affirmative, he rejoineel-—" Your master re¬ sides in the neighbourhooel of Padua; does he not ?"—" He does," I said.—" I know his person well," replied the stranger, " but cannot immediately recollect his name. I have often lieard it too. Oh ! now I re¬ member/ he added, after a momentary pause, " it is signor Julio ; ay, ay, I re¬ collect Julio;"—and so saying he walked away from me into the house. t This stranger,' I remarked, ' is most probably some one who, like myself, is ivithout company on the road, and wishes for a companion to pass the evening with. As you say he appears a man of respectability, go, and present signor Julio's compliments to him, and invite him to sup with me/ " My servant departed with my mes¬ sage, and in a short time returned with information that the stranger was gone to bed. * If he had receiveel my invitation a few minutes sooner/ I said, ' I have no doubt
doubt that he ivould have been happy to have deferred retir ng to his chamber for two or three hours longer/ * I inquired of the people of the house,' resumed my servant, * ivhether they knew his name; but they informed me that they did not recollect ever to have seen him before/ ít Having taken my supper, and finding the hours hang heavy on my hands, as 1 conjectured that the stranger had done, unprovided as 1 was witb books or any resource for passing my time, I retired to rest, and somewhat fatigued with my day's journey, I soon fell asleep. " How long 1 had slept I am uncon¬ scious, hut I was awakened hy the pres¬ sure of a hand upon one of mine, which was extended on the outside of the bed. Dn opening my eyes they were da/zled hy a glaring light, ivhich I imagined had issued from a dark lantern ; for on my looking up, 1 heard a faint creaking sound ivhich proceeded from the same spot from whence
whence thc flame had gleairud, and the light instantly disappeared. Ry the mo¬ mentary flash of light whieh had been presented to me, I had caught a glimpse of a human figure, standing by the side of the bed, and I instantly exclaimed— c Who are you ? and ivhat is your busi¬ ness with me ? —' Who I am/ replied a manly voice, composed of firm but sweet tones, * eannot at this time be ansivered you ; what I am, I may candidly confess, your most sincere friend/—* 1 repeat, ivhat is your business with me?* I re¬ plied; t and ivhy, if you are a friend, have you chosen this suspicious hour, and this mysterious maimer of disclosing your¬ self to me ?'—* For your sake, for my own/ answered the unknown ; t were we seen to converse together, destruction would overtake us both/—* Perhaps it is at this moment meditating against me from your band/ I exclaimed; r I shall therefore call for assistance, and——' whilst pronouncing the last words, I had raised
raised my voice, and made an effort to quit my bed. The unknown placed his hands upon my arm to retain me in my filiation, and interrupt eel me,—' In the name of God,' he said, * forbear; what I entreat of you is for your own peace, your own happiness, your own honour Γ 44 The accents in which he expressed these words were mild, and persuasive in the extreme, and he followed tliem with a sigh which appeareel to proceed from a broken heart. *' Kre I could resolve how to act, or what fo reply, he spoke again.—* I have but one question te» ask,' he said, * anel one admonition to give, and we part, pro¬ bably to meet no more on earth. Are you not, Julio, a foundling, reared hy the benei oh nee of the abbate of the monas¬ tery of San Stefano, in Padua?*—* I am," was rny reply.—* Then/ emphatically re¬ joint d the unknown, t avoiel the marchese di Valdetti! 1 —'Wbo is the marchese di Valdetti ?* I asked.·—* Your mortal foe/ he
he answered.—* I know him not/ I re¬ joined,—' Heaven grant you never may know him l pronounced the unknoivn. — t What have I to fear from him ?' I exclaimed.—' Every thing,' replied the stranger; 'persecution! dishonour! death! Farewell !' he aelded. pressing my hand in his as he spoke. ' oh ! fareivell ! One anxious purpose of my heart is accom¬ plished, and I am happier, at least less miserable than I was/—* If you are truly thus interested in my fate/ I said, ' oh, explain to me------' ' Not one other word/ he interrupted me by solemnly pronouncing, * nor, ivhen I quit this chamber, offer to follow me a single step, or breathe a sound that may be overheard, unless you wish to draw down instant ruin on us both. Once more, let me behold your countenance, and then yield myself up again to grief and soli¬ tude/' He opened his lantern, gazed upon me for a few seconds, and then again smothering
smothering the light, in scarcely articulate accents he stammered forth·—'Farewell! a long fareivell î Heaven guard and bless thee! farewell Γ Then raising his voice, he added— t Ilemember my injunctions; not one step or word, as you value my existence or your oivn;' and darted out of the chamber, closing after him the door with the utmost caution. " The state of my mind may be easily divined, but its torments were increased hy a perplexing recollection which I could not analyse. During the momentary view wiiich the stranger had been taking of my countenance, my eyes had been fixed upon his, and I felt convinced that his features were familiar to my sight, though 1 could not recall to my memory wiien or where I hael before beheld them : at length, after a considerable time passed in the torture of reflection, recollection burst suddenly upon my brain ; the being who had that night addressed himsel f tome was the very pilgrim who, when a boy at school,
school, had, as I had since received cause to suppose, examinee! the neck of my shirt, in order to ascertain whether it were clasped by the brooch which 1 had now for many years constantly worn, and which had disclosed me to her who pro¬ fessed herself to be my mother. What were my thoughts during the remainder of the night cannot require explanation ; I slept no more, and rising early in the morning, and inquiring of my servant for the stranger, learnt that he had left the inn at daybreak ; I asked the road he had taken, and ivas informed that no one had observed the direction in ivhich he had set out. " That every additional circumstance of a mysterious nature ivhich occurred to mc, heightened my desire to obtain the means of undrawing the veil ivhich ob¬ scured from my view the ambiguous fates of myself and those with whom I was connected, can scarcely require to be men¬ tioned. I have here only to remark, that even
even to the name of the marchese di Valdetti, against whom my unknown friend had cautioned me as my deadliest foe, I was an utter stranger. "On my return to Padua, I became thoughtful and melancholy ; my acquaint¬ ance perceived the change în my disposi¬ tion, and rallied me on the score of my being in love—a charge, of which as I felt fully conscious, I candidly admitted my¬ self guilty, in order to avoid a closer scru¬ tiny into my feelings. After a time I en¬ deavoured to argue with my own mind, to call the powers of reason to my aid, and to convince myself that the despondency of soul to whicb I bad too long been yield¬ ing myself, so far from assisting me in producing the end which I was desirous of accomplishing, would only tend to enervate my faculties, and render them less competent to take an active share İn any circumstances which might arise to demand my personal exertions. To this end I applied mystlf with vigour to the several
several arts of painting, music, and botany, of which I bad before possessed no mean knowledge, and with which, for the sole purpose of employing my thoughts, I now resolved to court a more intimate ac¬ quaintance. I also accepted the invitations of my friends, and suffered myself to be led back to that society from which I had for a time withdrawn myself; and I founel that if I experienced no other relief to my feelings from associating occasionally with my fellow-beings, a few hours passed in a crowded assembly gave a double charm to solitude on my return home. " The period now arrived which was productive of a circumstance upon which my mind must ever look back with the keenest sensations of horror—a circum¬ stance ivhich has blotted out my name for ever from the book of earthly bliss—a cir¬ cumstance which has rendered the world a blank to Julio, and Julio a cipher and an outcast amongst men ! "Being one day about this time invited to
to dine with a friend in Padua, I found the party composed of my intimate ac¬ quaintance, with the exception of one young man, whom I had frequently before observed in mixed societies, and to whom my friend now for the first time intro¬ duced me, informing me that he ivas a young man of good family, who had been studying the art of surgery at Pisa, and was noiv residing in Padua, for tbe pur¬ pose of perfecting himself in anatomy, under a celebrated professor of the science in that city. In the course of the varied and broken conversation which occurred during our repast, I observed the young strange*- io be well-informed, but opinion¬ ated, and eager to bring his own remarks upon every subject into notice. About the usual time of- separating in the even¬ ing, the guests departed, with the excep¬ tion of the young stranger and myself, who being engaged in a conversation of some interest ivith our host, did not rise to follow their example. When w r e were left
left alone with my friend, he said—' I am very glad you diel not retire so precipi¬ tately as the rest of my visitors have done; we seem so well entertained with one an¬ other, that if you have no other engage¬ ment, I hope you will pass the remai uder of the evening ivith me/ "We both readily complied with his proposal ; fresh wine was placed upon the table, and the laugh and joke relieveel the gravity with ivhich ive occasionally dis¬ cussed the various subjects ivhich were by turns started in the field of argument. At length the profession of the young surgeon was the topic introduced upon the carpet, and my friend, ivho was a man of an extremely-nervous habit, said— that he had reason to be thankful that the independence which had devolved to him from his father had never reduced him to the perplexity of selecting a pro¬ fession; hut, that had his circumstances compelled him to the exercise of one, that of a surgeon ivould have been the last he would
would have adopted, as he was certain that he never could have sufficiently divested himself of feeling, for the performance of the necessary duties ofthe situation, *' The young stranger strenuously de¬ fended bis profession, declaring, tbat what was frequently placed to the score of inhu¬ manity in the exercisers ofthat science, was only a commendable stifling of their own feelings, in order the more ably and more speedily to contribute to tbe relief of those whose sufferings it was their aim to heal. " I strongly coincided with him in opinion, and then addressing my friend, said—' If all the world were of your senti» ments, where ivould the sufferer obtain alleviation of his pangs? he must inevit¬ ably either linger through a life of imbe¬ cility and decrepitude, or be reduced by the anguish of his wounds to a hasty grave, ivhen the operations of science, skilfully administered, will in few in¬ stances fail to restore him to strength and convalescence/—* There is truth in what vol. il e you
you advance/ replied my friend, r bul dis¬ positions vary ; and had í been fated to the exercise of a profession ignobly as that of a tailor is usual!}' rated, í am positive that I could sooner have submitted to be¬ come a repairer of the tattered arms and legs ofa doublet, or of a pair of trunks, than of the fractured ones appertaining to a human form/ " The } ou ng stranger laughed heartily at my friend's assertion, and then said— * î am surprised, as you express yourself to he so great a victim to your nerves, how you can be sufficiently hold to receive a shock of electricity, of ivhich I have se*en you take many, apparently unmoved/— * I confess that il is an experiment which 1 extremely dislike/ replied my friend; ' but as I know it to be for the good of my system, I endeavour to subdue my feel¬ ings, and assume courage to endure it/— 'And we surgeons,' answered the young stranger, 'subdue our feelings for the good of others, which you must allow is at least as
as praiseworthy a motive as his ivho stifles them for his oivn peculiar benefit only/— s You have not yet practised yourself/ resumed my friend, * or at least only to a limited extent, and cannot therefore in¬ form me how a novice assumes fortitude to carry him through the first operation which he attempts/-—* The ardour of his zeal to excel in his profession, added to his desire of contributing to the rehef of the sufferer under his hands, nerve equally his heart anel arm/ replied the young stranger; 'but you are to recollect/ he continued, * that every student of surgery lias practised his art upon the bodies of the deael before he proceeds to exercise his skill on living subjects. 1 am surprised that, as a mere matter of curiosity, you have never procured an introduction into the anatomy chamber in the college of the Holy Cross in this city; it is easily ob¬ tained; I shall attend there to-morrow, and if you please, will take you with røe/ —* Excuse me,* returned my friend, ' İt e 2 must
must be compulsion indeed that leads me to witness a spectacle of the kind ; I deem it only suited to the observance of those who may derive professional benefit from their attendance upon it, and, moreover, regard it as a scene which should be kept strictly concealed from the eye of uninte¬ rested curiosity/ "The conversation noiv took another tum, and shortly after, the young stranger and myself bade our entertainer good night. When we were in the street, í addressed the young stranger by saying— 4 1 am of an entirely different opinion to our friend relative to the points which we ivere discussing, connected with your pro¬ fession; I am inclined to think that no one can see or knoiv too much of whatever relates to the acquisition of knowledge in any point of science; and if I did not deem myself to be taking too great a liberty with you upon our first acquaint¬ ance, I should be tempted to ask if you would oblige me by transferring to me your
your invitation to accompany you to¬ morrow morning to the anatomy cham¬ ber, ivhich our friend declined/ "The young stranger not only readily granted my request, but appeared highly gratified that I had advanced it; ¿ml the splendour of a full »noon illuminating a warm autumnal evening, he proposed a short stroll about the citv before we re- tired to our respective habitations, I agreed to his préposai, and the excellent wine, and animated conversation of the afternoon, having exhilarateel his spirits- he began to aeldress me with all the familiarity of an old acquaintance.— * There is certainly little pleasure/ said he, * in contem pkiting the dead, but the subject ivhich you will to-morrow behokl in the anatomy chamber was once one of the most lovely women in Italy« I think I shall almost feel some compunction in performing the task of practice, which 1 apprehend will be allotted to me, upo^ her now-insensible form ; for I believe e 3 that
that few have shared more of her favour than I have done/— t Was she then a female of a publicly-unprincipled life?' 1 asked. —* No, not exactly so,' replied the young stranger ; ' her transactions were denomi¬ nated private ; but so many possesseel the key to the enigma, that her secret was what may be called a secret pro bono pvblicoJ *—* And 1 suppose the contempt in which her memory is heid/ I rejoined, ' causes her rei naii is to be yielded an easy pur¬ chase to the dissecting knife ?'—-' Oh, by no means Γ ansivered my companion * she supported a style of infinite elegance during her life, and has doubtless left a fortune capable of interring her with "he magnificence of an empress; indeed, I understand her funeral to have been a sumptuous one; she was buried to-day in the chapel of San Tomaso/— * And by what means then will the college obtain the corpse?' I inquired.-—* Oh, my elear signor/ replied the young .stranger, 4 every corpse is attainable in this city ; and con¬ scious
scious that thc remains of her of whom I have been speaking will form an ad¬ mirable study, our professor has pursued infallible steps ior obtaining tbe body; ai.d in less than two hours from this time, it will be saie in the anatomy chamber/— * Strangers feel nothing on these occa¬ sions/ 1 remarked; * but relatives could not fail to suffer severely, wciv they ac¬ quainted with the remains of their kin¬ dred being thus exposed to the gaze of unfeeling scrutinizers/—' Probably tbey ivould/ returned my companion; * but especial care is taken that relatives are kept in the dark as to these matters/ *' After some farther conversation we parted, und I agreed to meet the young stbinffcrat eleven o'clock on the following morning, in the square of San Lucco. '* The young stranger ivas true to his appointment, and after the usual saluta¬ tions of the morning, hc said—* It is some¬ what earlier than the hour at which the e 4 professor
professor generally commences his lecture ; but if you please, we will* walk on to the college ; there will as yet be scarcely any one arrived in the anatomy chamber, and Ì shall have an opportunity of giving you a sight of this rara avls, as ï once thought her, which you would likely not else have an opportunity of obtaining, as her countenance will probably be concealed írom view ivhilst the professor delivers his lecture.' " I consented, ai we proceeded to the college of the Holy Cross. Arrived there, we ascended the grand staircase, leading from the hall to the second range of apart¬ ments, and were admitted by a porter, to whom my companion was known, into the anatomy chamber. It was a lofty and spacious apartment, around which seats were am phi theatrically raised above each other, for the accommodation of the stu¬ dents; and in the centre stood a table, over which was thrown a white cloth, ivhich.
which, clinging to the substance it con- cealeel, plainly discovered the outline of a human form beneath. " As the young stranger hael augured, there were as yet not more than half a dozen persons in the room, two of whom appeared servants in waiting, and the others students, who were sitting remoti 4 from each other, and appeared deeply en¬ gaged with the volumes which they held in their hands. ' The opportunity I anticipated is granted us,' said my companion; and motioning to me to follow him, he ap¬ proached the table, anei drew aside that part of the covering ivhich concealed the face of the subject. I stepped forward to view the features on which his encomiums had been so lavishly bestowed, and he- held—guess, if you ean, the horror, the as¬ tonishment, the convulsive pang which rent my heart, when, in the countenance of the deceased, I beheld that of my mo¬ ther ! e 5 ** Darting
" Darting a look expressive of the fury of my soul upon my introducer to this awful scene, * liar and villain !' inarticu¬ lately escaped my trembling lips, and clasping my hand before my eyes, as if apprehensive of being pursued by the ap¬ palling spectacle ivhich I had just wit¬ nessed, I rushed out into the street. My brain ivas burning, and my heart sunk cold as ice within my bosom. In the course of the last twelve hours, I had heard my mother accused of lascivious criminality, had seen her insensible re¬ mains ????.???! to the most humiliating and ignominious situation to ivhich mortal clay could he subjected! and could a son, ivho possessed a heart of manhood, the feeling* of a human being, witness this double degradation to the character and form of her wiio bore him, and not seek retribution on the asperser of her fame ? forbid it, every virtuous principle ' forbid it, Heaven ! " I rushed into the first tavern, and calling
calling for pen and paper, wrote a note tí» the following effect to the young student. * SIC.NOK, * The female whose character you have so falsely antl so vilely calumniated is niv mother! As you are vourself a son, you may readily imagine the feelings aroused in the bosom by an indignit) offered to the name of her who bore us; you must, therefore, either publicly re¬ tract what you have uttered to the dis¬ credit of my parent, or decide your quarrel with me by the sword. I shall expect your immediate apology by letter, or await you at three this afternoon, behind thc ruins of the monastery on the east side ofthe city. Jeun' Si My letter ivas instantly dispatched, but no ansiver returned. Accordingly, at the time specified I repaired to the ruins E ? of
of the monastery—a spot marked by the decision of many a point of honour; and had arrived tbere only a few moments, when I perceived my adversary advancing. I have already mentioned that I had ob¬ served this young man to possess a self- sufficient and decided temper; my own disposition was as inflexible as bis, when goaded to the pitch to ivhich it was now wound; and the expressions uttered by each at our meeting, instantly proved tint our swords must be tbe arbiters of our quarrel. We immediately took our ground ; our weapons were drawn, and at the close of the second encounter, my sword pierced my antagonist through the breast; the blood gushed from his heart» and he fell to the earth to rise no more ! Conscious that my own life was now in danger, I flew with all the precipitancy of dread to my villa, 'and having provided myself with a purse of gold, and taken the swiftest horse from my stable, 1 set off at full speed from the city of Padua, almost
almost unconæimis whither I directed my steps." Here ended the manuscript. Attirimi to it was a slip of paper, which contained these words :—■*' Thus far, adored Valeria, I had proceeded in the narrative of my Hfe, ere I formed the détermination of submitting it to your inspection; and I should long sinœ have concluded it (for little more remains to be ?? of the unfor¬ tunate Julio), but that I desired my tongue to impart the climax of my fate to her who governs my destmy, and for whom alone I wish to five. Come then, beloved Valeria ! return to the hut of the recluse, and even beneath the pressure of disap¬ pointment, the sting of privation, let ? deduce happiness from the charm of friend¬ ship and congeniality of soul ! come ! oh, come! and relieve my pangs by the in* fluence of Ihy reviving presence! Ihine, and thine only, Julio/' Valeria sat lost in a trance of thought, of ammement, and cf imsati¿if¿ed conjec¬ ture,
ture, as the portrait suspended round the neck of Julio, the only point on which she had ever rested an apprehension of his fidelity, was now fully proved to her to have been the resemblance of his mother; she could select no instance from those which composed the sum ofhis life, ivhich could militate against that union ivhich his ivords at her interview with him that morning, and noiv again the expressions with which he had closed his narrative, seemed so palpably to declare that he him¬ self considered incompatible with some circumstance, arising from the events of his life, ivhich it still remaineel for him to develop to her: what that circumstance was, she could not form the remotest idea ; and the only relief which she could pro¬ mise herself for her present doubts and anxieties, was to seize the first favourable opportunity for again repairing to his se¬ cluded dwelling by the side ofthe brook. Having deposited the manuscript in a place of security, and endeavoured to dress her
her teatures in that serenity which was íbreign to her heart, she hastened to join the family, conceiving that she had alreadv been too long absent from them.
CHAP
CHAPTER IV. **■*■ *■ ****** ** ?*?++ +* One woe doth tread upon another's heels. Ha miei. On approaching the apartment where the family of Di Borges usually assembled, Valeria heard Averilla and her niece Fran¬ cisca in earnest conversation together, and on her appearing before them, the former said—" I think that is the footstep of my dear Valeria ?" Valeria replied in the affirmative, and Averilla resumed— *' Is your headache removed, my dear child ? have you slept ?" " I have not slept," rephed Valeria; *' but I think that I am somewhat better than when I retired to my chamber/' " I hoped you might be asleep," replied Averilla, ** and therefore would not disturb you, although I have long been wishing to
to speak to you. We are all under an alarm concerning your cousin Paulina, though I hope our fears are groundless." Valeria eagerly requested an explana¬ tion of her words. " Give me leave, signora, to inform you what has happened," ejaculated Francisca ; *' I am the only person that know elirectly and properly, as 1 may say, how matters are. You must know, signora, that atter you had retired to your chamber this after¬ noon, the signora Paulina asked me to take a ivalk with her, which the politeness due from one hke me to a lady of her su¬ perior rank in life, caused me, of course, to consider an honour conferred on myself; for, as you have heard me say before, sig¬ nora, I have lived in the service of some of the first ladies in the land, and therefore know how to demean myself to my bet- ters, and I immediately prepared to attend her commands. Well, signora, blind ciiance» as the proverb says, led the way to us, and we strolled into the little wood by
by the side of the corn-fields, of ivhich you ivell know the situation ; so we wan¬ dered about, sometimes talking and some¬ times not, till the signora Paulina hap¬ pened to spy a most beautiful field-flower, that she felt an inclination to transplant into our garden ; so she desired me to run home for a spade, saying, she would take it up, root and all. Well, home 1 ran, and at the door of the house, ivhom should I meet but Mr. Terence! 'Oh, Mr. Te¬ rence/ said I, ' the signora Faulina is going to dig up a curious root in the wood yon¬ der; perhaps .she may not be very well acquainted with the business of trans¬ planting it herself; so, as you profess your¬ self to be a bit ofa gardener, suppose you go back with me, and assist her in the operation ; two heads, you know, are better than one, as the proverb says.— 'Oh yes/ says he—you know his queer sneering ivay, signora; * to be sure two h ails are better than one, if the other's only a calf's head, because if you are hun-
gry, yoo ran eat it; but 1 ean t be a babe in tbe wood with you just nou; í have other fish to fry/ und awnv hv walked; oh, how provoked I was at his impudence ' * If you are come of a bull, Mr. Terence/ said 1, * of whieh I understand there are abundance in Ireland, 1 was not born ofa eow, I ean tell you that, if yon meant your calf's head at me/ Rut what be said to me I don't value a straw; all that I re¬ gard is, that if he had but gone with me to the wood, as I desired him, the dear signora Paulina might have been here sate amongst us all just now/ * t For Heaven's sake proceed to what relates to my cousin," said Valeria. 44 Well, signora/" resumed Francisca, ·* when I returned back with the repade to where tht- plant was, and where I naturally expected to find tlu» signora Paulina» she was not there. I looked around me in all directions, as far as ever my eyes couhl penetrate, but nowhere eould í percei vt her; so imagining she might be behind somt'
some of the bushes that are scattered about the little wood, I called out as loud as ever I was able, ' signora ! signora Pau¬ lina! dear signora Paulina! for the love ofthe Virgin, pray answer nie, dear, dear signora Paulina l Ì screamed and bawled till I was as hoarse as a raven, as the pro¬ verb says, but all to no purpose ; no an¬ swer could ï get ; upon which, signora, I became so much alarmed, that I ran home to communicate the dreadful intelligence." " How extraordinary !" exclaimed Va¬ leria; "and is my dear Paulina not yet found ?" " I hope she may," said Averilla ; " your worthy father, my husband, and all our servants, are go'ie in pursuit of her ; and I trust they cannot fail to discover her, whithersoever she has wandered." " Yes, every body is gone to look for her, signora," rejoined Francisca, '* Mr. Terence and all ; he happened to be here at the time, just come from the Castello, on a message to his master, and he went willingly
willingly enough with them, though he would not stir at my invitation—a sulky felloiv! It is very true, as the proverb says, ' that one can't turn brass into gold with whistling/ but 111 go and look if any of them are returning." And with these words she left the room. " I never heard a more unaccountable occurrence," said Valeria ; " it is impossible that she can have strayed out of her road and lost her way, she is too well acquainted with every path in this neighbourhood/' 44 And we have no neighbours, but the honest and innocent peasantry," remarked Averilla, " whose upright hearts would revolt at injuring any human being, and who would die in the protection of an in¬ dividual respectée! by my husband/' " It is most extraordinary indeed," said Valeria ; " how long is İt since Francisca saw her last ?" " Full three hours, my love," replied Averilla. ' f And wiiy did you not summon me to
to assist in the search after my dear Pau¬ lina?" asked Valeria. " You could have effected no more than has already been attempted/* replied Ale¬ nila; '* and knoning you to he unwell, 1 was apprehensive of the sudden alarm in¬ creasing your malady/ 5 (i The maladies of the body are trivial compared with those oí the mind/' re¬ turned Valeria. " They are huketi, ?? child' thev are mdeed!" pronounced Averilla, emphati¬ cally, uith a sigh, ivhich appeared to be drawn from some coneuded feeling labour¬ ing in her heart. A short and anxious silence ensued ; it was broken b\ the return of Francisca. "I see someof them coming," she said; èí but it is growing so dusk that I can't dis¬ tinguish which of them they are that I see." Valeria ran to the dn u r 3 and in a feiv seconds was met b\ her iather and the farmer, Urbino took her hand, and led her back into the house. 4 * Paulina is not with
with you," she said; **merciful God, pro¬ tect her!" " I trust he will," replied Urbino; "she is pure of heart, and the innocent ever ex¬ perience him their shield," " This new, this unexpected calamity tt) follow so closely upon those we have already suffered," falteringly pronounced Valeria, through her tears. '* Such, lady/ 1 said Terence, " has ever been the wayward fate of human beings; at least, it was so in the days of our im¬ mortal bard, or be ivould not have de¬ clared, that— 1 W ¡j L -'»'! W- ', wlllfj, 'in ? ? »??* И·»! Mio!' *>} In, Hui .η ' ??????? " " But how/ 1 rejoined Valeria, " are frail beings to support such an accumulation of woe ?" " By hope, my honoured lady," an swered Terence O'Donnovan ; ** recollect what ouid W r illy says again— * Hope ib tbe lover*·* walking statí; Walk, hence with t bit.' " And
" And why should not it be the friend's and the parents staff too ? Depend upon it, my lady, Willy took it in a general sense, for the comfort of man, woman, and beast of every description, that form a part of animal society. I remember giving that exposition of the sentence once to father O'Rouke at Ballyporeen, and he said it was ivorth a place in the big bishop of Ferrats Easter-Sunday's discourse." "Come, come," said Di Borges, <t a truce to this conversation ; if Paulina has had the misfortune to fall into the hands of an enemy, neither tears nor quotations will effect her rescue." " True !" exclaimed Terence—- " You may ;t-> «ell go stand uj on the beach, And hid ¡he------" He ivas silenced by a look from the farmer, wiio proceeded thus-—" As it is impossible to form the slightest idea of the cause of Paulina's present absence, un¬ less it can be supposed to bear a relation to
to the unexplained events which have lately taken place at the Castello della Torvida, I think that the only clue we can hope to obtain to the mystery is for us to proceed thither, and pass the night as usual within its walls. Old Jeronymo, wbo will doubtless not have left the spot all day, may possibly be able to throw some light upo* 4 tbis ambiguous matter : so, signor," addressing himself to Urbino, 41 gird on L· couple of my pistols ; I shall stick another brace in my own belt to guard us on our way, as after these unpa¬ ralleled events, there is no knowing whom we may encounter; and let us set out without delay/* In mournful silence Urbino prepared to follow Sancbo's directions; and having bade an affectionate farewell to Valeria and Averilla, they departed, leaving be¬ hind tbem two of the servants belonging to the farm, for the safeguard of the fe¬ males at home. It was now within an hour of midnight, vol, il F ma
and the shades of night enveloped the earth. When tbe receding footsteps of thejr departing friends ivere ?? longer audible—"Are you inclined to retire to rest, my dear Yaleria ?" asked Averilla. " No, no," replied Valeria, " I am cer¬ tain I could not sleep ; nor do I desire to repose, if even I believed myself able to do so/' " I eannot myself go to bed with any degree of satisfaction to-night/' rejoined Averilla; " I ivill therefore retire ω my chai iber, and you shall, if you please, cor» · and sit there with me ; if we remain below stairs, we shall be unceasingly tor¬ mented with Francisca s prattle, which I am sure you must just now wish to be spared." This arrangement ivas accordingly made, and Francisca was sent to bed ; whilst the two male-servants were directed to remain sitting up in the kitchen. Valeria and her venerable friend sat for some time in silence, for real sorrow does not
not vent itself in words ; at length Ave¬ rilla said—" Oh, my dear Valeria, this un¬ accountable disappearance of your cousin brings to my recollection a circumstance, which I have for many years past endea¬ voured to banish from my thoughts, but which to-night will force itself upon my feelings, in spite of all my efforts to com¬ bat the impression. It ivas the will of God," she added, bursting into tears ; " bis ways are inscrutable, but always just. I may iveep, but I will never murmur." Valeria had never heard her express herself thus before, and uttered some ivords, indicating the surprise with whicn her friend's emotion affected her. " I have experienced a calamity in life," said Averilla, " of ivhich few have known the misery of a privation equally cruel." " Do you refer to the loss ofyour sight ?" asked Valeria. "Oh ! no, no," answered Averilla ; " that is a misfortune incidental to the frailness of our constitutions, and one which many f 2 others
others have to lament besides myself; no, no, the evil to which I refer is almost un¬ paralleled. I liave often thought that I would one day tell you ivhat I had suf¬ fered; for your heart is so gentle ami so compassionate, that it is ñtteá for the resting-place of a melancholy tale like mine: an opportunity ηοΛν occurs, and you shall know T the secret that preys upon my mind." Sbe vnped the tears from her eyes, and after a shoii: pause conti¬ nued speaking thus :—·" I Imd been three years united to my husband, to whom I had been betrothed from a very early age, ere it pleased Heaven to give me the pro¬ mise of becoming a mother ; at length I was blest with thc birth of a female infant, the only babe to which I ever gave exist¬ ence. My child was healthy and lovely, ¡md greiv to be the idolized object of mine and my husband's affections. I find tbat I cannot dwell upon the circumstance of which I am about to inform you ; my feel¬ ings will not permit it ; I can only in few words
words relate to you the heart-rending fact» My child had just completed her ninth month, when I was one day walking with her in my arms in the little garden in the front of our habitation ; suddenly a person with whom I had business called me to the house; I seated my infaut on a plot of grass near the door, and having placed some toys by her side, ivent to answer thc summons ivhich I had received from the house. I am certain tliat I was not absent five minutes from my child ; and on re* turning to the spot where I had left her, oh ! coneeiv r e my surprise, my anguish— my infant was nowhere to be found/* The tears burst afresh from the eyes of Averilla— ti Ob, my sweet babe !" she ex¬ claimed, * t methinks I see thee now. Rut I shall never behold thee more—never more gasse on thy lovely smiles, tby rosy dimpled cheeks. Oh, Valeria ! from that moment I never beard of her again ; all inquiries, all rewards to discover her fate, proved ineffectual ; and yet—yet I survive f 3 her
her loss, and still retain my senses. Surely I cannot have loved her as a mother, or I should have sunk to the grave ere this." Her bursts of sorrow now became so violent, that Yaleria felt it necessary to assume the task of admonitress, and to beseech her to subdue her anguish, by the remembrance of that resignation which she owed to the will of a First Cause. " I have bowed submissively to the or¬ dinations of Providence," said Averilla, w and X will do so again. Only grant me one indulgence, and you shall see me weep no mere." She placed in the hand of Valeria a key, and directing her to a certain drawer in the chamber, which she requested her to open, informed her that she would there find a coral set in gold, which she requested her to bring to her. Valeria obeyed; and on clasping the trinket in her hand, Averilla exclaimed-— * 4 This coral lay by the side of my child when she was stolen from me; it is a proof
proof that those wbo deprived me of her did not do so for the lucre of gain, or this had not been overlooked by thern—no, no, no ; and wbat could be their motive I shall never know. Tills coral has been pressed by the lips of ?? child ; oh ! let me press it to my own." She kissed it ardently, then said—" Now, my dear Va¬ leria, replace this where you found it, and let me staigglc to regain my fortitude of in inch" Valeria followed her instructions, ¿mì bad scarcely returned tbe key into her bands, ere they were startled by tbe clat¬ tering of a horse's feet, which was followed by a loud knocking at the outer door, Anxious to ascertain wbo was tbe claim¬ ant for admission, Valeria opened thc chamber-door; lier action was beard by one of tbe servants, who had been sum¬ moned from the kitchen by the noise, and he inquired of Valeria whether or not he should open the door? Having received her reply in the affirmative, he f é undre w
undrew the bolts, and found ivithout a man on horseback, who, putting into his hand a iolded paper, said—*** Deliver that to the signor Urbino di Cavetti;" and hav¬ ing thus said, rode off again at full speed. The letter being brought to Valeria, she found it closely sealed, and superscribed with her father's nume. A consultation now ensued between Valeria and her friend, whether the letter should be sent without delay to Urbino, or alv?»*; ^iä j.¿türn İn thc looming ? ??\ their ultimate decision was, that, as it might contain matter of immediate im¬ portance, one of the servants should ?* directed to take horse, and convey ? in¬ stantly to the Castello della Torvida. On quitting the farmhouse that even¬ ing, and arriving at the Castello, I ' rhino and his party found old Jeronymo, with a countenance of doleful despair, leaning against one of the pilasters which support¬ ed tbe flight of steps leading to the main entrance into the building. His hours, passed
passed in solitude, had been dull and mi¬ serable, and, probably ivcary of empty walk, he stood contemplating the starry heavens, ivith a set of features wbicb, as Terence truly observed, bespoke M Patience on a monument, Smiling aï grief;" and to the inquiries ivhich ivere made of him be replied, tbat no occurrence of any kind had token place at the Castello, and that he bad not seen an individual since the departure of Terence, on his walk to the farm in the afternoon. Sancho di Borges and Urbino had agreed not to retire to rest tliat night, air! accord¬ ingly seated themselves in an a pertinent, wbere tbey experienced no interruption, till Terence came to announce to them the arrival of the servant whom Valeria bad dispatched from the farmhouse. Urbino hastily tore open the letter, and found it to contain these words;--** Fear nothing f rom the disappearance of yemr F 5 nÍ€Ci\
mece, Paulina ; it is for her happiness and eventual good that she is for a short time removed from your presence? Whilst Di Borges was descanting on the extraordinary information contained in the note, Urbino appeared to be struck by some sudden idea, and drawing his letter-^asc from his pocket, he took from it a written paper, which he opened, and having compared it with the one he had just received—" By Heavens!" he ex¬ claimed, " they are the same—the hand¬ writing of the letter just delivered to me corresponds in every point with that of the note ivhich I received from a horse¬ man, at the albergo where I slept with my familv on the first night after my quitting Venice, You will recollect that the note to ivhich I refer contained intel¬ ligence from the unknoivn, in consequence of wiiose threats I had departed from Ve¬ nice, that, whilst I prosecuted the plan which I was noiv pursuing, I had nothing to fear from him." " It
" It is an enigma," said Sancho di Bor¬ ges, " ivhich exceeds comprehension/' " And requires the utmost caution and deliberation, as I apprehend/' replied Ur¬ bino, " in acting towards its solution." The friends noiv entereel into a serious and elaborate conversation, in wiiich we must for a while leave them engaged, and pursue the steps of the lamented Paulina.
F 6
????-
CHAPTER V.
W'hitt may tbis moan? ?? \y ??? ν ììi . Whilst Paulina ivas awaiting the return of Francisca with the spade, happening to turn her eye towards a knot of bushes near which she was standing, she per¬ ceived amidst the scattered branches the visage ofa man, who was attentively eye¬ ing her. Kre time was given iier for far¬ ther observation, he blew a shrill whihtle, at the sound of which two other men, the one on foot, the other on horseback, the latter of whom ivas enveloped in a loosely- flowing cloak, appeared from a clamp of underwood at a short distance from their companion, and all three immediately ap¬ proached Paulina. The two on foot seized her by the arms, and requesting her not to
to be alarmed, for that no harm was in¬ tended her, lifted her upon the horse be¬ iore their companion, who instantly cover¬ ing her with the long skirts of his cloak, set off at full speed. It was in vain that Paulina shrieked aloud for help, and alternately implored and commandée! to be restored to liberty: equally fruitless ivere her inquiries why this unwarrantable restraint ivas placed upon her, anel whither she was about to be conveyed ; the only answer which she could obtain from her conductor, was a repetition of the assurance already made her, that no evil ivas intended her. Still she raved for liberty, anel supplicated for compassion ; but her cries and ??????? were unattended to ; and at lengt i ι over¬ poivered by the conflicts of her mind, she sunk into a state of insensibility. On awaking from the temporary obli¬ vion into which she hael fallen, Paulina found herself extended on a velvet couch, and the glare of wax-lights which met her
her eye, displayed to her an apartment furnished with the utmost magnificence. By her side stood a female in the vale oí years, habited in a suit of vestments which, from their antique fashion, bore the ap¬ pearance of having been at least fifty years in the possession of their owner, and ivhich ivere now valuable only for tbe richness of the materials of which they were com¬ posed. The features of the female were plain and harsh, and appeared to partake more of thc masculine than of the softness of that sex of whieh her dress bespoke her to be a member. On perceiving Paulina open her eyes— " How fare you noiv, signora?'' she asked. Her voiee was as coarse as her person, but she endeavoured, as it appeared, to assume a mildness of tone, and smiling with af¬ fected benignity as she spoke, she conti¬ nued thus:—"Ah, no wonder you were exhausted with galloping along upon that jolting horse, beiore that giant of a fellow, Philippo, ivho has no more feeling than the
the beast he sits on ! Hiding on horseback never agreed with me, and I dare say it is the same with you ; probably too you have never been accustomed to the exer¬ cise, and that makes it worse to bear. Take a glass of wine," she proceeded, filling one. as she spoke, from a crystal vase on the table—-" it cures me of most complaints / and as she presented it to Paulina with one hand, with the other she raised a full triads to her lips, drinking to the health of lier guest, and their better acquaintance. Rising from the couch, and placing the wine, which the old woman had forced into her hand, on the table, Paulina be- sought her to inform her wiiere she was, and wh}' she had been borne away from the protection of her friends, in the extra¬ ordinary manner in ivhich she had been torn from them. ** It is very silly of you, signora, not to eirink the wine," saiel the old woman, regardless of her questions; " I am sure it will do you good^—it always does me good.
good. Come, taste it ; you'd better be ad¬ vised." Paulina again refused her offer; and the old ivoman raising the second glass to her own lipvs, said—" Well then, I must drink it for you, thats all ; for it woukl be a sin to let it be wasted, noiv it's poured out," Paulina still more earnestly repeated the questions ivhich she had before ad¬ vanced. " Well then, sit dowrn here by me on the sofa/ rejoined her companion, seating herself as she spoke, " and compose your¬ self, and lll tell you all I know of the matter, and then you'll be convinced that you have nothing to Jiar, at all events;" and taking her by the arm, she drew her down forcibly by her sielc. " Now then," she proceeded by saying·— " now then, signora- —-I forget your name, lm sure, although I have heard it more than once/* " Paulina/ 5 was the reply. " Ay —Paulina, Paulina/' rejoined the old ivoman—" and a very pretty name it is
is too. AA^ell then, signora Paulina, with a bewitching face and a captivating fonn like yours, what motive can there be, think you, feir catching a little flutterer like yourself, and shutting her up in a golden cage, but the old ruling principles love ?" tí AAliat !" exclaimed Paulina, starting frantically from her seat; " am 1 then brought hither to be made the victim of a villain's passion ? Sooner shall my for¬ feit life------ -'* " Pshaw ! nonsense í abate your ecsta¬ sies," replied the old woman·—'* there's nothing amiss intended you, I promise you that, Marriage, honourable marriage, awaits your acceptance, with one of the first men, and one of the greatest men, and one of the proudest men, anel one of the richest men in all Italy." *' Anel ivas it necessary to briiur. me hither clandestinely to receive his propo¬ sal ?" askeel Paulina. if That is his business," answered her companion—
companion-—" you must ask him that himself to-morrow, for voull not see him till tl en. Ue gives you this night to re¬ pose in, and to regain your wonted tone of spirits." Paulina sunk for a few moments into silent refiection; she recollected the con¬ versation which had passed concerning her, bet >en Francisca and a young cava¬ lier who had professed himself her ad¬ mirer, and doubting whether he might not be the present arbiter of her fate turning to the old ivoman, she said—> " What is he, ivhose unjust prisoner I at this hour consider myself?" " Why, I've told you already/' was the answer—" great and affluent." fct Is he young ?" demanded Paulina. " No, not verv —not very young/' re- turned lier companion, nor yet very old; a good enough age, and a good- enough-looking man. Hut follow me, and you shall see his picture; it hangs in the room wbere you are to sleep." The old woman
woman took up a candle, at *1 opening u door at the extremity of tb= apartment, ushered Paulina into an elegant bed-cham¬ ber, and raised her light tu the counte¬ nance of a half-length portrait ofa cavalier, richly habited in the Venetian costume— ** There, there it is," she í 'd ; u and so like, you might almost ? ,nk he was speaking to you." Paulina directed her eye^ to the picture, and an involuntary start fh 1 owed her ob- ¿CrvutİOİl of tbe counteiiíu , ;:;;;:ríl2Vcd; for İn the features of the f i ti ait she be¬ bélel the resemblance of ILu tall pilgrim with the dark hair, ivho had haunted her durin«' the carnival at Venice. " What do you start at?" asked her companion. " Do you know the person whom it represents ? Have you ever seen him ?" ** 1 believe—I think—I hardly know— 1------" stammered out the confused and tiembling Paulina. " Well, well," returned the old woman, '* youll
** voitll be convinced to-morrow morning after breakfast whether you are right or not, for at that hour the marchese will no doubt visit you." " What is his name?" asked Paulina. " Why, ?? not certiiin whether I am at liberty to disclose that to you," replied the old woman ; " so you must be content to defer gaining information on that head till you see him himself. There is your bed/' proceeded her companion, after a muse—" tbc best in the Castle. I assure i ou ; I have known a princess sleep in it before now ; but the marchese thinks no¬ thing too good for you. And there/' she added, throwing open another door, which led into a spacious closet—** there is a harp for your amusement, and sheets of music for you to play by, and mate¬ rials for drawing, and hooks without end, and, in short, every thing your heart can desire." u But my libertv," replied Paulina. " Ah ! many a one ivould joyfully give a finger
a finger to be such a prisoner," simpered out the old woman. The chamber door was now opened, and a plainly-dressed man entered the apartment.—** Wife," he said, addressing Paulina's companion, 4 * you are wanted beloiv stairs." ** Well, I'm only doing ivhat 1 was or¬ dered/' replied the okl woman, *' in attend¬ ing upon the í/ignora." kí Do as you are ordered now then, and go down stairs," returned the man. " You are the biggest bear in all the country, lipardo/' rejoined the old ivo¬ man, " that you are, and always bebave to me as if ï was a brute;" and with a half-curtsey to Paulina, muttering and grumbling, she left the chamber. During thii conversation, a few mo¬ ments had been given Paulina for observ¬ ing the man. Ile appeared about the age of his wife; his features were stern, but the sternness seemed blended with a mix¬ ture of honesty that almost inspired con¬ fidence
fidence. Slightly as the feeling was ap¬ parent, it penetrated to the heart of Paulina, and casting herself upon her knees before him, she implored his com¬ passion. " I can answer no questions to-night," replied Lipardo, emphasizing the two last words of his sentence. " When then may I hope------" Paulina was proceeding to say. Lipardo interrupted her hy loudly pro¬ nouncing—" "Will you please to taste any refreshment, signora, before you retire to rest ?" Paulina replied slightly in the negative. " My will» Ricarda," continued I i pai do, " will visit you early in the mornİn«r. J tf ?? Shouìd you require any attendance during the night, this bell," pointing to a silken cord as he spoke, " communicates with my chambei, signora; I sleep on the op¬ posite side of the gallery ;" and having uttered these ivords, he was departing. " Oh ! when shall I behold you again ?" exclaimed
exclaimed Paulina, eagerly pursuing his steps. " Good-night, signora," roughly pro¬ nounces! Lipardo; anel hastily quitting the chamber, Paulina heard liim lock the door on tlie outside. The moment her attendants had retired, taking up a wax-taper, of which four hail been left by Lipardo burning on a table in her chamber, she closely examined the apartments in which she ivas confined ; and having convinced herself that no one was concealed within them, she sunk upon the couch on which she had at first, opened her ewes to the hated walls of bei prison, antl hurst into tears ; she wept for the mi¬ sery wiiich her friends would experience on her account—she wept with apprehen¬ sion at the trials to which the future might subject her. Where could she be? In wiiom could she confide? To what hope could she look for refuge?·—'* Wherever i am, or in the power of whomsoever I may be placed," she at length mentally pronounced,
pronounced, " the game Providence in which I have ever trusted beholds me now ; He is still able to control the power of my oppressors; on his mercy I rely." She sunk upon her knees, and having recommended herself to the protection of her Heavenly Father, she once more threw herself upon the couch ; the bed she hael determined not to enter. Universal silence prevailed around her, and the first sound ivhich broke the still¬ ness of the scene, was the hollow voice of a deep-toned bell proclaiming the hour of midnight. Time moved on leaden wings, and at length the first hour of morning vibrated upon the air; still Paulina durst not sleep—a shivering coldness crept over her frame, and she wished, but feared, to tiste the wine whieh had lieen left in her apathnent, lest it should be drugged. The second hour of the morning sounded, and shortly after, in spite of her efforts to repel the invasion of sleep, she sunk into a con¬ fused and broken slumber. She
She had not slept long, ere she was awakened by a loud and dismal shriek, ivhich appeared to issue from an apart¬ ment at no inconsiderable distance from her oivn ; and this was immediately fol- lowed by the hasty bursting open of a door, and a voice exclaiming—" Help, Lipardo!—I say, help!" In a few mo¬ ments a second door was heard to open, and a voice, which Paulina almost Ikiieved that she recollected to be thatof Iticarda's husband, inquired the cause of alarm. * r Villain î slave î miscreant Γ exclaimed the first speaker, " how have you dared to do this ?" " What, my lord ?" was the reply. " To sufler him to escape from his dun¬ geon, and to confront me in my bed p re- joined the first speaker. *' 'Tis well he fled, or, by my hopes of heaven, this hand had reveiled in his blood, although the------" " My lorel, my lord,' exclaimed the other speaker, " you have beheld no one vol. il a —believe
— Ibiiévé me, you have not; these are the workings of your brain. Retire into your chamber; I will accompany you, and do not hazard any one gaining a knowledge of ------" They had now entered the apartment, the dœr was closed, and Paulina heard no more. ** The words to which I have just listened," reflected Paulina, Ci must have proceeded from the lips of a guilty wretch, who is haunted bv the dread of Ix/huldhur some innocent victim of his cruelty." Sleep was novv effectually driven from fior vouch, and she wandered mournful!) about her chamber, till the rising of the dawn» peeping through the saffron win¬ dows of the east, prompted her to extin¬ guish the lights whkh had been burning in her apartment, ¿aid, by drawing asido the curtains from the casements, to make ut least an attempt at ascertaining where >he was. Shortly the wished-fòr light of morning became
became sufficiently strong to assist her investigations. From the apartment in which she had at first been restored to recollection, she could behokl only battle¬ ments, surmounted by turrets and begirt by ramparts ; and immediately beneath the windows lay a small garden, sur¬ rounded on all sides by the walls which intersected the squares of the building. She next proceeded to the chamber; it was lighted hy a circular casement exca¬ vated in the dome, anel consequently couhl lend no assistance to ??? inquiries. Lastly, she entereel the closet in which the harp and lx>oks were deposited ; it had only one window, and this, like those in the first apartment, lookeel down upon an¬ other inclosure within tiie ramparts, above the walls of which appeared the waving tops of a knot of gloomy cypress-trees ; and beyond these, a brown and barren mountain closed in the view. With stifled anguish (tor her overbur¬ thened heart now refused her the relief of ? 2 tears )
tears) she once more cast herself upon the couch, awaiting, with undefinable sensa¬ tions, the events of the morning. In the course of time, the " busy hum of men" began ίο resound through tbe Castle halls ; and shortly after this, Ilicarda and her husband entered Paulina's apart¬ ment, thc latter of ivhom was attended by several domestics bearing an elegant morn· ing repast, ivhich tbey placed upon a table, and then, conducted by Lipardo, departed. " Perhaps, signora/' said Ilicarda, " you are not accustomed to make your own breakfast ; so, if you please, 1*11 pour out your tea, and keep you company." The old woman seated herself at the table, and began the operation of ivhich she had spoken. Paulina appeared insen¬ sible to what was passing, and Ilicarda observing her mind abstracted from the scene around her, said—" I wish, from my heart, your first interview with the marchese were over; and then, when you had once come to a right understanding of
of each other's sentiments, your spirits would be relieved» and you woulel be able to enjoy a little chat with your tea. For my part, I think the best cup in the world is good for nothing, without it's flavoured with conversation." " I shall take a cup with pleasure," re¬ plied Paulina, " for I have been very thirsty during the ivhole of the night;" and as she spoke she passeei her hand over her cheeks, ivhich were flushed arid burning with the fever communicated to them by the distracted state e>f her mind. ** Thirsty !" ejaculated llicarda, " and all that rich Franconian wine standing there untasted ! Its well it wasn't so near me, signora. AVhy, a few glasses of that would have made you sleep as sound arul as comfortable------But, blessed A'irgin í what do I see?" she added, leaning for¬ ward her head and looking into the cham¬ ber. ** Why, as I'm a holy sinner, you've not been in bed to-night î I wonder you u 3 are
are not ill w r ith sitting up ; and yet I vow you have as charming a colour as if you were only just opening your eyes after a long sleep and pleasant dreams." The tea being prepared, and a cup placed before Paulina—" Come now," ¿said her entertainer, " take a slice of sweet cake, or a Naples biscuit, or a queen's thumb, with a little preserve of barberries spread over it;" each of which when Paulina declined—" What will you pre¬ fer then ? You have only to ask and have, within these walls/* rejoined Ricar¬ da ; and on Paulina replying that she could taste nothing—" Well, I'll indulge you with some tea this time," said the old woman ; is but I must make it a con¬ dition with you, that you eat with it at another. Tea is reckoned very hurtful to an empty stomach, and therefore I always take care to lay a good foundation for it to operate upon;" an assertion in wiiich tlie devoirs paid by her to the preserves and confectionary with which the break« fast-table
fast-table abounded, proved her to liave been perfectly correct. " I dare say, signora," continued Ricar¬ da, between the intervals of mumbling her sugared crusts and sipping her scented hy¬ son, " that you and I sliall pass a great deal of our time together when you come to be settled, for Pm thc only woman of consequence within these ivalls, fit for the wife of the marchese to associate with ; and as he has no female relatives, and sel¬ dom receives company here in the coun¬ try, why you ivill see no person of your own sex above a common servant, except myself. My husband, signor Lipardo, iš the marchese's major-domo and steward, and withal his most intimate friend and favourite ; and ï am the superintendant of his household, and regulator-general of his domestic concerns/* Paulina, uninterested in all she heard, listened in silence; at which Ricarda seemeei by no means offended, being upon all occasions satisfied that it was sufficient G 4 for
for her to speak, and for others to receive the information which she vouchsafed them. Ricarda having concluded her meal, was just rising to command thc removal of the breakfast-table, when the sounds of a shrill horn, twice or thrice repeated on the outside of the building, arrested her attention.—" Oh ho 3" she said, " are you there, signor?" Then addressing Paulina, she added—" That is the horn of the marchese's nephew, whom those sounds inform me is just returned from a sporting party, on which he has been ab¬ sent from home for a few days. He's a fine young man, signora, and you will like him vastly for a companion, I am sure; he's very handsome too, I can tell you, and reckoned very much like me into the bargain. Be kind to him, signora, ivhen you are become his aunt, and speak a good word for him to the marchese, his uncle, upon every occasion, and you will always find a staunch friend in me in re¬ turn,
turn. There are wheels within wheels in all states and families, signora ; and though you may imagine me to be nobody, a Mend at court is always worth having, even to one who may believe herself to be wielding the very sceptre of govern¬ ment. You know little of Ilicarda yet, signora — you will know her better by and by." These words were accompanied with many winks and grimaces ; and when she had finished speaking, she rang the hell for tlte servants. AVhen the domestics had retired— " λ Veil, signora," said Ilicarda, " you will soon see the marchese now, and all will then be put upon a right footings no doubt. You look sweetly, upon my word —enough to charm the heart of any noble· man; and I hope to be the first to wish you joy f* and so saying, she departed. At the expiration of another half-hour Lipardo appeared, and announced the ap¬ proach of the marchese. The major-domo retired, and the apartment was entered by g 5 a man
a man of a tall and commanding figure, handsomeiy attired; his height and fea¬ tures precisely corresponded with those of the pilgrim at Venice; but although it was only two years since Paulina had be¬ held him, he appeared to have added as many lustres to his age. " Signora," he said, advancing towards Paulina as hc spoke, " I have only one apology to öfter for a line of conduct which you may probably conceive to re¬ quire an artillery of argument fbr its de¬ fence : excess of love, to ivhose resistless influence every mortal is condemned to bend, must plead my excuse, and shield me from the terror of your frowns." " True love it coukl not be," replied Paulina; " fbr the first principle by ivhich true love is swayed, is delicacy of action towards the individual who has inspirée! the sentiment/' '* Say rather," returned the marchese, " that true love is that fury of the heart, that loss of self-control, which spurs us on to
to deeds whieh, if our adoration was more calm, our reason less inflamed, we should lack fire to accomplish, and buoyant spirits to rejoice in having dared to execute." " The feeling you describe/* rejoined Paulina, " is a madman's passion, and should be fettered by the same coercion that a madman's other inclinations are restrained hy." " By this hand------" exclaimed the marchese, attempting to seize her hand, and to kiss it as he spoke. *'This hand is yet my own," pronounced Paulina firmly, " and shall be, till my heart accompany the gift." " If you disbelieve my love------" re¬ joined the marchese. Again Paulina interrupted him—" I might have helteved," sbe said, ** had you proceeded like a man of honour in dis¬ closing it. Had you sought my protector, the signor Urbino di Cavetti, confided your wishes to his friendship, made hhn the mediator of your suit to me, and at a g 6 distance
distance waited my reply, this had seemed like love ; and whether or not it had been accepted by me, it would have been an¬ swered with an acknowledgment due to the honour of your proposal. But when you play the thief, and steal the boon you covet, as a bravo does a purse, be¬ cause he fears to be denied if he requests it as a gift, you falsify the very doctrine you profess, and prove what you misname devotion to be tyranny." " By Heaven ! I mean you honour¬ able," returned the marchese. " 'Tis true, I might have acted as you represent ; but the impetuosity of my ? -elings- — But no more of that— ï will not ag.iin ? fend your senses by describing the ex¬ cess of my adoration ; only consent to be¬ come my bride, and words cannot express the joy and triumph with which I shall restore you, as my wife, to the presence of your protector Urbino.'* ib Never," replied Paulina. " I fear ywk not—I cannot fear the man who wantonly
wantonly casts aside the principles of his nature» as you have done. My friends are doubtless humble, when compared with you, but they will nevertheless find the means of searching out my prison; and, in a point of justice, the ivorthy Ur¬ bino iv'll not shrink from boldly opposing himself to the first potentate in the land. 11 " I beseech you to compose yourself, and hear me," he resumed. u Did you but know how your matchless beauty fired my soul, as I, a few days since, in passing the farm of your friend Di Borges, on horseback« accompanied by my steward, for the first time beheld you—~" " For the first time ? 3 ejaculated Paulina «—" for the first time! Do you then pre¬ tend to have forgotten the constant perse¬ cution (preference, perhaps, you called it) with ivhich you pursued me, two years ago, at the carnival?" ** The carnival! What carnival?" de¬ manded the marchese. ** Xeed 1 repeat it was the carnival of Venice Τ
Venice ?" replied Paulina. " I am certain that, whether or not you are pleased to avow a recollection of the circumstance, it cannot but live in your memory." " By my fondest anticipation of your enchanting smiles!" ejacuiated the mar¬ chese, " I swear that I never beheld you until that day of ivhich I have just spoken." "Why you prevaricate upon this point," answered Paulina, " is as indifferent to me as is the cause why you preferred to snatch me, like a ruffian, from the bosom of my family, to pursuing the steps of an honour¬ able suitor for my heart." *■' You wrong me—on my soul you do," rejoined the marchese, " I solemnly re¬ peat that I never saw r you till 1 beheld you in that wood/' " From whence your banditti last night tore me," added Paulina, pointedly. " Signora," resumed the marchese, after a pause, t ^ 1 perceive that our conversa¬ tion will not tend to the decision of that important business upon which we are met;
met; I shall therefore, in thc course f tbis afternoon, send you a written scrox¿, containing matter of serious moment, to whicb I most earnestly request your eai; n and ? prejudiced reply. Meanwhile con¬ sider yo irself the mistress of all that you behold, and, most of all, of him who now reluctantly quits your presence ;" and, fol¬ lowing these words with a mild and cour¬ teous inclination of his bead, he quitted the apartment.
?И??-
CHAPTER VL *>##■*■*#*'* J' t-t ****** f 9 ï do íove voti, Dearer than eyesight, space, and libertv — Jie yond *bat can be valued nel) and rare — No iesb than life, with «trace, health, beauty, honour-— A love that makes breath poor at» i speet h ?????-— Beyond ni! ?.???? of so much I bve sou. Horneo (md JuUct. Some hours now passed with Paulina uninterrupted by visitors ; the first who appeared was Lipardo, but he was attend¬ ed, as in the morning, by several domes- ties, over whom he kept a watchful eye whilst thcy were engaged in preparations tor her midday repast. When the dinner ivas placed upon the table, Paulina seated herself, and pretended to eat, in the hope of either being lefi alone with Lipardo, or of catching bome intelligence from his eye. All the inferior domestics, with the excep¬ tion
tion of one, who remained standing be¬ hind her chair, retired, and Lipardo sta¬ tioned himself near the sideboard ; but he continued constantly to employ himself either with the articles upon it, or by turning his eyes to the portraits suspend¬ ed against the walls ; and Paulina per¬ ceiving that it was iu vain to attempt to engage his attention, dismissed the repast A consielcrable time ivas again passed by her in solituele ; it was broken by the entrance of lipardo, followed by two ser¬ vants, who remained near the door of the apartment, ivhilst he, with a low obeisance, placeel a folded paper on the table beiore her, and they then withdrew together. On examining the paper, it was, as she had predicted it to be, the one which the marchese had in the morning informed her that he should send to her, containing terms for her consideration. It began with a declaration of his unalterable attach¬ ment, and the honourable motives hy which he was swayed towards ner ? hence it
it proceeded to enumerate the advantages of rank and wealth, whieh she could not fail to enjoy in the quality of his wife, and requesting her to fill up a blank, whk.ft was left in the articles, with her signature, and any sum ivhich she might deem sufficient for her annual expendi¬ ture. It concluded with imploring her to relieve his anxiety, by replying to his terms before the hour of noon on the fol¬ lowing day. It ivas signed, Alberto di Valdetti. The point in agitation ivas one on ivhich the sentiments of Paulina could never vary, and having perused the contents of the paper, she refolded it, and referred to it no more. In the evening she was visited by Ili¬ carda— " So," said the old woman, " I find that I am not to wish you joy just yet : well, well, 1 have no doubt it will soon be the case—but you young signoras are so shy and delicate in all affairs of the heart—though, to be sure, there are many matters
matters to settle where an engagement is forming for life; I was five or six hours myself between Lipardo's oflering me his hand and my accepting it, and greater people may probably take a longer time ; Rome was not built in a day. To-morrow is a new morning, and you bave a long night before you for consideration ;" and, after many other sapient remarks of a si¬ milar nature, she took her leave. Lipardo next appeared, to light her tapers for the night, but, as usual, attend¬ ed by inferior domestics. When in her presence, Paulina's eyes were constantly placed on his: and she could not forbear imagining that, on this evening, he ap¬ peared to regard her witli a considerable degree of curiosity and interest, although be made not the slightest attempt either to engage her attention or to communi- cate with her e} ?. When tbe universal stillness which pre¬ vailed throughout the Castle bespoke its inhabitants to have retired to rest, Paulina, exhausted
exhausted alike by the mental and bodily fatigue under which she had been sufier¬ ing, having discovered that the door of each of her apartments was provided with a bar, by means of which she could pro¬ tect herself from intruders—having care¬ fully secured herself against all access, was on the point of retiring to her bed, when a faint blow against the casement in the closet caused her to start. Actuated equal¬ ly by hope and fear, she stood scarcely able to breathe, and impatiently awaiting what might follow. In the course of a few se¬ conds, the noise was repeated. Snatching a candle from the table, she flew to the spot from whence the sound had issued, and as she approached it, the signal was a third time given. Placing her light upon a table by her side, she gently raised the sash ; and no sooner had she done so, than a substance resembling a small white ball darted through the aperture, and fell at her feet. She eagerly took it up, and found it to be
he a slip of paper folded round a smooth pebble. She instantly perceived that the paper was written upon, and lost not a moment in perusing its contents. Tbey were these :—" Dear signora Paulina, be comforted in the knowledge that you have a friend within these walls, ivho will de¬ fend your honour at the price of his own existence. Let your beart, for the present, rest satishVd with the certainty that you are thus guarded : meanwhile let the most rigid caution be the guide of all your actions." In a transport of thankfulness and joy Paulina pressed the paper to her lips; and in compliance with the admonition İt con¬ tained, she instantly shut the easement, and retired to her chamber. That the friend who had conveyed to her this soothing intelligence was Lipardo, she could not doubt ; and by the caution whicli he had enjoined her to use, he bad evidently meant to warn her against en¬ deavouring to engage his attention when he
he entered her apartments, lest her anxiety to do so should be observed, and thus de¬ feat any plan ivhich he might liave in agitation for her rescue. With an emo¬ tion of the purest delight she returned her thanks to Heaven for its interposition in her favour, and entering her bed, sunk to repose with some degree of composure. On the following morì) žig Ricarda, as on the preceding one, presided at the breakfast-table; and after tlie ceremonies of the hour ivere concluded, Paulina ap¬ plied herself to reply to the letter which she had received from the marchese, which she did, by positively assuring him that no offer which he could make, no inducement which he could present to her acceptance, could prevail on her to connect her destiny with his; and concluded by requesting, that as her determination ivas unalterable, he ivould, without delay, restore her to her connexions. Having sealed her letter, she delivered it to one of the servants, and in a «hort time
time received a reply, by Lipardo, from the marchese, requesting her to consider deliberately of thc proposals which he had made to her for the space of tbree days, at tbe expiration of which time it was his intention to receive her final answer in person; and assuring her that, till that hour arrived, he could not flatter her with a hope of being restored to her friends iy, any other character than that of his bride. Helving on the promises of her ι n- known friend, Paulina read his resolve, if not with indifference, at least without terror, and determined to await the event with all the composure of mind which she eould command. This day passed, as the former one bad done, unchequered, except by the hours of refreshment and the occasional visits of old ? icarda. When the midnight bell had tolled, she eagerly repaired to the ivindow of her closet, anxiously expecting a repetition of the signal by ivhich the preceding night bad been marked; but it was
was not given ; and sbe was compelled to retire to rest ivithout receiving any fresh communication from lier unknoivn friend. Not thus unsatisfactorily passed the succeeding night ; somewhat earlier than she was prepared to listen for the signal, it was sounded ; she flew to the ivindow, and descried, through the iron bars with which it ivas latticed, the figure ofa man. The uncertainty of the \?)? by which she beheld him, rendered her doubtful whether or not it were Lipardo ; she gently raised the sash, and beheld a young cavalier, of a most prepossessing counte¬ nance and appearance. The stranger instantly spoke.—" Banish all apprehension, dearest signora," he said ; " it is a sincere friend who addresses vou." " Who are you ?" asked Paulina, scarce¬ ly conscious what she uttered. ** To you a stranger," ivas the reply ; " but you arc not so to me—I have long knoivn and adored you !" He paused, then added—** Did your attendant never inform
inform you of a young cavalier who had addressed some questions to her conceni- ing you ? and------" he hesitated. t * Yes ; yes, she did, she did !" falteringly replied Paulina. t * I am that person," he returned ; " my name is Vincentio. I am the nephew of the marchese di Valdetti, into whose power you have so unfortunately fallen/ 5 " What can be his motive fbr detaining me here his prisoner/* rejoined Paulina, " when I have declared to him my ñxed resolution of never listening to bis ad¬ dresses?" " Hope may tempt him to believe tbat you will in time yield to his love, as tho only means of obtaining your liberty," re¬ turned Vincentio. " But why did he by stealth bring me hither," replied Paulina, ** in preference to laying his suit before my friend, my protector, Urbino ?" ? Most probably he apprehended a ne¬ gative to 1? wishes," answered Vincentio, vol» il h M and
" and therefore transported you to a spot where he possessed absolute dominion." <£ Gracious Heaven Ρ exclaimed Pauli¬ na, *' you cannot think tbat he will dare ------ to drag me to the altar by force?** she added, after a moments hesitation. ft Means must be devised to thwart his intentions, whatever they are," said Vin¬ centio. (S Fly then to the signor Urbino di Cavetti," returned Paulina, " whom you will find at the farmhouse of a worthy farmer, named Sancho di Borges; it is situate close to the postbouse, near to which you first saw me ; inform him where I am detained, and a few hours will ac¬ complish my rescue." " Such a measure would be utterly in¬ effective," replied Vincentio ; " an armed force could with difficulty gain admittance into this castle, if stoutly opposed by the vassals of the marchese; and were your friends even within the walls, there are amidst its recesses so many spots of con¬ cealment,
cealment, undiscernible to the eve of strangers, tbat even their presence could not act towards your enlargement." " How then am I to be rescued from the perils which surround me ?" ejaculated Paulina. " There is no hope but to work by stra¬ tagem," answered Vincentio ; (i I am ac¬ quainted with all that has passed between yourself and the marchese. You have .still two days your own before you will be called upon to give your ultimate reply to his proposals ; much may be done in the course of that time, and believe tht.t a heart which adores you like mine will not be inactive in your cause." " Can I confide in Lipardo?" asked Paulina. " I know not," returned Vincentio ; "I i>elieve his real nature to be honest and even kind ; but he has so long been ac¬ customed to be the tool of the marchese's inclinations, and to fill his purse by fawn¬ ing to his will, that an artificial nature has H 2 almost
almost superseded in him that with ivhich he was originally gifted." " And ids wife Ricarda ?" rejoined Pau¬ lina. ** Is the creature of pride and avarice united/* returned Vincentio ; " flattery has great weight with her, but the heaviest purse is certiiin to secure her its advocate and instrument." " If you desert me then," ejaculated Paulitui, " what will become of me?" and she clasped her hands İn agony as she ?????. " Say hut that your good opinion will be my reward/' answered Vincentio," and I ä wear by yourself, the most sacred oath I can propose, either to eftect your libera¬ tion, or to die in your preservation." The tear of gratitude started into the eye of Paulina, and she suffered Vincen¬ tio to draw her hand through an aperture of tlie lattice, «nd to press it to his lips.— % * An eternal bond is, I trust, now sealed between us/' he said; " you are henceforth my
my life, anel in defending you I shall only nrotect what is most valuable to myself;" and after a feiv moments' pause, during whicli the feelings eloquently communi¬ cated by the eyes of each supplied the de- fieieniey of ivords, Vincentio continued— * 4 I dare remain with you no longer; It has been at an extreme hazard that I have ventured to approach you at all; 1 have bribed one ofthe gardeners for the use of this ladder, anel must eiepart, lest he shoulel follow my steps, and learn the cause for ivhich I have employed it : good night, and good angels guard you ! confide in Vincentio ?* '· ( iood angels prosper thy endeavours l* exclaimed Paulina. *■ God grant they may 1" fervently pro¬ nounced Vincentio, anel quickly disappear¬ ed from her .sight. Having cautiously closed the casement, she retired toher chamber, and sunk upon a chair in deep reflection, bhe had at length beheld the young cavalier who hud H 3 so
so ardently professed his love for her; and at how critical a period of her fate had she been introduced to his acquaintance ! She regarded the event of their meeting as the interposition of Heaven in her favour, and considering him as the deputed instru¬ ment of that benignant Poiver for her sal¬ vation, she felt a reverence for his interest in her cause, compared with which a mere requital of his passion appeared an inade¬ quate return for his nobleness of mind. The suspense produced by expectation is sometimes even more tantalizing thau that of dread ; and quivering under the flattery of hope, Paulina felt it more diffi¬ cult to compose her spirits for repose, than she had done when no ray of promise had beamed upon the prospect before her. She entered her bed, but slept not, arid rose early, ivithout feeling conscious that na¬ ture's balm had been a stranger to her eyes. When her breakfast equipage was re¬ moved, Lipardo returned singly into the apartment,
apartment, ane! presenting her with a bunch of rare and exquisite exotics, he said,—« I believe, signora, that flowers are what you take peculiar pleasure in ; do me the favour to accept these at my liands ;" and witliout waiting for a reply, he again departed. Lipardo had placed the flowers on a table hy ivhich she ivas sitting, anel on her taking them up, the more closely to examine their beauties, Paulina perceived, concealed amongst the leaves, a scaled pa¬ per. She eagerly tore it open, anel read these words :—
" For your own sake, for the sake of Vincentio, do not attempt to en¬ tertain him again at the window of your closet ; you have already been obsei veel to do so, but all may yet be well, if you de¬ sist from repeating your hazardous inter¬ course ; should it be communicated to the marchese, the greatest misery, if not death lì é itself,
itself, might be the consequence to one or both of you." As Lipardo had himself presented her with the flowers, there could remain no doubt ofhis being himself the giver ofthe caution ivhich the paper contained. She now more than ever ivished for an oppor¬ tunity of conversing with him ; but the forbidding sternness of his countenance. when he entered her apartment, forbade all advances on her part, and she was com¬ pelled h) endure the pangs of uncertainty. Time moved on witii slow and heavy progress. ? very luxury ivhich could re¬ gale the sense, or delight the admiring eye, was offered to her acceptance in la¬ vish abundance; ivhilst the domestics who attended upon her bent before her person, like slaves humiliating themselves in the presence of a conquering monarch. But this unceasing splendour produced no gra¬ tifying impression on the mind of Paulina; she
she sigbed for liberty, for home, for the embraces of i*er beloved fiiends—most of all for the success of Vincentio in her eause, and his preservation beneath the trials to whicb bis zeal might expose him. At length arrived the hour at which the marchese had informed her that be in¬ tended to receive, in person, her final reply to his proposals. The door of her apart¬ ment ivas thrown open, and she expected to behold him enter ; but in his stead ap¬ peared llicarda. The old woman's countenance beamed with pleasure and exultation; in her hands she bore an elegant casket, which placing before Paulina, she opened the lid, and displayed within a magnificent set of jew¬ els, resting on a bed of satin, towards whicli, the moment Paulina's eyes were directed—" There, there, there, signora ? exclaimed Ilicarda, " if those don't make you a happy bride, 1 don't know what ean —»and those the marchese sends to you by me, and begs you to accept as a wedding ? 5 present*
present. Now are not they delightful ? Well, what answer shall I return to him ? of course, that you are highly gratified by his munificence, and will ------" " As I understand that I am to see him shortly, I ivill return my reply to him my¬ self," ansivered Paulina. " Well, well, just as you please about that," rejoined Ricarda ; " he bade me say- he should be here directly ; and I verily believe I hear his footsteps now ·/' and she was departing, ivhen casting back her eye to take another gaze at the jewels, she added—" I have seen much in the course of my life, but never saw the equal of those sparklers before ; they call them diamonds ofthe tirsi water, signora; but to see them twinkle in the sun, as they do just now, I should be mucb sooner tempted to believe they were made of fire ;" and tbe sound of footsteps now becoming audible in the gal¬ lery, aivay she bustled. In the course ofa few seconds the mar¬ chese appeared. After a iew words of courtesy
courtesy on entering the apartment, he md —" You cannot, signora, require to have repeated to you the cause which brings me hither; and I hope that I augur prophetically in predicting that ï shall win my suit." '* When I return you this," replied Paulina, placing in his hand the casket, " and tell you that it is impossible I can accept its contents, I need scarcely -add that my determination is the same as when we last parted." The marchese betrayed disappointment, and appeared struggling to subdue an emotion of a passionate nature, which was with difficulty withheld from mounting to his tongue. He had considered the daz¬ zling splenelour of the jewels as an krc- sistless advocate in his cause, and the cold indifference with which he saw them re¬ jected, by appearing electdedly to deprive him of ever/ hope of prevailing with the object of his passion, toucheel an ireful chord in his composition, which ivas be- H 6 ginning
ginning to string hini to a display of some fiercer tones in his disposition, than those wdiich had yet been witnessed by his in¬ nocent captive. Still he endeavoured for a while to pre¬ serve complacency of speech and eonduct ; and having once more recourse to the powers of persuasion, tbe same argument were again rehearsed on either side, which each had futilely advanced for the convic¬ tion of the other at their last interview. " Were I this instant to permit you to depart from hence," pronounced the mar¬ chese, tauntingly, " it would sound well in the ears ofthe ivorld, that a young and lovely female, like yourself, had for some days been singly a visitor at my eastle. and had quitted it ivithout becoming my bride." " I am willing to bear the aspersion," re¬ plied Paulina; " sutler me but to quit these walls, and the consciousness of my own innocence will be to me a sufficient shield agamst the unjust tongue of detraction." 44 And
(i And what will men, wbo, like myself, are intimate witb all the powers of love and beauty/ 1 was tbe reply, " say of tbe marchese di Valdetti, when they leam that after five days residence in his castle, be suffered the object of his adoration to escape from bim un won?" He paused a few instants, tben added— " Signora, the fierceness of my passion is, if possible, increased by the procrastination which it has endured/* The thunder of his voice grew deeper, and he proceeded thus—" Mark me, sig¬ nora! here, by my soul, I swear! ami neither cfods nor demons shall divert me from my purpose, mine you shall be ! re¬ member well my words—mine you shall be ! But íl is at your option to become my wife!" and darting at her a look of mingled love and rage, he quitted the apartment, Paulina's head sunk upon her clasped hands, and she stood lost in reflection· Where was now Vincentio? was it pos¬ sible
sible tbat he ivould gain acquaintance with the threat ivhich the marcbese bad utter¬ ed? Without the intercession of Vin¬ centio, the next hour might seal her doom. The apprehension almost maddened her, and sbe could scarcely impose sufficient command upon lier feelings to forbear calling aloud upon his name. She flew towards the casement in *he closet ; sbe did not expect to behold him from it, and \ T efc she felt disappointed that she saw bim not. At one moment she traversed the apartment with hasty and uncertain steps, as if desirous of flying from herself; at another sbe listened near the door, dread¬ ing to hear tbe returning steps of her per¬ secutor. At the expiration of about a couple of hours, llicarda made her appearance ; her eyes evinced displeasure, her forehead was wrinkled with a frown, and her mouth pursed. Throwing herself into a chair, near to ivhich Paulina ivas standing, and fixing
fixing upon her her repellent countenance —" So here's a fine piece of business/ she exclaimed, " to go and provoke the mar¬ chese, as you have done, after all the marks of esteem and affection which he has shewn you since )>our residence in this castle ; and above all, to reject a set of jewels that would almost buy a princi¬ pality ! what ivoukl you have forsooth ?" " My liberty," replied Paulina, " and my restoration to that tranquillity of mind which I enjoyed before I was introduced to a knowledge of the marchese/ ti Ay, but how will you come at it?' returned the old woman, somewhat relax¬ ing from the severity of tone in ivhich she hael spoken at her first entrance ; 4I how will you come at it ? I can tell you it is much easier getting within the wails of this castle than getting out of them, i am come to advise you as a friend, and I say, marry him—marry him, for the sake of St. Ursula, and the eleven thousand blessed virgins ! I say, marry him, lest ivorse
worse shouid happen ; he is frantic with love, and you must know that it is im¬ possible to take a mad bull by the horns." " Oh, in the name of mercy, have com¬ passion on me !" replied Paulina ; " you are the only person of my oivn sex to whom I have here access ; do not abandon me to a fate ivhich I dread worse than death ! Oh, in pity serve me if you can !" " Why, am not I serving you all I am able, by giving you my advice ?" returned Ricarda ; " and I tell you, that the only honest plan you can pursue is to marry the marchese/' " Marry the marchese !" echoed Pauli¬ na ; "I would sooner------" " I know ivhat you ivould sooner do as weil as you do yourself/' rejoined Ricarda, rising; and half-whispering in her ear, she added, " you ivould sooner marry his ne¬ phew, Vincentio ! Ay, you may start, but you see a httle bird has been singing to me; but don't he afraid of your secret— its safe with Ricarda. I am not always so ill.
? -tempered as I may at times-appear ; but I am teazed and tormented to death with many a plague that you know nothing about. So once more my advice to vou directly and peremptorily is, to consent immediately to marry the marchese. Why, he cannot live long, in tbe common course of nature, and then ivhen he dies, Vincen¬ tio, as his nephew, and you as his widow, will between you inherit all he is ivorth ; and you may then marry one another, and be the happiest couple in all Italy !" " And do you suppose, that if I were willing to submit myself to this humilia« tion," rejoined Paulina, " that Vincentio ivould tamely consent to behold the wo¬ man ivhom he loved subjected to such a degradation ?" " Ah, Heaven help him ! Vincentio diust not take any thing the marchese does otherwise than tamely," replied Ri¬ carda. " x\nd why I advise you to lose no time in the business is, because, as the w idow of the marchese di Valdetti, you might
might make Vincentio an honourable %vife ; but if any thing worse were to be¬ fal you, which Heaven forbid ! I am sure J have warned you sufficiently against it ! Why, he could not think of uniting him* self with y^u after that, you know.** " Could I not for a few moments see Vincentio himself?" asked Paulina. " See Vincentio !" repeated the old wo¬ man ; " I durst as soon give you leave to take out my right eye as to attempt it ! See Vincentio indeed ! there would be blood and murder truly, if you two were caught together !" She rose from her seat, then added«—" I have done more for you now than I ought ; but, as I told you the other day, there are wheels within wheels in all families, and this is one of them. So now, if you will take tbe advice of one who knows what is, and what is not, do as I have recommended to you ; it is your only chance. Take till the evening to re¬ flect upon it; Lipardo shall keep the mar¬ chese from interrupting you till that time.
time. But if you don't follow my advice, 1 am no woman, and the marchese is no man, if you don't live to repent it ! Mar¬ ry him first, and I'll engage that Vincen¬ tio shall wait for you till he dies. Follow my advice î follow my advice!" and with these ivords she again retired.
????-
CHAPTER ΛΊΙ.
??;!*· -îri.nj,p, ibi;. >Λ?ύ, a vomlfii'ui (1????\??. ' ÎÎOM ι . Titat Vincendo should have imparted his affection tor her to old Ricarda, ap¬ peareel to Paulina a ciuumstanee so unac¬ countable, that nothing but the testimony of Ricarda's oivn lips could have gained it her credit. Could it be possible that Vin¬ centio was privy to the indelicate advice ivhich the old woman had given her to become the wife of the marchese di Val- detti, for the purpose of inheriting from him, as his widows and thus ultimately swelling u.e wealth oi* his nephew, by forming* a second alliance with him ? Her brain swam in undefined and undigested ideas, and her mind was involved in a chaos of doubt, apprehension, and despair. Lipardo,
Lipardo, attended by the domestics of the castle, as usual, entered lier apartment with refreshments, and as usual departed again iu silence. About the hour of eight in the evening 1 , when the shades of twilight were begin¬ ning to descend to the earth, tbe opening of the door of Paulina*« apartment pre* sented to her view Ricarda and her bus- band, each bearing a light. " I am sorry to inform you, signora/ 1 said the former, speaking loudly and im¬ periously, " that the marchese does not any ionger permit you the use of these apartments. I am commissioned to con¬ duct you to a chamber in a distant part of the castle." <t Anywhere/' exclaimed Paulina, " where the marchese will not------" " The marcbese is ill, and retired to bed borne time ago," rejoined Ricarda ; " your obstinacy has provoked hira till he is per¬ fectly imwelL And no wonder, such in¬ gratitude to be returned fbr such favours, such
such condescensions, and such magnificent offers as vou received from him ; but some people don't know what they ivould have !" * s This ivay, if you please ; follow r me/ said lipardo. The major-domo led the ivay ; Paulina folloived his steps, and llicarela hobbled behind. " You are not going to such a lodging as you have left, I can tell you," cried the old ivoman, as they proceeded along ; fei but those who are wilful must take their own way of things. You would not fol¬ low my advice, and I am sure I spared no pains in trying to persuade you to make yourself happy, ivhen happiness was in your power." After tracing several vaulted passages, they ascended a flight of steps, at thc head of which Lipardo paused ; and hav¬ ing draivn from his pocket a key, he open¬ ed a door, and they entered a square apart¬ ment, u moderate dimensions, the walls of which
which were composed of stone, intermin¬ gled with occasional pannels of a dark wainscot, and in which the furniture was a wooden stool, a small table, a lamp, and a straw bed. " There, ivhat do you think of tbat for your bedchamber?" ejaculated Ilicarda; " if you had taken my advice, you might have been sleeping still in tbe best bed, and have been kept as warm in it too as your heart could have desired ; it is cold comfort here, I can assure you. The sun does not penetrate through that grated ivindow once in a year—the stone walls and roof make it constantly damp—and chimney you see it has none ; so the be¬ nefit of a fire, if even it were allowed you, is impossible." Paulina sunk down upon the stool, and with difficulty repressed her tears. " The cause ef your being removed hi- ther, signora," said Lipardo, " is, that the marchese believes that in this comfortless ¿olitude, removed from the enjoyment of every
every luxury, you will reflect on the ad¬ vantages which you have hitherto refused to accept, and be tempted to revoke your d Tmination of rejecting his liberal offers ; and he delegates me to inform you, that you will be allowed one week to delibe¬ rate on your fate, but that you may at any time put a period to your imprisonment, by acceding to his proposals." " Oh, for the love of God, have pity on me !" ejaculated ??????, A stern look from Lipardo awed her into silence.—" Lipardo knows his duty to his employer, signora," he loudly pro¬ nounced ; " it is in vain to tamper with an honest man ! Come, ivife," he added, anel having lighted the lamp ivhich stood upon the tables they were departing. " AVhen shali I behold you again?" in¬ quired the weeping Paulina. " A\ r e will bring you some bread and milk in the morning," replied Lipardo. ** Ay, you will get no Franconian wine here," ejaculated the old ivoman ; " this all
all comes of not taking my advice !" and they went out, Lipardo locking thc door after them. Shivering with cold, agonized in heart, and with an almost distracted brain, Pau¬ lina sat, lost in a stupor of thought, and appeared sensible only of existence by the excess of the misery ivhich she was en¬ during. How long she had remained in this sorrowing state she ivas uncertain ; bnt she ivas suddenly aroused from the trance of reflection into which she had fallen, by the sound of (i signora !" faintly pronounced. She hastily turned round her heael in the direction from ivhich the voice hael proceeded, and beheld the countenance and arm of Lipardo issuing from a chasm in the wall. He beckoned to her to approach him, and when she had done so, he took her hand, and having drawn her through the aperture, said—** This moving pannel is known only to myself; and if you have not before suspected it, you will now vol. il ι find
find that I am your friend ; though I con¬ fess that I am unacquainted how to serve you in any more material point than that of providing you with such comforts as the disappointed passion ofthe marchese woulel deny you." On casting round her eyes, ivhich now beamed with gratitude and hope, Paulina perceived herself to be in a small apart¬ ment, ivhere an inviting fire was burning on the hearth, by the side of which stood a table covered with refreshments. Lipardo again spoke.—" In that cor¬ ner/' he said, " in that corner you will nna fuel to keep your fire alive with during the night ; and there," pointing to fhe op¬ posite side of the chamber, " is a clean bed for you to repose on ; and now I must leave you, for I ahvays sleep in an apart¬ ment adjoining to the chamber of the marchese ; and shouid he wake and miss me, I should fine! some difficulty in ac¬ counting for my absence." Having instructed her how to move the
the spring of the pannel, he said^—" No one will approach you during the night, and without me no one can enter your prison, even by day, for I keep the only key ivhich procures admission into it. If at any time you hear feiotsteps approach¬ ing, or the wards of a key turning in the lock of the door, instantly quit the inner apartment, and close the pannel after you ; I will take care always to give you suf¬ ficient time for the operation." " Oh, how can I rewarel your unexam¬ pled goodness !" exclaimed Paulina. " I have motives for my conduct wiiich amply reward me p " replieel Lipardo«— " motives of which you can have no idea, and of which you cannot at present lie informed. Gooel - night — Heaven bless you !" *' It must—it will bless you for the frienelship which you have extended to¬ wards my defenceless state," pronounced Paulina. " I am, I confess, not utterly uninte- 1 2 rested
rested in wbat I am doing," answered Li¬ pardo ; " but there are worse men in the world than myself. Once more, good¬ night í Remember my instructions ;" and taking up a small lantern from the floor, be departed through another pannel in the wall, similar to the one by wdiich he had admitted Paulina to the comforts ivith ivhich he bad provided her. Paulina seated herself by thc fire, which proved a most welcome renovator of her almost-fainting frame, and the warmth of the glowing embers inviting the approach of sleep, she sunk gradually into a tem¬ porary oblivion of her unhappy situation. Early in the morning, Lipardo was true to his appointment in bringing her the bread and milk of which he had spoken ; he east at ber a glance whieh informed her that he was satisfied with the manner in which she had pursued his directions for her conduct, and without uttering a word, he again departed. In the course of tbe afternoon the ma» jor-
jor-domo brought her a fresh supply of the same provisions with ivhich he had fur¬ nished her in the morning ; and although he entered her apartment alone, and she heard no footsteps accompanying him even to the door, so far from addressing to her a single sentence, he did not even vouchsafe her a look ; a circumstance ivhich induced her to believe that he entertained a suspicion of spies being placeel upon his conduct. The distant clock, for it appeared by the faintness of its sound to be far remov¬ ed from her in her present situation, had just sounded the midnight Iiour, ivhen Lipardo entered through the pannel by which he had epiitted her on the preced¬ ing night, laden with such articles as he conceived might conduce to the further¬ ance of her comfort ; and having deposited his burthen, and pleaded his former ex¬ cuse of being compelled to be in attend¬ ance i xt M}n the chamber of the marchese, he left .¿er, informing her that his .wife 1 3 intended
intended to pay her a visit on the succeed¬ ing night, if circumstances favoured her putting her design into execution. The satisfaction communicated to the heart of Paulina, by the interest displayed in her cause by the major-domo and his wife, was materially abated by the asser¬ tion ivhich the former had made on the preceding evening, that he was unac¬ quainted how to serve her in any more material point than that of providing her with such comforts as the disappointed passion of the marchese ivould deny her. Thus, at the end ofthe iveek of delibera¬ tion which was granted her, what might not still be her fate? and she shuddered with horror at the idea ivhich her bewil¬ dered brain hael conjured up to her vieiv. Every circumstance around her, but the ferocious passion of the marchese, appeared to her a mystery. Why did the major- domo and his wife seem unconcerned about the preservation of her honour, or her peace of mind, and yet interest them¬ selves
selves so warmly in administering to the minor comforts of her existence? Vincen¬ tio had represented them alike the favour¬ ites and the tools of the marchese, if they had poiver and inclination to serve her in the instances in which they hael already displayed zeal in her cause, why not act towards her rescue from the fate which threatened her? Anel if Vincentio were indeeel inspired with the sentiment of aflection which he had professed himself to feel for her, why did he not, at this mo¬ mentous crisis, boldly stand forward her protector, and avow himself the honourable rival of his uncle ? But perhaps, she con¬ sidered, the promised hour for acknow¬ ledging himself in that character was not yet arrived, and she might be prematurely blaming him, when in reality he merited her warmest encomiums and thanks. It ivas also an impenetrable enigma to her, why he had confessed his love for her te> those of whom he had himself epoken as the creatures of his uncle, when his own 1 4> words
ivords had convinced her that he was not ignorant of possessing a rival in the mar¬ chese. The more she reflected, the more intricate appeared to her the involvements in which she was entangled : time alone could raise the mistv veil ivhich noiv ob- scurcd her future prospects. At the silent hour of midnight Lipardo appeared, bearing articles for the replenish¬ ment of Paulina's secret store, and follow¬ ed by Ricarda, muffled in a long black cloak, which defended her from the chill of the night, and ivould have served equally to screen her from observation, had she been met on her ivay by any individual whom chance might have raised from his bed, unlikely as that chance was, the pas¬ sages by ivhich Lipardo had conducted her lying through a part of the eastle ivhich was scarcely ever resorted to by any of its inhabitants, and indeed utterly unknown to most of them. " Here I am," said the old woman, as soon as the moving pannel had been closed by
by her husband ; "you see I doift forsake you, though you would not take my ad¬ vice. I have brought you a suit of my own apparel," she continued, throwing down a bundle upon the bed as she spoke, " ior I am sure you must need the comfort ofa change of clothes by this time. I am al¬ ways very particular about my linen my¬ self, and I dare say you have been accus¬ tomed to be the sanie." Paulina was beginning to return Ricar¬ da her thanks, in which she was interrupt¬ ed by lipardo-—" You will have time enough to talk when I am gone," he said; u so let me speak a word or two to my wife, and then lll leave you together. Well, then, Ricarda/* he added, address¬ ing the old woman, " in about two hours', or between two and tliree, I'll slip out of bed, if I think the marchese is asleep, and bring you my lantern." " Do so, do so/' replied Ricarda ; '* I seldom feel the want of sleep ; a few hours are sufficient for me, and I bave a great 1 5 deal
deal to say to the signora, ivho, î dare say, must feel the want of company all day long severely enough, and will be all the betten- for a little chat with me. The mind must be desponding indecel that I can't raise and enliven by my conversatie)»/' " Farewell, signora!" said Lipardo, and disappeared. Ricarda seated herself em the side of the bed, and motioning to Paulina to place herself by her, she said—" I am sure you must be much obliged to Lipardo for ivhat he's done for von. What would v' have become of you in that cold place, next door, without a spark of fire, and nothing to lie upon but straw ?" 4< I am more indebted to him, and to iou also," replied Paulina, " than I have words to express ; not so much even for thc comforts which you have afforded me, as for the consoling sensation whieh the knowledge ofyour friendship has commu¬ nicated to my heart." ·* And do you knoiv," rejoined Ilicarda, archly,
archly, ti to w f hom it is that you are oblig¬ ed for all that we have done for you ? For I will not pretenel to say that, stranger as you are to us, we shoulel have done quite as much for you, If it had not been in compliance with the entreaties ofa certain person whom you know. What think you/ she added, after a pause, " of the signor Vincentio?" 6i Ifit is the signor Vincentio," replied Paulina, ¿í to whom I owe------" cs It is to him, you may depend upon it," said tbe old woman, interrupting her; " anel now ive have time for a little con¬ versation, I'll tell you all about it. It is almost impossible that we should be inter¬ rupted by the marchese, fór I doubt if he even knows there is such a place as the one we ate sitting in, in the walls of his eastle; he passed a good deal of his time here on his estate in his youth, but at that time he wasn't lord and master of the territories, as he is now t and so did not possess the clue to all the mysteries ι 6 wldch
ivhich arc to be found within this build¬ ing; and since he came into possession, I don't think lie ever spent three days at a time here yet, till within the last five iveeks; and if even he should pop upon us, which I repeat to be an impossibility, I should tell him boldly at once, that wo¬ men had private affairs to arrange, in whieh no man, even a husband, had a right to interfere ; and that in doing my duty to you, by assisting you in some lit¬ tle particulars where you required my helping hand, I considered myself at the same time to be doing my duty equally towards him." Paulina listened in silence, anxious for that part of the narrative in which Vin¬ centio was concerned. " Could you take a little drop of Nantz brandy," rejoined the old ivoman, " mix¬ ed with a little water, to keep the damps of the night from giving· you cold ? I have brought a drop in my pocket," sbe added, pulling out a small bottle as she spoke ;
spoke ; " it is a liepior I'm not fond of, but I am forcee! to take a spoonful when I am out of beel after my usual hour, to keep the cramp out of my stomach/' Paulina declined her offer ; thc old ivo¬ man took her draught, and proceeded thus —" You must know, signora, that on ac¬ count ofa family business, ivhich it is not material to lose time in explaining to you iust now, Vincentio has not been acknow- ledged by his own parents since he was about a year old ; ever since that time he has been brought up under the authority, and entirely at the expence, of the mar¬ chese his uneie. Many a week, many a month, and many a year, has he been left here in his younger days, under the eare of my husband and myself; and by con¬ stantly living with us, we gained such a liking for him, and he became so fonel of us, that he considered us as his real pa¬ rents, and ive looked upon him with the affection ofa child. The kindness which wc shelved him, contrasted with the morose and
and haughty disposition of the marchese, for I must own that his disposition is not at all times the most conciliating in the world ; to be sure beauty, like yours, may soften and mould any heart ; but I mean with regard to his intercourse with the world in general. Stay, what ivas I say¬ ing? Oh, ay! our kindness made such an impression on his heart, that from a boy upwards, he has ail his life long en¬ trusted us with his secrets, and never con¬ ceived himself happy but in our advice on eveiy occasion." " He appears a most amiable young man," said Paulina. " No doubt you think him so," answer¬ ed Ricarda, smiling ; ** but in sober truth, he is what you describe him to be. He was a temper of ten thousand from his cradle: I remember that he didn't even cry above ten minutes when the breast was taken from him." " You knew his mother then ?" said Paulina. "His
u His mother í" repeated Ricarda. " Ob, I understand what you mean. I was his wet nurse myself, signora." " That must double your affection for him," said Paulina. " I don't know how it is, or what it is/' replied the old woman, " but he can melt my heart to any thing, as he has done towards you. But to go on with my story—about three weeks ago, Vincentio informed my husband and myself that be had seen a young lady who had inspired him with a passion which he ivas certain be should never be able to conquer; and tben proceeded to acquaint us that you were the niece of the signor Urbino di Cavetti, who ivas lately come to reside with his family at thc ancient Castello of ---------I forget the name." ** Delia Torvida" said Paulina. u Ay, thats it/' returned Ilicarda : ** I forget names strangely of late; but forget wbat I may, signora, I shall not forget yours when its Dì Valdetti. I have been ac¬ customed
customed to that name from the day I opened my eyes : I shall never forget that, 1 am sure." Paulina anxiously awaited the sequel of her harangue, eager to learn ivhether it was by the uncle or the nephew that Ri¬ carda anticipated the name to be transfer¬ red to her. " Well," continued Ricarda, " when Vincentio had informed us ofhis passion, he followed his account by imploring my husband to communicate the affair to tbe marchese, and endeavour to obtain him his consent to lay bis suit before your uncle, the signor UVbino, and make you an immediate offer of his hand: but as Lipardo was aware that the marchese had lately sustained some considerable losses at play, and that Vineentio's marriage could not be concluded ivithout a heavy draught upon his uncle*s purse, he besought bim to defer insisting on his making the com¬ munication to the marchese till bis recent losses were in some measure obliterated from
from his memory, anel promising to take the first favourable opportunity which pre¬ sented itself to him for engaging his uncle in the promotion of his happiness. Weil, all ivent on quietly till I was commandeel to prepare the apartments ivhich you oc¬ cupied on your first arrival at the castle for the reception ofa lady, ivhom my hus¬ band at the same time received orders to send out Philippo on horseback to escort hither ; and you may easily imagine our astonishment, when on your arrival we found you to hc the signora Paulina to whom Vincentio had lost his beart. Bless me ! there's tivo o'clock ! if I elon't make haste with my story, I shall have Lipardo coming for me before all our business is transacted." " How did Vincentio discover that í was here ?" inquired Paulina. *' From the account given of you by some of the elomestics who accompanied you hither, he suspectée! İt to he you," re¬ joined llicarda, " and bribed the truth from
ITALIAN MYSTEUIES. from Philippo; and oh, if you had but seen him throw himself at my husband's feet, and implore him to lend his assist¬ ance to rescue you from his uncle !" "And will not Lipardo consent," wcep- ingly pronounced Paulina, " in compliance with the happiness of a youth whom he so much esteems ?" *' Wby, what could he do, even if he were willing?" exclaimed Ricarda: " if we were to fly in the face of the marchese on your account, it would do you no good ; he has plenty about him Λνίιο are willing to do any thing he would pay them for. If we were only to venture to remonstrate, he might perhaps imprison us in a dungeon for life, or poison us, or starve us to death. The blessed saints only know wbat he might do, especially to me ; for I am sure he would think no more of killing an old woman than he would of riding over a tom-cat. No, no ; we both promised Vincentio to grant you all the indulgence we could, and to take all
all the care of you we could, unknown to the marchese ; and more ive cannot do, and dare not do/' " Could I not behold Vincentio here to¬ morrow night through the same means by which you have visited me to-night?" asked Paulina. " No, no, no !" ejaculated Ilicarda ; " there can be no good purpose answered in your having a young man to visit you in the night, and in the daytime, you know, it is impossible he should approach this place. If he has any thing particular to say to you, Lipardo shall inform you of it to-morrow night/* " Will you tell bim that I besought you to inquire whether he had any mes¬ sage to convey to me ?" arelently demand¬ ed Paulina. " I will—I will indeed," answered lli¬ carda ; " you may depend upon me. And now be as quick as you can in changing your clothes, that I may carry your soiled ones away with me, aiid get them refresh¬ ed
ed for you. These of mine, ivhich 1 have brought you, are much thicker and warmer than yours, and consequently much better adapted than your own to your present lodging." Paulina proceeded to comply with her request, and Ilicarda rose from her scat to assist her in the operation. The exchange ivas nearly made, when Ilicarda, letting fall from her hand a gar¬ ment ivhich formed a part of Paulina's new equipment, snatched a candle from the table, and holding it close to Paulina's shoulder, upon ivhich she ¡steadily and in¬ quisitively fixed her eyes—" What scar is that upon your arm ? How did you come by it ?" she exclaimed. " Indeed I know not," replied Paulina; " but I can recollect seeing it when I ivas quite a child." tí It is very strange—very strange in¬ deed !" rejoined llicarda. " Immediately below the turn of the shoulder ! And did you never hear any body mention it?^— none
none of your friends say what had occa¬ sioned it ?" " Never," answered Paulina. " ?? ? ?11, I never was so surprised by the sight of any thing in my life !" conti¬ nued the old ivoman. ** Tell me, have you one like it, that is, another scar on your back, at the bottom of your neck ?" rí Ye*. 1 have/'returned Paulina, "and somewhat longer and deeper than this on my arm." " Let me see it," eagerly ejaculated Ricarda, pulling off the drapery, as she spoke, from the part where she expected to find the object of her inquiry— tí Ah ! there it is indeed!" she continued, in a voice of emotion undefinable to her au¬ ditor—" there it is indeed î Great God ! was there ever any thing like this ? Won¬ ders will never cease ! Holy Virgin, have mercy upon me !" *-' Why are you thus agitated ?" inquir¬ ed Paulina, who ivas becoming herself un¬ nerved»
nerved, she knew not why, in proportion as she observed her companion moved. " Don't ask me ; I cannot tell you now," rejoineel llicarda ; " but answer me—are you sure the signor Urbino di ------1 can't think of his name now." " Di Cavetti," said Paulina. " Di Cavetti!" echoed Ricarda: " are you sure he is your uncle ?" " I have ahvays called him so," ansiver¬ ed Paulina, " and been taught to consider him such." " He is no more your uncle than I am your uncle!" ejaculated the old woman. " Merciful God ! oh, how my head turns round !" " You astonish me !" replied Paulina. " Not half so much as I am astonished myself/ interrupted the old ivoman. " A scar just beloiv the turn of the arm, and another on the back at the bottom of the neck! Angels of heaven ! was there ever the like !" The
The pannel was at this moment drawn back, and Lipardo appeared within — * t Come," he said, ** I havn't a moment to lose; I am never sure of the marchese for ñve minutes together. Come, wife, come/' " Oh, Lipardo !" she exclaimed, " I have such a thing to tell you! but I musn't begin talking here, for fear of the conse¬ quences. I scarcely know whether I stand on my head or my heels. í am sure you will not believe me, but another night shall convince you. God bless you, signora ! I'll see you to-morrow night, if possible. Well, I never kneiv the like before in all my life !" and whilst uttering these words, she had joined Lipardo, who stood anx¬ iously awaiting luv, and closed the pannel the moment she had passed through it. If the brain of Paulina had before been bewildered by dwelling on the extraordi¬ nary situation in ivhich fate had placed her, what ivere the reflections which now harassed her mind, in consequence of tbe remarks
remarks made by Ricarda upon the scars on her arm and neck ! Would the disclosure which appeared to have been just made to Ricard rt be instrumental in developing to her some secret relative to her birth, which, believing herself the orphan relath T e of Urbino, she had hitherto considered un¬ connected Avith mystery ? Her own mind eould furnish her ivith no reply to the questions which tortured her imagination; and Λνίί?ί an anxiety almost amounting to frenzy, she awaited the return ofthe midnight hour, ivhich she hoped ivould once more bring Ricarda into her presence.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII.
Tbc ?? wrapt up in yuur nmazmg words Deîirn to unfuid. Thon, thus abjur'd, I'll speak to thee a» just ?? iî )üü were the iniuiiter of Heave«, Sent down to seek the secret gsus of men. lloMS. We must now return for a while to the »ignor Urbino di Cavetti and his discon¬ solate family. Nine days bad now elapsed since the disappearance of Paulina, and every inquiry concerning her destiny, as ivell as tbe spot of her seclusion, iiaving proved fruitless, notwithstanding thc ano¬ nymous assurance which had L en received of her safety, and her eventual happiness being connected ivith her present myste¬ rious absence, her friends were affected vol. ?. ? with
with the deepest concern at her unex¬ plained fate, and their thoughts dwelt sor¬ rowfully and unremittingly upon her. On the tenth day, the morning proving damp and uncomfortable, and Urbino feeling himself neither well in health nor spirits, resolved not to quit the Castello that day, and sent Terence to thc farm- house, to acquaint Yaleria, and the fa¬ mily of Di Borges, with his intention of not visiting them till thc morrow; ane! Jeronymo, ivho seldom wandered from home, and ivho disliked proceeding to any distance without a companion, professing an inclination to accompany him, they set out together. At their departure Urbino accompa¬ nied them into the castle hall, in order to close the door after them; and as they were descending the steps, he perceived old Bianca, who had been one of his re¬ gular pensioners since Ids abode at the Castello, hobbiing along the sycamore- walk
walk as quickly as she was able, and making tbe most earnest supplications to him to await her approach. AVhen she had arrived near enough to be heard by Urbino^—" Oh, beneficent signor!" slie exclaimed, pardon me, per lamor 1?? ! I beseech you to excuse me for entreating your charity, ivhen I have already experienced so mueh ofyour good¬ ness ; but I never was so greatly distressed as I am at this moment. 1 have lost my poor boy î —lost my Calvino !" tí Lost bim î" replied Urbino. u Do yon mean that he is dead?" " I doift know, signor-—! doift know ? she returned, half weeping. i% 1 hope not; the saints send he may be alive! and that when he is taken from me, í may live to see him die in a bed, like other Christians ! He often leaves me, and strolls about the country fora day or tivo together; but he lias now been absent nearly twelve days, and I am almost starved for want of his ? S í.ssistance,
assistance, in helping me to gather fire¬ wood, and cutting pegs for the cobbler, by which we make a trifle ; and pulling nuts in the woods, which we sell to the children in the autumn. Oh, poor Calvino ! I am ill off ivithout him !" Urbino endeavoured to administer com¬ fort to her, by telling her that her son ivould probably soon return to her; and giving her a few pieces of coin, he dis¬ missed her, and retired to his study, He had not been long engaged with a book which he had taken up to beguile his thoughts, when he was surprised by the unusual sound of a claimant for ad¬ mission at the outer door of the Castello. Ile laid aside bis book, and proceeded to answer the summons. On opening the door, he perceived be¬ fore him a man of a healthy and robust frame and countenance, somewhat beyond the middle age of life, plainly habited, but bearing an appearance which denoted him superior
superior to the ordinary ranks of life—an opinion which his tone of voice and Ian· guage instantly confirmed. To his inquiry, whether the signor Urbino could be seen by him? having received in reply, tbat Urbino was the person to whom be was then addressing himself, he said—* r I shali esteem it a most particular favour, signor, if I can be indulged by passing half-an-hour in conversation with you." Urbino requested liim to enter; and having conducted bim to an apartment, the stranger was requested to be seated, and Urbino drew himself a chair bv his eide. ** A stranger/' Urbmo's visitor began by saying, " feels himself most awkwardly situate, when be is under the necessity of introducing himself to the person on whose time be is trespassing, without be¬ ing permitted, by the circumstances which occasion his intrusion, to mention his name as a prelude to conversatie L' И? ? 3 patîscd
paused an instant, then proceeded thus— " But rely on this, signor Urbino, that my heart, my soul, are devoted to one with whom you are connected ; and that the lively interest which I take in her fate has brought me hither." " Can it be my Paulina to whom you refer?" eagerly inquired Urbino. " Paulina," rejoined the stranger, " is the name of her who is the object of my present visit." " If you know her," ejaculated Urbino, " you are doubtless acquainted wiiere she is at this moment concealed; I beseech you to inform me if she be well—if——" " Is she not residing with you?" the stranger interrupted him by demanding ; " living under your immediate protection?" Dì Cavetti, in few words, related the sudden disappearance of Paulina, and the fruitless inquiries which he had since made after her. " Carried off by force !" exclaimed the stranger. " But no matter; where'er she be,
be, I engage to bring her forth ; the first man in the empire shall not screen her from my penetrating researches: that is, if she be toe female whom I suppose her to be." And after another pause, he add¬ ed—" Signor Urbino, I think I am right in supposing her not to be your daugh¬ ter?" " My niece," falteringly pronounced Urbino. ** No, nor your niece, signor," empha¬ tically returneel the stranger. Urbino made many efforts to speak, but the ivords elied away upon his tongue. " Do not equivocate with me, n rcjomed the stranger. " You love her—of course you must desire her happiness; most of all, her peace of mind, and the preserva¬ tion of her honour. They rest upon your conscientious reply to this simple e|ues~ tion—are you acquainted who were her parents ?" Stiil Urbino hesitated to reply. The ? 4 stranger
stranger repeated tbe assertion ivhich he had already made, anel confirmed its truth with an oath, which Urbino could not doubt to proceed from the lips of an ho¬ nest man. " If my confession of the past can pro¬ duce her the advantages of ivhich you speak/* said Urbino, " it ivould be both contrary to my nature, and the principles of justice, to withhold from you the in¬ formation which you seek. I will there¬ fore confide to your honourable keeping the narrative of the events by ivhich she was introduced to my knowledge, and be¬ came the niece of my adoption." ** I have no leisure at this time to listen to a detail offrets," returned the stranger; " a summary reply is all that I require; you know not who her parents were ?" " On my sacred word, I do not know them," replied Urbino. " Enough !" ejaculated the stranger ; " then Paulina is safe and happy, and you
you shall be most amply reivarded for the protection ivhich you have afforded her." is There is no return I will accept," re¬ plied \ Jrhino, " unless, for tbe quiet of my agonised feelings, you will tell me whether or not you are acquainted where she noiv is, and when I may expect to see her? and name that the reward of which you spoke." " It cannot be; do not urge me," re¬ turned the stranger. " You are always to be found at the Castello, 1 imagine?" " Or at the farmhouse of Sancho di Borges, about a league from hence/' an¬ swered Urbino. 4t You will soon see me again, signor/ 1 returned the stranger; he took the hand of Di Cavetti, shook it cordially in his, and having done so, be darted out of the apartment, hastily crossed the eastle ball, and issuing through the portal, moved with a hasty step along the sycamore-walk, and quickly gaining the road, he in a few ? 5 minutes
minutes disappeared from the sight of Urbino. By the visit, inquiries, and predictions of the stranger, the mystery of Paulina s absence was increased to the gootl physi¬ cian. He kneiv not ivhether to believe the stenger acquainted with the spot of her present seclusion, and was equally at a loss whom to conceive that man to be, who had declared that he possessed the means of discovering her retreat, if even it were situate under the protection of the greatest potentate in the empire· No questions, till the present hour, had ever been asked of him concerning Paulina, ex¬ cept hy the pilgrim at the carnival of Ve¬ nice; and between the stature, the fea¬ tures, and the voice of the pilgrim and those of the stranger, there was so decided a contrast, that he could not for a moment suppose them to be the same individual At all events, under the circumstances re* presented by the stranger, he believed himself to have exercised his duty towards Paulina,
Paulina, in having confessed himseif ig norant of her origin ; and upon the pro¬ mise of the stranger, that he should see her soon again, he rested those hopes which alone enabled him to support his composure of mind, as he reflected on the obscure fate of her whom he krved with all the tenderness of a real fether. Since the disappearance of Paulina, Ya¬ leria had been constantly employ eel by day in attending on her father, and en¬ deavouring to soothe by her presence tlie sorrows with which his mind was op¬ pressed ; consequently no opportunity had presented itself to her for repairing to the solitary abode of Julio, for the purpose of returning his manuscript, and listening to the conclusion of his narrative from his own lips. On receiving the intelligence brought by Terence, that Urbino did not intend on that day to quit the Castello, she resolved to avail herself of the ??&?- frioH.with which a fortunate chance liad ? 6 provided
provided her, and to repair that afternoon to the cell of the recluse. At the time which she had appointed for setting out, a lowering sky dimmed the lustre of nature's face, and a drizzly rain was fallins to the earth ; but the wea- ther was a consideration ivhich she could not admit as an obstacle to her ardent de¬ sire of beholding Julio ; and easily apolo¬ gizing for her absence to Averilla, who was alone in the farmhouse at the period of her departure, and who was ignorant of the state of the weather, she began her walk. The unfa vou rableness of the weather increased as she proceeded, but Valeria heeded İt not ; and she arrived in safety, and unobserved, at the spot of her desti¬ nation. She found Julio within his hut, and the joy ivhich he expressed at behold¬ ing her, could not conceal from her obser¬ vation the anxiety which be had endured on account of her long absence ; she briefly explained
explained to him the cause, which he cor¬ dially joined with her in lamenting; and after some time passed in conversation, hc turned his words to the subject on which they were met.—** Has then my beloved Valeria," he said, " perused the eventful narrative of her Julio's ???" Valeria replied in the affirmative, and Julio continued thus—" From his own lips she now awaits a relation of the dread¬ ful, the awful climax of his fate, and J u lio is prepared to unfold it to her; for it must be known by her, and therefore can¬ not be too soon divulged. Oh, Valeria r Heaven grant that thou mayest receive the disclosure which I am about to make to thee with fortitude of mind; for thou, Valeria, thou art intimately connected with the sequel of my melancholy tale !" The a&ritation of Valeria's mind beamed through her eyes, and sbe almost trem¬ bled at the solemnity of the tones in which Julio hud addressed to her his last words. ** Oh,
(t Oh, my Valeria l* he proceeded by saying; *' my adored, my idolized sister!'* " Sister !" repeated Valeria, falteringly. " Not by the ties of blood," replied J u- lio; " but in love, in friendship, and in soul." Valeria besought bim to speak ivithout reserve, and to relieve her from that anx¬ iety of mind with ivhich his mysterious expressions affected her. Julio consented, and spoke thus—" My manuscript, as you will recollect, broke oif at the period of my flying from Padua, immediately after my antagonist had fallen by my hand, I continued to follow an uncertain course, in the hope of arriving at a spot of security ; but I had lefb the city only a few hours, when I gained in¬ telligence that the officers of justice were already in pursuit of me. " For several days 1 hid myself during the light of day in forests, and by night itole fordi to purchase necessary refresh¬ ment
ment for the support of my existence, at various cottages, wdiich nothing but my state of abject need could at that time have tempted me to enter. At length, after pursuing a circuitous and uncertain course, I found myself on the margin of the Gulf, immediately opposite to the city of Venice; and thither I resolved to trans- port myself, hoping to pass unknoivn and unnoticed amidst its extensive popu¬ lation." The inclemency of the weather had been gradually increasing ever sinee Vale¬ ria bad entered the hut; the rain was now descending in heavy showers—-tho light- imur flashed vividly across the narrow ease- ment which gave light to the abode ofthe recluse, and the thunder rolled awfully through the skv. Valeria heard the storm with sensations the opposite of satisfaction; hut her desire to learn the conclusion of Julio's narrative superseded every other feeling, and she endeavoured to bend tier whole attention towards bim. i& Having
(ί Having crossed the Gulf, and arrived in Venice,'* continued Julio, " I entered a tavern, where I had no sooner seated myself, than I heard one of the guests in¬ forming his companions that the officers of justice from Padua were arrived in the city, in pursuit of a signor who hael killed his antagonist in a duel, and de¬ scribing the very dress and marks by ivhich I was identified. I folded my cloak closely round me, and again rushed * * ?/? out into the street, more than ever at a loss whither to bend my steps for refuge. " In this distracted state of mind I was wandering along, when I beheld, on the point of entering a handsome mansion, a signor of a venerable appearance, the mild¬ ness and humanity of whose countenance immediately inspired me with the despe¬ rate idea of briefly relating to him my un¬ happy situation, and imploring his assist* ance in protecting me. " During the feiv moments in which I was occupied in relating to liim my case, in
in the most hurried accents of alarm, I perceived bim to change colour, and an almost-indefinable expression, whicli I af¬ terwards found to have been produced by the struggle of contending feelings in his mind, took possession of bis countenance; and when I concluded speaking, he said — t You bore your adversary then no rooted hatred-—no malignant antipathy? The cause from which you have erred, ori¬ ginated in a point of wbat the world falsely names honour?' " I replied in the affirmative to his in¬ quiry. t Cursed infatuation !* he ansivered ; t how many owe to thee the subversion of their early bliss ! Stranger/ he proceeded by saying, whilst his lips trembled with the pangs of ill concealed agony, * the youth who owes to your band his untime¬ ly death is my son ! Not two hours have elapsed sinee he ivas brought a corpse to his distracted father's house. You are ai this minute in my power; but I extend mercy
mercy to others, as I hope one day to have it administered to myself at the throne of grace. To behold you expiate your crime on a scaffold could not restore to me my son—wiien the act of permitting you to exist for repentance cannot fail to yield a soothing halm to the reflections of my deathbed. One of my servants shall conduct you to a pass across the Gulf, whence you can be transported to an un¬ frequented country, about ten leagues from hence, where you may, in all pro¬ bability, escape detection. Let my lenity towards you teach you to keep a guarel over your passions in future. Farewell f But let me never behold you more/ " Thunderstruck by ivhat I had heard, I stood almost motionless, till aroused by the servant whom the generous Venetian had sent to conduct me to the pass of ivhich he had spoken. I gained it in safety, and was landed hy the gondoliers upon a soil which my foot had never be¬ fore trodden." At
At this moment a scorching flash of lightning darted past the casement; it ivas instantly followed by a tremendous clap of thunder, ivhich burst immediately above their heads. Valeria started from her seat; her countenance betrayed the wildest alarm, and Julio clasped her, for security, to his bosom. The roll ofthe thunder had not ceased, ere a voice ivithout called loudly for shel¬ ter against the storm; and before Julio had either time to reply, or was thorough¬ ly convinced that the sound which he in¬ distinctly heard was that ofa human voice, the door was hastily opened, and Urbino rushed in. He darted his eyes first upon Valeria, next upon Julio. A convulsive start shook his frame—he clasped bis hands energetically together, and raising his eyes towards heaven—'* Powers ot Mercy !" he exclaimed, " what is it I be¬ hold ? \ r aleria ! my child Valeria ciasped İn the arms of her brother's murderer !** The truth flashed like an electric shock upon
upon the senses of Valeria; a faint shriek burst from her lips—she disengaged her¬ self from the support of Julio, and flying into her fatliets arms, sunk senseless upon his breast.
CHAI*.
CHAPTER IX. To knowr mv deed, 'twere best »ot know m vu If ! ??? het h, —— ------------ -Ves, yes, \\% ???> í 1 know ii ?? sute umrú, ???.?? Hil The first of the astonished group who re¬ gained the power of utterance was Julio* — Si Signor," be said, ** I beseech you not to imagine that I have voluntarily trans¬ gressed against that injunction which you delivered to me at an awful moment of my life, never to suffer you to behold me again. At your entrance here, I was in the act of informing your amiable daughter of tbe impossibility of our ever being united in those holy bonds, in which hope once promised to ally our assimilating hearts; and likewise describing to her, tbat
that it would be the last time we could ever converse together. To you and her, mutually, I now make one solemn declara¬ tion—it is, that after this hour you will neither of you either sec me or hear of me again." After a moments pause, he added— ** I entreat you, signor, so fir to lìti our me, as to deign to peruse the narrative of those events which led me to the fatal act for ivhich 1 am now suffering." He presented to Urbino the manuscript ivhich had already been perused by Vale¬ ria.—" Your daughter," he continued, " is already acquainted with its contents ; but the record of my ivoes is there only de¬ duced to that period at ivhich you pre¬ served the life of him who had aimed the deadliest blow at your existence. This paper," he added, drawing one from the folds ofhis garment wiiilst he spoke, è< con¬ tains a recital of the adventures ivhich have befallen me subsequent to that hour; it will explain to you the motive by which I ivas
I was actuated in desiring once more to commune with your elaughter, before I epiitted her presence for ever. But the imperious mandate of honour forbids me any longer to intrude on the feelings of those whom I have already too much wronged. This moment separates us for ever—this gaze is the last which we shall ever interchange with each other!" and with a countenance of minified horror and despair, he then rushed out of the hut. Thc bleeding image of his son was re¬ called to the memory of Urbino by the sight of his destroyer. The tears trickled down his furrowed checks, and he turneel towards his daughter for that support which hc had a few moments hefore afforel- eel her. " Oh, my father!" exclaimed A r aleria, " decern me not guilty, I conjure you— judge mc not a despiser of my brother's wrongs, or a conspirer against the feeiings of my parent; believe me, till the mo¬ ment at which you proclaimed him so, 1 knew
knew r not that Julio was-—- M She cheeked her tongue, for her father's sighs pierced her heart, and her own tears almost stifled her utterance. Struggling to regain her composure of mind, and endeavouring to repel her tears as she spoke, she, in few words, recounted to her father her first acquaintance with Julio; and in confessing her former meet¬ ing with him on the spot where Urbino had just beheld them together, she did not omit pointedly to detail to her father the many hints which Julio had so em¬ phatically given her, tLat the union of friendship must be the only bond by whieh their hearts could be cemented.—" My knowledge of Julio, and my love for him," she said, " are the only secrets which I ever withheld from your participation; and oh, ray father I severely am I punished for having neglected to repose them in your confidence/* Absorbed in the reflections of his own miud, Urbino bad not perceived the depar¬ ture
ture of Julio ; and raising his eyes from the shoulder of his daughter, upon which his head had fallen, he looked around, as if in search ofthe being whose presence had not only caused the revival of his miseries, hut had awakened in him apprehension« of the most poignant nature. Valeria re¬ peated the words which Julio had uttered id departing. ** I heard his declaration," replied Ur¬ bino, " but was doubtful whether he had quitted the spot. Come," he added, " we w ill eiepart also—this is no place for us." '· The storm is not ??? entirely abated," said Valeria. " No matter," answered Urbino; ^ I will uot hazard his return whilst we are here." As Urbino was approaching the door— ** These papers/ said Valeria, pointing to the manuscript, and the folded sbuet wiiich laid by its side upon the rugged table—·· he requesteel^—-he—" she hesitated— " You will not suffer them to remain here ?" VOL. il L *' Do
" Do with them as you will," replied Urbino. Valeria took them up, and put them into the pocket of her father.—" They may," she said, " throw some light upon that ho¬ nourable conduct wiiich he had resolved." " Honourable !" echoed Urbino, with a painful smile. " Can it be possible," he proceeded by saying, after a moments he¬ sitation, " can it be possible that your heart still lingers after him ?" " Oh no, no ! Heaven forbid it !" fer¬ vently pronounced Valeria. " 1 am hence¬ forth, my dear father, thine, and thine onlv — a viritin in my tomb, as at my birth ; if you doubt my firmness, render it impregnably secure, by enclosing me for ever within a convent's walls." " Would you then prefer to waste your life in a monastic solitude, weeping for the past, uncheered by any future hope, to the easy task of proving yourself the active comforter of my existence ?" earnestly de¬ manded Urbino. * Oh,
" Oh, my father," replied Valeria, " do not suspect me of such insensibility 3 In¬ deed, indeed, I cannot b? more blessed than in my constant attempts to render you happy : render me so in return, by moulding me io your own wishes." " Thou art still my child !" ejacuiated Urbino ; " oh, let me once more clasp thee to my heart, and feel thee mine!" Again the tears started in his eye, but they were now the relieving drops of returning com¬ posure anil satisfaction. On quitting the hut, Valeria could not forbear casting rounel her eyes, to observe if Julio were anywhere discernible near the spot, but she beheld him not. The rain had noiv nearly ceased, the lightning was only a shadow of its former fierceness, and the thunder had retired, in low and hollow murmurs, to the distant moun¬ tains. Urbino dreiv bis daughter's arm through his, and they proceeded in silence. He led her towards the farmhouse, and when L 2 they
they had arrived there, a few words spoken hv l libino were received as a sufficient explanation of their having met, of whieh he had reasons for not desiring the real cause to be at that moment known even to hiv Iriend Di i »orges; and having ex¬ changed tiieir wet garments, Urbino de¬ clared ins <b, tern Unat ion of not returning hack to 'Jie Castelh» that night. The motive* hy ivhich Urbino had been actuated in leaving its walls at all that day, after th.e contrary intention which he imd sigii'med by Terence iu the morning tu the inhabitants of the farmhouse, was, íhut. remit ud agitated in mind, and anx¬ ious in spirits, hy the conversation which iiad passed bei u ecu the ¡stranger and him¬ self concerning Paulina, he had strolled out into tin· woods, as a temoorarv relief tí. his thoughts, anv! having wandered hrt lur ihan he 1 had either intended or ht en conscious that he was doing, he had heen overtaken hy the storm near the but t if the recluse, to which he had flown for
for refuge from the elemental war, and entered at the important crisis of which a detail has already been iriven. The temperature of th.e succeeding morning was mild and serene; and the face of nature, refreshed bv tliv ini ¡go- ratino' showers which had fillen on the foregoing evening, presented an inviting appearance, ivhich prompted Urbino to request liis daughter to walk ivith him t»> the Castello. Shi 1 readily consented, ami they set out Abroad all was cheerful¬ ness; the whistling hind ji/min^ his som» with the wild notes of the 4 feathered war¬ blers of the idr, seemed both equally to be rejoicing in the exhilarating beams oí the sun ; the verdure of tbe grove ap¬ peared more vivid to the eye; and tin 4 flowers of the *ukl sent forth a perfume delightful to the senses. Valeria endeavoured, by every means in her power, to compel hers* If to appear cheerful also, and to communicate the ι. 3 U eling
feeling to the heart of her iather; she gradually succeedeel in leading him into conversation, but their remarks were only on general subjects, and she felt gratified that he had not reverter to the occurrences of the preceding day. Whether or not he had perused the manuscript, and the folded paper wiiich had been given him by Julio, she was unable to form any opi¬ nion, and she resolved not to mention the subject to him. On arriving at the Castello, they were met hy Terence, who said that he had been rather uneasy at his master not re¬ turning home on the preceding evening, but that he had judged that he had walked to the farm, and that the inclemency of the weather had detained him there. " I hope you met with no alarm eluring the night?" said Yaleria, addressing Te¬ rence, with whom she was left alone, by the retiring of Urbino to his private apart¬ ment, " Not
ír Not I, my lady/' replied Terence: " you have often heard me express my opinion about ghosts; and all other in¬ truders I belave to be robbers, and 1 dare say the best of them are wise enough to know that I am only a poor mrvant, and that he ' W ho steuU my |>ni«-*- ? -UoU t cí Aí/ " It is a happiness to possess a coura¬ geous spirit, such as you are blessed with," returneel Λ "aleria ; *' but 1 lielieve courage is one of the characteristics of your coun¬ trymen." " Faith, my lady, in my humble judg¬ ment," replied O'Donnovan, " its the characteristic of every honest heart. * The man who has done no ill, dreads no in¬ jury,' I have heard my poor ould mother say ; and though she never read Shake¬ speare, by rason she hadn't the art of read¬ ing, at all at all, it was exactly the senti¬ ment of that same great poet. Don't yon remember, my lady, wiiere he says—·
î 4
' Thru ? ¡? \ìc nnn'ti t bnt h i% \ν* quínnd just ; ??! Ììi· Unt n.tktíl thoiiL'i) lock 'd uj f in ?tcci, 11 Iiom i < iw ¡enet with ínju^tiec ^ conujdfd." Ay, ay, king Dickon found that to be true enough at the battle of Bosworth Field. ?? -the-hye, my lady, that same humtbbncked Itichard saw some ghosts, aceordintî as master AVillv has drawn the ston : but ? fancy, like many another crater of his form intr, they were only the visions of his own imagination." And moving away from Valeria ?? he spoke, he concluded his sentence with exclaim- " \ , - ' i«, s > ο. -α?. h jm '"* N'alena smiled ; Terence ]>erceived it, and saitl—·· Upon my souL my lady, I mane what 1 say ; for I am going to the mill for flour, and 1 can promise you, 1 shouldn t have the least objection,this warm morning, if 1 had a groom to answer to the calí ot— * S «?. ií i - ¡π v î i lì v t i * i í im And
And with an humble obeisance of his head, he then retired from her presence. Yaleria next paid a visit to old Jero¬ nymo, who was employed in distilling rose-water in a closet, which he had amused himseif with fitting up as a labo¬ ratory, and who, pointing to a quantity of leaves, ivhich were unprepared for the still and then to the door of Pauli na^ chamber, which was within sight of his workshop, signified, hy a silent shrug of his shoulders, that since her disappearance he had lost all spirit for pursuing his phy¬ sical labours. Valeria, during their walk that morn ing, had been entrusted by her father with the visit which he had received on the preceding day from the stranger, and the hopes wiiich had been raised in hV breast of the speedy restoration of Pan lina, and she addressed Jeronyiuo by >av- ing— u I hope and t πια t that we shall ??? behold her again ; you must not, there fore, relax in preparing your scents, a^ I í. 3 a»n
am sure some of your preparing will be an acceptable present to her at her return." Jeronymo seemed delighted with the idea, shook Valeria cordially by the hand for having inspired him with it, and im¬ mediately proceeded to put his still in order. After some time passed at the Castello, Urbino and his daughter began to retrace their steps towards the farmhouse; they liad not proceeded far on their road, when hearing the sound of some one, who ap- t>eared to be running after them, they turned round their heads, anel perceived, close at their heels, Bianca's son, Calvino. " So, you are returnee! ?" said Urbino, addressing him. " Oh yes ! I am come back safe enough," ansivered Calvino. " I have only been in the woods gathering nuts ; mother need not have been afraid about me—nobody would run away with a fool like myself, I am sure." He uttered a vacant laugh, then added—-" You have been so gex>d to my
my mother, she says, since I have been away, that I am come to bring tbe young signora a present of something nice to eat;" and so saying, he drew from the pocket of his vest the remnant of a band- kerchief, in which was wrapt a ivomaits slipper filled with nuts—" There," he con¬ tinued, presenting them to Valeria, ** tbere are some of the nuts which I gathered whilst I was away, and see what a hand¬ some thing I have got to put them in." *' Merciful Powers Î" exclaimed Valeria, snatching it out of his hand, and carefully examining it, " this is one of the slippers which Paulina wore on the day of her mysterious disappearance." " Where did you find it?'* eagerly in¬ quired Urbino. ít On a green place," returnee! the lad-— " all green with grass, I mean; where there are trees and brambles, but no nut- bushes." " Where is it? Can you describe it to me?" rejoined Urbino. L β ·· Ob,
" Oh, its a long way off," answered the boy. " Is it near any habitation?" asked Ur¬ bino. " Habitation ! ivhats that?" said the boy. " Does any body live near the place of ivhich you speak ?" demanded Urbino. " liiere is a great house close by it," re¬ turned Calvino ; ft a great, great house. bigger far than that," he added, pointing to the Castello della Toriida. " Then somebody lives in it, 1 sup¬ pose?" rejoined Di Cavetti. " 1 suppose so too," replied Calvino; " but í cannot be sure neither." " Why so?" asked Urbino. " Why. I saw .smoke coining out of the chimneys,' replied the hoy ; ** but tliat is no sure sign, fbr. you knovv, whilst no¬ body liveel in the Castello, the chimneys used to smoke." ·* You eannot guess then wiio lives in the house of which you have been speak¬ ing?" returned Urbino. ** How
" How should Ι ?" exclaimed the boy, " it is sueh a great house, it must b« 1 a great man that lives in it, and a poor boy like me cannot be supposed to have any acquaintance with such folks. 1 know thc name oí the cobbler, Stoppo, and the baker, Mommo, and all such people, but I doift knovv tiu 4 name of great signors." " Did you never ask charity at this great hoibe ?" inquired \ aleria. 44 No, signora, 1 know better than that," answered Calvino ; *· the servants would likely be so proud as to set the dog upon me for disturbing them ; poor folks arc better friends to the needy than the rieb/ èi What this lad has told us must be reflected upon," baid Urbino apart to Va¬ leria : 4 * 1 will induce bim to accompany us to ttie farmhouse, and proceed accord¬ ing to the adviee of i)i liorgcs, who may perliaps haw some knowledge of the spot hu speaks of, and who, at ail events, knows better how to manage bim than I do. ------If \ou will go with us to tht* farmhouse
farmhouse of Sancho di Borges," con¬ tinued Urbino, turning towards Calvino as he spoke, " my daughter, ivho is mueh obliged to you for your present of nuts, has taken so great a liking to the slipper they are in, that she will buy it of you." " He he he !" grinned out Calvino ; " she will have to get another made, if she w r ants to wear it." " Certainly/ answered Urbino, " it cannot be worn singly." " Except old Bappa, the blind fiddler's sister, who has hut one leg, had happened to have had the gcod luck to have found it instead of me," returned Calvino, again laughing. " Come, follow us, and you shall be handsomely paid for your slipper," said Urbino ; and Calvino, chuckling and smil¬ ing at the idea of the promised reward, continued close at their heels till their ar¬ rival at the house, when Urbino, learning that Di Borges was from home, and being desirous of not letting the present oppor¬ tunity
tunity slip, of drawing from Calvino all the information which he was able to give concerning the spot ivhere he had found the slipper, invited him into the kitchen, where he ordered him to be well enter¬ tained, and upon no account suffered to depart—terms upon which Calvino, al¬ though partly a fool, was not so great a one as to have refused keeping his present station for life.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X.
if i' vverv (ίοπ<>, 'Λ ¡ i n *t iv anne, tiu·» if writ· v en 'iv t, ¡ι· <1· ra* qmc kí) The hours meanwhile crept on heavily and painfully with Paulina, especially as two days and nights had passed sinee the mysterious astonishment evinced by Ri¬ carda at the discovery of the scars upon her person; since whieh period she had not entered her prison, and Lipan lo, at his nightly visits to her with fuel and other necessaries, with ivhich be still assiduously provided her, had addressed to her only one single sentence, ivhich was—*' My wife will visit you soon—keep up your spirits with the knowledge that you are surrounded bv true friends;" and these words*
words he had uttered with rapidity, and an evident anxiety to quit the place. On the third night after her former visit, to the inconceivable joy of Paulina. Ri¬ carda appeared, accompanying her hus¬ band; she spoke not till Lipardo had re¬ tired, and closed upon them tbe pannel, and then seating berself, as before, upon tbe side of the bed, shesaid—" Well, here í am at last, and upon the most important business 1 ever set about in my life: no doubt but you have been anxious enough to see me, but my not eoming to you be¬ töre could not be prevented : all is for the Lut, i have ahvays said so, and ??? fresh reasons every day to maintain my argu¬ ment—And how do you find yourself, my sweet signora .·*" 4t Anxious indeed, as you may naturally suppose, for sonie explanation of the sur¬ prise with u hich 1 beheld you affected the other evening," answered Paulina. " All in good time," replied Ricarda; ** all in good time; we shall come to that hv-
by-and-by; in the meanwhile, be satisfied that it is all to your pride, and your hap¬ piness, and your honour, that I have made the discovery I have done : have patience, and let me proceed my own way— î can do notliing without I do it my own way." After a short pause, she continued thus—** Now, my dear signora, I have a great deal to say to you, and a great many questions to ask of you; and I trust that you will hear me patiently, and answer me candidly, for I am your sincere friend, and am earnestly endeavouring to pro¬ mote your happiness and ivelfare." * c Only shield me from the marchese/ Paulina was beginning to say. " Such a marchese !" cried the old wo¬ man, interrupting her : " but we wilj speak of him by-and-by ; and if his face burns, it will not be without being talked of behind his back. Now listen to me at¬ tentively : you tell me that you love Vin¬ centio ; your love for him is very young— you have seen him only once—are you sure
sure you love him well enough to become his wife ?" " It is true. I have seen him but once, replied Paulina ; " but he hael frequently seen me before I had an opportunity of beholding him, and professed a predilec¬ tion for me; and the warmth with which he promised to elefend me against his un¬ cle 1 , at our only interview, proves his affec¬ tion to be sincere—a conviction whieh challenges my gratitude, and thence pow¬ erfully awakens a reciprocal feeling in my heart to his own/' " Well, well, it is all very possible, anil very probable too," returned Ricarda. *■ í have frequently knoivn love at first sight turn out as Iiappily in the end as a three years courtship; it is all a chance, and in ? great measure depends upon the temper of the parties Jiited. But noiv listen to me, signora, and excuse my familiarity ; I have my motives, ay, and gooel motives too, for all I am saying and doing. Shouki you incline as favourably as you do now to- w a reis
wards Vincentio, if you did not believe him to be nephew of the great Di Yal- de4ti, and heir tobis marquisate?" i( I do not comprehend you," replied Paulina. *' Why," returned the old woman, " sup¬ pose he were only a cavalier of fortune—a soldier, tor instance, ive will say, with the prospect of no inheritance but his sword ; woulel you profess yourself as willing to share your fate with him then as you are now ?" 44 1 am surprised that you should have thought it necessary to have proposed that question to me," ansivered Paulina ; 44 such points İn my conduct as you have already observed, must have convinced you ofthe independence of my heart. Hael I coveted wealth, was it not offered to me, in its most extensive limits, in the person ofthe marchese?" (: Why that is true, very true—I might have thought of that," rejoined the old ivoman, ** hut I have been so hurried and flurried*
flurried, that 1 scarcely know what I have been doing or saying. Well, then, you positively mean that you would prefer Vincentio to every other man, aud accept him as your husband, if, as the Having is, hc carried his fortune on his back?"' " I should prefer hini to all the men I have ever known,*' answered PauÜua. " Well, then," replied the old woman, with a smile of inward exultation play¬ ing on her countenance, " you have led yourself into a fine scrape by your con¬ fession ; for be it known to you that Vin¬ centio is no more the nephew of the mar¬ chese than I am bis nephew, but my ???." " Your son !'* ejaculated Paulina. 4 * ??, my son !" replied Ricarda: ** you wont be ashamed of me for your mother- in-law, will you? To be sure, 1 am not your equal in any respect, signora; but I will be as kind and as good to you, in re¬ turn for the love you bear Vincentio, as the
the greatest and grandest mother-in-law in all the world could be." Paulina besought her companion to give her a solution of the new enigma which sbe had presented to her vieiv. " I cannot explain it to you just now,'' replied Ricarda, tí for it is a long story, and we have other matter of the highest importance to occupy our time, which must be short together to-night, ior vari¬ ous reasons. Now then," she added, as¬ suming a solemnity of voice ivhich de¬ noted lier deeply interested in the matter winch she was revolving in her thoughts, " hear me, and mark me. Yon wish to escape the snares of the marchese, and you are willing to become the wife of Vin¬ centio ; there is then only one expedient by which you can ever hope to avoid the former, or to have it in your power to unite yourself with tbe latter—you must give Vincentio your hand to-morrow night. What say you ?" " Tlie
" The measure is so hasty——·" Pau¬ lina was beginning to reply. " Hasty !" exclaimed the old woman, " and is it not better to marry the man whom you can love hastily, than by pursu¬ ing deliberate measures, to fall into the net spread for you by r him whom you loath and detest ? Reflect on that." " I have still no hesitation in resting my choice on Vincentio," replied Paulina ; k * hut it ivould add greatly to my hap. piness to be blessed with the sanction of my revered protector, Urbino, to my union with the man of my election/' " But it cannot he," returned Ricarda ; * è as things stand, it is an utter impossi¬ bility. Believe me, on the word of a Christian, that it will be joyful news to iiim that your marriage is concluded ; it ivill place you in possession of the means of requiting him tenfold for all tlie kind¬ ness which I understand he has shown you, and he will be doubly happy in see* ing you blessed with prosperity, joy, and exaltation,
exaltation, as you infallibly will he, if you follow my advice. And how, on the contrary, could you ever meet him again, if, after im olfer of salvation, the mar- ebese were to obtain a triumph over you?" " Too true/' sighed forth Paulina. " AH your future days, and his also, from the interest which he feels in your welfare, and the love whieh he bears you, would be turned to sorrow, ivhilst, if you act according to my admonitions, yon will have the ability of becoming the distribu¬ tor of joy to all ivho know you/' " Still you speak in riddles," returned Paulina. " 1 may do so," rejoined tbe old woman ; " but you must, 1 think, be convinced that it is the most earnest desire of my heart to serve you." Lipardo at this moment entered-— " Well," he said, addressing Ricarda, ' % is all arranged ?" " Ask the question there/' rejoined lli¬ carda, smiling, and pointing to Paulina. " Lipardo
Lipardo approached her, and repeated the arguments already advanced by his wife, with increased force and energy. Paulina trembled, and almost wept. èi It is the only measure whieh can save you from the brutality of the marchese/' emphatically pronounced Lipardo. Still Paulina did not reply. " For your own sake, 1 .supplicate you to consent," proceeded Lipardo. Paulina heaved a deep sigh. 4i You, a feiv days ago/ 1 continued Li¬ pardo, k * desired Vincentio to be asked, if he had any particular message to you ? fie requests you to be informed, that he be¬ seeches you, by the love and adoration ivhich be bears you, to consent to the pro¬ posal ivhich has been made to yoa by my wife; and moreover desires you to be made acquainted, that he will vuit you on this spot to-morrow night, accompanied by a priest/' Paulina hung down her 1. ad. 14 The day after to-morrow the mar- vol. il m ebese
chese will come to receive your final an¬ swer," proceeded Lipardo, " and this step can alone save you from his toils. You can then declare yourself a wife, and thus defy his hated passion," added Lipardo; tí you ivill have no occasion to acknow¬ ledge how r long you have been so." " And if he suspects how shortly I am become such/' rejoined Paulina, " his rage will know no bounds, and I may sink be¬ neath the vengeance of his disappoint· ment." " At your interview with him," re¬ turned lipardo, *' Vincentio and myself will be within call, and protect you in case of nceel ; this I most solemnly pro¬ mise and assure y em." x\ slow consent ivas at length wrung from Paulina, that Vincentio shouki visit her, with the priest, on the following night; and liiearda and her husband, with many cordial assurances of their love and respect, tlien quitted her. The day was passed by Paulina, like the
the former ones^ in reflection on the mys¬ teries by whieh she was surrounded ; but the agitation of her mind was still more increased, as she dwelt on the awful cere¬ mony, to the performance of which she had tacitly consented. At length the shades of night enveloped tlie face of nature, and with slow and heavy toll, the bell proclaimed the mid¬ night hour. It had not long ceased to vibrate, ere Paulina believed that she dis¬ tinguished the sound of footsteps, on the outside of the door by which she had en¬ tered her prison. She hastily closed the pannel and listened, but the sounds, if any there had been, had died away, and unbroken silence now prevailed. She again drew back the pannel, and re-en¬ tered the second apartment ; she had not long done so ere the second pannel was withdrawn, and Lipardo appeared, hear¬ ing a ianthorn, and followei 1 by two per¬ sons wrapt in long black cloaks. μ % The
The pannel being closed, one of Lipar- do's companions darted forward, and Pau¬ lina felt berself clasped in tbe arms of Vincentio. who, in the hurried accents of mingled joy and agitation, expressed to her in whispers his gratitude for the hap¬ piness ivhich she liad vouchsafed him, " We have no time to lose," said Li¬ pardo. He made a signal to the second personage, who was the priest, ? ? ? ??????? man, the casting back of ivhose cowl dis¬ played his grey and reverend locks be¬ neath. At his direction, Vincentio and Paulina stood forth. Their hands were clasped İn eaeh other, and a few moments rendered their fates indissoluble. Vincentio saluted his bride with a glowing kiss of exultation, and the priest was on the point of closing his volume, when a crash like thunder echoed through the prison, tbe secret pannel was burst, and the marchese, followed by tivo of his domestics, stood before tbem. The
The sword of the marchese was drawn in his hand, and darting towards Vincen¬ tio, at whose breast he aimed his weapon —" Villain !" he exclaimed, " take the reward of thy perfidy !" With all the fury of an ardent lover, turned into /engeance against the being who seeks to interrupt his joys, Vincentio sprang upon the marchese, and in a few moments disarmed him. Uttering the most dreadful impreca¬ tions, the marchese called upon one of bis attendants to give him a sword. Lipardo darted between them—*' If you are bent on murder, my lord," be ex« claimed, " here is a mark will teach you where to point your weapon !" Whilst speaking, he had, with one band, snatched tbe lamp from the table, and with his other drawn doivn Paulina's dress beneath her shoulder; he approached towards it the light, and added—" Here, my lord; this scar will lead you right !" The
The whok was the transaction of a mo¬ ment. A deep groan burst from the lips of tlie marchese, and he sunk senseless into tlie arms of his attendants.
END OF VOL. Π
Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Strcet, London.
