Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mysterious freebooter: or, The days of Queen Bess: a romance
THS
MYSTERIOUS F R ЕЕ В О "О T ЕВ.
СНА?. I. bit come to this? JULIUS 'CJESİK. OR the first time in her life,-Rosalind felt a sensation approaching to a belief in the existence of supernatural forms ; why she now felt it, it was difficult, nay» indeed impossible, for her to account, even to her own heart» She was, however, tqo con¬ scious that,she did feel \t* and almost joined Dame Edith, in hér apprehensions of some fatal eventrawakingbn one of the vol. m. . в inhabitant» * l'.
ΐ
liight, much fatigued with the journey of the day ; he therefore trusts, that you will receive this message as an apology för his not visiting you to-night, and will allow him to see you after the hour of break* fast in the morning. ?t Rosalind made a slight answer, and Alwin retired. Every delay towards a knowledge of her fate increased the anxiety of Rosalind ; and, desirous of passing the interval be¬ tween the present hour and the morning, in that state of forgetfulneós which she hoped sleep might grant her, she retired to her chamber. Dame Edith followed hec to it immediately. The dame was, by no means, in a pleasant humour. Lord Kufus had instantly retired ţo his cham¬ ber on entering his castle, without paying the slightest attention to the tale of ter¬ ror she had made an attempt of commu¬ nicating tohim; and the old lady seemed in actual fear of a summons to the other world,
world, by the spirit in armour, with the streak of blood down its left cheek, before the morning· Of the thoughts of Rosalind, when her head rested on her pillow, the spirit in ar¬ mour had by no means an inconsiderable share. Her mind reverted to the occur¬ rences of years gone by ; sbe recollected the voice which bad called to her father, "to spare her," when, in the chamber where her mother died* she was sinking at his feet, overwhelmed by the cruelty of his commands to give her hand to Lord Rufus, and forget her Edward. What interceding voice that was, she bad never been able to learn ; sbe now fancied that there had been a resemblance between that voicej and the one which she bad heard pronounce her name a few weeks before on tbe ramparts of her father's cas¬ tle: still this idea afforded her no assist¬ ance in solving the enigma which ap¬ peared to encompass her. One consolatory reflection alone arose в 3 out
out of the mass of ideas which crouded her mind. The voice had been a friendly one, and if the voice and the appearance therefore were one, *she could have no¬ thing to dread: if thev were uot, if any ill were haunting her, she had still this consolation within her own breast—that she had not one evil action to reproach herself with, and that innocence has never any cause to fear! At that hour in the morning, at which the message Lord Rufus had sent her, by Alwin, on tirer foregoing evening, had tøught htr to е.Ч -pect his coming, be en¬ tered her apartment. He moved into it with a slow step and sorrowful countenance, his eyes bent to¬ wards the ground. Rosalind was standing by a window: he approached her, and making an en- tjttky after her health, in scarcely audible accents, he led her Caá chair, and placed himself in one by her side. Rosalind shuddered at his touch; never had
liad .«he regnrdčd him in any point of view but that, of .dislike., The ninative of the unfortunate Eloise had now height¬ ened her aversion, almost to an insup? portable pitch. • Lord Rufus 1 spoke thus—"The most unpleasant moment of my lire, Lady Ro* salind, is now arriver]. It is impossible for me to express to you how ardent has, for a long time past, been щу desire to convince you, that when, I, firsi rendered myself hateful in your eyes, by the рки fession of that, love which swelled my føart —when I first ventured to ask, as n^ine, the only hand which could have blessed my life, I was urged into the de¬ claration qf my feelings by your father— who, instead of informing me, that there, were prior claims on your affection, in¬ duced me to Relieve your sentiments con¬ genial with niy own. This encourage^ ment, given tothefondest wish of my heart, niade love the tyrant of my soul; and wheu I fouud my hopes deceived in you, в 4 that
^mrc4 aa inlärning maibess t b rough ту wißt, that fal wat blindly into a co»duct, ©C wbich tlÑr «ше акше can be the apology.** Ife hesitated, as if expecting tîiat Eo- taÜttd simuld acknow (edge, fm truth, the avowal he had jtbt røadr, " Procedi, my Lord," «aid Жт&\та; * % the past has lost its power to wound; it is the present tfeitt I wish you to speak ©f— Proceed.* u Briefly then," continued Lord Rufat, ** believe, that I have, fbr a length út time, most sincerely repented, that one eo excellent, so deserving of happiness as yourself, shoultl, from her first knowledge of me, liave dated her acquaintance with sorrow ; that every moment of my latter years has been employed in plans for proving to you that repentance, and, as far as lay within the limits of my slender ability, restoring you to comfort. From this avowal your father's changed opinion of
of me has de^rçd me ; m oçşmtımkj wm given me fm cnterm^ у<шг pretence, m im^oring yo^r f^iveness,. and I al¬ most began to ck&païr of ever having it ia шу poner to make confesstkm to уст of my penitence. At length— Ohî btetsed chance!—the hour ariived at which it was given mc to «erve you. The,kmles£ ruffian, Ailanrød, besieged your fathers castle, and Heaven made me the engine ofyour rescue from brutaîity/ , A pause ensued. Lord Rufus rose from his seat, and moved to the other side of the apartment, apparently overpowered by the emotions of his heart ; in a few mo- meuts he returned to bis seat, and pro¬ ceeded thus— " Oh, Lady Rosalind î I once loved, but the esteem, the reverence I now feel, points out to me, that there is a greater joy iu giving happiness than in receiving it. Oh i bad my feelings then been what they now are! Had my kind genius whis¬ pered to my heart—* Receive thy blibs в â frum
from seeing her thou lovest, happy in the агаш of hitn to whom ha- heart is given ; make ît thy felicity to know that thou hast constituted theirs ľ But that hour is past ; that moment cannot he recalled ; and all that is now left me, is to repair, what I would give worlds that I had placed beyond the need of reparation. " ** Even in your power as I am at this moment, and repentant as you profess yourself," replied Rosalind, " 1 am too much hardened in the school of suffering, to fear to tell you, that your declaration makes not the impression on my mind which you probably expected it would ; but I will also tell you, how you may gain my future credit, li you will say that your interference has procured me the grant of being placed under the imme¬ diate protection of my Queen." " There is the stin^ !—theie is the wound that galb !" exclaimed Lord Ru¬ fus. " Oh, that villain, Allanrod 1—The monster refuses your petition !—111 fortune be
be hb recompence l— Ohi Lidy Rosalind, have I not reason to exclaim, that thb w the most wretched moment of my Ufe f when the perversity of my fate withholds me from the performance of that action which might gain me.the only esteem I covet to be blessed with ?" Rosalind fixed her eyes on those of Lord Rufus, she would have darted them, if possible, into his soul, and have read in it whether she was his prisoner or Allanrod^s. His warm declarations of repentance for a moment led her to believe them real ; then again, a vivid recollection of the past burst upon her mind, x\m\ sbe saw him all a villain. On the countenance of Rosalind, Lord Rufus read what was passing in her heart. * ť You doubt me still, I perceive," he said ; " you are^latíed, Lady, in a situa¬ tion that authorizes your suspicions, but you shall have proof that, with regard to myself, they are ill founded—though my own ruin ensue* you shall be preserved в 6 spotless
вряа^ш— K% though lie Madgtııecoöf* pc r isli i« your defence, your lipe shall not be sullied by thi- kiss of a hase robbar; your baemn sball sot be contaminated by the embraces ofa freebooterF* " oh, Heavens !" exclaimed Rosalind, ** what mean these words f —What new terrors are those you hint at r Explain— explain ; do not, ih mercy, do not torture me thus with maddening apprehensions ľ* ** Fear nothing, thou shalt be ssvedY* cried Lord Rufus. " From what ?—From what r" asked Rosalind. " From becoming the wiß ef Attanrod," returned De Madginecourt. **Thea?i/¿ tf Attutirmi Γ echoed Ro¬ salind. tf Does he seek to make me h& wife ? —The wife of Allanrod Γ " This is the secret that my bosom la- * boured with ; this is. the secret that has thus long detained me from, your pre¬ sence, since my return to my castle,*' re¬ plied Lord Rufus f " Skilful in plans, the freebooter
freebooter projecte an alliance wkh yon* tbat, by becoming connected wkh the family of De Mowbray, its intercession may procure him pardon front the crown, to «hich he is in moinen tacy dread of his lawless life becoming forfeit.*' * * And it is really your wish to save me from hts wiles ?" asked Rosal tnd. ** So witness for me, Heaven ľ* replied De M í«! gin ecourt- "Then give up Allan rod to the crown,'* pronounced Rusalind, with emphasis, " as hfe lawless existence merits, and I am saved." Lord Rufus clasped his hands with vio¬ lence together, and let his head fall upon tb.em. After a pause—" that cannot be," he pronounced, in a low voice. ·* You say you wish lo save me," con¬ tinued Rosalind,, " and yet reject the means that would preserve me. í feel myself justified in considering yonr re¬ pentance of the same character with your professions, and, regard ing, y pu as. I bave ever
ever done, a combination of fraud and perfidy." ** You know not," returned Lord Ru¬ fus, '« in how dreadful a strait I am placeil ; you despise my actions» Ьесаиъе you are ignorant of the motive froir, which they spring ; you doubt my fervor in your cause, because I date not shew you the secret ties by w hich I am bound to extend it to you only within certain limits· Is it not enough for me to aay, that you shall be saved, if my power, my Wealth, my arm can effect it?—But it cannot, must not, be dons by means of placing you under the protection of the Queen ; such a step would be certain perdition to myself. Give a patient mo¬ ment to consideration, and then tell me whether it can be the principle of your heart to return evil to me for the gootl I pant to confer on you ?—No, no ; such, I am certain, are uot the sentiments of your breast. " Once more Rosalind inclined towards his
hb arguments, and almost believed htm her friend It was mt the nature oi her heart to wbh to retur» evil for good ; htr feelings were the immediate re%*er«e. She looked at Lord Rufus, and beheld him pacing the room in a hurried manner, that bespoke his mind ill at ease. Her heart again softened towards him, as she cms-» ceived it possible tliat his desire to make her reparation for his past conduct, might be the principal cause of his present in¬ volvements. ** If," she said, f * yott reject the obvious means of ensuring mv secu- rity, you wül not doubtless hesitate to inform me what those are which you in¬ tend to adopt i» their stead ?" "AlkuiFod," replied Lord Rufus, "gives us but till to-morrow's eve for our sepa¬ rate decisions—to me, whether 1 will sur¬ render you at his request, or submit to the besieging of my castle ? to you, whe¬ ther or not you will voluntarily become his victim ? I have heard your resolution, Lady Rosalind, and my own has been long
long ímmeà. ÍM Ыт т»а hi« myrmî- d*nî#coïne; h; them dii cet their tinjttst ежпе aeaiîiîît my c-^tie; let tbem dash down stone fjt>.» støne* until the entite &biic become a pite of ruins—they sliall not» in ibrir victory, uud the spoil they seek. The triumph of Alktnro'» bhall lack the only puxe lie pants to obtain ; Rosa¬ lind shali «<»t lie found b v him in Rock- mount C'a^tle, nor upon the spot İt «tands on." " Vou speak in riddles," returned Ro» salind. ** I will solve my last declaration to vou, if vou enrol it amount the other riddles i have been constrained to put to you,'* answered De Madginecourt. ** Yon shall, Lady, be removed from hence to a place of security, before the freebooter comes. I have fixed my plans for your disposal ; the consideration of a sleepless night has presented me with the means. I fear to send you away from my castle openly, lest there should be spies from Allanrod
Allanrod lurking in the neighbourhood, who might cither detain yon oe yonr road, or convey to htm intelligence oí your mutt ; in either of these cases, I should be equally miserable with yourself, iir the failure of røy earnest desire to tave yoa Irom hit justly bated power.' 9 " Pray -proceed, шу Lord," eaid Rosa¬ lind, almost bteathlcM «rîth agitation, and impatient for the conclusion of bis plan. ** Beneath this castle," he continued, ** h a secret passage, which leads nearly half a league into the country westward ; at it$ extremity is a habitation— ϊ know not scarcely what to name it, a cell or grotto—once possessed by a solitary man, my friend ; thither will I, during the night which shall succeed this day, myself conduct you; a faithful attendant, who shall be your companion during your stay there, shall alone accompany us, and alone be acquainted with your retiring thither; which precaution must inevita* Ыу secure us from treachery. There you shall
shall remain til! the issiieof the threatened siege be pažiť, atid I will then,' niyself, ap¿ pear to conduct you to sómé spot of fu ¿ turé safety. " f · The eyes of Lord Rufus Were raised to Rosalind ; they beipoke him awaiting her affirmative to his proportion. The lights ahd shades of his character were alter¬ nately passirig before' heť mind, andshe leant successively to each. There might be sotne secret enmity to hér peace, her life, depending on her compliance with becoming the inhabitant of the cell he had described, Which, once arrived there, if might be too late for lier to regent not having guarded against, by refusingto go tb it : but then, want of compliance might yield her up to the brutality of Al- lanrod, when tbe advice of Lord Rufu·* promised to preserve her from his power. The moment of indecision was dreadful- it was laden with apprehensions that racked her brain. At length Lord Rufus urged her reply.. With
With anxmphaťiq.tone she spoke thusi — " Lord Rufus, you have already, dur¬ ing our conference this r day, yourself, al¬ lowed that my suspicious of your fair conduct towawls me, after w^bat is past, are not without justification. They roust sufficiently explain to you the hesitation which yçu now see me labouring under— r my reply is still, wanting. , I feci myself entirely in your power; 1 feel that I can¬ not bç more so on any spot of the globe than I ani . un^er the roof of your own castle, where eyery domestic is doubtless the submissive performer of his Lord's ac¬ tions. Thus, assured that you need not carry me hence, to iuflict on me any bar¬ barity which you -щау have doomed me to suffer in ι revenge for your once slighted love, I thiHjk it, probable, from your o#er jqst maţle to me, tha 4 t it may indeed be your intention to.&a-ve me from the misery of becoming tlte victim of this inhuman Allan rod. Carry me therefore to th^spot you haye describeel; my thanks I must reserve
reserve till you again call upon me to leave it.'* With numberless repetitions of the ec· stacy he derived from befriending her, Lord Rufus received her reply to the proposi* tion he had advanced to her considera¬ tion, and then left her, to prepare his sol¬ diery for the attack upon his castle by the mvsterious freebooter. Tlie strangeness of her fate overwhelmed Rosalind with terrors inseparable from open danger, and ivhich increase in pro¬ portion to the mysterious shade which en¬ velopes it. Sbe knew that Lord Rufus had an invention equal to the conception of any project, and daring talents to carìry him tlitougffótè'execution ; and she had also learnt enough of his past life, during her residence in his castle, to con¬ vince lier that he bad a heart too void of feeling to forego the perpetration of any act which his interest or ľm desires might require the performance of. As she dwelt'on these considerations, a thou¬ sand
sand nameless terrors, which exist in the most enlightened minds, and which set reason and examination equally at de¬ fiance, added horror to her thoughts; and her present situation, appearing to her more tolerable than the offered change, she now resolved; to await the event of the siege where she was. Towards evening Lord Rufus again en¬ tered her apartment. He came, he said, to enquire which of his household she would prefer as her attendant and com¬ panion, during the time it would be neces» sary for her to remain at a distance from the castle ? Almost trembling to speak it, Rosalind informed him, that her sentiments were changed, and that whatever danger might await her remaining in the castle, she felt a reluctance to quit İt. " Dearest Rosalind !" exclaimed JLord Rufus,, " pardon the familiarity of the * expression—I entreat you tobe guided by my advice ; for your own safety, do not distrust
distrust my words. Were my intentions towards you evil, were ffiy aim even at' your life, would it not be as easv to ι W me to take it here as dn any other spot ?" (t Do you mean tó avow by that ques¬ tion,** asked Rosalind, pointedly, "that you have already fourid ť8is castle a spot suited to a deed oi that horrid nature ?" His countenance fell; the throbbings of his breast could not lie concealed be¬ neath the corslet of mail which he wore, and he suid, în a voice 'of tremor, which he sought to disguise* under a forced smile—"What means the Lady Rosalind ?** The reflection of an instant convinced Rosalind that she baci hazarded too much bv this hint ; a confession of the know- ledge she was possessed of relative to the fate of his wife, might turn him into her most deadly foe, at the very moment when he was, perhaps, sincere in his friendship. She checked her rising feel¬ ings, and, with all the calmness she could command, she replied—" Women's fears â often
often lead them to speak without mean¬ ing, as well as to feel sensations they can¬ not, account for. The long awd gloomy passages, and vaulted, Miss, whicli com¬ pose a building of the extent of this castle, when my spirits are depressed, always seem to convey to my senses some tale of horror in the breeze tbat rustles through them ; and my Lord cannot suppose that my fate, at tliis moment, leaves my mind its wonted strength." Lord Rufus did not look as if he were perfectly satisfied with her explanation, but he forced a second .smile, upon his countenance, ancl began to renew his en¬ treaties to her to leave the castle. Again the mind qi Rosalind wavered, and once more she acceded to his plan. Hc urged her to name the companion she should-prefer. She believeTl all those * who composed his household to be alike indifferent to her, and replied to that pur· pose. "Then," said De Madginecourt, ' " yeur
<ť your companion shall be Edith, and your attendant my own page, Alwin." This proposition convinced hér, that all who composed his household were not equally indifterent to her. To Alwin, a combination of circumstances had given her an insuperable aversion. Policy again •wichheld her from confessing all she felt, and she merely said—r'* I shall feel hap¬ pier with only Edith for my companion." " So then it shall be," he answered ; Ci ancl at the hour ofyour departure Edith shall select sonie vassal, whom she ap* proves, that you may not be destitute of the means of sending, upon any emer* gency, to the castle." Rosalind continued silent. Lord Rufus promised to come to her apartment when the castle was buried in sleep, and again retired^ Rosalind then threw herself upon a couch, and gave vent to her tears ; her overburtheiied heart required the relief of weeping.
weeping. " Iiow strange!—how inex¬ plicable İs my fate!" she exclaimed. " Could I ever have believed that there could exist a man on earth whom I should dread more than Lord Rufus?-— that I should ever have consented to have fled for protection, under his escort, from a being more terrible fo my imagination than himself? Almighty Providence, thine omniscience sleeps not to the miseries of an imperfect being like'myself. I know thee merciful ; İ know tbee just ; I ask of thee only strength to endure the trials thy wisdom has ordained me to pass through ; grant me thý éupporť, and I aia still hlessed." ' " With her mind thus impressed, Rosa¬ lind retired, to the solitude of her Cham¬ ber, and passed soine time in addressing herself to Heaven for support and pro¬ tection ; and she rose from her devòtionk with a composure of feelings whkh seemed to promise her that her prayers ^veré ac¬ cepted at the throne of cotefd#t. ' f " * Vol, m, с ' CHAP.
sesa
CHAP. IL Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp, Oft seen m charnel vaults and sepulchres, Lingering and sitting by a new-made grave. MILTON. 1' ABOUT the hour of twilight, Dame Edith joined Rosalind in her apartment, with all the pride of consequence, at being the only person in the castle considered worthy of being entrusted with Rosalind's temporary departure from it, by her Lord. She informed Rosalind, that the person she had fixed upon, as their attendant, was a grand-nephew of her own, who was almost the only well-behaved male in the castle ; for
for he had profited somewhat by her in¬ structions, and she had at least taught him to hear, see, and say nothing. The whole evening the old dame was employed in packing up a couple of baskets of provisions, and deciding on what books she should take with her in her pockets. She must have food, she said, for the mind as well as the body ; it was not her way to feast on meat, and starve for sense. She did not doubt, she added, but that they should pass the time very plea¬ santly ; the grotto was a charming place, in her opinion, and situated in a beautiful grove. " I thought it was buried beneath the rocks," said Rosalind, "at the extremity of a subterraneous passage leading from the castle." " Aye, that's the way you get to it," replied the dame, " and part of it is un¬ der ground, sure enough, when you are got there, but the other part iş like a neat cot¬ tage above ground. I have often seen it С 2 formerly ;
formerly ; I can't say that I have been there of late at all. No—no, yonr Lady¬ ship, you are mistaken if you thought it was a dull place, like the cave of Poly¬ phemus ; it is, I dare say> almost as plea¬ sant as the grotto of Calypso. 4< Now I think of it, my Lady," con¬ tinued the dame, after a pause, "III take that book of the Oddeáey in my pocket, ahd then we can read about Ca¬ lypso, and compare her grotto with our's.** Fortunately for Rosalind, if the dame did but talk herself, she cared* not whether the person whom she addressed replied to her observations or not; thus Rosalind was allowed to indulge herself in silent reflection, whilst Edith continued talking without cessation. " It is a glorious thought of my Lord's, sending you to this-grotto," she went on, " to preserve you from the malice of this freebooter ; for such bve as his I can only call ma- rice, as he has never seen you, and only wants you for the wickedest of purposes. Pray
Pray Heaven he may get shot through the head in the siege. But III tell you what surprises me, my Lady—don't it you ?—· that if my Lord knows where to see this Scotch robber, and hold conferences with him, and so forth, he does not contrive at once to make him his prisoner, and de* liver him up to justice." Without a reply to this remai 'к* Dame Edith would not rest satisfied. Whatever Rosalind's own opinion of Lord Rufus was, she scorned to give it to any one but himself, and answered w "There are, doubt¬ less, obstacles in the way of his effecting it, which are not known to us." " True, my Lady ; the men say we are no politicians, " returned the dame, *' but I atn a woman of courage, and if I were a lady of rank—*-" At this moment a rap upon the door frightened away both Dame Edith's cou¬ rage and rank, and she dropped into a chair, exclaiming-—'* Heaven preserve us* what noise is that ?" c3 The
The pleader for entrance was no other than her nephew Zachary, the destined companion of their temporary seclusion, who overheard her exclamation^ and re¬ moved her alarm by announcing himself to his grand-aunt ; sbe immediately opened the door to him, and apologised for the indifferent specimen she had given of her vaunted courage, by saying, that ever since the ghost in the black armour, with the streak of blood down its lef-b cheek, had haunted the castle, she had not been like the same woman in fortitude that she used to be before—that is, Dame Edith, like many others both before and since her time, was very courageous when she baw nothing to be afraid of. The figure in armour had not recurred to the memory of Rosalind till the present moment, since the time of her conversa¬ tion in the morning with Lord Rufus'; and she now enquired, with some degree of eagerness, whether it had again been seen
seen since the dame had given her an ac¬ count of its appearance ? "îNo —no, Heaven be praised," re¬ turned the dame, " not that I have heat^ of;" and Zachary confirmed that it had not been seen during the last night. Eosalind eyed Zachary with an enquir*- ing eye, on account of the part which had been assigned him by his aunt, who, she imagined, might have v been actuated Jn her choice of an attendant hy a hint from her Lord ; but with his appearance she felt satisfied. He had a countenance which plainly bespoke its affinity *to a heart devoid of the abilities for fraud or stratagem. Zachary was one of those beings who bear a continual smile on their countenance, and seem content to wear out life with eating and sleeping. Zachary himself had not been one of those who had seen the spirit, and his senses were too dense to have been alarmed by the sight, if ever he had. One of the grooms, he said, who had been с 4 one
one øf those to whom it had appeared, believed that it had van bhed round a nook which led to the subterraneous pas- page, along which Rosalind had agreed to pass that night Dame Edifehîs terrors began now to be excited, lest they should meet the spirit m their way to the grotto. Zachary laughed at her apprehensions, and pro¬ mised if they did, to give the ghost a black eye, or knock out some of its teeth; vpert which Dame Edith began a long harangue to him upon his ignorance, whieh fthe followed with a learned dissertation lipon the ærial nature of spirits.. M the end of her discussion Zachary hurst bto % bud laugh.« " У Ou may at Well kave off talking," he said ; <* I am sometimes afraid of flesh and blood, but your learning will never persuade me to be afraid of air, I can promise you." "Ohi what a blessing," pronounced Rosalind, mentally, " is insensibility ! Why 4a philosophers labour to be wiser still,
still, when they can never return to that blissful state of ignorance from which they began their career after knowledge ?" A few minutes after the castle clock had struck eleven, Lord Rufus came to Rosalind's apartment! he had a cloak thrown over his shoulders, which, he said, was to protect him from the damps of the subterraneous passages, and he had brought with him another, of skin, for Rosalind, which he assisted her in putting on. When Dame Edith and Zachary were laden with their respective stores, they all left the apartment ; Lord Rufus prevailed on Rosalind to support herself on his arm, and with every encouragement which words could give her to believe him her friend, he led her along.- They passed through various parts of the castle, all alike unknown to Rosalind, who had only once visited the garden, and once the rampart bordering on the $ea, since her residence in it. After some time they arrived in a long vaulted pas- c 5 sage,
sage, which Rosalind would have con¬ cluded to bave been the aisle ofa church, had the corresponding parts of the build¬ ing confirmed her idea; but she soon found that it was an outlet from the castle to the concealed path through the rocks leading to the grotto. " The subterraneous passage we are ap¬ proaching," said Lord Rufus, " was, doubtless, dug out of the rocks at some distant period from the present time, when men sought refuge from their enemies in the bowels ofthe earth." " Alas !" said Rosalind, " that the hours of that necessity were passed for ever !" " May it please Heaven/* returned Lord Rufus, "since the necessity stiil exists, that we may owe them our thanks for having afforded you the protection which you are doomed to seek from them. At the extientity of the subterraneous passage," he continued, "on the spot where the habitation I have mentioned to you now stands, was once situated, as I have
have understood,a tower of great strength, connected with this castle; its vestiges are still to be traced ; and it was, doubt¬ less, for the purpose of escaping thither from the castle in the time of assault, that this passage was constructed." On arriving at the end of the vaulted passage, which grew narrower towards its extremity, a range of dark wainscoting presented itself to their view. Lord Rufus disengaged his arm from that of Rosalind, and placing his hand upon a particular part of the wall, wbich concealed,a spring, a door flew immediately open, ^gaiu he drew the arm of Rosaliiyföhrough his, and led her on ; they entered, what ap¬ peared, the ruins of a chapel, and her con¬ ductor confirmed her iu her opinion, by saying, that it had once been so to Rock¬ mount Castle. Rosalind cast her eyes almost fearfully around on the walls, green with damps, and tbe high and pointed window frames, wbich had become the. supporters of the creeping ivy, and the с 6 luxuriant
luxuriant night-shade, in whose cluster» roosted the owl, the bat, and the rook, which, on the interruption given to their midnight meridian, by thé intrusion of the light emitted from the flambeau car¬ ried by Zachary, sent forth those dismal shrieks, which communicate superstitious shiverings to the hearts of those whose ears they assail. They proceeded onwards, and as they passed through a deep vault, which Rosa¬ lind conceived to have been the cemetery of the castle, her eye fell on some broken columns, which had once supported the roof, and whose capitals were now hidden by the overshadowing briony; and as they rested on them, she fancied she saw a figure İn black dart from behind one of them, and disappear again amidst a cluster of tombs, which were barely discern¬ able through the thick shadow of night She started at the sight, and Lord Ru¬ fus enquired what affected her ? She felt averse to confessing her alarm, as she was resolved
resolved not te communicate to him the impression which had been made on her mind by the various rumours whieh had reached her ear concerning the figure in armour, and pretended that she had only stumbled over a part of the rugged and broken pavement. Zachary and Dame Edith were silent, of course they had not seen the figure glide from behind the shaft of the pillar ; her imagination,she conceived, might have deceived her, and she was inclined to be¬ lieve it had. Still she proposed to her own mind a question, which proved that she did not believe the appearance to have been solely the offspring of imagination ; and this question was, whether, if she had really seen a figure at that moment, it had been the one described to her in black armour ? On leaving the chapel and its precincts, Rosalind and her companions entered the subterraneous passage. The cavity they were to pass through was hewn out of the 4 bosom
bosom of the solid rock ; dank vapours there assailed their senses, and the damps distilled their aguish drops upon their heads. They had proceeded only a few steps into it, when Lord Rufus said—" My motive, Lady Rosalind, for conducting you, myself, away from my castle by night, you are already well acquainted with ; it is to confute the treachery of such as might not be proof against the bribes or threats of Allanrod, should he be tfie conqueror of my castle, and hold out to the weak the promise of reward for the discovery of your place of concealment, or the terror of punishment for the with¬ holding of the desired information. The shorter the time therefore that I am ab¬ sent from my chamber this night, the safer our plan, as any knowledge of my leav¬ ing it might lead to a suspicion of the cause, and thus to a discovery ofthe tran¬ saction that has marked the hour. The path hence to the grotto is strait—dan¬ gerous
gerous it cannot be ; I will therefore here bid you farewell. Good angels guard you, Lady; depend on seeing me, the in¬ stant I can appear to you without danger to yourself.'" As Rosalind had already acquiesced thus far in his plan, she bad no reason for dis¬ senting from this immaterial part of it; and accordingly, with an entreaty that he would, as soon as possible, give her infor¬ mation of her doom, she suffered him to depart, and proceeded onwards with Dame Edith and Zachary. As she moved along, her faithful Ger¬ trude recurred to her imagination, and she lamented more than ever her separa¬ tion from the affectionate girl. At his departure from Rockmount Castle to his meeting with Allanrod, Lord Rufus had promised to make the restoration of Ger¬ trude a part of his request to the free¬ booter. Weightier matter to her o%n hap¬ piness had occupied her mind since his return, and she had not, made any enquiry of
of him concerning her attendant ; but she doubted not that every other considera* tion had been sunk in the demand Allan- rod had made of her person. - About half an hour brought them to the extremity of the subterraneous pas¬ sage. A low arch, hewn out of the rock, presented itself to them; they stooped, and passed through it. It was the en¬ trance into what Dame Edith called the grotto ; to Rosalind it appeared solely as a small apartment cut out of the earth, which owed its walls merely to the spadô. In the middle of it stood a rude table, and seats, of an equally indifferent workman¬ ship, were scattered about; on one of these» Dame Edith, panting and puffing with her long walk, sough tf immediate rest, and Rosalind instinctively followed her example. " This is not the apartment we are to inhabit" said the darne, " that is up those stairs," pointing to some eteps in one corner of the place; <? we will go up them
them in a minute ; but I am so unused to walking, that my bones ache as if I had been beaten/ 1 Rosalind's eye kept roving round the place, although there was no object of sufficient importance for it to fix upon* In a few minutes the dame was ready to ascend into the upper apartment. She took the light» and Rosalind followed her; tlie stairs led tbem to a neat room, fur¬ nished in the style of a cottage; a door, opposite to the one they entered by* led them into a second room, similar to the first; and these were all the apart¬ ments of which the building consisted» There wae in each* of them only one long and narrow casement; Rosalind raised her eyes to that in the first room, and f йот the blank ii presented to her sight, she imagined the night to be dark; but from the second, she caught a view of a respiendant moon» glittering through the foliage of some surrounding trees, which convinced her that some interposing sub¬ stance
stance threw a shade upon that in thefirst apartment. Trivial as these circumstances may ap¬ pear to a mind at ease, they are such as the heart, suspicious of treachery, inves¬ tigates with the nicest scrutiny. A door in the second apartment, which was bolted within, next attracted her ob¬ servation. ** Whither does this lead?" she asked her companions. " Out upon the country, " returned the dame ; ' ' here are a iew knots of trees on this side the cottage, then a field, and next the 1 high road ; for every step we have set to-night from the castle, has been a step away from the sea-shore into tbe land : you can hardly hear the roaring of the sea here.*' The possibility ofan escape now struck the-mind of Rosalind, and darted a flash of joy across her heart ; but, upon a mo¬ ment's reflection, the pleasing impression faded away. " Whither should she fly ?" The roads were utterly unknown to her, and
and if she were acquainted with tbem, faintness and fatigue must overwhelm her ere she could reach a place of safety, as she was entirely ignorant where to seek her father, and had iio protector but the Queen, towards whom she could bend her steps. If she were even to hazard the event of flying from Lord Rufus, (could slie escape the vigilance of her companions, whp were doubtless commanded to keep a strict watch over her actions) and trust to the guidance of any friendly stranger to whom chance might lead her, she might, ere such a friend was found by her, be encountered by A İlan rod *s band, and her flight for safety become her ruin. Restoration to peace, she concluded, might be the issue of her remaining where she was ; to wander fortl\ alone upon the world, was, to court certain danger. In one ofthe apartments stood a couch; this Dame Edith prepared, with some clothes which she had brought with her, in addition to some which she found on the spot,
spot, for Rosalind to repose upon. After some time the dame prevailed on her to retire to it, but was resolute in not ac¬ cepting that share of it which Rosalind would willingly have given up to her comfort ; and wrapping herself up in the skin cloak which Rosalind had worn dur¬ ing her walk, she placed herself in a chair, by the side of the couch, saying, that iC she could sleep as well sitting as lying, and that li she did not sleep quite so long, or so easily, she should enjoy her bed the more when she returned to it, which she hoped would be the next night, as she had understood from her Lord, that the free* booter threatened to attack Rockmount Castle the next day, and she doubted not, from what she knew ofthe bravery of its troops, that half an hour's fightiug with them would cool his courage, and send htm quietly about his business/' *' Pray Heaven it may be so ľ' exclaimed Rosalind, and sunk on her conch, not to sleep, hut to waking refiection. Zachary,
Zachary, according to his own account, could have slept on a cannon ; so the dame advised him to take the stairs for his resting-place, and use the threshold of the door, at their top, for a pillow, in order that he might be. near enough to hear her call in case she wanted him. He would have preferred going down into the grotto, but the dame would be obeyed ; and in a very few minutes his snoring in¬ formed her, that he did not sleep the worse for her having selected his resting- place. 1 Rosalind slept as little as it can be sup¬ posed she eoujki do in her present novelty of situation, and witlť her mind thus ill at, ease ; as soon as the first streaks of returning day beamed through the case¬ ment, she left her, couch. She wandered about her apartment, till tlie light of day became sufficiently pow¬ erful to invite her to the window. The first objects which struck her sight, were ¿he distant battlements of the castte, rising above
above a cluster of trees that grew at their base, and just tinged with the yellow gleam of the rising sun ; beyond them rose majestic hills, cloathed with oak and beech, which retired into a long perspec¬ tive, and ultimately seemed to mix them¬ selves with the clouds. Immediately before the window at which sbe stood, lay a flat country, of which the verdure was scanty, and the vegetation barren; it extended almost as far as her eye could accompany if, and at length seemed to terminate at the foot of some. craggy steeps. * Having gazed some time on the scene which this casement afforded her, she went to the other, which, on the foregoing evening, she had imagined to have been obscured by some outward ob¬ ject, and she found that a bush of holly had been courted to twine its spreading branches before it, so as almost to deprive it of the power of giving light to the apartment İt was in. The ground imme¬ diately
diately before the cottage was marked by no track which bespoke its door to have been lately in use ; unchecked weeds were growiqg thickly around it, and the swal¬ lows ilew to its roof with a security that seemed to bespeak that they had never met with any interruption from its inha¬ bitants. Dame Edith, who had slept but indif¬ ferently during the night, was endeavour¬ ing to make herself amends in the morn¬ iiig, and therefore Rosalind moved about unnoticed by her ; as for Zachary, he was already at breakfast in the grotto below. When Rosalind retired from the window, several papers fastened upon the walls at¬ tracted her attention ; she went up to them, and found that they contained dif¬ ferent pieces of poetry ; some of them she perused, tbey pleased her fancy, and she sought for others. In pursuing her amuse¬ ment, to her surprise, she encountered some lines wbich were perfectly familiar to her. They had been given to her by her
her lost Edward; hehad informed her, that they had been written by the old man who had brought him up, and at the sup¬ plication of whom, when on his death¬ bed, Lord William de Mowbray had taken him under his protections These were not only the same lines, but in the same hand-writing of those which Edward had given to her ^s 'the composition of old Matthews. Rosalind eagerly examined, in turn, each separate piece contained on the walls of the cottage, and found the characters of them all to have been evi¬ dently traced by the same hand. The lines with which she <vas already acquainted were the following—
TUB SEA SIDE, When evening's balmy breezes wildly blow, And the bright orb of day is sinking low, I wander to the shelvy ocean's »ide, Where billows foam, or gently rolls th« tide«
"«ooth'á
Sooth'd by the scene, discordant passions oease, The soul is lulľd to happiness and peace ; While contemplation takes the guiding rein, And leads remembrance through a pleasing train. Who can tbc starťd expanse unmov'd behold, Or see its azure surface ting'd with gold» But must th' omnipotence of Cod aoore, And cease to doubt, if doubt he could before? Of life, an emblem ia tli' incessant change From high to low, through which the billows range ! How like to pain, when boisterous, rough, and wild ! I low like to pleasure, when serene and mild ? Yon distant sail, an image too appears, Of present pleasure, damp'd by future fears ; For yonder clouds a threaťning gloom portend j The present calm may in a tempest end. Thus İn the noon-tide of our early days, When joyoun hope in expectation pla>s About the heait, we feel its transports beat, In bweet vibrations round its native seat. Ah ! happy moments, sources of delight ! Why thus on hasty pinions wing your flight ? Ah ! happy days of innocence and case ! Why do you fly lor thode leas iure to please ? VOI, И!. O t<ÎSB'
Less sure to please**~-bť*ca,use each passioa grows As age increases ; thus the riv'tet flnws, At first soft murmuring o'er its pebbly bed, Till sweil'd by rains, its roaring torrcftts sprøatl.
Not a singb word through all the stanzas varied from the copy which Rosa¬ lind had, years before, received of the same lines from her Inward* at De Mowbray Castle ; apd tfye more jbe examined the writing, the more fully she was convinced that it was the same. The strangeness of the circumstance awakened in her mind an ardent curiosity to learn who had been the former inhabitant of the grotto—she might from such a knowledge unexpect¬ edly learn who were the parents of her never to be forgotten Edward ; she might discover the existence of some beings to whom she was at present unknown, t and to whom it might require her only to ac¬ knowledge herself as his wife, to consti¬ tute thera her friends, as well as relatives. 4 The
The idea cheered her more than any which had for some time received birth Ín her imagination, and she impatiently awaited the waking of Dame Edith, to whom she panted to propose the ques¬ tions rising, in her mind. The dame, lis¬ tened attentively to her enquiries^ without knowing the cause from whence they sprang; the verses, she said, had often charmed her, and she doubtless considered this a sufficient reason for any other per¬ son being desirous of knowing by whom they were written ; but of the author she could give no farther account, than that he was a man of a solitary disposition, and had resided there some two and twenty years ago; but that she knew not either his name, or whence he had come. * " Did he die here?*' astøed Rosalind* " No, my lady," returned the dame; "he grew, I have understood, weary qf the solitude he lived in, and left the country." " It is strange," said Rosalind, "as
he has been reported to me, both by Lord Rufus and yourself, as his Lordship's friend, that he was not invited rather to make the castle his abode tlian this loneiy spot, especially as the want of society ap¬ pears to have been a cause of dissatisfac¬ tion to him." ** Why, indeed, so it does seem, true enough/' replied the dame, " but I can't tell why it was or was not so." " Did he live quite aione here?" asked Rosalind. <r Entirely so', I believe," answered the dame. "He had no companion at all then," said Rosalind—" no son, no child?" " Not that I ever heard of, my Lad}-; what makes you ask the question?" re¬ turned Edith. " Only," replied Rosalind, endeavour¬ ing to conceal her feelings, l( because in that case it must have been lonely indeed," The subject was dropped ; Dame Edith prepared
prepared the breakfast, and Rosalind con¬ tinued silent. The day passed on heavily and mourn¬ fully to the daughter of De Mowbray. A companion, who knows not sufficient of our secret history, to feel that interest in our fate, which can. alone render con¬ versation acceptable to our feelings, is less pleasant than solitude ; and in order to avoid the necessity of listening, at least for a while, to the old dame's prat¬ tle, Rosalind took a pencil from her pocket, and reflecting on the bliss which might have been her's with her Edward, in a cot like the one she was now an inhabitant of, had she been the child of humble cot¬ tagers, rather than the offspring of wealth and splendour, she composed the follow¬ ing lines—
рЗ тил
THE PEASANT'S NESV. Far in the depth of yonder glade, Where plenty smiles around, The peasant's nest uprears its head, With moss and ivy crown'd. Embower'd -within the. friendly shad«. Of oaks encircling arms, It asks not art's insidious aid, To deck its native charms., A little garden, trimm'd -with skill, Boasts not each fl»w'r that blows ; Bat waters with its murmuring rill The jess'mine and the rote,. $eace smiles beneath its humble roof, bove dwells in every breast ; Each morn brings joy, for ah ! content Has bless'd, the peasant's nest.
" Whoever thou art," exclaimed Rosa~ find, *' by whom the lines I have this dajr perused
perused were «written, whether thou art still on earth, unconscious of my prcseut action, or from the blest abode of saints lookst down upon me—pardon the sym¬ pathy by which my mind is drawn to an emulation of thine, and despise not the impulse which leads me to place my una¬ dorned composition amongst thine, which are graced by genius and understanding;** and with these Words Rosalind placed them upon the wall, amidst those which she had already found there. Dame Edith put on her spectacles to peruse them. " Well, they are sweetly pretty," ,she cried, " and the first that I ever read that were written by a lady. Whatever the men may say to the con¬ trary, We don't know what we can do till we make the attempt ; and it is my opi¬ nion, that any wtmian might fix a pair of horns on the bead of some man or other, as Diana did on Aeteon's, if she had but the courage to try." »4 CHAP·
CHAP. IIL What are these,. So -witherM, and so vrild in their attire, That look not like the mhabitants o' the earth,. And yst are on't í MACBETH. A HE. evening approached without any intelligence arriving to Rosalind from Lord Rufus, or any sounds meeting her ear which she could construe into a sup¬ position of the attack upon the castle being begun. At times she hoped that Allanrod's threats would end in words; at others, that Lord Rufus might still come toan accommodation with him, and induce
induce him to relinquish the demand of her hand. * The twilight had scarcely begun to ex¬ pand its raven wings, ere Dame Edith obliged her nephew to have recourse to the flint and steel, to produce a substitute for the waning light ofthe sky, which ap¬ peared absolutely necessary to the keep- > ing up of her spirits in her present solitary abode. The lamp was accordingly placed upon the table, and Rosalind and the dame drew round it. " It appears strange to me," said Rosalind, " that, if it is now two-and-twenty years since the former in¬ habitant of this place left it, it should still remain in the good order in which wc found it, and the furniture appear so little injured by the hand of time." " Oh, my Lady," returned Edith, " İt has had another inhabitant since then." "Indeed!" rejoined Rosalind, "who might that be ?" " A person my Lord was good to,*' ώ5 answeied
answered the dame, casting a significant glance upon her nephew, who was at that time performing some office in the apart¬ ment ; " only a pensioner of my Lord's.? Rosalind perceived her disinclination tø speak before Zachary, and therefore said яо more. Ina few minutes lie went dow» into the lower apaftmentr " I did not like to answer your question before him, my Lady," went on the dame, '* because it is not Ät that such a* he should fcnow secrets whh which there can be no harm in your Ladyship's being acquainted. The last person who lived here was ------" Za¬ chary's foot, was heard upon the stairs* and again hb grand -aun t became silent. ** Whew yon have got what you want, ,T ehe continued, after a pause, addressing' him, " I desire you will keep below ; my lady and I are busy." " So am I going to be/' replied Za¬ chary, "for I am going to get my sup¬ per;" and he was on the point of again descending the stairs, when the sound of a horse's
й hofàé's fet caught the attention of Ro* sájirid and her attendants. ït appeared tô be moving at full speed, and as they continued to listen, it seemed to àpfyroàch towards their habitation. - The eyeå of Rosalind and Dame Edith rested in silent enquiry orf each other. Rosalind could not suppose that Lord Rufns would Send her information, except by fhe subterra¬ neous passage. Dâítte Edith actually ht* lieved that Allanrod hàd discovered Rosa* lind's retreat, and was coming, in person, to demand her ; but she forebore to ex¬ press her thoughts. " What can it be?" broke, at the interval of sonie momenta, fròift the lips of each ; ahd the insensible Zachary' mechanically replied to their question-*·*' Only a horse." The clattering of the hoofs drew nearer atid nearer, and at length stopped imme¬ diately opposite to the cottage; a rap with a stick upon the doot followed, and, almost at the same instant, the voice of ás ŕérsori, \Vbo hud discovered through the d 6 casement
casement that there were inhabitants within, called but— " For the tove of mercy, if ye are not callous to every im¬ pulse of' feeling, give us shelter beneath your roof." "Oh, Heavens, what a demand!" ex¬ claimed Dame Edith. "What is to be done ?" " Whatever our own situation/' replied Rosalind, "we should still have a hand of succour ready for the children of dis¬ tress. Let us enquire who makes the demand." " Surely you would not let any body in here !" cried Dame Edith. " I know not that it is in my power to do so," returned Rosalind ; " but we may bc otherwise able to afford them assistance on a knowledge of their wants." Again the same petition was advanced by the pleader without, and Rosalind could discern that the voice which uttered it was that of a female. Rosalind mounted upon the step at the ■ foot
foot of the casement, and opening a small portion of it, which just admitted her face through the aperture,, she rierceived a wo¬ man, whose countenance bore marks of the deepest affliction, sitting nearest to the head of the horse; in one.hand she hdd tîıe bridle, and with her other arm she supported a man, who was placed behind her upon the saddle, and whose counten¬ ance bespoke him suffering under the se¬ verest pressure of illness. " Oh, for the love of Heaven !" the woman again began, " admit us into your dwelling; my wretched, my unfortunate husband, must else die where you now behold him, when a little succour from you may protract, perhaps recover him his existence." " Oh, indeed, we can't let in any body to die here," cried Dame Edith; " we are very sorry you are going to lose your hus¬ band, but we can't do that." Rosalind was in this instance the mis¬ tress of her own actions, and attended not
not to the exclamation of the dame. Sftfc iooked stedfastly upon the countenance of the woman, and believed it to be one of those which bespoke a heart incapable of ingratitude—one which would sooneť have suffered wrong than inflicted it. The duty of charity had, from her earliest youth, been impressed upon the heart of Rosalind, as that of which the perform¬ ance raised her the nearest to him, who, though clothed in every virtue, did not escape earthly suffering. The afflictions she had herself endured, had rendered her heart every day more susceptible of the calamities of her fellow creatures, and she would rather have suffered from the per* fidy ofan object, who had proved unde¬ serving of her commiseration, than to have lived under the self reproach of hav¬ ing refused to stretch out her hand to a being who might have perished from her neglect. " Ifit is in my power to assist you," she said, " I will." She called to Zachary^ and, in a decisive tone of voice, hid
bid him make the attempt of opening the door, which silenced Dame Edith, and left her only her grimaces to shew her discontent of Rosalind*» proceedings by· The bolts were rusted in their socket sr, and the door itself had sunk upon its hinges, and settled itself an inch or more into the ground ; but these obstacles the strength of Zachary soon overcame, and an entrance to the dwelling was opened to the unfortunate strangers. The female requested assistance to take her husband from the horse ; Zachary went ont to her aid, and in a few minutes the sick man was brought in, and laid) at Rosalind's command, upon the couch where she had elept the night before. The woman, whose accent Rosalind perceived to be Scotch, was unceasing in her thanks for tţie kindness she was expe¬ riencing, and pronounced a blessing on Rosalind, with every effort which she made, but made in vain, to induce her husband
husband to tasce the wine which she had received at the hand of her benefactress. The dress of both struck Rosalind as extremely peculiar, and she knew not whether to conclude iţ the dress of the Scotch, or a garb which would, in any part of the world, have been considered as uncommon as it appeared to her. The dress of the man was less particular than that of his wife ; he wore buskins, and a philibeg of plaid, over which his coat hung down almost to his knees, but was unbuttoned before, and discovered his plaid mounting in the form of a corslet to his neck. On his head was a skin bon¬ net, bound down under his chin with a handkerchief, which seemed to be intended to preserve bim from the cold, out of con-i sideration to his ill health. The woman appeared about forty years of age, well made, tall, and stout of limb; her countenance was more interesting than handsome ; it owed its fascination princi¬ pally
pally to a pair of full black eyes, of which the expression was very great, and which gave an animation to the rest of her fea¬ tures. Her dress was not confined by stays, but formed of stuff, and bound round her waist with a strip of the same matt ial which composed her outer gar¬ ment, and which ligature gave it the only distinction it had between waist and pet¬ ticoat ; from under this peeped out a pair of russet boots : upon her shoulders hung a cloak, and the hood of this was thrown over a plaid bonnet on her head. Still, extraordinary as were their dresses, they did not bespeak poverty ; nor did the manners of the female represent her as a woman of a mean rank in life. " It avails not," she said, after a time, "he must die—I see he must. If thou hearest me," she continued, addressing her husband, whose head was rested on her arm, " grieve not to leave me behind thee;
thee; ï rejoice that thou art going so sooti tojóin our sainted mistress." " You see they are only servants, my Lady," whispered Dame Edith to Ro¬ salind. In a few moments the man opened his eyes. " Margaret," he said, " this hour is my last. I have not been insensible, although unable to speak to thee ; I shall never, never be able to execute my vow." " Have not I told you already not to let that thought vex you ?" returned the woman. " Have not I promised to exe*· cute it for you?" € l Will you—will yon indeed, Margaret ?'* replied the man ; " will you assume the courage to revenge the murder of that bkssed—*— ?" The word which should bave f bl lowed died awây on his tongue. " Yes, by Heaven ľ 9 -answered the wn*- man ; *' may I never enter those blessed regions of eternity, where she now re¬ ceives her* recompence fot all her wrongs* OA
on eaith, if I do not, with mine own hand, justify her on her murderer." 4ť I shall die happy, Margaret—I shall die happy Î" faintly pronounced the man, pressing her hand to his lips. A silence ensued. *' Ye have been sufferers, it should seem," said Rosalind, '* from the unfair death of some lamented friend ?" 4C The eleath of an angel, " replied the woman, emphatically. " It is true that slue was too good for earth—too pure Vo Jive in this wicked world ; but still Uie crime of her murderer deserves equal pu¬ nishment, and it shall meet its merited recompence." The time passed melancholily on. Ro¬ salind could not induce the woman to be more explicit as to herself than she had already been ; and the mystery observed by her, added to the evidently approach^ ing termination of the man's existence, made her almost repent her charity, al¬ though she carefully concealed her thoughts from
from Dame Edttb, who would only have triumphed In her feeliogs, without com¬ prehending the sentiments that occasioned tbem. u Wherever I go," said the woman, the tears streaming down her cheeks as she spoke, " your angelic benevolence will never be effaced from my heart. There was a time when I knew only pros¬ perity, but it is now long since my hus¬ band or myself have experienced such kindness as we have this night received at your hands; we had once a friend, a saint, an angel, like yourself.**—Her tears 1 now entirely choaked her utterance. " May I not know who that friend was?" asked Rosalind, again self-satisfied that she had admitted the strangers to her hospitality. '* No, no," she replied, " that is the only request which, in the gratitude of my heart towards you, I could withhold from yOu ; but that must not be nam. You will shortly know who was my friend, and
and who* I am too; but that must not be till that friend is revenged.]* The hour-glass on the table had just told the second hour of the. morning, when the dying man made an effort to raise himself upon the couch. " Mar¬ garet," he whispered forth. " I am here," she replied—" I am here." "Margaret," he repeated, " remember thy promise ľ' tc So bless me, Heaven, with life," she returned, " it shall òe done." Å faint smile stole over his counten¬ ance, which was followed by a convulsive sigh, and in a few moments after he ceased to breathe. The woman clasped her hands, and s&od bending over the corpse. " I la¬ ment thee not," she said ; " all thy com¬ forts on. earth were fled, and thou art now with the blessed in Heaven—Soon, soon shall I join thee there—-Prepare, my sainted mistress, to give me welcome !" She continued for sometime hanging over the
the body, and Rosalind, by the motion of her lips, believed that she was in silent prayer; one word only she heard of her oraisons, and that was the word " mis¬ tress," of which, at her first use of it, Dame Edith had so readily explained the meaning, but which Rosalind could not Jnduce herself to regard by any means in the same light. Her prayer ended, she kissed the inania mate lips of her husband, and then turn¬ ing away from the couch, wiped the tears from her face. This done, she ap¬ proached Rosalind, and falling upon her knees before her, she caught her hand in her's— u Whoever thou art," she said, " it is needless for me to implore on thee îhe blessing of Heaven ; thou hast a heart that must ensure it to thee, In words ade¬ quate to my feelings, it is impossible for ¡íme to express my thanks, that your pity has saved him, who now lies cold in death, from breathing out his last sigh unJiel- ' tered from the biting air; give his re¬ mains
mains a little earth, and if thy inheri¬ tance in Heaveţi be not already secured to thee, accept for it the prayer oia. dying woman." Having uttered these words, she rose from her knees, and ran hastily out of the cottage ; Ros&ľmd followed her with her eyes, and saw her spring upon her horse, on which she instantly set off at full speed.
CHAP.
CHAR IV. Thou seest We are not all alone unhappy— This wide and universal theatre Presents more woeful pageants, than the scene Wherein we play in. AS TOV LIKÉIT« JL HE countenance, bleached by the hand of Death, had no terrors for the mind of Rosalind, and drawing towards the couch, she examined the features of him¬ who lay extended urjon it ; they were calm and serene—a satisfying assurance that he had died at peace with Heaven. "Well," cried Dame Edith, «« of all the histories I ever read, í never met with
with any thing equal to what I have seen this night !—To bring an utter stranger to die under one s roof, and to leave him there too !—but some people have no con¬ sideration at all.*' This last sentence was probably intended as a reproof to Rosalind, if she chose to take it, for having admitted the dead man under her roof; for Dame Edith, with a courage very natural to piqued inferiors, ventured to express her dislike of what had taken place when it was past, though she had not dared to utter a syllable on the subject whilst the action was yet un¬ done, and her interference likely to meet with a reprimand. But Rosalind was too well satisfied with having acted rightly, to be moved by the displeasure of the old dame. On the mor¬ row she had every reason to expect a recall from her present abode, and she felt no inconvenience in giving up her couch tor that night to an unfortunate man, whose lifeless body ftiust else have been exposed VOJU lib e to
to the rude attacks of animals of prey ирол t he open road. " And what are we to do with the body ?" enquired Edith. " Nothing/' replied Rosalind; "we will return into the other apartment, and leave it; when ме are recalled to the castle, İt shall be buried." "'My Lord will think it finely odd to find a dead man here when he comes back/' exclaimed the dame. u li the sentiments which your Lord ^professes towards me are unfeigned," re¬ plied Rosalind, "he will not seeany thing reprehensible in my having performed a charitable action." " 1 hope you will tell him I had nothing to do with it," the dame went on. " He will perfectly understand that without explanation,"answered Rosalind, " as be made me the mistress of this abode." This was a hint to Dame Edith to put a stop to her observations, jvhich if she did
did not much relish, at least producedth effect Rosalind desired to obtain from it. Rosalind and tue dame w tapped them selves up in cloaks, and placed themselve in chairs in thefirst apartment. ťt I durs not sleep, on any account," said the latter "ina room next a dead man, especially Scotchman." Rosalind coidd not forbear an i n ware smile at the idea ofthe dead being fcaredr» in proportion as they were natives of onf or another country. The dame went on—" I am a true Enj glish subject, my Lady ; I revere ou| t Queen with all my soul, and hate th Scotch from my heart." The period at which Dame Edith m talking, was a few weeks after the unfoif tunate Mary Queen of Scots had bowel *» к her neck beneath the axe ; and the ped pie of England having been influence into α belief, that, by her death, thef Queen had been freed from a most iniqui! tous foe", who had endeavoured to hu|* £ 2 \Щ
her from her throne, and usurp her seat on it, condemned promiscuously all her ountrymen with herself. Although Elizabeth was the godmother f Rosalind, and she had heard only one ide ofthe question during the trial ofthe cotch Queen, still, from circumstances vhich she had singly gathered, but which ad rested on her mind, she had been led, rivately, to pity Mary's unfortunate lot, ud to believe her, if not innocent, at [east less guilty than she had been repre- |ented, and most rigorously punished by ¡he privation'of life. The dame, although shut for nearly a jjentury within the walls of Rockmount ľastle, conshiered herself by no means a ss able politician than those who visited ie court ; and she now began to descant, p ith all the fury of bigotry, on the hei- ousncss of Scorch principles, and the ni versal wickedness which must of ne- essity be inherent in the Scotch nation, hen they bad the example of most atro¬ cious
cious crimes set them in the person of theii monarch : but that she trusted and hopee that the punishment which had overtake! her, would lead them ali to repen tance,| and that before they died, they woul bless the Queen of England, as the instru¬ ment of their reformation. The narrow-minded principles of- tin dame were as much beneath the attention! of Rosalind, as she considered her argu¬ ments too contemptible for reply. Rosa* lind was a firm adherent of Elizabeth's,) and bore her that love and lespeet whichľ the honour she had conferred on her at' her birth demanded from her; but stilli she was not so blind in her affection, as}* not to be able to distinguish that the most! perfect may be liable to single actions,) but for the performance of which the! fame of their even rectitude would raise? them above the level of moitality: andrl she could not forbear considerinir theu * tu death of Mary, as the single shade, which! e 3 dimmed f
[limmed the otherwise unsullied lights of Elizabeth's character." The dame passed the night in intervals f sleep and conversation. Rosalind was ontentto wear away the hours in passive îxpectation of the ensuing morn, which t length arose with peculiar serenity-and tightness. Rosalind rejoiced at tbe ap¬ proach of day, because it enabled her gain to look towards the castle, and brm some idea whether the threatened ttack upon it had yet. been made. The ame rejoiced, because the light of day ispelled from her mind her superstitious ears. Rosalind stood at the casement some ime, befoie the increasing light enabled icr to discern the battlements of the cas- ¡jtle, and when she could see them, she ¡¡discovered no cause to beheve that the forces of the freebooter had yet been planted before them; indeed she believed ft hardly possible that the attack should be
be made without various sounds reaching her. The dame endeavoured to persuade her to sufler Zachary to go back to the castle,, and make enquiry ; but this ap¬ peared, in every respecr, so openly to be frustrating De Madgirïecourts plan for her securitv« that she would not for an instant admit the idea. " We have no provisions to last us longer than till night/' said the dame. u When that hour arrives/ 1 said Rosa¬ lind, " it will be time enough to think of procuring more ; besides, Lord Rufus İs acquainted with what stock we brought with us, and will doubtless not allow us to remain herein uant: much may occur in the course ofthe next twelve hours." The dame went to breakfast, with an appetite that seemed to bespeak her de¬ termined not to suffer their stores to last beyond the time siie had named, probably from her dread of remaining another night under the same roof with an unburied Scotchman. E 4r Rosalind
5 Rosalind continued.standing? before the window, her mind occupied alternately by the mysterious occurrence of the pre¬ ceding night, and the strange uncertainty of her own fate. Her eyes rested on the grandeur of the scene before her, closed in on every side by distant rocks, whose spiral tops were illuminated by the rays of the rising sun, which was creeping slowly above them into an azure firmament, un* spotteíl by a single cloud. At the fopt of the mountains, bevond the castle, she de- scried a broad stream, which wound amongst the trees that cloathed their sloping sides, and was then seen falling over the crags of a more perpendicular steep ; now it appeared flickering beneath the golden sun-beams; now gliding in a silver current under the shadowing fo¬ liage ofthe woods. The solid mass whicb composed tbe cas¬ tle, gave a feature of the sublimest kind to the landscape ; and the extent of the for¬ tifications, which spread along the plain, appeared
appeared the work of centuries, and seemed to frown defiance on the attempts of an enemy to invade them. As her eye drew nearer home, the ground sparkled beneath the dew-drops gemmed by the sun ; and the song of the sky-lark, flying in circles round the spot where its nest lay concealed, gave a momentary glow to her spirits. About two hours after sun-rise, as her eyes were stretched out towards the moun¬ tains, she perceived a moving body de¬ scending from the summit of one of them, on which the light of the sun restetl with peculiar brightness, and she concluded that it must be a body of troops, whose arms glittered beneath the reflection oi its beams. She called upon Zachary to as^ sist her conjecture, and he confirmed the one she had already drawn. These then, Rosalind concluded, were- the,troops of Allanrod, advancing to their attack upon Rockihount Castle. She en^ e 5 quired
quired of Zachary, at the distance of how many hours inarch they were from it? and he replied, " that they were a good way ^ff* although they seemed so near; for at the foot of the mountain they were now crossing, there ran a river, over which there was no bridge, and which was not İorâahle in that part: thus, on leaching the foot of the mountain, they must turn to the left, away from the cas¬ tle as it were, in order to reach a shallow elbow of the stream wliich they could pass." His account appeared to be a just one; for, in, the course of sometime, Rosalind saw the moving body, on whicli her eyes had been fixed, wind round a knot of trees at the base of the mountain, and disappear from her view. Several hours elapsed, during which no object met,the aching sight of Rosalind ; at length the >faint sound of a trumpet broke the sileuce of expectation. " That is
is our trumpet upon the battlements of the castie," said Zachary; " I wonder whether it will sound again," 44 What if it does?" asked Rosalind, £ ' what will that implv?" ζί A second blast, like the one wehave just heard, Lad\/' he answered, il will announce the approach ofan enemy,." A few minutes passed, and, at their ex- piiation, a second sound, similar to the first, was heaid. *' Was not that somewhat louder?" asked Rosalind. ť< You only heard it plainer," he re turned, tť because the wind happened to* catch it, and send it this way.'* "The attack will soon begin now, I warrant me," added Zachary, after a pause. "Thank Heaven, we are not there!" exclaimed his aunt, " Should those ruf¬ fians conquer, which the saints foibid, we might bave shaied the fate of the Sa¬ bine virgins." E 6 Ever
Ever anxious to fathom the mystery which subsisted between the freebooter Allanrod ancl Lord Rufus, Rosalind began to enquire into the history ofthe former, hoping that Zachary might, in his inter¬ course with the soldiery of the castle, have learnt some particulars relating to him, of wliich the present moment might make him communicative ; but be ap¬ peared to know only the common story— that he was a Scotchman, and .headed a band of fiee boot crs. ťt If the siege is ц-опщ- to begin," said Dame Edili), **do, my Lady, take my advice, ancl let us go down into the cave below for safety; only think of the con- equencc, if any of tîıe wretches should ome this way, and discover our retreat." ** We have noi hing to apprehend from hat," replied Rosalind. " On the level vt «л een us and the ramparts of the castle, ve could discover any one who was ap- locu'hing hither, long before they could liscem us, and it would be then time enough
enough to fly from them to the protection the cavern would afìbrd us. It is also very unlikely that any individual of a troop hke Alburod's, bent on plunder, should turn aside fiom the siege, to wan¬ der to a mean cot like this. Lord Rufus, doubtless, knew us secure in this situa¬ tion, or he would not have placed us in it," she added ; for every apprehension of De Madginecourťs infidelity to her cause had vanished, since the ocular demonstra¬ tion which she had-received of the free-· hooter's troops advancing to the attack of his castle; and she now only wondered what concealed motive could have with¬ held Lord Rufus from delivering so de¬ termined an enemy into the hands of justice* *' Yes, yes, we are safe here," said Za¬ chary ; "if any of them were within arm's length of the cottage, we could es¬ cape them. This trap," kicking his foot against the door at the head of the steps, fading into the cave below, £t hasa spring 5 that
that theycould never find out,and strength can't master it ; for it is so made, that the harder it is pressed upon, the faster it is—· so let them come if they will, say I." The sun was aiready past the meridian, ami the day, which had risen in cloudless splendour, was now become overcast, and seemed to threaten a storm ; the wind had rapidly risen to a considerable height; and the swallow, skimming in uneven mazes, scarcely above the level of the earth, mixed its screams with thé whis¬ tling gust. The clouds moved heavily, and almost imperc'eptibly, along the sky, their weight upborne b) the strength of the breeze, and prepared to fall in torrents upon the earth, as soon as they should lose its sustaining aid. " Hark 1" crietl Zachary, suddenly, " there they go!" - " What?—What?" asked Rosalind. " A fire from the castle, Lady/' he re¬ plied ; <ť the work's begun." λ Rosalind
Rosalind listened, but heard nothing; and she was inclined to believe, from the appearance of the clouds, that if Zachary had heard any sound, it bad been that of distant thunder, Uow awful is suspense !—How much more tolerable is the hour of actual suf¬ fering, than the period of doubt !—Appre¬ hension swells the worst of evils beyond the magnitude of which we find them in endurance. Rosalind had reasoned with her mind, till her arguments, by repeti¬ tion, had lost all their weight ; and she now beheld futurity, robed in the most. gigantic horrors. "Was it not distant thunder you<hcardr" asked Rosalind. Zachary's countenance indicated that he thought it was not, and also bespoke him in the act of endeavouring to catch a re¬ petition of the sound. In a few moments it was repeated, with' sufficient strength to leave the-less acute senses of Dame Edith no reason to doubt that
hail began to burst, in mingled torrents^ from the skies. With every moment the darkness con¬ tinued to .increase, and the tempest to. grow more violent. Rosalind begged that a lamp might be lighted, and Dame Edith warmly seconded her proposition. Za¬ chary accordingly proceeded to strike a light. " Now, for Heaven's sake, my Lady," said the dame, "dobe persuaded» and kt m go down into the grotto ; should our lamp be seen by any of tbe assailants, it may betray us to" them, and We cannot ^ now, as we could in the day-time, be apprised of their approach by our eye¬ sight" . , β Rosalind concurred in the dame's opi¬ nion, and declared herself willing to com¬ ply with her request,'Zachary having pro¬ mised to take his station at the head of the steps, that he might catch the passing sounds, vvhich was au indescribable conso¬ lation that Rosalind could not be induced to
to give up ; as she drew conjectures from each that was heard respecting tbe pro¬ gress of Allanrod's attack, although she could not at tbe same time forbear con¬ fessing to herself, how inaccurate, in all probability, were her ideas, founded on so deceitful a basis, The lamp being lighted, they rose to quit the apartment for the grotto below ; as they were moving towards it, the tlame, in passing the door ofthe room in which lay the inanimate object of Rosalind's charity, and which Zachary had opened, to fetch from thenGe the steel and flint, * uttered a loud scream, and would have precipitated herself down the steps before her, but for the interposition oi her ne¬ phew, who caught her in his arms. For some moments the dame's eye-balls appeared fixed with terror, and all her ef¬ forts to speak proved fruitless ; at length — u Oh, lieaven, save us!" she cried, " some judgment awaits us. Heaven save us Г
1 us !" she repeated, " I saw him wave his dead hand at me." For the first time İn her life, Rosalind was moved by the superstitious fears of another person ; she shuddered at the fact tbe datne had advanced, and, instead of smiling at her idea, as she would at any other time have done, she moved hasti 1 ν up to Zachary, upon whom she looked, not less as a comforter, at that moment, than she regarded the lamp which he held in his hand. The dame persisted in what she had ad¬ vanced ; the dead man, she resolutely declared, had waved to her his hand, as she had passed the door of the room where he lay, and she hurried down the steps, entieating Rosalind to follow her. Rosa¬ lind complied, but no sooner had she gained the bottom, than tlie folly of lis¬ tening to the terrors oť her companion struck her, and she felt half inclined to go up again, and resolve herself whether there
there were indeed any remaining life in him whom she had believed dead. " He is not alive," cried the dame, " I am certain ; his corpse is bewitched—in the name of the blessed Jesus, go not near him. Oh that you had not let him into the cottage !—Some punishment awaits us, for the kindness you have shewn to the enemies ofour good Queen," A clap of thuuder rolled with tremendous loudness at that instant over the grotto, and Dame Edith declared that she heard a groan from the chamber above, notwithstanding the violence of the crash. Rosalind was now strongly led to be¬ lieve, that life might not have been entirely flown from the unhappy man above, when they had thought it so, and that timely assistance might still recover him ; and she declared, that she would take Zachary with her, and go and examine into the truth of the dame's fears. The dame wept, shrieked, and implored her not to commit this rashness ; but Ro¬ salind
sal ind could not be withheld, by any per¬ sonal apprehension, from an act of duty, and was resolute in ascending the steps. Dame Edith saw her determination, and, fearing not less for her safety above, than she did for her own, in being left alone below, after her recent alarm, she shrieked her commands, in so forcible a tone, to Zachary to shut the door at the top of the steps, for the sake of the soul and body of the Lady Rosalind, entrusted to their care, that he complied rather from sur¬ prise than actual intention of obedience to his aunt, and fastened the spring be¬ yond his power to unfix it again.
CÍIAľ.
■¿■.„..JJJ
CHAP. V. 1 wilt advise you where to plant yourselves, Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time, The moment on't—for't must be done to-night. МАСВЕТУ. MOSALIND was not satisfied that the spring was immoveable-, till she had as¬ certained, with her own hand, that it was so; and*- sbe then descended again into the grotto. Neither the sounds of the thunder, nor of the musketry at the castle, lost auy part of their strength by being heard in », the grotto, and both continued to rage with unabatiug ferocity. With
With çvery moment the unpleasantness of Rosalinds situation continued to in¬ crease. The dame persisted in the cause oflier alarm not having been ideal. The insensible Zachary, unmoved by surround¬ ing circumstances, was sinking to sleep ; and the oil, which fed the solitary flame that cheered their dismal abode, was al¬ most wasted. The dame's fears were wound to a pitch of uneontroulable terror at the idea of the darkness iu which they must soon be inevi¬ tably involved, ancl wept aloud. Rosalind stood too much in need of comfort lierself, to be able to bestow anyon her companion, thus continued to sit in painful silence. Presently the thunder began to die away in scarcely audible murmurs, and the sounds ofthe musketry were no longer heard in lengthened echoes through the cavern, as they had a few minutes before been. ** Now then," thought Rosalind, "the die is casti" Anxiously did she"* pant for information of the event of the siege
siege from Lord^ Rufus, and as the hour crept on, and no footstep was heaid ap¬ proaching towards the grotto, she began to dread that tbe ruthless Államod was the conqueror. The lamp gave a dying flash, and ex¬ pired. A general silence prevailed. The dame, whO'4iad been afraid of stirring from her seat, even while the lamp; was still burn¬ ing, appeared to be now feaiftii even òf hearing the sound of her own voice; her stifled sobs were alone audible, and the unfortunate daughter of De Mowbray sat, worn by expectation, till she almost lost tbe faculty of thought. *·* At length the sound of distant voices played upon the air, but whether they proceeded from thè plain without the cot¬ tage, or from tbe subterraneous passage, Rosalind could not for some time distin¬ guish. In a shbrt time footsteps were mingled with the voices, and the rays of' vol. iii. f approaching
approaching torches already gleamed on tbe vaulted roof of the grotto. Scarcely were these discernible, ere the page, Alwin, was seen running towards the grotto. " Fly, Lady Rosalind ; fly to the fields for succour !" he exclaimed, as he entered it. " A Han rod is the con¬ queror—Lord Rufus. himself in chains— Your retreat, by some villainous treachery, is discovered to the freebooters, and his ruffian band already presses on my heels in search of you." " Then save me, Heaven ľ' exclaimed Rosalind, her hands clasped, and extended towards the power in whom her only hope was placed. " Fiy, fly, ï entreat you," continued Alwin, running up the steps towards the door into the cottage. " The spring is fastened '."he exclaimed, on reaching it— " ihen submission is alone left you/* These words were scarcely uttered, ere a number ofthe freebooters, some bearing arms,
arms, others carrying torches, burst into the grotto. Thè sight struck horror to the heart of Rosalind ; and, falling upon her knees before them, she exclaimed— "Oh, save mè I—save me ľ' —from Aí lan- rod, she would have added, but the words died on her lips. '* Fear nothing, fair Lady,"said one of the foremost, raising her as he spoke from the ground ; "the powerful Allan rod sends you joy by us. The conqueror commands ns to lead you to him in the chapel of Rockmount Castle, where he awaits to make you the wedded partner of his vic¬ tory and wealth." "Tell your conqueror," replied Rosa¬ lind, " that I would sooner he awaited nie there to entomb me, living, in the dust beneath his feet, than for the hated act you set a praise upon—tell bim, that Rosalind de Mowbray dares him to violate the rights of her existence, who is under the immediate protection of her sovereign Queen." f 2! The
The exertion of uttering these words, which she had spoken with a pretended courage, overpowered her, and as she ceased to speak, the tears burst from her eyes. ** You find, by the present instance," returned one of the men, who had some¬ thing in his appearance superior to the rest, " that the protection of your Queen is not so powerful or extensive as that which Allanrod is able to afford you; it were therefore wisdom \n you, Lady, to let this proof of his superiority open your eyes to the honour be intends you." * " You know me little,** replied Rosa¬ lind, " if you suppose that it is in the power of any sophistry to win my heart into becoming the willing partner of one, of.whose criminality I have every convic¬ tion, as I have of Ailanrocľs; if, therefore, your leader believes to meet in me a woman who will bend in humility before him, because the adventitious fortune of a inoment makes him a lawless conqueror, forbear,
forbear, fbr his sake, as it is evident you value not mine; to lead me into his pre* ьепсе— he he ever so great, I carry with me a mortification foi\bis pride.'* " We must obey," returned the free¬ booter; and he and one *of his companions then began to force her along the cavern. 4ť You are not the first of your sex, Lady, he has had to deal with, " observed one of the men. " Perhaps you mean to imply," said Rosalind, calmly, "that he owes his nanle for prowess to the unfeeling conduct Whicli he exercises towards our sex. " " #ow, Lady i ,J returned the man. " It is a natural conclusión,'* answered Rosalind, " that the wicked man should be unfeeling." " He is not cruel, unless opposition to his wishes drives him to hasty actions,*' returned the soldier. " A glorious character you give him/' replied Rosalind ; "he is just so little óf a tyrant, as to be able to act with lenity f 3 towards
towards those who do not thwart his wishes." *' For your own sake," rejoined the man, "moderate your expressions; re¬ member that you are in his power." " That Ido not allow," returned Rosa¬ lind; ** my soul and my opinions he can never bend to his detested purposes. Let his brutality extend to what lengths it may, he can never enjoy the triumph of having subdued my heart. When he has bent me to his villainous ends, whatever they may be, or taken from me a life, which is already a burden to me, «what can he boast of having done ?—tortured with his brutality, a form of mouldering clay, cast in the weak impression of a wo¬ man, whose mind could not be conquered even by the savageness of his cruelties, and whose resolution baffled the triumph ofhis enormities." Her conductors continued to lead her on towards the extremity of the subterra- »eous passage^ and thence she was made to
to retrace the steps which had led her to the grotto, through the mouldering ceme¬ tery, and ruinous chapel. The shadow, whicli had flitted before her eyes the last time she had passed through the vaults, returned to her imagination, but nothing now met ber sight, except various im li¬ vid uals of the freebooter's band. Having passed tbrough the secret door in the wainscot paneling, which opened into the long and vaulted aisle that con¬ nected the ruinous chapel with the castle, they continued to ťnove on through va¬ rious turnings and windings, which were terminated by a flight of stone steps. On reaching these, all the freebooter^, buí the two who led Rosalind, remained below ; by the two who held her, she was con¬ strained to ascend the steps, and, arrived at the top, one of her conductors pushed back on its hinges a heavy door, which they entered. Numerous torches had hitherto accom¬ panied their progress from the grotto, and, j? 4 for
for a moment, utter darkness appeared to Rosalind to have usurped the place of the streaming lights which had so lately been shedding their vivid influence around her; but in a very short time a couple of lamps, suspended from the roof of the building she was now in, just served to point out to lier, that it vvas a place appointed for religious uses. She distinguished a lofty marble tomb on which, as she passed, the partial light from one of the lamps fell, and she discerned tbe name ofEloise ; she doubted not but.that de ta Valois had followed; but neither ^e light, nor the ha^ty pace sbe was moving at, were fa¬ vourable for observation. The lamps were hung at some distance from each other, and as she was now moving in the intermediate space between them, a confused medley of pillars and mou umen ts, shaded «by the pervading gloom, were alone d^ceruihle. As she con¬ tinued to proceed, by the biflutnice ofthe second lamp, which fell on the objects she was
was approaching, she saw a semicircle of railing in brass, in the centre of which a part of the workmanship swung back on hinges to form a passage towards an altar, which was raised a few feet beyond it in the depth of a stone recess. By the side of this altar she perceived standing a priest, before whom lay an open volume. "Here," said one of the borderers, *' our Lord, Allanrod, will shortly appear, to claim the hand which ensines the feli¬ city of his future life." The horror tëhich assailed Rosalind's mind—the peculiarity as well as the cru¬ elty of her situation, choked her utte¬ rance. For some time she endeavoured, m vain, to speak ydat length, with diffi¬ culty, ehe faintly breathed out—"Priest, I charge thee, by thy hopes of Heaven, he not an accomplice in this act of kifamy !" No sooner had she spoken, than distant footsteps, the echoes of which played » & through
through the chapel, drew her eyes to the spot from whence they proceeded, and she perceived, approaching towards her, a man oftall stature, and ofa robust frame; he was clad in the Highland habit, and every part of his dress bespoke him a Scottish freebooter, except that on his head he wore an English helmet, of which the visor was down. *' This, Lady," said the freebooter, who had before spoken, " is the great Allan rod." Rosalind felt her strength gradually ι dying away; she gazed, but conld not speak. Al Ian rod approached towards her, and, in silence, placed himself by her side. Every object danced before the eyes of Rosalind, and she felt as in a lethargic tiance, from which she had not the power to awake herself. Allanrod waved his hand to the priest, wbo instantly began to read the ceremony that ACas to unite her to the wretch into whose power &hc had fallen. Again
Again she endeavoured to speak, but her efforts were more ineffectual than be¬ fore ; a faint exclamation of horror alone was she able to articulate. The priest proceeded, and Allanrod took the hand of Rosalind in his ; at the mo¬ ment be touched it, an unknown voice proclaimed — " Hold ! Monster, hold !" and at the next instant a figure, iu black armour, whose countenance was pale and emaciated, save where a streak of blood ran down its left cheek, stood between them. " Oh, God !" exclaimed Allanrod, and sunk into the arms of hi* attendants wlio had followed him to the altar. Rosalind turned her eyes upon the figure ; a sbrií к bur&t from her lips, and all sense fled from her.
f 6 CHAP.
CHAP. VI. I know a discontented gentleman, Whose humble means match not his haughty mind ; Gold were as good as twenty orators, And wili, no doubt, tempt him to any thing. XING RICHARD UI. W E have hitherto scarcely spoken of Edward since the hour of his departure from England, except to mention the in¬ telligence which Lord William de Mow¬ bray professed himself, about a year from tlie present time, to have received of his death. It now becomes us to recur to the period of liis setting out for Flanders, and to enquire into the correctness of this
this information, and the events which had marked his life since his leaving Cumberland. It will doubtless be remembered, that Rosalind saw her Edward no moie· atter the night which made her his wife; that onthe day subsequent to this event, Lord William brought her intelligence of his departure with a levy of troops for Flan¬ ders, and alledged, as the reason of his not hav ing visited her previously to his leaving the country, the apology wbich -slie had on the prior eveniug urged as an excuse for ι ef using to see Lord Rufus de Mad- ginecQurt—"thatshe was not well enough to receive vbitors;" and which sentence the Baron de Mowbray pretended that he had supposed must extencf equally to every individual. On the morning subsequent to that night which had made Edward the hus¬ band of his beloved Rosalind, Irwin ar¬ rived at early morn at ihe tower iu the village, and inlbrnied him, thatLojd YVib- 5 Наш
liam bad just received a command from the court, to dispatch a levy of his own private troops to join the army which was on the point of embarking for Flan¬ ders ; aiid that he had resolved on send¬ ing one hundred of his stoutest men, of which he gave the command to Edward, who was ordered to be ready to depart within three hours. Mingled were the sensations with which Edward recen eel this mandate from Lord William. To leave his Rosalind at that moment, although hehad placed it beyond the power of fate to give her lawfully*to the arms of Lord Rufus, occasion etl him a re¬ gret, which the honour conferred on him, in the command of the company over which he was placed, could not balance ; still bis eternal honour, his only chance of promotion in arms, and progress to¬ wards glory—the only attainments by which he could ever hope to advance suf¬ ficiently into the favour of the Baron de Mowbray, to be acknowledged by htm as his
his son-in-law, were at stake. At the present moment, any hesitation on his part would for ever condemn him,; ac¬ cordingly nothing remained for him but to accept the command with apparent cheerfulness. Thus convinced, iiis good sense over¬ came every latent, lingering wish of re¬ maining on the spot he now stood on, and he directly proceeded to the castle, to re¬ turn hU thanks to its Lord, for the ho- nour contened on him, in his promotion to the command of the body of men de¬ voted to foreign service, and to bid him farewell previously tohis departure. Lord William received him with that complacency which was necessary to gloss over bis self interested views in sending him out of the kingdom ; and when Ed¬ ward made a request to kneel at the feet of the Lady Rosalind, and receive her good wishes for the success of his arms, De Mowbray artfully replied, that it was with regret he was compelled to ι efuse his petition,
petition, but that Rosalind was much in¬ disposed, and had particulaily desired that no one should, on any cause whatever, be admitted to her apartment. Edward durst not advance the only plea on which he might have enforced his petition, and with a heavy heart, pro¬ nouncing a silent blessing on her name, he was constrained to place himself at the head of "his men, and begin his melan¬ choly march. The heart of Lord William de Mowbray bounded with triumphant joy. when the refulgent blades of the soldiery, headed by the devoted Edward, no longer cast their reflection on the plains of Cumber¬ land. A sigh of ecstacy escaped from his bosom, and he mentarlly exclaimed— βί Farewell, bane to the pride of my house !—Farewell, thou minion ofa fond, Ibolish daughter !" The Baron had yet to kam thať the indissoluble knot of love was tied between those bosoms, which had only virtue and affection for their guide ;
guide; and the unfortunate pair, thus united in love, were still ignorant, that the machinations of a pride-devoted fa¬ ther had driven Edward, as he hoped, for ever, from the presence of her in whose sight alone he lived. Little imagining that his daughter had possessed the firmness of soul to repair to herself his neglect of her dying mother's petition to him, " to give her Rosalind to the nian of her heart," he had vainly judged, that Edward, once- removed from her sight, time and his arguments would be efficacious in removing him equally from her tlioughts ; and that when he was once rooted out from them, it would be by no means a difficult· matter to place Lord Rufus in his vacated seat ; for this reason, therefore, had >Lord William given to Edward the command of the hundred men chosen for foreign 'service, as the most ready and least suspicious method of sending- him out of the kingdom-~an honour which belonged by right to his elder
elder chieftains, and which, but for this secret cause, had doubtless been theirs. And here Lord William intended to have stopped, trusting either to the conti¬ nuation ofthe war for detaining Edward abroad till Rosalind should have been prevailed on to receive Lord Rufus as her husband, or to the accidents of the field, for precluding the possibility of his ever returning at all. JBut when the suffering Rosalind disclosed to him that she was already a wife—the wife of an unknown —the wife of the foundling, Edward î Lord William, for the first time, expe¬ rienced a proof of that power which the insignificant sometimes possess of over¬ throwing the greatest plans of those who conceive themselves the most mighty ; and in the first heat ofhis rage, he determined on the immediate death of him, whom he wanted strength of invocation to curse witb the emphasi 3 he desired to condemn him. But his idea of depriving Edward ofhis life,
life, was soon overruled by various consi¬ derations which crowded on his mind ; principally he reflected on the expression of *' nobler which old Matthews had used on his death-bed, in reference to his young charge, and which the Baron had always felt a doubt in determining whe¬ ther it had been applied to his mind or his birth. If it had referred to the latter, the time might come when the youth might be reclaimed by his family, from the bo¬ som of which, perhaps, some mysterious circumstances had hitherto shut him out ; and should the progress of his life, in such case, bc traced by those anxious for his welfare and existence, and its thread bc discovered to bave been cut, by him, (for the, grave itself is not alwavs silent, and foul deeds will sometimes speak, thougii there be no tongues to tell of tbem) what would not be his disgrace, his punish¬ ment, for the act into which his hasty in¬ temperance had driven him ! Thesethoughts sunk deeply into his mind—and terrified out
'oul ofhis plan by the chimeras of his brain, for the most determinei! villains have their moments of fear, he resolved, by some other means than death, to prevent Ed* ward from ever returning hack to England. Edward meanwhile pursued his journey, unsusptciousof any fraud practising against him, but that which had ostensibly torn him from the arms of his beloved Rosa· Jind. The company which he headed embarked from England, and landed, after a prosperous voyage, at Ostend; in the neighbouihood of which place they were encamped, amidst various other troops, just landed from England. When the tower of strength was first begun to be erected in the village, of which the scattered roofs ^reared their humble heads in the valley which ran at the foot of an amphitheatre of hills, on the sum¬ mit of the highest of which stood the proud castle of t)e Mowbray, engineers were sent by the Queen from London, for the purpose of constructing its foun¬ dation.
dation. When the building was com¬ pleted, and the task, for which the work¬ men had,been hired, concluded, two of the number enlisted themselves into the service of Lord William, as pioneers. Of these two meta, neither was English ; the one was a rude and ignorant Cam¬ brian—the origin of the other it was not so easy to define. His father had been a Spaniard, bis mother a Frenchwoman; they had been stragglers for the greater part of their lives over the face of the globe, and had ultimately settled in the Netherlands, as the keepers of a prison. The name by which he called himself was Sanchez Xavia ; at the age of manhood, he'had been cast upon the world by his parents, to fight his way through life, ac¬ cording to his own confession, not as a leward for his good conduct previously to that time. He had entered into the ser¬ vice of an Irish gentleman of fortune, in France, and returned with him to hisown country ; no very honourable occurrence, it
it appeared, had driven him from that si¬ tuation. To England he had wandered during the preceding reign, and here there existed a stronger proof than suspicion, of his having assisted in the barbarous executions of murdered martyrs, which will for ever stain the memory of Elizabeth's predecessor, and render her claim un¬ doubted, to the bloody fame under which her memory lives. How be had lived, without punishment, till nearly his sixtieth year, as he' had done, is one of those enigmas which puz¬ zle the good, while the evil are unsensible that their preservation is not their just and merited clue. Too often is it the case in life, that those who deserve to be repro¬ bated by their fellows, gain their esteem ; while such as truly merit approbation from the world, are obliged to rest con¬ tented with the single applause of their own heart. Tbis instance is peculiarly ex¬ emplified in the cases of Hubert* and Sanchez Xavia. The rough, but honest, • IT ii net·i>
Hubert, was constantly saluted with the epithet of " Surly," and found but few who sought his companionship ; while the smooth tongue, and smiling countenance, of the rascally Sanchez, gained him a nod of welcome, and a friendly shake by the hand, wherever he went. So true is it that the majority cast their eyes no far¬ ther than the surface, and that the skilled in art are well acquainted that appearance is accepted by the multitude for reality* Sanchez Xavia had particularly requested ofthe Baron de Mowbray, that he might be one of the pioneers included in the number of men under the command of Edward. " His father and mother were both dead, but he had," he said, " a bro¬ ther, on whom the government of the prison which had lately been held by his father, had devolved, and he wished to see him, now an opportunity offered of so doing, without expence to himself. " That lie was going to fight against the country of which his father and mother had, by residence,
residence, become subjects, he cared not ; war was his trade, and therefore İt was in¬ different to bim where and against whom he exercised İt. He was not cruel from disposition, but fronr interest—he would not have dealt a painful blow to any one which he had not been paid to do ; but he would hire himself to the performance of any action whatsoever, and having once let himself to perform it, most religiously did he act up to the interest of his- em¬ ployer. Although we-have seen, in tlie instance of Hubert, that Lord William de Mow¬ bray could be mistaken in his opinion of character, still the fawning villainy of Sanchez was of too common a cast for a man, of even a less acute perception than Lord William, to be deceived iu ; rumour had also whispered in his ear, that gold was the deity of Sanchez, and that he religiously observed his tenets of faith towards those who showered it on him. His recoUection of Sanchez, at the pre"* sent
sent moment, was a most assuasive balm to the feelings ofthe pride-wounded Lord ; he united with the apt character of San¬ chez, to stratagem, the convenient strong¬ hold of the prison of which his brother was keeper; and doubted not that an an¬ nuity, equivalent to the charge imposed on them, would render both the brothers willing to find the means of decoying Ed¬ ward into its recesses, and retaining him their captive for the term of his existence. His heart leapt with exultation at the idea ; he doubted not a ready affirmative to his plan from Sanchez. What alone distressed him, was the means of malting known bis scheme, and the price be was willing to pay for its performance, to him whom he desired to appoint the instrument of it, without the hazard of a discovery of his intentions, or without leaving on re¬ cord a paper of his own hand-writing, containing his black purposes; wliich, by some gust of chance or fortune, might damn him as the actor of so nefarious a proceeding. дц*г irr, о After
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. After much deliberation with his own mind, he decided on leaving his castle „ for a short time, under pretence of his presence being required by the Queen, to cross the sta unattended, and to see Sanchez Xavia himself. His absence he commanded to be kept a profound secret from bis daughter ; anrf her mind, occu¬ pied with matter of nearer import to her own happiness, made not that enquiry relative to a father, from whose hand she had received the mortal stab to her feli¬ city, to Subject her to the fallacy which liad been preparer!» as a reply to such question, bad she advanced it. The Baron accordingly left his castle, and having disguised himself as a man of mean rank, be proceeded without delay to the coast, and securing himself a pas¬ sage on board a ship bound to the conti¬ nent, was soon landed there. On reaching Ostend, the Ikron took up his abode at a little inn on the side of the town nearest to the camp, and here concealing himself till the shades of even- big
ing began to fall, he dispatched a messen¬ ger to the English camp, to summonj Sanchez to his presence, No sooner didj Sanchez perceive who, was tbe strângeri that had sent to seek him, than his artful; brain prophecied, tbat there must be some secret cause for the Baron's having un¬ dertaken the voyage; and a mutual expla¬ nation quickly took place between them» on which they parted, fully satisfied with the promises of each other.
о à CHAP
CHAP. VJI.
Could great men thunder As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet ; For every pelting, petty officer, Would use his Heatfen for thunder ! Nothing but thunder í Merciful Heaven ! Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt Spltt'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak, Than the soft myrtle. But man !—proud man ! Drest in a Uttle brief authority, Mt át ignorant of what he's most assux'd. His glassy essence—like an angry ape, Plays such fantastic tricks before high Heaven, Ås make the angels weep. MEASURE FOR ?.ASO»E·
j JN the following day, when the exer- |ses of the morning were concluded, San- \ex. approaching his captain, said—*' Sir, I have
I have a booh to request of you."—"Name it," Edward replied.'—" Do you not, Sir," said Sanchez, «' behold that build¬ ing on yon distant hill?"—" Yes," an¬ swered Edward ; " what is it? it appears both strong and large."—"And so it is," rejoined Xavia; ** it is a prison wheie captives of a superior order are kept—my biother is the governor of it. To-morrow is his wedding-day ; he is about to many a rich widow of Ostend, and if you would condescend to grace his nuptials with your presence, he \Vould.deem İt a high honour conferred on him. Your brother officers will also be Invited, as he wishes to be in amity with all the British troops. · I have besides ţo request leave of absence-for myself from my regiment, for the day > that I may be present at the ceremony." Edward smiled inwardly at this invita¬ tion from the keeper of a prison ; but, aware how essential aie friends of any description, İn a country which we enter as enemies, he agreed on the following g 3 day
day to partake of the wedding-dinner of Garcías Xavia. "My brother, Gentlemen," said San¬ chez, addressing his officers, "isin a very different situation of life to myself; his place, as governor of the prison, is worth several hundred pounds a-year to him ; and the lady, whom he is* going to marry, is worth an annuity equal to his own — every child of the same mother has not the same good fortune/' At the hour of invitation, Edward aud his brother ofiicers, conducted by Sanchez, repaired to the governor's, for by that ap¬ pellation only was he known in the coun¬ try. As they approached nearer to the prison, every feature bespoke strength, and every part of its construction seemed to bid defiance to the captive to escape from its holds. Tbe building itself stood on the summit of a rocky hill, whose sloping sides fell into a deep moat, from the centre of which arose a fìtnty wall, of al least fifteen feìt in height; thus, while the
the prison appeared utterly unprotected, its situation, on the crown of a summit, rendered escape impossible, as every step which was set from the building only suuk the passenger still lower beneath the outer wall, which it had been rendered by art an impracticable labour to climb. Having passed the outer gate, the go¬ vernor met them as they ascended tbe hill ; he was a man of a handsome person, and appeared to be at least ten years younger than his brother. His address was polite and easy : and, in the words of a gentleman, he thanked them for the honour they conferred on him by their presence. He ushered them intoa handsome apart¬ ment, where he introduced them to his newly*married bride, a middle-aged wo¬ man, whose appearance had in it nothing remarkable, and a number of guests, of both sexes, who all bore the marks of being persons of some condition in life : but the most interesting personage of the о 4 party,
party, M'as the daughter of her who was that day become Madame Xavia, by her first husband. Belise, for such was her name, had just completed her nineteenth year ; her figure, although not tall, was beautiful in the extreme— her countenance was handsome, and nul of expression— her dark brown eyes conveyed in them sensibility, soul, a*id good humour—and her hazel tresses flowed in the most luxu¬ riant ringlets on her delicate bosom. The repast was handsome and profuse : of the many apartments which were in use, not oue bore the slightest mark of its affinity to a prison ; and Sanchez himself, although admitted to the feast, as the brother ofthe donor, retired with humility to the bottom of the table, and forbore to intrude his conversation upon the guests of the governor. Sanchez was indifferent about tbe dissimilitude of situation be¬ tween himself and Garcías : the villainy which he was hatching against the unsus¬ picious Edward, produced him inward t , gratification,
gratification, 'equal to'what his brother derived from the acquisition of property which had attended his marriage, and the guests of distinction which he saw placed round his table. Nor was Garcías himself, although thus wealthy, much' less delighted than his brother, at tlie idea of some in¬ crease' to the income which hc already possessed being ahout to flow to him from the intended captivity of Edward ; for rare is the instance when*the rich do not delight in the idea of becoming richer still, whatever the means which are to make them so. It appears unnecessary to say, that the brothers bad already held a private confe¬ rence upon the agreement which had been made between the Lord Baron de Mow» bráy and Sanchez Xavia· relative to the imprisonment of Edward, and that their plan had already been laid for preventing hím from leaving the walls of the prison, where he was now entertained as a wedding guest; to whieh feast he and his brother o Ô offîcm
officers had been invited» solely to colour over tbe treachery which was to be exe¬ cuted upon him befoie the arrival of mid¬ night. When the repast was ended, and the cheerful glass " went round the table, the smiling Belise was requested to produce her lute, and^indulge the party, by ac¬ companying its tones with her voice. With that readiness which bespoke a wil- liugness to oblige, rather than a conscious ness of excellence, slie immediately took up her instrument, and sang the following words—
As teaming o'er hh fountain hung» Two infants wandei'd by ; The eldest boy, was Gen'as nanťd/ The other, Industry. Beneath the stream, they had been told,. A treasure lay conceaľd ; So both plung'd ¡n to gain the prize, The waters wťre to yield. Fitm
Firm Industry kept diving on, Nor turn'd aside his ey« j While Genius swam across the tide, To catch a golde n fly t With joy the insect he ensnares, Rut ah ! his pleasure ñies ! When mounting from the deep, he sees industry with the prize.
Every one present complimented Belise, not less on the sweetness of her voice, than the subject of her song; and wheni it was understood that the music and words were both her own composition,, their encomiums were greatly iucreased.. Relise happened to be placed at table? next to Edward, and his commendations were amongst the warmest bestowed on, the fair songstress ; for there was some*- thmg m her voice and expression, whicli so strongly reminded him of his absente Rosalind,, tha-t every pulse in his compos о 6 sition
sition glowed under the words which flowed from her tongue. ' ín return tohis compliments, she said— tc My song contains a simple truth ; I have ever remarked through life, at least as far as I have had experience for my years, tbat perseverance always gains us the accomplishment of sueh desired ends as the too ardent and impetuous mind fails to obtain for jtself." ! " May thy words be prophetic, fair maiden," thought Edward; " may the' lingering hand of destiny still reward my perseverance with the happiness of being acknowledged the lawful protector oi my beloved Rosalind ! ,? Ať this idea a sigh ^escaped him. v « " Let me fill your glass, Sir," said Be¬ lise; "you are melancholy. Have ypu khe head-ache, or the heart-ache ?*'* Edward made some common-place apo·* logy for his absence, arfd emptied his glass Ito the health of his lively companion. "It
"It is not the h¿ad-áehe," went oa Belise, " or you would not take your wine thus freely; therefore it must be the heart ache, and what can cause tbat in so young a man as yourself? It must surely be love—am I right?" " Ifit be so, I must not be a tell-tale of tny love," ìeplied Edward, endeavour¬ ing to force a smile, " or I should be un¬ deserving a return of my passion." "That is very well said," answered Belise, significantly ; "but you should put the same restraint upon your eyes that you do upon your tongue—they are tell· tale*) in spite ofyour precaution." " And suppose I were to assure you I was not in love at all ?" replied Edward. " Them I should j>ay," returned Belise, " that the air of this prison has infected you with melancholy ; it has me already, I freejy confess. I love my mother, and have no great dislike to the man whom she lias- taken for her second husband ; but L feel extremely averse to the neces¬ sity
sity I am under, from my dependence upon my mother, oi being the inhabitant of this gloomy building., i have visited every part of it, once only, and I hope I shall never do so again, for it is piteous indeed to see the unhappy persons who are immured within its walls ; they have certainly every comfort which cantivity can bestow, but what are all the luxuries it can give, compared -with the privation of liberty, and absence from those con¬ nexions which form the chaFms of life, and without which existence is a blank, nay a misery ?" '* Your feelings,*' said Edward "aresuch as do infinite credit to your heart." *' I would 1 had the free exercise of them," replied Belise, "and there should not be a prisoner within these walls. Oh ·' it is dreadful to see those in affliction, to whom the power is denied us of alleviati n g their sufferings." " This building is however of such ex¬ tent," returned Edward, " that you will not
not be constrained to see those whom you pity." ** I shall equally think of them," an¬ swered she; " and I am sure no threats of my father-in-law will ever deter me frora rendering them every assistance in my powers When I see men in misfortune, I cannot help forgetting the cause from which they are doomed to suffer, and re¬ membering only that they are in a situa¬ tion which deserves the commiseration of the benevolent, and the wuccouring hand of such as are able to extend it towards their misfortunes." The sentiments of Belise opened a way for her into the nobie heart of Edward, and he listened to her conversation with the utmost pleasure and interest. " I have myself," he said, *' in many in¬ stances, been the child of mibfortune from niy cradle ; and having known how ac¬ ceptable tq a heart of giief is the sym¬ pathy of those on whom we have no other claim than the common tie ui humanity, 5 1 have
I have learnt the respect clue to feelings which are so highly honourable to the breast that cherishes them, " " This," said Belise, £< is not the exact moment fora conversation of this nature; we must tiefer its conclusion to some other opportunity, or our gravity will seem to cast a reflection upon the wed¬ ding we are celebrating. The dance is going to begin—lei us enjoy the plea¬ sure which the hour pi esen ts us with." The party was now rising ffofa table, and in the course of half an hour, the dyncing began in an adjoin i п ь apartment, Edward regarded it as a necessary com¬ pliment to his entertainers, to take a share in the dance, а»ч! accordingly selected Belise for his partner. The amusement they weie joining iii did not admit-of tbeir conversing m uch together while thus employed; and when the dances, for which Edward had engaged her hand, were con¬ cluded, another partner directly claimed her attention. Edward
Edward was far from being in spirits to enjoy an evening of this festive nature ; he felt it a painful exertion to go through the ceremony ofa single dance, even with the engaging Belise for his partner—thus he had resolved to dance no more, and moved towards the door of the apartment for air. Here stood in conversation the two brothers, Sanchez and Garcías ; Ed¬ ward joined them. Sanchez directly began to speak ofthe immensity of the building they were in, and to direct Edward's at¬ tention to various architectural points about it; one remark naturally pioduced another, and Edward expressing his sur¬ prise at the elegant apartments w hich he had that day seen connected with a pri¬ son, the governor began to explain to him that it was a prison of a superior order, merely used for cdminals of rank, and upon a widely different construction to such buildings as were usually distin¬ guished by that name. Sanchez seconded what his brotlier had said, and added, " If you
you please, Sir, to walk with me a few minutes, ï am sure my brother will give you his permission to take a view of its different parts ; and it İs well worth your while so to do— İ will answer that you have never before seen a building at all resembling this. I have visited the prin¬ cipal prisons in England myself, and the difference is great indeed." Edward's curiosity was raised by these remarks, and he accepted the offer made him of gratifying it. The season of tbe year was the latter end of May, and the hour about six in the evening; thus, notwithstanding the gloominess of tbe building, of which the narrow casements admitted but partially and sparingly the rays of day, it was still sufficiently light to allow of the investi¬ gation which Edward had been allowed to make, without the assistance of a lamp. Edward, following his conductor Sanchez, stole, unobserved, from the company in the dan cin g-i oom, and passing through a stone
stone corridor, they arrived at a few steps which led to an iron-grated door, that, Sanchez said, divided that part of the edi¬ fice which was set apart for the governor, from that which was allotted tó the pur¬ poses of imprisonment. They passed on through various passages and apartments, some oi sauue, others of wainscot, differently furnished, and con¬ taining, in different proportions, accom¬ modations and comforts for such as were destined to be their inhabitants. One apartment, or rather cell, particularly ar¬ rested the attention of Edward; itwas evidently a place where the torture was accustomed to be exercised on the un¬ happy victims of bigotry or criminality. At one end was an immense fire-place, which was scattered over with cinders, the remnants of the torturing fire which had scorched the supposed truth from the lips of some unhappy sufferer. In the centre of the apartment stood an iron chair, in which the wretched being had, . doubtless.
doubtless, been seated at the hour of pu¬ nishment ; and on the floor were fastened iron rings, which had been constructed for the purpose of confining his feet. " For Heaven's sake, let us pass on," said Edward ; * e this scene brings to the mind images too terrific for the heart, which is not entirely devoid of feeling, to dwell· upon with any degree of compo¬ sure." " Yes," replied Sanchez, "the torture by fire is bad enough for those who feel it ; it is worsethan being burnt to death —in that case the smoke soon does the business, and takes away all (€61^." * ť You «have then, it ahould seem, been a witness of both instances," rejoined' Eti ward. " Oh, aye," replied Sanchez. " I had my hands charmingly full of business, when Queen Mary indulged her spleen against the Protestant church, by roast¬ ing bishops.*' Edward fixed his eyes for a moment in silent
silent surprise on Sanchez. It had so hap·* pened that those unfavourable rumours of his character, which were whispered in the world, had never met the ear of Ed¬ ward, and this unexpected avowal of his having been an actor in scenes of such violent atrocityJ>oth astonished and vexed him ; nor did tbe confession lose any of the horror which attended it to the mind of Edward, by being made on the spot wbere they now stood, and with which Sanchez seemed to possess all the fami¬ liarity of old, acquaintance. Sanchez smiled at the concern with which Edward regarded even the tacit in¬ struments of punishment, and said, " I see, Sir, your's is a tender hea. t ; pardon me, but such strong feelings, as you ex¬ press, are dangerous sentiments to gain ground in any community. Wliat would become of the good, if the evil were af- lowed to exercise their villainy unpunished ? Your heart recoils at these instruments of punishment, and probably feels a deadly hatred
hatred against the common executioner, whose ofiice it is to rid the world of those whose crimes make them unfit members for existence ; and still it is to them, and to him, that you owe the security and happiness ofyour own life.*' There was undoubtedly truth in this remark, but it was that kind of truth which proceeds from an unfeeling mind. Edward's was indeed, as Sanchez had re· marked, a tender heart ; and he heard, with displeasure, that philosophy which appears an apology for a miud incapable of sensibility. Although these remarks, on the part of Sanchez, had opened to Edward the nature of his heart, still h'e was entirely unsus¬ picious of any treachery being intended towards himself; conscious that he me¬ rited no evil from any existing hand, he feared none, and continued to proceed in his investigation of the prison. Ascend¬ ing another short flight of steps, they ar¬ rived in a stone gallery of about twenty feet
feet in breadth, which they crossed, and entered an apartment handsomely fur¬ nished,, in which was a bed and every ap· pertenance of a becj-chamber ; beyond this was another room of equal dimen¬ sions, and through the latter a closet, where on a table lay scattered some books, and implements for writing, " It is not long since these v rooms were inhabited by a man of rank, " said San* chez; " he has, I understand, been dead only about two months." '* What was the crime for which he was confined here ?" asked Edward. " I believe only that of being one more than his family wished to bave belonging to it, " answered Xavia, with a significant smile. This assertion increased the dislike which 4 the last half-hour had given Edward to Sanchez Xavia ; and he was also surprised that he should so ^suddenly have becpme careless of developing 4he evil sentiments of his heart. ·· I will
" I will entreat you to stay here x a few minutes,*' said Sanchez, " till I get a lamp from an adjoining apartment ; it is growing so dusk, that we shall not be able to retrace our way to the governor*« apartments without a light, much less to pursue our circuit of the building." Edward answered, that he would await his. return, and Sanchez, saying that he -would be back in a minute, departed. Edward was surprised to see him shut the door after him, and still more was he astonished when he heard him double- lock it, and slip a heavy bolt into its socket ; be called aloud to him, enquiring the reason of his so doing, but received no answer; be heard his footsteps dying away as he proceeded along the stone gallery; ancl an universal silence then pre¬ vailed, broken only by his own quick breathings, caused býthe agitation of his mind, at the strangeness of the circum¬ stance just past. CHAP-
CHAP. VIIL I Will despair, and be at enmity With cozening hope : he is a flatterer, A-parasite·— »ichard п. Ill-starred Edward ι thy doom is then sealed ; the tyrant of thy fate holds thee the captive of his triumphant bonds, and exults in the drops of agony which chase each other down ifiy fevered cheek —which spring from thy racked heart, as it dwells on the painful idea that thy Ro¬ salind may never again meet thy embrace. Rut despair not, thou suffering youth : however delayed the hour of retribution, its arrival stiil is certain;rthe hand of voju in. a Cruelty
Cruelty shall wither, when it stretches itself out to execute the master-stroke of its unfeeling.purpose; and the victim of its machinations, although every ray of cheering hope be fled from its heart, shall meet that reward which is indivisible from the firm exercise of virtuous principles. For several hours no step approached the apartments in which the anxious and astonished Edward was confined. At length, the fall of feet was audible, they stopped near the door, and he called aloud to İıave it opened ; no answer was returned, but he heard a creaking noise, and sud¬ denly a lighted lamp appeared in the apartment ; he went up to it, and found that it had been mtroduced into the room by means ofa shelf, which turned upon a pivot in the wall; on the same shelf »was also some fruit and bread in a basket, a flask of wine, atid a pitcher of water. Again Edward called aloud, demanding enlargement; but the steps of the person who had brought him this supply of ne¬ cessaries,
cessaries, hastily receded from the spot, and all was again solemnly silent. Tbe mind of Edward was on the rack ; he had no hesitation in determining why he was made a captive ; not a doubt re¬ mained to him of his marriage with his adored Rosalind having been discoverçd by her father, and of his having taken this method of preventing him from ever leturning to claim her as his wife. To what torments might not she be doomed by a father, whose ruling passion of pride liad met with so unexpected, so severe a disappointment in the resplution of his daughter I he shuddered at the sufferings to which the intemperate rage of the Baron mİ4Îıt have condemned her, and sinking on bis knees, he breathed forth a prayer to Heaven for her preservation and protection. The night was passed by Edward in waking thought ; he augured it the fore¬ runner of a train of others similar to it, and despair almost benumbed his faculties. π 2 "On
On the following morning, the shelf introduced into his apartment a change of linen, and various other articles requi¬ site to the comfort of life; and a paper lying on the top of them, directed him to write for whatever he wanted, and to place his demands upon the shelf, by which means they would be received on the other side, and attended to with the greatest punctuality ; as there was only one thing which was desired to be inter- dieted to him, and that one tbing was his liberty. Well assured that the governor, Garcías, was better paid for his detention than he was able to reward him for his enlarge¬ ment, lie forbore to offer him terms, which he was convinced be should only receive the additional mortification of having re¬ fused. From endeavouring to make any impression on the hearts of his keepers, the sentiments expressed by Sanchez on the preceding e\ ening deterred him. The* 'man who had lately died in those very oi , £ apartments
apartments which he was now doomed to inhabit, Sanchez had said, " was detained a prisoner iu them, only because he was one more than his family wished for." In a place where atrocities of this nature were spoken of with such cool inditTerence, the voice ofthe sufferer could not expect to be attended to, nor the cries of the innocent victim to reach the heart. When the dancing at the governor's broke up, and the brother officers of Ed¬ ward were about to return to the camp, they inquired for him, and not being able to discover him in any ofthe apartments, they concluded him gone forward towards his tent; and departed, satisfied that they should find him already in bed. In passing hi* tent, they enquired of the sentry, whose patrol was before it, whether his captain was returned ? his reply in tiie negative rather surprised them ; but Sanchez, who had followed them from the prison, said, he doubted not but that Edward had been decoyed a 3 to
to the abode of some votary of the Cy¬ prian rites, of which many had their dwel¬ lings in the neighbourhoods and that he would arrive at the camp ere long. Under this idea, the officers returned to thrir respective tents. The morning came, and still Edward had not been seen: every possible enquiry was set on foot concerning him ; and as every effort to discover him pi oved ineffectual, his lieu¬ tenant dispatched to the Baron de Mow* bray intelligence of his disappearance. A speedy answer was returned by Lord William, lamenting· the untimely fate Avhîclı, he pretended to suppose, liad at¬ tended Edward, from his having ventured into dangerous society ; and appointing the lieutenant to the command of the troops, the ensign to his station, and Sanchez Xavia to fill the rauk of the lowest officer now promoted; but upon condition of their being reduced to their former situations, should Edward again appear amongst them; convinced of the impossibility
impossibility of which event, the Lord Baron concluded his eptstte with an ar¬ dent wish that he might still be safe, and his return to his men speedy. This intelligence the Baron took especial care to prevent getting abroad in Eng¬ land ; and it was probably a secret to every breast but bis own. Days and weeks passed on, and as not the slightest information could be gained oť him by any one of his traop on the continent, they concluded him to have. beeji murdered by some robbers, who had despoiled him, as a security against their detection; and as he had never been in the habits of particular intimacy with any one of bis compaiiy t his fate was, for a short time, talked of aud lamented, and in a still shorter, forgotten,, The unhappy Edward, meanwhile, drag¬ ged on existence through a round of months, unmarked, except by despair and agony, A solitary pleasure still attended his captivity; tbe livelong day he would H 4 sit
sit with his eyes fixed on vacancy, and believe the shadow of his Rosalind present to his sight—address the imagined vision, till he almost believed it real—and then, waking from his trance, give way to the most violent expressions of grief and frenzy. To one subject only did the thoughts of Edward wander from his Rosalind, and this was the engaging Belise, the daugh¬ ter-in-law of the governor. Frequently he reflected on the humane disposition which she had evinced in her conversation with bim on the day of her mother's wedding; on the pity which she had ex¬ pressed herself to feel for the captives of the prison; and more particularly on the avowal she had made, that her fear-of the governor's displeasure should never deter her from * rendering any service, which might lie in her power, to such unfortu¬ nates as were tbe prisoners of its relentless walls. Did she know his situation, he doubted not but she would use every me¬ thod
thod in her power to endeavour to pro¬ cure for hiitt his enlargement : should she not succeed, he felt that it would still be an. indescribable pleasure to him, to know that there was a being, possessed of a feeling heart, who was acquainted with his captivity, and would lose no oppor¬ tunity of releasing him from his bonds· But the means of uivin г her such know- ledge, appeared to be entirely removed from his power. Houriv did he rack his brain for schemes to convey to her the information of his captivity—a thousand various plans pre¬ sented themselves to his mind, but upon cool examination he found them all to be impracticable. Were he to write to her, his letter would doubtless be examined, and its contents once known, it would never reach her hands. Were he to send her any present, the motive of it would be enquired into, and any secret it might contain would be discovered, and his pur¬ pose frustrated. h 5 As
As nearly as he could calculate, he had now been confined thirteen months, during which time, no individual being had en¬ tered his apartment, nor had he even beheld a human countenance ; every ne¬ cessary of life, even his fuel, had been conveyed to him by means ofthe turning shelf; frequent questions in writing had been given to him, enquiring whether his Wants were all supplied; but the sound of no voice bad, during- that time, met his ear ; for if he made any demand of the person who came regularly to the shelf, it was not replied to by speech, but a written answer brought to it shortly after. The light was admitted into his apart¬ ments by windows in the roof; but still he conjectured that the rooms he inha¬ bited* were by no means the highest in the building, as he could perceive around his windows high circular walls, whose tops he could not discern ; and therefore con¬ cluded that his rooms were in the centre of the edifice, purposely surrounded'by S ' ; turrets,
turrets, to deprive- the prisoner of the hope of effecting an escape from the case¬ ments. For the first time, it now occurred to him, that the possibility of an escape might present itself to bim, were he to climb up his chimney, and take a survey- from its top ofthe surrounding walls. It was now the month of June, the evenings of course long, and the influence ofa full moon rendered the night itself almost a rival of the day. Ko sooner had this idea entered liis mind, than heresolved to make the attempt; he awaited with. impatience? the hour in the afternoon at which his evening, meal was brought to hiin ; and the steps of the attendant being no longer audible along the stone gallery,. hc stripped himself of his outer garments, and summoning, thať resolution which is given to us "by despair, he. succeeded in* mounting sqmefeet up the channel, which would at least convey him to the light and air, if not to liberty ; for already the beams &6 of.
of day met him as he ascended. But, alas! a few moments cast a damp upon his hopes; an iron grating, fixed across the chimney, baffted equaUy his attempts to remove it, or to crowd his body through its apertures. Disappointed expectation is one of the worst feelings to bear with any degree of complacency of mind. Edward threw himself upon his bed, and, for a while, gave way to fruitless lamentations; fcr the mind of greatest strength may be worn down by calamity, into expressing its sorrows in terms equally devoid of self- con tro ul, as the weakest could use in a similar situation. It is very easy to rea- ,^ son upon the wisdom of resignation, wheu we do not experience the necessity of exercising it ; and equally difficult to call it forth, when we are placed in a situation of trial and affliction. Edward had not a single implement iu his possession, with wbich he conceived it possible for him to wrench the iron grat¬ ing
ing from its holds, and force himself a way to the top of the chimney. His fice had been constantly of wood throughout the winter, and a pair of tongs were all the furniture of his hearth; and theseJ?a4 been so long İn use, that there could be no hesitation in pronouncing them too weak for the task of dislodging the iron grating from its seat in the stone wall. He had no swoid about him, when first trepanned into his present confinement; not a single article was there in his apart¬ ments which promised him the slightest assistance; and he felt almost decided that his plan must fall to the ground, till he began to reflect, that what he had not articles of strength to effect, might be produced by perseverance and art. He happened to have about him a large clasp knife of tempered stee( ; could he devise any method of cutting its edge into teeth İn the form of a saw, he believed that, witlu unremitting labour, the iron bars which
which composed the grating might be cub through. He searched his apartments narrowly round, but not even a nail could be found With which to begin his experiment of converting his knife iuto a saw. With fresh disappointment he desisted from his fruit¬ less search. Every thought was strained' to find the means of effecting his purpose;: and, at length, that invention, whic! el* dom foils to spring from spurring neces* sity, came to his aid. He observed that a single iron bar, which was» raised about half a toot from the hearth of his chimney, in orden to confine the wood within the limits of security, had a sharp edge to- wards the front ; and against this he resol veil to make the experiment of in* denting his knife. r Tha labour of the whole night produced Síin? one tooth, which though neither so sharp, n° r s° regularly formed as those of. ¡a < properly finished saw,, still eemed to m / ..... . , , ¡...,. promise.
promise him that his desired end might be accomplished - r and he hoped, when all the teeth were formed, to be able to dis¬ cover some means, of sharpening their points, which his mode of forming them naturally rendered, blunt and jagged* Carefully avoiding to work at those hours when he expected a supply of ne¬ cessaries to be brought to lm shel^ lest the noise of the process he was pursuing, should be heard, and lead to a discovery which might frustrate alt his high-raised hopes, and allowing himself but as few hours as nature could be satisfied with for sleep, liis saw was completed* in somewhat less than three weeks. As he had pro¬ ceeded in his task, he had gained skill in its performance, and evesy tooth had im* proved in sharpness and formation npon the last; thu&he felt less anxious than he had before done, about the discovery of a method for giving- keenness to their points, and contented himself with what could be effected by means ofa flat* stone wnich
which composed his hearth, and after¬ waids whetting them upon the leather of his shoe. Seven weeks of toil, of a nature infi¬ nitely more laborious than what he. had experienced while employed in making his sau% weve passeri by him in dividing the grating on three of its sides from the wall- in which it was fixed; the fourth he judged he should be able to bind down flat upon the side of tile chimney, by hanging upon it with the whole weiglit of Ids body ; desiring thus to spare himself the additional trouble of sawing İt apart from the wall, as he had been 'constrained to do the three others. Tbe grating, as he had expected, bent freely downwards impressed with his weight; but suddenly it started ftom the wall, and Edward being unprepared for this accident, fell with his head down¬ wards upon the hearth; a blow which he received on his temple was his least con¬ sideration ; what he most dreaded was, lest
lest the noise of his fall should have been heard, and bring some one to his prison to investigate the cause. He rose up with all the precipitancy he could command, and thrusting the iron grating into his bed, he drew on his nightcap, in order, if possible, to conceal his wound, should any one visit his rooms on the business of enquiry, and slipping off bis clothes, he jumped into bed himself A quarter of an hour passed, and no footsteps were heard ; thus reassured, he ventured again to quit his bed, and pay such attention as he had it in his power to do to the wound in his head. Having washed and bound it up, he again retired to bed, as a violent pain began to settle in his temples; and he judged that unless he took the precautioi of passing some hours in quiet, if possible İn sleep, his bruises might be of a disagreeable conse¬ quence. Before he entered his bed, he lifted up the mattress, and having con¬ cealed the iron grating between that and the
the canvas bottom of his bed, he laid hi» head on his pillow, with something like please e, at the reflection that he had ob¬ tained for himself free access to tbe roof öi bis prison, dancing about his heart; and anticipating the moment when hc should begin his investigation ofthe pos¬ sibility of effecting his escape. On the following morning, the violent throbbings be had the night before expe¬ rienced m his he-id, were considerably abated ; but that part of ifc on which he had fallen, was greatly swelled, and still extremely tender and painful. For two days, accordingly, he delayed his ascent up the passage which he hud formed for himself into the air ; and on the third, be resolved to hazard the execution of his plan. Fearful of a surprise, be chose tiie hour of evening for his experiment. The moon was now again at the full, and about nine in the evening, he began* to climb his dark aiid perilous way. He feared lest the parting, of the iron giating from
from the wall might not have loosened some stones, which his touch might d ruw down upon him in his ascent, or whether the rending of the iron from the stone might not have so much weakened the side wall of the chimney, that i* might render his passage to the top unsafe, per¬ haps impracticable', but, in a very short time, he had to congratulate himself on having passed the spot wbere tlie irom grating had been fixed, and ás he conti** nued to ascend, the full disk of the moon» shining from a clear sky, studded thickly with refulgent stars, met bis sight. The chimney was at least twenty feet in height, and the labour attendant on mounting it, which he effected by resting his back on one wall, and the soles of his feet upon the opposite side, had fatigued him more than he could have believed it possible, fpr what his eagerness to breathe tbe air had led hhn to consider but a slight exertion, to have done. Arrived at the top,, he anxiously cast hk
his eyes around on every side ; parapet Avails, circular uwers, and the sharp an¬ gles of massive battlements, met his sight at every turn j even in what he deemed his own exalted situation, he now found himself many feet below the height of the walls ; the light of the sky onl; met his sight from above, and through the vacant embrasures* which were accidentally seen in the parapet walls. He looked down, and perceived a flat roof, pari of which he knew to be the top of his ow:: apartments, for he recognised the windows of particular, shape, from which they received light. Upon this flat roof it was his desire to descend; but the chimney on which he was placed, rose at least twelve feet above its surface : could he contrive to slide down its side, he consi¬ dered that he might find it impossible again to climb up it ; and were lie èveu assured that he could compass this difficulty, if his foot should slip in his descent, his fail might be heard by tliose in the apartments beneath,
beneath, perhaps by the governor him¬ self; and thus every hope of future escape might be cut off to him, perhaps even punishment be inflicted on hitn, for having made the attempt at procuring himself liberty. Of this idea he was, however, more careless than any other ; no bodily torture could exceed the mental agony which he endured from his confinement, under the circumstances which attended his ban ish men t from England, and the wife of his affections. As be hnng upon the wall, in consulta¬ tion with his own mind, he heard a sound, whicb he, at first, imagined to be a pebble falling upon the window glass below him ; but it was almost instantly repeated, and he then discovered that it was the string of a lute vibrating beneath the touch of a finger. No sooner did he ascertain the nature of tbe sound, than the kind Be¬ lise recurred to his thoughts. It was un¬ likely there should be any other musician than herself within the prison) she mights at
Ät that moment, be near enough to hear his words, to reply to them, to promise him her assistance ; his heart leapt with testacy at the bare idea. The lute sounded again, but it appeared to be farther removed from him, for its tones were scarcely audible, though'it was evident that aH the strings were moved in their turn, and that some one was playing an air upon it. His first desire was to ascertain from whence the sounds proceeded. After much hesitation, he ' was convinced that they гтозе out of нл chimney about seven feet distant from the one on the top of which he was placed, and which did not rise to the height,of the latter by about the number of feet at which it stood from it. In the apartment beneath that chimney was, doubtless, Belise-r-that Belise, whose benevolent heart required but to be in¬ formed of his unjust sufferings, to exert herself with the most praiseworthy huma¬ nity to procure his enlargement. He doubted
doubted not but she would recognise his vmce, should he venture to call to her; but then, should she not be alone¿ should her dreaded father-in-law be in the same apartment with her, what affliction might he not bring upon her, as well as upon himself. A bell was regularly tolled at ten every night, from the highest tower of tbe build- jug; and oii this signal, every door was locked for the night, the lamps were езс- tingubhed, and all the inhabitants retired to their re&pective chambers, if not to bed. Edward resolved to descend into his apart¬ ments till tbat hour should be past, at which the person who brought hrtn his meals should come to demand his lamp for the night, anil when he was retired, again to ascend to the spot which seemed to lead to his only hope of enlargement, and endeavour, tf possible, to catch from the sounds which might arise to his hear¬ ing, whether or not the room, from which the adjoining chimney issued, was the bedchamber
bedchamber of Belise; if he should receive any reason to believe it so, he judged that he thjn might venture to pursue some method of conveying through it intelli¬ gence of his captivity. His lamp having, as usual, been de¬ manded, he lost no time in repairing to his bituation upon the top of the chimney. Several hours were tiiere passed by him in increasing anxiety ; but he heard neither the voice nor the lute of Belise, nor, in¬ deed, any sound whatever, except the growlings of the watch-dog at the outer gate, wbich appeared to be railing at the shadows of the night, as no attention seemed to be paid to his bowlings by any ofthe inhabitants of the prison. When the clock struck two, Edward again descended, spiritless and heartbroken with his fresh disappointment ; but still resolute to pursue his plan fbr endeavour¬ ing to ascertain whether he might address Belise, through the channel which he be¬ lieved to communicate with her apartment, without the fear of a discovery. CHAP.
CHAP. IX. ľll read you matter, deep and dangerous*. As full of peril and adventurous spirit, As to o'erwalk a curent, roaring loud, On the unsteadfast footing of a spear. PÏ11ST РАПТ OP HENftY THE FOURTH. Jť OR several successive nights, Edward repaired at the same hour to his accus¬ tomed station, but could obtain no satis¬ factory information relative to Belise's apartment. At length, oné night, a few moments after the midnight hour had sounded, ^ more than usual stillness appearing "to prevail around, he lieard a voice, which vol. in. ι he
he could not doubt to be her's, singing a plaintive air, unaccompanied by her lute ; he listened, and was decidedly resolved that the voice proceeded from the same chimney from whence had issued the tones ofthe lute. This decision carried with it to his mind, a certainty that beneath this chim¬ ney must be her bedchamber: the bell for retiring to restbad already been tolled two hours, and it was very unlikely that a young girl, like Belise, should be, at that time of tbe night, ip any apartment but her own chamber. He had learnt enough for that niqdit, and descended into his apartment, resolved, by some means or other, to convey to her, on the succeeding one, intelligence of his captivity. But the method by which this was to be effected, was a consideration full as dif¬ ficult as 'any of the »labours he had yet gone through. To address her in words, he durst not attempt ; although he could mot hear any sounds near to him wben mounted
mounted on his chimney, still there might be persons near enough to hear him, if he ventured to speak sufficiently loud for his words to reach her. Should he write to her, it would be almost an impossibility for him to throw the letter with such ex¬ actness, as to ensure its sinking through the aperture down which he wished it to fall; it might be carried away by the air to a different part of the building, picked up, and conveyed to the governor : should his aim be correct, there was still a doubt, whether a piece of paper, from the light¬ ness of its weight, would fall through the aperture or not; whether it wouid not be equally likely, and perhaps more so, to hang upon some part of the chimney, and never descend at all within the reach or knowledge of Belise. From the various plans which entered his head, he selected one, which shall be developed in thé course of its execution. On the following morning, before his breakfast was brought to him,, he placed ι % * upon
npon the shelf, against it should be turned round, a paper requesting a lemon to be procured for him. Not one of his de¬ mands had hitherto been denied hím, and in the space of half an' hour, a lemon was brought to him. He had previously written the following letter—
u DEAR LADY BELISE, " The English officer of the name of Edwaid, whom you must re¬ member to have seen on the day of your mother's wedding with the governor of tbis prison—whom you honoured hy your particular conversation during the repast, and with your hand in the dance—im¬ pressed by the exalted feelings of bene¬ volence which you that day expressed towards the unhappy captives under the power of your father-in-law,* hesitates not to inform you tha^t he is unjustly a pri¬ soner
soner within these walls, and ventures to implore your humane assistance in pro¬ curing his enlargement. He is so tho¬ roughly convinced of the excellent nature of your heart, that he is assured you will serve him, if the ability so to do be yours ; he, therefore, only adds, that for those exertions which he is conscious you will make in his cause, you will be rewarded ■with prayers and blessings from the hearts of himseif and his wretched wife, from whom he is inhumanly separated. He was trepanned into the apartments, in which he is now a prisoner, by the governor's brother, Sanchez, on the day öfyour mo¬ ther's wedding; and since that hour, the countenance oi no human being ha» cheered his miserable solitude. " Pardon him that he inflicts the wounds which sympathy will cause in a heart so exquisite in feeling as your own; but conscious that the lieart of humanity conceives the opportuuity of doing good ablessing, he, on this plea, grounds his • 1-3 ■. excuse
excuse for intruding upon you the sorrows of the prisoner, · " Edward/'
Having folded his letter, Edward had again recourse to his saw, with which he made a small aperture in one end of the lemon, and having extracted from it all the juice and pulp, he nipped his letter into as small a compass as the paper on which it was written was capable of being pressed into, and thrust it into the skin of the lemon. About half an hour after his lamp had been fetched away for the night, he as¬ cended that path which use had now ren·» dered him somewhat more of an adept in mounting. When he arrived at the top, the moon had retired behind л cloud, and he resolved to await the moment of its emerging, rather than hazard a failure of his plan, from his impatience to execute it* On
On this night, he heard not the voice of Belise proceeding from the spot from whence it had before flowed ; universal silence prevailed ; not even the howlings ofthe watch-dog interrupted the stillness ofthe infant morn. The hour of one was on the point, as Edward conjectured, of sounding, ere the refulgence of the moon tempted him to make his cast. "God speed thee!" he exclaimed, mentally, and threw from him his lemon; he durst scarcely follow it with his eyes, lest his aim should have been faulty, and the next moment present him with the failure of his plan ; but chance smiled on his effort, and he saw the paper which contained his petition, enter the aperture at which he had directed it. An emotion of pleasure, long foreign to his heart, ran through his veins, and he resolved not immediately to quit his station, but to remain there some minutes longer, and endeavour to learn whether any sounds would arise, to inform him ι 4 that
that Belise had gotten his packet safe into her possession. Full half an hour passed, and the uni¬ versal silence remained unbroken. Ed¬ ward was now on the point of descending again to his apartment, when he heard the wards of a Jock creak ; the sound ap¬ peared to be at a short distance from him on his left side, and not far from the chimney down which he had just thrown his letter. He was, ar rhe moment, in the act of beginning to descend the chimney ; his hands were rv&red од the top of the wall, and half his face only rising above it. Fear and expectation equally prevented him from moving, and he heard a voice say—" When you tap at the door, and í ask, who is there? say, the city of Ostend —be that your watchword—I shall know you by it."—" It is well," replied another .voice.—" Think you she will be with you?" asked the first speaker.— (t I hope phe will, but cannot, to a certainty, deter¬ mine,"
mine," replied the other.—" Well, well," answered the first speaker, ' ť tbat is nothing to me : I will be ready for you." The man who had spoken last now dis¬ appeared again through the door by which they had both entered upon the roof, and closed it after him ; the other .advanced towards the chimney which Edward had conceived to arise out of the chamber of Belise, and tftking from under a horse¬ man's cloak (or, at least, such appeared the garmctit in which he was u rapped) a ladder of ropus, he slung it, by means of a couple of hooks which were fastened to it, upon the top of the chimney wall, and then threw it into »-he inside. This done, he took off his cloak, and having laid it down, he climbed upon an iron supporter, which ian from tlic centre of the chimney to the leaden roof beneath, and from this he mounted on the top of the wall, whence be placed his foot upon the first step of his i'dddeľy and immediately begau to disappear down the chimney. 1 5 The
The agitated mind of Ed ward gave him ino power of reflectinff on wbat the con- J versation he had just overheard might imean ; all there was room for in his brain 'was tbe possibility of escape, wbich ap- jpeared to present itself to him in his 'knowledge of the stranger's watchword, and his ability of disguising himself iu the cloak, which he had left upon the roof. It was an opportunity too flattering not î tó be grasped at by one in the situation l o£ the unhappy Edward. Remounting the top ofthe chimney, he threw his legs over on the outer side, and clinging with his arms to an angle of the wall, by a sudden effort of resolution he suffered himself to drop down ; his arms supported 3iim against the wall for several feet of his descent, but here a prominence in the stonework threw him off his hold, and he fell with his back upon the hard roof of lead beneath. His shoulders were exces¬ sively bruised, and his left arm benumbed by
by the blow it had received; still, regardless of bodily injuries, while the power was left him of rising upon his legs, he listened anxiously, dreading lest tbe noise of his fall should have called any one to the spot. But all remained silent, and judging that every moment might be of the most ma¬ terial consequence to his safety, as the stranger might return, and thus frustrate his attempt at passing for him to the man, whoever he might be, in the turret, he hastily put on the cloak, and tappeti upon the door. " Who's there?" immediately asked а voice. — " The city of Ostend," replied Edward, trembling lest his voice should betray him. The door was opened, and he stepped in : by the lamp held in the hand of the man who admitted him, and whom he conjec¬ tured to be one ofthe keepers of the pri¬ son, he saw that he was standing at the head of a winding staircase. The inun began to descend, and hc followed him* " So you arc come alone?" said the man. ι 6 Fear fu L
Fearful of speaking, lest bis answers should betray hitn for an impostor, and equally dreading to remain silent, Edward re¬ plied—" Yes, but I shall come again to-morrow-night."—" Ah," returned the man, " it is ten to one if I can admit you again to-morrow night; why did you not bring her away now ?—What is the use of delay r—No time like the present." They were now at the bottom of the stairs, and Edward's guide moved hastily along a stone passage, which brought them into a lofty hall, of which the vaulted roof was supported by pillars, beyond the first range of which nothing was visible by the faint rays of the single lamp carried by the man. They had nearly gained the extremity of the hall, when the man suddenly ex¬ claimed—" Hark 1" They both stopped and listened—Distant footsteps were au¬ dible—" Yes," cried the man, " we are discovered ; fly to the chapel, and conceal yourself in the confessional." So saying, he
he blew out the lamp, and Edward heard him rapidly descending some steps at a short distance from the spot where hc hid Jeft him standing. This information was doubtless friendly, and might have been of infinite service to the stranger whom Edward was personat¬ ing, but to him it was entirely useless. He cast his eyes around ; darkness met them on every side. The steps of his*pursuers, if such they were, increased on fiis ear, and in a very few moments a light was visible on the opposite side of the hall ; a second followed it, and almost instantly altera third appeared in view. He perceived that they were carried by three different men, and iu the midst of them he heheld one with a drawn sword in his hand, whom he believed to be the governor. They did not speak, nor did they appear to see him. He slipped has¬ tily behind a pillar, hoping thus to escape their notice. They separated in the cen¬ tre of the hall, and taking different direc¬ tions,
tions* each moved slowly along, with his lamp held above his head, to assist his search-after those of whom lie was in pursuit. After some momen '.a, oue ofthe three passed within a few pates of the pillar behind which Eciwaul had screened himself; the light of the lamp borne by this man, shewed him a couple of steps which led intoa chapel. Onee more some¬ thing like hope warmed his heart, and as the man receded from him, he ascended the steps, and proceeded forward. The lamps were now so far removed from him, tbat he was again left in total c-arkness, save a taint illumination which entered by a lofty window, and which he conjec¬ tured to be the light of the moon. Eager to find some place of conceal* nient, he still moved on ; a single step, of about a foot in depth, which the light was not sutììcient for Lim to discern,threw him forwards, and lie fell against a wooden substance, which slid from him as the weight of his body sunk upon it, and be fell
fell with it to the ground. A loud noise accompanied this accident. " Flere !— Here!—this way í" was directly echoed from different parts of the hall, and in the space ofa minute the lamps advanced sufficiently near to discover to him that he had fallen upou a coffin, which he had knocked from its supporters ; and as he rested his hands on it to raise him¬ self again upon his feet, he read upon its lid, in brass letters, " Sanchez Xavia, aged LXIV." Before he had time for reflection, both his arms were caught hold of by tfie men who had entered the chapel, and the go¬ vernor, presenting himself befóte him, said—"Well, Sir, you see you are caught ; however, dorťt be alarmed ; those never need be afraid of me who can pay their way iuťo my good graces ; so come, deliver up to me the two purses of gold which youhave in your pockets; Г11 turn them to quite as gcod a use as you would, have made of them. " 4 "You
*' You know,'* replied Edward, sur¬ prised out of the reply, and forgetting at the moment that he was mistaken for ano¬ ther man, *' you know that I have n о gold about me." *' 1 know you have." replied the go¬ vernor; "I ovci heard you tell my daugh¬ ter-in-law that you had sold your commis¬ sion for four hundred and fifty pieces,, and that they were in two purses, one in each pocket of your horseman's cloak ; so give me leave to save you the trouble of de¬ livering them up to me yourself— ΙΊΙ make you ample recompence for the gift, though you give it me unwillingly— ГП maintain you for it for life—Don't think that I am weak enough to let you go, and inform against me for easing a young fool of his money." These words he followed by putting his hands into the pockets of the cloak now worn by Edward, írom which he pulled two purses, which, by the chinking sound they sent forth, as Garcías shaked them between
between his fingers, seemed to contain what he had asserted they did : not satis¬ fied with these, but thinking that ihere might be still more behind, the governor thrust his hands again into each pocket of the cloak, and, in withdrawing them from the examination, hc pulled the cloak oif one of .Edward's shoulders. * ' What's this I see?" exclaimed he. " Have you got on an English uniform since you sold your French commission ? What does all this mean?" added he, raising the cap which had fallen partly over Edward's eyes, " Why, zounds, and the devil, can I believe my sight?" he again burst forth— " My English prisoner í —Am I witched, or do my eyes deceive mc ? By what mystery do I see you here, in the cloak, and possessed of the money of Adolphus Biron?" Edward was unable to speak, had he been inclined so to have done; л mist danced hefore his eyes, and he felt ready to sink into the earth. ťť So
" So then," continued the governor, " not* satisfied with his attempt to steal my daughter, the brave Adolphus has been lendhig his assistance to my prisoner in effecting his escape/' " Whomsoever you are speaking of,** said Edward, roused to a reply by the unjust accusation preferring against an innocent man, " he. is entirely faultless with respect to myself, andjray attempts to escape your tyranny ; whatever I have done, in the hope of procuring my li¬ berty, I haye performed unaided. ï do not know Adolphus/' u You soon shall then," replied the go¬ vernor; "you shall enjoy the bappineii of being fellow prisoners : for since you have not known how to be grateful for the benefits and indulgencies youeujoyed in the apartments you lately inhabited, you shall for the future be taught the re¬ verse, and learn what you^have lost by your folly." " Wretch !—-Wretch !" exclaimed Ed- waid,
ward, "there will come a day, when you will learn what you have lost by the ex¬ ercise ofyour cruelties upon the innocent and unfortunate. How did your brother in blood s your brother in iniquity, who now lies dead at your feet, expire ? Were the last moments of his existence calm?—· Were they such as gave you encourage¬ ment to die uuder the performance of such acts as you are now livingin ?" Tbe governor's countenance underwent two or three changes from pale to red, and then again from red to pale ; and he replied, though by no means in so firm a tone as he had before spoken—-" What, do you think Sanchez died like a cowardly priest, and that I am to be awed by your pious sermonizing? Spare your breath, you onl) »vaste it on me; when Garcías Xavia has once said, ' I'll do it,' nothing can turn me from my purpose. I owe my faith to my employers, and religiously keep it with tbem." *' And what .regard do you pay .to the faith
faith you owe to Heaven ?" asked Edward, with emphasis. " Have not I tokl you already not to waste your breath on me;" he replied, in a tone of displeasure ; then turning to his men, be said, '* conduct him to the va¬ cant cell in the southern tower— ITI meet you there presently—do not leave him till I co4ie." The governor and one of his attendants then turned towards the direction by which Edward had wandered thus far from his prison, intending, as Ed waul could not doubt, to repair to the chamber of his daughter, in search of the stranger whom he had named Adolphus Biro n ; and the two men, who already held Edward, drag¬ ged him out cf the chapel to the opposite side of the hall, from which they con¬ strained him to pass through several pas¬ sages to the cell of which the governor had spoken. It was a lorry space oi about eighteen feet square ; it was built of a grey stone, of which material four pillars, placed
placed at equal distances from each other, seemed to be the supporters of the roof. On one side was a chimney, vast and dreary, and which appeared, notwithstand¬ ing its size, incapable of giving warmth to the prison, of which the air, even at the present clement season of the year, was damp and chilly. At each end was a rude bedstead, sprr-ad with straw, over which was threw n a vagged quilt, which appeared the only covering belonging to it. 'Jjhc men pkeni their lamps on a bench which stood near one of the pillars, and kept their hands fixed upon Edward's arms, whilst they awaited the coming of the governor. In the space of ahout twenty minutes he appeared, followed by the man who had left the hall with him, ancl another, who also appeared to be a servant of the prison ; and these led between them a young man, of about twenty-three years of age, habited in the military uniform of Prance. A couple
A couple of chains were immediately produced by the order of the governor, and with these the young man and Ed¬ ward were chained to opposite pillars ; padlocks were placed on the chains where they crossed their waists, to deprive them of the possibility of freeing themselves from them; and this done, the governor, without addressing his prisoners, com¬ manded his men to take up their lamps and follow him: they obeyeel—the prison was left ín total darkness, and its inhabi¬ tants heard the door locked and bolted upon them. " Unfortunate stranger," said Edward, addressing his companion in captivity, "add not to the many other miseries with which I am already burdened, thy resentment against one equally unhappy as thyself—who is indeed the instrument of thy present bondage, but who is en¬ tirely iree from the intention of inflicting on another those pangs under which be has himself so long mourner 1 " Adolphus
Adolphus replied — " I cannot blame you for the method by which you at¬ tempted to effect your escape from these walls ; it was the perversity oi our fate which led us both into а situation where the combination of circumstances has con¬ spired to render us more miserable than we were before.—I,"continued he, "have more to dread from the resentment of the governor than you aie acquainted with; my fears are not confined to myself alone, my every nerve is strung with agony for the fate ofmy Belise." "Heaven avertali danger from her be¬ nevolent heart!" exclaimed Edward. " I am well aware," replied Adolphus, " that you know how to estimate lier ex¬ cellence; a iew minutes before I reached her apartment this night, she had received a letter from you, mysteriously conveyed to her, which proves that you entertain just sentiments of her sensibility and be¬ nevolence : impressed with the liveliest pity for your situation, she shewed me your
your petition, and obtained my promise to assist her in attempting to procure your enlargement from captivity." <ť Generous girl V' exclaimed Edward, " may the reward of her excellent dispo¬ sition, although protracted, be ultimately adequate to her merits." ** Should I ever obtain my release from my present bonds," said Adolphus; ťí should my Belise ever be restored to my arms by the kind interposition of Pro¬ vidence in our behalf—how dismal are the prospects in life to which I am doomed to look forward I I am an outcast from those who should be my protectors, and I am left entirely destitute, by the loss of those pieces of gold which the villainous governor has this night stolen from the pockets of my cloak ; they were my all, and should I ever again clasp my Belise to my breast, she will hold a beggar to lier heart. " " My lot," replied Edward, " is equally destitute as your own ; I have myself never known
known a parent ; and the beloved woman whom I have allied to me, by the tender title of wife, is under the controul of an unjust and imperious father, by whose machinations I am now detained a pri¬ soner in this place, and who labours, with too much success, to prevent lier from ever again reposing her aching head on the breast ofan affectionate husband." This mutual confession drew from eacli enquiries that led to the history of their past lives. Edward freely narrated his to his fellow in'misfortune, who theu recounted the principal events of his own life in neaily the following words— i{ My father," said Adolphus, (( was a merchant of considerable repute ¡u the city of Dunkiik; my younger brother, Frederick, and myself, were his only chil- dien ; 1 was two years older than my biother; and about the time I had at¬ tained my fifteenth year, severe and una¬ voidable misfoi tunes attended my father in trade, which reduced him to the mor- VOL. in. к tifvmtï
tifying necessity of declaring hhnself inr solvent; and, in the course of the follow¬ ing year, he died ofa broken heart. '* At this unhappy period rtiy brother and myself mrťst have been cast destitute upon thé world, but for a brother of my deceased mother, a rich old bachelor, re¬ siding at Ostend, who invited us to make his house our hotne. " My uncle was a man of great pride, and austerity of character, and he took care to make us fcfel that we were in his debt : however, in the course of a couple of years, he became in some measure at¬ tached to us, and gave us to understand, that he intended to leave his fortune be¬ tween us at his death, though he never explained to us in What proportion he meant to»distribute iî. "About two years ago, that is, just after i had completed my twenty-first year, I became acquainted with my adored Belise ; I saw her but to love her, and to tyisli her mine. My brother Frederick, who
who IM also gaføed ati Itťtŕodíiceíon tò her, saw hör ^ith thè saine éyè's as tnyself^ but his attentions tvere by nò míeans so pka^ng to her aà rnine #ere, ahd lipöå me fell hér choice and her heart. " Her mother, though a woíñati őf сой*· siderable property herself, ¿till experienced infinite pride and satisfaction in sèei rig' her daughter likely to becötne the wife erf the co-heir of öríe df the wealthiest fcŕíeá in the éïty, and gave me every eti courage* inent in her power to persevere in rriy stftt. a My tíñele was acquainted with iný attachment to Belise, but considered İt as one of those impressions which assail the heart of yduth, affola it pleasure while they last, and are easily effaced by any other chicli promises a greater degree őf gratification ; for ait the very same time that he rallied me on my love for her,' he informed toe, with atl the seriousness of a гЛап who believes himself to be commu¬ nicating pleasing intelligence, ¿hát he k,S V had
had ascertained that my hand would be accepted, with the greatest readiness, by a lady of the city, who had already been twice married, besides being double my age, and with whose family he said it had always been his ambition to ally his own. " I heard his proposal with real sur¬ prise, and without hesitation expressed to him my astonishment that he should sup¬ pose my heart to be of so fickle a nature, as to relinquish the prepossession which he knew İt already to entertain for another object, particulariy .when he was well ac¬ quainted with the highly amiable quali¬ ties and engaging manners of her to whom İt was devoted. " He at first laughed at my scruples, but when hc found me resolute in my ad¬ herence to those principles which justice and lionour dictated to me to persevere in, he flew into a violent passion, and loading me with opprobrious terms, all of which he qualified with the epithet 'ungrateful,* he burst out of the room,· and left me to my
my reflections. From these Γ could re¬ ceive no consolation but the conscious¬ ness of having acted rightly, and the as¬ surance that my Belise would not waver from her attachment, whatever might'be tlte future fate oi the man on whom her affections were fixed ; for I concluded, from what I had already seen of my uncle's character, that the right I had assumed oi thinking for myself, and my having been sufficiently hardy to oppose one ofhis favourite schemes, would lose me his favour for ever : nor was I mistaken in my idea. From this time his coolness towards me increased every day; and I could perceive that my brother Frederick, who had be¬ fore stood second in his favour, was now raised to the very summit ofhis esteem. " Rather more than u week explained to me the cause of my observations ; my brother no longer spoke in raptures of Belise, as he had been accustomed to do, and in whose affections, I believe, he had, to that very time, entertained a hope of sup¬ lí. 3 planting
planting me. He even sought opportun nìties of undervaluing that disposition, and those charms, the praise pf vvhich had before been his favourite tppiç ; and when I remai ked to him the change that had taken place in his sentiments, he re* plied-^-* Well, then congratulate your¬ self that you have no longer a rival in your adoration of her. My uncle has se* jected for me an alliance of which I see the value, although у#цг honourable feçart spurned the mmy ЫуцпЩе$ that are atr ţached to it ; but you will no doubjt be much, happier with, lotfs and skuder cir-r щщ8$$пс№г "Ţheşe words, spo-ke?! with ц çg$r ^mptüjous впе^г, 4 jeft mc np cjpuhţ $№* my f hm\m' had b^en. ^w^y^d ky tbe уош i^Jf щШеЫ, aud h»a4 ШЩШ ţhe afiance whi<?h I ЬЫ rejeeted, My «wnjeçture was a just pne, for within a month he ЬееавЕке Ыг huşjwd. Qn t{ie day pf \ih. mar¬ riage, immediately after the ceremony Ii^i Ы^щрЫ^е, щ цасЬ thus, a^dr-me-i № — c It
-^•' ft is but just that the observance of the duty of obedience, and its neglect, should meet with opposite rewards ; know, therefore, that for bis acquiescence in the favourite wish of my heart, your brother is from this hour the declared heir of my property, with the exception of one le¬ gacy—that legacy I bestow on you be¬ fore roy death ; it consists of a coni mission, contained in that paper," extending his hand to wards me aş ţie spotte; "and learn, that it is not from any personal regard I bear you, that J confer on yon this gift, buit tQ deprive thş world of the opportu¬ nity of saying, that l 1цуе cast out an., orphan of røy laţe sister a heggar. You will therefore immediately join your regi¬ menti m УОИ* presence here cannot give pleasure either to mysejf, or to your bro¬ ther·* wh-pse fei^piaess consists in seeing '*. Humiliating as I felt it to be obliged to accept th^ chatty of one who so nn- jtisţljr deseed røe, sti}J more dreadftil к 4 was
was the idea of appearing before my Ee¬ lise, an outcast, and a beggar ; arid, re¬ ceiving from his hands the offered com· mission, I said—' From one on whom I have no direct claim> every gift must be acknowledged as a'favour ; I thank you, Sir, for what you have been pleased to confer on mc, and wish my brother and yourself much happiness in your conge¬ nial sentiments.' I was greatly gratified to find that the calmness with which I littered these words had the effect I de¬ sired them to produce, of enraging my unnatural relatíve; when, probably, had I suffered my οαίι real feelings of passion to have appeared, he might only have reaped from them food for his ill-natured gratification : and while he was studying a reply, I left the house. "In the heart of my Belise this unex¬ pected change in my circumstances had worked no alteration; but her mother, who was now become the wife of Garcías Xavia, and was probably influenced in her
her opinion by his crafty avarice, imme¬ diately forbade me access to 'the house, and charged her daughter on no account to entertain any idea of my now ever be¬ coming her husband. - " All access to my Belise was thus de¬ barred me, and I found that her mother had the intention of uniting her to^iôjd man, who had no recommendation but his wealth, from which he had made many handsome presents to the governor» ?to buy his interest în his favour. No means of communicating with lier now remained to me, but by writing: she bribed one of the keepers oi the prison to bring me a letter, containing a full account of what wift passing, which informed me, that she feared Jier mother intended to marry her to the man of her aversion in the course ofa few days. The keeper, who bi ought me this letter, pi oved to be a person that had forţnerly been in the service of my deceased father; thus his knowledge of 'me rendered him doubly willing to be our к 5 friend.
feer ktter, telling her, that if she would agree to fly with me, I would sell my commission, aná that we would rétive into some distant country, where the «oney I should thus have realized would purchase us a small farm, sufficient to «f&Htd us a comfortable maintenance. "In the eourse of a week I received from lier another ietter, acquainting me, fhat if I would be at the prison gate, at the^unfortunate midnight vvhich is just past, and provide myself with a laddør of ropes against my coming, onr mutual friend would instruct nie in a mode of gaining access to her chamber, where she would Ща me with such articles of value as she possessed, and then fly with me- Irom the tyranny of her mother aad the governor. - " That I came at tbe appointed time, i t Js unnecessary for me to repeat to yon j mr need 1 inform you of the means which I nsed, according to the instructions fif my ¿ friend,
intø the apartment of my Belise; but, ar¬ rived there» fate frowned upon our højtt»**«· ior the governor, whose profession render» him naturally suspicious and watchful, was, as hß has since explained it, lurking about the prison at the time of my de¬ scending into liei сЬашЬег, and catchŕng tlie sound of a second voice within it, he immediately laid Ins ear to the door, and having heard me inforni her of the four hundred and fifty pieces of gold which were in the pockets of my eioak, he re¬ solved, at one blow, to make himself mas¬ ter of tliem, and prevent our escape. ţc Having accordingly summoned to his aid some ofhis servants/ he proceeded to the hali, through whieh he knew we must unavoidably pass in our way out of the prison. Hera you, by the error mto whieh mv cloak led him, became bis V **■ ' vietiin, and having secured you, ke re¬ turned to the chamber ©f his daughter-in- law; we had just left it, and gained the к 6 TOOfy
roof, where I was expressing my surprise •at my cloak being gone, when his voice assailed our ears : in a iew seconds more I was his prisoner, and my Belise torn from my sight. " Here Adolphus paused ; his heart swel¬ led with agony at the idea ofthe torments to which Belise might be exposed by her cruel parents; his frenzied mind presented her to him forced into the arms of un¬ feeling age, and calling upon him for that protection which he was denied the power of rendering her. Edward and his fellow captive were both too miserable in their own feelings, to afford each other any portion of that consolation which adds strength to the mind, and pours a healing balm upon tbe wounds inflicted by the hand of sorrow. They both concluded their sufferings to be doomed to end only with their lives, and the ineffectual sigh alone broke the . silence of their lips* On the morrow some of the keepers entered
entered their prison, and lengthened the chains which bound them, to such an ex¬ tent as enabled them to reach the straw pallets that were placed at either end of their cell : this action afforded some re¬ lief to their aching limbs ; but still care was taken to keep them at that distance from each other, which shouid prevent their affording one another any assistance in freeing themselves from their bonds. Thus passed several months, during which the bare necessaries of life were brought to them for their support, and during which time they had not been able to extort a single word from any of the (çeepers who had entered their cell, in reply to the enquiries they had advanced to them. From Adolphus, Edward learnt that an engagement bad taken place a iew days before they had become fellow prisoners, in which Sanchez Xavia had been so se¬ verely wounded in both his legs, that am¬ putation had become necessary, and that he had died very soon after the operation. <ť We
* ť W^ are still not the most unhappy beings in esistşnce," said Edward ; "we are eminently blessed, when our hearts are compare^ with those of such men as Sanchez Xavia, Neither liberty, wealth, »or the accomplishment of our most ex¬ tended wishes, if puroina 1 » be the slave* of evil passions, can pWire us that true felicity which will be tlir companion even of imprisonment, poverty, and· the most cruel of disappointments, if the heart that suffers he free from self reproach*"
CHAP,
'¿щ$А*' л.
We that oí greatest works ig finist«,. Oft φχβ tlieift Jby üjff vfe^kesc ntiu^fc-
-Great floods have flown
Fiom simple source»; and great seas have dry'd ; Wben miracles have Ъу the greatest been deny'd. OR expectation tails, and most oft these, Where most it promises ; and oft iţ hits When« hopp if poldest, and despair most s¿ts. fLĽS V^LL ТЦДХ EţîPŞ WELL·« I HREP sad and rno^rnful years had now passed over the head of Edward in hjs captivity, when a circumstance took place, which pnce mpre animated the la** tent snarka of hope within bis breast. The
g The provisions with which himself antl Adolphus were supplied, consisted princi¬ pally of bread # and fruit ; amongst the latter of s which were frequently mixed chesnuts. On a certain day, their supply being brought as usual to tbeir prisos Adolphus, who had been for some time past indisposed, and unable to rise from his straw pallet, having refused all nou¬ rishment but the bread and milk aUowed him, the basket was set down near Ed¬ ward ; it contained some apples, some bread, and a few chesnuts. On looking into the basket, Edward perceived that one or two of the chesnuts were peculiarly marked with white lines.; he took them up, in order to examine what these could be—for where the mind has but little to amuse İt, it eagerly catches at any olrject which turns it for a while from itself—and found that tbey were made by particles of tbe rind being cut away, through which the white nut beneath shewed itself; and on the one which he first took into his hand,
hand, he imagined he could decypher those letters which compose the word " hœûed' He eagerly cast his eyes upon a second, and on this was engraved the single letter "A." A confusion of ideas floated in his brain ; and hastily picking out all those which bore .ón tbem any characters, he arranged .hem with a trembling band in difFerent situations, till they at last presented him with this sentence— * ' You have a friend within these walls." A tumult of joy ran through his veins, and falling on his knees, he exclaimed— " O God, accept my thanks ! in mm re¬ liance that the eye of Providence never sleeps'to the sufferer who places faith in his benevojence, I have never despaired— and thou hast rewarded my dépendance on thy mercy. O God ! my soul pours forth its gratitude before thee.'* This sudden exclamation on the part of
of Edward, roused the attention of 4dol- phus, in, reply to whose enquiries of thp cause which had thus agitated him, he, gave a full account of the occurrence of the last minutes : and a thousand conjec¬ tures were then formed by them both, of who could be the perspn from whom this enigmatical assurance of friendship had proceeded. It was also a doubt with jpdward, on cooler reflection, whether the information had been intended for him* or his fellow captive. Adolphus believed it either the work of his Belise, or of their mutual friend the keeper, who might have escaped from the detection of the fault he . had committed in admitting hitn on th-e fa,tal nigiit, from which he dated the corø- тгшцсещт% of his captivity, to %\e aj^arl* Dient of Belise, and might *till retain his situation in the ртщ. but have bmn Ы- Iherto prøyented fføm giving Ыт щ&щ~ mation that he was not les> than ever interested in his fate, Ptøwever, щ şQgfe^ţ а Фц4 of mystery hung
hnng over the inteUigence thus artfully conveyed, they mutually vowed that they would not accept any terms of liberation which did not include them both. The participation of their sorrows and hardships had rendered them sincerer friends than flippant prosperity could have qOpe; and they experienced the most consolatory sensations, from the strictness of that friendship by whicji they felt фещ- eelves allied to each other. Several weeks passee} on, and no fre-sh intelligence reache4 the captives; ца/~ røwly did ţhsy exarøine every supply of chesnuts which wa* ÎWghţ to tUe% aj>d with equa} nicety 4Ы they investi* gate, every article whieii wa$ Ыгоацре^ inţ© tì?cir ерЦ* ίμ the hppe of meeting with some farther information which midiit fceep ajive the eniber^s of hope within their breasts ; but disappointment attended ajl their researches. The weeks grew i^to months» and şevea of th^ese ha4 φογ§4 <№ щф tardy pa,c?e, when,
when, one evening, between the hours of eight and nine, the keeper, who had for some time past solely attended upon them, entered their prison : he closed the door after him, and, in a familiar tone, called out—" How are ye, gentlemen ? bow are ye?" Adolphus and Edward looked at him in silent surprise: his steps were fal¬ tering, and thev perceived that he was intoxicated ; in one hand he held a flask, his pipe was in his mouth, and in his other hand he grasped the large key of their prison door; he staggered towards the fire, and placed himself upon the bench, which he had drawn to the hearth. Having applied his mouth to the flask, and withdrawn it again from his lips with a smack, which pronounced him to have relished the draught it had afforded him, he said—"Gentlemen, I am cometo have a little talk with you: I am an honest man, though you see me one of the keep¬ ers of a prison. My master, the governor, makes a great deal of money by keeping you,
you, and others like you, confined in this place; now I don't see the reason why I should not make a little money as well as he—by letting you out of it—now an't I an honest fellow ?" However serviceable this intention might prove to our prisoners, they did not feel it at all consistent with tiuth to compliment him on the virtue of honestv; thus with a smile thev remained silent. * " Well," continued the keeper, " now I have explained to you my intentions, how much are you willing to give me for your liberty ?" Adolphus aud Edward, well acquainted that they were equally poor, cast upon each other a look of mingled enquiry, how they should leply to, the question, and of agony and despair, at the certain know¬ ledge that they had no bribe whatever to offer him. "You hesitate, methinks, a long while, " ci ied he, ťf for two men who have appeared as miserable as you have both done in cap¬ tivity,
tivity, about deciding on a reward fco* him who offers tó become your liberator. Mark this, a trifle wont satisfy mè, às ï can tiener return hither ágain to my present statioh, when I have once conveyed yon out of the reach of danger, and shall therefore be thrown out of employment." " My friend," said Edward, "yon must Ъе sensible that wé. can have nothing va¬ luable about us here to reward yöü With; nor will we deceive you iu promises that we should Dot be able to perform. We áre far from affl netit, and Weit we enlarged from this spot, our means Of life would be to be earned by us, as we have unju^ly Ъееп deprived of all wé once possessed, and have no dependance left us but our own endeavours. One thing alone We can assuré you of, that while we have thé power öf living, you shall never de desti¬ tute ; our gratitude will teach US tö exéťt every nerve in rendering you a reward equal tõ yóür áeseñ .:' inore Wé have It not in our power to promise." ťt You
"You have not!" returned the man, " why then I must try somebody else : promises wont do for me ; I have a cer¬ tainty here, and can't give it up for the chance of living upon ^promises. I am very sorry for ypu, but I can't afford to do any thing for you, as I am an honest man." He rose from the beuch, and was moving towards tbe door. " Stay," said Adolphus; " take this ring of hair; shew it to the governor's daughter, Belise, and entreat her to return what money she can command to him who sent it." "What should that be for?" asked the keeper; " do you think she'll lend her money, if she has got any, to a stranger, especially to help him out of her father's clutches ? she'd sooner send you a hand- cùtìf, I warrant me." " You niistake, you inistake !" cried Adolphus ; " I aifi По stranger to her; nor is she at all of the disposition of her father-
father-in-law. I entreat you to take it, and make the experiment." " No, no; there is too much danger in it," said the man : " ten to one but she informs against me to her father.", " í will pledge my soul that she will not!" exclaimed Adolphus. " Aye, but that would be no recom¬ pence tc me for the loss of my head, *' re¬ joined the keeper, " in case the governor was to chop it oft', in consequence of her prattling. I don't like trusting women." He placed the key 'm the door, in order to let himself out. " Do you then absolutely refuse to make the experiment?" asked Adolphus. " Not absolutely," returned the man : " there is one chance for vou ; if no other » prisoner can pay me for his liberty in any thing better than you have ofiered me, namely, promises, Л i come back, and make trial of the ring ; but if I can get any thing better, you must not expect ше. I am an honest man, and tell you the
tìifc troth í" and having said this, lie weat out, and locked the door after him· Their present disappointment bore less hardly on the friends than it would haine •done, had they -possessed no other chance of heing delivered from their bonds than the one which their poverty had just obliged them to relinquish. They were not at all surprised at the kind of philo* sophy practised by the keeper, who was in the daily habit of seeing his 4 master heaping together w^lth by the most nn* fair means; and they entertained some faint hope that he would find it diihcult to meet a ready reward for hie offered ser¬ vices from any unhappy victim to the avarice ofthe governor, and that he would still return for the ring. The night passed on, and the keeper did not return; thus they concluded, that he had either found some captive able to pay him for his enlargement, or that he had sunk to aleep uuder the influence of in·* 4 vol. in. ь toxication,
toxication, and had entirely forgotten the ring of Adolphus. .\ About that hour in the morning, at which their breakfast was usually brought to them, the door of the cell was opened, and a keeper, whom they had never seen before, entered ; he was followed by an¬ other man, in mean and tattered garments, one of whose eyes was concealed under a bandage, and whose left leg was bent up at the knee, and rested ou a wooden sup¬ porter. The former addressing Adolphus, spoke first—" We are come to fetch you," he said, " by order of the governor, to a better apartmeut. Here, comrade, un¬ lock his chain," he added, giving a key into the hand of the other man, who hav¬ ing received the key, moved up to Adol¬ phus,' saying to his fellow—" Stand you, meanwhile, by the door." There was someihing of such infinite familiarity to the senses of Edward in the voice of the last speaker, that it thrilled every
every chord in his system ; he fixed his eyes penetratingly on the features of the man, a variety of circumstances united in his mind, and he recognised, in the poor, tattered, and disabled figure, which stood before him-—the well-known Hum¬ bert. The eye of Hubert met his ; its expres¬ sion enjoined silence, and painful as was the injunction, Edward obeyed it. A few moments served to unlock the chain of Adolphus. Had his own inoli·, nation been consulted, he would have preferred remaining where he was, and sharing the conversation of Edward, wbich had been a great consolation to the mise¬ ries of his imprisonment, to the enjoyment of a better apartment without his society ; but knowing remonstrance to be in vain, as the command proceeded from a voice from which there was no* appeal, he suf¬ fered bimself to be led away without re¬ sistance; Edward and'hemchftngipg good ĺ 2 wishes
wishes for the future welfare of each other other, at parting.. For someminutes, Ed ward eould scarcely believe himself to be awake» so impossible did he feel it to believe that his senses had presented him with any thing more than an illusion, when he had supposed himself to have beheld the person of Hubert; and as lie became convinced thai г imleed a reality which he had seeii, h<? ^urst into a Hood of tears, which gave relief to his overburdened feelings. When his minţi became again sufficiently calm for reflection,, he no longer doubted by whom had been planned aud executed the artifice of the chesnuts; and his heart glowed with a fervency of gratitude to¬ wards Hubert, which surpassed in strength any sensation he had yet experienced ; so exquisite is the liappiness of finding a sincere f ι iend stdl allied to ns, at the mo¬ ment when we have believed ourselves to be forgotten mú §omkm by the whole world. How
Høw Hubert had introduced himself kto the prison, in his present disabled state ånd mean disguise, did not at ail excite hii surprise 5 what most raised life astonishment was, by what meant Hubert Imd Ifeamt him not to he dead, when he doubted not buf the report of hfe death had been currently circulated in England, and had discovered the place of his con· finement. • A thousand distracting thoughts be¬ wildered his brain, and pain and pleasure met in it with equal strength. Hubert might be detected in his friendship, might suffer death on his account. Hubert might succeed in procuring his enlargement, and once again conduct him to the arms ofhis wife. ** Oh, Rosalind! dearest, most adored of women ! dost thou stilt live?" he exclaimed. " Oh, that one sin¬ gle instant of communication had been permitted me with Hubert, that I might have received from him intelligence of thy ĺ 3 welfare!"
welfare 1" The contradictory ideas which swelled his imagination^ almost brought on a delirium ; he endeavoured in vain to compose bis mind, and throwing himself upon his pallet, prayed for sleep, lest rea¬ son should fade under the torturing influ¬ ence of combined hope and fear.
CHAP.
CHAP. XL
■■ ' ■■ ■ I will follow thee To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty. as you uke гт. W E must now dedicate a few pages to the adventurous Hubert. It will be re¬ membered, that in the conversation which passed between him and.the Lord Baron de Mowbray, relative to the disposal of Rosalind's then unburn child, the Baron had said—" Edward xvill see England na more; he is ly my design detained in Flan¬ ders." And at the same instant that con- л veyed to him this intelligence, Hubert 1 4 resolved,
resolved, that if human means could dis*« cover his retreat, and procure his enlarge¬ ment, to be himself the instrument of res¬ toring him to his lamenting Rosalind. Hubert was one of those beings who may be termed the universal friends of man ; the benefits of education he had not enjoyed, but nature had gifted him with a heart possessed of those rich virtues which instruction may refine, but cannot better. Whence then had one, whose soul waü the seat of every good quality, ob¬ tained the nâme of "Surly?" It was because the honest Hubert could neither fawn, smile, nor cringe; it was becanse the honest Hubert could not see the dig-» в ity of man insulted, whether it were clad in the laced robe of prosperity, or in the tattered garb of indigence, without ex¬ pressing the indignant feelings that arose in his mind; it was because Hubert could not commend an action of which he be¬ lieved the motive to be dishonourable ; it was becausc,desiriug the happiness of every human
human being, the many wretches whom he saw in existence, caused his brow to wear an almost^onstant frown of grief. When Edward, whilst a youth, first ad¬ dressed Hubert on the rani parts of De Mowbray Castle, and offered him the slice of bread and meat, which he so haughtily ι ejected, Hubert, who had been accus¬ tomed only to heat of the great, with des¬ criptions of their comforts, their luxuries, and their affluent ease, and who had seen so much of the poverty, the hardships, and the ill-rewarded labours of the poor, whom it had been his constant question, ' why the better provided for, by the hand of chance, did not more amply relieve ?* conceiving that there could be only the one motive of Edward's being unable to eat himself what he offered to him, and that any animal had been equally welcome to the gift, his very wants gave him pride to refuse the offer, of which he mistook the nature. Still did the next instant ex¬ plain that his heart was tender, although L 5 proud ;
proud ; ťor he scrupled not to submit to the most h amble supplication, to obtain what he had refused for himself, for the relief of a poor animal, whom hc saw hun¬ gry like himsel, and, like himself, the sport of superior strength and well-faring. But no sooner did Hubert discover his error, than mingled repentance and gra¬ titude swelled his heart. Edward, unlike the sons of fastidious grandeur, who arc irreconcileable on a first offence, and ever hate the object from which it sprung, easily perceived that the young Hubert possessed a degree oi character superior to the station he bad been born in; and justly conceiving him one of those personages for whom it is peculiarly the duty of the more fortunate in life to feel consideration, took frequent opportunities of conferring on him such little services and attentions, as proved to Hubert equal sources oi com¬ fort and gratification to his feelings. Actions of this «ature, when tbey spring from hearts like tliat of Edward, seldom
go unrewarded; the sensation of gratitude is the noblest feeling which the human mind can experience; and the justice of Providence has not deprived the poor of the power of tasting and exercising It, auy more than the rich— a knowledge which ought greatly to induce us to the per¬ formance of benevolent actions ; since, in the eventful scale of life, nothing is more likely, than that those who rjse to-day may sink to-morrow, and rejoice to meet him as a friend, whom they have once thought it a' condescension to acknow¬ ledge as a dependant. Every day Hubert became more and more attached to Edward, and bethought himself the happiest of human beings when, through the intercession of Edward, he was admitted a member of the new troops, then raising at the castle. When Edward ^vas sent to take the command of the newly-erected tower in the viUage, he first acquainted Hubert with his love for Rosalind, and confided ь 6 in
in his already tried friendship to visit the castle (a privilege which was not inter¬ dicted to him, although Edward enjoyed not the same liberty), and to bring hini intelligence of what was passing in it. At length, when Hubert brought him the dreadful information, that the Baron had destined his daughter to become the wife of the hated Lord Rufus, in the course of four more short days, and Ed¬ ward could nò longer endure absenee from her sight, Hubert repaired in the evening to the castle, under pretence of sleeping there ; and in the night he admitted Ed¬ ward, as they had previously agreed that he shouid do, by an outlet from the ram* parts, which led him into the vaults con¬ nected with the chapel From hence they had planned, that Hubert should proceed to the chamber of Gertrude, and require of her to give Ro¬ salind information of Edward's wish to see her in the chapel ; but that plan, our rea¬ ders will recollect, was anticipated, by Edward
Edward finding Rosalind already in the chapel when he entered it, whither she had come to pray by the side of her de¬ ceased mother's tomb. The events which followed this inter¬ view, down to the time of Edward's hasty departure with his company for Flanders, have been already fully detailed. At thi» period, the heart of Hubert ex* perienced as great a pang as that of the forlorn Rosalind ; uot even the opportu¬ nity of saying farewell to his benefactor Edward was given him : anxiously, most anxiously did he wish that he had beeu one of the number under his command; but the chance had not been his, and he lamented it more severely than any mis¬ fortune which had yet befallen him in life. Earnestly did he desire that a second body of troops might be sent to reinforce those already gone ; were he not of the chosen number, should such an event take place, he resolved to solicit for leave to become one
one of them ; and in this hope he grew tolerably composed. Thus had passed on seven months, when the Baron De Mowbray addressed Hubert, upon his post, as sentinel at the tower in the village, offering him five hundred pieces of gold for removing the child of Rosalind from Cumberland. Hubert could scarcely forbear falling on his knees before the Baron, and returning (hanks to Hea¬ ven that he had selected him as the instru¬ ment ofhis villanous intention. " Edward will see Eugland no more: he is,by my design, detained in Flanders," said the Baron. "Then/* whispered the soul of Hubert, " the five hundred pieces you offer shall be devoted to his release. " As eagerly did Hubert pant for the moment at which he should receive, from the hand of the Baron, the sum which would enable him to set out in quest of the victim of treachery, as the stag, which escapes
escapes from the pursuit of the hunters, pants for the cooling stream to allay its thirst. At length the hour came, and the five hundred pieces which Lord William had promised, were made slv hundred, and safely deposited in the pocket of Hubert. Cautiously had he avoided asking a single question relative to Edward, lest it should have led the Baron to suspect that ! he felt interested, in his fate ; thus the only ; clue whicb he possessed for tracing him out, was the common report which had been circulated throughout the country, on the departure of the troops, that they were destined for Ostend. Having dis- guised himself in the tattered jacket of a | sailor, and assumed the unnecessary sup¬ port of a wooden leg, he tied a bandage over his left eye, and having, in other respects, disfigured his person as much as he was able, he proceeded to a seaport town, where he took his passage on board a ship , bound for Ostend. Rich
Rich as lie was at the present time, he took especial care to make his expence* correspond with his appearance, that he might not, by any ilijudged display of his ability to procure for himself accom¬ modations superior to what his beggarly outside denoted him possessed of, draw down upon himself suspicion : -his money he had sewn within the lining of a waist¬ coat, which hehad chosen for its strength, not its appearance or comfort, and which he judged would provea faithful safeguard to the valuable trust committed to its care. A few days landed him at Ostend. Having talien up his abode at a mean house in the town, and signified to its landlord, that he was a poor distressed man, who hati once been a sailor, and had now been shipwrecked upon the coast of Flanders, from a vessel of which all tbe crew had perished except himself, he ex¬ pressed a wish of finding some employ¬ ment; he was indifferent, he said, of what nature,
nature, provided he was capable of per·* forming it, and that it wonld keep him from want ; alledging that all his relations in England were dead r and that every eountry was> now alike to him ; to which account, he added his inability of paying his passage to the opposite shore. The landlord of the house was a humane man, and promised him his assistance in procuring him some work, if any could be had; but he remarked, " that few were willing to engage a servant, whose dis¬ abled limbs must render him less useful than another man." To which Hubert replied, " that he was well aware of thia objection, and must therefore be satisfied with less wages." Hubert felt fearful of visiting the En¬ glish camp, lest, even disguised as he was, some individual in it should recog¬ nize him. Earnestly he wished for the means of making some enquiry "relative to Edward amongst the English soldiery, but his.
his apprehensions of a discovery forbade him to make the attempt. Walking abroad one day with the land¬ lord of his little inn, the prison, in which he then little suspected the object of his pursuit to be a captive, caught his atten¬ tion, and he enquired what it was; the landlord explained to him, that it was a prison where often ders of a superior order were kept, and where no comfort but that of liberty was denied to them. As they walked on, they approached nearer to ite walls, and the souud of music struclcthe ears of Hubert. " They are very merry, methinks, " said Hubert, "for the inhabitants of a prison/ 5 " The prisoners have nothing todo with the mirth you hear," replied the landlord; " this is the anniversary of the governor's wedding-day, and it is celebrated with great festivity. But tbe rejoicings of to¬ day are far inferior to those which took place on the day on which the governor M'as
was married ; they were splendid indeed : but it is no wonder, when we reflect on the great income his place is said to bring him in. No doubt but tţaat there г re many deeds transacted withiif a place like this, that are kept secret ata high price. " "It is a pity," said Hubert, " that any edifice should exist which is capable of concealing the crimes of those who live at large unsuspected, M'hilst the unhappy victims of their iniquity sigh out their days in solitude, unheeded and uncon» solef' " " It is a necessary evil," returned the landlord, " that there should be sucb places ; and as no good institutions exist without improper encroacLments being made upon the power annexed to them, we must be content, that if a little evil, by S'ich means, creeps into society, much good is produced to it from tbe same causes. But," continued he, " what I was going to remark to you, was an extraordinary circumstance which took place
|)lace at this same governor's wedding-^ Amongst the guests invited were the оШ- cers from the English camp; when the evening's entertainment was concluded, all the company left the house much about the same time, and, strange torelate, one of the English officers has never been heard of since. " *' Indeed V* said Hubert ; " what was his name ?" " I never heard him called by any name, 1 ' returned the host. Hubert stopped, lost in thought. " Луе, it is a strange story— isit not?" went on his informer, not at all suspicious that Hubert was more moved than any one might have been by the recital he was making to him. '* It is supposed that some villains robbed him on his way to the camp, and then murdered him, to pre¬ vent his preferring an information against them," Of a far different tenor was the opinion which Hubert formed of this mysterious occurrence»
occurrence. ť< Edward is. hy my design, detained in Flanders" Lord William de Mowbray had said ; and what place could appear more likely to be the scene of this treacherøus confession, than a building of tlie nature oi which the host had just de¬ scribed the prison they were lookmg at tobe? Dut Hubert closely shut up his ideas within his own breast, and endea¬ voured to continue his conversation with his companion, without discovering to hirø the emotions which agitated his mind. As they returned towards the town, Hebers, scarcely conscious of advanciug the question, enquired the name of tbe governor ofthe prison they had just seen? his host replied, " that it was Garcías "Xavia!" repeated Hubert, "it is a Spanish name, and an unusual ^ne. I think I have heard that there w<* pio¬ neer in the English troops that came over her^last year of that name; but, although ^ I cannot
I cannot recollect bis Christian name, I am inclined to believe it was not Garcías.** " No, no," answered Hubert's com¬ panion, " it was Sanchez." íť You know him then," said Hubert. "lam not acquainted with him," re¬ joined the host; " I have only heard of him ; he is the governor's brother." " Tlte retreat of my loved master is then discovered!" exclaimed Hubert, to himself. ** If Sanchez Xavia is the go¬ vernor's brother, and an English officer disappeared on the evening of his visiting there, no longer doubt remains to me of his iute.' The warm blood of joy poured into his heart, and he breathed a silent prayer of thanksgiving to Heaven. ' *' Did you know him ?" asked the host, who suspected nothing from Hubert's question. *' I have seen him, as you may have done,** rejoined Hubert, " but it is some time since. " He then gave a change to the conversation, wishing that the subject should
should be discussed as little as possible, lest he should let fall any expression which might draw upon him the eye of suspicion. Hubert's night was sleepless ; no sooner had he reclined his head on his humble pillow, than a thousand various plans, for gaining access to the prison, passed through his brain. He reviewed each separately, and some obstacle presented itself to the execution of them all ; he, however, felt an indescribable satisfaction in believing iiimself possessed of the secret of Edward's concealment, and willingly resolved not to let his impatience to inform him that he was acquainted with it, lead him into any rashness which might for ever blast the hopes he now entertained of one day restoring him to libeity, and to his be¬ loved Rosalind. The age of miracles, even at that dis¬ tant period, was past ; at least of those open interpositions of Providence which were once permitted to the eye of man : but those which are allowed to reach the miud
mind of observation, will never cease» while the justice ©f Providence continues to exist Although the finger which dis¬ poses the events oflife be concealed frpm our view, many are the instance« which feelingly convey to our senses the imme* diate interposition of a Merciful Power ; which, beholding with pity the sufferings of the innocent, accommodates, what ap¬ pear to the unthinking, the common acci* dents of life, to their eventual happiness, and triumph over their oppressors. To such a cause did Hubert attribute the accident which, in a short space of time, made him an inhabitant of tlie pri¬ son, whose walls inclosed Edward. Compelled to catch at the first em¬ ployment which ofiered itself to his ac¬ ceptance, as one of the most requisite parts which he had to act in sustaining his present character, he hired himself to an old woman who sold wood about the streets. On the third day of bis serving in his mw ,çapacityj ¿iş mistress took her road
road out of the town, and stopped at the gate of the prison. " The governor," she said, " is niy best customer; î come here regularly twice a-week." A man came to the gate, who received the stinted quantity of wood, placed it in the prison- yard, and having done this, again closed the gate. Having disposed of her wood» ihe old woman returned home for a fresh load, and Hubert, with a heavy heart, followed her, disappointed that he had not even been admitted within the outer wall of the prison. Thus passed on a second, a third, and even a fourth week ; Hubert still con¬ strained to lead about the blind horse, wbich dragged the sledge that contained his employer's logs. One day about this time, when they stopped as usual at the gate ofthe prison, a fat dame, who Mas a kind of superin¬ tendant of the household cc'onomies of the place, came out to the dealer in wood, vol. in. m and
and addressed her, with an enquiry, whe¬ ther she could inform her of any poor wretch who was willing, and hard-work¬ ing, and wanted a place; for that the man who had been accustomed to perform all the menial offices in the prison, had died the day befoie, and they were in want of some/one to fill his station? " I pray you, good mistress, engage me," said Hubert; " I shall be very thankful indeed for the situation." " I doubt you are not strong enough for it," returned the fat dame, eyeing him as she spoke from top to toe. " You arc lame, 1 see, and can't be very quick in your movements on that account." " But my willingness to oblige my employers may make amends for that de¬ ficiency," replied Hubert; " and I am strong, very strong, I assure you." " So, you ungrateful fellow," cried Hubert's mistress, " then you would leave me, that took you when you had not a bit of bread to put into your mouth." ; "It
" It is not ingratitude that prompts me to make the change," returned Hubert, " but it is because I should prefer the work I should bave here, within the house, to being continually obliged to walk about the streets." As tbe dealer in wood contended for Hubert's services, the housekeeper of the prison directly thought them woith hav¬ ing; which she, probably, would not have done had bis present mistress seemed wil¬ ling to part from him ; and accordiugly said—" Well, I have a good mind to try you :" and she then offend him a very small sum, as wages, for which she de¬ manded of him the peiformance of as many different concerns, as would, upon a modciate calculation, have afforded em¬ ployment for three other* besides himself. However, as the terms were iiidiiìcrent to Hubert upon which he entered the prison, so he did but get within its walls, he ac¬ cepted tbe proffered conditions. His mistress paid him a parting compit¬ ai S ment,
ment, in which she wished him ill luck for quitting her service; and his new one gave him encouragement, by saying— " that if he was obliging to her, she would be his friend with his master;" and with this promise he was ushered into the kitchen oi' the prison. His labour.was full as much as he ex¬ pected it woukl be ; he was tlie servant of almost every servant in the pi 'ьоп ; but still he was content, for he believed him·* self uear bis benefactor, Edward. Hubert had been about four months an inhabitant of lhe prison, when he was conducted to thè vault set apart for the governor's family, 'and commanded to dig a grave, which he was inferred was for the governor's brother, Sanchez, lt was with no little pleasure that he heard the account oi his death, and he performed his ta&k with great good will. The night had been the season at which he had been set about this employment ; and as he re¬ turned fiom the performance of his task, with
with the keys of the vault hanging upon his arm* his mattock and spade supported on his shoulder with one hand, and his lamp held in the other, he was surprised at hearing the sound of the governors voice, and seeing the keepers running about in a hasty manner, that denoted some matter of importance to have taken place. He durst not stop to ask any questions in the presence of the governor, but of the first keeper who foilowed him into the kitchen, he enquired the cause of the com¬ motion he had just seen atid heard. "Oh,"' replied tbe man, " there has been the devil eo pay ; the governor's daughter-in- law has been very near eloping to-night with a lover, whom neither her mother nor the governor approves ; ancl, as misfor- ' tunes never come siusrle, our English, captive was as near making his escape at the same time." ° Well, they ate not like me," cried Hubert ; " I don't want to get away ; 1 m 3 never
never was so well off in my life as I am here." " One ofmy comrades is turned out," went on the keeper, "who was discovered to liave let in the lady Pelise's lover, and who meant to have favoured her elope- nicni." " h her lover an Englishman ?" asked Hubert ** No, a French officer," answered the keeper: " the Englishman is an officer too." " What, is he a grandee, a lord, ora duke, or any thing of that kind ?" en¬ quired Hubert. " I don't know what he is," returned the man ; " titles are all sunk here; we seldom know our captives by name ; I never heard him called any thing but the English officer." Hubert was now entirely convinced— " Have you had him long ?" Hubert was beginning to say, wlien the keeper was cailed away, and no farther opportunity given
given him of adding to the number of his enquiries. Almost all the keepers of the prison were men who had for a long time beeu the servants of tbe governor, and whose fidelity to their master had beni tried. He who had just parted from Hubert was the only talkative man with whom he had yet met; be was a young Frenchman, who had but lately become a servant in the prison, and who, with the address to ap¬ pear discreet before the governor, and the old servants of the place, still loved to hear himself talk, when he was with any one who would listen to him. Hubert found him to be the only one in the fa¬ mily from whom hc was li kdy to gain any intelligence of what was passing within the walls, and therefore did aii in his power to attacb the young man to him. Pierre, for such was bis name, would probably bave scorned an intimacy with a man in Hubert's inferior situation, had be been able to have found any other M 4 person
person about the j)Iace, who would have indulged hiin in the use ofhis tongue; but not being able to do that, he preferred society, wluch he considered beneath him, ratlier than to desist from his favourite amusement of tattling. Amidst Hubert's numerous employ¬ ments, it was a part of his business to go to the outer gate of the prison, and receive from those who brought them^ the bread, the fruit, the milk, and, in short, every article consumed within the prison ; after bringing them in, he was appointed to carry them into the hall, and here the keepers received from him, in different baskets, the allotted portions for the pri¬ soners under their care. Hubert remarked that Pierre brought a larger basket than any of the other keepers, and received into it a double share of fruit and bread ; Pierre was also the last of the keepers who received from Hubert the portion for his captives; and this gave Hubert an opportunity of enquiring of him,
him, why he had always a double quan¬ tity put iuto one of his baskets ? " Why," replied Pierre, " ever since tbat night, when our young lady had like to have run away, and the English cap¬ tive to bave made Jiis escape, the unfor¬ tunate lover and the Englishman have both been confined in one cell, so the double portion is for them." Having thus gained the knowledge of which was the basket of provisions con¬ veyed to Edward, Hubert began to con¬ sider it no diflicult matter to give him in¬ formation that he had a friend at hand. After many debates with his own mind, hc resolved on engraving those words of hope v/hich have been already laid hefore our readers, on some chesnuts, wiiich he intended to take the hrst favourable op¬ portunity of putting iuto the basket that daily received the double portion of jmo- visions. To his great delight he found his plan by no means a difiicult one to exe¬ cute; he artfully contrived to give Pierre M â a subject
a subject to discuss, and, while he was en¬ gaged in talking, Hubert put his prepared chesnuts at the bottom ofthe basket, and covering them over with apples and bread, he gave the basket into the hand of Pierre, without feeling the least alarm that he should examine it—he was at ail times too idle to do more than he was ordered. From this time the davs passed on with Hubert, unmarked by auy event, till Ma¬ dame Xavia paid the debt of life, and he was again sent into the burying-ground, to open the family vault, for the reception of her body ; his friend, Pierre, assisted him in carrying his tools to the spot, and in the way thither informed him, that the vault was immediately beneath the jirison where the lady Belize's lover, and the young Englishman, were confined. Possessed of this knowledge, Hubert resolved to use every moment of the night, which he could spare from the labour he was employed on, iu endeavouring to make himself heard by Edward, in his prison
prison above him ; to this purpose he re¬ peatedly called on bini by name, but as he received no answer to his calls, he concluded, that the stone which parted them was impenetrable to bis voice, and therefore began to seek some other method of making himself heard. The roof of the burying-place was within the reach of his mattock, and he struck various parts with the iron end of it, hoping that some of the knocks would reach the car of Ed¬ ward ; but his endeavours proved fruit¬ less, ami he was compelled to complete his task, and leave the spot, whcie he felt a pleasure in lingering, on account of its proximity to Edward. On returning to the kitchen, he was surprised to find Pierre, who bad ptomiscd to sit up for him till he came back from the vault, was not there. During the time that Hubert had been employed in opening the vault, the go¬ vernor and Belise had repaired, at mid¬ uight, to the chapel, to say a reyuitm for m 6 the
the rest of Madame Xavia s soul; and on the governor's return to liis chamber, he found his money-box broke open, aud robbed ; nor was this all—his master-key to the various locks in the building, which was usually hung at the head of his bed, was also gone. An immediate search was made after the thief—Pierre alone was missing, and, as he did not return in the course of the succeeding day, uo doubt was entertained of bis being the purloiner of the governor's gold. A reward was offered by the governor for his apprehension ; but it proved in¬ effectual, as Pierre was never lieard of after. Pierre's flight was at first a circumstance On which Hubert by no means reflected with pleasure ; he bad been the only one in the prison whom he Iiad found ready' in his communications, and he feared that his absence would deprive him of gaining any intelligence relative to Ed wai d. While Hubert was wondering whether the new keeper
keeper would prove а шап from whom be might reap equal advantage as he had done from the familiar disposition of Pierre, he was surpnsed with the infor¬ mation that he was himself promoted to the station. Hubert received the intelligence with warm but concealed joy ; he now believed that he should enjoy the privilege of wait¬ ing upon Edward, and thus easily gain an opportunity of conversing with him ; butin this hope he was disappointed. The keeper who had heretofore watched over the pri¬ son of Edward in the evening, was ap¬ pointed to attend upon it entirely; and Hubert was deputed to serve two solitary captives, whose apartment ts were at one end of tbe stone passage, tbe other ex¬ tremity of which led to the prison of the two fiiends*
СИЛР
CHAP. XIL Oh í 'tis excellent To have a giant's strength j but it is tyrannous To-use it like я giant. MEASURE VOR Μ Ε Л? ÜRE· UN the eleventh day after ihe interment of the governor's wife, a stranger arrived at the prison aboutthe hour of noon, who was for some time shut up with t lie go¬ vernor in his private apartment, and then departed. In the evening, the governor, which was by no means usual with him, went out himself, saying, that he was going to meet
meet some friends, who he expected would arrive that night at Ostend. Each keeper had a small apartment, for his own private use, in some part of the gallery which led to the apartments occu¬ pied by the prisoners immediately uuder his care; that whieh was now become the property of Hubert, was directly opposite to that of one of his comrades, named Gourtray. While Hubert had been only in a menial capacity in the prison, this man had noticed hím but very little; now he was raised to an equality with himself, their acquaintance grew fast, and they usually passed their leisure hours İn each other's apartment. Hubert found Gour¬ tray to be, what he, perhaps uncharitably, but probably very jibtly, supposed every one wbo filled an oilice like bis, a rogue iu his heart- who wanted but oppoitu¬ nity, like Pierre, to make himself rich, at whosevcr expence he might become so. Upon this opinion of Gourtray's dispo¬ sition, the watchful Hubert had formed a plan,
plan, by which he hoped eventually to procure the enlargement of Edward ; and judging the present evening of the go¬ vernor's absence to be a good opportunity for opening to Gourtray a conversation of the nature he wished to have with him, hc invited him into his little apartment, saying—" Walk in, comrade; you and I have not had a glass together since I have held my office, so let it he this evening: I have a flask of choice brandy, which I will uncork for the purpose." Ciotti tray readily accepted the invita¬ tion, and thev seated themselves over Hu- herťs fire. With his second draught, Hubert said—"Come, let us drink to the health of the governor; not that his health is any more to you or me than that of any other man, except as being our employer, and it is my maxim always to wish best to those 1 gettile most by." " Thou resemblest me exactly," repiied Golii tiay; " if any one else would offer me a better livelihood than his wages af¬ ford
ford me, ï would kick him oif Ín a mi¬ nute, I promise thee.*' This was exactly the sentiment which Hubert wished to hear proceed from the lips of his companion, and hc satd~r"To my thinking now, I shouhi suppose, lhat you, who are a native of this country, and have not, like myself, the misfortunes ofa maimed leg. and useless eye, might easily procure for yourself some more lucrative employment than that of being a keeper in a prison," " Why as to that," returned Gourtray, * ť our waives, vou mnst allow, are well enough ; they are, uo doubt, made better than they would be, in order to ensure our fidelity to our master ; and; upon tbe whole, the place would not bc despicable, if our prisoners were not so stripped by the cursed avarice of the governor, tbat they have nothing left to fee us with for little services that wc might render tbcm, if they could pay us for them." " 1 warrant me though," replied Hu¬ bert,
bert, " that if you or I durst show any of them the way to liberty, he'd manage to find us a reward worth the trying for." *' I can't think that any one confined here has a reward in his power, " answered Gourtray ; "the governor pilfers them all as they come in—No, no, they can have nothing left." ťí I would not wager my life on that," returned Hubert. 4ť Misfortune makes men crafty, and there are ways and means of cheating the keenest-eyed. í dare he bound to say, that some of the captives here have been thus cunning, and have either money or valuables about them yet; but, perhaps, if you knew they had, you would not like such meaus of earning an' independent sum ?" ť< By Saint Francis," cried Gourtray, ' e I'd about it this instant, if I thought there was one wbo could make it worth my while. What, man !—do'st think I would not? All we keepers of prisons have the repute of being thieves and ras¬ cals,
cals, and we may as well bave it for something as nothing, according to my opinion." "Aye, it is but true/ 5 replied Hubert, with a smile, " tos true indeed ;" and again he put the flask to his comrade, who took a hearty draught, and then spoke thus—" Now, who, to yonr thinking, is there amongst all our captives, that is most likely to have a golden lining to his pocket? '*' Why, I have been so little amongst them till within these few days/' answered Hubert, that I can hardly be so good a judge as yourself. Let me se©—you have an Englishman under your care, bave you not?" " Aye, here hard by," returned Gour¬ tray ; " know you any thing of him ?" " How should I?" replied Hubert; " you kuow I have not been into his cell." " Then how came you to mention him?'* asked Gourtray. " Why/'
" Why." replied Hubert, "I have a pretty good knowledge of the English ; they are a crafty people, apt at stratagem, and I should not wonder, whoever he is, but he has managed to secrete the price ofa rescue somewhere about him.*' u Aye!" cried Gourtray, evidently ani¬ mated by the idea. " Why, I think it very probable indeed," went on Hubert; "and ifyou like to agree to give me a small share out of what he might in such case bestow on you, I'll go with you into his cell, and sound him for you. I understand his language bet¬ ter than you flo, and í am also somewhat more acquainted with the manners of the Englishman you are." Some time previous to the evening on which this conversation took place, Hu¬ bert bad taken one hundred pieces of gold from his waistcoat, and put them into a purse, v/hich he carried constantly about him ; and which it was his intention, if he could prevail on -Gourtray to carry him
hhn with him into Edward's prison, on the business of which he had just ρ ven him the idea, to slip into Edward's hand, jud - ina: that he could not fail to understand their being intended for him to bestow oiij Gourtray, as the price ofhis liberty. Gourtray continued silent for some moments after the last proposition on tbe part of Hubert. He then said—* 1 I ap-1 prove thy counsel ; it is good, and worthy j to he tried : if the attempt fails '~ f * procur-' ing us any advantage, we can lose nothing) by it, which renders it doubly estimable— but this is not the [ roper hour for the at¬ tempt. It the governor docs not retuin home before midniglit, 1 will come andı cat! upon you to go with mc to the En¬ glishman's prison ; if he does return, we iii ust wait for the arrival of some more favourable ¡»eusotı.;* and, with these words, he rose from his seat, and staggered *)ut of Hubert's apartment, carrying with him the flask, which contained but a small j portion of the brandy that bad lately filled] it,
it, and of which he hád drunk by much the better half. Hubert continued over his fire, antici¬ pating the joyful moment at whicb Gour¬ tray would return to conduct him to the cell of his lespected master. Meanwhile the Fleming, who actually possessed all that cunning which Hubert, in order to favour his purpose, had attempted to make Jiim believe the innaie principle of his jEnglish prisoner, judging it entirely un¬ necessary to make Hubert a sharer of tbc |p roli t that was to be reaped fiom the plan which hc had just proposed to him, pro¬ ceeded alone, as our readers have already been informed, to the cell of Edward aud Îıis friend, u here we need not repeat the ill success that attended his attempt. ¡ Goni tray, we must suppose, had never known that Adolphus was the lover of the ţmidy Belise, or it appears unlikely that hc sliould have refused to carry her the ing; or we must suppose, that if the cir- :umstance had beeu known to him, the fumes
fumes of intoxication had driven it from his brain. Whether Gourtray, after his ill success in the prison of Edward, made a similar offer to any other of the captives, is a circumstance of no consequence to this narrative; wehave, in this instance, only to speak of what refers to Hubert. Each of the keepers of the prison took his turn, by night, in attending- in the hall, and letting in such of the family as had, during theevening, been absent from the building ; and when every one had entered, he was allowed to retire to rest. On the present evening, this office fell upon (jourtray, and what hour he went tí) his poet was not known, as no one was absent from the prison but the governor, and none but suchas immediately entered the prison from the court-yard, had occa¬ sion to pass near the hall. Hubert did not retire to his bed at his usual hour, but coutinued silting m his room, expecting the return of Gourtray. Hc had heard the
the clock strike twelve some time, and as Gourtray did not ι eturn, he opened the door of his room to listen whether he was in his chamber on the opposite side of the gallery; this he had scarcely done, ere he recollected that it was Gourtray's turn to keep watch in the hall, lie found that he was not in his chamber, and therefore concluding the governor not to be re¬ turned, be was on the point of shutting his own door again, when he heard the bell from the gate sounding in the hall. The distance of his room from the hall was considerable, but the bell was power¬ ful, and the echoes natural to the vaulted roofs of the building, carried the sound powerfully through the air. "That bell," conjectured Hubert, " denotes the go¬ vernor's return : I shall probably then not see Gourtray again to-night." He entered his chamber, .but did not shut his door, as he felt a wish to speak to him when he came to bed, and learn 5 , whether
whether his resolution to make an offer of enlargement to the English officer still continued unshaken. In a iew minutes, the bell from the gate sounded louder than before; a short silence again ensued, and agaiu the bell was rung with redoubled violence. Hubert felt at a loss to conclude from what cause Gour¬ tray had not given ail mit tan ее to the claimant for it; and judging that if it was the governor, it became him, as he hud heard it thrice repeated, to attend to the summons,, he took up his lamp, and went down into the hall. lie saw not Gourtray iu his way to tîıe gate, which as hc approached, the bell was rung a fourth time. Hubeil unlocked the heavy gate, and on drawing it back upon its hinges, the governor, and three other men with him, entered. "What is the reason," exclaimed the governor, " that I have been thus long detained at the gate? you shall repent this negligence." vol. ία. n Hubert
Hubert directly replied—" Sir, the watch of to-night is not mine: I, by accident, heard the bell sounded repeatedly, and on this account I came down from my cham¬ ber to learn the cause." "Oh, I perceive," returned the go¬ vernor, " you are not Gourtray—it is his watch. Where is he ?" Hubert was obliged to reply that he did not know. " Go, call up some of the servants," said the governor ; "these friends of mine will sleep here to night, and they have not )ct supped. Do your best to assist in spreading tlie table immediately." Ai the command of the governor, Hu¬ bert preceded him and his friends to one ofthe handsomest apartmentsin the house; at the foot ofa flight of steps, which led to if from the hall, lay Gourtray, locked in a· ι ihm n -ihle sle·.'! · " How now, ras¬ cal ľ' exclaimed the governor ; but he did not awake; the weight of the brandy he had
had drank sat heavy on him, and he was incapable of bearing or understanding. At this time, some others of the keepers, who had been roused by the repeated ring¬ ing of the bell, entered the hall ; and to these the governor gave İn charge to convey Gourtray to the dungeon, where he commanded that he should remain a prisoner, till he judged proper to hear his defence of his conduct from liis own lips; an order which those to whom it was de¬ livered, durst not venture to disobey., As the governor entered the apartment into which he conducted his guests, the light of Hubert's lamp fell upon his coun¬ tenance, and Hubert perceived that he appeared much agitated, although evident marks of savage triumph were visible amidst the various passions that seemed to fill his breast. The guests, Hubert had only opportunity to observe, were in the English dress ; one of them was the pei son wbo had been closetted with the governor ín the morning. n 2 According
According to the directions he had re¬ ceived, Hubert called up some of the ser¬ vants, whose business it vvas particularly to attend to the governor's family ; and their presence rendered it unnecessary for him to do more towards the preparations for the entertainment of the guests, than to carry in some wood, and to make a fire of it upon the hearth. At the first sight of the strangers, Hu¬ bert concluded that one of them, at least, was a new victim, doomed to the solitude of imprisonment within the dreary walls be had just entered. He had observed that one of the three was habited more costly than the other two; and him he considered the unfortunate man, for no other reason, except that persecution usually appears to exert itself witb the greatest energy against those who stand in a situation the most attractive to envy. As he went into the room with the logs of wood on his shoulder, the governor whispered to him, to demand the keys of those
thos.e cells which Gourtray had been ac¬ customed to attend, and to visit them in the morning, with the first meals of tbe day, himself. This command was a cor¬ dial to the heart of Hubert; and he pro¬ mised with true fervour to obey İt. As he was again quitting the room, the best dressed of the three strangers crossed upon him by accident, iu such a situation that he could not help catching a full view of his countenance. He was voting; and handsome, and Hubert felt confident that his features were familiar to his sight. Again Hubert tinned his eye upon him, as he moved out of the room, and became still more ceitrin that the contour of his face was by no means that of a person whom hc had never seen before ; and what was still more extraordinary, he connected unpleasant ideas with the re¬ collection, although he could not recol¬ lect where hc had seen him before. But he had uot proceeded many steps away from the apartment, when memory came N 3 to
to his aid, and, beyond all possibility of error, he remembered that the man whom he had just seen a guest of the governor Garcías, was Alwin, the page of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, grown to the stature of manhood. Tbis conviction struck agony to the heart of Hubert. Emissaries from the man, who passionai cly desired to possess the lovely and constant Rosalind, and amongst these emissaries, the youth who in a particular manner enjoyed the smiles of his favour, must portend evil to the unhappy Edward. At first, his fears half distracted him; he knew not whither to fly, what to do, or hi»w to prepare bimself against any at¬ tack which might be made upon Edward's life. Some minutes of deliberation, how¬ ever, seemed to promise him, that if his existence was in danger from their arrival, it was at least safc for that nisrhr. as the governor woukl not eLc have commanded him to visit the prison where hc was con¬ fined,
fined, in the morning. Still, he consi¬ dered that this might be only a subterfuge to baiïïe suspicion, if it were awakened in any mind, and he resolved not to go to bed. He returned to his chamber, innn which he frequently wandered out upon the gallery, and endeavoured, bv action, to calm his perturbed spirits. In ılıt* course ofa couple of hours, lie heard tbe servants of the household retiring again to rest ; he made an excuse of fetching some « ater, which he pretended was for one of the 111* prisoners, and u»ed the opportunity to enquire if the governor and his guests were gone to 1кч1 ? He was told that they were not ; that the governor had said he had some busi¬ ness to transact with the strangers which, would not. admit of delay, and had di¬ rected all the servants to return to their chambers. "Oh God!" exclaimed Hubert, men¬ tally, " is it then tlieir intent this very night to^——" —he durst not conclude his n 4 sentence
sentence even to himself. Wretched be¬ yond the power of any intelligence to make him more so, or of any circumstance to adıl to the torture of his mind, hc re¬ solvei! to go down, and, if possible, to overhear some part of tlicir conversation. Every step of the building ho was well acquainted with; thus he was not under the necessity of сап y ing a light with 'him, to expose himself to any one whom acci¬ dent might lead the same way; unlikely as it was, that any person besides himseif should, at that hour, be moving about. His resolution was no sooner ñxed than put into execution. As he approached the apartment in which were the governor and his guests, he, at some distance, heard their voices, apparently in strong debate. On arriving at* the foot of the steps which led to the door of the apartment, he had not occasion to ascend them, for the pmpose of bring an auditor of their di »сойме; cither secure that they were not attended to by any ear, or heated into loudness
loudness by the interest of the subject thev we» e discussing, their words were eavSilv d'siiuL» i'bhable. 'Ihe In » "cnrcnec which Hubert beard, ajmeaicd to be spoken by Aluin. "Your captive,'* he said, " may die to-niorroW, aud v, herr would then he the annuity on vlnch you 4*t so high avalué? You couìd n »t luny; impose on the Loid R.tron de Mow hi i> by feigning him still alive; it i.s impossible he should bc thus deceived. Edward ma ι dte t -morrow, nnd —** ^ Τι-, tiue," ìcplitd the governor; " but he is jist as likely to Ine for many years to ninu." " \ud where İs the difference, * icjoined Al w in, "if )our iew ard in cither case be niatle equal?" Many moie arguments, of the same na* tuie, followed, bctwien ihc governor and Alwin; at length tlietoimei saul— **\Vcll, let the tvvo thous.'inij pieces of gold be ¿iven into my hands, and I will consent.'* N 5 Hubert
Hubert heard a box unlocked, and he supposed the gold was contained in it, for the governor then said —"lam satisfied." " Well then," demanded Alw in, " when will you give us the opportunity we re¬ quire?" " To night I dare not do it," returned the governor: tl the morning almost dawns, and some of my people, I doubt not, are already risen—this must be an action of secrecy. To morrow, at the hour of midnight, I will conduct you to his cell" "If we must submit to this delay, we must," rejoined Alwin ; " but as we are so decidedly determined together, that his death is certain, let me entreat you, to¬ night, to write the letter I requested of you, to the Baron dc Mowbray, that we may to-morrow dispatch a messenger with it to England ; as i u the speed you use in conveying intelligence of his ceasing to exist to Lord William de Mowbray, you most
most essentially serve him, who sends you, through me, the sum contained in that casket." íť Since we arc agreed," returned the governor, (i I feel no hesitation in writing the letter. Fill your goblets, and whilst you are emptying them again, I will pen the epistle you desire." Some minutes of silence ensued : the governor then said— tť Please to read what I have written, and tell mc if it meets your approbation." Alwin read thus :
«' Garcías Wavia greets the Lord Baron de Mowbray.—The prisoner named Ed¬ ward, whoui it js uow very nearly lour years since the Lord Baron enstrusted to his protection, tiirough the means of his deceased brother Sanchez, breathed his last on the evening preceding that of which this epistle bears the date—a violent n 6* fever
fever carried him hastily to the grave. Garrias Xavia tiusts that the noble Lord liaron do Mow bra}' will acknowledge him to have bren faithful to the trust reposed in Jiim, and will tieign to accept his thanks for the liberality with which he has re¬ warded the services he is proud of having bad it in his power to render to so illus¬ trious a noble. " Ostend, 7th Mqrdi. 1587."
" ît corresponds exactly with my wishes/* said Al. in, "and tomorrow I wiil dispatch onr of these, my iriends, as a messenger with it to England. Another day, then, we must remain your guests, and to-morrow night at twelve —" " 1 will myself conduct you to his cell/* said the governor. "And tbe instant our purpose in coming hither is effected, you must lead us beyoud the walls oí this edifice," said Ahvin. "It
íť It shall be done/' replied the go¬ vernor. Alwin now requested tho governor to conduct them to their respective chain* bers; and ou hearing this, Hubert dhcctly fled from the foot of the steps to the gal¬ lery where hc had left his lamp. If the state of mind in wliich Hubert passed the remainder of the ni^ht cannot be conceived by tbe redder, the author's attempt to describe it musi he ineffectual. At length the morning' arrived, and ihe refulgent rays of the suu once more en¬ lightened the eanh, As Hubert was on thr point of repairing to the cell of Edward wkh hb bicakfast, and that ofhis iclluw prihoner, Adolphus, one of the keepco rune to him, and »aid, hc was sent hy the gou rn or to go with hi. n into thr prison uf the English officer, and bring away trom it his fellow captive, the young Adolphus. " The governor/' he said, " had expressed himself to relent having so long euiidtunned him to a dun¬ geon,
geon, when his crime had been only that of love; and had resolved to give him a better apartment, to which he and Hubert were to conduct him." Hubert could not doubt that Adolphus was to be removed from the cell of Ed¬ ward, io order that he might not be a witness of his intended murder. " Tis well," he said, in reply tothe information delivered by the other keeper, and led the мау to the cell. Hubert perceived that Edward recognised him ; hut the present M'as not a moment to acknowledge that be did so, and he departed with Adolphus in silence. Tlic brain of Hubert had been racked. during the night, with a thousand plans for the piescrvation of his benefactor's life: and that wliich seemed to promise t tie greatest hope of success, was, if pos* sihle, to find the means of persuading the avaricious governor, that if he suffered the life of Edwarti to hc taken away by the emissaries of Lord Rufus de Madgine¬ court,
court, he would eventually lose a much greater leward than be hnd received as the price of his death. The lure he conceived to be good, but the difliculty was how to represent it to the governor. AVere he himself to speak upon it to him, he must, at the same tiine, confess himself an im¬ postor, a friend to Edward, and that be hid been a listener to the conversation the governor had, on the preceding night, held with the English strangers; antl to give him any anouymous information upon the subject he Mt averse, as he feared that it would not produce the effect of carrying conviction to his mind. The idea, how¬ ever, he considered as being too gootl to be surfered to fall to the ground. He accordingly resolved, that as he coukl not hold out. the temptation to him personally, be woukl do it anonymously; to this cnd > he wrote the fbllowing ktter: —
(i Garcías
" Garcías Xavia, beware what you do f Von are, on this paper, ad¬ dressed bv a fiiend of the Lord Baron de Mowbray, who writes to you in conse¬ quence of a knowledge he has obtained, that you are, at thib ииы -cnt, entertain¬ ing iu \oitr hou«e embs.iries iiom Lord R nan s de Madginecourt, whose vU\t to tlie continent. írom lhe well-known pas¬ sion ofthat nobltmiau for the daugliter of De Mowbray, v.ho is the wife of yonr prisoner Edward, eannot but porU:;d danger to his life. You are, theiefoie, again tn\{\ to beware what \ou do; for althoiii>h the Laren de Mou brav lia*> not yet pardoned his daughter's mai riage, the day is. in all probability, not far distant, When he will rceall Eouard to İ ugland, and acknowledge him his son and heir: thus jou will, m sueh rase, not only lose the reward he would bestow on you for the psesf rvation ofhis life írom his enemy De M idginecourt, but have to answer for his death. Therefore, a third time, bazvare.
beware. So enjoins you, a member of the English camp." Tbis letter, Hubert put, early iu the morning, into a letter-box on the outside the prison svall, of which tbe contents were daily carried to the governor at his breakfast-table. Throughout the dny, it was the inten¬ tion of Hubert to watch the governor, as much as opportunity would permit him to do ; and to endeavour to gather, from his words and his features, whether his letter had made any change in his resolution relative to Edward. Scarcely had Hubert removed Adolphus into his new apartment, ere he was sum¬ moned to the governor in bis private closet. Hubert judged it impossible that the de¬ ception he had practised should have been discovered, or even suspected ; btill he feared this might be the cause of his pre¬ sent summons into the governor's pre¬ sence;
sence ; however, whether İt was so or not, he could not tlo otherwise than obey it. He found Xavia pacing his closet, and when Hubert entered, he quickly thrust a letter iuto his pocket, which Hubert could not doubt to be the one he had written to him in the ni»bt. The £0- vernor turned towards Hubert, and bade him shut the door; his features betrayed a violent agitation of mind. '* I bave," said he, " a particular service to require at your hands—the reward will be ten pieces of gold. Will you promite me your secrecy?" Had Hubert been less eager than he was to learn the governor's secret, it became him, in support of his present character, to pretend that he regarded the gaining of ten pieces of gold worthy of any hazaid ; and he accordingly answered to that purpose. " But swear to me by thy Saviour," returned the governor, " that what I am about to entrust to thee, thou wilt never communicate to any of thy comrades." If
If the secret related to Edward, Hubert wished it, whatever it was, to remain one to his comrades, as much as the governor could do ; if not, he could have no motive for desiring to circulate it ; he therefore took the catb. " The reward which I now devote to thee," said the governor, " would have become Gourtray's, had he not labt night fallen under my displeasure; 1 now trans¬ fer it to thee, as a recompense for thy di¬ ligence in supplying his place at my return with my guests." Hubert made a suitable acknowledge- ment fór this consideration in bis favour, on the part ofthe governor; who then continued speaking thus—" I have, afc this moment, those within my mansion, who have been sent hither to purchase of me the life of my English prisoner; and I have ah cady received from them a sum of money for my consent to the deed : but reasons have since arisen in my mind, which point out to mc that it is my duty to
to preserve his life; and you must lend your assistance to me, in a plan which I have formed to that end." Hubert durst not reply, lest the tones of his voice should discover the joy of his heart at the success which had attended his letter to the governor. Garcías Xavia proceeded, by saying— " I have ptomiscd them to administer an opiate to my prisoner, during the course of the day, antf to conduct them to his cell at midnight, when he lies buried in the arms of sleep. 1 have privately re¬ solved, that before that hour arrives, we will remove him from his cell, and place in his bed the corpse of a young French¬ man, who is now stretched İn his coifin in the chapel for interment. One hour, therefore, after the bell has tolled for all the inhabitants of this house to retire to rest, be you in waiting for mc at the door ofour English prisoner's cell. I will leave my guests, under pretence of ascertaining whether every one is gone to rest, that they
they may with safety proceed to the pur- pos&of their coming hither; and we will then use the moments of my absence from them, to accomplish the plan I have al¬ ready made you acquainted with." Hubert waited to say no more than an humble promise of obeying the governor's orders, and retired from his presence. The ecstacy of Hubert's mind was almost too great to leave him capable of per¬ forming the offices of his station ; thrice, during the day, he was under the necessity of visiting the cell of Edwanl ; but he constrained himself each time to maintain a strict silence, which he, by signs, en¬ joined Edward to do also. I Je dreaded lest an incautious moment should now destroy the hope he had formed of the adventures of the night. The governor had resolved that night to preserve the life of his prisoner. Hubert believed that he should, that night, be enabled to re¬ store his benefactor to liberty.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. The awful hour of midnight now comes on. и iftBERT, W HEN the clock had struck eleven, Hubert left his chamber, and placed him¬ self at the door of Edward's cell. In a few minutes the governor appeared in the gallery. ťť AU are in bed, I believe," he said, as he approached Hubert. ** For nearly an hour all has been quiet," Hu¬ bert replied. i{ Open the door," said the governor; " we need not fear being inter¬ rupted in our proceedings ; no one can overhear us, except it be some of the pri¬ soners,
soners, who have not the power of quit¬ ting their apartments. As Gourtray is still in confinement for his last night's of¬ fence, there is no keeper in this gallery but yourself." This Hubert already knew, but it was an additional satisfaction to him to hear the governor assert it, and he obeyed his or¬ ders for opening the door. ťť Awake—-.awake," said Xavia, ap¬ proaching the pallet of Etl ward. Edward started up at this address, and the go¬ vernor continued, ** we come to conduct you to better faring." * ť The condition of my life is indiffe¬ rent to me," replied Edward, <ť while I am denied the enjoyment of liberty ; it is even a cruelty to protract my days, by bettering my condition, while you deny me all for which I wisli to live." The governor did not answer this ad¬ dress on the part ofhis prisoner, but hav¬ ing liberated him from his chain, com¬ manded Hubert to assist in leading him to
to anotlier cell. The present moment was the first time of Edward's beholding the governor since the night on whicb he had been conveyed, with Adolphus Biron, to the ceil be was now about to quit. When bc had first replied to the governor s ex¬ clamation·» he had not, in the moment of Iiİh hasty waking, perceived who it was that he u as addressing; now he disco¬ vered it to be Garcías himself who was leading him along, he could not forbear making an invocation to his humanity, fruitless even as hc believed the appeal would be. A -few minutes brought them to an apartment wiiich Edu ard u as commanded to enter, and the lock immediately tinned upon him. ** Leave tîıe key in the door," said the governor to Hubert, "for we shall reconduct bim lo his fonner cell as soon as the business of the night is concluded." Tiiis done, the governor and Hubert im¬ mediately proceeded lo the chapel, where lay the young Frenchmun, of whom the xr) governor
'governor had spoken İn the morning, pre¬ pared for interment on the following day*: taking him up in their arms, they bore hitn to Edward's vacated cell, and binding the chain round his waist, tbey placed him on the pallet, and threw a coverlid over h inf. The governor then commanded Hubert to retire to his own room, saying, tbat wben the emissaries from England had, as tlicy supposed, perlbrmed the deed of death, for which they had been sent into Flanders, and he had conducted them be¬ yond the outer wall of the prison, he would summon Hubert to assist him in replacing the tiead body of the young Frenchman in its proper situation in the chapel, and in reconducting Edward to his cell. Hubert obeyed Xavia's command of retiring to his chamber, while Garcías himself proceeded to the apartment where he had left Alwin and his companion. He who had made the third on the pre· ced inj evening, had set out that morning vol. ni. о for
for England, with the letter, written by .he governor to the Lord William de Mow¬ bray, to inform him of the death of his hated son-in-law. " Come forth boldly," said the go¬ vernor, addressing them ; " you will meet with no interruption in your proceedings." They left the apartment, and followed hie steps. An ived at the cell where Edward had lately been a prisoner, the governor said, " Vou need not fear his waking; he has swallowed a potion, that will ensure your security." The governor continued to stand at the door of the cell, extending his hand, which bore the lamp, into it, and pointing with the other to the pallet oliere lay the dead body. Al win's com¬ panion continued also at the door, stand¬ ing by the side of the governor. ..lwin himself moved up to the pallet ; having fixed his e>es for an instant upon the hody, of which the single lamp carried by the governor was too taint a light for
him tb discover ! the features/ he drew α dagger from the folds of his mantle, ancl having run it-twice into the body of th'e supposed Edward, he exelahtied —*' Fare- Well! thou wilt never tell tales of himwho sent thee to thy account !** He let th'e dagger fall from his hand as he spoke these words, and leaving the' cell, he ad* dressed Garcías Xavia, desiring that he 'would immediately conduct hiin and his companion out of the prison. l«ie moment their receding steps were no longer audible to Hubert, he darted into the gallery, and entering the apart¬ ment where Edward was, he exclaimed—■ "My master! My benefactor! Your li¬ berty, your life, depend on the present moment ! Follow me, follow me !" The heart of Edward beat a tumult of joy on these welcome sounds from the lips of the h.onest Hubert, and he was sa¬ tisfied to act under his direction, without that explanation for which ťfte urgency of the moment afforded no opportunity. о % Hubert
Hubert led the way back to his own chamber, and the instant they were both within it, he said—" In a very short time tbe governor will come hither alone, to summon me to his aid, in a point which shall hereafter be explained to you; the moment he appears, assist me to secure him, and we tnumph over our enemies." A iew minutes of awful and torturing suspense succeeded. The soul of Edward almost sickened, between the extremes of expectation and the dread of disappoint¬ ment j the feelings of Hubert were wound to a pitch of the most nervous hope and exultation. The door of Hubeit's chamber was at length pushed open by the hand of the governor, " Now then !" exclaimed Hu* bert. Edward understood the meaning of his exclamation, and both dai ting atthe sanie instant upon the astonished Garcías, made him their prisoner. '* This way with him!" said Hubert, aad they had led him to the door ofthe cell, where Ed¬ ward
ward had so lately been a captive, ere he was sufficiently recovered from the sur¬ prise in which the unexpected treatment he was receiving had thrown him, to be able to command ihe power of utterance. When he did speak, it tf as only in broken sentences that Ids astouishment and pas¬ sion could -gain a passage through his lips. 44 Wimt means thisr" he exclaimed. "Am I betrayed ? Wretches, ye shall repent— ye shall experience torments—ye shall— Help !—Help «—What, no help ľ' Edward started with alarm at the sound of his exclamations. " Fear nothing from his cries,'* said Hubert; 4< he has already informed me, that no one can overhear us here, but prisoners, who cannot quit their apart¬ ments.' ' " Oh, mercy, Jesu !— Jesu ľ' exclaimed Garcías, " ye will not murder me?— What is it ye will do with me?" "Let you live to repent the crimes of your life, and prepare yourself to meet a о 3 more
more awful adoiiui^mtor of justice than. you behold in- either jof us;" and having* said this, Hubert thrust him into the cell, and closing the door, turned upon hiim the lock. . " Now then Jet us be gone," said Hin» Tiert; *Uhe key which you saw me snatch ι out of his hand at the moment we firbt« seized him, is the master-key of every lock w hieb could impede our escape from these accursed walls." " Yet one instant stay," responded Edward : " I have a friend within this edifice, Adolphus Biron his name, the youth whom you this morning led away fronrthe cell in which I was then a pri¬ soner. During the melancholy period of our captivity, we made a promise to each oiher, not to accept the blessings of li¬ berty singly—he must be the companion ofour flight." The apartment to which Adolphus had that morning been conducted, was near the spot where they were standing; and, by
bert ílirectly admitted Edward into it. , It i& needless to describé with -what joy Adolphus beheld his friend, and heard thè purpose of his midnight visít; and the : moment the first burst of eestiicy/, which had been poured into his soul < by the promise of freedom, luul subsided, his thoughts turned to his Belise. " I can¬ not depart to leave her hereV* he said* - " Ifyou mean that Lady Belise, who is daughter-in-law to thegovernor," returned Hubert, "she is not within these walls; she has fled from hence some tlays." ft Fled !" echoed Adolphus. ** Yes," replied Hubert; "on the deatli of her mother, which happened about a fortnight ai>;o, the governor's threats of uniting her to an old man, who had for some time past been her suitor, but into whose arms her mother had, timing her lifetime, withheld her from being forced, produced such an effect on her mind, as to induce her to fly from the misery she о 4 dreaded,
dreaded, and she bas not since been heard of." " Unhappy, beloved Belise !" exclaimed Adolphus. iť Come tiien, kt us instantly, hence. Adolphus shall know no rest, till he has found the mistress of his soul," - , Conditeteli by Hubert, they quickly found themselves on the outside of the prisnnwall ; i u passing through the court wbich led to it, Hubert disencumbered himself of his wooden leg, and the ban¬ dage which he had worn over his left eye, for the sake of disguise. To avoid the citv of Ostend, Hubert. said, must be their first care, as there would, undoubtedly, be made the finst search after them in the morning, as soon as the governor was released from his pre¬ sent confinement, and should disperse abroad intelligence of tbe occurrences of the nighi;. Towards the coast he consb dered il equally dangerous for them to proceed, lest they should encounter Alwin and his companion, who had, doubtless,, sought
sought it immediately on quitting the prison, İn order to embark without delay for England : he therefore advised that they should entirely avoid tbe coast, and endeavour to push their way into Gér* many, from some part oi which empire they might stand a chance of procuring a passage to England, without exciting sus¬ picions of any kind concerning* them¬ selves. "It might, perhaps," he said* "delay their arrival in that kingdom a couple of mouths beyond the time in which thev might reach it, were they to sail directly thither from any part of Flan¬ ders; but he judged that Edward, having once obtained his freedom, with the diffi¬ culty and perils with which it had been gained, iio caution couhl be too great to ensure his not beiug again deprived of it; Adolphus, uncertain whither his road lay, íelt only convinced that it became him to ger away as speedily as possible from the neighbourhood of Obteud ; and accordingly agreed to pursue tlie road of o S his
his friend and Hubert, for at least a day or two. "As we shall undoubtedly be sought near the coast," icinarked llubcit, "as soon as our escape is discovered, let us use the nigiit, to proceed with all possible expedition, as far as wc are able, in an exactly opposite direction; at the first town where we shall arrive in the morn¬ ing, we will procure some conveyance, to transport us towards, a spot of greater security." " But how, good Hubert, arc our ex¬ pences to be defrayed?" a^ked Eduard. Hubert explained to bim» that he was in possession of above five hundred pieces of gold, which were all devoted to bis service; but he forbore to inform him how that sum had become his. Ed wai d began to pour forth to him those eulogiums on his generosity which the gratitude of his heart dictated to his longue, but Hubert interrupted him, by beginning to relate some of the occur-
rences of his own life since Edward and he had parted " And didst thou leave thy native land purposely to seek me out?" exclaimed Ed¬ ward ; " and hast thou past all thesö months, İn the meanest capacity, in order to be near me, and watch a moment for nfy enlargement from captivity ? Oh; ge¬ nerous, worthy man!—what benefit bad I ever conferred on thee, todemand a return of the exalted nature thou hast made me?" " Had you not acknowledged me a man," replied Hubert—" a being pos* sessed of the same feejings, and the same wants as yourself, although placed by des¬ tiny in an humbler sphere of life?—and did you not, by every means in your power, endeavour to equalize my com¬ forts with yotir own ? Yes, yes, you had done this to me—could 1, in return, do too much for you r" / Tears are expressive of the weakest, as well as of the noblest sensations of the human mind ; those wbich burst into the о 6 eyes
eyes of Edward, at this address from the excellent Hubert, were of that nature which bespoke him possessed of a heart, upon which the eye of Providence might glance in exultation, and declare itself well pleased with its created being. Hubert had remained in England so short a time after Edward's quitting it, that he had but little to inform him con¬ cerning those whom he had left behind, with which be was not bimself already acquainted. The only occurrence of im¬ portance which had taken place, during the few months that Iiu bert had continued in Cumberland after the departure of Ed¬ ward for Flanders, was the birth of Rosa¬ lind's child ; and Hubert had reasons, which will hereafter be shewn, for confin¬ ing tliis event, for the present, within his own breast. As Hubert proceeded to relate the ad¬ ventures of the two last days, the arrival of Alwin and his companions at the prison, the false intelligence which had been dis¬ patched
patched of Edward's death to Lord Wil¬ liam de Mowbray, and the use he had made of the knowledge which he had ac¬ quired of these eireumstances ; not only for the preservation of Edward's life, but also for gaining him his enlargement from the tyranny of the vile Garcías Xavia— the desponding husband of Rosalind ex¬ pressed the deepest apprehensions lest, immediately on the fabricated news oi his death reaching England, her father should force her into the arms ofthe hated Lord Rufus. Hubert replied, that he conceived his master (as he was still resolute in calling Edward) to have nothing to apprehend on this score ; for as the letter from the go¬ vernor could not yet have reached Eng¬ land, and as the Baron de Mowbray, on the receipt of it, would doubtless allow a due portion of time to the claims of de¬ cency, before he compelled his daughter to enter into a second marriage, there was little doubt of their reaching Cumberland 5 befoie
before any step of the kind had been taken, how icsolutely soever it might have been determined upon between Lord William and l)e Madginecourt. Edward derived little satisfaction from these arguments ; but he was loath to re¬ turn only murmurs to Hubert for the zeal he had shewn iu his cause ; and therefore, as he knew all complaints to be useless, he constrained himself to keep his thoughts locked ιψ in his own breast. A friendly moon, which rose soon after our travellers had quitted the precincts of the prison, guided them on their way, till the light of day eclipsed the silver splen» dour of the fainter orb : they had conti¬ nued to move forward without a single moment of delay, ami about an hour after the rising of the moruing, they found themselves at the mouth of a valley which led to a knot of cottages, in the midst of which, a church spire, raising its head above the thatched roofs, bespoke it a vil* lage of inferior note. At
At this village they procured some re¬ freshment, and a conveyance to the next stage, upon the road which ilubeit had resolved lobe the most judicious for them to pursue. They continued to travel on without interruption, and about four in the afternoon of the following day, they leached a town, where thev learnt that there was, on that day, a fair: they en¬ tered a house of public entertainment, and were \exed to (iud- that the room ¿hey were conducted into fronted a square, vhere the fair was held- As they dreaded a pursuit, they dreaded equally to be seen, and accordingly kept on the side of the apartment farthest removed from the win¬ dows, whilst they were constrained to re¬ main in the house, which was during the tinic that fresh horses were providing, and a hasty meal was preparing for them. Amidst the other sounds that ascended to their apartment from the fair, in the course of a few minutes, they heard the voice ofa female, whom they suppobed to be
be a common ballad-singer, chanting, to the sweetest melody, the following song :
What is power, what is wealth, Can ihey free «he heart from painj Or bestow soft blooming health, Where disease and sickness reign ? See yon mountain's rugged brow, Frowuing o'er ihe chrystal stream, While its crumbling honours show, Life's a gay, fantastic dream. Mark ambition, ceaseless toil, Looks with scorn on humble worih ţ Humble worth, unhurt the while, Pity feels for wealth and birth. In some sweet sequester'd glen, Deep embower'd from haughty ţride, Far remov'd from envious man, Let my life but smoothly glide : There
There I'll watch the setting sun, While soft memoiy brings tu mind, Days when happiness bep-im ; Days, alas! left far behind.
Adolphus displayed violent emotion, whilst the songstress pursued her ballad : in the midst of the fifth stanza he rose from his seat, and approached the win¬ dow, and whilst her last cadence vibrated on the air, he exclaimed—" It is she— 'tis she, by Heaven ! my beloved, my adored Belise !" and with these words he darted out ofthe apartment. Edward supposed that his friend had been mistaken, in the opinion he had formed of tbe songstress; but a few mo* ments afforded him another proof of how keen are the senses of a lover ; for Adol¬ phus returned to their apartment bearing in his arms, neatly habited in the dress of a Flemish peasant, his Belise, who had fainted with the joy and surprise she had experienced,
experienced, at so unexpectedly meeting him. When Belise was* sufficiently recovered to collect her ideas for speech, she corro¬ borated those particulars which Hubert had already given for the cause of her flight from her father-in-law; and added, that having kept herself concealed, after" her first departure from "the prison, in a wooť in the vicinity of Ostend, till she believed the heat of the pursuit, which she doubted not was set on foot after her, * to have subsided, she bad emerged from her retreat, had put on the disguise in wbich we saw h*r, and was pursuing her way to a relation of her deceased father at Maestrichr, whom she 'meant to inform of the Governor Garcías Xavia's cruelty to her, and the imprisonment of Adolphus Liron, and itnploic his intercession tir her behalf; as she despaired, by any other means, of preserving herself from an union with the man whom her father-in-law had selected as her husband, or of pro¬ curing
curing the enlargement of him who pos* sessed her affections. " But this habit)" said Adolphus, " is, my dear Belise, » only a change of dress, not the least disguise to yqur person." " Is it not?" she replied; "I had hoped that it would be ; but no matter— its use is now over. But, to tell you the truth, the principal cause of my putting it on, was not with regard to disguise, but to procure m3'self a maintenance on my journey. I had but one single ducat ill the world, at the time of 4 my escaping from the old governor, and as I knew it very inadequate to support me all the way on my journey to Maestricht, I put on this dress, whicb I happened to have in m}* possession at my departure, and trusted to my voice and lute to earn me my livelihood, in the towns and villages I had to pas-i through." After Adolphus had, in his turn, gra¬ tified the curiosity of Belise, respecting the mode of his escape from the prison, she
she said—"As I know that we are equally poor, I recommend /that we pursue my intention of pioceeding to my relation at Maestricht, and entreat his interposition in procuring for mc, out of the hands of Garcías Xavia, the пит of money which I inherited from my father at his decease, and which, J fVar, my mother, before her death, was sufficiently inconsiderate to trust in the hands of the governor : with¬ out the intervention of a friend, who is acquainted what measures ought, in this case, to be pursued, I am convinced I shall never be able to call it mine." Adolphus joined in her opinion ; but the difficulty which still presented itself to them was, how even their journey to Maestricht was to be performed, in the pennyless state they were both in. This difiicuïfy Ü:e generous Hubert easily settled for them : taking from his trusty waistcoat one hundred pieces of that gold, of wbich it had for years past been the guardian, hc begged tbem to accept
accept it, as a tribute of friendship, not from bim, but from his master Edward. 'f No, no/* said Adolphus, (i it mţiy never be in my power to repay you." ■ " You wrong the disposition which makes you tbis offer," returned Edward, " in the cause from whicb you hesitate to accept it—his is a heart of that nature, which cannot be more highly gratified, than by proving itself useful to bis fellow beings." Adolphus and lielise poured forth their joint thanks to a benefactor, from wh^nt they had so little expected so useful a service. The grateful Relise seized his hand, and imprinting on it a kiss, ex¬ claimed— " Бе this the bond, that í owe to you the happiness of possessing my Adolphus, and—" the tears.prevented her further utterance. ťt Depend upon ît," cried Adolphus, concluding the sentence, which she had been unable to finish, " that whenever fortune shall smile upon us—"
"I," exclaimed Hubert, interrupting him, "shallexperience an additional plea¬ sure to what I now feel, in considering, that I have, perhaps, laid the first stone ofyour future indépendance." Their repast was now brought in ; and after they had partaken of it, they rose to bid each other farewell. The route of Belise towards her relation, lay in an op¬ posite direction to the one destined to be pursued by Edward and Hubert. A lack of words is sometimes the most expressive sign of true regret at parting ; such was the separation of Edward with Adolphus hnd Belise ; and as their full hearts pro¬ nounced blessings on each other, not the least fervent were those which Adolphus and Belise Coupled with the name of the exalted Hubert.
CHAP.
CHAP. XIV.
Lo ! m the swptic'd train drew neu To ihis last mansion of mankind» The slow sad bell, the »able bier, In boly musings wrap tbe mindi And while their beam,. With trembling stream, Attending tapers ftintly dart ; Each mould'ring bone, Each sculptur'd stette, Strikes mute instruction to tbe heart !
Miner.
IT would be uninteresting to the reader to accompany Edward and Hubert in their wearisome journey into the German em¬ pirei suffice it to say, that many unplea· sant
sant causes conspired to oblige them to pursue the greater part of it on foot; and that, alter the expiration of nine long weeks, they found themselves at the port of Hamburg. Here, in the course ofa few days, they procured a passage on board a French ship, which bad been sent thither to load with merchandize, which she was destined to cany to Newcastle. The harbour of her destination appeared to Edward as desirable a spot for his landing as he could have fixed upon, had he himself been consulted relative to her course; aiid with a heart light as air, uow borne on the buoyant wings of expectation to¬ wards bis adored Rosalind, he went on board tbe Vessel.' Fbr the three first days, their voyage was prosperous; on the evening of the fourth, the English shore having, for the greatest part of the last day, been in view, the Captain made towards it, with an intention, as he said ; of coasting it up to the
the mouth of the Tyne. About the ti me of sunset, the weather was remarkably serene for the season of the year; the golden beams of the grand luminary of earth had quivered on the waves, till it had sunk into the obscurity of its watery bed ; and the captain, drawing his conclusion from the proverb, had foretold a morning of equal serenity and brilliancy. But pro¬ verbs are not always infallible : towards midnight the wind suddenly veered round to the south, it rose in short and angry gusts, and, in the course of a few hours, swelled into a tempestuous hurricane, which drove the vessel off tbe coast: with the moruing a thick rain began to fall, which obstructed all observation at the distance of halfa furlong from the ship; the English shore was no longer visible, 1 and the compass their ouly direction. Tbe gale continued to blow with equal violence throughout the day ; a hope was entertained by the mariners, that about the hour it had arisen on the preceding night, it might abate on this í but their vol» m. p expec-
expectations were deceived, and the cap¬ tain pronounced, that if the wind conti¬ nued to blow twelve hours longer in the same point of the compass that it then did, they should be driven farther into the North Sea. The next night came, and brought with it no change but that of the wind having veered in a trifling degree to the west¬ ward· Again the morning rose, and ushered in a day equally stormy as the preceding one had been ; at every fresh gust the billows ran mountains high, and the vessel truly seemed the sport of the waves, which, at intervals, rolled in curb ing circles over the deck, breathing, as it were, vollies of smoke in their hasty pas¬ sage. The wind now flew to the eastward of the south ; all power of directing the course of the ship was at an end, and she had nothing to trust to but the chance of escaping rocks and sands., I u the after¬ noon, a leak of considerable size was dis¬ covered in the hold ; the pumps were im¬ mediately set to work, but their efforts were
were soon found to be very inadequate to discharging the quantity of water which was forcing its way into the ship. To add to the horror of the scene, two men, w>ho were about this time employed in endea¬ vouring to take in some of the Canvas, fell from the yard-arm into the sea, and M'ere seen to rise no more. Every indi¬ vidual on board continued to work at the pumps, with a fervor, which nothing but the desire of preserving life could have given them strength or spirits to have done. Night was yet distant, and still' the darkness of the atmosphere encreased with every minute ; and, as if the terror of the scene was not already enough to gratify the spleen of nature, the thunder began to roll in tremendous cracks over their heads, and the foiled lightning to cut the heavy clouds on every side. In this extremity, not alone the mariners (with the exception of only two men), but the captain himself, lost tlicir resolu¬ tion, 'and ran for the support, of their courage to such strong liquor as tlie ves- p â sel
sel had on board; Every addea draught seemed insufficient to steel their minds against their approaching death ; and, in a short time, the resources of their cow ¿ ardice had so far driven out sense, that none were capable of working the pumps but Edward, Hubert, and the two ma¬ riners, who possessed a sufficient command over themselves to refufe the invitation of their companions to drown thought İn drunkenness. These, in a short time, found themselves entirely inadequate to the proper exercise of the pnn.ips; and one of the two ma¬ riners declaring that he was certain the vessel must, iu another quarter of an hour, go down, so rapidly was she filling with water, they agreed to launch out the boat, and, in this perilous situation, to tust themselves to the mercy of the waves. At the moment they entered the boat, a'crack oi thunder rent the aiv „ İt ap¬ peared to be the master-effort of Nature to dispel the horrors which clouded her faui; and a short time proved it to have been - .- ' so.
so, for, from that instant, the gusts of wind became less violent, the awfulness of the tliunder seemed to recede in hollow murmurings, and the lightning was but a faint image of its former fierceness. The ship sunk before half the quarter of an hour, which the sailor had giver, lici¬ to remain above water, was expired. It was now about eight in the evening, and although the blackness of tbe clouds was less thrcatning, the darkness of night was stealing so rapidly upon the flay, that the obscurity of the scene was becoming gradually thicker every moment. Could they defend their little bark from being overset by the violent motion ofthe waves, it was all they hoped or expected, till the day should rise, and furnish them with light to, guide their course. They conti¬ nued to buffet about in all directions, till about two hours more, as nearly as they could conjecture, had passed by ; about this time, the sailors said, that they guessed, from the direction in which the boat was driving, that she was running into some ρ 3 creek,
creek, which they almost ventured to be¬ lieve would carry her ashore. Thctviolence of the wind continued to abate; their boat rode with more safety upon the waves; the blackness of the night began to fade into a paler grey, and even accidental stars to peep from the atmo¬ sphere. At length, the mariners, whose sight use had rendered more expert than that of Edward or Hubert, declared that tliey were within a cable's length of land. On the sound of this intelligence, an ex¬ clamation of joy was poured from every mouth, and every eye bent towards the land, which, in a very short time, became discernable to all. The wind lying on their stern, shortly drove the boat upon the coast ; and when the water became too shallow for her to be earned farther up the land, tliey quit¬ ted her, and forded their way to the dry ground. Edward was no sooner landed, than a thanksgiving to,that Power, which had âo frequently testified its favour towards him
htm in the many acts of preservation he had experienced at its bands, burst from his lips : tbe soul of Hubert was not less grateful than that of Edward, but his gra¬ titude was confiiied to tive silence of bis breast. The two mariners als*» who had escaped with them from the wreck, sunk upon their knees, and fervently raised their voices to Heaven. f When their devotions were concluded —" Which way shali we proceed," said Edward, "with the hope of reaching any habitation? We aie probably at a consi¬ derable distance from any town or vil¬ lage." The mariners replied, that they had never before sailed near the coast on whicb it had now been their fortune to be wrecked ; that they conjectured it to be the coast of Scotland, but could form uo idea upon what part of it they were now standing. While they were deliberating how to proceed—" Hark ľ* exclaimed Hubert: they immediately became silent, and, iu th# space of about half a minute more, they p 4 heartl
heard the toll of a bell, " I was not mistaken," cried Hubert; " there it is again/' " A hell at this hour! a bell at mid¬ night!" exclaimed one of the sailors; " pray the holy Jesus we be not treading on ground that is witched !" " I have lost both my beads and my missal !" said the other ; " mercy, mercy, good Saint James ! protect me, holy mar¬ tyr, for I have no power of defending myself against evil spirits!" Edward was too well acquainted vvith the superstitious minds of seamen, to be moved by what they saitl : he endeavoured to convince thein, that unusual as the hour was for the bell of any religious house to bc tolling, yet that such cer¬ tainly was the bound which they had heard, and which still continued to vi¬ brate at intervals upon the air ; that some monastery probably was nigh, and that, if they followed the sound, it doubtless would lead them to a spot where they might obtain reliefând comfort, after the extremities
extremities to which they had been ex¬ posed. Having said this, Edward directly began to proceed iu such direction as the sound ofthe tolling bell invited him to pursue; and the sailors preferring, probably, rather to run into the jaws of danger, agreeably to their own opinion, in good company, than to remain where they ivere, svith no other counsellors than their own coward hearts, followed close behind him, repeat¬ ing, with most audible voices, piayers to their tutelar saints. They moved on for nearly halfa mile, the strength of the souud inci easing at every step upon their ears» till turning out of the path in which they were pr¬ eceding, in order to avoid some piles of stones which choaked up the road, they caught a view of lights at a short dis¬ tance. The progress of a İcw minutes more served to shew them that these were torches in the air, the flames of which played above a wall, that intervened be- F 5 tween
tween them and our travellers. Advancing towards this wall as rapidly as they were abie, they at length reached a spot of sloping ground, which led immediately up to it ; as they ascended this, the sound of female voices became audible; they were chanting a hymn, of which Edward distinctly heard the last Hues.
Nurs'd on Heaven's ethtreal breast, Oar sister ta*it«s celesti» I rfst} Freed from the pangs she know on w«h ? The child of Innocence by hccontl biith* Angets hover round her head, Angela deck her snow-white bed ţ Sister, farewell, more blest than wc, F*>r thou hast gain'd eternity !
After these words had been sung, a solemn silence ensued, the bell ceased to toll, and the lights began to move along. Edward and his companions, who were now
now divested of all supernatural fears, went up to a gate of iron woik, vvhich they discovered in the stone wall that di¬ vided them from those whose voices they had heard, and on looking through it, perceived a procession оГпццз» beaded by their priest, and lighted by the torches, of wbich they had, for a long t ϊημ* past, scen the Harnes iu the air, entering, with slow steps, a vaulted door, which led into ι the· bull of a convent. In thc.inidst of the nuns they beheld a man, who ap¬ peared not many years to have exceeded the prime of life, led by the abbess of thfii coti vent, and a )outh, whose dress bespake Jiim the sac ristiin. · The sight of any mule attending on Ihej funeral of a num excited the surprise ao Edward, particularly ^s he appeared to«. much in years to be a lover, and as, щ the sanie time, his demeanour bespokdj hiin weighed down with grief. 1 When the procession had entered thJ .convent, Ed wat d looked round to seJ upon whoui he should call, to itqucsi ι» в admittance
admittance into the holy building; be¬ cause, although he had seen enough to know it to be the dwelling of religious females, he doubted not, that on account ι of its proximity to the coast, some part of it was dedicated to the services of hu- j manity and chanty, out of compassion to : shipwrecked mariners, who, like them- : selves, might be cast upon its shores. ι He saw a couple of men busily employed [ in throwing the earth intoa grave, where, í from every circumstance he had observed, [ it was evident one of the sisterhood had that night been returned to her kindred clay. He accordingly hailed them ; they immediately advanced td the gate, and I demanded the business of those they saw j|without it. Edward explained their situ¬ ation, and enquired where they were? To 'this question, one ofthe men replied, that Jthey were cast upon the island of Aus¬ kerry, one of the most eastern of the Orkneys; and that the building, on the Ijoutside of which they stood, was the con¬ ivent of Saint Agnes, Edward next de¬ manded,
manded, if it would be permitted them to receive from it the offices of humanity due to their necessities, of which the most grateful woukl be, a place of repose for the night? His demand was replied to, in terms that proved that his conjectures, concern¬ ing the provision which had been made by the founder of the edifice in behalf of the unfortunate, were not erroneous. The man said he would instantly acquaint Saint Matilda, the lady abbess, of their arrival, and brinar back with him the kevs ofthe gate to admit them within its walls. In a short timé he returned, and with him came the portress, who though a nun and a virgin, no danger could have been apprehended from her being presented to the gaze of a seaman who had performed the voyage round the world, without having encountered a female during the whole of the circuit; for her age was at least seventy, her teeth were «one, one side of her body she was obliged tO'Sup« port on a crutch, and, in short, no part cf
of her composition appeared to retain the vigour of which it is but natural to sup* pose the whole had once been possessed, except her tongue. The moment she had unlocked the gate, old sister Judith began to display her^best point, by immediately putting into motion her valuable weapon : she enquired whence they came? how long they had reached 'the shore r whither they had been sailing? what was become of the rest of the crew ? and many more questions, between which she made u о раиье for a reply. "Etl ward mati e her merely such answers as he deemed necessary, in order to win her willing services towards himself and his companions. Hubert spoke not; and the sailors, unable to convei se in ber lan¬ guage, were satisfied to follow the fortunes of him who could make known their wants for them. "WeH," cried sister Judith, as they crossed the burying-ground, " you are come on a memorable night ; we have had a lţeart-reuding funeral There lies/' pointing.
pointing to the grave, which was not yet filled up, " one of the sweetest flowers that ever bloomed in Scotland." ** Who was sbe? 1 pray you tell me," said Edward. *'* No other,*' returned sister Judith, *' than the bonny Mabel Monteith." *' I do not recollect ever to have heard of her," replied Edward. '1 Not heard of her ! —why where have you lived? 1 * cried Judith—- " not in Scot¬ land, I am sure, nor iu England, I should almost think. You mibt ha\e heard of her, and her cousin, Lady .Margaret Mur¬ ray; the first the niece, and tbe other the daughter of the powerful Laird ofLecl- noch, who, in the last pestilence which raged in our country, fled from the world fothe mountains of Athol, where they se¬ creted themselves in a mean hut, partlvof their own building, and there escaped the plague, while every body thought ι hem dead of it. But ^ou see, you see," conti¬ nued she, emphatically, <k if we conti ive to put off the evil dixy ever so long', it will come
come at last. Yes, bonny Mabel Mon¬ teith was buried in that grave to-night." . Edward had now some faint remem¬ brance oi having heard the story when a boy, and meh tioned it to sister Judith, " Man, womau, and child know their story," rejoined she; " it has been told tweuty difierent ways, in verse;" and as .she uttered these words t they entered the hall of the convent, where Saint Matilda met them. She received them with that kindness, and courtesy of expression, whicli give the highest value to benevo¬ lence and hospitality; and perceiving Edward to be of superior rank to his com¬ panions, she addressed herself particularly to him, to enquire in what manner she could be serviceable to him in his present unfortunate situation? Having told her as much of his history as it was necessary that she should be matle acquainted with, she replied, that the French sailors had better remain in a cottage whicb she would dispose to receive ¿hem iu the village hard by, till some ves¬ sel,
sel, bound to the continent, should touch upon the island for water or provisions which, she saitl, was generally the case every fortnight, or sometimes more. For himself, she said, she would willingly sup¬ ply- him with money, if he wanted it, which sbe supposed to be the case, andf put him into /the road for England, in-| structing hiin how to travel it, with the] least inconvenience to himself. Of money, ι he informed her, that he did not stand \x\\ need, as his companion, pointing to Hu-| bert as he spoke, had some about him atl the time they had been obliged to quit} the foundering vessel. For her instructions^ how to pursue his route into Northum4 betland, he should be very thankful ; but added, " that he felt himself so much weakened and fatigued by the perils he had encountered iu his voyage, that he should, iu all probability, be compelled to intrude for two or three days at least upou her hospitality, before he shonld be able to pursue his journey into England." ** My son/' replied Saint fylatilda, "it
h not to me, but to the founder of this mansion, that you are indebted for such jcomforts as it cah aflord you ; if my wel¬ come to it can ¿uld to the gratification with which you receive them, you have it pom my heart î this is all which you will fsvz to me, should you reside with us a jmonth," Edward returned the abbess thanks, .suitable to the benevolent temper of her mind ; and having partaken with Hubert ipi some refresh ments that were set before peni, they requested to be shewn to their Respective chambers. At tbe hour of breakfast, sister Judith called them to their meal, and while they İvere seated at it, Saint Matilda, who did iot appear entirely to have forgotten the vorld, or to have lost her relish for so- tcicty, visited them ; she congratulated ¡them on finding them better, she said, ¡than sbe expected to have done,from tbeir diaggard and weary looks on the preceding night; and told Edward, that if hc was able to travei in two days time, slie could recommend
recommend him company as far as Perth¬ shire—for that there were, at the present moment, a gentleman and his servant, in her convent, who were at that time to set out on their journey thither. Edward replied, that he doubted not being well enough to undertake the jour-* j ney, and enquired who the jşentleman : was at whom she had hinted as a travel- j ling companion for him ? " It is," answered Saint Matilda, " the ¡ Laìrd of G len ross, the disconsolate w¡- ¡ dower of our sister, Bonnv Mabel, as we have always called her, immediately after whose funeral you arrived last night." * ' A wife, and still a member of your sisterhood ľ' exclaimed Edward. " Even so," returneil Saint Matilda. "I do not wonder that you express sur¬ prise ; for seventeen years she had been one of our sisterhood, ere I discovered who she was, or learnt that she hud eve; been a wife. At the time of her making this discovery to me, she was on her death¬ bed. Heaven grant that the portion of charity
charity vvhich I felt for her, on learning the imposition she had practised upon me, at the time of her becoming an inhabitant of this convent, be not less of religion than the severity with which most women, who,are placed in situations of authority hke myself, would have treated her î If ! I*have erred, I am satisfied that my error Jias been on the side of humanity." A pause ensued ; the abbess broke it— " I doubt not that she. would have died, without confessing to me the secret of her having ever been married, had she not „ been tortured with remorse for her unjust conduct to her husband, and felt it ne¬ cessary to the peace of her last moments to see him, and obtaitt his pardon, ere she quitted life." The abbess was at this moment called away from the apartment, and Edward, moving towards the window, saw thesame man whom he had on the preceding e ven¬ in «r observed to be led from the funeral of the deceased nun, by Saint Matilda and the sacristan, standing by the side of the
the grave, with his hands clasped, and his eyes raised to Heaven, as if imploring its charity for her whose earthly part lay concealed beneath the turf at his feet. As Edward continued to observe him, he could not forbear drawing a comparison, ( which communicated pleasure to his feet- ţ ings, between himself antl the Laird of; Glen ross. " Thou lamentest an í neonat stant and departed wife," he said; " Ij anticipate the bliss of again clasping to, my heart one who* lives but for me, and whose existence the fates bave spared her, again to behold me in her arms. Destiny is still kind, and I will not arraign herj dispensations. Sinful are those who mur¬ mur, when one gaze around the world will ever present f to their view, beings • more unfortunate than themselves/' In the evening Saint Matilda again vi¬ sited Edward \ she informed him, that' she iiad mentioned to Laird Archibald the, plan which sbe ln.d proposed to him of their journeying together, and that he had acceded to ita with pleasure, and had agreed
agreed to breakfast with Edward on the morning of their setting out; but thet he had declined an introduction to him till that time, wishing to pass his hours until tbat period in solitude, dedicated to the memory of his deceased wife. Edward began to remark, to the lady abbess, on such parts of the Bonny Ma¬ bel's story as the prattling old Judith bad made him acquainted with on the pre¬ ceding nigiit ; and Saint Matilda replied, *' lier lite has, in many instances, been a romance. Ifit will afford you any plea¬ sure to hea* such particulars of it as I am acquainted with, you shall sit an hour with me in my own parlour a^ter vespers, and I will relate them toyou." Edward replied, ťí that, not from idle curiosity to learn the concerns of others, but from tlic religious content with which it ever inspired his own mind, to hear in «diat manner the hand of Providence had interfered in regulating the destiny of his fellow beings, her offered recital would give him satisfaction." "Thou
"Thou art wise, my son," returned Saint Matilda ; * ' the great book of learn¬ ing is the human heart—to study its workings, and to observe in what manner the indulgence and restriction of its pas¬ sions have been instrumental to the ho¬ nour or disgrace of such members of so¬ ciety as have preceded us upon the stage oflife, isan enquiry worthy of the most exalted philosophy, and a curiosity which cannot be deemed a vice. Experience İs - the mother of true wisdom, and it is only to be acquired by attention to the conduct of others. " 1 am not talking," she ad¬ ded, with a smile, " like one immured for life within the walls of a convent; at least you may judge these sentiments not to be applicable within one: but trust me, that even here, in our small commu¬ nity, where you may perhaps imagine that none of the errors which exist in the world at large are to be found, example has top much sway for the happiness of many— because, my son, it is a sorrowful truth, that such is the force of example, that it; IL- does!
does not alone find followers when its ac¬ tions are ргаье· worthy, but begets imita¬ tors equally of its impurities," The bell now tolling to assemble the nuns to tlieir evening devotions, the ab* bess went to join them in the chapel ; on her return from it, Edward was summoned to her parlour by sister Judith, and Saint * IMatilda executed her promise of relating to him the history oi the Laird of Glen- ross, and his faithless wife, the bonny Mabel Monteith.
END OF VOL. ill,
ZAbï, MINEftVA FHE8S, Ь*йДОЬ1ШАЫ.*ЯТ1»КЕ,Т.
