Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mysterious freebooter: or, The days of Queen Bess: a romance
· p!«ш>^^^■ı^и^w■^■■■^*■^ | W^^ > ■^f'^' ^**^^ THE MYSTERIOUS 'FREEBOOTER. CHAP. 1. They bigged a bower ort yon burn-brac, And thick'd it o'er with rashes. AKCÏBKT BAILAD, İT svas one evening in the early part of spring, that Laird Archibald Glenross, having been separateti from his compa¬ nions in the chace, found himself alone, and at the distance of several miles from his own eastle, in the northern and moun¬ tainous part of the county of Perthshire. vol. iv. в As
As no trodden path pointed out to him a ready svay for gainhig the high road, the more he strove to extricate himself from the intricacies of the chain of mountains he was riding amongst, the more entan¬ gled lie became; and the dusky clouds of departing day beginning to descendió tlie earth, he despaired cf reaching home that night, and thought only of finding some humble cottage to repose at. " As the evening closed in, a .heavy rain began to fall, aud Laird Archibald was svet tlirough all his clothes, hefore a friendly, tliough distant, light gave hhn the comfortable assurance of his being svithin sight of some habitation. With all speed lie made up to it, and alighting from 'his horse, knocked with his fist upon the door, and implored admittance. He could distinguish the sv.hispcring of voices Avithin, but still he heard not the fall of steps, nor any promise of hiá request being * .. complied with. . *'.Agam and again he hit his hand upon ľ % ; the
> the door, and between the intervals of tbe roaring gust, he explained his hopeless situation, and entreated shelter fiom the increment weather, and the biting air. 44 The Laird of Glenross had at that time just completed his tweuty-fouith year; his person was handsome, ids figure good, his mannets universally allowed to be of the most generous and persuasive kind ; and liy tlie late death of his father, he was just become the representative of his house ; and the- benevolent actions svhich had attended his accession to the dignities of his station, he believed to have rendered iiis name not alone known, hut respected, in the neighbouihood >vhere he resided; accordingly, he failed not, in 'his petitfon for admission into ihe cottage, at the doov of which he was now .standing, to inform its inhabitants svho svas their petitioner. 4< Laird Archibald looked aroutulhim, in the hope of espying a acconci light in some other* cottage, svhose inhabitants might prove more/ impressive to the, calls
of humanity, but he could discoverjione; indeed, svhen he turned round his head frum the shelter svhich the little building he was standing under the cover of af¬ forded him, no object was discernible through tlvc thick darkness of night ; v nor did he fiud it scarcely possible to open his eyes at all, on account of the driviug rain and sleet, svhich were borne through the air on the svings of a keen northerly Avind. " Lfrird Archibald did not quit his sta¬ tion, for even the outside of the cottage was a defence to him against tlie weather, which fie knew not where else to seek ; and at intervals hecontinued to repeat his petition for admittance : after he had passed nearly half an hour in this disa¬ greeable situation, a female voice svithin the house replied—* We come/ 44 Of the most delightful nature was the sound ; he placed his foot upon thethres» hold, and the door was opened by a per- - son whose appearance filled him equally with surprise, as did the delay with which the humane action had been performed ;
it was a lady, habited· in the deepest mourning; and behind her stood another female, dressed exactly the same as her¬ self/and svhose appearance denoted her to be of equal rank as the first : the latter held ¡ n her hand a lamp * r tiie former, the ttioıııç/ht she had opened the door, thus addressed lyaird Archibald—* Enter, my Laird ; as we know you tn he a knight of Scotland, we trust that you ivill not sully the name, by forgetting the respect due ¿o two unprotected femaies; we therefore admit y o\ı ben cat hour roof. ; ' Good heaven i' exclaimed Glenross, fixing his eyes upon them, ' I cannot.be mistaken ; surely I behold the niece,^and daughter, of the Laird of Lednoch ?" 1 The same, the same ľ they- both re¬ pHed ; /Here, iu this seclusipn, have sve lived, while the world has thought us both ' long (lead. AVc are at present the sole inhabitants of tiri* cottage; wheu,you hear this, you svill not bè surprised that sve were scrupulous about admitting you into it at tliis- hour o$thc uight·* вЗ 'And
* And may I lose every claim to the honour of manhood/ ejaculated Laird Archibald, 4 if I forget the reverence due to my benevolent entertainers/ 'Enter, enter freely/ said the daugh* ter of Lednoch ; ' sve have heard much spoken in your praise, and doubt not to find you equal in honour to the report you bear in theworld/ *' Tlicy immediately placed a chair for their guest opposite to the fire; and as they had no change of garments to offer hini, they heaped additional logs upon the hearth, and produced a cup of wine, svhich lie drank at tiicir invitation. 44 When· some time had been passed in necessary attentions to the comfort of the weather-beaten Laird Archibald, he besought his fair entertainers to inform him by svhat miracle he sasv them alive and in health, when they had for some months past been supposed to have fallen victims tothe pestilence which had at that time raged in Scotland. " He had once visited, with hb father, at
at the Castle of Lednoch, in Aberdeen¬ shire; its Laird was then a widower, svith one son, Sir Alexander, a daugliter, tiie Lady Marga r ct, and an orphan niece of tlie name of Monteith, whose beautv Iiad acquired lier tbc t it le ofthe Bonny Mabel. 4< Since that time, the pestilence had carried off the Laird of Lednoch and his son ; his daughter and niece had been reported in the world to Iiave fled from Abeirieen, where the disorder had raged with the greatest violence, hut, never¬ theless, to liave, sunk under its ptver: lie nosv rejoiced that common fame liad lieen a false intelligencer in the instance oftheir fate, and received from their lips an account oftheir preservation. 4 ' Latiy Margaret satisfied his curiosity in these words :— * A very short time after the breaking out of that pestilence, to which there is scarcely a Scottish family who does not owe t lie privation of sonic loved relative, my dear father and brother having both ľ 4 fallai
fallen victims to its fury, my cousin Ma* bel and myself, at their death, having np one left us in the svorld to vvhom We svere boundby the ties of affinity—no one but each other to look up to for the mutual kindoihcfes of friendship and consanguir nity, bethought us alone of svhat steps we might pursue that seemed to promise tış the preservation of both our lis T es, svhich sve wished to ensure, more, I believe, ~{oţ the sake of each other s happiness, than our owu love of existence. * We beard of many who fled from the cities towards uninhabited spots, and died in their way to what they had re¬ garded as places of security ; but this -dici not discourage us—we hoped thnt ail might not be alike unfortunate ; and es¬ teeming the chance of prolonging our existence to depend alone on our quitting Aberdeenshire, where the plague raged in its hottest fury, sve resolved on setting out for the mountains of Athol> svhere we knew our old nurse, Mause, to reside ¡a а lonely
a lonely, cot, although we svere unac¬ quainted with the exact spot on svhich. her dwelling stood. 4 After some days of weary travelling, sve readied the mountains, and svith little difficulty discovered the humble cot of old Mause; vvith surprise she saw us step upon her threshold, and svith humanity and love she received us аь her inmates, tiil the fury of the raging .pestilence should be abated- ' Here we have nosv resided five months, old Mause having occasionally gone toa neighbouring village to procure us pro¬ visions, and bring us the report of tha times ; upon, this business she is now ab¬ sent, and will not return till the morrow: on this account you find us here alone, and unattended/ " Laird Archibald congratulated his fair entertainers on the object of tlieir seclusion from the svorld having been granted them, in the health,svhich he saw them enjoying; and assured them that в 5 tlicy
they had now nothing to apprehend from quitting their concealment, as the alarm¬ ing disorder from svhich they had fled svas entirely subdued. 44 When-the hour of retiring to rest ar¬ rived, the Lairtl of Glenross insisted that tlicy should occupy their accustomed chamber, declaring that his repose would he equally good in a chair befoie the fire, as if he svcre pressing the finest dosvn in the universe; accordingly, having ren¬ dered iris resting-place belosv as commo¬ dious as it lay in their posver to make it, they ascended to their bedchamber, and locked themselves in for the night. ťt Glenross, sylien left to liis reflections by the retiring of tiic fair recluses, felt more inclined to iudulq-c himself in thought than sleep. At the time of Iris visit to the Castle of Lednoch with his father, the charms of the Bonny Mabel had inspired him svith feelings svhich nothing could liave damped but the report which had so shoitly after been circulated in the world of .
of her death ; they r now blazed forth again with additional warmth; and circumstan¬ ces liad added such strength to his pas¬ sion, that lie almost feared to sleep, lest his dreams should /leny him that bliss of 1 beholding the Bonny Mabel through his mind's eye, svhich liis waking, reflections accorded him. 4ť At bidding him good night, the lady Margaret Murray liad placed a few books upon the table by hisside. — ' Should you not bc able to sleep the night through in your chair,' she said, 'you will periiaps finti something in these volumes to enter- tain jou/ * 4 A short time after their departuie, Laird Arcliibald looketl into the hooks, and found tiiem mo^ily to contain ancient legends in verse; upon one of tnese, svhich contained the history of the loves of King Richard С t vır tic Lion, and iıis Queen Matilda, he paused ; for loveis feci it a devotion to dwell upon the pages that treat of love ; and as lie turned over the leaves, a paper fell irom theni, upon whicii в 6 he,
he, at the first glance, discovered the cliaracters of a female pen ; he laid down the hook, and unfolding the'sheet, he perceived tbat tiiey were lines of poetry svhich it contained, and which were tints. inscribed :—
On trcing the Ftmtral ofa y nung E/iff/uA Officer, whnjella ľictin to the Plague itt Scotiand, и here he teas entirely a Stranger. Behold ihc thronging crosvd ift yonder street, SVhere expectation strains each eager eye ; Tliink tbey the warrior's cüuntless brow to meet, Crown'd with the laurel wreath of victory? Alas ! no shout of triumph bribes the çtle, To boast of conquest wiih eJtulting breath ; The solemn dirge explains the mournful tale, And chants the final victory of Death ! Ah, what remains of that which once had life ?· Mute is the voice that wak'd at pleasure's call ;. Youth wiih the tyrant held unequal «nife, To brok the woof that wove the fun'ral pall. The helmer, once that brae'd his youthful brow, To fancy's eye his well-known face pourtray* ¿ The harmless sword directs no fatal blow, The mai tial belt but mimic show displays. Tlic
Tlic warlike horse, with fün*ral trappings proud, P»ws tbc rude earth, and champs the frothy rein·, Mŕstakes fcr joy ihc tumult of the crowd, And fancies still his master hc sustains. No,rar pau mal cauqlit hi? parting breath, No friendly hand reviving cordials gave ; No lifted finger hush'd the voice of Deadi, SVhcn in harsh tones he calľd hira to the grave. The half-form'd wish hie trembling lips betray'd, ι Unheeded fell upon я stringer's ear; Hts sinking frame no kindred eyes survey'd, To claim*the Lirth-iight of the kindred rear. .Ftrhape my wand'ring feet his grave may *eck, May find the spot where his cold ashes lie ; Then shall a sigh from mem'ry's impulse speak, A Granger's pray'r for trail mortality.
"These verses had been svrittcn J)y the Lady Margaret Murray, svho was as higlily gifted with the qualifications of the mind, as was her cousin Mabel with those ofthe person. "The
" Tiıe Laird of Glenross had read them svith the utmost pleasure; hc svas himself a man of refined sense, and he hoped to learn that they were the effusions of his beloved Alaiiel : the mooring brought him the conviction of liis error from lier owa lips. — l Oh no/ she replied to his enquiry if the verses svcre her's, never wrote a line in my life/ "He ft 11 rather disappointed, hut the confession was made hy Mabel witii a smile which compensated,, by excx^s of beauty, for every deficiency in poetical skill. 44 Laird Arcliibald readily accepted the invitation of' his fair entertainers to break¬ fast at their cottage ; and a short time after tlieir repast was ended, old Manse returned home; she confirmed the infor¬ mation wliich the Laird of Glenross had given tiiem, that all danger from the late pestilence svas removed, and that they might with safety agaiu emerge into the svorld. " All
" All obstacles to their quitting the seclusion of tlie mountains being thus ob¬ viated, Glenross promised to go himself in person, on the foliosving day, to the castle of Lednoch, and having assembled an escort oftheir osvn servants, to return svith them as soon as possible to the cot¬ tage, and be himself one of their con¬ ductors to tlieir parental habitation. 44 With many acknowledgments they accepted his courtly offer ; and hc tlien departed, leaving the Bonny Mabel sus¬ picious of the sentiments svhich she had created in his heart, and hy no means displeased at the prophecy of her own. 44 Earlv on tlie fourth morning, the svinding of the horn over the mountains of Athol, announced the approach ofthe Laird of Glenross svith his promised escort; aiul the Ladies Margaret and Mabel svere conveyed back to the Castle of Lednoch, svith all the state becoming their rank and birth, where tlicy were received svith every demon-
demonstration of joy by their assembled clans. 44 By constant intercourse svith the ob-, icet of his adoration, Laird Archibalds passion became too violent to be confined îo his osvn breast, and he breathed the confession of his hive into tiie ear of the Bonny Mabel, svho ack novi ledged him tlie lord of her affections, svith blushes that heightened the charms w hich had inspired him with the consuming fire. 44 When a due time had been given to the preparations for their nuptials, they weie uniteti at tlie altar of Lednoch Abbey. By their union, the clans of Glenross and Monteith became consolidated into one vassalage, and the Castie of Glenross svas fixed upon as their place of residence. 44 llie lover has no eye» except for the outward perfections of his mistress—the husbantfsearches for tliose of the mind. Wlien nearly half a year had passed over the heads of the Bonny Mabel and her Laird in their marrieti state, aud the aflec- 3 tion
tion he bore İıer began to calm into the sedateness of a friendly esteem, it was not svithout regret that he discovered her mind to be as unadorned, as her person svas richly ornamented ; svhile in the Lady Margaret, svhose person svas plain, when compared svith that of her cousin Mabel, the alluring graces of a highly cultivated understanding shone with extraordinary brilliancy. 44 To the Castle of Lednoch, which was her parental inheritance, the Lady Mar* garet felt asperse to retiring as a residence, saying that she sliould infinitely prefer being allowed to constitute a part oftheir family, lo the solitude whkh she must experience as the mistress of a castie—a decision which the Laird of Glenross heard lier make svith pleasure, as it en¬ sured him many houre of satisfaction in the enjoyment of her conversation. 44 But let it not be understood that Laird Archibakl regarded the Lady Mar¬ garet in any other light than as % svoman svhose
whose universal knowledge İt gave him pleasure to possess an opportunity of re¬ ferring to with the familiarity he had the power of doing tt» her*s. Where the ten¬ derer emotions were concerned, no svo¬ man batl ever, for one single ir.staut, entered his beai Г in competition with his Mabel : hut love, even svith the most heavenly object, svill not always satisfy tbe mind of ieafon ; it mu*t also banquet on that food in which the understanding holdsa share; and this repast of reason, none coniti, in the opinion of Laird Archi¬ bald, spread in richer delicacy to the senses, than Latiy Margaret Murray. 4 She svas/ remarked Saint Matilda, 4 a svoman possessed ofan uncommon under¬ standing for the age iu whicii slie svas educated ; and svas, besitìes, gifted with that strength of mind svhich it is very unusual to find the inmate of a female breast. *
CHAP.
CHAP. II. Sh, gentle pair, ye little think how nigh Yotir change approaches, whtt* all tlicic delight» SS ill vani» h , and deliver ye to woe ţ More woe, the more your taste ie now ofjoy ; Happy, but for so happy, ill iccur'd Long to continue. milton. ABOUT tsvo years after the Bonny Mabel batl become a svire/* continued the Lady Abbess, 4r svas the periotl at svhich our unfortunate Queen Mary gave lier hand to the Earl of Darnley. In com¬ pliment to her people, who expected some expenditure from tiie royal coffers to be made on this occasion, a sveek svas set apart for sports and tournaments, to be held at Kinnavain Castle, in tbe county of Dumfries,
Dumfries, and to which all the nobility and gentry of Scotland were.invited ; of the numberof the guests, were the Laird of Glenross, with his wife and the Lady Margaret. ** What svere the diversions of the first day, I knosv not ; that ofthe second svas a tilt, at svhich twenty pai is of knights were to display theiv skill in the wielding of the lance, Ou the inoreiiag of tbis day,. the Queen herself put into tbe hands of such of Iter female guests as bore the rank of nobility, elegant scam and chains, with svhich to reward the conquei ors of the hour ; and the manner in skİiîcİî she directed tlf pii;:tsto be distributed, was not the СОПШКЩ method or'each lady pre¬ senting the emblem of partiality to aay victorious knight whom it best pleaded her so to lionour, but for such kuighti as conquered their opponents, to kneel for their reward at the feet of whatever lad/ they deemed it the highest gtatilication to receive the mark of their conquest from. 44 Qf
4t Of the third pair of knights ssdio con¬ tended for the prize svhich conquest gave them the right of claiming from the hand of beauty, the appearance of one was ex¬ tremely remarkable; he bestrode a charger of the brightest black, svith a flowing mane and tail, that greatly increased the beauty of its form ; his dress svas an entire suit of sable armour; at his back flosvcd a cloak of lion's skin, svhich svas fastened upon İıis shoulders svith tlie pasvs of the animal in sparkling sils'cr ; and upon iiis head hc svore the visage of tlie lion, cast in mas¬ sive silver, around the brows of svhich depended the real mane of the beast. ŕí During the combat, like the rest of the knights, be svore his visor dosvn. ¡ " 4t Three rounds svere allosved to each . I pair of combatants for the trial of their' skill j in the two first of svhich he broke ' the lance of his opponent, and in the. third he unhorsed liim. His victory svas the most complete ot any one gained that I day; and when he ceased to wield the lance,
lance, he threw himself at the feet of tiic Lady G lenross, for the reward of Ids prow¬ ess ami skill. <ť At the evening board svhich suc¬ ceeded the pageant of the day, the victo¬ rious knights appeared doffed of their ar¬ mour, and, amongst them, he who had svorn the suit of sable with the cloak of lion's skin : he was tall, handsome, svell shaped, and insinuating in his manner. Themoment hia eye fixed upon tlv Bonny Mabel, he approached her, and entered into a conveisation, for svhich the ar¬ rangements ofthe morning had gisen no opportunity. '' On the fourth day, the claimant for the honorary scarf and chain in the gilt of the Lady Margaret Murray, svas a Sir James Lambrun, a youth firmly attached to the family of the Stuarts, and in par¬ ticular to its present head, the universally beloved Queen Mary. t( The Laird of Glenross observed the marked attention of Sir James to his cousin
cousin Margaret, and also of the sable knight to bis wife, and ihey both afforded him pleasure; hc judged that Margarct might be beginning an acquaintance svliich might eventually lead to tlie hap¬ piness of lier lite; and it flattered his love for his wife, to ve her the object of ad¬ miration that sîıe was. 4i The Bonny Mabel was more charmed svith the attentions of the sable knight than her Loid supposed ; he judged the indulgence of her vanity to be guarded by the innocence of her lit ait, and he foreboie to remai к upon İt to her Tbe sable knight, on the contrary, persuaded her that the suonee of her iiusband pro¬ ceeded froni iiuhffcieiicc; and favouring her own inclination, -she trusted to the voiee of a new acquaintance, without seek¬ ing the advice of an old friend. But I must not anticipate her story —Immedi¬ ately on the first commencement of her acquaintance with the sable knight, slie had enquired his name; this the Laird Archibald
Archibald had also done, the moment he iiad seen him kneel to his svife for the pledge of her favour; and to fhe enquiries of both, it had been replied by the cham¬ berlains of the court, that his esquires had announced him as S ; ~ Allanrod. 4t The festive sveek passed on in the utmost joy and hilarity ; a splendid ball on the sixth evening concluded the re¬ velry ; and after having attended the Queen and her newly-espoused consort to their devotions at the Abbey ofGrey Friars at Du mti íes, on the Sunday the nobility svcre expected to leave Kinnavain Castle, and the royal pair to return to Edin¬ burgh. * 4 When the dance svas breaking up, the Laird of Glenross not perceiving his svife in the ranks of the dancers, con¬ cluded her fatigued, and gone to her cham¬ ber ; and, under this idea, he repaired thither himself. She was not there ; and supposing that he had overlooked her in the ball-room, he did not choose to return to
to it, but sat down to await her coming. Nearly an hour passed asvay ; and as slie did not appear, heresolved on going down once more bimself; taking up his lamp for that purpose, his eye fell on a letter, upon which, as it appeared, hc had set down his lamp at first coming into the room ; he took it up t and fountl it di¬ rected to himself, iu the hand-writing of his svife. Hastily he tore it open, and read nearlv these svords :—
4 I have for a long time perceived tliat you have preferred the con¬ versation of my cousin Margaret to my¬ self; you may nosv enjoy it without in¬ terruption ; yon svili experience no farther restraint in your inclinations from 4 Mabel G lex ross/
vol. iv. с <( The
44 The emotions of grieft surprise, and vexation, svith svhich Laird Archibald read these lines, you may easily imagine; how did hc lament the improper constiti tion ss hich his wife had put upon the pleasure that he had enjoyed in the soci¬ ety of Lady Alargaret ; how did he ex¬ ecrate the villain who had robbed him of her charms. 44 lie could not doubt svith svhom she had fled from him—it could be no other than the sable knight, Sir Allanrod. I Je hastened to the porters of the castle, and enquired how long they had passed the gates ? the confusion of the evening had been such, that no one svas able to reply to his enquiries. He returned to the castle hall, and amidst the assembled esquires and chamberlains, he demanded svho svas Sir Allanrod, and svhere he dwelt? No one could reply, with any degree of satis¬ faction, to his questions. 44 In the distraction of his doubts he ran to the queen, and of her, and her L· rovai
royal husband, he made the same enqui¬ ries; but they could not give him the in¬ formation he desired : Sir Allanrod was known to them only as a knight, svhom the general invitation they had issued to allthe Scottish nobility antl gentry tojoin in the feslivities ofthe sveek, iiad brought to Kinnavain Castle. 44 The senses of Laird Glenross svere so far besvildered by his loss, that but for the unremitting care and attention of the Lady Margaret Murray, some rash act had, in all probability, been the consé¬ quence of Ids grief: on the following morning he returned with her to his cas¬ tle, hardly conscious of the change of place he was making; and as every en¬ quiry after the Loony Mabel, and her vile seducer, proved fruitless, hc sunk into a melancholy composure, which threatened amore unhappy termination than had tlie violence oť grief whicii he had displayed on the first discovery of her inconstancy. с â 4Í Hosv
44 How did hc lament that he liad es-er felt pleasure in the innocent society of Latiy Margaret ; antl at times he svas almost repentant of having married svith regard ouly to the perfections of face ; antl Jiaving trusted his happiness Jn the power of one svho had shesvu herself so little capable of estimating the afiection of a husband svho had most tenderly Ios'ed lier. <ť One year having been completed, svithout a single breath of .intelligence reaching him concerning either bis svife or the mysterious Sir Allanrod, svith svhom she had fled from him, having lost all taste for the svorld and its inhabitants, he resolved, from that moment, to consider himself as a widower, and to,become a member of the monastery of White Peni¬ tents at Perth. Accordingly having wit¬ nessed the marriage of Lady Margaret Murray svith Sir James Lambrun, at svhich ceremony he performed the part of father to
to the bride, he retired from the svorld, as he then believed, never for a day again to emerge into its deceitful scenes. eť 1 must now," said Saint Matilda, 44 part for a svhile from Laird Archibald, and pursue the nan ative ì am giving you inmv own character.·—In the retirement iu sviiicii 1 live upon this island, and within the svalls of this religious building, the events of the busy svorld, as you may suppose, seldom reach vy ear. I hati heard of the manner in svhicii the Lady Margaret, and her cousin, the Bonny Ma¬ bel Monteith, had preserved themselves from the pestilence, for İt hael been chanted all over the kingdom in lays and ballads, but farther I had never heard their names mentioned. That such a no¬ ble as the Laird Achibald of Glenross, existed, I svas not even actpiainted ; thus it svas impossible that I coulti kiuw any thing of her marriage. ' 4 About tsvo years after her elopement from her Laird, that is neaily tsventy с 3 years
years from the present time, one beauti¬ fully serene evening in the middle of sum¬ mer, a female pilgrim rang at the gate of the convent; and svhen sister Judith re¬ plied to tlie summons, she requested to see the lady abbess. t£ I accordingly received her in the very apart men î where we are nosv sitting. The movent she entered it, she said— * I come; good mother, to enclose my¬ self for ever, an i tili abita n t of these sacred svalh ; I know the sum which it is re¬ quired of me to offer up to Saint Agnes for the obtaining of my grant, and I have biought it svith me, although not in mo¬ ney ; these jewels, I trust, svill be ac* cepted as a donation of sufficient value to ensure me my petition.'·—And svith these svords she put into my hand a casket, which contained some large and brilliant diamonds, and a vanety of other precious stones. 4 Who art thou, daughter r' 1 demand¬ ed. ť Whence eomest thou, thus unat- tcnded>
tended, and, at the same time, mistress of these valuable articles r' ť - You have heard of me, I doubt not/ she replied, * although you knesv me not till nosv : I am the daughter of the late Earl of Monteith, svhose escape, svith that ofmy cousin Margaret Murray, from the pestilence svhich raged three summers ago in our kingdom, has been celebrated in many songs and ballads/ 4 indeed !' said I, 4 are you that Ma¬ bel Monteith? What is your motive for retiring from the svorld ?* 4 My cousin Margaret/ she anssvered, 1 is lately married to Sir James Lambrun, a man in great favour svith our Sovereign, and constantly about the court ; and as slie is so entirely devoted to him as never svil lingly to be deprived for a day of his society, and as niy disposition lies far away from the busy scenes of the svorld, I have judged this habitation to promise ше a happy resource against the solitude с 4 in
in svhich I must else live, now I am sepa¬ rated from her.' 4 But svhy, my daughter/ I asked, 'arc you here alone :—whore are your atten¬ dants?' 44 I parted from them all, for ever/ she answ ered, ' in the vessel which brought me to this island ; I forbade them to fol¬ low meou shore, w ell assured of receiving from these holy wails the protection whieh I vk of them/ 4 M by diti }ou seek this convent in preference to any otlier?' I demanded. * Because/ slie replied, 4 there is one sister in it svho knosvs my family svell, altliough we have never seen eaeh other; antl standing almost alone as 1 do in the svorld, it svas an inducement to mc hither, to reflect that I sliould live beneath a roof svhich sheltered one to svhom my parents had been known. She to svhom I allude, svas the first cousin of my mother, and I remembered to have heai el that she had taken the veil, at a very early age, in the convent
convent of Saint Agnes, in the island of Auskerry ; her name was Bertha Lennox—- is she still living amongst your sisterhood ?' 4ť I replietl in the afiirmative ; she tes¬ tified great joy at hearing that our sister Bertha was still alive, and requested to see her ; I dom pi icd with her petition, by introducing them to each other ; and the aged mm appeared to derive much satis¬ faction from embracing the child of the iriend of her youth. ťť Feeling thus convinced that the Bon¬ ny Mabel M'as no impostor,' I accepted the ofiering which she had dedicated to our tutelar saint; she was immediately admit teti to her noviciate, and at the re¬ gular period, took the vows of our order. 44 The turn of Mabeľs disposition ap¬ jieared to be a settled melancholy; i knew not whet lier to believe il her real lemper,, whether to imagine that she had any secret hing at her heatl", wliich gave her pain, or tiiat she was dbvtibiied with the reli¬ gious life upon which bhe had voltmtvvy с 5 cult red.
entered, I frequently spoke to her upon the subject, as did our sister Bertha ; and her constant reply was—* I am s^ery happy, quite happy, more happy here than I coukl be any svhere else /—svhich svords always left a doubt on my mind, svhether she meant to express her heart at ease, or religiously resigned to her fate. 44 About ten years after her becoming an inhabitant of this holy mansion, our sister Bertha died ; Mabel and myself ss T ere by the sitie of her bed svhen her spirit fled from the earthly form svhich it had just before anî nated.— 4 Oh, svhat a hap¬ py death !' exclaimed Mabel, as she bent over lier lifeless relative; 4 thy endurances are all past, and thou hast no sins to ac¬ count for in the svorld to come/ 44 Nor hast thou, my daughter, I hope and trust/ I said— 4 Hast thou?' I added, for her svords had increased those doubts concerning the tranquillity of her mind svhich I had before entertained. I hope my good mother cannot think ι othenvise
othenvise of me than as one fully confident in the mercy of heaven/ she anssvered, svith a smile; and I again thought I had svronged her in my former opinion. 44 The years passed on, unmarked by any material occurrence, till about tsvo months ago, when the Bonny Mabel svas seized svith an illness svhich, from the first moment of her being assailed by it, seem¬ ed to threaten the termination of her ex¬ istence. In a very short time, our good father confessor, svho is alike the practiser of physic in our consvnt, pronounced it as his decided opinion, that her malady must prove fatal. 44 1 have ever judged it a mistaken kind¬ ness to svithhold from the sufferer on the bed of sickness, the knowledge sve may have of his trembling upon the margin of the giave, and I therefore disclosed to her, that the period of her days svould be short. 4 Am I then about to die?' she cried ; 4 endue me, heaven, with fortitude !— and do thou, my kind motlier, summon с 6' hither
hither the good tather David, and receive, svith tenderness and compassion, the con¬ fession ofmy svretched heart.' 44 I complied svith her request, and sent to call the father David to her chamber. When sve svcre alone svith her, she im¬ parted to us the secret of her marriage svith the Laird of Glenross, her subse¬ quent infidelity to him svith the sable knight, Sir Allanrod, and concluded by informing us, that having repented ofthe act of shame s\hich she had committed, and not daring to return to her husband, she had found means of flying from her seducer, and «ettin«; herself eonveved to our convent ; to eater svhich, under а false relation of her circumstances, she had judged, she said, to be her only means of procuring herself an asylum svhich could bc grateful to her penitent feelings. 44 It svas too late to chide; all that re¬ mained for us to do, svas to exhort her to prayer ; but she refused to compose her mind
mind for devotion, till I had given her my solemn promise to send a petition to her husband to come and visit her on her death-bed. — 'Did she nousee him, and re¬ ceive her pardon from his lips/ she added, 4 she should die svithout hope of forgive¬ ness in the svorld to come/ 4i The moment I had dispatched a mes¬ senger to the Lairtl of Glenross, she ap¬ plied herself, in the most contrite manner, to acts of devotion. Thus passed on five sseeks, nature growing every day svea ker s\ ithin her : at the expiration of that time, arrived Laird Archibald ; never did I be¬ hold so affecting a countenance as his svas at the moment of his first entrance beneath the roof where lay his perjured Mabel, still beloved, although so many years, blackened by infidelity, had passed since he had beheld her. 44 I conducted him to the door of her chamber, an/i there I left him ; he re¬ quested that their interview should be private, α Nearlv
44 Nearly tsvo hours passed before he returned to my apartment ; svith the pla¬ cid sadness of one resigned to misfortune, he then informed me of the frailty of his Mabel, tolti me that she had svith frank¬ ness eonfesseel to him her crime, auel al¬ ledged, as the reason for her having voiuntarily piunged into sin, the jealousy which his innocent attentions to the Laely Margaret Murray had excited in her breast, and of which siie had not, till too late, al lo weel herself to investigate the cause. The marriage of the Lady Margarct svith Sir James Lambrun, and her husband's seclusion from the svorld, hatí opened her eyes to the fallacy of her opinion concern¬ ing the nature of the esteem they enter¬ tained for each other ; and no sooner had this conviction reachetl her mind, than it was follosved by a sense of her osvn guilty conduct, in having yielded to the delusive persuasions of Sir Allanrod ; antl thus corrected in her vicious course by the redawning of her reason, she had formed
formed and executed a plan of immedi¬ ately flying from her seducer, to the re¬ tirement of a religious seclusion from the svorld, devoting the remainder of her days to the attempt of making her peace svith heaven. By the most strict observance of every religious duty since her becoming an inhabitant of the convent of Saint Agnes, her mind, she said, had been cheered svith a faint hope of forgiveness in a future state; but still she felt that her death would be a most svretched one, un¬ less she svere permitted to implore, and to obtain the forgiveness of her injured hus¬ band, ere her tleparture from life. 44 This forgiveness the excellent Laird Archibald had already granted her, and nosv added to it, his prayers for her hap¬ piness in a future state. 44 In a short time I returned svith him to the chamber of the expiring Mabel.— 4 If true repentance/ she said, i be the washer out of sin, fear not for the liap¬ piness of my soul, my friends ; heaven is svitness
svitness how contrite a heart I have, for the last twenty years, borne svithin this breast. I have repented, from a convic¬ tion of my crime, not from the asve of future retribution. Oh, most exalted hus¬ band/ she added, * there is no reward svhich heaven can bestow, too great for thv excellence ľ i( Siv closed her eyes as she pro¬ nounced these words, and we believed her in silent prayer; buta fvw moments con vinced us that her spirit had fied from its earthly habitation. 44 The Laird Glenross sunk on his knees by the side of the bed, on svhich she lay extended in death ; Id's hands svere clasp¬ ed, his eyes closed, and his head bent downsvards ; the whisperings ofa fervent devotion burst from his lips. When hc rose from his kneeling position, he fixed his eyes for a few moments upon the corpsein the most expressive silence, then addressing himself to шс, hc said—* I have hitheito confined the sveakness svhich 1 feci
I feel svithin my osvn breast, but it can no Ion<rer be restrained/ 44 With these svords hc burst into a violent flood of tears, and suffered me to lead him asvay from tiic cliamber. íť Here ends the story of this unfortunate pair," said Saint Matilda ; (i the grief of the unhappy Iiusband, after the interment of his wife, was as great as if she İıad never broken to bini lier vosv of fidelity ; and the prayers which he has poured forth at the altar of her saint, for the happiness of her soul, as fervent as the most spotless virtue could have drawn for its reward from the lips ofa lamenting husband." Tlie midnight hour svas on the point of sounding, svlien the abbess concluded the history of the Bonny Mabel, and Etlward thanking her for her relation, retired to his chamber; but it was some time before sleep visited liim after be had enteied liis bed ; he lay reflecting on the baseness of Sir Allan rod's character, and considering that an equally vile seducer might be endeavouring
endeavouring to undermine the principles of his belos-ed Rosalind ; so certain was lie, however, or her faith, that he had no apprehensions on the score of her con¬ stancy, and only lamented the unpleasant trials to svhich the persecution of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, or any other rival of his virtuous love, might expose her constancy. And svhilst he svas pro¬ nouncing expressions of w rath and indig¬ nation against the unknown Sir Allan rod, merely as being the seducer of that sex of svhich he had been born to be the pro¬ tector, rather than the bet raver, he little imagined that, ere he should again clasp his Rosalind to his heart, she svould be driven from the castle oí her father by the savage attack made upon it by the free¬ booters of that very Sir Allanrod, svhose character and conduct another instance of his vicious nature svas leading him to ex¬ ecrate and. condemn. At the hour on the following morning appointed for the Laird of Glenross and Edward
Edsvard to become travelling companions, they met at breakfast in Saint Matilda's apartment ; they svere introduceţi as stran¬ gers to each other, antl conversed as such till they had crossed that arm of the sea svhich brought them to the main land of the Scottish kingdom. Here Laird Archi¬ bald resumed the dress of the order of the White Penitents, of svhich he svas a mem¬ ber ; and shortly after, as they pursued their journey, he spoke of his osvn story, and the death of his Bonny Mabel, Edsvard soon found that the abbess of the convent of Saint Agnes had informed the Lairtl of Glenross of her having com¬ municated to him the principal ev r ents of his life ; and he found also that he svas not displeased at his having acquaintance svith them; and as his own svords gas^e Edward encouragement to speak upon the subject, he enquired ofhim, íť if he was acquainted svhether the base seducer of Ids wife svere still in existence?" Laird
Laird Archibald replied— £ť That he believed him to be alive." {< You svi 1 ], doubtiess, яеск him out then/' returned Edward, " and revenge on him the infidelity of a wife svho svas lured, by Ids seducivc tongue, from the path of duty/' 4 ' Never, never! 1 ' answered the Laird of Glenross; " with the assumption of tliis habit, I made a vow of holding uni¬ versal peace svith man ; it becomes my present character, therefore, not to per¬ secute him for the evil hc has done me, but to offer up my prayers for his for¬ giveness." Edward, in the svarmth of youthful feelings, judged this, if not a mistaken piety in the Laird of Glenross, at least a religious forbearance which fie should him¬ self have been averse to have exercised in a similar situation—for the ardent glosv of his mind, heated by the expectation of again clasping his Rosalind in his arms, rendered
rendered him so sensitive to the passion of love, that hc trembled svith fancietl ago¬ ny, eveu at tiie tale ofa seducer's triumph. 4t Had you knosvn svhere to have met Sir Alianrotl ere you had pronounced the vosvs of seclusion from tiic svorld, you had not spoken thus forbcaringly of tlic injury hc lias done to you/' returned Edward. / ťí Probably hot," rejoined Laird Archi¬ bald, t( for I should then have acted svithout that tliscretion srhich tlic inti¬ mate acquaintance that I iiave since tluit; time gained svith religion, has taught me tobe essential toa life oľ future happiness; suffice it> that I know him to be a svreteh too infamous to en -"'aure the regards ofthe virtuous man, even in his chastisement ; for to tlie villanous name of a seducer, he adtls those ofa rebel antl a robber/' Here Laird Archibakl paused ; these particulars of Sir Allanrod he had learnt from the death-bed confession of his svife; Jbut lie refused to acquaint Etlward either of
of svhat country he svas a native, to svhat government he svas a rebel, or svhere he held his residence. — ťÉ According to the present religious ideas to svhich his mo¬ nastic vosvs compelled him, he did not," he said, ť< consider himself authorized to ex¬ pose any human being, however unwor¬ thy he might himself know him to be, to the contumely of those' he had not svi on ged." tÉ Are she svho svas the Lady Margaret Mm ray, and her husband, Sir James Lam¬ bì un, still alive?" Edward enquired. (< Yes, tluy are," replied the Laird of Glenross, tl but it is some time since I have heard of them, and I know not svhether they are at this moment in Scot¬ land or uot ; their happiness has been materially broken in upon by tîie misfor¬ tunes of our unhappy Queen Mary, to svhom· their attachment svas ofthe warm¬ est nature. Peihaps, as you say that you are lately from abroad, you may not yet have heard that our injured monarch has fallen
fallen a victim to the hatred borne her by the Queen of England. It is now nearly six sveeks since she bowed her innocent head beneath the axe, svhich svas raised against it by the cruel commands of Eli¬ zabeth. During the whole periotl of her imprisonment, Sir James and his kuly svere her constant companions ; and the only consolation svhich she tasted for many years previously to her death, arose from their steady friendsiiip." The death of Mary had not yet reached Edward, and he feared that, in the tumult of her state affairs, Elizabeth might not have had leisute to attend to tiie appeal of her god-daughter, Rosalind, upon lier for protection ; if to such an extremity she had been driven by the cruelty of her father, or the importunities of Dc Mad¬ ginecourt ; and upon this idea he became still more anxious than ever to reach Eng¬ land, that he might at least be relieved from the torturing apprehensions occa¬ sioned to him by his present suspense. A
A fesv days travelling brought them into Perthshire, svhere they partetl, the Lairtl of Glenross taking his road tosvards the monastery of the White Penitents, and Edsvard pursuing liis course tosvards Nor¬ thumberland. Laird Archibald had known no more of Edward's history than that lie svas upon his return to a beloved svife, svhom he had not for many years behekl ; and when they bade each other farewel J, h e 'promised Ed¬ svard to tell his lieads for his prosperous journey, aiul safe meeting w İtli the lady of his affections. Edward pursued his svay svith all tlie speed he svas able to make ; and in tlie course of another sveek, his faithful com¬ panion; Hubert, congratulated him on the happiness of once more treading on Eng¬ lish soil.
СИЛР.
CHAP. III. Fortune is weary of oppressing me : Thro' my dark cloud of grief, a cheerful ray Of liglit breaks forth, and gilds the wiiole horizon. bRANKLIN. \J)N the first night of their arrival ín England, svhen they had retiretl to a pri¬ vate chamber in the habitation of a pea¬ sant by the road sitie, svhere they had obtained leave to repose themselves, Hu¬ bert thus addressed Edward—'* in tsvo days more, my dearest master, sve shall reach Cumberland; it is therefore better to form the plan of our proceedings nosv, than to defer it till lhat time. You must vol. iv. ό be
be svell asvare that it becomes you to ad- s-ance, svith the utmost caution, tosvards De Mosvbray Castle; you cannot svant to be told, that to approach it at all, will be a task of danger, svith your Rosalind for sou r sole friend svithin its svalls; svith lier, theiefore, it must be your first at¬ tempt to gain an interview, as the single person on svhose services you can rely ; and having communicated to her the joy¬ ful intelligence of }our existence, let her advice regulate your future conduct." 44 But," returned Edward, *' there are no means of my gaining access to her svithout my being seen, and probably re¬ cognised, by the servants anti soldieiy of the castle, if I am so foitunate as to eseape the observation of the Lord Baron De Λί osv bray himself." 44 Ridicule not the method svhich I have devised foryour safeguard to her pretence, " answered Hubert, " but consider that the exigency of the case requires desperate means to be opposed to it. As sve travel through
through Northumberland, I svili step aside from the road, to a town near which we shall pass, svhere I svili procure you asuit of armour, such as svas-worm by the Eng¬ lish soldierv on their expedition into Flanders, and as similar as possible to the one in svhich you left Cumberland ; ha¬ bited in this, you shall approach, and enter l)e Mowbray Castie, but not as the living Edward; you must represent the apparition oť the man you are ; and by striking fears, of a supernatural nul ve, into tiıe minds of sucii as shall behold and recognise your countenance in your 4s- guise. you svili be allowed to shape your course to your own svish, uninterrupted by any one, as a religious awe svili with¬ hold every hand from stretching itself out to your molestation." 44 Surely this invention srill not impose upon the senses of alii" replied Edward. 44 Can you, my dear master, who are so svell acquainted with the timid and superstitious natures of tlie inhabitants of d % Cumber-
Cumberland, doubt it?" returned Hubert. 41 Any supernatural appearance, I am cer¬ tain, svould be more terrible in the eyes of them ail, than a legion of Scottish free¬ booters drasvn up against them İn battle array : that ss hich assumes the person of one svho has been so svell known to the greatest part of them, cannot fail to ren¬ der them sufficiently cowards for the pur¬ pose you require; and having once gained admittance svithin the castie, by means of your disguise, you are too svell acquainted svith its seeret turns and svind ings, to re¬ quire from me instruction svhere to con¬ ceal ) ourself, till a favourable opportunity shall arrive for sou to approach your Ro¬ salind." It required much persuasion on the part ofthe wary Hubert, to induce Edward to adopt the atlvice he gave him.— <£ It svas true," Edsvard considered, 44 that he hati found him, svith regard to his own enlarge¬ ment from the prison in Flanders, apt at stratagem, and cautious in the construc¬ tion
tton of his plans ; but still he could not immediately reconcile himself to the one be had, in the present instance, devised for his approach to liis belo veti Rosalind. 44 Do any other means, svhich promise you the accomplishment of your desired purpose svitli greater security and facility to yourself, offer themselves to your ima¬ gination?" Hubert enquired ofhim. Edward replied reluctantly in the affir¬ mative. {i Then be, at least, svilling to make experiment of the be.sr method which pre¬ sents itself," rejoined Hubert; ' 4 antl lis¬ ten to a second inducement which I shall ghe you, strong as tlie first, for its adop¬ tion, Siiould the vile Alwin, svho svas commissioned by De M atlgi necourt to be the instrument of your intendetl death, or the Lord Rufus himself, behold you in your svauderings round the castle svalls, svhile you shall be asvaiting an apt mo¬ ment for entering svithin them, it is more than probable tiiat your appearance may n 3 strike
strike tei rv to their guilty souls, and draw from tlieir Hps a confession of their crime; uay, if it be even heard by them that such a shape has walked by night, their caution may bend to their apprehensions, und the truth burst from their lips." Edwartl svas, of course, ignorant ofthe disagreement svhich liad taken place be¬ tween Lord William and De Madgine¬ court during his absence from England, and replied— st I cannot admit the slight¬ est doubt of Loid Rufus and his train being at this time inhabitants of De Mow* bray Castle: for svhat purpose could he have sent emissaries into Fianders, to de¬ prive me oflife, but the end of becoming hiiibclf the Iiusband of my Rosalind, in svh.ich desile he knosvs that he is possessed of her fatheťs favour?" 4 ' And docs not this s r ery supposition point out to you," returned Hubert, íť that certain danger must asvait your approach to the eastle, in any form but the one I liave ptoposed to you ? If De Madgine- *' court
court and his attendants are the guests of the'castle, svill not any rumour svhich may be eonveyed to him of the living Edward hashing been seen near it, cause him immediately to issue a ïesvaid for the certain performance of that act of death, in svhich he had been once foiled? -and svili not Lord William equally, if the in¬ telligence of )our return should meet his ear, redoom you to the imprisonment from svhich you have escaped ?—You must, you must pu ι sue the plan I has r e marked out for you to follosv. " 41 But," enquired Edward, 44 where svill be your station, svhile 1 make the attempt of gaining admittance to the pic-sence of my Rosalind ?" 41 On our arrival in Cumberland, ΐ must immediately qui*- you," answered Hubert; 4i question me not, my dear master, upon svhat business I leave you, or whither my steps will be bent svhen sve part; but be satisfied that it is for your ό 4 eventual
eventual happiness that I shall for some time be separated from you." Edward forbore to trespass upon the request of the generous Hubert, and en¬ deavoured to compose himself to sleep. On the following morning they again pursued their journey, with the same ener¬ getic spirit svhich had marked their steps ever since they had escaped from the pri¬ son of Garcías Xavia. At a small town upon the confines of Cumberland, the suit of armour, of svhich Hubert had spoken, svas purchased, and Edward in¬ duced to equip himself in it, according to ihe directions of his faithful companion. Edward having agreed to assume the appearance of his osvn spirit, the decep¬ tion could not be rentieret! too complete ; and, accordingly, Hubert prevailed upon him to mark his left 1 cheek with a streak of blood, antl for this reason—he had, from the chamber in his prison, heard enough of the conversation svhich had passed
passed betsveen Alwin and the governor, svhile in the cell of Edward, to knosv that the first time Alwin had svounded the corpse of the French captive svho had been placed upon Edward's pallet in the prison, his tremulous hand had unintentionally struck the dagger into its cheek ; and therefore thougiit that a representation of this wound upon t lie cheek of Edsvard, svould be a maik that must at once con¬ vey the history of the supposed spirit, and its appearance on earth, to all such as svere in thf confidence of De Madgine¬ court and his adherent Alwin. Edward's equip meut took place tosvards the close of evening, on the skirts of a wood which divided Cumberland from the more northern county. But three hours tra¬ velling lay betsveen Edward and De Mow¬ bray Castle, and he resolved to approach it under the cover of the shade of night, a time svhich Hubert, svith a smile, en¬ joined him alsvays to choose for leaving his spots of concealment, as a necessary d 5 observance
observance for sustaining his present cha¬ racter. ťť Here then, for a svhile, we part," said Hubert; and he again repeated·— * 4 Question me not on the business that takes me from you, but rely on my being employed for your eventual happiness." 44 Wîfen and svhere shail sve meet again?" asked Etlward. " When," answered Hubert, tl I can¬ not with exactness determine ; the spot svili, in ail probability, be De Mow bray Castle." Hubert having then matle a transfer of j>art of the gold which" he had stili re¬ maining, from tiic safehold of his trusty waistcoat to the pocket of Etlward, tlicy bade each other an affectionate farewell, and took separate roads. The agitateti minti svith whieh EdsvartI pursued liis way, may bc easily imagined. Again lie felt dissatisfied with the disguise he İıad assumetl, and anxious to exchange the plan for some other; but he could devise
devise none, nor had he the means of putting any other into execution, if even it had entered his imagination. Ju&t as the eastle clock struck eleven, he reached the moat; his heart beat svith rapture at beholding the svalls that en¬ closed his Rosalind; but the possibility of iier having been aheady forced into the arms of another, on tiie report of his death, suddenly turned his tide of rapture iato the vost acute pain. In a short time he sasv aman approacb- iíí^ towaids the spot svhere be stood ; he nios'ed up to him, in oider to try svhat effect his dhguise svould produce upon him ; an exclamation of tenor burst from Ids lips, and he fled. Edsvard svas thus satisfied that his appearance svas answer¬ able to the expectation svhich Hubeit had formed ofit; but lie was .sorry that it had frightened away from him his old friend Ambrose, -to whom he should have felt little reluctance in confiding his secret. The alarm whicii svas occasioned to d в Ambiose,
Ambrose, and to the sentinel, Simon Wit- Hams, by their observation of a figure in armour svandering on the outside of the castle svalls, has already been mentioned, and its cause explained in svhat sve have just related of Edward. Suffice it to say, that after having undergone the necessity of hiding himself for three successive days, in a cave svith svhich he was acquainted, in the neighbourhood of the eastle, on the fourth evening after his separation from his friend Hubert, chance favoured him in his attempt at crossing the drav- bridge, after Lord William and liis men had passed over it, at the time of their setting out on their march against the advanced body of Allanrod's troops. Tlie additional effects of terror svhich svere produced on old Ambrose, and Phi¬ lip Watkins, the sentinel of the liour, at the foot ofthe bridge, by beholding svhat they believed an aerial being, bearing a lesembiance in its countenance to the lost Edward, and disfigured svith a bloody gasli
gash dosvn its left check, Iiave also been detailedto our readers; wehave, there¬ fore, in this place, only to speak of Ed¬ svard himself. Not alone from the testimony svliich EdsvartI had received that the appearance of his ρ- rson hati struck terror into the minds of all svho behekl him, but also from the observation he had made from his spot of concealment harel by, that a large number of the Baron's soldiery had t quitted the castle thatnight, from svhich cause he knesv that the ramparts svouhi be less thickly planted svith sentinels, than they at other times svere ; he ventured boldly to pursue his way tosvards a part of the glacis, from svhence arose a portion of the rampart svall that encircled the terrace svalk, upon svhich opened a door communicating svith the apartment that had at his departure from the castle been occupied by Rosalind. From the glacis, he immediately began to climb the intervening svall : the moment his
his head svas raised abos'e it, Ids eyes fell on a female at a short distance from him, svhich the giow of hi.s heart instantly in¬ formed him could be no other than the mistress of his aflections. Trembling vvith the evthion raised in İıis breast bv a va- lieis of contending feelings, lie coukl not, on iiis íívt atvvpt tí) address her, com¬ mand iis utterance at all; a second at¬ tempt t vibled liim faintly to ptonounce her name, and the instant that she turned her heatl tostards the spot svhere hc svas stationeti, he bearti a tloor open, and a voice, svbicii the apprehension of a disco¬ very from au enemy prevented him from lecoguizing to be Gertrude's, addressing her. Thus fearful of detection, he im¬ mediately disappeared; and wlien the return of silence encouraged him again to ascend to tiie top of ttie svall, Rosalind svas not only gone, butthe sentry of the night placet! befoie the turret, through svhich lay the passage froui lhe rampart to her apartments. Dis-
Disappointed, but not discouraged, he turned his thoughts to the refiection of svhere he should conwal himseif during the next day ; he had nosv passed the drasvbridge, aud the cave, svhich had be¬ fore* been favourable to his retreat from observation during the hours of day, svas no longer attainable, lie revembered the communication leading from the northern ramparts to the vaults beneath the castle y ami thence to the chapel, through svhich his friend Hubert had conducted him to liis concealed interviews svith Rosalind, svhen lie had stolen by night asvay from the tower in the village. To the privacy of these he resolved to commit himself ; and having, svith the use of, the utmost caution and slow proceeding, reached theni svithout attracting the observation of any individual, he believed himself for a time at least, once more in safety, The morning svas already beginning to break, ere Edward reached the interior of his hiding-place ; he therefore resolved not 3 to
to emerge from it into any of the avenues' svhich led toss ards the chapel, till the suc¬ ceeding night shoultl again base spread the veil of darkness over the earth. AVhen the hollow-toned clock of the castle had once more sountled the hour of midnight, Etlward directed his steps to¬ wartls the chapel ; tiie beams of the moon peeping through various slender chasms in the rocky ceiling ofthe vaults through sviiicii he svas moving, and gliding through the frame-work of tlie decayed cloisters, svliich ran at intervals along the side of his path, guided him to it. The full disk of a resplendant moon shone through a spiral window at one enti ofthe building, and its refulgent light rested on the altar at the opposite extremity. The eye of Edsvard fell on it, and he stood for some time resigned to an overpowering sensa¬ tion svhich filled his mind, as he gazed upon the shrine at svhich he had become the husband of Rosalind. Places svhere the most interesting events of
ofour lives have taken place, svhen be¬ held at any remote period from the time of their happening, excite iu us sensa¬ tions of the most acute nature. Imagina¬ tion places around them the same perso¬ nages, causes them to react the same scenes which are impressed upon our me¬ mory, and sve encourage the delusion svith a svarmth amounting almost to the real joy or pain svhich we experienced at the memorable moments that have in¬ scribed them on our recollection. By Hubert, Edward had been supplied with the implements for striking a light, and by their means he now applied him¬ self to illumine one ofthe lamps, of svhich there svere always several dispersed about in various niches in the walls, readv for burning on any solemn occasion svhich required the evening use of the chapel. From the chapel lie had resolved boldly to pursue his way through the castle to the chamber of Gertrude; and having made himself knosvn to her, employ her to an¬ nounce
nounce his existence to his belosxd wife* accordingly, the moment his lamp svas lighted, he proceeded to the massive door svhich opened into the passage communi¬ cating with the corridor that led into the great hall of the castle. To his severe disappointment, and contrary to former custom, be found it locked, and impervious to every attempt he made to open it. We liasse already saij¡J, that as the in¬ cursions of the borderers became more determined, it had been deemed dangerous to suffer it to remain unsecured, and that, on this acco'int, its key had heen added to the number of those which it was the duty of old Ambrose, as the porter ofthe castle, to keep in his custody. In disappointment and reflection, Ed¬ ward sunk down upon the base of a piltar, which afforded a resting-place for his ha¬ rassed and enervated frame. After somfc time passed in thought, he iecoliect. i that, at the time of his quitting England, Rosalind
Rosalind had been in the constant habit of praying, once in the course of every revolving day, by the side of her deceased mother's, tomb : the intimate acquaintance svhich he had svith the virtuous and steady principles of her heart, led him to sup¬ pose that the calamities svhich she had since that period been doomed to experi¬ ence, svould, if possible, has*e strength¬ ened her constancy and fervour in her former habits of devotion ; and thus as¬ sured, in his own opinion, that there could not be the «lightest doubt of her ace ustom ary visit to the grave of the Lady de Mosvbray being performed in thç course of the following day, his first resolve svas to remain in the ehapel till she should appear in it ; but a little farther consider¬ ation pointing out to him that she might come to it, attended by those over svhose conduct she might not have suflicient posver to restrain them from bearing in¬ telligence of his existence to his enemies, his final determination was to place, upon the
tlie marbie tomb svhich enclosed the ashes of the late Baroness, the cross of rubies svhich she hati bequeathetl to htm by the name of mother, and svhich he had vowed to Rosalind never to part from but in death. This cross he had constantly svorn upon his breast, from the first moment of his receiving it at the hantl of Lord William, a short time after the death of the Lady de Mowbray ; and he concluded it impos¬ sible that Rosalind should not behold it, as she knelt in devotion by the side of the tomb ; and equally so, that she should not conclude its being placed there a tes¬ timony of his existence, antl of his not being far distant from the spot where she shoultl find it. The issue of this plan, he doubted not, would be her devising some means of seeing him alone in the chapel, or of conveying to him instruction con¬ cerning the comlnct which it svould be becoming in him to pursue, for their mu¬ tual safety and happiness. Thus
Thus resol veti, he took the cross from the ribband by which it svas suspended round bis neck, and having placed it upon a svilite speck of the mai ble svlıİck composed tlie tomb, he returned again to his concealment amidst the saults. Night after night, svith increased anxi¬ ety, he visited the chapel ; antl to his inexpressible astonishment and grief, the cross was still unmoved from the situation in svhich he had placed it. This repeated disappointment of his higlily raised hope of beholding his cross exchanged forsorne token plaeed on the spot for him to find by the hantl 'of his Rosalind, rendei ed him not alone uncertain what to conjecture of her late, but equally so how it became him to proceed for gaining any iniorma¬ tion concerning her, or obtaining an in¬ terviesv with lier. To this end his soul was day and night upon the rack of thought ; but in every point of view in which he could place it, the idea of his emerging from liis present concealment, or
or attempting to enter into conversation svith any of the inhabitants of the castle, appeared so replete with danger, both to himself and the svife of his affections, that he was compelled to decide it an insur¬ mountable necessity for him to keep him·· self a close prisoner in the vaults, till-he should either again see Hubert, or receive intelligence from him. At parting, Hubert had informed him that their next meeting would be at De Mosvbray Castle, although he had not fixed any time svhen that meeting svas to be expected : earnestly he prayed that İıis arrival might uot be long protracted ; and as he doubted not, let Hubert come to the eastle in svhat character he might, that the story of an alarming spectre having passed the drasvbridge would reacli his ear, and be to him sufficient information that his master svas secreted in some part of the fabric, the hardships of his case svere somewhat softened by the assurance that Hubert would lose no time in dis¬ covering
covering his retreat, and console him at least svith his friendship, ifit svas not in his posver to conduct him to the happi¬ ness at svhich he aspired. To the svretchedness of his mind svere added bodily inconveniences, svhich heightened the unpleasantness of his situ¬ ation ; liis bed was of no softer material tlian.the uneven clods of earth which composed the "floor of the spirits, antl his provisions such as he conti ived by night to steal f Vom a storehouse ivar the en¬ trance to tiic vaults from the rampart, svhere bread ofthe coarsest kind w as piled on the tlays of its being baked at the castie, against it should be fetched asvay by a person appointed for that purpose, to tlie tower of strength in thevillage, for the use of the soldiery it contained. It svill be remembered that Rosalind visited the chapel on the morning suc¬ ceeding the departure of her father from De Mosvbray Castle; and that morning, it will be perceived, was the one previous to
to tlie night in svhich Edsvard placed his cross upon the tomb of the deceased Ba¬ roness. In the course of this very ni-;ht occurred the illness of Gertrude, svhich our readers have already been informed svithhekl Rosalind for seventeen mornings from paying her accustomed devotions in the chapel : On the eighteenth, the amend¬ ment of Gertrudes health was such, that she again repaired to that spot svhere her devotions were performed svith the greatest satisfaction to her osvn mind. With her finding the cross, and her subsequent re¬ solution of visiting the chapel by night, at the hour she had, previously to her marriage, been accustomed to meet Ed¬ svard iu it, our readers are also acquainted, antl with tiie suddeu discovery of the ap¬ proach of the freebooters to an attack upon tlie castle, at the moment she had reached the great hail in her svay to¬ wards İt. At the same moment of time that Ro¬ salind svas descending from her chamber, Edward,
Edward, svho did not relax in his nightly visits to the chapel, although increasing disappointment alone marked the periods of his entering it, made the joyful disco¬ very of his cross being removed from the spot svhere he bad placed it ; but scarcely hadthe rapture svhich had been admitted at his eyes, communicated itself to his heart, ere his ears were assailed by the blasts of the trumpets blown from the advanced body of the enemy, and replied to by similar sounds fiom the heights of the castle. For a time he supposed that the sounds might pretlict the' return of that body of men svhom he had seen march from the castle on the night in svhich he İıad gained a passage over the drasvbridge ; but svhen the clangour of contending arms ran through the air, svith the discovery of his eiror, he felt himself entirely at a loss to decide what eould be the cause of thejpre- sent hostilities, as he did not suppose that the audacity of the moss troopers had vol. iv. e arisen
arisen to a sufficient height to encourage them to liazard a regular attack, such as be could discover that which svas now passing to be. A prey to the most torturing suspense of mind, Edward svandered about the cliapel ; a thousand different ideas crosvd- ing into his brain, a thousand various plans entering his imagination, and unde¬ cided svhich to select, or indeed svhether it became him to put any one of them into execution or not : at one moment, trembling for the safety of his Rosalind, he resolved to rush boldly into the castle, to search her out, and present himself as her lawful champion ; at another, he de¬ termined to issue from the vaults, and ascertain svho were the enemies of the castle ; cooler reflection then represented to him that he had not the posver of en¬ tering the castle svalls, and tiiat by issu¬ ing out from the vaults, he siiould expòse hiraself, without the possibility of benefit accruing either to himself or his Rosalind, from
from such an exposure, to the fire and arrosvs of the soldiers upon its svalls. At length he recollected that from a dormitory, now ruinous arid in disuse, behind the chancel of the chapel, therö had once been a communication with a small bastion, which had beeu a spot of / defence to the building in its monastic state, but svhich svas now entirely ne¬ glected, since it had become a regularly fortified castle. To this he resolved, if possible, to trace out his svay, in the hope of obtaining from it a view of the contest svhich svas passing svithout, and which he considered, by his being able to form a judgment of İt only from thç single sense of hearing, might thus be magnified to his imagination. With some diificulty he found the steps, the entrance to svhich he had once before seen, but never yet attempted to ascend ; the iron hand of time had so far mis¬ shapen and despoiled them of their former properties, that no one, svithout the spur ES of
of feelings like those by svhich Edsvard svas at the moment actuated, could have made his svay up the ascent which they had once afforded ; svith much time and la¬ bour he effected it. On looking out from the ruined bastion, he found the day al¬ ready to be rising, and the contention of arms to have ceased ; his situation svas not a favourable one for viewing the ram¬ parts, being too much confined svithin the walls of the castle ; and as the enemy were not visible svithout the moat, he concluded them conquerors, and already svithin the building.—* 4 Almighty God, preserve my Rosalind !" burst in quiver¬ ing accents from his lips ; and scarcely had the exclamation escaped them, ere he perceived a vehicle, svhich was drawn by four horses, and attended by some men on horseback, passing over the draw¬ bridge. A secret instinct, inexplicable, except it be'that every circumstance of svhich sve knosv not the exact cause, gives ns additional anxiety for the safety of those
those about svhose fate sve are uncertain, and at the same time most anxious, in¬ stantly caused Edsvard to believe his Ro¬ salind confined in the carriage he had seen; and svithout any decided plan in viesv, he made a hasty effort to retrace his svay from the bastion to the dormitory bel osv ; m\d incautious svith regard to the ruinous path he had to tread, he fell, and his head struck svith such violence against the svall of the turret, through svhich he was descending, that the blow depris^ed him of all sense.
в 3 CHAP.
CHAP. IV. Has pitying Heav'n consented to my pray'r ? It has ! it has ! — . — ■—■■- ......■......... But language poorly speaks the joy I feel; Let passion paint, and looks express my soul. HENRY JONSÜ. W HEN Edsvard recovered the posver of recollection, and again raised himself upon his feet, the first sound svhich he heard svas the castle clock striking the ninth hour of the morning; and when its hollow tones had died away upon the air, a solemn silence prevailed. He re¬ turned to the chapel, and his eye falling upon the altar, he found it despoiled of the tripod lamps of silver svhich had before stood on marble pedestals on the sides of the sacramental table; and the golden eagle,
eagle, upon svhich the sacred volume had hitherto been supported, svas Iikesvise gone : and these observations convinced . him that whosoever had been the enemies of De Mosvbray Castle, theirs had been the victory. He moved tosvards the door of the chapel leading into the body of the cas¬ tle ; he found it burst from the lock, and standing open. He approached it, and as he stood listening with eager desire to catch some sound svhich might convey to him information, svhethcr or not the ene¬ my had yet quitted the place, be leaned for support upon the open door, for a faint sickness oppressed him ; and although he at present felt little anguish from the blosv svhich he had received upon his head, he was sensible of an aching numbness, svhich seemed to be the forerunner of much acute pain. For above two hours he continued to wander at the distance of a few feet from the door of tlie chapel, near the entrance E 4 into
into the vaulted corridor leading into the great hall of the castle; and as no sound, tither within the building, or on its ex¬ terior, met his ear, save the periodical voice of the clock, he began to imagine the castle deserted ; for even in his con¬ cealment in the vaults, lie had scarcely ever passed five minutes together without some sound reaching him, either from the sentinels on the walls, the closing of doors withiu the castle, or similar causes of noise. Another hour, passed in the same un¬ interrupted stillness, convinced him that the inhabitants were fled, and he began to proceed towards the marble hall ; ar¬ rived there, the same scene of devastation, svhich sve have alreadv described Lord William to have witnessed on his return to his castle from the strong-hold of the freebooter Allanrod, met the eye of Ed¬ ward. With grief and astonishment he con¬ templated the scene before him ; iiow altered
altered tlie appearance of all around him,- since those happy days svhen he had lived the friend of Rosalind, and the friend of the Baron ! He ascended to her chamber, and it afforded him a slender gratification to behold the various articles of forniture svhich it contained ; svith most of svhich he had, as it vvere, an intimate acquaint¬ ance, and svhich still remained in their accustomed places, having been consi¬ dered of too iittle v r alue by the enemy to be made part of their pillage. Burning svith thirst, for the fever into which the agitation of his mind had throsvn his blood, was increased by the pain svhich svas the cousequence of his fall, lie des¬ cended into a lower part of the building, and proceeded towards a marble cistern, at the extremity of one of the corridors branching out from the great hall ; the gilt cups svhich had been svont to be found in the bason, had been rent by the des- poiiers of the castle, from the light chains by which they had for years past been E 5 fastened
fastened to it ; and Edsvard taking off his casque, received into it the grateful stream for wdiich his parched throat panted. As he raised his eyes from the casque after his draught, they fell upem the figure of a man in an attitude of surprise, at the opposite extremity of the passage, svho almost instantly uttered an exclamation of alarm, and fled. Scarcely had the man disappeared, ere Edward recollected both his countenance and his name ; he svas the very Philip Watkins svho had been the sentinel at the drasvbridge on the night that Edsvard had passed over it in his disguise ; and as Edward was still in the same suit of ar¬ mour, with the same representation of a streak of blood marked upon his left cheek, he svas not much surprised to find that Philip fled from him ; svhat most sur¬ prised him svas, that he alone should be remaining in the castle when every other inhabitantmppeared to have fled from it. It had so chanced, that on the night A of
of tlie freebooters* attack upon the castle of De Mosvbray, Philip Watkins had been the sentinel at the watch-tosver ; at the approach of the enemy, he had exerted his lungs svith due effect, and blown a hearty blast of alarm to the inhabitants of the castle ; and whether he conceived that he had performed all his dutyin so doing, or whether he had any partieular aversion to oppose the enemy svith more substantial efforts than the svind svhich he had sent at them through his trumpet, is not exactly ascertained ; all we are informed of the busi¬ ness is, that svhen the attack svas over, and the castle had surrendered to the enemy, Philip svas still safe and snug inbis watch- tower, from svhence he had seen such of his comrades as had fallen in the contest, buried beneath a tumulus cast up for that purpose on the outside of the svalls ; and those svho had survived, led asvay prison¬ ers by the conquering paity. The same vaulted passage or corridor, at the extremity of svhich was the cistern, e 6 kd
led also to the kitchens ofthe castle, and tosvards them Philip svas proceeding, in order to examine svhether the freebooters had left Ыт a dinner ; his first glimpse of Edsvard filled him svith terror ; but scarcely had he fled from him, svhen re¬ collecting that he had alsvays heard it affirmed that spirits never svere visible ex¬ cept by night, he assumed courage to take a second look. For this purpose he returned cautiously to the passage, and the moment he again appeared in sight, Edward hailed him.— 4< You are Edsvard alive !—Are you not Edsvard himself alive ?" repUed Philip to his exclamation. Edward advanced hastily tosvards him. 4i Yes, I am," he said ; i( keep my secret, and you have nothing to fear from me ; but should you disclose it, you may work my ruin, and thus merit my resentment." 44 Alas !" replied Philip, 4< there is no one left svi tiiin these svalls for me to com¬ municate it to ; wheresoever you may have been concealed about them, you must
mustTias'e heard the attack that has been made during the night ; all the survivors of the siege are the prisoners of the free¬ booter Allanrod/' 44 Allanrod Ì" exclaimed Edward, for the seducer of the Bonny Mabel imme¬ diately recurred to his memory, as did the epithet of 4 robber/ svhich Laîrd Archibald Glenross had given him: ť4 Al¬ lanrod !" he repeated. Philip immediately began to explain the terror svhich this mysterious freebooter had, for some time past, been to the Eng¬ lish borders, aiid to recount Lortl Wil¬ liam's marching against him, and the ill success svhich it svas conjectured, from his not having since that time returned to his castle, had attended his expedition ; but Edsvard scarcely listening to his svords, or permitting him to utter them, urged the most impatient enquiries after his Ro¬ salind. With astonishment he heard from Phi¬ lip, the enmity svhich had broken out between
between Lord William and Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, and vith rapture did he learn that no other suitor had been forcetl upon her by her father : but the tide of joy svhich filled his heart on gainiug this information, svas quickly turned into an opposite feeling, upon tbe recollection that she svas nosv the prisoner of the infamou/é, the villanous Allanrod—perhaps already the victim of his lust, or loaded svith chains svithin his strong-hold ; and with the svildness of delirium he expressed aloud his apprehensions. Philip Watkins svas one of those to svhom Edsvard had in his boyish days been indebted for his first knowledge of mili- tary exercises : svhen the soldiers of the castle had been drawn out on the rara¬ parts for inspection or exercise, Philip had often indulged him, by suffering him to bear his pike for a short time on his shoulder, and sometimes had given him a lesson in the management of the cross- bosv. These kindnesses had made an im¬ pression
pression on the heart of Edward ; and- svhen the Baron, some years after, doubt¬ ed the number of his troops, as the in¬ cursions of the moss-troopers became more formidable, Edsvard procured for Philip an advance in his profession, which Philip had ever felt pleasure in acknowledging that he osved to à the indulgence he had shesvu Edsvard svhen a boy. So great had been the esteem in which the urbanity of Edwards manners, and the beuevolence of his heart, had caused him to be held at De Mosvbray Castle, that at the time of the false intelligence of his death being circulated in it, few of its household did not let fall a tear to his memory; and amongst the most sincere mourners for his fate, next to his af¬ flicted svife, one in particular had been Phi¬ lip Watkins : his joy, therefore, at seeing him still alive, svas at least equal to the sorrosv he had felt for his supposed death; and he instantly demanded Iiow he could be
be of use to him, declaring himself en¬ tirely devoted to his service. Edward remembered, svith equal satis¬ faction as Philip bore it in his memory, the intimacy svhich had subsisted betsveen them, svhen he svas about half the length of the pike svhich he had been so emulous of handling; and Philip being, besides, almost the only person svhom he had ever heard Hubert speak of as <4 an honest fel¬ losv," he felt no repugnance, situated as they both svere at that moment, to give him a short sketch of svhat had befallen him since his departure from England. ťť Nosv then/' said Edsvard, as he concluded svdiat he deemed a sufficient account of his ads T entures to interest Phi¬ lip in his fate, (i nosv if thou svouldst indeed serve me, devise some means for bringing me into the presence of my Ro¬ salind ; give me thy assistance to rescue her fiom the power of the freebooter Allanrod." Philip
Philip repeated, " that hosvsoever it was in his power to serve him, he might com¬ mand him."—He then proceeded to in¬ form Edward, that he did not believe the Lady Rosalind had been conducted to the fortress of the borderers ; from bis elevated situation in the watch-tower, he had, he said, been able to command an extensive view of the country. She had, as Edward had imagined, been carried asvay from the castle in the vehicle svhich lie had seen pass over the drawbridge ; but it had proceeded tosvards the south, in an exactly opposite direction to the track follosved bý the victorious freebooters, svhen they had borne off) in triumph, their prisoners and spoil ; tliey had moved di¬ rectly north, and from the north they Iikesvise had marched svhen he had first heheld them in the night, approaching to their attack upon the castle.— <e It there¬ fore appeared to him," he said, li that the Lady Rosaliud had, by the order ofthe chief
chief of the horde, been conveyed to some plaee less repugnant to the feelings of a delicate female, than the fortress ofa ban¬ ditti must have proved to them, svhere it svas his design to detain her till a ransom was offered for her person." All the haunts of the moss-troopers were knosvn to be upon the borders of the Scottish kingdom; fesv had even s'en tured to settle themselves upon the confines of England : the idea accordingly formed by Philip, of Rosafind's destination, appeared probable to" EdsvartI, and he immediately expressed his svish to endeas T our to trace out the road by svhich she had journied, in order that he might learn the spot svhere she was detained, antl, if possible, by his presence, corroborate that idea of his being still in existence, svhich he doubted not she must have conceived upon finding his cross on the tomb of İıer mo¬ ther ; and tliat, by her, the cross had been removed from the spot svhere he had placed it, Philip had convinced him, by assuring
assuring him that no one but herself ever entered the chapel, except on the Sunday. All carriages were at that time so rare throughout tlie kingdom, especially in the more remote northern counties, that Philip did not despair of very easily gain¬ ing information svhere such a one had passed, provided its route had been taken within viesv of any of the cottages or sheepfolds, svhich svere scattered about the country. Accordingly, having prevailed on Ed¬ svard to take some refreshment, (to induce him to allot a portion of his care to the hurť he had received on lfis head, and svhich was now so much ssvelled as to prevent him from svearing his casque, he svas unable,) they set out, Edsvard hav¬ ing throsvn a plain surtout over his suit of armour, and put upon his bead a sol¬ dier's bonnet as a substitute for his casque. For more than tsvo leagues, they svere able to proceed from the observations which Philip had made upon the vehicle in
in its progress, from his situation in the svatch-tosver, svhich were greatly assisted by the track of the svheels, svhich was discernable on the sandy roads over which it had passed. Early in the evening, Philip prevailed on his companion to stop for the night at an hospitable cottage, svhich afforded them accommodation as sveary travellers, and svhose osvner, at the entreaty of Philip, called in a neigh¬ bour svho had some little skill in surgery, and svho applied a healing medicine to the bruise on Edward's head, of svhieli he svas himself too careless fbrjiis own safety ; so true is it, that the wounds of the body are not felt, at least not regarded, when he who bears them suflers at the same moment under any mental calamity. Pursuing their jouiney on the follosv- ing day, by the information svhich they were able to gather froin the shepherds, svho bad'seeu the vehicle which they de¬ scribed, pass their folds, and, at intervals, assisted by the marks which the svheels had
had left of their passage, tovvards evening ihey came up svith a party of pilgrims, who ss'ere returning to their homes, from a pilgrimage they had been making to the lady at Walsingham, and svhom, svith their minstrels and some other travellers vvho had joined company svith them, in ortler that their number might prove a defence to them against the freebooters, of svhom there svas a geneial terror throughout the northern parts of the kingdom, they found seated on the side of a shady hill, regaling themselve^ ou the contents of their svallets. With the hospitality customary to their profession, the pilgrims invited Edward and his companion to partake of their homely fare : they svere faint svith tra¬ velling, and readily accepted the ofiered kiuduess. AVhilst they sat amongst them, it entered the imagination of Edsvard, that any disguise must be preferable for him to attempt gaining an interviesv svith his Rosalind in, to theauH çf amour which he now
nosv .wore, and svhich might render him, he judged, a suspicious character to her guards; accordingly, producing some of tlte gold svith wiiich Hubert had, at their last parting, furnished him, he privately offered a couple of pieces to one of the pil¬ grims, svho had informed him that he hati now but one more day's journey to his house, in exchange for his robe, his staff, and his hat, The pilgrim had no objection to so advantageous a saie of articles, of svhich he sincerely hoped he should never stand in need again ; and the bargain svas, with¬ out hesitation, struck. Having equipped himself, Edward en¬ deavoured to make a similar, purchase for Philip ; but no other of the pilgrims was sufíiciently near home, to authorize his quitting the dress of his present profes¬ sion ; and, therefore, he found his desired end of habiting his companion like him¬ self, unattainable : but Philip entering into Edsvard s idea, meanwhile made so successful a suit, by the powerful argu-
tnentofgoid, to one of the minstrels, svho, lie found, loved money better than music, eveu in the holy service of lightening their svay to journeying pilgrims, svhich was bis avocation, that he obtained of him the promise of a spare doublet and cloak, svitli svhich he svas furnished in a knapsack at his back, and likewise a lute, in playing upon svhich, Philip possessed some little skill; and he judged that it might not prove au unacceptable pass¬ port for them to the prison of the Lady Rosalind, if she svas at the present mo¬ ment the inhabitant of one. Accordingly, having made his agreement svith the young minstrel, he applied to Edsvard for the purchase-money of his new accoutre¬ ments ; and Edsvard having resvarded the minstrel as liberally as he had done the pilgrim, the lad, on seeing the money, said— 44 Indeed you liave the svorst of the bargain, for I shall reach my own town to-morrow,, svhere I can buy ail the same articles
articles ï have sold to you,, for tsvo-thirds of the price you have paid me for them." " The better luck for thyself," said «Philip, satisfied that Edward's wish had been gratified in the obtaining of their disguises ; and tiiey then bade farewell to the party of tras r ellers by whom tliey had been regaled, and set forward· About noon, on the fourth day after their quitting De Mowbray Castle, as they ascended an eminence iu the road, the sea, at a short distance, burst upon them; and Edsvard, on perceiving it, began to suppose that they must, after all, have puisued a svrong track. Whilst they w^ere in debate together, 'some villagers of difieren t sexes approached them, dressed in svhat appeared their holiday apparel. Philip addressed them, for İt had been agreed between him and Edsvard, that lest Edsvard should in his speeeli betray himseif to suspicion, he should pass for the dumb brother of his companion.— 44 What castle is that ?" askeel Philip, 44 Rock-
" Rockmount," they replied, 4 * the castie of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt." Edward gas r e an involuntary start at the sound. 44 We are all going thither/' rejoined one of the females, 4< to celebrate the birth-day of the old housekeeper, Dame Edith, who is to-day one huudred years old." 44 Then, I suppose, my Lord himself is not at the castle?" enquired Philip. 44 I don't knosv," replied tiie female svho had before spoken - 44 But I do/' cried one of the males : 44 Lord Rufus left it this tlay, at eaily morn, and it is tliought that he is gone to London, to ask our queen's advice about a young lady that he has rescued from a band of moss troopers." - 44 Tiie queen's aelvicel" said Philip. 4 4 Aye, " returned the mau, 4< the young lady svhom he delivered from her enemies, is our gracious queen's owu god-daugh¬ ter ; her name is De Mowbray, the voju iv. f daughter
daughter of the richest and greatest noble in all Cumberland." This act of humanity on the part of the hitherto unfeeling De Madginecourt, to the woman who had slighted his ad¬ dresses, was surprising information to Edsvard ; it exceeded all the enigmas in which his lite had hitherto been in¬ volved. 44 Perhaps," said Philip, 4ť as there is to be a merry meeting at the castle, a little ofmy music would prove acceptable; and it svould be a gita t charity tlone to my poor brother and myself, if tliey svould admit us fora shoit time within its svalls." 44 Oh, I doubt not but ye will be svei- come," replied the young man ; " I have interest svith the old housekeeper's niece, svho is one of the domestics, and you shall have my recommendation." They trudged on tosvards the castle; the villagers walked boldly over the drasv¬ bridge, telling Edsvard and Philip to re¬ main at its foot, till they had gis'en inti¬ mation
ι » mation of them at the castle, saying that they svould shortly return and inform them svhether their presence would be agreeable svithin it. The few minutes that Edsvard and his companion svere left alone, they passed in imperfect surmises on the unaccount¬ able information they had just receivetl, of Rosalind being under the protection of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt: thankful, hosvever, that he had gained knowledge of the place of her retreat, all Edward at the present moment desired, svas per¬ mission to enter the svalls svithin whicli she svas enclosed. In a very short time, the young peasant svho had promised to be their advocate svith the servants of the castle, returned at the head of about a dozen of them, who gas r e the supposed minstrel and his bro¬ ther a most cordial invitation to enter, and conducted them to the great hall, where they were to be regaled svith Dame Edith's treat. f % Philip
Philip Watkins svas but an indifferent performer on an instrument, and the voice svith svhich he accompanied it was by no means one of the best ; but he svas svell stored in old ballads and romances, and luckily for him, it appeared that his audience infinitely preferred the matter svhich svas sung to the manner iu svhich it svas executetl ; thus he proved exactly the musician suited to their taste. What most puzzled him, svere the questions svhich they svere continually asking of him concerning his brother, as svhence arose his dumbness ?—-svhither he svas con¬ ducting him?—and various other enqui¬ ries of tlie like nature. When the night began to advance, Philip excused himself from singing any¬ more, saying that he was exhausted svith theamusement he had already given them; but that İf they svould suffer him and his brother to sleep at the castle that night, be svould willingly play and sing to them the whole of the next day, if it gave them
tfiçm pleasure. To these terms they agreed svith much satisfaction ; and Philip and Edward were accord ingly served with their supper, and shewn to a chamber. Concealed under his pilgrim's garb, Edsvard still svore the suit of armour wdiich had been provided for him by Hubert. Beneath the roof of Lortl Rufus de Mad¬ ginecourt, svhere it svas probable to sup¬ pose that the villanous Alwin svas exist¬ ing, he considered that the supernatural appearance which he had assumed on his entrance into De Mowbray Castle, svas, of all otlier places, the one most likely for him to derive the safeguard from it, svhich he desired it to afford him : the present night,, he also reflected, might be the only one svhich he should have the liberty of passing svithin the svalls of Rockmouut. Thus, if he did not use the passing hour for »venturing forth into the eastle in quest of the apartment of his Rosalind, he might lose the oniy opportunity that ï 3 svould
svo ľ hi t ver bt gruıîcd for endeavouring to V'V au vtevvv with her. Aí «-¡ug uîiiïcr this idea, the moment he believed the inhabitants of the castle re¬ tired to rest, he issued from his chamber ; he bad no clue by svhich to guide his steps, save a single expression svhich had fallen from the lips of Dame Edith on quitting her guests.— 4t 1 must now/' she had said, " return to my charge in the svestern gallery."—This charge he couid not doubt to be Rosalind ; and, therefore, towards the svestern gallery he resolved to bend his course. Contrary to the opinion svhich Edward had formed, previously to his quitting his chamber, of all the castle being already locked in sleep, he had proceeded but; a very little svay in his search of the wes¬ tern gallery, before the sound of voices struck ids ear, and before he had time to decide from whence they had proceeded, a door opposite to him was opened, and from
from it issued about half a dozen/of the domestics, in the act of leading to bed tsvo of their fellosvs, for the strength of whose brains, the mead svith svhich Dame Edith had regaled them, had proved of too potent a nature. Edsvard was immediately seen by one of the party, svho, svith a dreadful out¬ cry, proclaimed his cause of terror to the rest: the cries of fear burst from esvry mouth; those svho svere able, fled—and those svho required support in their move¬ ments, fell to the ground. Not doubting that an alarm svould be raised throughout the castle, Edward, with all precipitancy, returned to his chamber, and giving Philip a hasty com¬ mand to preserve silence, he dresv on his pilgrim's habit, blew out his lamp, and threw himself upon his bed. The stillness of the mansion continued unbroken, no sound reaching the cham¬ ber of Edsvard and his companion butthe hoarse voice of the svaves, svhich beat F 4 against
against the rock it stood upou ; and Ed- wai d began to suppose that the domestics bad not aroused any of their fellows, in consequence of the alarm they had expe¬ rienced from beholding him ; but he durst not again venture to quit his chamber that night, upon the same business svhich had before led him from it ; and he lay beseeching Philip to exert himself to the utmost, on the foliosving day, to enter¬ tain the seivants, İn order to give them a chance of being invited to pass a second night in the castle. As soon as they arose in the morning, a relation svas given of the horrible appa¬ rition svhich had been seen by a party of the servants in the night, and Edsvard could scarcely refrain from a smile at the many exaggerations svith svhich the sim¬ ple fact svas nosv increased, info the most terrific of all terrible histories. To Dame Edith the story was also recounted, and by her, it svili be remembered that intelli¬ gence of syhat had been seen was con¬ veyed
veyed to Rosalind, svho experienced some degree of surprise at the similarity of the appearance to that svhich had a short time before been witnessed at De Mowbray Castie, still httle suspecting hosv neariy the interest of herself and the.spectre svere connected. Philip took advantage ofthe impression which the story of the spectre had made on the minds of the inhabitants of Rock¬ mount Castle, aud suug to them many monkish traditions of ghosts and goblins, svhich, to his desire, brought on evening again, svithout auy hint having been given to him, and his nominal brother, to quit theplace; accordingly, he petitioned that they might have leave given them to re¬ tire to their resting-place of the former night; for whicli permission >yas scarcely granted them, ere a great bustle svas oc¬ casioned in the castle, by the return of Lord Rufas, aud those \vl\o liad attended him in bis expedition. The pleasure svith svhieli Edward had f 5 looked
looked forsvard to the hour of retiring to¬ rest, svas entirely overthrosvn at the arri¬ val of the anticipated period, for he then found that a second bed in the chamber where he and Philip Watkins had reposée! on the preceding night, svas to be occu¬ pied by tsvo of tlie grooms svho hael re¬ turned to the castle along svith Lord Rufus. Thus circumstanced, he perceived that it svould be impossible for him to repeat the attempt İn svhich he had, on the foregoing night, failed, svith any hope of greater success attending upon it, and be lay stretched on his pallet, a victim to the agonies of despair. He considered that as soon as the morning should arise, and thev should again descend into the hall of the castle, they svould be told to depart, and thus every chance of his de¬ şii ed end in coming thither cut offi At one moment he resolved boldly to stalk forth in his disguise, and enter the pre¬ sence of Lord Rufus, and his villanous associate, Alwin ; he doubted not but that his
his appearance would strike terror to their soul-, and wring from their iips a con¬ fesión ofthe muider which they believed themselves to have committed ; but he, at the same time, reflected that the deceit could not long pass upon their senses; and that the spot he was now on, svas one svhich svould, of all others, be the most favourable to his enemies for completing the purpose in svhich they had once been foiled ; and this reflection svithheld him from venturing into their presence. When they arose iu the morning, and returned to the hall of tlie kitchen, the first svords they heard from the domestics informed them y that an enemy svas shortly expectetl to besiege the castle, and that es T ery preparation svas to be made svithin it, svith all speed ami industry, for re·*· peiling the attack. Philip enquired svho the dreaded enemy was ? 44 The united bands ofthe moss-troop¬ ers," svas the reply, 4t svho had vowed i: 6 vengeance
vengeance against Lord Rufus de Mad¬ ginecourt, for having rescued the Lady Rosalind de Mosvbray from Allanrod, svho was one ofthe most esteemed chiefs." Again Edsvard was throsvn into asto- nishinent, by hearing Lord Rufus named as the protector of his Rosalind.— 4t Could it bc possible," he reflected, 4i that Ro¬ salind would submit to osve her protection to the man who had been the cause of all her misery in life—now, too, svhen en¬ mity had broken out betsveen him and her father!"—The mystery svhich he had be¬ fore been unable to solve, svas now be¬ eome still more obscure; the only thing of which iie svas certain svas, that if Lortl Rufus svas indeed the true friend of liis Rosalind, there remained no doubt, from the attempt svhich batl been made totake asvav his life, that he svas stiil his decided enemy ; and this conviction made him infinitely more suspicious of ihe friend&hip svhich he was making a display of lender- ing to her. 44 If
44 If the freebooters are advancing from their strong-holds to an attack upon this castle/* rejoined Philip, 4i I pray you to permit us to remain within its walls till the contest be decided ; for our road lies north, and should we encounter them, little as it is that we have to be plundered of, ï very much fear that they would not spare us : I beseech you, therefore, kind masters, to let us a bitle here till we can proceed with more safety/' His petition prod need the desired eifect; the servanis took pity upon him, and his helpless brother, as they considered Ed¬ ward, and consented to their remaining at the castle till after the siege. During the course of the tvvo following days, Philip, i»n liis intercourse with the domestics, lost no opportunity of intro¬ ducing into his conversation, the name of the Lady Rosalind, and endeavouring tó¬ gáin some tidings concerning her; but all he could gather relative to her, svas, that Lord Rufus had declared he would 3 sooner
sooner part svith his life and liberty him¬ self, than surrender her into the hands of the freebooter Allaurod; and that the ser¬ vants had d isco vereti that she no Inn ser inhabited the apartments in the western gallery, svhich had been set apart for iier use on her first arrival at Rockmount; and that, from the little fear svhich their Lord testified for her personal safety dur¬ ing the threatened siege, and the sudden disappearance of Dame Edith, and her grand-nephew, Zachary, from the inha¬ bited parts of the building, they conjee* tured her to have retired, at the advice of Lord Rufiiá, for protection, to some subterraneous vaults on the left of the castle, in which, they said, there svere an apartment or two, svhich had formerly been fitted up as a dwelling. The moment the arrival of the free¬ booters on the outside of the castle called' its inhabitauts from the interior parts of »the svalls and ramparts, in order to repel the attempts of the besiegers to subdue it, Edward
Edward and lik companion, left svithout any observers of their actions, immedi¬ ately began to search for the entrance into the subterranean vaults, of svhich the ser¬ sjants had spoken to Philip Watkins. They proceeded tosvards tlie left, iu which direction the conversation of the scivants had informed them lay the ob¬ ject of their search ; and after some time, they discovered a long anil s r aulted pas¬ sage, gro sving gradually narrosvcr as they dresv tosvards its extremity, and svhich, from the singularity of its form tallying svith the description svhieli their kitchen fiiends have given of the entrance to the vaults, they could not doubt to t be the ьате of which they had spoken. But svhen the3' had reached the end, although assisted in tlieir search by the light ofa lamp borne by Philip, no door svas discoverable in the wainscot, although the hollow sound svhich it returned to a blosv struck upon it by the hand of Ed¬ svard,
ward, convince tl them that there svas an extensive vacancy beyond İt. ît has been alreatly said, in a foregoing part of this history, that the door whicli formed the entrance into the subterra¬ neous vaults leading to the grotto, opened svith a spring; svitli the situation of this spring Edsvard and his companion svere unacquainted, and svithout possessing this knowledge, it svas utterly impossible that they should gain access to them. Still, although unsuccessful in their at¬ tempts, tbey did not relax in their endea¬ vours to effect a passage into the subterra¬ neous dsvelling, nor could Ethvard endure the idea of quitting the spot over svhieh Hope stretched out her balmy pinions. At length the tumult of the war ceased, and the riot of conquest svas heard pouring through the castle. In a very short lime, several members of the freebooters' band appeared in the vaulted passage, bearing flambeaux ; they passed by Ethvard aud Philip,
I Philip, with a sneer upon them, as cowards who had skulked into this reeess for safety during the siege, and bursting their way, svith the butt-ends of their match docks, through tlie wainscot panelling, they en¬ tered the vaults. The heart of Edward now turned to ice in his breast ; the most agonizing of hu¬ man sensations assailed his brain ; the mement svas approaching, at which hts Rosaliud might be lost to him for ever£ and, still more torturing idea 1 he might be a witness of her misery, without the posver to save her. Tliese reflections were but the transitions of a moment; he was awakened from thera by the vo*-:e of one of the freebooters, svho appeared to possess some degree of command over his fellows, and svho called to them to return quietiy to the great bail of the castle, and to remain there till lie should an nounce to them that tlie Lady Rosalind was become the svife of their chief. To be a witness to the solemni-
gation of which ceremony, he was himself going tó proceed to the chapel. Edsvard formed the instant determina¬ tion of following his steps; the darkness of the hour favoured his design, and he moved along securely in the shade, guided hy the rays of the lamp canied in the hand of the freebooter, in svhose path hc trod. Arrived at the chapel, he secreted himself behind a tomb ; by raising his head above which, he could command a viesv of the altar, at which he saw the priest already standing. Resolved to make an effort for the pre¬ servation of his Rosalind, even though his life should be the price at svhich he made it, he considered that, alone, opposed to a body of savage fVeebooters, with svhom the spilling of his blood svould not be a feather's weight in the scale of those enor¬ mities which marked their character, the only chance on svhich he could rely for being able to afford assistance to his Ro¬ salinds or ensure safety to himself, must be
be the effect of the disguise which waa concealed beneath liis pilgrim's garb, and svhich he entertained a slight hope might produce the same terrific effect on the freebooters, which it liad done on the servants of tlie castle. It svas, however» a last hope to preserve the lionour of a beloved and suffering svife, and he re¬ solved to hazard. Accordingly he thresv off liis pilgrim's habit and hat, and replaced on liis head the casque corresponding svith his suit of armour, svhich he had worn slung hy his side, and concealed beneath the folds of his garment, during his residence in Rock» mount Castle. He was still possessed of the crimson dye with svhich the gash on İıis left cheek had been represented ; and having found that those who had been alarmed by him in his disguise, had been most terrified by the streak of blood down the side of bis face, he again applied the liquid to his countenance in the same si¬ tuation as before ; and this done, he asvait ed #
awaited, svith the most torturing anxiety, the approach of his Rosalind and the vil¬ lanous Allanrod. At lengtii the dreadful moment arrived, at svhich he behekl his Rosalind—that Rosalind so tenderly beloved, and on svhose adoretl image his desiring eyes had not rested for five long years, led into the chapel by two of the banditti. Scarcely had she reached the altar, ere, from ihe other extremity of the chapel, advanced a figure of height and strength, svhose habit would have bespoke him to be Allanrod, had he not moved to the altar, and taken the hand of Rosalind in his, as the trea¬ sure which the voice of the priest svas to make his own. 44 Second my endeavours, thou protect¬ ing God of the innocent and oppressed V 9 Edward breathed forth iu silent prayer; and darting towards the altar, he rushed between the wife of his sacred aflections and the villain who was about to rob İıinı tìf his earthly paradisa. The protecting God
God of the innocent and oppressed did second the endeavours of him svho had prayed to him in agony of heart; for even the savage Allanrod and his bloody horde shrunk back, appalled with supernatural dread, as they beheld him ; and Edsvard, snatching to his arms the enly blessing of his existence, bore lier, svith the rapidity of lightning» from the presence of her astonished enemies.
CHAP.
CHAP. V. I had a mighty cause To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.
Hadst thou but shook thy head, or made a pause, When I spoke darkly what I purposed ;
Deep shame had struck ше dnmb, made me break oft', And those thy fears, might have wrought fear in me : Bnt thou didst understand me by my signs, And didst in signs again parley with sin ; Yea, without stop, didst let thy heart consent, And, consequently, thy ràde hand to act The deed, v/hich both ош tongues held vile to name. KINO JOUW, W E now return to the Lord Baron de Mowbray, whom we ieft extended, in the acutest
acutest agonies of miud, on a couch, in the sable gloom of the funeral chamber, in his despoiled castle. To those svhose hearts are rent svith remorse, it is an ima¬ ginary relief to pour forth their souls in exclamations bespeaking the svretched ness of their feelings. Thus impressed, or rather almost insensible that sounds pro¬ ceeded from his lips, Lord William raved forth the racking sensations of his breast. 44 Oh that the child of my Rosalind had been spared by me !" he exclaimed. * ' Tlie miseries svhich have fallen upon me and my house, had not then perhaps over¬ whelmed me. The stings of conscience svhich I nosv feel, had not then pricked my bleeding heart. I might have risen from the calamities brought upon me by an unjust foe, to future peace of mind ; but nosv— О God 1—oh merciful Provi¬ dence !—svhen, svhen shali the murderer taste peace r'* 4t When his crime is expiated by death I" exclaimed a voice. The
The Baron sprang from liis couch, but his iips refused their oftice, and he sunk down again upon it : he turned his eyes around the apartment, and they fell upon a dusky substance which was approaching slowly towards him, from the dark shades svhich enveloped the opposite end of the chamber,·— 44 Who art thou?" he fearfully demanded. 44 Hubert/*, ret urned the voice. 44 Hubert Г' echoed De Mowbray; 4e art thou living, or hast thou forsaken the confines of the grave, to burst upon my miseries with thy fearful sight ?" The figure approached close to the Baron, and the remaining light of day was just sutficient to shew him the fea¬ tures ofthe living Hubert. 44 Alive i лт/ 5 replied Hubert, 4i but ï come to thee resol veil on death/' 44 If it is my life thou seekest/' re¬ turned Lord William, 4ť take it ; I am sunk so low into the abyss of misery, that it will not cost ше one pang to yield it to thee/ 1
44 No, no," rejoined Hubert, " it is no second murder that I seek to do ; the death svhich I demand, is a forfeiture of existence due to justice—the only expia¬ tion of guilt svhich this world can grant— the only act svhich can malie me quit it, devoid of the horrors svhich,a murderer's conscience is so justly cursed svith. Are you prepared to die ?" 44 I know not svhat you mean," replied I)e Mosvbray ; 44 1 tell you to take my¬ li fe freely ; you refuse to stain your hands with my blood, and still demand of me ifl am prepared for death." u Death on the scaffold, I mean !" ex¬ claimed Hubert; "am I understood by you now ?" 44 Not understood, upon my life," returned the Baron, scarcely able to ar¬ ticulate. 44 Did you not," asked Hubert, inan impressive and solemn tone, 4ť seduce me into a promise to murder a helpless inno¬ cent babe ?" vol. rv» g 4ť You
s{ You accepted six hundred pieces of gold for the deed," anssvered the Baron. 44 Aye, likely I might," cried Hubert, 44 but they cannot heal the svound svhich that devil's act has )eft upon my con¬ science. Yoii tempted me to evil, svlien vour better state in life should have taught you to instruct me in svhat svas good, and not to have lured me into the path of wickedness. You sasv me poor, and bribed my'necessity into the performance of guilt, svhen it became your station and know¬ ledge to have given me the means of avoiding that svhich might lead to my eternal ruin," The Baron groaned aloud. Hubert continued thus— 4< That sense which svas denied to me from education, 1 have gained from repentance. The com¬ parison ofmy osvn iniquitous heart svith that of other men, svhose lives have been innocent, makes me recoil svith horror at myself; I see them happy allthe day, and the night repairing to them, with an easy slumber,
slumber, the labours of their waking. With me the days are irksome, full of fear—the nights are passed in waking mi¬ sery : each man, I think, suspects me for the criminal I am—a murderer !—and of svhat degree ?—the most atrocious in the scale of murderers !—that of an innocent babe, svithout the means of defending it¬ self from the attacks of villany. — 4 On him/ methinks men cry, 4 rests the stain of vice ; his hands are dyed in infant blood : aszóid him, shun the contagion of his breath, the horror of his eye ; leave liim an outcast to the pangs of con¬ science/—Thus do I feel, as if these sounds svere hourly breathed upon mine ear." 44 But they are not, are they, good Hubert ?" asked the Baron, doubtfully. 44 Only by mine osvn conscience," he replied ; tť the deed of horror hitherto lies buried in ignorance on earth, but it can¬ not be hid from heaveii ; and if such g a svould
would be man's horror of the act, what must be the detestation in which angels hold it?—Where must we expect to go?— svhat recompense to ¿wait us, svhen the screen of earthly existence no longer de- fonds us from retribution ?" 44 We will repent, sve will repent !" exclaimed De Mowbray, 44 Aye, and suffer too/* replied Hu¬ bert, 4i or our repentance will be an un¬ satisfactory' reparation for tlie crime it follows. Where is the punishment ofthe guilty-*—where the terror of the wicked—· if they shall commit a úeéá of villany, veiled by their machinations from every earthly eye, and silence all their fears of future retribution, by saying to them¬ selves— 4 1 will repent?'—Thus cannot I stifle the goadings of remorse ; I feel that an exposure of my guilt, and my abettor in guilt, to the world, is necessary to the happiness of my soul ; and thus resolved, I come to seek you out, that we may to¬ gether
gether expiate our crime by that death which will give a lesson of caution to those sve leave behind us." 44 Hear me—I conjure you, hear me," exclaimed the Baron ; 44 your terrors hurry you beyond your reason." 44 1 svill hear you," returned Hubert; 44 but understand that it is my reason svhich prompts my utterance, and renders me insensible to all terrors but those I experience in the concealment of my guilt." 44 Is not God ouť only judge ?" asked the Baron ; 4f are sve accountable to men for our actions ?" 44 A secret villain," replied Hubert, 44 living amongst men, under the enjoy- ment of a fair reputation, is a serpent en¬ dued svith sense, and uniting the worser part of man svith the evil qualities of the reptile. The serpent is knosvn to contain venom in its sting, although its silver skin hides its destructive power. Against the secret villain, man has no instinct о 3 implanted
implanted in his breast to teach him to fly from him ; it must, therefore, be equit¬ able, that at his deatb, his skin should, like the venomous reptile's, be pulled off, and his poison exposed to the sight, before he can be purified for a second state. " 44 Hubert, oh Hubert," cried the Baron, taking the hand ofhim he addressed, 44 in the name of heaven, I [conjure you to become calm ; I am the Lord Baron de Mosvbray—reflect on that—the Lord Ba¬ ron de Mosvbray a criminal on a scaffold ľ* 44 The Lord Baron de Mosvbray is a murderer," returned Hubert— 44 reflect onthat." 44 Crimes like ппде are committed/* said the Baron, 4i when the heart is on the rack of torture." 44 The sufferings of those on whom they fall, are not, on that account, theless." 44 Tİıe aggravations which drive us to such acts, are great." 44 So is the crime that follosvs them." 44 You once appeared my friend. Do you
you not recollect, svhen by the tosveŕ iii the village -----" 44 Name it not—then it was you worked upon the ignorance you should have in¬ structed ; we were then equally fools, but you alone the villain. Fool you were, to think it friendship in any man w T ho pro¬ mised you assistance in iniquity—villain, to tempt any man to that iniquity. I svas a fool to believe that evil could ever bring me good. Friends indeed ! If L then thought that we were so, I am nosv grosvn wise enough to knosv that friends in evil are mutual enemies/' 44 After your promises, your oaths of friendship, you, Hubert, are you my bit¬ terest enemy ?" groaned out the Baron. 44 Need I again repeat to you," replied Hubert, 44 that I knesv not then svhat it was to be the victim of a goading con¬ science?—that my pi csent actions are the result of reason and religion ? Enemy I am not—I am now, indeed, your friend ; for in delivering your life ιψ to justice, I preserve alive the happiness of your soul/' g 4 4t Surelv
4 < Surely I dream, " exclaimed the Baron ; 44 visions are floating before my eyes, and imaginary sounds assail my sveakened sen¬ ses. Thou canst not be Hubert ; impos¬ sible that thou, entrusted svith the secret of my soul, shouldst use thy knosvledge thus to goad the victim in thy power. Whence dost thou come?—how arrived here at this critical moment of my svay- svaid fate ? Speak—explain, I entreat thee—my brain and heart are alike upon the rack." 44 Of my history, anon," replied Hu¬ bert ; 4< I shall return to you ere long, perhaps pass the night with you, I svould prepare you for the fate that asvaits you, and shall not consider an> portimi of time Jost svhich I use in giving instruction to уощ though you poured a baneful doctrine into fny deluded senses. I shall be here again presently." Hubert moved tosvards the door ; it svas nosv become too dark for the Baron to fol¬ losv him to it with his eyes, and he stood for a few moments entranced ; but the _shuttiug..
shutting of the door on the part of Hu¬ bert, anel the sound of the key moving in the lock immediately after, startled him, antl he sprang towards the door, svhich he hastily endeavoured to open, but it re¬ sisted his efforts : he called aloud upon Hubert, but no anssver svas returneel to his cries ; his knees trembled under him, and he fell against the svall, upon svhich he leant in a state of existence that could hardly be termed life."
g 5 CHAP.
CHAP. VI. ТЫ great king of kings, Wath in the table øf bie law commanded, That thou shalt do no rnurder j wilt thou the» Spurn at his edict, and fulñl a man's ? Take heed ; fbr he holds vengeance in his hand, To hurl upon their beads, that break his law. KIN· RICHARD Ш. J. HE situation of the Baron de Mow¬ bray was now even more svretelíed than it had been when a prisoner in the fortress of Allanrod. What svas he to expect from the dreadful menaces of Hubert ?·—the en¬ forcement of his threats, or that argument might still be able to soften his inten¬ tions?—Whence could Hubert become? How was he alone in the castie, ,at an hour
hour when the fury of the spoiler had dris'en from its walls every other inhabi¬ tant ?— whither was he gone?—when svould he return, and svhat was his imme¬ diate design with regard to himself? These points alone occupied the mind of Lord William ; and nosv indeed svas his repentance sincere for the death of his grandchild, if that repentance svhich pro¬ ceeded from terror, might be allowed the appellation. Neariy tsvo hours had passed, and still Hubert returned not ; the curtain of night svas drasvn over the earth, and no speck of light cheered the apartment svhere Lord William svas confined : he searched out his svay to the door, and endeavoured, by the imposition of his sveight upon it, to force it open ; but the hard oak resisted his efforts. Pride and anger began now to mingle themselves svith the other sen¬ sations svhich preyed upou his mind. For Lord William de Mosvbray to be a pri¬ soner in an apartment of his osvn castle, g 6* and
and made so by one of the meanest of his dependants, svas an idea almost as painful £s the disgrace and punishment with which that dependant threatened him. At length a footstep svas audible in the gallery, and- the Baron, svho had strayed to the farther end of the apartment in the wanderings of his hurried brain, sasv the door opposite to him open, and a figure, svliich could only be Hubert, enter with a dim lamp burning in a lanthorn İn his hand. 44 Hubert !" exclaimed the Baron. 44 Hubert lieart you," he returned. 44 Hubert," repeated the Baron, 44 hast thou forgotten me for thy Lord ?" 44 I acknowledge you as the Lord Baron de Mosvbray," returaed Hubert. 44 Well then," rejoined the Baron, 4i my svealth, my posver of giving liappiness, cannot be unknosvn to thee ; thou canst not be ignorant that my riches are still great, notsvithstanding the spoil svhich has been drawn from my castle by a sa- 4 vage
våge enemy. Ifit is thy intention to ex¬ act froin me a greater resvard for the ser¬ vice I have received at thy hands than that I have already conferred on thee, svhy dost thou not demand İt in terms of respect, of friendship?—why threaten thy superior svhen thou hast but to ask ofhim, and to receive?" 44 Has>e I not already explained to you, my Lord/* replied Hubert, calmly, £4 tliat nothing this svorld is capable of bestosving ean restore me to happiness, or set me at peace svith my osvn mind—that I place my hope of forgiveness, after death, on the expiation svhieh I shall make of my crime by the forfeit of my life—and that worlds should not bribe me to forego the ray of comfort which this idea glances on my desponding heart ?" 44 If thou art thus madly bent upon thine own ruin and disgrace," exclaimed the Baron, becoming for the first time impassioned, * 4 on what authority dost thou
thou unite me in the rash act thou hast resolved upon ?" 44 I shaU die but half purged of my iniquity," returned Hubert, 4 . 4 if I suffer him to live unsuspected, who instigated me to the crime." 44 Hubert," roared out the Baron, 4ť 1 command enlargement from this apart¬ ment." 44 It cannot be, my Lord, till sve are both fetched hence by the officers of jus¬ tice," rejoined Hubert. 44 The officers of justice summoned hither!" cried Lord William; 44 thou threatenest me svith falsehoods. " 44 Time will convince you that I am not deceiving you : the officers of justice are summoned h ither by mc, and apprized that they here svill find us both," Hubeit replied. <4 Villain !" exclaimed De Mosvbray, " or tliou, or I, shall not live to see that hour—unless----- -'* The
The violence of bis emotions choaked his utterance. 44 Unless what?" asked Hubert, 44 Give me the key, thou monster of iniquity !" roared out the Barou, darting tosvards the door. 44 Never," replied Hubert, calmi}'. The Baron put his hand to his side—he had forgotten that he svas unarmed—no ssvord met his hauti. He muttered an exclamation of mingled curses and re¬ gret, and again tlirew himself svith his svhole weight upon the door, in the hope of forcing it from the lock. Hubert continued standing by the side ofa couch, upon which one of ids hands was rested. 44 Give me the key,", repeated the Baron, 4i or by that God svhose venge¬ ance thou dost dread, thy life shall an¬ ssver the refusal/' Hubert continued unmos'ed. 44 Villain, the key !—I say the key !' a third time shrieked forth the Baron, anc sprang
sprang with ihe fury of a tyger upon the neck ofhim whom he addressed. 41 Forbear, my Lortl,"said Hubert, <4 or I must defend myself" The Baron was unmindful of his admo¬ nition. 44 Lion," said Hubert, and immediately Lord William felt himself pinioned dosvn to the ground by his cloak. , The Baron turned himself round to en¬ quire by svhat force he had been torn from the neck of Hubert, and perceived the glaring eyes of a dog, Hubert's faithful attendant, svhich met the light of the lamp that svas placed upon the table, and gleamed with terrible ferocity. The Barou shrunk in terror from the sight. * 4 Fear nothing, my Lord," said Hu¬ bert ; * 4 he is uiidtr my absolute command, and will not harm you without my order, svhich I trust you will not drive me to the necessity of giving hitn, since you see I am prepared svith a friend against your attacks.—Come oil/' added Hubert, ad¬ dressing
dressing the dog, svhich immediateiy quitted his hold of Lord William's cloak, and returned peaceably to the side of his master. The Baron lay groaning on the floor ; his only chance of escape, which had been in a trial of strength.svith Hubert, was now taken from him, and promised .re¬ wards tîie only sparks of hope svhich were left him ; and from these he expected but little friendship, in the present determined state of Hubert's mind. Mingled promises, threats, and argu¬ ments, burst from his lips, but Hubert was not to be won to his suit by any of them. The Baron sunk upon bis knees before him.— 4< In this posture of humi¬ liation, canst thou refuse to grant my prayer ?" he exclaimed. 44 it pains me to see you in it," replied Hubert, 44 but it pains me more to reflect On the crime svhich has reduced you toit." 44 Thou art the cause of this humilia¬ tion/' returned the Baron, 4< and re* fusest
fusest to feel for the svreteh thou hast made." 44 And svhat a wretch have you made me?" replied Hubert— 4 ' reflect on that, and then ask yourself if you can justify your wish to have me die without an ex¬ piation of my crime," 44 Heart of stone !" exclaimed the Baron, * 4 may tortures, posverful as its stubborn¬ ness, rend its fibres I" 44 It merits such punishment indeed/* returned Hubert. 44 Weak fool !" roared out De Mow¬ bray, 44 may curses stronger than those tortures follow thee from the verge of death into eternity." 44 For your osvn sake, my Lord," said Hubert, 44 forbear to curse one whom you have aheady sufficiently injured. Let me entreat you to give some portion of this night to prayer. " A silence of some minutes ensued. Lord William broke it·—" Tell me," he said, ¿i hy thy hopes of Heaven, I adjure tliee to
totell me, does the hand of justice pur¬ sue us ?" 44 By my hopes of Heaven," anssvered Hubert, 44 the hand of justice is stretched out tosvards us both, according to our merits." 44 Then God have mercy!" feebly ar¬ ticulated tbe Baron, and again sunk upon the floor, burying his face in his cloak. Hubert took a book from his pocket, and placing hitnself opposite to the lamp, read. In a short time the Baron sprang up again, and paced the room with the wild step of a frenzied mind. 44 My Lord," said Hubert, 4< compose your feelings, and read some passage of this book." * Lord William replied to him only with a deep groan, and continued liis pace. Another silence ensued, svhich De Mosvbray broke.— 4t My thirst is exces¬ sive," he said; "am I to he confined here without the necessaries of life ?" Hubert
Hubert immediately produced a basket of refreshments, and poured out for the Baron a cup of mead. Although he had impatiently demanded it, lie scarcely touched it svith his lips, and refused all substantial nourishment. After the Baron svas served, Hubert himself partook ofthe contents of the basket. 44 Hosv can s T ou be thus calm?" asked the Baron, observing him. 44 Because my repentance Ь sincere/* anssvered Hubert. 44 Vou repent, then, of one crime, to step more boldly into another/ said the Baron ; 44 it looks, indeed, much like repentance to be one of Al Ian rod's ban¬ ditti/' u My Lord, î do not understand you,'* returned Hubert. 44 Perha it does not suit your pur¬ pose to own it ; but I recognized you, even in the disguise you wore svhen you entered my prison in his fortress, bearing a lamp and a dagger in your hand. Con¬ fess
fess to me by what means I svas conveyed into the subterraneous vaults, svhere I again sasv you passing before me, and hosv you traced me hither ? If you are re¬ solved on dying, as you say you are, it cannot avail you to keep these secrets." 44 My Lord, you rave," replied Hu¬ bert; ť< I know uot svhat you are speak¬ ing of—the name of Allanrod is to me unknosvn. A robber I have never been, nor can I underställd your words but as those of freu zy." 44 If you svill not speak of yourself, reply but to this one question," rejoined the Baron ; ' 4 tell me svliat mysterious connexion it is that subsists between Lord Rufus tie Madginecourt and the freebooter Allanrod?" 44 My Lord," anssvered Hubert, 4i 1 can only repeat, that I know not the name of Allanrod." 44 Liar !" exclaimed the Baron, in half- smothered accents, and continued to wan¬ der about the apa: tment» Tlie
The clock of the castle nosv sounded midnight. A feebleness of body and mind overposvered the Baroiij and he once more thresv liimseif upon a couch. Hubert trimmed his lamp, and resumed his book.
CHAP.
SÄ»
CHAP. VII. ■*Tis only when with inbred horror smote, At som« base act, or done, or to be done, Tf^t the recoiling soul with conscious dread, Shrinks back into itself» maso s. A HE light of returning day had forsorne hours reanimated the face of nature ere the Baron de Mowbray, sinking under bo¬ dily and mental fatigue, fell into a rest¬ less slumber ; from this he was awakened by the noise occasioned by the shutting of the door of the apartment in which he lay extended upon the floor, with his head rested against the foot of a couch ; and on casting his eyes around, he found that Hubeit had ieft the chamber. Again
Again the most impetuous desire of ef¬ fecting his eseape from the captivity to svhich he dreaded Hubert had condemned him, entered his mind, and again he sought the means of forcing his svay out of the apartment. The upper compartments alone of the suudosvs in this cliamber could be opened, and they were moved by a chord fastened to a spring, svhich acted upon them for that purpose ; tliese upper divisions svere much above his reach, es r en svhen mounted upon a table srhich stood beneath them, consequently unfavourable to the hope of escape. Anxious to obtain a viesv into the inne r court of the castle, which the painting upon the svindow glass prevented him from gaining through it, he dashed out the panes from tho losver frames. The compaitments of glass betsveen the stone work which intersected the long and spiral svindows, svcre too narrow to have admitted his body to pass through them, if even their height from the ground had not
no.Lbeen so great as to have rendered it impossible for h'nn to have leapt down, svithout the hazard of fracturing some of his limbs in tbe fall. Whilst he stood thus a prey to despair, his eye suddenly fell ou an armed figure svhich issued from one of the arched portals leading into the court. The figure he instantly obsers r ed to be in the dress of his own soldiery ; tsvo others s in the same attire, almost im¬ mediately followed ; and svith these was a man, in the rasv and tattered garments svhich characterized Allanrods band of freebooters. His heart bounded svith joy at the sight, and he was on the poîut of calling to them, when the one, svhom Jie had first observed, turned his eye upou the casement, at whieh Lord William svas standing, and he recognised in hini his chief leader, Irwin, whom he had believed to be still a prisoner in the fortress of Allaurod. 44 Do I behold my Lord de Mowbray?** exclaimed Irwin. vol. iv. и i{ Oh,
eí Oh, Irsvin !—my friend!—my friend !" returned the Baron ; 4 ' blessed be Heaven that thou art arriseti to my aid 1—Hasten hither instantly, I entreat thee." 4C We come, my Lord—we come," re¬ plied Irsvin; and, svith his companions, immediately disappeared from the court. The Baron fiesv to the door of the cham¬ ber, svhere he stood trembling under the alarming possibility of Hubert not having left the key on the outside of the door, but taken it svirh him. In the course of a fesv minutes he/heard the sound of foot¬ steps in the galieiy, approaching towards the cetiar cliamber, anti very shortly after he experienced the testacy of beholding the door open. On entering, Irwin im¬ mediateiy enquired from svhat cause he found his Lord a prisoner in that apart¬ ment. The Baron replied to this demand, by explaining, in as few svords as possible, that tiie surly Hubert, whom, he said, Irwin could not but remember to have heen
reen formerly one of the soldiery of the castle, had, at a certain period, a fesv years past, been entrusted by him with the care of an infant, nearly connected svitli him¬ self, svhom he had, for the most urgent reasons, svished to L zve reared in obscu- rityvand which office Hubert had taken upon himself, and received a reward from him to perform. f4 From that time/' con¬ tinued the Baron, " I had not seen him, nor even heard ofhim, till he appeared tó me by night in the fortress of Allaurod, during my confinement in it ; and at the moment of his second appearance in it, I svas hastily conveyed asvay from the spot, iu a manner svhich I am not able to ex- plain or account for. Let it at this mi¬ nute be sufficient for me to iuform you, that I effected my escape from tlie strong¬ hold of my enemy ; that on returning to my castle, I found it despoiled, as you now behold it ; and that svhilst I stood in this chamber, fixed in agony, and lament- h 2 ing
ing the unhappy fate of my daughter and myseif, Hubert again appeared before me. " 44 Proceed, my Lord," said Irwin ; for tlie Baron paused, and turned aside his countenance. \ " c It appears from his account of him¬ self," De Mosvbray continued, * 4 that the passion of avarice stole into his heart, and tempted him svith the desire of possessing the sum svith svhich I had furnished him for the maintenance of the child, and to this end he became its murderer. His» conscience, nosv, it seems, reproves him svith the deed, and svrings his, heart svith tortures of such violence, that they have induced upon his mind a state of frenzy, under the influence of svhich he believes that I commanded the death of the in¬ fant, and that he cannot taste salvation in a future life, unless he delivers up him self and me to justice in this. You can¬ not, from this account svhich I give you, doubt tbe derangement of his brain; when he
he returns hither,therefore, wiiich I expect he shortly svill do, you must assist me to secure him, and I svill tlţen deliberate upon svhat steps it svere most adviseable for me to take respecting him/' Irsvin bearti these svords, on the part of the Baron, svith a degree of astonishment whieh lie could not repress. The Baron's faltering accents gave him a suspicion that his heart was ill at ease svithin his breast ; and tbe recollection; of Edward's hasty departure from Cumberland, aiid Rosalind's imprisonment from the world, subsequent to that period, connected with the Baron's asvowal that there had been a child born, svliich he had wished to con¬ ceal from the public eye, carried with it a train of strange ideas to the mind of Ir¬ svin, although he* forbore to give thetn utterance, " Dul you suppose, my Lord/' he said, 4ť that it svas Hubert svho twice appeared to you by night in the foi tress of Allanrod, svithin the chest in your prison 37 h 3 " I cannot
44 1 cannot doubt it," returned the Baron. 44 Yon are deceived, my Lord," replied Irsvin; 4c itwas myself svhom you there beheld," <f You, Irsvin !—You!" exclaimed Lord William, in a tone of voice svhich bespoke him unable to give credit to the svords svhich fell from the tongue of his leader, 44 I svill immediately explain to you," returned Irsvin, "what nosv appears to you a matter of doubt. Did not you, my Lord, svhilst confined in the fortress of Allanrod, throsv from the svindosvofyour prison, a paper, containing a promise ofa thousand pieces of gold to svhomsoever should convey inteîligenee of the place of your confinement to De Mosvbray Castle?" 44 Yes, yes, Idid/' anssvered Lord Wil¬ liam; ie this svas an experiment for re¬ gaining my liberty, svhich I several times repeated." 4 'One of these papers," said Irsvin, 44 svas
u was found by the member of Allanrod's band, svhom you nosv behold—my com¬ panion : and he, as chance willed İt, was the very person destined to attend upon me in my imprisonment." The Baron stepped forward to behold the man to svhom Irwin alluded, and saw him standing without the tloor of the chamber, svith those two of ids own sol¬ diery whom he had befoie observed in the court belosv. 4ť Was it he svho found that paper?" said Lord William, returning towards Irwin. 44 Tfie same, my Lord," replied the leader ; t4 he is a man svhom posvrty had urgedj in opposition to his natural incli¬ nation, to enter into the company of the freebooters, antl burning svith the desire of obtaining a resvard, svhich promised him the means of quitting their band, svithout exposing himself to the miseries of famine ; and still fearful of the tortures to svhich Allanrod might condemn him, if he svere either detected in flying as a mes- h 4 * senger
'senger to De Movvbray Castle, or enlarg¬ ing you from your prison in the fortress ofthe freebooter, he resolved to inform me svhatwas passing in'his mind; and having done so, he questioned me, svhe¬ ther I svould equally ensure to him the thousand pieces'of gold, ifhe gave me in¬ struction fer effecting your escape? Your Lordship cannot doubt that I instantly gave the promise svhich he demanded. 'Our agreement being made, he inforrned me, that the point svherein the greatest danger lay to svhomsoever should attempt your release, svas the act of reaching thç turret where*you svere confined; but, that if Τ svere »inclined 'to * hazard the under¬ taking, he would direct me in the only way ■ by svhich it could « be done. I de¬ clared myself ready to make the ¿fttempt; and, at the dead hour of midnight, put¬ ting a lamp into my hand, and presenting me with a dagger for· my defence, he led me through the sepulchral vaults of the ancľent monastery, and bringing -me to the
the foot of a narrow aud spiral staircase, he directed me to ascend it acquainting* me, that when I had reached the top, I should find bolts, which I .must undraw, and then raise upa certain poi tion of the wainscot, which, he told me, formed the lid of an apparent chest in your prison ; and svhich private connexion with the bury¬ ing ground below, he supposed to have been constructed in former times, for the purpose of conveying, with the greater secrecy and ease, into the vaults beneath, such pei sons as had been deprived of life in the prisons above them—and of crimes «of this nature, he said, the piace had been a frequent witness, in the days of *гс%юи§ persecution. 44 I ascended the stairs,, and he remained below, hid in a dark corner of the vaults, which he had chosen for the purpose of concealing himself from view, should any once chance to pass that way. Scarcely had L raised the lid of the supposed chest, eue , my companion, seeimg a-distant light h 5 aoDroachiusr
approaching tbsvarris tiıe spot, and being fearful of a surprise, which might defeat our intention svith regard to you, gave me a signal, svhich had been· agreed upon between us, to return-to him ; 1 instantly let fall the wainscot partition, and ran ■ down the stairs. He hid mv lamp iu a Janthorn, svhich lie had brought witii him for that purpose, and" sve knelt down be¬ hind a mouldering tomb, where we screen¬ ed ourselves from the observation of a freebooter, svhom my companion judşeıl- to be on his svay to steal liquor from the cellars of Allanrod. The moment he had passed us,;·I returned to my prison, aiul· he to his accustomed Sleeping place ; as sve judged it unsafe to renew our attempt that night/* : "But on the following oneyou repeated it/' said the Baron; ."'did you not?·—For the armed figure, svhich you now explain to me io have been yourseif, again ap¬ peared to me beneath the lid of the chest/' Irwin replied, that k on t }ι$· subsequent »ight,
night, the freebooters having nearly all left the fortress, upon an expedition of plun¬ der, which he had now found to have been directed against De Mowbray Castle/ the. friendly borderer and himseif proceeded, svith less fear, tosvards the Baron's prison, in the turret. Having ascended the stairs, he raised the lid of the chest as before, and that he had scarcely done so, ere he perceived the Baron suddenly to vanish from his sight on the opposite side of the apartment. In the greatest surprise/* continued Irwin, 44 I immediately returned to my companion, and commun ieated to liim what I had seen ; equally astonished at the intelligence I brought, as I tny&lf had been at svhat 1 had witnessed, he resolved to ascend with me into the turret, anri in¬ vestigate the cause. We directly entered the apartment whicli had been your pri¬ son, and discovered a trap*rioor in the floor, which had yielded to the imposiue»: of your weight upon it, and tliroini/i Vhich it w*\- uldent thut you had Kv·-.. нб 'Μ ο ν
u Upon perceiving this, I concluded that you had been precipitated into the vaults svhich we had just left ; but my companion informed me, that the ancient buryiug-groimcl was intersected by a wall, svhich ran immediately across the turret, in svhich you had been a captive, and that you had fallen on that side ofit, to svhich sve had not the posver of gaining access. Dreading that you might there perish, in consequence of th.e bruises you might have received in your fall, 1 besought him to make the experiment of conduct¬ ing me to you ; he declared that it was impossible for hitn to serve you in your present misfortune, for that the ancient tombs, in the opposite division, svere used as the receptacles of such articles of value as were brought to the fortress by the banditti; and that, on this account, the entrance to it was guarded by a man, named Fra&İer, 4 and tsvo others, whose fidelity to Allanrod had been tried, and , through
through whose 'sleeping apartment lay the only passage whieh led to the spot. In this dilemma sve considered, that the single chance by which we could be able to afford you assistance, must bc that of effecting our escape from ihe stronghold of the freebooters, and proceeding, with all the speed we wei e able, to De Mowbray Castle, svhere it must be my business in¬ stantly to collect all your vassals capable of bearing arms, and to lead them to an attack »pon your prison. Thus resolved, sve stole out from the ruinous building, svith all the caution of men, who dread that every succeeding moment may be the termination of their existence ; aud having gained a dell, at a short distance, sve eletermined to hide ourselves in one of the rocky cavities, of which it had many, till the approach of night should favour our proceeding on our destined journey— for already was the sun beginning to break from the elouds, and every moment bringing svith it the fear of α disgoveiy. 5 We
Wc had entered but a few paces into the cave, svhich sve had chosen for our con¬ cealment, ere sve svere alarmed by the sound of voices and footsteps svithin it ; in a s r ery shoit time, however, our fears svere removed, by discovering that its in¬ habitants were the two of your Lordship's soldiers, whom you nosv behold before you, and svho, like us, had effected their escape from the fortress in the night, and svere seeking shelter from the light of day. They had been more provident than ourselves, in bringing svith them provi¬ sions for their journey; and by sharing svith them the contents of their wallet, our strength and spirits were preserved for the undertaking ofthe ensuing night. 44 At the hour of noon we heard sounds indicative of the return vf the victorious 4 freebooters from their expedition, andas soon as the shades of night were spread, sve set forward on our'svay, resolving to repose uo more till we should have gained the spot of our destination* On our ar- . r?Val
rival here, you may easily imagine the consternation svith which vve beheld the castle despoiled, and deserted ; but our astonishment and joy were still greater, wheu our eyes fell upon the countenance of its Lortl, for svhose safety our fears hail been so strongly excited." In as brief a manner as possible, the Baron then recounted to Iisvin, antl his ί companions, alt that had befallen to him, subsequent to his descent into tjie vaults, and the providential means by which hc had effected his escape from them ; " but , svhat," he asked, * ( could be the light ! svhich I so long puisued ?" The freebooter answered — ** That he doubted not it batl been a lamp, borne eitlier bv Fi asier, or one of his fellow- guards, who svcre suspected of paying nightly visits, of not a very honest nature, to the treasures which they svere deputetl to protect." Tiiese explanations having been matle on both sides, the recollection of the past was
was quickly driven from the mind of the Baron, by the anxiety svith which he an¬ ticipated the future, and his doubts Jiow to act under the trying and perplexing scene svith svhich he svas threatened. The only method by svhich he eould shield himself from the dreaded accusation of his enemy, appeareďto be that of becom¬ ing himself the accuser of Hubert; and to pursue this plan, therefore, he fixed his determination. The entreaties of Irwin couhl not pre- s'ail upon Lortl William to quit the cedar- chamber ; he persisted in remaining there till the return of Hubert, having com¬ manded the twosoldieis, svho had arrived with Irwin, to secure him their prisoner, as soon as he appeared in it. At the expiration of about two hours after the arrival of Irsvin and his compa¬ nions at the castle, a footstep svas bearti in the gallery, and in a fesv moments Hubert entered the cedar-chamber, bearing in his hand some refreshments, which, he had brought
brought svith him, for the breakfast of Lord William. Immediately on his com¬ ing into the chamber, the command svhich the Barou hael given svas obeyed, aiul he svas seized by the two soldiers; the acrion, as wed as the presence of Irwin, and the soldiers, appeared to surprise liim; but. he stiil retained his composure of counten¬ ance, and ere he had time to enquire why he was thus amiled, tiie Baron explained the cause, by $aytng<— 4< You ure now my prisoner, nor. shall you agaiu taste liberty, tilt you have giveu such au account of the deathof theiiifaut f whom [entrusted ttiyour care, as a court of justice shall deem suffi¬ ciently satisfactory to acquit you upon/' 44 I-have already, my Lord/* replied Hubert, ť£ expressed my tlesire to meet you in a court of justice ; I am therefoie rejoiced that you have resolved to accede to my svish." 44 Does, not my firmness shake thee from thy mad purpose ?" enquired the Ba¬ ron, after a pause. 4i No>
44 No, my Lord, it does not in the least cause me to svaver from my determina¬ tion," returned Hubert. 44 Thy confidence is not îess strange thau thy frantic intention," replied the Baron. 44 It is placed in the justice of Iieaven," answered Hubert.
CHAP.
CHAP. YUL Oh, sweet my mother, cast me not away î ■ ...... « ...... I beseech you on my knees j Hear me with patience but to speak a word. ROMEO AND JUbJ£T. W E now again turn the page to Ed¬ svard and his Rosalind. With the rapidity of the lightning's flash, shot from the re¬ sistless bolt of Jove, Edward sped his svay from the chapel, bearing the treasure of his soul senseless in his arms. Entirely unacquainted with the intricacies of the building,' he thought only of removing her from the presence and power of Allan- rod*
rod, and his vile adherents; and for this purpose he retraced theonly path of svhich he had any knowledge, and which was the one that had led him into the chapei, from the entrance into the .subterraneous vaults. Here he paused an instant ín re¬ flection how to proceed. In that instant the wonted powers of her mind returned to Rosalind ; svith an exclamation, long and piercing, she shrieked forth his name. *' Edsvard Γ* she cried, u my husband lives 1—"tis not the pallid spectre of the* man I once was blessed in loving 1—'tis he!·—it is himself that I am again per¬ mitted to throw my trembling arms around, and hang upon forsuccour. Oh, > God'!— omnipotent and merciful ¿God !—^accept niy gratitude-for the excess of bliss that fills my heart Î" With a fervour not less animated and devout, than the dying zealot holds to his breast the emblem of his Saviour's suffering, and his own forgiveness, and presses upon it, with religious ecstacy, his fevered
fevered lips^ did Edward clasp to his breast the long-lost wife of his affections; and as he held her in his arms—** Rosalind !— dearest, persecuted, suffering Rosalind ľ' he exclaimed, α welcome, svelcome, to the heart that lives for thee, and thee alone 1" Cut the instinctive voice of danger quickly whispered an admonition to the lieart of Edward, not to lose an instant in flying from the spot svhere he stood. Va¬ rious sounds were assailing his ears from every side; atone moment they appeared to be approaching towards him, at the next to be again receding from him. TJie darkness of thenight was relieved only by solitary lamps, which cast a pale reflec¬ tion on the lofty walls. After some hesi¬ tation wbich vy ay they should bend their steps; he perceived a glimmering of light, which appeared of a différent nature to that emitted by the lamps, and, in the hope of its proving an outlet from the castle, they flew towards it ; as they ap¬ proached
proached it, they discovered it to be a svindow at the end of a vaulted con ¡dor, throimh which the beams of tlie moon obliquely shot a sickly light upon the white marble floor beneath 'it. At tlie moment Edward was contem¬ plating, with a full heart, the disappoint¬ ment of his hopes, the eye of Rosalind dis¬ covered a second luminous space, thnx 0 U which appeared the full face of ihe planet, Λν hose beams liad al traeteti them towards tbe window ; and as they moved a few paces nearer to the inviting scene, the breeze, by which they were met, con¬ vinced them that no object here inter- sened between tbem and the air. In this conviction they endeavoured to increase upon the speed with whieh they were al¬ ready moving, аш! in a tew minutes-they found themselves arrived at a postern- gate, leading out upon the ramparts, front¬ ing the sea. Tliat their course had hitherto been un¬ interrupted, Ed ward was not surprised; tiiose
those svhom he had left in the chapel, he supposed to be withheld from pursuing them, equally by superstitious fears, and the attention svhich their Lord, Allanrod, svas requiring at their hands, in conse¬ quence of the alarm he had received. All the adherents of De Madginecourt he concluded to be prisoners ; and he had himself heard a command issued, for all the freebooters to assemble in the hall of 4 he castle, and there to asvait the tidings being brought to them of their Lord's marriage svith Rosalind behm· solemnized. lie wished that his fricftid Philip svere still by his side, but the svish svas a vaiu one. Having issued out upon the ramparts, they discovered that they were on the op¬ posite side of the castle to that on svhich tlie drawbridge svas situated ; nothing svas discernible fiom this spot butthe buoyant svaves rising above each other in sils-er swells upon the murmuring bosom of tlie deep. 4i Let us tly to the beach, and se¬ crete ourselves in some friendly cavity, s\hich
svhich one of the cliffs upon the verge of the sea svili not fail to afford us 1" ex claimed the anxious Rosalind. 44 But hosv wiii it be possible for you to descend the steep and rugged declivity which leads to the margin of the ocean ?" enqu ľ "ed Edward. 44 I once svandered by day on this very rampart/' replied Rosalind, 44 and I then discovered a footway dosvn the cliffy but a fesv paces to the left of om present situation." <¿ But the moat—the moat!" ejaculated Edward; 4C hosv shall we pass the moat? There can lie no doubt of the drasvbridge being securely guarded, although the rani- parts on this side of the castle arc left naked and deserted." Scarcely had Edward spoken these words, ere tlie sound of voices arrested his atten¬ tion, and, on turning round his head in the direction from svhence they proceeded, he perceived two men moving slowly along, upon what he, at the first glance, supposed
supposed to be a partof the rampart svall; but he almost immediately discovered that he svas deceived in his idea, and this dis* cos'fcrv rendered him wholly at a loss where to suppose- them walking, as they ap¬ peared to be crossing the moat on а level svith the parapet svall. Rosalind con¬ firmed him in his belief that there was no second drawbridge communicating with that jiart of the castle, and he almost be¬ gan to think that they moved on air. Rosalind and himself vvere at this time concealed by the shade of a high bastion, svhilé on the tsvo men, the objects oftheir fear, their curiosity, and surprise, the mom casta vivid light. When tluy iiad gained the ramparts, Edward eould distinguish from their dress that they ?re moss¬ troopers; and from their conversation, as they passed before the spot where Rosa¬ lind and he were standing, he found thac one of them had been svounded by a biing from the castle, and that his com- [panion had returned to seek him after the YQL* IV. I S ictory,
victory, and to lend bim his assistance in reachiug the svalls of which they- had made a conquest. Instantly convinced from what he İıad overheard, that there umst become passage by which these men had crossed the moat, and svhich might prose instrumental to the flight of Rosalind and himself, Ro sooner had the two moss-troopeis turned an angle of the svalls, than, svith the trembling partner of his anxieties, he flew to investigate the spot. The moment they arrived at it, a sur¬ prise of tlie most joyful nature presented itself to their sight ; they found that a temporary biidge had been throsvn across the moat, in order, as it appeared, to fa¬ vour the rushing of the enemy upon the castle, at the period of its defenders grosv- ing languid in their exertions. Thankful for the beneficial aid it afforded them, they gave but little consideration to the cause of its existence, and having tra¬ versed it with winged steps, they flew to¬ wards
4vards the jbeacb, svhich tiiey gained in safety, and with overflowing ecstacy of 'soul. Tiiey mossed hastily oti, in search of some nook svhere they might shelter them¬ selves from the pmsuit, svhich they doubted not svould shortly be set on foot after Ro¬ salind ; and as they proceeded along, they T poured forth upon the delighted senses of each other, those sentiments of joy, of thankfulness, and of astonishment, svith svhich their hearts svere filled at the ţ'esto- ration to each other, svith svhich they svere at tliat vornenc blessed. 4< To be torn asunder nosv," exclaimed Edsvard, ťt svould be a pang exceeding all the miseries that I have hitheito endured." 41 Forbid it, pitying Heaven!" ejacu¬ lated the tender Rosalind. 4i Oh, tiiat sve could at this instant be wafted to the foot of our sovereign's throne; that it were nermitted us to kneel before my royal godmother, and implore her protec¬ tion for two unfortunate beings, svhose ι % natural
natural protectors have cast them off, and svho have alone her clemency and justice to repose on for their future peace!" 44 Be of comfort, dearest Rosalind," returned Edward; 4( the hand of Provi¬ dence appears to be stretched out in our cause, ami it will protect us on our jour¬ ney towards Elizabeth." 44 /lias !" replied Rosalind, ť * .you speak of the join ney as if it were possible for us to accomplish it eie the morning; consi¬ der the distance from hence to the abotle of our loyal mistress—the clangei s, the pei iis that asvait unprotected travellers, like ourselves. Oh, paidon me, my be¬ loved husband, that at t lie moment thou art restored to me, my lieart should sink thus fainting in my breast." The voice of Rosalind faltered as she pronounced these svortls ; the tears burst from her eyes, and she sunk, fainting, into the arms of Edsvard. Words were all the comfort svhich he bad it in Ids power to bestow on her ; and as
as he called upon her in accents of the tenderest nature to revive, and place con* fidence in the svill of Heaven to preserve them from their enemies, his attention ss>as, for an instant, called from the object of his anxiety, by a rapid cutting of the svaves behind him, and on moving round his head, he perceived that the noise pro¬ ceeded from the motion of the oars with with svhich a man, svhom hc discovered in a small boat, svas rosving his little bark towards the shore. On perceiving this mav a sudden thought, svhich communicated both hope and rapture to his heart, dai ted into his imagination. He had already sviped the crimson stain from his cheek ; and the instant animation returned to the frame of Rosalind, leading her towards the man who had just sprung from his boat upon the shore, he addressed him, by saying—? 44 Fear me not—I am a man like yourself; you have nothing to dread at my hands; benefit it is at your option to receive from x 3 them,
them, if you have a heart capable of feel¬ ing for the miseries ofyour fellow beings, and are oppressed with svants which the recompence due to a benevolent action would provide you with the means of supplying. Carry us sonthsvard from this spot, to any port or harbour, where it is probable that sve may obtain a vessel to transport us farther dosvn the coast, and ten pieces of gold shall be the compensa¬ tion I svili bestosv on you for your com¬ pliance ; five of svhich I svill now give you, as an earnest of my promise being made, by one svho vrill not break his svord to you." The fisherman^ for such was tbe man be addressed, appeared not less surprised by the proposition made tó hím, than hy the sudden appearance, as it seemed to him, of tsvo beings, of the superior cast, of svhich their garb bespoke them, by fhe side of his boat. He stared alternately upon each, svithout repîyiog to Edward's appeal ; but when Edward
Edward epfçrced his petition, by producing five of the pieces of gold with which the s faithful Hubert had furnished him at their )ate separation, his tongue immediateiy became untied ; and having received them into his own possession, and reminded Edsvard of the other five svhich svere to follow, he agreed to rosv them-down to a creek r at the distance of about a league and a half, svhere, he said, small vessels, sailing southward, vvere not unfrequently to be fouud* s The greatest inconvenience svhich they experienced svhilst in the fisherman's boat, was its owner's curiosity to leam the cause from svhieh they had taken refuge in it; and as Edsvard judged it most safe ngt to gh'e him their true history, he svas not a little puzzled to find evasive replies to his questions, svhich svcre very nume¬ rous—otherwise the man prosed both civil and kind. He thresv a wrapping cloak, which had been iutended to defeucf him¬ seif from the coldness of the uight, over ι 4 the
the shoulders of Rosalind, and pressed both lier and Edward to partake of such food and liquor as he happened to have on board. The tide bein*? unfavourable to their progress, day was beginning to dawn svhen they reached the creek towhich the fisherman had promised to transport tliem. As they^ arrived near İt, they discovered some low cottages planted at the distance ofa few yards from the margin of the sea, but no vessel of any description appeared in sight. Having landed tliem, the fisherman re¬ commended to them to knock at a door, svhich he pointed out, and which, he in¬ formed them, was the habitation of a Suan who was in the habit of supplying such ships as touched upon that part of the coast, v. ith fresh water and provisions, and who was the most likely person to in¬ form them whether uny vessel was shortly expected to pass that way. They followed his directions, and scarce- ly
ly had Edward struck his liand against the door, ere the pilot, of whom the fisherman had spoken, follosved by a lad svho svas his son, came out, ready equipped, as it appeared, for the svater. They stepped back a pace or two in surprise, at the ap¬ pearance of Edsvard and his fair compa¬ nion ; and hefore they had time to enquire their business, Edsvard signified svhat it svas. The pilot replied, that if it svas their wish to get themselves transported to Lon¬ don, his son and himself were then going to earry a sheep on board a ship in the service of government, svhich svas lying off at sea, about half a league from the shore, anil svhich svas nosv on her svay to the Tosver of London ; <4 and this vessel," lie added, 4 * he doubted not, svould rea¬ dily receive them on board, as passengers," The desire svhich Rosalind liad expressed to lier husband, at tbe moment of their reaching the beach on the foregoing night, of being able to throw herself at the feet ι 5 of
t of her sos'-ereign, aud interest her in their cause, had governed him in his actions since that time; and hence arose the de¬ cision with svhich, in his flight from Rock¬ mount Cattle, he had still taken the^pre- caution of making progress tosvards the metropolis. The light of day svas not yet sufficient for them to distinguish the ship of which the pilot had spoken ; they, hosvever, trusted to his leport of lier, and entered the boat in which his son and himself svere going to rosv up to her. As they advanced out to sea, the vessel, gradually became visible; and svhen they had reached iier sitie, at the request of Edward, the captain appeared upon deck; and a very fesv svords ratified an agreement for the passage of Edsvard and Rosalind to London, Towards tlie captain, Edward main¬ tained the same silence and secrecy, with regard to their names -and histdry, svhich he liad dorie to the inquisitive fisherman. His
1Ш tiffîf was principally passed in ţh$ cabin whichi was albtted to their use, svith hissïfosaimd ; and their hotw&were spent in a relation of ihc adventures svhich* hud befallen them since their separation fiom eacb other, intermingled, with thek doubts, their wishes, and their appreţien*- »ions, for the event of the future. The ship had got under way almost im¬ mediately upon their coming on board ; and on the evening of the third day they arrived at the mouth of the Thames* svhere she anchored for that night. As Edward and Rosalind had dwelt on past occurrences, one circumstance Jiad particularly excited their surprise, and that was-, the effect which the suddeu ap·* pearaqce of Edward, in his disguise, in the chapel of Rockmount Castle, had produced on Allanrod. It had by no means astonished them, that the lower ørders of "society, both at De Mowbray Castle, and afterwards at tliat of Rock- mount, should have been alarmed by the ι 6 appearance
appearance svhich had been purposely planned to inspire svith terror Hie minds of superstitious and ignorant beholders; but that Allanrod, a chief, even though of a banditti, a situation svliich alone would have bespoken him of no mean origin, even if the account of his cour¬ tesy and accomplishments; ssdiich Edward had learnt from the history of the Bonny Mabel Monteith, related to lim by the abbess in the islanti of Auskerry, had not met his ears, 'should has T e experienced so great an alarm fiom the sight, as to has 7 e sunk senseless, at beholding it, into the arms of his attendants, svas a fact for which he could not in any way account ; but that the consciousness of the train of evils, svhich had marked his iniquitous .life, liad rendered him more susceptible of fearful impressions than a man svhose days have been more innocently passed. About five in the afternoon of the fourth day after their escape from Rock¬ mount Castle, they svere landed in the metropolis
metropolis of the kingdom ; and Edward having satisfied the captain of the vessel for the service they had received at his liands, they proceeded towards that quar¬ ter of the city in svhich stood the royal palace, and svhere they procured for them¬ selves the use of an apartment in its vi¬ cinity, on taking possession of svhich they tasted the first moment of security svith svhich they had been blessed since their reunion svith each other. A night of undisturbed rest was a re¬ freshment of svhich the strength and spi¬ rits of Rosalind stood peculiarly in need, ere she could be adequate to the under¬ taking of entering the presence of her sovereign, upon the painful, the difficult busiuess for svhich she svas to appear be¬ fore her; and her itleas relative to the reception she should meet svith from Eli¬ zabeth, almost deprived her of the sleep necessary to enable her to go through the arduous task of the succeeding, day. Kindly as she believed the Queeu svould treat
treat her, and mindful, as she did not doubt to find her, of those promises of love and protection svhich she had made to her, at the moment of her becoming her sponsor at the holy font of Christi¬ anity, stili the unprecedented peculiarity of her situation, the detail of extraoi dinary events for which she had to implore her hearing, filled her svith apprehension at the idea of approaching her throue; antl not least painful to her imagination was the probability of lue queen considering the honour whicii she had conferred on her, in becoming her godmother, sullied by the union svhich she had contracted svith her beloved Edwartl ; she dreaded that Elizabeth might merely dwell on the circumstance of her being become the svife of an unknosvn, and be unwilling to make any allowance of pity or indulgence for the cruel extremities by which slie had been driven to that act. When they arose in the morning, hav¬ ing, with the assistance of their hostess, procured
procured a change of habiliments for themselves, of which some pieces that still remained of Hubeit's gold enabled them to make the purchase, and Rosalind hav¬ ing been careful to attire herself with the utmost simplicity, they repaired to the royal mansion of Elizabeth ; a chamber¬ lain of the household appeared to receive them, and, in faint accents, Rosalind re¬ quested to be г 'vitted to an audience of the queen. The chambei lain replied, £l that her Majesty svas iu ill health/and unable to receive any visitors, but such aa svere honoured by her most intimate acquaint¬ ance." ťt I am one," rejoined Rosalind, 44 on svhom her smiles have hitheito fallen svith the most condescending benignity. I entreat you to bear her information, that her god-daughter, Rosalind de Mosvbray, implores permission to kneel before her." 44 The name of De Movvbray, " anssvered the chamberlain, ťí is iadeed one that is 3 most
most likely to gain its suit. Your peti¬ tion, Lady, shall instantly be conveyed to the ear of our royal mistress ;" aud having said this, he commanded some of the attendants svho svere in svaiting in the hall of the palace, to conduct Rosalind and her husband to an apartment, svhilst he proceeded to execute the commission svith which she batl charged him. During the time that they icniained in this apartment, awaiting the return of the chamberlain, some domestics attended to place them chairs, and throw additional logs of svood upon a fire svhich svas burn¬ ing on the hearth ; and of one of these, svho appeared of a superior order to the rest, Rosalind ventured to enquire, 4ť whe¬ ther the queen had been long indisposed?" He replied, 4i that her Majesty svas not yet recovered from the grief into which the death of her lamented cousin, the Queen of Scots, had throsvn her/' Rosalind could svith difficulty confine to her osvn breast the surprise with svhich this
this account filled her mind : Queen Eli¬ zabeth had been the instrument of the failen monarch's death ; and therefoie it appeared to her indefineably strange, that she should now be represented as mourn¬ ing her loss. The chamberlain presently returned, follosved by a venerable female, in svhose person Rosalind recollected the Dosvager Lady Butler : she svas a svoman of the strictest religious principles, and in her conversation the queen at this time found particular delight. From the moment the fatal blow had been struck, which had put a period to the existence of .the Scot¬ tish Queen, Elizabeth had repented ofthe ι step svhich she had taken to free herself from an innocent rival ; and thus im¬ pressed, she scorned the consolation and the lessons of those priests, who bad a fesv sveeks before urged her to the act of svhieb she now lamented that she had not svith¬ held the performance ; and to the pure doctrines.
doctrines ofthe Lady Butler she now alone listened. By her Rosalind svas conducted to the presence of her sovereign ;' as she quitted the apartment where she left Edward, he bade lier farewell, with a look in which svas con\ T eyed the earnest desire of his soul for her appeai to the feelings ofthe queen, meeting such a reception as might prove a balm to the suppliant's breast.—Rosa¬ lind breathed a sigh of hope, and followed her conductress. Passing through a» antichamber into a retired apartment, Rosalind here beheld: the queen reclining on a couch, pale, and apparently as ill in health as the Lady Butler had described her to be in mind. She was unattended, exceptbytwoyouiig females, who s»ere embroidering in a dis¬ tant part of the chamber, beneath a »pirat window of paiuted glass- through svhich the rays of day were admitted, dyed svith yellow tinte, that gave a-jaundicedliueto tha
the scene, and increased the pallidness of Elizabeth's countenance. With tottering steps Rosalind approaches towards the couch, and unable to give utterance to tlie svords in which she svished to address the queen, she bent her knee, and prepared herself to fall at her feet ţ, but Elizabeth, svho had raised herself upon ber seatas Rosalind had advanced intothe- apartment, extending tosvards her one of her hands, caught in it that of the trem¬ bling daughter of De Mowbray, and with* held her by к from prostrating herself before her. 44 Rosalind de Mowbray ľ' the queen exclaimed, <4 whence arises it that ï thus unexpectedly behold you in my presence? Wbere к the Baron, your father?—Can İt be a truth that was reported to me, that you are here wholly unattended ?" '* Oh, my beloved, my gracious sove«» feign !" faintly breathed forth Rosalind* ** I am come hither to Implore*your mo* therly protection ;. 14m overwhelmed witb svretched?
wretchetl ness and sorrosv, and I fly to » you for advice and succour." 44 Can İt be possible that Rosalind de Mosvbray stands in need of either?" re¬ turned the queen ; 44 if it be, she has done svişely to recollect the friendship which Elizabeth pledged to her infant state, antl to fiy to her for relief, and re¬ tribution." Cheered by tliese consolatory words, the tide of joy ran through the veins of Rosalind, and again she would have suuk at the feet of her soverign ; but Elizabeth, in the most affectionate and engaging tanner, placed her on the couch by her side. 44 You behold in me/* said the queen, (t a mourner for the death of my lost cousin, Mary of Scotland. The lasv of my ccuntry has exacted from me the ter¬ mination of a life which, as an individual, it would has'e beeu my joy to have pre¬ served. Iu seclusion I have passed my days, since the unhappy hour svhich gave hes
her to eternity ; and nought could hase aroused me from the stupor of grief and melancholy, in which your petition to be admitteei into my presence found me, but the name of her to svhom 1 have pledged my faith to be a parent ; and by breaking a letter of my promise to svhom, I svill not ghe myself a second cause for remorse of mind." 44 Heaven svili return to you, in aejdi- tional blessings, the ¡ntere&t which you graciously express yourself to take in the fate of one so little wos thy as myself of exciting it within your breast," replied Rosalind. 44 Life is a scene of svoe," rejoined the queen, 44 and happiest they svho cim alle¬ viate those pangs of anguish w hich gnaw upon the hearts of others. With all, it is a duty to perform this charitable part ; but in a sovereign like myself, it svere a blasphemy against tlie Deity, svhose image and Whose delegate I live on earth, were I to
I to neglect to act upon this principle of henevolence. Yet 1 fear me, that io one «ingle instancevof my life,- I have trans¬ gressed. '* She paused, and contending feelings appeared to agitate her bosom, When she spoke again, she reverted to the deatb of Alary, and even a tear fell from her eye, as she recounted the godlike resignation svith svhich she died. But still Rosalind, «Ithough she endeavoured to check the idea, and desired to believe the penitence Of Elizabeth of the most perfect and reli¬ gious nature, could not forbear imagining that she discovered her to be more repent¬ ant of the stain svliich she dreaded that this action had cast upon fier fame, than of the pris'atiou of iife svhich the Queen of Scots had suffered from it. 41 I forget myself/' said Elizabeth, after another pause— 44 commence the ap¬ peai which уоц are about to make to my heartland 'm «contemplating how I can serve
-serve you, I will endeavour to chase from my remembrance, the scene of affliction whicii is ever present to my senses." 44 I much fear," replied Rosaliud, u that hosvever you may pity me for the wrongs I have endured, 1 shall still, İn certain instances, appear to my sovereign to have acted with rashness and svith sveakness." 44 Let those «condemn the* sveak ness of their fellow-beings," anssvered the queen, 44 whose lives have been a current of un* deviating purity ; but such there are not, although a blindness to their osvn errors often leads the vain and the conceited to think thus of themselves. Man is, by his nature, prone to error ; s/ere he perfect, he were no longer of this earth. You svill Ье judged by a mortal, Rosalind de Mosv¬ bray, wheu you open your heart to me ; and although a queen, I have the feelings ofa svoman." As Elizabeth ceased speaking, she svaved her hand to the young svomen at the far¬ ther
ther end of tlie apartment ; svlnch signal they understood, and immediately obeyed hy quitting her presence ; the Lady But¬ ler too, svithout receiving the same hint for retiring, withdrew into the anticham¬ ber. By their absence Rosalind felt em¬ boldened, and assoou as they svere alone, the queen again urged her to begin her story. Without farther hesitation, Rosalind entered upon the recital of such events as had maiked her sonowful life siuce the period of her former visit to the court. She recounted the tleatli of her mother, and the impressive appeal whicii in her dying moments she had made to the feel- iugsof Lord William, relative to the union of their daughter : she proceeded to the arrival of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt at De Mowbray Castle—to the offer which he had made to her of ins hand—to the cruel Severit} 7 with svhich her father had com¬ manded her to receive him as her husbaud -¿-to the month of grace which he had al¬ io wed
losved her for preparing herself for becom¬ ing his wife; and thence to her solemn interview with him in the cedar chamber. Here the queen interrupted her.*— u Is it possible," she exclaimed, *' that De Madginecourt possessed the hardiness to make you an offer of his hand, and at the period too vou mention ?—at that very period my frowns had driven him from my court—vain, pitiable fool !—for knosv, Rosalind, that De Madginecourt svas once sufíiciently presumptuous to believe that England's queen svould share her throne svith him. It was an error in svhich a sos'ereign could not permit a subject to exist, and I quickly opened Ids eyes to the delusion svith svhich his hopes ss r ere feeding him Stung to the soul by tlie mortification to svhich his own sveakness and folly had reduced him,' he instantly retired from London, conscious of taking svith him my displeasure ; and I believed him lamenting the presumption svhich had cast him from my good opinion, İn the vol. iv. к privacy
privacy of his osvn domains. It is nosv explained to me that he svas otherwise employed ;, and I am grieved to find that a noble, in svhom I had placed tlie faith svhich I have till this moment esvr done in Lord William de Mosvbray, should have fallen into the sveakness of becoming the dupe of so designing and so crafty a heart as that svhich animates Lord Rufus. Not less surprised am I that the Baron, your father, should not, in whatever union presented itself to the acceptance of Ro¬ salind de Mowbray, have deemed it a matter of necessary complimenti if not of compunction, to have entreated her royal godmother fo grace it svith her sanction, ere tin alliance svere attempted to be formed.*' To the queen it appeared incon testibly evident, that in seeking the hand of Ro¬ salind, Lord Rufus de Madginecourt had only been planning the means of ascend¬ ing to a secondary step in the path to¬ wards royal favour, when foiled in his artemot
attempt at mounting the most exalted station of honour and of posver; and it increased the contempt svith which she already regarded liim. For the conduct of the Lord Bai on de Alow bray, in hav¬ ing omitted to request of her to honour with her countenance, the alliance svhich he had prepared for liis daughter, she could devise no cause, but that he had dreaded lest she should have been svon to sympathize in the feelings of Rosalind, and out of respect to her happiness, have withheld her consent to the marriage ; and regarding this 4 procedure asa proof that he preferred being himself the agent of the plans for the future life of his daugh¬ ter, instead of submitting her to the ac¬ ceptance of such provision as the queen had it, unlimitedly, both in her posver and her intention to make for her, she became equally incensed against the blind wilfulness of his conduct, as she svas ¿gainst the united meanness and arro- к 2 gauce
gance svhich had marked that of De Mad¬ ginecourt. Hitherto every observation made by the queen upon the fate of Rosalind, and the authors of the miseries to svhich she had been condemned, hati tended to as¬ sure her of the interest which Elizabeth took in her happiness; bu' svhen calletl upon to pursue her narrative, her heart still sunk svithin her, for the moment was now come, at svhich it svas necessary for her to confess to her sovereign, her pri¬ vate mairiage svith Edward. In accents almost choked by contending feelings, the declaration was matle. Till the moment of her acknowledging herself a wife, the queen had listened to her tale of svoe svitli the most compas¬ sionate and indulgent attention ; svhen these svords fell from her lips, she impa¬ tiently enquired, 4< on svhom she had bestowed her hand ?" Trembling, Rosalind replie/ -- ťí On Ed- svaid." To
To this reply naturally follosved, on the partof the queen, the enquiries of, ' 4 Who was EdsvartI ?—of svhat lineage ?—of svhat rank ?" With increased agitation Rosalind re- counteel the simple histeiry of Etlward, previously to his becoming an inhabitant of De Mowbray Castie, expatiated on the brotherly affection which she had expe¬ rienced from him, and dwelt on the name of де» by which her deceased mother had bequeathed to him the legacy of the cross. After Rosalind had ceased to speak, the queen maintained a silence of some mi¬ nutes; during which the anxious pleader for her indulgence and pity fixed her eyes upon her countenance, and beheld in it marks of her being deeply engaged in thought. At length, Elizabeth raising herself upon her couch spoke thus— 4 " That the god-daughter of England's Queen has both erred and degraded her¬ self, in contracting an union svith oue svho^ if he be not unknosvn, is, at best, к å but
but the offspring of an inferior subject of the realm, is a point which admits of no controversy. But the pangs svhich have rent her motherless breast, the painful extremities svhich have driven her to the action, shail not be increased by a want of feeling tosvards her on the part of her sovereign, Elizabeth holds the conduct of which Lord Rufus de Madginecourt and the Baron de Mowbraý have been guilty, in too despicable a point of view, to become, in her osvn person, an imitator of their insensibility. Rosalind de Mow¬ bray shall not be excluded from a parental interest in the heart of her queen, because she svas svithhekl from seeking her advice and friendship at the moment of her af¬ fliction and necessity." At the sound of these wprds, the tears burst into the eyes of Rosalind, and throw« ing herself at the feet of her svho had ut¬ tered them, she imprinted on her extended hand a kiss of gratitude, svhich she ac¬ companied svith an exclamation of rap¬ turous
turous thankfulness, rendered neaïly inar¬ ticulate by the sobs through svhich it svas uttered. * ., 44 Calm, calm your transports," said the queeu, again raising her god-daughter from her humble position ; ** while you merit my favour, you shall shaie it; I will nevei* consider as a transgression of your osvn, an error into which the crimes of others have driven you. But although I am thus resolved in your cause, there are still svorlcliy customs, of svhich the universal benefit is too certain and too great to be broken through incautiously by a sovereign like myself, svhose exam* pie should be the excitement of my peo¬ ple's just and honourable conduct ; ex¬ ceptions to beneficial ordinances in society, come svith the worst grace from those the highest in authority. But I svili explain myself more fully to you svhen you have unfolded to me the remainder of your narrative ; I must know all that relates to you, ere my judgment can be formed к 4 svith
with perfect correctness. Suspend, if possible, your emotions, till you have re¬ lated to me where you have passed your days, in what retirement, in vvhat asylum found refuge, since your ill-judged union : why have you thus long delayed to pre¬ sent yourself before те?" Again Rosalind resumed the thread of her calamitous history ; she spoke of the imprisonment in her own apartment to which her father had condemned her, after the departure of Edward from Eng¬ land, and ofthe sufferings which Edward had endured in Flanders; she rehtta tiie attack threatened to be made upon De Mowbray Castle hy the freebooter Allan* rod, the marching out of her father with his chosen men to meet the divided forces of the enemy, at the instigation of thô deserter, Donald, and his subsequent de¬ feat and captivity. Thence she proceeded to describe the despoiling of Lerd Wil¬ liam's castle by the moss-troopers; the almost incredible circumstance of her hav¬ ing
ing been rescued from them by the inter¬ ference of Lotti Rufus de Madginecourt ; the demand svhich Allanrod had made of her'hand, and the determination of Lord Rufus rather to submit to tlie sacking of his castle, than to deliver her into the power of the freebooter : lastly, she re¬ counted her seclusion in the grotto ; the triumph of Allanrod in his attack upon Rockmount Castle; her being dragged to the altar, and placed there by the side of the dreaded chief, in order to be uniteti to him by the bond of marriage ; the sudden appearance of İıer Edsvard in the chapel, and the rescue of her person from, her enemies^ svhich his disguise had ena¬ bled him to accomplish. The queen heard Rosalind's account of sucb occurrences'as had marked the latter years of her osvn and her Edsvaid's exist¬ ence, with an interest svhich their extra¬ ordinary nature excited for them ia her breast ; but the fact svhich most astonished. her was, the change svliich appealed to s. 5 have
have taken place in the sentiments of Lord Rufus svitli regard to Rosalind ; upon this circumstance, Elizabeth dsvelt svith manv ·* an unsatisfactory surmise : like Rosalind, she couhl not intluce herself to believe that he actually repented of his former conduct tosvards her, and that this re¬ pentance had been the cause of the com¬ placency svith which he had lately treated her ; she did not doubt that some refined motive ofa self interested nature lay con¬ cealed beneath his shesv of service, al¬ though she could not immediately con¬ ceive what that motive was. Although the dislike svhich the queen professed herself to bear Lord Rufus, might have been supposed to have prompted and encouraged Rosalind to the disdosure of all she knesv concerning him, iť will stifl be observed that the pure and virtuous suffeier, incapable of falsehood, sacredly maintained the promise svhich he had ex¬ acted from her at the time she was imme¬ diately in his. posver, svithin, the.walls of his
his own castle, of not disclosing to Eliza¬ beth that any secret bond existed between himself and the freebooter Allanrod ; he had informed her fhat the disclosure of such a tie must inevitably cost him his life, and her gentie soul recoiled from being the instrument of depriving even an enemy and a monster, like De Madgine¬ court, of his existence.
к 6 CHAR
СИЛР. IX. To die—to sleep- No more j—and by a sleep, to say we end 1 he heart-ache, and the thousand nat'ral shocks That ñesh is heir to i— 'tia a consummation Devoutly to be wish'd. 1 am îchW, and bend ap Each corporal agent to this terrible feat. fcUOBtrn. xäFTER several farther remarks upou the events svhich tlie unfortunate Rosa¬ lind hid recounted to lier, the queen reçu; r d to those words svhich she had before let. fall— 41 of there being certain beneficiat
beneficial ordinances in society, which a sovereign ought to be the last to break through ;"—antl she explained them by saying— ŕí that altliough she bore no ani¬ mosity, no auger to Edsvard, as an indi¬ vidual, still it was impossible for her to admit lum to her court, as the husband of the daughter of one of her barons —that by such an admission, she should be countenancing the daughters' of other »obles, İn forming alliances derogatory to their rank in life ; encouraging tbem to contract unions svilh men of inferior circumstance», svho might , become the poison of the families into svhich they were admitted ; and that she should, likewise, by such a step, be emboldening men of dangerous and designing minds, to insinuate themselves into the hearts of unsuspicious females, for the very purpose of rising, through their means, to situai- tions, from svhich they ought most care¬ fully to be withheld." Rosubnd's heart acknowledged the jus- ' : ■ tice
tice ofthe queen's observations ; although she could not restrain the tear from start¬ ing iuto her eye, svhilst she considered them as embracing the fate of one so tenderiy beloved, and svhom it had been the most anxious svish of her soul to behold, bending his knee at the feet of her royal goti -mot her. Upon the countenance of Rosalind the queen read svhat svas passing in her mind, and thus addressed her— 4i Do not suffer yourself to be cast dosvn ; I have already pledged myself a friend to you ; and I nosv make the same promise tosvards him, in whom you are most interested. But for the reasons I have already given you, my favour cannot shine openly upon hini, at least for the present. I svill make it my study to investigate his character—to discern svhether iie is worthy of the hand svith svhich he is blessed ; and if I find him thus deserving, circumstances may arise to work a change in his favour, svhich, if too suddenly brought about, coutd
could not add to the eventual happiness of himself or you. In causes of this doubtful nature, slow proceeel ings aie the surest; hasty acts lead the multitude to suspect them the veils of improprieties." Has ing said this, the queen icquested Rosalind to call to her the Lady Butler. When she entered, Elizabeth took a key from her pocket, and directed her to fetch her a purse of goltl, svhich she informed her she svould find in a drawer of her escritoir. W'htlst the Latiy Butler svas absent, executing the queen's commission, Eli¬ zabeth, calling Rosalind to her sitie, said — 44 The gold svhich will be brought me hither, is for the use of vour husbanel. ' You must, for a time, Rosalinti, consent to be parted from him ; it is necessary for the accomplishment of the plan, svhich I have formed foryour future felicity, and svhich I svilì presently explain to you, .that as you have nosv providentially es¬ caped the toils, of your enemies, you should
should no more quit my palace, till I has^e brought them to account beibre me, for their conduct tosvards vou." The Lady Butler entered svith the риье, svhieb the queen receiving at her hand, put into that of Rosalind, accom¬ panying her action, by saying— tť Hei e are fifty pieces ; retire into the anticham¬ ber, svhere you svili find the implements foFsvriting; explain toyour husband at large ail that has passed betsyeen us; gis^e him those reasons which withhold me fiom admití ing him an inhabitant of this mansion, as likewise those by which I am. actuated in retainingyou near my person ; and having done this, direct him to pro¬ eure for himself an abode in the vicinity ofmy palace; tell him that any commu¬ nication, which he may desire to convey to you, by letter, I svill issue my com¬ mands for having safely delivered into your ha n ils, as iikesvise into his, such as you may svish to send to him. Acquaint hmi, moreover, that Elizabeth professes herself
herself the mother of Rosalind, and svili not consequently be tjie enemy of him ia whom her daughter lives." Infinitely svould Rosalind have pre» ferred to iiave communicated svith her own lips to Edward, such matter as the queen had commanded her to write to hitn ; but udverne to advancing any request, svhere so great indulgences were volunta¬ rily granted, she retired to the anticham¬ ber ; and having committed a full account of her interview with the queen to paper, she concluded, by entreating hhn to svrite to her, at least once every day, svhich rule she promised to observe tosvards him, during the period which it should be deemed necessary, by the queen, for their separation to continue. Hasdng folded her epistle, the confi¬ dential Latiy Butler was charged hy Eliza¬ beth svith its delivery. Edsvard having read the information svhich it conveyed to him, had no alterna* tive
tiveto quitting the palace. With linger¬ ing steps, and a heavy heait, he returned to his solitary abode, svhere his reflections were his only companions, aud his sole employment that of placing them on paper, for the perusal of his Rosalind, svho was mean svhile continuing toexperience, with every hour, aiid i tional kindness from the queen. In the afternoon Elizabeth summoned hito her presence some of the members of her privy council/svith svhom she had not conversed since the death of Mary of Scotland ; and having passed nearly three hours svith them in her closet, she returned to the apartment svhere she had left Rosalind; she entered it leaning on one of her maids of honour for support, and svith the burning glow of fatigue painting her cheeks. Rosalind advanced to meet her, and said— tť Alas ! my gracious sovereign, it afflicts me much, that I should be the cause
cause ofyour suffering anxiety, to svhich your health and strength are so ill adapted." 44 Oh, no, no, you are mistaken," replied the queen, svith a benignant smile; 4ť I trust that both will be amended, by the posvers of my mind being called into action." After she had some moments reposed herself on her couch, she said—"I have resolved, Rosalind, that in the present crisis of affairs, nosv under my considera¬ tion, it is requisite that my first step should be the release of the Baron de Mowbray from his present captivity ; and my next, the utter subversion ofthe daring freebooter, Allanrod, and his lawless band. In your father's attempt at uniting you to Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, svithout any reference being made to me -in the business, he has shewn himself so far indifferent about any consideration svhich it is in my posver to evince for his welfare, and
and that of his family, that it is not from any regard to him that I shall send a force to procure his enlargement ; but in order to afford to the other, and worthier nobles ofmy kingdom, placed in a similar situa¬ tion to what his has been, a proof tbat the arm of Elizabeth shali ever be stretched out to redrew the wrong* tlvy mny suffer, in their attempts to protect her kingdom from the ravaging banditti svitli whicii it is at this instant infested* 1 have there¬ fore commanded, that, with the rising of to-morrosv's sun, a proclamation be issued throughout the city, announcing to my knights and captains round my throne, that i shall hold, upon the ful- fosving ûv+y, a public court, at svhich I shall select the leaders of an expedition, svhieli it is my puipose, without delay, to send forth against the boidereis." ťí Heaven grant that your royal aid come not too late—lhat ,}.hey find not my father deprived of life i" exclaimed Rosalind ;
Rosalind ; for it svili be remembered that she svas utterly ignorant of his escape from the stronghold of Allanrod. 44 Such is my prayer also," returned the queen. 4t I svish to see hím, and re ceive from himself the motis'es svhich induced him tp adopt so harsh, and un¬ natural a conduct, as he has been guiity of tosvards a child, so particularly, favoured in the pledge of protection svhich it re¬ ceived at its admission amitist the mem¬ bers of Christianity ; for it is but equitable that both sides of any question be iieard, ere a decisive judgment is formed upon it/' she added, svith an expression, that assured Rosalind that they svere only svords of favour, and, in her osvn mind, not the slightest doubt hung upon the truth of the narration she had received from her lips. 44 As soon as my deputed forces shall have marched against the freebooters," resumed Elizabeth, "my next concern shall be to dispatch a summons to the 5 Lord
Lord de Madginecourt to appear before me. in the recital svhich you have gisren mc, of the calamities experienced by your husband in Flanders, I have seen bini guilty of an attempt to deprive an English subject of his life ; and although the crime is not amenable svith his death, since it svas committed beyond the boundaries of my island, it is, nevertheless, my duty not to suffer such a transgression of the virtue of an English noble to pass unre¬ proved, and unstigmatized svith the cen¬ sure it merits. Where," after a pause, asked the queen, 44 is that Hubert, of svhom you speak, as having been svitness of the atrocious villainy ?" Rosalind informed the queen svhere Edsvard and he had parted, and that Hubert had assured him that they should meet again. "As he is in the kingdom," replied Elizabeth, 4t he will no doubt easily be found, svhen he learns that those to svhom his cares are directed, are under the im¬ mediate
mediate protection of Elizabeth." And to these svords the queen atlded an enco¬ mium upon the nobleness of Hubert's heart, and the gratitude he had evinced tosvards the benefactor of his youth.— 44 Hc is one of those rare and brilliant examples of true merit," she said, ' 4 ou svhich it reflects the highest praise upon majesty to confer a resvard ; and he shall not be forgotten by me," As the queeu continued to dsvell on the circumstances svhich immediately occu¬ pied her minti, she told Rosalind that she conceived the strongest proof of De Mad¬ ginecourťs sentiments, svith regard to herseif, during her stay at Rockmount Castle, not to luive been of the innocent and friendly nature svhich he had endca- vouied to induce her to believe them, svas the attempt svhich he hat! made, of de¬ priving Edward of his life, during his imprisonment in Flanders, and his having again proposetl himself, immediately after Iiis supposed death, to Lord William, as the
the suitor of her hand. Rosalind coin¬ cided in the opinion of the queen, and said, that such liad ever been her osvn idea; and they both agreed that Rosalind coultl uot be sufficiently thankful for hav¬ ing escaped, svith unsullied honour, from his posver, although they svere entirely at a loss to conceive on svhat account he had spareel her, in her defenceless state. After a mght, during svhich the balm of sleep had been almost a stranger to her pillosv, Rosalind arose at early morn, antl svrote to her Edward a full detail of the resolutions svhich the queen had formed on the preceding evening. When EdsvartI read the account òf the forces svhich it svas the intention ofthe queen to send against the detested Allanrod, and ofthe public court, svhich she had appointed to hold, for the purpose oï selecting the leaders ofthe expedition, his heart beat a tumult of desire svithin his breast, tobe named one of the envied number. The
The anxiety svhich he felt to obtain a post amidst the chosen, was unconquer¬ able; and he determined to present liim¬ seif befoie the queen, at her public court, amongst the otlier captains svho should appear tliere, as an officer that had borne her majesty's arms in Flanders, and to urge his petition to be enrolled İn the present expedition. After some debates svith his osvn iniud, he judged it most adviseable not to ac¬ quaint his Rosalind svith liis intention. He considered, that, apprehensive of his safety, she might endeavour to alter his determination ; or that, if such svas not the case, she might impart to the queen his svish, and that Elizabeth might raise obstacles to the accomplishment of it, of the same nature as those svhich she had advanced as reasons for not yet admitting him to her presence. He had both seen and heard so much of the villanies of Allanrod, that he abso¬ lutely felt as if the chastisement of the - vol. iv. L freebooter
freebooter svould be incomplete, unless his arm svere one of tlvse stretched out tô vanquish arid to crush him. The whole of the present day he spent in preparations for his a opearan ce on the foUowing one. He procured an armourer to polish the suit of mail, svhich had been his constant habiliment since liis arrival in England, till the hour of his reaching London. The purse svhich the queeu bad sent to him, supplied him svith the means of procuring whatever he deemed appropriate antl necessary to his equip¬ ment ; accordingly he provided himself svith a surcoat of scarlet cloth; on svhich was.embroideied an emblem of valour and hope ; and in the front of his helmet was placed a knot of waving plumes. Thus clad, svhen the hour of repairing to the appointed assembly arrived, he found no obstruction offered to his enter¬ ing the palace ; aud the way to the pre- sence-chamber was pointed out to him, in like manner as ta the other suppliants ■for
for admission to the presence of the queen, by the chamberlains of the court, who were attending i a the hall of the royal mansion for that express purpose. On entering the antiroom to the cham¬ ber of audience, he found the croud of those who were pressing to throw 4 them¬ selves at the feeţ of their sovereign so great, as almost to impede his progress ; but in a short time his attempts to ap¬ proach the door of the presence-chamber were rendered successful, by placing him¬ self in the train ofa body of knights, who were advancing towards it, and for whom a passage was cleared. Arnved within a few paces of the spa¬ cious door, which was throwa back upon its hinges, Edward cast his eyes through the aperture, and, for the first time, be¬ held the Queen of England, the god¬ mother of his Rosalind ! At the extremity of a magnificent saloon, Elizabeth appear¬ ed, seated on her throne, beneath a superb canopy of crimson velvet, richly embroi¬ ls Ώ dered,
dered, and fringed svith gold ; she svas surrounded by a vast body of nobles, svho were, svith herself, divided from the press¬ ing throng, by a semicircle of gilt wire, svhich svas extended round them, at the distance of about ten feet from the base of the throne. While he stood wrapt in admiration of the majesty and grace svhich shone con¬ spicuous upon the countenance of the queen, a figure, habited in the marine dress of the times, pressed before him.— The eagerness svhich the person thus cla ' testified to place himself immediately in the door-svay of the presence-chafnber, attracted the observation of Edward ; and as he fixed his eyes upon the stranger, he saw him draw, from the folds of his dress, a pistol, svhich, with tîie utmost dexte¬ rity, he levelled at the person of the queen. With the quickness of lightning, Ed¬ ward darted upon him, anil dashed from his hand the weapon of destruction. In the
the momentary struggle, it discharged itseif, and the bali, svith which it had been loaded, entered the ceiling of the saloon. The report of the pistol caused a general consternation antl alarm throughout the court; every one flocked to the spot from svhence it had proceeded, and those svho were able to arrive withiu sight of it, observed Edward svresting a second pistol from the offender, with svhich he had attempted to put a period w his own existence, after haviug been foiled in his attempt upon the life of the queen. Elizabeth herself had been hurried by her nobles into another apartment; but the natural firmness of her minti had not been at all shaken by tlie danger from svhich she had just been rescued ; and learning that the offender svas secured, contrary to the advice of such members of her council as were present, she com¬ manded him to be brought before her, h 3 in
in order that she might lierself examine him. The report of the occurrence had, in the course of a few minutes, been con¬ veyed to every part of the palace ; and no sooner did it reach the ear of Rosalind, than she flesv to convince herself, that her royal protectress svas indeed tn safety. Scarcely had she reached the apartment to svhich the queen had retired from the audience-chamber, ere, at an opposite door to that by which she had entered, the offender svas hd into it, in compliance with the command svhich the queen had issued to that effect. No sooner did the eye of Rosalind fall upon the countenance ofthe young man, for such he appeared, than she discovered it to be one svith svhich lier memory had acquaintance ; ariti in a very fesv moments she recollected that the resemblance of his person svas extremely great to that of the female, whonb with her husbaud, she had
had received into the grotto, iu the vicinity of Rockmount; and the ktter of svhom had breathed his last sigh there, svhilst receiving acts of kindness at her hands ; at the same instant she also recoUected the vow, of svhich her husband had spoken to her; the promise which she had roade to him of revenging the death of their sainted mistress ; and the mysterious declaration which she had made to her at ber departure—*" that she was a dying woman." Tbe offender heing placed opposite to the queen, at a short distance frorn her person, Elizabeth said— 44 Who are you? and upon what provocation have you at¬ tempted to take away my life ?" The person, thus addressed, replied— ** Although you behold røe in this habit, I am, like yourself, a svoman—my name Margaret Lambrun/' A sudden emotion overspread the coun¬ tenance of the queen, at the sound of these words, and she east a look of sur« ι. 4 prise
prise upon those svho svere standing near her— 4 * Are you the Lady Margaret Lam¬ brun?" she exclaimed. 44 I could not doubt that you svould re¬ collect me,"returned Margaret : 44 till your inhumanity drove every friend that loved her from sharing her prison svith the in¬ jured Queen of Scots, you liave often $een my husband and myself hovering round her person, svith the hope of com¬ municating a single ray of comfort to her afflicted heart. When your hatred to* wards her became more inflamed to cruelty, by the godlike resignation svith svhich she bore your injustice, and you deprived her even of this slender, consolation, sve returned to Scotland, to lament the fate which we could not amend ; and endea¬ vour to sers T e her by our prayers, since we svere denied the gratification of dedi¬ cating to her our personal services. But when sve learnt that you had raised your hand against her life, our anguish rose to frenzy—our entire possessions sve distri· buted
buted amongst the various Catholic churches in Scotiand, to buy masses for the repose of her soul : this done, my husband pledged a vow to Heaven, to revenge her death, by the extermination of your life; and I resolved to profess myself an accomplice in tlie act, that I might not survive him ; but that my soui might wing its way svith his, to a reunion with our mistress in Heaven !—Heart¬ broken svith affliction, he, on our journey hither, sunk into the sleep of death ; but not till he had received a promise from my lips, to fulfil the oath of retribution, which he had sworn. Arrived in London» I asvaited with the greatest impatience an hour, svhen I shoultl learn fhat you svere about to appear in some public situation, where 1 miglit gain access to your pre¬ sence. This day presented me with the chance I desired—this habit gained me the passport, that I belies'ed it vvoultl, into your palace ; and had I, svitli tlie L 5 weapon
sveapon which I aimed at your heart, effected my purpose, I was provided svith a second, to free myself from the punish¬ ment of your avengers. " Although the queen heard this hardy declaration with astonishment, still her fortitude and wonted presence of mind did not forsake her, and she replied— 44 Is it really possible that you could conceive the deed of whieh you have attempted the per¬ petration, a duty ?" 44 Yes, a double duty," returned Mar¬ garet: 44 You have deprived me of a sovereign, dearer to me than existence ; and by her death, you have also caused that of my husband : thus, in striking at the root ofyour life, I endeas'oured to re¬ venge both theirs at a blow." 4 ^And what, upon your osvn grounds of argument," asked Elizabeth, 4i must you consider my duty to be towards my people, whom you have attempted to de¬ prive of their sovereign ?" "Do
li Do you ask this question of me in the character ofa queen, or of a judge?'* answered Margaret. After a moment's hesitation, Elizabeth said—* 4 1 now address you as a queen." 44 Then," returned the offender, with the intrepidity svith wliich she had before spoken, 4i if I were the Queen of England, I svould pardon Margaret Lambrun, thar, by the performance of a mereiful action, I might endeavour to re-establish my fame, ere it be committed to the annals of history. " The queen, turning to some of hè? council, expressed her surprise at the sin¬ gularity and hardiness of the character before her; and then commanded her to be carried to tlie Tower, for farther exa* mination, at a future period, x The moment Margaret Was withdrawn from her sight, the queen exclaimed— " I have been an abuser of time—1 have trifled away those moments with tbe Gri- ь 6 minai
minai object, svhich ought to have been employed in gratitutle to my preserver.— Where is he svho disarmed the hand ofmy assassin ?" One of the lords in svaiting by her side» replied—* 4 that he was attending in the audience-chamber." 44 Who is he, and what is his name?" asked Elizabeth. Upon these points no one present could give her information. They said that he svas a young man in the garb of a soldier, but that his person svas not knosvn to ;them. The queen commanded him to be in¬ stantly conducted into her presence. Every eye was turned eageriy towards the door at svliich he svas expected to • enter ; and svhen that of Rosalind beheld, in the preserver of her godmother, her queen, and her protectress f the Iiusband of her tenderest affections» a flood of joy poured into her heart, which overwhelmed all
all sense in ecstacy, and svith a faint sigh she sunk into the arms of the Lady But¬ ler, who svas standing by her side. By those svho observed her emotion, it was supposed to be occasioned by the agi¬ tation of mind into which the danger of the queen had thrown her, added to the oppression of the heat caused by the crowd of persons svhich filled the apart¬ ment, and she was directly removed from it into purer air. Edsvard saw, at h"; entrance, but one object, and that svas the queen. With a modest expression of the satisfaction svhich glowed in his heairt, beaming from his eyes, he advanced towards the spot where she svas awaiting his approach, and sunk upon his right knee before her. Elizabeth raised him, svith her own hand, from his posture of humiliation, ami, accompanying her svords svith a smile of the most affable benignity, slie said— 44 Words svere a sveak expression of the gratitude with which røy heart beats for
for your loyalty ; ask of me any boon, as the recompense of yonr fervour in my cause, and conceive it already granted." 44 The gracious recollection which your majesty bears of the service that I have been so fortunate as to render you, would for me be recompense enough," replied Edward, 4d did I not believe, that £y accepting the promise which your gene¬ rosity has condescended to make me, I may be enabled to render myself a second time useful in your cause." 44 Explain yourself/' returned the queen, 44 1 have, for several years past/' re¬ joined Edward, " been honoured by bear¬ ing your majesty's arms; permit- më now to march under уоцг standard, against the freebooter, Allan rod, and my proudest wishes will be accomplished." 44 And is that the only recompense which thou desirest,,for having preserved a sovereign's life?** exclaimed Elizabeth ; 44 Whosoever thou art, thy soul is noble, whether
whether thy blood be so or not. Lords of my council and armies," added the queen, bending her looks -alternately to the nobles on either side, 44 1 trust there is no Englishman, who does not rejoice in the preservation of Elizabeth : I trust therefore that no Englishman can envy the honour asvarded, as the recompense of England's joy.—Elizabeth, bestows on her preserver, the command of the expe¬ dition against Allanrod." Again· Edward fell prostrate at her feet, and kissed the hand wiiich she extended to him. 44 Hast thou rank, young man ?" asked Elizabeth. 44 Neither rank nor fortune, but my Word aud honour, Madam/' retuined Edward. The queen took a sword from tlie hand of one of her attendant lords, and having raised it over the head of Edward, she said— 44 From this liour tliou art possessed of both— rise a Knight of England ¿ and for
for the support of tby title, Elizabeth be- stosvs on thee ten thousand marks of gold." The keenest feelings are the most diffi¬ cult to be expressed ; sueh svas the case with Edsvard ; joy, confusion, astonish¬ ment, and gratitude, met so forcibly in his heart, as to deny liim the '- er of utterance. - 44 By what name shall I enquire for you, svhen I svish to take my leave of yon, previously to your setting out, and give you my svishes for success in your expe¬ dition ?" asked Elizabeth. 44 Edward is my name, so please your majesty," he replied,. 44 Sir Edward/' repeated the queen, with emphasis; 44 and so farewell, my noble knight !" Elizabeth nosv quitted the apartment, and Sir Edsvard svas directed to attend the queen's secretary at svar on the following morning, at the liour of eight, to receive the documents of his march. CHAP.
СИАР. Χ. Ob, happy hout ! If I not set thee down, The whitest that tht eye ot time e'er saw, let me ne'er «mile, when I remember thee. M. tftK. must be unnecessary to expatiate on the rapture experienced by Sir Edsvard, on having risen to the favour of the queen, by means so honourable and gratifying to his feelings. With a heart light as gossa¬ mer he returned home, to impart, by let¬ ter, to Rosalind the overflowing joy of his soul. Scarcely had he composed liimseif for writing, ere one of the chauıberîains of
It
of the court entered his apartment, nnd presented him svith a note, which con¬ tained the following words— 44 Oh, my husband, our excellent queen has learnt, tliat it is my Edward svho is the preserver of her life; this knowledge has removed every obstacle to your being admitted into her presence : hasten then to obey the summons ofyour gracious so¬ vereign, and your affectionate Rosalind." When Sir Edward raised his eyes from the paper, the chamberlain, svho had brought it to him, said—" We wait, Sir, to con¬ duct you to our royal mistress." Sir Ed¬ ward obeyed his signal for descending into the street, where he found prepared for him to'mount, ahorse, richly caparisoned, and a royal guard to march on either side of him, svhich the love and loyalty of the people rendered a most useful precaution, as the ardour svith svhich ail ranks pressed to behold him, would, but for the resolu¬ tion of the guard, have entirely obstructed his progress to tlie palace. On
On arriving there, every idea which he had ever before been able to form of happiness, svas exceeded by the gracious reception which he received from Eliza¬ beth; by the shouts of J03 wliich issued from the lips of the grateful multitude ; and most of all, by beholding the reflec¬ tion of that honest pride with which his osvn heart was filled in the eyes of his Ro¬ salind. The sensation svas such as none CQukl' hav£jfglt<trwMi the strength svith svhich Rosalind and her Edward were im¬ pressed by it, but those svho had, for an equal period, like themselves, drank ofthe cup of misery and despair ; it svas a tran¬ sportation, as by the power of magic, from the dark^gulph of mourning, to the lightly buoyant clouds of fluttering joy—iu the imagination, it may be drasvn ; by the pen, it cannot be executed with its natural lustre. Sir Edward svas now considered an inha¬ bitant of the palace, till he should march on hb expedition against Allanrod. In
In the evening the queen summoned to her, her privy council, and her secretary at war, and having presented to them the young knight, she entered into consulta¬ tion svrth them upon the most adviseable plan of proceeding against the freebooters. The first object, it was decided, must bc the restoration of Lord William de Mow¬ bray to liberty ; the next, that of making Allanrod a prisoner, as he appeared to be the cliief animator öfoMriMÅtoibghotdW? and these points being concluded upon, it was referred to the opinion of Sir Edward, svhat force he deemed necessary for the undertaking ? He replied— tl That he desired no more than one thousand men, svell acquainted svith the use of arms ; they svere, " he said, 44 at least equal to tsvice their number, of a rasv banditti, svho svere entirely unin¬ formed ofthe use of tactics." Elizabeth directed that the number should be fifteen hundred, and then ap¬ plied to her secretary at war to determine from
from svhat quarters the requisite force should be drawn. After some debate upon this point, it svas agreed, that three ofthe fifteen hundred should be immediately drafted from the troops nosv lying in the vicinity of the metropolis, and be ready to commence their march on the morn of she second day from the present one ; and that expresses should be sent forward upon the road along svhich the expedition was to proceed, tosvards the north, for the like draughts tobe made from other regiments, and added to Sir Edward's force as he passed through the tosvns in which they svere slatioued—and the arrangement svas so planned, that the number ofthe troops should be completed at York. Before tlie breaking up of the council, it was suggested to the queen by her mi¬ nisters, that it would be regarded by hei people, as a necessary proof of her grati tude to Heaven, for the blessing of be continuing her auspicious reign over them svhich had been granted to her in the pre serv at io
eervation of her existence, that she should appoint a day for returning public thanks¬ giving to that effect in the cathedral of Saint Pauh, and they therefore entreated her to name one for that purpose. Elizabeth replied—- 44 That she svas not deficient to Heaven ín gratitude for the singular protection svhich she had received at its hands, but that she chose to defer her public acknowledgment of it, till the return of Sir 'Edsvard to London should enable İıim to be present svith her at the hour of iier devotion ; that by beholding him, through svhom her providential rescue hati been effected, her mind might be the more firmly bent tosvards the cause in svhich the benefit had originated." Her ministers in return ventured to sub¬ mit to her opinion, svhether so İoııg a de¬ lay ofan act of dcvotion, v rnight not ap¬ pear the effect of coolness in its per¬ formance. For the possibility of such a supposition, the queen's countenance immediateiy ex- 5 pressed,
presset!, that she would on no account give tlie shadosv of a plea. 44 It shall then," she said, 4( be the day after to- morrow; Sir Edward sliall defer his set¬ ting out till the subsequent morning, and attend us to Saint Paul's." Matters of public importance being thus decided, the queen reconducted Sir Ed¬ ward to the apartment svhere they had left Rosalind, tojoin the members of the privy- council ; and here, amidst many particu¬ lars of his osvn history, lie imparted to the queen, at her command, the account svhich had been given htm, at the convent of Saint Agnes, of the Latiy Margaret Mur¬ ray, the cousin ofthe Bonny Mabel, svho had afterwards espoused Sir James Lam¬ brun, a man most devotedly attached to the interest of the Queen of Scotland ; and there appeared scarcely any reason to doubt that she was the very person nosv in cus¬ tody for her attempt upon the life of Elizabeth. The
The queen and her guests had so much matter before them for conversation and reflection, that the night svas far advanced ere they retired to rest, although the health and spirits of both Elizabeth and her god* daughter svere in a state to require the nourishment of repose. On the foliosving day, Margaret Lam¬ brun svas brought before the queen's mi¬ nisters for her examination. From the investigation svhich she undersven t, it ap¬ peared that she svas indeed the daughter of the deceased Earl of Lednoch, svho had preserved herself from the contagion of the pestilence, by flying to the moun¬ tains of Athol ; that having espoused a man, svho owed his ali to the House of Stuart, and on that account had been attached to it svith a strength of affection which bordered upon frenzy, she had im¬ bibed from liim his principles, and consi¬ dered it an act of duty to his memory to fulfil the plan for avenging the death of 'his
his mistress,« to svhich his mind had been devoted for some sveeks previously to his decease, 44 She had/* she confessed, 4i suffered many struggles within her own breast, and made every effort she had been capa¬ ble of, to divert her mind from her design ; but that allthe arguments she had used to convince herself that it svas better to re¬ sign her purpose, had only tended to strengthen lier iu it. I havee.\perienced," she adtled, íť that reason has no power to restrain a svoman from vengeance, svhen she is impelled to it by love." It had been feared and suspected, that Margaret might have been a member of some dangerous conspiracy, formetl per¬ haps by the Roman Catholics against the government and the queen ; but on the present examination of the culprit, it svas fully proved that all apprehensions of this nature svcre without, foundation.. One of the nobles present enquired of her— 4< Since you confess that you expe- voL· iv. и rienced
rienced many struggles with your osvn mind upon the propriety of the % action svhich vou have committed, and could not subdue your idea ofthe necessity you svere under of attempting it, are you sa¬ tisfied svith having made the attempt, and happy that it has not been productive ofa fatal consequence, or the reverse?" 4 ' Why should I reply to your demand," she replied, *'since the lasv considers only the attempt ?" Her answers to various other questions svliich svere put to her, displayed the same collectedness, antl strength of mind ; but her examiners still Ivlieved her repentant of htr crime, although too proud of spirit to unke confession ol it. The report of Margaiet's examination svas laid before the tjueen, and her ma¬ jesty at the same time informed that tiie necessary preparations for the trial svould be piade w ithout delay. 4i Sbe must be found guilty, must she not?" enquired Elizabeth of the Earl of Southampton,
Southampton, svho had brought her an iccount of the examination, at svhich he hv' been present. ťt There can be no doubt of İt, Madan," be replied. 14 And death must be the punishment, which the law asvards to her crime/' re- ioined the queen. The earl returned an affirmative anssver :o her question, and then retired, upon a iignal to that effect from her majesty. The queen passed nearlv the svhole of :he after wi and even i n a; alone in her >rivate apartment. On the following morn- ng, at an early hour, Sir Edward receis r ed ĺ summons to attend her in her closet. ť I have an .embassy, svhich I slutil request )f you to perform fpr me, to the prison of Vlargaret Lambrun," she said. ť< This is he day appointed for me to visit the ca- hedral of Saint Paul, and return my dranks to Heaven for the preservation of ny life, of svhich it chose you as the in- »trument. Theintchtion of inflicting pu¬ ai ΰ nishment
nishment on those svho have injured us, bespeaks resentment against them in our breast; hovv then can I, without wilfully drasving dosvn upon myself the vengeance of Providence, pray, * that my trespasses may be forgiven to me, in like manner as I forgive them svho may have trespassed against me/ svhilst 1 permit a fellosv· being, svho has betu guilty of an offence tovvards my pei stm, to be detained my prisoner, for publie execution ?—Convey to Maigaict Lambrun that paper ; it con¬ tains her pardon." " By this unparalleled benignity of soul, Madam, ' exclaimed Sir Edward, 44 you increase the glory I have been blessed by rendering you ¡.since by it you affoul one more proof of the many virtues that had died with you, had the assassin's blow been fatal." 44 But,"added Elizabeth, 4< inform her, thac ere the expiration ofa sveek, it is my condition that she quit my kingdom for ever; I svill provide lier an escort out of it,
it, and, if she be destitute of them, with the means of life." Sir Edward immediately proceeded to the Tower, and svas conducted to the apartment of the Lady Margaret She expressed a haughty surprise at his ap¬ pearance, tlie motive of svhich he explained by putting into her hand the pardon, to which the royal signature was affixed, and which he presented to her svitli an im- preasive eulogy on the humanity of the queen, and the gratitude svith svhich the conduct of Elizabeth ought to fill hor hearr. Having twice or thrice successively pe¬ rused the contents of this paper, as if doubtful of the evidence of her senses, she raised her eyes to Sir Edward, and said, in her usual tone of firmness— 4t Since the Queen of England has vouchsafed to «frânt: me her pardon, bc pleased, Sir, to acquaint her majesty, that I have but one pt e- quest to make of her, svhich she shall re- M 3 ceive
ceive from me in the course of a fesv hours, in svriting." Sir Edward having executed the com¬ mission svith svhieli his royal misti ess liad charged him, returned to inform her of the icception svhieli it had met with from the object of her humanity. " Whatever that request, it shall be granted," tiie' queen said; and, decked svith the smiles of conscious benevolence, she proceeded to her cliamber, to attire herself in a manner appropriate to Lhe bu¬ siness of the day. At the appointed iiour the religious pro¬ cession, in the centre of whicii moved Eli¬ zabeth, passed in solemn order from tlie palace to the church ; it svas graced hy the presence of every nobie svho had re¬ ceivetl intimation ofthe design in time to become a part of her train ; antl tlie bles¬ sings of the populace, and their prayers for the future preservation of,their queeu from the attacks of d iijloyalty, were poured upon her ear from every quarter. On
On her return to her palace, a letter svas delivered to her by the lieutenant of the Tosver. 4< He had been commissioned," he said, 4 ' by Margaret Lambrun, to put it into her majestv's own hauds." The queen tore it hastily open, and fountl the contents to be these—
44 MADAM, 44 Ere you have perused these lines, I shall be at peace for ever. Wliilst I feared that an act of suicide mvht be imputed to the dread of tlvse tortures to sviiicii the voice of justice might condemn me, I determined to endure life, rather than submit my reputation to the obloquy of such cowardice ; now your gracious pardon ha? removed that apprehension, and no motive can be attributetl to my self-destruction, but my delire of uniting my spiiit svith those of my esteemed friends, svho are no longer of this earth, m 4 I do
I do not hesitate to swallow the draught of death ; and the only petition svhich I leave behinti me, is that of being com¬ mitted to the earth, svith the ceremonies of the Catholic church, of which I have lived a member—such is the prayer of the dying 44 MARGARET LAMBRUN."
With a countenance, on svhich the greatest consternation and" surprise were depicted, the queen turned to the lieu¬ tenant, and enquired, <4 whether he had not left Margaret alive ?" His reply svas™-*' that he had received the letter from her ovvn hands." Elizabeth com municated to him the contents, and diiected that he should im- medufely return to the Tower, and make personal investigation into her safety ; and if he found her stili living, to svithhold her from committing the act of violence, upon svhich she appeared determined. Accompanied
Accompanied by the Earl of Suffolk, and tsvo other gentlemen, commissioned by the queen to attend him, the lieutenant sped to the Tower, and directly led the svay to the apartments wbere Margaret svas a prisoner : she svas not iu the first, and they proceeded to the second cham¬ ber, in svhich stootl her betl ; upon İt they found her extended : her frame svas torn svitfi -convulsions, and her features fixed in the agonies of death. Medical aid svas instantly calletl ¡n toher assistance, but it arrived in vain ; the struggle in svhich they batl found her svas her last, and, vvith a tleep and lengthened groan, her spirit fleti into eternity. Upou a table, near her bed, stood a drinking* cup, at the bottom of svhich appeared a sediment of a dark nature, svith a few drops of water floating ahove it; this was the remnant of tiie pohon which she batl ssvallosved : by its side lay a small silver box, in svhich the drug had been contained. m 5 Although
Although the queen had nothing to re¬ proach heiself svith, on the scoi e of huma¬ nity, in the case ofthe deceased Margaret, still she receivetl the intelligence of her death svith many expressions of regret, and some degree of painful reflection. Her untimely end was a link of tlie chain of miseries svhich the deatli of Mary had svound round the heaits of tiie Scotch ; and once more Elizabeth svished i u vain that she couid recall the first inimical ac¬ tion of which she had beenguilty towards the fallen monarch.
CHAP.
CHAP. XL —i— —'Tis one thing to bc tempted, Another thing to fall-----------. No ceremony that to great one's 'longs, Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword, The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe, Become them with one half so good a grace, Аэ mercy does. ¡¡.ÍÄASVJRE *ÛR MEASURÏ. JL HE succeeding day svas that appointed for the setting out of Sir Edwartl against the borderers. With the first ofthe morning the queen calletl to berone ofherminhteis ; she had pledged her svord to grant the last request > и 6 of
of Margaret Lambrun, and to him she issued her commands for the observance of her promise, by directing the body to be removed into Scotland for interment, and ordering that enquiry should be made at Rockmount Castle for that of her hus¬ band, Sir James, in order that he might be laid by the side of his svife. Tliis tlone, she dispatched a courier to Rockmount Castle, upon a business of a difierent nature; him she charged with a mandate to Lo¡d Rufus himself, com¬ maiKİing hirn to appear before her, svith¬ out delay, in London; for although from Rosalind she had learnt him to have been vanquished by the moss-troopers, she doubted not that he had already paid the ransom fixed upon for his liberty, and re¬ turned to his despoiled castle. Having matle thev arrangements, she entered her breakfast apartment, antl sent to invite Rosalind and her husband tojoin her at her repast, that she might enjoy the society of the latter for a fesv hours previously
previously to his departure, svhich was to take place about noon. The various concerns svhich had occu¬ pied the mind of the queen that morning, had causetl her to begin her meal full an hour after her usual time; and herself and her liappy guests had not yet risen from table, svhen one of her attendant gentle¬ men entered the apartment, and informed her that Lord William de Mosvbray svas arrived at the palace, and entreated to be admitted to the presence of her majesty. Upon the receipt of this intelligence, the greatest surprise svas tiepicted on the countenances of the queen anti her guests, while tiie gentle Rosalind coniti w ith diffi¬ culty prevent herself from falling off her seat. The queen perceived her emotion* and immediately addressed lie» iu thefewords— 44 -Rosalind, sou foriset that vou are un- der the protection ofa mother And a queen, uniteti in one person." Then turning to the gentleman from . 5 whom
svhom she had received the information of Lord William's arrival, slie said— 44 Is it known to you whether the Baron de Mow¬ biay is acquainted that Sir Edward and his tlaughter are the inmates of my palace?" 44 So please your majesty, I have no reason to believe that he knosvs it," svas the reply. 4< Let him then be kept in ignovnceof it," rejoined tlie queen ; and to this com¬ mand, she added her directions for him tobe conducted into an apartment, tili she svas ready to receive him, svhich, she said, he might be informed she sliould shortly be. When the messenger had quitted the room— 41 Heaven be praised!" exclaimed Rosalind, ' r that my father is no longer the prisoner ofthe dreaded Allanrod." 44 I commend thy filial affection, my Rosalind," said the queen, "whichshines forth svith additional lustre, in proportion to the acquaintance svhich those svho behold it, have with the very blender claim
claim that your parent's conduct tovvards you has left him to excite it in your breast." 44 He İs still the author of my being," replied the trembling Rosalind, " and 1 feel it the firbt duty of tbat existence, to implore my sovereign to temper the re¬ sentment against him, svhich my past suf¬ ferings have excited in her heart, with a lenient consideration for the eirors to svhich human nature is prone." 4i Exalted, generous svoman !" ex¬ claimed the queen, 4t svorthy the love and admiration of thy sovereign, the dove-like supplications of tiiy forgiving nature shall not fall unheeded upon the ear of Eliza- betli, because Elizabeth svill not neglect the performance of any act svhereby she may add to the huppiness of her merito¬ rious god-daughter." Rosalind kissed the extended hand of her sovereign, but her heart ss'as nosv too full for utterance. In
In the course of a fesv minutes the queen arose from her breakfast table, and telling Sir Edsvard and Rosalind that it svould probably not be very long befoie she svould summon them into her presence, she pro- ceetle j d to another apartment, into which she commanded the Baron de Mosvbray to be conducted to her. On his entrance, the queen, svho had seated herself at the upper end of the apart¬ ment, gave him a reception svhieh bore neither the marks of pleasure, nor the re¬ verse. With a countenance dressed in smilesand humility, he advanced tosvards her, and kneeling at her feet, svhilst he touched svith his lips the glove that co¬ vered her hantl, he poured forth many adulative expressions upou the joy svliich he experienced, at once more entering her presence ic It surprises me, I confess, to behold you he re," leturned Elizabeth; 44 for I had learnt that you svere the prisoner of the
the freebooters, and had prepared a force to march to your rescue. ' Lord William returned the queen his most grateful thank** for her kind inten¬ tion, and then besought her to suffer the troops svhich she jiad selected for the pur¬ pose of his rescue, to proceed svithout delay to that of his daughter Rosalind, svho, he said, had been torn from De Mosvbray Castle by the freebooters that had despoiled it, and, he doubted not, been conveyed to the same fortress in svhich he had himself been a prisoner, as he had understood it to be the residence of the chief of the banditti, the dreaded Allanrod — 4 ' And svhat/' he said, 4< in¬ creased his apprehensions for her safety, svas the demand svhich had been made of him by Allanrod, to grant his daughter to Lord Rufus de Madginecourt to wife, as the price of his own ransom." 44 And does this demand on the part of the freebooter Allanrod, increase your ap¬ prehensions for her safety ?" asked Eliza¬ beth.
beth. ťt Sureiy I do not comprehend you aright ; for it has beeu reported to me, that vou had used every means in vour V iJ m/ power to compel your daughter into the arms of Lortl Rufus de Madginecourt," Lortl William felt entirely at a loss svhat to decìde the queen's fet hngs svith regard to the union lie had once entleavoured to contract for j tosali n d with Lord Rufus; and equally fearful of condemning him¬ self, if her sentiments we: e unfavourable towards it, by maintaining silence, he ¿aid— (i There was a time, my sovereign, svhen I should have approved the alliance of De Madginecourt with my daughter, but------" lie hesitated. i{ I supposed that sou had been misre¬ presented to mc," replieri the queen, with coolness, but with point, " for I judged that, had an alliance been in agitation, the approbation of her royal god vot her would have been asked to grace it." The Baron felt the reproof, and eager to turn the thoughts of the queen from himself
himself to one more culpable, he replied—» 44 Tlie conduct of Lord Rufus has since that period been of so different a nature to svhat it then svas, that I svouhi sooner have follow etl my tlaughter to the grave, than to the altar as his bride. Since I have been the prisoner ofthe freebooters, I have discovered him to he guilty, in the point of loyalty, as svell as friendsiiip; for the demand wldch Allanrod caused to be made to me, of giving-my daughter's hand to his friend, Lortl Rufus de Mad¬ ginecourt, plainly bespeaks some secret connexion to subsist between them. Thus in his union svi-h an enemy of tbe state, Lortl Rufus proves himself a foe to its interes iS." Lord William paused.—The queen pas¬ sed a fesv minutes in reflection upon tlie strangeness of the information which he had conveyed to her, and doubtful whe¬ ther to believe it tbe truth or a fallacy. If it svere true that Allanrod had demanded the
the tlaughter oi D Mowbray to wife for Lord Rufus tie Madginecourt, some tie, some Fiit nelly union o ust subsist betsveen them, to have caused this demantl on the part of the freebooter; and if Allanrod had been authorized by Lord Rufus to make this demand forhim, whv ivd not Lord Rufus pu filed by the rime during svhich Rosalind had been the inmate of his castle, for forcing her into compliance wiih his still ? From Rosalind she had learnt that, during this period, Lord Ru¬ fus had in formet! her, that Al Iran rod had demanded her to svife for hiinself, and Lord Rufus had suffered his castle to stand the attack of a siege, rather than deliver her into his posver. These svere contra¬ dictory circumstauces, points from svhich the queen knesv not vvhat conclusion to drasv;.and if the assertion svhich Lord William had made to her, of Allanrod having required the hand of Rosalind to be given to De Madginecourt as the price -of
of his liberty, were a fallacy, she could not imagine to what end he had devised and propagated it. The Baron de Mowbray we have, throughout the series of adventures iu which sve have witnessed him, perceived to bea man inoffensive towards those who plaeed no obstacles iu the way of his favourite passion of aggrandizement of power and wealth, and heedless what un¬ just action he committed, where self- interest was concerned ; it was therefore, in the preseiit instance, natural to such a character as his was, however he might feel interested in the fate of his daughter, exposed as he believed hv to the power ofa band of freebooters, to feel still more for his own safety, which was trembling under the threatened accusation of the resolute Hubert. Accordingly, finding it difficult any longer to restiain that subject which was uppermost in his heart, from mounting to his lips, he broke the bilence which had
had for some minutes pi evaded, by say¬ ing— 44 Upon the house of De Mowbray tlv cou n tt nance of m ν gracious sovereign has t-vti shone with tiic most conspicuous and benign partiality ; it is ; therefore, not onh witii satisfaction, but svith pride, that i m fin m iıer, tliat there is at this moine, t existing, an attack, a base ca¬ lumi- s , levtileii against the honour of that lwe, in which her inteifeience is most materially requisite for tbe presentation of its fame iu the eye of society." To what he svas nosv referring, the queen svas entirely ignorant, and therefore di* rected him to explain. AVith many pauses and hesitations he gave the demautletl explanation ; but he saitl nothing of Hubert's having threatened to accuse him of having commanded the murder of tlie child ; he merely acquainted the queen tliat, having entrusted the care of an iniant, wiiom lie wisiied to have brought up in obscurity, to one of his vas¬ sals for that purpose, that vassal had mur¬ dered
dered ŕt, for the sake of possessing undi vided, the means svith svhich he had fur¬ nished him for its maintenance and his osvn ; and that judging some severe pu¬ nishment due to him for the crime, yet undetermined in svhat svay to proceed against him, he had biought him in chains to London, in order to act under the advice of the queen. The Baron's story carried svith it evi¬ dences of its osvn imperfect ness, svhich could not pass upon the acute senses of Elizabeth, and she said— 4 ' But, my Lord, I do not perceive in svhat manner a crime committed by a vassal, is to reflect that violent disgrace of which you speak, upon the house of De Mosvbray. Let me cleai ly understand upon svhat grounds your ap¬ prehensions of this nature are foum\cch ,> With still more hesitation, the Baron svas obliged to confess, that the criminal, frenzied by the torture of his osvn mind, had declared an intention of accusing him of
of having commanded the death of the child. 44 If it be proved," replied the queen, 44 tliat the senses oi the accuser are ically deranged, by the corroding reflections of his mind, his accusation svill be of no avail, lf this i& not the case, the credit givvn to his accusation svili materially depend on the degree of interest svhich you svill be found to have iii the death or existence ofthe child.—Who was the in¬ famt svhom you desired to have reared in seclusion from the world ?" she adtled. ct One nearly connected svith myself," returned Lord William, forcing a smile, antl desiring to convey to the queen that it had been an illegitimate child of his own* Elizabeth probably comprehended him thus, for she anssvered— 4 ' it had been a safer case for you, my Lord, if the infant had not been at all connected with your¬ seif; those are the svorst of crimes svhich are
are engendered in folly, and matured in vice." These svords she spoke svith asperity, and adtled, after a moment's pause—** and svho, my Lord, is this accuser whom you dread?" 44 He svas once a soldier in my ranks, so please your gracious majesty," returned De Mosvbray : l4 His name is Hubert." 44 Hubert !" echoed the queen, and sunk into thought; for the idea of that Hubert, svho had been the faithful fol¬ lower of Sir Edsvard, immediately entered her minti ; and ahhough she couhi not for an instant admit the probability of a soul noble and disinterested, as his had bten tlescribetl to her, being the agent of a crime of tiie borriti natine of an infants murtler ; still as she tlwclt on the gold of svhich Sir Edward had fountl him possessed svhen enlarged by him from the prison in Flanders, and on the mysterious manner in svhich he had parted from him soou after their arrival in England, declaring vol. iv. n that
that the bnsiness he svas going upon, was for the eventual happiness of his master, she belies-ed that his svealth might liave been acquiretl, by his having been made the guardian of this child of svhich De Mowbray batl spoken, and that his strength of attachment» to his master might have led him into the false opinion of conceiving tbat the accusation he had resolved upon preferring against Lortl William, relative to that child, might, by working tlie fall of the Bai on, cause the restoration of Rosalind and her husband to happiness. This idea once admitted, the queen could not divest iier mind of it, and she enquired of Lord William, 4 * hosv long it svas since he had entrusted the child of svhich he had spoken, to the care of this Hubert?" He replied, <r that it svas nosv full four years, he believed nearly five, since the event had taken place." Tiiis Elizabeth recollected was about the neriod
period at svhich Hubert had been repre- ι sented to her to have left England, in quest of his captive benefactor Edsvard. This recollection strengthened the suspi¬ cion svhich she had before entei tained ; should the time of his return to Englanti tally svith that of Edward's follower, she considered that she should be confirmed in it. To this end, she enquired <>f the Baron, ťť svhen he had first seen Hubert after the time of his committing the child to his care ?" In reply to this question, the Baron stated tlie unexpected appearance of Hu¬ bert before him in the cetiar chamber of his osvn castle, svhen he svus lamenting the devastation matle in it by the free¬ booters. The queen svas now fully confirmed in her suspicion of its being the same Hubert to svhom the preserver of her iife owed his escape from his captivity in Fianders; and unable to reconcile these apparent contra¬ dictions, she desired to hear the account N S which
svhich Hubert should iiimself give of ťhe 'transaction, and its consequences, as the various occurrences of svhich she had lately gained acquaintance from the lips of her god-daughter, hati given her some insight into tiie crafty disposition of De Mow¬ bray, and she therefore doubted the cor¬ rectness of the information he had just' Iaid before Ivr. 44 Where is this Hubeit to be found?" asked Elizabeth. The Bartv described a particular -spot in the vicinity of the Tower, where he had left ¡bim in the custody of Irwin, and those two of his sokliers vvho had escaped from tlie stronghold of Allaurod. Tlie queen rose from her seat, -and in¬ forming Lotti William that slie svouhi see him again presently, quitted the apart¬ ment; and having commanded Hubert to be brought tothe palace, she sent to sum¬ mon Sir Edward to meet her in anotlier apartment She judged that the nature ofthe conference which she wished to hold with
svith him, relative to the strange situation in svhich the Baron De Mt)wbray had expressed himself to be placed, might be too overpowering to the feelings of a daughter,svho had not forgotten the parent the injuries- svhich she had received at the hands of the fatiier, and therefore she forebore to extend her invitation to Ro¬ salind, Sir Edward heart! her account of what hati passed between berself and the Baron de Mosvbiay svilii the greatest astonish¬ ment, aiul declared that the case svas of so extraordinary a kivi, that he could not venture a surmise upon its real state, till he had likewise h ear« I tiie account svhieli Hubert should himself give of it; of tlie strict honour of svhose heart and principles İıe made an asseveration of tliat strength which vvas to be expectetl from the tongue of a man wiio stood indebted to him for the blessings of which he was novv in possession. To Sir Edwaui, the point was one of ¡N- 3 the
the most delicate nature ; it appeared that either the saviour of his peace and exist¬ ence, or the rather of his beloved wife, must be proved a criminal of the blackest (he; and with the most painful agitation painted on his countenance, he continued to traverse the apartment in silence, whilst the queen sat lost in reflections equally perplexing and distressing. At length Hubert was announced. In his way to the palace, he had gained in¬ telligence of those facts of which the Baron de Mowbray was still ignorant ; and the instant he was conducted into the apart¬ ment, rushing towards Sir Edward, he fell at his feet, and clasping his knees, he exclaimed— 4ť Joy, joy to my beloved master! amidst the blessings called down upon thine head by a grateful nation, although the last to greet thy excellence, not the least fervent is the voice of thy rail hi ul Hubert." Even the presence of the queen, and the awful crisis of the moment, did not preveat
pte\*cnt Sir Edward from acknowledging the gratitude svith svhich he received these testimonies of joy and fidelity from his tried friend ; but, having in few, although expressive svords, declared to hiin the sen¬ timents of his heart, he admonished him ofthe presence tliey were in. Turning his eyes svith the utmost hu¬ mility and reverence towards the queen— u Although my speech/' he said, <4 be not sufficiently refined for the address of majesty, the gracious sovereign hi whose presence 1 now kneel, has, in the instance ofmy ioved master, displayed too forcibly her regard for the heart of svoi th and ho¬ nesty, to make me fear that her displea¬ sure shoultl fall on one svho has only the sincerity of liis loyalty to recommend him to her bearing. May heaveii lay up in store for thee to future ages, gracious queen, an hundred fold ofthat bliss svith which my own fi ilings acquaint me that your benignity has filled his heart !" n 4 The
The honest fervour of Hubert in the cause of ids master, drew a tear into the eye of Elizabeth ; antl as she sviped it from her eheek, she rejoined—' 4 Were all my subjects like thee, I svere a happy queen indeetl !" Then suddenly recollecting the accusa¬ tion preferred against him by the Baron de MosvÍMav, svhich the interesting; seene of his meeting svilii his revered master had for the moment driven from her remem¬ brance, bb« adtled, m an impvesbis*e tone — t£ Heaven grant that thou prove as svorthy, upon the investigation of tliy in¬ most soul, as it is my desire to find thee !" <( Oli Hubert !—oh my friend !—whose services have entwined thee round my heart," exclaimed Sir Edsvard, "should it be possible that thou hast committed any action svhich casts a spot upon thy iame, which must render thee less per¬ fect, less exalted in mine eyes than thou nosv appearest in them, that heart svould, upon
upon such a conviction, feel a pang far, far be} oud the bhss of which tliy means have matle it the possessor." Whilst Sir Eebvard vva.-i speaking, a smile. of the utmost serenity aiul in svai d satis¬ faction of miud, stede over the couu te- nanee oí' Hubert ; aud in a tone of voice Gonespondeut with it m composure, he rep'iied—" Has then tlv Lortl tie äíow- lu.cy been prefci ring au accusation against me here? it is but as I expected, and as i hoped." 11 Hoped î say you hopeel' M demaneled Elizabeth. Hubeit repeated his decla:ation. Stdl more surprised than ever, the queen commanded him to explain his meaning. Falling agaiu upon liis knees, from svhieh he hud just befoie been permitted to rise, Hubert saitl'— 4i Moat gracious soveieign, if the services svhich I have rendered to my beloved master have any weight in the scale of your good opinion, as liaving been the mean instruments pf n 5 enabliug о
enabling him to perform the blessed, tîie meritorious act svhich has drasvn upon him your royal favour, by the remembrance of those services Γ implore your majesty, that, in the presence of your gracious self, I may be permitted to hear Lord William state his accusation." This request appeared to Elizabeth one of an uncommon nature ; but the expres¬ sive eye of Sir Edsvard ranked so forcibly on the sitie ofthe pleader, that Elizabeth commanded the Baron to be conducted into the apartment. Hubert's arms svere bound together at the svrists, svith chains svhich had been put upon them by the command of the Baron, immediately on their quitting De Mowbray Castle: this circumstance as¬ sured the queen that he could intend no treachery against the life of his accuser, as he had not the power of performing it ; and thus convinced, she began to fear the discovery of some great evil on the part of Lord William. Huliert
Hubert again addressed the queen.— 4i 1 ÌKveech your majesty," he said, 4 * that having gjanted thus much concerning myself to my petition, you will grant still a little more for the sake of my accusers permit not any of your attendants, so please your gracious majesty, to be pre¬ sent at the discussion svhich is about to take place between tîie Bai on de Movvbray aiul myself. 1 repeat, that I make this t n t reai y for the sake ofmy accuser." From her irresolution hovv to reply to this demand, the queen was relieved by the entrance of De Mosvbray, svhose eyes instantly fell upon Sir EdsvartI. Had a damning fiend, charged vvith the mandate of futurity to hurl him to the nether svoihl, encountered the sight of the Baron, the life-blood could not have turned colder at his heart, nor the strength of manhood have fled more rapidly from his trembling knees : thriee bis bleached lips moved without utteraace; he stag- N 6 A gered
gered tosvards. a chair, antl leant upon it for support. 44 Art thou astonished/' demanded Eli¬ zabeth, 4 ' to behold one doomed by thee to languish out a life of misery w ithin a. captive's cell, transplanted to a soil svhere the rays of my favour shall warm him into bliss? Thy senses do not deceive thee ; it is the same Edward svho, in return for the little bounty svhich he for a svhile re* ceived at thy hands, has g ţoan ed beneath thy tyrannous persecution—an injustice to svhich I should call upon ihee to ex¬ plain thy cause of provocation, and to make remuneration to the sufferer, svere uot thy offence, in this particular, lost in die greater guilt ofthat crime with which thine owi; lips have informed me that thou art accused by this man," The Queen paused. Tiie Baron appeared several different times to be on the point of speaking, but as' often closed his lips again svith marks 3 of
of the greatest agitation of mind depicted on his countenance, ere a sound had escaped tiiem. " Prove tliy sel ť innocent of the accu¬ sation svhich thineowii tongue fiist taught mc to knosv that tiiis Hubeit had against thee, antl I shall suppose thee likewise falsified in other accusations," saitl Eliza- neth:—-and having saitl this, she svaved her hand to her lords in svaiti v»;, and they all left the apaitment, Tiie eye of Hubert sparkled svith plea¬ sure at this command on the part of the queen; and as soon as ihey svere departed, tiie Baron De Movvbray appeared more at ease, in consequence of their absence, antl· addressed Hubert in tiiese svords— 44 Where, vile miscreant, is that child svhich I en¬ trusted to thy guardianship?" 44 Do you, my Lord, speak of that babe," replied Hubert, calmly, * 4 con* cerning svhich you said to me, that no- art iu the hiding up of those that live, can equal tlie security of the grave ?" 44 Sovereign
44 Sos'ereign of my hopes!" exclaimed De Mosvbray, addressing the queen, 44 canst thou credit that I svould speak thus of a babe, svhich I have alreatly de¬ clared to have been nearly connected svith myself?—because I conceived it con¬ ducive to the honour of my house to have it reared in obscurity, am I, there¬ fore, to be jutlged guilty of having svillcd its unfair death ?" 4 ' Prove to me that you svere interested in its existence," answered the queen, 44 antl you svill ι emove my .suspicions." 44 Is not everv one/' ciied the Baron, svith enereasing agitation, 4t interested in the fate of those svhose blood flows from their own ?" 44 But that interest is sometimes of a nature to bear the most cruel consequences to the heaits of those descendants," re¬ turned Elizabeth; 44 witness the union into which you svould have forced your daughter svith the Lord de Madginecourt: you svere doubtless urged by interest to inflict
inflict on her the cruelties svhich she then experienced at your hands." 44 But, Madam," exclaimed De Mosv¬ bray, stung to the soul by tliis evidence ofthe queen's acquaintance wdth his former proceedings, 4i if I exerted my authority over a daughter possessed of reason, to point out to her the utility of my plans, but svilfully blind to her own happiness and mine, is it t itence to bc inferred that I should become the monster to command the death of her innocent babe ?" "Her babe!" exclaimed the queen, 44 the babe of Rosalind! svas it then her babe svhich you entrusted to the care of this man ?—and svas it not born svithout life, as its unhappy mother was taught to believe it ?" The confession had escaped the lips of the Baron, and es T ery turn of his agonized countenance svas a conhrmation of its truth. Hubert again sunk upon his knees— 44 Blessed Heaven !" he cried, '* do thou iïive
gis'e ear to this avowal! And thou, О gracious queen ! lieaven's choicest dele¬ gate on earth, do thou inscribe upon the tablets of thine heart, tiiis joyful confes¬ sion. Yes, my beloved master, tliou art the father of a babe, iovely as blooming parents like voursels'cs could wish the oiispring of your loves! Fearful, if 1 adopted any otlu-r metlu/d than tlic one I has e pui ved, in the саич' of tifus drset ted btlpkvs iniant, that the grandsire who had endeavoured to nip the blossom in its hud, might deny it ever to iiave pos- fccssed being—vy invention has been turned to the means of obtaining from his own lips a confession of its existence at its birth: that confession is obtained, and the happiness of mvlife is complete!" With lier hands clasped towaids Hea¬ ven, the queen stood with her eyes half fixed upon De Mowbray, half averted irum him in horror : svith him, all sense seemed lost in shame, in disappoiistinent,, and in the tortures of conscience. Sir
Sir Edward had fallen upon the neck of îîubert, and had the mingled emotions ofjoy, surprise, and gratitude, left hhn the power of rendering his words articu¬ late, he svould have been heard to pour forth blessings on the man, who, to the salvation of the father, had added that of im helpless and oppressed infant. 44 I told you, my loved master, when we parted in Northumberland/' said Hu¬ bert, 44 that it was for your eventual hap¬ piness that we were about to separate: — the cause is now explained to you—as is, likewise, tlie declaration that 1 made to our gracious sovereign» that, in requesting this interview might be without witnesses, í made that demand for the sake of my accuser/' 44 Mouster of criminality !" exclaimed the queen, addressing De Mowbray, 44 does not thy soul sink within tliee, at beholding the virtuous integrity which thy temptations have not been able to shake? Does not tby heart sieken at the ' lesson t
lesson of humanity afforded thee by a vassal? I have pledged my promise to thy godlike daughter, svho is uow, svhere she ought long since to have been, under my protection, to treat thee svith mercy: to her, therefore, and not to Elizabeth, thou osvest the lenity that svili he extended to¬ svards thy crime; but although I do not follow thee svith the rigour of the law, mine eyes must never fall on thee again—- quit for ever the presence of Elizabeth/* The Baron entleavoured to move to¬ svards the door of the apartment, but his tottering limbs refused r:o bear him to it, and he sank upon a couch near svhich be was standing.. 4t Shield me! shield me from the sight ofmy wronged child I" he groaned fortli in accents scarcely audible; 4< bury me svithin some cloister's svalls, where solitude and repentance may be my only companions to the grave." The queen advanced towards Hubert, and taking svith her ovvn hands the chains from his wrists, she said— (t Ere tbis last action
¿etion of thv excellent heart svas knosvn to me, I had decreed thee a reward for thy services to the preserver of my life: svhat rcwartl that shall be, sve svill bere¬ ifter determine ; liecome, mcansvhile, the esquire of that valorous knight, svhom it has hitherto been thy pride to follosv in a meaner capacity." Having saitl this, the queen summoned her attendants, antl commanding them not to quit the apartment, but to watch os*er the Baron de Mowbray, svhom she expressed as ill at ease in his mind, she directed Sir Edsvard and Hubert to follosv her. She led the svay to her closet, and svhen they had entered it, she said— 4< You must perceive, Sir Edsvard, that it is most es¬ sential to the happiness ofyour Rosalind, that she should never again behold her father, or be made acquainted svith the crime svhich he once intended to her in¬ nocent child. He has himself spoken of a monastery as a fit retreat for his future lifp ι
life : I svilì, therefore, furnish him svith a letter to the Abbot of the Holy Ghost in Wiltshire, svhose members are never per¬ mitted again to return into the svorld, from the moment of their first entering its svalls, commanding that hebe instantly received as a brother ot tiie order." Tiie heart of Str Edward, like that of his Rosalind, ever leant towards the sitie of mercy ; bur he foresaw too much dan» ger to the happiness of himself, and those svho formed that hajipiness, in the resto¬ ration of a man like the Baron De Mow¬ bray, svhose passions svere under the con· troul of neither reason nor religion, ΐο his former rank in life, to consider that it became him to urge any petition tti the queen for the permission of his continu¬ ance amidst society; accoidingly, the moment the queen had composed her epistle, some gentlemen, in svhom she placed confidence, svere called to her, and the contents having beeu entrusted to them, they were directed to remove bini froai
from the palace, and to lose no time in beginning tbeir journey svith him into Wiltshire. Sir Edward considered, that as the hus¬ band of the Baron's daughter, it svas a becoming condescension in him to be himself the messenger of the queen's pro¬ ceedings in his favour to Lord William; accordingly, having obtained the per¬ mission of Elizabeth to this end, he re¬ turned to tlie apartment where be had left the Baron ; and scarcely had iie reached the door, ere a scene of the most affecting uature vet his sight. Rosalind, the tender Rosalind, racked with the tortures of suspense and appiè- hension, and no longer able to endure absence from the apartment in which she supposed tfv queen to be elosctetl svith Lord William und lier husband, had just entered it wuh trembling steps, and svas flying to the embrace of her father, svho, svith his face buried in his hands, turned from her imploring arms, and, in a voice of
MYSTERIOUS FREEBOOTER. of agony, shrieked forth the crime svhich rendered him unsvorthy to be clasped in them. The mother's heart is nester dead to the memory of tliat offspring for which she has borne the pangs of birtli; and at the sound of its name, a thousantl perplexing ideas of hope and afl'ection burst upon her Inaili. 44 Wliat, svhat of my child? tell me, I implore you, tell me if my infant livt-s?" she exclaimed, iu a tone of voice almost as frenzied as that in svhieli her father had addiessed lus frantic exclamations to her. " Yes, yes, it lives," replied De Mow¬ bray ; ίζ but thy father would have snap¬ ped its tender stem oflife, and hurled his soui to—" Rosalind heard no more—svith a faint shriek siie sunk into the arms of her hus¬ band, svho bore her instantly from the aparţine n t. In Ids way svith lier to a chamber, lie was
svas met by the queen, ssdio comprehend¬ ing, from the few svords svhich Sir Ed¬ svard let fall, svhat svas the cause of Rosalind's senseless state, conceived no¬ thing so essential to her future peace as to prevent a second meeting between her and her father, sviiicii she tireadetl that the dutiful antl forgiving temper of her god-daughter nfioht induce her to seek ; she theiefore accelerateti the departure of the fallen Bai on, vvho, if he liuti a svish remaining in life, it svas the wish of hiding himself from the scrutiny of every eye. Till the necessary preparations could be matle for his setting out, he was taken to the house of Lord Burleigh, svho, as the uncle of his late svife, could not refuse him a tempoiary slither beneath his roof; and svhere the fever of disappointment and remorse rose in his brain to a height that seemed to threaten to strike at the root of iiis life. TheQueen herself svatched the return of
of sense to the overpowered frame of the unfortunate Rosalind ; when that period arrived, sad and desponding were the feelings of lier mind ; but the gentie rea¬ sonings of tbe queen, aided by the per¬ suasions oí her beloved Edward, instilled some degree of calumets into her soul, and, after a time, won her into confessing the necessity of her being withheld from farther communication with her parent ; and no pains were omitted to convince her, that his own wish had been gratified in his seclusion from tlie world. From the gloomy contemplation of her father, she turned to the blissful expecta¬ tion of clamping in her arms a pledge of her love for her revered Edward. Impa" tiently she requested to behold the saviour of her child's existence; and Hubert en¬ tered the apartment, and knelt by the side of the couch upon which she lay extended. Tears alone fell from her eyes, and she was unable to advance tlie enquiries which slie
she had in her osvn miud prepared to* make of him. The soul of Hubert melted in sympathy svith the feelings of the mo¬ ther, and an interval ofthe most affecting silence ensued. At length, the desired explanation flosved from his lips ; he said— fi That having resolved to use the money svhich the Baron had given him, as the price of his removing the child from Cumberland, for the enlargement of his loved master from captivity, he had immediately, upon receiving the infant at the hands of Lortl William, conve) etl it to the cottage of a sister of his osvn, married to one of the shepherds on the mountains, antl in whose kindness and mothei ly attentions to it he knesv that he could confide. *' This done," continued Hubert, 4< I proceeded iuto Fiantleis: with all that befell me in that country, 30u are already acquainteti. I have only to explain the reason of niy not having informed Sir Edward that lie svas a father, and that I vol. ıs T . о had
had been so fortunate as to has^e had it in my posver to preserve the life of his babe. It had then struck me that my single sviec svould be insufficient to prove its birth —that nothing coukl effectually substanti.ite its ever having lived, butthe confession of Lord William himseif; ac¬ cordingly, í resolved to tell my ioved master nothing of his child, till I could present it to him as the acknowledged graiuhou ofthe Baron de Mosvliiay. 14 When sve parted in Northumberland, and Ък ľ.dward рин ceded in his disguise to Dc Mowbray (astle, I went in quest of his child. My .-ister had removed her abode, and several days elapsed before I was able to discover her new dsvelling. í found iur situated not a day's journey from De Mowbray Casrie, and the trea¬ sure svhich I had entrusted to her keep¬ ing, svell and hajipy. it had so chanced, that scarcely an hour before the time of my reaching the cottage of my sister, Luid William had ieft it; he İıad called at
at it for refreshment, on Ids way to his own castle from the stronghold ot' the freebooters, after having escaped fiom the captivity iu svhich be had been held by them. I resolved wilhout delay to follow bini to his castle, and obtain tiie inter- viesv svith bim which had hen lomr planned iu niy mind. On rea; hing tiıe castie, I found it despoiled by lhe free¬ booters, and the Baron its only inhabitant: 'this appeared a most favourable opportu¬ nity for working upon his mind in tlie manner 1 Iiad resolved to do, and 1 en¬ tered his piv cace. It must bc needless to describe the surprise w ith which he beheld me—the fury with svhieli he heaid me declare my intention of delivering him into the hands of justice, that he might expiate, in a manner agreeable to tlie mandates of the law, the crime svhich he had induceil me to commit. 1 doubted not that this threat, on my part, would provoke him to throw the supposed mur¬ der solely upon me; and that, iu order to o S procure
procure the infliction of public punishment upon me for the death of the child, he must first prove it to have batl existences thus, with the greatest satisfaction, I be¬ held the eifect wiiich my declaration had produceţi on his minti. His passion drove him to such extremes, that, I believe, had ï been unattended, and he armed, I had not lift ids presence aiive ; but his arms had been taken fiom him by tlie free¬ booter.*,, 'and I found a most serviceable companion in that dog, my compassion for whose hungry state first tlrew upon me the good opinion of my revered mas¬ ter, anti which I had left svith my sister duriug my absence from England, as one of tiie guardians ofthe child »vhich I had entrusted to her care. ** Itwdsmv inteution," continued Hu- bert, t: to have detained Lortl William a prisoner for some tlays in his despoiled -castle, and to have endeavoured to work his mind to repentance; but the arrival of îr wiu and his companions defeated that plan,
plan, ami I was obi ¡getl to retum to my original device, of tirasving him on to con¬ fess tbat the child hati been bom alive. Those powers sviiicii never sleep to the svrongs ofthe oppressed innocent, stretch¬ ed out their arms in vy cause, and tlie proudest wish of my vui is accomplished." lt will doubtless he perceived that the beautiiul boy on whicii the eyes or the liaron feil svlien hc awoke trov his vno-e in the cot of the hospitable shepherd, was his own grandchild ; svirh íhis particular Hubert was acquainted, and matle it known to the parents oťthe babe. The queen expressed not less impatience than Rosalind aiul hv husband to beliokl the child, wbosi inte rests were so neariy allied witli tlieir own, and svhich had thus Jong been the sport of fortune; and Hu¬ bert was requested to set out wit bout de¬ lay, and conduct him to the anus of his anxious father antl mother. No commission could have been of a more pleasing nature to Hubert, and he о 3 insisted
insistid on beginning his journey tosvards Cuuibi'iland that very afternoon. Eiiza- î etii observed the impatient fondness ofa mv hevs heart beaming in the eyes of Ro- s:.ïiiid, and immediateiy promised to pro¬ vide him svith horses antl attendants foi his journey. 'iiil the hourof his departure, Hubert svas not permitted to quit the apartment svhich contained his master and Rosalind; and as they dwelt on the strange occur¬ rences svhich had maiked their lives, Hu¬ bert addressing the Lady Rosalind, said— ** There is one circumstance which I doubt not still appears a mystery to you, and whieh I liave often svished to have ifc in my power to explain to you—I mean the voice svhich, on the evening of your interview with the Baron in the cedar chamber, called to him 4 to spare you / it svas mine, lady ; I had discovered a pri¬ vate and disused passage at the back of this chamber, svhich led tosvards that of Gertrude; and towards her apartment I was
was proceeding, in order to tiel i ver to her a request from my master, that you would meet him at the chapel, svhen overhearing svhat was passing betsveen you and Lord William, I couid not forbear endeavouring to serve your cause, by calling out in the manner I did." 44 And were you the form svhich 1 be¬ hekl on the day subsequent to my mar¬ riage, enter my chamber, and aftei svärds appear in the door-svay of the cedar cham¬ ber?" asked Rosaliud. This supposition Hubert also confirmed, by saying, * ť that he hati at that time been seeking an opportunity of informing her ofthe suddeu depaiture of Sir Edward for Flanders, but had been frustrateti in his attempt at gaining access to her." The moment the horses and attendants svhich the queen had commaiitled for the use of Hubert were reatly to depart, he set out on his journev, carrying with him the blessings of the happy parents svhom he left behind, and receiving the farewell о 4 of
of Rosalind in an embrace of affectionate grati t vie. Hubert had not long quitted the palace ere Lord Burleigh arrived at it, and brought wirb him information that the fust violent tiansports of Lord William's emotions having subsided, he had himself demanded his journey to be accelerated by every possible means, towarels the monas¬ tery in svliich the future period of his life was to be passed. — " It h now, " added Lord Burleigh, tr nearly an hour since he quitted London, rejoicing in nolhing so much as that a second inter.iesv with his da ughi er liad been spared him." éí May tliis slender proof of his con* sciousness ofthat evil repute in svhich all cluiriteters of worth must hold him/' said Elizabeth, " lead him to devote the future hours of his existence to such sincere re¬ pentance as vay purify his soul, and ren¬ der hhn svorthy to unite, in another state, svith those of svhose society he is unde¬ serving in this." The
The tears stole down the cheeks of the amiable Rosalinti; vvith her hands claspcti to heaven, siie seconded the wish of the queen ; and retiring shortly after to her chamber, spent the evening in prayer for the restoration of peace to the minti of her father, and forgiveness to his crime.
о 5
CHAP.
CHAP. XIL Like a caught lion, raging in the snare, Hc plunges in his passion, spends his force., And etmrgles with the toit that holds him faster. N. ttH, Ά HE unexpected arrival of the Lord Baron de Mosvbray at the palace of Queen Elizabeth, and its consequences, had delayed the setting out of Sir Edward, on his hostile expedition into the North, to so late an hour, that it svas judged expedient for him to postpone the commencement of his journey till the succeeding morning. It may be imagined that, as Lord Wil¬ liam was no longer the prisoner of the freebooters.
freebooters, the queen might have become less anxious forthe marching of the troops, than she had been svhilst she considered herself called upon, as a sovereign, to effect the rescue of one of tîie barons of her realm, svho had lost his liberty in de¬ fending the rights of his country ; but it must, at the same time, be recollected, that, although his enlargement batl been the ostensible busiuess of tliis expedition, it had in the private feelings ofthe queen, been the secondary one, antl her chief object that of subduing the daring free¬ booter, who appeared to mock her power, and svht) hati possessetl suflicient audacity to demand her god-daughter to wife. Accordingly, although the setting out of the troops had, from causes of necessity, been postponed, still the ardour of the queen for their marching batl not ex¬ perienced the slightest abatement. Not less impatient than his royal misti ess svas Sir Edward, to chastise the notorious Allanrod, svho appeared to stand fottìi, о 6 distinguished
distinguished by crime, from the common race of man—that Allanrod svho, to the iniquity of heading a lasvlcss community ot' robbers, atldetl the atrocious vice of haviug been the adulterous disuniter of sveddcd and happy heai us, in the persons of the Lairtl of Glenross, and iiis svife, the Bonny Mabel—that Allanrod svho, al¬ tliough the open fine of England, had tlaretl to lift his thoughts to an union svith Rosalind tie Mosvbray, the daughter of one of its barons. Nor svas a justifiable enmity to the foes of their country tlie only passion svliich animated the hearts ofthe Queen ond Sir Fdward, in tiie conquest over Allanrod, wliicii they svere mutually anticipating ; a great degree of curiosity, wliich tlicy were impatient to liave satisfied, had been excited in their breasts, by the unac¬ countable and contradictory circumstances of the freebooter having demanded the liand of Rosalind for his friend Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, as thepriccof her father's 3 enlargement
enlargement from imprisonment in his fortress; and Lortl Ruí us having been un¬ able, a few weeks after that period, to pre¬ veni Allanrod fi om leading her to the altar as his own destined bride. It was evident that some secret tie subsisted between them, and what that tie svas, it appeared probable tliat nothingbut the ovcrthrosvof Allanrod vid his band of robbers would ever de¬ velope. Irwin, the leader ofthe fallen Baron de Mowbray, »vasaman well acquainted svith the duties of a soldier, a quality for svhich Sir Edward had ever prized him ; and no sooner did he learn that he was in London, than he sent to request to see him, andat ihe interview which this message produced, he proposed to Irs\ in to join him on hie ex¬ pedition into the Noah. As he had been a, captive in the stronghold of the free¬ booters, Sir Edward judged that his pre¬ sence might be of infinite use to him in his undertaking, and Irwin readily agreed to march with Jiim. Amidst
Amidst other matter, Irwin informed Sir Edsvard of the freebooter by svhose means he had procuretl his own release from captivity, and who, he said, svas now in London, svhere Lortl William batl pro¬ misetl to pay him tlic stipulated reward of his services. 44 Tiie poor fellosv," replied Sir Edsvard, 4i shall uot lose the recompence fbr svhich he hazaidetl his life. Let him be brought before mc; 1 will make him this assurance in person, and take the same opportunity for proposing to him some questions rela¬ tive to his late captain." The freebooter svas accordingly con¬ ducted into the presence of Sir Edsvard, and the generous promise with svhich our young knight addressed him, stating, 44 that, as the husband of tlie daughter of the Baron de Mosvbray, he considered himself calletl upon by the voice tif honour to execute his obligations," so far svon him the heart of the grateful deserter, that svliatever particulars he svas acquainted with
svith concerning Allanrod, it instantly be¬ came as great a gratification to himself to disclose, as it could be to Sir Edward to hear them. But it appeared that the knowledge svhich he had of the chief of the free¬ booters wms very limited. He described him to be a man of an athletic and com¬ manding' i'orniy clad in the Highland fashion of dress, and his face constantly hidden beneath the visor of his helmet. Resembling, in every respect, to this ac¬ count, had he appeared to Irwin, when he- had beheld him on the brow of a distant hill, after the combat which had a few weeks before taken place between the freebooters and the soldiery of lhe Baron de Mowbray ; and correspond ing with this description had Sir Edward seen hini, when advancing towards the altar hi the chapel of Rock- mount Castle. The moss-trooper could give no further account of him, except that it was very rarely that he ever headed any expedition of
of plunder, but that he generally deputed the command to one of his leaders ; that he seldom visited the fortress, and then never remained at it above a day or tsvo at a time, during svhich period he kept himself retired in a couple of apartments adjoining to each other, ina tower at the southern extremity of the building, svhich was in better repair than afiy other partof it; that his attendants svere a man named Frasier, and tsvo or three others, svho en¬ joyed his favour, and exercised authority, in bis name, throughout the fortress. Of this vague kind svas all the infor¬ mation he svas able to give. To the name of Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, he was an utter stranger; he knesv not that there was such a noble in existence. About the hour of noon, on the day succeeding that upon svhich the discon¬ solate Baron de Mosvbray had set out for one of those mansions of seclusion from the active duties of life, of svhich a fesv were still existing, svhich owed their being tra
to the pretended blindness, and not to the open tolerance of the queen, Sir Edward, animated by the good svishes antl affecti¬ onate farewells bestowed on him by bis be¬ loved svife and revered sovereign, marched with the first division of his troops for Northumberland. As he proceeded onwards, the promised supplies joined themselves to his standard; and, svhen he quitted Yoik, he found himself at the head of fifteen hundred men. During his march, hb thoughts rested solely on the object for svhich it had been undertaken : he doubted not obtaining a full victory over the freebooters, and re¬ turning to"London worthy of the most benignant smiles of the queen. But the information whieh he had deri veti from, the moss-trooper was, in one point, un¬ favourable to his desires.' He liad said, that Allaurod seldom resided at the fortress,, and, when he did so, never above a day or tsvo at a time ; tlie chances, therefore, werft·
svere much against his being an inhabitant ofthe building, at the moment of his at¬ tack upon it—and, svithout taking Allanrod his prisoner, he considered that his victory svould be but half a conquest. To this uncertainty hosvever, he svas compelled to submit, and to trust to the discovery svhich his vanquished band mi^ht be tempted to make of their leader, if he did not fall into his posver a captive of war. Sir Edsvard svas principally guided in his route by the knowledge which Irsvin had of the country; and, by his advice, he halted for a day of refreshment to his troops, on a plain about ten miles distant from the haunt of the freebooters, in order that twelve hours, given to repose and ease, might enable his men to exert them¬ selves more effectually in the business of the fight. During these hours of cessation from the toil of marching, they were allosved every indulgence which couid inspire them with vigour and strength, for stretch¬ ing;
ing out their arms svith spirit and energy, in the cause of their country and their queen ; and, svith the first hour of the morning, Sir Edward gave the command for proceeding tosvards the spot svhere their services were to be called into action. The d&y svas just beginning to break, svhen the ads anced guard, at the head of svhich Irsvin svas marching, descried the stronghold of the enemy. Irwin accords ingly halted, till the main body of the troops had joined him, and then sent for¬ ward a herald, as had been agreed upon betsveen Sir Edward and himself, to de¬ mand— 4t Whether the freebooters svere svilling to surrender themselves to the banner of mercy, svhich the queen graci¬ ously held out to them, or preferred, by op¬ posing their strength to the troops svhich she had sent against them, to provoke her vengeance?" On receiving this intelligence from the herald, the freebooters displayed at once tlieir disregard of all military observations, and
. 'l and the undaunted ferocity of their nature,, by surrounding him, and dragging him a prisoner into their fortress. The eminence on svhich the English troops svere halting, svas sufficiently near to the fortress, to enable them to distin¬ guish that their herald had been compelled to enter its w,.lls; and, ashe remained sv ithin ihem a longer time than couhl have been necessary to the ftaming of a repiy to the demand with which he hati been charged, Sir EdsvartI suspected his mission to have been abused, and gave the word for his troops to march to the attack of the place. Ere they couid reach it, the freebooters svere already mounted upon its svalls, and discharged at them a treble fire from their matchlocks, svhich they seconded svith a shower of arrows; and, as the troops drew nearer to the building, tiiey hurled down upon them large stones, which they tore, svith the fury of savages, from the ruinous tosvers and parapet walls. But
But the vehement exertion svith svhich the freebooters commenced their defence, rendered them unable to prosecute the struggle, svith equal spirit, for any length of time ; and, as they grew exhausted by tiie violence of their cfibrts, the sokliers, under the collimanti of Sir Etlward, by a steatly and skilful management of their strength, svcre becoming, with every mo¬ ment, more able to sustain tlie conflict. For about three hours, the contest was * carried on, svith tiie mo ? t determined spirit, on either siile. The numbers svhich fell, both amongst the freebooters and the as¬ sailants, thii not appear to slacken a nerve iu tlie cause—nay, ihe purple title, svhich flowed around the combatants, seemeti to act as a stimulus to their valour. At length a projecting turret at one angle of tlie building, which was supported upon a wall not less mouldering than itself, becoming still more weak by the free¬ booters having drasvn massive lumps of stone from its tottering sides, to cast down
down upon the enemy, and rocking under the weight of those who were cli m bi inr upon it, for the purpose of providing them¬ sehes with ammunition for their slings, fell with a crash, which threatened inevit¬ able destruction to those whom it boi e svith it to the earth, and also to those to svhom the rapiflity uť its i'ail gave no time to fl) fiom the *pot upon w Stich İt sank. This event, which was fatal to no in¬ considerable number of the ivvLr sol- ilieiy, piovcd still of wo'se covi quence to the tiecbooteis; they sustained from it а loss of so guai importance, as dis¬ abled them ftom cans ing on theii opeia- tions of delence with any farther degiee of success; and although their hardy souls scorned to cry for qtmitcr, their aims shortly alter fell in despair from their hands, aiul victory rested upon the vest of Sir Edward's troops. The title of foitune being once decid¬ edly turned against the freebooters, a very short time made them the prisoners of
of tlie victorious party ; and Sir Edward, svith Irsvin by his side, rushed into the building, making impatient enquiries of all svhom they sasv, svhether Allanrod svas himself svithin thefortrcss.—But even the threat of instant death could not terrify the tequired information from the lips of any one of the bandiţii; antl Sir Edward judging that ihis stein raciturnity carried with it maiks of then unwillingness to confess that he was weted in some part of ir, as hati he been aiwvt, it appeared unlikely that tbey should not readily have declared İıinı so, he demanded of Irwin svhether he was acquainted svith the svay to the .southern tower, and having learnt that lie svas, he bat J e him lead to it, and fol low etl his steps, ı»î tended by some of his own sokliers, whom he called upon for that purpose. - v Headed by Irwin, they proceeded to the extremity of a long antl narrow pas¬ sage, svhence an archway led to a flight of stone steps : these they ascended, and having
basing arrived at their top, Irsvin svas on the point of entering a door svhich pre¬ sented itseif to their view, svhen it svas fuddeniy opened from svithin, and Fra¬ sier, svith about a dozen other men, rush¬ ed out svith their drawn ssvords, and immediately fell upon Sir Edward and his companions, with the same savage fury that aad marked the actions of tlic other banditti, during the combat. Unpre¬ pared for this attack, as they considered the victory already theirs, and therefore the use of arms to have ceased, Sir Ed* svául and irsvin, svhh tlieir attendants were for some time in the most imminent dan¬ ger, owing the osservatimi of their Fives sídel}' to their ŕ JII in the exerci v of ihc sword ; but tii- clangor of their arms being heard Lel· w, several oftheir fellow- soldiers bastem d to tîıeir assistance, and thejiesperate re wnt of the law less band svere secured, in like manner as their bro¬ thers in iniquify had just been before them. Scarcels
Scarcely allowing themselves a moment to breathe, as they judged for whose sake this desperate eflbrt had been made to prevent their entering the apartment, ihey rushed into it, and perceived a figure, svhich they both instantly recog¬ nized tobe Allanrod, in the act of endea¬ vouring to force his way out ofa narrow svindow, through svhich he had just thrust one leg antl arm, and attempting to wrench away an iron bar which pre¬ vented the rest of his body from passing through tlie aperture. Sir Edward darted upon him, and seiz¬ ing the arm svliich was towards him, hc dragged him back bv it into the anart* meut, exclaiming— 4t Thou shah not es- c;ve me. monster ! tiie hour ot thy atone¬ ment is at length come !" The position in wiiich Allanrod had been fouud by Sir Lthvaul, was such as had rendeied Ium unable to tevst tiie force of his anu; and as he feli bi neath if upon the floor of tlie chamber, t uni¬ vo ν /v. ν ing
ing his countenance, svhich was, as usual, concealed by the visor of his casque, upon the arbiter of his fate, a convulsive start shook his frame, and bending him¬ self forward, with an effort of the wildest nature, he seized with both Jiis, the hand in svliich Sir Edsvard still bore the naked sword, which he had drawn in his own defence against tiie ruffians svhom he Iiad encountered at the door of tlie apart¬ ment, and in tremulous but solemn ac¬ cents, expressive of mingled agony, hor¬ ror, and remorse, be sbriciati forth— 44 Hotd—hold ! point not thy sword against a father \ s life Γ Tbe quivering iips of Sir Edsvard would have eci oed tbe exclamation, but the shock of astonishment wbich had com¬ municated itself to his heart, svas so ex¬ cessive a.s to tit ny Iiim the power of utter¬ ance, or of motion. v Det eis e ve not, I charge thee/'pro- cee -nd Allanrod, in the same appallingtonc of voice in which he had before spoken.— 4 'Art
ťf Art thou not the acknosvledged grand¬ son of an aget I man, named Matthews, svhose residence svas ou the margin of a small lake, in tlie vicinity of De Mowbray Castle?" Still Sir Edward could not unlock the faculty of speech.—To the demand of Allanrod, Irsvin replied for him in the affirmative. 44 No doubt then Jiangs upon our affinity/* rejoined Allanrod.—" And; oh (fod, that we should meet thus —that I bhould have been doomed, in ignorance of thy birth, to iiave been thy persecutor through life! Goti of justice, svliat a meeting is this— between a son and a fa¬ ther Г " Art thou indeed my father ?" stam¬ mered out Sir Edsvard ; and, in a softened tone, he atlded—" Oh thou distributor of earthly events, can this be the author of my being?" " The God who hears thy invocation is the witness!" cried Allanrod. "Scorn v 2 me
mc not. Ere this asvful moment, I had resolved to make'thee retribution for the pangs thou hast experienced at my hamls —retribution svorthy tliy acceptance : thou art the legitimate heir of honours and of rank, and sbalt be proved their legal possessor !'* 44 But svho is he that I am called upon to acknosvlcdge as a fatiier ?" demanded Sir Edsvard. * 4 Oh, disclose thyself to me!" cf I svili," replied Allanrod ; 4i first my heart, then my countenance ; and it is a lieart of no common nature : too soaring to have lived trammelled with tlie galling ties by svhich common svorldlings av bound—too proud to meet death from an) hauti but this Γ anti as he spoke, lie tore open his corslet, and plunged a dag¬ ger into his bit abt ! The heait of Sir Edward dietl svithin him at the sight ; every object floated before İıis eyes: lie entleavoured, but in vain, to call in assistance; he »ank upon his
his knees, by the side of the bleeding body, and had not the power to make an effort at staunching the tide of life, svhich was flosving from the breast of Allanrod. Irwin snatched the dagger from his hand; but the deed of death svas past recall: at his summons, some ofthe sol¬ diers, svho had followed Sir Edward and himself to the door of the chamber, ap¬ proached, and svould have applied band¬ ages to the wound; but the self-destroyer, svith the resoluteness ofa tyger, madden¬ ed by the torture and imprisonment of a toil into svhich he has fallen, tore away such ligaments as they svere endeavour¬ ing to' svind round him, exclaiming, at thesametime— 44 Protract not my suffer¬ ings, for I will die !"—Then turning to Sir Edward, he addressed him, by saying — 4t Having shesvu thee my heart, it now alone remains that 1 suffer tiue to behold my countenance. I have sworn an oath that Allanrod should never be seen svith¬ out this visor svhilst alive : I now con- p 3 sider
sider myself in a middle state, between life avl tleath, and my oath thus void, Behold, therefore, thy father; but remem¬ ber that the periotl of his having knosvn thee to be his son, is short— remember, and behold me!"* — and having spoken these wortls, he niised his visor, and tiis- covertd beneath it the countenance of—· Lord Rufus de Madginecourt! That excess of surprise svhich had be¬ fore filled the mind of Sir Edward, on Shearing himself declared the son of the freebooter Allanrod, is a sveak expression for the sensations which it nosv experi¬ enced ; the mist which had aheady been floating before his eyes, increased to total darkness; every faculty became letlmr- gized, and, svith a groan composed of horror and astonishment, he fell senseless into the arms of Irwin. Unmoved bv feelings like the rest of men, Lord Rufus stiil retained a resolute composure on the margin of the grave : he called to hb son to attend to Ids thing svords ;
words ; antl svlien the eyes of Sir Ethvard again opened to the light, De Madgine¬ court, in accents svhich the sveakness of approaching death rendered scarcely au¬ dible, thus addressed him — 4 * Enquire amongst the freebooters for a man, named Frasier; he will funiUb vou with the kev of a cabinet in the chamber adjoining to this, in which you will find an explana¬ tion of tîie circumstances that now move your svonder It svas my wish uever to have beheld you again, since the tiivo- s r ery I has'e matle of onr afihiity ; umì I wrote the papers svhich are locked in that cabinet, in order to repair to you thç wrongs í hati inflicted on you, svhilst ig¬ norant that I svas the author of s our ex- 4*- istence. That Frasier, svho now possesses the key, I had commanded to seek you out, and place them in your hands, after my death ; for I came hither to die ; my intention has only been hastened by your arrival."—He paused ; the pbwers of na¬ ture were almost drasvn to their close, and ρ è Lord
Lord Rufus gasped svith a painful and convulsive struggle for breath. 44 Speak not of reparation to me," re¬ plied Sir Edward, commanding svith dif¬ ficulty the posver of utterance*— 4 * Oh, lis*e to make your peace svith Heaven !" The eyes of Lord Rufus appeared start¬ ing from their sockets, and the first groan he had breathed passed through his lips : his countenance was svrithed svith agony, and every feature indicated the near ap¬ proach of that moment at svhich soul and body part for ever. * 4 Or if our efforts cannot save thee," continued Sir Edward, 4t take svith thee to a future state the free forgiveness of thy son : his piayers shall follosv thee into eternity." Again the eyes of Lord Rufus svere fixed upon Sir Edsvard; their expression svas of the most pitiable nature ; they be¬ spoke the remorse svith svhich he was stung, at the conviction lie had just re- ceis'ed of the surpassing excellence and nobleness
nobleness of that heart svhich he had wronged, svhen compared svith his own, from svhence tiiose svrongs had sprung. 44 I have but one request to make," said De Madginecourt; 4< on the noble¬ ness of thy nature, I rely to grant it.·— Extend that forgiveness svhich thou hast, unasked, bestowed on me, to thy brother; and when thou hast forgiven, do not de¬ sert him." 44 Brother !" echoeel Sir Edward.— 41 A brother 1" 44 Speak quickly, or I die, and hear nob thy promise," said Lortl Rufus. 44 I know him not,but stilli promise," replietl Sir Ethvard. Lord Rufus caught the hand of his son in his, and pressed it svith a convulsive grasp of gratitutle,. for his compliance* with his petition ; an agonizing pang then rent the last fibre of his life.— 44 Mercy—mercy,. Jesu í" tiembled on his; lip, and his spirit fled from earth.
в 5
CHAP.
CHAP. XIII. . în nature there's no blemish but the mind ι None can be calľd deform'd, but the unkind: Virtue is beauty ; but the beauteous evil Are empty trunks, o'er flûunsh'dby the devih tMAKSSPEAftï, İT cannot be doubted.but that a very shoit lime elapsed after life had fleti from the hotly of Lortl Rufus, ere Sir Eti ward caused Frasier tt) !>e brought lo him, and having convinced him of his affinity to the man whom lie had lately serveti re¬ ceived from htm the key of the c^oinet. On opening it he found a small packet, of which the direction svas— 4I For Edward, the
the son and heir of Lord Rufus de Mad¬ ginecourt." With an impatient hantl he broke the seal, and applied himself to the perusal of the contents; but, as they con tained only partial account of occurrences > with which our readers svili desire to be¬ come more intimately acquainteti, for ihe purpose of developing some mysteries svhich have been presented to them in the former pages of these volumes, instead of transcribing tnem, sve shail give an un¬ veiled detail of the life of him svho has been one of the principal actors upon oui- stage. The same year svhich gave birth to Lord Rufus de Madginecourt, resigned the pa¬ rent svho had borne him tothe grave; and scarcely had he completed his sixteenth year, ere, by the death of his father, he became the representative of one of the families of the first distinction İn the king¬ dom of England. Some years previous to this estent, he had been placed under the care of a tutor, ρ б iıı t rod need
introduced into the family for that pur¬ pose, svho found him by no means secon¬ dary in genius and sense, but deficient iu application, and infinitely more incorrect in the regulation of his morals than his mau ners. His father, however, being a man of severe habits, the natural disposi¬ tion of the son was checked under his ob¬ servant eye; but no sooner had he paid the debt of nature, than the tempestuous passions of his soul began to break forth. His tutor, svhose name svas Ravil, svas a clergyman of the episcopal church, svho, during the preceding reign of persecution, had been compelled to desist from the ex¬ ercise of his religious function ; and the saviiiiis of whose former years of industry had been so nearly exhausted by his hav¬ ing possessed no other source from whence to supply the exigencies of himself aud family, as to reduce hini to seek the situa¬ tion in svhich sve have just found him placed. , ţ In the course of the four first years of his
his residence in the family of De Mad- ginecourr, a fever, which at that time raged in the kingdom, had carried off his svife antl two daughters, and he had nosv remaining to him only one son. This young man, svho was about six yeats older than Lortl Rufus, hts fatiier hati i, ι tended to eurer into ihat piofession svhich he batl bimself followed in his former days of happiness antl prosperity; but Lortl Rufus happening to gain acquaintance svith him, on an occasional visit svhich he matle to bis tather, at Rockmount Castle, vvas so much pleased with his society, that he in¬ sisted on retaining him as his frientl and compa-fiion —promising to rentier the ex¬ ercise of any profession unnecessary to him through life ; and this young Kavil svas the very man to whom our readers have already been introduced as the asso¬ ciate of Lord Rufus, in the narrative of the unfoitunate Eloise tie la Valois. In the course of that nan ari ve, enough was displayed of his chai acter to bhesv that lie
he «'ач possessed of a disposition svhich couhl not fail to gain him the favour and gootl opinion of a south like Lord Rufus-, svho, in a friend, sought only the bold exei'iitnrof liis vicious plans, Mie fawning adulator of his actions, anti tlie invariable approver of iiis sentiments No sooner was tins tie of mutual cor¬ ruption of heart, misnamed friendship, formed between tin 4 soimger Ravil and Ins patron, thnn ihc father and the tutor lost all influence; still that love, svhich the affinity of blootl causetl him to feel for the one, and that partiality which, from the habit of constant intercourse, had grown in his mind for tlie other, rendered him tinable to tear himself from them ; and he continued an inhabitant of Rockmount Castle, and the kind antl tlie lenient ad¬ viser of liis son antl his pupil, although he sighed to perceive how unprofitably his admonitions svere receivetl by them. The years passed on, un marketi by any occurrence connected svith our history, till
till Lortl Kijfus, having compĽtcd iťs tvvents-fii'st year, visited tbe court, clad in all the dazzling pomp antl splendor, of svhich hc gloried in miking a display. Whilst in the metropolis, he conceived a desire to virit France, and having obtained from El.zabeth an iniioductitin io tiie mo¬ narch of the neighbouring kingdom, he departed, taking svith him a large and· splenditi train of attendants, and his friend Ravil as his companion. On leaving the French court, the man¬ sion of the Marquis de- h Valois svas one of the fir.st to which the letters, with svhich he was honoured by tiie king, gained hini admittance; and no sooner had he en« tered it, than a passion, exceeding in strength any svhich he had ever before felt, took possession of his bea; t for the lovely antl enciiauting Eloise, the tlaugh¬ ter of liis entertainer. Utterly unacquainted svith the controul ©f his inclinations, svlien auy end struck him as derireable, he iiad simply been ac¬ customed
customed to consider by svhat means it couhl hematic attainable; arguing, there¬ fore, according to liis regular system, he found marriage to be the only channel through which the possession of Eloise could be obi «tinetl, and therefoie resolved instantly to make her an offer of his hand, svithout a thought given to the repentance into which a tie of this hasty nature might lead him* When Eloise escaped from the mansion of her father, antl it appeared improbable that he should ever behold her again, vio¬ lent disappointment took possession of his soul ; but it svas short in proportion to its strength ; and after the first sveek of her flight írom the marquisate of La Valois, it svas not probable that he svould ever have thought of her again, svith the af¬ fectionate tlesire that he had as many days betöre regai tied her with, batl he not, by the most extraordinary of chances, when shipwrecked on his way from Genoa to Cette, been preserved from perishing, on
on board the very vessel which svas tran¬ sporting her back to France from her cap¬ tivity in Algiers. At this unexpected meetiug, the flame of love, svhich absence bad smothered, burst forth again svith redoubled heat ; but the manuscript of Eloise has already in¬ formed us of the tlreatlful occurrences wiiich took place on board the Algerine vessel, in which svere included the deatli of the villainous Ravil, and the unfortu¬ nate D'Altonville; and we mav therefore pass on to Madginecourťs arrival in Eng¬ land, svith the imhappy victim svho had fallen into his toils. Some time before the departure of Lord Rufus for France, the elder Ravi f svhose healtli antl spirits had been materially im¬ pai reel by various causes of distress, finti¬ ing himself ill at ease amidst the noisy and dissipated scenes of Rockmount Castle, hael requested its Lord, on svhom was his sole dependance for the subsistence of his future days, to remove him to some spot of
©f quiet obscurity, svhere he might pass 4 the evening of his life. Lord Rufus hati m many instances found the counsels of his tutor of service to his interests, and therefore felt averse to re¬ moving him far from his presence; accor¬ dingly he proposed to build for him, as a retreat/a small dwelling, for which he resolved, that the ruins of an antient tower, at the distance of about half a league from the castle, should setve as the foundation. There ss'as still subsisting a subterraneous passage from the castle to this tower, and this he considered would afford an easy communication for supplying him svith the necessaries of life; for him therefore ' was constructed the cottage or grotto, svhich at a later periotl formed the retreat of Rosalind-—but mowrf this hercailer. On landing iu Englanti, his heart, burnt up by the fever ot tlesire, svas in a most improper state to be addressed witli any admonitions contrary to the immediate gratification of Lis wishes, aud therefore he
he procuretl a priest to unite liis hand svith that of Eloise, from svhoin be batl not any -of these reasonings to fear, which Ravil might have ventured to breathe in his ear, ba<l he been called upon by him for the performance of the sacred act. Scarcely had a month been passed in the enjoyment of Eloise's charms, ere tbe joys of ecstasy began to svane into cool¬ ness, and svith a second they were suc¬ ceeded by satiety. He began to consider her as the impediment to bis forming a connexion svhich might increase his weakh, and ssvell his consequence ; and no consideration prevented him from svork- itig her immediate destruction, but the knowledge of her being about to become a mother. At length Eloise gave birth to two in¬ fants of opposite sexes. At the time of their entrance into the world, Lortl Iluftis was absent from his castie; and at the same moment that the intelligence of his being a father was announced to him, he svas
svas likewise informed that the girl had ceased to breathe. Having resolved that no vestiges of his marriage should remain, De Madgine¬ court seized upon the death of one child as a plea for removing the other from the protection of its mother ; and having torn it from her arms, he convev ed it through the subtei raneous vaults to the cottage of Ravil. He had already informed the old man of the death of bis son, although he had forborne to explain to him by svhose hand he had fallen ; and his inducements for remaining in the vicinity of Rock¬ mount being thus materially sveakened, he prevailed upon him to consent to re¬ move into Cumberland—to change his name to that of Matthews—to take svith him the chilei— and to bring it up there as his own grandson The oltl man looked fonvard svith no small degree of satisfac¬ tion to the task of rearing an infant, which might g r sv up to call forth those affec¬ tionate principles of his heart which were almost
almost dead within it; and departed into Cumberland svith the child, promising toi profess himself his grandsire, and never to develop his real origin—Lord Rufus, on hts part, returning to him a promise of visiting their abode at least once in estery six months. j In this particular Lord Rufus svas fori some years true to his svord, but he al-l ways ciiose the season ofthe night for his! visits, and beheld his son svhen locked in! the arms of sleep—not sufíering that son; to behold him, lest any difficulty should arise in replying to such questions as he might ask concerning him ; and it so chanced, that at the time of Loid William de Mowbray's being thrown irom his horse, in the vicinity of Matthews's cot¬ tage, Lord Rufus was just arrived at it upon one of his periodical visits: he, therefore, svas the second figure whom the Baron beiield in the door-way ot the cotlage ; aud ou his account was Mattlitws at first reluctant to admit him withiu his d weih n ι?,
dwelling, antl afterwards so particular iu exacting trom him a prouve of secrecy relative to svliatever might meet his obser¬ vation, if receivetl witiiin it. The child being thus removed from the eye ofthe svorld, all the thoughts of De Madginecourt were turned tothe disposal of the mother. He had for some time past suffeied her to be attended upon by only one confidential servant, and by him he sent to her the dagger antl letter, svhich sve have alreadv recortled as having been received by the unhappy Eloise, as pre¬ dictors of the violence which svas intended her. Lord Rufus hoped that she might be¬ come sufficiently weary of a life of paiu and misery, to have seized thankfully and greedily upon the means of suicide ; but lie was tleceivetl in the nature of her heart. Eloise act etl rigorously up to the declaration vvith svhich she concluded the nan ative of her suflerings--* 4 that she svould never lift her hand against her osvn 5 existence ;"
ι existence ;" and Lortl Rufus finding her thus resolved, became the monster to strike to her heart the blow of death, svhich he then accused her of having perpetrated upon her own person. ! Thus perished the unhappy mother of " Edward, by the hand of that iniquitous being to svhom he osvcd his existence. Once more a free member of the svorld, Lortl Rufus plunged wildly info those j vices, wiiich, if they do not d rasv dosvn ' open punishment upon the exerciser of them in this life, still goad his soul at certain moments svith terrors of the fu¬ ture ; antl, notwithstanding the greatness of his wealth, his extravagance, in the pursuit of pleasure, was so unbounded, as frequently to throw him ¡nto the greatest difficulties when called upon for the pay¬ ment of his debts. That servant in the confidence of Lord Rufus, svhom we have spoken of, as hav¬ ing been the sole attendant of the Latiy Eloise for a short period previous to her death,
death, was a Scotchman, named Frasier : he had once been a gentleman; he had broken his fortune by gambling, and since its loss had committetl some actions svhich had driven him from his osvn coun¬ try into England : hither he had come, attended by an only sister, svhose princi¬ ples, if not so decidedly corrupt as her brother's, had still been of too relax a kind to cause her to refuse the advances svhich Lortl Rufus had made towards her person. She svas nosv dead, but Frasier had contrived to insinuate himself into the favour of De Madginecourt, so far as to have become a member of his family, aud to enjoy almost as much of his confi¬ dence as his friend Ravil had done. Venting one day a paroxysm of ragéin the presence of Frasier, svhich was occa¬ sioned by liis inability tp command a large sum of money, svith which he was impa¬ tient to purchase some sensual gratifica¬ tion, Fra-de r said— 44 Ah, my Lord, Scot¬ tish freebooters tlo not complain thus of the
the svant of money ; svould that 3 7 ou had a few score under yonr com .- vd, or tiiat I svere the captain of as many in your pay." When Frasier first expressed liim¬ seif in these svords, his meaning scarcely extended beyond a ¡oke, and Lord Ruin«, hearing them at the time svith a smile, dismissed them from lus memory ; but in the course of a few days they again re¬ turned to it Ín a different shape to that in svhich they had before met his ¡senses, and he began to reflect wliether such a plan, for the increase of his wealth, might not be- practicable ; and having dwelt on it for some time in the solitude of his own mind, he imparted his itleas to the subtle Frasier, and they employed themselves svith seriousness on the formation of a scheme which might rentier their undi¬ gested plan feasible and easy—which af¬ fords an additional instance of thesiender causes from svhich the most important undertakings of a man s life almost inva¬ riably flosv. vol. iv. Q Frasier
Frasier was too well acquainted sviti the poverty of the lower orders of thi Scotch, ami their enmity to tbe English, not to be well assured that, a plunderiin horde might, without any difficulty, bt raised from amongst them, who would re quire to know nothing more of their cap^ tain than his name, and his ability to re ward them for their services in his cause. Several bands of this nature, who hai obtained .the miraos of borderers and moss troopers, had already been formed u poi the confines of the two kingdoms ; the} liad chiefly been selected from the ,rud< and ill-living Highland peasants, to whou any state of existence was preferable и the miserable one fiom whicii they hacı been taken—and hundreds were, uodouht, still remaining, who would be glad of tin same oppoitunity for changing their con dition. It svas accordingly resolved that Frasiei should pass into Scotland, and еЫы as strong a force as he could find willing to rail)
rally round his lawless standard; and that they should know themselves as the free¬ booters of Sir Allanrod, under svhich title it svas agreed that Lord Rufus should sometimes appear to them, svilii his coun¬ tenance concealed beneath the visor of his casque ; for there appeared au equal ne¬ cessity ín his case, for not confiding the knowledge of his person to his banditti, as there did for lus sometimes shewing himself amongst tlicm. For a~considerable time (his ravaging band, headed by the desperate Frasier, had no settied luikin:*; piace, but the ca¬ vities of rocks, and rude huts and tents, svhich tbey built on the mountains; at length, however, thcj took possessiou of the ruined monastery upou the boîtiers of Northumberland, of svhich our readers have already had a full tlescription, and having converted ths into a fort ress, their depredations became moie bold, as they possessed a stronghold to retire to for their <i % personal
personal defence, and the concealment of their booty. Tlie svealth svhich thev wrested from its lawful possessors was great; it was such as even exceeded the expectations which Lord Rufus had formed of it, even svhen a private tax Iiad been paid out of it to the joint avarice and knavery of Fraaier, svho svas, upon the svinde, periiaps. as just an agent as De Madginecourt could lias'e found for İıis nefarious scheme. To sup¬ pose that a man, wbo served him in the quality ofa robber, would be strictly ho¬ nest to his employer, Lord de Madgine¬ court knew too much of human nature, ard the motives from wbich all men act, to expect. in every enjoyment svhich gold could purchase, Lord Rufus revelled ; female heauty was the charm which possessed the greatest power over his heart ; and every paît of England having supplied luxury to his wishes, tiic delights of anticipated novelty
novelty liad for some time rendered hitn desirous of visiting Scotland; but the dif¬ fidences whicii subsisted betsveen the two kingdoms, had withheld him from putting his inclinations iuto effect: at length, au¬ guring that no Englishman svould he pre¬ sent at the revelry in svliich all Scotland svas invited to participate, at Kinnavain Castle, upou tfie marriage of Mary with her cousin, the Earl of' Darnley, he re¬ solved to profit equally by that and his assumetl title of Sir Allanrod, to visit the Scottish court. He accordingly passed over into Scotland, and causing: himself to be announced at the 'tournament,as Sir Allanrod, he perceived that there were none present who svere likely to recog¬ nize him for the person he really was, and to expose his fictitious character; and being thus assured of security from detec¬ tion, he resolved to enjoy the week of festivity without restraint. Here it was liis chance to meet the Bonny Mabel Monteith, the svife of the c¿ 3 Laird
Laird of Glenross ; her beauty, so unì' s T ersaliy ack nosy ledged, svas of tbat en¬ chanting kind whicii instantly bound hk heart a captive in the fetteis of adoration, and he resolved to possess lier, if earthly means could purchase the ardent desire oí his soul. The Bonny Mabel,, of svhose heart va¬ nity svas the ruling passion, and svho had for some time past considered the pleasure svhich she perceived her husband to take iu the society of the enlightened Lady Margaret Murray, as almost a crime committed against herself, listened, svith triumph, to the adulating tongue ofa man whom she regarded as sensible of the ado¬ ration due to her pre-eminent charms ; ami, from listening, she consented to re¬ svard the high opinion svhich he professed himself to entertain oftheir perfection. Accordingly, on the very evening of the ball, svhich concluded the festivities given by the royal Mary, and her newly married consort, they fled together from Kinnavain
Kinnavain Castle, and their flight knesv no interruption till they batl reached the con¬ fines of the English kingdom. Here they paused in their progress, and here the Bonny Mabei, svho hati not been able to resist the appeai made to her vanity, con¬ fessed herself still not entirely lost to shame. She besought Sir Alianrotl, as İt svas impossible that she could ever become his svife, to suffer her to enjoy his aifec¬ tion in. obscurity, ami to place heť in some retired solitude, where none shoukl visit her hut bimst If. As the Lady Glenross was nov/ entirely in hUpovvei\dispossessed, by tlie rash step she had taken, of any friend lo svhom she couid turn for protection, he, without re¬ luctance, confessed to her his real rank and name; and, at his desire, she con¬ sented to become the inhabitant of that Gottage svhich was united ίο Rockmount Castle by a subterraneous passage, and of svhieli Ravil had lately been the occupier· Ikre ί£ svas agreed that she should live, α 4 and
and be teputed as a peasant giil, svho had lallen into the snare of his seduction. At the expiration ofa year, the Bonny Mabel gave biith to a male infant : a mo¬ ther, like herself, could not bc supposed to feel much desire to he the personal in- spectress of her child's rearing, and it was therefore, svithout any opposition on her pai t. sent into a distant pai t of the county, timler the care of a nurse, svho svas pro- sided for that pmpose. Before a second year of adultery liad flown over the head ofthe Lady Glenross, Üıe marriage of her cousin, Margaret Murray, with Sir James Lambrun, and tbe voluntary seclusion from the svorld, to svhich her husband had condemned himself, İn consequence of her infidelity to his lied, had opened her eyes to the innocence, of that friendship svhich had subsisted between him and the Lady Alar¬ garei ; and this conviction, added to the cooiuess svith svhich Lord Rufus nosv be¬ held her, svhen compared to the rapture with which
which he had, at their fibt acquai litance, dwelt upon her charms, resolved her, if possible, to execute a plan, which she had formed, for escaping from Iiim into Scot¬ land, and placing herself for life in the convent of Saint Agnes, in the island of Auskerry; for wiiich convent, sve have already sait!, she felt a preference, on ac¬ count of one of its members being a rela¬ tion of her deceased mother. In the habitation svhere she tiien dwelt, money had been useless ; accordingly she possessed none. All the wealth she hati at eommanti was herjewels, in whicli she had been decked for the queen's ball, on the night of her flight from Kinnavain Castle with Lord Rutus, and which had, ever since that periotl, been deposited in a chest in the cottage, which contained her clothes. With a part of these she bribed one of the domestics, svho had attended upou her from the time of her arrival in the county of Durham, to become her escort q 5 to
to Uie island of Auskerry, and to main¬ tain an inviolable secrecy upon her fate. The man was true to the confidence reposed in him ; he founel means of pio- curing her escape, in disguise, from the vicinity of Rockmount Castle, and con¬ ducting her to the coast, from svhence he provided a vessel, to transport her Tn Scotland. Of the particulars of her lanel- ing on the islanti of Auskerry, of her re¬ ception into the convent of Saint Agnes, antl her subsequent tleatli, sve are alreatly informed. The sudden disappearance of lhe Bonny Mabel svas rather a cause of surprise than regretto Lord Rufus de Madginecourt; constancy svas not one of the passions of his heart ; and she who was now iost to him, liad been his a sufficient length of time to have quenched the iire of his pas¬ sion hi possession. She hati left tor him in the grotto a letter, in which she in¬ formed him, that repentance for her past conduct had driven her to fly for ever from
from his arms; aud entreating him, as he bad once valued her, to protect the child whicii she had borne him for her sake. Lord Rufus had loved the Bonny Mabel better than any woman svhtwe affections he Ivd ever shared ; he t hei cibre reael her leiter svith ¡ι degree of attention, which that of a pleader, svho had beea less inte¬ resting to his feeiings, wouki perhaps not Jiave commanded ; and he resolved to fulfil her petition respecting thechild. in compliance svith tliis determination he fretjuentiy visited it, in order that he might be certain of its sveİfarîng ; and beiug struck svith the resemblance which it bore to its motlier, for svhom latent sparks of love were still lurking in his breast, he felt a tlesire to base him more constantly in his sight; to this end he brought him, aţ the age of six years, to his castle, as the son of a peasant, svhom he intended to bring up for a page, to attend upon his person, α ò The
Tiıe hoy's name svas Alwin, by svhich he has already been introduced upon the stage of our history ; and it svili nosv be perceived svho svas the brother, for svhom Lord Rufus, in his dying moments, en¬ treated a promise of forgiveness and pro¬ tection from Sir Edward. Al svi n svas a child of sharp and ready talents, and he insinuated himself into the favour of Lord Rufus, unconscious that those arts, svhich he had at that early age sufficient cunning to perceive calculated to gain him indulgence and praise from İıis patron, were directed to the author of his existence. Lord Rufus, on his part, became every day more and more attached to tlie boy ; he appeared to him the only being svho had ever been capable of calling forth affections of the nature svhich he felt for him ; and he peihaps loved him the more, for the novel sensation svith whicii he svas inspired by hini ; In short, ere Alwin
Alwin hati attained his eleventh year, De Madginecourt svas ever dissatisfied svhen he svas not by his sitie. About this time svere waged those con¬ tinental svars, at the commencement of svhich arose those false hopes and ideas, svith svhich the vain Lortl Rufus flattened himself, that the favour extended to him by Elizabeth, in the exaltetl command svhich she honoured him, by permitting him to bear in her armies, svas ofa nature svhich extended beyond a friendly regard» At his return from these svars, on the morning of his receiving the thanks of hh sovereign, for the judgment antl efficacy svith which he had executed the trust that had been reposed in him, he first beheld the daughter of his friend, Lord William dc Mosvbray. We have already given the history of his viesvs aud passions subsequent to that time, dosvn to tlie period of Rosalind's marriage ; sve have therefore, in this place, only to revert to certain actions on his part,
part, of whicli the motives have not been explained. For the first few years after the birth of that son, svhich had been home him by the unfortunate Eloise de la Valois, Lortl Rufus perfoimed his promise of vhitiug fhe child and his protector, Matthesvs, onee iu every six months; but various causes tben arov, to make him neglectful in this point of duty ; av! at the time of his an iving at De Mosvbray Castle, in tlic c!ku acter of Rosalind's, suitor, so long a period hati elapsed since he hati matle any enquiry after Ed sward, aiul liis nomi¬ nal grami fatiier, that he svas entirely ignorant of the fate of both: aflection lie certainly had none for the chi hi, svhom he had driven thus unnaturally from his protection ; but there svas still a certain feeling in his heart, svilirli rendered him desirous of learning svhether or not he were in existence. The proximity of De Mowbray Castle to the spot on svhich stood the cottage of Matthews, urged him to
ro snatch an hour for visiting it ; accord¬ ingly, dreading that his absence from the eastle, by tlay, might lead to а disclosure of tiiat secret, svhich he intended never to reveal, he stole, at the dead of night, from his apart men ts ; and lia ving, by ик ans ofthe sentinel, procured a passage over the draw bridge of De Mowbray Cas¬ tle, he'proceeded tt* the cottage, by the bitie of the lake. Ilo fourni it deserted; ami upon inves¬ tigat vn, he discovered that it must have bceu some time without inhabitauts. lie svislied to know svhat was become of those who iiad formerly resided in İt; but it svas impobbible to makean enquiry to that pur¬ port, w ithout divulging their fate to be of some importance to him ; and theiefore he resolved, if not satisfied svith ignorance, to endure it, ami trust to the hope oftheir being both removed from earth, by the hantl of death ; and this svas a hope in which he svas most ardent ; for his affec¬ tion fbr Al win was now. become so great, ^ that
that he had resolved, should his elder son, Edward, never appear, through the ad¬ vice of Ravil, to claim his birthright, and should Rosalind de Movvbray bring him no male descendants, to declare Alwin the heir to his name and possessions ; for svhich end it was his design to report him the legitimate son, which Edward really was. Accordingly hc, svithout delay, re¬ turned lo De Moivbrav Castle; and chance had so fitted it, that Rosalind, who.se slumbers had been disturbed by dreams of an awí'ul nature, and svho had left hei bed, in her endeavours to compose her agitated mind, was a witness of his entrance svithin the walls of her father's castle ; a circumstance of svhich it will be remembered, that the mystery heightened that disgust which she already felt for him. This disgust svas aftenvards swelled into horror, by the svords which she heard him pronounce, as she passed the door of his chamber, in her way to the chapel-— " Die
u Die she must," he had said, <4 aiid if she svill not kill herself, 1 must do it for her." And this conviction of bis either having been a murderer, or his intention of be¬ coming one, fixed her in the resolution svhich she had aheady formed, of never becoming his svife. There are moments when conscience svill goad the hearts of the most hardened İn iniquity ; and the hours -devoted to sleep, svere those in svhich De Madgine¬ court felt the scourge of a murderer's recollection. At these moments would he, in imagination, react the murder of his sainted svife; and if not asvakened from the trance of painful thought, in which sleeping fancy held him, his suffer¬ ings svere exquisite ; as a relief from those attacks of horror, he bad for some time past obliged Alwin to sleep in a closet adjoining his bedchamber, and instructed him to svake him, svhenever he should hear him struggling svith the fiends of memory. Alwin was faithful to his trust ; for
for the Lord Rufus was liberal to excess, in rewarding him for his services and his secrecy ; and Rosalind perhaps the only person, except the page, svho had ever ι been an auditor of his nightly pangs. Having explained these mysteries, sve proceed to that period at which Lord Rufus de Mad* vecourt, from "having fin>t addressed Rosalind, solely on account of the tavour in which she stood svith the queen, became so strongly enamoured of her person, as to demand an interview with her father ; at svhich he proposed to hini to lead lier to the altar, and compel her to becoî . a. second time a wife, whilst yet the h usuanti of her affections lived. We have already seen in how con¬ temptuous a manner Lord William receiv¬ ed this unnatural proposal, and the enmi¬ ty by which it was succeeded between hini and De Madginecourt. But although the Baron de Mowbniy had been sufficiently wary to refuse his adjunction in a step, which, if taken, threatened to unite dis¬ honour
honour svith his name, still, either from ineaution, or indifference, about con-j ceafing the truth in this respect from) Lord Rufus, he let fall enough to inform him, that Edsvard svas held in a confine-^ ment, to svhich he had doomed him inj i Flanders, and from svhich it svas his in¬ tention that he shoukl never return toj England to claim Rosalind as his wife. Να sooner had Lord Rufus obtained thi&| knosv ledge, than feeling secure in his own imagination, that svere Edward' once re¬ moved from life, the Baron svould feel no scruple in compelling his daughter to ac cept him as her зесош! husband, all hisj thoughts were bent upon devising the readiest means for depriving him of life. The Загон, had said enough relative to Edward's confinement/to convince Lord Rufus, to whom Flanders svas a country well known, which must be the prison, where he had found the means of confin¬ ing a man who had committed no osten«. sible crime; accordingly, resolving that the
the deed of Edsvard's death should be performed by oue, in svhose fidelity he could place the most unlimited confi¬ dence, he engaged to that end the ser¬ vices of his page, Alwin ; promising him, at his departure from England, that, on bis ret urn svith a confirmation of his rival's death, his resvard should be a dis¬ closure to him, on the part of Lord Rufus, which svould not only teach him to knosv himself as the heir ofan immense wealth, but empower him to place his inheritance beyond a doubt. The deluded youth, svho Kad been svon alike by precept, example, and indulgence, on the part of his united father and pa¬ tron, to consider his will as absolute, and all his desires as just, elated by the pro* mise svhich svas to reward his present mission into Flanders, thought lightly, or indeed scarcely at all, of the crime by svhich it svas to be purchased ; and, at¬ tended by tsvo trusty companions^ he set out on his guilty journey. In
ïn the preceding pages we have been informed of such occurrences as took place in the prison of Garcías Xavia, after the arrival of Alwin in Flanders ; sve have seen that the misguided boy, at the mo¬ ment of perpetrating Ids supposed crime, svas not master of tlic same fortitude svith svhich be had undertakeu the commission of it. His eveiy sense was unequal to its office; his eyes did not discover the imposition wliich svas practising upon them, in the body of anot lier van having been placed in the situation wbere lie ex¬ pected to find the ns'al of Lord Rufus; antl his unsteady hauti, instead of diieet- ingthefiiftt blow wbieb it aimed at its victim to his bea't, dv itd tiıe sveapoı of death into his cluck. Delighted, however, at tiie ultimati completion of his task, Alwin returned tt England, and deli vereti to Lord Rufus ; particular detail of the transaction ; ii return for svhieli, ttie elated De Mad ginecourt, clasping liis son to his breast confesse«
confessed to him their affinity, and İıis intention of declaring him his heir at his death. Alwin listened to him with equal ecstacy antl surprise; and the knowledge svhich he had thus gained, whilst it ren¬ dered him still more unlimited in those demands svhich he was constantly making upon the purse of Lord Rufus, for the in¬ dulgence of his own inclinations, caused him also to consider himself as more im¬ plicitly bound to fulfil the mandates of his nominal patron. Accordingly, when the Lord Baron de Mowbray, contrarv to the high-raised expectations of De Madgine¬ court, refused to give him the widowed hand of his tlaughter; svhenthe Lord Ru¬ fus, struggling between the pangs oť indig¬ nant pride and disappointed passion, leant altei nately to various plans, for obtaining by force the person of her, the willing e ift of whose charms svas refused to him, and at length resolved to use to that effect, his second character of Allaurod— he confided to Alwin ϊιίε union svith the * free-
freebooters, and questioned him whether he svould undertake to act tlie part of a deserter from the band of the dreaded Allan rod's banditti, and proceed as such to De Mowbray Castie, svilii a tale cal¬ culated to draw Lord William into his toils ? Had uot the discovery of his affinity to Lord Rufus been already made to him, there is little doubt that Alwin svould readily have complied with his demand, so forcibly had the habits in which he liad been educated taught him to desire all that Lord Ruf us himself wished; but now he had obtained the knowledge, that it was a father to wiiom his services had, from his infancy, been given, a sense of duty, of which the strength was surprising, in proportion to the deficiency ju every other virtue of that heart in svhich it g rew, rendered him enthusiastically svarm iu uie agency of any plan svhich could add to the happiness of the man iu whom all his expectations were centered ; and svith,ex¬ ultation
ultation he assumed the fictitious cha¬ racter svhich Lortl Rufus batl proposed to him ; and, thus accoutred, he proceeded to De Mowbray Cattle, svhere we have already seen the success that atteneleel his stratagem—for Alsvin was'the supposed deserter, svho, at the opening of our his¬ tory, intioduced himseif to the Loid de Mow bray and ids leaders, under the feigned name of Donald, as a youth svi vse famiiy hati been tlie vi vivs of the noten nus Aliamoti s bi utukts anti lust. No sooner was the Larvi tie Mosvbray enticed into that chcoiinrer with the free¬ booters, in which his se)ldiery met uith an entire overt h rosv, than Lord Rufus con¬ sidered himself as, at lengtii, secure of obtaining the hand of the Latiy Rosalind ; he believed that every man slove of liberty svas too great to suffer him to have any scruples about the teims on svhieli he svas to obtain it, so as it weie but presented to him as obtainable upon any contiiiions at all ; and, therefore, he doubted not that the
the demand which he caused to be made to Lord WiUiam, from Allanrod, of his promise to bestow his daughter Rosalind in marriage on Lord Rufus de Madgine¬ court, as the price of liis immediate en¬ largement, svould be replied to svith a ready afiirmative. But in the firmness of ihc Baron, in withholding his daughter from the pos¬ session ofthe man svhom he now considered as undeserving of her hand, his hopes en¬ countered a fresh disappointment ; and his first resolve, upon receiving a negati с г to his request fron the lips of Lord William, svas that of assailing De Mowbray Castle, and enjoying her charms by force. But a little reflection pointed out to him, tlvt the bliss he should thus obtain must be transient and that its conse¬ quences might be fatal to him, while the exercise of some degree of policy might still cause Rosalind to believe that he was deserving of her gratitude, out of which sentiment it svas possible that -. feeling vol/ iv. r approaching
approaching to love might ultimately spring. To the accomplishment of this end, therefore, he directed his confidential frientl, Frasier, to send а sufficient force against Oe Mowbrav Castle, fbr irs utter vV щ/ subjugation, svhilst, to the trusty Alsvin, be confitled to lead a small detachment of his own soldiery from Rockmount towartls it, at the same hour, to whom, at the eommanti of Frasier, the freebooters svere to tlelivtr up the Lady Rosalind, svho was thence to be conducted uuder tiie escort of a taithful English kvier of De Mad¬ ginecourťs, named Sir Maurice, to his castle on the coast of Durham. Thus far Lord Rufus succeetled in his plan upon the unprotectetl Rosalind: he imposed himseif upon her as lier rescuer from the (headed Allanrod, and his fero¬ cious band of freebooters, and she con¬ fessed herself grateful for the deliverance: but a small part oniy of the plan he had conceived, was accomplished. Tlie next step
step towards the attainment of liis desires was, to teach her to believe tbat the nefa¬ rious Allanmd demanded her as his bride; and having worked upon her mind with this dreadful apprehension, again to sooth her feeiings by declaring, tiiat he would submit to the sacking ol his own castle by the lawless freebooter, ere the threatened indignity should be oťfered to her person. He perceived that this declaration won some degree of fait h fromllosalind, to the re¬ pentance which he professed himself to feel, for having, at a prior period, been the cause of unhappiness tó her, as likewise to his present desire of repairing to lier his former contluct; and, glorying in the observa¬ tion, he v desired to make every possible shew of his present merit, and theiefore sent a private order to Vi asier to inform his horde, that they were commanded by their chief, Allanrod, to march toan at¬ tack upon the castle of Lord Rufus de Mangi necourt, İn the county of Durham, and to lead them on to it without delay, я 2 charging
charging him, at the same time, to bring a force capable of subduing his soldiery, as the fruitful issue of his stratagem de¬ pended upon the conquest being assigned to Alianrotl Tiiat a man like Lord Rufus made no scruple of sacrificing the number of indi¬ viduals uho.«e fall hi this siege was un¬ avoidable, isa matter which cannot excite surprise. Having still farther shesvn his zeal for the safety of Rosalind, by conducting her to the grotto, at the end of the subterra¬ neous passage leading from the ca c ilc, Lord Rufus passed the interval, till the hour of the expectetl siege, in contempla¬ ting his future prospects of happiness: be had resolved, the moment the fretlvoters svere declaied the conquerors of Rock¬ mount Castle, to enter the chapel in his disguise of their chief, to cause Rosalind to be conducted thitherto him, and there, in mockery of the rites of religion, to re¬ ceive her hand from his vile accomplice Frasier,
Frasier, svhom lie iiad instructed to appear at the altar, in the habit of a priest, for the purpose of imposing the marriage, as a legal one, upon the senses of Ro¬ salind. Having drank the nectar of her charms, in his character of Allanrod, it svas his design to quit her chamber ere the light of day should enable her to distinguish his countenance, and having then left her, for the space of about a sveek, to her own refiections, to present himself again before her, as tiie zealot of her cause, to inform her that, by the acquisition of additional force, he had conquered the freebooters, and that their detested chief had died by his hand. The greatest joy, lie doubted not, wouki rush into her heart svith this intelligence, and, at the moment that it svas softened tosvards him as her deliverer, the master¬ stroke of his plan was to be effected, by once more throwing himself at her feet, the suppliant of her smiles : he believed R 3 that
that the gratitude with which she would he inspired, for the accumulated services that hc had rendered her, svould leave her unable to refuse him the boon svhich he shoultl sue for, as the recompence of his exertions in lier cause ; but, should it be possible that she should still attempt to svithhold from him the possession of her charms, even after she believed them to have been rilled by the chief ofa band of robbers, he considered that the indignity svith which lie should conceive himself to be treated, by a conduct of this nature on the pai t of Rosalind, would no longer leave him master of his osvn feelings ; that it svould prompt him not only to convince her that Ids tieeply planned arts had al¬ reatly obtained for him the blessings of possession, but perhaps spur him on to deprive her, by death, of the posver of bestosving on any other object that happi¬ ness which she denied to him. But the hand of Providence stretched itself out tosvards the too iong-afificted Rosalind,
Rosalind, and preserved her from an ac¬ cumulation of misery, under svhich the powers of reason must have forsaken her— Edward, the beloved partner of her heart, svas sent to preserve her from the pollu¬ tion ofa villain's touch. Ami now sve are acquainted who Aİ- lanrod really svas it svill no longer appear strange that his soul sank svithin him, and his every nerve became pahied with trembling apprehension, when he beheld Rosalind snatched from his arms by the apparent shade of the murdered Edwaui, But svhen Lord Rufus had, in some measure, recovered trom tjie excessive terror wiiich hati shaken his senses, ar, beholding svhat he had, for the time, be¬ lieved to be the apparition of the mau svhose death ivd been perpetrated at his command, he began to suspect that there might be some deception in the appear¬ ance which he had seen, and commanded an instant search to be made for Rosalind throughout the castle, u 4 Blessed
lütssc'd in the smiles of fate, Ifosalmd and the befoved partner of her soul had a'ready giiîiiecl the beach, and ber pur¬ suers did not extcud tlieir search after her beyond the walls of Rockmount Castle. But w hilst tlie fruitless pursuit svas carry¬ ing on in every part of the budding, Al¬ sı in, who, actuated by the seal which he ;ilsvay* felt for the accomplishment cf his fatheťs wishes, was the most strenuous ín îhc eause, discovered the pilgrim's robe antl hat behind the tomb in the chapei, svhere Edwartl had thrown tliem down- Since the time that Philip Watkins had been admitted as a minstrel into the cas¬ tle, Alwin had more than once passed tlirough a hall adjoining the kitchen, where he batl seen him, and Edward in his disguise, seated amidst the domestics; antl recollecting that these were the gar¬ ments svhich had been worn by the min* streľs nominal brother, svho had been declared to be dumb, a suspicion of some deceit being allied with his character im- ' mediately
mediately Hashed upon hit mind» and he commanded the search wliich was making ff*r Rosalind, to be extended to the taiu- strei aad his brother. I« a seis short time, jwx>r Philip was fourni lurking near the vaults, where Ed¬ ward bad Jeft him wheu he had followed the steps of one of the freebooters to the chapel. He was instantly dragged before Lord Rufus, who still wore the dress of the freebooters' cbk*Ç aud to whom Alwin quickly reiateti the cause by svhich he had bten induced to bring him into his pre¬ sence. With an air and voice that might have struck terror to a much more courageous soui than that ot' Philip Wat'% ш, whom sve îiave already perceived not to have been os-erbm thencd svith valour, Lord Rufus, placing his hand upon the hilt of his sword vs bespoke, commanded hitn to confess tlie truth, as he hoped to live be¬ yond the present moment. Philip was an honest and a well-in ten * ь 5 tioned.
tionèd fellow, although not ä brave one, and the threat of death svas probably the 'only öne which could have caused him to betray a man to svliotrt he had promised fidelity; but life ¡s'a charm from svhich few ate shilling to part'; and falling upon his ktičes/ With a prayer that his might Ъе pŕeáeYs v ed to him, he made the required confession í ThVástón ish fríen ťsvh ich seized upon the 'mhlas 'öf Lord 'Rùfus 1 and Ahyin, on the 'Cöhvictiöii which they received from the ' Tip^s of Philip; of their'having been jug¬ gled svith in their attempts upon the.life of Edward, in the prison of Garcías Xa¬ via, may bè easily imagined ; and they demanded of Philip, svhether he was able to explain hosv his preservation had been 'eletteti/ ; ' . = ' . Apprehensive of the consequences of refusing tö reply Чо any question they advanced,'Philip briefly related the ser¬ vices svhich Hubert had rendered to his benefactor; - - i y · ; - "■' . /*· ν The
The surprise of Lord Rufus increased Йроп this recital ; and he demanded from svhat "extraordinary cause every vassal in * De Mçsvbray Castle appeared to have been thus strongly attached to this .Ed¬ ward ? "I percei s r e two of you/' said De Madginecourt, " risking your lives in his service : from svhat motis'e. arises your partiality to him ?" Philip replied, that the urbanity of his manners and the excellence of his heart, had won him universal esteem in De Mosv¬ bray Castle; and added, " that his deserted ■ state had rendered Jiim a peculiar object of regard." "Deserted!" echoed De Madrine-, court. " Did he not enjoy the; protec¬ tion of the Baron de Mowbrày?" Philip replied, that what he referred;to * was,^ his not being' possessed of any na¬ tural protector,- upon svhom he could <:all for acts of 'service or kindness. % " Whence came he then?" asked De Madginecourt, sternly—" svho svas -hç t R.Sf луЬеа^
svhen Lorcl William admitted him into- his castle ?" '*The grandson/' answered Philip, "of an aged man, named Matthews, who re¬ sided on the margin of a small lake in the vicinity of ,De Mosvbray Castle ; and by svhose sudden death he svas left-de¬ pendant on, the charity of strangers." 44 Matthews!—Edward his grandson! — he that Edward ! O God of retribu¬ tion !—mercy, mercy, Heaven !" groaned forth Lord Rufus; and leaning for sup¬ port on Alwin, he left the chapel, and, svith trembling steps, reached his own chamber. Scarcely had they entered iţ, ere Lord Rufus spoke, and the tone of his voice svas such as, for the first time, awed the senses of him whom he addressed.— f f Alwin/' he .said, t( sve are accursed of Heaven 1 I have commanded the mur¬ der ofa son, and thou hast raised thy hand against the existence of a bro¬ ther!" - . . - # This
This declaration svas an enigma to Alwin : in a brief, hut impressive man¬ ner, Lord Rufus explained it to him ; aud if the goaded consciences of the guilty ever svere deserving of commisera¬ tion, their hearts svere rent svith pangs most truly pitiable. Oh, how asvful is that moment at svhich the veil of delu¬ sion is removed from before {he eyes of the sinful svreteh, and he at length be¬ holds the heinousness of the course of iniquity through which he has traveUed to the summit of his criminality ! In agony of mind, Lord Rufus threw himself upon his bed, and for several days he refused to rise from it : at length he one day called to hitn Alwin. — " Re¬ pent, repent," he saidj "and thou shalt yet be happy ; the soul of thy brother is of too noble a nature not to forgive the heart that is filled svith' contrition/'— Having spoken these svords, he pressed his son to his breast, and'then directed him to retire again to the adjoining apart-
apartment ; svhich command Alwin obey¬ ed, totally unsuspicious-that he had then beheld his father for the last time. At the dead of night, Lord Rufus, at¬ tended by r Frasier and a small number of tlie freebooters, left Rockmount Castle, and proceeded to the fortress on the con¬ fines of Northumberland. Arrived there, he directed Frasier to lead him to the tower in which he sup¬ posed the Baron de Mowbray still to be a. prisoner ; ami on learning that he had effected his escape about the time that. his castle had been despoiled, he ex¬ pressed great regret at being disappointed of the interview svhich he had antici¬ pated svith him. 4i It svas my desire/* he said, addressing Frasier, 44 to have seen him, and informed him of the li¬ neage of his daughter's husband, that: he might have accorded to him his par¬ don, and paternal protection in addition to the inheritance which L am shortly* about to .bequeath to liim/' Frasier
Frasier remarked on the term shortlv, and Lord Rufus replied — iC Yes, тегу shortly ; I cannot endure life, under the reflections that I am doomed to hear about with it." He retired to the chambers which were set apart for his private use in the build¬ ing, and in one of these he applied him¬ self to writing. He first composed an ephtle to the Baron de Mowbray, con¬ taining such matters as it had been his intention to give him information of, had he obtained a conference svith him; this done, he drew out a histoiy of the birth- and inheritance of his son Edward, svhich he addressed „to him, and in which he declared to him his ignorance of their affinity at the time that he had been his persecutor ; and entreated forgiveness of him for himself and his brother Alwin, svhom he, i u the strongest terms, re¬ commended to his protectioia. Tlie epistle addressed to Lord William hc enclosed in that iutended for his sou 3 x,dward;
Edward; and lic had just summoned Fra¬ su r into bis apartment, and given him in chaige, ins!antly to search out tbat in¬ jured son, and place the packet safely in his hands, when îbe herald from the English army, commissioned by the queen, and headed by Sir Edward, retched the fortress. Although resolved to die, De Mad- giivcomťs apprehensions of death were still so great, that he required some im¬ mediate spur to the act of suicide upon whieh he had determined ; and ids su¬ perior dread of falling a prisoner into tiie power of the English troops, as a rebel, who had headed a band of robbers, trained to the molestation of his mother- country, furnished him with this spur, and he would have fallen upon his sword the instant that information was brought to liim of the English forces being in sight, had he not been withheld by Fra¬ sier from the deed ; but the instant of his resolution being once past, he suf¬ fered
fered himself to be entirely guided by Frasier, who represented to bim that the defeat of Elizabeth's army was certain ; and that if he were resolved on death, it were at least better to die with the satis¬ factory knowledge of-dying the chief of a conquering band. That lingering love of life which exists in every breast, probably prevailed more with Lord Rufus than the arguments of Frasier, who, committing the defence of the fortress to the other leaders, placed himself, with a score of chosen men, within De Madginecourťs apartment, determined, as he declared, to guard his iife, or perish with him. To these the defeat of their comrades was not known, at the moment when they opposed the entrance of Sir Edward and Irwin into the chamber where they had stationed themselves, to protect their chief; and the intelligence of the overthrow of the freebooters was şo unexpectedly and sud¬ denly conveyed to Lord Rufus, that he waa
was rendemi incapable of reflection by the sh'jck ; anil tu:grtting, at the in¬ stant, thdt he ndght rescue himself from captivitv, bj flyt*»g from exbtence, lie attempted to effect hb ewrape from his enemies through the spird window of ius cliamber. Oi the aw fal interview svhich suc¬ ceeded this «went, we have already given a dwspnov &> powerful *¿i4 the effect produeed upon the scufei of Lord Rufu»-, at beht»luin|/, in the person of his injured son, the agent of that rojal niistre&s, to sı hom his. conduct had beea equally criminal, as to the chad whom he had, without a just cause, discarded from his affections, that İt deprived him at once of e wry desire to live ; the grave appeared to him the only stí I for his crimes and his shame ; and svith a degree of triumph at thus escaping from the taunts of men, he plunged the dagger to liis heart. Beyond the tomb sve cannot follow him ¿
hím ; but impressive are tiıe reflections which arise out of the contemplat ion of a life like his- Bom to the enjoyment of rank and svealth, endued with every qua¬ lity svhich ean render man a blessing to the society in which he exists, vanity and avarice, tiie meanest passions svhich in¬ fect tiie human minti, stole iuto his tuurt, and overrunning it like a noxious weed, poisoned in the bud every gene* ruus fiower whieh might have sprung up to its ornament. Thus on the soil where virtue might hav r e thriveu ia its fairest form, the foulness of vice fixed its abhor¬ rent stamp; and every capability svhich it possessetl of scattering comfort on the millions beneath it, svas converted into the purchase of enjoyments not less selfish than unsatisfactory to their possessor. The doctrines of religion instruct us svhat svili be the reward of those who possess the means, and with it the will of distributing happiiiess to tlie circle in svhich they are placed ; and awfully do they
they set btfore our observation the dread¬ ful reverse to svhich tfie amply gifted of Heaven, who have heen the bane, and not the comfort of their fellow-beings, svill be doomed. May the example of De Madginecourťs death furnish a con¬ vincing proof ofthe incapability of those enjoyments which are purchased by ini¬ quitous means, to confer happiness on the heart svhich s r ainly expects to derive it from them !—-may it lead to the reflec¬ tion, that a life of that nature svhich en¬ sures a cahn and peaceful hour of disso¬ lution, is the only life which, in this state of trial, can be deemed a happy onel
GHAF.
CHAP. XÏY.
The gloom that oTtrepretd emr roeria Is now dispersii ; our late nVhaps Recall'd, shall be th' amusing narrative, And story of our future evening, oft Rehears'tl. ------ Our son too—he bball hang upon The sounds, and lift his Hule hands in praise To Heaven t taught by his moiher's bright example, That to be truly good, is to be bless'd. И. »ЛНТ80К.
HOW delightful is the task svhich leads us to tell of the happiness svhich the virtuous enjoy ! How exquisite to recount the resvards svhich attenti on the trials endured, by superior beings like Sir Edsvard
Kd ward and Km lìosaìind í— to behold them rem* »ved from tlie oppression of llie vicious, and the tyranny of the un fed¬ ine, to the ¡ov -fraught exercise of that benev«Irtiee whicli is the sfKmtaneous <Tovth of tb.rir hearts, and to tlie en- jtn ment of that domestic love which is the recompence of evers pang under¬ gone to secure its pí^sess'vtt ! It must be almost unnecessary, after svhat sve have setn of the exalted senti¬ ments of Sir Etl w aid's heart, to say, that although he discovered the father 'in tiie persecutor, lie diti not, on this discovery, forget the obligations which are due from every created being to the author of his existence. With affection it svas impossible that he should follow a parent like Lord Ru¬ fus to the grave, but svith that outward bhosv of respect svhich reflected bark upon himself, in its brightest lustie, the sentiment svhich he bestowed, he attended the earthly remains of his father to their last
last abode; and, considering that the rights of burial in England coukl not be permitted to bim, as a rebel to the inte¬ rests øf his country, he procured per¬ mission for him to he interred in the burying-ground of a monastery upon the confines of the Scottish kingdom. Alwin was, mean wlule, not forgotten by him ; he sent him an assurance, that, although he could not receive him as a brother to his hearr, he would not suffer him tíi 4el the loss of his father, in the point oť those comforts svhich he had lieen accustomed to enjoy. Tins mes¬ sage he sent to him by Frasier, svho, rejoicing hi the ojiportunity thus afforded him oi living from the punishment svhich asvaitetl Ids ft How-freehoott is, at the hand of the English government, instead of bearing the commission with which hc svas charged to Rockmount Castle, fied into Scotland, and secreted himself there, in the assumption of some nesv chara«, ter, from
from the punishment svhich he feared mighl overtake him. From the tongue of common fame, Alwin heard the occurrences svliich had taken place at the fortress ; and, unable to credit that Sir Edsvard svould grant to him that forgiveness w hich the narros/* ness and viee of his own heart svould probably have withheld him from be¬ stowing on his brother, batl he been placed in his fortunate situation, and Sir Edward in -that in svhich he nosv stood ; a victim to apprehensions and re¬ grets, whieh almost consumed his senses, he precipitated himself into the sea, from one of the tosvers of the castle, svhich overhung its hosom ; and his corpse svas brought to land a few days afterwards .by some fbhermen. At the same time that Sir Edsvard had dispatched the treacherous Frasier to Rocknif tint Castle, he hail sent forward Irwin to Loudon, charged to deliver an exact
exact account of all that liad taken place since his departure from İt, to the queen and his Rosalind. Accordingly, the re¬ ception which he met with at the palace, on his return, was that of being saluted by a body of nobles, who ushered him into the presence of the queen as Lord Edward de Madginecourt. But if his heart experienced an honest pride at the smiles of pleasure with svhich he svas welcomed by estery member of the Bri¬ tish court, smiles of svhich the queen herself set the example—if his heart danced svith ecstacy, at the kiss of svel¬ come imprinted on his lips by his be¬ ioved Rosalind, svhat svas the exultation svith svhich he received, from the arms of Hubert, the losrely, blooming boy, svho svas tlie pledge of her love, for svhom all his miseries had been endured, and for the blessing of whose affection he svould again have undergone a second pilgri¬ mage of equal hardships. 1 vol. iv. s The
The tears of os^erilosving joy started into his eyes ; he pressed the babe to his face, and they fell upon his rosy, veiv v et cheek.—Almost jealous of the deliglit svhich her husband svas experiencing from his caresses, Rosalind again dresv him to lier own breast, and kissed off the tears svith svhich his father had bedewed him.— i4 О bless thechild of my beloved Rosali uti i" exclaimed Lortl Edsvard—· 44 Angels guard thee, son of my adored Edward !" responded his mother. ** Son of Edsvard and Rosalind, is thy happiest пате/' saitl the queen, hanging over him, as she spoke ; 4t but thou must also be the son of Elizabeth; the goti mother of thy parent, I pledge myself in the same degree of responsibi¬ lity to thee." In compliance svith this promise, the young EdsvartI svas, a fesv days after- svards, christened iu the chapel of the palace, svith a display of the utmost é state
state and magnificence; and the queen became the sponsor oî his faith, in like manner as she had beeome to his mother. After a mouth passed in the royal mansion of Elizabeth, the Lord Edsvard and his Lady took possesion of Rock¬ mount Cattle, to svhieh Rosalind ob¬ tained her husband's permission to carry svith her her faithful Gertrude, and okl Ambrose, formerly the porter of De Mowbray Castle, svho, svith the other vassals of Lord William, bad been re¬ stored to liberty by the subversion of the freebooters. To the unequalled Hubert, the queen presented an estate in the vicinity of Rockmount Castle, not sufficiently large to deprive its possessor of comfort, by forcing upon him grandeur, but large enough to give him the svealth of a happy competency ;—a situation suited to the just and moderate feelings of hiin to svhom it svas assigned ; and the great¬ est happiness of liis existence svas the s l Z contem-
contemplation of that felicity of svhich he had bten the glorious author. Dame Edith svas continued by Rosa¬ lind in her situation of housekeeper; and «lying, at the age of one hundred and sixteen years, her earnest wish was com¬ pieteti, of living a century beneath the roof of Rockmount Castle, of svhich she had become an inmate svhen scarcely sixteen sears old. a/ Philip Watkins threw himseif at the feet of Lord Edward, and implored for¬ giveness for the confession which had been forced from his lips, rather by the polished blade of Lord Rufus's sword, than the eloquence of his tongue ; and Lord Edsvard, kindly remembering only the happy consequence svhich had arisen from his svant of fortitude, bestowed on him, with his partion, the permission of coin miling in his service for life. The Baron tie Mowbiay lived only three years in the asylum to svhich he had flpwn from the taunts of the workl, and
and sunk into the sleep of death, with a penitent and religious concern for the errors of his life, svhich afforded a most consolatory balm to the feelings of his daughter, in the expectation svhich they gave her of his liappiness iu a future state. Lord Edward did not, in his prospe¬ rity, forget his friend, Adolphus Biron, * and the intei esting partner of his fate, the lovely Belise ; and he had the satis¬ faction to learn, that, by the interfe¬ rence of her » nele, at Maestri cht, the fortune left to her by her father Iiad been recovered from the hands of the Governor Garcías Xavia ; and about five years after her union svith Adolphus, Garcías, terrified by the approach of death, into a desire of repairing some of the injustice svhich he Ivd beei. guilty of in life, bequeathed to her such a porfiou oï his svealth as increased the independence svhich she and her husbaud already possessed, into a fund of riches, for
for the future portions of a numerous offspring. ISot less happy, in repeated pledges of their affection, svere the Lord and Lady de Madginecourt ; and on their second son, Elizabeth conferred the title of Ba¬ ron de Mosvbray, svhich had else been extinct at the death of Lord William ; and with it she assigned to him that domain svhich must otherwise, in default of a male heir, has r e returned into the hands of the crown. Thus blessed in the favour of a gra¬ cious sovereign, and in the conscious rectitude oftheir own hearts, Lord Ed¬ svard and his Rosalind lived long, and lived happ'dy. In distributing comfort to the nevly, they doubled their owu store of happiness—in educating their children to pursue the path of vii tue, they felt their own mindi ameliorated by the instruction which ihey conveyed; and the moments svhich they passed in a return of thanksgiving to that Omnipo¬ tent
tent Being, by svhom their preservation from a host of foes had been so miracu¬ lously sv rought, svere resvarded svith the glorious expectation of joys more exqui¬ site and more exalted still, beyond the grave.
FINIS,
ΧΑΝΕ, ЙИИгдГА-Гйевв, ЫЕАСЖКИАИ. STliJtT.
