Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The unknown: or, The Northern gallery: a romance
ι ■■' » Il l — W —Щ
THE
илкжо w ж.
CHAP. I.
** Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. 4 *
(t I hold the world but as the world, Л stage where every man must play hit p*rt, And mine a sad one !"
S.1AKE41»EARE.
JuLARK í hark ! do I not hear the tramp¬ ling of horses' feet, mixed with the hoarse murmurs of the roaring gust ? is it so ? do they come to bear him from me?" fran- voi,, ι. в tically
tically exclaimed tbe Lady Benigna Latimer, pressing, as she spoke, the hand of that husband whom sbe was in momentary dread of having torn from Her. " No, my dear mother, no ; I hear no sounds but those occasioned by the wind/' replied the gentle Eleonora. After a few moments of silence, the Lady Benigna, with a lengthened sigh, again drew her respiration, which bad been sus¬ pended by alarm, and said, t( I believe I was mistaken—but of what comfort is my error? the evil I dread is but fora short, a very short period deferred—they will conic, and where is then our hope?" " In Heaven/' replied tbe pious man, for whose fate the apprehensions of his suffering family were excited. The night was in truth a fearful one, in the beginning of the month of March ; the wind whistled loudly and mournfully through the leafless trees in many a hollow murmur, which was capable of being con¬ strued into any sound; the sleet and snow, driven
aviven along in curling circles by the gust, were falling in sheets to the earth ; the bird of night, unsuccessful in its search altev prey, sent forth the most dismal shrieks ; the casements jarred responsive to the blast that shook them in their frames, and the doors closed with sudden claps, which com¬ municated starts of terror to the heart. Roused bv a sound οΐ this nature, the Lady Benigna broke the silence which had for some minutes been preserved by the little circle which was seated wjth herself around tbe pale embers of a wood fire, in a spacious and gloomy chamber in the an¬ cient castle of Worcester, the present re¬ sidence of the reverend and revered bi¬ ßhon of the diocese, Hugh Latimer, .. jne extremity of the chamber stood a bed, in which lay the Lady Magdalene, the venerable mother of the worthy pre¬ late, (now eighty-nine years of age) whose worn-out frame had received a shock, from a calamity impending over the bead of her beloved and on!) son, which appeared to в 2 threaten
threaten the speedy dissolution of her earthly existence. By the side of her pil¬ low sat an ancient female domestic of the family, who, with the solicitude of a friend, administered to her such scanty portions of medicine, calculated to stay the flight of her departing spirit, as her resolute indif¬ ference about her own fate, which was for¬ gotten by her in her agonizing rellections on that of her son, would allow her to taste. Around the cheerless hearth were placed the prelate, who, placid in conscious in¬ nocence of heart, and upborne from the contemplation of present evil by a < ertain assurance of future reward, displayed a countenance of the most reliirious con- о tentment; on his right hand sat his dis¬ consolate wife, with one of her arms twined through his, and clasping a hand of his between the palms of her's; on his other side sat ihe young and sensitive Eleo¬ nora ; rpon her lap was placed the sacred volume, from wh.'cii the Bishop had, till within
within tbe few last minutes, been entailed in reading to his family, and upon which bis hand was still rested. One solitary lamp, suspended in a niche at the oppo¬ site extremity of the apartment to that at which the bed was placed, in order that its llame might not occasion inconvenience to the sight of the invalid, emitted scarcely sufficient ü¿rht for the females to be able to observe those emotions of grief with which they were all conscious that the countenances of their companions were marked. " Oh that it had pleased high Heaven," resumed the Lady Benigna, "to have spared to us our beloved Edward ; he was а sove¬ reign worthy to be vested with the purple of royalty í a prince, deserving the warm¬ est affection of an adoring people ! how great, how pious, how exalted were the principles of his mind, umile yet tbe blos¬ soms only of manhood were upon him, while yet he had attained none οΐ the vi¬ gour q[ maturity ! Oh, had he been longer в 3 permitted
permitted to bless his people vith that m:;d exercise of power which formed the no¬ blest ornament of his young heart, bow supremely happy must bave been the lot of English subjects, and of the protestant church, sheltered by the full-grown foliage of his ripened talents Î Oh, cruel hand of death, that bereaved us, in the person of our king, of his people's friend and com-; forter ! Oh, more cruel die of fate, which has placed upon his throne a successor, the scourge of the meritorious and the inno¬ ve«· l" util L · <e Cease, cease, my beloved Benigna," replied Latimer, " these plaints are of¬ fensive to the ear of Omnipotence; they are murmurings against the dispensations of that Providence whose judgment is un¬ erring: there are bitter draughts which must be swallowed in this terrestrial ex¬ istence, to ensure to us the honied drops of eternal felicity : obscure, but never to be -I doubted, are the ways by which Omni¬ potence weaves out its progressive web ; causes,
г raises, which the reason that we bere enjoy is not sufficient for us to comprehend, require that the skein of life should not run even ; in proportion to the placidity with which we here encounter its shackles, we shall hereafter be rewarded by an un¬ interrupted course of unruffled beati¬ tude." '·' Λίαν Heaven extend its mercy towards us !" returned the Lady Benigna. iC Amen ! amen !" faintly articulated his venerable mother, extending, as she spoke, her trembling hands, clasped together, to¬ wards Heaven, and raising in the same di¬ rection herdim eyes; thus she continued forsorne time apparently in silent prayer. In this action the Lady Maddalene bad been raised in a trifling degree upon her pillow by her faithful attendant, who watched and seconded ber e\ery motion and desire ; and scarcely bad she a^niıı sunk upon it, exhausted even by the slen¬ der exertion which she had been usino;, when a gentle tap upon the door of the в 4 apartment
apartment announced a claimant fur ad mission. ** There ! there'" exclaimed th: L·, ív Benigna, who'.í' se:u,e.s w«. re c<.*nfuiťd Ь\ the agitation of her mind, and bereft of their wonted power of defining the nature of those sounds svhir h met her ear, t! they come, they come !" ** 'Tis some one who a*ks admittance at the chamber door," said Latimer. f · íiücd angrh grant it шзу be Cyprian returned ľ' cried his wife; and Eleonora Hew to admit iii m. The apartment was entered by a grey- haired venerable man, who advanced into it with a slow step, and mournful counte¬ nance, which bespoke him by no means the messenger of joy ; he was a faithful man, who had for three successive genera¬ tions been a servant in the family of La¬ timer, and had lately, by its present head, been promoted to the office of steward—· it was that Cyprian whom the Lady Benigna had pra\cd to behold, The
The old man hnd that day travelled nearly three-score miles on horseback; the good Bishop perceived him to be faint and trem¬ bling with the exertion he had undergone, and rising hastily from his own seat, forced Cyprian into it. " Well, good Cyprian, what news? have you seen Sir Oswin Bolton ?" enquired the Lady Benigna. ť ' Yes, good my Lady, I have seen and communed with htm," replied Cy¬ prian, the tears starting into his eyes as he spoke. t( But thou hast derived no comfort from his lips— í see thou hast not," rejoined the aülicted wife. Cyprian replied by drawing from the pocket of his vest a letter, which he put into the hands of his master. With a steady hand the Bishop received it ; not did it yet tremble when the con¬ tents met his eye; but when he was call¬ ed upon to impart them to his family, when his mother summoned him to read в ô thcni
them by the side of her bed, and his wife and Eleonora hung upon him in awful ex¬ pectation of the dreaded intelligence, in¬ capable of displaying weakness on his own account, for them the tears trickled down his manly cheek. The letter ran thus :—
' DEAR Fllir.ND, (< It occasions me extreme pain inni ï am not enabled to convey to you tidings of happiness, or of comfort; and 1 am alone emboldened to confess to you the truth which you desire to hear from mc, by a knowledge of that religious for¬ titude which is the inmate of your breast, and I am certain will not forsake you at the latest moment of your existence: Arch¬ bishop Cranmer is already conveyed a pri¬ soner to the Tower; and the Queen has dis¬ patched emissaries to bear you to the same spot of confinement ;— May you, in this dreadful
dreadful extremity, find consolation for the injustice of bigotry, in the purity of your own heart ! Greatly do I lament that it is not in my power to oiTer my friend any relief of a more efficacious nature than my sincerest wishes for his triumph and happiness.—Farewell.—God support tlicc! So prays Oswin Bolton."
Λ flood of agony burst from the eyes of the Lady Benigna and Eleonora; —the ve¬ nerable mother of the prelate lay enduring those pangs of grief which are too acute to admit the relief of tears; she was how¬ ever the first of the females who recovered the power of utterance; "Collect your family, my son," she said ; " let us all pray together, and give us your blessing ; it is perhaps the last time you will ever do so." With Latimer, the inclinations of his в ii revered
revered mother had ever been laws, and he immediately dispatched her old attend¬ ant, Katherine, ίο summon his household into her chamber : when they were arrived in it, he addressed to them a most affec¬ tionate and pathetic explanation of hi*, pre¬ sent situation. cc The hour is come, my children," he said, ce at which I am called from you, and from my beloved relatives; not by the hand of death, but by the au¬ thoritative sceptre of power : mourn not my absence, formy fault is my glory;— mine enemies can charge me with no crime but a steady adherence to that religion which I have ever taught you to regard as the surest passport to Heaven.—Should I return acquitted by the tribunal of justice, ye shall all share my happiness, and my triumph :—Should I never behold you more, rest assured that while ye continue firm in the true faith, ¿ny blessings will ever be upon you.'* He then proceeded to read various por¬ tions of the holy testimene and to repeat several
several prayers and thanksgivings., closing his acts of devotion by pronouncing on them his blessing. The benevolence of his actions,, the gentleness of his disposi- tion,, the uprightness of his heart, had gained for the wonby prelate from his domestics and dependants, an affection al¬ most amounting to filial tenderness; sobs burst from every breast, whilst they at¬ tended to his address, and to his blessing ; and when he had ceased to speak, as if loth ίο quit the spot where his benign counte¬ nance smiled upon them, they still conti¬ nued upon their knees before him, in which position they had received his last recommendation of their souls to Heaven : -—Scarcely had their transports of grief subsided into silent tears, ere the solemn stillness of the scene was broken in upon by the reality of those sounds which the Lady Benigna had so often before trembled with the apprehension of;—now indeed the trampling of horses was heard in the outer court ; now indeed the shrill bugle 2 at
at the gate demanded entrance into the in¬ terior of the building. Instant confusion marked the counte¬ nances and actions of all, except those of Latimer himself. " There can be no doubt/' he said, (C who are the claimants for admission ; I will go down into the hall, and meet them myself/' No one had power to move him from his purpose; gently checking his wife and Eleonora, who, urged by the wildest ap¬ prehensions, endeavoured to turn him from his intention, he said, ct Would ye with¬ hold me from displaying that í experience no alarm at their presence ?" and followed by a long train of affection at e mourners, he descended the stairs leading into the hall, the doors of which had at his com¬ mand already been thrown open ; and which, as he arrived within sight of them, he saw entered by a body of men in the livery of the royal guards, and headed by Sir Eldred Pemberton, a knight wil h whose countenance he was acquainted, and whom he
he knew to be a firm adherent of his se¬ verest enemy, Gardiner.—With a degree of affected condescension, Sir Eldred ad¬ dressed himself to the prelate, and en¬ quired whether he were the Bishop Lati¬ mer? and having been replied to in the affirmative, he said, ' c I am sent hither, commissioned by our gracious sovereign Queen Mary, to conduct you to the Tower of London, where you are adjudged to endure a temporary seclusion from the world, till those crimes with which you are charged shall have undergone the in¬ vestigation of men adequate to pronounce you falsely or justly arraigned, in the ac¬ cusations which you now labour under." " I am prepared to meet their investi¬ gation, and to obey the commands of my Queen," replied Latimer. t( Is it required of mc to set out to-night?" " You may, if it better please you, de¬ fer the commencement of your journey till early morning," replied Sir Eldred : *· our return with you is not restricted to
to a few hours; we are only commanded not to enter London without you." " Shall I be allowed," asked the Bishop, (( to enjoy the society of any of these be¬ loved friends, or the kind services of any of these affectionate domestics, whom you now behold surrounding me?" " I am authorized to say," replied Sir Eldred, i( that one servant of your own choice will be permitted you, in addition to those who are provided for the use of unfortunate men like yourself, in the abode of which you are about to become an inhabitant." " Then ƒ will be that one servant," ex¬ claimed the Lady Benigna ; i( my husband will not deny me the only happiness which it is possible for me to taste during the period of his imprisonment ; and surely your Queen will not be sufficiently cruel to deprive a heart-broken wife of the wretched consolation of taking upon her¬ self the office of a domestic/* No reply was returned by Sir Eldred to this
ibis enquiry; and the Lady Benigna added, <f Have I vour permission, Sir, to accom¬ pany my husband in this humble cha¬ racter?" With a slight inclination of his head, he answered, " 1 did not receive any restric¬ tions concerning who was to be the single selected domestic allowed to my pri¬ soner." Latimer enquired at what time in the morning Sir Kldred wished them to com¬ mence their journey ? " At the hour of six it is my request that you be ready to set out," he replied. Finding that the indulgence of passing the night beneath the roof of their own mansion must be repaid to Sir Eldred and his companions in liberal entertainment, Latimer gave orders to that effect, and then retired from the hall with his wife and Eleo¬ nora. When they had reached a private apart¬ ment, he said, " It communicates the greatest happiness to my soul, my dearest fïenigua,
Benigna, to find thee, as every action of thy life has foretold me that I should do, willing to diare the fortunes of thy per¬ secuted husband ; with joy I heard thee de¬ clare thy intention of becoming the part¬ ner of ray prison ; and ßrmly do I believe that thou wilt experience more content¬ ment within its dreary walls, than thou couldst do elsewhere, bereft of my so¬ ciety :—but thou alone art permitted me ; my revered mother, and my beloved Eleo¬ nora, I am compelled to resign." Eleonora burst into tears at these words, and threw herself upon the neck of her father, imprinting trembling kisses on his cheeks. " Cheer thee, my sweetest child, cheer thee," replied the venerable man, raising her, as he spoke, gently from his breast, " thou wilt have my prayers, though my person be no longer present to thee; and the same Providence will be thy protectee. —It is indeed uncertain when I may return to you ; it is therefore necessary that I should
should make some ai.angemcnt for your future fare, whilst I am yet with you ;—My worn-out parent lies at the extremity of life ; her earthly pilgrimage appears to be almost drawn to the period of its reward in a future state ; whilst she lives, you will continue to reside here with her.—1 have no apprehensions that your peace, or that of any one in this castle, should be dis¬ turbed on account of their connexion with me ; I am the single mark at which perse¬ cution aims; but in case of her death, I will provide you with a letter, which you shall, immediately upon such an event, commission the faithful Cyprian to con¬ vey in person for you to Lady Thomasine Blunt—my child knows of whom I am speaking." e( She is your relation, is she not ?" faintly articulated Eleonora. mf (ί My cousin," returned the Bishop, α the niece of my deceased father ; her protecuon for you I shail implore: in her youth die was pre-eminent for the excel¬ lence
lencc of her disposition, and the suavity of her manners; and I regard her as one who will prove a most compassionate and indulgent guardian ίο my child:— lier husband, Sir bigismund, is not a follower of the religion which wc profess, but he is a man who, from the representations which ha\e been made to me of him, will not, 1 dare believe, attempt to interrupt the happiness of those who differ from him in the tenets of their faith," Having concluded his explanation, La¬ timer directed his wife and daughter to proceed to the chamber of his mother, and inform her of the occurrences of the last hour; and then to collect together such articles as would be necessary for the use of the I ady Benigna and himself upon their journey, and in their future resi¬ dence; telling them that during their ab¬ sence he should emplov himself in writing the letter of which he had just spoken. They followed his directions, and when they had done so, Eleonora was commis¬ sioned
sìoned by her mother to entreat him to en¬ deavour to take a few hours repose, in order that he might be the bet! er able to endure the fatigue of his approaching journey. As she drew near the apartment where she had left him, she heard the sound of voices within it ; and, uncertain whether her presence might not prove an inter¬ ruption to a conversation of moment, which he might be sei/ing the last hour he could call his own to hold with some confidential member of his household, she stopped on the outside of the door; it was not quite closed, and at the moment that her hand was laid upon the lock, in doubt whether or not to enter, she heard her father say, " If any arrive who demand to search my cal: ¡net, permit it freely to their inspection ; I have no transai tions which 1 wish to conceal from the eye of any one, save this small packet ; it en¬ closes a detail of that mysterious circum¬ stance relative to my Eleonora, with which thou art already well acquainted, and to which
which I may one day consider it right to direct her attention ;—to thy protection, therefore, I commit it." " Mysterious circumstance relative to my Eleonora!" repeated the heart of her who had so unexpectedly heard hersei f named ; and sensations of extreme sur¬ prise, natural to the situation in which these words placed her, filled her mind. " It shall be safe in my keeping, good my master," replied a voice, which she re¬ cognised to be that of old Cyprian. A hollow gust of wind now blew round the cattle, and prevented her from distin¬ guishing whether her father spoke again ; the next sound that she heard within the apartment, was that of Ïeet approaching towards the door ; and the shame attend¬ ant ou the suspicion of being regarded as a listener, caused her immediately to push open the door, and enter the room,—The same impulse which had governed her in her last action, prevented her from ques¬ tioning her father, although by the instant departure
departure of Cyprian, she was left alone with him :—She considered also, that a pa¬ rent so pre-eminently kind, indulgent, imd aifectionate as her's had ever been towards her, could not have withheld any occur¬ rence of moment to herself from her knowledge, but from a motive of the most commendable nature ; a conviction which she considered would increase the fault of giving tongue to her anxious curiosity:—Accordingly, covering in the best manner bhc was able her agitation» she delivered to her lather the request with which she had been sent to him from her mother. 4 * Your daughter too hopes, you will be induced to retire for awhile to гсъ;," she added. " dux my child doubt that I vbnll r" re¬ turned the Bishop; it 1 shall indeed to bed, and hope for good repose ; 1 have no fears of conscience to keep mc waking." lie took the hand of Eleonora, and led her to the door of her chamber ; arrived there,
there, he threw his arms around her neck ; imprinted on her lips a fervent kiss, which he accompanied, as was his nightly cus¬ tom, with his blessing; and then retired to his own apartment.
CHAP,
ГНЛР. 11.
*« 1 lehulïl you as a «hing en^yM, and sainted 3 By )< ur rcncunťťment an immortal spirit, Aiut to be ıulk\î with in sincerity, \> with j saint."
«« f!e was a man, икс htm f >r at? İn all, * I shuîl tuit ЬчЛ uroi h>< like again." W" κ shall avail ourselves of the interval which look pla* с between the separation of the dînèrent members of Latimer's fa¬ mily for the niîrht, and their reassemblino at early morn, for brtelly retracing the history of him for whom their solicitude was at this period excited, vol. r. 0 Iliieh
Hugh Latimer was descended from pa¬ rents, who, although not of noble birth, were still of considerable eminence, and of the fairest reputation ; they were both natives of the county of Leicester, in which was their residence at the time of their son's entrance into the world. The person of Latimer was by no means adorned with qualifications equal to those which ornamented his mind ; his eve was expressive of intelligence of soul ; and the placid smile which usually played around his lips, denoted the gentleness of his spirit ; farther he owed no debt to the graces ornature. At a very early age, the young Hugh displayed talents of an excellent and su¬ perior kind ; which being observed, not only by his father, but by many men bet¬ ter able than he himself was to direct his judgment, every laudable method for en¬ larging the mind of his son, and storing it with the richest materials of literature, was pursued by him. After
After a preparatory introduction to every branch of knowledge and of sci¬ ence, Hugh was sent to the university of Cambridge, for the completion of his edu¬ cation :—His parents had been bred in the faith of the Komish church, and a reve¬ rence for the same religion had been con¬ veyed by them to the heart of their son ; in this persuasion he accordingly entered the university ; but here the law of fate had ordained that a change was to be wrought in his religious opinions. A very short time after his becoming a student at Cambridge, he formed an ac¬ quaintance with a man, whose excellence as a literary character was not greater than the fame which he bore for the purity and regularity of hb religious habits; thi* was Thomas Bilney, the most considerable mau of his universit), who favoured the re¬ formation which was then attempting to be worked. It is not here our intention to extol one rcligon at the cxpence of another; с 3 ncF
nor to adduce any arguments or opinions which may subject us to the accusation of prejudice, or the idea of attempting to render a book of amusement a vehicle for religious controversy ; wc shall there¬ fore content ourselves, in this part of our narrative, with stating, as briefly as the subject will admit, such facts as are ne¬ cessary to account for the subsequent events of our history. The acquaintance which Hugh Latimer had formed with Thomas Hilney, grew ra¬ pidly into the most confirmed intimacy; Bilney regarding his young friend with not less real friendship, than Latimer bore him honour and affection.—Cambridge was at this period the scat of bigotry, ignorance, and superstition ; a trum sincerely la¬ mented by Bilney, who, convint cd of the superiority of a holy life, and pure heart, over those outward shews and forms which were then thought the essentials of reli¬ gion, laboured with unceasing zeal to pro¬ pagate the reformed opinions.—The un¬ affected
affected piety and excellent sense of his friend, made by degrees so btrong an im¬ pression in favour of his sentiments upon the heart of Latimer, that he became, like him from whom the change in his heart wai derived, one of the most strenuous ίο? theo'oform :—The plat id and cheerful <л ч ::с:ке of f.;Jt:ner vos a moit power¬ ful u capon in ¡алонг of the ι ause he had estÏOiised ; and ir::nv who iistcned to his oratorv merelv from a de »ire of tindiiiíľ fomcthing to condemn İn his opinions, were ultimately brought out to hisside. In these labours several \can> were passed by him, during which two events of some moment in hb» lile occurred: the jir t was the death of his father; the se- con.L the ťoii\cNo» of his mother to the reformed opinion*: hut iUcvc was ^tiìl a third, which took place in the course of the^e \ca. :, a*\d which we must not omit to mention, as it н of the first importance to that part of \\U hi-iorv in which we shall hereafter be most inte- с 3 i c>ted.
rested —The heart of Laiimcv, s".ího;:¿h a man devoting himself peculiarly to the extension of that religion which he him¬ self professed and preferred, was still but the heart of a man, subject to those feel- ings and those passions to which human nature is heir. In the family of his mother resided a young female, in whom the graces of modesty and virtue were more pre-eminent than those of the person ; in these she was not defective, but the beau¬ ties of her mind were of a more brilliant nature :—She was an orphan, distantly re¬ lated to the Latimers, and had now no protector but the Lady Magdalene :—For her grew daily in the heart of Latimer, an affection of the most puro and fervent na¬ ture ; but he had already, by the interest of Lord Cromwell, obtained a benefice in Wiltshire ; and the ecclesiastical laws of the times pointed at those as criminals, who did not, in their profession of the church, abjure marriage; and the name of friend was therefore the tendcrest epi¬ thet
thet bv which he was allowed to call her his. The persecutions set on foot by the Kom ¡ih clergy against the professor of the reformed religion, were at this time great ; but they pro\ed no obstacle to Latimer in discharging the duties of his holy office in the most scrupulous» the most coercive, and the most impressive manner, although he was no longer en¬ couraged and upheld in his undertakings by the countenance of Bilney ; that friend having been called upon to pay the debt of nature, in the same year that Latimer was appointed to his Wiltshire benefice. Upon the ascent of Anna Bolevn to the throne, the reformists found in her, for the short time of her authority, both a warm and powerful advocate ; and through the joint interest of that Queen, and his former favourer, Cromwell, Latimer was raised to the bishopric of Worcester. lie received the intelligence of his ap¬ pointment to a see with heartfelt pleasure; с I not
not on nccütmt of the pro.r.uïion in ran* which he derived from it, but from regard to the more extcii4\e field which was now opened to him for the propagation of his religious opinions; and this field was still more extended by his being called upon to attend the parliament, and the convoca¬ tion. A custom was observed in the reign of Henry the Eighth, which had original Ι ν been introduced at court in (hat of his father and predecessor, of the bishops present¬ ing the King with new year's gifts, which thev went in person to offer to him, and ac¬ companied with good wishes for his pros¬ perity during the succeeding twelve months ; these oblations were chiefly of pure ¡jok!, and not uncommonly of con¬ siderable \alue. From no spi; it of meanness nor eco¬ nomy, but from the laudable motive of making an i m predion upon the heart of the Ki" T . iW î:'s vy entupi good, Latimer's prient vur* a ne*; tetament, simply bound. with
with one of its kn\cs turned down, in so conspicuous a manner thr.t it could not escape ol^cnution, at a passage which admonished against a free indulgence of the passions, and im*on\tar.cy v\ the mar¬ riage state; which were the acknowledged uces of the monarch, and from which it was Latimer's earnest desire to reclaim him. Henry, who lived in the midst of flat¬ terers, utterly unaccustomed to the voice of truth, was not lo^s startled than dis¬ pleased b> this unlooked-for re Uike ; but he was withheld fom openly displaying his dissatisfaction by the interposition of his Queen, Anna, who used every argument to convince him how sincerelv Latimer had his welfare at heart;—won by her in¬ tercession, the King did not suffer his an¬ ger to appear, but accepting the prelate's will for the deed, comported himself to¬ wards him with his usual complacency. In the ensuing year, Latimer was again called upon to attend the parliament, at с У which
which a suffrage was to be passed upon the six articles drawn up by the Duke of Nor¬ folk; and as it was contrary to his principles to give his vote for the act, he judged it wrong and unbecoming in him to hold an office in a church where such terms of com¬ munion were required ; he accordingly re¬ signed his bishopric, and retired into the county of Leicester to his mother. upon this resignation of his holy office» Latimer no longer considered himself a minister of the church, or bound by the same tics which affected a man of that pro¬ fession ; he accordingly entered without hesitation into the state of wedlock, unit¬ ing himself with her upon whom his most tender affections had ever been placed.— The present was probably the happiest pe¬ riod of the worthy prelate's life ; he was an enthusiastic admirer of the country; the habitation in which he resided with his best-beloved parent, his mother, was situ¬ ated on a spot equally romantic and beau¬ tiful ; and in the enjoyment of those scenes which
which communicated pleasure to his heart, he was blest with the society and love of her whom he had selected from amongst all her sex. The inveterate enemy of Latimer was the licentious and crafty Bishop Gardiner; and scarcely two years had passed over the head of Latimer in his retirement, ere the popish party had gained considerable in¬ fluence at court; and his good friend Cromwell having fallen amidst many other sufferers of the times, Gardiner seized the opportunity of his death, for exercising his spleen against Latimer; he accused him to the King of having spoken contemptu¬ ously of the six articles; and Henrv, who had not forgotten the present made to him by the worthy prelate on the anniversary of the new year, although during the life¬ time of his Queen, Anna, he had, at her intercession, smothered the resentment which he had felt, was by no means dis¬ pleased at an opportunity of revenging himself upon a man whom he considered ctí to
to have shewn him an insult; and imme¬ diately issued a mandate for his being con¬ veyed to the Tower. With the utmost placidity the worthy man received the royal command, and en¬ dured nearly se\*en years of imprisonment without a murmur against his fate, or his enemies; upborne in placidity of temper, and fortitude of mind, by the conscious innocence of his own heart. No steps u ere ever taken to swell his punishment beyond captmty; but he was doomed to bear it without a single com¬ fort which might ha\e alie\iated the un¬ pleasantness of his situation : still the ri- «iours which he suffered could never move him into anger or bewailing; "Heaven," he was very frequently heard to repeat, e( k- 'm me fulfilling some wUe end, at pre¬ sent hidden from the observation of mor¬ tai man; 1 am satisfied that without its sanc¬ tion, men could not exercise authority over me; and I now bow to thobc invi¬ sible means which I shall hereafter bless." 2 Immediately
Immediately upon the death of Henry, the protestant interest rewvcd, and Lati¬ mer was released from his captivity, and restored to his joyful connexions. No sooner had the youthful Edward as¬ cended the throne of England, than the parliament moved an address to the pro¬ tector, imploring of him the restoration of the esteemed Latimer to the see of Wor¬ cester; the protector himself, strenuous in the cause of the reformation, readily acquiesced in their request ; and sent to summon Latimer to his presence, in order that he might reinvest him with his eccle¬ siastical honours. The native modesty and humility of Laiimer's disposition did not dilate with pride ai this imitation, by which it was imponible for him not to feel himself greatly flattered ; and approaching the chair of the protector, no little astonish¬ ment filled the hearts of those present, when they heard him decline the honour presented to his acceptance. The
The protector expressed that surprise which others felt, and asked Latimer the motive by which he was actuated in his reply. ff I am," he answered, " sinking into the vale οΐ life, and consequently less ade¬ quate to the fatigue of an important of¬ fice, than I was when I resigned it." (c I can scarcely believe tiiat it is Latimer who speaks," replied the protector, "when Ϊ hear him suffering any obstacle, any per¬ sonal inconvenience, to oppose itself to his returning to a situation where it will be so greatly in his power to promote the cause he espouses !" This encomium on the part of the pro¬ tector drew the tears into the eyes of La¬ timer, and he said, "You judge rightly, my Lord ; no personal inconvenience should withhold me from sen ing the cause of my religion with the last particle of my strength ; there is a tie which restrains me that cannot be removed."—He paused an instant, and sinking on one knee before the
the protector, he explained to him, " that having considered himself no longer a servant of the church, he had become a husband." With universal regret the council were now compelled to sulfer him to depart; but although absent, he was not forgotten by them ; and in the course of a couple of months, Latimer was informed that for his sake the canon was repealed which had hitherto forbidden the marriage of the ministers of the church. The joy and triumph which inspired the hearts of Latimer's family may be easily conceived ; the present moment appeared to them a full requital for all the anxiety they had experienced during his late cap¬ tivity :-—How little did they imagine that those scenes would be repeated during the short span of his future life ! During the reign of Edward, the happi¬ ness of Latimer and his family was unin¬ terrupted. The palace appointed for the use of the bishop
bishop of the diocese of Worcester had lately been destroyed by fire, and Latimer and his family held their dweiling in an ancient castle, af the distance of scarcely a furlong from the citv of Worcester, be- longing to the Earls of that name ; the present Karl being at this period absent from his native country, it had been lent by him to their accommodation, till the palace, which was then rebuilding, should be ready for their reception. The decree of Heaven granted to Ed¬ ward only a reign of six years, and on the accession of his sister iUnry to the throne, every protestant trembled for his religion and his personal safety.-—The bigotry of the new monarch was known to be oí' excesive strength, and her temper of that unfeeling nature, that every se¬ verity was dreaded from her investiture of the sovereign power; and more was not apprehended at her hands than her con¬ duct justified the apprehension of.—In¬ stantly on mounting the throne, she re¬ stored
stored the deprived popish prelates to their respective ecclesiastical offices; and with this act she contented herself till the sit¬ ting of parliament, when she published an edict forbidding the exercise of any reli¬ gion except that of the Romish church, which she herself professed. The hearts of the timid sunk within them, and thev either did, or pretended to comply with her edict: but the souls of men like Latimer were not to be shaken by the breath of a mortal from their faith. -—Iiourlv, tidin<rs were carried to the Queen of those who refused to abjure the protestant worship; and her passions be« ing exasperated, more perhaps by their want of obedience to her will, than warmed by her reverence for religion, a vast num¬ ber of innocent men fl -П the victims of her implacable resentment. The Bishops of î, ndon and Gloucester had already died martvrs to their fivth, ero- Latimer Ьсдпп to apprehend his own dati¬ ger ; his eves were opened to the proba¬ bility
bility of his fate, by the arrest, and subse¬ quent death, of the prelate of Saint Da¬ vid's, whose mildness of manners, and gentleness of disposition, had not been able to gain for him either security or pardon. Already it began to be whispered that Cranmer and he were the next on whom the bloody hand of papal cruelty would seize :—Sir Oswin Bolton, a firm friend and adherent of Latimer's, dispatched to hima messenger, imploring him to fly, and endeavour to ensure his safety by secret¬ ing himself in the least inhabited parts of Scotland : but he refused to quit his re¬ sidence ; his wife, his Eleonora, his mo¬ ther, all used their supplications to this effect, but he -could not be moved—" I will never give my enemies reason to sup¬ pose that I fear them, by flying from them," he said. The rumour of his ganger at last grew so strong, that his heart-broken relatives were in hourly dread of seeing him torn from
from their arms.—-The certainty of the worst is more tolerable to endure than suspense ; and once more the Lady Be¬ nigna dispatched the faithful Cyprian to Sir Oswin Bolton, entreating him, if he had by any means been able to gather a knowledge of the Queen's intentions with regard to her husband, to communicate them to her without reserve. We have already seen Sir Oswin's reply to this enquiry, which, conscious of the fortitude of his friend, he addressed with¬ out hesitation to himself;—we have also been informed how soon the confirmation of the sad truths which his epistle con¬ tained, reached Latimer, in the arrival of Sir Eldred Pemberton and his body of , guards ; and we may now satisfactorily resume the thread of our narrative.
CHAP,
CHAP. Ш. " Wrapt in clouds of щу:-гсгу and sücnce." Wjlpoie.
*' Art thou some god, ьоте angel, or some <!evil ?" SliAKESPb..VRE. The morning arose overcast with gloomy clouds, congenial to the depressed spirits of Latimer's family :—Ere the dawn had yet scarcely peeped from the sky, the guards under the command of Pemberton were heard pacing the hall of the cattle, and awaiting the appearance of their leader. The servants of the cattle had not been / more
more able to repose than had their supe¬ riors; the light of morning therefore af¬ forded something like relief to their anxi¬ ous minds, by again assembling them to enjoy the consolation of each other's hopes and surmises. The breakfast w T as prepared; Latimer alone appeared to retain sufficiently his powers of mind to be sensible that it was placed before him.—In the course of half an hour, Sir Eldred sent to enquire whe¬ ther he were read ν to begin his journey? —The Bishop simply replied, " Tell Sir Eldred I come:" he endeavoured to speak these words in a cheerful tone of voice, but as his eye turned towards the bed in which lay his mother, and whom it ap¬ peared much more than probable that he should never behold again, his tones fal¬ tered. Upon the sound of the summons, a deep sigh burst from the lips of the Lady Magdalene; Latimer approached the bed; she extended her arms to give him her farewell embrace-—" Oh my son/' she said, * 4 at
"at this moment we part for ever!"— "Oh, no, no," replied Latimer, " if not on earth, we meet again in Heaven !"—It was in vain that the Lady Magdalene en¬ deavoured to reply; the fever of agony parched her tongue, and denied her the power of utterance ; her son imprinted a fervent kiss on her lips, and quitted her chamber. Arrived on the outside, he leant against the wall for support; not his fortitude, but his bodily strength forsook him ; his nature fainted under the idea of his hav¬ ing for the last time beheld the author of his being ;—the appearance of Eleonora recalled his powers into action ; he put into her hand the letter which he had on the preceding evening addressed to the Lady Thomasine Blunt; and having repeat¬ ed to her his directions with regard to the use which she was to make of it in case of his mother's death, he descended with her into the castle hall, where the Lady Be* nigna stood awaiting his coming, Sif
Sir Eldred Pemberton stepped forward, and informed him that in the outer court of the castle he would find a carriage pro¬ vided by him, to convey the Lady Benígna and himself to London, in which he should be their companion. '* Promise me/* said Eleonora, taking a hand of each of her parents in her*s as she spoke, and carrying them to her lips, " pro¬ mise me, that at whatever price our meet¬ ing be effected, I shall see you both again.** " Your mother will be restored to you, no doubt, my child/* answered Latimer. " Oh, no, no, no," cried the Lady Be¬ nigna, " if thy days are shortened, mine will be cut off likewise.** Depart he must ; the worthy prelate conceived it therefore right to curtail as much as possible the pangs of separation, and accordingly hurried his wife out of the castle. From the parting embrace of her mother, the wretched Eleonora turned to receive the last pressure to a father's heart;—
heart ;—her head fell upon his breast, and she fainted in his arms. When she revived, she found herself attended by the servants of her father's household, in one of the spacious apart¬ ments of the castle, and seated near a case¬ ment, of which a compartment had been thrown open, i'i order to admit a purer air for the benefit οΐ lier recovery. " They are gone then," shu» said, casting around her eyes, " gone for ever." "You may -.till obsen e them," replied Cyprian, pointing with his finger out of the window. Eleonora turned her eves hastily towards the spot to which he directed her attention, and she beheld the carriage. which contained her beloved and valued parents, attended by the guards on horseback in their polished coats of mail, ascending a distant hill, and forming a moung picture, which, had the objects that composed it been united with less sorrowful ideas in her mind, she must have gazed upon with pleasure ; as it was, the
the tears which filled her eyes, rendered her unable to trace their progress, and she exclaimed aloud, "In whom, alas! shall Kleonora now find a protector?*' At this instant were heard three loud claps, which appeared to be produced by some person on the terrace beneath the open window, striking together forcibly the palms of his hands. At the sound of the first, Cyprian, who was now alone in the apartment with Eleo¬ nora, observed her to start ; at the second, a wild anxiety was visible in her features ; and at the third, she uttered a faint shriek, and sunk back in her chair ;—he observed the colour to fly from her cheeks, and be¬ lieving her to have fainted, he flew to her relief. * In the course of a few minutes, Eleo¬ nora opened her eyes; she rose hastily from her seat, and moving to the window, she leaned out of it, looking around her, apparently anxious for the appearance of some one whom she expected to behold vol. ι. , n beneath,
beneath, but was disappointed in not see¬ ing: s * Cyprian/' she said, drawing her head into the apartment, ' f did vou not see any one on the terrace ?—who could it be that made the noise we heard ?" fť I did not look out, Lady/' he return¬ ed ; " I supposed it to be Egbert the gar¬ dener, clapping his hands to frighten away the blackbirds from the blossoms :—had you any reason to suppose it any one else?" (t It might very probably be Egbert," replied Eleonora, and she drew a chair towards the window, upon which she sat down. " Pray let me shut the casement," re¬ joined Cyprian; " it is so damp a morn¬ ing, that you will take cold if you keep it open." Eleonora could not contradict the truth of this assertion, and Cyprian shut the window. ч Cyprian wandered about the apartment, and wondered that Eleonora did not ad¬ dress
dress him; her heart was entire! f ft*? 0 from that empty pride which too' «ftcn animates the breast of the superior, i n its intercourse with its fellow-beings o *f ^ CăS fortunate circumstances in life than İ tsell ; she had learnt from her excellent fath er to value man according to the worth o. Mıîs heart, and not according to the store s of his coffers ; and her kind and eondescé tid¬ ing manners had from an "infant Ы ел such, as had gained her the universal lo Ve and admiration of her father's household* ; by this father, the old and faithful Cypria 1 had, ever since the period to which she could carry back her recollection, 'been regarded rather as a friend than a domes¬ tic ; ami consequent!) estimated in 'the same fioiuť of view by his wife and child. -^Cyprian Avas conscious of the place which he hekl in her heart*; he expected to hear her Speak to" him of those beloved parents from whom'she had jnst been se¬ parated·*—to dwell· with him on surmises rnative to their future fate,- and join him о 2 în
in prayers for their restoration to felicity ; on the contrary, he now beheld her lost in reflection with her own mind, and al¬ most believed that he could gather from the turn of her eye an expression, which betrayed her to consider him as an in¬ truder. After a time, Cyprian endeavoured to gain her attention to some remarks which he advanced to her consideration ; Eleo¬ nora appeared scarcely to be conscious that he was speaking ; frequently she did not reply to his questions at all ; if she answered them, it was in faintly-uttered monosyllables. At the expiration of about an hour af¬ ter the departure of Latimer, Cyprian was called upon to attend to some duty which had been left in charge by his master; and Eleonora immediately ascended to her chamber to indulge in reflection; and with her reflections she mingled bitter tears. If we have been guilty of a fault to¬ wards any one whom we esteem, the mo¬ ment
ment after our separation from that person, is the oue at which our error appears to us in its true light, and we repent of its com¬ mission ; then it is that we foresee the possibility of no opportunity ever occur¬ ring to us of repairing the past, and of our offence resting a load upon our con¬ science to the hour of our death. With a consideration of this nature were the reflections of Eleonora embittered, when the first burst of agonizing grief which rent her heart at her separation from her loved parents, had subsided into a moderate calmness, and thought had be* gun to return to its wonted channel:— for towards those parents did Eleonora, in One action of her life, feel herself to have committed a trespass. Of all existing parents, her*s were per¬ haps the most affectionate that had ever showered indulgence on an only child— of all daughters, Ek onora stood unri¬ valled for her filial tenderness, her gentle d 3 obedience
obedience to the mandates of their expe¬ rience, and hen exemplary solicitude to adtl to the happiness of those beîng> whose anxieties for her felicity never slept— öf what error then could a character of this excellent nature have been guilty, towards those who appeared to engross her every idea, her every wish ?—The sin which Eleonora had committed was that of con¬ cealment:—And whence could have arisen the necessity of her practising an art of this nature ?— r It had sprung from .*hai pas¬ sion to which every other feeling is se¬ condary, even in hearts of the most an¬ gelic dispositions—that passion, the pure effervescence of which all the cold argu¬ men rs οΐ philosophy will never be able to freeze—that passion, which adds nerve even to the soul of heroism, and inspires the virgin, timid as the shrinking fawn, with resolution—that passion, which binds indissolubly with garlands of roses, where links of iron cannot clasp together—Love ! —from
—from thi%omntpotent sovereign of hu¬ man nature, arose the ollence of Eleo¬ nora. It' was now nearly a year, since a morn¬ ing of unusual brightness, and summer heat, in the beginning of the month of May, had tempted Eleonora abroad from her fathers house, at an earlier hour than she was accustomed to ramble out ; she had bent her steps towards a little wood at a short distance from the castle, in the retirement of which stood a soUtarv her- m i tage, inhabited by a female now in the vale of years :—Of the history of this re¬ cluse, not the least particular had ever been gained;—to the very few who had any communication with her, she was known by the name of the hermit Agatha ; and with the exception of Eleonora» Latimer appeared to be the only pers*,:: whose so¬ ciety gave her pleasure; and her being known to him at all, had been a matter of the greatest accident. We have already said, that the abode of о 4 our
our prelate's mother in Leicestershire, at the time of her son's becoming the hus¬ band of her ophan protegee benigna, was of the most romantic and beautiful kind ; — the house which she inhabited was situ¬ ated in the bosom of a cluster of hills, rich in every verdure which gives the as¬ pect of loveliness to the contemplated scene, and renders the face of nature rich in those fascinations which almost convey the idea of Arcadian landscape:—at the foot of one of these hills, dug from its moss-covered side, was a cell, which had once been the abode of a solitary man, retired from the cares and vanities of the world, and who had now paid the debt of nature some years. Since his decease the cell had been un¬ inhabited, and the encroach*ng ivy which fell in luxuriant clusters from the arms of the venerable oaks which grew on cither side of its entrance, had almost obscured it from observation, till the peasantry round about suddenly observed it to have been
been cropped of the foliage, which had hitherto shut out from it the light of day, and lhe warm beams of the sun ; and they likewise perceived the sandy ascent which led to İt* entrance to be marked with re¬ cent footsteps. Kot the impulse of idle curiosity, but the benevolent intention of proffering to the present inhabitant of the cell such little friendly services as they had been accustomed to bestow on her prede¬ cessor, caused them to introduce them¬ selves to the new comer, who was the her¬ mit Agatha. She received their attentions with a mix¬ ture of thankfulness and reserve ; and al¬ though grateful for their kindness, she ap¬ peared to delight in their absence. In those days, hermits, at least of the male sex, were too common to excite surprise in any breast ; but the silence which Aga¬ tha maintained relative to her history, and the motives of her self-exclusion from the world, was a singular instance, as other hermits gloried in explaining the causes » 5 for
for which they had inflicted on themselves the voluntary penance of exile from the pleasures of life. But in the case of Aga¬ tha, every circumstance was wrapt in dark¬ ness and mystery ;—who she was, whence she came, whether or not she possessed any connexions in the world, and by what means she had become acquainted with the existence of the cell in which she had taken up her abode, w*ere all secrets into which no one was able to penetrate : when any questions to this end were advanced to her, she would regularly reply to those who asked them, "Ifyou can esteem me for what you already know of me, I am happy in your friendship and acquaintance; but seek not to know more of me, or I must cease to'regard you for so doing.'* Her countenance bore m:>rks of her hav¬ ing been an extremely beautiful woman; but the corroding hand of sorrow appeared to ha\e committed irreparable ravage upon her ".harms": she Was possessed of a strong understanding, and her mind was um om- 5 monly
monly enlightened for a female of the age in which she lived ; in her deportment* al¬ though a hermit, there was dignity, and even majesty : the expression of her coun¬ tenance was that of natural haughtiness checked by the influence of good sense : at times there was a wildness in her eye, and a momentary incoherence in her words, which conveyed the idea οΐ her labouring under a temporary derange¬ ment of intellect; but it passed hastily off; and her actions were ever grave and consistent: her never-\ aning dress was а garb of the nature of those worn by pil¬ grims ; and it dilfered in nothing from that of the profession, except that the shell, which is the badge of the order, instead of being placed upon the upraised verge οΐ her hat, was fixed upon its crown, and the verge drawn down over her eyes, as if she were desirous of shading her countenance even from the observation of those with whom she accidentally conversed. -î Very shortly after her becoming the in- o ti habitant
habitant of this sequestered cell, the good Latimer being informed of her solitary si¬ tuation, went to visit her: at his first ar¬ rival, she received him as if his coming were an intrusion upon her solitude ; but when he announced himself to her, it ap¬ peared that she was no stranger to his name, and the excellent reputation which he bore in the world ; for she immediately smiled upon him with the greatest com¬ placency, and catching his hand in her*s, she carried it to her lips, imprinted on it a fervent kiss, and exclaimed, " Heaven bless thee, worthy man ! pardon me, that I cannot forbear bestowing on thee that blessing which I ought to petition at thy lips; I am urged by an impulse which I cannot restrain." This was one of those instances of a fer¬ vid mind, which sometimes caused suspi¬ cion to glance at the soundness of her rea¬ son. Latimer offered himself and his fa¬ mily to her as friends; besought her, if she had any weight upon her mind, of which
which the burthen had driven her from society, to make communication of it to him ; and to believe him actuated in his advice, not by any idle curiosity to learn her unfortunate story, but by a desire of being enabled to bestow on her his con¬ solation, and assistance towards the re¬ gaining of her peace of mind. In terms of the most unaffected grati¬ tude, she returned him her thanks for the benevolence of his intentions; but to the latest hour of their acquaintance, forbore to repose in him her confidence. After she had resided for some months on this spot, Agatha was prevailed upon by her friend Latimer, to extend, to his mother's habitation, her walk, which had hitherto been confined to the boundaries of a shadowy glen which lay before her cell, or to a cottage at a stone's throw from the borders of it, where she pro¬ cured the necessaries of life.—The Lady Benigna was already known to her, for she had visited her with her husband at her solitary
solitary dwelling:—The prelate's mother w r as for the first time introduced to her; the Lady Magdalene received her with the utmost courtesy, and Agatha returned to her the greatest respect and condescen¬ sion : but she appeared alone interested by the sight of the Bishop's only child, Eleonora, who was then about fifteen month:; old ; at the moment of her first beholding it, she uttered an exclamation of surprise, which she said had been be¬ trayed from her lips by her admiration of the extreme beauty of the infant; she took the babe into her arms, kissed it re¬ peatedly, and addressing herself to its at¬ tendant, Katherine, begged of her fre¬ quently to walk with her young charge towards her cell, that she might enjoy the pleasure of beholding and caressing it. As time moved on, the complacency of Agatha increased towards the parents of Eleonora, especially towards the venerable prelate ; and for Eleonora herself, she ap¬ peared to entertain the most sincere and tender
. tender affection. Eleonora was on her pai t gratified by the partiality evinced for her by the recluse, but at times alarmed, even by her caresses; for frequently while she was bestowing them on her, sudden starts of an awful expression of soul would animate her countenance, without any ap¬ parent cause to give them birth ; and as the big tear rolled down her cheek, tran- quillitv would return to her features. But when Eleonora had completed her twelfth year, and began to possess a know¬ ledge of the variety of character which marks the h 'iman race, she ceased to de¬ rive alarm from the peculiarities of the solitary Agatha, and began to regard them rather as claims upon the breast of feeling for its pity and sympathy.—From this period, therefore, the daughter of La¬ timer offered to the female hermit, from a sense of duty, those attentions which she had before paid her from the less excellent motive of seeing herself approved for be¬ stowing
stowing them on one whom her parents respected. When the period arrived at which La¬ timer was reappointed to the see of Wor¬ cester, and consequently obliged to quit the county of Leicester, in order to reside in his own diocese, he was no sooner him¬ self acquainted with the necessary change, than he visited Agatha, for the purpose of informing her of it, and requesting her to tell him whether there were any services which he could perform for her before his departure ? When he had ceased speaking, the fair hermit maintained for some minutes the silence of apparent regret; she then said, " Yes, there is one service which it is in your power to render me ;-—procure me a habitation similar to the one in which I now reside, in the vicinity of your new abode ; I have been so long accustomed to the attention: of yourself and your kind family, that it would materially embitter, nay
nay probably shorten my days, to be de¬ prived οΐ the comfort of their future en¬ joyment." The benevolent Bishop, who had the happiness of every human being at heart, immediately proposed to her a residence in his family ; but this offer she was firm in refusing; and he promised her therefore to endeavour to procure her a habitation near him, congenial to her desires. Accordingly, on arriving in Worcester¬ shire, one of Latimer's first considerations was that of putting into effect the promise he had made to the recluse. At the back of the castle in which his residence was fixed, was a small wood, which formed a part of the domains of the Earl of Wor¬ cester; it was a beautiful and romantic spot—one which he judged exactly suited to the taste and solitary disposition of Agatha ; and in the centre of this wood he caused to be erected a neat hermitage, consisting of two apartments, of which he invited her to take possession. The
The gratitude which Agatha felt for this increase of kindness, annea «rd to be more than once on the point of forcing from her lips a disclosure of her history to him from whom she was experiencing those favours which so sensibly touched her heart. "You must," she frequently at different times repeated to him, " judge me a mo*t un¬ grateful, or a most distrust ful being, to withhold my confidence from a benefactor like yourself; and rather than you should think thus ill of me, I would open to you the secrets of my heart, painful as would be the task." 41 If the task be painful, forbear ît," Latimer as regularly replied; " it would give me equal pain for you to suppose that it is my expectation to be repaid for those little services which I have had it in my power to conler on you, by the price of such communication аз would cause a moment's anguish to your own heait" "O worthy man!" exclaimed Agatha, " how amiable h thy heart, and how happy m Uit
must it be in the possession of such a daughter as thou art blessed with ! О had such a child"—— the tears burst from her eves, and the remainder of her words were scarcely audible, but Latimer belie\cd that he could distinguish, "been given to me;" -—she rose from her seat as she spoke, and passed several minutes in wandering wildly about, before her spirits regained their former degree of composure. . But notwithstanding the earnest desire expressed by the hermit Agatha of being situated near the abode of Latimer, it must not be supposed that the intercourse be¬ tween the inhabitants of Worcester Castle, and the solitary of the hermitage, was fre¬ quent;—commonly days, and not unu¬ sually weeks, passed without their seeing each other; the family of Latimer were not always constant to their residence ül the county where his See lay ; nor was the hermit Agatha invariably the inhabitant of her little dwelling in the wood :—but whi¬ ther she went, when she accidentally quit¬ ted
ted ils peaceful retreat, was a point hidden from the knowledge of all» in the same folds of thick obscurity in which was wrapt every circumstance relative to her history. About three weeks had elapsed, during which the unfovourabicncss of the weather had prevented Eleonora from visiting the recluse, when the unexpectedly fine morn¬ ing of which we have just spoken, induced her to set out on a walk to the hermitage —Her mother was at this period not weil either in health or spirits ;—her father was absent from home ; and judging that the enjoyment of Agatha's society for a few hours might be of essential service, in cheering the despondency of mind wider which the Lady Benigna was labouring, Eleonora intended to request the presence Îf the hermit at the castle, and to return |ain before the hour of breakfast. As she descended the gentle declivity of the verdant lawn which led from the castle f о the precincts of the wood, the face of nature presented to ber view a scene of the fltOJtt
most exhilarating and beautiful kind—the golden sun emerging from a bed of purple clouds, cast its glittering rays upon the grass converting by its da/zling influence the dew-drops which hung upon its blades into peerless gems—the woodland song¬ sters were pouring forth, in soul-enchanting notes, their gratitude and extacy—every branch, every spray bore a freshly-ex¬ panded leaf, or blossom—every flower ex¬ haled a perfume, sweet as was borne upon the wings of those ziephyrs which fanned the groves of Uden in its state of inno· cence. Proceeding onwards, she entered the masses of the little wood, and having crossed a narrow rivulet, over which a pass was formed by the trunk of a tree rented on either bank, she was in the act of stoop¬ ing down to gather some violets which had attracted her notice by the sweetness of their scent, when she was startled by a rust¬ ling noise amidst the brambles and under¬ wood, which grew in luxuriant thickness around
around her. In this wood she had never Ыеп accustomed to meet any human be¬ ing, but the solitary female, whose dwell¬ ing was sheltered in its bosom ; and she had never seen her deviating from its re¬ gular paths. The noise increased, and Eleo¬ nora felt her heart beat quickly within her breast—for sounds are always mote alarm¬ ing, ín proportion as they are unexpected and indefinable, rather than loud and ter¬ rible ; of the force of this truth was Eleo¬ nora at this moment sensible ; she stood awaiting the event with suspended respira¬ tion, * In a few seconds she observed the figure of a man to îwae from a knot of bushes, at the distance of only a few paces from the spot where she was standing ; he ap¬ proached the margin of the rivulet, and sinking upon one knee, he dipped the crown of hi% cap into the stream, and having filled it with water, lifted it to bis tips : whilst he wa* drinking, cither an ac¬ tual sound, or the idea of one, appeared to
to reach his senses, for he suddenly broke off his draught, and threw his eyes around him with an expression οΐ anxious curi¬ osity ;—upon Eleonora they fell, and upon her they rested. The stranger appeared about twenty- live years of age ; his figure and face were both strikingly handsome, particularly the latter, which at this moment gained addi¬ tional interest, from a belief which its ex¬ pression conveyed to the mind of Eleo¬ nora, that he was sinking under the pres¬ sure of recent exertion, or fatigue : his dress was of an indefinite kind, from which it was not easy to decide upon his rank in life ; his legs were cased in boots of russet leather, which bore the marks of age ; a surtout of coarse brown cloth covered his body, and descended nearly to his knees ; a linen ruff encircled his neck; and his deer-skin vest·, flying open at his breast, displayed beneath a shining surface, which appeared to be part of a breast-plate of mail;
mail ; his surcoat was confined round his waist with a leathern belt; and beneath the skirts of it peeped out on his left side the point of a sword-case ; his cap was of the same nature as those worn at that pe¬ riod by every degree of Englishmen ; in his hand he carried a staff, resembling that of a hunter, with a sharp polished blade at one of its ends, and a leaden bullet at the other; and upon this he rested, whilst he fixed his eyes on Eleonora, If the countenance can be read as indi¬ cative of the feelings of the heart, alarm was evidently the predominant emotion of his, on his first sight of the fair Eleonora ; but as he continued to gaze upon her, an expression of mingled pleasure and admi¬ ration was seen stealing over his features ; with an irresolute step he approached her, and sinking on his knee before her, he ex¬ claimed, " Lovely and interesting being, pardon this address ; I cannot be deceived in your eyes; eyes, gentle as your's, must be
be the index of a heart whose inmate is benevolence : O, for the love of mercy, extend your pity towards me !" *' Who are you ?" returned Eleonora, " and what is it that you require of me?" " I am," he replied, " a wretch, an out¬ cast, craving at your generous hand a mor¬ sel of bread ; for I have not eaten for these twenty-four hours past." " Is thy state indeed so wretched ?" re¬ joined Eleonora : " hasten with me to the castle yonder, where thy wants will be in¬ stantly supplied ; every unfortunate meets ready succour beneath the roof of my fa¬ ther Latimer." <e Oh, no, no/' he hastily exclaimed, " I cannot go thither; I must not be seen in the habitations of men ; my life might be the forfeit of my daring ;—I cannot quit the shelter which this wood affords me. ťŕ You alarm me," replied Eleonora ; " this declaration seems to imply that you vol. i. e are
are a criminal, and to upbraid me for hold¬ ing converse with you." " О stay, I entreat you stay," he cried, catching hold of her robe as he spoke, in order to prevent her quitting him ; " cor¬ rect the harsh judgment which you have formed of an unfortunate being, now for the first time in your presence !— О recall your uncharitable opinion of my charac¬ ter; and believe that although persecuted and wretched, he who kneels before you is no criminal." His accents were those of the most ear¬ nest and supplicating sorrow ; they entered the heart of Eleonora; and a tear which started into her eye, communicated hope and joy, in the assurance of her friend¬ ship, to the stranger. t( О blessed omen of an angelic soul !" heeontinued, " you feel for my miserable situation— О may every blessing which Providence holds in store for the reward of the benevolent, be showered upon you ; may
may it requite you with bliss equal to that which the tear of a fellow-being shed in my cause, communicates to my heart ; xvitli a more rapturous sensation it cannot inspire yon/* " If vour fears arc, as vou sav, directed towards every one, how have you ventured to address me?" asked Eleonora. Faintly smiling as he spoke, he replied, ** 1 have ever placed faith in the gentle breast of your sex, and found it the sanc¬ tuary of every virtuous, every sympathetic quality :—In the benevolence of woman I have never yet been deceived ; and in your charity, who appear to me more of angel than of woman, 1 feel a double se- uirtty." " I cannot endure the idea of a fellow- being sn tiering from want whilst it is in my power to administer to hi* nece^itits; I will therefore return to the castle, and dis¬ patch from thence a servant of mv fa- thcr\ to meet you here with some re¬ freshments/' rejoined Eleonora. г. "Л - О lady,*
" О lady," he exclaimed, " deem me not ungrateful for your kind intentions; and if in my words I appear less thankful than I feel, the faintness that oppresses me must be my apology." <f Do not continue to kneel to me," said Eleonora ; tc vou tremble with weakness." " 1 have used much fatigue within the last two days," he replied, " and the pe¬ riod that I told you 1 had fasted is a long while to be deprived of food, especially when the body is in strong exercise." ft And still the necessity which presses on you, will not induce you to comply with either of the two offers that I have made to you," said Eleonora. " Oh, no, no," he returned, t( a worse evil than that of hunger might be the event of such a hazaad ; I dare not encounter it." " Sincerely do I pity you," replied Eleonora, " and could I have served you »------- " It is not yet certain that you may not," he
he interrupted her by saying—" pardon me ; you can but mock my presumption, and refuse my prayer: is it impossible that vou should voursclf walk hither again in the course of an hour—of the morning?" Eleonora understood the meaning of these questions; she perceived that he wished her to bring him relief in person, but was still apprehensive of openly mak¬ ing such a demand. She had never be¬ fore seen a human being in the wretched state of suffering in which she beheld this young man ; his countenance had prepos¬ sessed her heart in his favour, at the very first moment of her observing him, before he had made her acquainted with his hap¬ less state—his misfortunes now interested her feelings, and she conceived her duty tp be concerned in bestowing on him such assistance as the privation of might en¬ danger even his life :—upon this last con¬ sideration she principally formed her re¬ solution ; and directing him to remain near е У the
the spot where he now stood, she promised herself to fetch him from the castle such refreshment аз his wasted strength so mate¬ rially required. He repeated to her his thanks, in accents,, j f possible, more fervent than before, and having expressed them, he added, " You will then come alone, lady ?—if you do not, all the kindness you are conferring on me, may turn to my undoing," Eleonora promised that no one should accompany her, or be made acquainted with her design, ar*d moved towards the castle: on reaching it, she enquired for her mother, and finding that she was not yet risen, no obstacle presented itself to her returning to the relief of the stranger : —she was so constantly in the habit of earning a little basket of provisions to several poor families in the adjoining vil¬ lage, that such a one was immediately pre¬ pared for her, without even an enquiry re¬ lative to the use which she was about t« make
make of it ; and having added to its con¬ tents a flask of mead, she once more set out from the castle. When she arrived within sight of that part of the wood where she had left the stranger, she observed him standing with his sword drawn in his hand, and employed in attentively examining the edge of its blade, and passing his fingers over it, as if he were apprehensive of its having received injury, probably, she imagined, from some encounter in which he might have been engaged :—The moment he beheld her, hie sheathed his weapon, and as he replaced it by his side, she observed that his thighs were incased in cuisses of steel, over which he again hastily drew the folds of his sur¬ coat. , She presented him with the refreshments which she had brought, and having put them into his hands, she said, ,r If thou art really an innocent sufferer, as 1 believe thee to be, may thy fate never lead thee to any one more inimical to thy prosperity e 4 than
than myself;" and with these words she was departing. Laying his hand, with the utmost respect and gentleness, upon her's, he detained her by it whilst he said, " Judge me not, most meritorious lady, an encroacher upon the favours which I have already re¬ ceived from you, when I venture to en¬ treat you to add one more to those for which I now stand indebted to you ;—you have both professed and shewn yourself the friend of my unfortunate case; suffer me therefore ere we part, to caution you how you may avoid unintentionally be¬ coming my bitterest enemy—Have I your permission to proceed?" Eleonora could not refuse her hearing to a demand of this nature, and he pro¬ ceeded thus :—" For the love of that hu¬ manity, which I am certain, from the know¬ ledge which I have within this last hour acquired of your nuble heart, that it would create you agony to trespass against, do not, I entreat you, ever relate to any hu¬ man
man being your rencontre here with me ; do not ever, if you should hear a descrip¬ tion of my person or dress, confess that I ha\e been seen by you ; do not, above all, if wc should ever chance to meet in dif¬ ferent circumstances to those in which we now behold each other, acknowledge a for¬ mer acquaintance to have existed between us:—give me \our promise to this víYei î, that 1 may depart from you w^h the de¬ lightful reflection of my having found in vou that which is indeed a treasure almost unknown to m\ heart— a t.ue friend/* ·* If thou art e\en le^ *L vnin-jf thin 1 believe thee," replied 1.Icon, ι a, *· th,»u necd'st not fear that any rireumstam e which may hereafter appear to con*, i. t thee to me of demerit, should tempt me to thy injury; 1 would not willingly i.u.»o misfortune to anv fellow-beinir." " If \ ou will not make this promise," he replied, " 1 bhall reflect upon vou ui!h
dread ; if you give ease to my heart by your compliance with my petition, a grate¬ ful adoration of your memory will never be absent from my thoughts." The emotion of his soul appeared vio¬ lent whilst he uttered these words; and as he spoke, he grasped the hand of Eleo¬ nora with a degree of wildness in his looks;—both for his sake and her own, she wished to separate immediately ; and considering that an essential benefit might arise to him, if it were to extend no far¬ ther than the calming of his present anxi¬ ous feelings, fro я her acquiescence in a request which she believed could be pro¬ ductive of no injury to herself, she gave him her solemn promise to adhere tc the terms to which he had besought her to subscribe. With a rapturous exclamation he re¬ ceived her promise, and implored a bless¬ ing on her head for having made it :—He now suffered her to withdraw her hand from
from his sMsp. alld Eleo,,,,,, eW> „ f am ebi I have been able to serve vou-fare- well!" ' « JWell.·· he replie.,. « but not for ever ! < JU( | granli , lot f<Jr cycf ...
EG
CHAP.
CHAP. IV. " ■ ** Is it possible That love should of a sudden take such hold? ■ ■ - ........... - ..... ------------- ТП1 t found it to be true, I never thought it possible, er likely."
" Hope is a lover's walKmg-stalTi walk hence with that, Aud manase it against despairing thoughts." SllAKESrCARI. Eleonora thought no more at the present hour of her intended visit to the hermit Agatha, but returned hastily to the castle, and framing some excuse for retiring im¬ mediately to her chamber, she gave up her thoughts to reflection on the strange ad¬ venture which had that morning befallen her. She
She knew not what or whom to suppose the mvsterious stranger, unless he were a «ŕ ** member of one of those protestant fami¬ lies against whom it had been the first act of Mary's sovereignty to denounce her vengeance, and who were now* Ovin«; from the terror of her persecution ;—but then, if he were one of those unfortunates, how unaccountable that he should have refused an introduction to the abode of Latimer, whom every reformist regarded not less as a shield of defence, than a parent of be¬ nevolence!—The more she reflected, the more her curiosity was excited, and her mind harassed to imagine a motive for his mysterious conduct. Ko civil war at this moment agitated the kingdom ; it was therefore natural to conclude, as she had ascertained that he was armed, that he had been engaged in some private affray;— perhaps his- sword might have pierced the heart of some foe, from the pursuit of whose friends he might now be flying:— on this probability her thoughts rested :— whatever
whatever his situation, her pity and sym¬ pathy were strongly excited in his cause; an emotion new to her feelings animated her heart, as she continued to reflect upon him ; and in the sincerity of her desire for his welfare, she called on Heaven to wit¬ ness her resolution of maintaining sacred the promise of secrecy which she had made to him upon the occurrence of the morning. During the whole of that day, Eleonora confined herself within the walls of Wor¬ cester Castle ; on the following one, about the hour of noon, she once more set out to visit the recluse of the wood ; she re¬ traced the path where she had the day be¬ fore met the unknown ; but neither in go¬ ing, nor in returning, did she encounter a single person. Nearly three months passed on, during which the unknown appeared no more to Eleonora; but although she did not behold him, his image was not the less engraven on her heart; and with each succeeding 4 day
day she became more anxious to learn his fate, although she had now lost all ex¬ pectation of seeing him again. About this time the hermit Agatha was attacked by a fit of illness, for her reco¬ very from which -she was indebted to the uncea-ing attentions οΐ J ¿»timer's family, who ad ministered their friendly cares to her both by day and night. When she was runsidcrabiy amended, but not suffi¬ ciently recovered to be left without a corn- pinion, Eleonora insisted on taking her turn alternately with her mother, and old Katherine, in pacing the night at the her- mitaue. The second nicht of Elconora's watching was one during which the air was uncommonly hot and oppressive, so much so as to render the invalid unable to sleep : when morning beamed, Agatha requested her fair guest, who had arisen at the dawn of day from the couch pre¬ pared for her repose, to indulge her by striking the chords of her lute, of which she hoped that the melody might lull her to
to sleep— Eleonora immediately complied with her request, and opening one of the casements İn the outer apartment, she took her seat by it, and played an air which she knew to be a favourite with the invalid. It gave her satisfaction to find that her notes produced the desired effect of lulling to slumber the senses of Agatha ; and strik¬ ing the chords οΐ her instrument to a more gentle melody, she continued to play, lest the charm should fade, if she ceased to create those sounds which produced it.— As she still moved her fingers over the strings, she was suddenly startled by a deep sigh, the sound of which appeared to en¬ ter at the narrow casement close to which she was sitting ; she immediately raised her eyes towards it, and beheld the mysterious stranger, whose necessities she had once relieved, standi η , under a tree at a short distance from the hermitage, observing her. With the utmost difficulty Eleonora sub¬ dued an exclamation of surprise, which she felt
felt mounting to her lips;—the counte¬ nance of the stranger became instantly animated with an expression of the great¬ est delight, and with his hands clasped, the joint effect, as it appeared, of extacy and supplication, he approached towards the window. " Blessed be this hour!" he exclaimed, " which once more admits me to your presence," " I am not alone," whispered forth the agitated Eleonora. " Thanks, many thanks," he replied, <c for your generous caution ;" and catch¬ ing the same low tone of voice in which she had set him the example of speaking, he added, " Will you, most revered maid, deign to appoint a time when I may see yon alone, if it be but for a single mo¬ ment ? I have a matter of the utmost im¬ portance to communicate to you." The feelings of Eleonora recoiled from the idea of appointing a meeting with a man who was almost a stranger to her, and she
she replied, " Cannot you now impart to me what you wish to say?" *' Have you not yourself warned me that there is danger here," he returned, " by informing me that you are not alone? When shall I see you ? for Heaven's sake appoint the time." Still Eleonora hesitated to reply. ť: Oh accumulation of misery!" he ex¬ claimed, " you do not, I perceive, wish «ver to behold me again ; and my fate is now a million times more wretched, than if you had never blessed me with your friendship." At the moment Eleonora was about to re^ly, she cast her eycis upon a window opposite to that by which she was stand¬ ing, and saw old Katherine approaching towards the hermitage—In hasty accents she warned him of his danger. He received her information with gra¬ titude, and added, "To-night, to-morrow night, and the night after, I shall wander at the hour of eight, on the spot where your
your humanity saved my life—if you do not for one instant condescend to meet me there, I shall live to curse, instead of bless the hour of my preservation ;" and having said this, he disappeared hastily amongst the trees. The parting words of the unknown made a deep impression on the feelings ©f Eleonora; they had been spoken in the accents of α soul rent by the most acute pangs of despair; from her first interview with him, her pity had been his; and the few last moments had so fully convinced lier that the agitation which his unexpected presence had produced in her heart, was caused by a sensation of a still tenderer nature, that she considered it л dutv of propriety which she owed to herself, not to attend the appointment to which he had so earnestly entreated her coming. The unknown now again occupied all her thoughts ; she wished that the promise vwiich she had made to him of secrecy, on the
the first day of her becoming acquainted with him, had not been made, in order that she might have been at liberty to re¬ commend him to the protection of her fa¬ ther—from this step the sacrcdness οΐ her word withheld her ; and she began to re¬ flect, whether, as she was the only person at whose hands he would accept those ser¬ vices of which a cruel destiny appeared to render him so painfully in need, it did not become her to wave these scruples of ex¬ treme delicacy, and to repair at the ap¬ pointed hour to the spot which he had named in the wood :—she resolved, how¬ ever, as she had still three evenings be¬ fore her, on either of which she might see him, if her inclination leant to the meeting, to deliberate upon the matter for a day or two longer, before she formed her determination. In the evening of the second day after Eleonora 's last rencontre л ith the stranger, it had been Latimer's intention to vbit the hermit
hermit Agatha; but being prevented in his design, he commissioned his daughter to be his representative. The mind of Eleonora had for the two last days been tossing in a sea of painful doubt ; she dreaded lest by refusing to sec her rmsferious acquaintance, she might plunge him into same calamity, which the very confined knowledge that she now had of his circunv*'4ccii did not allow her to foresee; and sue feared equally the self- reproach with which accident or design might conspire hereafter to load her mind, for having complied with a request of this obscure nature. The sensibility of her heart was such as to place her upon the present occasion in a state of irreconcdeablc difficultv to her own mind—she knew not how to act, and wished chance to be her director. The hour at which her father had pro¬ posed to her to become his representative in a visit of friendship to the hermit Aga¬ tha, was that of nx in the evening—Had she
bhc fell a reluctance to have passed through the wood mi near the hour of the stranger's appointment, «he durst not have confessed it, as bhc was not at liberty to have as¬ signed any cause for that reluctance ; and accordingly she threw her stoic over her, and set out. When she had passed over the draw¬ bridge, she paused a moment in reflection —chance, for the interference of which bhe had ьо earnestly prayed in the case subsisting between herself and the un¬ known, appeared to have decided that she should once more behold hiin ; the hour of eight would be the легу time at which she must, without deviating from her re¬ gular custom when she visited Agatha in an evening, pass near the nutlet in the wood ;—■ now her heart beat with a painful violence ; now again it sunk motionless within her breast—In the course of a few minutes she proceeded onwards—The sun was already in the west, and the clouds of dapple grey which foretold the approach of
of evening were collecting in the oppo¬ site direction of the horizon. For the first time in her life, Eleonora felt a sensa¬ tion approaching to apprehension, at en¬ tering that wood, where not the idea of a fear had ever before availed her senses— she had not penetrated far into its recesses ere the sound of hasl ν footsteps struck her ear; ü\c stopped and listened—thev ad¬ vanced, and in a few seconds she beheld scveial men in the habits of hinds, issue from different thickets around the spot on which she stood—a'armed by their sudden appearance, and the more so by observing that they were all armed, although somo of the number were not provided with more formidable weapons than sticks which they had broken from the arms of trees, <>he*uttf red a loud and piercing shriek. One of the men instantly approached her, and requesting her not to be alarmed, informed her that they intended her no ill, that they were in search of a person whom they believed to have concealed himself in the
the wood, and begged her to рш on with¬ out apprehension. The desire which Eleonora felt to en¬ quire who the регмт wa % of whom they were in pursuit, was almost insurmount¬ able ; but bhc commanded her feelings suf¬ ficiently to represi, her inclination of ask¬ ing ihis information—bhe decided that if it were indeed her mysterious acquaintance of whom they were in search, that such a question might excite their suspicion of her having tome knowledge of htm ; and therefore, not Ic« out of respect to the promise which bhe had made to him, than to her own private desire of his welfare, she parsed on, On reaching the hermitage, it was with some dìifiruìty that %-he could feuffîciently rompose her feature«, for the agit:, ι ion of her mind to escape the penetrating eye of Agatha—«he however succeeded in her en¬ deavours to this end ; bnt the doubts and apprehensions which racked her mind whihtf «he remained with her, were of the most
most painful kind^—She could not divest herself of the idea that these men were the enemies of the unknown, ^nd that of him they were now in pursuit ;~ hent e she concluded that if she had on the preced¬ ing evening repaired to the place of his appointment, and lent her ear for a few moments to what it had been his wish to impart to her confidence,« he might by tlm time have removed hmr.elf to some dis¬ tance from that spot, in the vicinity of width it was much more than probable that he now lay concealed ; and thus her compliance have preserved him from tbe evita to which he might now be exposed. As she sat by the side of Agatha's couch, her thoughts wandered far from the recluse whom site v.as w&iting —at one moment she fancied that ^;he heard the cry of som« bein«: în distrez ; at another the shout of triumph; and at a third, the clash of con¬ tending swords— but still a« each apparent ынин1 subsided, bhe endeavoured to rc- аэдге bedelf with the belief that they had **'!.. i, ж onh
only been the crcaîiom of her hurried imagination. The sun had now sunk beneath the ho¬ rizon, and the gathering bhsdcs of evening had begun to cast their dusky vapoun over the face of the sky :—with trembling steps Eleonora quitted the hermitage, and bê¬ lait to reirar с her wav towards the castle. Where the overdiiidowing foliage of the trees met in a branching canopy аЫпе her head» the cu^mV* appeared to be inlmitely farther adtait*·«*« 1 than when %icvcil from Mich ipot?» a4 were less shaded by the cltw- tcring elms; and Eleonora citóle one of those paths which wa% immediately cx- pobcil to the ;?i«K0i»p!iere. She pas&cd the цнн where, in her way to thf hermitage, &he had cncountcrcd the armed men, without any came for alarm, ťiŕfcpf %*hnt lay concealed in her own brea%< ; she was now within a furlong of the pass over the rivulet, where bhe had fir*t fcecn the bH«g whose image was oc- uipying her thoughts; without crossing this
this rivulet, she could not,regain the castle, and there was but this single place at which the rivulet could be crossed, except by any one who was willing to ford its waters. She wished to know the hour;—she cast her eyes towards the sky, and forming her opinion from certain observations which she had been accustomed to make, she con¬ jectured it to be near, very near the hour of the stranger's appointment—at this mo¬ ment the clock of the castle struck— İt sounded a single quarter—this she con¬ cluded must be one quarter past eight ;~— thus probably, if no advers? circumstance had occurred to prevent his keeping the ap¬ pointment which he had proposed to her, he would have left the spot before she reached it, despairing of her coming— This conjecture gave rise to an undefined sensation in her heart, which she knew not whether to decide productive of satisfaction, or the reverse—Again she moved on; at the entrance of the narrow path which led dirait to the trunk of the tree that funned r 5 the
the pass across the rivulet, lay a cap, ex¬ actly resembling the one which she had seen him wear; near it was part of a linen ruff, which appeared to have been torn w T ith violence from the neck of its wearer; and upon the grass where she discovered it, Were several spots of blood. " Oh merciful Heaven !" exclaimed Ele¬ onora, snatching them hastily from the ground, " I cannot be deceived; too surely these were worn by him when I last beheld him ; he has been assailed, Wounded, per¬ haps— О powers of omnipotence, hear my prayer, and grant that his life be spared him!" Scarcely had she concluded this invoca¬ tion, ere she felt a hand gently laid upon her shoulder, and accompanied by these words, " Am ï then so blest ? does the paragon οΐ her sex take interest in my wretched fate?"—it was the voice of the stranger himself, and the deep blushes of Eleonora revealed to him the confusion with which she was overwhelmed, by the knowledge
knowledge of his having overheard the exclamation which circumstance had sur¬ prised from her lips. Joy sparkled in his eyes, and he said, u Yes, lovely fair, I have, as you suspect¬ ed, been assailed, and wounded, but the injury I ha\e received is not great, and your presence is a balm which heals the smart :—Upon this very spot I was attack¬ ed, but I have escaped my enemies; and the dread of being opposed to them again, was not sufficient to drive me hence, whilst I was encouraged by the cheering idea of meeting you : crouched beneath the shel¬ tering foliage of yonder friendly thicket, I have for some while past been lying, in breathless expectation of your coming." " But," replied Eleonora, casting her eyes anxiously around her as she spoke, '* are you not alarmed Jest they should now return, and find you here ?" A bewildered expression animated the countenance of the unknown, and he said, " Were all their poniards opposed at this f 3 moment
moment to my breast, I would not fly the opportunity which is presented to me of unfolding to you the cherished secret of my heart :—Hear me then, most angelic lady, and reply to me with pity and with mercy, for your frown has more power to wound than their united swords-—Lady, the first moment of my beholding you, famine threw me a suppliant at your feet ; but whilst I contemplated your benign, your lovely countenance, a passion stronger than the pangs of want entered my heart, and usurped immediate empire over my senses." The agitation of Eleonora increased at everv word he uttered ; her trembling knees appeared unable to support the bur¬ then of her sinking frame ; still she en¬ deavoured to move on, and as she at¬ tempted to proceed, she said, " Forbear, forbear, this is a language which í did not expect, nor can I listen to it." " Nay, hear me, hear me," he ejacu¬ lated ; " from me you shall never be called upon
upon to listen to any language, or to wit¬ ness any conduct, but that of the respect which is due to a perfect being Eke your¬ self— vou will not. I am sure, tall ine culp¬ able, bccauic I am convinced of your per¬ fections; but rather, Ín the bene\ ölence of your hc;:rf, >ou will rej Ά c th:U the sentiments I feel for you, cause me a mo¬ mentary oblivion of oppressing cares: from the instant that I parted from yon on that morning on which our acquaint¬ ance began, the recollection of your friendship has been the cheering star of m ν misfortunes; and I have been unceas- ingly seeking an opportunity for unfold¬ ing to you, that I had devoted to you all that I dare at present call my own—my heart." * Again the agitated Eleonora attempted to cross the rivulet, and again he detained her — " I am happy," he said, " I am blest ; my enemies cannot inflict on me any regret equal to the joy ofthat discovery which the f 4 few
fe· w last moments have made to mc, that 1 attı not indifferently regarded by you." " What declaration have í made to that effect r " asked Eleonora. ff Did I not overhear your prayer that my life might have been preserved?" he answered: "Yes, I did hear that happy declaration ; but you did not hear the blessings which my heart in silence im¬ plored of Heaven to pour down upon you for having uttered it." " Humanity prompted my prayer,'* re¬ turned Eleonora ; " and since I (ind that it is no immediate service which you have to request at my hands, I must entreat that we separate." " Only leave me hope to exist upon during your absence," he exclaimed: " such is the nature of my circumstances, that it will probably be long, very long indeed, ere we can meet again—will you then, during the long interval of separa¬ tion which 1 foresee, and dread, deny me the
the only consolation that can sooth my unfortunate state ?—you do not hate me ; thus much I have proved from your own words—where there is not hate, there must be some degree of esteem ;—only confer to mc whether I have excited that passion sufliciently in your breast for you to de¬ sire to behold mc again—to know more of me when fate permits mc to reveal myself to you r" ·· If it were permitted me to know more of you no*, my answer relative to our meeting at some future period might be more decisive," replied Eleonora. ·* Oh God !" he cried, striking his fore¬ head with the palm of his hand, '* why am I denied the power of re\ea!ing my¬ self to the only being for whom life is desirable to me !— О banish your distrust of me, banish it, I implore you!" " I have been taught to consider mys¬ tery in some degree the veil of impro¬ priety," replied Eleonora, " and cannot r "» thus
thus suddenly conquer the lessons in which I have been educated." " Oh, why did you preserve my life, why did you preserve it ?" he exclaimed. The emotion with which he spoke was so violent, that Eleonora became alarmed. " If ever you hope to see me again," she hastily cried, " suffer me instantly to de¬ part." " I have only sorrow to pour into your car, and therefore you are weary of my society," he replied. " Ungenerous surmise !" returned Eleo¬ nora ; " have I not given you a proof that I do not shun those who are pressed down with sorrow?" <f Oh Heavens!" he exclaimed, "into how ungrateful an expression has the keen¬ ness of my feelings hurried me !—I merit not your pardon," " You have it notwithstanding," she re¬ turned, "and you shall have my prayers for the relief of your overburthened heart." "Will
,r Will you pray for mer" he replied; " then 1 am satisfied ; you ъШ think of me in your orisons, and my idea will be the companion of the sighs you waft up to Heaven—Henceforward i am thine alone; bin «ily devoted are my heart and arm to thee— но witness for me, ail the pou era of blisb !** *' Farewell." said KIconora. The stranger appeared mo\ed to the ut- mobt tenderness ; and having in the most gentle and respectful manner pressed hb lips upon her hand, he said, ** When may I dare to hope that 1 ¡»hall see you again ?" <% Throw off the imstery in which you are enveloped," answered L.leonora, '* and make the hour your own."—Having ut¬ tered these words, she departed, and the stranger, crossing his hands upon his breast, wich a sigh which seemed to proceed from his innermost h^art, stood observing her, till a winding turn in the path a!on* which she was moving, shut her from his view.
FÖ
(ί:λς\
CHAP. V. " Ibtk ! heard yr that sip,h?— Solemn and tier j», it scem'd like Misciy's tone ; ■ ■ ..........— - and baiK—a groan !" llrnerni.
■— ...... — -.—.—— .............. ..«« Let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of woik, Tu know it furthei."' SllAK£$r£ARt. Day again passed on after day, without Ele¬ onoras seeing the unknown, or hearing any one spoken of in her intercourse with society, whose person or circumstances at ;dl corresponded with his; and as he did not appear tefore her again, she con¬ fi eluded
- eluded that he had either forgotten her, or that being withheld from unfolding the mystery which had encompassed him when she had before seen him, and which she had directed him to prepare to divulge when he next beheld her, he was restrain¬ ed from entering her presence, by an ap¬ prehension of the necessity which he might still be under of concealing from her his name and history, exciting her displea¬ sure. His recollection was still cherished bv her in the private recesses of her heart, ач fondly as it had ever been, although she blushed almost to confess to herself, that she felt thus tenderly fora man of whom she had so slight a knowledge; and the only apology with which she could recon¬ cile herself to the fact was. that the pecu¬ liar case of distress in which she had lir^t beheld him, had engaged Ïor kim a certain degree of her tenderness, which under any other circumstances she would not have felt for him. But
But whilst we dwell on those particulars · which were most interesting to the heart of - Eleonora, we must not omit to mention a circumstance of an extraordinary nature, which at this time occasioned not only in¬ terest, but a considerable portion of anxi¬ ety, to all those with whom she was con¬ nected. In the Castle of Worcester, was a suit of apartments known by the name of the Northern Gallery, of which the use was interdicted to the family by whom it was now inhabited :—when the Earl of Worces¬ ter had quitted the castle, he had given free liberty to the crown of appropriating it to the use of the bishop of the diocese, till the palace should be rebuilt for his re¬ sidence; only requesting, that as it was of so vast dimensions as to be infinitely more than sufficient for the convenience of any family, however large, that these apartments might not be intruded into ; assigning as his reason for this request, that in them he had deposited his papers, his plate, and various
various other articles of value, to which he wished no one to have access. The cause appeared so probable, that its truth was never doubted; and when Latimer took up his abode in the castle, every key was put into his possession, save that which opened the first door of the Northern Galler/. There are always thoic amongst the in¬ ferior ranks of society, who will assign su¬ perstitious fears to any spot, over which, in their opinion, hangs the slightest veil of mystery ; accordingly the single fact of their being debarred entrance to these apartments, proved a sufficient cause for some of Latimer's domestics to pronounce them haunted—These idle prattlings ne¬ ver reached the ear of Latimer himself, but they were heard by Cyprian, who, supe¬ rior to the prejudices of the uninformed and inconsiderate, endeavoured to argue them out of their folly ; but his reason¬ ings proved less efficacious in correcting their
their opinion, than did the peaceful suc¬ cession of seven years, during which nei¬ ther sound nor sight issued from the dread¬ ed gallery to substantiate their apprehen¬ sions. Next in courage to Cyprian amidst the domestics of Latimer's household, were Eg¬ bert and Bennet, the gardeners ; and these accordingly did not scruple to occupy a chamber over that where Cyprian lodged, in a tower adjoining to those very apart¬ ments which Avere so universally dreaded by the rest of the servants. A few weeks after Eleonora 's last meet¬ ing with the mysterious stranger, Cyprian and his fellow-lodgers in the tower had scarcely passed the entrance to the North¬ ern Gallery in their way to their chambers, ere Bennet, who was undoubtedly the least courageous of the three, catching hold of the arm of one of his companions, ex¬ claimed, "Hark! hark! what is that?" " Why the castle clock striking twelve," replied
replied Egbert ; " have you listened to its tones all these years, to be frightened by them at last?" The castle clock was indeed striking the midnight hour, for Cyprİaıij having been engaged with his accounts, had sat up much beyond his usual time ; and Egbert and Bennet, having fallen asleep over their ale, bad forgotten that they were not in bed, till he had awakened them for the purpose of retiring to it. "Yes* yes, I hear the clock/* Bennet replied, *· but 1 heard likewise » voice— í am certain I did." " And what did it say ?" asked Cyprian, laughing. " It said, " Hold I hold Г replied Ben- *'.et; t( I heard the words distinctly, and can only wonder that you did not hear them likewise." *· You have been so long asleep in the kitchen, that you are dreaming as you walk," cried Egbert; "come, come to bed, and"------ He
He was interrupted by a deep and lengthened groan, as of some being suf¬ fering under the greatest agony. "There! there! what say you now?" exclaimed Bennet, in the most nervous trepidation of fear; (< Was I not right? —Heaven preserve us ! Heaven preserve us!" Cyprian and Egbert both heard the sound, and began to believe that Bennet might have been correct in the declaration which he had made of a former one hav¬ ing struck his ear. Again the groan was repeated, and fol¬ lowed by a faint cry, which seemed to ask for assistance. " It proceeds from the Northern Gal¬ lery," said Egbert, looking very much as if he considered the event of the present moment as a justification of the alarm with which his fellow-servants regarded it. " The sounds issue most certainly from thence," remarked Cyprian, retaining his composure of voice, but with an expres¬ sion
sion of consternation marked on his coun¬ tenance. A blow as of some one falling with vio¬ lence upon the ground was now heard; the groan was again repeated ; and unbroken silence then prevailed. The existing circumstance appeared to Cyprian of so extraordinary a nature, that he judged it becoming in him immediately to impart a knowledge of it to his master, and declared his intention to his compa¬ nions, who, stout as their hearts might comparatively be, did not choose to remain in his absence so near the spot from whence the terrific sounds had issued ; and there¬ fore accompanied him to the door of La¬ timer's chamber. The worthy prelate happened to be in a small closet adjoining to his bed-room, where he usually passed some part of the night in prayer or in study ; and hearing the voice of Cyprian, he came out to en¬ quire the cause of his summons. Cyprian explained the fact, and La¬ timer
timer having attended to his account, di¬ rected him immediately to call up some of the other domestics οΐ his household, saying that he judged the present circum¬ stance not only to permit, but to prompt him to an investigation of the forbidden apartments ; and that he did not choose to expose himself to the contingency of meeting danger within them, unprotected: ■— " He considered it now," he said, " no breach of trust to penetrate into them, as his doing so might, perhaps, rescue from the hands of robbers, those valuables of tbe Earl of Worcester, which they were said to contain, or produce the more es¬ sential service of preserving the life of a fellow-being." The domestics were aroused according to his direction, and clinging together under apprehensions of which they durst not make a verbal display in the hearing of Latimer, they followed him with trembling steps towards the Northern Gallery, When they arrived before the folding doors
doors of dark oak which formed its en¬ trance, not a single sound was audible, but such as were caused by the quick breath¬ ings of the group collected around the prelate ; and Latimer commanded the por¬ ter of the castle to deliver up his keys to Cyprian, whom he directed to make ex¬ periment of them each in turn, upon the lock of the door which obstructed their progress into the hitherto unexplored gal¬ lery. Cyprian obeyed, but without success— every key was tried in vain. Latimer, however, convinced equally that Cyprian would not have deceived him in his ac¬ count of the night's event, nor have suf¬ fered himself to be alarmed without a cause, continued resolute in his design of entering the gallery ; and to this end he directed an instrument to be sought, with which to force the lock. Whilst this was gone in quest of, the silence within the gallery remained un¬ broken. At the expiration of nearly a quarter
quarter of an hour, the instrument was produced, and the business of forcing the lock begun—the desired end was in a very short time accomplibhcd, and the doors into the gallery thrown upon, although there was some difficulty attendant upon forcing them back on their hinges, which were corroded with rii'»f. All within was in total darkness—La¬ timer took a lamp from the hand of one of bis domestics, and calling upon them to follow him, he entered—he perceived upon the countenances of most of them a KÍuííance to obey, which nothing but his authority and his example could supersede; and he addressed them by saying, " Do not let me sec those coward looks shaming \ our manhood ; rely upon the protecting arm of God,, which will neither permit the existence of supernatural agents, foi purposes injurious to his created beings nor leave them undefended against the as¬ saults of the wicked;—recoiled \om*- sehes, and assume courage."
Having spoken these words, he pro¬ ceeded—but his progress was short ; hh steps were arrested by the sight of an ob¬ ject of a most horrid and pitiable nature— In the doorway of the first chamber lay the body of a man, weltering in his blood. The prelate himself could not forbear tittering an exclamation of surprise, and his attendants shewed signs of the most lively terror :—Cyprian doubted not that from this unfortunate man had proceeded the cries and groans which had been heanl by Egbert, Bennet, and himself. Latimer commanded h*m to be raised, and experi¬ ment to be made whether life had yet cn- tirelv forsaken him ; his orders were obev- ed, and it was discovered that although not yet perfectly cold, all animation had fled fťom him. As they continued to examine him, they discovered upon him three wounds; one on his head, a second on his breast, and a third, a few inches lower than this—the second of these appeared to
to have pierced his heart, and caused his death. His entire appearance denoted that his death had not been an act of suicide ; and the cry of " Hold! hold!" which had been heard by Bennet, and which there could be no doubt of his having uttered, con¬ firmed the supposition of his having been assailed by a force superior to that which he had been able to oppose to it in his own defence ; and this conviction appear¬ ed to adduce another fact, which was, that there must be some person or persons who had perpetrated this deed, concealed in some of the chambers within the gal¬ lery ; or that some outlet would be dis¬ covered, by which they had made their escape. Perceiving that no efforts which they could use in the case of the bleeding stran¬ ger gave the least promise of his restora¬ tion to life, Latimer observing a bed in the chamber, by the door of which he had been
been found lying, ordered his corpse to be placed upon it, whilst an investigation was made of the succeeding apartments that ran on either side of the gallery ;-—as they approached the bed, several spots of blood were discovered by them on the counterpane ; and touching them with •heir fingers, they found them to be still wet—a circumstance which appeared to imply, that the deceased had been first as- roiled by those who had perpetrated his murder when he was reclined upon it—an idea which was strengthened by the mark of a pressure along the middle of the bed, which appeared as if some one had lately lain upon it. The body being placed upon the bed, Latimer ordered such of his servants as Imd brought arms with them, to prepare them for use, saying that it was evident that there were some persons near who did not shrink from the spilling of blood, and that to them it was more than probable they would very soon be opposed ;—and vol. i. о the
the prelate quickly percetved that the fear of a substantial enemy, and an aerial one, were of infinitely different degrees; for those who had displayed mont reluctance to enter a spot which they had dreaded as the residence of a spirit, showed no want of courage in preparing to encounter be¬ ings formed of the same materials as them¬ selves. The search was accordingly commenced, and most vigorously pursued ; every cham¬ ber, every closet, every ni>ok, which could possibly be supposed to be of sufficient size to admit into it a human being, was searched with the most rigorous scrutiny ; but not an individual could be discovered; nor was there any vihible outlet by which any one could have made his escape. These circumstances greatly increased the consternation not only of his domes¬ tics, but even of the prelate himself; again and again their search was renewed, but with the same ill success; e*ery pannel was struck, in the hope of its returning a hol¬ low
low sound to the blow, which might indi¬ cate it to be the opening to some conceal¬ ed passage ;—every foot of the arras which ornamented the chambers was raised, with the expectation of finding a sliding door concealed behind its folds ; but all in vain ; —impenetrable darkness sealed the mys¬ tery of the stranger's fate. At the extremity of the gallery was a door, of which the lock was turned, but the key was still in the wards ; in İt were piled, upon tables and shelves, a great num¬ ber of books and papers, which» by the dust collected upon them, appeared for a considerable time past to have been un¬ touched by the hand of man ; and in a se¬ cond apar! ment through this, stood vari¬ ous chests which, by their immense weight, were guessed to contain such valuables as the Earl had described to have been the occasion of hb denying to the inhabitants of the castle access to this gallery ; upon all these appeared the Earľs seal, un¬ broken; and Latimer furting found the о 4 doo»·
door of the first of the&e two chambers locked, and the kev on the outside, was from this circumstance fully satisfied, that no* one could have eflëcted his escape from tbe gallery through them. КсяНу three hours were рачг -ed in fruit- lesa attempts at making some discovery which might throw light upon the myste¬ rious occurrence of the night ; and the first streaks of the grey dawn then beginning to appear in the *3cy t Latimer resolved to desist from his ttnrecompensing endea¬ vours, till the full-grown day should lend the as&btancc of its beams lo their investi¬ gation ; but he directed that a certain number of his servants should remain arm- #d» upon tvafr h at the door of the cham¬ ber in which they had deposited the corpse, in order that no opportunity might be given to those beings, whose motives and whose ways were at present alike inscruta¬ ble, to perpetrate any purpose which they might be agitating. Laf imer retired to bed, but not to sleep; his
his reflections on the scene of which he had that night been a spectator, kept him waking :—the Lady Benigna had discover¬ ed his absence from the closet adjoining to her chamber ; and on his return, her en« quiries were not to be evaded without a confession of the truth ; and it having been disclosed to her, she mingled her comments with those of her husband; but they could devise no clue to au elucida¬ tion of the night's mystery. Intimer arose again at an early hour, and immediately proceeding to visit those whom he had placed, guardians over the corpse, was informed that no circumstance, had occurred during h b absence, .tq disturb the tranquillity of the scene.—The, light of day had now gained its full strength, and the investigation of the chambers was once more renewed; and its issue was,so unsuccessful, that it was unanimously pro¬ nounced by those who had made it, that there could be no outlet from thifrgaJiery, с 3 but
but the folding doors by which they had entered it. Greatly perplexed in mind by the sin¬ gularity of the case, the prelate's first step was to address a letter to those powers by whom the castle had been assigned to him as an episcopal residence ; requesting that they would state the fact to the Earl of Worcester, present to him his apology for having penetrated into that part of the castle from which he had requested all communication to be withheld, and entreat him, if he were able to assign any cause for the existing mystery, to commit it to his confidence. This done, his next measure was to set on foot an enquiry in the surrounding neighbourhood, whether any individual who answered the description of him whose death was at the present time the cause of great disquietude to the inhabitants of the castle, had lately disappeared from his fa¬ mily ? or whether any person resembling him
him had been lately seen in the coun¬ try ? No sooner were the females of the cas¬ tle risen, than intelligence of what had passed in the night was conveyed to Eleo¬ nora; her informer was a simple girl, her attendant, named Gillian ; and as Eleo¬ nora listened to her recital, the colour fled from her cheeks, and a faint sickness oppressed her heart; for in the murdered stranger she pictured to herself her myste¬ rious acquaintance. "Ah, my Lady," cried Gillian, on ob¬ serving Eleonora 's emotion, (< you may well be frightened to hear of such doings under the roof where you live ; we ser¬ vants have always said, since the first mo¬ ment of our coming to live here, that there was something superficial belonging to that Northern Gallery, and now it is come to light— ·' Murder will out/ as the proverb says." " Can you describe to me the person g 4 of
of him who has been found dead there?" asked Eleonora. " Aíercy bless us, my Lady," returned Gillian, " you don't suppose I have been to look at him ; I would not see a man that had died immolated all over with his own blood for all the world's worth.—What a pity my good master believed all the Earl said about locking up the gallery because his valuables were contented in it ! If I did not know our worthy Bishop to be too good to deserve any misfortune to befal him, I should say with the proverb, ( That he de¬ serves to be cheated who trusts to a stran- ger." " If the proverb speaks true, what do I merit Î" considered Eleonora. —After a short pause given to reflection, she directed Gillian to leave her ; and sinking upon her knees, she addressed a prayer of supplica¬ tion to that Power of whom the promise which she had made to the mysterious stranger permitted her alone to ask inter¬ position
position in her present difficulty ; $Ы? prayed, that the promise which humanity had prompted her to give, might not eventually lead to the injury of herself, or of thote connected with her;—she pray¬ ed, that if the mi lierer of whom she had just heard tiro ved to be he to whom that promise 1 had been made, that fortitude mL; hi be given to her, to let the indiscre¬ tion cd* which she had been guilty remain for e\ei buried in her own heart. Having by this aci composed her feel- iiicis, i,he descended into the apartment where ь!*е was sccustomed to meet her pa¬ rents at break fa >t ; she considered that froni her fathers coincrsaii.on at this meal, she should probably gatiter circumstances to confirm or confute her apprehensions; and she prepared her mind for the ,worst.— Д$ she enured the apartment, her father was in the act of describing the alarm which had in the course of the night been occa¬ sioned to himself and Jus domestics, to g 5 his
his mother, the Lady .\fagdalene : when he had concluded his account, Eleonora as¬ sumed courage to ask, " How the unfortu¬ nate man was habited ?" Latimer replied, fr That his garments were of a coarse brown cloth, and that beneath these, some parts of his body were incased in an ancient coat of mail." The lips of Eleonora quivered with agi¬ tation—a dress which in description ex¬ actly resembled that of the murdered man, had been worn by the unknown. Whilst they were yet at breakfast, Cy¬ prian entered the apartment. " You com¬ manded us, Sir," he said, addressing La¬ timer, " to bring to you any trinket which we might discover upon the unfor¬ tunate stranger, in order that yc#u might preserve it, as a clue to the future disco¬ very of his name and history :—your or¬ ders have been obeyed ; in the pocket of his vest we have found this portrait/' Latimer received it at the hand of Cyprian. and
and found it tobe the miniature of a young and beautiful female, set round with dia¬ monds of n verv lar^c size. It appeared extremely enigmatical by what means a man οΐ the inferior appear¬ ance of the deceased should have become possessed of a trinket of this extraordinary value: but equally strange was every cir¬ cumstance relating to him ; and distant ap¬ peared the developement of the mystery. The lady represented by the portrait seemed to be at most eighteen years of age ; of a complexion peculiarly fair and delicate, and a countenance of extreme beauty ; and the ornaments of lace and jewels with which the painter had deco¬ rated her, bespoke her of superior rank. Having permitted the picture to the in¬ spection of his family, I.::timer took it into his own possession, and deported it in a place of security ; considering that its pro¬ duction miiţhi at some future period prove of the most immediate consequence.
r. 6
CHAľ.
CHAP. VL v Ah fear I ah frantic fear ! I see, 1 see thee near; 1 know thy hurried eiep, thy haggard eye! Like thee 1 start, like thee I fly, For Io! what monsters in thy train appear!" Collikn
" Oh how this spring of love resembleth Th' uncertain glory of an April day, Which now shows all the beauty of the sun, And by and by a cloud takes all away." SHAIESJEARC. Every enquiry relative to the deceased Ktranger which was set on foot by thòso commissioned by Latimer for that purpose, both
both in the neighbourhood of the castle, and likewise for many miles around the country, proved fruitless; and an arrange¬ ment was accordingly made for his inter¬ ment, on the fourth morning after his death. Eleonora could not divert her mind of the idea, that the murdered man was the mvsterious bem«^ who*e life had once been preserved by her bounty ; already had one of those prepossessions of the heart, which can only be accounted for by the omnipo¬ tence of that power which directs the pas¬ sions, fixed upon him her tendcrest esteem; and now she believed him no more, her in¬ terest in his fate increased in proportion as she considered it faultless in her to che¬ rish such a feeling ; and she resolved to find the means of beholding the stranger who now lay dead in the hitherto interdict¬ ed gallery, previously to his interment, in order that she might ascertain whether or not he were the being for whom her keen¬ est anxieties were awakened. 4 The
The afternoon preceding the morning appointed for the funeral arrived, without KIconora having heen able to find an op¬ portunity of visiting the chamber of the deceased ; the superstitious fears and weak mind of her maid Gillian, rendered her unwilling to trust her with her inclination; and although utterly untainted with those supernatural fears which were entertained by the majority οΐ her father's household relative to the Northern Gallery, still she did not wish to visit it entirely alone : whilst she was debating with her own mind whom she should select as her companion, she recollected hau'ng heard, that on the night of the stranger's being found in those apartments, her father had appointed a certain number of his domestics to keep watch in the chamber where his body had been placed ; if this order had not been repealed, and there were still constant guardians of the mysterious apartments, she considered that she should feel ex¬ tremely averse to being observed by them in
in her visit to the corpse ; as her emotion would beyond all doubt be apparent to them, if she discovered in it the stranger whose image haunted her imagination. With her m4nd in this state of irresolu¬ tion, Eleonora was wandering in a garden which communicated with the outer court of the castle; thither Gillian followed her unperceived ; and having for some time observed the despondency and agitation which were visible in her mistress, she said, " My dear Lady, what can be the matter with you ? you look as melamchoiy as one of the weeping statutes over some of the marble tombs in the cathedral— What are you thinking of, if 1 may make bold to ask?" " I was," replied Eleonora, " thinking of the murdered stranger." " Oh do, dear Lady," returned Gillian, fi try and illiterate him from your me¬ mory, for, as the proverb says," "Pray forbear!" exclaimed Eleonora; " tell
ŕt telí mc no proverbs just now, I have an insuperable aversion to their sound,*'—for she had not forgotten the impression which Gillian's proverb of, " lie deserves to be cheated who trusts to a stranger," had made upon her mind; and she dreaded lest at tbe present moment of her depression of spirits, any similar truth should fall from the lips of her attendant, which might still more unhinge her feelings than they al¬ ready were, and render her less adequate to the execution of the purpose upon which her thoughts were bent. " I obey," replied Gillian ; <f but I am sure, begging your pardon for giving my opinion, I think proverbs generally speak the truth, and therefore I am fond of them." Eleonora might have answered, that the mind cannot always bear to hear the truth spoken ; and consistent with her feelings might she haveadded, that the truth uttered by the lips of a simple 4 bcing like her attendant,
attendant, sinks with infinitely greater force into the heart, than when delivered in the studied phrase of an orator. Gillian had been admitted into the ser¬ vice of Eleonora, not on account of any particular talent which she possessed, to recommend her to the situation, but be¬ cause she was the niece of old Katherine, the faithful and aged attendant of the Lady Magdalene; and the only quality for which she was valuable to her mistress, was her fidelity, and which, in the estimation of her character, Eleonora suffered to out¬ weigh her illiterate simplicity. " Answer me, my good Gillian," re¬ plied Eleonora, " does any body watch in the chamber with the deceased ?" " Oh no, no," returned Gillian, " since he has been put into his cofììn, he is left quite alone; and pleased enough all the men are that they are excused watching by him ; for Egbert, the gardener, who is, I believe, the most courageous of them all, told me ingeniously that it was a job even
even he did not like—for, he says, though no hirm ha» happened to any one yet, since the doors into the Northern Gallery have been opened, yet somebody may be the worse for it before they are closed up again—I dare say he thinks of the pro¬ verb, * That the pitcher does not go so often to"------ Before she had concluded her sentence, Gillian recollected her mis¬ tress's injunction, and with a look of apo¬ logy, became silent. Ever did the proverbs of Gillian appear to be destined to wound the feelings of Eleonora ; she might herself, she consi¬ dered, if she visited the Northern Gallery, be the person to whom some unpleasant circumstance might occur; still any idea was preferable to the tormenting uncer¬ tainty in which she might pass the remain¬ der of her days, if she did not behold the countenance of him who now lay dead in one of its chambers. " Gillian," she said, " I am going to confide to you a secret ; I have an inclina¬ tion
tion which I cannot subdue, to behold the man whose death has thus mysteriously dis¬ turbed the tranquillity of our abode, be¬ fore he is committed to the grave." " Behold that dreadful sight !" exclaim¬ ed Gillian : " Oh, my dear Lady, if my coiyunctions can have any defect upon yon, pray be moved by them, and don't think of any thing so rash/* Eleonora endeavoured to rally her out of her ill-founded apprehensions; she re¬ presented to her that the dead ought never to be considered as objects of fear, under whatever circumstances it might have been the will of Omnipotence to call them hence; told her that it was her duty to subdue a timidity of this nature, as by en¬ couraging such a feeling, she was guilty of doubting that the protection of Pro¬ vidence would at all times be extended to¬ wards her ; and concluded by saying, that she expected it of her, as a mark of the attachment which she professed for her, to accompany
accompany her that evening to the. North¬ ern Gallery. Urged on one hand by her own exces¬ sive fears, and on the other by the disin¬ clination which she felt to oppose the wbhes of her mistress, poor Gillian knew not how to reply, or on what conduct to decide:—at length she informed Eleonora, that if she would consent to admit Egbert; the gardener; as their companion, she was certatnr that he would not refuse such a re¬ quest; if advanced by her, and do all in his power to protect· them through the strange undertaking upon, which her lacly was bent. Eleonora- smiled; at the idea, of their needing protection, and told Gillian, that as she felt a reluctance to proceed entirely. alone to the Northern. Gallery, and could not prevail upon her to go with her on any other terms, she would willingly admit Egbert into her party, provided Gillian would take upon her to answer for his re¬ taining
taining the business a secret; as she felt, she could not herself resol \ e on what ac¬ count, averse to her father gaining a know¬ ledge of her having entertained a wish of this nature. Kelucťníly Gillian went in pursuit of Egbert ;—he was absent from the castle, and not expected to return in less than an hour or two.·— Eleonora waited for two hours with patience, but when they were expired, she became anxious, as she dread¬ ed, lest chance should so combine unto¬ ward circumstances, as to prevent her vi¬ siting the chamber at all.—Already the grey clouds of evening were beginning to steal away the splendor of the day ; and again she sent Gillian to enquire whether her friend were returned :—Egbert was, alas ! · not come. "ì'Tis well," said Eleonora, assuming courage from circumstance, " I -will then proceed to the ¡Northern Gallery alone;" —-and she -now almost repented that she 4iad ever unade^tHian the confidant of her plan,
plan, since she was not to reap from it the comfort of a companion to that spot, which, even to such minds as were entirely free from superstitious fears, conveyed a solemn awfulness very closely allied to ap¬ prehension. Gillian, on her part, endeavoured once more, by every feeble argument which she could devise, tf dissuade Eleonora from a purpose which appeared to her the very climax of rash daring ; and finding her not to be shaken from it, she said, '* That rather than her beloved mistress should be exposed to danger alone, she would ven¬ ture to go with her/' " Consider the matter well, before you form your final determination," said Eleo- noia, who now feared that the terrors of Gillian might render her not only a use¬ less, but a burthensome companion; "pray consider the matter well." fc Yes, yes, I have considered," replied Gillian, with a considerable degree of agi¬ tation ; " for all you laugh at proverbs, my
my Lady, it is a proverb that tells me not to leave you— f Two heads/ it says, f are better than one/ so I will go with you, for I never knew a proverb in the wrong yet ; and even my silly head, joined to your's, may save you from some peril which you might fall into, if I sufièred you togo all alone." They accordingly entered the castle, and having crossed the great hall, they pro¬ ceeded hastily along the corridor, which branched off from it, to the foot of the stairs leading to the Northern Gallery ; these they ascended, and Eleonora observ¬ ing her companion to shiver and tremble, took her arm, in order to reassure her. " Itili you go on, my Lady?" asked Gillian, her lips quivering as she spoke, " We are already there," replied Eleo¬ nora, delaying a few moments to answer her question, which few moments brought them within sight of the folding doors leading into the gallery of mystery. Arrived at the entrance, Eleonora drew her
her arm away from that of her attendant, who, apparently ready to sink with appre¬ hension, laid one of her hands upon the wall, against which she leant for support. " Come," said Eleonora, u it is but a few steps farther." " I cannot, I cannot/* with difficulty uttered Gillian; " I would do any thing to serve you, indeed I would, but í can¬ not-—I could not be more frightened, if í were certain that the devil in garnet, Hea¬ ven forgive me for mentioning his wicked name, stood there ready to receive us." (t Well then," answered Eleonora, "if you can assume sufficient courage to re¬ main where you are till I return to you, I wHf go alone, and make the investigation í wish ; now I am come thus far, I feel no longer any reluctance to proceeding alone." tc I will stay, I will stay for you indeed/* replied Gillian, *' if nothing comes to frighten .me away, and make mc quite for¬ get you, end my promise too :—but pray make
make haste ; and pray, my dear Lady, go only into that one chamber where the body lies ; and if you wish to explode any oft the contagious ones, let it be another time, when I grow a little more courage¬ ous, and I should not wonder if I did in tíme, for this morning I never would have believed that any persuasions could have got me as far as here, and you know, <f Rome was not built in a day." Eleonora only wished to visit that one chamber, and therefore readily gave Gillian her promise to that effect. Arrived at the door of the apartrtient which contained the corpse, and to which she was guided by the drops of blood that yet stained the floor, the coffin, rested on supporters, and covered with a pall of black cloth, was the first object which met her sight:—Beyond the coffin stood a bed, of an extremely antique fashion, and of which the velvet drapery, of а dingy purple, cast a gloomy appearance upon the side of the chamber on which it voi*, i. я stood :
stood ;— ön her left hand she observed three casements, through the centre one of which the light was alone admitted ; and against the wall bebveen the case¬ ments, were affixed mirrors of a consi¬ derable length—the opposite bide of the chamber consisted merely of a dark oaken wainscot, unrelieved by any obje/1, except a single piece of furniture, composed of a vood of an equally dark hue with the pan- nelling of the apartment, and which ap¬ peared to be a cabinet of an extraordina¬ rily large size. Having taken a cursory view of the sur¬ rounding scene, she stepped on ; she moved towards the cofiin, and with a palpitation of heart before unknown to her, she sta¬ tioned herself on that side of it which was the farthest removed from the windows;— with her fingers placed upon the e<lge of the pal!, prepared tc» raise it for the inves¬ tigation which she had come to this spot purposely to n:ake, she threw her ťyes once more around the chamber; an uni¬ versal
versal silence prevailed ; and the unbroken stiline», added to the gloominess of the içene, cast upon every object a supersti¬ tious colouring. Once more she prepared to raise the co¬ vering which hid from her impatient view the countenance of him who lay beneath it, cold in the embrace of death ;—at the instant she had drawn up the sable mantle to the edge of the coffin, a loud snap, re¬ sembling one of tho*e sounds which are not unfrcquently produced by the too powerful heat of the sun upon panels of wainscot, caused her to start violently, mid quickly to raise her eyes from ihe object on which they had before been bent ; as she cast them around in her sudden alarm, they fell upon one of the mirrors which intersected the windows, and in this she saw reflected, the armed head and shoul¬ ders of a man, who appeared to be stand¬ ing immediately behind her. lire she vonld sufficiently collect her thoughts for action, a loud shriek struck и *¿ her
lier car; this was immediately followed by arepetitfon of the sound which had before etartled her;—footsteps directly became audible in the gallery ; and turning her eyes towards the door of the chamber, she perceived before it, her father and Cy¬ prian. u My dear child," said Latimer, advanc¬ ing towards her, " what motive can have brought you hither?" The agitation of Eleonora's mind de¬ prived her of the power of replying ; she cast her eyes languidly, although inqui¬ sitively, around the chamber, as her father and Cyprian led her between them out of it ; but no armed figure was now visible. Having passed the folding doors which formed the entrance into the gallért/, the first object beheld by the prelate and Cy¬ prian, was Gillian ; with her head covered in her kirtle, she lay extended úpon the floor, and trembling in so violent a man¬ ner, that she appeared to he shaken by an ague. Cyprian
Cyprian raised her; animation had al* most fled from her heart, and the palene» of death overspread her features;—but «till poor Gillian had suñered no evil ; nor had she beheld any objects of terror, but such as her fervid imagination had magni¬ fied into monsters of dread:—from het Yips had proceeded the shriek which Eleo¬ nora- had heard, as she had stood by the side of the coffin ; and the cause of alarm which the simple girl had received was thitf —*it had so chanced, thatf at the very pe¬ riod of Eleonora 's ascending to the North¬ ern Gallery, her father, who was still dis* satisfied with the investigations that had hitherto been made of the chambers which it contained, had entered it, attended only by Cyprian, once more to scrutinize them, in the hope' of gaining some light relative to the mystery that now hung over them : deeply engaged upon the purpose which had led them thither, they had not heard the approach of Eleonora ; and having concluded their search in one apartment, и 3 they
they were erossing the gallery to another on its opposite side, when their forms hav¬ ing been indistinctly seen at its extremity by Gillian, without their features having been recognised by her, she had imme¬ diately mistaken them for inhabitants of another world, and uttered her apprehen¬ sions in a scream, which had instantly drawn them towards the spot from whence it had proceeded ; but their progress had been arrested, by the prelate's eye en¬ countering the form of his daughter in that chamber where he to his astonishment beheld her bending over the coffin which it contained, and observed her counte¬ nance impressed with marks of the wildest agitation of mind. On descending into the castle-hall, the " Lady Benigna and several of the domes¬ tics, some of whom had heard Gillian's ex¬ clamation, gathered round them with im¬ patient enquiries, and looks expressive of the greatest curiosity :—the explanation given by Gillian damped their highly- raised
raised expectations ; and Latimer, leading. his daughter apart from the servants, asked her again, with a smile, " What extraordi¬ nary motive could have impelled her to shit the coffin of the murdered man ?" From confessing the truth, a double cause withheld her, and she therefore sim¬ ply replied, ťŕ That her curiosity had been excited to behold one whose fate had oc¬ casioned so much conversation and sur¬ prise." " I think it by no means improper for every one sometimes to contemplate the countenance of death,'* replied Latimer, " that he may derive from it a lesson of humility, when he reflects, that of the same frail materials he himself is com¬ posed;—but í also think, my child, that you had chosen a subject for your ob¬ servation, which might be construed into a slight deviation from the delicacy becom¬ ing your sex, and might draw upon you a smile for the idleness of your curiosity— neither should you have made that silly и 4 girl,
gir!, whose prejudices overcome the little reason of which she is possessed, your com¬ panion, to a spot with which the illiterate have connected ideas of superstition." " You cannot judge of my feelings," re¬ flected Eleonora, " nor is it at my option to suuer you to participate in them."—· Unable to speak, she attempted to smile, but the effort was ineffectual; and with real agony of heart, she heard her father give orders for the coffin to be instantly closed. She re(|tte&tea bis permission to retire to her chamber;—-as she passed through the castle-hall, sounds struck her ear, which she knew to be the execution of the com¬ mand he had a few minutes before issued : —her uncertainty relative to the fate of a being who had in so extraordinary a man¬ ner been introduced to her acquaintance, and by a still more strange direction of fate, created for himself the warmest in¬ terest in her breast, was now doomed to cause her unceasing pangs, which she was forbidden
forbidden by her voluntary promise to call in the voice of friendship, or of affection, to lighten :—She threw herself upon a couch in her chamber, and a flood of tears came to the relief οΐ her overburthened heart. When a certain degree of composure returned to her spirits, she began to re¬ trace İn her memory the events of the c\e:iing:—the sensation which made the strongest impression upon her mind, was the disappointment which she had experienced at having been prevented from ascertain¬ ing whether he whose form was now for cer excluded from observation, had been t fie man in whose fare her heart took in- tcrcbt—Next in strength to this emotion, was her recollection of the armed figure which she had beheld reflected in one of the mirrors suspended between the win¬ dows; she was certain that her fancy had not in this particular deceived her, and that the object which had occasioned her surprise had not been the rreatiire of her u 5 heated
heated imagination ; and as she continued to reflect upon its sudden disappearance, she became almost tempted to believe that the superstitious fears entertained by her father's household of the Northern Gal¬ lery, were not without foundation :—but why this figure should have appeared to her, and why, as it had appeared before her, it had vanished again without the ex¬ ecution of any purpose for which it might have become visible to her, she could not devise a reason, except indeed that its ■udden disappearance had been caused ei¬ ther by the arrival of her father and Cy¬ prian at the door of the chamber, or by the sudden scream of Gillian—if such had been the case, to her alone appeared to. have been directed its mission ; and whilst the possibility of her suspicion being a just one excited in her breast the greatest astonishment to account for the motive of such an event, she did not feel by any means desirous of a second time encoun¬ tering so enigmatical a visitant. Whether
. Whether she should impart to any one the circumstance which to her appeared of so extraordinary a nature, was a subject upon which she was for a long time unde¬ termined ; but her final resolve was to re¬ tain it a secret within her own breast—she considered that by those for whose opinion she had respect, it would be regarded as the effect of a childish terror, at finding herself within one of the apartments, con¬ cerning which the vulgar and indiscrimi¬ nati ng had propagated idle and apparently unfounded rumours; and by ihis appre¬ hension she was principally guided, in re¬ solving not to make the appearance which ■•he had that evening beheld, a part of her conversation to anv individual being. Eleonora passed an almost sleepleA night : at an early hour on the following morning, the body of the deceased was com eyed to the cathedral church, and in¬ terred in one of the adjoining cloisters: as the procession which accompanied it pass¬ ed over the drawbridge t f the castle, E'eo- K tí nora
nora beheld it from the window of her chamber, and the emotion of her mind was naturally great, in proportion to the uncertainty which she experienced of whom the grave was that hour destined to enclose. On the return of those who had accom¬ panied the body to its last abode, Latimer caused proper persons to be introduced into the castle, for the purpose of repair¬ ing the lock upon the folding doors of the Northern Gallery ; and they were once more closed, not to be opened by any hands but those of Latimer himself; and to ensure obedience to his commands, he fixed upon them his seal. in the course of a due period, the pre¬ late received a reply to the letter which he had sent to those powers by whom the castle of Worcester had been appointed to him as a residence, relative to the mys¬ terious death of the stranger; in it they informed him, that the Earl of Worcester was not returned to England, and that 4 they
they could therefore obtain for him no clue to this extraordinary event. For the first month after the interment of the stranger, every shadow which glided aïo.iîT the halls of the castle was construed kJ bv some of its inhabitants into a ghost ; and every sound which was heard within its vails, said to proceed from the North¬ ern Gallery : but as the weeks rolled on, and no real cause for alarm arose, tran¬ quillity began again to be restored to the minds of Latimer's household, although the event, which had excited astonishment and terror, did not cease to be talked of by them. No occurrence of moment took place till the arrival of the succeeding Christmas day ;—this was a festival for the display of christian gratitude, which Latimer caused his household to keep with the most rigid solemnity.—On the morning of this anni¬ versary, it was his regular custom that every member of his family should attend di¬ vine service in the cathedral of his see ; not
not even the porter of the casîîe was al¬ lowed to be absent from the duties of the day ; on this single occasion the castle was left during the hours of demotion without an inhabitant. The worship being concluded, a feast was provided in the hails of the castle for the poor of the surrounding neighbour¬ hood; and with this act of eharit\ did La¬ timer close the memorable day. When the festivities were ended, Eleo¬ nora retired to her chamber; in one cor¬ ner of this apartment stood a reading- desk, upon which was supported a \o- lumc οΐ prayers, from whence it was her regular custom, every morning and evening, to address the Author of her being: having placed her lamp upon the table, she turned to the pages dedicated to the evening of that day, and was sur¬ prised to perceive between the leaves which contained those particular prayers, a folded paper; she hastily opened it, and found written upon it these words, " The Unknown,
Unknown, whom the humanity of the ge¬ nerous and angelic Eleonora once rescued from deaih« existing only upon the hope that the intet e»t which she has excited for heirrlf in his breast, is not utterly unex¬ perienced by her own heart, adopts this method of informing her, that although denied lhe happiness of her converse, he is still near her; that no impression will cvercHace her image from his mind, or weaken the ailection which he bears her: —one mode alone of communication with her, does fate allow him ; by one only sig¬ nal it may accidentally be in his power to prove to her that he is hovering around her;—whenever she shall hear the sound of any one slapping the palms of his hands thrice together, let her conclude that he is then near her :—and (), most enchanting maid ! as thou valucst his happiness, ac¬ cept his vows of love—as thou values! his safety, remember the promise of secrecy which thou hast long since pledged to him." With
With astonishment Eleonora read these lines; she was not so much surprised by their contents, as perplexed to account by what means they could have been con¬ veyed into the volume in which she had found them—■—Had any one of her fa¬ ther's household been bribed to place them there?—or had the unknown found the means of depositing them there with his own hand ?—How strange the information that he was near her, but debarred from beholding or conversing with her !—Where could be his hiding-place t was it in any recess of the wood where she had first en¬ countered him ? or in the cot of some trusty peasant in its precincts ?—Again she wondered, as she had frequently before done, what could be his motive forsecret- in<r himself from the observation of his о fellow-beings—must it not either be the suspicion, or the consciousness, of some crime ? and if she believed it such, did it not become her to contract with herself an immediate resolution of never again hold¬ ing
ins communication with him? r.ndoubt- edly it did :—But then, had he not declarecl to her, that although persecuted, he was no criminal ?—and might she not, by cast¬ ing him off from her regard, not only be guilty of an unjust action, but also of & cruel one, by depriving him of, perhaps, the only solace of his hard fate, which her friendship might afford him ? The predominant sensation excited in her mind by this letter, was a joyful satis¬ faction communicated to her feelings, by the proof which it brought her of the mys¬ teriously-murdered stranger not being the man in whose fate her feelings took inte¬ rest ; and with the delight which she ex¬ perienced at this conviction, she became more decidedly sensible of the nature of the esteem which she bore him. In joint reflection on the mysterious mannerin which the epistle had been con¬ veyed into her prayer-book, the inde¬ finable information which it conveyed, and the still more obscure destiny of him by whom
whom it had been written, did Eleonora pass the greater part of the night :—she suspected that Gillian, or some one other of her father's domestics, might have been bribed to place the paper in the situation where she had found ; t ; and she debated for some time with her own mind, whe¬ ther she should, on rising in the morning, make any enquiries to that end ; but she ultimately resolved, that such questions would but excite unpleasant suspicions, and be partial infringements upon the sa- credness of the promise which she had made to the unknown. She rose at her accustomary hour, and on entering the breakfast-room, she found there Cyprian in conversation with her father and mother; Latimer and he quitted it together almost immediately on her en¬ trance, and when they were gone, the Lady Benigna informed her that Cyprian had been imparting to his master, that as he had passed the doors of the Northern Gallery, in descending from his chamber that
that morning, he had observed the seal which Latimer had a few weeks before placed upon them, to be broken through : —"The circumstance is extraordinary, is it not?" remarked her mother. Eleonora had power only to reply by a simple affirmative, whilst her ideas were busy in reflecting whether it could be pos¬ sible that the Northern Gallery were the hiding-place of the unknown ; and that he had broken the seal, by emerging from his concealment, for the purpose of con¬ veying his letter into her chamber; but a few moments consideration confuted this suspicion ; for were it possible that the Northern Gallery were his hiding-place, he was possessed of no key with which to open the folding doors that communicated from it with the other parts of the castle ; nor, if he had possessed such a key, could he have known which was her chamber. In the course of an hour, her father re¬ turned to the breakfast apartment : in con¬ sequence of the seal which he had fixed upon
upon the doors of the interdicted gallery having been broken, he had, with Cyprian, once more made an investigation of the chambers which it contained, supposing that they might discover some traces of the motive by which those who had broken it had been urged to the action ; but they had found the stillness of the grave to pre¬ vail over every part, and every article re¬ maining exactly as it had been left after űie interment of him who had so unac¬ countably been found dead within one of its chambers: it was accordingly concluded By them, that some contraction in the wood had caused the seal to separate in itfr centre ; and Latimer placed a fresh seal upon the doors, for the security of the va¬ luables contained within the gallery. The weeks again rolled on, unmarked by anv event; no circumstance occurred to call in question the tranquillity of the Northern Gallery; nor did Eleonora ei¬ ther behold the unknown, or receive from him any additional tidings ; she often re¬ flected
fleeted on the signal 'or which he had pre¬ pared her, but that signal did not meet her ear, till the morning on which her pa¬ rents had departed, under tiie escort of Sir El.lred Pemberton, for the Tower of Lon¬ don :—one of the first exclamations which she then made, whilst seated by the case¬ ment near which Cyprian had placed her, in order that her oppressed spirits might enjoy the benefit of the reviving air, was, " In whom, alas ! shall Eleonora now find a protector?" which words, it will be re¬ collected, were immediately replied to by the sound of hands thrice struck together— a reply which she could not do otherwise than consider as intended to convey to her feelings the consolatory promise of, " In me shall that protector be found to you. iJ
CHAP,
CHAP. VII. " Things so stranie aie »ext to miracles." Jephsq*.
" All, that live, must die, Passing through nature to eternity." Shaklsha*!. We have already said, that very shortly af¬ ter the departure of her parents, Eleonora ascended to her own chamber, where, from what we already know of her history, we cannot doubt her to have experienced re¬ flections of the most anxious nature, pro¬ duced equally by the strange situation in which she stood with regard to the un¬ known,
known, and by the words which she had on the preceding evening heard her father ut¬ ter to Cyprian, respecting herself------ " What," she again and again enquired of her own heart, '' could be the myste¬ rious circumstance, connected with her¬ self, of which he had spoken ?"—but it was a question to which her imagination could furnish her with no reply. The day passed on heavily and solitarily —she visited at intervals the chamber of her grandmother ; but the Lady Magda¬ lene had not spoken since the moment of her separation from her son, nor did she appear sensible of such sounds as were ad¬ dressed to her. On the second evening after the depar¬ ture of Latimer and the Lady Benigna, old Katherine entered the chamber of Eleo¬ nora, as she was preparing to retire to rest; the tears were streaming down her cheeks, and in accents rendered almost in¬ articulate by sorrow, she informed her that she did not believe it possible for the Lady h Magdalene
Magdalene to live out the night ; and re¬ quested her to come and watch with her by her bedside : the affectionate Eleonora instantly dressed herself again, and repair¬ ed with Katherine to the chamber of her grandmother, whose countenance she be¬ held visibly impressed with those ghastly marks which are the forerunners of death. The night was cold, and the strong gusts of the north-east wind penetrated through the casements, which were exposed to its keenness. Eleonora and her companions, Katherine and Gillian, suspended their lamp over the chimney-piece, and drew round the fire: of the most melancholy nature were the hours that intervened be¬ tween the sounding of the midnight clock and the rising of the dawn; Katherine al¬ ternately bewailed the misfortunes which had fallen upon the house of which she had for three score and ten years been a cherished dependent, and wept the ap¬ proaching dissolution of her aged mis¬ tress:—between the shiverings of cold and the
the tremblings of fear, sat the restless Gil¬ lian, expecting every moment to hear or behold some terrifying signal of the Lady Magdalene's death, which the superstitious tattlings of the illiterate like herself had caused her to believe always preceded the termination of existence: the spirits of Eleonora herself were too much depressed, to enable her to become either the recti fier of Gillian's opinions, or her consoler; her own feelings were too much in want of the alleviating balm of sympathy, for her to be able to bestow it on another. At length the grey curtain of night be¬ gan to be withdrawn from the skv, with- out any alteration having taken place in the Lady Magdalene : for the anxieties of mind which Eleonora was enduring, she felt some relief absolutely necessary, if it were possible for her to procure it ; and accordingly, as soon as the rising sun had begun to gild the distant hills with his beams, regardless of the coldness of the air, and feeling grateful that the morning vol. r. ι was
was clear and cheerful, she resolved to pay a short visit to the hermit Agatha, whom she had not seen since the departure of her parents.— Eleonora found the recluse utterly ignorant of the arrest of Latimer ; she had from Ы own lips learnt the dan¬ ger which was impending over him, but knew not yet that the awful bolt had burst upon his head. In the strongest terms she bewailed his unfortunate case, and equally did she lament .that the short period which had been allowed Jiim to prepare for hij» departure, had prevented him from bid¬ ding her farewell. " How sincerely do I pity ihee, sweet blossom of innocence," she said, addressing Eleonora, ' : deprived, at an age when a fathers protection is most requisite to thy sex, of its blessing ! «—Oh, how cruel is the hand of fate which rules us in this terrestrial existence ! how contrary to the opinions which short-sight¬ ed mortals form of happiness, arc all the events with which it is marked !—Oh, how glorious must be the reward which is de- f creed
creed to the deserving in a future state, when the path which leads to its attain¬ ment is thus thickly planted with thorns, and the cup of human life thus painfully filled with gall!" One of those wild expressions of coun¬ tenance which Eleonora had not unfrc¬ quently beheld in the female hermit, now took possession of her features ; she rose from her scat, and wandering distractedly about, continued to speak thus— c< Did not the magic hand of hope chain reason to ils seat, the pangs of unjust suffering would drive it from the heart, and leave the wretch on whom calamity has fixed its torturing mark, amere machine of sense¬ less being, for late to wreak its spleen upon. "Thv woes, mv daughter, have not vet risen to this maddening height; and jm.iv it be'the will of that Power which distri¬ butes mercy to the earth, that si:ch should never be thy lot; but those which I have en¬ dured have been swelled into this wretched i í accumulation
accumulation—I have felt the teeth of ser¬ pents gnawing my heart, the weight of mountains crushing down my brain. Oh that there should be beings formed to he the scourges of their fellow-beings, w'hose feelings are frozen to the voice of misery, or who hear it only to glory in the com¬ pletion of their diabolical machinations ! by such fiends has my existence been beset, by such tortures have the fibres of my soul been rent ! Oh, I cannot describe them to thee, with the force of painting which their blackness merits; but in my mind's eye ï behold them ; and one, one stands forward to my view— villanous and bloody- minded is his heart—savage the smile that wrinkles on his lips—murder is in the glare of his dark eye—and when he speaks"------ a sudden start convulsed her frame ; qui¬ vering as if the palsy shook her limbs, she pointed with the finger of her extended hand towards the entrance of the hermit¬ age, and exclaiming, ff Ah, behold î the monster
monster stands before me ! shield me, thou God of mercy !" she sunk with a piercing shriek upon the ground. Instinctively Eleonora turned her eyes to the spot towards which the fìnger of Agatha had been directed, and caught a momentary sight of an object which communicated a chill to her heart ; the figure was that of a man, whose extreme tallness of stature was not less conspicuous than the bony angles of his thin form ; he was habited in an un¬ couth garb of black stuff, w T hich, hanging loosely over his limbs, served to shew the scantiness of the flesh with which they were furnished ; contrasted .with the hue of his sable garments, the pallid yellow¬ ness of his thin long hands and ghastly vi¬ sage, appeared the more striking and ter¬ rific ; his black eyes were sunk deep into their hollow sockets; and the expression with which they beamed, was that of fa¬ mine urged to murder. Scarcely had Eleonora perceived him ere he vanished, like a shade, from before her ι 3 sight ;
upon her senses \\\r= of a nature wver to be forgoltrn .— almost petrified with hor¬ ror and surprise, she* continued gazing \:уит the spot where he had stood, al¬ though he was no binger visible on it, till a deep <xroan, which was uttered by Aga¬ tha, called her attention to her: with dif¬ ficulty Eleonora succeeded in raising her from the ground, and placing her upon a scat. After some time, Agatha said. " I blush for myself, mv dear young friend, thai í have thus exposed to you the weak¬ ness of my feelings; we are all frail be¬ ings, and however strong the resolutions which we make of not suffering our forti¬ tude to be diminished by reflection, mo¬ ments will arise to shew 1 the inabilii у of human beings to keep such determinations. Pardon me, Eiconura, I fear that I hni с alarmed you ; a recollection, too vivid for mv peace of mind, of those wrongs which manv vrars a<ro I suffered, hurried me be- yond myself; you will scarcely credit how grc.it
great was its effect at that init:mt on my senses, when I tell you, that for the in¬ stant, I even believed m\ elf to behold the atrocious enemy î vas describing. I doubt not, from the exclamation whvh I made, that vou actually belle\ed me to see some person." " Yes, indeed I did," replied ElcotKi**.t ; *' and you did see some one, did you not?" " Oh no, no," returned the hcrrrit ; ' ( it has more than once occurred to me before, that my idens have been so ^fre'j?,ihrn< d by the phren/.ied agony of my :u!i«d, í! .it I have believed them real.—There was no one near." "Are you sure of that?" asked Eleo¬ nora ; " I thought myself, that 1 beheld a figure of extreme lankness, of a ghastly and terrific visage, whose mournful habit, of a raven black,"------ With a faint and melancholy smile, Aga¬ tha interrupted her; " Such a one," she said, " was I describing, and the interest ι 4 with
with which you listened to my words, led you, my dear child, to experience the same impression which my mind under¬ went." Eleonora was not less surprised by this declaration, than she had been alarmed by the appearance which she had a few mi¬ nutes before beheld; she could not be¬ lieve that her senses had deceived her; and she knew not whether to suppose that Aga¬ tha had really believed the form which had stood before her to have been the creation of her own fancy, or that she had any pri¬ vate motive for wishing to lead her into that belief. A considerable silence ensued ; Eleo¬ nora could not withdraw her eyes from the entrance of the hermitage, and Agatha sat with the palms of her hands pressed to her forehead, as if endeavouring to regain her composure of mind ; when she spoke, she again apologised to Eleonora for the alarm which she had occasioned her by the wild extravagance, as she expressed it, into which
which the recollection of painful ideas had led her; and casting her eye upon the hour-glass, she observed that it was near the breakfast-hour, and besought her to join her in her humble repast. Eleonora replied, that in the present state of the Lady Magdalene's health, she did not conceive it right in her to remain any longer from home; and rising to de¬ part, Agatha said she would accompany her to the skirts of the wood. Eleonora heard this proposition with pleasure—the many strange circumstances of which she had been a witness in that wood, inspired her, in the present gloomy state of her mind, with no small degree of reluctance to pass alone through its almost impene¬ trable shades. Agatha took the arm of her young friend, and they began their walk; as they moved on, a jay darted suddenly out from a bush, in which probably its nest was concealed, and flew across the path ; at the noise occasioned by the rust¬ ling of its wings, Eleonora started. ι 5 " What
"What alarmed vou, mv dear child?'* said Agatha. flushing deeply, Eleonora replied, " I was startled by the suddenness of the sound." " Your spirits were not wont to be thus weak," returned Agatha. u Events, of a nature which I have not been accustomed to encounter, have lately befallen mc," said Eleonora, with a trem¬ bling voice. " True, my child," rejoined the re¬ cluse; "and it would indeed be wrong, were your spirits to retain that sprightif- nrss of which they were once possessed, whilst calamity is impending over the head of him who claims your liveliest sympathy in his fate; but you should struggle to prevent sorrow from making these en¬ croachments on your fortitude. Twice within this hour have I been a witness of your sinking under a timidity entirely new to vour nature." w' Eleonora did not immediately reply—she * fixed
fixed her eyes upon those of Agatha, and, after a short pause, said, " I own it was very weak in me to start as I did just now at the bird, but"------; she hesitated. « But you think," said Agatha, taking tip her words, <( that there was an apology for your entering so far into my feelings, as to believe that you saw the very being, whose idea a short time ago assailed my senses ?" " Indeed, indeed," answered Eleonora, " I still believe that 1 saw a person exactly corresponding with the description you were at that moment drawing." With a smile of incredulity, Agatha re¬ plied, " My dear child, were your father now with you in happiness, and in the en¬ joyment of that liberty which he a short time ago was blessed with, you would yourself ridicule the idea which you now cherish. It is the nature of sorrow to pro¬ duce effects of this kind in young and sen¬ sitive minds; and it is the duty of such minds, while they cherish tenderness of i 6 feeling,
feeling, to struggle against the weakness, which is prone, if unresisted, to creep with it into their hearts; a too keen sensibility is the bane of* their existence who nourish if, it leads them to extract from every cir¬ cumstance the excess cither of infelicity or of joy ; and as pain in this life is so in¬ finitely predominant over pleasure, a habit of this nature must eventually render us the victims of our own feelings." Eleonora forbore to reply ; she was al¬ most compelled to regard the pertinacity with which Agatha denied the appearance of a human form at the entrance of the hermitage, to be the effect of one of those temporary derangements of mind, under which her father had not unfrcquently be¬ lieved her to labour. At the extremity of the wood they part¬ ed ; Agatha promising shortly to call at »he castle, and make enquiries after the health of the Lady Magdalene. With a slow step, and with a sorrowing and reflective mind, Eleonora ascended the terrace
terrace which lcd to the castle; in the outer court she was met by Cyprian ; the Lady Magdalene, she learnt from him, was still existing, in the same state of insensibility. The good old man observed a hue of the deadliest pallidness overspreading the countenance of his young mistress; he even believed that her steps were trem¬ bling with faintness:—'* You are not weil, dear Lady," he said ; " I cannot wonder that you are not ; why did you go out alone ?—if í am old, I have an arm that is tolerably strong, and very willing to sup¬ port you." lie extended it to her as he spoke, and Eleonora passing her's through it (for it was a most welcome support to her sinking frame), he led her to the apartment where her breakfast was pre¬ pared. The dejection of her spirits was so great, that the idea of being left alone was re¬ pulsive to her feelings, and she requested Cyprian to remain with her. i( Pardon my inqtiisitivencss," said the old b
old man, aficr he had stood nome time ob¬ serving her; ff it docs not proceed from idle curiosity, but from the interest which I feel in your happiness: Has any circum¬ stance with which I am unacquainted, lately occurred to disturb your peace ? I cannot forbear conjecturing that such has been the case; your countenance h morc pale, your features more care-worn, even than when you left the castic two hours ago/' Eleonora directed him to shut the door of the apartment, and then communicated to him the strange circumstance to which she had that morning been a witness at the hermitage. Cyprian listened attentively to her account ; and when she had con¬ cluded it, he declared himself entirely at a loss what opinion to draw from the op¬ posite declarations of the hermit and her¬ self: bv the singularity of the incident, he was as much struck as herself. " I am as certain as I am of mv own ex- isteme," said the daughter (Л Latimer, " that I beheld a form, whether of this earth
earth or a supernatural being, it is impos¬ sible for me to decide ; of the most ashy paleness was its visage, and iî& black gar¬ ments"------· Cyprian interrupted her— " Habited in black," he said : " Was it a monk ?" " О no, no," replied Eleonora; "not such his garb; his countenance bore on it the ferocious marks of a robber or mur¬ derer. Why did you enquire if he were a monk ? you asked the question as if vou had some reason for advancing it." " Why," replied Cyprian, " what yon have related to me appears so very extra¬ ordinary, that I will impart to vou a cir¬ cumstance of a similar nature, which I once beheld on the very same spot." "Indeed!" ejaculated Eleonora; "did an instance of this kind ever occur to vou ?" " You shall hear," answered Cyprian·: " it is now about three years ago, bince one evening, in the middle of the spi ing, my revered master commissioned me to carry
carry a book to the hermit Agatha, which she had petitioned him to lend her. As Ì was going along, I happened to lift up my eyes; it was just at that part of the road where the branches of the two beech-trees form an arch across the path, through which the hermitage first breaks upon the view of one advancing towards it from the castle. I happened, as I said, to lift up my eyes, and I beheld a monk aj: that moment bend¬ ing his head to enter the humble dwelling. * As we are all utterly unacquainted with the connexions of Agatha, I judged that this might be some friend who was come to her cell, either to visit her, or to pray by her: unwilling therefore to interrupt them, I re¬ solved to wander about in the wood till I should see the monk depart, and then pro¬ ceed on my errand : I continued loitering about fora considerable time, keeping my eyes constantly fixed upon the hermitage, that I might inform myself of his depar¬ ture, and not be unnecessarily delayed. I suíľered about an hour to pass thus ; at the expiration
expiration of which, not knowing how long Agatha's visitor might continue with her, I determined to perform my commis¬ sion. On reaching the hermitage, I en¬ tered the outer apartment, and found no one in it. I spoke—no answer was re¬ turned to my words; but I believed my¬ self to hear some one breathing in the inner apartment, and proceeded to the door leading into it. Here I perceived the recluse, sleeping upon a straw pallet ; no one else was visible, and therefore you must be as well convinced as myself, that there could be no one else in the her¬ mitage, for it contains no single hiding- place. Do not you, my dear young Lady, think that my adventure was as extraordi¬ nary as yours?" " Have you never mentioned this cir¬ cumstance to any one before?" enquired Eleonora. " No, Î have not," replied Cvprian : u I had two reasons for being silent upon it; the first, because 1 feared that my veracity might
might be called in question ; the second, because I judged that I might be uninten¬ tionally divulging some secret of import¬ ance to the happiness οΐ one, upon whose comforts I could have no right to intrude.'* Eleonora and her humble friend sunk into reflective silence ; the account related by each corroborated the opinion of the other, that there was some greater mys¬ tery connected with the character of the hermit Agatha, than Latimer had appeared to believe; and anxiously did Eleonora wish thr.t she now had her father with her, in order that she might impart the per¬ plexities of her mind. Hence arose the following reflections: i( Have I always been as communicative of the feelings of my heart as it perhaps became me to be, towards him ?—have I not concealed from his knowledge, a secret of the utmost im¬ portance to my own happiness, in com¬ pliance with the entreaties of a stranger? —and may not the want of his breast to repose my present .anxieties in, be made the
the punishment of my former conceal¬ ment?—But has he, in return, withheld no secret from mcr he has. What is the mysterious event connected with his Eleo¬ nora, of which he spoke to Cyprian on the night previous to his departure ? But does this knowledge authorise me, his child. to question the justice of his actions, and to set up a conduct for myself, without regulating it by the advice of so excellent a parent? О no, the first proof of a daughters affection, is obedience to indul¬ gent parents; the first proof of her own wisdom» the submitting her inclinations to the guidance of tlieir experience.—Oh my parents," she continued, ** I may, per¬ haps, never behold you again, and when too late, have occasion to repent that I did not seek your advice !" The tea:-s b tust into her eye·«, and relieved her over¬ burdened heart ; and the promise of eter¬ niti love and protection which the un¬ known had made to her, recurring to Iht mind, as also the proof of his constam y anil
and truth, which he had given her in the promised signal, which she had heard im¬ mediately after the departure of her pa¬ rents, communicated some degree of com¬ fort to her heart : but where there is mys¬ tery, there must ever likewise be doubt ; not even the powerful charm of love can banish the tormenting sensation from the heart, however forcibly implanted in it may be the image of the object beloved. Her conversation with Cyprian was at length interrupted by the appearance of Gillian, who, as she entered the apart¬ ment, exclaimed, " Oh, my dear mistress, how terrifying it is to be in the Lady Mag¬ dalene's chamber ! the death-watch has be¬ gun to tick at the bed's head, and there¬ fore it is moralltj certain that she wont be with us long now." Eleonora ascended in silence to the chamber of her grandmother, and once more took her melancholy station by the side of her bed ; where, as she sat, she could hardly forbear a smile at the signi¬ ficant
fi can t look which was given her by Gillian, when the cricket accidentally chirped amongst the logs upon the hearth. In the afternoon Eleonora heard the voice of Cyprian, in a closet adjoining to the Lady Magdalene's chamber, making enquiries after the venerable invalid; when he quitted it, she rose, and followed hint into the gallery; " Cyprian/* she said, " let us go down together—I have some questions which I wish to propose to you/* They entered an apartment, and Eleo¬ nora thus addressed her companion: "You have doubtless been made acquainted by my father, that when it shall have pleased Heaven to recall the spirit of the Lady Magdalene to its abode of bliss, that my residence is no longer here ; and that Ì have in my possession a letter, which you are to convey to one whose protection it is its purpose to implore for me ?" Eleonora paused for his reply ; Cyprian informed her, that he was already, as she supposed,
supposed, acquainted with the circum¬ stances from the lips of his revered master. if The Lady Thomasine Blunt, to whom the letter is addressed," rejoined Eleo¬ nora, <e is the cousin of my beloved fa¬ ther; more of her I know not, for no in¬ tercourse, as you must be well acquainted, except by letter, has been kept up be¬ tween the families since the period of my recollection. Can you give me any in¬ formation concerning her, or of those with whom she is connected? You can¬ not be surprised that I am anxious to gain some account of persons amidst whom I shall soon be fated to live." Cyprian answered, that the information with which he was able to furnish her, was extremely slender ; u he doubted not," he said, " that she already knew, that the father of Latimer had been the brother of one only sister, his senior in years, \vho had espoused a man of con¬ siderable consequence and wealth, to whom
whom she had borne two daughters, Alice and Thomasine ; that Alice had become the wife of Sir Edmund Kny vett, a knight, resident at Buckenham Castle, in Norfolk, and had now been many years numbered with the dead; and that Thomasine was that Lady Blunt, whose protection was about to be entreated for herself." <( Is she not the second wife of her hus¬ band, Sir Sigismund ?" asked Eleonora. Cyprian replied, ťí That such was the case ; that his first wife had been the Lady Elizabeth Talboyse, who, listening to the seducine: voice of Henrv the Eighth, had borne that monarch a son, who was named Henry Fitzroy :—that Sir Sigismund had been induced to give his hand to the Lady Elizabeth, b v the rich dower which her royal paramour had bestowed on her ; and that she had lived his wife scarcely a vear, her death being supposed to have beca hastened by the sorrow which she had ex¬ perienced at being discarded from the af¬ fections of the King, on whom her heart had
had been solely fixed, although various causes had induced her to espouse Sir Si¬ gismund Blunt." " What can be the occasion of the ces¬ sation of that intimacy which once sub¬ sisted between two families so nearly al¬ lied as are those of Siv Sigismund and my dear father?" demanded Eleonora. " It had arisen," Cyprian said, " he had understood, from the difference of their religious opinions; Sir Sigismund Blunt being a warm Catholic, as might naturally be conceived, from his connexion w r ith Lord Henry Fitzroy/' " On the night before his departure from hence," returned Eleonora, " my father represented Sir Sigismund to me as one from whom the professor of an opposite faith to his own had no severity to dread; and you denominate him a warm Catholic," " But, my dear young Lady," returned Cyprian, t( recollect, that a man may be a zealous professor of his own religion, and still possess a nature sufficiently gene¬ rous
rous not to nourish in his heart any illibe¬ ral sentiments against thoso whose tenets differ from his own ; as such a man have I heard Sir Sigismund represented—of a be¬ nevolent disposition and manly principles ; and were he even the reverse of this re¬ presentation, the gentle soul of the Lady Thomasine, which is by every tongue spoken of as not less than angelic, must act as a sweetener of the bitterest disposi¬ tion." These words were spoken by Cy¬ prian to sooth the apprehensions which he saw growing in the mind of Eleonora; she understood his motive, and replied to them only with a sigh; whilst she inwardly im¬ plored Heaven to avert from her the evils which her fancy drew : when she spoke again, she said, " One only son has been the offspring of the Lady Thomasine's mar¬ riage with Sir Sigismund —is it not so?" Cyprian replied in the affirmative, and added, " From what I recollect of the pe¬ riod of his birth, he must bé about your own age—perhaps a few mou.tíiš'older." vol. ι. к " Would
" Would the Lady Thomasine hád boriié a daughter, rather than a son !" exclaimed Eleonora ; " the anticipation of meeting a femaie of my own years, with whom I might havtí contracted a friendship, would have been an infinite relief to my feelings amidst my present sorrows.'* Önce more Eleonora ascended to the melancholy chamber of the Lady MTagda- ïéne; and as she continued to rëfléc't otí her own situation, she believed, that had the regulation of her future conduct tíeeH left entirely to herself, she would have felt less anxiety in committing herself to the protection of her mysterious acquaintance of the wood, than in entering the family of Sir Sigismund Blunt, whom one olT those unaccountable prepossessions, which not unfrequently seize upon the heart in sickness, or in sorrow, rendered her most unwilling to encounter. When night approached, the same group drew round the chamber fire, which had on the preceding one worn away the heavy hours
hours before it. The sun, however, was not fated again to rise upon the terrestrial existence of the Lady Magdalene: be¬ tween the hours of twelve and one, a deep groan burst from her lips ; it was the first sound which she had been heard to utter for a considerable time, and old Ka¬ therine and Eleonora immediately hastened to the side of her bed. Her eyes, which had heretofore been closed, were now open, but entirely devoid of expression, and apparently íived. Katherine attempted to insinuate between her lips the brim of a cup, which contained a refreshing cor¬ dial; but in vain—every power οΐ assist¬ ing nature appeared already to be dead within her. Jn the course οΐ half an hour, the mas- tiflT in the court-yard of the castle, baying at the shadow of the moon, broke with his hoarse growlings the stillness of the night. Gillian crept close to the side of her aunt, and said, " Now the dog howled, she was convinced death was at hand;" and her к 2 aunt,
aunt, from wh'om her superstitious ideas had been principally derived, had gained from experience little more courage than her niece, and shivered and trembled al¬ most as much as she did, "Oh, that dog, that dog!" cried Ka¬ therine; <( he 11 be a true prophet; it is too plain he will ; only look how black her Eps turn ! The poor dog used to be very fond of my good Lady, when she was able to walk about ; and she used always to pat his head when she passed his kennel in the court; and then he'd wag his tail, and look so pleased! and now the poor beast has an instinct of her death, like ail of us!" " Surely," replied Eleonora, " he al¬ ways barks, just as he does now, when it is moon-light." " Oh no, no," returned Katherine, " not just as he does now; I never heard him bark in this tone, except when old Austin Brown, the former steward, died." A silence ensuel, during which Eleo¬ nora,
nora, regarding the countenances of her companions, almost caught their supersti¬ tious ideas; and again and again did she cast her eyes timidly around the chamber, doubting whether there might not be ap¬ pearances, as well as sounds, to foretell the approach of death, and whether her sight might not fall upon one of them. " Look there ! only look there !" ex¬ claimed Gillian suddenly ; and Eleonora now hastily closed her eyes, which had before been turned inquisitively in every direction. " What is it ? what is it that you see ?" demanded old Katherine, in a voice of alarm. " That log of wood," cried Gillian, pointing towards the chimney, "that dread¬ ful log of wood ! above a quarter of an hour ago it fell from the fire, and rolled upon the hearth, as dark and as black as a coal, and now it is all over in a blaze !'* " Ah, I see, I see," replied Katherine, the die is then cast î —all hope is past !— к 3 the
the death-watch, the dog, and the lire í three warnings of death !—three warnings cannot fail. Oh, my poor old mistress, thou art lost to us !" At the expiration of nearly another half hour, the Lady Magdalene spoke: <( Latimer, my son, where art thou, La¬ timer?" she faintly articulated, stretching out her hand as she spoke, as if she sup¬ posed him to be standing by her side, and expected him to take it into his. Her hand was extended on that side of the bed next to which stood Eleonora ; she took it into her's, and pressed it between them ; the ehill of death was on it, but the energy οΐ her feelings still communicated to it some portion of strength—the hand of Eleonora which met the palm of her's, she grasped with a tremulous fervency; ''Pro¬ tect, Heaven bless and protect thee, my beloved son," she with difficulty pro¬ nounced ; and with a gentte struggle sunk into the sleep of death. At that instant Eleonora, for the first time
time in her life, stood, as it were, alone in the world. It was true, that since her separation from her beloved father and mother, her grandmother had lain in a state of utter insensibility ; still she had been able to console herself with the idea that she had a near relative, beneath the same roof with herself; of that consola¬ tion she was iiQjw.dtrøii'Hdtfi, rof mf^y na¬ tural protector was she now ^bereft : this conviction ргщЦщеД g fhİÎÜiig j^nsafion, which appeared to freeze fier blood in its current towards her h ei irt.; she şunXşpeech- less upon a chair, from whjeh she was led by the domestics to her chamber, and placed in her bed. Had she been able to indulge in \ys$ rgfle^tiflns, «1§ί?ρ would probably have fled fier coueh ; but ^ke fa¬ tigue which she ,hi$ AJndßrgpne in having passed the two preceding nights without repost had so for jexjia.us;tc<i ^e,r spinte, that диет .a short .time she ^идк W-cepjinj; into ¿he arms #f ^hjiyion.
к 4 CHAP.
CHAP. VIH. " IT thou leniember'it not the slightest folly That ever love ditt make thte iun into, Thou hast not Jov'd ■ ...-■. Or If thou hast not sate as I do now, Wearying tbe hearer in thy mistres» 1 praise, Thou hast oot lov'd ■ "■ ■ Or if thou hast not broke from company Abruptly, aş my passion now- makes me, Thou hast not lov'd"------______ SUiXEttiAKt,,
" Hie face vas pale, his eyes were wild, . His beard was dark \ - ·· *- ■ — ' -..... And wild and frantic was his mien, Dread signs of terror showing." Mrs. Ro»iksû*. On the succeeding morning Cyprian's first care was to form every arrangement for the funeral of the Lady Magdalene ; these directions occupied him throughout the day,
day, and evening was beginning to ap¬ proach ere he entered the presence of Eleonora. After some preparatory con¬ versation, he enquired of her, whether it was her choice that he should, without de¬ lay, proceed with her father's letter to Lady Blunt, or not set out on his mission till after the interment of her grandmo¬ ther had taken place ? "Did my dear Îather direct you how to act in this case?" asked Eleonora; " for I would have his commands implicitly obeyed." Cyprian replied, " that Latimer had said, c As soon as my mother shall be no more, convey my letter to my cousin Blunt." " If such were his words/' returned Eleonora, " you shall begin your journey on the morrow. Since I am fated to quit the shelter of my paternal roof for the protection of strangers, it matters not how soon the change takes place/' Latimer had left the letter addressed to к 5 Lady
Lady Blunt, unsealed, in the possession of tiis daughter, in order that sbe might at ieisttre peruse its contents ; this she 'had already done* but once more she unfolded tbe paper, and passed her eyes over the ^characters which it contained—they com¬ posed a most affectionate address to the feelings of Lady Thomasine, reminding her that the same blood flowed in the veins *oT "herself and Eleonora ; and entreating Ъег, however their religious opinions might differ, to suffer that charity which is due from every heart of sensibility to 4ts fellow-being in calamity, 'to direct her İh extending her maternal protection to ( hts friendless child. The tears started into the eyes of Eleo¬ nora —she kissed her father's name upon *the paper, the last which-she should ever, perhaps, behold written by his-own hand^— -refolded the letter, and impressed'it with a seal. Accordingly, with the dawn pf the fol¬ lowing day, Cyprian set out on his jour¬ ney
,ТДЕ ney .ţp\4ards дЬе ( cpstle of Şir Sigismund Blunt, which was situated in Nòrthiamp- ♦ ' л " >■ « , , ff "".'* * tonshire, on the banks of the river Nen, İn the f vicinity of the city of Pçterbo- rouffh; and which, with its extensive do- main, he t had inherited, in the,right of his wife, from her father, Sir Allen Gower. During the absence of Cyprian, the hours passed heavily and mournfully over f the head of the disconsolate Eleonora ; she (el t ^a .reluctance-to f vjsit the hepriiitage, since ,the extraordinary ,occurrençe of which she had heçn a.witncýS the last time , of j her going ţhiţţier ; and Agatha djd not »cqme to.tîţe castfe. t Sjhe could, ngt always Wçep for her t paçiiqts;,şhe çou|djipt,aîwa)s jPVay ; şj}e : cp t i||d r not 5 alw^ys t reject ; ţ ;md, asa temporary^ejifff^^erafHictedj mipd, ; şfıe ţoqk.up a volume of o|d legends of the, r tw^th pen tury,, |r ţ om ( v^hjçh she ;; ^d irequept^y been a^cys^içd^o.read f aloud to heratiend^pt; fiilljan^by wh? ( se,remarks { цроп the m,3rvellous and J^crqic adventures which they re«w4ed, she.ruid,. in her days
of happier mood, been often almost as well entertained as by the románccá them¬ selves. Gillian was now her constant compa¬ nion, and seeing her fake up the well- known volume, entreated to be allowed to participate with her în the amusement it could afford ; and for which she was al¬ ways obliged to be indebted to the com- plaisance of some other person, as her education had been too simple and con¬ fined for her to have acquired the ability of thus entertaining herself. Almost the only one of the collection which Eleonora had not read, was entitled, ·* The Maid and the Stranger;** in its ori¬ ginal form it was of considerable length, but if may be briefly related thus; ** A young damsel, of extreme beauty and accomplishments, named OrHla (of what country, the history gave no informa¬ tion ) being rendered very unhappy by the importunities of her father, who was not Se» illustrious as a knight of wealth, than
as a warrior of valour, for her to espouse one of his battle-comrades, to whom she had a great dislike, both on account of his age, which was double her own, and also of many disagreeable qualities attached to him, found her only consolation in wan¬ dering in a grove adjoining to her father's сал le. '* One summer morning, as she strayed along her favourite paths, being oppressed by the heat of the sun, she laid herself down upon a mossy bank, at the foot of a tree, to repose, and it so chanced that she sunk to sleep. When she awoke, she was surprised to see a handsome young man, clad in a suit of polished armour, standing by her side; starting up, she enquired who he was, and whence he came ? " He replied, that he was a knight, that he was possessed of great wealth, and of one of the most splendid castles İn the world ; that he was travelling for the plea¬ sure of viewing the country ; and that on the preceding evening he had with his at¬ tendants
,2(Н> teiídftnťi been attacked by φίίικΓιΜΐ ; .that ;tlie robbers had put to the.sword all his -companions ; that they liad despoiled him ■of his >money, his jewels, and his horse ; ¿md.fhat he ^Qnsidercü" it almost a miracle that ¡he had escaped from them with his life. He added, that bis castle was a great many hundred miles oil) and that he de- sp/ured.of being able to reach it,.destitute, asdic was, of the means of existence. *' ? The gentle heart of Orilta avp,s moved to pity by the strapger's account of him- ( SQİf, and she immediately offered him some coin which,she had about her, and a neck¬ lace of precious stones, whjch.she wore round her L neck. JJe accented them with ^^reíäsionsof ,tbe greatest gratitude; but still he lingered .near the .spot, and ap¬ peared цпаЫе to tean himself from,the de- . jjght of beholding his benefactress. Orilla jwas not Jess enchanted w i φ her new ас« .pjuamtançe, than,tbe^stranger appeared to .be delighted with, her ; and, observing that #be, regard- Jhkn with;a,cQmplacent ^mile, he
lie ventured to declare tbe passion with which she had inspired him, and to im¬ plore Tier to inform him whether the af¬ fections of hor beurt were disengaged. r ' For n considerable time the fair dam¬ sel was irresolute how to reply to his ques¬ tion ; at length, by gentle advances, he gained from her a confession of her actual situation. íŕ O heavenly maid !' he ex¬ claimed, 'could my prayers prevail on thee to bestow on me that affection which is vainly demanded of thee for another, already the wealthiest, I were then also the "happiest of knights/ ' Ah me !' replied Orilla, ' did my heart 'incline towards thee, it would »be 'impos¬ sible f to gain the consent of my father to mytunion with any man .but, the .one whom he has selected for me/ 'But why ask his consent?' returned {the knight; '»would it not be for our¬ selves thaťwe'should wed each other?' 'But to contract an union/ said Orilla, '' on which a father's curse might MV. * 4 . * Would
' Would that be worse/ returned the stranger/ l than to condemn thyself a wretch for life to the embraces of a man whom thy soul loathed, and who would perhaps be sufììciently villanous to treat thee with cruelty, because thou couldst not love him r' · ■ . " Orilla shuddered at the idea ; she thought it indeed too probable that this might be her fate, and heaved a deep sigh. " The stranger perceived the emotion of her heart, and was encouraged by it to propose to her a plan for their mutual hap¬ piness; it was, that he should immediately proceed to barter the necklace which she had given him, for a spirited courser, with which he should return at midnight to that spot ; that she should meet him there, and bring with her such trinkets and gold as she possessed, as the means of defraying the expences of their journey to his cas¬ tle; that the moment of her arrival, he should place her behind him in silence upon
upon his horse ; and then use all speed in removing her from the pursuit of her fa¬ ther. *' After a considerable degree of hesi¬ tation on the part of Orilla, during which ihe stranger continued to urge his suit with increasing fervor, she consented to the appointment; and the stranger, hav¬ ing sworn that her happiness should be the sole care of .his future life, departed." Here Eleonora laid down her book ; the case of Orilla appeared so strongly to re¬ semble her own, that she could scarcely believe it a fiction composed nearly a cou¬ ple of centuries before, and had some dif¬ ficulty in convincing herself that it was not a sketch drawn from her own adven¬ tures. * f What think you of this tale, Gil¬ lian ?" she said ; te do you think the stran¬ ger promises fairly ?" " Why, as to that," replied Gillian, " he promises fairly -enough to be sure; but let us see what he will do ; according to the proverb,
proverb, '* Promising is one thin^, an4 performing another." *' Perhaps you think the lady too credu- lpuş/' leti, ¿d Eleonora. " U you mean by that, that she is too much in a hurry 4o he married," answered (ïilljan, "J shaVt be surprised if, before we come to ihe end of her histpry, we iiml that she makes out the pioverb which says, "H№e \o wfd, ana* repent aţ l^i- *iipe/' Eleonor* ei^hed am} paused; the adv^p-f turns ^f Orili» hitherto with the ¡Kmng$ Ш§Н тщ& not «pre similar to ter pwn with \m mysterious acqpaintance of the WO©4* ^Ьип úw prorøtø of the siwple GiWm *«ere ppplieable to 4hose Îears which, evpr since her iknowkilge of hiin ¡Vid compţeec^dj }&d ЬоИ a sh*re in hpr feelings. She gave some minuits ig re¬ flection; and thee experiencing 9 de¬ gree of curiosity to learn the sequel pf the itle, $be ngüin tpplc ир her book, дп4 ÍPttöd the narrative continued thus : " Orilla
H< Orilla having placed such articles of л alue a« she possessed in a casket, and de¬ posited it in her pocket, proceeded at midnight to the wood; she had not gained the spot of appointment many minutes, ere she heard the sound of a horse's feet, and almost immediately after she beheld, by the light of the rising moon, the stran- ge*·, mounted on a milk-white steed ; he rode up to her side, vaulted from his horse, and having placed her upon it, he again sprung into his seat ; and» upon a signal from hie matter, the courser bore them along at a fleet pace. 4t They proceeded for a considerable time in silence, as had been previously agreed between them. At length Orilla spoke, the stranger replied to her only by an abrupt injunction to silence. Still they rode swiftly on, and after another lapse pf time, Orilla a second time enquired of her companion, 'whither they were going?' 'Hush!' cried the stranger, and again the maid felt herself constrained to repress her enquiries.
enquiries. Still their courser abated no¬ thing of hisspeed, and presen tlyOrillaa third time repeated her question : f We shall soon be at the end of our journey/ replied the stranger.—'At the end of our journey !' repeated Orilla. —* Even so,' he returned ; and Orilla heard him in silent astonish¬ ment. They were at this moment enter¬ ing a deep and gloomy forest, and the branches of the trees amongst which they were riding, frequent! ν almost tore Orilla from her seat. At length the stranger check¬ ed his horse, and dismounting, directed Orilla to do the same ; she obeyed, and he then de¬ manded of her to deliver up into his hands whatever she had about her of value. Orilla produced her casket ; and the stranger, having got possession of it, instantly drew his sabre from its scabbard, and stabbed her to the heart." The tale proceeded by explaining that the pretended knight was a robber, who had worked upon the credulity and inno¬ cence of Orilla, for the purpose of ob¬ taining
taining from her a booty, and had then deprhed her of her life, in order to add security to the villany of which he had been guilty. " Merciful Heaven !" exclaimed Eleo¬ nora, " and is such the reward decreed to those who, disdaining the meanness of sus¬ picion, give faith to the accents of those who appear to speak them fair? Evil world í how dreadful is thy nature, if dis¬ trust is the only method by which tho&e who live in thee may shun deceit and in¬ gratitude!" Eleonora fixed her eyes insensibly on Gillian as she spoke, who, supposing her¬ self addressed, answered, " Ah, my Lady, the proverb, you know, says, " It is not all gold that glisters, and therefore it is right to look before we leap." About a page and a half of the story.. Eleonora perceived, was still remaining; and supposing that it contained some mo¬ ral extracted from the tale, she again re¬ sumed her reading ; as she turned the leaf, she
she was surprised to behold, upon a blank space which had intervened in the manu¬ script between the conclusion of this tale and the commencement of the next, some words which appeared to have been traced upon the parchment by a pen dipped in blood ; sne hastily perused them, and found them to compose the following sen¬ tence : ** Frtr not, Eleonora ; ihe confidence which thou h«t placed in a stranger, shall not be abused like that of the uo- tunate Orilla !" Again and again did Eleonora peruse these words, ere she could convince herself rliat her senses did not deceive her; and she could then only conjecture them to have been written by the unknown ; but how he should have gained an opportunity éf writing them in a book of her's, or by what means he could have guessed that she should select fór her perusal a tale which in sonte of jfs patts resembled her own ad¬ ventures
ventures with him, and thus turn to the very page which he had inscribed, she was utterly at a loss to imagine. Eleonora read no more tlzt evening, and shortly after retired to bei; but her night was a sleepless one—reflections of a dis¬ tressing and perplexing nature filled her mind, and kept her awake till the grey streaks of dawn were beginning to appear th the heavciiš ; she then sunk rito a resi¬ les *ìlYmber, from which she ar f ? uiirc- fré&hcd, and ill at ease. bhé employed her morning in turning över the leaves of the volume in which she had so unexpectedly found a sentence, ap» fiaren tlý written in blood, addressed to herself; she believed it possible that i с might not be the only one of the kind which the book contained, and under this idea her search was commenced ; but it proved a fruitless one. On the heavy wings of doubt, appre¬ hension, and sorrow, crept on the hours. The seventh morning after her decease witnessed
witnessed the interment of the Lady Magr dalene. Painful as was the task to Eleo¬ nora, she attended the corpse to its last earthly abode, in the cathedral of Wor¬ cester, because she knew it to be an act which would give satisfaction to her be¬ loved and absent parents, Cyprian was not yet returned, and she had therefore no friend to support her through the sorrow¬ ing ceremony, w ho was calculated to lighten to her the heaviness of the office ; and she came back to the castle almost sinking be neath the combination of such feelings as she had no reluctance in displaying, and of such more painful ones as it cost her many a struggle to conceal within the li¬ mits of her own breast. The day was passed in sorrowful so- lemnty by all the household of Latimer; the evening was one ofthat peculiar gloom when the lowering aspect worn by the face of nature, sensibly, though almost unac¬ countably evin to those who experience the effect, increases the melancholy sensa¬ tions
tions of a sorrowing mind. Old Kathe-» rine had already retired to her chamber, and Eleonora was in the act of ascending to her own, when the bugle affixed to the gate in the outer wall of the cattle was blown with a sharpness which caused Eleo¬ nora to start ; and before she had time to recollect herself, orto express her surprise to Gillian, who was attending her, it was repeated a second and a third time, with a shrillness which denoted boih impatience and authority. The sounds of course pe¬ netrated into every part of the castle, and the domestics immediately hastened to the drawbridge. On arriving at it, they per¬ ceived at its foot about a dozen horsemen, attended by a troop of hinds and peasants, armed, some with staffs others with vari¬ ous weapons, which chance appeared to ha\e put into their hands. Before time was given to Latimer's servants to enquire what was the business of the strangers, one of the horsemen thus addressed them : " Let fall the drawbridge, and admit us vol. i. L instantly
instantly within your walls; we are pos¬ sessed of the authority of our so\ creigli, Mary, to search your castle, on suspicion of its being the hiding-place of a rebel to her royal power" Entirely at a loss how to act, the ser¬ vants turned their eyes for instruction to¬ wards Eleonora, who had followed them to the inner gate of the castle. The coun¬ tenance of Eleonora bespoke her equally undecided ; and could her heart have been read by them, it would have been found the seat of fears infinitely exceeding their's, for she dreaded lest the rebel, of whom the horseman had spoken, should prove her mysterious acquaintance, and that she might be doomed to see him laden with those chains which, however eminently his political conduct might merit, she felt that it w r ouId cause her bosom an agoniz¬ ing pang to see him sinking under. As the space of a few minutes elapsed without an answer being returned to the demand of the horseman, he exclaimed, iC Lower
" Lower the drawbridge instantly, or I shall command my fellows to level their firelocks at your heads, as the just reward of your disobedience to the royal man¬ date which we bear." An alarm of a different nature to what they had before been experiencing, seized upon the domestics of the castle, on hear¬ ing this declaration; and thev immediately let fall the bridge, and raised the heavy portcullis. Access to the castle being granted them, the horsemen spurred their steeds into the inner court, the troop of peasants and hinds by whom they were accompanied, following their steps with all the swiftness they were able.—Chained, as it were, by astonishment, to the spot, Eleonora did not attempt to fly from them, till the horsemen had dismounted, and were ad¬ vancing towards the entrance of the great hall, near the door of which she was stand¬ ing; her thoughts now suddenly turning from the fate of him on whose account her L 2 fears
fears were excited, to the danger which might await herself, she began to recede with hasty steps. The horseman who had before spoken, observing her retreat, and the marks of alarm which attended it, fol¬ lowed her to the door οΐ the apartment into which she had turned ; and touching his cap, in signal of his courtesy, as he spoke, he said, " Is it not the Lady Eleo¬ nora whom I address ?" Tremblingly she replied in the affirma¬ tive. " Banish, Lady/' he returned, Ci all ap¬ prehensions with which the unexpected arrival of myself and my companions may have inspired you; our intentions are not wantonly inimical to any member of this House; were they even so, your sex would claim for you our reverence and protec¬ tion. Information has been conveyed to фе throne, that a rebel, who is one of its severest enemies, and adjudged to death fety the laws of his country, has found ajeans of secreting himself in a desolate part
part of this building ; in pursuit of him you behold myself and my companions here; the peasants whom you see accom¬ panying us, have joined us on our way, in order to display their loyalty to their Queen, by their active services in her cause. Should we discover him whom we seek concealed within thcbe walls, the en¬ mity of the state will fall on those alone who have been the instruments of his con* cealment." The heart of Eleonora sunk within her: the desolate part of the castle of which he had spoken, could only mean the North¬ ern Gallery ; and within its prohibited walls, various causes had given her reason to suppose that her mysterious acquaint¬ ance had found an asylum. Turning from her, the horseman ad¬ dressed the domestics of the castle, com¬ manding them to deliver up to him the keys of every apartment, and to conduct him first to that part of the building which he had been informed was interdicted to l3 the
the use of its present inhabitants, and therefore the place at which suspicion first glanced, as the concealment of the object of his search. The servants had no alternative but to obey, had they even been conscious of the reluctance with which Eleonora saw them follow his directions ; and accordingly led the way to the horseman and his compa¬ nions to the foot of the grand staircase, at the extremity of the hall, from the top of which branched off various corridors, lead¬ ing to the different quarters of the castle. It was already too dark for the demanded investigation to be made without the as¬ sistance of torches; and whilst these were preparing, Eleonora stood the effigy of mute despair, breathing a silent prayer for the protection of him on whose safety her own happiness depended. One idea alone arose to her mind, to give her con¬ solation and hope under her present pain¬ ful terrors, which was the possibility of the murdered stranger, who had so myste¬ riously
ríoiisly been found in the Northern Gal¬ lery, and not the youth to whose relief she had administered in the wood, being the rebel of whom the emissaries from the Queen were now in pursuit; it was true that the length of time which had elapsed since the death of the former very forcibly combated the idea which gave her hope: but when the mind is sinking under tor¬ turing apprehensions, it eagerly catches at the most trivial circumstance which ap¬ pears to possess the power of relieving its anxiety; and is unwilling to analyze its cause of hope, lest the balsamic im¬ pression should fade beneath the chilling powers of reflection. The torches were now produced, and, contrasted with their superior brilliancy, the little remaining light of day appeared immediately to vanish from the skv ; the companions of the commanding horseman who had addressed Eleonora, received the lights at the hands of the domestics, and repeated his command to be shown the ĺ 4 way
way to the uninhabited part of the build¬ ing. Eleonora continued standing in the door-way of the apartment into which she bad fled at the entrance of the horse* men into the castle ; with her eyes she followed them as they ascended towards the galleries ; and when they were re¬ moved from her sight by having turned into one of the corridors which branched off from the head of the staircase, her regards fell upon the motley group of peasants and hinds who were pursuing their steps. As she continued to gaze upon them, sbe observed one of the last of the troop, who was clad in a coarse and rustic garb, to strike a cudgel, which he carried in his hand, with violence against one of the oaken pillars that formed a ba¬ lustrade on either side of the stairs. The hollow wood returned a loud· echo of the blow, which caused Eleonora to start, and fix her eyes upon the person by whom it had been produced; she perceived that his
his face was turned towards her; and in the succeeding instant, thè gleam of a torch borne by one of his fellows, passing over his countenance, she recognised in him her mysterious acquaintance of the wood. A tide of joy, almost superior to the apprehensions under which she had a mo¬ ment before laboured, burst upon her heart, and it was with the greatest diffi¬ culty that she could restrain herself from uttering an exclamation expressive of her feelings. The unknown appeared to be convinced that she had seen him, for he almost immediately turned from her, and as he did so, she beheld a smile of plea¬ sure and satisfaction pass over bis counte¬ nance. With composure and comparative tranquillity of mind, did Eleonora now await the event of the search which was making by the royal emissaries, it was continued for nearly two hours, at ¿hft. expiration of which time they dcSQcpÄe.U into the Ml, muttering s^nAejoıçe.ş wtøefe - ĺ 5 bespoke
bespoke them unable to decide whether the object οΐ their pursuit had escaped from the castle, if it had ever been his hiding-place, or whether the domestics, who one and all declared themselves, in the most solemn manner, ignorant of any person's ever having attempted to rind concealment in it, had contrived to screen him from their observation. As they passed through the outer court, in their way to the drawbridge, Eleonora believed that she could with her eye single out the mysterious stranger from amidst the peasants; but he did not for an instant turn his regards towards her, much less repeat any signal to draw her attention towards him ; which she could not doubt to have been the reason of his striking the balustrade with his cudgel at his en¬ trance into the castle. iŢhe drawbridge being once more ele¬ vated, and the castle-gates closed for the night, Eleonora began to join with her father's domestics in remarks on the event just
just past, and to enquire οΐ them, whe¬ ther they had heard the name or rank of the rebel of whom the emissaries from the Queen were in pursuit ? They replied., that they had not ven¬ tured to make this enquiry of the royal guards; but old Anselm, the porter of the castle, said, that as they had left the outer court, he had heard one of them exclaim to his companions, <c Although we have not found thee here, I trust thou wilt not, escape us, crafty Percival Godolphin !" e( Percival Godolphin !" repeated Eleo¬ nora ; i{ h not that the name of a Kentish, knight, who was arraigned with the late Duke of Northumberland, for hawng been one οΐ his principal adherents in his at¬ tempt to place the Lady Jane Grey upon the throne ?" ' f Yes, the same, the same," was replied by several of the servants. " I thought that he had paid the forfeit of his life for his misdeeds,' 4 returned Eleonora, L G fí I thought
" I thought so too, Lady," replied An¬ selm ; <( but the pursuit which is now raised after him appears to confute that report." With a slight adjunction in his opinion, Eleonora withdrew herself from the castle- hall.—Of the rebel Godolphin she had no knowledge, and therefore no particular in¬ terest was excited for him in her breast ; with the warmest pulsations it beat towards the mysterious stranger; and retiring to her chamber, she passed a considerable por¬ tion of the night in reflecting on the un¬ expected manner in which he had that evening appeared before her.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. ---------—_-----------------------<( But their way ■Lies through the perplexed paths of this drear wood, Ýhe nodding horror of whose shady brows, Threats the forlorn and w¡andeimg passenger."
" )5иЦеп ^nd sad to fancy's frighted eye, Did shapes of dun and murjty hpe advance, ■ ι ' ■■ ■' ■ ........ - of gesţme strange, ( And passing horrible." Mason. *-■ The hour of breakfast was scarcely past with Eleonora, ere the faithful Cyprian returned to Worcester Castle, and entered her apartment. "Welcome! welcome!" she exclaimed, rising to receive him; " what
fr what tidings do you bring? what reply does Lady Blunt return to the suit of my unfortunate father, for the protection of his child r'* " She .sends von back by me," returned Cyprian, ,f » reelings of lo\e and tender¬ ness, and [)roiuises you a mother's care." '·' And her husband, Sir Sigismund, âiá he second this message?" enquired Eleo¬ nora eagerly. <c lie is not my relation; I have no claim upon his protection, and therefore 1 dread to İçe) myself an intruder in his mansion.'* " Lady Blunt directed me to join Sir Sigismundo promises of friendship with tier's," answered Cyprian ; " I did not myself see him ; he was unwell during the short period of my stay at Castle Gower, and did not quit his chamber/' c£ You think then that it was real illness,, and not a want of condescension in him- to my forlorn state, which withheld him from sending me a welcome from his own lips?'* said the anxious Eleonora.. tf Indeed
(i Indeed I trust it was/' replied Cy¬ prian ; " the domestics informed me that his health was now mending, but that he· had for a considerable time past been so severely indisposed, as to have been seen only by Lady Blunt and his sons." "His sons!" repeated Eleonora: " I thought that when we conversed together, a day or two before your departure from. hence, concerning the family οΐ Sir Si¬ gismund, that you told mc he was the fa¬ ther of only one child." " I did so, Lady," replied Cyprian ; *' but during my absence from home, I have learnt that it is not less the pride than pleasure of Sir Sigismund to acquaint the world, that the Lord Henry Fitzroy^, the royal offspring of his first wife, grants him permission to name him also his son." After a pause given to reflection, Eleo¬ nora ascended to her chamber, in order to make the necessary preparations for com¬ mencing her journey on the following day. She had enquired of Cyprian whether he supposed
supposed that the Lady Blunt would ob¬ ject to her introducing a female servant οΐ her own into her family ? and having learnt from him that Lady Thomasine had requested that she would in every respect consult solely her own inclination and convenience, she resolved to take with her Gillian, whose attentions custom had rendered almost necessary ; and the sim¬ ple girl received the tidings of her ap¬ proaching journey with the greatest de¬ light. Eleonora awoke on the succeeding morning, long ere the grey tints of dawn had begun to streak the sky. Deprived of the society of those whom we value and love, the places where we have been wont to enjoy the comforts of beholding and conversing with them, appear to gain all their power of interesfing our feelings ; and the anticipation of quitting them in¬ spires us with sensations of melancholy, secondary only to those excited in our breasts by our separation from .the persons whose
whose ideas, by being connected with them, give them this charm for our senses. When the light of day at length burst from the heavens, Eleonora arose, and early as the hour was, she found Gillian, awakened by far different sensations to her own, ready dressed to attend upon her.— Having habited herself in the suít which she had chosen for her journey, she pro¬ ceeded to bid farewell to those spots about the castle which possessed the greatest in¬ terest for her feelings : foremost amidst these was her father's closet, adjoining te his bed-chamber, where she had so often listened to the salutary lessons of advice which had fallen, in the honied accents of mingled persuasion and conviction, from his lips, or beheld him, as it were, beati¬ fied on earth, when returning his thoughts to his worldly duties, after the consolatory joy of conversing in private with his own pure mind, and raising his joyful hopes from an approving conscience to the Au¬ thor of his being. Here, it was most pro* bable
bable that she should never again behold him ; to this apprehension succeeded a more dreadful one—" Should she ever be¬ hold him again at all?" this idea commu¬ nicated a pang to her heart, which shot an agony, little short of distraction, into her brain ; she sunk into a chair, and a violent flood of tears came to the relief of her over-burthen ed feelings. In this state of grief she was found by the ever-watchful and attentive Cyprian; the subject of her thoughts was as clearly expressed to him as if she had explained it. He took her hand to lead her from the scene, which added deeper shades to the gloom of her already desponding mind ; and as he did so, he reminded her that she had not bidden farewell to the hermit Agatha. Not less her own inclination, than a sense of this attention being due to one with whom she had from her infancy lived in the habits of intimacy and friendship, caused her to reply to his admonition with thanks ;
thanks; "I might, perhaps," she said, "in the present wretched state οΐ my mind, have forgotten poor Agatha ; and I should have been grieved that ï had done so, w T hen I recollected my omission. You shall go with me to the hermitage." Whilst utter¬ ing these words, the violence of her tears had been checked ; having spoken them, she cast her eyes once more expressively around upon every object contained in the closet ; and having done so, " Oh, my father, my dear father !" fell from her lips; and again bursting into tears, she suffered Cyprian to lead her away from the spot. They quitted the castle in silence, and with slow steps : when they arrived within sight of the lowly dwelling of ihe recluse, Cyprian enquired of his young lady,· " When she had last seen Agatha?" "Not," replied Eleonora, "since the morning previous to the death of the Lady Magdalene ; of which visit, and the extra¬ ordinary
ordinary circumstances that attended it, I gave you an account," "Indeed!" returned Cyprian. "I am surprised that she has not been to offer you the consolation of her friendly atten¬ tions amidst your afflictions. When you last saw her, she told ) ou that she should shortly come to the castle, to enquire after the health of her who is now no more; did she not?" "Yes, 'she did," answered Eleonóra; " and I can no otherwise account for her having neglected to keep her promise, than by admitting that she labours under a malady of mind, which effaces from her memory some occurrences, and strength¬ ens with unduly vivid colours, the recol¬ lection of others; it is impossible, by any Other estimate, to judge of the conduct of one who appears so truly amiable in her disposition, and so very incoherent in her actions." Upon this point Eleonora and Cyprian had
had long beert unanimous; discussing upon it, they reached the hermitage, of which they found the outer door closed. cs Agatha is from home," said Eleonora; (( her absence may account for her noc having visited me since the death of my grandmother." We have already said, that Agatha was occasionallv in the habit of quirting her little dwelling in the wood for two or three weeks together; and we must now add, that when she did so. and then onlv, she closed the outer door of her habita¬ tion, as a signal of her absence to those who miffht come to visit her: when she merelv strolled into the little wood by which it was surrounded, or to the pre¬ cincts of the neighbouring village, this door was not shut— a distinction which was known to those who were her acci¬ dental visitors. " I do not doubt that such is the case/* said Cyprian ; ic it is, however, possible that she may not yet be risen;" and he accompanied
accompanied his words by rapping upon the door with his knuckles. An interval of nearly a couple of mi¬ nutes having elapsed, Cyprian repeated his knock ; and no answer being returned to it, Eleonora and himself received it as a confirmation of Agatha being at that time absent from her dwelling; which oc¬ casional absences had not created less sur¬ prise in the minds of those who knew her, than many other unexplained instances of her conduct. As they returned through the wood, all the scenes of which Eleonora had been a witness in it were revived in her imagina¬ tion ; and pre-eminent in the picture stood her mysterious acquaintance; the spot where she had first beheld him drinking the water of the rivulet from his cap—the tree by which she had seen him standing, whilst she was soothing with her lute the spirits of the sic,k Agatha—the narrow pass where she had found his torn and bloody ruff, and where he had afterwards made to her
her a declaration of his passion, all in¬ spired her with sensations which she felt it difficult to conceal from her companion. As they again entered the castle, she won¬ dered whether he were now within any of its recesses, or concealed in its vitinitv; whether he were still one of the troop in search of the rebel Godolphin, and bv what inducement he could ha\e been acted upon to join in the pursuit ; above all, she desired to know whether he were ap¬ prised of her intended departure from Worcester Castle : but she was doomed to endure ignorance upon these points, con¬ cerning which, if any individual connected with her had even possessed the power of giving her information, she was withheld by her voluntary promise to the unknown from endeavouring to obtain it. After a slight and hasty repast, Eleonora informed Cyprian that he might direct the horses to be brought out. The conveni¬ ence of carriages was at that day known to very lew, and a luxury neither envied nor
nor sought after by the many ; and Eleo¬ nora, without the slightest degree of he-^ sitation, had resolved to commit herself during her journey to the wary footsteps of a favourite steed, which had for manv years borne no burthen but herself. When Eleonora entered the court-yard, all the domestics crowded around, to bid her farewell, and pray for Her prosperous journey ; she gave her hand to all, and re¬ ceived upon it a,kiss of affection and of gratitude from the lips of each ; but her heart was too full to allow her to speak those wishes which she felt for their wel¬ fare— " God bless you, God bless you all/* she with difficulty articulated ; and being placed upon her horse, she began slowly to descend the sloping terrace. By her side rode Cyprian, whom she had selected as the trusty companion of her journey. Gillian followed, escorted bv a couple of servants, whose horses were laden with Eleonora's baggage ; and at a short dis¬ tance rode two others οΐ Latimer's domes« 4 tics,
tics, wdiom Cyprian had directed to attcrrd them with arms, for their defence against robbers, or for their relief under any un¬ toward circumstance which might befall them on their way. For a considerable time Eleonora feared to look back upon the habitation which she had quitted, and the well-known, well- beloved landscape which surrounded it; her heart was already full ; a thousand tender images were crowding upon her recollec¬ tion, and she dreaded lest a sight of its receding features should entirely bereave her of the little strength of mind which she at that moment possessed. At length that degree of affection which the associa¬ tion of ideas caused her to feci for the ina¬ nimate objects from which she was depart¬ ing, gave her resolution to raise her eyes towards them, as she emerged from a deep glen through which her road lay, at the distance of about a league from the castle. The sun was at this moment hidden beneath a passing cloud ; and unrelieved by his vol. j. M ra} s,
rays, the vestiges of the scene appeared less distinct than they otherwise would have done ; the castle and its woods were blended, by distance and by the haziness of the sky, with the general landscape; and the eye of Eleonora, having no par¬ ticular object of ancient acquaintance to rest upon, was a circumstance propitious to her feelings, as it spared them an addi¬ tional pang. The whole of the first day was passed by the travellers in almost uninterrupted si¬ lence ; towards noon on the second, the novelty of the prospects which presented themselves to the view of Eleonora, and which had for some hours attracted her admiration, drew occasional observations from her lips; these on the third day were increased into repeated short conversations with Cyprian, sometimes relative to the fate of her beloved father, at others con¬ cerning the family in which she was about to take up her abode; and much as she regretted the necessity which she was
was under of quitting Worcester Castle, it still appeared as if every step which she set from it lightened her heart of some small portion of its heavy weight of sor¬ row ; it was an undeiinable sensation, for which, perhaps, no cause could be given, but her having performed an effort which she had dreaded, as she had done her de¬ parture from that spot to which her sor¬ rowing heart, uniting gloomy prophecy with actual affliction, augured that she should never return. Eleonora was little accustomed to tra¬ velling, and the anxiety of mind under which she was labouring, rendering her Jess able to endure fatigue than she would under happier circumstances have felt her¬ self, îheir progress was purposely slow, and the journey of each day accommo¬ dated to her ability for performing it. On the sixth evening they reposed for the night at the distance of little more than twelve miles from Castle Gower. The morning broke from the heavens in the m 4 utmost
utmost serenity of beauty; the tempera¬ ture of the air was warm, and exhilarat¬ ing beyond what the season of spring usually affords. The morning repast be¬ ing ended, they once more mounted their horses; the country through which their road this day lay, was of uncommon love¬ liness, and possessed charms of the most fascinating kind for the senses of Eleonora —the scene was marked at intervals by the diversities of hill and dale in their riebest variety ; here the meandering river was seen stealing in gentle murmurs through the mossy glen, there pouring its frothy current down the craggy steep—now glit¬ tering beneath the golden sunbeams, then again gliding in a silver current under the noo shadowing foliage of the woods; on one hand appeared the thatched roof of the lowly cottage, sheltered in the bosom of a knot of umbrageous elms, bespeaking all that innocence can wish, and comfort give—on the other arose the frowning pile of monastic seclusion, from the walls of which,
which, in pious strains, ascended the chaunting voices of its holy inhabitants, pouring a soothing solemnity upon the ear of the traveller; now again the deep glen confined them between its rocky sides, 4»hose onlv marks of vegetation were the meagre patches of shrubs which fringed their summits, or tinted their recesses— then burst upon their view, rich and cul¬ tivated tracts of pasture, speckled with browsing cattle, enlivened by the activity of the industrious husbandman, and dress¬ ed by the bounteous hand of nature in the smile of plenty. These diversities of scene continued till they entered upon the precincts of a deep and gloomy forest, which Cyprian inform¬ ed them was not more than four miles dis¬ tant from the spot of their destination. Dark clouds had for some time past been collecting in the sky, and gradually ob¬ scuring the refulgence of the sun ; it al¬ ready appeared shorn of its beams, and a m 3 few
few minutes more entirely screened it from observation—a dewy coldness was diffused upon the air, the invigorating warmth with which the morning had risen was entirely dispelled, and a misty dampness was de¬ scending to the earth, which could yet hardly be called rain. ' c How closely do the changes of wea¬ ther resemble the uncertain life of man !" exclaimed F.leonora ; " how beautifully did the sun this morning reflect his beams upon the earth, how serene a noon aid the face of nature appear to prophecy, and in these few short hours how changed is the aspect around! Thus rose the morn¬ ing of my days, and thus, ere my noon of life arrives,"------she paused, for the rising tear checked her utterance. Cyprian was beginning the part of a consoler, when he was interrupted by one of their attendants, who, directing his at¬ tention towards the west, told him, " that a storm was rising in that quarter, which he
he feared must overtake them before they could reach the end of their journey, what¬ ever speed they might use." They immediately turned round their heads, and beheld a mass of black and heavy clouds rising in tremendous majesty from the verge of the horizon towards which their backs had hitherto been turned, and climbing with a hasty and threatening progress into the sky ; and during the few moments that they continued to observe them, they perceived the forked lightning to cleave through their centre, and after¬ wards heard the murmurs of the distant thunder. '* It is coming upon us indeed," said Cy¬ prian ; et unless the wind changes, it will shortly be driven over our heads." " Let us put our horses into a fleeter pace, and use what speed we are able," exclaimed Eleonora; " it may be possible for us to outstrip the tempest, and perhaps to reach Castle Gower ere it rises to its full strength." m * From
From the appearance of the sky; Cy¬ prian and the other domestics feared that this would not be possible; there w T as, however, no shelter near at hand; and hoping that some spot of refuge might be found for their lady on the other side of the forest, they encouraged her idea of adding to their speed. The horses obeyed the signats of their riders, ana bore them swiftly along; but the clouds, which were swelled with the awful storm, rode with double their precipitancy through the sky, i\nd in little more than a quarter of an hour, the thunder burst in roaring claps above their heads, the lightning blazed around them on every side, and the rain descended in torrents; not one effulgent speck was now visible in the sky—the dusky clouds appeared to have knit them¬ selves into a sable veil, which obscured the luminous face of Heaven. The foolish Gillian, with the aptness of every weak mind to increase evils by sink¬ ing under them, shrieked aloud with ter¬ ror,
ror, and prevailed on one of her fellow- travellers to become her guardian under the shelter of a tree, beneath which she dismounted. The other servants rode up to Eleonora, and endeavoured to persuade her to do the same. " No, no," she re¬ plied, " we are safer in this open pa^th ; the height of the trees may attract the lightning/' For a few moments this opi¬ nion swayed her ; but the violence of the rain continuing to increase, and large hail¬ stones falling mingled with it, she was pre¬ vailed upon to ride under the sheltering branches of a majestic oak, where the un¬ derwood, meeting the foliage of the tree, formed a tolerable screen from the incle¬ mency of the weather. Scarcely had they gained this station, ere Cyprian, raising himself in his stir¬ rups, and endeavouring to look through the surrounding branches, said, tc Hark ! do I not hear other sounds mixed with the roaring of the thunder?" In a few seconds an interval in the thun- M υ der
der took place, and they all distinctly heard the winding of a shrill horn, accom¬ panied by the sounds of " Hilli ho ! hilli ho! what ho bird! hilli ho!" and again the horn was wound with a still louder blast. ' f There are others besides ourselves ex¬ posed to the tempest," said Eleonora. " They seem to be a company who have separated, and are endeavouring to assem¬ ble their companions," replied Cyprian. Again the loud voice of the thunder rolled along the sky, and no other sound was for a time audible. When another in¬ terval took place, the horn was again heard, but it now appeared more distant : again " Hilli ho! hilli ho'/' rang through the air, and these shouts were followed by the cry of dogs. " They are hunters/' said Cyprian ; and he was seconded in his conjecture by his companions. The horses ridden by our travellers all bore patiently the startling glare of the lightning,
lightning, except one, which was an ani¬ mal that had not been well broken to the rein, and which was bestrodden by one of the armed attendants ; at every flash he reared himself into the air with gestures of the wildest apprehension, and it was with difficulty that his rider could keep his seat upon him ; in this, however, he for some time succeeded, but at length a vivid streak of fire, which appeared to pass along the ground immediately before his feet, ren¬ dered him ungovernable ; bis rider was thrown to the earth, and in his fall the matchlock which he carried went off; the powder from its barrel blew against the nostrils of Eleonora's steed ; added to which unexpected sensation, the loud re¬ port of the musket almost close to his head, inspired him with a degree of terror which he had not derived from the tem¬ pest; and he immediately darted with his mistress into the thickest of the forest. it was in vain that the terrified Eleonora shrieked aloud for help ; the sound of her m G pursuers
pursuers did but increase the terrors of her horse, and accelerate his speed. Her heart sickened with apprehension, whilst her brain became dizzy with the swiftness of the pace at wdiich she was borne along. The single idea of which she was capable, was a desire of springing from her saddle ; whilst she was meditating this step, the branch of a tree struck her across the fore¬ head, and all sense immediately forsook her. When recollection returned to her, the first occurrence of which she was consci¬ ous, was the sound of these words, " Cheer thee, cheer thee, fair maid, all danger is past." They were spoken by a voice of which she had no remembrance; and on opening her eyes, and casting them around her, she perceived that she was supported in the arms of a youthful stranger, who was kneeling by her side upon the ground. Opposite to her stood another young man, habited in a hunting dress, similar to that worn by him who was extending towards her
her the offices of humanity. They were accompanied by several domestics, whose habits also bespoke them to be partakers in the chace; but the suits worn by the two young men, evidently denoted them to be of superior rank. Perceiving her in some measure reco¬ vered, the youth who had been kneeling by her side informed her, that his com» panions and himself, having heard her cries for assistance, had flown towards the spot from whence they had proceeded, and had arrived within sight of her at the mo¬ ment that she had fallen from her horse. He then proceeded to enquire οΐ her, whe¬ ther she had been journeying alone, or had been separated from the friends who were accompanying her ? and besought her to inform him whither her road lay, that he might esc«*t her in safety to the place ef her destination ? With difficulty Eleonora collected her¬ self sufficiently to begin to reply to these questions; and scarcely had she done so, eve
ere Cyprian and another of her attendants were seen approaching; and in accents of the greatest joy she exclaimed, " Here comes one of my friends, here come some of my companions !" Hastily Cyprian rode towards her, ques¬ tioning her as he advanced upon her safety ; and his thoughts were so entirely engrossed by the interest which he felt in her fate, that he paid no attention to the countenances of those who were surrounding her ; he was, however, immediately recognised by them; and the youth whom Eleonora had at the moment of her revival found bestowing on her his active services, exclaimed, f( Cy¬ prian !—I cannot be mistaken—thou art he indeed ! and this fair one is then doubt¬ less the daughter of Bishop Latimer \" Upon this address Cyprian instantly turned towards him b| r whom it had been littered, and behekr in the speaker the Lord Henry Fitzroy. Dismounting from his horse, with an obeisance due to the rank of the young nobleman, Cyprian in¬ formed
formed his lady who her protector was; and Lord Henry's companion at that mo¬ ment advancing, Cyprian recognised in him Sii' Hildebrand, the son of Sir Sigis¬ mund Bin n t. A mutual explanation now took place; all present expressed the greatest satisfac¬ tion at learning that Eleonora had received no material injury from her fall ; and her new friends were eager to propose some mode of easy conveyance for her to Castle Gower. As ihey were little more than two miles distant from it, Eleonora expressed a wish to walk thither;, but this was over-ruled by her advisers, who persuaded her to suffer the saddle to be taken from her own horse, which had been caught by the exertion of the huntsmen, and placed upon that which had hitherto borne Cyprian. This ar¬ rangement being made, Eleonora was again mounted, but she could not prevail upon herself to proceed without having her horse led by one of her domestics. Sir
Sir Hildebrand and Lord Henry insisted on being her companions; and the faith¬ ful Cyprian, believing that he could be of most service and comfort to her on foot, walked by her side. The tempest was now nearly dispelled ; the thunder had receded in low murmurs to the distant hills, the lightning was scarcely a shadow of its former fierceness, the rain had ceased, and the beams of the sun were once more peering forth from the relieved sky, and casting their influ¬ ence upon the drops of rain which were hanging on the leaves of the trees, threw a glittering refulgence over the scene, which appeared expressive of the joy of nature at the cessation of the late storm. Eleonora besought Lord Fitzroy and Sir Hildebrand, " As she had the attendance of her own companions, not to quit the fo¬ rest on her account, but to resume the pleasures of the chace, in which she had seconded the tempest in interrupting them:" but they declared, that having 5 been
been cut with their dogs since the break of dav, they had been on the point of returning home, when she bad first heard their horn sounded in the heart of the fo¬ rest. " If I discover that I have been the means of curtailing your amusement," she said, (( that conviction will cause me the greatest uneasiness that I shall derive from the recollection of m ν accident." i{ And for myself," replied Lord Titz- rov, " I can never cease to have a grate¬ ful recollection of the preference which fate has deigned to shew me, in making me one of the instruments of your pre¬ servation." Of the minds or dispositions of her new acquaintance, Eleonora could not, from her present slender knowledge of them, attempt to form any opinion : by the strong contrast which existed between their persons and their manners, she could not help being already struck. Sir Hildebrand was extremely tall ; she conceived
conceived him tobe full six feet in height; had he been slenderly formed, his height must have been remarkable, but his bulk was equal to his stature ; and although his proportions were well adapted to each other, to view him as a whole, he ap¬ peared a most unwieldy form. His hair was of a li^ht flaxen, and without a single bend, so that it possessed not even that grace of shape which might have com¬ pensated for its defective colour; his countenance was fair; his eyes were large and grey; and his eye-brows, being of the same bleached hue as his hair, were incapable of communicating to them any expression; no glow of health animated his cheek, but he still appeared the pro- totype of strength and well-faring. In stature Lord Henry was several inches lower than his nominal brother, and in form more slender ; his hair, of the deep¬ est black, curled in short ringlets upon his forehead, and down his cheeks; his com¬ plexion was dark; his eyes penetrating and
and expressive; his eye-brows full and arched; his nose aquiline ; his teeth white and even; activity of body and quickness of mind appeared his prominent charac¬ teristics. Their tones of voice likewise, and their manner of expressing their sentiments, were as dissimilar as their persons—the voice of Lord Henry was manly, but soft and melodious, that of Sir Hildebrand was hoarse and rough ; Lord Henry expressed himself in the flowery and amplified lan¬ guage of a studied and finished courtier; Sir Hildebrand spoke no more words than were absolutely necessary to the meaning he wanted to convey, and these appeared not the effect of selection, but of chance. When they had arrived at the bounda¬ ries of the forest, near a point where se¬ veral roads leading into its bosom met, th¿y were overtaken by Gillian and the horseman, who had been sufficiently com¬ plaisant to remain her companion under the tree; and the joy of the former was uncontrollable
uncontrollable at again beholding her mis- tress, at parting from whom she had been almost as much alarmed, as at the horrors of the tempest. On emersrintľ from the forest, a verdant track of cultivated land appeared before them, extending to the margin of the ri¬ ver, upon who'ïe sloping banks Castle Gower formed the principal feature in the landscape ; when they arrived before it, Lady Blunt, who had seen their approach from a window, rame out to meet them, and to receive Eleonora, The counte¬ nance of Lady Thomasine bespoke mild¬ ness and benevolence united; her address was of the most affectionate nature ; and the kindness of her reception so far ex¬ ceeded the moat sanguine expectations of our forlorn wanderer, that she could not repress her feelings from mounting in tears to her eyes. When they had entered the castle-hall, Lady Blu ut said, "You are fatigued with your journey, my love; the alarm also which
which you have experienced from your accident, has overpowered your spirits: let me conduct you to a chamber—I doubt not but a few hours repose will be of in¬ finite service to you." Eleonora thought so herself; for al¬ though she had sustained no material in¬ jury from her fall, her head ached vio¬ lently, and she felt an aguish tremulous- ness, which she could not subdue, creep¬ ing upon her, and readily accepted Lady BIunťs offer. In the kindest manner Lady Thomasine lent her arm to Eleonora, to assist her to her chamber ; and as they ascended the stairs leading to it, Eleonora contemplated, with pleasure and interest, the features of a relative whom she now for the first time beheld. Lady Blunt appeared about fifty years of age ; the hand of time had com¬ mitted great ravages on her person, but it still bore indisputable marks of her hav¬ ing once been handsome; her counte¬ nance appeared, as it really was, the index of
of a heart in which the softer and fascinat¬ ing virtues held a seat ; extreme meekness seemed to sway her words and her actions; and a tinge of melancholy, which hung over her features, made a most irresistible appeal in her favour to every heart of feeling. Gillian and a servant of Lady Blunt at¬ tended them to the chamber appropriated to the use of Eleonora; when by their as¬ sistance she had been undressed, and placed in the bed. Lady Blunt directed them to retire, saying that she should herself sit by her bed-side. Eleonora remonstrated, begging that she might not impose on her this restraint; but Lady Blunt was reso¬ lute in pursuing her intention, and ac¬ cordingly dismissed the attendants : when they were gone, she thus addressed Eleo¬ nora — C( Regard me, my dear child, as your sincere friend ; although no inter¬ course has for manv vears subsisted be- tween your father and myself, I have not ceased to consider that the same blood ani¬ mates
mates our hearts. Although our religious opinions differ, I have never borne him any degree of enmity because his faith was not similar to my own ; and I am certain that his disposition is of too excellent a nature ever to have received my memory with coldness to his recollection on that account : believe me, therefore, when I assert, that not less out of respect to the bonds of consanguinity by which I am al¬ lied to your unfortunate parent, than out of pity to the misfortunes of one so young and so peculiarly situated as yourself, no¬ thing but an undeserving conduct on your part can ever convert me into your enemy." This tender address from the lips of one who, although her relative, was to her an titter stranger, produced an effect on the agitated and overpowered spirits of Eleo¬ nora, which appeared almost to deny the tide of joy which had rushed with it into her heart ; the tears burst from her eyes, her
ber utterance was choaked ; at length she 'spoke— u О my dearest Lady !" she ex¬ claimed, <e thus kind and aifectionate my dear father told me I should find you ; and if I ever prove undeserving of your good¬ ness, may my punishment be not only the loss of your regard, but of my father's love." Ladv Blunt was almost as much affected as Eleonora herself; she besought her to compose her mind, and endeavour, if pos¬ sible, to sleep ; and in order that she might not exhaust herself by conversation, she retired to a window at the farther end of the chamber, and took up a book: but Eleonora found it impossible to sleep ; an agitated mind can seldom taste those slum¬ bers which would prove the best restorers of its troubled peace. Motherly were the attentions which Lady Blunt bestowed on Eleonora throughout the day ; with the dusk of the evening, she sunk into sleep; and for the first time since
since her arrival at Castle Gower, her ve¬ nerable protectress then quitted her cham¬ ber. About the hour that the family were retiring to rest, Eleonora awoke, and Lady Blunt, according to the directions which she had given to those attendants whom she had ici't with Eleonora during her ab¬ sence, was immediately summoned; she found her fair charge infinitely better than she had been previously to the short repose which she bad been enjoying; and having prevailed upon her to take some refreshments which she had prepared for her, she left her, at her own particular de¬ sire, with Gillian for her only companion. during the night, a bed having been pre¬ pared for her in a closet adjoining to the chamber of her mistress. When \cň alone with Eleonora, Gillian would have enjoyed to tell her of all the novelties which she had that day seen in their new abode ; but she was enjoined to silence by her mistress, who wished, if possible, to resume her vol. ι, n sleep ;
sleep ; and ever ready to serve her lady by any means in her power, she imposed on herself the painful restraint of holding her tongue. The god of sleep smiled propitiously on the wishes of Eleonora-; a gentle and re¬ freshing slumber closed hrr eves through¬ out the night, and she awoke not till the orb of day was casting his exhilarating beams into her chamber, the windows of which fronted the east; and on drawing aside the curtains οΐ her bed, she beheld the flickering rays of the golden planet peeping between the knots of virgin's bower, which had been courted to bloom upon espaliers of trellis-work on their out¬ side. Gillian was already risen ; change of habitation, to which she was unaccustom¬ ed, had inspired her with restlessness, and she was wandering about the chamber; with joy she saw Eleonora awake, and hav¬ ing enquired after her health with the af¬ fection which she really felt for her, and found
found that İt was improved by the tran¬ quillity of the night, she began to pour forth those observations which she had been obliged to restrain within her own breast on the preceding evening. (i Dear my Lady," she cried, ct what a different place this is to the old castle al Worcester! how black its walls are, and how dark some of its passages and apartments ! but this castle is all over as Ughisomc and airy, and cheerful as a bird-cage ! was ever anything so sweet as these flowers growing against the windows î why where you sleep, you may almost reach your hand out of bed and pluck a posy—and what a delightful aspect here is of the country from this chamber !— О how handsome the river looks, twining and winding about like a long snake í and I declare there are a cou¬ ple of old swans, and five of their young signals, swimming upon it." Eleonora wished for the refreshment of a little air, and accordingly rose and went to the window, which she directed Gillian N 2 to
to open. She had on the preceding day seen sufficient of Castle Gow T er, in her ap¬ proach to it, to perceive that it was a very different building to Worcester Castle; infinitely more modern, and, in fact, par¬ taking very little of the nature of a castle at all—it had not yet been erected a cen¬ tury and a half ; it had been built by the great grandfather of the present Lady Blunt, and the name of castle had been given to it rather out of courtesy, than from its possessing any of the characteris¬ tics of one. Not only the site of the building, but its interior, were, happily for the spirits of Eleonora, such as were rather calculated to enliven the mind, than to inspire it with additional gloom. The prospect to which her eyes were now di¬ rected, was indeed of the most beautiful kind—from the walls of the castle, a gar¬ den, composed of the choicest varieties of nature's fruits and flowers, dazzling the eye with their rich hues, and delighting the scent with their balsamic odours, ex¬ tended
tended to the margin of the river, whose gently gliding waters appeared as a bar¬ rier of liquid silver to the forest, which rose in sombre majesty into an amphi¬ theatre beyond it. On every side the land¬ scape was closed in by distant hills, whose conic tops were illuminated by the rays of the rising sun, which was creeping slowly above them into an azure firmament, un¬ spotted by a single cloud ; whilst the sky¬ lark, skimming in mazy circles round the spot where its nest lay concealed, added its cheering melody to the fascination of the scene. Eleonora had scarcely been risen halfan hour, ere her kind friend, Lady Blunt, came to visit her, who with true satisfac¬ tion heard of her amendment, and with a mother's solicitude, entreated her not to quit her apartment till the hour of dinner. Eleonora complied, and her breakfast was brought to her in a closet adjoining to her chamber. Still Eleonora had not seen Sir Sigis- N 3 mund
mund Blunt, nor heard him spoken of, since her arrival at Castle Gower; she considered that he might still be an in¬ valid, and reproached herself with not having made enquiries concerning him of Ladv Blunt. \Yhi!st those reflections were passing in her mind, Gillian was removing the breakfast equipage, and she asked her, ft Whether she had heard if Sir Sigismund were recovered from the indisposition un¬ der which Cyprian had informed her that he was labouring when he had visited Cas¬ tle Cower with her dear father's letter to Lady Thomasine ?" "Why, my Lady," replied Gillian, « I understand that he keeps his chamber, and has done so for several weeks past ; but he is not sick for all that." "Not ill !" exclaimed Eleonora. "Oh no, my Lady," returned Gillian ; " the servants here tell me that he is low- spirited; and that he often shuts himself up in his chamber, nobody can tell why, for a long, long time together." A servant
A servant of Lady Blunt's entering to lend her assistance to Gillian, their con¬ versal ion was obliged to be broken oil" Against dinner-time Eleonora habited herself in one of those suits of solemn black, which were for a certain period des¬ tined to he worn by her, out of icspect to the memory of the departed Ladv Mag¬ dalene. From the simplicity of her dress, the exquisite symmetry of her shape gained additional grace, whilst the snowy white¬ ness of her skin shone with greater bril¬ liancy, from being contrasted to her sable robe; unconfined by any ornament, her nut-brown tresses Mowed luxuriantly down. upon her shoulders; and the faint blush which tinged her cheeks, for their wonted roses had faded under the withering breath of sorrow, gave a character of peculiar in¬ terest to her countenance. Lady Blunt led her into the dining hall ; on entering it, they found Lord Fitzroy already there ; his reception of Eleonora was the most courteous and flattcrine::— n 4 Lord
Lord Henry never for an instant forgot that he was the son of a king ; his mode of ex¬ pressing himself Eleonora had already re¬ marked to be of the most polished and princely kind ; ihe splendour of his dress now bespoke, that even in this particular he did not forget his consanguinity to a monarch. Scarcely had Eleonora taken the seat appointed for her at the table, ere Sir Hil* debrand burst into the hall ; he was in the act of menacing, with the fury of a ty¬ rant, a trembling page, who, in the hum¬ blest accents, was imploring his pardon forsorne petty offence; the climax of his anger was to command the boy to his chamber, directing him to remain there without food till the succeeding day at that hour. The poor page burst into tears, and re¬ tired; Sir Hildebrand sent another of his servants to turn the key of the chamber upon him, in order to prevent his leaving it. Eleonora
Eleonora wished to entreat for his for¬ giveness; but, almost a stranger to Sir Hildebrand, she durst not assume the cou¬ rage to speak in his behalf. The eye of Lady Blunt met that of Eleonora ; she ap¬ peared to entertain the same wish, checked by an equal apprehension. " It was strange/' Eleonora thought, <c that a mother should stand thus in awe of her son:" she wished at this moment to examine the countenance of Lord Fitz¬ roy, in order to learn whether she could gather from it his sentiments with regard to the conduct of Sir Hildebrand ; but he had taken his seat by her side, and she felt timid of turning round purposely to ob¬ serve him, lest her action should be re¬ marked. Without addressing any one present, Sir Hildebrand placed himself at the table. After a few moments pause, Lady Blunt said, "You do not perceive, my son, that our fair friend graces our table to-day with her presence." n 5 Scarcely
Scarcely raising his eyes towards her, "How fare you, Lady?" he muttered; and without waiting for her reply, he turned to a servant, to ask for wine. Eleonora knew not whether to believe that she was considered by him as an in¬ truder in his father's house, or that he was careless of displaying the natural surliness of his disposition, even to a stranger like herself; she did not doubt that Lord Henry Fitzroy perceived that the conduct of Sir Hildebrand had rendered her uncomfort¬ able, and wished to afford her an equiva¬ lent in his own attentions; for he second¬ ed every persuasion used by Lady Blunt to tempt her to partake of the delicacies of the table, and did not cease to address to her his conversation. Once already, at the invitation of Lord Fitzroy, had Eleonora lifted the silver gob¬ let of wine to her lips; when the cloth was removed, he a second time pressed tier to taste it; she pleaded a want of cus¬ tom, for returning a negative to his re- 4 quest ;
quesjt; and he then said, "You will not, Lady, í think, refuse to moisten your lips to the better health of Sir Sigismund Blunt." Eleonora immediately sipped a small quantity of the wine; and considering that it was now indispensably necessary for her to make some enquiry after her host, addressing Lady Blunt, she said, " í rurs e not vet had the happiness of being intro¬ duced to Sir Sigismund." " I trust, my lo\e," returned Lady Blunt, " that in the course of a dav or two more, he will be sufficiently recovered to become known to you, and to derive pleasure from your society ; he has lately been indis¬ posed, and is stil] fearful of quitting his chamber." Whilst Lady Blunt was uttering these words, Sir Hildebrand turned his regards slowly upon her, a surly grin stealing over his features whilst he did so ; and when she had ceased speaking, a sound between an exclamation of contempt and a stilled laugh burst from his lips. n G Lady
Lady Blunt attempted to appear not to notice a conduct which it was but too evi¬ dent that she saw and felt with pain. After a time they rose from table, a change which appeared a relief to all. Lady Blunt invited Eleonora to walk in the garden, and Lord Fitzroy petitioned for leave to accompany them. As they quitted the dining hall, Sir Hildebrand threw himself upon a couch, placing his replenished goblet of wine on a footstool by his side. The gardens of Castle Gower were the most beautiful, as well as the most ro¬ mantically planned^ that Eleonora had ever beheld, and appeared to be a great source of pleasure to Lady Blunt. When they had passed nearly halfan hour in wandering along their verdant paths, they were met by a servant of Lord Fitzroy, who informed his master, fC that his horses were ready." <( Are you then resolute in quitting us this afternoon?" said Lady Thomasine. ' r It is with reluctance that I depart," re¬ plied
plied Lord Henry, " but my presence is ne¬ cessary in Suffolk." " You will see Sir Sigismund before you go ?" said Lady Blunt earnestly. (i I have passed the greater part of this morning with him," replied Lord Henry significantly. With a faint smile Lady Blunt returned him a silent inclination of her head. Addressing Eleonora, Lord Fitzroy said, ŕ ' I anticipate shortly, fair lady, the hap¬ piness of receiving Sir Sigismund and his famil v, as visitors at mv castle; and urcat will be t'ite disappointment which I shall expe¬ rience, if you do not increase the delight their presence will afford me, by deigning to accompany them." As he spoke, a gra¬ cious smile spread itself over his features ; and as he bade her farewell, he raised her glove to his lips; he then took a friendly leave of Lady Blunt, and departed. When he had left them, Eleonora en¬ quired of Lady Blunt, "where Lord Fitz¬ roy held his residence ?" and she replied, t( that
·" that his abode was at the noble castle of Framlingham, in Suffolk, the most superb and statelv edifice in the kingdom." As the evening hnd besun to draw in. Ladv Blunt had retired with Eleonora to a p' private apartment of her own, where they had not been long seated, before a servant entered to them^ who having whispered Lady Blunt, again retired ; she immedi¬ ately rose from her seat, and said, " Will my dear cousin excuse my absence, and acquit me of all intention of neglecting her, if I request that she will suffer me to pass the remainder of the evening with Sir Sigismund ? he is not quite so well as he was in the morning, and wishes for my society." "Did Γ consider, my dearest Madam, that you would sufìer me to be any re¬ straint upon your actions/' answered Eleo¬ nora, " the protection I am enjoying from you, would only increase the uncomfort¬ able feelings with which I am already op¬ pressed : use jne without ceremony, and my
my wounded mind will deri\e an inexpres¬ sible balm from the idea of my being shel¬ tered beneath the roof of your mansion." Lady Blunt pressed her hand affection¬ ately in her's, and took leave of her for the nurht. Eleonora repaired to her own chamber, to which she was soon after followed by Gillian ; but wishing to indulge in solitary reflections, she dismissed her, telling her that she would undress herself when she felt disposed to enter her bed. A portion of each evening since her separation from her parents, Eleonora had never failed to pass in prayers for them ; in her orisons to Heaven, the idea of the mysterious stran¬ ger had a place, and with a sigh she dwelt upon his recollection, and the uncertainty of her ever beholding him again. When her devotions were ended, and she had risen from her posture of humili¬ ation, she moved towards the window of ber apartment, and observed that the night was .serenely beautiful—innumerable stars glittered
glittered in the sky, and the resplendent cnescent of a crowing moon was rising above the distant forest. The tenth hour of the evening had been some time sound¬ ed, and she conjectured that all the family were already retired to repose, for she be¬ held no lights in such parts of the castle as were within her view. She cast her eyes once more upon the brilliant firmament; and was about to quit the scene of en¬ chantment with which the face of nature presented her, when suddenly a vivid flame appeared, darting its rays through one of the casements of a circular turrer, which formed an angle of the castle: contrasted with the comparative darkness of the night, this luminous appearance could not fail to attract her attention ; but she probably would not have cast her eye towards it a second time, had she not the next minute beheld a door open by its side. The door being opened, the light within served to shew her that it was placed at the top of a flight of stone steps, which led from
from it into the garden. During her walk in the afternoon with Lady Blunt, she had remarked a flight of steps descending from the centre of each of the two turrets which fronted the garden ; but had again forgot¬ ten them, till the reflection of the light upon a substance of which she could not perfectly have ascertained the nature with¬ out this assistance from her memory, re¬ minded her of the situation of those steps. Almost instantly she observed the figure of a man to issue from the door-way, and begin to descend the steps; scarcely had »he lost him in the shade below, ere a se¬ cond came forth ; that he was exceedingly tall« was the only observation that she had time given her to make upon him, and which opportunity the moment he was en¬ gaged in closing the door afforded her ; he then ran down the steps with hasty strides, and became, like him that preceded him, lost to her view in the gloom. Although she could not be justified in forming
forming any opinion οΐ the actions of those with whose motives she was not ac¬ quainted, still Eleonora could not forbear considering the scene of which she had just Ъееп a witness as an extraordinary one. In all our opinions we are greatly swayed by concomitant ideas, and such was at that moment her case ; there had seem¬ ed to her something mysterious in the ac¬ count which she had heard of Sir Sigis¬ mund ; something like secrecy had ap¬ peared to her to govern every individual of the superior order whom she had yet seen in Castle Gower; and under an im¬ pression of this nature, she was tempted to class every transaction which was not explained to herself, amidst the marvel¬ lous, an inclination which she would not have felt on any spot where simplicity of conduct had marked every preceding scene and character. She could not forbear imagining, that one of these two persons must be Sir Si¬ gismund ;
£ismund ; the taller might probably be Sir Hildebrand. But for what purpose should they descend at that hour into the garden ? Sir Sigismund was an imaiid, and it was therefore more likely that he would avoid, than court the damps of night : but then he had been represented by his servants to Gillian as being a prey to low ness of spi¬ rits; a disorder of this kind, it was not impossible, might cause him to wish to shun the light of dav, and to taste the air when none were stirring to interrupt his solitary walk ; his mind might be so much disordered by his disease, that it might not be safe for him to be trusted alone ; and on this account his son, or an attendant, might have the charge of following fais steps. Whilst these thoughts were passing in her mind, the two persons who had given rise to them appeared traversing a walk which ran parallel with her window. The taller was still behind, and at the distance of
of a few paces from his companion, who moved with a slow step, which in the opi¬ nion of Eleonora denoted a melancholy mind ; his arms were crossed upon his breast, and his head bowed over them ; thus he continued for some time to pro¬ ceed ; with a sudden start he then raised his hands towards Heaven, uttered a groan, which must have been deep and from the heart, for its sound to have reached Eleo¬ nora, even faintly, at the distance at which she was stationed from him, and darted, with the velocity of a hind, amidst the trees» The steps of his follower were im¬ mediately quickened in proportion to his, and again they both disappeared from the sight of Eleonora. She could not prevail upon herself to quit the window. At the expiration of about half an hour, she heard the sound of voices near the foot of the steps leading into the turret; she could not distinguish what was said, but in a few seconds more she beheld the
the same two figures ascend the steps and re-enter the turret ; the door was closea with а loud clap by the taller of the two, who still followed his companion, and im¬ mediately after the light disappeared, and returned no more.
CHAP.
CHAP. X. " Oh ! good old man ! how weli in thee appears The constant service of the antique world, When servire swear for duty, not for meed!" As You Like It»
" If to do, were as tasy as to know what were yood to do, cha¬ pels had been churches, and poor mens' cottaiţes, princes' pa¬ laces.—It is a pood divine that follows his own instructions .—1 can easier teach twenty what were good to be done, than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching." Thf. Meiicjiant or Veni с r,. Eleonoka slept but little that night, the strange scene of which she had been a wit¬ ness, in the garden, frequently recurring to her imagination, and breaking her slumbers. When
When breakfast was brought to her in the closet adjoining to her chamber, Gil¬ lian informed her that Cyprian wished to see her previously to his departure, which had been appointed for that day. She de¬ sired that he might be sent to her, and in a few minutes he entered her presence. Xi Well, my good friend," said Eleo¬ nora, as soon as she beheld him, tc you must then quit me ? you know not how it grieves my heart to part from one so firm Ι ν attached to the interests οΐ my unfortunate family as you are; but Lady Blunt con¬ ducts herself towards me u ith so great kindness, that I dare not appear to impose upon her goodness, by asking her permis¬ sion for you to remain here." " \ am glad you have not done so, my dear young Lady," replied Cyprian ; " for I think that I can be of infinitely greater service to your feelings elsewhere than I could be here/'-—He paused. " How so ? where do you mean ?" en¬ quired Eleonora. " Whv/'
" Why," returned the old man, <c I am certain, that although your saint-like dis¬ position withholds you from giving tongue to all the painful feelings of your heart, that you are, like myself, not a little wretched that no information has reached us concerning the fate of my beloved ïnas- t?r. The indulgence of writing to you, or to any of his friends, is_, I doubt not, inter¬ dicted to him ; for under this restriction I remember that he laboured when the father of our present cruel sovereign, influenced by the evil counsels of the crafty Gardi¬ ner, condemned him to imprisonment within the same walls where he now exists an innocent captive. Ï have therefore re¬ solved to proceed to London ; it may be possible that I may find the means of gain¬ ing access to his presence, and consoling him with my assurances of the kind recep¬ tion which has been given you under this roof; at all events, I shall be able to learn, from the rumour of report, what we have to hope, what to fear, for him, and
and of communicating this intelligence ίο you." " Kind, aifectionate man !" exclaimed Eleonora, pressing Cyprian's hand in her's as she spoke, *' how shall î ever be able to requite you for the interest which you take in the fate of my poor father ?" (C I am already requited," replied Cy¬ prian, ŕť and am discharging a debt of gra¬ titude to ycur father, which í owe to him, and to all who are connected with him—■ Did not his family rear me from my in¬ fancy ?—did they not increase their kind¬ ness to me, by assisting me to support my aged parents?-—has not our worthy Bi¬ shop himself raibed mc to the office of confidence which I now hold under him ? •—has he not condescended to let mc share even his friendship ?—and is there any act of mine which is capable of lightening but a feather's weight the suilerings of either himself or you, of which it would not be a mark of the blackest ingratitude in me to withhold the performance ?" vol. ι. о The
The tears burst into the eyes of Eleonora at this address on the part of the old man ; and it was with difficulty that he could re¬ strain his from overflowing with the tide of sensibility which swelled his heart Eleonora passed a considerable time in conversation with her humble friend ; when he rose to quit her, <c Heaven, Heaven smile on thine endeavours!" she exclaimed. " I need not charge thee with any message to my dear parents, in case it should be thy good fortune to behold them ; the heart of their Eleonora is the same as when they were torn from her ; towards them it ever will be the same ; agonized by their sorrows, exulting in their joys ;— О may the season of their joys be once more permitted to return !" Again the tears ran streaming down her cheeks, and rendered her words almost in¬ articulate. Promising to convey to her the first in¬ telligence which he should have the means of sending, Cyprian bade her an affec¬ tionate
tionate and respectful farewell, and de¬ parted. The train of Eleonora's sorrowful re¬ flections were broken in upon by an in¬ vitation sent her from Lady Blunt, to ac¬ company her in a morning walk. Consb dering that not only the refreshing air, but also the society of her gentle friend, would be of service to her spirits, she joyfully accepted the proposal, and went down to meet her. Lady Thomasine's walks, she found, were, almost without exception, confined to the gardens of Castle Gower; she had a nursery of plants, to which it was one of her prin¬ cipal amusements to attend; and an aviary of select birds, which had an equal share of those hours which she devoted to re¬ laxation: she informed Eleonora, that her time being principally passed alone, in¬ deed almost entirely without any compa¬ nion of her ow r n sex, she experienced pleasure in having her mind occupied by these innocent recreations. о 2 Everv
Every additional minute which Eleo- nora passed in the society of Lady Tho¬ masine afforded her fresh instances of the gentleness and amiability οΐ her soul; and she could not be sufficiently thankful to Heaven for having given her a protectress possessed of manners so bland and vir¬ tuous. As they proceeded along a path which ran parallel with the walls of the castle, Lady Blunt, suddenly withdrawing her arm from that of Eleonora, through which it had been passed, stopped immediately un¬ der the turret, which the occurrences of the preceding night had led Eleonora to regard as a spot of some mystery ; and raising her eyes towards it, she said, " Poor fellow ! don't you hear his bewailings?" Eleonora listened, and heard the plain¬ tive voice of one, who appeared to be aU most weeping, singing a most melancholy air. " Who is it, Madam ?" she eagerly enquired. u Poor Edwin, Sir Hildebrand's page," returned
returned Lady Blunt ; " the boy whom you heard him yesterday command to be kept a prisoner in his chamber till to-day at the same hour : the highest room in this turret is his apartment." " Is it possible that Sir Hildebrand has not yet released and forgiven the offence of one so young ?" said Eleonora. " Sir Hildebrand's temper is very vio¬ lent," replied Lady Blunt, with a sigh, " Pardon me, my dear Madam," re¬ joined Eleonora, (i if I venture to say, that I think it a violence amounting almost to cruelty, if that poor boy has had no sus¬ tenance since yesterday noon, nor will be permitted any till that hour returns." Lady Blunt sighed again, and more deeply than before. ff Do you think he has been without food or drink for the course of that time?" asked Eleonora. " Oh yes/* replied Lady Blunt, c( no one dares to disobey Sir Hildebrand's commands." о 3 Eleonora,
Eleonora was sensibly touched by the sufferings of poor Edwin, and said, "Surely, if you, his mother, were to condescend to interfere with Sir Hildebrand, he could not refuse your request." " ît would be of no avail," answered Lady Thomasine; " if I were not certain of this, Ï should undoubtedly speak to him in his behalf, because I feel apprehensive that Edwin's punishment may continue till night, for my son passes the day from home ; and as he will not be here at the hour of noon to sanction the act, no one will have the courage to let the boy out of his prison, or to supply his wants." t( О Heavens!" exclaimed Eleonora; " in the course of that time he will faint, nav almost die with want. Would 1 could sec Sir Hildebrand, that I might myself endeavour to make an impression on his heart in the poor boy's favour." "No, do not; pray do not attempt it," said Lady Blunt, regarding Eleonora with tenderness as she spoke. For
For some moments they both ceased speaking, during which their eyes were fixed on the window of Edwin's chamber, and they listened with pity to his sobs and murmurs. Footsteps passing behind her, attracted the attention of Eleonora; and on look¬ ing round, she beheld Sir Hildebrand equipped for his visit, and attended by a couple of his servants ; by the direc¬ tion in which he was moving, she knew him to be proceeding towards the stables; if, therefore, she did not avail herself of the present moment to intercede for the page, she knew that for the remainder of the day he must unavoidably be condemned to misery ; she accordingly flew towards him. Sir Hildebrand perceived her ap¬ proach, and slackened his pace, but with¬ out any salutation or mark of complacency calculated to give her courage in uttering her petition. ''Pardon me, Sir Hildebrand," she said; o4 ff 1 come
i( I come to you a petitioner—I have a re¬ quest to make of you." Her voice fal¬ tered, and she paused. " For what?" exclaimed Sir Hildebrand, unmoved. " Your page, Edwin," resumed Eleo¬ nora; " grant me your permission for his enlargement." A smile stole over the features of Sir Hildebrand; but it was a smile which ra¬ ther bespoke contempt of the sympathy which she expressed in the fate of the suf¬ ferer, than accordance in her feelings. For some moments he stood viewing her with a fixed stare, which drew the mantling blood of conftrnon into her face ; and then turn¬ ing to his domestics, he said, iC Go one of you, and let the boy out; but give him to understand, that he docs not owe his en¬ largement to my forgiveness, but to a ladv's tender feelings ;" on these last words he laid a satirical emphasis; and when the servant was gone, he added, " Remember, Lady,
Lady, you are a boon in debt to me, for the condescension I have shown you;" and increasing his smile, he left her. Eleonora was delighted that she had ob¬ tained her request ; but the sentence which Sir Hildebrand had addressed to her as he- quitted her, was a considerable drawback upon her pleasure; she, however, forborer to tell Lady Blunt more than that she had obtained Edwin's release. As they proceeded in their walk, Elee— nora felt extremely desirous of learning something from Lady Blunt respecting the apartment in which she had on the preced¬ ing evening seen the light, after she ha<f supposed all the family retired to rest ; she, however, considered that it might be deemed an impertinence in her to make a* direct enquiry to that purport; and was, therefore, obliged to confine herself to such questions as .she believed might lead r to a deyelopement of the truth. In the turret were only two windows vi* sible from the garden, and the apartments о 5 of
of Eleonora ; the one through which the light had shone, and another above it, which she had just learnt from Lady Tho¬ masine to be the chamber of the page. " That apartment," she said, " beneath the page's, which has a door that opens upon the steps leading into the garden, is most delightfully situated." " I think it is a pleasant apartment/' re¬ plied Lady Blunt. " I suppose it is the apartment of Sir Hildebrand," rejoined Eleonora, " as his page sleeps in the chamber above it ?" "No," replied Lady Blunt, " that apart¬ ment is not occupied at all." Eleonora now felt more surprised than ever; the apartment not occupied í and still she had seen two persons issue from it, and shortly again return to it' They at this moment reached the aviar) ; the attentions of Lady Blunt to her favou¬ rite birds gave a turn to the conversation, and Eleonora durst not again revive it. When they returned to the house, Lady Blunt
Blunt went to visit her husband in his apart¬ ment, and Eleonora seated herself in the air, near the entrance into the castle : she had not taken her seat many minutes ere she observed a youth, whom she immedi¬ ately recollected to be the page Edwin, running towards her; had she not pre¬ vented the humiliation, he would have fallen on his knees before her; his fervent thanks for her interposition in his favour, he poured forth in the simple and tender lantniao;e of the heart. <( What was the offence which you had yesterday committed, to draw 7 upon yoib the anger of Sir Hildebrand?" asked Eleonora. " Why, my Lady," returned the boy,. " the matter wherein I disobliged him, I am now more than ever convinced was not a fault." <c Indeed !" said Eleonora. " Yes, I am quite certain of it," he re¬ plied ; (( I am sure, when I look in your face, that you could not commit a fault; o G and
and I drew Sir Hildebrand 's anger upon me, by shewing the same kindness to a poor dog, that you have to-day conferred on me." <r How was that ?" enquired Eleonora. " Yesterday morning, in the chace/' re¬ sumed Edwin, " one of Sir Hildebrand 's dogs disobeyed a signal which he made to him ; and so he tied him to a tree, and flogged him very, very much indeed, with his whip." i( Well, Edwin?" said Eleonora. " Why, my Lady," continued the boy, " when I saw the blood start from his sides, 1 was so sorry, and so hurt, that I untied the string with which he was bound to the tree, and let him go." Eleonora was delighted with Edwin's hu¬ manity, and said., tc your fault was trivial indeed V 3 "Pardon me, my Lady; it «*f rå be called a fault," returned Edwin; "I have told you why already " Eleonora smiled, ^ Yes,
" Yes, indeed, I know I am right/' add¬ ed the page ; if you have preserved me, as 1 did the poor dog; and 1 see, without knowing it, that Τ acted like an angel." Eleonora commended the laudable prin¬ ciples of his heart, in which she admonish¬ ed him ever to persevere; and did not quit him till she was informed that the mid-day repast was served up in the castle-hall. When Eleonora retired in the evening to her chamber, she dismissed Gillian, and placed herself by her window, expecting again to behold the figures which she had seen on the former one ; but the hour pass¬ ed away, and thev did not appear. The air was cold, a thick rain was falling to the earth, and she conjectured that this might be the cause of their absence. The succeeding day rose in cold and dewy damps, caused by the rain, which had fallen during the whole of the night, and prevented both Eleonora and Lady Blunt from visiting the garden till after the mid-day repast. To the former, the din- 3 ner-hour
ner-hour brought with it sensations of an unpleasant nature ; it compelled her to encounter Sir Hildebrand, and the sen¬ tence with which he had parted from her on the preceding morning rendered her somewhat reluctant to meet him ; he was, however, as deficient as usual in attentions, both to his mother and herself; she believed that she caught his eye fixed once or twice, with an expression of in¬ ward satisfaction, upon her countenance ;. but she hoped that those apprehensions of him with which his uncouth manners had inspired her did but create the idea. In the evening, Eleonora went, for the first time, alone into the garden; she stroll¬ ed towards the river, and mounted a little eminence overhanging its waters, where she found a seat, shaded at the back like an arbour, with the interi wined branches of the osier and the hazel, and canopied by the feathery foliage of a weeping willow, which threw its drooping honours across it. She was pleased by the rusticity of the spot,
spot, and seated herself upon the bench. The sun was sinking towards the lower world, and the shadow of the earth steal¬ ing gradually across the river, till it reach¬ ed the forest beyond; and then climbing up the sloping sides of the hills which formed the distance of the landscape ; ul¬ timately chasing away the last beams of the refulgent planet that hung trembling on their summits, and drawing over them the purple veil of evening. How serene, how solemn, how enchanting, was the scene ! how enviable a tranquillity did it «illuse over the mind of the beholder ! Eleonora acknowledged its influence with the soothing tears of admiration. The stillness was interrupted by the sound of distant voices; in a few minutes more Eleonora heard a gentle cadence, which informed her that the persons were singing-—the sounds proceeded from the river, and she was presently able to dis¬ tinguish some words of their song, which would alone have informed her that the singers
singers were fishermen, had she not already- caught a view of their boat winding round an arm of the river; she perceived that they were three in number, that they were suffering their little bark to glide down the stream with the tide, and were throwing their nets at intervalsas it proceeded. They presently ceased to sing, and Eleo¬ nora learnt from their conversation that their sport had been indifferent. When ihey were within a stone's throw of her, she saw one of them draw up a net, and at the same time heard him exclaim, "Here's something, however !" " Λ trout, and a fine one too, Nicho¬ las," cried one of his companions. "Marry, is it," returned the first speak¬ er ; " and did you see that other fish jump out upon the top of the water, as I hauled in my net ? just, for all the world, as if it had a mind to take a last peep at its com¬ panion." " Perhaps it was his wife/* said the se¬ cond. "No;.
íf No, no/* rejoined the first; ci if so be that fish have the same kind of con¬ nexions that we Christians have, I think it most likely that it was his sweetheart— your wives seldom follow their husbands so far into danger." They laughed at their companion's re¬ mark, who continued thus—' f He is a fine fellow of a fish, I must say for him ; and to see how he gasps and pants, I can't help thinking but he looks like a disap¬ pointed lover." Scarcely had the fisherman uttered these words, ere a voice, which proceeded from a part of the garden immediately beneath the eminence where Eleonora was seated, exclaimed, :c Pray sell me that iish !" The fisherman replied with the greatest respect in the affirmative ; and directing his companions to row their boat towards the shore, addressed the person who had spoken to him, enquiring, " Whether he should kill the fish, and prepare it for cooking?" " Xo>
" No, no, do not kill it ; I charge you not to kill it," eagerly exclaimed the per¬ son on shore. The tones of his voice in¬ formed Eleonora that he was a man ; her situation was such, that he was entirely obscured from her sight. The purchaser of the fish having paid the price demanded for it, said, " Now it is mine, throw it again into the river alive, and be careful that you do not hurt it in so doing." The fisherman obeyed ; and as his com¬ panions again pushed off the boat into the middle of the river, he returned his thanks to the person on shore, for the liberality of his reward, by the name of Sir Sigis¬ mund. ( ' Sir Sigismund !" echoed the heart of Eleonora ; " is it Sir Sigismund who has performed this compassionate action ?" and desirous of beholding him, now she had been witness of an act sot creditable to his feelings, she crept towards the edge of the eminence on which she had been seat¬ ed;
ed ; as she reached it, she heard him ex¬ claim, " Thank Heaven, that I have this dav bestowed happiness on one of its created beings." This sound was instantly followed by that of his receding footsteps; and after a few seconds she beheld him moving along a walk in the garden at some distance from her; the remaining light of day was barely sufficient for her to observe that he was of the middle height, and wrapped in a cloak which w T as thrown across his shoulders. For some minutes she stood reflecting on the occurrence which she had just over¬ heard ; it was one which delighted her, as it entirely changed the unfavourable opi¬ nion which she had, she could not herself account why, taken up of Sir Sigismund, from the reports which she had received of the gloominess of his character. The in¬ distinctness with which she beheld objects, as she endeavoured to follow the figure of »Sir Sigismund with her eyes, warned her that it was time for her to return to the castle ;
castle ; the raven wings of evening Were quickly expanding, and the trembling twi¬ light fading beneath their gloomy influ¬ ence. She quitted her station, and in a short time reached the house. On entering it she was met by Lady Blunt. " 1 shall sup with you to-night, my dear Eleonora," she said ; " Sir Sigis¬ mund İs so well as to dispense with my so¬ ciety this evening." The table was already spread in an apartment adjoining to the castle-hall ; they seated themselves at it, and Eleonora was well satisfied to find that Sir Hildebrand did not join them at their repast. When the servants were retired, Lady Blunt said, " To-morrow you will become known to Sir Sigismund ; he will to-mor¬ row again mix with his family ; indeed, I believe he would have done so a few days ago, but for a religious reason—about a week before your arrival, our family-priest paid the debt of nature ; we have not yet been able to replace him, and Sir Sigis¬ mund
mund feels a reluctance to mix with society till he has attended the celebration of mass in our private chapel. To-morrow morn¬ ing, a holy man from a neighbouring mo¬ nastery comes hither for the express pur¬ pose of performing this important office, and receiving the confessions of such of our household as wish for this communi¬ cation with him. In our religion, Eleo¬ nora, we cannot feci happy unless one of the members of our household be a re¬ verend man, whose holy function autho¬ rises him to administer to us the ceremo¬ nies of our faith ; and of these the unfor¬ tunate death of our lamented Cyril has lately deprhed us." A silence ensued—Lady Blunt broke it : tJ О how venerable a man was our beloved Father Cyril!" she exclafmed; "O how truly did he act the part of a father towards us all l Conviction of the right flowed from his tongue in its m'ost persuasive tones ; the impression which, his actions and his argttrøeats ajike Brøde on the heart, few
few have the fortitude or eloquence to equal." i( Could you have heard my poor father in his religious office," replied Eleonora, struggling with her tears; íť but the dif¬ ference of your opinions has prevented that." <f it has, my lo\e," replied Lady Tho¬ masine ; ťŕ but you must not consider, that because Sir Sigismund and myself are warm adherents to the faith in v\hich we both have been born and educated, that the slightest degree of asperity rankles in our bosoms against those who profess opposite opinions to our own ; if you do, great is the injustice which you render us; we are both, I trust, too good members of Chris¬ tianity to bear enmity against such of our fellow-beings as endeavour to approach towards Heaven by a different path from that in which we judge it right to tread." " With such liberal sentiments on your part," answered Eleonora, " I am more than ever surprised that a familiar inter¬ course
course should not have subsisted between vou and my parents ; for the spirit of my father is of all others the most indulgent towards every sect which acknowledges the existence of a supreme Creator." " 1 know it, know it well," returned Lady Blunt, tenderly ; " Latimer is a rela¬ tive whom I venerate, and whom I love : Sir Sigismund discoursed the intercourse which in the early part of our lives sub¬ sisted between us." <( Sir Sigismund then dislikes my father," said Eleonora. "Not so," replied Lady Blunt; "Oh no ! Sir Sigismund never speaks of him but with respect and praise; far from dis¬ liking, he pities him, and laments his pre¬ sent misfortunes; were it in his power to serve him, I am certain that he would not suffer any obstacle to withhold him from exerting himself in his cause. To you, my love, I will not scruple to confess that there are irreconcileable features in Sir Si¬ gismundo
gismund's character ; he is a good, a wor¬ thy man, but his motives are often inscrut¬ able, iucpmprehensiblc !" r< Would he, indeed, serve my dear fa¬ ther!" exclaimed Eleonora, unable to re¬ press her tears; " would he, indeed, serve bim ? О pardon me, my dearest madam, for eagerly catching at the very shadow of a hope which might alleviate my father's fate -—could nothing be affected by means of Sir Sigismund's affinity to Lord Henry Fitzroy, who is the brother of that sovereign from whose asperity his sufferings flow ?" " Oh, my love," returned Lady Blunt, rr were the voice of Lord Fitzroy employed in his cause, it would but fan the flame which now threatens him; implacable is the hatred which exists between the royal Mary and her fathers son." Eieqnora sighed, and their conversa¬ tion was interrupted by the entrance of a servant, who came to inform |>ady Blunt that the Fjtftør Igna^iuč woţild attend on the
the following morning, at six o'clock« for the performance of mass. They shortly after retired to rest, and Eleonora passed a night of greater com¬ posure than she had yet done since her se¬ paration from her parents.
VOL. I.
V
CHAP,
ι ■ ii ааявеаааеиэ
CHAP. XL c ' Then, Oh, you blessed ministers above ! Keep me in patience, and in ripen'd time Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up In countenance." Shakespeare.
■■ — - ....... ---------" Shapes that walk At dead of night," Akcnside. Euìonora was awakened on the following morning by iones of the softest music stealing upon her senses. The moment (Jillian entered her chamber, she enquired of her whether she could inform her from whence they proceeded, and found that they issued from the chapel of the castle, where
where mass was then performing, and that its celebration was attended by various ia- .str urn ents of music. Whilst Gillian was assisting her mistress in dressing, ( ' Pray, my Lady," she said, " have you never seen the chapel since you have been here ?" Eleonora replied in the negative. <( Dear-a-me, my Lady ! well, I wonder you have not had the curiosity to take a peep at it," returned Gillian ; (C there are such delightful pictures in it ! there's one that gives an inscription, as I may sav, of the punishments of the wicked hereafter, that is done so beautifully, it is enough to frighten one out of one's seven senses ίο look at it ; and another, that they tell me is the death-bed of a sinner, with a coun¬ tenance so charmingly miserable, that it penetrates to one's very heart. If you have a mind to go and take a look now whilst service is performing, I know the way into a gallery over one end of the chapel, where we can get a peep." ρ 2 "On
*' On no account," replied Eleonora ; ** I will not hazard interrupting any one in those devotions in which I do not myself think it right tojóin." " О sure there could be no harm in a peep," answered Gillian ; " ( A cat may look at a king/ as the proverb says; and we should only take an artificial glance at the place, and those that are in it," Eleonora was steady in refusing to com¬ ply with her attendant's persuasions ; but added, <( That as she had never had an opportunity of beholding a chapel devoted to the Roman Catholic religion, she should like very much to take a view of it when the service was ended, and the household of the castle had retired from it;" and directed Gillian to give her notice when this was the case. Gillian was punctual in conveying her the information ; and, conducted by her, Eleonora entered the chapel through a door under the gallery : the beauty of the place infinitely exceeded what she had ex¬ pected
pected to behold; it was a striking speci¬ men of simple and elegant taste—the floor was of chequered marble, the roof and sides of a light grey stone, the latter in¬ tersected at equal distances with religious paintings, surrounded by mosaic borders of the most exquisite workmanship ; the furniture of the altar, the seats, the chairs, and the cushions to kneel upon, were of a dark blue velvet, ornamented with silver fringe : the effect of the whole was pecu¬ liarly attractive and pleasing. Eleonora advanced towards the altar; above it was suspended, between a double row of silver branches, in which wax ta¬ pers were burning, a painting which claim¬ ed alike her admiration and her sympathy —it represented the Saviour of the world, crowned with thorns, and submitting with the meekest resignation, to the insults of the unfeeling and unbelieving populace; it brought to the mind of the observer re¬ collections which claim equally the grati¬ tude of the Catholic and the Protestant 4 ? 3 heart
heart—the painter had handled his subject with succfss—~the camas appeared little short of animation. With her ideas entirely absorbed in the picture, stood Eleonora, till a deep sigh roused her from her tranre of thought ; she turned round her head, supposing !t to have been uttered by Gillian; but she found that Gillian, having led her to the spot which she had considered as worthy of her inspection, and which she had at some other time sufficiently examined for her own pleasure, had quitted her. The sigh was repeated ; and Eleonora now be¬ lieved that it had proceeded from the lips of some one who was divided from the chapel by a door of a dark brown wainscot which she perceived on one side of the altar; and to which a single step, composed of the same material as the door itself, led. Eleonora had, undoubtedly, heard that confession formed a part of the religion of the Boman Catholics; but entirely unao * quainted with the nature of a place of worship
worst ip such as she was now in, she had not the remotest idea that the door she be- beld excluded from her sight a being in the i'Lt of performing that duty. Whilst her eyes were yet directed to¬ wards the door, it was slowly opened, and the step descended by a man handsomely dressed, who appeared between forty-five and fifty years of age ; his figure was good, his countenance more than usually hand¬ some, but strongly marked with the ex¬ pression of a mind deeply sorrowing, or ill at case, within itself. The moment Eleonora beheld him, a suspicion flashed upon her senses, that he could be no other than Sir Sigismund Elunt ; and the sound of his voice, when he addressed her, immediately confirmed her opinion, Sir Sigismund had advanced some steps iii*o the chapel before he observed her; then raising his eyes from the ground, on which they had before been bent, and fix¬ ing them upon her countenance, a violent e ± start
. start shook his frame, and he exclaimed, f< Merciful God, whom do I behold ! who, or what art thou ? speak—speak—I entreat thee, speak!" Alarmed by his manner, Eleonora trem¬ blingly and falteringly replied, ,f I implore your pardon, if I have offended or inter¬ rupted you ; when I entered the chapel, I believed no one to be within it." Still Sir Sigismund kept his eyes fixed on her's; after a short pause, during which he appeared to have been collecting his recol¬ lective faculties, he again repeated, "Who are you?" Faintly Eleonora stammered out her name. tc Are you Eleonora Latimer?" returned Sir Sigismund ; he advanced towards her, and taking her hand in his, he said, " Par¬ don the strange address with which I have greeted you at our first introduction to each other;" he pressed the hand which he held in his, and continued, " you know not how strongly your person brought to my
my memory one, once most valued and esteemed by me; so great is the resem¬ blance which you bear to her, that at the first moment of my beholding you, I be¬ lieved you the aerial shadow of her sainted form. My spirits are weak, Lady, and ideas which a stronger mind would deride as the offspring of folly, are become pain¬ fully habitual to my senses/* He appeared to wait for her reply. Eleo nora knew not what to answer, and conti- nued silent. Sir Sigismund spoke again— ťf Accept my welcome beneath this roof; that you are unfortunate, is a sufficient claim for you upon my services and my protection,- were you not the relative of my wife/* ** The obligation which I shall lie unde* to your benevolence," returned Eleonora, " is greater than Ishall ever have it in my ability to repay/* " It is at this moment in your power," returned Sir Sigismund earnestly, " ta throw the obligation entirely upon me: > o wilï
will you consent to perform this kindness towards me ?" ' f I do not comprehend your requesl," returned Eleonora. (t Confer on me," resumed Sir Sigis¬ mund, cc the favour of not making the surprise with which mv first observation of your person affected me, the subject of your conversation to anv individual be¬ ing; and you will bind me to you in an eternal debt of gratitude." '"The request is too trivial for mc to merit your gratitude for my compliance,"' answered Eleonora; " were î to transgress it, I should be amply worthy of that scorn from you, of which Ì trust ν ou wiji never find me deserving. It shall not be spoken of by me." Sir Sigibmund returned her his warmest thanks, repeated (o her his promises of protection, and thtn led her into an apart¬ ment where Lady Elunt was expecting the assemblage of the family at break labt. Thore was an undeiinable something íj both
both in the countenance and manners,of Sir Sigismund, which interested every one who beheld or conversed with him; while to most it appeared evident that he labour¬ ed under some secret, some painful im¬ pression, for which the humane pitied him, and the unfeeling ridiculed what they term¬ ed the weakness of his nature.. Short, very short as had been Eleonora s> acquaintance with him, to no one was the unhappy state of his mind more clearly laid open than to herself; and sincere was the pity which she already felt for him. Of the benevolence of his nature she had received one instance in the friendly pro¬ mises which he had made to herself, and a still more unequivocal one had met her knowledge on the preceding evening,. There were, she considered^ doubtless,, many who would deride the humanity which he had displayed in saving the life of an irrational anima!, as the ctlect of a pusillanimous tenderness of heart, partak¬ ing strongly of an ulfcctation of feeling ; i 1 β but.
but this she was herself conscious could not have been the case, as he had been unacquainted that his action had been known to any one but the fishermen, whosr minds were not sufficiently refined either to consider or to estimate his mo¬ tive; and on this account she honoured him for a conduct of which, under oppo¬ site circumstances, she would probably have thought very differently. At dinner, Eleonora, for the first time, beheld Sir Sigismund and his son Hilde¬ brand in society with each other; and she could not forbear observing how contrary to the usual manners of a parent and a son were those of Sir Hildebrand and his father. Instead of compliance on the part of Sir Hildebrand with the inclinations of his parent, or any endeavour to please, oi¬ to oblige him, it was evident that Sir Si¬ gismundo principal study was to meet and to obviate the wishes of his son ; whilst he betrayed visible marks of apprehensioji lest his constant endeavours to this end should
should not produce the desired effect of restraining his temper within the bounds of tolerable placidity. The presence, however, of the Father Ignatius, who had visited Castle G' -'er for the purpose of celebrating mass, and had been entreated by Sir Sigismund to remain and read the vespers, as the day was Sun¬ day, and he felt a dislike to its passing without a second time performing his de¬ votions in the chapel with his family, ap¬ peared some restraint upon the surly and tempestuous passions of Sir Hildebrand's soul, which shone forth as conspicuously as it was possible for them to do in so an inexpressive countenance as his; and Eleo¬ nora remarked, that whenever his eye was turned upon his father, it was with a dis¬ satisfied and unfeeling stare. When the hour of retiring to rest ar¬ rived, Eleonora, who, during the evening, had been oppressed by a violent head-ache, suffered Gillian to undress her, and place her
her in bed ; when rested on her pillow, she found it too welcome a relief to the tem¬ porary malady under which she was la¬ bouring, to rise from it in order to watch the turret with which she had received cause to believe some mystery connected ; and the night accordingly passed without her making any farther observations. On the following afternoon, whilst Eleo¬ nora was reading in the closet adjoining to her chamber, her attention was attracted by an uncommonly sweet and soft voice which she heard singing a plaintive air: it proceeded from the garden, and she at first believed it to be the voice of a female; but on looking out, she perceived that the songster was the page, Edwin, who was seated on the last of the steps leading to the door in the turret; and as he sung, he cast his eyes repeatedly towards the win¬ dow in which Eleonora had, a few nights before, beheld a light. When Edwin had finished his song, he stilt
still continued sitting on the step, and looking wistfully towards the casement above his head. Eleonora entertained a wish to increase her acquaintance with the youth, and ac¬ cordingly, throwing her stole over her, she went down into the garden ; as she approached him, " That is a very melan¬ choly song which you have been singing, Edwin," she said. £i Yes, very melancholy indeed," was the reply. <( And whom were you singing to please ? " asked Eleonora. " Yes," replied Edwin, fi it pleased me very much, because ¡„know it pleased— that is, because it—it,"------he stammered, and became silent. <f Here seems to be some secret, Edwin," rejoined Eleonora, smiling. " Dou 't tell, pray don't tell, that I said it pleased any body else," returned the page. " You
" You did not say so," replied Eleo¬ nora; íC therefore it is impossible that I should repeat it of you. Are you afraid that your vanity should be called in ques¬ tion ?" " Oh, no, no," replied he eagerly, " I should not mind that, but I should gain myself ill-will ; and worse than that : but pray don't ask me." " Why, to be sure, you doiťt pretend to be in love ?" said Eleonora. " Oh no, Lady, oh no," answered Ed¬ win ; " I don't know what such kind of love as you refer to means ; but I hope it never makes any body's heart ache, as the affection which I," ------again he stop¬ ped short. " Why did you so often look at that window whilst you were singing ?" en¬ quired Eleonora ; " is there any body in that apartment whom you are singing to please?" " There is nobody in that apartment, I assure
assure you," replied the boy ; '* that is only a closet which runs by the side of a chamber." "Somebody is in the chamber then?" said Eleonora. t( I must not tell, indeed I must not," returned Edwin ; " and I hope you'll not say you asked me such a question ; will you, my dear Lady ?" " Depend on my never doing any thing to bring you into trouble," Eleonora an¬ swered. <c Then in the chamber beyond the closet, there is somebody who listens with pleasure to your songs ; and melan¬ choly indeed must be the temper of that person's mind, if you select your ditties to its taste." "Oh dear, oh dear!" sighed out Ed¬ win, as if commiserating the lot of the unfortunate being. " Are you afraid to tell me whether it is a lady or not ?" asked Eleonora. t( Hark ! hark ! I hear footsteps, I am sure
sure 1 do/' cried Edwin ; and was out of sight in a moment. Eleonora herself now heard the foot¬ steps, and on turning round her head, she perceived Sir Sigismund ; he approached towards her, and invited her to walk with him to a cottage at a short distance, where he said he had business. Eleonora readily complied ; in their way thither he repeated to her again and again those assurances of his friendship and pro¬ tection which he had given her on the pre¬ ceding day : but she remarked that he did not once name her father. On arriving at the cottage, she found that the poor man who resided İn it was confined to a sick-bed ; that his family were entirely supported during his illness by the purse of Sir Sigismund ; and that, not satisfied with sending them whatever he believed might assist the recovery of the sick man, or alleviate the distress of his wife and children, lie was come in per¬ son to enquire into their wants. When
When again left to the solitude of her own reflections, Kleonora contemplated with increased admiration the virtues of Sir Sigismund; and in the gratitude of her heart, poured forth her thanks to Heaven for having placed her under the protection of so worthy a man ; she did not forget the unaccountable surprise which he had testified at his first sight of her, and she would have considered it as merely the momentary effect of the weakness of spi¬ rits under which he was labouring, had not the injunction which he had given her not to reveal the astonishment with which he had been affected, led her to suppose that there must have been a more powerful rea¬ son for his emotion. What that was, it was impossible for her to devise ; nor did she feel anxious to do so, as she could not suppose that she had any further connexion with it, than such as the hand of chance had gi\ en her, in the resemblance which she might bear to some unknown individual. The mystery also which appeared to be connected
connected with the turret, did not lose its share in her thoughts ; and on retiring to her chamber at the hour of repose, ob¬ serving that the night was beautifully se¬ rene, and rendered almost a rival of the day by the brilliancy of the moon, she re¬ solved to watch for the appearance of the figures which she had before seen. She had not been stationed more than halfan hour at her window, when the light of a lamp shone through the lower case¬ ment of the turret ; in another minute the door was opened, and the same two per¬ sons, to all appearance, whom she had be¬ fore beheld, descended the steps, the taller of the two still following his companion, as on the former evening on which she had observed them ; he who first reached the garden threw himself immediately down upon a grass-plot which encircled the base of the turret ; the other leaned his back against the trunk of a tree close by his side, and stood observing him. Suddenly he who had hitherto been prostrate
prostrate on the earth lifted up his head, and partly raised his body, supporting him¬ self by resting on one of his hands. Eleonora heard a murmur, which she believed to be the sound of his voice ; and her curiosity being wound to an uncon¬ trollable pitch, she opened a compartment of her window, in the hope of his words reaching her. She heard him sigh deeply, but for some time she could not distinguish whether he spoke or not ; at length she heard him ex¬ claim, " О Heaven, have mercy ! take me, О take me to thy eternal repose!" again he breathed a lengthened sigh of despair, again he sunk upon the ground, and once more silence prevailed. Thus elapsed a space of several minutes. With a start as vivid as the lightning, she then saw him rise upon his feet ; here he paused, his face raised, and his hands ex¬ tended towards Heaven ; ·' Forgive, mer¬ ciful Providence !" he cried, " the rash¬ ness
ness of the act!" and darted in an instant from her sight. " Miserable wretch ! " mentally exclaimed Eleonora; "suicide is his purpose!" and it was with difficulty that she could restrain herself from uttering an exclamation to withhold him from his design. In a few moments she beheld him flying, with the swiftness of an antelope, along a path which led to the banks of the river; she now attempted to call, but her tongue clove to her mouth, and denied her the power utterance. Now she saw him pre¬ cipitately climbing the eminence from whence she had a couple of evenings be¬ fore witnessed the humanity of Sir Sigis¬ mund; from thence she dreaded that he intended to plunge himself into the river; ber blood turned cold, every sense but that of sight died within her. Now he extended his arms to throw himself for¬ ward : at this instant his companion darted upon him, and forcibly withdrew him from the spot of danger, Eleonora
Eleonora clasped her hands, and breath¬ ed a prayer of thankfulness to Heaven for its interposition in his favour. On again looking out, she observed the preserver of his companion's life leading him by the arm along a path which ran immediately opposite to her window ; they continued to approach, and she observed, that the countenance of him who had en¬ deavoured to commit the rash act, from which he had just been sa\ed, was buried in his hards,; she received it as a mark of his « ont ι ition, and her pity was more strongly than ever excited towards him. From him she turned her c\ es towards his companion ; the tall lankness of his form peculiarly struck her, and she could not lorbear imagining that she had seen a figure resembling his before her arrival at Castle Gower; at the moment this idea filtered her mind, the light of the moon fell full on his countenance; and, to her inexpressible astonishment, she recognised in
in him, past all possibility of doubt, the pallid and terrifíc being whom she had once for an instant beheld at the entrance of the hermit Agatha's lonely dwelling !
EKD OF VOL I
Line, Ifedfef, ud CotLetdcfiblStie«.
