Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The Recess; Or, a Tale of Other Times
THE
RECESS, &c.
Τ О
Adelaide Marie de Montmorescu
у
AFTER a long and painful· journey through life, with a heart exhaufted by |-arrlictionF, and eyes which can no longer fupply tears to lament them, I turn my I every thought toward that grave on the I verge Gf which I hover. Öh ! why then, I too generous friend, require me to live over my misfortunes ? Such has been the peculiarity of my fate, that though' tor¬ tured with the poifeffion and the lofs of vol. I. Б every
every tye and hope that exalts or endears humanity, let but this feeble frame be co¬ vered with the dull from which it fprung, and no trace of my ever having ex i (led would remain, except in the wounded confeiences of thofe who marked me out a folitary vičYim to the crimes of my pro¬ genitors : For forely I could never merit by my own the mifery of living as I have done—of dying as I muft do. Alas ! your partial affection demands a tnemorial which calls back to being all the fad images buried in my bofom, and opens anew every vein of my heart. Yet confummate mifery has a moral ufe, and if ever thefe iheets reach the publiek, let the repiner at little evils learn to be jufter to his God and himfelf, by unavoidablecom- parifon. But am I not aifuming an info- lent confequence in thus admonilhing? Alas, it is the dear-bought privilege of the unfortunate to be tedious ! My life commenced with an incident fo extraordinary as the following facts alone could incline any one ţo credit. As foon as capable of rtfieciion, I found myfelf and
and a lifter of my own age, in an apart¬ ment with a lady, and a maid older.than herfelf—Every day furniíhed us with whatever was neceifary for fubfiftence or improvement, fupplied as it feemed by fome in vifible hand ; for I rarely miffed either of the few who commonly furround¬ ed me. This Recefs could not be called a cave, becaufe it was compofed of vari¬ ous rooms ; and the ftones were obvioufly united by labor ; yet every room was dif- tincl, and divided from the reft by a vaulted paíľage with many ftairs, while our light proceeded from fmall cafements of painted glafs, fo infinitely above our reach that we could never feek a world be¬ yond ; and fo dim, that ttøe beams of the fun were almoft a new object to us when we quitted this retirement. Thefe re¬ marks occurred as our minds unfolded ; for at firft we were content, through habit and ignorance, nor once beftowed a thought on furrounding objects. The lady 1 have mentioned called us her chil¬ dren, and careíľed us both with parental fondnefs.—Bleft with every gentle charm, В 2 İC
it is not wonderful ihe fully poíľeíľed the affections of thofe who had no one elfe to idolize. Every morning we met in a larger room than the reft, where a very venerable man performed mafs, and con¬ cluded with a difcourfe calculated to en¬ de-ar retirement. From him we learnt there was a terrible large place called the world, where a few haughty individuals commanded miferable millions, whom a few artful ones made fo ; that Providence had gracioufly refcued us from both, nor could we ever be funiciently grateful. Young hearts teem with unformed ideas, and are but too fufceptible of elevated andenthufiaftic impreffions. Time gave this man infenfibly an influence over us, as a fuperior being; to which his appear¬ ance greatly contributed. Imagine a tall and robuft figure habited in black, and marked by a commanding aufterity of manners.— ï-ïis features bore the traces of many furrows, and a kind of early old age, which interefted every oblerver. The fire and nobility of his eye, the graceful- • nefs
. nefs of his decay, and the heart-affectin'g f folemnity of his voice, While on his reverend temples grew \ ' The blojfirns of the grave- ■'· gave an authority almoft irrefiftible to Fa¬ ther Anthony, as we called him from hearing our mamma, to whom we under- ftood he was brother. He ufuaily partook our dinner, and from that time 'till the \ next morning vaniíhed, for we knew riot how or where he went*. The interval we pafled in little ufeful works, or in conver- fation with our mamma, whofe only em¬ ployment was that of forming our minds, for the world we were taught to dread.— She was our world, and all the tender af¬ fections, of which I have fince proved my heart fo full, centred in her, and my fil¬ ter. Time and forrow had given a wan delicacy to features exquifitely regular» while the foft fyrnmetry of her perfon united to every common idea of beauty а. Λ elegance a feminine helpleflhefs, which is, when unaffected, the moft interefting of all charms. Her temper was equal, and her underftanding enriched by a moft ex- B 3 te η five
ten five knowledge, to which ihe was ¿very day adding by perpetual ftudy. Inclined ftrongly by nature to ferious reflection, and all her favorite employments, I ufed to pafs thofe hours at her fide Ellinor de¬ voted to her play-things, or to Alice, whofe memory was overcharged with thofe marvellous tales children always delight in* As our ideas every day expanded, we thought more and more concerning our origin, and our imprifonment. We knew Father Anthony conftantly difappeared» but how or where was a fecret beyond our comprčheiifion ; for in all our refearches we had never found a door except thofe common to the family, and which ihut lis from the world. Ellinor, whofe iivel / ima¬ gination readily imbibed the romantic and extravagant, conjectured we were in the power of fome giant; nay, fuch was her difguft to Father Anthony, that flie fome¬ times apprehended he was a magician> and would one day or other devour us. 1 had a very different idea; and fancied our reifcat a hallowed circle to fecludeus from the-wicked, while Father Anthony was
was our guardian genius. Frequently we \ by agreement interrogated Alice, who \ though fond to the common degree of an [ old nurfe of both, but more efpecially Ellen, refifted thofe little arts nature her- felf infpires. Our mamma we now and then ventured to found, but her gravity always difconcerted us, and we retreated from a vain attempt. She once abfented herfelf fourteen days, and left us to our own conjectures, in a fpot truly chearlefs. Part of the time we fpent in fearching once more for a door» and the reft in childifh lamentations for her lcfsj which Alice ftill aflured us would be but a temporary one. Inflexible in the difcharge of her duty, ihe ftill periifted in locking our apartment every day after dinner, at which time all who had occa- fion, doubtlefs, paflfed in and out of the Recefs. Being deprived of my cuftomary re- fource, books, to am ufe a part of our melancholy leifure, we mutually agreed to invent tales from the many whole-length pictures, which ornamented the beft room, В 4 and
and to take them as they came alternately.. Ellinor readily invented a ludicrous ftory upon the portrait of an old man, which made us both laugh heartily. I turned my eyes to confider what I ihould fay a- bout the next; they refted on the figure of a man of noble mien ; his dreis I then knew no name for, but have fince found to be armour; a page held his helmet» and his hair, of a pale brown, fell over his.fhoulders. Fie was furrounded with many emblems of martial merit, and his eyes, which feemed bent on me, were full of a tender fweetnefs. A fentiment of veneration, mingled with furprifing foil nefs, pir reed my foul at once; my tongue faltered with a n ameléis idea, and I reired my head againft the Ihoulder of my fitter. That dear girl turned to me with quicknefs, and the beam of her eye was like that of the picture. I furveyed her over and over, and found in ever/ feature the ftrongeft refcmblance ; when fhe frowned, fhe had all his dignity ; when fhe fmiled, all his fweetnefs. An awe, I could net conquer, made me un- 4 able
able to form any tale on that fubject, and I directed my attention towards the next.. I с reprefented a lady in the flower of youth, dreft in mourning, and feeming in every feature to be marked by forrow ¿ a black veil half fhaded a coronet ihe wept over. If the laft picture awakened vene¬ ration, this feemed to call forth a thou¬ fand melting fenfations ; the tears rufhed involuntarily into our eyes, and, clafp- ing, we wept upon the boform of each other. fc Ah 1 who can thefe be ? cried we both together. Why do our hearts. thus throb before inanimate canvas ? í arel у every thing we behold is but part of one great myftery ; when will the day come, deftined to clear it up ?" We walked arm in arm round, and moralized on every portrait, but none interefted us> like thefe ; we were never weary of fur- veying or talking about them ; a young heart is frequently engrolTed by a favorite idea, amid all the glare of the great world ; nor is it then wonderful ours were thus poíľeíTed when entombed alive in fuch· a narrow boundary» I knew not why,, but
but we lived in the prefence of thefe pic¬ tures as if they underftood us, and bluftied when we were guilty of the flighteft ; folly. The moment our mamma returned, we flew into her arms, and interrupted her tender careiTes with importunate enquiries concerning thefe favorite picture*. She regarded us with aftoniíhment— her eyes filled with tears, and ihe bade us leave her to recover herfelf alone. Shortly after íhe fummoned Alice, and held with her a converfation which reftored her tranquil¬ lity j but fhe carefully avoided our enqui¬ ries, endeavouring to diverfify our hours by mufic, drawing, poetry, geography, and every ornamental branch of educa¬ tion. Whenever we ' verged toward an hint about the retreat — " wait, my dear girls, ihe would fay, the appointed hour— alas, one may follow it, when you will wiih yourfclves ftill uninformed."—Im- prefľed with an undefinable melancholy, our years paiľed on 'till womanhood ap¬ proached. Pardon
Pardon me if I linger over thefe feenes; I have but few fuch to relate, and they are all of my life upon whkh my heart dares to paufe. How are we born to in¬ vent our own miferies ! We ftart forward from the goal of youth, fearlefs and im¬ patient, nor know the heights and depths through which we muft labor ; opprefled in turn by every element, and often over¬ whelmed with that moft infupportable of all burthens, our own dUľatisfied fouls. How have I wept the moment I quitted the Recefs—a moment I then lived but in the hope of! To be always erring, is the weakneff of humanity, and to be always 'repenting, its punifliment.—Alas! could we learn wifdom without experience, man¬ kind would perhaps be too happy. Father Anthony in time ingratiated himielf with us, by his continual remon- ftrances againft our being ihut up in a place which bounded our ideas fo much that hedefpaired of making us comprehend half of what he taught us. We feconded his advice with endlefs entreaties. Our mamma, who was perfuafion itfelf in her own
own perfon, was not proof againft it in that of another. " Alas, my children, would íhe often fay, by what fatality do you fo paffionately defire to leave a home you will hereafter remember with a pleafure full of regret ? In vain you would return to it—you will loie a tafte for the tranquil enjoyments this folitude offers, without perhaps finding any to fupply them. Yet far be the felfiih weaknefs from my heart of pun ifhing you, even for your welfare. You ihall Jee this admired world. May it ever pleafe you as it will at firft fight!" We embraced her with youthful tranf¬ port, and then each other—-" We ihall go' at laft, exclaimed both together, we Ihall fee many more like ourfelves !" " What fay you, children ? cried ihe ; ah ! you will fee few indeed like your- felves." The next day was appointed for our enfranchifement. We packed and unpack¬ ed our little luggage fifty times over for mere employment 'till the appointed hour came; when we were fummoned to the chamber
chamber of our only friend, who was walking about apparently agitated with a fecret. " Are you grieved, mamma, cried l y that we are going to be happy ?" " Ah no, Matilda ! 1 am grieved, be¬ caufe I think you are juft ceafing to be fo. In this peaceful folitude T could fupply to you every loft relation—the adopted chil¬ dren of my heart, I ftood between you and a fate at once diftinguiihed, obfcure, and affecting.— Alas, why do vou wreft your¬ felves and your fecret from me ? Why do you oblige me to tell you, you muft never more call me any thing but Mrs. Marlow ?" « Never more call you mamma ! fighed 1, incoherently, who then are our pa¬ rents ?" tf You have no father : he who gave you exiftence fleeps in the bofom of God.'* " Our mother------------" " Lives—but not for you—enquire no farther ; let this fpecimen of knowledge teach you to fear it.—When the time re¬ quires it, 1 ihall difclofe .your whole ftory ; « . —weep
«„weep no more, my lovely, my affect¬ ing girls ; I have loft but a name ; for my nature is unalterable. All who will fee us know I never was married, which abfo· hitely compelled me to this difcovery. But I dare believe they will rely on my rectitude, and welcome you by whatever appellation 1 fhall give you. Reafons you will hereafter know, induce me always to conceal a retreat, where alone 1 could have hid you, and both muft, ere we leave it, folemnly promife never to difclofe the fe. cret." Chilled with this folemn preparation, our defire of liberty vaniíhed ; we felt like links ftruck from the chain of crea¬ tion ; and ftill with reftlefs imaginations explored the remainder of a myftery which we wept by anticipation. ct She lives, but not for you ľ* were words whofe found vibrated to my heart, while pleafure danced around me, and the doubt attend¬ ing the future, often robbed the prefent of enjoyment. After we had made at her knees the ftrict promife required, (lie mufikd our faces,
faces, and taking my hand, as Alice did my filter's, led us through many cold paf- fages for fome minutes; when unbinding our eyes, we found ourfelves in a noble cloifter. We flew into the garden it bor¬ dered, and how ftrong was the impreffion of the fcene before us ! from the manfion, which ftood on a hill, fpread a rich and fertile valley, mingled with thickets, half feen or cluftered hamlets, while through the living landfcape flowed a clear river, .. -------- and to the main The liquid ferpent drew his /ther train. The fun was finking, involved in fwell¬ ing waves of gold and purple, upon whom we almoft gazed ourfelves blind : for though we had often read and heard of his effulgence, the author of univerfal being can alone difplay it. Imagination, Madam, may fometimes furpafs the won¬ ders of art, but thofe of nature leave all imagination far behind. Mrs. Marlow led us through the Abbey, which might rather be called a palace :. it was
was erected upon the ruins of a Monaftery I deftroyed at the Reformation, and ftill I was called by the name of St. Vincent. 1 It had all the Gothic magnificence and I elegance, and we learnt with pleafure | that Mrs. Marlow, the fifter of its owner, ι Lord Seroope, was confidered by every fervant as its miftrefs. A noble apartment -within hePs was allotted for us, and the \ charms of the new world mingled with our melancholy reveries, alike deftroy- | ing our repofe. The ri-fing of the fun, whofe firft beams gilt our windows, I rouzed us entirely. Methinks, while I •expatiate on thefe trifles, time feems fuf- pended, and the fcene ftill living before me. The rich dew-drops, thofe jewels with which nature decks her bofom, glit¬ tering to the rays that wandered over the grafs : the various animals that feemed to derive a daily exiftence from the return ofthat glorious orb : the morning hymn of the winged creation, all united to awaken our gratitude, and humble us be¬ fore the author of our being, " Accept oh God, would we 4 cry fpontaneoufly, the adoiation
adoration of two hearts, who know no claim in this mighty univerfe but thee! oh deign to blefs the defire of doing right with the power ! and if forrow only is our portion, fan&tfy it with refignation : fo when time delivers us up to eternity, hope may be our conductor !" We were delighted with a playful group of fawns and deer, with whom we longed to frolic, and itole through Mrs. Marlow's chamber into the park, by a paflage flie had pointed out to us the day before. What was our furprize when we fav/ thofe with whom we had in idea mingled, were large fierce creatures, and that had they not run from us, we muft from them ; that every bird feared its natural pro¬ tector, and that man lived in continual warfare with very thing in creation, even to his own fpecies ! I am tedious, and muft have done with thefe puerilities, which yet on reflection yield the pureft pleafures of our lives· Mrs. Marlow procured for us the beft in- ftručtors in every art and fcience that re¬ mote refidence afforded, and, by her own Vol. I. С example»
example, gave that elegant finiih to our manners, precept never can. Extremely detached, by our fituation, from fociety,we eafily difcerned Mrs. Marlow was willing we ihould be fo, for ihe frequently exprefľed anxiety at the thoughts of Lord Scroope's return ; who, I underftand, was fent am- baíľador to the Hague from Queen Eli¬ sabeth. Our mafters, our fervants, and the various ruftics who tenanted the eftate, met in the chapel of St. Vincent's Abbey once a week, and thofe were all our intercourfe with fociety. On the evening of every Sunday we regularly went to the cell of Father Anthony, which was a cot raifed byLordScroope (to whom he flood in the fame relation as Mrs. Mar- low) on the verge of a large wood which Ihelteredthe manfion behind. Here,whi!e we were indulged with all thoie fimple repafts novelty gives charms to, our minds were enlarged by converfations on every thing fublime or inftruaive. If benevo¬ lence drew Mrs. Marlow abroad, fhe made us always her companions, and gave her alms but through our hands ; ordering US
us ever to add fome mite of our own, in proportion to our means. Avarice is rarely the vice ofyouthi at leaft, if I may judge by my own heart ; for the chief k:y of receiving, to me, was that of giving. Nor could Charity havedcfcended to earth in a more lovely form, than that of Mrs. Marlow. At a tale of diftrefs her eye affumed a melting benignity rarely feen, and never defcribed ; while her approach gave that pleafure to every fufferer, one ihould feel at the vifible prefence of a guardan angel. Three years elapfed in this manner, ere Lord Seroope returned ; and when he did, he was fo deeply engaged in politics, that the various prefents he continually fent from London, made to us the only differ¬ ence. Still the fad found,—- iC your mother lives—but not for you !" rung through our hearts occafionally; ftill we equally de¬ fired to difcover the Recefs ; and wan¬ dered through St Vincent's Abbey with the fame curiofity we once before did through that. The more we reflected, the С 2 more
more we were convinced it muft be near us.; but the refpečt we had for Mrs Mar- jow's folemn injunctions, fealed our lips to every fervant, and we never were allowed to ramble unattended. Mrs. Marlow, endued with the pureft principles, juftly conceived happinefs the nobleft ufe of underftanding; and bent her whole attention towards convincing us, the fate aopointed us was the moft liefirable in the world. c< Here, would fne fay, in a happy retirement, free alike from the drudgeries of high or low life, peace and innocence becalms your hearts, and blooms on your cheeks. Unenvying and unénvied as now, may that moment find you none can avoid ! Ah, how un¬ like the vices and miferies of a court ! There you can have no vice fo injurious to yourfelves as fincerity 3 no merit, like hypocrify. Love and friendfhip are un¬ known, and their names made ufe of buc to entrap the unwary. Women that have beauty are deftroy t d by it, and all who have not, are neglected. The gifts of man take place of the gifts of God, and money alene
alone constitutes merit.—Ah, never ! ne¬ ver ! my dear girls, can you enough blefs that indulgent Providence, which with¬ draws you ň om it î" Shall I confefs my vanity ? When I looked in the glafs, I did not think I ihould be neglected, even at court. I had no opportunity of forming any juft com¬ parifon indeed ; for the ruftics around us, fcorched with toil, had only charms enough left to íhew what they might have been with care. The clearnefs of my complexion, and the delicacy of my fea¬ tures, left me no equal, but' my fifter : Nay, even our habits, though often only of a finer camblet than theirs, were made in fo different a manner, that they did not appear to be compofed of the fame mate¬ rials. However difpofed to profit by the ad¬ vice of our more than parent, Heaven did not permit us to be happy. The clouds broke at once over our heads; Mrs. Marlow, our only tye on earth, and therefore doubly prized, was feized with a fever; the more dangerous, becaufe it С 3 was
was not violent enough at firft to fhew itfelf. To paint our diftraction would be a vain attempt. Kneeling on each fide her bed, for fourteen days and nights, we by tears and inward fupplications perfe- ruted the Almighty. Afiectionately at¬ tached to us, fhe ftruggled for our fakes with the diforder, till having worn her down to a ikeleton, it began at laft to abate ; but notwithftanding every effort of art, could never be eradicated. Scarce had we breathed after this diftrefs, when an ex¬ prefs from London delivered a pacquet to Mrs. Marlow, which occafioned her in¬ ftantly to fummon Fadier Anthony ; they remained in confultation for fome time, when they bade Alice order us inftantly to join them. <f My children, faid Mrs. MarloWjfaintly, an unforefeen event obliges us once more to retire to the Recefs. Every thing is at this moment preparing for our reception. You are now at years to judge of the im¬ portance of its concealment, nor will I longer make it a myftery.—But why thus afflict yourfelves for a temporary re¬ ftraint ?
ftraint ? If I am willing, for your fakes, to be carried thither, like a corpfe into a tomb, furely you will not be fo un¬ generous as to vent one felfiih lamen¬ tation ?" Effectually filenced by this noble re¬ proof, we collected, in confufion and j grief, our clothes and ornaments ; when, returning to her room, we found there Father Anthony, an old domeftick called James, Alice, and the Houfekeeper; who, having difperfed the other fervants, pre¬ ceded us to a ftore-room on the ground floor, and opening a prefs, unfaftened a falfe back, which conducted us into a clo- fet, dark, but for our torches. She then lifted a part of the floor, fitted very neatly, and difcovered a narrow pair of ftairs, down which we went, leaving her behind, and effectually fecured ourfelves, by bolt¬ ing it firmly on the infide. We paft through feveral fubterraneous paifages built on arches, and preferved from damps by cavities which paifed through every ftatue that ornamented the garden, 'till at laft we reached our prifon. But judge of С 4 my
my aftoniíhment, when I found the fo of¬ ten-fought entrance was a door of the fize of that portrait which firft gave me fuch lingular fenfations, and which I perceived was made to fall together, with a fpring almoft imperceptible. Father Anthony filenced the exclama¬ tions I would have made, and drew me at once to Mrs. Marlow ; who, pale and lifelefs with the fatigue of this removal, gave additional terrors to the moment. Whether the agitation of her mind had in- creafed her malady, or it was originally beyond cure, I know not ; but faw, with fpeechlefs affliction, from the moment of our return to the Recefs, ihe would ne¬ ver leave it alive. Enclofed in a fpot with¬ out fufncient air, attendance, or advice, we fáw her finiih her generous attachment to us, by refolutely refitting our intrea^ ties. " Let us quit this dreary place, I would fay, if but for a cottage. Let us not, in lofing you, have the cruel aggravation of contributing to fo great a misfortune.— Oh. i
Oh ! what more can we have to fear, than the lofs of all we love?" " Why, why, my children, returned ihe, thus embitter a common fate ? Can I, who have voluntarily paflfed my youth in a tomb, dread to bury my duft in it ?. You know my opinion is fingular, nor do I think man could avert the ftroke when God recalls us, however wife or willing. If 1 had been taken earlier from you, indeed, heavy to all muft have been the calamity; but after hav¬ ing taught you to live, there remains this only leifon, and my duty is complete 5, you now are enabled to judge for your¬ felves, confide in God,, and he will noe: defert you." " Alas ! would I cry, drowned in tears,, from your eye alone have we learnt when we did any thing aright; we ihall no lon¬ ger know good from evil when that dear eye is clofed." " Matilda, replied ftie with a folemrt air, remember only when you are called to any important action, to confult your heart in folitude i God has placed in that heart
heart an unerring monitor, and if we hear not the fmall ftill voice, it is becaufe we drown it in the noife of the world ; then ihall we meet again to part no more; then at the tribunal of the Moft High, I ihall gladly fay, " thefe trea- fures, О Lord, didft thou entruft to my hand unfullied, behold even fo 1 reftore them." Rifing up as ihe pronounced thefe words, ihe held a hand of each of us to her heart, while her eyes ftreamed with a kind of glory when lifted toward her Creator. Never did I fee fuch an animated figure; her foul feemed that moment burfting from its beauteous manfion to join its fifter angels. cc Matilda and Ellinor, my more than children, you recollect, faid ihe, I fup- preifed your curiofity once, by telling you, I would reveal your fecret finally when the hour demanded it. That hour is come. Alas ! I cannot but weep to remember, that a thoufand interefting ideas are now going to detach your affections from her who agonizes over you." Wc
We kiíľed her hand in fpeechleíš for¬ row ----- " 'Tis true, continued ihe, my brother might hereafter difclofe yourftory,butthere are among its incidents, fome that need the gentlenefs of a woman to teach you to bewail, without imitating. In this little hiftory you wiil find the full motive of my retreat, and the means by wnich it was effected. " You already know I am fifter to the prefent Lord Seroope, but you know not that I derived by birth from the ill-judged zeal of my mother. Bred up a Papift, ihe no fooner entertained a pafiion for Lord Seroope, than ihe formed a defign to convert him to the Cotholick religion. She was handfome, as I have always heard, and he was young 5 he affected to be fen¬ fible of her efforts, which redoubled her zeal. She thought the love of Heaven alone actuated her heart, but he took ad¬ vantage of thofe moments, and ihe found too late ihe had facrificed her own fouľs welfare to his indulgence : her relations, who
who had the more encouraged her, as my father was a great match in point of for¬ tune, exafperated at an error they ought rather to have charged themfelves with, lhut her up, and treated her with the ut¬ moft rigor. " In this terrible fituation ihe was deli¬ vered of me ; her relations took rne in¬ ftantly from her fight j they wrapt me in the moft d ifgraceful habiliments, and fent me, with a letter full of the bittereit threats and tauntSjto my father. Far,however, from- feeling that indifference very young men ufuaily behold their offspring with, he received me as the firft gift of Heaven,. and, committing me to the charge of pro¬ per people, made me of no lefs confe¬ quence than if I had been his legitimate daughter, and heirefs of his eftate. " In the mean time my mother was kept in total· ignorance of the fate of her child; miferable in her own heart, and eternally taunted for the difgrace fhe had brought on her family, ihe at length re¬ folved to make her eicape to Lord Seroope i — lhe effected it, and found in his
his houfe the treafure of all her hopes, her child ; but as ihe was not of an age to be independent, on her being difcovered by her kindred, ihe was again torn from his arms, and I was forever bereaved of a mother before I was fenfible I had one. How often did my father repent his in-· juftice to her! it hung heavy on his foul in life, and was moft terrible in death. Invaia he fought her, for never from that hour did Heaven permit the erring pair to meet. Л few years afterwards he married, and had by his wife the prefent Lord; this circumftance, far from leflen ing his affec¬ tion, endeared me ftill more to him ; he remembered I had no fortune but from his bounty, no claim but on his heart. His Lady having no more children, be¬ gan to confider :r.e as her daughter, and the misfortune of my birth was almoft forgotten. In this fituation I grew up, careíľed by all his friends, and admired infinitely more than I deferved ; for, from the time my brother grew of an age to appear in the world, Lord Seroope had I left St. Vincent's Abbey for the Court. 4 Many
Many matches offered, of which my fa¬ ther often entreated me to chufe. I how¬ ever faw no man with a preference ; and as I was fenfible my heart was too tender not to become partial, I wifhed to evade all propofals 'till then. I had in this in¬ terval the misfortune to lofe my father, whofe fenfes failing him in his laft fick- nefs, he had no power to make a neceíľary provifion for me ; yet in his delirium he raved of me and my mother continually. I felt this lofs the lefs fenfibly, as I was treated with the utmoft generofity and tendernefs by my brother and the dowa¬ ger Lady Seroope ; but I found my train of admirers diminiih apace, when one appeared, who atoned in my eyes for the lofs of a thoufand. He was a young Weft- Indiaiv, poíľeíľed of a confiderable for¬ tune, an amiable perfon, and an untainted heart. When I fay I loved him, I fpeak but coldly; you will know how well here¬ after. Mr. Colville, for that was his name, was of a character too much re- fembling the young Lord Scroope's, not to be favoured by him. He proved by the 3
the generofity of his behaviour, the fince¬ rity of his love; neither the misfortune of mv birth, or want of riches, dimi¬ niihed his ardor ; but rather, on the con¬ trary, augmented it. His fortune was independent, and I was not defirous of more than a very moderate competence. The day of our marriage was fixed, and arrived equally wiíhed by both. We were united in the prefence of the Lord and Lady Seroope, who had loaded me with noble prefents. Our hearts were gay, and a large company aiTembled on the occafion, invented a thoufand diveriions. I was fitting after dinner at the head of the table, finging, when a fervant entered and whifpered my hufband ; he rofe up, and followed him into the next room ; my eyes were induftrious to find him, and as he left the door open, I perceived him, from an oppofite pier glafs, take a packet of letters from a man ; Jie held them in his hand 'till I ceafed finging, and then began reading : he continued to do fo for fome minutes, when I faw his hand íhake with great violence, which fcon di- miniihing,
miniíhing, he fell to the ground, i ran to him in the utmoft agitation i —. he was cold and convulfed. I took up the papers, but had not read half as far, before I was as infenfible as himfelf. (Mrs. Marlow was lo aŕľečied at this paffage, íhe had not power to proceed; at laft recovering, fhe held up her hands, while her fine eyes were drowned in tears, and repeated) tf Let me not, oh God, fince I furvived that moment, fink under the remem¬ brance of it! I muft cut Ihort defcription, .my children, on a circumftance which fo nearly affects my heart. The letters were .from his mother; after telling him lbe had fuffered him to depart with the more eafe for England, as íhe wiíhed to have an opportunity of declaring a fecret to him, lhame had long fupprefied, and which her decaying health forbid her lon¬ ger to conceal, ftie related the incidents of her life ; a few of which decided our fate, and convinced me the fame parents gave birth to both. What a terrible dif¬ covery! 1 ihall pafs over thofe events you
you already know, and only mention, that on feeing forced by her tyrannical re¬ lations from Lord Scroope's houfe, they fent her uňderthe care of an uncle, m the Spaniih fervice, to the Wfeft-indies. Dur¬ ing the parage, íhe found UerlMf agaia with child i her kinfman, exafperated at thisrirci?mftance,uítd every means topre- vail on her to marry Mr. Coiville (a rettfer whole pi an tatioriJì joined his, and who was a paíľeňgeron board the faene vtlTel) without acquainting him with her fituation. Per¬ fected and dhlľŕeííed on all fides, ihe at hft took a refolution on the firft ocoafion^ to declare all to het lover. His affiduity fumiihfcd her with öné ere long,which ihe did not ftegkc^. As {bon as he had conquered hit furprife, he aíľured her ilie íhould never repent her generous confidence in his honour, which affected him the more fenfibly as his friend would meanly have deceived him. He owned himfelf fo attached, that if ihe could give up fruitlefs hopes to partake his fortune, he would marry her d i redly, with¬ out claiming any right from the ceremony, Vol. L D bu:
but that of reîeafing her from the tyranny of her kindred, and hereafter providing in the fame manner for her child as he would for any of his own. Overcome with the feverity of her treatment, from thofe who were bound to pity her, and fenfible the ftranger who could fpeak fo generoufly on the fubjeci:, might make her as happy as ihe now durft hope to be, ihe requefted time to deliberate on the propofal, which he granted. Some days elapfed, during which, fhe refolved to fecure to herfelf the privilege of keeping one of her children, by confenting. They were united by a holy father then on board, who, at Mr. CoMlle's defire, gave out that he had married them two months before in London, but concealed it from fome motives refpecting the lady's friends. Her uncle, under whofe care ihe was, not fufpečting the eclairciifement, was aftoniftied how ihe had brought her lover to confent to this; but, as his authority I was at an end by her compliance with his I wiihes, he affected, the utmoft fatisfačtion, I and offered them fome valuable prefents. I Mr. I
Mr. Colville, whofe ingenuous heart ab¬ horred his meanne-fs, refufed with con* tempt thofe poor compenfations, for a deceit which might have proved fo fatal to his happinefs, nor left him to fuppofe he was ignorant Ы the favor intended him. He painted the infamy of the pro¬ ceeding in the ftrongeft colours, and on their arrival at Jamaica, carried his bride to his own plantation, without deigning to take leave of her relations. " Here, faid the dear lady, I gave birth, my fon, to you, and here I firft learnt to be happy. The generous kindnefs with which Mr. Colville treated you, the unwearied at¬ tention lie ihewed to me, deferved, and obtained my whole heart. It feemed as if the fincerity of my conduct, had can¬ celled its errors 5 I may truly fay s I ne¬ ver faw him carefs you, without ardently wiihing you had a claim to the name he beftowed on you. You grew up without my ever hearing of your real father, and as it little became me to wound the heart of my huiband, I preferred an abfolute filence on the fubject, nor feemed to re- D 2 member
member fuch a perion ever had exifted. I will not fay I never thought of him; nature taught you to recall him to my mint! by a thoufand artlefs geftures.—I gave you, after fome years, two fifters and a brother, the lofs of whom you doubt¬ lefs remember. A generous, though fi¬ lent ftruggle, continuedduring their lives, between Mr. Colville and myfelf; I al¬ ways attempted to convince him you, though the elder, had not more than a juft portion of my love ; and he, no lefs anxioufly, fought to fatisfy me his own children had not made him forget what he had promifed refpecling you. Hea- I ven, however, took them to itfelf, and I Mr. Colville divided between you and me a fortone too dearly gained by his lofs; though you have paid thè tribute of filial gratitude over his grave, my fon, remember that is infufficicnt; you-owehim every thing, and can never difcharge the obligation. Your youth, and the pleafiire Mr. Colville took in being called your father, made it very improper I fhould intruft to you a fecret fo humiliating ta myfelf, and dif- 2 treifing
trefíing to him î yet, fenfible of the nece A fity, I have, fince his death, a thoufand times refolved on it, and as conftantly given up the defign. At laft, my dear child, you rendered it eafier to me, by propofmg to vifit England, and I fuffered you to go with lefs regret, becaufe I hoped you there would find another pa¬ rent; one whofe claim in you is the fame with mine, and one, who I am aíľured, will proudly acknowledge you. Go then, my dear Anthony, to Lord Seroope; fhew him this letter: tell him, for I am not afraid to fay it, even to yourfelf, I fend him a fon worthier of a nobler name than theweaknefs of your motherhas given you. Tell him, I will not allow him to provide for your fifter Gertrude, fince the fortune I pofle£> is already deftined to her, if living. Do you, my dear Anthony, re¬ pair my lofs to her, for never, in refpečt to my hufband's memory, will I fee again the father of my children ; this place ihall be my grave, and here, while life remains, î will blefs you both, and pray that D J the
the fins of your parents may never bé vifited upon either. <{ Vain wiíh, faid Mrs. Marlow; the ftroke was already given. Judge for me, my dear girls, what I felt on reading fuch tender fentrments, and remember¬ ing the characters were thofe of a mo¬ ther ! " We were removed to feparate apart¬ ments ; Mr. Colville, no longer my huf- band, had ftrength of conititution, but not ftrength of mind, to fupport this ca¬ lamity; he fell into a deep melancholy, and fhut himfelf from alľ the world : as to me, Heaven, in mercy, took away my fenfes by a violent fever; I. remained in a daric-erous fituation leverai weeks, (luring; which time he formed a. refolu- tion, my reftoration gave him an opportu¬ nity to effect. Each wanting courage to i ее the other,, he informed me, by letter, he only waited my confent to return to his own country* and diipofe of his effects, the produce of which might endow the monaftery where he ihould receive the holy habit. He conjured me to fupport
a misfortune, his letter convinced me, he v/as ready to fink under. The fad choice he had made was already mine ; I wrote to inform him of it 5 I conjured him ne- λ er to betray to our mother the fatal event of her concealment, but to perfuade her we were both happy.—What a vain re¬ queft ! had not Heaven deprived her of ever feeing him, how could he have con¬ cealed fo exquifite a diftrefs ?—A wound in the heart will ever bleed on the flio;hteft touch. " I recovered my fenfes, but that difguft with which every difappointment (and how much more fo deep a one !) over¬ whelms a young mind, made every thing odious to me ; the hours when 1 was fo pleafingly deceived, were all I reckoned in my life. Before I left my room, my Lord's marriage with the Lady Matilda Howard was concluded ; his union with the firft Lady in England, both in birth and beauty, gave the greateft pleafure to all who loved him. Little able, and lefs difpofed to affift at feftivities, I retired on the plea of bad health to the Abbey. D 4 The
The death of the Dowager Lady Seroope,. in the midft of the pleafures, entirely damped them k Lord Seroope conducted bis new Lady into the country, to pafs- the time of mourning ;. the amiable en¬ gaging bçide conceived a friendfhip for me,, whkh,. as is frequently the eafe in? noble mmdsy had perhaps its fource in my misfortunes. With ail the graces that adorn- grandeur,- Lady Seroope had the fweet fimplicity of a village maid ; a heart full of the moft exquifite delicacy and fenfibilLty>. and features which did juftice. to her mind. My Lord perfecly adored her,, and her rank and charms foon made me find St. Vincent's Abbey no longer a retirement. " A letter came in aibor&time feom my brother, which i-nformed me, that on his- arrival at Jamaica^ he found my mother had died during, his abfence j. this was accompanied with bills for a large fum,. as my portioft of her valuable legacy. There is fortieth in g fo tender i^ the паше,. the idea of a mother, although unknown, that in fpite of my other afflictions,! found a very
a very fenfible one in her bis. My heart had now no refting place» Before, the re¬ membrance that the blow came from her, however unintentionally, gave me a little courage, which 1 was n«t fure I poífeíľed till it was loft,. There is a pleafiure to* hearts· capable of refinements in faerifieing fomething to the friends we love; the fi-^ lence we endured to iaveherftom diftrefs: had leíľened mine, which now broke forirv anew. The amiable Lady Seroope nçg* lefted nothing to foften iţ ; íhe ufed ever.yr effort to prevent ray retiring to the mo* ûaftery, as I had purpofed, and her influ^ ence over her Lord made her wiihes to^ furely his for him to neglect adding bis İA- treaties; the obligations I owed İıis fami* ly, the efteem I had for hh Lady,, ani¬ me very refinement I have mentioned^ made me unable to refufe. I could neve$ make to© large amends for fuch kindneisV My fifter-in-law,. who rather hoafted than* difowned the title,, to gratify me, neg* tečted the amufements, namral to her years, and a mind at eafe ; iţ feemed a$. if I bad the. authority veiled ш her> anei not
not her will, but mine, directed the fami¬ ly. Our guefts departed by degrees, and Lady Scroope's brother, the young Duke of Norfolk, with fome other relations, alone remained. " To fatisfy my brother Anthony no le¬ vity had erafed from my mind the tender ties which once united us, and which neither time nör reafon could ever entirely diifolve, I laid before him the motives of my conduci, and conjured him to be¬ lieve, fince I could never be his, I never would be another's. Lady Seroope not being able to prevail on me to return to London, departed without me, after ex¬ torting a promife, that I would think no more of a nunnery. She had left*the Abbey three months, when ftc gave birth to the prefent Lord, to the inexpref- fible joy of her huiband. To íhew all the gratitude in my power for the favours I had received both from Lord Seroope and his mother, I divided my fortune, and in¬ fifted on their accepting half, as a prefent to the young heir. The generous Matilda would have returned it, but her Lord,
mere
more fenfible of the value of money, re¬ ceived the gift. She reproached me for it with that kind raillery which friends know how to make fo agreeable y lhe told me ihe ihould ceafe to love me, fince the world wouid now call her attachment in¬ te refted. "In the time of her abfence, I fpent many hours in reviewing the ruins with which this place abounded 3 the gloomy mag¬ nificence of thofe great remains of art, was more fuited to. my fadnefs of foul than the fofter and more varied feenes of nature y the liking í had conceived for thefe places, doubtlefs firft caufed the houfekeeper to íhew me the Recefs. She had lived in the family a vaft number of years, and knew the fecret. How often had I walked through its ruined ailes, without fufpečting it could pof- fibly contain one habitable fpot ľ I will now, my dear children, explain its fituation and ftručture :—It was once inhabited by nuns of the order of St. Winifred, but defertcd before the abolition
abolition of Convents, from its ruinous condition j in this fituation it remained many years, fhunned by the country peo¬ ple, and devoutly vifited by thofe tra¬ vellers whom chance or curiofity brought this way. When the Reformation, in the time of Henry, robbed the monks of their vaft domains, the anceftor of Lord Seroope obtained this land of the king; he pulled down the monaftery to erect a convenient manfion in the fame tafte, and difcovered a fecret paíľage from thenee to the Convent ; it was blocked up without being generally known, and the ruins left as an addition to the prof- pe čl ; nor till chance gave the commu¬ nication a value, was it remembered. The nobleman who could obtain fo vaft a favor, 'tis needlefs to mention, pro¬ feiTed the reformed religion, but not able to forget that in which he had been brought up, his houfe became the afylum of many of the unrevenued fathers -, this circumftance being noticed, he found his views in the world depended on his ex¬ pelling them, when the fecret paifage oc¬ curred
curred to his remembrance. He had the ftones removed cautioufly by the holy fa¬ thers, and found theplacewell arched and paved, and free from damps ; it termina¬ ted in a room they fuppofed to have been the refectory, and which ftill re¬ mained entire. They removed, by de¬ grees, fuch accommodations as were ne* ceffary into ir, and thither the refugees retired, being fupplied with food from the Abbey: but finding themfelves ihut up in too fmall a place, and in total want of employment, they began working under ground, and by degrees formed two other paifages from the Recefs, one of which ends in the Hermit's cave, where the eldeft of them lived, and the other in the midft of the ruina. Thus providing againft difcovery, or rather fecuring their efcape if that ihould happen. In furvey¬ ing the ruins, they fount! feveral places enclofed, and yet undemoliihed ; from among thofe, they feleded the few we have lived in, chufing tfoem always fe¬ parated to prevent fufpicion. Thus, in a few years, each father had his own ¿cell,
cell, and a monaftery was hid among the ruins of the convent. At length, the feverity of government abating, feveral of the monks ventured again into the world, and of the eight who made it their afylum, two only ended their days here. Lord Seroope, fenfible of the va¬ lue of fuch a retirement, -carefully kept the fecret when its inhabitants were gone ; two fervants alone knew it, and they were faithful ; nor till the houfe-keeper told me the ftory, had I an idea of fuch a place. " This account appeared to me almoft fabulous ; the ruin was at leaft half a mile from the manfion, which then had a view Of it rifing plantations daily diminiihed, -till the wood became frequented, or indeed paffable only on the fide леаг the Hermit's cave : I impatiently defired to explore the «whole romantic fecret. " The houfe-keeper did not delay a mo¬ ment to gratify my curiofity; ihe fum¬ moned an old fervant who knew the way, with torches, to lead me through the windings. The arched roof which was, 4 by
by fome contrivance in the building, kept aftoniihingly free from damps, echoed to our very feet. The gloomi- nefs of the fcene accorded with rny ideas, and iuggefted a fcheme which I have fince thought a providential one, to my mind. The d ivi fio n of the rooms, the bare walls, and holes in the roof for air, difpleafed me ; but fince my affection for Lord and Lady Seroope debarred me from de¬ voting myfelf to a convent, I refolved to fit this place up, and retire to it whenever the owners, with their guefts, made St. Vincent's Abbey too gay for me. Three times I vifited it, and each time found my defire greater. I difcourfed with the old man, who, from a confiderable re¬ ward I offered him, agreed, with the affi- itance of his fon, who was a builder, to ren¬ der this a comfortable habitation. I was unwilling to admit a third perfon into the fecret, but foon discovered his fon James was already acquainted with it. They directly began lodging their implements in the cave, which was altered to give a face to the whole. Three months made it
it what it now is ; charmed with a dew vice which Î little forefaw woold be «fe« ful to my friendi, the houfe-keeper and ¡ту maid Alice, braught, by my direc¬ tion, every nccefíary to tlie da*k room, from whence the men fetched them. The time of my Lard's retam drew nigh, the place was aired, and my books and ckxKes already carried there ; no fooner had 1 refigned the care of the family into the hands of щ amiable fifter, than I acquainted her with my intended retreat. I-Jer furprife was extreme at iêeing how commociimıs we had rendered fo fe· queftcred a fpot; but being fearful, if ihe oppofed ray relblution, of íêeming to conftrain ma, ihe fuffered me to indulge my fø»cy. Hither then I retiredi at* tended bf Alice and James, the latter of whom Iked in the cave to fecure us from difcovery, and furnifh us every little convenience» This folitude, fo fuitable to the fadnefs of my foul, was inexpref- fibly agreeable to me ; it had all the ad¬ vantages of a nunnery, without the tie to
to continue in it ; a reftričtion the moft likely to make retirement odious. My brother Anthony (with whom I conftantly correfponded) charmed with the defcrip¬ tion of a fpot fo well calculated for hearts wounded like his and mine, aifured me, inftead of ihutting himfelf up in a con¬ vent, for which he felt he had no voca¬ tion, as foon as he thought he could bring himfelf to confider me only as a fifter, he would fix his refidence in the cave. " I had remained there two months, when a meffenger arrived to recall Lord Seroope to Court; the caufe could nor remain a fecret. Mary of Scotland, that beautiful and unfortunate Queen¿ who had been imprifoned by her fubjecb as an acceifary to the murder of her hufband, had found means to eicape, and implore the protection of Elizabeth. The jea¬ loufy and hatred that princefs had long entertained for one fo fuperior in thofe endowments moft admired by herfelf, made this ftep excufable in Mary, only Vol. I. E - from
ι
from the cruelty of her fituation. . Byt did : not that very fituation entitle her to royal treatment? In Elizabeth many noble qualities are mingled with impati¬ ence, caprice, pride, and exceflive vanity. Overjoyed at getting a rival into her hands, doubly formidable, inftead of offerì ngMary a princely afylum., till, on the proof of her innocence, íhe ihould be reftored to her crown, Elizabeth inftantly made the Queen of Scots fenfible of her power, by dropping thofe ardent expreffions of friendfhip and efteem with which all her letters had before been filled (moft pro¬ bably to hide the very reverfe) and infill¬ ing on her confenting to be tried by laws, with which fhe was unacquainted, and never yet fubject to. It was to propofe thofe haríh terms to Mary, the Queen had fent for Lord Seroope j íhe deputed him in conceït with the duke of Norfolk, and feveral other Lords Commiffioners, to receive from Mary her juftification, and examine into the authenticity of the proofs.
« The
Cf The deferted, ·μβ.γ ? ahrioít betrayed Queen of Scotland, too late found hap little the profeiuorjs of the great ^,re to be relied on. She was tfOw,in a worfe con¬ dition than if fhe had .ftill íemainçd }fi her of« ccaintry, arrd fu b mi tred ţolaw« by which ftie had governed. Compelled, by the feverky of her fate, to bend to л woman but equal with herfelf; to give herfelf up a prifoner to a govern rruent .Л^е had never offended, and over ,vvhich ihe was probably deftined to reign ; as a cri¬ minal, to attempt a juftificatiqn ( before people too probably ordered to condemn her, and, even if they avoided that, too politic to clear her innocence, and re¬ ftore her freedom ". For the Queen of En¬ gland had already placed a number of peo¬ ple around her, who watched all her fteps fo cautioufly, that they wanted only the name to become a guard. Amid al thefe fears and mortifications, fubmiffion was Mary's only meafure. She had learnr, young as flie was, to fubmit with dignity, and demand a degree of generoin v, by not feeming to doubt of rinding it. She there- E 2 fots
fore received the Queen's decifion with compofure, delivered herfelf into Lord Scroope's hands, and agreed to defer ap¬ pearing before her fifter Elizabeth, 'till me could appear with honor. " This great event engroifed the atten¬ tion of all Europe. Various opinions were formed, and Elizabeth never found Mary more formidable than when in her power. All blamed her errors, but they pitied her youth, and imputed many of them to inexperience and . faults in her education. Her uncommon beauty, af¬ fability, elegance of manners, and ex¬ preflion, were ftrongly commended by all who had feen her, and thofe who had not, liftened to the tale with avidity, and re¬ ported it with increafe. Every word in her praife was a dagger to the heart of Eliza¬ beth, and the unfortunate Mary's greateft crimes with her, were the graces íhe re- ceived from nature. " Lady Seroope had fpent fome of her early years in the French Court. Mary was too affable and amiable not to attach every one for whom ihe had an inclina¬ tion.
tion, and the friendlhip lhe Ihewed for the Lady Matilda, would have made the feparation the more afflicting, but that Mary, by the death of Francis the fécond, found herfelf no longer attached to France, and was obliged, with infinite regret, to quit the kingdom ihe had been educated in, to govern one filled with do- meftic jars, and almoft ignorant of thofe foftnefľes which give charms to foci¬ ety ; and which, in a peculiar degree, adorned the court ihe had hitherto reign¬ ed over. (( The troubles in which ihe had been plunged, from the hour íhe returned to Scotland, had hardly left her leifure to diftinguifh thofe formerly honored with her notice : Lady Seroope had, how¬ ever, always preferved an attachment to her, lefs the fruit of gratitude than fym- pathy". The Queen's prefent fad fitua¬ tion, of which ihe heard amply from her Lord, touched her to the verv foul. She accufed Elizabeth of meanneíš and injuf¬ tice; and, without doubting the inno¬ cence of Mary, fne ardently defired to E 3 lighten
lighten her captivity, ina convince her that misfortune had not robbed hef óf cyefy friend. Ťhefe fénťÍméň'ts were ŕoo fervently generous hot. tò engage ňí6. I infenfibly took part in what interefted my fifter fo nearly, and learnt to' deplore a Prmcefs thus treated, whom, in a happier íiruatŕon, I mouľd doubtlefs have cen- fureá. u Lord Seroope, to fatisfy his wife, who entreated him to the ftep, repreiented to Elizabeth, the impropriety of leaving the Queen of Scots unaccompanied by any bay cf diftíŕíction, arid without the at¬ tendance, nothing could exempt the place fire had chofen for an afylum, from pay¬ ing her', whéthlr guilty or innocent. To give force tó this, he hinted the error of hirih meafiirês, which ihteréftéd thè com¬ mon people, and by engaging their pity, might weaken their fidelity. "The laft reafon, weighed infinitely more with our Queen than the firft, for her heart was more fullof policy than feeling. She however appointed Lady Seroope to attend
attend upon Mary, and fent orders to treat her móre fuitably to her rank. "Overjoyed at carrying her point, with¬ out appearing in it, Lady Seroope did not delay her journey j but unwilling to leave me, ihe ufed all her intereft and in¬ fluence to perfuaďe me to accompany her. She represented, íhe did not wifh to en¬ gage me in any gay feenes, the office ihe was allotted to being that moft conform¬ able to the melancholy turn of my mind. The inclination I had to fee MaryjoinKi with her, and I confented. " Bolton Cáftle, whither Mary had been conducted by the Queen's Command, was a ftrong fortrêfs On the borders of York- ihire. Without furniture, or accommoda¬ tions for a royal gueft, it declared at once to that Princefs, the melancholy captivity to which ihe was deftined. The huma¬ nity of Lord Seroope in vain attempted to conceal the fate that awaited her j ihe gave herfelf up to an immoderate grief, which was augmented * by the news of Bothwelľs death, who had taken refuge in Norway. E 4 « We
We were met at Derby by the Duke of Norfolk, whofe ardent defíre to íèe the Queen of Scots had induced, him to join us. This nobleman was of an amiable prefence, in the prime of life, full of a ge¬ nerous ardor, a captivating vivacity· Without an equal in rank in England, he had formed, long fince, the defign of efpoufing Mary, and Bothwelľs death had renewed hopes her marriage with him had fruftrated. I was amazed at the difference vifiblein the manners of theDuke; nordid I immediately perceive whence his impa¬ tience of any difappointment,, and deep , reveries could proceed ;. but the pleafure he took in hearing his filter's commen¬ dations of the Queen, the ibftnefs that fparkled in his eyes, while he related the events her letters to Bothwell had aid open, ihewed me at length that am¬ bition had raifed a fi ame in his heart, he miftook for love. " We arrived at Bolton, and Mary was not apprized, till Lady Seroope was in¬ troduced to her preience, that Elizabeth- had fent her a friend fo afìxioufly defirous· to
to lighten her captivity. I would defcribe the Queen of Scots to you, my dear children, had not nature drawn a truer picture of her than I can give. Look in the glafs, Matilda, and you will fee her perfect image. I could not contain my aftoniíhment — <c Oh Heavens! exclaimed I, is it poftible in lamenting the fate of that injured Queen, I have wept for a mother ľ* " A fnort time will explain all, faid Mrs. Marlow. The Queen was in the bloom of youth, and the forrow which hung over her features, gave them, an irrefiftible attraction. Her air of refigned dignity and feminine fweetnefs, was mingled with innocence and unconfcious modefty. If I was inclined to pity her before, how greatly was that fentiment enlivened ! rier faults feemed to vanifh, or to be atoned by her misfortunes. Nothing could be more interefting than her firft interview with Lady Seroope, whofe tears alone could exprefs her forrow and affec¬ tion. "How
3
α How muft a fcene, which diftreifed me, touch a heart prepared to love her ! The Duke found there was a paflfion ftrortger than ambition j her crown no longer engroifed his thoughts, it was herfelf alone he defired ; he lamented the evils it had overwhelmed her with, and from which, éven her resignation of it, would not relieve her. Love commu¬ nicated all its delicacies at once to his heart ; and the man who had dared afpire to her, While in profperity and peace, in this fad moment of humiliatrort had not prefumption to lift his eyes tb her, to fpeak of his affection, ór infult her by his companion. " Lady Seroope was too quick- fighted to overlook this change in her brother ; but far from drawing ahy ill prtfäge from it, ihe flattered herfelf he was deftined to re¬ ftore the Queen, and to finó in her grati¬ tude and affection, a reward proportioned to his merit. "Willing torelieve the tedioufneíš of the hours, that Lady devifed amufements of which no one partook, though all, from a juft
a juÆ fenfé of the* intention, appeared fatisfied with them. The filence and me¬ lancholy öf thè Duke' of Norfolk engagea the Queen % (he found к à delicate com¬ pliment tö her diftrefs,· arid regarded hitti with ári átťe'htLôň tób Mattering to bê" over¬ looked. Charitled with äh ëfteem, which he had rather wilhed than hoped, the ar¬ dor óf his foul fèitfid tförds, and Wtárý difcovered, in attempting to attach a friend, ihe had gained a lover. Confi- dlrihg her inťeŕefí ònljj» Bife müft have encouí-agèd him; butiíemetttberirtg boW fatal hér partiality might one dajr prove* ihe eóhju>ëd hím to fubdue while yet ih, its infancy, á- paffion it wOOld be cru¬ elty tò encourage; fø remèrhber her only äs, an unfbttunatë fúetây and m that light, confëiîed herièlf obiigéd to him for hb intereft arid power in hec favor. ct Tn the ñri\ wildnefs of love, nothings feems impoffible; an anfwer fo mild, only- animated the hope it was meant to extin- güiíh. He formed a thoufand projects,. he engaged his fifter in hk intereft, and every
every hour of his life was filled up by plans. for the deliverance of the amiable Queen. But as it was impoffible his refidence ihould be a fecret, and he juftly feared awakenino; the attention of Elizabeth, be-· fore his fchemes were ripe for execution, he engaged his fifter to make a requeft, he wanted courage to mention ; fince ihe might, with more propriety, reprefent to the queen, the policy of rendering her fate his. iC In this dangerous conjuncture, the unfortunate Mary liftened once more to the partial advice of her heart ; which prompted her to yield to fo noble, fo de¬ ferving a lover. She had caught his frenzy, and realized the fictions of his brain with the fame facility. His vaft eftates, numerous vaífals, and ftill more, his ex¬ tended and noble connections, fiattered her with the hope of amply rewarding him, and ihe thought it but generous tó let the recompence rather precede the fervice than follow it. " Fatal delufion of a prejudiced mind ! Oh Mary, too tender Princefs! why were not
n«t all the paft misfortunes of thy life, which had their fource in love, monitors to thee ? Why did they not teach thee to avoid this error, which heightened every affliction, and gave new pangs to a long, long captivity ?' " The Duke not daring to engage his brother-in-law in an action contrary to his commifiion, entrufted his intention only to his fifter. Too ardent and too amiable an advocate to be denied, the Queen of Scots was perfuaded by that Lady to unite herfelf with the Duke. They were married in the prefence of the Lady Seroope and myfelf, Sir Arthur Fo refter, and the Duke's two Secretaries. " Pofíeíľed in herfelf of all his wifhes, the prifon of the Queen became a palace to the Duke ; and every hour feemed to add to a paflion, which appeared at firft incapable of addition. The authority Mary had given him over her, the tendernefs with which fhe regarded him,were powerful arguments againft the approaching reparation ; but Lady Seroope faw with concern, the ex¬ travagance of a paflion ihe had encou¬ raged.
Taged· She knew too well the temper of Elizabeth, pot tú anticipate her refent¬ ment, if this ftep was difcovered, and knew likewife Ju? own fafety would be a poor motive, for perfuading her brother to leave Bolton ; ihe therefore reprefented to him, how ill he rewarded the lovely Queen of Scots, by lengthening an impriibnment it was his duty to curtail.; and aikcd him what expectation Mary might form from a huiband, who already preferred his own indulgence, to her freedom, happinefs, ^nd glory ? " Thefe reproaches were too true to of¬ fend the Duke. He lamented, h\it yielded to the cruel neceífity. Mary, as if fore¬ warned that theie hours were all the eafy ones remaining of her life, ufed every means to detain him ; but the generofity of her affection, awakening his more ftrongly, he bade adieu to the charming wife, he was never more to meet, and ici out for London, to engage all his friends to favor a marriage, no one now could ¿Drevent. He flattered himfelf his intereft a was
was fô great, that the Queen would be reduced to confent, whether confonarit to her inclination or not. Indeed, this was the only rational mode of proceeding; for to imagine Elizabeth weak enough tO «nite her rival and heirefs, voluntarily* to the firft of her fuhječts, would have been an unpardonable blind nefs. " Fortune, however, had deftined other- wife, and only fmiled awhile, to make her frown more terrible. All the great Lords of Elizabeth's Court, who had feen, with regret, the imprifonment of Mary, entered with pleafure into Norfolk's fchemes. His letters were filled with the moft flattering hopes, and the Queen, who was with child, gave him notice of it. This circumftance added to his joy ; he promifed, before the time of her deli¬ very, ihe fhould have her prifon gates opened by all the nobility of England. The Earls of Shrewibury, Derby, Bed¬ ford, Northumberland, Weftmoreland, Pembroke, Southampton, Arundel, and Suflex, had warmly engaged in his caufe; and their names alone would influence many.
тпапу. But the friend he moft" relied upon, was the Earl of Leicefter, whofe afcendancy over the Queen was well known ; he had taken on himfelf the dif- clofure of the whole to Elizabeth, when that meafure became neceftary. In the • mean time, Norfolk uíèd every means to prevent the Regent of Scotland from ac- cufing Mary to the Queen ; nor was his • artifice unfuccefsful. Murray, after hav¬ ing entered England for no other purpofe, fuddenly returned, without taking any ftep in the bufinefsj a circumftance,which defeated all the meafures of the Engliih Court. But Elizabeth more ftrongly ap¬ prehending from this fome plot to releafe Mary, removed her to Tutbury, and added the Earl of Shrewibury to Lord Seroope, as her keepers. " My fifter ftill followed her, nor could I defert her in fuch a fituation. We had hoped, from the information of the Duke, to find the Earl of Shrewibury inclined to favor her ; but whether he forefaw the end of this unfortunate project, or had deceived Norfolk, he kept a. ftričt watch over
over the Queen's actions, whofe condi¬ tion now confined her to her apartment. "TheDuke, flattered by Murray's re¬ treat, commiflioned fome of his friends in Scotland, to found that nobleman ·η the fubject of his marriage ; they unwa¬ rily laid open more than he intended, and Murray, enraged at having been his dupe, fenrnotice of the plot to Elizabeth. She was on a vifit to Lord Leicefter, who was ill when the letter arrived ; and eon¬ ii J ing to that favorite, the caufe of her agitation, he fent, while the Queen was çonfulting vith Cecil, to warn Norfolk to retreat, as Elizabeth feemed bent on committing him to the Tower. Thun¬ derftruck at this unexpected difcovery, the Duke fet out, with precipitation, for his feat of Kenning-Hall; but, reflecting on the road, that his flight was a ftronger proof againft him than the accufation of his enemies, he returned directly; he was however met by fome officers, fent in purfuit of him, and conducted to Burn¬ ii am. Vol. L F "His
ťí His Secretary pofted off to Ttubury with an account of all thefe proceedings. They funk the deeper into the heart of the Queen, as fhe hoped, by this time, to have been at liberty. She was every hour in expectation of an event which muft publiih her marriage, or load her with infamy. In this hard trial, Lady Seroope fuggefted to her the only fafe way of proceeding; which was, to convey her child, by means of the Duke's Se¬ cretary, immediately after its birth, out of the Caftle, and concealing the caufe of her indiípöfition, wait a more favora¬ ble moment for avowing her marriage. This was the only plan to avoid injuring the Duke's fafety, or her own honour. To prepare every thing againft the time, I took my leave of the Queers as re¬ turning to St. Vincent's Abbey 3 and retiring to a neighbouring hut hired on purpofe, waited with my maid, to re¬ ceive the infant íhe ibould brine: into the world, which was to be carried to the Recefs, and placed under my care, till the fate -of its parents could be afcer- tained. -"This
ct This fad moment was haftened by a fadder event :—Bothwell, who was fup¬ pofed to be dead, found means to convey a letter to the Queen, afluring her the re¬ port v/as fpread only to quiet the Scots, who otherwife would never have fuffered him to reft ; and that he waited in Den¬ mark till the divifions of her kingdom ihould e nable him to raife a powerful party, and attempt her deliverance. Mary, on the firft fight of the well known hand, felt all the horrors of her fare;' ihe fell into ftrong convulfions, which were fucceeded by the pains of labor. She gave birth to two girls—for you, my dear children, are the fruit of this fatal marriage, who, fcarce had been held to the bofom of a mother, before you were divided from it, I fear, for ever. " The faithful Secretary conveyed you with the tendereft caution to me. When he repeated this fad tale, oh ! how my foul wept for the ill-fated Queen ! I vowed ye fliould be mine, for ye were ťat children of misfortune, and never, never have I broke that vow ; diftrefs en- F 2 deared
deared me to you with a parental kind¬ nefs, and fortune gave you to me to con¬ fole me for all her feverity. 'Tis you only have kept alive in my heart the fofteft impulfes of nature. You were cherubs in your infancy, and grew up to chear my days, and embelliíh my foli¬ tude. Full of the great charge vefted in my hands, I fought the earlieft opportu¬ nity of quitting a dangerous place; I brought you fafe to this fpot, attended by Alice, after having you baptized Matilda, the elder (which you was by a few mi¬ nutes) after Lady Seroope, and Ellinor after the Duke's mother. " To return to the Queen of Scots.— She languiihed a long time between ill- health and defpair ; but the Duke found means to aifure her that this misfortune ihould not long feparate them. He applied now to the Pope to annul Mary's former marriage with Bothwell ; the Pope hop¬ ing to find ibme great advantage in the projected union, feemed inclined to grant his requeft -> but the conditions he im¬ pofed
pofed were ίο hard, that the Duke had no hope. "ínthe mesn time,Elizabethfindingan eŕľečtual bar placed between Mary and Norfolk by Bothwelľs being yet alive, and having fome hopes from the ill-heal: h of the Queen of Scots, of feeing an end of her fears, after conveying her to Coventry, ihe releafed the Duke, at the intercefiion of his confiant friend Lord Leicefter. Senfible of the rafhnefs of his former con¬ duci, he refolved to avoid that fault, and made no attempt to fee the Queen of Scots, employing himfelf in hunting and diveriions at Kenning-Hall, till the fpies of Elizabeth, perfuaded he had laid afide his projects, gave up their employment. The Duke Daft from the feat of one friend to that of another, to appearance in fearch of amufement, but in reality to aflure himfelf of their attachment ; and, as if by accident, to vifit St. Vincent's Abbey, and embrace the daughters of his love. You were a twelvemonth old when I conducted the Duke in the night to this Recefs. The captivity and fad fituation F 3 of
of his wife arofe a thoufand times more ftrongly to his mind when he beheld her children torn from her bofom as if the product of *îi (honour, and hid in folitude from every hunian eye ; to ice, and know he could not prevent this, pierced him to the very foul. He fpent the night in viewing you, in recommending you to Heaven, in forming a thoufand filent complaints againft his deftiny, and refolu . rions, which by íhortening his life, perpe¬ tuated on you the e^ils he fought to reme¬ dy. But when the dawn of day compelled him to return to his apartment, he again took you both in his arms, and while the rears oí paternal affection 'iowed gracefully down his cheeks,poured on you a thoufand bleftings i he then gave you to me, and while í was ftilling Ellinor, he fat in a deep reverie, when fuddenly ftarting from İt, he came and ftood by me, and taking my hand— iC I have yet hopes,'my dear Mrs, Mar¬ low, faid he, of bringing thefe infants into life, as the daughters of the lovelier!, the moft amiable of favereigns ; till when, I commit
commit them to you, as the moil facred of all depofirs. Teach them to enjoy an humble rank, and they will adorn a high one; keep them in total ignorance of their birrh tili able to know irs inutility. But if Heaven never allows me to claim them,—if the misfortunes of their pa¬ rents end but with their lives, aft up to the facred character with which I alike inveii you and my filler. Never let them know the Court of Elizabeth, but innocently and happily let them die in the defert where they bloomed.'' " Shades of the honoured Pío ward and the amiable Mary, î have fulfilled your injunctions, exclaimed Mrs. Marlow, (turning with an enthufialtic action to the pictures I have mentioned with fo much refpečt) your words have been ever prefenr to my memory, and my cares have noc beenufelefs. * " Alas, Madam, faid we, dropping with an emotion of awe on our knees, are thefe lovely figures the portraits of our parents? Oh! my father, my tender unhappy father! íhall we never fee you ? Were we never to F 4 be
be held in your arms but while infenfible of that bleifing? and you, my dear mo¬ ther, who brought us forth in bitterncis and pain, fhall we not fpend our lives in foftening yours, and íhed our forrows upon your grave r" u You interrupt, and diftrefs me, chil¬ dren, faid Mrs. Marlow, let me finiih my melancholy tale ; you will, alas ! have hours enough for complaint. " The Duke departed the next day, and in a ihort time, Elizabeth having appointed the Lord» Huntingdon and Hereford in the room of Lord Seroope, the Queen of Scots was deprived of her only comfort, by the departure of his Lady. " The Duke, finding gentle attempts ineíFeciľiiiií, refolved on a meafure hedeem- ed infallible, and entered into a treaty with a trufty Spaniard named Ridolpho, to engage the Duke of Alva to ailift him with ten thoufand men, to be landed at Harwich, from whence they were to march to London, to intimidate Eliza¬ beth. The Duke of Alva confented, and
and even the Pope at length aíhamed of neutrality, took a fhare in Mary's de¬ liverance. Every thing was prepared ;. Norfolk's friends in England only waited the fignal to join him, when one of thofe trifling accidents which difconcert the wifeft fchemes,. rendered this in a moment abortive. " To foment the divifions in Scotland fo much as to keep the Regent employed > and prevent him from interfering in the affair, the Duke fent many fums to be fcattered among the Queen's friends, in that kingdom, at different times ;—but now when the crifis approached, he haď prepared a large bag of gold, which witli a letter he unfortunately trufted to a man quite ignorant of the plot ; the carrier, in putting it up, by fome accident cut the bag,, and the contents filling him with aftoniíhment, he communicated this fin- guiar difcovery to a fervant of Lord Bur¬ leigh's, who was his brother ; this man,. through a hope of getting the gold be¬ tween them, and fuppofing fome myftery was hid ia the letter, períuaded him to> ihew
íhew it to his mafter ; the carrier con¬ fented, and Lord Burleigh eafily per¬ ceiving the plot, though not its ex¬ tent, communicated it to the Queen ; in confequence of which the Duke was arrefted in his bed, and all his fervants imprifoned. " This fatal ftroke owerturned every re¬ maining, hope ; betrayed by his fervants, all the letters the Duke had written and received on the fubject, moft cf which he had ordered to be burnt, were produced againft him ; his very benevolence was conftrued into a crime, and forne mone v he fent to the Countefs of Northumber¬ land, who was in exile and diftrefs with her Lord, became an article in his im¬ peachment. He was condemned, and heard his lentence with a fortitude which melted Lord Shrewibury, whopronounced it, into tears. cf Lady Seroope, diftračted at her bro¬ ther's fate, fell at the feet of the Queen, and left nothing unlaid to move her; but all ihe could obtain was the deferring his execution, for Burleigh had fo ftrongly prepoifefled
75
prepoíľeíľed Elizabeth with the idet that the Duke fought her life, that although no circumftances arofe ta confirm it on his trial, nothing could baniih it from her mind. " Bur what was the fituation of the Queen of Scotland.at this completion of her misfortunes ! An exile from her own country, a prifoner in. another, a wife without a right to that name, and a. mother, while a ftranger to her children; her fate was wound up in the condemna¬ tion of her huibandj and ihe had the poig¬ nant affliction of knowingfhehadraifed the axe againft him, which all her tears could. not avert. Pierced with defpair, ihe conjured the Lady Seroope to allure the Queen he would not only voluntarily confent to remain her prifoner for life, but would give up her claim to the Crown of England, if her fifter (as ihe was. com¬ pelled to ftile her) would free the Duke of Norfolk, and reftore him to his ho¬ nors. This propofal Elizabeth received as a fineíľe, from which ihe only faw how deeply
deeply Mary's heart was linked with his. Even the all-prevailing Leicefter's elo¬ quence failed ; felf-prefervation was an unconquerable principle in the foul of Elizabeth. "TheDuke was beheaded fourteen years ago, when you, my dear children, who were bought with his life, were not above two years and a half old. He died as he had lived, with dignity and honour. " Never was nobleman more lamented: he had endeared himfelf to the body of the people by his courage, generofity, and affability ; and to his equals, by an un- confcioufnefs of fuperiority, which pre¬ vented envy, and an uniformity of con¬ duct, which gained admiration. He was the firft victim to the Queen's fears, nor could ihe have chofen one whofe merits were ftronger proofs of the value lbe fet on herfelf. " LadyScroope detefting too late thear- tifices of the Court, and funk in aifiiction for the lofs of a brother lhe adored, retired hither
hither with her Lord, who had thrown up his employments. Her body partook of the debility of her mind, and foon gave fymptoms of a decay, which reduced her to the grave. " Her temper too was quite changed. This Recefs, which fo lately appeared a horrible dungeon, now feemed to her, as to me, a calm retirement from the odious forms and cares of life. She ipent many days (and would every one, had it not afflicted her Lord) in weeping over you ; in tracing in Matilda the mildly-beautiful features of her friend, and in Ellinor, the captivating graces of her brother. 'Tis to her you owe thefe valuable pic¬ tures. " Eftranged from all fociety, the Queen of Scots gave herfelf up to the blackefl: defpair, ihe had, alas ! no hope to foften her captivity, no bofom to receive her tears; with Norfolk died all profpečt of releafe, and at the fame time all defire of it; what was the uni verfe to her without he embelliihed it ? Would it not have aug¬ mented her affliction to have enjoyed a fo-
a fovereignty flie durft never hope to ihare with him ? " Elizabeth, whofe. fears were always awake from this moment, cut her daily oft* from lome comfort or convenience ; fre¬ quently changed her keepers and prifon i and by her feverity, taught the captive Queen that hatred may be ftronger even than love. " LadyScroope furvived her brother but a twelvemonth, and left no inheritor of her virtues. She recommended you both in the moft fervent manner to her Lord., who folemnly fwore to make a provifion for you fuitable to his fortune, though not your birth. <c Some years paft away, when Lord Seroope, whofe grief was at an end, find¬ ing himfelf tired of the inactivity of a country life, accepted fome overtures the Queen made to recall him. He left to me the charge of St. Vincent's Abbey ; which he has not inhabited fince. "Hurried on by other events, I have hi- .tlierto neglected to mention the return of my
my brother Anthony, in three years after I brought you here. He fixed his refidence in the hermit's cell, devoting his time to the ftudy of phyfic, and the care of ex¬ horting the poor, except at thofe hours you have feen him in ; for his life and mine have been uniform. " Ì have only two circumftances more to mention ; one of which is more afflicting to me, than I once believed, aught reflect¬ ing money, could ever be. Lord Seroope, who has been abroad fome years in a pub¬ lic character, has becon.e the object of the crafty В jrleigh's hatred, or fufpicion, and is now confined ; while his eftates and wealth are feized by the Queen, who knovvs fo well the value of money, that it is too probable my Lord will never be able to fulfil xhe promife made to his wife in your favor. The other is, that during feveral paft years, I have not been able to hold any intelligence with the Queen of Scotland, who fent me fome letters during the firft years of her imprifonment, which, with ihofe ihe wrote to the Duke, I have pre^ ferved,
ferved, with various other teftimonials of your birth. Time may enable her yet to give you the fplendor to which you were born ; for Elizabeth is now ftricken in years, and Mary more worn by forrow than age. Wait then, my dear children, with patience, when I am in my grave-, the deftination of providence, and never claim your parent till fhe pleafes to acknow¬ ledge you. No virtue is more accepta- ble to God than patience. To beftow happinefs, is only in his power ; to de- ierve it, ever in our own. Oh! if my prayers are heard ! if my wiihes afcend to the throne of the Moft High, he will lead you through this world in peace ; he will unite you again to my bofom, in a better 1" Here our generous protedtrefs, our more than mother, ended, clafping us to her heart with an ardor that evinced the fincerity of her words. But what new ideas ; what amazing- feelings did her narration give birth to ! The impulfes of nature taught us to trea¬ fure every word ihe uttered ; for what in 4 the
the hiftory af our parents could be indif¬ ferent? Never did our foiİLude appear fo amiabte—" the Court of Elizabeth I"— Oh my lamented father, could the fole in- fličbor of all thy evils, ever, ever attach thy children! Could lhe who opprefled her equal, and a Queen, innocent at leaft in all that refpečled her, only becaufe ihe was in her power, be capable of alluring two hearts, untainted by that courtly politenefs, which fandifies the errors of a ibvereign, and terms her very vices noble weakneíTes ? But then, to learn I had a mother yet alive ; to believe 1 might one day be re¬ ceived to her arms, only endeared by misfortune -, full of this melting, this heart-expanding idea, Γ would have fought her prifon ; I would have been the companion of it : happy, if all my cares could make her forget for one moment, the rigour of her fortune ; or call to her remembrance, amidft all her complaints, againft the injuftice of the world, that it ftill contained two beings Vol. I. G who
who were willing to return for her the life ihe gave. My duty to Mrs. Marlow alone di¬ vided my heart : ihould I defert her, who had neglected every thing for us ? What ! are the ties of nature to cancel, in one moment, thofe 7 of inclination, gratitude, and efteem ? Oh, no! I owed, it is true, my being to another; but ihe to whom I owed the beft part of that being, the for¬ mation of my mind, the inftilling thofe fentiments which alone make us valuable to ourfelves and fociety, had a claim be¬ yond all others, which nothing but death could diifolve. That awful moment was drawing nigh ; every one that paíľed, ftoìe fomething from the mortal part of Mrs. Marlow. Oh thou amiable faint ! thou woman after God's own heart 1 can I re¬ member the time when thöu wert called from us, without floods of unavailing tears ? Never—never—felfiih as they aie, they will flow, even though fo often ex- haufted,
She
She delivered us a cafket, which con¬ tained the papers ihe mentioned, and di¬ vers atteftations, figned by herfelf, and the late Lady Seroope, and filled with all ' the ornaments of her youth. Then, after recommending us tenderly to Father An¬ thony, flie joined in prayer with him, and all her little family; and in the midft, expired. Oh, Madam, how ftrange, how terrible ro me, was that moment ! I faw Death firft feize on one dearer than myfelf: the manfion in which we lived, now became a folitude indeed—a filence—how fo¬ lemn'! prevailed. In the firft flow of a rational grief, how vaft a vacuum is left in the heart ! to hear no longer the voice which led us through life: to fee the eyes, whence ours drew fortitude, clofe, never more to open : the whole frame allume that awful pallidnefs, every moment in¬ creafes, and which brings fo melancholy a memento to the breaft ! Thefe touch¬ ing ideas cannot always arife, for fome lofľes deftroy the power of reflection and complaint. G 2 To
To attempt interring the duft of Mrs. Marlow in the chapel, muft have a- wakened the fufpicions of the Queen's officers. The fecret of our retirement was in the breaft of only three do- mefticks, and it was highly neceifary to keep it concealed. On this account, a grave was made for her in Father An¬ thony's cell, whither we conveyed her, wrapt in white, and crowned with the fading produce of this world, in imi¬ tation of that ever-blooming wreath promifed hereafter to all, who perfevere in virtue. Grief makes the moft violent impref¬ fion in youth; but, happily, it is the moil tranfient : a little time abated the acute- nefs of ours ; neverthelefs, our folitude being deprived of its ornament, appeared uniform, melancholy, and difgufting. We gradually loft our affiduity in our works, when we no longer promifed ourfelves the great reward of her praife. Father Anthony, who was never a favourite with us, became every day more unpleafant. Mrs.
Mrs. Marlow had always preferved a fway over him, which foftened the -feverity of his manners: that being now at an end, and his temper ftill more hurt by his affliction for her lofs, he appeared a gloomy tyrant ; and the additional care- fülnefs with which he obferved us, laid an odious reftraint on all our exprefiions, and made our meals wear an air of fullen- neíš each party was unconfcious of cauf- ing. Obliged to hide in our hearts all the little follies and wiihes we had been ufed to reveal to Mrs. Marlow without fear, we converfed with the Father only upon moral and indifferent topics ; thus every day was the fame, and each of courfe more tedious, when Ellinor fuggefted a fcheme which promifed fome amufement. This was to explore the paifage leading to the ruins, where we might at leaft breathe the frefh air, and, for one hour» have the pleafure of a little novelty. I readily came into the propofal, having had a curiofity to emerge frora the moment I heard that paifage firft mentioned. It G 3 was
was the full height of fu m mer, and we pitched upon a long afternoon, when we had no fear of being fought for. The pafíage was narrower,, clofer, and damper than the others, but very ihort. We took a torch that we might find th¿ way of opening it. When we drew near the mouth, I oblervcd fome little holes, made doubtlefs to give the concealed pcrfon an advantage. 1 made Ellinor keep bick while I examined the place, but law nothing, however, to awaken any appre- henfion ; along avenue of broken arches, intermingled with brambles and wild wall-ftowers, in the paths of which the grafs grew very high, was all I could dis¬ cern—nothing could mors fully prove the υ n frequented nefs of the fpot. We therefore examined the faftening immedi¬ ately, and foimd it a fmall fquare door wieh two hinges on the top, and faftened 2crofs the bottom by a large bar of iron laid on ilrong hooks. I was unable to open it alone; Ellinor therefore extin- guilhed the light to aiîift me ; but with all our curiofity and courage, th^ fight of the pile of ruins threw us into an u ni veria 1 trepi-
trepidation. On turning round, to ob¬ ferve how the entrance was hid, we perceived a high raifed tomb, at each corner of which ftood a gigantic ftatue of a man in armour, as if to guard it, two of whom were now headlefs. Some famous knight, as appeared by his nu¬ merous enfigns, lay on the tomb. The meagre ikeleton had ftruck an arrow through his fhield into his heart; his eyes were turned to the crofs which St. Winifred held before him. Nothing could be better contrived tha 5 n this entrance, for however rude the fculpture, the or¬ namental parts took the eye from the body of the tomb. The little door, which dropt after us, was one ftone, lined with wood, and fo neatly fitted, that even when unfaftened, it was not to be difcerned. For a long way beyond, the profpečt was wild and awful to excefs ; fometimes vaft heaps of ftones were fallen from the building, among which, trees and buíhes had fprung up, and half in¬ volved the dropping pillars. Tall frag¬ ments of it fometimes remained, which G 4 feemed
feemed to fway about with every blaft, and from whofe mouldering top hung dufters and fpires of ivy. In other parts, ruined cloifters yet lent a refuge from the wea¬ ther, and fullenly lhut out the day , while long echoes wandered through the whole at the touch of the lighteft foot -, the in¬ tricacies of the wood beyond, added to the magnificence of art the variety of nature. We quitted, with regret, our new empire, when the fun left his laft rays on the tops of the trees. We refolved to conceal our ramble, left Father Anthony ihould forbid us to repeat it. Thofe, Madam, who would maintain a lafting fway over young peo¬ ple, muft, by foftening the diftance of age, fteal into their confidence. Love and refpečt. are united, but if fear once clofes the avenues to the heart, no other fentiment ever overcomes îr 5 obedience is then never led by inclination, and we re¬ joice to efcape from haughtinefs or aufte- rity, however venerable the form they aifume. Frora
From what trifles fpring the pureft: pleafures of life ! a profpečt, a flower, a fong, can dilate the heart, while the paflions are yet hid in it, nor have poi- foned its fimplicity, and curtailed its en¬ joyments. Concealed pleafures are allowed to be the greateft ; nor can any remark be more juft ; to deceive the watchful, reflects a compliment on our own fagacity, which renders us infenfible to the error. Almoft every day did we vifit this dar¬ ling fpot, always, like young birds, ven¬ turing one ftep further; and fo often had we ventured without feeing a human be¬ ing, that, at laft, we ceafed to tear. * On one fide the wood fhelved down for a con¬ fiderable way, beyond which the road was cut, and mingled wiih hamlets that gave a promife of fociety, which the rufticity c f their inhabitants would not allow them to fulfil. But you reproach me with lofing time in uninterefting defcriptions.—Ah, Ma¬ dam ! this wood was not always a de· fart. Chance, or, rather I íhould fay, Provi-
Providence, led into its folitary wind¬ ings, the man, of all Elizabeths Court, the moft diftinguiihed and admired; the man to whom nature had been prodigal of every advantage, which art and ap¬ plication had poliihed to the higheft per¬ fection. One day, in calling my fitter, I difco¬ vered in the hollow of the wood and building, a very fine echo; delighted with this, I began finging ; the notes dying diftinčlly away, formed a melancholy fym- phony, when I was interrupted by Ellinor, who quitting fome birds that flew tamely to be fed by her hand, ran towards the Recefs with great fpeed, waving to me to follow her. We had ίο often alarmed each other without any caufe, that I hardly moved, when a noife I heard among the trees (which grew extremely thick on that fpot) alarmed me. A voice, that funk at once from my ear to my heart, conjured me in the moft earned manner to ftop. Notwithftanding the neceífity I found for flying, my eyes longed to claim acquaintance with the features
features to which that voice belonged, and my head, by an involuntary motion, was turned over my ihoulder. The gen¬ tleman had now made a way through the ihrubs which impeded his paifage, and I found it impoffible to retreat but by dif¬ covering a fecret it was highly my intereft to conceal. Perhaps I was not forry to have an excufe to my own heart for a rafrV nefs it was too fenfible of. The irrefolu¬ tion of my attitude, which was that of a perfon ready every moment to run, made him approach with profound fubmif¬ fion and refpečt ; but finding me attempt to fly, though almoft without knowing it, he inftantly ftopt. "By w n ate ver chance, faid he, nature has hid in this fequeftered fpot her faireft productions,, permit me, ladies, to derive an advantage from it. Believe me, you fee a man who needs too much your compaffion and afliftance to venture ta infult you, were fuch а thought capable of intruding into a heart never yet inhu¬ man. Let me conjure you, then, to judge of my intentions by your own, and allo*v
me,
me, if you know of an afylum (and arenot, like me, driven here by fome prefent dif¬ trefs) to íhelter myfelf from aífaífins too well prepared to take my life, for courage to preferve it." The oerfon of him who pronounced thefe words, made their effect indelible. He appeared fomething paft the bloom of life, but his beauty was rather fixed than faded j of a noble height and per¬ fect fyrnmetry, he would have had an air too majeftic, but that the fweetnefs of his eyes and voice tempered the dignity of his mien. His complexion was of a clear and polifhed brown j his eyes large, dark, and brilliant ; his hair gracefully marked the turn of all his features, and his drefs was of a dove-coloured velvtt, mingled with white fattin and filver ; a crimfon fafh inwoven with gold, hung from his ihoulder with a picture ; and the order of the garter, as well as a fo¬ reign one, with which he was inverted, fliewed his rank not lefs diftinguiihed than his perfca.
3
Afto-
Aftoniíhment —anxiety—a thoufand ra¬ pid ideas melting into each other, and, defying language, confufed and filenced mej when Ellinor, more miftrefs of her own judgment, took upon her to anfwer, by directing him to Father Anthony's cell, aifuring him at the fame moment, that this was all we could do to ferve him.— " Ah, Ellen ! cried I, paftionately feizing her hand, he then muft return and be mur¬ dered!" Struck with the vehemence of my own words, my eyes funk to the ground, and changeable bluíhes covered my features, which redoubled when the ftranger took my hand, with a grace all his own, and bowing cm it. " To your generous intention, Madam, 1 ihall at leaft be a debtor—-this is not a time or place for deliberation—My, I be- feech you, while you are yet able ; the villains who purfue me, may not refpečt your youth, your beauty, or your inno¬ cence, and nothing could fo greatly add to my misfortune as the involving you in it. If heaven lengthens my days, I may, perhaps,
94 THE £ E C E S S," kc. perhaps, be able to convince you, him you wiíhed to fave is not unworthy your concern 3 if, on the contrary, this proves my laft, I bave only to requeft you will deliver this (untying and giving me the picture) to the Queen, who will not fail to diftinguiíhthe bearer. How, how did every word penetrate my heart—Ah ! how rapid is the progrefs of paffion, and how, in one moment, does it quicken, nay, double every \"еп{е and fenfibility ! I could, with the fame eafe, have expofed my own bofom to the aftaf- fms as his. Fear furmounted every pru¬ dential confederation, and I was only go¬ ing to ufe the caution of enquiring who he was, when the found of voices, not iar diftant, put that out of my head. Re¬ taining, in mine, the hand which had hi¬ therto held it, I led him through the moil folitary arches to the foot of the tomb ; but our aftoniíhment at fight of him, bors no comparifon with his, when he found this to be our habitation. The time not admitting any explanation, he affifted us to enter, and followed himfelf; when leaving 4 Ellinor
Ellinor to watch the approach of thofe we had heard, I conducted him into the lanre room of the Recefs. With an im- patient gratitude, he fell at my feet to thank me for my anxiety, but inftantly ftarting back, he threw me into fuch a tré¬ pidation, that I funk into a feat without power to look behind me, imagining ei¬ ther that the murderers, or at leaft, ba¬ ther Anthony, muft be at hand ; when looking around him, and at me by turns, he exclaimed, " Merciful heaven! by what ftrange ordination of chine do I find, in this de- fart, two dead portraits of my unhappy friend, and the Queen of Scots, and two breathing ones more lovely than even themfelves: Imagine my diftrefs at this fpeech. I faw, in one moment, the whole of a fe¬ cret preferved with fuch caution for fo many years, committed to a ftranger by an indifcretion, which itili I could not condemn in myfelf. Fluctuating with all the irrefolution of youth, I now knew not whether I ought to deny the truth o* wha
what he had averred, or repofe, in rurn, a confidence in his honour; but the time I had fpent in deliberating convinced him ; for my confufion was an affirmative no¬ thing could overcome. " You are filent, Madam, cried he, but your eloquent eyes imply a doubt it is my duty to clear. Oh ! if 1 was capa¬ ble or wronging your confidence, or be¬ traying any fecret you wiih concealed, heaven would have aba-ndoned me to the fate from which itsfaireft daughters faved me. Look but at that picture, and you will find an indubitable evidence of my fincerity." It was the picture of Elizabeth, given by heríêlf to Robert Dudley, as the in- fcription informed me. " Ah ! have 1 then, returned I, been the happy means of difcharging the debt long owing to Jlx>rd Leicefter ?" 4< How, how have I been fo fortunate, returned he, as to diftinguifh myfelf to you ?—If Ï durft believe, and yet it muft be fo—for how fhould a lefs lovely mother give being to fuch children, and how, otherwife,
otherwife, íhould fuch matchlefs beauty and elegance be hid in a defart ? Tell me, I conjure you, Madam, whether my paft friendlhip with the Duke of Norfolk, does not intitle me to yours ?" " It doc*, indeed, my Lord, cried I, (burfting into tears at the name of my fa- 'ťher) to my eternal gratitude. Your frank' avowal fets me above all diftimtdation î ï s dare own to you, that you have gueíľed my birth moíLtruly. " But, why then were you bnried i ι this folitude ? Why not acknowledged in Trance ?"— " Ah, my Lord ! might I not, with much more reaibn demand, how the favo¬ rite of Elizabeth came unattended and alone to feek, in thefe woods, an afylum 1 from aiTaffins ?" ¿ íC I will reply to you with candor, Ma¬ dam, added he, and thus befpeak your confidence. The favor of a ibvereign may eafily make us great, but many circumftan¬ ces muft concur to make us happy ; and when you hear fome events of my life, •I Jare promíiè myfelf your compaffiOň." ' Vol. 7. H Ellinor,
Ellinor, having executed her commif- fion, rejoined us at this moment. I will frankly confefs I wiíhed her abfence, and had impöfed a taik on her I could never have executed. The prefence of Lord Leicefter had awakened in my mind a thoufand hopes and wiihes unknown be¬ fore. Not.recollecting the improbability of his paíľmg fo many years without form¬ ino· tender attachments, almoft unconfei- onfly I afpired to his heart ; and my apprehenfion of Ellinor's fuperior charms, had made me meanly cheat her of an op¬ portunity of making a rirft impreffion : by fubmitting ţo my injuftice ihe rendered me fenfible of it in the moft generous manner, and the care I then took to dif- оЪу her merit, induced my Lord to ima¬ gine Ì regarded him' with indifference. Thus I reaped a double advantage from my return to rectitude. My fifter informed us, ihe had feen four men examining every part of the ruins : aflured Lord Leicefter muft be hid among them, as one had picked up hi* hat (which he doubtlefs» dropt when he addreiftd
adreifed me) and fwearing never to quit the wood till they had found him, they feparated to purfue the fearch. I turned pale at this terrible intelli¬ gence, which made his departure imponi¬ ble ; but as we every moment expected Father Anthony, who might have a ihare in the alarm the aífaííins would occafion, we agree4 to hide my Lord in Mrs. Маг - low's chamber, which had been hitherto deferted, and a place where none but our¬ felves wøeld feek him. It was now evening, and as the age and infirmities of our maid rendered her ra¬ ther an kicumbranoe than relief, we fet before Lord Leicefter a repaft, perhaps more adapted to his health than his ap¬ petite, 4du* all o«r Retreat at that time afforded ·, and, withdrawing, left him that we might be .ready if our guardian ihould vifit us. As Ihould not have you imagine, how¬ ever we were indebted to nature, thè fur- prifeLord Leicefter exprefted, iprung ohly from our beauty, I muftobfervr tpyou,wc dreft to the tafte of Mrs. Marios rather H 2 than
than that of any country ·, and thofe ha- rbics which covered happy hearts, pre¬ ferve a long fuperiority in the fancy. Clofe jackets and coats, of pale grey, were trimmed round the ikirts and fleeves with black bugle fringe j the collars were thrown back from the throat· and čheft with point lace, and-tied at'the boiom with black taffels ; ; our hair,· which was very thick, covered -our ñecles and fore- beads, falling in'rings from under- cam- brick coifs ; fmall beaver hats, with high crowns, and waving· black feathers, com¬ pleted our appearance, at once too ruftic and too elegant riot to'ftrike-every perfon. •Simplicity is the perfection of drefs,*and Ellinor prefents herfelf in that I. have de¬ fcribed, more beautiful than wheh adorned with all the gaudy trappings pride and luxury has invented. She ltd an arch, α fmiling eye, which, while it indicated obfervation, teemed with good nature ; a complexion perfectly fair, and delicately heightened bv a bloom which came from ihe heart, as its changeablenefs implied ; a graceful ftat;ure,! v and a manner which won
won almoft every one to love her half as well as I did. But 1 need not expa¬ tiate on my Elleno character; though dormant at prefent, it will foon demand your companion in the hardeíl trials of life. Love, Madam, is the parent of arr. When we left Lord Leicefter, without declaring my own fentiments concerning him, I fought to penetrate into my filter's, for that 'confiant error of afiril paffion had infected me, anď I fancied the man wh^ had fubdued my heart, might thofe of all my fex ; every glance increafes a fear fo exquifitej I thought conftantly ΐ read'in her eyes ideas afiiičtingly fimilar to my own ; yet the lively fenfe ífie expreiTed at our indifcretion, which ihe eafily conceived would put us in the power of Elizabeth's favorite, made me very doubtful j for al¬ though the fame apprehenfion occurred to" me, the confidence I already hadin his honour, and the ftrong anxiety I felt for his life,, made it a faint and diitanr alarm. &3 This
This night I firft found my reft dif- turbed by the reflections of my mind. I hoped one moment every thing. I flattered myfelf the fimplicity of my edu¬ cation, and the purity of my heart, would,, by a contraft with thofe of the court, atone for the want of that polifh a court alone can give i the obfcurity of my birth, I found too fenfibly a misfortune, And with¬ drawing my compafiion for the üfíI time from my parents, beftowed it on myfelf- Muet again would I fay y can he defpife the daughter of his friend ? Will he deftine· me to fuifer for an indifcretion in which I had no-ihare ! Oh! let me judge his heart bynvy own,, which already feels the ibvereignty of the univerfe wouid be too< little for happinefs, if he was not to par¬ take it. The calm reft of my fifter fet my heart at eafe reflecting her j I told every mo¬ ment as it paifed,. anxi ou fly expecting that in which Lord Leicefter was to begin his- narration. I had exhaufted the few misfor¬ tunes my imagination bau treafured, with¬ out
out being able to find any which could, in fo well-governed a country, reduce a man of his diftinction to flight; but how, untainted with the vices of the world* could I guefs at the real one ? Without acquainting Lord Leicefter, who had the conduct of our education, we made him fenfible we had reafons for concealing him from every perfon : he had too much politenefs to prefs for an expla¬ nation, and we were compelled to leave him alone till the departure of Father An¬ thony ihould give us an opportunity to liften to his hiftory. The Father, always flow and delibe¬ rate, feemed this day to have gained an addition to" thofe qualities ; inftead of re¬ tiring after dinner, as ufual, he began a long difeouríè (from a momentary impa¬ tience I had difcovered through fome trifling occafion) on the fubduing our paffioiis, eveTy word of which augmented mine, and the lefs we feemed fenfible of his argument, the more he became inclined to prolixity, till my impatience having arifen H 4 to
to t^ie greateft height, allayed of i tfelfj and I learnt, nothing but acquicfcing in all he advanced, could put a period to the tedîotïs converfation. This fineife fuc¬ ceeded?.he departed, and without flaying a moment longer than was neceftary to af¬ certain that circumftance, we releafed the Earl, and conducted him to our great room, as we called it. Lord Leicefter did' not delay to gra¬ tify cur curiofity,.but began his ftory thus: (for to prevent the coldnefs a relater al¬ ways gives to events, and as almoft the very words are familial to my memory, whenever a narration occurs, I, injuftice to-the perfon concerned, ihall give him the power of fpeaking for himfelf.) ' c Sprung from a family too diftirv- íruiíhed to be unknown to vou, ladies, I might pafs over the early part of my life in filence, did not one circumftance in it account for the honours and favours my royal miftrefs has delighted to fhower upon me. The laft of five fons,, I was too young to be fenfible of the lofs when my unhappy
unhappy family were facrificed to their own ambition and epifcopal tyranny. Without any fortune, and obnoxious to thofe who had trembled.at the very name of North·· umberland,. no happier fate had awaited me from the perfecutions of Mary's reign (a time which will fill the lateft with hor¬ ror) had not the Earl of Arundel gene-· rouíly fcreened me from her rage. He had me conducted from a feat of my father's, beftowed on him by the Queen, to Hu* bert Hall, a noble one of his own, where 1 was educated; with his children, without being'known to the. world. The kind¬ nefs of this nobleman well deierves com¬ memoration, fince to the compafiion awakened by my youth and helplefs ftate, nothing was added: but a grateful remembrance of a fmall favour the Lord Guildford had ihewn him, ata time when his religion was more feared, though lefs punifhed, than ours then was. Senfible of all his generofity, Τ neglected nothing to prove my gratitude; and habit giving me the fame advantage in his affection with
with his own children, he feemed to take pleafure in numbering me among them, and propofed to unite me to one of his daughters, who had from her infancy en¬ tertained a partiality for me. Fate was againft him ; for of the four lovely chil¬ dren he had when í was added to the number, \ faw him without one, before 1 was fifteen. Thefe loíľes, far from fouring his temper, only foftened it; he bent himfelf more intently on eftabliihing me in all his fortunes, and was not without hopes of obtaining the reverfion of his title for me. Mifs Linerie, the daughter of his fifter, and the heirefs of a large fortune, befides what ihe might hope from him, was the lady he made choice of for me ; and the agree¬ ment was formed with her father and guardians, without my knowledge; nor did I venture to refufe my confent, when it was demanded ; although I had never feen the lady, and found my heart ur- fcrly repugnant to a match in which it had no ihare. " The
" The prmcefs Elizabeth (whofe noble endurance of an unjirft imprifonment, will reflect eternal honour on heirprudence) was, during the life of her fifter, kept in clofe captivity, various Lords, as various fears obliged them to change, had the charge of her ; the Earl of Ano-ndel was for a ihort time entrufted with the impor¬ tant office, and thus was I early introduced to the knowledge of that pious lady. Far from extending the prejudices iti« might. juftly have imbibed againft my family to rnyíeIÇ ihe was pleafed to honour me with her notice; to take amufement mpoliihing; my manners and accompliihing my mind* Brought up a Catholic, it was to her I owed the enlightening ©f my underftand¬ ing, and the difcretion to conceal a dif¬ ference of opinion from my benefactor,. which might have alienated, and perhaps broken his heart. ' f My attachment to her was as great as her own goodnefs ; ï longed, with the ardour of youth, to fignalizé myfelf in her fervice i nor was it long before ar* occafion offered. The Earl of Devon- ibire,
íhire, actuated, either by love or ambition, flattered himfelfthatthePrincefs'scaptivity would make her gladly embrace a propofal of marriage : he engaged many noblemen who favoured theProteftant religioninthe fcheme, and he imagined nothing was ne¬ ceifary towards obtaining her confent but herknowledgeofthedefign., Toeífect this, he difguifed himfelf as a< gardener, and worked'feveral days in the hope of feeing Elizabeth, but in vain -, for the Queen's orders were fo ftričt, that íhe was allowed for exercife only a long gallery with lat¬ ticed windows, which joined to her apart¬ ment. The awkwardnefsof the Earl in his new employment, of which I was fond, and confequently a competent j udge> caught my attention j, I fpoke to him, and the involuntary tremor, caufed by a fear of detection, ftrengthened my fuf¬ picion ; he eluded my queftions with tao much exačtnefs, to be what he af¬ fected -, and this I mentioned cafually to· the Princefs,while entertaining herin the gallery: ihe liftened to what I· faid at¬ tentively, and then walking to the win- dowj
dow, defired me to point out the man, who was fitting to reft himfelf, with his eyes fixed intently on the houfej Elizabeth remained at the window buried in thought; at laft, turning towards me,ftie demanded, if I efteemed "her enough to run ibme hazard for her fake ? Ί aflured her with an eagernefs proportioned to the de¬ fire I had to ferve her, that 'ílie could command nothing I would not execute with joy. She replied, " had not ihe ex¬ pected fuch an anfwer, iheiiad not ventured fuch a queftion ;—what I wiih thea, continued the Princefs, 'is that, when you can find him alone, you will tell that man, I have feen, andjínowhimj and fince I cannot doubt his intention is to render me ibme fervice, 1 j-equefl: he will fignify its nature by you ¿ but as he may douht the fincerity of л gentle¬ man, whofe intereft feems fo -oppofite to Jiis own, íhew him this jewel, he will remember it, and fay I bid you tell him¿ that it was the gift of his father to me fome years ago." cf The
cc The Princefs then took from her arm a remarkable diamond, and gave it to íny care j I withdrew from her preíênce, and never did night feem longer than that I fpent, before it was poflible for me to execute her command j but refolved not to lofe a moment, 1 arofe very early, and placed myfelf in a thicket, through which I knew he muft pafs. His reluctance to mix with the daily labourers, whofe hap- pineíš reaches not beyond a coarfe meal, and a coarfe jeft, made him ufuaily come alone, and when the reft were paft, I faw him approach. Certain, without know- ingwhohewas,thathemuftbeamanofdif- tinčtion, I drew near him with refpečt, and delivered my embafly ; the confufion and doubt my addrefs occafioned, vaniíhed at fight of the diamond ; he fell into raptures at the goodn eis of the Princes, and no words feemed fufficient to teftify his gra¬ titude for my fervice. <f Acquainted enough with the world to know the placing a confidence is the fureft way of attaching a young mind, he made no fecret of hiš name, and gave into 3
into my hands a letter as valuable to him as his life. Elizabeth, difgufted at the free hope he ex- preft,or perhaps unwilling to remove herfelf itili farther from the throne by offending her fifter, declined the propofal of theEarl, who neglected no inftance to induce her to change her mind, as he could never hope то find a time fo favourable for herefcape ; he fancied at laft, I had an intereft in her rejecting him, and when nothing could prevail with her, laviíhed all his re¬ proaches on me, as the capital obua t le. I know not to what extremities he might have carried his resentment, had not Lord Arundel, to whom die head gardener had declared his fufpicion of xhis man, from having found fonie jewels fewed in his garb, caufed him to be apprehended v but his ill health and «amusties, difabling him from an itniwectoe examination, no¬ tice was fent to tke Cowt, and the Earl conrrøed with caution. The Princefs alarmed at this aocktent, which ihe fore- faw here»eraies wouid conferve to her dif- advantage, without giving her a chance to juftify
juftify herfelf, forgot that calmnefs, wttch conftituted in her early years the meri¬ torious part of her character. I too fen¬ fibly felt her afflictions,.not to participate in this; and to prove my fympathy, formed a defign, which the romantic generofity incident to youth alone could juftify. " Intrufted with.the charge of the cri¬ minal, it was very·eafy forame, in the dead of night, to fet him free; but to render my generofity complete and en¬ fure his efcape, I ordered a horfe to be in readinefs in the thicket as for myfelf, and furniihing him with fome clothes of my own, conducted him to the garden gate, and returned more fatisfied-with my own conduct than I ever yet had been. iC The confequences of his.efcape fug¬ gefted themfelves immediately to Lord Arundel on his receiving ihe informa¬ tion; he fent. for me, as rny. connivance was evident, and enraged at my refufing even a reafon for,it, fave the pţomife I had made, he ordered me to becpnfined, and difpatched a meífenger to court with the full particulars of-the prifoneťs en- 4 br gemen r.
largement. A İhort time, however, abated his refentment; he reproached himfelf for a rafhnefs as culpable as my own, and fent feveral of his fervants to ftay the firft, Kit not finding him return, he was pleafed at once to forget my obftinacy, and, by coming to vifit me, fhew he pardoned my fault —He then told me he had nothing to propofe, that would enfure my fafety, but immediate Might; and not doubting that he could appeafe the Queen, recommended me to fer out immediately for Ireland, to take refuge with his bro- ther-in -law, Sir Patrick Linerie. Over¬ whelmed with his goodnefs, I had no way to atone formy error, but obedience, and prepared for my journey without he- fitation ;—the reluctance with v/hich the Earl parted from me., was a cutting re¬ proach ; but heaven did not fuŕľer me to efcape unpunifhed : I was met on the roai by a party of guards, conducted by the firft mefienger,who, ignorant of the change in Lord Arundel's refolu tion, imagined I was making my efcape likewife, and con¬ jured the officer to feize me : aftonifhed Vol. L I at
at a ftroke fo unforefeen and unlucky, I delivered up my arms without refiftance, and was conducted to the Tower of Lon¬ don. " Some days elapfed without my feeing any but my guard, when I was con¬ ducted before the privy council, and interrogated concerning what I knew of the pri loner and hisdefigns; but re¬ fufing to anfwer, I was remanded back to a clofer dungeon and harder fare. This was repeated feveral times, infomuch that I was aftonifhed at not being tried and fentenced by the law; when one day 1 was agreeably furprized at feeing Lord ,-Arundel enter my prifon. Want of air and proper food had fo altered me, that the good man, neglecting his commifiion, wept like an infant on my neck ; but re¬ covering, and remembering he was not fent to confole me, and had witnefifes at¬ tending to report our difcourfe, he began with conjuring me, by every power he had over me, as a father, a guardian, and a friend, to provide for my own fafety by a difcovery of all I knew, without which my
юу life would be devoted, in fpitc of hi* efforts, and the affliction of lofing the only prop of his age, would infallibly Ihorten, his days. " The gentlenefs of this addrefs, the concern which wrung every venerable ι feature, pierced my foul ; and, although I could not betray thç Princefs, I will candidly confefs I lamented my rafii -offLcioufnefs ¿ but as repentance was fruit- lefs, I had он1у to fummon patience to endure an evil I had brought on myfelf·. neverthelefs, to afflict: the benefactor, to. whofe soodnefs 1 owed all, was a trial in. deed. I threw myfelf at his feet, 1 согь ured him only to remember mv obftina¬ cy, to caft me from his heart, but never to employ a power I revered, to make m odious and contemptible,— aíľuring him an honourabledeathwas, in my eyes, in¬ finitely more to be defired than a life pro¬ longed by treachery and ingratitude.— lie regarded me with attention, and after feeming to deliberate for a mo¬ ment, he proceeded to offer me the moft -fplendid rewards. I ftopt him ¿ " oh, I 2 my
my Lord 1 exclaimed I, can you think fo meanly of the man before you, as to be¬ lieve, after refifting your intreaties, he can poorly be bribed to do ill ; how truly un¬ worthy then were I of the name of your ion ?" " What can. I fay ?" faid he, turning to fome men prefent, and drawing his hands from mine to clafp them together in an agony of grief; <{ how leek to cor¬ rupt a conftancy I admire ? Adieu, my dear fon, I am unequal to the taik im¬ pofed on me. May the God who taught you principles fo juft, blefs and protect vou, whatever your fate -, my days may ftill be fewer than yours, and this is, per¬ haps, an eternal farewell.—Adieu again, I will never forget you ;" faying thefe words, he caught hold of forne perions prefent, who rather carried th^n led him out. " I had before this been fupported by pride, but the fenfe of doing wrong, had never mingled with my feelings till now : my own life had hitherto prefented no- fhing to make it particularly valuable ; but
but that of Lord Arundel, was a bleif- ing to himfelf and his country : and what right had I to ihorten it ? I, whofe peculiar duty it was to watch over his de¬ cay, and fmooth his paifage to the grave ; this remembrance gave me inexpreifible grief. cc I found likewife that the court, from my refolution, imagined the plot of much more confequence than it really was ; yet after fo many denials 1 could not declare the whole, without bringing an imputa¬ tion, more terrible than death, on my memory : I therefore called together every reflection that could fortify my mind, and waited my fate with compofure. " A very few days after this interview put an end to the life of a Queen, whofe cruelty caft a blot alike on her fex and re¬ ligion, and Elizabeth being placed on the throne by the voice of the people, made the opening of my prifon doors one of her firft cares;—flie did me the honour of fee¬ ing me in the garments I had worn in my confinement, and gaverne her royal word that ilie could find no greater pleafure in I 3 her
her fovereignty, than that of rewarding my fidelity. " An allay was prepared to this fatis¬ fačtion; Lord Arundell had expired the night before of the gout in his ftomach ; but, knowing I might claim my fafety from the new Queen, he had left me joint heir with his niece, of his eftates, with only one condition, which was, that of mar¬ rying her ; ordering the covenant ihould be fulfilled in two years, and if either party refufed to comply, his or her ihare of the fortune iliould go to the other.-— All the advantages I could have reaped,. had he left me fole heir of his. wealth, ■\yould never have recompenfed me for his lofs. This blow leíľened the hopes of my life i I had promifed myfelf in the firft moments of my freedom, to convince this nobly difinterefted friend, that independence could never leíTen my gratitude, but would rather increafe an attachment to which the malicious could then afľign no motive but the juft one. tc The Qneen, in the firft years of her reign, loaded me with honors, called v me her
ber knight, nor entered into any amufe- ment in which I was not a party. The obfequious behaviour of my equals, flat¬ tered a vanity latent in my heart, and peiv- fuaded me they faw deeper into her inten¬ tions than myfelf. I was much younger than Elizabeth, and involved in another engage¬ ment, yet the world thought fhe loved me ; but being little d ifpofed to matrimony, and by the Queen's bounty enabled to indulge myfelf, I gave up to Mifs Linerie the eftates of her uncle, without even feeing her, becaufe I would not offend the rela¬ tion of Lord Arundel!, by giving the world realbn to believe I did it from diftafte. This circumftance no fooner reached the ear of the Queen, than it filled her with gladnefs vifible to the whole Court, which confirmed them in the belief 1 was deftined one day tofhare her rank. I had reafon to be convinced, from many circumftances of the Queen's conduci, known but to myfelf, that fhe really had an aŕľe£tion for me, and only waited till lome of the elder nobility, who were my rrvals, had given up the puifnit, I 4 and
and till my years allowed her to make me her choice, without bringing a cenfure on her prudence. " Attached to Elizabeth rather bv era- J о titude than affection, I had patience enough to wait her refolution, and enter¬ tained myfelf rather with the gaieties, than the politics of the kingdom. It was at this time the beautiful Mary of Scotland ihone forth (fatally for herfelf) the rival of Elizabeth, and deftroyed that peace which profperityand admiration had contributed to beftow on our Queen. In the adverfity of her youth, ihe flattered herfelf with fupporting a fuperiority over her opprefibr by a difcreet fubmifiion ; but to meet with fo powerful a rival in beauty, talents, and empire, when at the iummit of her glory, was a ftroke as mor¬ tifying as unexpected : Elizabeth ever fickened at the name of Mary, and, by ex¬ travagant praifes,. pointed the fevere re¬ marks ihe continually madeon her conduci. She maintained with a rigid exačtnefs the advantages ihe poífcíľed, from the fitu¬ ation
ation of her kingdom, over her neighbour, and continually affected to chufe her a hufband from the handfome and diffoluter nobles of her Court. Melvil, the Scotch Ambaffador, among other prefents to Eli¬ zabeth, brought with him a piòture of the Queen of Scots; it was done by â French artift exquifitely ikilled ; this lit¬ tle portrait Elizabeth al ways wore hanging to her breaft : I never beheld it without admiring the fineft imitation art could ex- ecute of the moft finifhed production of nature. One evening while the Queen was con verfing with me, my eyes, by a kind of habit, were fixed on this orna¬ ment : flie fuddenly rofe, and retired in great wrath to her apartment. She fhut herfelf up three days before the extrava¬ gance of her refentment permitted herto- form any refolution j at laft the Countefs of Somerfet came to me with the pic¬ ture, and an aflurance from the Queen, that as ihe perceived I could never be happy without the original, fhe fhould alter her defigns, and had fent directions to
to the Earl of Bedford to propofe me to Mary. " Thunderftruck at fo exceiîive and ri¬ diculous a jealoufy, I neglected nothing to fatisfy the Queen ; I made a thoufand proteftations of my indifference to the Queen of Scots in vain ; Elizabeth's pride was offended, and that was the hardeft to appeafe of all her paffions—ihe infifted on my keeping the picture, and haughti¬ ly forbad me ever to remember her butas my fovereign. <c I retired from her prefence piqued by her haughtinefs, which, though a quality adapted to her rank, is difgufting in her lex. The picture of Mary was yet in my hand—when I remembered the fweet¬ nefs and affability fhe was famed for, the infinite fuperiority of her charms, and the foftnefsof her cnaracler, 1 was grateful to Elizaberh for her anger ; fince it broke the ties my gratitude had formed,. and left me in hope of a happier fate.— I repented a meflhge I had fent off to the Earl of Bedford to forbid his mentioning my
my name, and only wifhed it might ar¬ rive too late.—In my union with Eliza¬ beth I faw I muft be a cypher, for ihe was jealous to excefs of her power: with Mary I might fhare a kingdom, and, by ftudying her humour, render her and my¬ felf happy. All our wiihes are not, how¬ ever, to be fuccefsful. The Queen of Scots, prepofiefied that Elizabeth intend¬ ed to raife me to the throne of England, believed the propofal a jeft, and treated it as fuch. The Earl of Bedford gave inta this, from а conviction that he fhould oblige me by it, and thus I found my^ feif, after having afpired to two Queens, without hopes of either. " From the moment of my being neg^ ltcìed by Elizabeth, I had found myfelf in the condition of thofe favorites who. fall from the pinnacle of greatnefs to ob- feurity. After feeing my prefence make a circle, and my apartment a.Court, I ap¬ peared alone, or continued in folitude. Vanity, and not generofity, had governed me, and of thofe who followed,, no one really loved, and all envied me ; they re¬ joiced
joiced in my difgrace, and ridiculed my ambition. Whatíhall I fay, ladies ? fhall I give falfe motives for my actions, or con- fefs faults my youth may excufe ? I muft be fincere, whether that fincerity intereits you in my favour or otherwife. tc Refolved at all events to have the pleafure of mortifying my enemies—1 wrote to the Queen, aiturin g her, the ho¬ nors fhe had loaded me with, were incum¬ brances, fince fhe had withdrawn her favor, and if mv offence (unwitting as it was) exceeded forgivenefs, I requefted to refign my employments and retire toKenilworth. This letter 1 took an opportunity of pre- fenting to her in the gardens of Sheen, and, far from pronouncing a íevere fen- tence, (lie was pleafed to ih e d tears, and tenderly reproach me on the lightnefs of my attachment; on which Itook thepicture of the Queen of Scots, and cafting it into the Thames, entreated her to bury with it the remembrance of my fault.—She gave me her hand ro kifs, and I had the pride of leading her to the Court, re-inftated in her favor. « This
" This difgrace taught me a ufeful lef- fon ; which was to employ my power but to ferve the worthy, the only way to fe¬ dire friends and avoid making enemies. I learnt how to rate juftly all who fur- rounded me, to defpife flattery, and by never elevating myfelf, put it out of the power of malice or envy in future to hu¬ miliate me. The Queen was preíľed by the Parliament to marry ; ine had pro- mifed to deliberate on the propofal, and my intereft in her heart, made me hope a favorable conclufion to my fuit, when an unfortunate chance overturned all my fchemes and hopes, and made me trem¬ ble whenever the Queen opened her lips to mc, left I ihould hear a relb¬ lution which was fo lately my utmoit wifh. * ( Sir "Walter, the head of the Deve- reux family, was lately created Earl of Eíľex ; he had been fent to Ireland to fob- due the rebels, where he married. He returned to Court to prefent his bride, whom 1 had fc arce regarded a moment, when my heart became fenfible cf a fen¬ timent
'timent unknown to it before. I was am- 'bitious of her notice, and envied rhe courtiers who furrounded her; I yet trem¬ bled to approach her, and the compli¬ ment of introduciion was delivered by me with a low voice and timid air; the cold dignity of her manner, and her inftantly turning from me to converfe with Lord Sands, affronted me highly. I examined all I had faid or done, but not finding any thing exceptionable on my part, I condemned her as a flattered girl, vain -of accidental advantages even to folly; I rretired with the Queen without taking any farther notice of Lady Eifex. The Queen gave a ball that evening : I dreft feveral hours too foon, and continually fancied the clock ftood. 'Not doubting that I had the power of mortifying Lady Eifex, I determined to ufe it; even her Lord feemed United in her offence, though I had no complaint to make againft him rbutthathe had married her. In ihort, pleaf- -ed or angry, I could think of nothing but her, and though I ftaid at home till quite 4 tired
tired, I found myfelf the firft in the draw¬ ing room. " The Queen learning I was there, and pleafèd with my attention, which ihe placed to her own account, fent for me to herclofet; among other queftions, ihe aikcd how 1 liked Lady Eifex, and the afperity with which I cenfured her, was far from d i (pleating Elizabeth, who had a talent for fatile and was fond of all who excelled in it. " We entered the room at the fame mo¬ ment with the lovely bride, more obvi- ouily fo as more adorned. The Queen turned to me who was leaning on the back of her chair--·" I think, faid ftie, my Lord, I muft take the liberty of ap¬ pointing you to dance with Lady Eíľex, that the Court may have an opportunity of admiring how well I have matched her." " I thought, returned I, your Ma- jefty had promifed me the pleafure of enter¬ taining you y and, furely Lady Eíľex has matched herfelf much more happily." u Lord Leicefter, madam, faid that Lady in an ironical tone, is uniform in his opi¬ nion
шоп refpecting me, and for once I agree with him." Saying this, fhe gave her hand to her Lord, who honoured the younger Cecil with it. Amazed at a pique, I could no way explain, I remained in a füllen re¬ verie, till the Queen interrupted it by aiking, if 1 did not think Lady Eíľex's wit inclín ed to the fevere ? I replied " when I knew whether fhe had any fenfe I· íhould judge of her wit, but that at pre¬ fent ihe was perfectly unintelligible to ine." Why, furely my Lord, cried the Queen, leaning on the arm of her -chair and raifmg her eyes t© mine, you know ihe was Mifs Li..eric?" What a fund of intelligence was conveyed in thefe few words, and what a revolution did they make in my mind!—To find I had refufed, and in refufing infulted the wo¬ man on whom my happinefs muft depend, •òr, rather, from whofe refentment my mifery was begun.—Pride, anger, and ambition vanifhed; my heart overflowing with chagrin and love, applauded her juft difdain, and owned ihe could never de¬ fpife me for my ftupidity half fo much as ? I did
I did myfelf. Infenfible to all the dtŕ courfe of the Queen, my eyes nurfued with a vain and late regret the beauteous bride, till the meanders of the dance eluding my fight, I ftruck my head in a tranfport againft the Queen's chair, and being obliged to excufe myfelf,complain¬ ed of a vertigo and retired. cf I was interrupted in the midft of the difagreeable reflections arifing from th* paft fcene, by Elizabeth's phyfician, whom fhe had gracioufty ordered to attend me. He eafily invented a reafon for a malady his arc could neither caufe or cure, and having: directed me to be bled, left me to repofe. The Queen fent feveral mef- fengers to enquire after me, and when I paid my duty next to · her, almoft gave me a relapfe by difmifiing her attendants. Perplexed and uneafy, I hardly dared to raife my eyes, or anticipate her de¬ termination. I met hers, which feemed equally irrefolute, and a paufe of a few moments was at laft interrupted by Eli¬ zabeth. Vol. L К * She
ťC She informed me, that after the moft 'mature deliberation, lhe founds that •although íhe preferred me to all men cxifting, ihe could not by marrying make me happy, or be fo herfelf; that in yielding to this weaknefs of her heart, fhe ihould for ever fully her reputa¬ tion for wildom, which would always, while fingle, teach her how to manage other potentates, either by hope or fear ; and. that fuch ,a degradation, ingenerai opinion, would too fenfibly affect her.— Leicefter, faid fhe, thou feeft my inge¬ nuous motives—I know thou loveft me, and to make thee fome amends for the grief this muft give thee, be aifured by our royal word, that we will never marry another man however glorious his rank. Confider, therefore, whatever matrimo¬ nial treaties are on foot as tubs thrown out to the whale, and remember Lliza- beth's friendfhip íhall diftinguiih thee al¬ moft as much as her choice could. " I kiffed the hand ihe held out to me 'With apparent chagrin, but in reality fhe had relieved my heajrt from a heavy load. .1 ven-
I wentured to admire a fortitude which reduced, me to defpair, and 4 thus amply' gratified that vanity, which in her, takeá the lead of fenfibility. Neverthelefs, I was ftruck with her demand of a folemn pro¬ mife on my part, never to marry without her confent, and confidered it ás a felfiih and arbitrary exaction unknown to a ten¬ der heart. " The whole Court learnt I had loft mf hopeswithout lofing my influence. The Queen, juft to her promife, gave me à palpable fuperiority on every occafion, and I only defired it to make my homage more gratifying to the fair Lady Eifex, who ihewed too much anger to rob me of hope. Had (he appeared equarry indif¬ ferent and polite, ihe would totally have difcouraged me, but a man may ieafon- ably flatter himfelf with the profpečt of a pardon, as 'long as a lady 'deigns to appear offended. I made every poiftble conceffion to her pride, and the pleafure ilie found in humbling me, interwove me infenfibly with her happinefs. .. К г " I Ihould
** I mould fpare to your virgin delicacy, ladies, the acknowledgment of a difgrace- ful and guilty love, was it not abfoliitely eflential to mark the remainder of my ftory. There was a levity and incon- fiftency in the manners of Lady Eíľex, which foon awakened her Lord'sjealoufy -, andas fhehad always been indulged to folly, me could fo ill brook any reftraint, that it threw her the more readily into my power. The belief that I was loved alone by her, and had my fel f reduced her to make another choice, enabled her to pre- ferve a merit with me even in her fall. The few hours we could ileal, were la- vifhed in the moft ardent aŕľečlion. I grew almoft as jealous of her as her Lord, and bleft the caution with which he İh ut her up more and more, even from me, fince it to¬ tally excluded all other lovers. The offener I faw her, however, the more ardently I de- fired it ; and when at laft her Lord was ap¬ pointed to thecommand of theforcesin Ire¬ land, whither he defpotically refolved to carry her, my раШоп and grief kept pace with
with hers; the Court prefented nothing to me worthy to fupply the lofs of one fo amiable, and had not the Queen give» me a command in the Low Countries, I know not how I Ihould long have con¬ cealed the emptinels of my bofom now its tenant was flown. " Several years paft away in a variety о feenes without my feeing Lady Eiľex, when the early death of her Lord left her at liberty to fix her refidence in England. I returned home on the firft intelligence. The fober widowhood in which íhe lived, made it difficult for me to gain admiifion to her prefence, which I at laft effected by a difguife. Her beauty ihone through her fables with new and more touching graces, while my heart betrayed me into ißvoluntary exclamations and careíľes. She wept, and retreating from my arms, aíľured me, the only action of her life ihe repented was that attachment which had fullied her innocence, and which fhe was refolved to expiate by eternal feclufion and repentance. All my intreaties Were rruitlefs. She burft К 3 from
,from me into an apartment where İhe told me, her brother, Mr. Linerie, was, who inftantly rufhed into the room, and de¬ manded by what right I had prefumed to detain her? I anfwered truly, by that of a lover alone, and flattered myfelf with gain¬ ing the intereft of this young Irifbman in favor of my pretenfionr, by obtaining a .confiderable poft for him the next day. I eafily difcerned her aim was a marriage with me, which from every reafon, and more efpecially the promife I had made to- the Queen, I wifhed to avoid. Endlefs négociations were carried on, and thefe fermented the weaknefs of my heart to fuch a degree, that I forgot her error. Va· nity but too eafily perfuades a generous man to pardon a frailty of which he is the caufe and the object. Lady Eifex liftened very readily to an honourable propofal, and gave me at Greenwich an exclufive claim ta that hand fo long\ fo paftionately beloved. " Anxious to,concealtIiisevent from the Queen, who rigidly maintained over me the rights of a jealous lover, while fne dii claimed
difclaimed the title, I vifited my bride very rarely, and my affection rather en- creaíêd than diminiihed ; in fact, 1 was the more completely happy when with, becaufe I hourly experienced, in every abfence, the impoffibility of being happy without her." To return one moment to the poor Matilda i from the moment I x>rd Leicef¬ ter named this Lady, my heart prefaged her his wife ; the doling evening had luckily prevented the various changes of my countenance from being vifible, but the Iuppreft fwellings of my heart at laft conquered my fpirits, and I funk back at this part of his recital, if not fainting, at leaft fenfelefs. Lord Leicefter,. alarmed, united with the terrified Ellinor to recover me ; when fearing my full eyes would betray my heart, I urgedindifpofitioB y and bcfought his excuic for retiring to my chamber. He made many apologies for having fa¬ tigued me, to which Ellinor alone could ànfwer. ^s foon as he left us, giving К 4 way
way to an irrefiftible impreffion of fad- refs, I threw my arms round Ellinor, and wept bitterly ¿ her generous tears ftreamed with mine, and we feemed fully to mingle fouls without exchanging one word. " I underftand you, my beloved finer, faid ihe, and will fpare your delicacy, but you wanted courage to hear the whole, and this lady is not immortal. Think better of yourfelf and your hopes, my dear Matilda, for Ellinor becomes a prophet in your caufe, and fays Lord Leicefter and you were born for each other." This little fally could not call the fmile ftie wiíhed for into my cheek. 1 was the more hurt at this event, becaufe 1 ¿had, (though I know not för what reafon except that we all too readily believe what we wiih) overlooked it in my arrangement of fuppofitions. I paft the whole night in walking about my room, and lamenting. <c He is married ! I would exclaim; that invaluable heart and hand are then ano¬ ther's ! Oh, juft Heaven ! have, I then in¬ herited my mother's fate with her fea¬ tures ?
tures ? Is a guilty paffion ordained to. be the crime and fcourge of all my race ? ìet me at leaft bury it in my bofom. Yes, cried I, with confcious dignity, 1 may be' unfortunate but not cenfurable : the daughter of Mary Ihall be worthy the Stuart line. When this admired Leicefter returns into the world, he Ihall remember with reverence this innocent afylum, and the family of Howard Ihall be ftill dear to him. Oh may he return in fafety to that moft happy of wives ! while I wafte my youth in a folitude only pleafing by its having once been his Ihelter." Self would then predominate, and floods of impaffioned tears waih away every juft re- folution. Alas, I forget to whom I am writing ; the language and thoughts of levers muft be uniformlv the fame, and I can only excufe thefe rhapfodies, by ob¬ ferving a tender heart traces its own emo¬ tions under the name of another with á melancholy pleafure. Lord Leicefter, at the ufual hour, the nett day refumed his narrative· " The
" The wars in the Low Countries car¬ ried me abroad half the year ; and the re¬ mainder I divided between the Courtand my Lady. Security perhaps produced careleifnefs, and the French Ambaflador, whofe Court was interefted in depriving me of the Queen's favor, as the chief obftacle to her appointed marriage with the Duke of Anjou, by ibme unexpected vigilance traced out the fecret of my marriage, of which he immediately apprized Elizabeth. I had the vexation one morning to receive the moft marked tokens of her difplea^ fure, for ihe is but too well known to give an unbounded licenfe to her tongue, when¬ ever her paflions are awakened. She ended her virulent reproaches with ordering me immediately to join the army in the Ne¬ therlands, and never to return without her permiftion. Thunderftruck-both with the difcovery and her conduit, I bowed and retired, without attempting to offer a fingle word in my own defence. The Queen made me however fome atonement for her violence, by refufing the Duke, when
when every preliminary was fettled; which cruelly difappointed the French Ambaf- fador. " No longer condemned to filence, my retinue efcorted Lady Leicefter to Kenii¬ worth Caftle, as the fafeft refidence while" the Queens anger continued; and Γ obeyed her in departing for Holland. I foon learnt that Elizabeth's chief reafon for not recalling me,was the being obliged- to pardon my wife, to whom, by a 'moft- unaccountable whim, ihe had transferred all her refentment, and whom ihe hoped 1 to punifli by continuing to feparate us· The times, and a variety of reafons^ made our correfpondence uncertain*; months fometimes elapfed, and without I* fent an expreís, I obtained no news of one fö dear to me. I was unjuft enough to im** pute the difficulties by turns to the Queen and my enemies; and piqued at Eliza¬ beth's ungenerous motive for exiling rne>. refolved to pafs over incognito into Eng¬ land, and conduct Lady Leicefter into>· the Netherlands, or, if flie was averfe to* that meafure, endeavour to appeafe the- Queem "I ex.-
íf I executed my defign fo happily, that my arrival at my own Caftle was the firft news of my intention to Lady Lei¬ cefter, whom I found confined to the Houfe by indifpofition. It ftruck me her joy was nearly allied to forrow ; but the thought was momentary, and I imputed it ţo her malady. Her beauty appeared much impaired, but placing the altera¬ tion merely to grief for my abfence, it became a new call upon my tendernefs. She told me the terror ihe was under ·, for Elizabeth had made her almoft a prifoner in her own houfe, where ihe had paffed fifteen months without any company ex¬ cept her brother, who had kindly fol¬ lowed her into this folitude to fix her in¬ fluence over an ungovernable train of fer¬ vants to whom ihe was a ftranger. I re¬ turned Lineric every acknowledgment, and complimented him with a fine dia¬ mond given me by the States on a former occafion. " A long abfence from this manfion where art and nature unite to produce al¬ moft the effect of novelty, piade it ap¬ pear
pear a moft heavenly retreat from the noife and buftle of a camp. I paiľed the afternoon in furveying the gardens, and directing many neceíľary alterations. " Infenfibly fatigued beyond bearing, I confented, at the perfuafion of my Lady, to retire and endeavour to reft an hour early in the evening. I had flept feveral, when my valet, Le Val, threw open the curtains, and with a countenance full of horror and intelligence, deprecated the wrath fuch a rude falutation muft necef- farily occafion. " Amazed beyond expreflion, I bad him recollect himfelf, fince, while thus confufed, I could not rely on his ac¬ counts, however kind his intention." " Pardon me, my Lord, faid he, the liberty your fafety reduces me to take, of founding the truth of the grievous intel¬ ligence I am obliged in duty to reveal, by fitft queftioning your Lordftiip : have you remarked that almoft all your domefti«ks are changed ?" <l I was ftruck with conviction by the queftion,
? .queftion, though I had not made theob- fervation. fC No, no, faid he warmly, there was , a deviliih reafon for that." " Beware, Le Val, returned I, of what -you would infinuate; For if, without proofs you dare afperfe— " " I have but too fufficient reafons, my JLord, added he, íhaking his head, but ,they fball never pafs this bofom if you give an affirmative to my next demand.— Are you convinced, my Lord, that man ; is brother to my Lady who is called -fo Г «I hefitated." * f Let us hope not, faid he with vehe¬ mence, left we ihock humanity j for as fure as one God made them both, they are but too well agreed/' " Horror-ftruck with the idea, my heart fickened, and involuntarily admit¬ ted a doubt but too many circumftances »corroborated.—Her love of retirement might proceed more from fuch an attach¬ ment than regard for me—Nay, even her -marriage be but.an honourable veil to the 4 loofctt
îoofeft connexion. I had neither power nor will to filence the poor fellow, who went ön with an honeft eagemefs— ţc Of all the fervants long retained by your Lordlhip, two only remain, and thè reft are a fet of ungoverned Iriih, attached by country to both .brother and fifter. The fewer owns he kept his place by filence and fubmifiion, and dame Mar¬ gery, the houfekeeper, moft probably, by managing all my Lady's fecrets. But the fewer will make oath of my Lady's intercourfe with Linerie, and, that far from wiihing for your return, they are alarmed at it beyond meafure, as my Lady expects every hour to be delivered. Nor is this all." " Give me time to breathe, Le Val !, cried I, for this horrible intelligence un^ mans me." " I could not be filent and know you wronged, my Lord, though your fword were to rip out my heart. But I fear the worft—I fear left fomething is now hatch¬ ing againft your life, for my Lady is ; in. Margery's room, directing fome carp in the
the manner you uíêd to like fo Well ; and I faw Lineric*s lêrvant fet out for Coven¬ try, from whence he is this moment re¬ turned with a horfe his fpeed has half killed." "Well, well, faid I, beaflured I fhaîl confider over all you have faid, and will avoid tafting the diih you mention." " Ah, my Lord ! that will only con¬ vince them you fufpečt their diabolical intention, and the fervants of their own placing form a little army in the houfe. If my Lord will hear the advice of his fervant, I have a way to propofe, which ^ill have no ill confequence if no ill is meant; if otherwife, it will fall only on the contrivers. Another difh compofed r of the fame ingredients, the fewer can place at the botom of the table ; when the fupperis ferved, I will pretend tobedrunk, and making a fcuffle in the adjoining hall, my Lady and her brother will naturally take the alarm, and interfere j the fewer can in the interim change the two difhes, by which means my Lady will tafte the diih
diíh of her own preparing, and muft abide the event." This plan was of itfelf fo innocent and well contrived, that I refolved to au- thorife it, and Le Val, fatisfied with his difcovery, retired. He had indeed re- lieved his mind, but what a weight had he left on mine ! The bare idea had filled me with a thoufand horrors. Every thing confirms us in either love or hatred,—The filence of my friends when my marriage was difcovered; her tears, her altered perfon, that remiflhefs in writing, for which I had in my own heart cenfured the Queen-—all, in ihort, I fo lately thought ineftimable proofs of her love, now rofe as terrible prefumptions of her guilt; and yet, when I faw herenter my chamber prefently after, and tenderly ac¬ cufe me for fo long an abfence, I could Have received a mortal draught from her hand with lefs pain than it coft me to fuf- peČt her. The day was clofing, and the table covered when I entered the Hall, occali- oaed by my long fleep. Le Val began the Vol. I. L preme-
premeditated uproar, and Lady Leicefter with her brother flew towards the door,- whence the attendants had before depart¬ ed, eager to encreafe the bufile. The faithful fewer, on whom I kept an eye, exchanged the difiies in the manner agreed, and we j-eturnrd to the table. I obferved to my Lady that ihe trembled violently, ♦which fne naturally enough attributed to the alarm. Afifuring me ihe had herfelf prepared the carp, ihe infifted on my do¬ ing honor ro it, and urging her to bear me company, I accepted her invitation. An involuntary emotion made me every moment ready tO prevent her tafting the exchanged difhj hut the pleafure with which the infamous Linerie feemed to fee me fwallow the fuppofed death, filenced me. Scarce was the table clear¬ ed, when Lady Leicefter funk back in ftrong convulfions. Confcience made Linerie exclaim, " poifon, poifon!" Every common antidote was adminiftered in vain; ihe was borne to her chamber in an hopelefs ftate, and 1 retired to mine to meditate alone, This terrible conviå ion of
•of the unhappy fate prepared for me on my return from an exile ihe alone had oc- caiioned, converted my love into horror and averfion. She raved dreadfully at in- tervals,and perfiftkig to the laft I had poi- foned her, expired early in the morning. The blackncfs of the foul difFufed itfelf over the body, and the proof of her infi¬ delity was too obvious in her perfon. " Whether Lineric's conftitution was lefs liable to infection, or that he had tailed the carp more fparingly, it was not till ihe expired that he found himfelf af¬ fected ; but the dole was too deadly for him to efcape. Convinced by his filler's exam¬ ple, that there was no effectual antidote, he fummoned all hislrifh domeftics into his chamber. The faithful Le Val chofe that moment to enter mine, and inform me of the confultation, which he infifted would produce fome fatal event, if I did not confent that moment to mount horfes which were ready, and attended by him and Williams fet out for London j this ftep would give me the advantage of firft re·· preienting the fact, while it fecured my L 2 pcrfon
perfon from any favage revenge ; the fewer in the interim, by the intervention of the tenants, might feize on the Caftle the moment the ruffians abandoned it in pur- fuit of me. " This advice had its due weight with me, and quitting the Caftle by ftealth, I rode off with Le Val and Williams from my own fervants as the worft of aífaífms, and from my home as my grave. It was now day-break, and we had not pro¬ ceeded many miles, when, from the top of a hill, we perceived a party apparently purfuing î having the fleeter horfes, we kept the advantage for near twenty miles, when, by taking fome íhorter road un¬ known to us, we faw them very near. St. Vincent's Abbey appeared at the fame moment in fight, which Le Val conjured me to feek, giving him my cloak to mif- lead the aífaífins. We had no time for deliberation ; I ftruck into the wood, where, finding my horfe an incumbrance, I left him to bis fate, and was endeavour¬ ing to make my way through the bullies, without any certainty of bemg right, whsã
v/hen I had the happinefs to meet fo fair a deliverer." Lord Leicefter thus concluded his fto¬ ry ; but oh ! how much of my life had evaporated during the relation ! The un¬ conquerable anxiety with which I follow¬ ed him, united my heart for ever with his ; and convinced me, no difparity of either fituation or years can reftrain the eager fentiments of youth feeking for merit. As the only acknowledgment for his no¬ ble franknefs, 1 in turn related the little tale already repeated, of our melancholy birth, and undecided fate. Tears, com¬ pofed of every melting fenfation, feemed to fall from my eyes on his heart. Thofe fine eyes were teemingwith fomegenerous confolation, when a fudden noife obliged us to feparate. Hardly could he regain the chamber, hallowed as Mrs. Marlow's, ere Father Anthony joined us : the na¬ tural aufterity of his air heightened by fome prefent chagrin. He threw himfelf into a chair, and preferved a long filence ; which, fear of his having pene¬ trated into our myftery, prevented my Ĺ 3 breaking.
breaking. Confufed beyond defcription, a thoufand colours chafed each other from my cheek ; nor had I power to* raife my eyes to my fifter, who,,accuftomed equally to love and honour me, feemed, in hold¬ ing my hand, to have gained a fufficient protection. "Unfortunate children ! cried he, with a deep figh, Heaven has at laft completed the calamitous circumftances under which you were born : deftined to an imprifon¬ ment as lafting as your royal mother's, you have but the melancholy advantage •of chufing it. Lord Seroope is dead in the confinement and difgrace with which 'Elizabeth rewarded him : his lands, his. 'honors, the very fpot on which you ftand, aH, are the property of a diftant relati¬ on, and you now fee before you.your only friend—a feeble, helplefs friend ;. bending daily towards that grave you alone render difpleafingto hirr¿ The moment may yet come, when the rights of your mother will afcertain yours, and all I can do for you in the interim, is to convey you fe- cretly into France, and place you under - " the
■the protection of the family of Guife ; their prudence or their pride, may equally induce them to fecure you an afylum in a monaftery. " The terrible alternative implied in thefe words, froze up my blood ; and the beatings of my heart died away ;—to be¬ come an exile from England—to forget' Lord Leicefter—or to be forgot by him—- to be delivered up a martyr to the family of Guife j perhaps by them tyrannically buried in a cloifter, a perjured felf-con- demned wretch, whofe foul was full of an earthly image, while devoting itfelf to its Maker. All the arguments and en¬ treaties Father Anthony made ufe of in a' long harangue,, were loft upon me ; I knew him to be fpeaking but by the mo¬ tion of his lips, and offered up to God, in my tears, a confutation of all. he could advance. He left us not till too late for another interview with Lord Leicefter ; and I paft the night in an anguiih time can never erafe from my memory—pale r lanrefreihed, either by fieep or drefs, I met L 4, my
my Lord next morning, more like a fpectre than myfelf. He took my hand, and expreflmg his furprife but by a glance, killed it in tender filence. I did not dare raife my eyes to his, and tears fteal ing from under their lids, fell on the united hands. Oh, how much Was expreffèd in the filence ofthat moment ! I feemed to underftand all I wifhed, and at length refpired freely. Ellinor, unreftrained by the tender de¬ licacy which actuated me, declared to Lord Leicefter at once the fate allotted us, and her utter deteftation of it. The eagernefs with which he entered into our intereits, befpoke fomething ftronger than friendlhip. A thoufand times he aflured Ellinor of his efteem and affection : to me he faid nothing, but prefling the hand he ftill held, its trembling confeíľed it knew all the diftinction. A ray of pleafure once more enlightened my foul : methought at that moment I could have borne every evil fortune can inflict. No, he will never forget me, fighed I to my¬ felf, in whatever remote folitude I am again
again loft to him ; this dreary Recefs, the daughters of Mary, in their ruftic garb and lowly manner, will eclipfe all the glories of a court, all the gifts of Eliza¬ beth. For the remainder of his ftay, * ferene delight, which neither arofe from, nor can be conveyed by language, ani¬ mated us alike ; the intercourfe of the eyes and heart took place of that of the tongue, and perhaps nothing was more remote from our thoughts than what we converfed about : till my Lord fixed my attention by declaring he would no longer intrude on our goodnefs than till the next morning. A figh accompanied theie words, and a figh was my only reply. Ellinor, who ever treated him with a freedom infeparable from a difinterefted regard, infifted he ought not to quit fo fafe an afylum raihly. He replied, he ihould bury himfelf with us, did he not hope to revint it in a more acceptable manner. Breaking off at theie words with an irrefolution and timidity which ihewed he had not faid all he intended, after paufing a few moments he refurn- ed,
ed, Cf Can you pardon, Ladies, a friend¬ lhip perhaps too officious ? But fince your natural fupport, and juft hopes have failed, may I flatter myfelf you will have the goodnefs to fufpend your refoluticns re¬ injecting the future, till I can appear with honor again before you ? A ihort time is due to clearing my own fame ; for ill would it become me to claim the guardi- anihip of theRoyal Mary's beauteous chil¬ dren, while loaded with opprobrium." He was proceeding, when the cough of Father Anthony itartled us. Scarce had Ellinor time to lead my Lord out at one door, ere he entered at another to vifit Alice, who had funk under the fatigue and grief attending the lofs of her mif¬ trefs. With an art I had newly learnt, I fnatched up a book, in which Γ affected to be fo abforbed, as not to hear him tilL at my ihoulder. With real perturbation I arofe on his fpeaking; and, as ufual, was preceding him to Alice's chamber, when he called me back in hafte,- and pointing to the ground, bade me give ^ him what lay there» Bút what words can expreís-
'čxprefs the various emotions which ran through my frame, when I perceived it was the picture of Elizabeth, which the 'Earl had, in retiring, fomehow or other dropt! Inftead of obeying,. I fnatched it up, and attempted to hide it in my bo¬ fom; when, with a ftrong arm, the Fa¬ ther wrefted it from me, and read in my features half the myftery : the name en¬ graved on it, the date, all put him out of doubt as to· the owner, and nothing re¬ mained but to learn how I had come by it. Without the finefľesof my fex on the occafion, as foon as my terrors and tears permitted, I related the whole adventure- incoherently. With his cuftomary ítem- nefs, he overwhelmed me with reproaches. " Raih girl, cried he, could no human prudence fave thee ? Did not the loft Saint, whom I muft ever lament, en¬ tomb herfelf merely to preferve a fecret x the folly of a baby's curiofity betrayed ere her afhes were cold I What confidence can be placed in the favorite of Elizabeth,. whofe intereft it undoubtedly muft be, to flatter thofe in whofe hands his life now
now is, and then deliver them up to exalt himfelf by the total filent ruin of the Stuarts ? prudence directs us rather to fecure ourfelves by retaining him for ever here." " Firft, may I periíh on the block where my father ended his days ! cried I, in a tranfport of love and grief: let me, oh God, rather be a martyr to the fins of man¬ kind, than fubmit to partake them! What! be more cruel than the aífaífins, from whom we faved him ? Pardon me, Fa¬ ther, cried I, recovering myfelf; but you know not the ftory or the heart of Lord Leicefter, who, far from betraying us, is anxious to become our guardian and protector." " Such a guardian as the wolf is to the lamb, retorted he acrimonioufiy—who, oh, who would willingly have the ma^ nagement of youth î Unhappy child, added he, wilt thou inherit the faults with the features of thy mother ? an idle weak¬ nefs like thine fapped all her morals, and left a ftain on her life, time never can erafe; but
but if not more virtuous, be at leaft more prudent." " Hold, Father Anthony, cried I, with a dignity which awed even him into fi¬ lence, nor cancel all the merit of your cares, by a furmife my foul difdains. Far be it from me to cenfure a parent, but itili farther be it to dejerve the cenfure of an indifferent perfon. I may have erred, but only in innocence ; and the life that beats within this bofom, can never iffue to ; anobler purpofe, than to fave that of Lord Leicefter." Nothing is more dangerous than to judge a generous and youthful mind harihly : it then is too eafily acquitted to itfelf, and rifes againft fufpicions it is un¬ confcious of deferving. The ihock the FathetVdoubts had given me, brought to light, without one idea of íhame, that partiality I durft hardly before acknow¬ ledge to myfelf. Convinced by my manner, that he had loft his influence over me, hè commanded Ellinor to re-conduct my Lord into his prefence* I
prefence, and requefted to be left alone with him. I departed moft reluctantly, but I would not entirely exafperate him. The injuftice of mankind gave me too much reafon to dread left he fhould affront Lord Leicefter, who might unite the innocent with the guilty, and aban¬ don us entirely : averfions extend but too frequently through families; nay, even defcend from generation to gene- ration. Their conference continued two whole hours, while I counted the moments in painful expectation ; at laft hather An¬ thony entered our room, and bidding Ellinor entertain Lord Leicefter, defired me to collect my fpirits, and liften to him. " However my fufpicions may ofľend you, young Lady, faid he, I will fuppoie it poflible I may know as much of the world, who have paffed my youth in it, as you who have yet been confined almoft to thefe walls. Well had it been if you had never gone beyond them. When I tol you 4
you this Lord you have faved demands vour hand, you will indulge a thoufand romantic fallies, and fee in his requeft a love as blind as your own. Perhaps there may be fomething in that: perhaps too he recollects that your mother is the next in fucceffion to the crown of England— that lhe may die in prifon, and that the averfion the Engliih ever entertain to a foreign fway, may prevail over the prior claim of your brother James, and his ambition may be gratified by a preference given to you. The cruel necefiity im- pofed by your unlimited confidence of at¬ taching Lord Leicefter to your intereft, makes it needlefs toenumerate the objecti¬ ons I could reafonably urge againft your union : the recent lofs of his wife, I find, puts it in his power to marry you : you. have left yourfelf no choice but to marry him : and never will I confent to his departing from this Recefs, till the con¬ tracts I ihall dictate are folemnly figned and the marriage completed in all its forms.' ,
" Imagine
cc Imagine, Madam, my fituation dur¬ ing this fpeech---------" " Oh, Anthony, thy dictatorial manner then was happi¬ nefs ! in one moment to emerge from the abyfs of defpair, and foar into the regi¬ ons of blifs: to find the generous Leicef¬ ter was willing once more to facrificc his fafety for love ; once more to rifque a difpleafure from which he was not yet re¬ lieved : to raife me from obfcurity—ah! to raife me to himfelf! a height, in my eftimation,beyond the throneof my ances¬ tors! The fond hope, iuggefted by the Fa¬ ther's fpeech, of one day rewarding inv Lord's tendernefs, was all I remembereďjf к. Crowns and fceptres, thofe play-things , in the hands of love, furrounded me in imagination, and impafľoned tears rolled down my glowing cheeks, while I faid to myfelf, in the language of Miranda, " I am a fool to weep at what I am glad of." Keflection and circumftances a little íõftened Father Anthony, who faw him- j felf on the point of being relieved from a heavy charge, to which his impove- riihed 3
rifhed fortune, and decaying years, ren¬ dered him unequal. The amiable Leicefter joined us, and every heart being lighten¬ ed of its load, an evening of fuch refined pleafure fucceeded, that could I wilh to live over one of my whole life, I would fele it that as the happieft. The intereft, the honour of my Lord, demanded his return to Court, and Father Anthony having prepared due contracts, infifted on my compliance. His com¬ mands, and the wiihes of Lord Leicefter, added to thefe weighty reafons, over-ruled my fenfe of decorum, and our hands were united. The peculiarity of the fituation can alone excufe fuch a marriage ; but I was born for obedience. Formed wholly of the mild elements, I wept the difap¬ pointment of my wiihes ever in filence. Scarce had the tranfports of finding my¬ felf happy given place to reafon, when my mother recurred to my mind. Un- bleft by her matron prefence, my nup¬ tials were but half hallowed ; nay, un- VöL. U U bleft
bleft with her confent. I compared with grief her fate and mine : a long cap¬ tivity had impaired her health, and no hope of a releafe to her fpirits. I, al¬ though pent in a ftill narrower prifon, beheld it enclofe almoft every human good, and could have confented to end my days in it. But the honour, the welfare of my Lord ordained otherwife ; every paifing hour gave his enemies an advantage. Our fer¬ vant James had been fent immediately on our marriage to Keniiworth Caftle, which he informed us on his return was ín the poiTeflion of the faithful tenants, who had been able, of all the fervants, to fecure only Dame Margery. Thisdetefta- ble inftrument of a fuperior*s barbarity, more terrified at the idea of an infamous death than any due fenfe of her crime, attempted to end her days with a rem¬ nant of the poifon prepared for her Lord ; but being detected, it only fupplied a new proof of her guilt. Tormented by fear and defpair, ihe at laft found means to drangle herfelf in the night. In her my Lord
Lord loft one evidence of his innocence, which made his prefence at court doubly neceifary. The family of Lineric, having received information of the melancholy cataftrophe of both brother and fifter, from the Iriih fervants, who had been their abettors, had carried away the bodies, as if to inter them, but kept them in the hands of furgeons, ftill undetermined how to proceed. Involved in one fate with my love, I knew no peace even in his arms; but with inceifant admonitions drove him fromme, refufing refolutely to accompa¬ ny him : and although his fondnefs in¬ duced him to urge my departure, his rea¬ fon muft fuggeft to him all its danger. Would Elizabeth, who had thus refented his marrying an equal, ever pardon his afpiring to her blood ? and how could we fufficiently guard from others a fecret my very features betrayed to him ? Actuated but by the fingle wifh of palling my life near Lord Leicefter, I neither aiked to be known, or honoured by any one but himfelf, nor to be greeted by a title only endeared to me, Ьесац& he bore it. M 2 The
The ftrong averfion with which I had been taught to regard the reigningQueen, might perhaps influence me in this caie. Before I gave my hand to Lord Leicefter, I had made him promife never to carry rne to court; a promife readily given, fince it perfectly accorded with his wiihes. Nay, in this happy union, every wiih I could form feemed to be completed; I gained to that dear mother, (who ne¬ ver left my thoughts, although I could neither afk her advice or confent in de¬ ciding my fate) a powerful friend in the favourite of her unjuft rival. î hoped he might yet be prevailed on to attempt her freedom; and I already placed myfelf at her feet, overcome with the idea of having been the inftrument of her deli¬ verance. Alas, Madam, were it not for fuch vague imaginary joys, how could we exift? All our real pleafures fall infinitely foort of thefe; for the preceding and fol¬ lowing affičtions oblige our reafon too often to correct them. ' But fancy, pow¬ erful fancy, gains vigour from difappoint¬ ment; and an infant hope ever arifes like ? the
the Phoenix from the aíhes of the dying one. A week after my marriage, Lord Lei¬ cefter departed for Court, promifing foon to return, and conduct me to Keniiworth, where he had previoufly refolved I ihould refide with Ellinorv He depended lefs on Elizabeth's partiality, than the juftice of his caufe, and was far from declining a trial, in which he was fatisfied his inno¬ cence would become confpicuous.TIe was forry neverthelefs to convince the Queen he had wronged her confidence, only to obtain the moft unworthy of her fex. From his departure 1 date my entrance into the world. I had rather, till this pe¬ riod, looked on, than lived in it. Now I began to feel its anxieties, the painful con¬ fequences of its tendereit ties. Shall I tell you all, Madam, that paiľed in my heart? Notwithftanding the proof I had received ofamatchlefs affection,I could notperfuade myfelf Lord Leicefter would ever return. If the Queen, finding him once more free,« and taught his value by his lofs, M 3 ihould
fliould at lait refolve to efpoufe him, hov/ could a poor girl, already poifeffed, and left in a folitude, where even the news of his infidelity could not reach her till too late, how could fhe weigh againft a crown ? Where could ftie hope for juf¬ tice, when the Sovereign who fwears to protect, muft find it her intereft to condemn her? Overcome with this for¬ midable phantom, I gave myfelf up for fome days to a defpair as violent as my love. This imagination was only in¬ terrupted by another not lefs afflicting. How, if his intereft in the Queen's heart had expired in his abfence; if equally offended at his difobedience and its mo¬ tive, ilie fhould join with his enemies? His proofs appearing lefs fatisfactory to me than himfelf, I feared it was poffible he might be condemned, as a criminal, when he was in reality the devoted vic¬ tim. One of thefe fuppofitions was as ш- juft to the Queen, as the other to my dear Lord j and Father Anthony difpeîled them
them all by fome letters he brought me. I had the happinefs to find Lord Leicef- ter was received by the Queen with kind- nefs, and that the family of Linerie, per- fuaded of his innocence, would not pro¬ voke him to make public the infamous defign of his late wife, by calling him to a trial -, he had therefore but one cau¬ tion to obferve, which was, to conceal this nev/ union with more care than the laft ; and to effect this, he muft delay our meet¬ ing for fome little time, left his immedi¬ ately retiring from Court Îhouîd lead the curious to fearch into the caufe. My doubts vaniíhed with thefe proofs of his attention. I had only now to con¬ tend with the involuntary hatred I had conceived for the Recefs. 1 wandered through every apartment, without finding reft in any : my impaifioned fancy fol¬ lowed my love into the court, and the filence and confinement I lived in, be¬ came more and more odious. I beheld with aftoniíhment the compofure of my fitter, and envied her a tranquillity I would M 4 not
not have regained, by being unmarried, if I could. At laft the happy hour arrived when I was to quit· my retirement. Lord Lei¬ cefter had projected the mode of my departure ere he left me. Le Val and his valet were the only perfons in the fecret. To all others, we paifed for young women educated in a Convent, who, not finding a call to the monaftic life, came with the confent of our friends, to embelliíh the retirement of Lord Lei¬ cefter by our mufical talents. This tale we were well able to fupport, for my voice was a very fine one, and the fkill and tafte of Mrs. Marlow, added to the tuition of a mafter, had taught me ro manage it properly. Ellinor had not the fame advantage, but touched the lute with a delicacy fo exquifite, that we became neceifary to each other ·, and as I never fung fo well without her accompa¬ niment, ihe had been fo accuftomed to adapt it to my voice, that fomething feemed wanting to either, when the other was filent. T he paffion Lord Leicefter had for
for mufic, in which he was a proficient, gave the ftrongeft probability to the whole. He had paid a handfome fum to accompli ih the two daughters of his ftew- ard in that fcience, and the young wo¬ men were taught to expect an addition to their number. The time Le Val remain¬ ed in the Recefs, preparing every thing for our departure, was long enough for him to feem employed in fetching us from abroad. Lord Leicefter came fe¬ veral times to' direct all, and to fup¬ port and cheer us with accounts of the care he had taken to render the apart« ments deftined to us, commodious and agreeable. The Recefs, till now, fo calm, fo tire- fomely tranquil, became at once full of confufion and hurry ; the family pictures were taken from their frames, and conveyed through Father Anthony's cell, gradually to Keniiworth. By what ftrange caprice is it, every thing; feems dear to us the moment we know we muft lofe it ! Involuntary tears filled my eyes when the hour of my de¬ parture
parture arrived. As much a ftranger to the world as if juft born into it, how could I promife to myfelf years as peaceful as I had experienced in the Recefs? Long habit has the art of giving charms to places ; or, rather, it is the people who inhabit them. It feemed to me, as if in quitting the place where the duft of Mrs. Marlow was interred, I quitted likewife her idea : every fpot I looked on was marked by fome noble fentiment, or ten¬ der emotion of that dear lady : but I was tinjuft to myfelf, for 1 have carried in my heart, through every fcene of life, her refpectable image, and nothing but death can efface it. To part with thofe we love, is the mod painful ftretch of humanity j but what can make it painful to part with thofe we do not love ? Separation, like death, feems to erafe all the individual ever did to difpleafe us,and leavesnoremembrance but of his obliging actions. We loft but little in Father Anthony ; but could he forget what he muft lofe in us ? His declining
declining years, and ill health, required the tendered attention; and furely, the care he had fhewn in our education gave him a juft claim to expect it from us. My feelings in this were fuperior to my lifter's, for he had been the means of my happi¬ nefs. I joined my intreaties of thofe of the generous Lord Leicefter, to prevail on him to refide in a retirement at Kenil- worth : but although he feemed deeply aŕľečied at parting with us, he was inflex¬ ibly bent on ending his days where thofe of his fifter ended. James ftill remained to attend on him, and Alice was borne very ill to the carriage which conveyed us away. We took nothing but the ornamentî from the Recefs, leaving the furniture ready to accommodate any future unfor¬ tunates, whom Father Anthony ihould think worthy fuch a relief. It was in the duik of the evening we arrived at Kenilworth caftle : the fteward's wife received us with her daughters. Unconfcious of our fuperiority, they treated us as young people, who fought, from
from the generofity of their mafter, a comfortable fubfiftence. Although I had agreed to confirm this ftory, I felt myfelf ihocked at the freedom they u fed from it. I could have fallen to them, but was af¬ fronted at their rifing to me : A little time however reconciled mc. It is Lord Leicefter's intereft, and ihall be my plea¬ fure, was always my argument with my¬ felf. Mrs. Hart, for that was the name of this dom eftick, expatiated on her Lord's perfon, character, and magnificence; (lie orfici ou fly pointed out the rich ornaments of the gallery and apartments, and looked round to us every moment with the imper¬ tinent expectation of feeing us filled with the low awe and furprize of people unac- cuftomed to grandeur. The indifference with which we regarded every thing, was not a lefs affront to her confequence : lhe ihrunk before it, and paflfed the re¬ mainder of the evening in a cold and haughty filence. Her daughters, not more amiable than herfelf, gloomily regarded our dreíľes, and by whifpering, excluded us from joining in the converfation. Such
Such was 'my introduction into the family it was my right to govern. My heart funk within me ; I believed my¬ felf already fallen to a fervant, and neg¬ lected my Lord Leicefter. Unufed to the circumípečtion neceifary, where fe- crecy is defired, I demanded to be wel¬ comed in his arms. I furveyed the eyes of my Ellinor, fearful they might re¬ proach me for having innocently degrad¬ ed the daughter of the Queen of Scots 5 but that dear girl, too delicate to add to my nneafinefs, preferved, apparently her gaiety, and fweetly accommodated herfelf to the people with whom fortune had mingled her. The alledging fatigue and indifpofition, obliged them to conduct us to the apart¬ ment allotted us. 1 ihould perhaps have wondered at its richnefs, but that I faw fcarce any inferior. 1 was no fooner left in it with Ellinor, than Γ gave free fcope to the tears 1 had fcarce been able before to fupprefs. My face was hid in her bo¬ fom, when the voice of Lord Leicefter recalled me to myfelf. 1 dried my eyes, «nwillinsr
unwilling even tacitly to reproach him : heentered through a private door, to change the caufe of my grief to joy ; for in his pre¬ fence I hardly ever knew any other emo¬ tion i and the generous anxiety with which he entreated our pardon for the reception difcretion had obliged him toorder us, had fomething in it fo graceful, fo ardent, and tender, that all the pride of my heart fub- fided at once, and left it full of gratitude and. affection. We wiíhed my fifter a good night, and then paffing through a dark paíľage, the whole length of the grand gallery, came into Lord Leicefter's apartments, tc which every place I ever faw was mean. He had a noble fpirit, a fplendid fortune, and an exquifite tafte. He had greatly improved this ancient feat, the gift of Elizabeth : its finely chofen fituation, ele¬ gant architecture, and fuperb furniture, made it the modei of a thoufand others. The beauties divided through the reft of the houfe in this apartment were united j and he gave a proof of the attention infepa¬ rable from real love, by omitting nothing to .3
to embeli i ih it, he had ever heard me commend. Ah, Madam ! thefe are the mighty trifles that fo exquifitely flatter a. tender heart, and form its, moil perfect enjoyments.
ГНЕ
Τ Η Ε
RECESS, &C.
PART IL
J.HE communication between our apartments was a profound fecret to all the fervants but Le Val and Williams, my Lord's valet; in whofe fidelity» after the late trial, he had the moft perfect con¬ fidence. We were, to keep up the farce, prefented to Lord Leicefter tne next day, who foon, by his growing diftinction, taught Mrs. Hart and her daughters to obferve a kind of deference in their be¬ haviour to us. He ordered them to at¬ tend
tend us round the gardens and park, and not to fail fhewing whatever was worth obfervation ; and through what a beauti¬ ful variety did they lead us ! a world in miniature ! A magnificent lake prefented itfelf, in whole clear bofom the trees were reflected, and round which the iheep and deer grazed on rich pafture : fwans, and water-fowls innumerable played on its furface, and an aight in the centre was made highly pičtureíque by feveral half-feen cottages, and emblems of agri¬ culture. The late Lady Leicefter needed not to have made a merit of remaining within thefe walls, fince nature and art could furnifh nothing lovely that was not enclofed here. Several gilded boats, and little veffels, danced on the bofom of the lake, and added, by the various ftream- ers which played upon the furface, to the gaiety and richnefs of the profpečt. When we turned the other way, the Go¬ thic towers, fwelling battions, gigantic ihtues, and majeftic fweep of the build¬ ing, made that an obiect fcarce lefs wor¬ thy of admiration. Vol. I. N All
« All our allotted employment was to fing to Lord Leicefter while at dinner; but as he f equently entertained the neigh¬ bouring Nobles and Gentlemen, a cur¬ tain of muffin was drawn over the bal¬ cony to fcreen us from obfervation. In the evening we fometimes fifhed on the Jake ; or Lord Leicefter, to indulge in our company, joined in the concert we •formed : every day brought with it fome amufement, and the reftraint we lived under, kept up, even in matrimony, ail that delicacy, and fpirit of affection, which is, by eafe of mind, too apt to decay. At laft, painful neceflity obliged Lord Leicefter to return to Court : he, however, would not leave me with more than ©ne equal in the family, therefore di¬ rected that I fhould prefide one month, and my fifter the next ; by this method, rendering: it hard for them to fix on his favorite. We likewife, with the,fteward's daughters, wore one kind of habit, and bufied ourfelves in the working rich ta- peftry. ι Щ \
My own happinefs could never erafe from my mind the oppofite fate of the unhappy Queen who gave us birth. She was then confined at a place not far diftant from Ken il worth. I had already tried all my intereft with Lord Leicefter in her favour, without fuccefs ; and ίο juft was his no¬ ble inflexibility, that at the moment· my heart was pierced by it, my reafon acl r .mired it. " Another man, would he fay> in attempting the releafe of the ill-fated Mary, would only forfeit his obedience, and endanger his life j and were thofe all, perhaps I Ihould not be able to refufe my Matilda. But remember, my love, ro thefe I muft add, the blacked treachery and ingratitude: it would be, viper like, ftinging to death the generous heart that warmed me. Never employ *he voice of virtue to charm me to vice ; for what feems a duty in you, would be the worft of crimes in me ; and what con¬ fidence could my wife have in my honor, if I was capable of betraying, a partial Sovereign r r '
Κ ι I then
I then would urge, my only wifh was to reftore my mother's liberty, which no¬ thing but an unparalleled breach of con¬ fidence could have taken from her for eighteen years ; obferving, her crown had been lined with thorns too keen for her to defire to wear it again. " Ah, my dear Matilda ! he would cry, how ignorant are you of thefe terri¬ ble emotions, jealoufy and revenge! per¬ mit me to know your mother's character better than yourfelf. She had too much pride and pleafure in reigning, to fubmit tamely to this imprifonment; or even fuppofing, tired of the evils always in¬ feparable from a Crown, ihe could ma¬ fter her juft refentment, and feeking an afylum with her children, afk only to die in peace, her relations would not luffer it. The ambition of the Guifes is become a proverb ·, they would make ufe of her name and wrongs to fhake the throne of Elizabeth ; and inftead of guarding the Queen, to whom I owed a perfect duty, 1 ihoukl have have the mifery of feeing a ter-
1
a terrible war devour my country, of which I was the caufe. Who knows, my dear Matilda, if amidft thefe cala¬ mities my temper might preferve its equa¬ lity ? I might remember, with regret, the fatal advice which had milled me, and you might lament, too late, the fa¬ erifieing your own happinefs to a fallaci¬ ous hope of reftoring your mother!s·^-* Remember Elizabeth is now declining, the chances of life may bring about all you wiih.—The compaffion of the people has been kept alive for Mary thefe feven- teen years ; iliould we lofe Elizabeth, her very imprifonment would turn to her ad«r vantage, by keeping her in the midft of a kingdom to which flie is the lawful heir : my fuppofition is not vague, for the ex¬ ample of Elizabeth herfelf proves it very poftible." What could I oppofe to reaibning fo . juft ? 1 could only recommend the caufe of my dear parent to him who can pull down the mighty and exalt the weak*
N 3 Every
Every letter from my Lord was filled with complaints of the tedioufnefs of the Court, and breathed the very foul of love. —He often intreated me to tell him I was- happy, and when I complied, reproached me, through a tender caprice, for being- lb without him.—He required me to enu¬ merate my hourly employments, and al¬ though half my time was fpent in writing pacquets to him, always complained of the ihortnefs of my letters. He, indeed, gave me no caufe to retort ; for it appeared as if he withdrew from the Court half of his hours to amufe me with all the little humorous- incidents it continually fur- niitied. But even thefe had not always the power to effect what he wiibed—my fate never allowed me one hour of perfect happinefs, and an evil arofe in his abfence which filled me with the moft terrible ap- prehenfions. My lovely frfter, who was ever my pride and delight, pofľeíľed in a peculiar degree, that amiable gaiety which leifen3 the diftance of rank. From her firft in¬ troduction.
traduction at Keniiworth, ihe had given way to an increafe of fpirits, natural from fuch a change in our profpecb^ little fore- feeing hew great a danger might arife from it.—Williams had been raifed by Lord Leicefter to the fuperintendancy of the family on his returning to Court. He preferred this man, believing he would, from knowing me his Lady, take care I was treated with due refpečt. Williams had been a foldier, and had eontracted the authoritative air annexed to petty officers, which made him in appearance peculiarly fuited to the poft aíTigned him.—I muft confefs he was never a favorite with me-j nature had been unkind to him, and he- had been* more.unkind to himfelf, in not foftening her feverity. He was beyond the meridian of life, his perfon coarfely made, his complexion fwarthy,. and his face much icarredj, he had; befides a- fiercenefs of mien which hardly bent even to Lord Leicefter, who, of all men, emi¬ nently poíľeíľed. the art of infpiring as much, refpeót as affection,-
N ¿r This-
This man then, mad am, marked out thus by nature, ventured to raife his eyes to the royal, the beautiful EMinor—the fprightli- nefsof her manner abated his refpečl, and he had theinfoUence to declare his paillon; call it honourable, and iblicit her return. My ûfter had too much underftanding not to feel her own fault, and too much pride to fupport his infolent freedom. She left him with ineffable difdain, as not worthy of a reply ; and came directly to me—a pre-fentiment of fome evil confequence arofe in my mind at the moment lhe re¬ lated the infult. I refolved to give Lord Leicefter immediate notice of it, that he might take his mea fures accordingly, and in the mean while appeared conftantly with my fifter. But we had to manage a man equally artfui and fearlefs. He had the confummate impudence to open my letter, and (finding.its fubječt) detain it. In the mean time, no advice arriving from Lord Leicefter in anfwer to mine, I re¬ mained on the rack of uncertainty > tor¬ mented by the confidence of a wretch from whom there was no poflible efcape, and
and uncertain even of the nature or extent of our danger. At laft, unable, as the wife of Lord Leicefter, to endure his infults» and tired of waiting my Lord's refolution, I took an opportunity of repreitnting to him the daring boldnefs of his conduct, in fpeaking of love to the fifter of his Lord. Without any emotion or confufion, he pleaded guilty to the charge, but artfully endeavoured to exculpate himfelf from prefumption, by alledging the rank in which we appeared, and the fuppofition that we were raifed from ob feurity by his Lord; who of courfe could only ennoble me.—At this infinuation, all the pride of Norfolk and Mary animated my features, yet fortunately recollecting myfelf, I replied with moderation; for the villain doubtlefs aimed at diicovering from whom we really fprung, fince our habitation had too probably ftruck him as containing a confequential fecret. I forbad him mildly ever to addrefs my filter in that light again, without the ap¬ probation of my Lord, and attempted to retire;
retire; when flopping me, he bade me re¬ collect that I talked to one poifeffed of inore authority in the houfe than myfelf; that I likewife knew a fecret of the ut¬ moft importance was in his power, and he was determined to make every ufe of it, in cafe I did not perfuade my fifter to accept him ; that I muft imagine him a fool by referring him to Lord Leicefter; in ihort, inftead of informing him, he was refolved to prevent his arriving at the knowledge of the affair, for which reafon he had kept back all my laft letters. How cruel, madam, was my fituation ! alone, without any means of gaining pro^- tečtion from the remainder of my fervants, except by declaring a fecret he knew too well I would never reveal ; to be thus braved, as well as infulted, was dreadful! I had yet no way of eluding him, fince the whole family were under his governance, and had I offered to write to Lord Lei¬ cefter through any other channel, I had the greateft reafon to fear it would fall into his hands·
By
By this terrible dilemma were the days, of the wife of Lord Leicefter embittered in the midft of affluence j in a fpot which. might be called the palace of pleafure,—♦ Thus fituated, I could only counteract treachery and art by the fame. I appeared, after fome reflection, alarmed at his threats, and more willing to forward his- views: 1 exacted from him an oath not to betray my fecret, and on my fide folemnly vowed never to mention his, but to em-» ploy my intereft with my fifter in his fa¬ vour:—We parted with mutual diftruft,. and an apparent reliance on each other's fincerity. I performed one part of my promife by conjuring Ellinor to deceive him with falfe hopes, till Lord Leicefter's return gave me an opportunity of confult- ing him on the fafeft way of difpofing the traitor. Lt was with much reluctance fhe confented, but it would have been a cru¬ elty unlike her character, to refufe to lichten an. evil íhe was the innocent caufe of, I had then only to find fome means of letting my Lord know it without breaking my word:, for once in my life J. was
was guilty of duplicity, and, likePhiloc- tctcs, found rry equivocation furniíhed a terrible puniihment. I wrote a letter, de¬ claring the whole to Lord Leicefter, which 1 kept in my bofom to give to him whenever he fhould return ; in the mean time I wrote as ufual, and delivered my letters^o Williams. The profound filence I obferved on this fubject, probably in- fpired him with confidence, and although Ellinor refufcd to marry him directly, the point he aimed at, the complaifanceTvith which we both treated him, lulled him at laft into a perfect fecurity. Worn out with hourly complaints of this wretch's impertinence to my fifter, and my fears of the event, I counted, with more than a lover's impatience, the days which muftelapfc before I could fee Lord Leicefter. At length the happy one arrived which brought him, and gave me at once joy and forrow, for who could teil me all its confequences ?—Foftered in a Court, where he knew but one fuperior, Lord Leicefter had added a perforai pride to that which naturally fprung from
from the nobility of his birth. The par¬ tiality of his Sovereign, who difpenfed, through love, with his obedience, had prevented his learning to difguife his foibles -, it was the bufinefs of every one to feem blind to them, by which means he was a favorite without being a hypocrite. Thofe who loved him well enough to allow for this error, and a va¬ nity I can fcarce term fo, when I re¬ member the vanous and numerous ad-» vantages he poíľefíed, might do any thing with him. Impaifioned, generous, good- natured, and noble, where once he was attached, his fortune, honor, nay life, would be Hiked for his friend; but the few who are worthy that name, too often confined his affections. Lord Leicefter was too exalted perhaps to be loved. Bur I digrefá. Pardon me, Madam, when you confider the caufe. This open nefs of heart gave me juft reafon to apprehend a guilty mind would read the indignan: eye of my iove, and induced me to fup- preiL for fome davs, the intended difclo- fure.
fure. My precaution fucceeded ; Willi¬ ams knew the character of his Lord, and finding by the freedom and confidence he uill teftified, that I was true, began to rely on my word. A journey on which he was accidentally fent, affifted me highly, in leaving time for my Lord to cool. I laid the letter on his table one evening before I went to bed: Lord Leicefter, who was in another room, came in after me, but had not half read it when he frigntened me by his rage and indignation. Had the man been in the houfe I know not how the matter would have ended, but at length my tears and diftrefs foftened him ; he pafíed two days after in a thoughtful man¬ ner; I knew not, nor ventured to afk him his refolu dons : at the end of that time he regained his temper and compo¬ fure ; he faw the apprehenfions lurking ftill in my heart, and bade me take cou¬ rage, for he had found a way to quiet them for ever. I conjured him at leaft to conceal with caution his confa· oufnefs of the affair, which he promifed, and
atnd in a great degree performed 5 but whe¬ ther it was that knowing he was apprized of it made me fancy his manner would reveal it, I cannot fay j certain it is, I never faw him look at or fpeak to this man afterwards, without feeling my heart fink within me. Sir Francis Drake, at this time, formed all the converfation of England; he had fitted out a large fleet againft the Spani¬ ards, with which he was ready to fail from Plymouth. Many noblemen, and others, engaged as volunteers, and an in¬ finite number of people aiTembled from all parts to view the fleet. Lord Leicef¬ ter, who had always been a ftrong friend to Sir Francis, fet out to take leave of him, and enlarged the train of domeftics he ufuaily travelled with, for the fake of appearing honorably among numbers who did not know him. So ardent was the defire of all ranks of people to partake the fight, that not a fingle male fervant willingly ftaid behind.—Williams had fo great a reliih for thefe expeditions, that be aíked my Lord to take him; Le Vaľs л. ficknefs
ficknefs keeping him at Keniiworth, Lord Leicefter complied. A fortnight elapfed before they returned, during which poor old Alice expired : with her died one of the witneifes of my marriage: Father An¬ thony was ftill in good health, as James, who regularly cameoncea month,brought word. Lord Leicefter returned, and returned without Williams.—Struck to the hearr, I had fcarce ftrength to enquire what was become of him. My Lord aíked me if í fufpečted him of having murdered the rogue? ff I have only fent him, added he, with a gay air, a long voyage, to teach him to keep a fecret. I knew no other way of getting rid of the rafcal. S : r Francis has undertaken to provide for him too effectually formydearMatildato know- any further anxiety on his account: in fliort, he is fhut up in a diftant part of the veíľel, the failors are taught to confider him as a madman, and have neither time to li it e n to his tales, nor fenfe to under¬ ftand them.------Thus, my dear love, our fears are entirely over." " Rather
c · Rather begun," I might have replied, for no rhetoric ever after charmed mine to reft.—A thoufand accidents ruin our tranquillity, but it is better to endure their worft confequences, than return evil for evil. However neceifary the ftep, the aifuming a right to fentence this man, was too culpable in my eyes, not tr- make me uneafy; yet, fince it certainly was to relieve me, that Lord Leicefter ex¬ ecuted the fcheme, and becaufe nothing could now recall it, I feemed fatisfied : Ellinor too perfuaded me tö be ίο, from thinking the traitor juftly puniftied. Before Lord Leicefter returned to Court, I gained his confent to a pro¬ ject î had long revolved; this was, to vifit my mother—to have the joy of being held in her arms, and to be ac¬ knowledged by her bleilîng.— He was too anxious to indulge all my wiihes, to refufe me in this inftance; but, not heing able to further it openly, he only gave me a fufficient fum of money to Voj.. I. О bribe
bribe her keepers, and directed Le Val to attend us. This man proved as faithful as Williams was the reverfe—if at firft he refpečted me but as the wife of his mafter, I afterwards gained an afcendant with him from my own conduci:, which attached him to me as much as to his Lord, and made the moft effential fervices feem trifles in his eyes. Eager to oblige and obey, he feemed always ready to fly before he knew whi¬ ther, and a word of commendation was a fufficient recompence. He was now in the poft of Williams, who was fuppofed to have voluntarily embarked with Sir Francis, and the fecret of his fate re¬ gained with Lord Leicefter, my fifter, and myfelf. Attended by Le Val, we kt out for Coventry with beating hearts. We were to vifit, not merely a mother, but an only parent, the fole pcrfon in whofe arms we could claim a refuge; though now, alas, far more able vainly to offer her one. We were to fee that Queen whofe matchlefs beauty was her leait or¬ nament;
nament; to behold her graces withered by eighteen years confinement ; to fhare in her afflictions, and prove how dearly the children, who had never known her, could love their mother. Bur, alas! Madam, we were not per¬ mitted to realize thefe vifions. — Le Vai found her keepers too honeft, or too fearful to fuŕľer any ftranger to converfe with her, and the only privilege money could pur- chafe, was that of feeing the Queen, through a grated window, take her morn¬ ing walk in a fmall garden. Overwhelmed with defpair at this news, we yet em¬ braced the only indulgence we could gain. — But, what did we not think that fiithlefs woman deferved, who thus treated her equal, her relation, her friend ! We were conducted to the window, where we were permitted to remain without attend¬ ants ; we faw her come down the walk— but oh, how changed, and yet how lovely ! Damp rooms had weakened her limbs— her charming arms were thrown round the necks of two maids, without whole alľiftance íhe could not move—a pale О 2 refig-
refignation fat on her ftill beautiful fea¬ tures: her regal mien could not be eclipfed by a habit of plain purple, nor her fine hair by the veil which touched her fore¬ head. ------Her beads and croîs were her only ornaments, but her unaffected pi¬ ety, and patient fufferance, mingled the Saint with the Queen, and gave her charms beyond humanity. Our emoti¬ ons were too rapid and ftrong for defcrip¬ tion ; we wept — we incoherently ex¬ claimed—and ftriking ourfelves eagerly againft the bars, feemed to hope fome fu pernatural ftrength would break them. More afflicted at feeing her thus*, than not feeing her at all, I neither could be¬ hold her for my tears, or refolve to lofe a look by indulging in them.—She drew near the fpot where we ftood, when our handsjwhich we had thruft,in fupplication, through the bars, caught her attention.— She raifed her fine eyes, with their ufual divine compofure, to the window — I would have {poke, but my lips denied all utterance. Alas! that bleffed—that be¬ nignant glance, was the firft, the laft, the orly
only one we eyer received from a mo¬ ther.—When ihe withdrew her eyes, ihe carried my very foul with her ; all my ftrength failed at once, and I funk in a fwoon in my lifter's arms. ****** , 1 Sufpicions of this nature made it dan¬ gerous for my Lord, were we frequently to appear there ; yet this momentary view had awakened fenfations, which, though lefs ftrong than love, were equally laft¬ ing, and which empoifoned my hours in the bofom of happinefs. Bitter tears upon the cheeks of my Leicefter, when with fond endearment he would ftrain me 10 his heart, alone fpoke my thoughts, and 1 facrificed the lefs to the greater duty.— Ellinor, my dear lillinor, wag, on this theme, my only counfellor, and we fpcnc days in forming a thoufand projects ; weeping every evening at difcovering their impracticability. The frequent ab¬ fences of my Lord, left me too much leifure for this melancholy employment ; О 3 yet
yet the ardor of his paffion made him chufe every opportunity, however fhort, to be with me, and I trembled left thefe inceíľant journeys fhould attract the no¬ tice of Elizabeth, who had been for fome time indifpofcd, and of courfe more alive to any inattention of her favorite. But Lord Leicefter had not been u fed to con¬ trolli, and fometimes imputed hints to in¬ difference which arofe from the molt ge¬ nerous motives, for my life was without any enjoyment in his abfence, but the l^ope of feeing him again. When he was away, I wandered wearily through every room, and faw only a magnificent foli¬ tude : but, whenever he appeared, joy and mufic animated the whole family ; every apartment feemed to have found its gueft, and evçry fervant the happy fub- ječt of his duty. To excufe his frequent abfences to the Queen,my Lord avowed apafľionfor hunt- ing>withwhich his conduct fo little agreed, that he fhut himfelf up in Keniiworth Caftle, and feldom paíľed beyond his own walls. Confcious this muft in time be obferved, I learni
1 learnt to ride expertly, and often obliged him to accompany us in mere prudence. To prevent our being too much fatigued, my Lord generally ordered a tent to be pitched, with refrefhments, in the foreft; and one morning, finding myfelf ill, I quitted the chace almoft directly, and went in fearch of our refting place, guicled by а huntfman, as ignorant of it as our¬ felves. Among the clofeft and moil in¬ tricate paths we encountered ρ gentleman on horfeback, attended by many fer¬ vants ] to make way for us, he ordered his fervants to return, and difmounting, bowed, ?.nd remained uncovered while we pafled. — Addreffing the man who attended us, he eagerly enquired for my Lord —the queftion, I knew not why, alarmed me j I turned inftantly to ex¬ amine his features, and my horfe conti¬ nuing his pace, ftruck my head againft an arm of a tree with fo much violence, that the reins dropt from my hand, and the ftranger was juft quick enough to catch me. 1 fainted : one of his train opened a О 4 vein
vein in my arm> which inftantly revived me, and I found myfelf in the- (trangere arms,, who preiTed, with more than com¬ mon concern, the· hand he held. Сопь fufed and perplexed wich this accident, I endeavoured in vain to withdraw it, and feeing my hair had fallen in its ufual curls over my neck, looked about for my hat, which yet hung on the bough that ftruck me. Regardlefs of every intreaty, I per- lifted in mounting my horde,, and return¬ ing inftantly* after I had rendered him every acknowledgment his active polite¬ nefs merited. He replied with fuch pecu¬ liar grace and gallantry, as gave me a great defire to know who he was, but his pur- iuing me with his eyes, rendered it impof- fible for fome time : after which the huntf- man informed me he was the nephew of Lord Leicefter, Sir Philip Sydney. His appearance confirmed the agreeable im- prefiion made by his character, and I only regretted being introduced to him by a vexatious accident which feemed too much to poØKs his mind. EngroiTed by thefe re-
reflections, although I lay down, it was impo iTi ble to eloie my eyes, when the abrupt entrance of my Lord roufed me completely. Extreme vexation and dif- order marked his air> and without the leaft enquiry into ray hurts, he threw himfelf into a chair by me, and lament¬ ed the malice of his fortune Alarmed beyond meafure, I ftarted from the bed, and kneeling at his feet, conjured him to tell me in what new inftance he had reafon to complain.—" Matilda* &id he, fixing his eyes on me with a iad intent- nefs, the Queen approaches."—My heart died within me ar the words ; his fup- porting arms alone faved me from falling to the ground, and his careffes from faint¬ ing. " I know her well, continued he, and have every reafon to fear we are betrayed. The fubtilty of approaching without an exprefs* convinces me that ihe fufpecis at leaft fome charm in Keniiworth I dare not avow. I had always purpofed, in com¬ pi ianv e alike with, my promife and my fafety*
fafety, to convey you to the Recefs in cafe this event happened ; but now I fear the appearance it vvill have, alike to my own fervants and Sydney's companions, who are all of the Queen's train, and but too much ftruck with your beauty.—One ex¬ pedient alone remains—tell me, my love, may your Leicefter hope to triumph over your becoming pride, your juft refent¬ ment ?—Will you condefcend to appear before Elizabeth in the fame humble light in which you have hitherto ap¬ peared ; and, forgetting awhile ihe has been the perfecutor of your family, will you confider her only as the patronefs of your huiband ?" " I will forget every thing, cried I, ia a tranfport of tendernefs, which interferes with your fafety and fatisfaction : too hap¬ py in having fomething to facririce in proof of my love, I will be whatever you wiih—as the daughter of Mary, my foul rifes againft Elizabeth ; but, as the wife of Leicefter, 1 ought to know no pleafure except his ; nor have I hud, till this
this alarming moment, a merit in fubmif¬ iion." " What are the ties of marriage, faid my Lord, (the tears mingling on our cheeks) to thefe in vifible ligaments of the foul ! I can fo little bear to be furpaíľed in generofity, that 1 can hardly refrain from leading you to the Queen as her hoftefs, and charming the court with the fight of a wife, who is my fole pride and cverlafting pleafure." Precious, ineftimable moment of my life, when the warmth of my heart was fo fully difplayed, fo glorioufly anfwered Î —Ah, Madam, Lord Leicefter had the rare fecret of governing a generous mind. The fame confiderations prevailed on Ellinor to give the fame confent, and the ihort hour previous to the Queen's arrival was fpent by us in fchooling our eyes and hearts, left the fpirit of the injured and pride of the noble ihould betray all.—— Apprehenfive too, left the fimilitude my features bore to thofe of my unfortunate mother,, might ítrike fome idle obferver, I de-
I departed from her mode of drefs, and letting my hair curl more over my face and neck, enwreathed it fancifully with flowers; then mixing with the villagers in habits refembling theirs, we waited to u flier the Queen into the great hall, by ftrewing that and the inner court with aromatic herbs. The amazing hurry produced by this unexpected vifit, had not fubfided, when the cannon proclaimed the approach of Elizabeth. A faint ficknefs came over me; my limbs were fcarce able to fup¬ port my weight, and my eyes hardly ferved to guide my fteps. My nature fhuddered at her, and the fpirit of Nor¬ folk trembled proudly within me. Moil fortunately confounded with the gay ca¬ valcade, I foon had performed my taik, and retired without once fixing my eyes on her face. I ftrugglcd much with my¬ felf, and regained a tolerable ihare of com¬ pofure ere her dinner was ferved, at which we were, as ufual, to fing. Concealed from the public gaze, I had now an op¬ portunity
portunity of examining the Queen. She was talking to my Lord, who waited be··. hind her chair. Though the features of Elizabeth retained nothing of her mo¬ ther's fweetnefs, they were regular 5 her eyes were remarkably fmall, but fo clear and quick, they feemed to comprehend every thing with a fingle glance ; the de¬ fect in her ihape taking off all real Ma- jefty, íhe fupplied that deficiency by an extreme haughtinefsj a levere, fatirical fmile marked her countenance, and an abfurd gaiety her drefs. I could not bu: fuppofe foreigners would imagine that Queen owed much of her reputation to her counfellors, who could difgrace her venerable years by a bare neck, and a falfe head of hair made in the moil youthful faíhion. Yet, under other cir¬ cumftances, the fcene would have been charming. The hall enriched and adorn¬ ed with fine (tatues, tapcftry, and purple fringed with gold, the high arched (¿othick windows, which being thrown open, gave a beautiful view of the lake, covered with newly ornamented boats, ftruck the Queen with admiration j while the
the immenfe crowd of royal attendants, and above all,thcprofound refpečtof many of the nobles, were fights no lefs new to me. I turned my eyes round to difcover if among them I could find any to com¬ pare with Lord Leicefter. Where, ah where ! could they felect his equal ! iuppreft anxiety gave a redoubled glow to his cheek, and his exprefiive eyes pierced through the veil which hid us from all others. Dinner removed, the mufic be¬ gan. The ufual pieces played, a lilence enfued only interrupted by my voice and the lute of my fifter. Amazement feemed to transfix every beholder, and all eyes purfued the bent of Lovd Lcicefter's,— The (¿úeen dropt a peach (he was paring, and (peaking with warmth to Sydney, lie replied with an air fo enlivened as íheWcd his heart was in the fubject. Scarce had I reached the conclufion of the air, when the curtain was drawn afide, by the offi¬ cious Sydney, and we ftood t *pofed to the view of træ whole court. Over¬ whelmed with a thoufand fenfations, 1 dropt the book I dung from, and Ellinor 3 ■ bent
bent over her lu^e with abeautiful modefty f The various exclamations of the noble¬ men might have flattered our vanity, had we not been continually told any thing, can make, to courtiers, the wonder of an hour. That fatal moment was fure the critical one of my life; it awakened dan¬ gerous fufpicions in the foul of Elizabeth : endlefs anxiety in the man in whom my life was bound up, and a pafiion in the heart of another, the cold hand of death alone could extinguiíh. I mean the ami¬ able Sydney: charmed at finding in the perfon who charmed the whole court, thofe features indelibly impreiľed on his memory, he delivered himfelf entirely up to his predilection with a generous warmth. The moment I could recollect myfelf, I confidered the Queen attentively; ihe fat in the penfive pofition into which our appearance had thrown her; fometimes furveying us with deep obfervation, then, with a keener glance, Lord Leicefter. I laboured to fupport the painful examina¬ tion with comporre, but the care de¬ feated
feated itfelf, and involuntary blulhes co¬ vered my face, as often as I became the object of her attention. The indifference the Queen expreffèd towards the mufic, obliged every one elfe to be filent on the fubject, and we foon obtained permilľion tö retire. Sydney, who was the meíľen- ger, overwhelmed us with apologies for the fhare he had in on r confufion, although by the command of his fovereign. I had perpetual reafon for refenting his officioufnefs, but Sydney was not born to be hated. To exalted generofity, and the moft manly courage, he joined ele¬ gance, refinement, and a temper fuperior to events. Yes, gallant Sydney, this no¬ ble juftice Matilda owes thy virtues!—of all her misfortunes, that of becoming thine touched her moft deeply.------ Our apparent ftate of dependence never once induced Sir Philip to forfeit that refpečt a man of merit owes to himfelf;—it only united to the politenefs univerfally due to the fex, an affecting deference which dig¬ nified its object. A hufband lefs adored than Lord Leicefter, might with reafon 4 hav*
have dreaded fuch a rival------Midnight alone gave us the freedom of comparing opinions, and I faw with unfpeakable re- gret,thepeaceof my Lord deftroyed during this vifit. A depreifion, he could hardly account for, filled up the intervals we paifed together; and inftead of employ¬ ing them in forming any reafonable plan, nothing remained of all our mutual ten¬ dernefs but filence, fighs, and tears. Elizabeth, in defiance of time and un¬ derftanding, indulged a romantic tafte inconfiftcnt with either; and, not fatis¬ fied with real pre-eminence, affected to be deified by the flattery of verfe. The Lady of the Lake was the title ihe chofe to be known by here, and nothing art could invent, or wealth procure, was wanting to render the various pageants complete. - A boat fcooped like a İhell, and enclofing a throne, conveyed her to the aight, where I and many more, ha¬ bited like Nereids, waited to receive her, and uíhering her to a grotto inlaid with (hells and looking-glafs, we prefented her, \ t ol. I. P in
in baikets made of fea weed, pearl, coral, amber, and every jewel of the water; while the place refounded with panegy¬ rics fo labored and mi lappi ied, that it was with difficulty we forebore fmiling at the gravity with which lhe liftened to them. 1 found, with furprize, Lord Leicefter feared the eyes of every indifferent fpec- tuor would penetrate through л myftery, Elizabeth only had an intereft in deve¬ loping. It is the common weaknefs of humanity to bend the attention folely to minute objects, while the leading ones come upon us totally unawares.---- 1, on the contrary, fancied myfelf every mo¬ ment furveyed with a harih air by an in¬ flexible imperial rival.—Every lady of the court, under the pretext of feeking our intimacy, continually founded Ellinor and myfelf on our real condition, and the timid incoherent manner in which we an- ftvered, gave me the moil mortal tears of rheir employer.------Abject ilaves to tne Qjeen's aimüement, íhe kept us conti¬ nually
Tiually in her fight, and without deigning to open her own lips, feemed to tempt us to complain by eternal whims.—In thofe moments, love, íhame, and apprehen¬ fion, fpoke a language intelligible in.all countries in the features of Lord Leicef¬ ter i and Elizabeth, having doubtlefs af¬ fli red herfelf, by thefe artifices, that there muft be fomething to reveal, left her train ât one end of the gallery, and re¬ tiring to the other with my Lord, inter¬ rogated him, as I inftantly conjectured. —The fate of my mother now arofe mòre ftrongly to my mind. " Ah! why,thought I, did I leave the happy folitude in which ihe placed me, only to ruin the object of my affections, and deliver myfelf up to an inexorable tyrant, who can now wreak her malice without even being fufpecied I" While thus loft to the itirrounding crowd, T obferved my Lord reply to her eager queftions with hefitation and anxiety; as he talked, he fixed his eyes on me with the uneafy air of a perfori who wiihes to convey through them what he is hopelefs Ρ 2 of
oí making you comprehend any other way, I refolved to prevent an error on my part, by u timely retreat ι when fud¬ denly fpeaking aloud, Lord Leicefter ad¬ vance d töwardßusi— 14 Mark well all 1 fay/' faid he, in a whifper, leading me and my fifter to the fe*t of the Qyçen,— " I ihall more furprife thefe children, faid he, with the knowledge of their origin than your Majefty—it is needlefs to give them the reafons I have laid before you for this íècrecy ; it muft be fufficient honor and pleafure for them to find themfelves daughters of the houfe of Dudley, and objects of their Sovereign's gracious pa¬ tronage." Seeing: him bend his knee, ours, iìubborn and reluctant as they were, gave way, and we kiffed the fatal hand ihe majeftically tendered. She informed us, ihe added us to her train of maids of honor, and fhould carry us with her on the morrow towards London.—Lord Lei¬ cefter, charmed with having eluded all her fufpicions, dreamt not of the fnare he h r -Л wound round his own heart in yielding us up to Elizabeth, whofe confummate art had
had induced her to give credit to A moft improbable fiction, on purpofe to place uh beyond hii reach, which flic could no other way hâve effected. The hour of reft enabled him to open all his heart,—I underftood that Eliza¬ beth had addrefled him in fo decifive я manner on the conviction of ©ur being born above our prefent rank, that he could not hope to fave us from the moft menial degradations but by a falfe confi¬ dence; Heaven had fuddenly infpired him with the idea of a pôffibility, that his br'o,- the'r, the Lord Guilford, might have mar¬ ried Lady Jane Grey, a twelvemonth ere the two politic Dukes of Suffolk and Northumberland thought it prudent to appear leagued ; during which time, he declared the unfortunate Lady Jane gave birth to us both : the fame policy had in¬ duced them to conceal this event till the Suffolk family ihould be eftabliihed on the throne, and that hope being for ever de¬ feated, prudence ftill buried us in oblivion; —finally, that the fecret refted now only in his own bofom, from whence his at- P 3 tac h men t
raêhffîtfîf t© iii?åb#eh wöwld fìgv#F íliffiir it (q iran/pipe, and that if fbi Q^een ftill wilhec} to patronize us, he thought it would be prudent to let us imagine our¬ felves his own illegitimate daughters.—. To all this Elizabeth replied little, but fuffering him to fettle it his own way, perfifted only in taking us from him. Her mode of conduci convin: ed me at once that fhe utterly difcredited the whole of this ficción 5 which placed us, by ano¬ ther branch, almoft as near to the throne as we really ftood. Would not a jealous, felfiih fouj, like hers, have demanded dates, facts, teftimonials and witnefics ? Would ilie not have made us undergo the fate of Lady Catherine, the legal heir of the houfe of Suffolk, whom, by a bar¬ barous, unfeminine ufe of power, ihe had torn from the moft near and facred of human tyes, and condemned, even in the bloom of youth, to a folitary life of im¬ prifonment, only for having dared to be¬ come a wife and mother ?— -Would not, ili a word, all the fury of her temper have blazed
blftžtd fefthj biii thai flie ffîtdliâftd a m§fg fâft and filene puin i Unwilling to add to the anguiihof this moment by one furmife, I threw myfelf into his arms, and filent, fpeechlefs, {train¬ ed him to my heart-—fupplicating, men¬ tally, that God who alone could protect us. No language could have affected Lord Leicefter like this conduct.—-He accufed himfelf of having meanly confi¬ dered his own fafety; and we were ob¬ liged repeatedly to aifure him, that we thought he had acted with the moft con¬ fummate judgment, ere We could recon¬ cile him to himfelf. "Surely Matilda thinks me a furhcient fuiferer, cried he, in lofing the charm of her fociety ?-—Can I have forgotten, that I dare no longer indulge even my eyes with her beauty ? —Can I have forgotten that all other men may freely adore her, and that her happi¬ nefs is not more in the power of Elizabeth than mine is inUiers?---Did I not know that the Queen 'would willingly punifli her whole race wit?h the celibacy ihe im¬ pofes on herfelf, I iliould doubt her pro- P 4 tecting
tecting the pretenfions of Sydney ; but fye dreads too much multiplying claims to the crown, artd I аюпе ihall be perfe¬ cted with his paffion —Pity my fituati¬ on, added he, and with a uniform cold¬ nefs, dalb his prefumptuous hopes. ------ How do I lament the fate which in¬ volves the fair Ellinor in calamities the fame motives cannot reconcile her to! but fince her choice and affections led her into the world, I rely upon her generous foul to fupport its evils with prudence and patience.·—This will be our laft con¬ verfation for íotñt time—one only cau¬ tion let me recommend to you both— make no confidents, cultivate the friend¬ fhip of Ladjf Pembroke, and never for¬ get that you conftantly act under the eye of a haughtV) jealous, and revengeful So¬ vereign.'* Needlefs admonition 1 Could a daugh¬ ter of the Stuurt line ceafc to dread and hate Elizabeth?—-Could â wife too, who iaw the life of the man fhe loved depended on her prudence, ror one moment dare to ihew lhe did Co ?
1
Con-
Condemned to mingle with the world> I entered it with prefages fo melancholy as ihewed my future fortune.—-Without daring to teftify my grief, even by a look, I departed from that hofpitable manfion in which I had vainly promifed myfelf long years of unfpeakable happinefs.---1 departed without my Lord, and in fo do¬ ing experienced every mifery of love and dependance. —Ah! how weak are thofe wretches who look up to us with wonder, cried I, mentally, as we paiľed through every town, did ye know the breaking heait this fplendid garb covers !—did ye feel the galling chain which writhes round it, and deepens my cheek with deftructivc beauty, how would you blefs the graci¬ ous God who gives you peace and igno¬ rance ! Received, acknowledged, and admired, we foon became familiar appendages to Elizabeth ; nor had we any hopes of fee¬ ing our bondage end but with her life. It was not the leaft of my evils that 1 in¬ volved my Ellinor in this calamity, which love of me could alone render ftjppoi ta¬ ble.
ble. By a caprice for which there is no accounting, Elizabeth, whofe eyes were ever watchful, and heart fufpicious, bent both for ever on Ellinor; who endured from her, with filent indignation, a thou¬ fand paífionate extravagancies. Contrary to Lord Leicefter's idea, I plainly per¬ ceived fhe encouraged every pretender to either, obviouily to develope the myftery ftie eafily difcerned through his falfe con¬ fidence.— Tortured with the paflion of Sir Philip, I found all my rigor could not ex¬ tinguiíh hopes the Queen patronized,while Lord Leicefter's confidence feemed to contract, in proportion as it became diffi¬ cult for me to partake it. The fair Pembroke attached herlelf particularly to Ellinor, and Rofe Cecil, Lord Burleigh's fécond daughter, profef- fcd an unbounded friendfhip for me. I had fo great a deference to the command of my Lord, as to withhold mine, till time «-utiVinccd im- too feelingly, that flie was incapable of abuAflg it, She wás almoft й fti-diiger at CöUfï as well aë öUffèlvei, Ifid
and brought up under a mother who ab¬ horred it; the death ofthat mother leav¬ ing her to the care of an ambitious father,. he flattered himfelf her beauty would win her a hufband of merit, ere fne had grained courage to aiľert her own choice. He was not miftaken in the firft opinion : the ten¬ der bloom both of her mind and perfon, attached to her a thoufand hearts, but though in all other inftances compliance itfelf, in the article of marriage, ihe re¬ fufed to ohey even the Queen, who con- fequently hated her. This fad confor¬ mity of fituation, both were at liberty alike to lament, and with the candor in¬ cident to youth, 1 found it difficult to limit my lamentations. Our fituations and tempers made us alike cultivate an attachment with Lady Arundell, Sir Phi¬ lip's eldeft fifter, who had long fince re¬ tired to a feat of his on the banks of the Thames upon the imprifonment of her Lord, With lefs íliining quáliŕkätion* ıhan her more fair ftftd fortunate fifter» Lady Af tmdell pofMed ä Roman itrtmgih öf foul· lelyvid frem ehildlı©öd b\
Elizabeth, íhe might have remained a favorite, even while her huiband was a victim, but ihe inexorably infifted on íharing hls prifon, and when it foon after became his grave, retired in an honourable poverty, and owed her little income to her brother's bounty. — Thus, in inno¬ cence and hallowed widowhood, paffed the days of this amiable woman, who now en¬ joyed that firft and laft of human plea¬ fures, the feeing herfelf furrounded with friends, although íhe had only merit to attach them. The refentment of Philip the fécond of Spain broke forth at this period, and employed every one's thoughts ; more efpecially the Queen's, with whom love was ever fo fubordinace a confideration, that I flattered myfelf Lord Leicefter would chufe this opportunity to plan our future meetings, and a little relieve me from the infupportable tortures of perpe¬ tual hypocrify. When now, to complete my evils, he for whom I renounced every diftinction due to my fex and birth, he in whom my foul was treafured, regarded me
me with coldnefs and difdain. I ex¬ amined my own heart. It did not make me a fingle reproach ; but the know¬ ing I was wronged could not reftore my peace. I began to dread that fatisfied love had given place to ambition ; that cobfidering me as the only bar between himfelf and Elizabeth (who became more and more gracious to hirw) he vainly re¬ gretted he had made me fo -My ha¬ tred to the (¿neen redoubled, although fhe treated me much better than my fifter, as ilie always conceived Ellinor his fa¬ vorite, becaufe the vehicle of his fenti- mtnts to me : yet, though his difplea- fure was ftrongly marked, it did not fpring-from indifference; for at the fame time he carefully avoided my converfa- tion, he incelľantly watched my actions, and was always in my view, without ever being in my reach.— -It was impoffible not to difcern he muft be jealous i but alas, fufpicion foon makes the caufes it feeks. My bluíhes and the dilbrder of my air, when any fuppofed lover acj- drcfied me, confirmed his fatal prejudice; and
and the impoffibility of finding an oppor¬ tunity to acquit myfelf almoft diftračted me. Fortune, fhortly after, added the only aggravation my fate admitted. The fair Rofe Cecil, whofe attachment I have mentioned, had infenfibly engaged my affections by the warmth of her own. The pleafure I took in difcourfing about my Lord, made me overlook for a time, that ihe was equally unwearied of the topic ; but the eager manner in which fne revived it, while increafmg forrow buried his name in my heart, at laft opened my eyes. I obferved her more clofely, I faw the ftrong affection which impelled her to be near to him, while her heightened colour, and univerfal agitation, whenever he addreífed her, made the fecret incli¬ nation of her heart but too obvious. There are wives who would have feized this occafion to retort, but fne was fo in¬ nocent I could not diftruft her, and was above appearing to do fo. Some imagi¬ nary flight overcame a mind fo delicate, and one evening ihe indulged in her tears, and unbofomed her whole heart. In 4 vain,
vain, ihe faid, did years and circum¬ ftances divide her from Lord Leicefter, ñnce ihe took more pleafure in fileYitly ad¬ miring him, than in being admired by the whole world ----- tc Ah, madam, cried ihe, how barbarous are hereditary hatreds! Exert yourfelf for me, deareft Matilda, di- veft my Lord's mind of fo narrow a preju¬ dice, aíľured that this obligation will dou¬ ble an attachment equally produced by your own merit and the family you fprung from." What a propofal was this to a wife—to a wife, did I fay ? alas, to a lover—a wild and excravagent lover!----She embraced me, and hid her tears and agitations on my bofom------a bofom which ftruggled with agonies yet more trying. Affected alike with her innocence and her fate, I returned her careíľes, and wept like a mo¬ ther over her child.----She left me fuf¬ ficient leifure to confider my anfwer; I told her, in pitying, I ihewed her ail the kindnefs in my power, fince the little in¬ fluence I had with my Lord was obvious enough.
enough. 1 hinted that hers muft ever be .1 hopelefs attachment, a? the vifible dif¬ tinction of the Queen made it very im¬ probable Lord Leicefter ihould marry any other woman, not to mention the valt disparity between her years and his. She replied, that lhe had confidered this over fo often, that fhe had reconciled herfelf to every article.----The Queen thought more of war than marriage, and furely if Lord Leicefter could be brought to do jufticc to her heart, her youth would never be confidered as a fault. In ihort, I eafily underftood that what íhe wiíhed íhe was refolved to hqpe. I dropped the fubject, but it was with in¬ finite chagrin I beheld this lovely girl en¬ courage a pafiion, fo many caufes concur¬ red to render hopelefs. In fact, it did not long efeape the Queen's notice, and the unfortunate Kofe faw every body appear to be acquainted with her weaknefs but its object, who ihewed a coldnefs towards her, almoft amounting to diflike: to me flie always flew for confolation, and I fre-
frequently adminiftered that I could not find. On fo important an event as the cxpecbd invafion, the Engliih were all prepared to take arms : Lord Leicefter, as their leader, was already encamped; and I parted with him in common with the other Courtiers, without the liberty of uttering a fyllable that might give peace to hie heart or my own. The mifery of my fitu¬ ation became intolerable, when fear of my Lord's fafety was added to every other fear, and I refolved on an explanation, whatever the confequence. The natural afcendancy love and fuperior years gave him over me when prefent, vaniíhed with him: I intreated him tofuffer me by know¬ ing to repair an involuntary fault, and be¬ fore it was too late, recover an affection I could not long furvive. I conjured him to remember that he was my all in this life, and that if ne continued to withhold his confidence, I could only conclude he re¬ pented the having ever beftowed it; and ihould finally give up all care of a being, Vol. I. QL whicty
«vhich was no longer dear to me than while i ε was fo to him. The equivocal turn of thefe expreífions 1 thought would fecure this letter, even if intercepted, from producing any evil confequence ; and while dubious how to convey it, Sir Philip Sydney demanded permiffion-to take leave of me :—not even the pangs Τ fuffered through his love, could rob him of my regard—the dif- guiíing it was all in my power. To his care I committed this letter, aifured he might be trufted even with the truth ; and tranfported with the leaft mark of my con¬ fidence, he promifed all that lovers ufuaily promife. No fooner was he gone, than I remem¬ bered the ill-chofen meífenger might ren¬ der Lord Leicefter infenfible to the con¬ tents of a letter bliftered with my tears.—» Alas ! when once wc enter the labyrinth .of pofiibilities, to which jealoufy is the fatal centinél, hardly ever can we extri¬ cate ourfelves. The. gentle confoiations of Ellinor were all my fate had left me¿ but
but for her, ficknefs muft have been the confequence of forrow: but during the hours of retirement (for one apartment held us) ihe omitted nothing to footh or ftrengthen my mind : — incomparable fifter ! what a foul was thine ! Oh ! whv were tears my only tribute to thy bound- lefs generofity? At length Lord Brook arrived exprefs from the camp, and took the firft oppor¬ tunity to deliver me a letter from my Lord. He faid I had found means to convert the accnfer into the criminal, and. conjured me to pardon a mean jealoufy, which puniftied itfelf. My too ready obedience to the Queen's command, be added, and the obvious pleafure I appear-, ed to find in his nephew's converfation, had poifoned every moment of his life fince I came to Court. Sydney's talents, his equal years, his generous difpofition, áll confpired to make him a formidable rival. <c I am not meanly jealous of your perfon, continued he—no, Matilda, it h your heart of which'I am a m i fer; ıv>r Q^2 dO
do I wiih you mine, whatever your lofs may coft me, longer than you wiih your- ielffo. Under the cruel circumftances impofed on us, lefs might excufably alarm a heart which has fo feverely fuffered for its candor j yet, too juft in my nature to con¬ fider that as your fault, which muft have proved our mutual misfortune, I refolved to bury in my.bofom its killing fuggefti- ons, and ceafe to perfecute you with a paffion which you dared not repel, how¬ ever reluctant your heart. But that which would have made a common mind jealous, has eradicated the weaknefs from mine ; for nothing but fpotlefs innocence could have made you chufe out my imaginary rival as the vehicle of your fentiments. Truth and conviction flaih upon my be¬ wildered fenfes, and love breathes through every invaluable line of your dear letter. —How, how iliall 1 ever recompence you for my injuftice ?—I can no longer live without humbling myfelf at your feet, and receiving a pardon I fear I mall never deferve. I have at length refolved to confide
confide our fecret to Lady Arundell— forrow and experience have furely taught her difcretion. Her houfe is the only re¬ tired one to which you can come with fafety. Appear indifpofed, and the Queen will not fufpečt more in the requeft of pafiing fome time with my niece, than that of being unable to fupport the hurry and fatigue of the times. I will prepare Lady Arundell for your reception, and fnatch the firft moment confident with my duty to fìy and enliven your folitude. The embrace that confirmed you mine was lefs dear to me, than that which will feal your forgi veneís. —Oh! my love, ended he, who could endure the tortures of doubt, *were not the moment of reconciliation fo exquifite a tranfport!" Ah, true indeed ! for all the pleafures of my life faded before that moment ! I feemed to treid in air, and had hardly command enough of myfelf to affect lan¬ guor and hcknefs. Elizabeth, who al¬ ways.found herfelf fatigued with indifpo¬ fition, becaufe not fubject to it herfelf, Q^j readily
readily confented to my fpending a month with Lady Arundell, who received me with infinite pleafure. I found ihe had been apprized of my marriage only, and that my Lord ftill withheld the fecret oí my birth. She allotted me a magnificent apartment, which concluded with a fa¬ loon opening to the Thames. This лот ble room was embeli i ílied with valuable paintings, fome of which were not yet íiniíhed, and a painter of eminence fre¬ quently attended to complete them. This man v/as employed by her to take a pic¬ ture of me, which might fill up the interval of my Lord's abfence, as well as agreeably furprife him. While one day dreifed gaily for this purpofe, and waiting in the faloon». I perceived the man enter, but how was I furprifed to fee him a moment after at my feet! I turned indignantly towards him; Ah, heavens! it was my Lord, my Lei¬ cefter himfelf! who, fafe in t hat difguife, which he and Lady Arundell had agreed on, was to forbid the painter whenever he could vifit us with fafety. Wc learnt from him news of the utmoft importance, that
that Heaven itfelf had fought for Eliza¬ beth, and defeated an armada her power could ill have coped-with. This intel¬ ligence, by fecuring Lord Leicefter, joyed even my heart ; and the pride of forgiving being added to the pleafure of loving, life could bellow no more on me. I had now learnt to be beforehand with- fufpicion j and as Sir Philip, charmed with the opportunity of feeing me out of rhe chilling circle of a Court, was almoft a daily vifitor, I refolved to end his hope*, even at the rifque of an implied con¬ fidence, í could hardly fometimes for¬ bear weeping to fee him thus purfuing a ihadow, and waiting a glorious youth,— Oh Sydney ! you was worthy of a better fate, and could I accufe myfelf of em¬ bittering yøurs, I ihould be a wretch in¬ deed!—-but no, I honored, revered, ad¬ mired you i nay,hacl 1 not already exchang¬ ed my heart, it mult have been yours—you, whom fo many women have loved, and none, no none were ever known to hate. ,0^4 Having
Having formed my refolution, I per¬ mitted him one day to lead me to the ter¬ race. Overjoyed with the diftinciion, he entertained me with a thoufand pleafant fallies.—Ah ! is there a more pungent fenfation in nature, than the neceífity fortune fometimes impofes on generous minds to afflici: each other ? I opened my lips—the truth hovered on them—but it was not till he himfelf tenderly preíľed me to add language to my expreflive looks, and confide to him the fenti ments I had endeavoured to fupprefs, that I could fpeak. " Alas ! Sir Philip, cried I, why am 1 reduced to tell you, your merit and your attachment are by a combination of events my only misfortunes ?" <c What do you utter, Madam ? cried he,-—is this poftible ?"--- " A painful truth, returned 1, Which the hlgheft ëfteërri ft»f fbi\ EHUİH aİHHg e*= ти -----Л am feflfteii sf lhe ififlaifigê* §( ; Klisâtehı Ш Ытщ ть i 8fñ тъщ « QlŞ her 1 returned be \ does the fair Matilda know fo little of rne, as to ima¬ gine
gine I would owe her hand to regal au¬ thority?— No, Madam, Sydney would riot on fuch terms, he may proudly fay, deign to accept even yourfelf. While my paffion was only my own misfortune, I thought myfelf at liberty to indulge it, but the moment it becomes yours, pride, honor, fenfibil i ty, all ordain eternal filence. Yet, fu rel у r added he, m an affecting tone, a heart like mine might hope to know the fatality which thus wounds It." " By the love you have profeiTed for me, cried I, feizing his hand in turn with energy j by the honor which actuates you towards every human being, I conjure you prefs no further into à fecret I have no right to reveal—if I had ------· " If you had ! — ah lovely* gënerotis, candid Matilda--- щ í will mt İfiVidl Úñf \Ш&Щ Щ Ehİftk İi fiêëët&f jţ ΙΘ e§8= §§äi: " üfiig \щ hiFá fei ásri¥i§ mf шкк §f 'm felg пмт má вдр§===р1 ftiFfly mm ~-mm I hmi тШщ $ш obferved
obferved were you but to allow me ex¬ pectation." " Why, why, cried I, weeping, am I compelled to a half confidence in a heart fo noble!—--but be aifured, Sir Philip, time can never unite us by any other bonds than thofe of efteem ; and furely, every day muft ftrengthen thofe." " I think I underftand you, replied i he, fixing his eyes on mine with a melan¬ choly firmnefs, — and finali I expofe you to the ungoverned paffîons of the Queen ? г --no, fince 1 am never— -fince efteem is to be the only bond between us---ha paufedi and kneeling kiffed both hands, as if taking an everláfting káve === when »em ym Ш itië===ihöygh t wring чту ЙЫ=1 ©f lhi§ hiâri===when fiiMi ym ím mf, I will ftd iñfltltd ιθ all yöWF i& tifimi 1 Riflngj he quitted me, and walked to¬ wards his barge, with fad and irrefolute fteps, frequently looking back-as if he was ready to return, and recant his decla¬ ration : but the barge fwiftly conveying him toward,London, I gave free vent to the
the tears I had with infinite difficulty fup^ preíľed. The followiug evening Lord Leicefter had promifed to pafs with\us.: he arrived wich an air of fatisfačtion it was impoffi- hle I could avoid lharing, eveawhile ig T norant of its caule. " Who would rely on the conftancy of a lover, faid he, with a happy fmile, fince even my Matil¬ da's charms could not retain my nephew's attachment ! He has follicited the Queen's confent to marry Mifs Walfingham \ you know her love for him, but hi9 fudden re¬ turn of it, amazes all acquainted with both. Elizabeth calls him a whiitifieál fooi, but dyë§ mí êárg i§ öffëftd İİr* f fâBëli by fgfyflñg hef êöfifgfiii hêwtvif tPfplëâftd ai his thus mashing himfelf« ihe fflftffiâgi will be iiltbraiiå in a ftw ilay§ ? sod ìtìv Matilda Is Invitta te И rivals triumph." ДЬ no, I ihould have returned» had his jçaloufy not taught me caution, thy Matilda nas a triumph of her own to enjoy. Alas, I now underftood Sydney's parting words, and my heart floated in tears
tears tinctured fo ftrongly with every fen¬ timent but love, that I could hardly dif¬ tinguifh whether that had not a ftiare in the fublimity of the moment. My Lord prefľed me to return to Court previous to the ceremony ; he even gave out that I meant to dd fo, and this I only underftood by a line which accompanied the formal invitations fent to me and Lady Arundel!, « Ah, Madam, added Sir Phi¬ lip! ín thi poftftfipf, is it iťue that you return ife my feerift§f i§ §§mpltattd ľ 1 11 Νθ, I will mì fiiufflf flghtd h a huftand's claims екипа n© (т\\щ and humanity refumes its rights," ****** The dread that malicious obfervers might once more pry into Lord Leicef¬ ter's moments of retirement, at laft con¬ quered the reluctance I felt at returning to Court. I faw, in defiance of danger, felf- indulgence continually increafed upon him. At firft, a few hours of the evening were all he devoted to me and Lady Arundell -,
Arundell; íhortly after he came later and pafled the night : he then pleaded fear of difgracing one or the other, and loft whole days. ------------Couldft thou won¬ der thy former marriage was difcovered ? faid 1 often to myfelf, after exhaufting all п)у rhetoric in vain to drive him from me,—Oh Leicefter ! what was the wrath uf Elisabeth then* to that fli« would feel eöüld lhe explore the whole öf §hU fe* ш! í" 1 ттцй EUleøf te wHii m w§fd my ftbftmei Wi§ rnweh nmarkidi and ai laft mw ned m& mert a v§l«niaFy viåim, A fad and filent admiration was the only ехргеЛшп of my features at the fight of Sir Philip i he fighed at the compliment indifpenfably due, which his bride re¬ ceived with cold contempt. To a coun¬ tenance naturally haríh and inquifitive, however beautiful, Mifs Walfingham had always united a temper, proud, pallonate* and peevifh. Her ftrong attachment to Sir Philip, had in all inftances, where he was concerned, fubdued for a time, or, veiled thofe failings. He could not bo ignorant
ignorant of a paffion he had fo often been milled upon, and the moment he found it wns not poflible for him to make hin Own choice, he generoufly reiblvfd to In¬ dulge herâi lila motives could not be lieubtetb äš alt thë Qê№ krleW ftê hää m frøynt and ëvgpy My ftw il w¿§ iii hé? pêwif i§ Ыт\т ih§ \щщ$ öf w^r rflşfl,rr= = lvîţ ftlă§, if was nøt in h§F ro¬ ture— far from feeking to win upon his heart, by a filent indulgence of all his little foibles, (lie wearied him with im¬ portunate fondnefs, and whenever bufi¬ nefs or wearinefs drove him from home, employed the interval in fomenting vi¬ olent paffions with -which ihe feldom failed to overwhelm him on his return. Incapable of bending fo noble a mind to the little triumph of conquering a low one, and as incapable of regulating his life by the narrow rules fhe would have laid down for him, he faw no al¬ ternative but the purfuit of glory, and follicited tobe fent to his government of Eiuihing. 4 Oh,
Oh,'pardon me, beloved leice-fter, the bitrer tears í have lo often íhed for the gallant Sydney.- Why, why hat) he not Ľhofen my filter? MheWas fVe^j İlle \ш\ à hiwdj a butu it peľlbH WöFíhjf tiis j ilig would have crowned his däy§ wiih hap= pifi§ft á»d his Ш¥е with h§nfìFi Alası in rhi wiak priiţi Ьитавиу w§ ftgk f§ n^w möáfl mg diftiñ^Í9R§ ef mm^ må \ф\т\у oppofc our limited faculties ίο om n i fcience. New difturbances in the Netherlands, now obliged Lord Leicefter, as com¬ mander in chiefs to accompany his ne¬ phew. I faw them both depart, with a reluctance fo extreme as foreboded fome calamity. The generous Sydney under¬ ftood my filence, my conflicts, my wiihes^ <c Rely on my -cares—rely on my honor, faid he at parting, and be aflured, my breaft muft be cold as the earth which then will cover it, ere that feels one wound which lodges the fair Matilda's heart.— Oh, let me worihip the wife- ordination of Providence] If amidft all the evils fatt
fáit mi щШат have ö¥grwhçlm^ı prønøHRPing a fød adı>U| whå§ iriııft l h^ve endwrvd ii^d I been, (he Ph«frni but why by fuch remembrance difturb heri iove!— Yet dear is the fenfibility, adored Matilda — Oh let the tears which now enrich your cheeks, be wholly Syd- ney s! And they were wholly Sydney's ! A fad prefentiment heightened the anguiihof this parting, by telling me we never more ihould meer. It remains not for my weak pen to paint the heroic death of Sir Philip Sydney; it has employed the nobleft. Even envy and malice dropt involuntary tears, while friendfhip was ^xhaufted in vain lamentations. As to mc, I fct no bounds to my forrow, and every reafon which once confined my efteem for him to my own bofom, dying with him, I mourned as for a darling bro¬ ther; and thus perpetuated the fecret ha¬ tred of his widow, who, weak woman, envied me even the melancholy privilege 4j( bewailing him. Anxiety 3
Amiin у før ihë fo№ «Г l-i»hl yiëiftéri whh -h Ihiä ëVëril limit HP^Hitfily %МЩ Ш İten MVP Wiy W 4 ftill nrøcr саге, ín Y4İ« J impure my ёвнинуа МЩ$1 (шцц tt) grief: fime çqnfirm«4 * n №" pretention wl>kh had freque^dy alarme4 rae immediately after щу Lord's depar¬ ture. I found but too plainly, that im¬ prudent love had produced anew misfor r tune, and that J bore about a living tefti- mony of my carriage, from whicţi the worft confequences might; arife. Ah, unhappy babe, thy mother's anr giiiíh foreran thy birth ! Deprived by a lad combination of circumftances of a welcome, throbs of terror were thy fir(t fymptoms of exiftence. This accumula¬ tion of misfortune feemed to benumb my jeafon. I knew not what ţo refolve on· I faw myfelf almoft in my royal mother's melancholy predicament when I was bocp. "Alas, perhaps I may to-morrow be en¬ tirely fo, 1 would cry to myfelf j let rne fly then while yet my prifon gates are ögen." —The eye of Elisabeth' became yçtmore Vol. Í. ""K'' dreadful
dreadful to me ; I fancied every moment it dived into my heart, and death for ever feemed to furround me in forms yet dearer to me than my own. My filter's better fenfe eafily difcerned how dangerous and how vain a project flight muft prove. " You, lhe would fay, whofe timid heart Ihrinks even from thofe it loves : who have hitherto trod the moft fafe and confined circle; who hardly know what lonelinefs means j how, in this fituation, can you encounter the pe¬ rils of the road, the infolence of drangers, the dangers of the fea, and the terrors of a camp ? Even admitting all thefe happily paft, in following Lord Leicefter, y®u only change the object of Elizabeth's re¬ fentment; from which, diftance may not ihield either you or your Lord. — Oh, by how many ways may lhe revenge her¬ felf !—Leicefter it is true loves you ; but in you, at prefent, are centred future diílinčtionj pomp, and a variety of plea- fures never yet indifferent to him :—thefe will be the leaft of his loffes 2 and, be¬ lieve
lieve me, if the fecret tranfpires, that it Ь his own way will one day prove your deareft confoUtion: — and, furely, my dear Matilda will not entirely forget a fifter, whole only joy or forrow ihe yet has been." . The laft tender confideration entirely fubdued a fpark of difpleafure çxcited bý the former. I fubmitted my wavering refolutions to her direction, and wrote an anonymous letter, defcriptive of my fitu¬ ation, which, with innumerable charges* Lady Arundell delivered to Lord Brook, the diftinguiihed friend of Sir Philip Syd¬ ney, to convey into Lord Leicefter's own hands. That amiable woman became the confident of my prefent fear, and with unwearied kindnefs conjured me to refy upon her conduct— in her houfe ihe af- fured me of an afyhim, and in herfelf of another mother for the unfortunate infant. I felt all the indulgence of heaven in pro¬ viding me fuch an unexpected refource j and almoft wilhed I had not made my Lord a partaker in cares, he was fo little Η ι able
able to relieve. By her advice I fum¬ moned courage to appear again in the Court. " We íeldöm, faid the priíáent Lady Arundell, criticife thofé we fee every Йау ; novelty alone attracts Curiofity ; and if you are abfent any time, fome eye of the many your return will attract, may fierce through every veil into the caufe. I will carefully watch, and when neceifary, ^rarn'ýou to retreat." % I found ón my return, thè fair Rofe Cecil had quitted London by the com¬ mand óf her father, who Was highly in- cènfed, alike at her refufal of a very ad¬ vantageous match, and the pafiion that caufed it. The lofs of her fbciety, which at another time I íhould have lamented, became an advantage in the prefent deli¬ cate conjuncture. I no longer durft wiih for companions I could not keep at a di¬ ftance ; and I hoped ere we met again I ihould be more at liberty to cultivate the •ttachn ent íhe proretfed to me, while time would have conquered that unfor¬ tunate one which alone could interfere with It, İ ı-üuıunl
» I counted the moments ere a Jetter could arrive from my Lord—in vain El¬ linor aíTured me the time was infufficient, had Lord Brook's journey met with no delay. We were talking this oyer оде morning, when a lpud knocking at the door much earlier than ufual, itartled us both ; how was I amazed a moment after to fee my Lord rufh in, booted, and with that d i fordered drefs and air which ihew¬ ed him juft arrived 1 Pale and ipeec u lefs, 1 threw myfelf into his arms, and made no other return to his embraces than by fighs and tears, while Ellinor, ftruck with the fingularity of his conduci, repeatedly demanded how he came there ? — " To fee, to fave my love, cried he, .fixinp· his eyes on mine with unutterable fondnefs ; will not my Matilda blefs me with.ano¬ ther felf? and could 1 be fuch a lavage to leave her to face the pain, the ľ nef, the danger alone ? Dry your teats my molt beloved, am not I with you ? Ì whom you have made the h.pp'xü ut mankind} J, who was born but to wor- H j »hip
irhip'you ?"—* Imprudent ! cried I, link¬ ing my own bofom—alas, my love, how is it I fee yon here V It fcemed as if rea¬ fon, like light, pierced at once through tîıe chaos of his mindr Abforbed in the fingle confederation of mv frtuation, he had ported to England without refting a hioment on the receipt of my letter, nor fcould find a caufe might fatisfy even in¬ different obfervers, much more the jea¬ lous íbul of Elizabeth,—" Ah, heavens \ we are now indeed ruined, cried I, wring¬ ing my hands, the implacable enemy of my peace will become fo of yours, and every malicious eye will now be fixed on her who finks under the moft eafual ob- fervation.—Oh that the filent manfion in which 1 fo long vegetated had been my grave, fince I quitted it but to become a misfortune to the man 1 love V*- —" Why will my Matilda, returned Lord Leicefter, with a rmbli ffiihJntft, monopolize leve and |iñiF©fi§y } Perhaps I have yut (US* dent influens §vtr Kiliibtfh] ιθ pir- fuade Ыг> fçars for her welfare alone brought
brought me home; but even if not, íhall I refufe to bear a fingle mortification for her fake who has borne fo many for яме ?—The worft ihe can difcover is оиг marriage j your birth is beyond the power of malice. Summon your fortitude, my love, and let us concert every meafuric jieceiTary to our mutual fafety, for I wiţl take all the care of myfelf you would wiih me, Never more, I folemnly fwear, will your huiband leave you. Dreams of for¬ tune and favor fade away before the re- -alities of life; let us, with our darling iifcer, feek a ihelter in France j I want tiot the means of affluence, independent of the Queen. L.et us then avow our union, and thus convert my dear Matil¬ da's tendernefs, always her firft charm, alike into her virtue and her happinefs. There, \Ш from the vengeance of Eliza¬ beth, we may, with©«§ (m ör dimrmor, quierty await \m аШЫШг Imagini, my leve, fhľfxqulflti 1™фш §f ш1г= eling fhe Thf©ne ef ym? \mûm wifh lovely pledge? of our unioni fo while empire fills every power of her imagina¬ it 4 tion,
tion, hafüre may throb through every *pulfe to her heart. w The fond, fond vifion floated alike 'through my brain ! Lord Leicefter, in¬ different to the opinion of the Queen, re¬ folved to wait on her without entering into the reafons of his return, whkh was already known through the Court. Eli¬ zabeth had for fome time kept her cham¬ ber, neverthelefs íhe permitted him aft audience ere íhe left her bed. I knew her capricious temper, and while medi¬ tating what line íhe meant to purfue, fe- veral of her ladies then in waiting came out of her chamberí the laft of whom told me it was her pleafure, that I alone ih©uld witneu her eonverladon with Lord Leicefter. Confcience íhivered my whole frame, and I entered the apartment as a condemned wretch would that where the rack was preparing. Lord Leicefter, equally furprized, pointed out by an ex- $feilive glance a place where the clofed curtain would prevent her remarking the changes of my countenance j and thither, more
Л
more dead than alive, I took тпу ftation. ** Leicefter, faid ftie, in a Janguilhing voice, thy unexpected return upon the news of my indifpofition, ík a freíh mark of thy watchful duty and unwearied af- fecìion. I have long refifted that tender inclination which diftinguiihed fhee ia earlieft youth; but now, when I have no potent enemy to fear, I may crown thy paffion and indulge my own, without endangeringmryfelf or the ftate.—A new plot I have difcovered to releafe Mary, renders It abfolutely necelTaty I ihould, by marrying, cut off her hopes and thofe of her party j I ihall now, in ШГО, fur¬ prife them. Long have I weighed the buiinefu in my mind, and frequently de¬ termined to recall thee ι but thy unex¬ pected return, by evincing the ftrength of thy tendernefs, demands an immediate recompence. — Take then at laft the fo- long-withheld hand of Elizabeth, wly> thus refigns all authority over thee, ex¬ cept that thy heart gives her.'* She pauf- ed, extending a withered hand. Lord Leicefter,
Leicefter, confufed beyond all expreflion, and expecting me to drop fenfelefs every moment, hefitated a few broken fentences of faint gratitude, and kiffed the fatal hand íhe no longer drew from him, fixing a moment after his eyes on me ; and oh, how comprchenfive was the look ! — " I perceive by thy trembling, my Lord, continued (he, how much I have furprized thee. Recover thyfelf. — My election of thee is expected by every one, and (hall ,be immediate to mortify Mary. I find myfelf weil enough to quit my chamber ; it is" my intention thou lhouldeft lead me hence this evening, and, by taking a re¬ gal feat under the fame canopy, prepare the kingdom for the declaration I purpofe making to-morrow. The ceremony of efpoufal will demand time and fplendor, but never more (halt thou quit her, who finds, after trying every effort, it is im- pofíible to live without thee. ,> There are inftances in nature of timid beings whom darknefs merely woyld de¬ prive of their fenfes, who yet, on defpe- rate 3
rate emergencies, encounter the jarring elements without ihrinking.— Î, who had till that moment been compofed of tears and trembling, now found I muft no longer hang a helplefs weigh* on the heart of my hufband, and bleíTmg the caprice which made her felečt me as the only wtt- nefs of her dotage, I leant againft the ta- peftry, and endeavoured, by a felf-col¬ lected air, to arm him for the occafion· I had the mifery to fee his fortitude dimi¬ niih in proportion as mine mcreafed, and that after ftruggling with his feelings till almoft convulfed, he was obliged to ojuit the prefence of the Queen precipitately, and fcarcely could his failing lrmbs con^ vey him thence. The attendants, before difmified, now entering, the Queen called the Lady Latimer to her bediide, and I followed the footfteps of my Lord.— Heavens and earth, cried I, on looking round in vain for him, what is now to become of me ! Even Ellinor, my only comfort, fate had cruelly robbed me of, nor was ihe to be found throughout thé whole
whole palace. Ere the tumults of my mind could fubfide into recollection, 1 was in¬ formed Lady Arundelľs barge waited, to convey meto Chelfea, where (lie was great¬ ly indifpofcd. Eafily imagining this was a feint of Lord Leicefter's, to unfold his fentiments to me in fafety, I haftened into k, and was conveyed to the fatal faloon on the banks of the Thames, once con- fecrated to love and pleafure only. I found Lord Leicefter alone with his niece, meafuring the apartment with unequal Heps and a diftracted air j he took my hand, a.id foftening with pity for my fitu¬ ation, led me to a feat, and threw himfelf by me. His tears bedewed the hand he kified. ------ "Support yourfelf ftill, my foul, faid he, the cri (is is come unawares j and fate is beforehand with our intentions. Elizabeth indeed has furprized me, but as her pafiion, however weak and abfurd, is generous, it now ftabs me to the heart.— To furľer her to publiih it to the world, to ftamp with ridicule my Sovereign, my benefacbefs, would no doubt awaken her moft
moft mortal hatred, and rob me of my own efteem.—Matilda, my love, can you fupport the truth, and all the truth?—Did I not tell you that, one day or another, your anxious wilh of feeing your mother f.ee might interfere with your own hap¬ pinefs? It has indeed) for even at the rtioment the Queen in tender confidence imparted to me a plot to releafe Mary, ihe meant to obviate by her own marriage, my fecret foul upbraided me as an abet¬ tor, if not a principal in that plot.—Hap¬ py in the idea of furprifing you with its event, and far from expecting fo extraor¬ dinary a one oft the part of the Queen, I find by papers Lord Burleigh gave me ere I entered her apartment, that the enthufi- aftic affiftants of Mary premeditated the martyrdom of Elizabeth, and haye reafon to imagine* that ihe by this time knows the man whom ihe was Willing to level with herfelf, has been Capable of fo infa¬ mous a concealment. Nay, how do. I know how far I may be included in the barbarity ? She may beled to believe, фе hænd to which íhe gave her own an hour ago,
ago, was armed with a dagger, and ready cvtry moment to ufe it. —- My life is at ilake, and oh ! what is infinitely dearer, «very virtue which once I hoped would long furvive me, cancelled by ingrati¬ tude. "—Theagitationsof his mind almoft deprived him of his fenfes.—I threw my¬ felf at his feet.—-" Oh ! if ever the unfor¬ tunate Matilda was dear to you, cried Í, now ihew it—now ftruggle to endure for her—has fne ever feared to do fo for you ? ît is in vain to hope any thing from Eli¬ zabeth, as circumftances appear ihe muft condemn you.—Already 1 fee you in the Tower—I fee thofe gates open to receive you, that have entombed fo many alike noble and innocent. If ymi would have the babe Its mother's anguifti almoft urges into a premature exiftence— óh ! if you would hâve it fee the light of heaven, plunge her no farther in defpair. —* Flv now* tførøjHiié very moment while wc havr yet the powtr. While you !*ve your in- micenee may yet'br vindicated \ and while you livt I may perhap* be able to do lo," 4 Lord
Lord Leicefter, ihaking his head, gave a deep figh—-a figh more foul-piercing than the moft violent agitation.—" You know not what you fay, my love, return¬ ed he---even now, in all probability, my houfe is furrounded, and exprefles dif- L patched to clofc every port in the king¬ dom, ihould I attempt to leave it ; and hardly is there a ruftic inEngland to whom my features are unknown. One expedient alone remains, and greatly would that foften the ftroke. You are neither ex¬ pofed to my danger, nor like me the marked of every eye- -flight is ftill in your power, and in you I íhall ftill think my¬ felf fate — put yourfelf under the protec¬ tion "---" Never, cried I, ftarting up with vehemence ; î am your wife, that holy title 1 will maintain before men and an¬ gels, and nothing-—nothing I in turn fo¬ lemnly fwear (hall part us. I will, with watchful duty, íliare thé prifon to which I (hall always remember I hive eon·* demurd you ι And oh I If your fate li accelerated by my means, be aíľured 1 ulike will (hare your grave,"—· 0 One fcope
hope of fafety i$ yet yours, cried Lady Arundell. How coined» it efeape you that the Recefs may ftjll fupply a fad and dear afylum till we can judge of cir¬ cumftances?"—The thought had indeed occurred to me, but I dared not name the memorial of the prefent misfortune* I examined his eyes in filener. " My gentle love, my fweet Matilda, can I refolve to grieve thee, fighed he, fpeak, would you wifh me to conduct you thither ?" My tears only allowed me to pronounce, " yes." " Yet how, refumed he, İ9 it poftible ? — How can you fup* port the Inevitable fatigues of the jour¬ ney, with the addition öf Ш feats In ymt pf#fèflf fltUâiİÖfi f 4 " íe í gan ftj|/= p§n щ fhifigı fviry thing, fëbbed 1 1я= ftftieuUffly, buf ehe Uf a mymr dangtr/' « Уев, my {uve, added he, к i (îi n g away my tears, I will, if poíFible, live tq re¬ ward your unexampled tendernefs. Lady Arundell think for us, fuggeft the mode of our departure'.4 4ζ k íhould be fudden, cried our generous friend, and how can either be fuffioieotly difguiied, or how, ihall
ïhall we ^înd proper attendants.^ «« We will have none with us, returned Lord Jjeiceftcr, I rely on your care to fummoa Le Val frora Keniiworth Caftle ·, he is mailer of the fecret of the Recefs, whi- ther he can follow us, and convey with «afe, at different times, the treafure hoarded in.the Caftle j while with the ve¬ nerable fofter-father of my love, we wait your farther informations."-*——." Ah, how happy was it, added I, your fond- nefs obliged me to ride! now can I follow you fearlefs of any thing but Eli¬ sabeth. Supply me, dear Lady A rundell, with ih« homely garb of a fervant ι my 1мг A muit have tmmk le (b@ dif« gyife ©f â pâim#t| iflvifiiêd må worn en » tappier QcqafiQí), y§t jf evin I herdly knew him in If, wHô tlfc Ш\ difeevtr bim ì Oh, hafte «w darling fťmd ! fecure m the fleeteft horfes m* I feem every гдо·· ment environed with the guards of Eli¬ zabeth—-when ihall we be any thing but a trouble to you ŕ" The amiable Lady-Arundell provided ^11 in the manner required, and we fet Vol. I. S off
25Э ;S off immediately* ■: Erefun-fet we reached a peäfínťs cot : near St. Albano, where my Lord, infilled we might wiťhíifety take a little' rcftf/ whic'h indeed I greatly re¬ quired^* Adcultoitied to pafs and' repaís that ro.id for ever, he fancied he remem¬ bered every face he faw, and 1 too furely theught all remembdťetfíiiľrl» Our full. tie höft aiul hh wife feátiéd te Μή juft iifldéfftandiflgf 'enough ιθ fe§hftiå : thf 'ídti ©ŕ fflyrtw wílh 1 4i§ } 3 Bríďí F©ulWiTiy I H öFd m brekk' of dfly/ftcr^ly ^(hlfíng no more tQ enter any houfe till wè reach¬ ed our afylum. Eveir the pro fu fé "re- compenčfe my Lord béftowéd òri the pea- fants; rather according with hťá'foul '-¿Han his'appearance, excited their' fufpicions j theýpréfled tıs to'ftay in à ŕnáhneŕ whi ch pointed mine, arid we departed with'a precipitation which'I dare 'fay confirmed theirs : purfuing' oor 1 journey by' roads little frequented, Lord Leicefter being perfectly acquainted with the'grrjurid. I went through incredible fatigtìes without corripíäínť; j rŕdlrÍg the whole day With no otHsr
othçr /cefreíhment than a draught of flew milk,fupplied by. a girl aswepatfed along; till as the fun was declining, we· re-ached a brow which.xrommanded St» Vincent4 Abbey. At the well known profpečt my heart dilated -—. my. tycs v/ah d ered over tlie Whole ..with fenfuiom our firft home pn\y cau qţrite« ----- ■ ^- Natul e feemed to tinge thë >Vüüd9 with. .uitput vealUF6=« tlit 4 fŕäflUM^ifit ftťt^m ftiiafldëfëd İn Ш1= jelUe.al^ñeti .шн1Щш : Ы Уу asift Ъщш* mih *= tønijggiigo imma m fţft rndn 1 ih§ Дай! Qfjhi 'Wİlİöw§ which every where fringed its margin, and the em¬ purpled fun diffujed the rfipofe he feemed hafteningtopaftiike—an invincible charm took роДеШоп of my heart, and even .the ftnic of misfoftune was for the moment ffufpended. "Here, ,cried I, checking my horfe, here we fhall be.iafe-~ah, more than fafe, here we may, be - happy !-.-«»Why, why cannot thofe hours, return when firft we met ? thofe hours of undefcribable fe¬ licity ?---This landfcape thea bounded . S г our
«ицг Driíhés j in it9 пш -røw circle is con* tamed áll neceíľary to exiftence, İri ö«r* ff Ives áll eítf ritiál lo háppin^ft i but íb* liéty, thai firft öf y§fflfigs, bHngs with il f¥İlı diaţh §nly paft §urø, Asd ıh· vrnciable Faíhff ÀRfhenyi with what joy—ah 1 with what forrow will he re¬ ceive us — forewarned even by our pre¬ fence of affliction, he will hardly dare to indulge the rapture of a moment."— Every fentiment and fenfation mingling thus in my mind filled the interval ere we arrived at the fpot, where my heart recognized the minuteft object. Alight¬ ing at fome diftance, Lord Leicefter faf¬ tened the horfes in an obfcure part of the wood, and we proceeded on foot to the hermit's cave. Evening began now to gloom over the hemifphere.- -I had before agreed not to open my lips, till my Lord had by degrees revealed him¬ felf to Father Anthony, whofe enfeebled fenfes might not be able to refift the furprife ; but how did that return upon ourfelves, when a voice with which we were
were unacquainted replied to US without opening the door! Heart-ftrutk, I caught the ami of Lord Leiêêftif, wim щепу fñqyifid aftip thi htrmif, íŕ Hi hai betft dead fhife ft« days, returned th& man, and is interred among the Scroops family in the vault of St, Vincent's Ab·« bey : I am placed here to protect thç few effeds he left behind, till his relati¬ ons Ihall direct what is to be done with them."—" And thus vanifli our hopes of fafety > peace, and pleafure, fighed I, turn¬ ing difconfolately from the cave. Oh, fainted Anthony, I have now no tears for thee, and that lofs I íhould lately have íhed floods for, is now heard witrt indif¬ ference. Where, wretched wanderers as we are, where now can we betake our¬ felves ? Had we ftaid in London, friend¬ lhip, nay.intereft, might have iheltered us ; here I am as well known as you are there, and the poifeflbrs of St. Vincent's Abbey will infallibly difcover both. Nay we know not who thofe are y and whether we might not throw ourfelves into trie power
power pf our wòrft enemies, \ Alas,, my bve, what do youfi*ffer for my fake 1 it is in vain to·'affect ftrength; nature fails, and í rriuft reft if only on the damp earth." ---" Gracious God ! exclaimed Lord Lei¬ cefter, fupporting me in his arms,.how have we deferved this accumulation of evils? Let us wind through; the.wood; who knows, my'Matilda, but .providence .has left the gate of the tomb, open ţo ihel¬ ter us? It is plain, the peafant who inha¬ bits the cave is not acquainted with the fecrets of father Anthony, and in all pro¬ bability that of .the Recefs died with him. Oh!, ftruggle a. little, but a little, my love, fomething bids me believe Heaven will yet protect us." Though faint between want of nouriih- ment and exceifive fatigue,. I yet ftrove to follow my Lqrd, but didit fo flowly, that night entirely involved us er.e we reached the tomb.t Long cuftorh, however, ena¬ bled me to lead him aright.—" It is open, cried he, in a-tranfport of joy, come, my iove, and let me affi ft you to enter."—-He did
did fo, bvif hardly was I within if, ffe Ï found myfelf violently feised by feveral perfons, who inftantly deprived me of the power of utterance had heaven allowed it, but agony and horror fo entirely overcame me, that í funk fenfelefs in their arms,
ÏND OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
