Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The Recess; Or, a Tale of Other Times
ggjgS ■■ ■ , ini .¡Epa ÏHE
RECESS, &c.
мярмнан*
V^ HEN the fick languor of the faintings gave place to reflection, I found myfelf in my own bed; whither I un¬ derftood I had been conveyed by the or¬ ders of Lord Arlington, as foori as the wound was ftâürtchecf :—his proved fo flight that it left him ño pretence for apprehenfion. Eagerly I enquired for Lady Pembroke, when to my inexprefli¬ ble rage and aftoniihment I was informed, that me had been turned from my door, whither friendihip led her to venture a re- Vol. ψ. В gulfe.
pulfe. The immaculate character of that admirable woman I thought even Lord Arlington would have refpečted ; but with¬ out deigning to inform himfelf of the real circumftances of the unforefeen interview he had fo dreadfully interrupted, by this rude implication he treated two of the moft eftimable and diítinguiíhed perfons in the kingdom as abettors, if not con¬ trivers, of his diihonor.—The little blood left in my veins turned to gall at the idea. I watched an opportunity to tear away the bandages ; and difdainfully refigning myfelf to. a premature fate, I endeavoured to forget the generous hearts this raftı action would pierce.—The awful God, whofe juftice I thus qeftioned, ftill ex¬ tended to me his mercy—my dangerous fituation was difcovered in time by my careful attendants, who, infinitely more attached to me than their Lord, ufed every means to prolong the life he, perhaps, wiihed at its period. In the cruel ftate of mind which dic¬ tated this defperate refolution, it proved a me-
*"
a melancholy advantage ; as the injury now fell on my confirmation only, and my intellects efcaped. It was many months ere I had ftrength to crofs a room, or fpirits to venture a queftion—during this memorable interval I called together every enfeebled power, and placing my confid¬ ence as umpire between myfelf and Lord Arlington, fixed and afcertained the rights of either. Convicted even by my own heart of imprudence, I wondered not he conftrued error into guilt; and while thus cool offered him every vindication of my innocence he could reafonably de¬ fire : but Lord Arlington was the flave of paflion and caprice, and not having firmnefs of foul to form, or fix, a judg¬ ment, followed through years witn in¬ vincible obftinacy the impreffion of the firft moment.—From this period he ever treated me as an artful v/oman, whofe licentious conduct had obliged him to rifque his life in vain defence of that honor already fullied, and loft in my Β ι perfon ;,
'-·
perfon; nor did he affect to aflert his legal rights from any other reafon than to feparate me from Eifex. This con¬ duct, and the mifreprefentations of Lady Eifex, blazed the fatal incident throughout the Court, and fixed a ftain on my charac¬ ter time could never erafe—happily that ftain reached not my perfon or my heart, and an injuftice fo aggravating on the part of Lord Arlington entitled me tö forgive the little error in myfelf which oc- caiioned it. In this conjuncture I once more turned my tearful eyes every way around in fearch of a protector to interfere between me and a fate alike unmerited and fe- vere.—Alas ! there was not a human be¬ ing virtue allowed me to call to my aid ; and I exercifed the faculties Heaven had fo unexpectedly bleifed me with, by re- folving to fuffer with patience. Elizabeth Vernon (our old companion), the fair and gentle coufin of Lord Eflex, refolved if poflible to fee me—flie ad¬ dreifed
dreífed Lord Arlington, and çlemanded that privilege ; the favour ihe held with the Queen hindered him from denying a requeft he granted with the utmoft re¬ luctance. That fweet girl bathed me in the· tears of innocence and affection—{he told me, " that the fear left his prefence ihould in- cenfe Lord Arlington to further brutality, had induced Eifex, when I loft my fenfes, to withdraw from a fcene whieh rent his very heart-^and the fame reafon ftill oblig¬ ed him to remain at a diftance.—That dur-. ing the long and dire uncertainty attend¬ ing my illnefs, he had fcarcely breathed— his own foul continually told him how pure mine was. Fancy prefented me to him forever, pale, fpeechlefs, expiring, my fad eyes rivetted on his with a tender¬ nefs death itfelf could not extinguiih j however guiltlefs of my blood, eycry drop which oozed from my veins feemed to congeal on his heart ; in fine, that al¬ moft deified by my fufferings, and his fenfe of them, İ reigned alone in his af¬ fections, which were from this moment В 3 con-
confecrateij to me by a moft convincing proof. Having ufed the utmoft art and diligence to difcover how Lord Arlington fo foon became apprized of his fecret re¬ turn to England, and a meeting fo un¬ planned, and fudden, as to interrupt it almoft immediately, though fuppofed to be as far off as Greenwich, Lord Effex learnt that his Mafter of the Horfe, being among the domeftics he brought with him to Pembroke Houfe, had quitted it as foon as he alighted, and haftened to Greenwich in fearch of a girl attending on Lady Effex, of whom he was enamor¬ ed ; through whofe means her Lady became likewife acquainted with his fecret ar¬ rival without knowing its motive. That fufpicious woman had already remarked that Lord Arlington was among the bridal train, and in his hearing publiihed the return of her Lord, with all her own in¬ jurious furmifes—ill fortune for once had given them the color of truth, and Lord Arlington needed no more than the hint to make him mount the fwifteft horfe and fly
fly to fatisfy himfelf.—Lady Eifex was quickly informed of an incident ihe ought to have forefeen, and giving way to another extravagance, paflionately conjured every friend ihe met to follow, and prevent the conflict to which her Lord now ftood ex¬ pofed—but when could friendihip keep pace with love and vengeance ? The ftraggling mediators arrived only time enough to witnefs the event no human power could guard againft. Incenfed be¬ yond all bounds at the conduct of his Lady, the raih Eflex took the only ftep wanting to my ruin. Determined to make her íhare the mifery flie had occafìoned, he parted with her at once and forever—in vain were all her fubfequent vows of for¬ row and repentance·—in vain had íhe from that moment indulged hopes of his cooling and conciliating—his temper, till this fatal period, no lefs yielding than fiery, now aflumed a cold and philofo- phic fternnefs ; in fine, that the grief and difappointment to which Lady Eifex re¬ figned herfelf would feverely punifliher В 4 unjuft
unjuft fufpick>ns> and ere long reléale her Lord from the ill-judged bondage he had hitherto groaned fo impatiently under." The fair Elizabeth thus ended her re¬ cital, which was fo clear, concife, and affecting, that I could not avoid taxing her with being the emiifary of her coufin ι her bluihes acquitted her, and befpoke a fecret time foon, explained. She was fecretly beloved by the gallant South¬ ampton» that heroic friend who was only lefs attached to Eflex than myfelf, and from him had learnt the various parti¬ culars public report could not apprife her of.—I held myfelf infinitely indebted to her friendihip, and through her means fent that farewell to Lady Pembroke I was not allowed to pronounce^ It had been but too obvious through her whole recital, that I was totally the victim of calumny, nor could any human jK>wer qow juftify me.—I had been found in the arms of Eifex—the fact was indu¬ bitable, the true caufe of that fatal impulfe npt likely tö be credited, even when re¬ peated«
peated· My youth, my wound:, and my paft conduct, blended the raih judg¬ ment of the many with compaftion, but the. moft liberal-minded ventured not ta acquit me. Thofe impaflioned vindica¬ tions the confcious foul of Eifex offered, were always confidered as a mere point of honor in him, and no lefs necefifary to> his own juftification than mine ; they there¬ fore only ferved to ftamp guilt on both.—· Oh, misjudging world, how feverely on the moft fuperficial obfervation doft thou venture to decide !—let the barbed ar¬ row of misfortune reft in the bofom it has wounded, nor, by inhumanly tearing it out to difcover whence it came, rack the heart already broken. Defamed, dejected, and forgotten by all but the generous fifters of the Sydney family, I followed, once more, my fate in Lord Arlington ; and reached again that Abbey deftined alike to entomb me in playful childhood, and in blafted youth— ι the lame imperious will which had de¬ ftroyed me, had deprived that venerable manfion of its fweet, its folitary charms—7 the
the hallowed fpot where once the ivied trophies of time bound up the defaced ones of religion, prefented nothing now but a bare and barren level ; and the lofty woods, which fo long protected alike the living and the dead, had wholly given place to infant plantations, through the thinnefs of which the weary eye every where pierced : I returned with difguft from the defolated fcene, and locking myfelf up in the remoteft, and moft gloomy chamber of the Abbey, fpent my life in meditating on my every lofs. Lord Arlington now valuing me only as the appendage of his pride, confoled himfef for my undiifembled averfion, and cared not what employed me, pro¬ vided I was yet his legal prifoner.— Alas, I had no longer refolution to reft my hopes on any object—to form any fubordinate defign, or to reap any fub¬ ordinate pleafure. The poor children ftill fupported by my bounty, no more touched the lute in my prefence—that over which my own fingers once wandered with the wild elegance of untried youth, now
now ufelefs and unftrung, hung up, an emblem of the difcordant foul of its owner. Tafte, genius, and fcience, thofe rich columns with which enthufiaftic fancy erects in peaceful minds a thoufand light aerial ftručtures, deep funk, and broken in my heart, prefented to the mental eye a ruin more terrible than the nobleft fpeculation ever paufed over.—Mifan- thropy, black-vifaged mifanthropy, reign¬ ed there like a folitary favage, uncon¬ fcious of the value of thofe treafures his rude hand every day more and more de¬ faced. I was roufed one night with the infor¬ mation that a favorite fervant of Lord Ar¬ lington's, who had long languiihed in a confumption, now found himfelf at the point of death, and importunately de¬ manded to fpeak with me—but ill-dif- pofed at this feafon even to the gentle offices of humanity, and convinced he could have nothing to impart I ihould think of confequence, I rejected the re¬ queft ; but finding his Lord was inebri¬ ated beyond the power of comprehen- mg
ing aught, on being again folicited, I rofe, and accompanied by a maid who loved me, entered the fick man's chamber.—■ I call a harih and cold glance round, and hardly heard the thanks he gave me— having difmiffed all the fervants, except the maid I mentioned, I prepared to liften to him, imagining lome matter relative to his office of chief bailiff and furveyor, alone, could thus difturb his laft hours.— " Lady," faid he, Cf in the hollow broken voice of approaching diffoiution, I could not have departed in peace had you not beftowed this indulgence—pardon me, I befeech you, for propofing to my Lord the deftručtion of thofe ruins I have fince feen too plainly your heart was ever wrapt in—alas, that propofal cofts me my life. —Condefcend too to liften to a fecret which continually drags back my foul when ftriving ţo quit her dungeon—my crime perhaps brings with it a fufficient punifhment.------In removing the rubbilh of the artificial hermiťs cell, in complb ance with the directions of my Lord, I one day faw a common laborer turn up fomething
fomething which tried his whole ftrength, when cafting a quick and fearful glance around, he covered it with earth. I defpatched the men 'm hearing to another part, and feizing the arm of him I had watched, I infifted on feeing what he had endeavoured to conceal—it proved to be a fmall iron cheft ftrongly fattened—I agreed with him to convey it away till the evening, when he might rejoin me, and we would open it and divide the contents together. He yielded rather to neceflity than choice, and I took the caiket with a purpofe God has feverely puniihed— the many keys intrufted to my care fup¬ plied one which immediately opened it ; under a number of papers and trifles of no value, I found a large fum in gold, and a few jewels—as I knew my part¬ ner in the difcovery had remarked that the cheft was heavy; in the room of the gold and jewels, I fubftituted an iron crucifix, and many rufty keys ; then lock¬ ing the caiket, Waited anxioufly for the evening. The poor laborer feeing mc return, wiftfully examined mjr features, 2 but.
but not daring to exprefs the doubt vi¬ fible in his own, expected in filence the deciding hour. I fuffered him to take infinite pains to break open a cheft I was confcious would not repay the labor— great was the poor wretch's difappoint¬ ment when he emptied it—I affected the fame chagrin ; but turning over the pa¬ pers, I offered to give him twenty nobles ; a fure proof, had he reflected a fingle moment, that I muft have wronged him : hé readily accepted this propofal, and at my defire, promifed never to mention the incident ; then with much apparent gratitude departed. Eagerly I replaced my guilty gains, and fecretly refolved to take an early opportunity of quitting my Lord to commence builder in London ; but fear did not fuffer me for a time to venture this meafure; alas ! I have wanted health fince to do any thing—from this moment, peace, appetite, and reft have fled me—if worn Out with watching, I dropt into a flumber," the idea that my treafure was ftolen, has made me often ftart up, and regardlefs of the cold fweac pro-
produced by the mere apprehenfion I have flown in the dead of night to convince myfelf it was fafe—imaginary whifpers have ever been near my bed, and uncertain forms have glided through my chamber— the dawn of day never gave me · relief, every eye feemed to dive into my fecret, and every hand to be intent on impo- verifhing me—in a word, Lady, to this fad moment it has prematurely brought me ; for many months doubtful whether I Ihould furvive, I have been confidering ! how to beftow that wealth I could no longer hope to enjoy—the poor man I fo bafely defrauded of it periíhed a íhort time after by the fall of a pillar, and reftitution to him can never be made. It came into my head this evening, that you were faid to have been brought up in thefe ruins ; certainly I had often feen you walk and weep on the very fpot where this cheft was found ; perhaps in giving it to you I only reftore it to the right owner; accept it, Madam, and fwear you will never difcover the gift to my Lord."—This requeft appeared a needlefs
needlefs injunction, if the treasure had not been obtained by defrauding Lord I Arlington ; and though perhaps I ihould háve been filent through choice, I thought rt beneath me to engage to be fo—-find¬ ing me paufe, he continued, α fear not any ill defign in this requeft, Madam, you will one day be glad you complied with it, and for your own fake alone is it propofed; the hand of my Lord is grudge ing —yours bounteous as that of heaven.— Do not rob yourfelf of the means to be liberal which now are offered to you—yet on no other condition than the vow of filence will I give it up.*' A ftrange de¬ fire to examine the papers, more than any I felt for the money, made me at laft ас- * cjuiefce. My maid, by his direction, drew the iron cheft from an obfcure corner, and emptied it of both gold, jewels, and papers which fhe and I divided, and with föme difficulty concealed till we reached my apartment—he feemed only to have lived to make this difcovery, and a few hours after expiated his fin with his life. While
. While he ftrove to imprefs my mind with the neceffity of concealing the ad¬ venture, I pondered deeply over, it ·, not eafily difcerning how I ihould interpret this ftrange ordination of providence; it at laft occurred to me that the treafure might be put into my hands for the af¬ fi (lance and comfort of my fifter—how did I know whether ihe was not even then haftening towards me, perhaps impo¬ verifhed, certainly diftreffed ?—Oh, how confolatory íhould I find it to minifter j to her external wants, though thofe of her I heart ihould be beyond my power of com- : forting ! The contempt I felt for Lord j Arlington was rooted too deep to admit [ of my thus applying his fortune, had I | been the unlimitted miftrefs of it; I | therefore faw a degree of wifdom and propriety in receiving and fecreting a gift heaven feemed fo ftrangely to put ; into my hands, as if it were to forerun fome yet unknown incident. The papers confifted chiefly of the correfpondence between Mrs. Marlow and Vol. HI. С Father
ι
father Anthony, while yet thy were lo¬ vers, and after the cruel difcovery which annulled the nominal union— Î perufed thefe invaluable epifiles with pulfations of tendernefs I lately thought myfelf in¬ capable of; they recalled me to life and fenfibility, and I gathered fortitude from thofe who now were duft; I raifed my eyes to heaven in fearch of their pure tranflated fouls, and wandering from pla¬ net to planet, fancied there muft be one peculiarly allotted to lovers now no lon¬ ger unhappy—A thoufand trifles whofe value muft ever be ideal and local, were preferved with thefe letters :—cyphers, hair, fonnets, dear perpetuators of thofe bright hours of youth we look back on with pleafure to the lateft moment of decaying life. I kiifed the innocent re¬ liques of fuch an unhappy attachment with devout regard, and held them not the leaft part of my legacy. Time diffipated the flattering illufion which led me to expect my filler —my mind funk into its ufual inertitude, and
and the acquifition remained, if not for¬ gotten, at leaft neglected. From this profound ftüpor I was át laft roufed as by án earthcpíakè— Lord Arlington in hunting fell from hiš horfé, and breaking fome blöod-veffel, wás brought horne to appearance lifelefs— confcience and humanity called on me to forget my wrongs; I made every effort to fave him, and for a time he appeared to mend; but the incurable habit of inebriety he even at this period indulged, defeated both care and medicine ; and, after enduring a ferie's of fufferings which annihilated my fenfe of injury, he expired in the prime of his days. Good heaven, what á tranfition did this event make in my life !—habituated to flavery—accuftomed to fuppofe Lord Arlington deftined tò furvive me, I be- held this incredible revolution with mute I furprife—the horror of his fufferings gave way, when they ceafed, to the fweet idea of liberty—liberty, fighed out my weary heart, ah ! to what purpofe is mine now С 2 re-
reftored ? I beheld myfelf in the fituation of a criminal, whofe ihakels are ftruck off only to launch him into the immenfe ocean in a little boat without a rudder, oars, or fuftenance—where could I find a hope to reft on ? alone in the vaft uni- verfe, I turned around in vain in fearch of one generous hand, whofe aid I might receive without fear or íhame. The relation of Lord Arlington who fucceeded to his title and eftate was an illiterate rude fea officer, whom his ill— nefs alone had detained in England. He came on the news of his deceafe ; efcort- inğ the late Lord's two fifters, to whom the perfonals were all devifed. I waited only the reading of the will to quit the melancholy manfion I meant to abjure for the future.------Gracious heaven ! how deep was my indignation and rage to find myfelf mentioned in it as an infane wretch to whom he bequeathed a mere maintenance, and left to be confined un¬ der the charge of his fifters in St. Vincent's Abbey, which as a purchafe of his own, de-
defcended to them ! Never, in all the trials I had hitherto experienced, had I felt a tranfport like that this ufage exci¬ ted—to extend his tyranny beyond the grave !—Mean, execrable wretch ! even at the moment I was exhaufting the little conftitution his cruelty had left me in un¬ wearied attendance, deliberately to con¬ demn me to an imprifonment fo ihock¬ ing, and render it perpetual !—human nature could not refift fo pungent a pang —it made the mifery it puniihed ; and I funk into the dreary gulph once more from which I was lately emerging—my brain ftill fires but to remember it.------ Oh, my fifter ! whatever the inflictions of your myfterious fate, thofe of mine may furely difpute the woeful pre-emi¬ nence. The overjoyed Eifex difpatched an ex¬ prefs, as foon as the news of Lord Ar¬ lington's death reached the Court, con¬ juring me to quit the melancholy prifon I had fo long inhabited, and retire to a С 3 feat
22 THE R E С E S S, kc. feat of Lord Southampton, in Here¬ fordshire i whither that nobleman's bride would i mmediatçly repair to meet and com¬ fort me. Lady Southampton was the fair coufin of Lord Effex I formerly mentioned, who by marrying privately had wholly loft the favor of the Queen. The declining ftate of Lady Effex's health, he added, daily promifed him that freedom, made doubly defirable now I had recovered mine. It had always been the intention of Lady Southampton to follow her Lord to Ireland ; and he befought me to give him the fweet fatisfaction of know.- ing I was fafe in the company and protect tion of his coufin, folemnly promifing not to obtrude himfelf on me ere the laws of fociety authorized the avowal of thofe fentiments which had fo long lived in his heart. The relations of Lord Arlington, pof- fèffing by his will an abfolute power, inter¬ cepted and opened this Letter—far from pouring the balm it contained into my bleeding heart, they kept the dear tefti¬ mony
mony of an unequalled attachment ; and fent back the meffenger with the melan¬ choly news of my infanity and confine¬ ment : but Lord Effex had been already duped, and could not eafily credit this in- , formation. He deputed Henry Tracey, \ a young officer, much in his confidence, to afcertain my real fituation j command- ! ing him not to be difmiifed by any other mode of conviction than being admitted | into my prefence.—Alas ! ere this was İ refolved on, refentment had again fired | my bewildered brain, and Lord Arling- Ş ton had little to apprehend in allowing \, Tracey to entermy apartment. Buried in a profound ftupor, I replied nottohis quefti¬ ons, but drawing my mourning veil over my eyes, fat like a felf-devoted Perfian, the voluntary victim of defpair. The faithful Tracey, ftill fearful of being im¬ pofed on, infifted on having my picture, as well as a lock of my hair, to prove to his Lord that it was indeed myfelf 'he had be¬ held in this deplorable ftate ; and havn¬ ing obtained tjiis requeft he departed С 4 " But
But what became of Effex when Tra¬ cey returned with this melancholy con¬ firmation ?—the teftimonials his confi« dant had brought added force to the eternal paflion of his foul : a thoufand times he made Tracey defcribe the apart¬ ment—my drefs—my looks—and fome¬ times fancying even that cautious friend had been deceived; at others, that the wretches in whofe power I was left, had, for the ihort period Tracey was permitted to behold me, ftupified my fenfes ; he created a thoufand delufions to coun¬ teract the fearful impreffion of the truth. Diftracted with thefe ideas, Lord Effex fet out for Ireland, invefted with abfolute powers, and heading an army attached to him alike by gratitude and expectation- he had not marched far ere he formed the bold refolution of committing the con¬ duct of the troops to Lord Southampton, and turning off he pofted to St. Vincent's Abbey, determined to judge from his own fenfes of the ftate of mine : he ar¬ rived there at midnight, and requiring the
the unwilling owners to produce me, in a tone which admitted neither denial or delay, they conducted him to my chamber------a dim lamp alone glim¬ mered in it, and clofing my eyes as the ftronger lights approached, I waved my hand in ftupid filence to have them removed. The tranfports of grief and furprife which overcame the generous Eifex at this terrible conviction, threat¬ ened his own intellects—by fome wonder¬ ful ordination of providence my cold and apparently uninformed heart waked at that well known voice—day broke once more upon my foul, and my eyes once more opened to behold their darling ob¬ ject. This furprizing effect of his pre¬ fence would have perfuaded him that rea¬ fon had never deferted me, but that my poor maids expreifed a joy at this unex¬ pected revolution too unfeigned to be mif- conftrued ; they entreated him to leave me time to ftrengthen my faculties ere he again abforbed them, and he confined ţo ftifled
ftifled exclamations, and filent homage, all the paflion and projects with which his bofom fwelled. Alithea, who had for years been my favorite attendant, informed him (as foon as he could be perfuaded to withdraw, and leave me to repofe) of the cruel and unjuft will, which, by rendering me a prifoner for life, had occafìoned this dreadful relapfe. Negligent at ail times of prudence, and now perhaps of propriety, he boldly told the Arlington family, that he would periíh ere I ihould again be left in their power ; and having planted fome of his moft faithful domeftics to <niard о my chamber door from every one but my own maids, he retired to the apart¬ ment allotted him, to meditate on the mode of proceeding leaft likely to endanger my newly recovered intellects. Alithea very prudently had me bled, and I funk into a fweet and found fleep, the comfort I had long moft wanted. I waked late the next morning with in¬ tellects
tellects entirely clear, through weak ; Γ remembered I had feen, or fancied I had feen Effex ; Alithea imparted to me the truth, and fhed tears of joy to find I an¬ fwered her rationally—I yielded to her intreaties in delaying till the afternoon a meeting fo dear and affecting, and took the medicinal cordials and other nouriih¬ ment fhe offered me ; a few hours ftrength- ened me furprizingly, and I was at laft allowed to receive the generous lover my foul fo much defired. While he poured forth the moft ardent vows of unremitting affection, and furvcyed, in tender forrow, the ravages grief and difappointment had thus early made in my wan countenance, and emaciated form, I beheld with fur¬ prize the advantages he had acquired in both inftances ; his graceful flower of youth was fettled into firmer manhood ; his fair and florid complexion, funned over by his military exploits, had gained ftrength without lofing delicacy, and his eye, now no lefs accuftomed to command than charm, feemed to employ its firft power on all the reft of the world, while its
its laft was folelv referved for me. Ah
man, happy min ! ' r .^- are you in the indulge.^ . - with fci- entific refe . -p.d :in ac- tivity unk . i ^ мттап; from VOI: \ us in life ever f. ' .· ■.-'.'lis and bloomi- .·.: ......· * * ■■■) thofe w »u:;)i v iiich the vital p-:>vv. r¿ ·.>■ :· ·. ι; »ecu helplefily away; ami v. . · '.' ; -ľ л г ι π- fortune .c;rñ:it3 v^ur v г · ' : ι г ■. '-X'Th uii- bli£"htcd "•'•• : ·"· r> ot Οί^; :v.";ììeni ví.»u em- Ui tiv. ·. Lit« ι : : ·. : O'J*. !"i¡¡ ·' · ; »pineîs j icarce confcious of : ;>c the сок '- : cv'- »rOpS VOU ľ checks iiTibliic rrotiï t-iol· tii her, permitted tOO vite tO V·'/.:"::·ľip?.ť. VO ! . · ι ~ i<-'
it was ■<· ::r i 0::- ; s ere i circa trini my¬ felf to converfe long with Hffex, who em¬ ployed that fweet interval in amufing my mind with lighter topics, while he ar¬ ranged his future plans ; but finding I ftill appeared calm, he ventured at laft to unfold to mc the mighty defigns which floated in his imagination. cc Inexorably oppofing choice to fate, my deareft Elli¬ nor
nor," faid he, " never from the moment in which I firft beheld you, have I formed a project diftinčt from yourfelf, this I am about to unfold has been for years the child of my dotage—collect your fpirits, liflen without wonder, and, if poflible, ap¬ prove it : from the moment I knew the bafe arts that muft have been made ufe of to feparate us, I clearly comprehended we ihould never unite with the confent of Elizabeth ; but, however indebted to her partial diftinčtion, it was a point in which even fhe could not controul me ; it is not the pofts or advantages I derive from her favor, on which my ibul values itfelf; elevated on a more folia foundation, it has taken every road to glory, and I may proudly fay, given a grace to dotage ; yet as that dotage, however unbecoming her years and her rank, has been uniform and generous, I have fworn to yied Eli¬ zabeth, to the lateft moment of her life, every homage but that of the heart ; and facrifice to my flaky all but my happinefs.—it is hard to reconcile duties and
and inclinations fo entirely oppofite, yet I think you will own I have done fo. To a blind partiality for me, and her own egregious lelf-love, the Queen ig¬ nobly facrificed your youth, your hopes, your happinefs ; but alas, ihe forgot in fo doing, that fhe would only make them more perfectly mine—without any con¬ fideration for the hufband ihe had given you, a wretch I could at any time look into infignificance, I ftudied folely how to extricate you from a bondage not more infupportable to you than myfelf.— Among a thoufand other projects, I re¬ folved to apprize the King of Scots of your exiftence and fituation, foliciting from his fraternal regard a fafe afylum, and that peace and protection my youth and circumftances would not allow me to offer you. I found means to convey to his knowledge your whole melan¬ choly ftory—but how íhall I declare to ycu his ungenerous conduct? Fool that I was, to think the man who could tamely fubmit to the murder of his mother, would be interefted by any other tye ! Far from exert-
exerting himfelf to refcue the dear un¬ happy fifter I conjured him to compaf- fionate, he affected to difbelieve the ftory of his mother's marriage with the Duke of Norfolk; though the Countefs of Shrewfbury folemnly aífured me he had, through her hands, received from the Royal Mary the moft authentic proofs of it, as foon as he efcaped from the power of the Regent, and was allowed to act as an independant Sovereign. Anxious with¬ out doubt to centre in himfelf every right of his mother, he voluntarily re¬ nounced all regard for either her afhes or her offspring, ignominioufly fubmit¬ ting to kifs the hand which had íhortened her davs. ------What after this is to be hoped from the king of Scots ? and why fiiould you facrifice to a brother, by whom you are difowned, thofe bright profpects which now dawn before you ? Born of the firft Engliih Peer, and the Princefs immedi¬ ate in fucceflion to the Throne—a native of this kingdom ; there is only one thing wanting to eftabliih rights from whence you may juftly form the higheft hopes— authentic
authentic teftimonials of thefe facts : and that fuch ftill exift, I have certain in¬ formation—it is true they are difperfed among the Catholick relations and friends of Mary, yet do I not defpair of obtain¬ ing them.------The Englifh ever difpofed to be jealous of their national rights, dread the remoteft chance of their anni¬ hilation, and already turn their eyes to¬ wards the family of Suffolk in preference to receiving a foreign monarch.—That unhappy branch of the royal line, by turns the martyrs of fear and policy, have bled through fucceeding generations, till re¬ duced wholly to females ; among whom there is not one endued with courage or talents to venture a conteft, had they even the priority of birth which refts with you. Let us then adopt the views of Lord Lei¬ cefter, who certainly meant by the moft watchful policy, to pave the way for your filler's fucceflion, whenever Eliza¬ beth ihould expire. Your fate is bound up with that of a man much more capable of effecting whatever views he íhall adopt. 4 Eli-
I lizabeth daily totters on the verge of the grave—difpofed to hate the Prince lhe has irretrievably injured in the perfon of his mother, ihe itili refufes to acknow¬ ledge the King of Scots for her heir ; and has fully inverted me with every power that may enable me to profit by the po¬ pularity I have honorably acquired. My own birth, though it does not give me a lineal claim to the Crown of England, is yet noble in many generations, and princely in forne. Circumftances and merit ι thus entitle me to match with you—nor need you doubt thefuccefs of this project.— Born as you are for empire, endued with beauty to adorn, and majefty to dig¬ nify it—with inconteftable evidence of your birth (which I will employ every art to procure) I will boldly prefent to the people of England another blooming Queen—they will with joy adopt you ; nor can the feeble attempts of the boyiih Scotch pedant againft an army w r on by my munificence, endeared to my com¬ mand, and relying on my valor, affect a Vol. III. D claim
claim fo ftrongly fupported, How many inftances does our own hiftory fupply where courage and popularity have de¬ throned monarchs in full pofleflion of every other advantage ?—You now are in¬ formed of what has long been the ul¬ timate object of my life; every action and view has had a fecret reference to it, and far from idling away my youth in the various pleafures the gay court of Eli¬ zabeth offered to her favorite, I have con¬ tinually ranged the feas, watched in camps, difciplined armies, and by every poflible means ftudied to increafe my mili¬ tary fame, knowledge, and popularity, as what muft one day decide more than my own fate. It is this that has made me eager to conduct the Irifh war—In that country I íhall be at the head of an army, which will eafily enable me to profit by the death of the Queen,without alarming her declining years with the appearance of cabal, myftery, or rebellion.—Boldly refolve then, my love, to accompany me to Ireland, as the only place on earth where you
you can be entirely fafe ; I will lodge you in fome impregnable fortrefs with Lady Southampton ; I will remain in the camp, and never approach it but by your permifiion—I demand this inftance of your confidence, of your love ; and fwear in return inviolable honor and obe¬ dience—Oh ! anfwer me not raihly fweet rllinor—rather recall the fatal moment of obftinate prudence which once before brought on both fo tedious a period of fuffering, and remember you again have the power of deciding my fate and your own. Effex rofe from my feet, and left me ab¬ forbed in the deepeft reflection ; my mind however inftantaneoufly adopted the afpir¬ ing project he had prefented to it. Through the dark and heavy cloud which had long hung over my foul, the fun of love now pierced at once, and turned it all to am¬ bient gold.—To mount a throne ; to fhare it with the choice of mv heart ; to give to him that fovereignty I owed to his valor—I was aftoniíhed that the ide Ä D 2 fhould
ihould fo long have efcaped me : yet fuch a train of misfortunes had fucceeded my birth, as might well obliterate my fenfe of its rights. " Bafe and unworthy fon 1" fighed I, cf ungenerous, cruel brother ! why fliould I facrifice to thee my only chance on this fide the grave?" The mean acqui- efcence of James, under a blow which al¬ moft nerved my arm againft the royal mur¬ derer, had already fufficiently ihocked my feelings, and íhut him out of all my plans ; alas, I could only excufe his mif- conduct by fuppofing he was yet fubjected to his mother's enemies ; though even then, a generous foul would refolutely have protefted againft the evil it could not prevent ; but to learn he facrificed an inviolable duty, and every focial feeling at the ihrine of that bloated idol, felf, robbed him of all claim to the feelings, the duties, he renounced. The deter¬ mined plan of the generous Eifex had every thing in its favor, nor was my concurrence fo necefifary to his fuccefs as happinefs—but wherefore ihould I he- Jkate,
fuate, when not to unite in it was to deliver myfelf up to an implacable ene¬ my ? yet, as avowedly to depart with Eifex, or even after him, would awaken dan¬ gerous fufpicions in the mind of Elizabeth, and confirm all the flanders of the world ; I pondered much on a fingular idea that arofe in my mind, by which both might be obviated ; indeed the fituation of my health would have fufficiently oppofed my going with him, had no other objection oc¬ curred.—I perceived an air of ftifled an¬ ger in Effex when he returned, which I con¬ jured him to expound :— cc It is a r*v*tt*r of no confequence," faid he, " with his uiiwl franknefs ; fortunately the fe^v friends I have brought with me are tried and valiant, and we have the powe· in our own hands : the wretches, my love, who furround you, pretend an au thorny írom the Queen, as well as from the late Lord Arlington, for your detention j this will oblige us to ufe a violence I would rather have avoided; but that is a trifle." " Oh ! call not any thing a trifle which affects your fafety, how- D 3 ever
ever remotely'' cried I ; " in yielding to the bold project you have ventured to form, beware I do not become its ruin—yes look not on me with fo marked a wonder ; my foul accords to, adopts at once all your views. I will at laft indulge my heart, and thus affiance it to yours—born to purfue your fortune, I will joyfully con¬ fent to partake it, fo you, in return, fwear the confidence will render you but more guarded ; in confidering my own honor, I am only watching over yours ; pledge then your word that you will not inter¬ fere with my plan, and I in return will vow, that all I henceforward form, ili all have the fame tendency with your own." The generous Eifex fcarce credited his fenfes, and gave with readinefs the aífur¬ ance I defired.—Refolved to guard my fifter's prior rights, and unable to judge of the motives which might bury her for a time in oblivion, I infifted on his fupporting her claim in preference to mine, if ever lhe íhould appear; and he perhaps the more readily acquiefced in thi* requeft, from a conviction that íhe no longer
longer exifted, as all my opinions on that head appeared to him entirely vifionary. Refufing to confide in this dear rafh lever the means by which I meant to re¬ join him, I obliged him to affume an air of grief and defpair> which perfuaded the Arlington family that I had relapfed in^ to infanity. In the interim a maid of mine had been feized with an epidemic fever of the moft dangerous kind ; I impati¬ ently haftened the departure of Effex, left the cruel malady ihould infect him, and conjured him to wait with Lady South¬ ampton at the Port, from whence the troops had already embarked, till I ihould rejoin him. The air of fatisfac¬ tion he perceived in me made him com¬ ply againft his better judgment, and the Arlington race, no lefs overjoyed at his departure than my fuppofed relapfe, and fearful of the epidemic fever, íhut up thofe who immediately attended on me, in the quarter of the Abbey I inhabited, avoiding it themfelves as though the plague were enclofed there.
D 4
In
In this folitude I executed a furprizing project I had long meditated : from the moment I was informed of the mock interment of Lord Leicefter, my mind had dwelt on the idea ; I faw it was only to methodize the moft wild and romantic plan, and, however unfeafible it at firft appeared, time might form and bring it to effect—The treafure of the furveyor now became a treafure indeed ; reflection convinced me that the bequeft originated in his having been the confid лив as well as witnefs of his Lords ungenerous will, and by thus difpofing of it, he enabled me to efcape from the defpicable bondage it entailed upon me, without betraying his truft.—The maid, who alone witneffed the myfterious legacy, had, by her inviolable filence on fo fingular an event, fufficiently proved that ihe could merit my whole confidence ; fortunately, ihe was no lefs favored by thofe in whofe power I was left, and became of courfe the propereft, and only afliftant I could fix on :—-by thus turning the artifice of the Queen upon herfelf, I might at once eicape from her
her power, and that of the guardians un¬ der whofe care íhe had placed me ; and gratify the firft wiih of Effex v/ithout endangering his fafety. Alithea embraced the plan with joy, and engaged her parents, who were la¬ borers in the neighbourhood, to aid the delufion.—I affected to be feized with the fame fatal fever as foon as the maid's fymptoms became mortal, and when ihe foon after died, refigned my bed to her corpfe : her hair, height, complexion, and age, fo far agreed with mine as to lecure me from common obfervation, and dread of the contagion faved us from a very ftrict fcrutiny; as it was believed the maid expired at the fame time with my¬ felf, by Alithea's judicious management her fuppofed body was to be delivered to the parents of that faithful domeftic ; when placing myfelf and treafure in the homely coffin, I was boldly conveyed like the Emprefs Maud through the midft of my enemies, and lodged in their humble cot till enough recovered to purfue the route of Eifex. Alithea
Alithea now publiihed the news of my death through the family, who heard of J it with joy ; the unguarded conduct of the generous Eflex had fuggefted to them, ¡ that to have acted under the authority of the Queen, might one day be a veryl infufficient vindication :—this idea added г fear to that hatred they always enter-1 tained for me, and with pleafure they bu- j ried both thofe paflions in my grave.— Having furveyed my wardrobe, jewels, and papers without finding the leaft defi¬ ciency, they prepared for my interment, and difcharged my immediate attendants ; among them the favcred one who had aided my fcheme, and her return to her parents reftored peace to my bofom. From the humble cot of that honeít creature's parents do I ciofe this period of my memoirs—here, as from an invi- fible world, have I furveyed the gloomy pageant, with which the erroneous judg¬ ments of thofe from whom I efcaped have dignified a low-born female, and by plac¬ ing her pompoufly at the fide of Lord Arlington, they perhaps have blundered uncon-
unconfcioufiy on propriety.—As the fable train wound by my window, my foul paufed on the folemn vanity---------Oh ! that in thy tomb, thou quiet fleeper, fighed I, may be interred with my name all the painful part of my exiftence ! that renovated to a new and happier being, I may emerge again into a world which ftill opens a flowery path before me, with corrected fpirits, unfaltering reafon, and a temper fuperior to the fliocks of misfortune ! ------ ****** The foul, ever capricious and uncer¬ tain, fully enjoys only the pleafures it makes for itfelf.—Often do I feem even in this ruftic afylum, concealed in thecoarfe garments of the other fex, and looking to¬ wards a diftant kingdom as my home, to have hoards of hope and happinefs to build on, my youthful, healthful days were ne¬ ver bleft with. --------- *·#■**** My
My own fate has once more recalled to my mind that of Matilda—I have medi¬ tated much en a fifter fo dear—alas, too certainly Effex is in the right, and there exiíls not a being I can call by that name. —Long years have fucceeded each other, and ftill that incomprehenfible myftery, that dreadful filence continues ; nor is there a circumftance but death that could occafion it.—Farewell then, oh name ever fo pleafant to my lips, fink deep into my heart, and remain eternally en¬ graved there—farewell, thou pure fpirit ! too etherial for a world fo grofs, I will no more look for thee on its furface, I will no more imagine thee beneath it— no, I will now raife my ftedfaft eye to that heaven " where the wicked ceafe from troubling," and in fome yet undifcovered ftar fancy I behold thee ? Ah deign,, if ίο, to guide the uncertain fteps of a wan¬ derer, and, if my cruel fate conduci: them ftill toward precipices, irradiate the fcene, and deliver me from the danger !—My fpirits are highly wrought, and a folemnity too exquifite for defcription poifeffes 4 every
every faculty—I muft fteep them all in oblivion ere I recover my equanimi-. tv. ----- '—· ****** Happinefs ! undefinable good, in what fhall I comprize you ? no, I will not fuppofe it can be done in gold, and yet how pure was the tranfport alitile ofthat vile metal called into the care-furrowed countenances of Alkhea's venerable pa¬ rents ! To the earth which gave, I have reftored the remainder ; it is buried eaft- ward under the fpreading chefnut planted by Edward IV.—that popular tree, pro¬ tected alike from the caprice of its owner, and the fpade of the labour, will hide it fafely : but, oh î if ever one noble heart fighs under its iliade, oppreífed with the fting of penury, may iome good angel whifper, cc you reft on that which can fully relieve you." All is now prepared for my flight; I have refufed the attendance of Alithea ; it will be well fupplied in the remem¬ brance
brance that fhe is happy—indulgent hea¬ ven has given to her parents who grow old in peace and virtue, a lover who knows not falfehood or ambition, and a foul juftly grateful for bleflings beyond all valuation—the faithful creature delays the happinefs of him (he loves till he fhall have conveyed this broken narrative into the hands of Lady Pembroke; nor do I fear to truft him with it.—Dear, noble friend, once more my foul fondly falutes yon ; beftow on my flight thofe pious prayers with which virtue confecrates our purpofes, and believe mine rife ever fcr you. LADY PEMBROKE WRITES. Scarce had I recovered from the fur¬ prize and grief occafìoned by the publication of this fweet creature's fuppofitious death, ere a ruftic demanded permifiion to fee me, and myfterioufly delivered the wonderful packet—alas, how affecting did I find it ! far,
far, however, from drying up my tears at learning ihe yet lived, I looked with ter¬ ror on the future, left every following day ihould multiply, or terribly finifh her mi¬ feries. Ah, dear Matilda ! I cannot agree with this fair vifionary, who fo eafily adopts the romance of her lover.—Something feems to aflure me thou art ftill alive, and fuffering ; and for thy fake I will preferve thefe melancholy memorials : alas ! per¬ haps it were truer kindnefs to deftroy them. LETTER I. Dated Drogheda. FROM the fafe inores of another king¬ dom once more do I greet my friend.— Alas ! ill can we judge for ourfelves, dear Lady Pembroke. Provided with a fleet horfe, I fet out to follov/ Eifex, but fcarce had I travelled a fingle day, ere my fhattered conftitution (no longer able to fuftain the leaft toil) claimed two, to recover the fatigue of the firft. During my ftay at the inn, my youth
youth, the delicacy of my perfon and man¬ ners, with the air of referve I found it neccf- farytoaffume, excited a curiofity my libera¬ lity alone was able to bound, though even that gave rife to fufpicions almoft equally dangerous. I began to fear that my fcheme would wholly fail in the execution ; I hired, however, two ruftics well recom¬ mended, as a guide, and an efcort, yet in travelling on the folitary mountains of Wales, often dared not turn my head over my ihoulder, left in my guards I fhould behold my murderers. My im¬ paired health rendered the journey very tedious ; during its progrefs, I paffed for a poor youth following the fteps of my father, and far gone in a confumption— After immenfe fatigue, I arrived at length at the port ; where I underftood with in- expreffible chagrin that Effex had'em¬ barked for Ireland a week before.—Alas ! a moment's recollection enabled me to account for this, apparently, ftrange de¬ fertion :—in my eagernefs to conceal my favorite fcheme, I had forgot to guard againft
againft the chance of his being inform¬ ed of my fuppofed death ere I reached him. On enquiry, İ plainly perceived that he had left fpies in the neighbour¬ hood of St; Vincent's Abbey when he quitted it, who, milled by report, had haftened after him with news of the me¬ lancholy event. I learnt he had delayed croffing from time to time without giving any reafon for it, but on being roufed by the arrival of two officers, he ordered the feamen to be called in the dead of night> and embarked the moment the tide fa¬ vored his departure. Though this information left me only myfelf to reproach, it did not leffen my chagrin. I wandered toward the lhore to meditate at leifure : it was ftill littered with foldiers and their appendages ; they were indulging with ungoverned licence in drinking and riot.—Every thing I beheld, increafed my fears of the voyage ; it was in¬ deed a tremendous thought -, to embark with a numerous body of licentious men for an unknown country, while wrapt in myf- Vol. III. E terv
tery myfelf, and without a protečtor.«^- How, if actuated by curiofity, or a lefs excufable motive, they ihould guefs at my fex, and pry into my ftory ? perhaps even the name of their general would want influence to guard me. I turned woman again, and trembled at the bare idea. While irrefolute in what manner to difpofe of my unfortunate felf, I ob- : ferved a body of travellers approaching, i and underftood with joy that it was Lady Southampton and her train, efcorted by a chofen troop, for whom thofe I had already feen waited—I bleft indulgent heaven, which thus relieved me from the effects of my own indifcretion, and de¬ manded to fee her—to fee her was enough, for with the penetration natural to her fex> ihe inftantly knew me, and throwing her arms around my neck, reproached me with a generous freedom for having re¬ tarded her journey, by obliging her to wait in vain for my arrival : and finally, for ihocking her with the fictitious ftõry of my death.—I explained to her my un¬ guarded conduct, and its motives.—She afiured
aífured me that íhe dreaded the effect it might have ort my lover, as her Lord had not time to write more than that Eifex was in difpair for my lofs, nor dared he ven¬ ture to leave him; therefore conjured her to confide herfelf to the care of the offi¬ cers he mentioned, and follow with all expedition.—This information doubled the regret which had already feized on me; but to guard againft all fufpicion and enquiry, I refolved to retain my maf¬ culine habit, and pafs for one of Lady Southampton's pages, till fafely lodged in Ireland. We arrived here laft night, and found a letter from Lord Southampton, lament¬ ing the impofliblicy of waiting for his Lady, without abandoning Eifex to a grief which urged him to raíhnefs and defpair; he ended with conjuring her to remain in.this town till he had confidered how to difpofe of her fafely.—Oh, fortune, for¬ tune, how unfairly do we accufe thee, when folly alone has led us into error !—I am more miferable than it is poflible to ex- E 2 prefs.
prefs. Lady Southampton would fain per¬ fuade me that this overfight may eventually prove lucky, as it will prevent my again feeing Effex ere the death of his Lady.— Ah ! what alteration can her lofs make in my fate ?— cc I tell you, my watchful friend, you cannot love my honor more than I do his fafety—between him and me there is another bar not lefs infurmountable.— Did not my fifter's marriage with a fa¬ vorite of Elizabeth coft him his life ? Alas, perhaps hers too was facrificed !"— over her myfterious fate a dark veil early fell, dipt perhaps in the blood of her be¬ loved—rather may I fee my own veins opened, than furvive fuch a calamity ; but even at this moment it has perhaps fallen on me, and I may be dying in Eflex while yet unconfcious of my fate—oh, what horrors take pofleflion of my foul at the bare idea !---------Lady Southampton has fealed her Englifh difpatches, and I can only fay adieu.
LET-
LETTER II. Dated Drogheda. BOUND to this fpot, my generous friend, and dreading all which paffes be¬ yond it, hardly can my heart feel the congra¬ tulation you beftow. Environed by enemies, and rendered raih by difpair, Eifex now renounces the glorious vifions he poífeífed my imagination with, and reflgns him¬ felf wholly up to his command.—-Oh, that the arrow which ftabs me ihould have been iharpened by my own hand !—All here is alarm, uncertainty, and confu¬ fion—we get and lofe in the courfe of every day a paifage to our friends, nor dare we truft to that channel aught of im¬ portance. Sir Coniers Clifford with a chofen body of troops was yefterday fur¬ rounded, himfelf and half his men cut off immediately—among the officers was a relation of Lady Southampton's ; ihe has been weeping the whole day for him.— For my own part, confcious I have not a tear to beftow on common inflictions, I E j gather
gather mine into my heart, which feels ready to pour forth a deluge the moment one of my many fears íhall be confirmed— you can form no conception of the wants, the woes, the horrible feenes we witnefs.— Born and bread in the arms of luxury and profperity, a diftant war but faintly affects our minds; but oh, how tremendous does it appear when once we are driven into its tempeftuous feat !—death, ghaftly death, aflumes a bloody variety of forms ; while rapine, famine, lickneis, and po* verty, fearfully forerun him. I have hitherto thought my filter's fate more coniummately wretched than even my own, but how is every evil lightened by comparifon !—Beloved Matilda, born as you were to woe, you faw but one bounded profpečt of the infinitude the globe prefents to us ; the horrors of this were unknown to you— u n comforting is the pillow of her who fleeps within the found of a drum, and fancies its every ftroke is fate,—Is this to live ? Ah no ! it is to be continually dying, This
This country fo nearly allied to our *wn, yet offers to our view a kind of new world; divided into petty ftates, inve- terately hating each other, it knows not the benefit of fociety, except when ne* ceflity combines the various parties agamft a common enemy; yet, though neceflity units, it cannot blend them; the leaft ceifation of general danger awakens all their narrow partialities and prejudices, which continually break out with bloody violence. The advantages of commerce, the charms of litera*· ture, all the graces of civilization, which at once enrich the mind and form the manners, are almoft unknown to this people ;. with a favage pride they fancy their very wants virtue, and owe to their poverty an unregulated valor, which often enables them to contend with well-difci- plined troops, whom they fomtimes de¬ feat by mere want of knowlede ; at others, on the contrary, they obftinately purfue an unequal conteft, while fpeculating reafon turns away from the bloody fcene, vainly confcious that their mingled bodies E 4 ftrew
ftrew the earth, only becaufe no bene¬ volent being has yet deigned to attempt the conqueft of their minds. How deeply muft fuch reflections operate on a heart bound up in the life of the ac¬ compliíhed leader ! endued with but the common powers of humanity, expofed with the reft, alike to the fword and to the ele¬ ments, he, even he, muft one day periíh ; and while I weep the wretches every hour 'deprives of their beloved protectors: I know not but I may at the fame moment be added to the number.—Ah, if defpair ihould impel Eifex,—his natural heroifm •needs no fuch incentive,—ihould he fall, unconfcious of my yet furviving, to that fatal though well defigned artifice I ihould for¬ ever impute his lofs, and die for having feigned to do fo. A wild fancy has taken ftrange poifef- fion of my mind—Lady Southampton fays it is madnefs; perhaps it really is fo, but I can think of nothing elfe : ihe, how¬ ever, is too timid to judge—ihe will pafs her whole life here Ì really believe. Were
Were I but for a moment to behold that expreifive countenance,—were I by a kind of refurrection again to appear be¬ fore him ! --------- Something ftrangely impels me—a chofen troop are now fetting out,—I ihall be fafe under their protection.^-Ah, if this ungovernable impulfe fhould be but a prefentiment of his danger—never, ne¬ ver fliould I forgive myfelf were I to leave him, wounded and dying, to the care of perfons comparatively indifferent. " Argue no longer, my dear importunate friend, I will go, but depend on my haftening back,"—Lady Southampton would have made a wretched love for Effex; ihe is the moft apprehenfive of women -, but ihe was not born to ma v te with that afpiring hero.
ГНЕ
THE
RECESS, &c.
PART V.
J\ Silence fo tedious will make you number me among the dead ; recover yourfelf, my beloved friend—born to a perpetual conteft with ill fortune, I fink not even yet under the oppreffion.—I have been collecting all my thoughts to purfue my ftrange recital, more ftrange indeed every day. In
In our way toward Ulfter, we were in¬ tercepted by a body of the rebellious Irifh, and a defperate íkirmiíh enfued— how íhall I own it, and call myfelf the the love of Eifex ; yet fo it was—I, who had been fo valiant in imagination, and remote from the field óf action—I, who had in fancy lifted a fword with the ftrength of Goliah, and interpofed a ihield before Effex, heavier perhaps than myfelf, ihrunk into annihilation at the bare fight of the conflict ; and the faintings which laid me among the flain, perhaps alone faved me from being added to their number. I revived in the hands of fome ferocious women, who in {tripping the dead, had difcovered at one moment that I yet lived, and was of their own fex. Induced either by a fentiment of huma¬ nity, or the hope of a reward, they liftened to my eager fupplications for life, and conveyed me to a neighbouring cabin ; whither they fummoned a prieft, who opened a vein in my arm. On feebly
re«
reviving once more, I caft my eyes round in fpeechlefs aftonifhment, fcarce know¬ ing whether I ihould think my efcape a blcfiing. I was environed by a let of beings who in complexion alone bore any refemblance to myfelf, their languagej manners, and lives, feeming no more ana¬ logous, than thofe of the inhabitants of the Torrid Zone. I laboured in vain to com¬ prehend them, or to make myfelf under¬ ftood, and was in difpair giving up the attempt, when the prieft already menti¬ oned came to my relief. Through his means I informed them that the Lord De¬ puty would redeem me at any ran fom, provided they fecured me from danger and infult. I ihould, I believe, have en- fured my own fafety, hacì not the victo¬ rious party learnt, by fome ftraggler, that an Englifh woman of diilinguiihed rank had been difcovered among the flain. They eagerly turned back to demand me, and the hope of reward alike influencing my prefervers to keep me in their hands, a difpute no lefs fierce, though not fo bloody,
bloody, as that I had before witneffed, followed ; it was too violent to be com- promifed, and at length, as the only way to prevent murder, both parties agreed that I ihould be put into the hands of their General, Tiroen ; or, as fome called him, O'Neal. Intreaties or refiftance would have been equally vain, and I was obliged to rejoice they thought me of confequence enough to act fo honorably by me. During this interval, one of the fer¬ vants deputed by Lady Southampton im¬ mediately to attend on me, having lin¬ gered a few minutes behind the Engliih troop, followed to rejoin them at the mo¬ ment of the onfet: the found of the firing reached him ere he fell in with the fcouts, and clapping fpurs to his horfe, he flew back to the village we all had lately quitted, there to wait in fafety the event of the conteft : at this place he was informed, a band of rebels had iffu¬ ed out from an ambufcade formed in the neighbouring mountain ; and while he was wavering what ftep to take, the news
news of my fex and capture fuddenly reached him ; ftruck with the idea of fome important myftery, as well from my diiguife as the cautions of his Lady, he haftened back to her with the ftrange in¬ telligence. The generous but timid Lady Southampton, impreifed folely with the idea of my danger, wrote inftantaneoufly ţo Eflex, briefly reciting all he did not know of my ftory, and ftrongly conjuring him to exert his utmoft influence to pre¬ ferve me from infult. But who íhall paint the feelings of Eifex, when this furprizing intelligence firft reached him ! intelligence which, in one moment, opened all thofe fources of tendernefs in his foul grief and def¬ pair had well nigh congealed. To think I ftill lived would have been confummate happinefs, had I not been thus unaccount¬ ably fnatched away, even at the very mo¬ ment of my miraculous renovation : fo fingular a complication of events almoft deprived him of his fenfes, and wrought impulfe up to agony. Perhaps the laft 2 un-
untoward incident of my life was necefi¬ fary to fave his brain from partaking the diffractions of his mind— fick at the heart of an incurable forrow—fatigued with the cares of government, and the flavery of command, the news of my exiftence and capture made him find in diftinčtions hitherto fo oppreflive, the fole profpečt of recovering a treafure, which alone could give value to his future life. From the knowledge acquired in his mili¬ tary command, Eifex was enabled to decide on the character of Tiroen—he juftly be¬ lieved it unprincipled and ungovernable ; how muft he tremble then to recollect my fate was in his hands ! In a conjuncture fo dangerous, he refigned himfelf entirely up to the guidance of an impaflioned heart, and difpatched an officer of rank, charging the arch-rebel, by the blood of thoufands yet unfpilt, not to exafperate the Engliih, and himfelf in particular, by maltreating the lady fortune had thrown into his power -, for whofe ranfom any fum
fum was tendered her captors ihould de¬ mand. This raih and impetuous addrefs had confequences only lefs dangerous than thofe it guarded againft. Tiroen unfor¬ tunately difcovered at once that he had the happinefs of the Lord Deputy in his keeping, and though he flattered him from time to time with promifes of noble treatment, he fecretly determined no doubt, that if he ever parted with me, it ihould be upon his own terms. It was not till feveral of thefe meifages had paífed, that Tiroen's curiofity led him to pay me a vifit : the attention excited bv my mafculine habit had led me imme¬ diately to requeft one more fuited to my fex; and the delicate fituation I ftood in, obliging me to conduct myfelf with the utmoft caution, I had thought it pe¬ culiarly fortunate to efcape the notice of the General. The continual repetition of his tedious vifits, when once he had feen me ; the laviih fupply of fuch accommodations as that
that ravaged country then afforded—an obftinate filence on the ftate of my affairs, and the moft wearifome difcuflions of his own, all too foon convinced me, that neither his pride, his ambition, or his fe¬ rocity, had been able to guard the heart of Tiroen from that powerful paflion which invigorated the being of his dif- tinguiiflied rival-r—I trembled at the recoil lection that I was wholly in his power- already misjudged as the voluntary mif¬ trefs of Eflex, unwilling to announce myfelf, and unable, had I done fo, to prove my right to diftinction, mine was indeed a fearful fituation. I was not allowed to hold any correspondence with the Engliih, and only knew by the watch kept over me, that a human being was anxious for my releafe. Whatever confequences might enfue from my appearing pleafed with the diftinc» tions laviihed on me by Tiroen, I felt eve¬ ry day more fenfibly that I' had no other means of avoiding the licentious infolence of his officers; who fancied their fervices Vol. Ill, F fo
fo important to the cáufe they had efpoufed, as to fecure their conduct from too ftričt a fcrutiny. Tiroen meantime fought occafions to break off, renew, and prolong, the fecret intereourfe in which he had now engaged with Effex : but a lingering treaty agreed not with the fiery impatience of that un¬ fortunate hero. His divided foul no longer attended to the duties of his command—the bufinefs of the war was at an end—Effex was no longer a cool and prudent General, watchful to feize every advantage, and harrafs the enemy—-alas, he was now only a wild and extravagant lover, ready to fa¬ crifice every confideration to the recovery óf one adored individual.—Delivered up to paflion, to terror, to agony, to every torturing excefs of overftrained fenfibility, at this fatal period the generous Eifex was gradually facrificing the whole renown of a life hitherto fo glorious. The news of Tiroen's love crowned his misfortunes; and that execrable traitor, determined to bring, if poflible, the Lord Deputy to his terms, by various emiflaries had him informed of plots
THE RECESS, &c. 67 I plots he never laid againft me, and re- pulfes he never fuftained ; always fpeci» oufly dilbwning fuch defigns, in terms caU culated only to redouble the fufpicions of I his rival. By artifices like thefe the warlike talents I and dignified mind of Effex were kept in I abfolute fubjection; he no longer dared I to exert the valour which burned proudly I at his heart, but ftifling every emotion ¡ love did not excite, he eagerly engaged j in a fecret and dangerous treaty.^—The I raih propofal of Effex to confer with I Tiroen from the oppofite banks of a rivu-p I let, I imputed to the paflionate defire a I lover ever has to judge of the perion and I talents of the man who dares to rival him— I this interview could not be kept a íecret — i alas, perhaps it decided the fortune of the Lord Deputy-*-Misjudged from that j moment by a bufy world which fees only i the furface of things, to timidity, to ava» rice, to indolence, to ambition, by turns, has been afcribed an incident, of which love had all the merit or the íhame. —Ah ! had the erroneous multitude^ confidered F $ but
but a moment, furely they had difcerned a myftery in his conduct.—What could ambition, glory, pride, require, he did not poifefs already ? If to hold the moft abfolute fway over the moft abfolute of Sovereigns could gratify thofe wiihes, they were gratified.^—Rather, ye bufy Many, learn to pity than condemn the generous frenzy of a bleeding heart which boldlv facrificed everv thing to an over- ruling, an irrefiftable paflion—a paflion mine muft break to anfwer—and it will break.—Oh! my lhook brain, how wild it wanders !-----r ****** Gay vifions of a higher, happier fphere, where are ye ? ah ! deign to gild awhile this gloomy world !—how inexpreflibly fweet are at intervals the trances of my mind !------care, forrow, fuffering, mortality itfelf is forgotten ; abforbed in a bright obfcure, every high- wrought feeling hovers on the verge of a long eternity— fye on this earthy cover»
covering, how it drags down my foul, my foaring foul. I wake from thefe day dreams, and re¬ turn to my fubječt —in fruitlefs and tedious negotiations were thus confuming thofe days we would in vain recall, thofe impor¬ tant days fraught with the very fate of the nobleft of mankind. The long delays, the eternal difap- pointments, exhaufted my patience ; agitated by a thoufand apprehenfions which no lefs concerned my lover than myfelf, mifery once more ftruck her iron fangs through my quivering heart. Com¬ pelled to ftruggle with a foul juftly con¬ ic ious of virtue ; to fupport an apparent tranquillity ; to adopt an artificial cha¬ racter ; to fuffer Tiroen to delude him¬ felf into a perfuafion the tye between me and Eifex was diíhonorable, left an un¬ certain one íhould want power to reftrain him, how many implicated indignities did I patiently endure !—Perfecuted with F 3 his
JĞ his bafe folicitations ; overwhelmed with bribes as fplendid as they were contemp¬ tible, I could ward off his expectations only by a feint my nature difdained. In anfwer to his unbounded offers, and ten¬ der proteftations, I one day bade him re¬ member that in thofe inftances he could not furpafs the generous lover he fought to rival; for that it was in the power of Eifex to give me every thing but his title. —Ti¬ roen paufed indignantly for a moment, and my heart exulting in its artifice, fondly hoped the ipectres of his whole line of royal anceftors would fweep before him, pre¬ cluding every idea of a union fo diíhonor¬ able. His whole eftimation, and the fuc¬ cefs of the war depended, I well knew, on his retaining the affections of the peo¬ ple, and how could he hope for thofe if he difgraced the blood of the O'Neals ? He fcarce credited the boldnefs of idea which appeared in this hint of mine, and ftruck with a perfuafion I muft be of fome fuperior rank to dare thus to elevate my eyes to him, he once more attempted to dive
dive into a miftery fo carefully and oh- ftinately concealed. I was however on my guard, and funk again, into my ori¬ ginal obfcurity. Still eager to potìefs a woman he could not efteem, he at laft afiured me (after having obferved that an engagement to a lady of his own fa¬ mily alone held his party together) that he would bind himfelf in fecret by every tye I ihould dictate. I unwarily re¬ plied, that the conduct and love of Eife* had been fo unqueftionably noble, that nothing but a fuperior and public mar¬ riage could vindicate me even to myfelf, in breaking with him.—Tiroen's look and anfwer made me fenfible of the dan¬ ger of this fpeech, and that in leav¬ ing him without hope, I had left my¬ felf without fafety. I felt from this moment like a wretch entirely devot¬ ed; and under the name of indilpp- fition (of which indeed I had fufficient reafon to complain) I procured from a furgeon who bled me, a quantity of li¬ quid laudanum, fome portion of which F 4 I pre-
72 THE I pretended to take every night, butin re¬ ality referved the whole of it for that fatal one which íhould confirm my fears. Such were the fufferings of Effex and myfelf, while the two camps were in fight of each other, and nothing but the moft guarded vigilance could prevent the in¬ cenfed Engliih from coming to action.— I was one evening alone in the tent allotted to me (for Tiroen would never truft me in any neighbouring fort or town), which, from the afcent it was pitched on, com¬ manded the whole valley, and looking with tearful eyes towards the increafing fires in the Engliih camp, when Tiroen approached me unawares—his complex¬ ion was fluihed with wine, and his eyes and air íhewed a determination at which my nature ihuddered—no longer regard¬ ing decorum or reípečt, his manners made me in a moment fenfible I had de¬ ferred taking my laudanum too long.—An idea, at which I have never ceafed to wonder, fuggefted itfelf to my mind ; and while fluctuating between the poflible and im-
ímpoflible, I a little föothed the boifter- ous wretch at whofe profligate vows I trembled—-intoxication deprived him of the guard he had fo long kept over his lips —imagining himfelf already poíľefTed of the beloved of Eflex, he could not for¬ bear vaunting of the addrefs which fecur- ed her to him.—I learnt with equal horror and amazement, that the long delay my capture and the fubfequent treaties had occafìoned in the war, were all concerted ltrokes of diabolical policy to ruin the fair fame of the Lord Deputy,—-That during thefe fatal treaties, Tiroen himfelf had fent the moft indubitable proofs to Elizabeth of the mifcondučl of her General, and had every reafon to fup- pofe he would immediately be recalled, and ignominioufly puniihed : nor could ihe ever felečt another equally dear to the army, on which every thing in war depended. ---------1 turned with eneiFable difdain towards the moniter.· ------ Oh, that an eye-beam could have killed him !— Engroűed, however, by his vari¬ ous
ous views, inflated with felf4ove and ap- plauíê, and confufed with wine, he faw not a glance which would inftantaneoufly have unfolded my whole heart, to the execrable, the ungenerous traitor: un* worthy the race he fprung from, and the fword he drew.—He continued to expa¬ tiate on his hopes of wholly expelling the Engliih, and afcending the throne of Ireland; But what after this unwary and black difcovery could his views be to me ? A thoufand dangers were prefling upon my foul, and a thoufand projects floating in my brain : I had hardly temper or recollection to methodize any-—while he continued to charm himfelf with the difclofure of all his vanity and ambition, hatred and hor¬ ror nerved my heart with courage to ex¬ ecute a ftrange defign, the defperation of fuch a moment alone could have fuggefted. Convinced, by the tenor of his difcourfe and conduct, that I could efcape his licen¬ tious purpofes only by feigning an inten¬ tion of yielding to them, 1 fmoothed my agonized features into a fmile which al¬ moft
moft ftiffened to a convulfion, and com¬ plained of thirft— a glafs of water ftood by, of which I drank-—inclination no lefs than gallantry, made him in lift on pledg¬ ing me; but refufing to give him the water without wine, I mixed it with an offi- cioufnefs perhaps but too obvious, adding the whole quantity of laudanum provided for myfelf. The hafte and tremor attending ίο dangerous a tranfaction, might well have excited diftruft in him at any time, much more at fuch a crifis; but not in a condition to obferve very ftričtly, and de¬ lighted with a condefcenfion on my part alike new and unexpected, in a tranfport of gallantry he dropt on his knees, and uniting my name with his own, cemented both with that of happinefs : the latter feemed to tremble back into my heart as he eagerly fwallowed the beverage. Sleep had before hovered over his eyelids ; it was now forerun by ftupefaction. The hour of reft arrived ; but the woman who ufually flept in the outer tent came not near it—I could not doubt but that their ab¬ fence was owing to the previous orders 2 given
given by the General, and falling on my knees, entreated him who armed the Aifyrian with courage voluntarily to dare the fituation into which I was brought unconfenting, to bare me boldly and fafely through it. A fortitude equal to the danger, feemed to fpring from the addrefs and the occafion.—The regimen¬ tal cloak Tiroen had thrown off on enter¬ ing ferved to cover my mafculine habit, which I refumed with expedition : it was a cloak fo remarkable, and familiar to every eye in the camp, as almoft to enfure my fafety. I overweighed my throb¬ bing temples with his warlike plume, and finally, drawing from his finger a fignet to produce if necefifary, I boldly grafped his dagger to decide my fate Ihould I be dif¬ covered, and iffued forth a fécond Judith. I had warily marked the progrefs of the night ; the laft watch had now gone by, and the time was paft when it was proba¬ ble any officer ihould be ftirring of note enough to addrefs the General. I had heard Tiroen fay it was his common prac- *' mm rr> v '°k the camp at night, and in
in that confidence ventured to pafs for him. Scarce had I gone a hundred paces when the homage of the centinels aífured me the counterfeit was undifco¬ vered. With an agitated heart I paffed from one to another, guided only by the dif¬ tant lights (for Tiroen always pitched his camp on a hill) till near the advanc¬ ed guard, I then retired behind a large tent, and difrobing myfelf of their Gene¬ raľs accoutrements, put on a common hat I had carried for that purpofe—what were my terrors when having reached the confines of the camp, now doubly watch¬ ed, I prefented the fignet as a proof I was fent on earned bufinefs.—The guard he¬ fitated, but after tedioufly debating, while I went through tortures, they judged it prudent to admit a token which alone could have enabled me to reach them, and I was fuffered to pafs. I ihot like an arrow from a bow when once thefe dreaded limits were overleaped, fcarce daring to addrefs my very foul to heaven,
heaven, left one loft moment ihould un¬ do me. Whether my eyes had deceived me in the imagined nearnefs of the Engliih camp, or my trembling and unguided feet had wan¬ dered wide of it, I knewnot; but forely were they bliftered ere I approached its limits— > piercing through thickets which tore alike my garments and my flefh, with fpirits faint¬ ing even to death, I fuddenly heard a fcout give the watch-word in Engliih. Over¬ joyed to think myfelf fafe, I unhappily wanted prefence of mind to pronounce a fingle fyllable, and the officious foldier miftaking me for a fpy, levelled his piecej and inftantly pierced my fide—My fpirits were no longer equal to contending with danger or with death, and the fear of difcovery being the prevailing fenti- ment of my fex, I feebly conjured the man, if he hoped for pardon, to bear me to the tent of the Lord Deputy. The delicacy of my complexion and cloaths had already furprized the inadvertent foldier—he quickly called together fome
of his companions, who aflifted in laying me on a hurdle, and bearing me toward the tent of Eifex. The morning was now broke—I faw the early beams of the fun emblazon the golden ornaments of the Generaľs tent— fome officers came out of it as I approached.—My heart, from which life feemed every moment ready to iflue, made a courageous effort to collect into itfelf the fcattered prin¬ ciples of a being I appeared on the very point of refigning. I fancied ere he yet fpoke, I heard the voice fo dear to me^—I fancied! ah, I indeed faw him, ruih forward on the firft hint ; but, root-bound as it were, he flopped before he came to me, and fent his very foul forth in a groan.—"Yes, Eifex," cried 1, if extending my feeble hand, the wretch heaven did not allow to live in thy arms, receives its next indulgence in being per¬ mitted to die' there," ------But how ihall I defcribe the tearful tranfports, the touch¬ ing agonies of his recovered intellects ! I funk under the keen extafy of the mo¬ ments
ment, and long faintings fucceeded, oc¬ cafìoned by my lofs κ,ί blood, that once more brought me to the very verge of the grave. The amiable Lady Southampton came at the inftance of her coufin, and gave by her prefence, a decorum to my fitu¬ ation it had long wanted. Every effort of art was exerted to foothe my broken fpirits, and ftrengthen my exhaufted frame. He, who alone could give effi¬ cacy to medicine, hovered ever near, and when fpeech was interdicted, by affec¬ tionate looks fuftained me.—Ah, how pleafant were even thefe fufferings ! how delightful was it to collect back into my heart thofe gentle impulfes war and terror had driven from the. r home !—To affiance my foul in filence to its only Lord, and to fancy that whatever fate heaven ihould hereafter ordain him, mine could no long¬ er be divided from it. As foon as my amended health allowed, I entered into a detail of all that had paffed fince Lord Effex left me at St. Vincent's.
.kc. Vincent's Abbey. He in return in¬ formed me, that the lethargy into which Tiroen was plunged by the laudanum I had fo haftily adminiftered, was very near being fatal to him, as the utmoft effort of care and medicine could only preferve him the faculty of breathing; fince to difturb his deep and unwholefome flumbers always threw him into a dan¬ gerous delirium. The courageous effort by which I had recovered my liberty, he added, ftill formed the whole converfation of both camps. I bleffed the awful power who faved me the guilt of murdering even a villain, and did not immediately re¬ mark that Effex gave me no farther in¬ formation. I foon learnt from Lady Southampton the painful truths my Lord fought to hide from me—that Elizabeth had inceffantly urged him to profecute a warwhich his fears for me had hitherto fufpended; but finding at length that both intreaties and com¬ mands were loft upon him, flie grew cold and Vol. III. G dif-
difgufted. His friends in England had given him but too much reafon to believe that his enemies were gradually acquiring the afcendancy in her heart, he as gradually loft ; fince all her favors were now la- viihed on Sir Walter Raleigh, the houfe of Cecil, and the Earl of Nottingham, a party who had long meditated the down¬ fall of Eifex and Southampton, of which they now fpoke as a certainty ; and that even the common people beheld with difcontent the flow progrefs of the war in Ireland, nor could Eifex any longer depend upon popularity. The unguarded friend who made me "this recital, engrolfed by her own ihare in it, forgot how it interefted me. I called to mind the information fent by Tiroen to Elizabeth, which but too well accounted for the Queen's anger and difguft, and conceived at once all its probable confequences. Eifex, unlike all other favorites, could never be brought to know any claim to fuperiority but merit ------incapable of thofe little arts by
by which mean fouls attach the infidi¬ ous train of fycophants a Court always abounds with; he had ever fcorned a partial monopoly, and politic diftribution, of pofls and places.------The mercenary wretches, who had bowed to him in vain, paid their court to his enemies with more fuccefs, and inftructed by them in every weaknefs of the favorite, were ever ready to ftrengthen any prejudice the Queen might conceive againft him. A thoufand fears incident to age and decaying power were thus cheriihed in her, which, magnified by paflions time itfelf could never allay, might too probably ftamp the bafe intelli¬ gence of Tiroen with the fatal authority of unbiafled truth, and give to the inactivity of Effex, the appearance of treafon.— Such a train of circumftances could hardly fail to ftagger a mind in full poffeifion of the nobleft and moft im¬ partial judgment; what then might we not fear from a Sovereign always influ¬ enced by prejudices each paffing day ftrengthened, by infenfibly impairing her reafon ? Fortunately, through an extrava- G 2 gance-
gance of dotage which almoft puniihed the errors of her youth, thofe prejudices had hitherto united in his favor:—yet while J perceived but a fingle chance againft him, my foul fhrunk from the idea of entrufting his life with her. To give Lord Eifex the opportunity of vindicating himfelf to Elizabeth, I re¬ folved to account for her conduct ; and divulged to him the inadvertent acknow¬ ledgment made by Tiroen, during our laft memorable interview, of his own perfidy and diflimulation. A generous fcarlet burnt on the cheek of Eifex while he execrated the traitor ; but ftruck immediately with a full conviction of the confequences that might refult from this bafe intelligence, he formed the extraordinary refolution of returning to England to juftify his honor. This determination no lefs fhocked than furprized me ; far from imagining my in¬ formation would lead to fo wild a pro¬ ject, I rather fuppofed it would fuggeft to him the impoflibility of ever revifiting En¬ gland, unlefs the reduction of Ulfter was fully accompliíhed. —In truth, I dared not
not confefs my fears that even then to re¬ main with the army alone could enfure his fafety.— F very reafon I could urge, or Southampton enforce, were in his judg¬ ment feebler than his own—his honor was piqued, and nothing could hinder him from vindicating it.—Perfuaded a ftep as bold as this alone would convince Elizabeth of his innocence, and accuf¬ tomed to regain, whenever he appeared, that influence over her, his enemies had often encroached on in his abfence, he perfuaded himfelf he need only be feen to triumph, and concluded a truce, as the preliminary to his departure. The pride of fex, fenfibility, and ho¬ nor, contended with the leading paflion of my nature, and taught me to difdain over-ruling him I could not convince :— neverthelefs, I almoft funk under the conflict.—The frightful fituation in which I had been placed fince my arrival in Ire¬ land, made me obftinately refufe to con¬ tinue there, whenever Effex ihould leave it ; and the curiofity I had excited alike by my bold efcape, and wound, made G 3 itr
it hazardous to commit me to the charge öf any officer left behind. Surrounded with friends, relations, and dependents, Effex (fuch is the painful uncertainty ever attending on elevated rank) knew not one to whom he could fafely intruft fo delicate a care. The generous South¬ ampton, determined to fhare the fate of his friend by accompanying him, propofed to unite that of his Lady with mine, by fhipping us off ere they embarked, with fervants they fhould mutually felečt ; ap¬ parently bound for France, but in fact for the coaft of Cumberland. In the moft ro¬ mantic and folitary part of that remote county the Wriothefleys had long owned a caftle, where malice itfelf would hardly feek, and certainly never find us ¿ there he afifured Effex we might repofe in peace, till they fhould return again to Ireland. I felt all the merit of this project, by which the amiable Southampton robbed himfelf of the dear fociety of his wife, merely to do honor to the beloved or his friend j and adopted it with the ut¬ moft
moft eagernefs, from the hope that if the bufy trafmitters of Lord Effex's actions had ever mentioned me, this total fepa¬ ration would extinguiih all jealoufy in the mind of Elizabeth ; who I knew would much fooner overlook the lofs of an army than hishearu Although Eifex knew not how to place me happily in Ireland, it was with pain he confented to my quitting it; but find¬ ing me obftinately partial to Lord South¬ ampton's defign, he propofed my re- fuming my mafculine difguife, and fe¬ lected a veifel whofe captain was devoted to him, having ordered a lighter one to be prepared for himfelf. So fad a prefentiment ihivered my foul on the morn appointed for our embarka¬ tion, that it was the utmoft effort of my principles to fuffer Eífex to act in confor¬ mity to his. I had previoufly infifted that he ihould fail at the fame moment with my¬ felf, to end my fears ofthat formidable favage Tiroen ; and when he entered my chamber to conduct me to the ihip, my heart G 4 qui-
quivered on lips which had no longer the power to utter a fyllable. —He be¬ fought, he conjured me, to fupport my finking fpirits ; " the higheft hopes," he added, with an air of fincerity, " elevated his own ; that it had always been his pride, his pleafure, to deferve the diftinč¬ tions laviihed on him by the Queen ; and whatever views he had formed when hea¬ ven fhould call her hence, he could not refolve even by ingratitude, much lefs treachery, to fhorten her days who had crowned his with glory. Doubt not," con¬ cluded he, "my love, but I ihall recover all my influence, and remember when next we meet it is to part no more." Ill-omened feemed that fentence to me—I fancied too his voice founded hol¬ low—I fancied !—alas, every dire chi¬ mera fenfibility prefents to an impaflioned heart, took full poffeifion of mine; yet, as to exert the leaft influence at fo trying a moment was to render myfelf account¬ able for his future fate, I oppofed every ennobling fentiment to an ungovernable paffion 4
paflion, and heroically refigned him up to his duty. We quitted the port at the fame inftant: he fteering for that neareft the Irifh coaft, I for the North of England.—Both by confent remained on the deck with fouls fixed on each other, till the beloved indi¬ vidual vanifhed, and the veifel'feemed an object only lefs dear; that at length dimi¬ niihed to a cloud, the cloud ihrunk to a fpeck, and the fpeck became invifible.— I threw myfelf on my bed, and, giving way to the tears I had hitherto ftifled, I befought the Almighty to guard him he had fo eminently diítinguiíhed. Companion had induced Effex to con¬ fent to our taking on board an old officer who had been defperately wounded. The intenfe ficknefs produced by the ele¬ ment, caufed his wounds to open, which obliged us to put back and land him, or facrifice his life to our convenience ; and this unforefeen delay expofed us to a calamity as lafting as it was grievous. Launched
Launched a fécond time on thofe reft- lefs furies to which alone I could com- pare my own perturbed foul, the next day brought the comparifon ftill nearer— A dreadful tempeft arofe, nor were we within reach of any port. The enraged and howling winds drove the veifel at pleafure a thoufand times fidelong into the deep, and the impetuous and foam¬ ing waves threw it up again with equal violence. ------------We remained ftupified with terror; íhut. down with our wo¬ men in the cabin, the rapid motions and cries of the feamen, the tremenduous cracks and groans of the veifel, united with the warring elements to make that fate indifferent every moment brought nearer. To prepare my mind for the im¬ pending event, I, however, recollected, with due gratitude to heaven, that the light veifel in which Eflex failed, had doubtlcfs made a near port, ere the ftorm began, and landed him in fafety. I pondered once more on that wonder¬ ful character I had fo often confidered. I faw, however ftrong the predominant foible
THE RECESS, kt. gì foible of Lord Eifex, it ftill gave way to rectitude ; and, fearful the paflion which led him towards me might one day affect his fafety, I bent to the awful God who thus in thunder called away its weak and helplefs object :^—not without admir¬ ing the fingularity oí that deftiny, which by interring me in the ocean, fecured the forged death and funeral I had publiihed for myfelf, from ever being difcovered. Strengthened, if not confoled, by thefe ideas, I fought to cheer my no lefs fuffer¬ ing friend ; who, rejecting alike food and comfort, refigned herfelf wholly up to ficknefs, faintings, and forrow.—Ah, who íhall fay we fuffer in vainJ the feel¬ ings of the foul, like the organs of fight, gain ftrength by ufe, till we dare to ana¬ lyze that fate we once could not have ven¬ tured to confider; while the refined and ex¬ quifite fenfe of mental anguifh which ren¬ ders us fuperior to common evils, often gives an apparent fublimity to efforts which are little in our own eftimation.—Lady Southampton, yet diítinguiíhed by nature, fortune, love, clung to thofe rich poffef¬ fion s
fions, and ihrunk from the awful immor¬ tality which threatened every moment to take place of them.—She liftened to me with wonder, and this inftance of for¬ titude impreifed her mind with a rever¬ ence for my character, time could never obliterate. The fudden abatement of the ftorm contributed little to our fafety ; as the ihip, ill calculated for fuch a conflict, had bulged upon a rock, and now filled fo faft with water, that the utmoft dili¬ gence of the crew could hardly fave us from finking.—The fight of land, ere the evening clofed, had fcarce power to cheer, for a moment, wretches who no more hoped to behold the dawning of the morn.—To the uproar and turbulence of the ftorm a filent horror and defolation had now fucceeded fcarce lefs ihocking. Midnight wa3 hardly turned ere a dif¬ mal univerfal cry informed us the veffel was finking—Lady Southampton threw her arms helplefsly round me, and the unprincipled part of the crew, burfting into
into our cabin, increafed the horrors of the moment by opening our coffers, and gathering together their moft valuable contents : an officer followed, who tak¬ ing our hands in filence, led us toward the deck:—two boats were now prepar¬ ing—the laft melancholy chance we had of furviving.—The captain, who hap¬ pily owed every thing to Eifex, informed us, that as the larger boat had the bet¬ ter chance, he had fixed on placing us in that, ere the fcattered crew could collect, and by prefling too numeroufly upon us, rob us of a laft hope.—We were con¬ veyed into the boat while he was yet fpeaking, and the failors fo impetuoufly followed, regardlefs of the captain's re- monftrances and commands, that our danger feemed hardly diminiihed by the removal. ------A hope neverthelefs arofe which encouraged each individual to an exertion from wdience the general fafety was afcertained. Entirely enveloped in the only watch-coat which had been taken from the wreck, Lady Southamp¬ ton
ton and myfelf (who were the only women faved) knew but by the voices of our companions whether life or death was to be expected—the fea ran high, and the grey dawn prefented to our eager eyes a coaft, which we were informed was that of Scotland, at no great diftance; an old caftle appeared, on a lharp projection of the land, whofe folid battlements feemed proof againft every attack of art and na¬ ture ; but the ihoals, rocks, and furf that intervened, threatened to make us ever behold it at a hopelefs diftance, un¬ lefs we could intereft the compaflion of its owners. Every fignal of diftrefs was made for hours apparently in vain, till the turn of the tide ; when two fiíhing boats appear¬ ed, flowly working their way towards us. A difcordant ihout of joy on the part of our companions fplit the ears of my fick friend and felf, who inly worihipped the power that preferved us.------The bene¬ volent ftrangers approached, and their garb no lefs than unknown language pro-
proclaimed them natives of the Scotch coaft. To the men around us they of¬ fered bifcuits and whifky in abundance, and beftowed on me and Lady South¬ ampton a draft of cold water, which feemed as much more refrefliing as it was innocent. Revived by this unexpected revolution in our fate, we by joint confent fliook off the heavy watch-coat which had a little faved us from the inceffant fpray of the enraged fea, and when the'boat was at length drawn towards the flight of rude fteps leading to the caftle, we both quitted it with no lefs celerity than thankfulnefs.— Our progrefs was for a moment impeded by furprize—-at the gate of the caftle ftood two beings who feemed of fome fuperior order; fo fingular were their drefs, beauty, and benevolence.------ Л youth and his fifter waved us towards them with graceful courteiy—the latter wore a light veft and coat of Scots plaid, with a belt of green fattin clafped with gold ; the rude wind had carried off the covering of
of her hair and caufed her long auburn locks to ftream on the bofom of the morn¬ ing, expofing to view her flight ancles half booted, and tinging her cheeks with that pure cold colour, youth, health, in¬ nocence, and heaven, alone can give.— the youth, who in features ftrongly re¬ fembled his fifter, was habited as a hunter, with a fpear in his hand, and a dagger hanging in his belt.—Both with fmiles of hofpitality ran forward to re¬ ceive us ; and while the young lady took the arm of my friend, the youth with an impaflioned pleafure ihook my hand, cafting a look of mingled wonder and dif¬ dain at the foiled, though rich, habili¬ ments I had on; which indeed originally rather agreed with my own fex than that I intruded upon. The antique hall into which they conducted us, was hung with tattered banners, mouldy coats of arms, and every proud remnant of war and ancientry. Refreftiments fuitable to our paft diftrefs were bufily fet before us, nor, with that intuitive politenefs fuperior minds always poifefs,
poifefs, did either venture to exprefs a curiofity till they had frankly fatisfied ours.—From them we learnt that the fpot fortune had thrown us on, was an ifland on the coaft of Scotland, and the place which iheltered us, Dornock Caftle, held by the Laird of that name ; that they were brother and fifter to that Laird, who was now abfent on a family concern of no fmall moment; in íhort, that their elder fifter, Mabel, famed through the country for her beauty, having unhappily fliewn it at Court, the King would not fuffer her to return ; and their brother, fearful ihe ihould yield to his licentious wiihes, had haftened thither to claim her. The young people who made this artlefs recital, were formed to grace it—when the fair Phcebe fpoke of the charms of her fifter, her own were heightened by a fofter, fuller bloom; and when íhe mentioned their dangerous effect, the proud blufli of a generous íhame gave manlinefs to the boyifti features of her brother Hugh.— Accuftomed as my friend and felf had long been to every worldly charm and Vol. III. H ad-
advantage, we faw in this remote fpot, and theie untutored children of nature, a fimple and noble grace art only refines away* When it came to my turn to narrate, I ufed every artifice to guard againft the poffibility of danger.------Adopting the name Lady Southampton had lately quit¬ ted, I called myfelf Vernon ; a youth em¬ ployed till lately as a page in the train of the Earl of Eifex, and now his fecretary— the lady with me, I faid, allied to the Earl of Southampton, was lately wedded to me; and both were following thefe noblemen when overtaken by the tempeft which had thrown us upon their ihore, and rendered us debtors to their humanity. Finding we came from the feat of war, and were converfant with the Court of England, they both afked a thoufand various quefti¬ ons fuitable to their fex, age, and fimpli- city, refpecting the one and the other ; and our defcriptions, to their unformed conceptions, comprized every charm of magnificence, glory, and gaiety. The
The happy device of a pretended mar¬ riage enabling me to ihare the chamber of Lady Southampton, we chofe the hour of retirement to confider our prefent fitua¬ tion, and the mode moft likely to reftore us once more to the country and connexions from which the ftorm had feparated us. ------My friend juftly remarked, that the failors wrecked with us, and its natives, were all the people likely to vifit this re¬ mote and folitary ifle, and that if we failed to take advantage of the departure of the firft, we ihould throw ourfelves wholly upon the generofity of the Laird of Dornock, of whofe character we could not venture to decide from thofe of the amiable young people, who had fo warmly embraced our caufe.—After the applica¬ tion of Eifex to my brother in my favour had been rejected, I had every thing to fear if any circumftance ihould betray me into his power, and the ftricteft fe- crefy on our names and condition alone could give us a hope of liberty;—how under fuch reftrictions we could clearly H 2 explain
explain our prefent fituation to the two no¬ blemen whom alone it concerned, neither of us could difcover; neverthelefs, ne- ceflity obliged us to come to fome refolu¬ tion ; and perfuaded the writing of each would be known to him to whom the letter was addreifed, weary as we both were, a part of the night was fpent in preparing two epiftles for the failors to convey.—The morning came and with it the mortifying information that we were a few hours too late ; the men faved with us having hired a fiíhing fmack in which they failed away at the turn of the tide : nor did the owners know their deftina- tion till the veifel returned. I was not without an idea that our youthful protec¬ tors had voluntarily concealed fo material an event, in the hope of detaining us ; but certainly had that really been the cafe, it was not half fo inexcufable as our own imprudence and neglect.—We hired a boat to purfue them with the letters, but after feveral days fpent in painful expec¬ tation, the packets were returned to us, with.
with the mortifying information that all enquiry had proved fruitlefs. We had now no refource but in the generofity of the Laird of Dornock, and endeavoured to fortify ourfelves with patience to wait his return. The youthful brother and fifter ex¬ preffed a generous concern for our fitua¬ tion ; but wholly without power, they could do no more.—Prifoners at large, as we were, effectually bounded by the roar¬ ing ocean, and depending folely on con¬ tingencies for freedom, the days to us crept heavily away—I fometimes remem¬ bered with a figh that I was in Scotland— that kingdom where by inheritance I might claim a rank that would enable me to decide my own fate, had not a com¬ bination of events, forerunning even my birth, made every advantage of fortune and nature alike ufelefs to me. I en¬ deavoured to difcover the real character of their King, but even from the report of his friends, to be able to term it good, I was obliged to think it weak ; and in Η 3 that
that cafe knew he would inevitably be furrounded with artful politicians ready to profit by his foible; in íhort, I found that, however near he and I were allied in blood, we were born to be diftinčt be¬ ings in creation, and to meet would en¬ danger the fafety of the weaker. When I turned my anxious foul toward Eng¬ land, it brought me no relief.—As far from the reach of intelligence as if in the wilds of Arabia, I in vain fought to dif¬ cover the reception Eifex had met with at Court.—That name, which in the va¬ nity of my heart I had often thought the world refounded with, I found, with checked pride, was fcarcely known in an adjacent country, till my lips fo often re¬ peated it ; and even when moft anxious to oblige me, thofe of others only echoed the found fo dear, fo beloved ! I had but too much reafon to fear doubts of my fafety would make him carelefs of his own, and often would have refigned every brilliant profpečt fancy ever fpread before me, to afcertain the life of the Earl. Too
Too late I regretted the pride of heart which had made me refift the defire I felt to detain him in Ireland ; and could not but acknowledge it was rather that than principle which reconciled me to his de¬ parture ; yet, in a fituation fo delicate as ours, to wiíh was to command ; and the facrifice his own foul did not dictate, mine difdained to fuggeft. My mind now daily paffed through fuch a chaos of ideas and emotions, as would have prevented the time from ap¬ pearing tedious, had not its prolongation been the origin of moft of them. Often fitting on the rude battlements of the caftle, while the furges beat againft their bafe, have I tuned the lute of Phcebe, and while ihe warbled a few wild airs of inconceivable melody in a lan¬ guage unknown to me, my full foul has wept over the myfterious fate of my Af¬ ter.—Ah, how eafy is it to be unknown ! —to be entombed alive !—If I, even in a civilized adjacent kingdom, in effect the country of all my anceftors, can be thus H 4 helplefs,
helplefs, what may the poor Matilda have been ?---------Turn bufy imagination from the fatal fuppofition. The overfight we had committed in fuffering the failors to leave us, became every day more and more regretted.— Lady Southampton foon found herfelf in a fituation that required the tendereft in¬ dulgence, and would forbid removal, even if our afylum íhould be traced by anxious love. We fpent our lives in fretting, and had we not poffeffed an un¬ limited intimacy, 1 know not how we ihould have endured the inceffant chagrin. —deprived even of the ufual refources; a fcanty library, a lute, fome ruftic airs, and a pedigree as old as the creation, bounded the poffeflions and knowledge of our young friends, and could not add any thing to our own. The Laird of Dornock, however, re¬ turned at laft. —Ah, how unlike his gen¬ tle kindred !—phlegmatic, felf-willed, crefted, and imperious, his afpečt pre¬ fented a correfpondent harihnefs ; and we inftantly felt it vain to reft a hope on his friend-
friendihip ; he no doubt reproved his bro¬ ther and fifter for having lived on fuch familiar terms with ftrangers, avowedly fubordinate; and though he often made us fenfible our company was a burthen, he took not a fingle ftep to relieve himfelf from it. Phoebe had begun to improve herfelf in mufic ere his ar¬ rival ; it was his pleafure ihe ihould con¬ tinue to do fo ; but his prefence threw a coldnefs and conftraint over the whole party, which made what I had once thought a relief, an inconceivable toil. The ingenuous noble girl faw her brother's infolence with a grief which prevented her from profiting by the lelfons fo much defired—her guihing tears would often relax the firings of her lute, while low- warbling tales of hopelefs love, and her fad eyes fix themfeles on mine with an exprefiion too ftrong to be mifunderftood. 1 perceived while unconfcious of the dan¬ ger, becaufe poífeífed with the remem¬ brance of my own difguife, I had won the gentle heart I only fought to form.— Cir¬ cuirli! anced as I was, this could not but be
be a dangerous acquifition ; and by a fa¬ tality yet more alarming, her elder brother foon after became enamoured of Lady Southampton; nor did he conceal that inclination—he had from his arrival re¬ garded, me with an eye that indicated doubt on the fubječt of our marriage ; but the increafing fize of my friend, and our habit of living together, appeared to controvert a fufpicion which never¬ thelefs remained in his mind. Anxious to profit by the only hour in the day which could favor his views, he was obliged to give the advantage he fought ; and permit me to teach his fifter with no other guard than his younger brother, Hugh, while he paifed the interval with Lady Southampton.—All equally rejoiced at an incident all had equally defired ; as to my¬ felf, determined from the moment I had been convinced of the paflion of the fair Phcebe, to feize the firft opportunity of intrufting her with my difguife, ere íhame for the miftake ihould difguft her with the object, I was not forry to confide it to her
her brother: as, if it did not more at¬ tach him to my intereft, it would at leaft obviate every fear he might entertain on his fifter's account, whom he could then fafely leave at any time. This juft can¬ dor produced more confequences than one. The fweet Phcebe ftarted, bluíhed, and firft lifting her fwimming eyes toward heaven, then covered them with her hands—when I ceafed to fpeak ihe timor- oufly railed them to my face.— iC Ah! why had you not been thus fincere at firft ?" cried the generous girl, ff the power was then in our hands— ^űíc;"— íhe ihoòk her head, and in that emphatic gefture ftrongly finifhed her imperfect fpeech. Alarmed and anxious, I conjured her to confide to me thofe reafons which made our fituation in her opinion fo hopelefs. She could not refift my entreaties j and at length acknowledged, that from the mo¬ ment her elder brother returned, Hugh no lefs than herfelf had obferved a haugh- tinefs and feverity in his air and lan¬ guage more forbidding than ufual ; at laft
laft they had difcovered that their fifter, Ma¬ bel, far from liftening to virtue and the Laird of Dornock, had yielded to the King; and to protect herfelf from her family, had been compelled to publifh her íhame, by claiming her lover's protection. To re¬ concile the Laird of Dornock to fo cutting a difgrace, a title had been offered him, with any poft about the Court he ihould fix on : and that at length the fair Mabel had confoled herfelf for the forfeiture of every rational diftinčtion, by the temporary honor of reigning in the heart of her King, and being called a Countefs." I enquired with furprize, how an event íhould affect us in which we apparently had no concern ï Hugh anfwered, f< that his brother, far from accepting the fplendid coverings offered for infamy, had retired from Court in great indignation ; that at firft they had both been compelled to fcorn and return every letter and prefent fent by their fifter : yet of late fome view, inex¬ plicable to them, had made a fingular al¬ teration in the Laird of Dornock's fenti¬ ments.—
ments. —Several couriers had been dif¬ patched by him to the favorite Countefs, but neither their commiflions, nor the anfwers, ever tranfpired; yet many cir¬ cumftances had given them reafon to con¬ clude that our pacquets had never been forwarded, as we were taught to believe.— I changed colour at the idea of this deli¬ berate treachery, thanking heaven I alone had been informed of it ; as Lady South¬ ampton, often unable to govern her feel¬ ings, by fome imprudent fpeech would infallibly have betrayed her knowledge of it. The young Hugh, obferving my un¬ eafinefs, aífured me, c though hopelefs of finding a faithful meffenger, he held him¬ felf anfwerable for the releafe of thofe whom he had contributed to enthrall, and that I might depend upon his own fervices if I would deign to ccnfide in him, nor ihould we be fufpected as the caufes of his dif- appearance, fince the Laird of Dornock well knew his fifter Mabeľs particular fondnefs for him, and would naturally imagine he was determined to profit by the
the high favor ihe held at Court."------ * Is there a charm on earth fo touching as generofity?------The noble youth paufed with an air that indicated his ardent de¬ fire of having his offer accepted, left it ihould be miftaken for a vaunt. I took a hand of each young friend, and returning acknowledgments fuitable to the occafion, declined embroiling them with their fül¬ len brother; who could not want power to render our fituation much more into¬ lerable, if once he fufpected us of alienat¬ ing his family from their duty.—I per¬ fuaded them, as well as myfelf, that our own friends would with unwearied dili¬ gence fearch us out the moment they dif¬ covered that any part of the crew furvived the wreck ; of which the Captain would certainly inform them, unlefs, he funk with the ihip. Yet day after day proved this hope vain and fallacious.—A dreary winter paifed away in this remote Caftle, through every aperture of which the keen and howling wind poured unreftrained; and the wild ocean
ocean fwelled with frequent ftorms, while our afrighted fenfes often miftook the roar of the tempeft for the groans of the dying. I had almoft ceafed to hope, when one day, while our hoft was hunting, I wandered to the battlements as ufual, and defcried from thence a fmall veifel approaching, better built, and more clean, than thofe I was accuftomed to fee ; as it drew nearer the land, I perceived Engliih dreifes. ------My heart took the alarm, I leant impatiently forward, (training the keen fenfe whofe imperfection I com¬ plained of*—-The boat drew near. I dif¬ cerned the regimental of Eífex ; I gave a groan of exquifite delight, and reeling forward, ihould have plunged into the ocean, had not the young Hugh, who ftood behind, held me faft.—The officer looked up, and I inftantly perceived him to be Henry Tracey, the favorite aid-de¬ camp of Lord Eifex, once before de¬ puted in fearch of me.—Difappointme-it mingled with the various and interefting
emo-
emotions of the moment.—I pointed to the ftranger, fighed, and fainted away. They bore me to lady Southampton, , who thunderftruck at feeing me lifelefs, and unable to guefs the caufe, feemed little better herfelf. Hugh, who clearly comprehended from my impafiioned gef- ture, how interesting the arrival of the ftranger was to me, haftened to bring him to our apartment, while yet his bro¬ ther was abfent ; when inftantly retiring, he left us full liberty---------" Tracey ?" cried both of us at once, fc Eifex ?" " Southampton ?** echoed each heart, Cf fum up all in a word."— cc They live," returned he, " and need only behold you to be happy."—"Ah, gracious heaven!" cried I, lifting my eyes thither, while I pre¬ fented my heart with my hand to the faithful m -fie nger, ct receive my tranfport ; we now can breathe freely ; give us the relief of knowing the events which fol¬ lowed the dangerous voyage of Eífex and Southamption" " I ihould hardly dare to do fo, had I not firft afifured you of their fafety," refumed Tracey, " for 4. forrow
forrow I fee has been preying already on your blaom ; it would not perhaps have been more fpared had you paffed this trying interval in London." Apprehenfive every moment [pi an in¬ terruption from th« Laird of Dornock, we befought the worthy Tracey to difpenfe with all preface, and haften his recital. " With terror and anxiety," continued he, " I followed my Lord into the veffel fe¬ lected to convey him home, nor were thefe emotions diminiihed when I per¬ ceived the Lord Deputy full of fits of doubt and reflection, which at times were ob¬ vious even to himfelf; often would he affect to drown them in gay fociety and wine, and, for the firft time in his life, he aflumed a falfe bravery.—At the hours of retirement, far from indulging that intimacy fo long eftabliihed between him and Lord Southampton, of which I had fometimes been a greateful and humble partaker, he funk into an abfence of mind, and total filence, no lefs alarming to his beloved friend than myfelf ¿ in effect, that Nobleman faw that he had <fet his for» Vol. III. I tune
tune en ă cefi> and he would fiand the hazardı of the die,' as I conjectured by his turniqg to me one day, and by an expref- five motion of his head* leading mine towards ^the fide of the veifel, where the General leant; his thoughtful coun¬ tenance apparently fixed on thofe rolling waves which yet perhaps he faw not. ------ « All is not well in the heart of thy Lord, Tracey," faid his noble friend r then pauf- ing a moment, he adtled, in a lower tone, « c Ah Effex, aut Cœfar: aut nullus Γ The Lord Deputy happily advanced, and faved me the neceffity of corroborating fenti- ments it gave me pain- to adopt. It was not with the cuftomary greetings we beheld the pleafant fhores of our na¬ tive country—doubt and anxiety threw a gloom over thofe lively and Ipontane- ous emotions, which often fufpend even the fenfe of fuffering. Lord Eifex loft not a moment, but pofted toward the Court, with fuch expedition, that he outwent all information, and was his own harbinger.—We arrived one morning ere ľ e t
yet the Queen had left her chamber; but alas, it was no longer the Court we had left— every face around appeared ftrarigé to us; and we faw too plainly that the invidious Cecils reigned there triumphant;—Lord Grey, a favorite of theirs, whom we had met on the road¿ had prefumed to pafs the Earl of Eíľex without notice—that Nobleman gave him only an eye-beam, and haftened on to decide his fate.— Forni was annihilated by eircumftances, and he rulhedinto the prefence of Elizabeth thé moment his arrival was announced—ac* cuftomed to behold him with complacen¬ cy, tö receive him with kindnefs, íhe yielded through furprize tö the habits of fo many years, and granted the pri¬ vate audience he requefted.—¿She liftened to a vague and weak vindication of his conduct in Ireland, and the dotage of her foul was traňíiently gratified with the idea, that he had preferred the recovery of her affection t3 that of his reputation in arms. After ä long conference, the Earl rejoined his friends; pride and pleafure I 2 had
had fluihed his cheek, ånd the idea of reaf- fuming his accuftomed influence, diffufed through his mien that benignity and gra¬ cioufnefs which are at once its nature and its charm. Refentment and rage never conftituted any part of his character but at the moment he fuffered by thofe paflions: fuch galling fenfations were already for¬ gotten.—Overwhelmed with the congra¬ tulations of his friends; encircled even by his overawed enemies, the herioc Effex rofe above the triumph he could not but defire—every face was inftantane¬ oufly changed, and thofe who knew not an hour before whether they ihould recollect him, now with fervile adulation hallowed his very footfteps.—This fatal interval of ihort-lived power was, however, the laft heaven allowed him.—The crafty Cecils and their faction feized the moment he in¬ judicioufly quitted the Queen, to- per¬ fuade her that this indulged favorite had not only acted contrary to his commiffion, in venturing himfelf to return, but that he had brought home with him all his chofen ad-
adherents, as well as e\ r ery aipiring fpirit likely to ftrengthen his fway, and circum- fcribe hers.^They touched the foul of Elizabeth where it was moft vulnerable, and having thus oppofed to each other the two leading weakneffes of her nature, by throwing the weight of party into the one fcale, it foon preponderated. She was unhappily in that declining age which renders every human being in fome degree capricious and timid.—Already tinctured with fear, ihe foon yielded to the various informations officioufly brought her by factious confederates.—She was told on all hands that Lord Effex was holding a Court even in her Palace, and infolent and daring as this .conduct could not but appear, it was of lefs confequence than the unbounded influence he ever main¬ tained over the people—-an influence he would more than recover the moment he was feen in London. " For themfelves they heeded nor^-willing martyrs to their integrity and fealty; but for their Queen, they all trembled at the proípečt." —It was I 3 too
too hazardous to be rifqued by Elizabeth; fear and refentment conquered the tender prepofleffion which itili ftruggled faintly at her heart, and íhe determined to afcer- tain her own fafety, as well as that of her kingdom, by imprifoning her favorite; nor is this refolution to be wondered at, iince even her love conduced to it, when irritated by the imaginary fting of ingra¬ titude. She had fet the Earl up in early youth as an idol for her own heart to worihip ; but he was not born to be fatif- fied with unmerited admiration--------- the more he acquired the more he fought to deferve; till having eftabliihed his favor on innate noblenefs, he rofe above par¬ tial diftin&ion, leaving her to lament at leifure the very elevation ihe had given. From this period ihe had been weak and irrefolute in every inftance where he was concerned ; at intervals laviihing ho¬ nors to which he. had no title ; at others, witholding advantages he had fairly won. The motive of this inconfiftency he could npt fail to difcern, but perfuaded an at¬ tach-
tachment which thus powerfully coped with her judgement, was unconquerable^ he forgot that ihe was finking faft into the vale of years, when the nobleft paf- fions infenfibly condenfe into felf-love. You who fo well know the heart of ray Lord, Madam," cried Trâcey, turning to me, " will better imagine than I can defcribe, his deep fenfe of an indignity entirely public, and apparently premedi¬ tated. So unexpected a manoeuvre maf- tered his judgment, and giying way to the moft paflionate extremes, he drew his fword, and would have returned it by her meffenger, befeeching her " to re¬ ward his fervices by adding a more de¬ cifive blow to that ihe once before be¬ ftowed on him, fince both feemed to him lefs ihocking and ignominious than fuch open and unmerited contumely."—r^In vain his friends fought to moderate his wrath ; in vain his enen+ies drew near, eager to catch and treafure the raftı ex¬ prefiions he ihould unwarily utter, and convert them to his ruin.—Touched on I 4 the
the tendereft point, his honor, the world combined would have wanted power to filence him—he gave full fcope to his indignant and wounded feelings, and, with afeverity of truth more galling and dangerous than the greateft exaggerati¬ ons, declared aloud, " that the Queen had out-lived all her nobler faculties, and that her foul was grown as crooked as her bo¬ dy." This cutting farcafm was too faith¬ fully conveyed to Elizabeth, who, regard- iefs of his pride while her own was thus wounded, committed him to the charge of the Lord Keeper, whofe houfe was in effect his prifon. Oh heavens ! what wild viciflitudes, what tranfports of paflion took pofleflion of my Lord, at recollecting the impru¬ dent readinefs with which he had deliver¬ ed himfelf helplefs and unguarded into the hands of his enemies ! ftruggling like a lion in the toils, every vein would fometimes fwell almoft to madnefs, nor dared I leave him a moment alone. I had no other hope of aflfuaging his irritated paflions, than by recalling to his 3 mind
mind the beloved image of the fair voyager, to whom the news of this event, and the fear of what might follow it, would be little lefs than death. I averted one ftorm however only to give free paf- fage to another; the tear of tendernefs proudly trembled on the burning cheek of anger, and a grief it fplit my heart to behold, took poffeffion of his.— " Spare me the killing remembrance," he would cry "—difgraced—defamed—imprifoned ; how íhall I ever lift my eyes to that fair, that noble fufferer ? I tell thee Tracey, rather would í have died than known this íhameful moment" ------Impreifed by the unwearied attachment I had ever fhewn him, and overweighed by the fenfe of his own fituation, my Lord at length con- defcended to lighten his own heart by unfolding to me its deareft views ; well he knew they would never pafs beyond mine—no, every vein of it ihould crack ere I would wrong fo generous a confix dence, which I acknowledge but to prove my fate wholly dependant on the Noble¬ man
man I ferve : I would have it fo, and heaven could afflict me only by feparating them. The faithful Lord Southampton was his daily vifitant : though not himfelf a prifoner, the confeioufnefs that every ac¬ tion of his life was watched aqd reported, bound that nobleman to a moft cautious .obfervance. The Cecils had now no wiih «ngratified, for the imprudent bitternefs of Lord Eifex had fupplied the only fuel to the Queen's refentment which could long keep it aliye ; nor did time, in cool¬ ing the paflions of my Lord, incline him to fubmiffion—convinced in his own mind that he was the injured perfon, reflection only fettled rage into difguft and con¬ tempt ; neverthelefs, his conftitution fuf- ferred feverely by this variety of paflions ; when one feized upon it which annihi¬ lated all the reft, and completely under¬ mined his health— т -a grief more touching than glory or ambition could occafion fuddenly overcame him.—The time was now elapfed which ought to have brought Ш him and Lord Southampton the wel¬ come
come aífurance that the partners of their fouls were fafe in Cumberland—the time was come I fay !—alas, it was gone !— Afraid to communicate to each other a terror which preyed alike on both, Lord Southampton difpatched exprefs upon ex¬ preß in vain.—The days that lingered ib tedioufly away, however, matured doubt into certainty. Lord Eifex no longer contended with the nervous fever which obliged him to take to his bed-, where reaching out a languid hand to his over¬ powered friend, he broke, at laft, the fear¬ ful heavy filence. " They are gone, for ever gone, my dear Southampton," cried he, in the low accent of incurable difpair ; "heaven has fpared to fouls fo gentle and fuf¬ ceptible thofe trials our ftouter minds can perhaps better contend with.—Oh, thou dear one ! yet do I regret that this bo¬ fom did not receive thy laft fighs! that en¬ tombed with thee even in the ocean, death had not confummated a union fortune ever frowned on—but I haften impatiently to re- iointhee,oh Ellinor! myfirft, my only love V* The
The killing remembrance which dif. tracted his mind foon rendered a malady, flight at firft, defparate; he was even given over; the Queen for a long time wirhftood the accounts given by his friends of his fituation, fo deeply had his enemies impreifed her with the idea that this was only a refined artifice to tempt her to humiliate herfelf. Never¬ thelefs, by one of thofe paflionate emo¬ tions with which nature fometimes over¬ reaches the moft elaborate fineífes of art, fhe fuddenly determined to afcertain his real fituation, by fending her own phy¬ fician to vifit him.—The report of that gentleman convinced her of its danger— he was ordered to watch over the Earl with the moft anxious care; and even to hint to him that every diftinction would be reftored with his health.—But, alas! fympathy itfelf had no longer any charms for him, and the prefence of Lord South¬ ampton feemed the only relief his fate admitted. That amiable Nobleman, no lefs fenfible of the mutual calamity than his
his friend, had not the fame reaforts to bury his affliction in filence.—Repeated mef- fengers were fent alike to Cumberland, and the port you embarked from, ladies : thofe who returned from the latter only con¬ firmed the fears which had hitherto fluc¬ tuated—they informed the lover and the huiband, that the wife of the Captain mourned for him as dead, nor was it doubted but that the crew and paifengers were alike victims to a ftorm fo fudden and tremendous. The active and enliv¬ ened foul frequently exhaufts its moft acute fenfations by anticipation.—Cer¬ tainty could not add to the grief occafì¬ oned by furmife ; and the extinguiihed hopes of the friends gave them alike up to that cold and füllen deipair, which is the worft of all ftates, becaufe frequently incurable. Thofe late hopes the Queen was willing to revive her dying favorite with, made not the leaft impreffion on him ; and the Cecils learnt with fur¬ prize, that, neither their views, their conduct, nor even his own difgrace- fui
ful imprifonment, any longer touched Lord Effex; nay, that not even his recovery was able to revive thofe habits the world where taught to think hitherto uncontroul- able. His friends, on the contrary, bleft the íkilful phyfician who prolonged a life lb valuable, and faw with the happieft hopes, that thofe romantic flights in his character his enemies had almoft wrought up to his ruin were at once extin¬ guiihed; leaving it without any other diftinčtion than a melancholy fweetnefs which rather turned his thoughts toward philofophy than war. The people, ever naturally difpofed to fide with the unfor¬ tunate, cried out, that he was the inno¬ cent victim of the Cecil party ; who by fome odious ftrokes of policy, added po¬ pularity to their depreffed rival* in dimi- niíhining the/r own------Elizabeth herfelf could no longer fupport the idea that the man íhe ftill loved was obfcurely break¬ ing his heart* while yet in the flower of yoath, in an unmerited and difgraceful prifon.—She yielded to the information of the
the phyfician that his amending heakk required air, and fent him her permiffioa to retire to any of his feats in the coun¬ try ; but forbad him to attempt appear¬ ing in her prefence : a reftriction perhaps more agreeable to him> than herfelf, could ihe have feen the defolate fituation of mind in which he departed. From the country he addreffed a letter of thanks to the Queen, which difplayed at once his eloquence, gratitude, and languor : in truth, the latter gained ground daily in his character. Lord Effex was born capable of uniting in his per¬ fon every various and generous purfuit, had fortune allowed it, but not even he was equal to living without one,—I fre¬ quently trembled at beholding his gloom and inanity. Wholly withdrawn from ths fphere in which he had hitherto moved, and the pleafures he had once enjoyed, the rude fociety of his neighbours, and the boifterous amufements the country afford¬ ed, rather offended than employed an en¬ lightened and fufceptible heart. He wan- 3. dered
dered all day in the woods alone, and returned every evening fpent and unre- freflied, only to recover animal ftrength enough to enable him to pafs the morrow in the fame melancholy manner. In this fituation I fancied a falfe hope could not add to his danger, and might perhaps roufe thofe active faculties every hour feemed more and more to abforb. I one day ventured to repeat to him an imaginary dream, tending to prove you ftill exifted.—Not even the fîrmeft mind can refift the fubtile attacks of fuperftion when labouring under depreflion.—His foul fo eagerly adopted the fiction of my brain, that I was a thoufand times tempted to acknowledge it to be fuch, but dared not venture to ihew him I had played upon his wounded feelings. Revived with the moft vague and diftant hope, he impatientlv drove me away on a fearch my own foul foreboded to be fruitlefs. I even debated after I fet out, whether I ihould not loiter out the appointed time in England till I could decently return from my
my imaginary peregrination, when a dream, more pointed and fingular than that I had feigned, awakened in myfelfi thofe hopes I had communicated to my Lord, and led me from ifle to ifle enquiring for you : but I will not call it a dream, fince furely the event proves it a vifitation.— Oh, gracious God ! what joy will my return pour into the hearts that now ach for either ! How pure will be the fatif- fačtion derived from their acknowledg¬ ments !" During this long recital, my tumul¬ tuous feelings purfued my love through every defperate fituation.------My woe- ftruck heart hardly dared to breathe, till finding him at laft free and well, it gave a deep figh, and refpired with¬ out pain. Effex infulted, endangered, imprifoned j ---------1 caft my eyes round thofe gloomy, walls, I fo late thought my prifon, and raifing them to heaven, adored the power who there confined me, · unconfcious of the conflicts I could not have fupported. Ah, Effex ! what were the warring elements, the midnight Vol. III. К wreck г
wreck, the long, long folitude, the dire uncertainty I had fo bitterly bewailed, to the fingle idea of feeing thee one moment at the.mercy of Elizabeth, one moment jn the power of thy enemies ! And yet, for me thy generous foul loft all fenfe of even thefe inflictions ; pride, vanity, and grandeur, in vain affailed thee : a true and noble paflion beat unalterably at thy heart, condenfing in one favorite for¬ row, thofe mighty powers, which once fulfilled every various and active duty of humanity. But this was not a moment for im¬ paflioned reveries. Lady Southampton recalled my attention to the prefent mo¬ ment; and wc employed it in inform¬ ing Tracey of the name, character, and fituation, we had thought it prudent to aflume, as well as thofe of our hoft. Scarce was he mafter of thefe important particulars, ere the Laird of Dornock returned, and broke in upon us with an abruptnefs and anger he took no pains to diiguife. The fight of an Engliih officer
officer a little abated his wrath. Tracey, according to the plan we had agreed on, called Lady Southampton his fifter, and, with every teftimony of gratitude for the hofpitable ihelter our hoft had fo long given us, offered a recompence ftill more agreeable ; with which happily he had had the forecaft to provide himfelf.—While the Scot ftood irrefolute refpecting his anfwer, the wary Tracey turned to us, and, in an authoritative voice, faid, he muft anfwer to the Queen for his ab¬ fence, did it exceed the appointed time ; and therefore, we muft quickly take leave of our friends, and haften our de¬ parture for England. This decifive fpeech increafed the perturbation and difap¬ pointment already obvious in the features of our hoft ; neverthelefs, our going was to him fo unforefeen an event, that, not being able to find a fufficient reafon for detain¬ ing us, he tacitly confented toit. My heart bounded at the unhoped-for liberation and I would have failed that moment, defpite of wind and tide ¿ but, К 2 as
as the failors declared this imponible, our departure was delayed till the next morn¬ ing. Whether the various incidents of the day accelerated the hour appointed by nature, or, that Lady Southampton, con¬ trary to her own idea, had reached it, 1 know not; ihe was feized at midnight, however, with the pains of labour, and fuffered fo feverely, that her life was def- paired of. In the courfe of the enfuing day fhe was delivered of a dead child, and I was obliged to confole myfelf for the long delay this event muft neceffarily occafion, by the pleafing idea that the partner of my fate was not prematurely divided from it—in truth her vexation was fo great, that I was reduced to ftiñe my own, leaft I fhould contribute to her illnefs. The fate which hope yet gilds, though but from the verge of the horizon, is never quite infuppcrtable. We found, in the protection of Tracey, and the idea of rejoining the world, to which he feemed our immediate link, the means of be¬ guiling many a tedious hour ; nor was this
this confolation fuperfluous ; for the Laird of Dornock became, from the moment of Tracey's arrival, more füllen and im¬ penetrable than ever.—Self was, in him, the prevailing principle. Early inverted with that bounded, but abfolute, autho¬ rity, which oftener produces and fhelters tyranny, than a more extenfive field of action, he had hitherto known no oppo¬ fition.—How often has a blind paflion warped the nobleft n atures ť nor was it per¬ haps unnatural that he ihould ftretch his prerogative, to retain in his hands a lovely and beloved woman, over whom he could claim no right.—long inured to fear, fufpicion, and anguifh, they readily re¬ turned to their throbbing habitation, my heart. I often fancied I read murder written in dark, but legible lines, on the knit brow of our hoft; and though Tracey flept only in an outer chamber clofe by us, fcarce could I perfuade myfelf that he was fuifered to reft peaceably there, or yet live for our protection : neverthelefs, I ftrove at times to reject thofe black chimeras a live¬ ly imagination perhaps too readily adopted. K3 The
The Laird of Dornock no longer inter¬ fered with us, or our fate ; neither did he withhold from us the company of his fifter.—That fweet girl, new to fociety, with a romantic happinefs peculiar to youth, gifted every object with her owh graces and virtues : impreifed at once with the merit of Tracey, íhe transferred to a heart which could return it the pafiion I had unv/arily infpired, nor was her fécond choice unpropitious. Tracey, whofe foul had expanded in a camp, was yet to learn the inconceivable charm of love : it took full poffeffion of him. With a fweet, though fad pleafure, I witnefied pure and innocent vows, which continually reminded me of thofe days, when like Phcebe, I looked enraptured on the varied landfcape of life, yet glow¬ ing with the early beams of hope ; un¬ confcious of the fhowers which often would fall, the heavy nights which muft wholly obfcure it. Tracey, no lefs de¬ lighted than his miftrefs, no longer haften¬ ed his departure to England, and looked aito-
aftoniíhed that we did not find every charm of exiftence in this difmal exile. I, however, anxioufly waited, with Lady Southampton, the day when her recovered health Ihould enable. us to de¬ part.—It came at length, and we were eagerly preparing for the voyage, when the Laird of Dornock fent us an order to read, by which the King of Scots im- powered him to detain us. I know not any ihock of all fate had impofed on me, I ever felt more fenfibility : neverthelefs, I had prefence of mind enough to ob- ferve, by the date of this order, that it had been obtained during the confine¬ ment of my friend. The difappoint- ment and defpair this incident occafì¬ oned, was only alleviated by the recol¬ lection that in abufing the authority of the King, to indulge an unworthy incli¬ nation, the Laird of Dornock had made himfelf refponfible to the laws of his country for our fafety, by admitting that fuch perfons where in his cuftody. Tra¬ cey gave him notice of this immediately ; and though he moderated his rage in К 4 con-
confideration of the fair Phoebe, he warned the Laird of Dornock to treat us nobly, as he would anfwer it to his own King, and the Queen of England, in whole name we ihould foon be demanded. To this indignant vaunt, for in truth it was no better, the haughty Scot coldly re¬ plied, <c that he íhould take his chance of incurring an old woman's anger, who perhaps had already refigned all her rights to his mafter." Tracey could no longer controul the feelings of his ge¬ nerous foul, and replied with acrimony. The Laird of Dornock bade him profit by the occafion, and be gone immedi¬ ately, if he did not mean to be in¬ cluded among the prifoners. There wanted only this ftroke to confummate our wretched nefs, and, however reluc¬ tantly we loft our only friend and pro¬ tector, Lady Southampton joined me in urging him to go: till over-ruling all his objections, we haftened him alone into a bark, which an hour before we ftemed to fee ourfelves in. He comforted us with
with the aífurance of foon returning, be¬ ing fully perfuaded the King of Scots- would never authorize fo unjuft and illegal a procedure, when once the whole cir¬ cumftance was impartially ftated to him. I fighed, at remembering I knew him bet¬ ter ; but as an explanation at that mo¬ ment was vain, I urged not the un¬ bounded influence of the fair Mabel, through whofe illicit connection with the King this order had doubtlcfs been ob¬ tained. How ihould that Monarch be convinced of a remote act of injuftice, who even at the moment of committing it, was wronging every moral and religi¬ ous duty ? The man who once volunta¬ rily errs, muft either be weak or vicious; in the firft inftance, he refigns himfelf up to the paifions of others, in the latter to his own ; and in either cafe fcarce ever re¬ covers the narrow but even boundary of virtue. it was not by fuch means I hoped for freedom—ah, no! my views all pointed to¬ ward the lover to whom my heart like the needle 4
needle ever vibrated, though far divided. —Let Effex be once informed, fighed I—. let him once know where to find me, and he would crofs the globe to enfure my fafety. When the chagrin of this trying moment abated, I called to mind the infinite relief the vifit of Tracey had given our fpirits, and the change it had made in our fituation, by acquitting us of thofe petty obligations which always humiliate a noble mind, unlefs it finds a congenial one in the beftower. I foon obferved that the Laird of Dor¬ nock had not courage to profit by the bafe injuftice he had committed. The fubfervient fituation Tracey placed him¬ felf in, when we were prefent, and the profound deference with which he obeved our every wiih, neither agreeing with the rank we avowed, nor the regimental he wore, a vague idea of myftery had taken poffeffion of our hoft's mind, which wanted vigor and activity to attempt developing it. Confcious too late, that he had, in releafing Tracey, fet a fpy on his own conduci.
conduct, he vainly regretted the timi¬ dity which prevented his detaining him. He neverthelefs, at intervals, ftill talked of love to Lady Southampton, offering to buy a return by imaginary worlds of wealth : for to us, accuftomed to elegance and luxury, all his poffeflions appeared but a gaudy poverty. As thefe orienta¬ tions and abfurd offers were one day made in my prefence, I could not but take fome notice of them ; he filenced me however, by replying, that I muft be cau¬ tious how I exerted a fpirit fo likely to make him transfer his attachment, and be fatisfied with protecting one of the two t fince I could neither think fo ill of his difcernment, or my own beauty, as to believe him the dupe of my difguife. As it was the firft time a doubt on the fubječt had ever tranfpired, my confu¬ fion gave him a full conviction : I could not recover myfelf fufficiently to reply for fome moments : at length I told him that he had gueffed the only part of our fe¬ cret which did not lie too deep for his know- kgCi
lege ; neverthelefs, that all he had difcover¬ ed. was but the leaft part of the myftery; and finally, that the day which informed him of our names and rank, would call him to a fevne account, if his conduct were in the leaft unworthy either of us or himfelf.—I boldly added, that the only thins wanting to our fiifety, was, to have the С -urt of England informed of our afy¬ lum, and now that was by Tracey's means afcertfiincd, we were not without noble friends to claim us. The grandeur of air natural to me when infult roufed my pride, aftordfhed and awed him—his mind laboured with vague and indili in ¿t apprehenfions; and as all attempts at diving into a fecret locked up folely in the hearts interefted in retaining it, muft be vain, he half repented having exerted an unjuftifiable influence, he could no longer hope to profit by. Lady Southampton acknowledged her obligations to my firmer fpirit ; and both having no farther reafon to affed iii berd i mu ion, refumed the habits of rank and
and diftinction ; hiring domeftics of our own till the moment of enfranchifement Ihould arrive. Heaitily weary of us both, I often thought the Laird of Dornock. meditated propofing to releafe us ; and while I was one day infenfibly guiding him to that wiihed-for point, an order from Court was delivered into his hand. Convinced it would liberate us, I caft an eye of triumph on him, while he opened it ; and faw his countenance confefs the fame idea y but a moment caufed a vifible change in it. He read the order aloud, and we found with inexpreflible afloniih- ment that it contained the iti ičkft charee to guard his Englifh prifoners, as he would anfwer it to his King : yet with all due deference.— 1 eagerly caught at this arti¬ cle without feeming to notice the firft, which neverthelefs funk deep into my heart; nor was his infenfible to the latter.—The wearinefs and difguft he had begun to indulge, increafed ; and his pride re¬ volting at the idea that his caftle was become a ftate prifon, and himfelf only a jailor.
a jailor, he felt every way irritated, hu¬ miliated, and offended. No human bé¬ ng fubmits to power with fo ill a grace as him who has unjuftifiably exerted it; and when its reftrictions fall heavily on fuch, mere retribution becomes in effect a fe- vere revenge. A tedious interval had again elapfed without any news from England. The tender, timid, Phoebe often perfuaded herfelf her lover had never reached it ; and the fingularity of finding ourfelves appa¬ rently forgotten, fometimes inclined my friend and felf to unite with her in that opinion—yet, how many other caufes might we reafonably aflign for the neglect —caufes, fo much more afflicting, that we recalled our thoughts to the iile for con- folation. Whether the infinite variety, the eter¬ nal transitions my own life had already afforded, inclined me to hope on ; or, whether the inceiľant prayers I addreifed to him who alone could relieve me, en¬ dued my mind with fortitude, I cannot fay i bur, I certainly found in it refources hi-
hitherto unknown. Every paffing day feemed to refine and fettle its powers and perceptions, till thofe turbulent paflions, which of late ruihed like a cataract through my frame, now, with a gentle, health¬ ful, current, gave motion to my pulfes. We learnt from Phoebe, that many letters came from Mabel to her elder brother, the contents of which he fo cau¬ tioufly concealed, as made it obvious we were their fubječt. This news only con¬ firmed us in the belief that Tracey had reached England fafely ; and afforded us at the fame time the flattering idea, that our friends were anxioufly labouring to recover us ; however their progrefs might be impeded by obftacles, we could nei¬ ther guefs at, nor decide upon : nor were thefe fuppofitions vain. An order at length arrived, that we ihould be deli¬ vered to the officer who ihould prefent its counter-part. Oh, what joy, what gra¬ titude, what anxiety, did this profpečt of a deliverance afford us ! From the dawn of the morning till night black¬ ened the ocean, did one or the other watch
watch with eager expectation the pro¬ mifed veifel.—We beheld it at laft, and hardly could Effex himfelf have been more welcome to my eyes. Tracey once more landed, and glad was the greeting on all fides.—He pre¬ fented each of us letters—dear and precious characters ! my foul poured through my eyes when I again beheld them! With laviih tendernefs Effex hailed my fécond refurrcction, and vowed to ihew his fenfe of the bleffing by an implicit fub¬ miffion to my will.—" You fhall no more complain of the terrors of a camp, my love," continued he, " 1 turn for ever from the bloody fcene.—A court no lon¬ ger has any charms for me : infpired with jufter fentiments, alive to purer pleafurers, in your heart and my own will 1 henceforth look for the wayward ftraggler, happinefs. I am no longer, my fweet Elli¬ nor, the Effex you have known ! I am become an abfolute ruftic, a mere philo- fopher. With you I will abjure the woild, and in fome folitary fpot, devote myfelf to love and the fciences. Oh! íhut
fhut your heart, like me, my love, to the paft, and look only towards the future. I wait with impatience the news of your fafe arrival in Cumberland* arid date from it our happinefs." Thefe words were to my foul, what the balmy breath of fpring is to the frozen earth : the winds at once ceafe to blow, the fnow finks into her bofom^ the buds put forth their verdure, and nature for¬ gets ihe has fuffered. Tracey came fraught with gifts rather fuited to the fpirit of the donor, than that of the accepter ; yet, they opened the heart of the Laird of Dornock, who liftened to the avowal of Tracey's love without repugnance ; and at length pro¬ mifed him his fifter, if, at the expiration of two years, his rank in the army en¬ titled him to claim her.—The tears of the young lovers for ever cemented thofe vows his will thus authorized. Joy hav¬ ing difpofed my heart to receive the föft impreflions of every gentle paflion, extinguiihing all that were not fo—I re- Vol. III. L mem-
membered, with aftonifhment, the moment when I readily adopted the ambitious projects of Effex.—Rank, rices, glory, what are ye ?—Gay ornaments which lend fplendor indied to felicity, but which only incumber and weigh down the foul when ftruggling with the waves of misfortune : gladly we lighten ourfelves of fuch ad¬ ventitious goods, and grafp in tranquility and love, the unenvied, but rich eflence of all our fortune. In life, as in a profpečt, we can long enjoy only a bounded view; and all which prefent, either to the mind or eye, a multiplicity of objects, however great or beautiful, overftrain the faculties, and deftroy the repofe. Rejecting at once every gaud vanity delights in, from the diftant throne, and the mighty mul¬ titude, ready perhaps in turn to conduct me to it, my foul called forth the beloved individual, and fearing him at my fide in a fafe and humble folitude, afked what we ihould lofe by the change ?— -lofe! Ah! rather what might we not gain ?—How fweet
fweet was it then to find Lord Effex him¬ felf at length cheriihed ideas wholly fimilar; that, weary of war, ambition, envy, and all the turbulence of life, in renouncing the court of Elizabeth, he left, with the power, the wifli of poffeifing it !■—That time, folitude, reflection, difappointment itfelf, had rather refined than extin¬ guiihed his tafte, which thus regained its true bias ; feeking in the powers of the mind, and the impulfes of the heart, a happinefs not' to be found on earth, when thofe fources fail to fupply it. In leaving for ever the dreary fcene of my exile> I could be fenfible of only one regret : but flattering myfelf, Tracey would ere long reftore the fweet Phcebe to my friendihip, I foon dried up the tears due to the floods that charming girl beftowed upon our parting. The rapid motion of the veffel bore no pro¬ portion to my impatience ; whenever I looked, that detefted ifle was ftill in view ; I thought we fhould never lofe fight of it· L 2 Oh !
Oh 1 how I anticipated the fweet re¬ pofe which awaited us in the green foli- tudes of Cumberland ! I flattered myfelf Effex would already be there; though Tracey afifured me, fpies ftill followed his fteps, from which only a long confir¬ mation of his peaceful intentions could re¬ lieve him. At length the pleafant íhorr. of Eng¬ land was defcried ; welcome to my heart was the ihout which proclaimed it ! Our very fouls íhot through our eyes once more, to hail our native country. We found at the port, fervants, and every accommodation that might render our journey eafy. Ah 1 how beautiful was that journey !—a thoufand various objects of fimple majefty united to form one perfect whole, and a new delight ftole on every fenfe, as we wound through va¬ rying vallies embowered by hanging woods, reflected in many an expanfe of clear water, dim ihadowed at intervals by mountains, whofe arid heights defied the fun they feemed to fwell to* Far
Far in thefe green labyrinths we came at once upon the Caftle from whence I now write.—It is in fact only an elegant ruin, and might rather be termed the refidence of the anchorite, Solitude. In tearful glad- nefs the fair owner threw her arms round my neck, and bleft the power which per¬ mitted us at laft to reft here. From this antique manfion do I date my narrative ; and, in arranging it, feek only to fill up thole hours yet unbleft with the prefence of him born to fill every future one. Dear Lady Pembroke, I cannot exprefs to you the divine repofe which hufnesatlaft my overworn faculties. —I look back with wonder on all the paft griefs, the mortal conflicts, my ihattered frame has contended with. So pure, fo per-r fečt, is now my grateful tranquillity, that it feems proof even againft misfortune it¬ felf.—No more ihall my beating heart— r my burning brain—but why fliould I re¬ vert to fuch difmal recollections ? Embofomed in the maternal arms of nature ; fafe in the obfcure and folitary L 3 fitu-
fituation of this ivied afylum, here my affrighted foul, like a feared bird, faintly folds up its weary wings ! delights to be alone, and joys in mere fafety. I think I can never be happy, be grateful enough, and while my heart exhaufts itfelf in en- İoyment, I ftill call on it for ebullitions to which it is unequal. Pride, pafiion, va¬ nity, all the groffer particles of my na¬ ture are at once exhaled, and every pure, every focial virtue, unfolds and bloffoms to the vernal fun, forerunning even the fnow-drop. Oh ! that radiant, glorious luminary ! how new to me feems its influence !— Dark have been the films through which I have hitherto viewed it. Pardon, my darling friend, thefe flights of fancy : how playful does the mind grow when at peace with itfelf? Haften, generous Tracey, haften to my love, and inform him of our arrival. But is not Tracey already gone ? Oh ! haften then, my Effex ; quit that bufy fcene, where virtue inceffantly hovers on the verge of a precipice a thoufand ready
ready hands would plunge her over,— partake with me the deep repofe of this folitude—no longer heed Elizabeth her¬ felf, not even her power can reach us here. Nature's gigantick phalanx, im- paffable mountains prefent their formid¬ able fummits in long array, overawing every inferior guard ; while, in their vi¬ vid hollows, happinefs repofes on the bo¬ fom of her mother, Nature.—Oh ! come then, and in " A life exempt from public haunts " Find tongues in trees, books in the runningßreams^ " Sermons in β ones, and good in every thing. 1 * * # * * * * * A thunder-bolt falls on my brain! avenging heaven, why does it not wholly fplit it ? Tried—fentenced—condemned 1 —while I, entombed in a now detefted folitude, gaily dreamt of endlefs happi¬ nefs.—Oh ? let me once more ruih madly into the world, overwhelm my agonized L 4 , fenfeş
fenfes with the ihouts of armies—the groans of the dying—fountains of blood —rivers of tears—find if pofiible a hor¬ ror in nature may counteract that now raging in my foul.—The wreck of the univerfe alone can equal it.—But let me give the ruin fcope—wherefore, where¬ fore, ihould I wiih it leifened—Oh 1 Lady Pembroke ! LADY PEMBROKE WRITES. The trembling hand of the friend laft invoked, takes up the pen to finiih the woes of a fair unfortunate, who will ne¬ ver more be her own hiftorian.—Alas, they had now reached their climax. The eccentric turn of mind which made the fweet Ellinor form a plan fo extraordinary as her fuppofed death and burial, excited an aftoniihment in me, its artful execution alone could increafe. Neverthelefs, th,e regular purfuit of a fingle idea was far from perfuading her friends, her intellects had recovered their tone, or equality. When
When this heart-breaking narrative came to my hands, I could not but ob¬ ferve that the fweet miftrefs of Eifex had a very partial knowledge of his character, or information of his actions.—Bleft with the moft equitable and generous heart that ever actuated a human bofom, his virtues often took a falfe colour from the felfifh views of thofe who once found the way to it. Credulity was fo much his fault, that even his enemies pro¬ fited by it, whom he always ceafed to confider as fuch, the moment they deign¬ ed to deceive him with a falfe proteftation of regard.—In fact, the lenity of his na¬ ture continually counteracted that am¬ bition, which was its only vice ; and ir¬ radiated his character with the milder glo¬ ries of humanity : a luftre, more foft, pure, and lafting, than mere conqueft can beftow, Neverthelefs, the early habits of power and diftinčtion had féized on his affections, and even his love co-operating with that indulged foible, they increafed together. The daring project he had formed was no
no way unfeafible, had he managed it with addrefs ; for he poífeífed the hearts of4he whole kingdom, a few envious in¬ dividuals excepted. But art was unknown to Eifex ; and thofe his fuperiority of¬ fended, were proficients in that fcience : unhappily too, they were fo immedi¬ ately around the Queen, that they could convert the fufpicions ihe fometimes en¬ tertained of his conduct, into certainty. Yet fo rooted was her love for this un¬ fortunate favorite, that it long contended with that lhe bore herfelf; and tears of ill-judged fondnefs have often abforbed the bitternefs his enemies would have wrought to his ruin. Such a weaknefs alone could induce a fovereign, wife and experi¬ enced like Elizabeth, to delegate a power дсагсе inferior to her own, into the hands of a Nobleman, valiant, popular, and af piring. In confenting to Effex's com¬ mand in Ireland, the Queen made an abfolute facrifice of her own inclination (which was only gratified when he was near her) to his ; or, perhaps, in effect, both
both unconfcioufiy yielded to the fecret policy which invariably fought to fepa¬ rate them.—Convinced fhe had bound him to her by every tie of gratitude, honor, and confidence, how muft fo high a fpirit as that of Elizabeth be ihocked, wounded, and irritated, to fee her favorite loiter away his days inactively in Ireland, resardlefs alike of her admonitions, and the cenfures of the people ?—Infenfibly fhe imbibed the prejudices of the Cecil family, the inflexible enemies of the Earl ; to whom ihe fubmitted the govern¬ ment of the ftate, lefs from any efteem for their talents, than the latent defire of piquing the negligent Eifex, to whom they were equally obnoxious. Time con¬ firmed to the Cecil faction, the influence they at firft owed folely to refentment. The wearifome fupinenefs of the Lord Deputy was at once fucceeded by a fufpicious, and myfterious conduct. His fecret treaties with the arch-rebel, Tiroen, the anonymous captive who feduced him into thefe—all was reported with ag- 1 gravation
gravation to Elizabeth. The refentment occafìoned by the error of his conduct, was doubled when lhe knew that of his heart: jealoufy took full pofleflion of hers, and lhe determined to make him feverely fenfible of her power ; but ihe was told it was not fafe, at that period, to recall him. Obliged for the firft time in her life to controul herfelf, and meditate how to get him again into - her power, her temper became abfolutely intolera¬ ble. Her Ladies preferved a 'melancholy filence, fave the artful few won over to foment, and profit by, her irritated paf- fions. The fate of Eifex feemed wholly to depend on the event of a war, hitherto unprofperous ; when to the aftoniihment alike of friends and enemies, without performing any confiderable exploit which might fecure him a welcome, the Earl pofted fuddenly home, and prefented himfelf before Elizabeth, with the daunt- lefs air of unblemifhed innocence, Whe¬ ther the furprize of the moment really revived that powerful paflion of which he
he had fo long been the object, or whe¬ ther fear for her life made her diflemble the bitternefs and rage fwelling at her heart, is a circumftance which never reach¬ ed my knowledge. It is certain the Queen received him gracioufly, and liftened to a very imperfect and incoherent defence of his conduct. They parted friends j and Eifex inftantly giving way to that credulity, which fo often made every talent heart and nature could unite in his perfon abortive, confidered himfelf as effectually re-eftablifhed in her heart, and indulged all the exultation fuch a tri¬ umph over his enemies could not fail to occafion. What a thunder-ftroke then was his im¬ mediate difgrace ! a difgrace he could not but impute to his own imprudence ; fince in returning without advice, he had deliver¬ ed himfelf voluntarily into the hands of his enemies. To the mortification of a long and humiliating imprifonment was ihortly after fuper-added a killing grief, in the fuppofed lofs of the beauteous Ellinor. Re-
Refigniňg himfelf to a fullen and filent defpair, he no longer condefcended to offer Elizabeth any further vindication of his conduct, nor could be perfuaded to make the leaft fubmiflion. This con- cuflion of feelings, however, ihivered his animal, no lefs than his mental, fyf- tem. A fever followed, which foon rofe to a dangerous height. Obftinately re¬ jecting all medical advice, he declared a thoufand times that he wifhed only to die : nor had the wiih been vain, but that the Queen, unable wholly to fubdue the fenti¬ ments of tendernefs which had fo long reigned in her heart, fent her own phy- iician to attend him, with offers of peace and pardon. The defperate ftate in which he found the Earl, was faithfully reported to Elizabeth ; who, touched to the heart, hefitated whether lhe íhould not revive him by an immediate vifit; fo hard will it always be to counteract by political manoeuvres the genuine impreflions of nature. The Cecil party fuddenly found themfelves on the brink of ruin; and every
every argument, fear, pride, or prudence, could fuggeft, was enforced to delay this interview. Elizabeth yielded to the pow¬ erful combination of reafons in that in¬ ftance, but could not deny herfelf the pleafure of correfponding with Lord Ef¬ fex as he grew better 5 and foon fuffered him to vindicate his conduct : nay, even condefcending to reproach him with the unknown lady who had fo fatally influ¬ enced it. To this perplexing hint, he replied, his grief alone muft anfwer» and the melancholy tenor of his life fo exactly agreed with this declaration, that Elizabeth prefled no farther into a fecret it was plain the grave now veiled : ra¬ ther feeking by kindnefs to invigorate a mind i 11-fortune had been too hard upon. It was now the ihining time in the life of Eflex. The purple torrent of fuc¬ cefsful war had hitherto fwept away, or funk, thofe fweet humanities, thofe focial virtues, time at length caft up in the vale of adverfity.—Endued with eloquence tafte,
tafte, fcience, fenfe, and fenfibility, he now refigned himfelf to the charms of phi- Jofophy, poefy, and the mathematicks. Innocent and tranquil refources, to which the mind muft ever turn when difap- pointed, if bleft with powers capable of reliihing them. The Cecils never thought Eifex more dangerous. Age and infir¬ mity now made Elizabeth anxious for peace abroad, and tranquillity at home y and there wanted only a meeting be. tween her, and the much altered Earl to re-eftablifli him in her favor: but that meeting his enemies entered into a league to prevent ; and began, by winning Elizabeths phyfician to order the Earl/ of Effex into the country.-^An artifice fo refined as his liberation was not immedi¬ ately difcovered to be policy by any party; and the Queen, lulled into a belief that ihe could honourably receive him when he ihould return, fuffered him to depart without an audience. Wearied of wars, camps, and poli¬ tical j ealou fies, and difcuflions, the melan¬ choly
choly Eifex defired in freedom only the folitude he found; when Tracey re¬ turned with the aftoniihing news that the miftrefs he ftill adored yet exifted. —Fatal news to his future repofe !—The impoflibility of openly claiming Ellinor revived, with his paflion, all his dangerous and precarious projects.—Every other effort to obtain her was made without fuccefs, ere he fecretly applied to the King of Scots; who always knew his own intereft too well to grant any favor with¬ out having fecured an adequate return. James ardently defired to be nominated as the fucceifor of Elizabeth by herfelf, and had not fpared bribes, promifes, or flat¬ tery, to intereft thofe around her whom he thought likely to influence her choice. The unhoped over-turns of the man whofe courage and ambition James moft feared, was a circumftance of importance. Uninformed of the real name or charac¬ ters of the prifoners Lord Eifex fo eagerly defired to recover, the King of Scots fent the Laird of Dornock notice to guard them more ftričtly. The impetuous tem- Vol. III. M per
per of Eifex made him always refign to the prevailing object, every other intereft : but a treaty like this could not be car¬ ried on fo fecretly as to efcape the fuf¬ picious eyes of the minifters. With what malignant joy did they filently watch its progrefs till the moment when its publication would inflame the Queen to their wiihes ! Effex now once more thought it his intereft to be bufy, admired, and popu¬ lar : he relapfed into all his old habits, and, having gained the Queen's permif- fion, returned to London. Far, how¬ ever, from profiting by this indulgence, to re-inftate himfelf in her favor, he remain¬ ed at home; throwing open his doors to all impoverifhed ofHcers, and clergy, among whom a number of fpirited adventurers appeared, whofe laviih praifes feemed to render his popularity greater than ever. Elizabeth, with difguft, beheld him afifume the diftinčtions íhe perhaps intended once more to beftow ; and kept in filence a ftrict watch upon his conduct. By a re-
ï
refinement, known only în politicks, his enemies fcattered among his partizans many creatures of their own, inftructed to dive into all his intentions, and fpread abroad ieditious and treafonable projects, as though intrufted ΰγ himfelf.with fuch. This malice was but too fuccefsful.— inflated with the adulation of misjudging friends, the extravagant admiration of the multitude, and the infidious attacks of his enimies, the felf-deluded Eifex fprung the mine himfelf which deftroyed him. The mifchief commenced by a broil between the Lords Southampton and Grey; the laft aifaulting the former in the ftreet ; and, though the offender was ceremonioufly puniihed, the fpirit of party broke out in a thoufand little daily quarrels. The Queen, already per¬ fuaded that Effex, ever haughty and impetuous, fcorned her power, defprfed her,perfon, and only waited a favor¬ able moment openly to infult both, was irritated beyond all endurance by the artful M et dif-
difcovery (at this cruel crifis) of his fecret treaty with the King of Scots.—Its real caufe was unknown to her, and the of¬ fence, though trifling in itfelf, of a na¬ ture moft likely to exafperate a Sovereign whofe eyes were ever turned from a fuc- ceflor íhe refufed to acknowledge.------ The difcovery proved decifive—Eliza¬ beth inftantly refolved to deliver the un¬ grateful favorite up to the laws of his country, and authorized a judicial en¬ quiry into his conduct. The Cecil party defired no more; for well they knew, Eifex would rather die than brook the deliberate indignity. The commiflioned Lords aifembled at his houfe on a Sunday, as the time when they ihould be moft fafe from the infults of the partial po¬ pulace.—They found the Earl fuffici- ently inflamed, who, fwearing he never more would become a voluntary prifoner, íhut up the Lord Keeper, and the reft, in his own houfe, ruining forth armed, and followed only by a few friends and do-
domeftics, to claim the protection of the people. By a fatality not peculiar to himfelf, the bubble, popularity, which had fo long fwelled and glittered before his mif¬ taken eyes, burft at once, and kft to him a vacuum in nature.—The facred day was but too judicioufly chofen by his ene¬ mies. ------Without preparation------ almoft without a friend, the unhappy Effex ruihed through the ftreets of London, crouded only with peaceful and humble mechanics, who emerged from every clofe lane environed by their wives and children to enjoy the weekly holiday.-— To people of this ftamp the gallant Ef¬ fex was almoft unknown—certainly in¬ different : with ftupid and curious eyes, they turned to gaze on thofe warlike fteps none ventured to follow—fteps which bore the noble Effex fo faft to¬ ward ruin. Diftrefs, however, only in¬ creafed his defperation, and the citizens being fpirited into making an ineffectual effort to prevent his return, a íkirmiíh M 3 enfued
enfued. The amiable Tracey had the fate he defired, and fell at the fide of his Lord ; who, even in his cruel mo¬ ment, dropt a tear on a youth fo beloved. Fame, honor, happinefs, nay, even life, were fleeting faft from Effex ·> and however carelefs of thefe goods, friendihip ftill afferted her rights over his feelings—In compãflion to the few generous adherents who muft have fallen in his caufe, had he longer refifted, the Earl at length fur- rendered his fword. All Was now over with this admired, and erring favorite.—Imprifbned in the Tower he had ample leifure to re-con- fider the events which brought him there,—The defertion of the people had opened his eyes to the realities oflife.— He too fenfibly found, that, while he minif- tered to their neceffities, their pride, or their pleafures, the multitude could rend the air with acclamations j but that the mo¬ ment a claim is in turn made on their feelings, they always become cold, tor¬ pid., and inanimate. He perceived with vain
vain regret that he had been duped into this outrage on the laws of fociety, by the manoeuvres of his enemies, no lefs than the credulity of his heart. But he was not formed to profit by thefe hu¬ miliating difcoveries; they impreifed a nature fo generous, only with the deepeft difguft.—-He was, however, confoled with remembering felf-prefervation was the fole motive for his daring attack, and that no action of his life had yeţ violated the duty he had fworn the Queen. He refolutely prepared himfelf to meet the judgment of his peers, and only lamented the friendihip which invol¬ ved the generous Southampton in his fate ; who fhared without regret the prifon of a friend fo dear. The Queen, meanwhile, experienced every emotion fuch a painful contrariety of paflions muft neceffarily occafion.—■— The imprifonment of her favorite, as ufual, feemed to cancel his offence : but he was now beyond her jurifdičtion, and the victim of the laws. She had un¬ ivi 4 happily
happily furrendered him up to them, and robbed herfelf of every prerogative but that of pardoning ; a prerogative ihe feared fo high a fpirit would never foliei t her to exert.—She regretted, too late, having driven him to fo dangerous an ex¬ treme, and while his fate was yet uncer¬ tain, fuffered more, perhaps, than he did in its completion. The friends of the Earl, perfuaded no kind of influence would be ipared to bring him to the block, were unanimous in intreating him to win over the Queen by an early repentance and fubmiffion: but they knew not the grandeur of the heart they would have humbled.—Born to diftinguiih himfelf moil eminently when outward diftinčtions were with¬ drawn, it was then only Eifex feemed to ufe his better judgment. (C Can any one call himfelf my friend," would he in¬ dignantly exclaim, " and yet wiih me poorly to petition for an obfcure, an ignominious life ? What ! to pine away the flower of manhood in infamy and folitude ! ihunned by all, yet unftigmatized by public juftice, and
and íhunning, in turn, the exalted cha¬ racters I dare no longer emulate.—Shut up with thofe tormenting companions, my own thoughts, till led, perhaps, by defparation, to inflict that fate upon my felf, I have meanly evaded receiving from the law.—No, my friends, I am en - thralled here as a traitor—if proved one, it is fit I expiate my crime ; and if ac¬ quitted 1 know the value of a life ven¬ tured hitherto only for my country.** Neither arguments, or intreaties, could lhake his refolution 5 and he heard with unequalled firmnefs that public fen¬ tence, from which, he ftill perfifted, there was no appeal. In vain every dear and affecting image was pourtrayed in the ftrongeft colours before his active ima¬ gination.—From that of the woe-ftruck Ellinor, liberated too late, and weaving in - a diftant folitude a thoufand fairy bow¬ ers for love and happinefs to dwell in.— from her alone his nature ihrunk. fC You may wound my heart,** would he fighing fay, " through every /ein ; but my reafon Ь ftill inflexible, nor is even that fweet creature
creature an argument for my fubmitting to difgrace.—No ! when I raifed my eyes to thee, dear Ellinor, my confcious foul beheld in itfelf all that could intitle me to mate with thee.—I cannot refolve to look up even to the woman I adore.—. Better fhe ihould weep me dead, than fecretly defpife me while yet exifting.— Pure and precious will be .the tears that fall upon my grave, but never could I behold one which would not fecretly re¬ proach me.---------Leave me, my friends, to my fate ; honor has hitherto been the invariable rule of my conduct, nor can I now adopt another." From the moment the condemnation of Eifex reached the Queen, peace and reft were ftn? ïgers to her.—The chofen of her heart was now the victim of the laws, and that heart muft bleed through his, unlefs he could be induced to throw himfelf on her mercy. A thoufand emif- faries aífured him of a ready pardon------ a word, a wifli, would have obtained it.— To thefe he ever replied with the fame col¬ lected
lected air, " that had the Queen earlier ihewn him this indulgence, his life had never come within the cenfure of the law ; but as even her utmoft bounty now could only prolong to him the liberty of breath¬ ing he was willing, as well for her fafety as in fubmiffion to his fentence, to re- fign a privilege, which became a bur¬ then the moment it was his only one." An anfwer thus calculated to touch the moft indifferent heart, ftabbed that of Elizabeth : yet as, unaiked, to grant him a pardon, would ftamp her declining life with inexcufable weaknefs, íhe under¬ went every hour the moft trying con¬ flicts. Ah ! why do I fay the moft trying ? alas, there was a fair, and forlorn one, buried in Cumberland, who more than died when this cruel intelligence reached her. As the fentence of Eflex extended to his friend Southampton, the relations of the latter difpatched an exprefs to his wife, hoping ihe would arrive in London time enough to foliert his pardon of the Queen.
Queen. The meffenger found the un¬ fortunate Ladies buoyed up with fafety, folitude, and many a gentle hope. When the approach of horfes echoed through the remote valley, no other emo¬ tion was excited in either, than the fond and latent flutter arifing from the idea that it might be one or both of the con¬ demned Earls.—How terrible was then the tranfition in their minds, when fully informed of their defperate fituation; and bereft of every refource expected mifery fupplies ? The unhappy wife of Southampton, engroffed by her own ihare in the affliction, obferved not its deep, its deadly effect, ori the intellects of her equally fuffering friend; till the ftupe- fačtion of Ellinor became intenfe, and obvious, and the evil irremediable. The human mind, even when moft elevated, is not equal to the influence of two oppofing paifions—a facrifice muft be made, and friendihip yields to love. Lady Southampton pofted away with unremitting diligence, intrufting her friend
friend to the care of faithful fervants, who were directed to bring her forward more leifurely.—The deep gloom of the fweet Ellinor's mind, in the courfe of the jour¬ ney, gave way to a vague and irregu¬ lar gaiety; but as this had fometimes forerun her recovery, fo might it then, had ihe been furrounded with fuch perfons as knew her difpofition.—Thofe who had her in charge, uninformed of her name, fituation, and wounded fpirit, could not reafonably be expected to guard a- gainft events they could not poflibly fore- fee. It happened, one day, while they were refting, Ellinor caft her eyes upon an extenfive building, full in fight, and her wandering imagination called it Kenil¬ worth.—An officious attendant informed her it was Fotheringay Caftle.—She wildly ihrieked, ftretched forth her arms expref- fively towards the fatal manfion, then tear¬ ing thofe lovely treifes once before de¬ voted to her calamity, and fcarce grown to their ufual luxuriance, threw herfelf on the ground, and relapfed into total in- fanity. But
But when Lady Southampton entered the prifon of her Lord, upon whole ach* ing bofom íhe poured forth all her grief and paflion, his difturbed friend found every fibre of his heart wrung; end turn¬ ing a fearful, eager eye toward the door felt a horror, not to,be expreffed, at rinding no one followed her.—^The afflicted wife wanted prefence of mind to conceal a truth which confummated the fate of Eífex« —a truth fo terrible, that fain would he have believed it invented by his friends to reconcile him to his fentence.—Con¬ vinced at length—" now indeed do I feel the weight of my bonds-—-now indeed am I a prifoner, would he exclaim.—Oh, Ellinor, matchlefs Ellinor, that I could •fly to thee ! recall once more that un¬ equalled foul, which always, like a fright¬ ened bird, forfakes its home when mifery hovers over it.— Thou, thou, haft broken a fpirit equal to every other affliction— thou haft made a coward of me—to fave thee, my love, .1 could almoft refolve, poorly to condition for a oUfgracefdl life, and wifii to furvive my honor." Per-
perfuaded his prefence would have the fame effect it once before took at St* Vincent's Abbey, he paflionately foli¬ cited to fee her.------This fingle idea feized upon his mind—it even became his folemn requeft—his dying wiíh.— In the hopelefs ftate of her diforder, the ef¬ fect of their meeting was dreaded only on his account ; but as all intreaty and ar¬ gument proved vain, his friends at length refolved to yield to his pallionate, his only folication, The day was now appointed for the execution of Eifex, and the par¬ don of Southampton granted, which alone he defired ; as all his friends were freely admitted to his perfon, there was no difficulty in leading thither the darling ôf his heart, in the habit of a youth, ac¬ companied by Lady Southampton.—«*- Worlds could not have bribed me to witnefs fuch an interview,—Ah, deareft Ellinor ! were thofe fenfes they fo eagerly defired to reftore to thee, in reality a lofs ? How, had they been perfect, wouldft thou have fupported the trying fcene, ex¬ piring
piring love, and officious friendihip, dragged thee to witnefs ?—How wouldeft thou have fixed thine eyes on the gloo¬ my tower, or thofe guarded gates through which thy lover muft fo foon be borne, but never more íhould pafs ?—How muit thy foul have bleed to behold thofe fine features, a few hours were to feparate from the heart which then gave them fuch agonized exprefiion ? But that fuperla- tive mifery was not ordained thee.—-Re¬ tired, beyond the reach of love itfelf, were all the various powers of that fuf¬ ceptible foul !—Thy vague eyes con- feifed not their everlafting object—thy ear caught not his voice—nor did thy bofom anfwer with a Angle figh, the burfts of grief which ftruggled at that of thy lover, ftill exquifitely alive to every human affliction ! To thee his parting foul yet clung; and when his eyes beheld thee no longer, they willingly Ihut out creation. He faw not, from the moment of Ellinor's departure friend or relation ; but turning all his contemplations towards the
the awful futurity in which he was fo foon to launch, died to this world even before his execution. On the night which preceded that event, this billet, equally addreifed to my fifter (with whom the dear unfortunate re¬ fided) and myfelf, was delivered. < c Dear, generous guardians of the loft ancel, my foul yet bleeds over, receive in this my parting bleffing ; and pardon, oh, pardon, an incredulity but too fe¬ verely puniihed by conviction ! a convic¬ tion fo terrible as reconciles me to the death to-morrow will beftow. Yes, thefe eyes have been blafted with beholding the pale ftatute of my love, dead while yet breathing—fpeechlefs—infenfate. -------To the gathered multitude—the fatal fcaffold —the axe which feperates foul and body, I turn for relief when this remembrance preffes upon me. " Adieu, ye faithful fifters of the gallant Sydney—Oh ! if intelligence too late ihould vifit the fair form bequeathed to your friendihip, with fympathy foothe every aching fenfe.---------Yet wake no Vol. III. N more
more to woe my worihipped Ellinor !— Still may thy pure fpirit flumber in its breathing tomb, till that appointed hour which at length unites thee to thy ESSE X." Tower. It feemed as if in this epiftle were en¬ clofed every lingering weaknefs of mor¬ tality : for die remaining hours of his life were devoted folely to the duties of religion.—In the flower of manhood, at the age of three and thirty, this envied favorite refigned every earthly diftinction, and afeended the fcaffold with a compo¬ fure innocence and Heaven alone can beftow. The melting multitude too late bewailed to fee his glorious youth fet thus in blood.—His ear caught the general murmur of forrow and applaufe ; he caft a look of corrected knowledge on the fpectators i then lifting his eyes to Heaven, ferenely fubmitted to the executioner; who fevered a head and heart, which, had they acted in unifon, might have awed the world. Of
Of her ίο much beloved, fo generoufly, fo fatally faithful, little more remains to be faid .-"-Neither time* care, or medi¬ cine, ever availed toward the reftoration of thofe intellects which might only have proved an additional misfortune—Yet even in this ftate of infanity, Heaven permitted her to become the inftrument of a fingular and exemplary vengeance. A year or more had elapfed, during which her calamity took all thofe variable and dreadful forms peculiar to itfelf.—The defire of having every medical aififtance made me bring her with me to London ¡ where one evening, with a degree of re¬ flection and art often blended with infanity, íhe eluded the care of her attendants ; and well knowing every avenue of the palace, paffed them all with wonderful facility· The Queen wholly funk in the chilling melancholy of incurable defpair, and hopelefs age, refigned herfelf up to the influence of thofe evils.-'—Her ladies were often employed in reading to her, which was the only amufement her chagrin addmitted. ------One memorable N 2 nigh
night it was my turn—Elizabeth difmiifed every other attendant in the vain hope of finding a repofe of which ihe had for ever deprived herfelf. I purfued my taik a long while, when the time confpired with the orders of the Queen to produce a filence fo profound, that had not her ftarts now and then recalled my fenfes, hardly could my half-clofed eyes have difcerned the pages over which they wandered.— The door flew fuddenly open—a form fo fair—fo fragile—fo calamitous ap¬ peared there, that hardly durft my beat¬ ing heart call it Ellinor. The Queen ftarted up with a feeble quicknefs, but had only power to falter out a convul- five ejaculation. I inftantly remembered Elizabeth believed her dead, and ima¬ gined this her fpectre. The beaute¬ ous phantom (for furely never mortal looked fo like an inhahitant of another world) funk on one knee, and while her long garments of black flowed gracefully over the floor, íhe lifted up her eyes to¬ ward Heaven, with that namelefs fweet- nefs, that wild ineffable benignity, mad- ne£s
nefs alone can give, then meekly bowed before Elizabeth.—The Queen, heart- ftruck, fell back into her feat, without voice to pronounce a fyllable. — Ellinor arofe, and approached ftill nearer ; ftand- ing a few moments, choaked and filent. «f I once was proud, was paflionate, in¬ dignant," faid the fweet unfortunate at laft, in the low and broken voice of in¬ expreflible anguiih," but Heaven forbids me now to be fo—Oh! you who was furely born only to chaftife my unhappy race, forgive me—I have no longer any fenfe but that of forrow."------Again fhe funk upon the floor, and gave way to fobbings ihe ftruggled in vain to fupprefs. The Queen dragged me convulfively to her, and burying her face in my bofom ex¬ claimed indiftinčtly, —" fave me— fave me—oh, Pembroke, fave me from this ghaftly fpectre !"— *< Effex—Effex—Ef¬ fex!" groaned forth the proftrate Elli¬ nor, expreffively raifing her white hand at each touching repetition.—The vio¬ lent ihudderings of the Queen, marked N 3 the
the deep effect that fatal name took on her.— Ci Somebody told me, continued the lovely wanderer, that he was in the Tower, but I have looked there for him till I am weary—is there a colder, fafer prifon, then ? But is a prifon a place for your favorite, and can you condemn him to the grave ?—Ah gracious Heaven, ftrike off his head—Ms beauteous head !■—Seal tip thofe fparkling eyes for ever.—Oh, no, I thought not," faid ihe with an al¬ tered voice,-r-" So you hid him here after all, only to torment me.—But Effex will not fee me fuffer-^rwill you, my Lord ? So—fo—^fo"-TB-the flow progrefs of her eyes round the room, íhewed, flie in imagination followed his fteps.—" Yes-^- yes,"—added lhe, with revived fpirits, " I thought that voice would prevail, for who could ever refift it?— and only I need die then ; well, I do not mind that—I will fteal into his prifon and fuffer in his place, but be fure you don't tell him fo, for he loves me —ah ! dearly does he love me, but I alone need figh at that, you know/' And
And figh ihe did indeed.—Oh ! what a world of woe was drawn up in a fingle breath!—The long filence which follow¬ ed, induced the Queen once more to raife her head—the fame fad object met her eyes, with this difference, that the fweet creature now ftood up again, and putting one white hand to her forehead, ihe half raifed the other, as earneftly demanding ftill to be heard, though her vague eyes íhewed her purpofe had efcaped her.— " Oh, now I remember it," refumed ihe, tf I do not mind how you have me murder¬ ed, but let me be buried in Fotheringay ; and be fure I have women to attend me ; be fure of that—,ou know the reafon." This incoherent reference to* the unpre¬ cedented fate of her royal mother, af¬ fected Elizabeth deeply.— M But could not you let me once more fee him before I die? refumed the dear wanderer.·—Oh! what pleafure would it give me to view him on the Throne !—Oh, I do fee him there !" exclaimed flie in the voice of fur¬ prize and tranfport. " Benign, majeftic !— N 4 Ah,
Ah, how glorious in his beauty !<—Who would not die for thee, my Eflex !"-*---- cc Alas, never, never, never, ihall / fee him !" groaned forth the agonized Eli¬ zabeth.------" Me married to him !" re¬ fumed our friend, replying to forne imags nary fpeech,— cc oh, no, I took warning by my fifter !—I will have no more bloody marriages : you fee í have no ring," wildly difplaying her hands, " except a black one; a black one indeed, if you knew all—but I need not tell you that—have I, my Lord ?—look up—here is my love—he himfelf ihall tell you." She caught the hand terror had caufed Elizabeth to ex¬ tend, but faintly ihrieking, drew back her own, and furveyed it with inexpreflible hor¬ ror. tc Oh, you have dipt mine in blood!" exclaimed flie, tf a mother's blood ! I am all contaminated—it runs cold to my very heart.—Ah, no,—it is—it is the blood of Effex ; and have you murder¬ ed him at laft, in fpite of your dotage, and your promifes ? murdered the moit noble of mankind ! and all becaufe he could
could not love you. Fye on your wrin¬ kles !-*—can one love age and uglinefs ?— Oh, how thofe artificial locks, and all your paintings fickened him !—How have we laughed at fuch prepofterous folly!—But I have done with laughing now—we will talk of graves, and ihrouds, and church-yards------ Methinks I fain whould know where my poor fifter lies bu¬ ried—you will fay in my heart perhaps— it has indeed entombed all I love; yet there muft be fome little unknown cor¬ ner in this world, one night call her grave, if one could but tell where to find it : there ihe refts at laft with her Leicefter—he was your favorite too—a bloody, bloody, diftinčtion."— —The Queen, who had with difficulty preferved her fenfes till this cutting period, now funk back in a deep fwoon. The diftrefs of my fituation cannot be expreifed.—Fearful leaft any attempt to fummon a fingle being fliould irritate the injured Ellinor to execute any dire revenge ; for which I knew not how ihe was
was prepared, had not Elizabeth at this juncture loft her fenfes, I really think mine would have failed me. I recollected that the Queen by every teftimony was convinced that theunhapy object thus fearfully brought before her, died in the country long fince ; nor was it wife or fafe, for thofe who had impofed on her, now to acknow¬ ledge the deception. " So-~fo—-fo, M cried Ellinor, with a ftart, " would one have thought it poflible to break that hard heart, after all ? and yet I have done it—She is gone to—no, not gone to Eflex."---------" Let us retire, my fweet Ellen," faid I, eager to get her out of the room, left the Queen íhould fuffer for wa«t of afliftance.— " Huíh," cried ihe, with increafing wildnefs, tc they will lay we have beheaded her alfo. —But who are you ?" fixing her hollow eyes will¬ fully on me, cc I have feen you fom e where ere now, but I forget all faces in gazing on his pale one,—I know not where I am, лог where you would have me go," added ihe, foftly fighing, ct but you look like an angel of lights and may be, you will carry 3 n "' e
me with you to Heaven«" I feized the bleffed minute of compliance, and draw¬ ing her mourning hood over her face, led her to the little court, where my fer¬ vants waited my difmifllonj when com¬ mitting her to their charge, I returned to wake the ladies in the antichamber, through whofe inadvertent flumbers alone, Ellinor had been enabled to pafs to the clofet of the Queen ; a circumftance which combined with a variety of others to give this ftrange vifitation the appear¬ ance of being fupernatural. Every common means were tried in vain to recover the Queen, and the ap¬ plications of the faculty alone could recall her fenfes ; but the terror fhe had endur¬ ed has ihook them forever. Shuddering with apprehenfions for which only I can account, flie often holds incomprehen¬ fible conferences ; complains of an ideal vifitor; commands every door to be fhut; yet ftill fancies ihe fees her, and orders her to be kept out in vain. The fup¬ pofed difregard of thofe in waiting in- cenfes a temper fo mapy caufes concur to
to render peeviih, and her unmerited an¬ ger produces the very difregard ihe com¬ plains of. Rage and fear unite thus to harrafs her feeble age, and accelarate the decay of nature. When thefe accu te fen¬ fations fubfide, grief and defpair take pof- fefiion of her whole foul ;—nor does ihe fuffer lefs from the fenfe of her decaying power. Unwilling to refign a good ihe is unable to enjoy, fhe thinks every hand that approaches, is eager to fhatch a fcep- tre, ihe will not even in dying bequeath* Oh, fweet Matilda ! if yet indeed thou furviveft to witnefs this divine vengeance, thy gentle tears would embalm even thy moft mortal enemy ! thou couldft not without pity behold the imperial Eli¬ zabeth, loft to the common comforts of light, air, nouriihment, and pleafure, That mighty mind which will be the object of future, as it has been of paft, wonder, prefenting now but a breathing memento of the frailty of humanity.—Ah, that around her were aifembled all thole aipiring fouls whofe wiihes centre in do¬ minion;
minion ; were they once to behold this diítinguiíhed victim of ungoverned paf- fion, able to rule every being but her¬ felf, how would they feel the potent ex¬ ample ! Ah, that to them were added the many who fcorning focial love, con¬ fine to felf the bleifed affections which alone can fweeten the tears we all are born to fhed !—Gathering round the weary couch where the emaciated Queen withers in royal folitude, they might at once learn urbanity, and correct in time errors, which, when indulged, but too feverely punifh themfelves. ****** Abforbed and blended in the bufy and woeful feenes this heart-breaking hiftory prefented to my mind—an anxious par¬ taker in each fucceeding calamity—I feemed to live over again the melan¬ choly years we had been feparated, in the perfon of my fifter.—My own misfortunes —my darling daughter, the whole world vanifhed from before my eyes—deep-fixed 1 on
on objects no longer exifting, or exift¬ ing but to double my affliction : I re¬ mained almoft the ftatute of defpair ; every fenfe feeming rivetted on the ma- nufcript I held ; and buried in fo profound a reverie, that Lady Arundell judged it prudence to interrupt it. The confolatory reflections her friendihip dictated, died on my ear, but reached not a heart which deep¬ ly purfued the fad chain of ideas thus pre¬ fented to it.—Starting as from a frightful fleep, I, at laft, funk on my knees, and ra' fing my eyes, with the manufcript, at once toward Heaven.— <c Oh, mighty au¬ thor of univerfal being !" fighed I, " thou who haft lent me fortitude to ftruggle with almoft unequalled trials, fupport my exhaufted foul againft this laft-— this great- eft.;—Let not the killing idea that it is a human infliction, trouble the pure fprings q{ piety j whence alone the weary fpirit can draw confutation.-^----- Rather ftrengthen me with the holy belief that it is thy vifitation for fome wife end ordain¬ ed j fo íhall my enemies fleep in their graves
araves uncurfed, and my heart remain in this agitated bofom unbroken. Alas, who knows but by thy divine appoint^ ment, I may be at laft permitted to recall the fcattered fenfes of this dear unfortu¬ nate ? to foothe that deeply-wounded, that embittered fpirit í Ah, Ellen ?—' Ah, my fifter !" groaned I, deluged at laft with falutary tears,— " changed—loft—an¬ nihilated as thou art, my unaltered affec¬ tion muft ever defire thee.—I need not enquire whether ihe is here—your fym- patiizing, generous tears, dear Lady Arundell, inform me that the fame roof fhelters the twin heirs of misfortune." Although Lady Arundell acknow¬ ledged that my finer was under her protect tion, fain would ihe have perfuaded me to delay a meeting fo touching, till more able to fupport it ; but, deaf to the voice of reafon, nature, powerful nature averted her rights, and my foul obeyed her impaflioned impulfe. The deep, the eternal impreffion of this agonizing meet¬ ing, recurs even now with all its firft force.
force. I had Ihuddered at the murder of my mother—I had groaned on the coffin of my huiband—I had wept a thoufand times over the helplefs infant who trem¬ bled at my bofom—but all thefe terrible fenfations were combined when my fad eyes refted on thofe ftill fo dear to me.— When I faw all their playful luftre quenched, and fet in infenflbility—when I felt that heart, once the feat of every feminine grace and virtue, throb wild and unconfcious againft one which I thought every moment would efcape from its narrow boundary.—But let me quit a fcene too trying for recollection—too touching for defcription. Oh, Ellinor— my fifter !
THE
THÈ
RECESS, etc.
----------- ——— m ι -------------- PART Vi.
X IME, which inures us tö every kind of fuffering, at length ftrengthened my mind againft the heavy fadnefs impreifed on it by the fate of this dear unconfci¬ ous fufferer. It was with true grati¬ tude and concern I learnt Heaven had called to itfelf the amiable and accom¬ pliíhed lifter of Lady Arundell* who eaught a cold during her attendance on Vol. III, О the
the fick Queen, which ended itt a con¬ fumption, and carried her offa few months after Elizabeth. Actuated to the laft by the fublimeft fympathy and friendihip, Lady Pembroke had added, to the moi¬ ety of the furveyor's treafure (which ihe had caufed to be dug for in the fpot fpe- cified) a fufficient fum to fecure the dear unfortunate every comfort her forlorn ftate admitted ; placing with her Alithea, the favorite maid fhe had fo tenderly com¬ memorated, and committing both to the charge of Lady Arundell ; who with equal generofity received fo anxious a truft. A virtue thus confurnrnate fanctifies itfelf, and can receive neither glory or grace from the gratitude of humanity ; yet furely the ihcenfe of the heart arifes even to heaven ! accept it then, oh, gentleft of the Sydneys, although infphered there ! The ftrange and unaccountable differ¬ ence in my lifter's opinion and my own, refpecting- Lord Leicefter, fupplied me a fource of endlefs meditation : yet, as this difference became obvious only from a ths
the time we arrived in London, I could not help imputing her blindnefs to the fame caufe ihe afligned for mine.—Certainly ihe imbibed the unreafonable prejudices of Lord Effex; whofe ambition (however, fatally expiated) always inclined him to diflike a Nobleman born to fuper¬ fede him. I faw but too plainly from the irritation and vehemence to which her temper from that period became fub¬ ječt, how much a woman infenfibly adopts of the difpofition of him to whom ihe ^ives her heart. I had not however look¬ ed on her choice with the contemptuous afperity with which ihe regarded mine.— Lord Effex, I will frankly own, ere yet he rofe into favor, was gifted like her¬ felf with every captivating advantage of nature. ------The fire and ingenuoufnefs which afterwards marked his character, then lived only in his eyes : and the cul¬ tivated underftanding he poffeffed, point¬ ed every glance with elegance and ex- preflion. One muft have loved Lord Leicefter to fee Effex with indifference— one muft have lovecj him to the excefs О 2 I did
i$6 I did perhaps, not to remark the attach¬ ment my fifter avowed.——Innumerable inftances of it now flafhed on my memo¬ ry, I was aftoniíhed could at the moment éfcape me. íí ße was indeed more clear fighted than myfelf—But why do I en¬ ter on fo vain a difcuflion ?—^Alas, dear Ellinor İ beloved Leicefter ! I have no right but to lament ye. I had likewife gathered another pain¬ ful doubt from the ftory of my fifter. England had gained a King in the fon of Mary Stuart, but her unfortunate daugh¬ ters muft not hope to acquire a brother. From the moment 1 had been informed that mine had acceded to the throne, the tender mother's heart had fluttered with the idea of prefenting to him the lovely girl fo nearly allied to* his blood. Al¬ though regardlefs of diftinčtion in my own perfon, I could not turn my eyes on the fair daughter of Lord Leicefter with¬ out coveting for her every human advan¬ tage. ------Unwilling to be fwayed by pre¬ judice, I feparately confulted- with the few
few friends fortune had left me 5 who all concurred in giving me an impreffion of the King, degrading, if not contempt·* ible. They reprefented him as national, vain, pedantic, credulous, and partial: wanting generofity to beftow a royal fu¬ neral on the body of the martyred faint, his unhappy mother ; yet daily impo¬ verifhed to meannefs by favorites and pa¬ rafi tes. Enílaved by the imperious fpirit of a Queen he neither loved nor valued s and only endeared to the people he go¬ verned through the ficklenefs of their natures, which are always gratified by change. As thofe who fpoke thus could have no poflible intereft in vilifying or depreciating him, I could not but give fome credit to their account ·, and made it my firft concern to fee the King ; anxious to read in his countenance a confutation^ of every charge. How unaccountably was I difappointed when my fenfes took part with his enemies!—I beheld with aftoniihment, in the perfon of James, youth without freflinefs, royalty without О 3 grant
grandeur, height without majefty------ an air of flynefs and a fecret fervility cha¬ racterized features, which, though devoid of the graces of either diítinguiíhed pa¬ rent, wanted not regularity ; and a {loop¬ ing flouch gait gave an invincible awk- wardnefs to a figure nature had endued with fymmetry. Offended and repelled, my heart funk again into its own little manfion, nor claimed the leaft alliance with his.—I determined to watch at lei¬ fure his real character and conduct, nor ventured to confide to his care the fin¬ gle treafure Heaven had permitted me to retain, of all it once beftowed. Refolved to educate my daughter fuitably to the fortune lhe was born to, I thought it wife to bury in my own bofom, at leaft for a time, the fecret of her right to it j and the eccentric turn of mind every fucceed¬ ing day rendered more obvious in the King made me continually applaud the moderation and forefight which had guarded me on this interefting occafion. I, how-
I, however, judged it neceífary to af- fume a title no human being envied, or offered to difpute with me; and to fupport it properly without enčFoaching on my daughter's valuable acquifition, I found I muft reiblve to re-vifit Kenil- worth Caftle, now the property of ano¬ ther family.—In the building were con¬ tained cabinets fo fecure and unknown, that Lord Leicefter always depofited there, ere he journeyed to London, (beh pa¬ pers, jewels, and other valuables, as he thought it unfafe to take with him. On the memorable night when laft we quitted thatpleafant dwelling, I had affifted him to place in the moft curious of thefe refervoirs feveral caíkets, for which he feemed more than commonly anxious ; and I added to their number, that containing Mrs. Mar- low's papers, and the teftimonials of my birth. As if actuated by fome fad pre-fenti- ment that he ihould never more re-vifit this fpot, my Lord took great pains to familia¬ rize me to the management of the iprings, and gave into my hands duplicates of the О 4 keys.
keys. By a fingular chance, amidft all the tranfitions of my fate thefe keys rer mained, and feemed continually to re¬ mind me, how important to my daugh¬ ter's welfare it might one day be to rer cover the caílçets. ------ fuch a motive alone could conquer the reluctance I felt a- gain to behold a ipot facred to the memory of a huiband fo beloved. You will call this perhaps, a childifti weak¬ nefs, after all I had born ; but alas, the mind feebler and feebler from every conflict, fometimes finks under a trifle, after repelling the more powerful attacks of ill-fortune with magnanimity. Lady Arundell, with herufual kindnefs, propofed accompanying me ; and we for- rowfully meafured once more thofe miles which fo ftrongly revived in my mind the moft interefting remembrances. At Coven¬ try we refted to enquire into the character of the prefent owner of Kenilworth Caftle. We were told that this magnificent man¬ sion, which I had left fit for the reception of a Sovereign, had long been in the hands
of a mifer, whofe avarice had induced him to ftrip it of its princely ornaments ; not lefs from the defire of converting thofe into money, than to deprive it of every charm that might tempt the en¬ quiring traveller to knock at the inhof- pitable gate. Yet, even when this ruin was effected, the ftructure itfelf was fo complete a piece of architecture as to attract a number of unwelcome vili tors ; to exclude whom, he had now let it to fome manufacturers, and refided himfelf in a romote apartment. The chagrin this extraordinary revolution could not but occafion in my mind, was increafed when I recollected how hard it would be, perhaps, to gain admiflion ; and even when that was obtained, we knew not whether the only room T wiihed to lodge in was now habitable. Lady Arundell, with her ufual forefight, advifed me to feem to have no other motive for this vifit, than a defire to re-purchafe the Caftle; and when fliewn through it, to appear to be ftruck with fo fevere an in- difpofition, as foon as I reached the ι chamber
chamber which contained the cabinets, as ihould render it impofiible to remove me ; leaving it to her to reconcile the Owner to fo troublefome an intruder, by the moft laviih generofity. A fineife of this kind alone could afcertain me any fuccefs, and the ficklinefs of my afpečl, I was fure, would fufficiently coroborate fuch an aifertion. We fet out immediately, that by ar¬ riving in the evening we might have a pretence for pafiing the night there,— My foul turned from the weli-known fcene, and fickened alike at fight of the reviving verdure, and the fplendid man¬ fion, to me alas, only a gay maufoleum. Humbly I folicited entrance at a gate which once flew open whenever I appear¬ ed ; but, ah, though the exterior was the fame, how ftrange feemed the alter- ation within !—No more did the liveried train of afllduous domeftics aifemble to the diftant winding of the huntfman's horn.—No longer did I reft in gilded galleries, whofe pictured fides delighted one fenfe, while their coolnefs refreihed another.
another. No longer could I, even in idea, behold the beloved, the noble own¬ er, whofe gracious mien endeared the welcome it conveyed—A change which jarred every feeling had taken place. A numerous body of diligent mechanics were plodding in thofe halls were Eliza¬ beth had feafted, and their battered fides hardly now informed us where the rich tapeftry ufed to hang. My ears were fud¬ denly ftunned with the noife of ahundred looms ; and the diftant lake once covered with gay pageants, and refounding only to the voice of pleafure, prefented us ano¬ ther fcene of induftry not lefs bufy, ftrange, and furprizing. By incidents of this kind, one becomes painfully and inftantaneoufly fenfible of advancing into life. When firft we find ourfelves failing with the imperceptible current of time, engroffed either by the danger of our fitu¬ ation, or enchanted with its profpečts, we glide fwiftly on, fcarce fenfible of our progrefs, till the ftream revifits fome fa¬ vorite fpot : alas, fo vifible is the defo- lation of the ihorteft interval, that we grow
grow old in a moment, and fubmit once more to the tide, willing rather to ihare the ruin than review it. Among the few fervants retained by the meagre mafter of this defolated man^ fion, one appeared who immediately re¬ called himfelf to my mind by the name of Gabriel. I recollected his having been warden of the outer lodges. The title by which I was announced—the weed í ftill continued to wear, overcame a wretch already bowed to the earth by age, infir¬ mity, and penury: and when to thefe circumftances was fuperadded the re¬ membrance of the plentiful and peaceful days he had known under a Lord ever munificent to his domeftics, gratitude became agony, and the poor old man funk in a fit at my feet. An incident like this might well have affected an indif¬ ferent fpectator.—I was fcarce more fen¬ fible than himfelf: and the alarm foon fpread through the laborious mechanics, tiil it was conveyed to Sir Humphry Moretón. —Timoroufiy he emerged from his
bis apartment, and, as the humble croud made way for him, he meafured me afar off with his eye, and feemed loft in conjecture on the fubjeőfc of my vifit.—> My purfe was yet in my hand, and part of its contents in thofe of fome perfons who had lent a ready afliftance. Whether this, or the wan delicacy of my looks interefted him, I know not; but every care-fur¬ rowed feature gradually relaxed as he ap¬ proached me, ftriving in vain to foften into the fmile of benevolence. I rofe to return his courteous falutation, and in¬ formed him, that when laft I paft the walls of this Caftle, I was its miftrefs, the dear and happy wife of Lord Leicefter; but perceiving uncertain apprehenfions of fome remote claim began again to con¬ tract his brow, I added that fenfible I had loft every right in a fpot yet dear to me, I came to enquire whether he was difpofed to part with it, and to refcue from po¬ verty fuch worthy fervants of its late noble owner as had alike outlived their labours and him who Ihould have recompenfed it. What
What heart is infenfible to that virtue in which we alone can refemble our Maker ?--------- Benevolence, like religion, awes even thofe it cannot win. The mifer loudly applauded my liberality : and by a greater effort on his part, al¬ lowing for the difference of our charac¬ ters, invited me to fpend the night in the Caftle. The chamber I had been accuftomed to inhabit he called his beit, and thither was I conducted, I was not un¬ provided with the means of enfuring my own welcome, and my fervants hav¬ ing fpread the cold viands we brought, Sir Humphry's fprits grew light over luxuries he was not to pay for. A temp¬ tation fo agreeable prolonged his ftay, and I at length difcovered the only way to fliorten his vifit, would be to compli¬ ment him with all that remained : fee¬ ing my fervants, in compliance with the hint, where about to convey it out of the room, fear left any íhould be loft by the way, prevailed over the hilarity of
of the moment, and he departed with the wine. With an impatient beating heart I raifed the tapeftry, which providentially had been preferved in this room, lefs from its beauty than antiquity ; as it was fo worn that it had long been pannelied in many places.—Behind the bed we difcovered the fecret fpring of the cabinet, which I opened without any difficulty; and with, the afliftance of Lady Arundell took down the well-remembred caíkets, pauf- ing at intervals, to weep over all the tender ideas the fight of them recalled fo forcibly to my memory ; then raiftng my eye toward Heaven, while devoutly thanking the God who thus profpered my remaining wiihes, I almoft fancied I beheld the bea¬ tified fpirit of him who concealed thefe treafures. Lady Arundell would not reft without mfpečting" their contents. The largeft: was filled with family papers, bonds, contracts» mortgages, many of which were to me unintelligible, and all ufelefs. The
The next contained letters and little or- ments, lefs precious from their intrin- fic value, than their analogy to particu- lar events.— u n der thefe was a gilt caiket filled with jewels of great values and what was of infinitely more, the authenti¬ cated bonds and acknowledgments of all the fums Lord Leicefter had informed me he had providantly depofited in other countries; and of whieh I knew not any memorandum remained. This was fo noble an addition to the bequeft which already enriched my fweet Mary, that it feemed to me, as if her father even from the grave delighted to endow her: while the Almighty, gracious even when we think him moit fevere, had thus fe¬ creted, for her advantage^ treafures it would have been impoffible for me to have preferved through fo many defperate viciflitudes. „. The next caiket was a gift from the fond mother to the darling of her heart: it contained all the teftimonials of the Queen of Scots, and other parties con¬ cerned
cerned, ön the fubječt of my birth, with the contract of marriage between Lord Leicefter and myfelf. I felt rich in thefe recovered rights: and though prudence might never permit me to claim alliance with King James, yet to bequeath to my daughter the power of doing fo, at whatever period it ihould appear ad¬ vantageous, was a great confolation to me. Lady Arundell and I paft part of the night in packing thefe valuables in empty trunks brought for that purpofe ; then, clofing the fecret cabinet, and leaving no traces of our fearch for it, we retired to reft. We departed early the next morning, carrying with us that ancient domeftic of Lord Leicefter, on whom me¬ mory had fo powerfully operated, and two others, who, long fince expelled from the Caftle, fought a miferable fubfiftence in the hamlets around it. It joyed my very heart to fupply to thefe poor wretches a lofs irremediable with refpečt to myfelf, and the profound attachment of their Vol. III. P few
few remaining days amply rewarded me. Through the intervention of the friends I yet poffeffed, fome eminent merchants in London undertook to get the bonds, notes, &c. duly acknowledged : and, in procefs of time, fuch confiderable fums were of confequence recovered, as afcer¬ tained to myfelf and child our accuftomed affluence. Years and misfortune had only cemented the ancient friendihip be¬ tween me and Lady Arundell.—I added my income and family to hers.------ Her houfe was fortunately fo near London as to allow me the advantage of procur¬ ing the firft inftructors for my daughter ; and the infirm ftate of Lady Arundelľs health, rendering her as much a prifoner from neceflity, as I was from choice, both infenfibly found, in the improve¬ ment of my daughter, a mild and grow¬ ing fatisfaction, which more than made amends for the world we fliut out. Ah ! could I defire a greater pleafure ? Pardon, madam> the fond extravagance x of
of maternal love, and allow me to pre¬ fent to you the darling of my heart in her fixteenth year. Already fomething taller than myfelfj to a form that united the ftricteft fymmetry with the wild and vari¬ able graces of glowing youth, my Mary added the perfect features of her father, exquifitely feminized by a complexion tranfparently fair, and a bloom alike de¬ licate and vivid ; her hair, of the golden brown I have defcribed as peculiar to his, fell below her waift in a profufion of artlefs ringlets, heightening her beauty even to luxuriance.—If fhe had borrowed any thing from me, it was the collected modefty of her mein ; and from my fifter ihe had ftolen that penetrating, faf- cinating fmile, thofe two alone of all I ever faw were gifted with :—alas, it was now wholly her own.—Although light- nefs and elafticity characterized her figure, every limb was rounded even to poliih- ing, and never did I contemplate fhe foft turn of her white arms when raifed to touch the lute, without thinking thoíè P 2 more
more perfect than even her face.—-Hcf voice was no lefs fweet in fpeaking than finging ; with this difference—-that in the firft ihe foftened the foul to pleafure, in the laft, elevated it to rapture.—Her underftanding was ftrong and penetrating, yet elevated and refined,—-Her fenfibility (the firft formed of all her feelings) was rather deep than ardente Maternal ex¬ perience had moderated the enthufiafm incident to youth, nor was it obvious in any inftance but the love of knowledge. Itrceífant, unremitting, in her ftudies, books were her only extravagance, and mufick her only relaxation. To com- penfate for the worldly pleáfures I judged it prudence to deprive her of, I was laviih in indulgencies to which her tafte natu¬ rally led : I kept muficians on purpofe to accompany her, and found, in the years filled up by herfelf and her employ¬ ments, that fweet though faddened plea¬ fure parents only know, and which, perhaps, more than makes us amends for all the more lively ones it recaís to our
our memory. J n effect, the more lovely flie grew, the more neceffary I found it to hide her; and, offering her daily up to God, I left her wholly to his difpofal ; determined neither my pride, vanity, or ambition, ihould interfere with the happi¬ nefs I fupplicated for her. On peru fing this defcription, I per^ ceive at once the impoflibility of your crediting it ; yet, far from accufing myr felf of partiality, I could call on all who ever beheld my daughter ţo atteft my candor.—How readily woulcţ Lady Arun¬ dell have done fo— entçndered to her by a love only inferior to my own, that faith¬ ful friend found in declining life a new tye wound round her heart, for which the daily thanked me. As nothing robs us of the confidence of youth like the appearance of myftery, when time called reflection to being in her tender mind, I flowly and by de¬ grees confided to my daughter the pain-? ful events you have thus obliged me to commemorate. This indulgence fecured P 3 to
to me her whole heart, and I trembled only left her deep fenfe öf paft misfor¬ tunes fhould affect her health ·, for fenfi¬ bility was the leading feature in her cha¬ racter. Far, however, from feeking to ex¬ pound the future in her own favor, the flattering profpečts her diítinguiíhed birth, and yet more diítinguiíhed endowments, might well fpread before her, paffed away like a ihadow, and fhe faw only her mo¬ ther. A thoufand times has ihe bedewed my hand with a reverence the moft en¬ dearing : and the tears with which fhe often embalmed the memory of her fa¬ ther, almoft recompenfed me for his lofs. From that period her expreifive eyes were fixed ever on mine with fuch blended fadnefs and admiration, as proved fhe thought me almoft fainted by mif- fortune. More ftudious henceforward of my pleafure, more fubmiffive to my will, more folicitous for my repofe, it feemed as if, in learning ihe was my only remain¬ ing tye on earth, fhe conceived that the various affections and duties of all I had loft
loft devolved to, and centred in, her¬ felf. But fympathy was the genuine im¬ pulfe of her nature ; for with equal care ihe watched over her unhappy aunt.— Whenever that dear creature's incurable malady aflumed the appearance of me¬ lancholy, ihe was extravagantly fond of mufick.—At thofe intervals my lovely Mary would lean over her lute with the meek benignity of a defcending angel, and extract from it fuch folemn iounds as breathed at once of peace and forrow : infenfibly foothing the perturbed fpirit, and melting only thofe yet undifturbed. That fubtle eflence of our natures, fen¬ fibility, which madnefs can only unfix, not annihilate, often paufed unconfcioufiy upon the pleafure, and foftly funk into repofe. A child thus eminently amiable at once concentred my affections—commanded my efteem— poífeífed my whole confi¬ dence—actuated, in íhort, my very being". —Ah, how noble, how affecting is the friendihip grounded on the maternal and F 4 filial
filial tye; when, unconfcious of any weak¬ nefs in her own heart, the mother dares prefent it as a pure and unflattering mir¬ ror to her child, and, with that felf-ap- plaufe which even Heaven approves, con¬ templates the upright, the innocent foul it reflects ! Sacred and indelible becomes that precept which is expreifed but by example.—Happy are thofe enabled to form fuch an attachment as inexperience ftrengthens on one hand, and knowledge on the other:—Neither the gufts of youthful paflion, nor the nipping frofls of age, can deftroy a plant rooted thus by mutual virtue ;— dt only gains vigor from time, and, by the peculiar indul¬ gence of the Almighty, our fublimeft merit ripens into our moft perfect plea¬ fure. Satisfied that I had already acquired fuch an influence in my daughter's mind as fhould enable me to regulate her princi¬ ples, I left it to time and circumftances to call them into action.—The great bufinefs of my life now feemed over ; and
and, delivering my heart up to the flatter¬ ing prefages of maternal love, a thou¬ fand vifions of almoft forgotten gran¬ deur and happinefs floated before my eyes, and fometimes half-deluded them. The fluctuating complaints of Lady Arundell at length fettled into a con¬ fumption ;—It was an hereditary diforder of the Sydneys ; nor perhaps could the folicitude of myfelf and my fweet Mary have availed aught toward her reftora¬ tion, even if a cruel Ihock, in which we were all equal fufferers, had not precipi¬ tated her fate. Among the unconfcious caprices which by turns actuated my unfortunate fifter, was a paflion for fitting in the open air.— Neither times or feafons had any influ¬ ence over her ; and ihe would infift on it alike in the fnow of December, and the fcorchlng fun of July.—To this felf-will I had no doubt greatly contributed. From the moment of my return to Eng¬ land, I had vehemently oppofed the fe¬ vere controul to which flie had hereto¬ fore
ii8 THE R E C E S S," kc. fore been fubječt, and habituated her at¬ tendants to yield to her in every inftance which did not abfolutely endanger her fafety : fully determined not to render an exiftence wholly wretched no human being could now make happy. But as uninformed minds never know a medi¬ um, the people appointed to watch her gradually fuffered her to become fenfible of her power, which foon grew into an unbounded indulgence. It was now the depth of winter, and fhe had fat in the keen air for hours, watching the fnow, which fell in abundance.------The moil violent fhiverings enfued, followed by a fever which fettled at laft on the nerves, and brought her to the very verge of the grave.—Neverthelefs, it appeared to have falutary effects—her fpirits were funk indeed to extreme lownefs, but they became more equal ; and traces of reafon were often difcernable in her acti¬ ons. If flie did not remember, flie yet ftrove to know me ; and fometimes ftu¬ died my features in a manner the moft touching.
touching.—I confidered this as the very crifis of her fate—her only chance on this fide Heaven, and fcarce dared leave her for a fingle moment. I entrufted the care of Lady Arundell (whofe fituation, though more dangerous, was not fo me¬ lancholy) to my daughter, fearful left her youthful fpirits ihould be injured by conftantly beholding an object fo affect¬ ing- But I had forgot that my own ihat- tered conftitution was not equal to the fa¬ tigue and anxiety of watching over my fif¬ ter. I fell one evening into a fucceflion of faintingfits; the fervants conveyed me to bed; and the fear of alarming Lady Arundell hindered them 'from informing my daughter of my fituation. My faint¬ ings at length gave place to a drowfinefs, fo intenfe that I might call it a ftupor.— 1 remained thus for fome hours, when I ftarted with an indiftinct idea of a heavy fall, and a dep groan. Terror roufed, and collected in a moment, every dor¬ mant faculty.—I ruihed through the chamber which divided mine from my fifter's, but I blamed myfelf for ímpe¬ tu ofi t v
tuofity when I perceived that all was pro¬ foundly filent in hers. The two nurfes were in a deep fleep, and the expiring watchlights heavily winked, and revived, before the cold dawn of the morning, I gently opened the curtains of her bed— Ah, gracious Heaven, what did I feel when I beheld it empty !—The agonized Ihriek I gave, rouzed both her carelefs attendants, who, impreifed with but one idea, flew towards a door I now firft perceived to be open : it led to a gal¬ lery ornamented with fuch portraits of our family as had furvived the wreck of their fortunes; among them was inçau- tioufly placed that (already fatally com¬ memorated) of the Earl of Eifex at the ftorming of Cadiz, an unfortunate le* gacy bequathed to my fifter by Lady Pembroke.—My foul took in at a thought all the fearful confequences.—I tottered into the gallery—alas only to behold my worft apprehenfion verified.—The fair fpectre, which once was Ellinor, lay proftrate before the picture—one hand had convulfively gathered her difordered garments
varments over her thin cheft ; the other was ftill exprefíively extended towards the inanimate image of him fo belov¬ ed—Impatiently I laid my hand upon her heart—it anfwered not the trembling enquirer-—its wandering eflence was ex¬ haled, and íhe had ceafed forever to fuf¬ fer. Thy parting prayer, oh Eífex! was furely prophetic, for her foul, in re¬ covering memory, had burft its mortal bound, arid foared to Heaven. Scarce were the dear remains quietly interred, ere thofe of the amiable Lady Arundell followed them. I bore thefe loffes with devout refign ation ------The tears which fall when Heaven recais the unfortunate ftill the wild paflions of the fad furvivor, and deeply wound only the foul yet new to fuffering. It was with a quickened apprehenfion that I per¬ ceived the effect of thefe firft afflictions' on the tender fpirits of my daughter : not that I fought totally to ftifle the lively impreflions of natural affection ;—the tears of youth, like the genial fhowers of May,
May, ferve only to fave the planter's toil, and fimply ripen the rich fruits of the mindi but when either fall too often, they impo verifh the foil, and waih away the buds yet blowing. My own foul afforded no variety of cheerful images with which I could hope to invigorate the gende fpirits of my Mary; unwilling to form new con¬ nections, I rather thought it prudent to change my abode, and by a variety of feenes infenfibly amufe her; and my fteward was fent accordingly to feek ano¬ ther manfion. I called back the moment when the gloomy aifles of a ruined con¬ vent, by poifeffing the fimple advantage of novelty, diverted by mind even at the forrowful crifis which robbed me of a fofter mother. Alas, in yet untried youth, the proípečt that is unknown ever adds toits own charms thofe of imagination; while in maturer life, the heart lingers on all which once delighted it, hopelefs of finding in the future, a pleafure fancy can ever compare with thofe it reviews
in the paft. To my daughter, however, the whole world was yet new, and, in fixing on a fcene habitual to my feelings, I could not fail to delight hers. I hired a man¬ fion near the Thames' fide, in Richmond, to whieh we removed early in the fpring. Perhaps, in this choice, I was influ¬ enced, almoft without knowingit, by a latent motive: diftinčt as I had lived from the world fince my return to Eng¬ land, the fame of the prince of Wales had yet reached me.—This accompliíhed youth had at once rofe above the weak- neffes of his father, and the prejudices of his rank ; devoting his heart to the virtues, his mind to the fciences, and his perfon to thofe manly and becoming exercifes which, invigorating every hu¬ man power, prepared him alike for the enjoyment of peace, or the purfuit of war. Delighted to underftand a Stuart was rifing to redeem the glory of his declining race, I paflionately longed to fee, know, and be valued by the royal Henry.
Henry. The King, unworthy â fon fo diítinguiíhed, took no pleafuťe in his company; but, even in tender youth, refigned him to a court of his own, from the adulation of which merit fupe¬ rior to praife alone could have guarded him. Henry had, like myfelf, a par¬ tiality for the beautiful village of Rich¬ mond; he always paifed part of the fummer in a palace near the Thames ¡ and I took pleafure in thinking a par¬ tition of wood alone feparated his gar¬ dens from mine. With a judgment unequalled at his years, the Prince knew how to be affable without abating aught of his dignity ; and, while in the circle of his own court he preferved the authority of a fovereign, to the unfor¬ tunate who addreifed him, he had the benignity of a brother : fuch was his character in Richmond, where the peo¬ ple almoft adored him, and took plea¬ fure in amplifying on the fuperior qua¬ lities be fo eminently poífeífed. The fweet hopes his merit fometimes in fu fed into
into my bofom¿ came accompanied with an equal number of fearsj yet could not my heart forbear to cheriíh them. The revolving feafon tinged this fweet retreat with every variety of verdure; the waves of the Thames were more tranflucent then ever; all nature awak¬ ened once more to perfection, when the Prince of Wales took up his abode in the adjacent palace.-^This news light¬ ened the foft red of my daughter's cheek, and even faintly coloured my wan one.— Not daring to exprefs to her the eager defire I felt to fee the Prince, and not ac¬ cuftomed to venture out without her, day after day elapfed in anxious expecta¬ tion. My gentle Mary, with a delicacy from which I drew the moft happy pre- fages, now always chofe to go abroad either fo early or fo late that it was almoft imponible we íhould ever meet the Prince, and the veil ihe ufually wore was clofed with fo much care as to enfure her the happinefs of being overlooked, even if fortune threw him in our way. Vol. III. <i. Never-
Neverthelefs, I took nqtice that the ar¬ rival of the Royal Henry ftrangely filled up the void in our lives.—What he would do, or what he would not do, conftantly regulated our motions, and employed my daughter's thoughts even more than my own. His tafte afforded us a variety of indulgences of which he knew not we were partakers.—Sometimes moon-light concerts, or magnificent fireworks; at others, parties on the Thames ; where the Prince ftill took pleafure in beholding a variety of little veifels, built and orna¬ mented for the amufement of his early years, and which were manned by chil¬ dren,—They were often fo near, we fan¬ cied we heard the voice of Henry, when both mother and daughter would give way to the fame impulfe, and haftily re¬ tire. The fummer might have elapfed in this manner, had not chance been more favorable to our wiihes, than we could re¬ folve to be. We were returning home one morning in an ill-contriyed carriage, newly in¬ vented
vented for airings, the inconvenience of which I bore patiently, from not being able to walk or ride on horfeback for any length of time fince my memorable fever.—The fervant who drove ftopt as ufual at the brow of the inchanting hill, that we might enjoy for a few minutes its beau¬ ties, when the found of horns approach¬ ing near informed us the Prince of Wales was returning from hunting, which at once ftartled the horfes and ourfelves. My Mary, actuated only by the impreffion of the moment, made an eager fign to the man to drive on ; and the horfes, already frightened, yielded impetuoufly to the flighteft touch of the rein, fly¬ ing forward with the moft dangerous ra¬ pidity. The clumfinefs of the carriage, and the badnefs of the road, threatened us every moment with being overturned —for me there was no efcape, but could my daughter be prevailed on to leap out, I was fenfible íhe would be fafe. Far from obeying my intreaties, or even commands, ihe threw her arms around Q^2 me,
me, and protefted it was for me alone ihe feared. The carriage funk into a deep rut at laft, and we were thrown out at a fmall diftance, with a violence that al¬ moft deprived me of my fenfes :—my darling Mary had wholly loft hers. I perceived the train of Henry approach¬ ing, but the favorite wiíh of feeing him was forgotten in that of recovering her.' I was prefently environed by the hunters without regarding them, till their extreme folicitude obliged me to raife my eyes from the lifelefs face of my daughter in acknowledgment. I per¬ ceived with a furprize even that mo¬ ment could not conques that on either hand ftood a young man, adorned with the order of the garter, and fo diftin- guifhingiy handfome, that I knew not which was the Prince of Wales, but turned from the one to the other with an air of wildnefs and ftupor.^My looks, however, made little impreffion on the ftrangers, their whole attention being fixed on the inanimate form of my daugh¬ ter.—
ter. —In truth, fortune had contrived to ihew her to the utmoft advantage. I had thrown up her veil to give her air, and bared her beautiful hands and arms, poliíhed and white as Parian marble ; the wild rings of her auburn hair played on her youthful face as the yellow leaves of Autumn curl over a later peach; whilft every feature, formed with a truth which might bear the niceft examination, perhaps only appeared more exquifitely regular from the abfence of exprefiion ; and even her figure and attitude (leaning on her mother's knees) prefented a perfect mo¬ del for a fculptor. The affiduities of the ftrangers, together with my own, at length recalled her fcattered fenfes. ------ She opened thofe eyes fo dear to me, and fixing them on the two ftran¬ gers, a rofy fuffufion alone proved ihe faw them, with fuch quicknefs did lhe turn toward her mother ; when, be¬ holding me to appearance unhurt, ihe lifted her foul to Heaven in a lock or gratitude, and throwing her arms round QL3 щ
my neck, relieved her overcharged heart by weeping on my bofom. "An an¬ gel in foul as well as form !" exclaimed one of the ftrangers; " aflure me, madam," continued he, " that this terror is the only ill confequence of my fudden approach, or I know not how I ihall forgive it to my¬ felf." This addrefs afcertaining the Prince of Wales, he became thè fole object of my attention.---------Ah, where ihall I find words to endear to you, Ma¬ dam, the royal youth my heart at once opened to adopt ? Henry was yet but in the dawn of manhood, neverthelefs his height was majeftic, and his figure finifhed. The beauty of his features was their leaft charm—virtue herfelf feemed to fublime every happy lineament, and fpare beholders the trouble-of developing his character by conveying ¡t in a glance. His manly voice united the firmnefs of his own fex with the fenfibility of ours, A confufion of fad remembrances were at once prefented with him to my mind ; and the admiration be excited was
was ftrangely blended with regret.—I forgot that he had addreifed me, and con¬ tinued to contemplate him in filence 4 ever and anon turning my ftreaming eyes wildly from him to Heayen, even then, my ¿dating heart bids me add, fcarce changing the object. The amiable Hen¬ ry, in whofe nature fympathy was the prevailing fentiment, touched with я conduct fo myfterious, almoft forgot my daughter in turn, fo wholly was he en¬ grolfed by me.—Informed of my un¬ fortunate lamenefs by my attempting t© rife, he immediately concluded it to be the confequence of the recent accident, and fcarce was fatisfied by my affuran¬ ces of the contrary. Oh! as my eyes furveyed the fuperior lbul, living, irradi*- ated in the bright orbs of his, how did they ftream at remembering that, had his father been born to -half his virtues, 1 might now have been cheriihed by af¬ fection—dignified by rank-^unwiclowed —unbroken—a ftranger yet to forrow 3 —My mother too.— Moft unhappy of parents as well as fovereigns I I had a 0^4 tear
tear for thee at this interefting mo¬ ment. The refpečt due to ftrangers induced the Prince to conceal the curiofity my conduct could not fail to excite, but hav¬ ing informed himfelf from the attendants of my title, he addreifed me by it, and infilled on conducting me home. I now underftood the nobleman who had divid¬ ed my firft looks with the Prince to be the Vifcount Rochefter : that contempt¬ ible favorite of the king, celebrated only for his beauty.—The vifible coldnefs of my air checked a forward infolence I obferved in him, and obliged him to quit us on our arriving at home. With what fecret tranfport did my foul welcome a Stuart worthy that name, glo¬ rious for fo many ages !—The Prince feemed delighted with his new acquaint¬ ances. ------The foft referve of my daugh¬ ter's air------the deepening rofes of her cheek, and the low accent of her har¬ monious voice, when politenefs obliged her to anfwer the Prince, whofe ani¬ mated eyes reduced hers often to feek the ground.
»round, ' prefented to my elated heart every fymptom of that paflion which alone endears the fufferings it occafions, A flow of happy fpirits new to my daughter, almoft forgotten by myfelf, gave chear- fulnefs to the hour which Henry faw elapfe with regret. On this chance introduction was grounded an acquaintance a few days ripened into intimacy.—Led to diftin- guilh the Prince alike by his own merit, and the ties of blood, which fecretly allied me to him, it was with the ten¬ dereit fatisfaction I beheld him cheriíh the inclination he had already conceived for my daughter : yet the dignity of his mind forbidding him to form an en¬ gagement he knew not how to fulfill, it was through me alone he addreifed himfelf to her. Convinced it was in my power to prove her entitled even to fuch a lover, I fuffered fate to take its courfe, attending only to prudence. Confcious that Henry had hitherto moved in a very confined circle^ I was Доге that to extend it muft draw much ob- fervation
fervation on thofe he favored. To guard therefore againft the malice of furmife, I fixed on the hour of the Prince's vifit for my daughter to ride out j and always received him alone. His attendants, who faw her regularly depart, were at a lofs to imagine what could attach their royal matter to the infirm widow of Lord Lei¬ cefter. The charm was in truth fimply affection.—The amiable Henry had early been accuftomed to every kind of homage but that of the heart, and had too much fenfibility not to feel the want he knew not how to mpply. Deeply fufceptible of the true regard I had conceived for him, impreifed at once by my mind, my manners, and my mein, with the idea of myftery, and the defire of obtaining my confidence, it was only by his own candour he fought to gain upon mine. Slowly and by degrees he deigned to re- pofe with me thofe regrets and anxieties from which the utmoft indulgence of na¬ ture and fortune cannot exempt a fingle individual. He often lamented the dangerous diftinčtion of being the firft- born
born of his father's children, fince it coft him every other.—Separated almoft in infancy from his parents-^—^furrounded with mercenary fycophants, who fought to make their court to the reigning King by a partial reprefentation or mifconftruc- tion of his actions, he had fhot up un¬ loved, uncheriihed, and feen thofe ten^ der affections he was born to Ihare, gra¬ dually centre in that fon from whom his parents had nothing to fear. ■ Nor were there wanting infiduous flatterers e- qually ready to undermine his filial duty, by pointing out the weakneflfes of his fa¬ ther, even where they were moft likely to wound him. He had puniihed himfelf, he added, for yielding to thefe impref¬ fions by an abfolute obedience to his au¬ thority, but it was with grief he remem¬ bered that was now the only tye between them,—Nor would I wonder, he conti¬ nued, it ihould be fo, if I confidered that, bom as he was to imperial power, with an ardent paflion for glory, he had hi τ therto been íhut up in the narrow fphere of his own court, languifliing away the í flower
flower of his youth without a choice, a friend, or a purfuit :—Till the infamous Carr íhould deign to decide what foreign Prince's bribe he would condefcend to accept, and to what bigoted Papift he ihould facrifice the fon of his mafter. While the admired Prince of Wales, the Idol of the People, the Heir of Em¬ pire, the endued of Heaven, thus con¬ fided to me the fimple and rational griefs which clouded a fortune fo brilliant, could I fail to meditate on the. equality of pro¬ vidence ?—Which gracioufly allots even to the loweft fituation, fome portion of hap¬ pinefs, and depreffes the higheft with the fad fenfe of misfortune. It is the fatal peculiarity of youth to throw the ftrongeft light on every fecret grief, and wafte away under an oppreffion imagination often doubles. To cure this propenfity is therefore the province of experience. I fought to imbue the Prince*s mind with the only principle mine had derived from all my fufferings. —That the nobleft ufe we can make of under
underftanding is to convert it into hap- pinefs ; and that every talent which docs not conduce to that great end, ought rather to be confidered as a burthen than a bleffing to the poíTeflbr. —That the mind, like the eye, ever magnifies the object of fear or averfion, which often, on a ftrict examination, excites no other fentiment than contempt.—In fine, that he was not at liberty to ihew any other fenfe of his father's errors, than by prefenting a faultlefs example in his own life; and that, if he would have it without blemiih, he muft divert his tafte from channels where it would meet with oppofition, and turn it into thofe through which it might flow freely.—That the culti¬ vation of the fciences would at once fill up that void in his life ever fo painful at his years, and attach to his welfare all who loved them : a body whofe in¬ fluence was never known unlefs oppo¬ fition called forth the powers of elo¬ quence. The
The Prince had too much judgment not to fee the utility of this council, and too much generofity not to value its can- dour: neverthelefs, it was a language yet new to him^-b-Ingenuity had been exhaufted to teach him to govern others, but to fubdue himfelf was a leifon none had ventured to inculcate. How did Ì lament that a foul fo ductile had in childhood been injudicioufly delivered up to its own guidance, and fuffered every day to imbibe fome new prejudice, def- tined perhaps to mark the character through life ; and which an upright and íkilful monitor might fo eafily have era¬ dicated ! The Prince could not be infenfible to the maternal caution which induced me to fend my daughter abroad whenever he honored me with a vifit, yet the obferva- tion did not for fome time appear to influ¬ ence his conduct.—Satisfied with merely beholding her as he entered or departed, the defire of opening his heart to me feemed to fuperfede every other impref¬ fion»
don. Neverthelefs* long reveries would follow the moft accidental meeting, and long paufes intervene in the moft inter* efling converfation j rendering it fuiH- ciently obvious, that his mind labored with fome project, hitherto fuppreffed either by pride or prudence. Perhaps I ihould ever have wanted courage to open my lips on fo delicate an occafion, had not my daughter com·» plained to me that ihe was now become the univerfal object of attention; and that the fuit who attended her were often rudely furrounded, and fometimes inter-r rogated by fuch of the Prince's court as had not benefited by this example.— By going abroad unexpectedly with her, I found that lhe was not offended without reafon, and, fenfible of my imprudence in thus rifquing her fafety, I came to the refolution rather to abridge myfelf of the pleafure of the Prince's fociety, than purchafe it by endangering my daughter. ---------1 defired her to retire for awhile when Henry ihould vifit me
me next, and ere he could account for the fingularity of finding her at home, entered into the delicate explanation. With an acknowledged attachment to him, that I bore my child alone could have over-ruled, I fubmitted it to him¬ felf, whether I could too cautioufly guard againft a cenfure or infult ihe had no na¬ tural protector to refent.—The generous Henry paufed for a few moments with ir- refolution, when fuddenly collecting cou¬ rage he broke filence.— cc Will Lady Leicefter pardon," faid he, " thofe obtru- five vifits ihe has fubmitted to with fo much complacency ?—Will Ihe deign to become the confidant of the only in¬ cident in my life I have hid from her— will ihe liften with indulgence ?"—He paufed a moment, but, ere I could refolve how to anfwer, purfued the dif- courfe --------- cc Accuftomed even from childhood to the enfnaring glances of the light and the lovely—led to imagine myfelf older than my years by the con¬ tinual propofals for marrying me that
have conftantly fucceeded each other, it is not wonderful that a heart naturally fufceptible ihould mature before its time. Among the many beautiful girls, who have already fought to attract me, I foon diítinguiíhed one, by whom my peace, my honor, my innocence became en¬ dangered : perhaps they had been loft, had I not found her felfiih and^ambitious. I need hardly inform you that this feducing fair one is the Countefs of Eifex !—Vain of her influence over me, ihe took plea¬ fure in pubi iihing it, and taught me early to blufh for my choice ; but I could not refolve to do fo continually. I formed the bold refolution of contending with my own heart, and retired hither to reco¬ ver it, or die. Lady Effex, enraged and humbled at this conduct, confirmed me in it, by attaching herfelf to Vifcount Ro¬ chefter: thus rendering it fufficiently ob¬ vious fhe had never loved me.— Befőtted with her beauty, that weak favorite is go¬ verned by her caprices, and him I was born ţo obey yields to thofe of Rochefter. Al- Vol. III. R though
though í do nôt immediately perceive how Lady Eífex means to effect her revenge, I am convinced it is only maturing,- and daily expect a blow, from which I know not how to guard myfelf. Under thefe circumftances how can I venture to in¬ volve your fate with mine ?—How can I afk you, to permit me to offer to your lovely daughter the heart which ever ho¬ vers near her ?—Speak Madam—my hap¬ pinefs is in your hands—dare you rifque your own to promote it ?" While I li¬ ftened to this fenfible, this frank declara¬ tion of the Prince's error, and his attach¬ ment, my fond heart found its firft wiíh accompliíhed, and adopted at once the royal youth ; folemnly vowing to ihare, without repining, every evil that might follow an alliance fo dear : nor did I fail fecretly to exult in my Mary's hereditary right even to this diftinčtion. To cement the confidence between us, and convince the Prince his prefent choice was judicious, I refolved to confide to him the fecret fo long, fo painfully prefer ved ; an<¿
and related my whole hiftory. As I re* traced its affecting incidents, I knew them to be fo only by his eager, his generous fympathy; fo wholly was my own foul engrolfed by the happy profpečt he had opened before it. The Prince of Wales acknowledged with joy the rel ation (hip I claimed ; to confirm all I had advanced, I prefented to him the long-faved teftimonials, which he perufed with filent reverence : then fix¬ ing his eyes, itili imprefíed with that ele¬ vated fentiment, on mine, he gave ut¬ terance to the dictates of his heart.— <c Who could fuppofe," exclaimed he, tf a fortitude fo unexampled could poíTibly be combined with a frame delicate even to fragility !—-May the misfortunes you have indelibly impreifed on my memory, my more than mother, be the laft of your life—May that being who directed my foul to cheriíh the admiration and eftcem infpired by your lovely daughter, and matchlefs felf, fuffer the youth before you to fupply to your heart, all it ought ta have inherited*—all it unhappily has R 2 loft.
loft. Dear will be the moment when to the form of your angel mother my autho¬ rity íhall add the name, and that moment will hereafter, oh ! moft honoured of wo¬ men, infallibly be mine.** While I liftened to predictions fo flat¬ tering, I. almoft believed them accom¬ pliíhed. In thy unblown youth, oh, royal Henry, was comprized every pro¬ mife that could dilate or fill the heart: mine centred at once in thee, and my daughter : finding, in the mere hope of fo glorious a union, a total fufpenfion from fuffering and forrow I had now no referves with the Prince, and leading in my bluihing Mary pre¬ fented her to her royal coufin; who gracefully offered up his unblemifhed foul on the hand he bowed over. So pure a tranfport took pofleflion of mine as obliterated every other impreffion. í matched the united hands fo dear, fo be¬ loved, and prefling them to my bofom, fickened with very extafy, and withdrew to recover myfelf.—Wandering alone by the
the fide of the Thames, í raifed my full eyes to heaven; and called the happy fpirits of my mother* fifter, and Lord Leicefter, to fympathize with me in an event which promifed to end the perfe¬ ctions of my family, by thus bleíTedíy uniting the laft fprung branches of it. A ferenity of the fublimeft nature fucceeded the fweet trouble of my fpirits, and ena¬ bled me to rejoin the youthful lovers with the dignity due to my own character. The ûtuation in which we ftood en¬ deared us itili more to the Prince, by perpetually reminding him how intimately our welfare was connected with his own. Every hour feemed to unite us more and more to each other. Henry fpoke to me with the freedom of a fon ; conjuring me not to take any ftep that might create the leaft fufpicion of my birth, or the fecret tye formed between us, till he had well weighed every confequence that might enfue : and, to elude the watchful fpies, with whom we were alike furrounded, he propofed paiTing in the evening through his garden to ours, if I would deign for R 3 a while
a while to allow him thus to reach the faloon. Our fituation was too delicate not to require the ftricteft caution, yet as Ï could difcover no mode of receiving the Prince, which was not equally que¬ stionable, and more dangerous, I ac- tjuifced in his propofal as well as that he fhould render one of his gentle¬ men (Sir David Murray) a confidant of this intimacy, though not of its nature, or extent. An incident fo important engrofling my every thought, my heart returned once more eagerly into the world. It had now an intereft in fully underftanding the real characters of the King, the Queen, Vifcount Rochefter, and every indivi¬ dual likely or intitled to interfere at this interefting crifis—I examined, confi¬ dered, and weighed every thing. I foon difcovered that the whole royal family were at variance ! That the imperious Queen, unable to wreft her hufband from his fa¬ vorites, or her fon from his duties, fcorned the firft, and neglected the Jatter: confining herfelf wholly to a court
court formed of her own.creatures, who affifted her to fpoil her younger fon ; whom ihe had almoft eftranged from his brother. Her beautiful daughter, who united in her own perfon the graces of Mary with the fpirit of Elizabeth, alone allured to the court of the Queen the few perfons of merit it afforded. Henry was often lavifh in the praifes of his fifter, and, as fhe was the only relation he ever voluntarily fpoke of, I naturally conclud¬ ed ftie was the only one intitled by fu¬ perior qualities to that diftinction, King James, who had mounted the throne under happier aufpices than almoft any preceding foyereign of England, had al¬ ready lived long enough to lofe the affec¬ tions of his people. By turns a pedant and a buffoon, his folemnity was even more difgufting than his levity. Go¬ verned by a predilection of the moft ab- furd and fingular nature, to a beautiful favorite he always delivered up the reins of empire ; readily fubmitting to a íhame¬ ful fubjeótion in all important points, provided he might enjoy a ridiculous fu¬ ll 4 premacy
premacy in his hours of indulgence and retirement. From fuch a weak and in- confiftent King, and his profligate Mi¬ nifters, the wife, the fcentific, and the good, had gradually retreated j and, in neglect and filence, contemplated from far the growth of that exemplary Prince, who promifed to retrieve the fame of his anceftors, and the glory of the kingdom he was born to reign over. A youth of eighteen capable of uniting the unble¬ mifhed virtues of that age, with the dis¬ cernment of a maturer one, was a phæ- nomenon, and of courfe either adored or detefted—While the body of the king¬ dom regarded him only with the firn fentiment, the worthlefs favorites of his father were actuated folely by the latter. To marry and efcape the plans of Ro¬ chefter was the intereft of Henry ; and to marry without his father's knowledge his unwilling choice.—Yet highly fenfible of the flavery impofed by his rank, he had refi fled every temptation from beau¬ ties of an inferior one :—but, when ap¬ prized of my ftory, he faw, or fancied he faw,
faw, in my daughter, a wife alloted him by heaven—one to whom no juft objection could poflibly be made, one born to give happinefs to his heart, and honor to his name. Nor could he doubt, even if his father fhut his eyes againft the truth, but that he íhould be able to convince the people of my birth, when the publica¬ tion of the marriage ihould give my ftory the whole weight of his credence. Succefs, in his judgment, depended fole¬ ly on the concealment of the purpofed union till it could be accompliíhed ; for, ; if the intention tranfpired ere the event, he was fatisfied the moft defperate efforts would be made to wreft us from him. Yet as at this very period a public treaty was negociating with a foreign Prince, he could not form a tye of fuch import¬ ance without giving his father juft caufe of offence, the nation at large a contempt for his character, and the diftant Sove¬ reign thus infulted a mortal difguft. We therefore agreed to wait till this Minifte- rial project like many others fliould difap- point itfelf, and feize that moment to celebrate
celebrate and publiíh a marriage, which was to end all our fears, and .complete all pur hopes. During this interval I obferved with pain that the extreme timidity of my daughter's character prevailed over the enthufiafm incident to her years ; and damoed with vague apprehenfions thofe moments love and hope might have made {ό happy. I faw this little feminine weak¬ nefs with extreme uneafinefs. The Prince of Wales was diítinguiíhed by a manly firmnefs, which ever wifely weighed the approaching trial, then calmly dared it. For a foul fo noble, I defired to find a faultlefs bride ; and looking fearfully into the future, I fometimes thought my Ma- rv's timid heart would one dav throb without caufe againft that of a fovereign oppreífed with innumerable cares, he perhaps fought to lofe the remembrance t)f in her fociety. Neverthelefs, I did not perceive my tender admonitions on this fubječt had any other confequence than that of inducing my (laughter to bury in her bofom thofe fentiments and emo¬ tions,
tions, I had fo many years delighted to participate. It was now autumn !------The time of the King's periodical progreffes. ------The Prince could not avoid following his father, but he lingered in his duty ; and having ftaid a day too long with us, ha¬ ftened to overtake the King, whom h e was to feaft at Woodftock. He wrote to me from thence, complaining of fatigue and laffitude ; but, with his ufual atten¬ tion, informed me he was in treaty for Kenilworth Caftle; where he flattered himfelf I ihould again fee golden days like thofe I ftill remembered with fo much pleafure. Alas, thofe he had irradiated were quickly haftening to a period ! At the firft vifit he paid me on his return, my foul was ftruck with a very apparent alteration in his perfonj which was grown thin and wan beyond conception, confidering the fhortnefs of the time. Not all the joy he expreffed at our meeting could fatisfy me he was ei¬ ther well or happy ; but, obferving he evaded my queftions, and fearful of alarm* ing
ing him without reafon, I ftrove to fup- prefs that maternal anxiety all his aíľu- fances of health and cheerfulnefs could not difpel. I perceived my daughter was impreifed with the fame idea, for, though íhe fpoke not, it was vifible to me that ihe wept greatly when alone. The evenings were now too íhort and damp for me to allow the evening vifits of the Prince; and I rather chofe to rifque every danger by receiving him openly, than fubječt him to any by an ill-judged caution. ——Adas, thefe cares were vain.------The rapid decay of the royal Henry's health became vifible even to indifferent fpectators. An affecting languor was the only exprefíion of thofe fine eyes once fo full of fire^ and út youthful cheeks every following day ihould have tinged with a deeper bloom, grew more and more wan and hollow- He could no longer conceal his illnefs. Alas, it pierced me to the foul ! I was miferable at remembering a charge fo precious, as his welfare, ihould be com¬ mitted to fervants of whatever denomi¬ nation
nation.—No mother—-no fifter—rduties indifpenfible in every other rank of life, were it feems incompatible with royalty. Oh, Henry !—dear amiable youth ! even yet am I tempted to accufe myfelf for not having better deferved the tender ap^ pellation thy filial reverence fo often be¬ llowed on me, by daring every thing for thy fake ! Slaves to imperious cuftom, our actions are too often regulated by that idle multitude, whofe moft lavifh ap- plaufes would but ill confole us for one fingle reproach from that unerring mo¬ nitor, our own confcience. Either not convinced this fecret malady was undermining his conftitution, or in¬ different to the event, the Prince ftill con¬ tinued in the purfuit of his ufual athletic exercifes and habits, till his ftrength was wholly unequal to them. í once more perfuaded him to call in medical aififtance, and he promifed to attend to himfelf as foon as his fifter and the elector ihould depart.—Obliged to appear at the celebration of their marriage in London, he came to pay us a parting vi-
fit. Impreifed, perhaps, with the idea ¡t would be the laft, he threw himfelf into my arms, and fhed there the firft tears 1 had ever feen fall from his eyes.—Mine readily overflowed—a grief too deep for utterance preifed upon my foul, and Henry recovered ere I could. His heart miffed my daughter, who was gone abroad.—He fighed, funk into a little reverie, and breaking it, with a faint fmile, faid, " he ought rather to congra^ túlate himfelf on her abfence." He fighed again, and, after another paufe, refumed his difcourfe in a low and broken voice.— <c Mourn not thus, my mother (for I will ftill give you a title you may juftly claim from her who bore me ; fince who ever loved me as you have done ?) I have youth in my favor, and this oppreflive malady may not be mortal : for your fake alone do I wiih it to be otherwife, believe me.—Already weary, difgufted with this World, I could retreat from it almoft without a pang, did I not know my lofs would be to you an irremediable calamity, Yet, who íhall judge of the difpenfations
of the Almighty ?—I might fulfil all your wiihes without feeing you happy— * I might obtain all my own without ceafing to be wretched. Recai this often tó your memory, whatever follows our part¬ ing; and remember your name will be ever on thefe lips while they have power to utter a found.—For the adored of my foul—but fhe is furely become a part of it ; and if not permitted to poifefs het* in this world, I will expect her in a bet¬ ter."—Perceiving his dim eye was fixed on a picture of my daughter which hung at my bofom, I prefented it to him.------- (< And do you too, beloved Henry/' re¬ turned I, in a broken voice, " remember that the mother who gives you this, would have comprized in the original every grace, every virtue, to be found through human nature : and having done fo, would ftill have thought her honored in your choice.—Ah ! royal youth ! refign not a heart fo noble to vapouriih depref- fion ?—Your life, your happinefs, are not your own merely—a nation are born to pray for the former, to crown you with 2 the
the latter.—For myfelf—upon the fweet hope of matching my daughter with you, of iharing the foft tranfports of mutual virtue and affection, I have learnt to live, but furely I could never furvive its ex¬ tinction."—My full foul allowed not of another fyllable. The Prince fixed his fuftufed eyes on mine, with a myfterious melancholy, almoft amounting to defpair; and touching with his lips thofe hands his trembling ones ftill grafped, ruihed pre¬ cipitately into the court yard. The found of his voice drew me towards the window ------the graceful youth made me a laft obeifance and galloped away ; while my partial eye purfued him till beyond its reach, and even then my ear feemed to diftinguifti the feet of his horfe. With his ufual kind confidertion, Henry wrote to me the next day, that he found himfelf better ; and, in the pleafure of feeing his fifter happy, felt reconciled to the impolitic match made for her.— He even affifted at the various feftivals with which the nuptials of the royal Eli¬ zabeth were honored ; but fcarce were ί they
they over, when his health and fpirits failed at once, and the faculty were called in to his aid. A malady which had been fo long engrafting itfelf on his conftitu¬ tion left but little hope of his life ;— I had ceafed to entertain any : yet, far from fupporting the idea of loofing him with fortitude, my foul mourned as if it then had firft known forrow. Not daring to give free vent to my appre¬ henfions in the prefence of my daughter, I ftrove with cold and watery fmiles to flatter thofe hopes in her heart my own had long rejected, and faw with vain regret, the deep exceifes of a fenfibility I had laboured to excite and ftrengthen. What days, what nights of iadnefsand fufpenfe were ours, while the unfortunate Henry was languifhing away every vital power ere yet they had reached maturity 1 —Frequently delirious, our names ef¬ caped unconfcioufiy from thofe lips, which at his lucid intervals, uttered only fighs and groans. Murray, his beloved at¬ tendant, gave us conftant information of the progrefs of his fever; nor did the Vol. III. S amiable
amiable Henry fail at intervals to charge him with tender remembrances. Sir Da¬ vid at length acquainted me that, as the im- paffioned delirium of the Prince pointed ever toward us, the King had been ap¬ prized of it;—that he had minutely queftioned his fon's moft favored at¬ tendants, and among them himfelf, on the origin, progrefs, and ftrength, of an attachment thus fuddenly and ftrangely brought to light, deeply ruminating on all he heard. cf I could not feel ac¬ quitted to myfelf, madam," concluded the faithful Murray, fC were I to conceal diis, nor dare I add a furmife on fo delicate an occafion. " " Ah, of what importance to us are all the late inquiries, the vague conjectures of James!" cried I, folding my daughter to my bofom, " if heaven deprives us of his ineftimable fon, neither his love or his hatred can greatly affect us.—Beloved Mary—dear inheritor of misfortune !— widowed ere yet thou art a wife, a long obfcurity, a folitary youth is all thy por¬ tion—a forrow which can never end thy ι mother's
mother's—But why íhould I hefitate to avow myfelf?-—Wherefore ihould I not publifh claims which even tyranny can not cancel ; but perhaps it will not dif¬ pute ? The timid, abject fpirit of James knows not how to contend with one firm in virtue—immutable in truth.—Ah, had I done fo long fince, I might at this moment, dear Henry, have hovered near thy couch, and foftennd the anguiih no mortal can prevent!—Perhaps the King already furmifes the fact—let him de¬ mand it." Sir David Murray's next letter breathed the veiy fpirit of defpair.--------- cc Prepare yourfelf, madam, faid he, for the worft; perhaps, ere this reaches you, England will have loft its deareft hope, the royal Henry's friends their only one. The moft defperate efforts of art have failed, and exhaufted reafon often now revifits with a languid ray the noble heart fhe is fo foon to quit for ever. The Prince has juft ordered me to commit to the flames every letter and paper in which S 2 you
you are mentiond: — a fure proof that he has given himfelf up.—Alas, he knows not how often names fo dear have efcaped him ; he has called for you, madam, and your angelic daughter, almoft the whole night, but frequently recollect¬ ing himfelf, has waved his feeble hand, and fighed out no -no------no."------ Three hours after, another exprefs ar¬ rived.------ (C Pardon, madam, the hafte and incoherency of fcrawls penned at fo trying a moment.—Alas, the moft fan- guine of us has now ceafed to hope.— Our royal matter's fpeech entirely fails him—his laft effort was haftily and re¬ peatedly to call me—I new to his bedfide; but, though my every fenfe feemed to re¬ folve into ear, I found it impofiible to underftand him—either I widely erred or he named France ; perhaps I commit a fécond error in fuppofing he referred to you, madam, but I voluntarily rifque every thing to fulfil the parting wiih of a mafter fo adored. The King, the phy- ficians, all have taken a along leave of the
the almoft beatified Prince ; and there is nothing left for thofe who love him beft to wiih, but that his pure fpirit may pafs away in peace." The agony and ftupor this affecting billet occafìoned, were hardly abated when another arrived.------" It is all over, ma¬ dam," concluded the worthy Murray, ' c raife your ftreaming eyes to heaven ; it is there alone you can now look for the incomparable Prince of Wales.— Fatigue and anguiih difable me from fay¬ ing more." It was not till the awful moment which reftored the unfullied foul of Henry to its omnifcient Creator, that I had dared to breathe a wiih of which he was not the object, or allowed my thoughts to pafs beyond himfelf.—That exquifite fenfibi- lity which lives through all dear to us, had made me feverely fuffer with him, and confecjuently pray for that releafe which alone feemed likely to give him eafe, nor did I recollect till he was gone forever, the void his lofs would leave in S 3 my
my hopes.—The tremendous calm, by which death is ever followed, now took its turn.—Bereft of a fupport on which 1 had long unconfcioufiy refted, I funk into a defol ation which made me almoft wiíh to follow the lamented Prince.— It is at thefe intervals, madam, we be¬ come moft truly fenfible of all the im¬ perfections of our nature.—How often had I flattered my own erring heart with the vain belief it had acquired ftrength, purity, and virtue, from its various tri¬ als ! alas, what but pride, vanity, and ambition, ftill throbbed unalterably there ! time had only altered the object, not the pafiion, and centred them all in my daughter. We íhut ourfelves entirely up, and deep¬ ly joined in the general mourning. The fad pleafure of knowing him we bewail¬ ed, univerfally lamented, was yet ours. I perufed, I appropriated, with a mother's fondnefs, the lavifn eulogies, all feds, all parties, all poets, graced the memo¬ ry of the Prince with :— iţ was the only mi-
mitigation my grief could know.—A confiderable time had elapfed without our hearing any thing from Murray, in con¬ firmation of his conjecture concerning Henry's laft wiih, and the imperfect ac¬ cents which lingered on his dying lips.— But though I could not refolve to be¬ come a guiltlefs fugitive even in com¬ pliance with Prince Henry's will, I had had no other motive for remaining in England than to ihew I was not driven out of it. I now determined to quit a country which had been the grave of a hope fo dear, and found my daughter en¬ tirely of my mind. In gratitude for the unwearied attention of Sir David Murray, I informed him Cf of my intention to re¬ tire into Flanders, not doubting but that the Hollanders would afford an honor¬ able afylum to the widow and orphan of Lord Leicefter.—I befought him to ac¬ cept a ring of confiderable value in token of my deep fenfe of the generous attach¬ ment he had ihewn alike to myfelf, and that incomparable Prince whofe lofs was çver prefent to my mind ; and requefted S 4 as
ns a laft proof of his regard, the reftoration of that picture of my daughter I had given to the royal Henry at our memorable parting." The anfwer of Murray ftrangely ftartled and alarmed me.------- <f Your intention of quitting England, madam," faid he, "re¬ lieves my mind from extreme anxiety;— time and circumftances have united to convince me I did not mifunderftand the laft imperfect accents of my much-loved mafter.— Lofe not a moment in haften¬ ing to the afylum you have fixed on.— The picture, madam, is, I fear, irre¬ trievably gone—I cannot by either bribes or intreaties procure any tidings of it.— fower, alas, I now have not !—If ever it comes to my hands, rely on its being re¬ ftored by him who will ever devoutly pray for your happinefs." This inexplicable letter roufed every dormant faculty.—Wherefore ihould my retiring abroad relieve the mind of a perfon unconnected with me from ex¬ treme anxiety ? -------Why íhould he urge thus my departure ? As it was rather
pride than prudence which induced me to feek a country where I might fearlefsly aifert my every right, that project was now rejected from the very motive which firft dictated it.—A myftery my nature ever difdained. Refolved to comprehend all úit motives on which Murray wiihed me to act, I ordered every thing to be re¬ placed, and fat down once more quietly at home ; refolved to brave the ftorm, if indeed there was any gathering, rather than afcertain my fafety by a difgraceful flight. I once more wrote to Sir David, acquainting him with my prefent con¬ duct, and its reafons, infifting on being fully informed of thofe which actuated him to offer me advice fo fingular and myfterious.—How infinitely was my im¬ patience, curiofity, and difdain, heighten¬ ed by his anfwer !-------" I hear with ad¬ miration, madam, a determination which from a perfect knowledge of your cha¬ racter, I ought, perhaps, to have fore- feen ; neverthelefs, my fentiments are not altered, nor lefs urged could I divulge the reafons
reafons on which they are grounded : but decorum and delicacy give way to your commands, and the occafion. Never¬ thelefs, I find it impoffible to commit them to paper.—Dare you give me ad- mifiion at midnight?—I fhall be near your gate upon the chance, but be wary in the choice of my conductor, as per¬ haps my life, nay, even your own, de¬ pends upon its being fuppofed you never had any private correfpondence or com¬ munication with me." How did my nature take fire at this incomprehenfible letter !—Me to Hoop to fecrefy !—to be expofed to fhame !—The unknown danger, with which he reprefented me to be environed, appeared wholly indifferent; fo exquifitely fenfible was my foul of the imputation oí diihonor.—At times I refolved to íhut out Murray, and leave the brooding mif¬ chief to difclofe itfelf by its effects; but love for my daughter controling- the ftrong fpirit of indignation infeparablc from innocence, I yielded to the fuggei- tiojii
tions of prudence, and prepared to admit him.—Inured to every other fpecies of fuffering, I knew not how to blufh before any human being. My perplexed and agitated mind paffed through the infinitude of poflibilities v/ithout fixing upon one.—At times 1 imagined all the caution of the royal Henry had been infufficient, and that the King, by means of forne loft or fe¬ creted letter, had been fully apprized of his fon's attachment to us, and the hopes that were grounded upon it ; though even then, I knew not why my life ihould be in the queftion ; ftill lefs could I ima¬ gine it endangered, had his difcoveries reached farther, and traced out the long buried fecret of my birth. Involved in bufy, vague, and alarming conjectures, I hardly knew how to wait with any patience for the fingular hour appointed to afcertain them. Senfible, by the deep effect this took on my own mind, that it muft dreadfully Ihock my daughter's, and ftill fiattering m v fe If
myfelf that this indiftinct danger might be the creation of adefponding temper in Henry's favorite, I refolved to wait the event of my midnight interview with him, ere I confided more to my Mary than lhe muft already have learnt from the change in my refolution refpecting quitting Eng¬ land.—But as to fee her was to explain all, (for how could I hope to veil emo¬ tions which burnt indignantly on my cheek ?) I fent her word that I was feized with a violent headach, which I would en¬ deavour to remedy by fleep ; and accompa¬ nied this meifage with a new book ihe had an eager defire to fee, and which I fincerely prayed might wholly occupy her attention at this interefting crifis. Oh, world ! how falfe, how erroneous are the feelings we imbibe from thee !— Nature ordained fhame the companion of guilt, but overbearing cuftom has broke that tye, and oftener bids her follow virtue. Scarce could I refolve to know my imputed crime, or look with complacency on the amiable man who had
had ventered to fuggeft the unforefeen danger.—It was the utmoft effort of my reafon to govern this unworthy im¬ pulfe. The eftimable Murray was fenfible of an equal conftraint, and, by the generous confufion with which he appeared before me, reftored my mind to its dignity and compofure. His mourning, and the tears which followed the name of his loft royal mafter, drew forth mine, and at once blended our feelings. Sir David, with infinite delicacy and addrefs, entered into the Prince of Wales's fingular illnefs, as well as the various opinions his death had given rife to :—but how did my foul freeze with horror to learn that there were many (and among them fome of his phyficians) who believed him poi¬ foned ! The killing grief fuch a fufpi¬ cion muft at a more tranquil moment have caufed, vanifhed, however, at once before the confufed and rapid fenfations his following difcourfe occafìoned. —Oh, let me paufe here a moment to adore the in-
indulgence of the Almighty, which alone could have enabled my intellects to fupport fo terrible a ihock as the report that it was from my hands he received the deadly prefent !—I looked at Murray a while in fpeechlefs aftonifhment !—Grief, anger, ihame, and horror, divided and tore me in pieces.—I fcarce heard his prayers and adjurations, but, pufhing him from my feet, fhut up every indignant fenfe in my fwelling heart, and only hoped it might burft with the deep convulfion. A confiderable time elapfed ere I was enough recovered to enquire into the origin of fo black and malicious a ca¬ lumny, î then conjured him to inform me who was fuppofed to be its diaboli¬ cal author.—To this he anfwered, that when the equivocal decifion of the fa¬ culty refpecting the caufe of the Prince's death firft reached the Queen, the vehe¬ mence of her grief, as well as that ot her temper, made her inftantly join with thofe who pronounced him poifoned.— This doubt was no fooner publiihed than i f
ir became general ; every domeftic of rhe Prince's houfehold had been by turns rhe object of fufpicion to his fellows, and Готе of them had been weak enough to afcertain their fafety by quitting the kino·- dom. The rumour was by this means corroborated and ftrengthened ; but, a? nothing tranfpired that could authorize я judicial enquiry, the King became fatif- fied that the melancholy cataftrophe of his youthful heir had been in the common courfe of nature ; when, all at once, by fome incomprehenfible means, the vague fufpicions of the multitude, which were far from extinguiihed, though wholly unfixed, revived with added force, and centred in me. It was nov/ generally believed that the Prince of Wales, in the laft vifit he paid me, had tafted fome dry preferves (a little refreihment of which he was extremely fond, though fortunately the diffraction of my mind at that period had prevented me from offer- ng him any) which moft likely were poifoned, as his laft illnefs rapidly in¬ creafed immediately after.—it was well- known
known that I had been the confiant object of his delirious reveries ; and every vague or myfterious exprefiion which had efcaped him at thofe intervals, had been remembered, traced, and applied, with diabolical ingenuity. The fingu¬ lar precaution of his feeing his own papers burnt had ferved only to perfuade the prejudiced multitude that the unfortu¬ nate Prince was unwilling to ftigmatize her who had deftroyed him. By fuch plaufible and bafe fuggeftions the eyes of an inflamed and afflicted nation had been led towards the folitary dwelling, where, unconfcious of danger, I remained buried in a grief the moft charitable imputed only to remorfe. Their wanted but little to incite the people to anticipate the ftroke of juftice, by tearing me to peices, when the King confirmed the general fufpicion by a renewed and more minute inquiry into the nature of his fon's vifits to me, their continuance, and defign : and no perfon being able to fatisfy his curiofity, he dropt harfh and ambiguous expreffi ods ; that feveral of his favorites had fince 3 ur S fd
tirged the propriety of bringing me to a public trial ; a meafure which had the whole weight of the Queen's intereft. Alarmed and uncertain how to proceed, Sir David had learned at this very junc¬ ture my intention of retiring into Hoi» land ; and, by fuppofing me pre-ac- quainted with the flanders of the pub¬ lic, had unwarily reduced himfelf to the painful neceffity of repeating them.— He concluded with hinting the prudence of abiding by my former defign of im¬ mediately quitting England, as in in¬ ftances where the prejudices of a na¬ tion infected even thofe individuals in¬ trufted with the execution of its laws, innocence iifelf was fcarce a protection : biafed judges might eafily miftake pre- fumptions for proofs, nor have candour enough to vindicate the honor which had thus been queftioned. While Sir David yet fpoke, a new world difplayed itfelf before me.—Ah ! how unlike the paradife pictured by my guiltlefs mind !—Thofe countenances in Vol. III. Τ which
which I yefterday faw only the living image of their Creator, now glared upon me like fo many fiends.—A horrible gulph feemed to open beneath my feet into which a thoufand hands fought at once to precipitate me, and my timid foul retreated in vain from the danger.—To live undiftinguifhed—to die unknown, were mortifications fufficiently grievous.— But the bare idea of being arraigned— dragged as a pre-judged criminal before a partial judge, had fomething in it fo tremendous, as made every other evil appear eafe. My blood flowed impetu¬ oufly through my frame, and my be¬ wildered judgment wanted ftrength to govern the torrent.—A malice fo bold, profound, and diabolical, could have only one author, but where to look for that one I knew not ; nor could I re¬ collect a human being I had injured, or a villain I had provoked.—Like a wretch awakened by aifaflins in the darknefs of midnight, I knew not but the hand raifed to ward the blow might bleed on the pre-
prefented dagger. In this terrible con¬ juncture I had only virtue to befriend me : though, alas, virtue herfelf half- withers before the blighting breath of ca¬ lumny ! While Sir David enforced the arguments he had already urged to in¬ duce me to quit the kingdom, my foul, by one of thofe violent exertions great occafions will fometimes produce, reco¬ vered all her powers.—Indignation fub¬ fided at once into fortitude, and anger into heroifm.— <f You have hitherto only feen me, SirjDavid," faid I,— cc it is now alone you can know me;— íhuddering with horror at the imputations you have ex¬ plained, I yet dare not retreat unlefs I can confute them—no, not even con¬ demnation could induce me to fly, and leave my honor behind me.—What \ ihall I blight the opening virtues of my child by expofing her with myfelf to un¬ merited cenfure ? The pride, the plea¬ fure, of unfullied virtue, was all for¬ tune permitted me to retain of the wealth and honors which once glittered before T 2 my
my youthful eyes—nor did I undervalue* the moft dear and facred of all poffeflions —alas, even that is now ravifhed from me, and one way alone can it be re¬ trieved.—Defperate as the effort feems, it muft be ventured—yes—I will fee the King whatever it cofts me : furely, the fainted fpirit of the royal Henry would appear to vindicate my innocence (hea¬ vens ! that I fhould live to know it quef- tioned!) were every other means to prove infufficient.—I will trouble you no farther, refpečted Murray, unlefs you will deign to convey a letter to Lord Rochefter, requefting a private au¬ dience of the King," An idea fo fingular had transferred the aftoniihment Murray had at firft excited in me to his own mind ; that my intel¬ lects were touched then feemed to him very probable, but perceiving that I was miftrefs both of my fenfes and temper, he prefumed not to contend with a fpi¬ rit injury had nerved ; and, ftruck with the dignity I aflumed, began to believe í had
had indeed fomething important to dif- clofe r though quite at a lofs refpecting its nature. I wrote to Lord Rochefter (now newly created Earl of Somerfet) according to the idea I had formed; and Murray, having engaged that the letter fhould be delivered early in the morn¬ ing, departed with the fame caution with which he had entered, leaving me alone. —Alone did I fay ?—Ah, gracious hea¬ ven, never was I lefs fo !—The fhades of all I hacì, ever loved feemed to ga¬ ther round me on this interefting occa¬ fion, and volumes of obfcure ideas ruih¬ ed impetuoufly through my brain.—I had unexpectedly reached the very point of my fate.—That important moment fo often delayed, fo eternally dreaded, was at length arrived, and the long trea- fured fecret on the verge of being pub¬ liihed.—For myfelf I had long ceafed to fear—The fraternal acknowledgment of the King could now add nothing to my happinefs ; fince, alas, that incom¬ parable youth was gone for whole fake T 3 alone
alone I defired it : nor could his re¬ jection greatly imbitter a fate which had left me fo little to hope.—But, oh, when I remembered his fingle breath might blight the tender bloflom I had exhaufted my verv being to rear—precipitate my youth¬ ful Mary, ere yet her virtues were known, into an obfcure and diíhonorable grave, where, where, could I gather ftrength to cope with this idea ? I employed the remainder of the night in collecting and arranging fuch plaufible reafons as ihould amufe my daughter's mind till the event was known ; thus fparing her all the pangs of fufpenfe.— I gathered together likewife every paper, and proof, which could authenticate the rights I was compelled to avow, and, on peru fing them once more, found fuch reafon to be afiured, not only of fafety, but diftinction, that a facred calm fuc¬ ceeded to all the tranfports of grief and indignation with which I had of late been agitated. By
3
By a feigned invitation from a neigh¬ bouring lady, who permitted me to ren¬ der her houfe my convenience, I fent my daughter abroad for the day ; and fcarce had done fo ere an exprefs arrived, to acquaint me that the Earl or Somerfet would wait on me in the afternoon. What were my proud emotions when the upftart Somerfet littered my court with a princely retinue !—-Alas, the only Prince who had ever entered it, with a noble confeioufnefs, defpifed fuch idle parade. By oppreflive offers of fervict, the Earl made me fenfible of his impor¬ tance, and fought, by unbounded adula¬ tion, to gain upon my heart, and dive into its intentions : but it was not by fuch a me¬ dium I fought diftinction. I politely avoid¬ ed referring either to the ilander, or the purport of the requefted audience, and enly thanked him for having obtained me the ear of the King ; half bluihing to have gained it by fo contemptible an lnterceifor. I perceived chagrin, curi¬ ofity, and difappointment, ftrongly ex¬ preifed in his really fine features, but I Τ 4 could
could not prevail on myfelf to confide aught to the man Prince Henry had defpifed. The Earl took his leave with the fame profound deference, and affur¬ ances of fervice, with which he entered ; having appointed the next morning for prefenting me to the King. As the privacy of the promifed au¬ dience enabled me to difpence with form, I made no addition to my fervants, nor any other alteration in the weeds I ufu¬ ally wore, than that of forming them to the model of my mother's drefs ; which ever rencered the likenefs I bore her from my very birth ftriking and obvious. A thoufand half-forgotten occurrences prefled upon my agitated foul as I paft through each well-known apartment, till all were loft in the prefent, by my reach¬ ing the clofet of the King. The afllduous Somerfet, dreft as elegantly as though he had meant to charm me, advanced on my being announced, and politely offer¬ ed me his hand----------a fudden chill came over me;-------1 trembled,------lingered----- drooped,
drooped,—but refolved to conquer my¬ felf or periíh, I ihook off the fçalding tear which hung upon my cheek, and accepted the favorite's introduction.------· The fuperior air with which I affected to enter was not necefifary towards confufing the King, who, always awkward and per¬ plexed, feemed more than ufually fo ; and doubtful, whether he fliould not fly the moment he faw me, or at leaft call back Somerfet who had inftantly retired.----------- Bending my knee in compliance with cuftom, I inftantly rofe, and, retaining the hand he had prefented to me, fixed my eyes, ftrongly animated by the occa¬ fion, on his ever-vary ing countenance. " Your Majefty," faid I, "doubtlefs, ex¬ pects to find in me a weak fuppliant, foliciting protection, or fuing for your pity ; buton terms Üke thefe I had never bent before you—I come to claim a dear and facred title hitherto unknown, but never annihilated. · Does your heart, oh, royal James !" added I, melting into tears," recognize nothing congenial to it in thefe features ì this voice ! the ti¬ morous
morous hand which grafps yours for the firft time, in fraternal alliance ?—Oh, iainted Mary! dear author of my be¬ ing, look down from heaven, and touch the heart of your Ion, in favor of the de¬ fo late fifter who now ilands before him." The King ftarted, receded, gave ma- nifeft tokens of doubt and difpleafure, and fought to draw away the hand I cb- ftinately retained.------1 kiifed, I bathed it with impaflioned tears. tc Shake me not off, reject me not unknown," re¬ fumed I in the deep tone of ftifled an¬ guifh.— ic It is neither pride, vanity, or ambition, which induces me now to publifh a fecret fo long buried in my bo¬ fom. By the afhes of our anointed mo¬ ther, I conjure you to hear—nay even to believe me.—Born in obfcurity—reared in folitude, the early victim of misfor¬ tune, long fuffering had reconciled my weary foul to every evil but difgrace: againft that fhe ftill proudly revolts.----- The fame blood which flows through your veins, burns in tumults along minCj
mine, at the very thought of aught unworthy—it urges me to affért my in¬ nocence by indubitable proofs—it will be acquitted, before men as well as an- crels ; nor does the claim thus avowed reit on my declaration alone, your Ma- jeftey will fee in thefe papers the folemn atteftations, the unqueftioned hand¬ writing of your royal mother; in thefe you will find the corroborating teftimo- nies of many noble and unblemifhed perfons.—Perufe them cautioufly, and oh, beware how you pre-judge me !" Un¬ able to utter another word, 1 almoft funk at the feet of James, and gave way to the oppreflive, the agonizing fenfa¬ tions fuch an æra in my life could not fail to awaken. The Kino· ftill regarded me with an irrefolute, uneafy air, coldly advifing me to compofe myfelf by retiring into the anti -chamber, while he perufed the papers on which he had hitherto only glanced his eye ; though even that cur- fory view had deeply tinged his cheek with filent conviction. I was met there by
by the Earl of Somerfet, who, per¬ ceiving me near fainting, ordered water, and fuch effences as are cuftomary, remaining himfelf by my fide, as if of- tentatioufly to convince me he did not influence in the leaft the determination of his royal mailer.—The bitternefs of the conflict was, however, over the mo¬ ment the fecret was avowed, and my fpirits foon began to recover their wonted equanimity. The obliging efforts of Somerfet to revive me did not pafs unnoticed, though my watchful ear followed the footfteps of the Kins:, who ftill continued to walk about with an unequal pace, Hopping at intervals. He opened the clofet door at length, and Somerfet retiring out of his fight, made figns to me to re- entei¬ lt. -------The King came forward to meet me with affability, and felzi n g my hand flightly fainted my cheek.·--------- iC Take courage, madam," faid he, " for however you may have furprized us with tins fudden declaration, and wonderful dif¬ covery.
covéry, reverence for our deceafed mo¬ ther's rights, and juftice to thofe you de¬ rive from her, oblige us to acknowledge you as her daughter.'* And now I was indeed near fainting, I might rather fay dying.—To be at once acknowledged as his fifter, as the daughter of Mary ! Scarce in my happieft hours had I dared to flatter myfelf with the promife of what was now fo incre¬ dibly realized. My fufceptible foul in¬ dulged the exquifite tranfport, and one ihort moment compenfated for ages of anguiih.—A thoufand impafiioned, inco¬ herent exclamations, burit from my lips; and giving way to the genuine impulfe of gratitude and affection I threw myfelf for the firft time into the arms of a brother, nor remembered they were thofe of a King. Never did the moft confummate hypocrite counterfeit a joy lo pure, lb perfect ; and though I could have brought no other proof of my birth, the lacred throbs of nature might well have afcertained it. The
The King fat down by me, and, turn-» ing over the papers he ftill held, quelli- oned me at intervals refpecting thofe that appeared myfterious or deficient. ï entreated his patience while I briefly ran through the wonderful events of my life and thus very naturally led his at¬ tention toward the fole object of my cares, my hopes, my exiftence.--------- " I have already heard much of your daugh¬ ter," faid James ; " they tell me fhe is beauty itfelf—why have you thus ftrangely concealed her ?" As I could not declare my real reafon, which was fimply want of efteem for his character, I pleaded various trifling ones, that indeed had never in¬ fluenced me. "Say no more," faid the King, interrupting me, " I eafily perceive, Ma¬ dam, you was not fo referved to every one—I plainly difcern "who was your con¬ fidant; had I earlier been entrufted with your fecret, it would have been happier for all, and I fhould then have been able to account for"—He paufed ere be came to the dear name of his fon, and fighing
fighing dropt the unfiniihed fentence. As to me, entranced alike with his unexpected candour, gracioufnefs, and generofity, I feverely reproached myfelf for relying on report, and not proving the character I ventured to decide upon. I had a long converfation with the King afterwards, every word of which heightened my con¬ fidence, efteem, and affection. I gather¬ ed from many exprefiions, that he feared oppofition on the part of the Queen, and his favorite ; and was fearful that this late declaration of his mother's marriage with the Duke of Norfolk would not fully fatisfy the minds of the people, or eftabliih my rank fufflciently. He paufed upon the whole, with the air of one who is a party in what he meditates ; and I thought the leaft I could do, was to leave the regulation of *me important acknow¬ ledgment in his choice.—To be vindi- ted in his opinion, I truly aiTured him, was rhe firft object of my life, and I fub¬ mitted my general vindication, in the public acknowledgment of my birth, en¬ tirely
tireîy to his better judgment. That J had been fo many years a folitary being in the midft of fociety, as not to have one friend to whofe inclination I need yield my own. In fine, that time had gradu¬ ally robbed me of all interefted in the important fecret I had juft confided to him, which now refted folely with him, my daughter, and myfelf. He replied that " this inftance of my prudence, as well as regard, infinitely heightened the partiality he had already conceived for me ; nor need I fear his delaying the acknowledgment longer than was abfo- lutely ncceifary, fince he could not but look on fuch relations as ineftimable ac- quifitions : neverthelefs, as he had many points to confider, and many perfons to reconcile, he recommended to me to continue the fame circumfpection I had hitherto fhewn ; but that he could not rcfirain his impatience to behold the fair maid of whom he had heard fo much, and would come to-morrow evening to a feat of my Lord Somerfet's, whither he
he would fend for myfelf and my daugh¬ ter, and hoped by that time he ihould be able to afcertain the day for publifhin^ my birth, with a due regard * . his mo¬ ther's honor ; after which he could gra¬ tify himfelf by eftablifliing me in a fitu- ation that ihould make me forget ail my misfortunes."—Thofe misfortunes were already forgotten in the unhoped-for tran- fition in my fate.—I took my leave with the profoundeft gratitude, burning with impatience to impart this bleffed news to my Mary; and, as the King did not offer to return the papers, I thought it better to leave them in his hands, than confirm the doubt my long filence could not but give rife to in his mind, viz. that I wanted confidence in his ho¬ nor. I haftened to Richmond, and commu¬ nicated this furprifing, this happy event, to my darling girl.—A thoufand times I enfolded her to my delighted heart, and found every tranfport doubled in her participation. She tenderly entered into Vol. III. U ail
all my feelings, and fweetly fmiled at the eagernefs with which I fought to adorn her for the next day's introduc¬ tion. Yet, confidering the King as the Have of exterior, it was a material point to heighten her beauty by every adven¬ titious advantage. To prefent her in abfolute black, was to recai the mofr melancholy impreffions to the mind of James; I therefore refolved to lighten her mourning w T ith a fanciful elegance. I dreft her in a veft of black velvet thrown back at the bofom in the French fafhion, with a femicircle of rich iace points, which fhewed at once her grace¬ ful waift and cheft to the greateft ad¬ vantage. Her petticoat was of white fattin, wrought in deep points round the bottom with black velvet, and richly fringed with filver. A fuller coat and train of filver muftin, wrought with black, fell over the flittin one, and was looped up to the waift at regular diftanccs by firings of pearl, and dragged toward the bottom into points by the weight of rich
rich black bugle taffels and rofes of di¬ amonds. Full fleeves of the fame filver muflin were braced round her arms to the elbow by ftrings of jet, and rofes of diamonds ; and from thence they were bare, except fór fimilar bracelets circling each Wrift. The rich profufion of her auburn hair, which fell in natural curls below her waift, required no^ ornament but to avoid tne affectation of fhewing it, fhe wore a hat of whit fattin with a narrow fringe of black bugles, and a waving plume of feathers. This fplendid drefs, on which the legacies of both her father ánd Anana were difplayed, by fome peculiar happinefs, either in its make or mixture, became my Mary be¬ yond any I had ever feen her wear. The fond mother's heart anticipated the impreffion fhe would infallibly, make on her uncle, and drew from her heightened beauty the happieft prefages. Ah, who could have conjectured that this brilliance and parade were only def¬ tined to forerun оле of the moft difmal U 2 ню-
moments of my life !—That an inhuman tyrant had delighted to employ the trembling hand of misfortune in decking a gaudy pageant, for herfelf eternally to mourn over ! At the appointed hour, a clofe carnage eame for us with due attendants, and as the King had defired me not to bring any of my own, I rigidly obeyed, nor even hinted whither I was going. They drove usa long way, while engroffed by medita¬ tions on the approaching interview, as well as concerning the dear creature by mc, 1 hardly knew how the time paffed. My daughter at length obferved that it was farther than fhe expected.—I looked out but it was too dark for me to diílinguiíh any object, and all I could difcern was an increafe of attendants. I called out aloud, and one drew near, who to my inquiries reipectfully replied, that the King had been detained in London, whi¬ ther they were haftening bv his orders. This information quieted us again ; and I ftrove to recai my fluttered fpirits into
into their ufual channel, by turning the converfation on our future profpečts. Neverthelefs, we went at fo great a rate, that I thought it impoffible we ihould not be near London, when all at once I found we were driving through an un¬ known village. The furprife this oc¬ cafìoned was doubled by my daugh¬ ter's throwing herfelf into my arms.—It was not immediately I could compre¬ hend her, when fhe told me that a light which gleamed from the window of a cottage, had fhewn lier that we were en¬ vironed with armed foldiers. From this alarm we were not yet recovered, when, by a fudden rife, and hollow found, we perceived we had paffed over a draw¬ bridge; immediately after which we flopped. As we alighted, I caft my eyes round a large and dreary court-yard, where a few ftraq-ydino; centinels were planted, but neither lights, fplendor, or attendants, indicated a royal gueft, or a favorite's refidence. The gloomy paf- fdges through which we were uíhered, U 3 feemed
feemed rather to lead to a prifon than a palace.—Arrived at an empty apartment, I gave way at once to the dire, the ob¬ vious truth ; and arraigning in filence my own egregions credulity, felt, feverely felt, its every confequence. An officer who had preceded us, now offered me a packet, which I received as the fentence of my fate, but made no effort to open it—Hope, fear, curio¬ fity, ever dear and powerful emotion were annihilated by inftantaneous con¬ viction, and a ftupor fucceeded more dangerous and dreadful than the moit violent operations of the paflions.—My daughter, more terrified by this ftill agony than even the cruel and unexpected event of the evening, threw herfelf at my feet.------- <( Oh, fpeak to me, my mother !" exclaimed the dear one ; fc do not indulge the defperation your countenance ex- preflès ! do not confummate to your poor Mary the horrors of the moment !" I gazed at her with a vacant air, but na¬ ture refumed her rights, and fondly plucking at my heart, the tears I re¬ fufed
fu fed to my own fate, flowed lavi ihly for hers.—So young, fo fair, fo innocent> fo noble,—how could I but bewail her ì Surely thofe maternal tears alone pre- ferved my fenfes at a juncture when every thing confpired to unfettle them. My Mary, by an expreifive glance, requefted leave to open the packet, and, ftarting at fight of the paper it contained, put it eagerly into my hand ; a glance informed me, that it was that defamatory declaration the crafty Burleigh had deceived my fif¬ ter into figning, while a prifoner in St. Vincent's Abbey. The King, in fending this, only added infult to injury, fince the teftimonials I had delivered to him might have invalidated a thoufand fuch vague and artificial falfehoods ; yet had it a fortunate effect, for nothing lefs could have roufed my fpirits from the cold and füllen torpor which every paf¬ fing moment feemed to increafe— cc Info- lent Barbarian !" exclaimed I, " not con¬ tent to imprifon the unhappy offspring of the Queen who had the misfortune of giving thee being, doit thou delight in U 4 , vil -
villifying and debafing even her aihes !— Oh, paper ! dictated and preferved furely t for my ruin ; by what fingular chance haft hou furvived the very views thou wert invented to ferve. —Treafured, as it ap¬ pears, only to effect a ruin your execrable contriver could not forefee.—Yet of what confequence is this fingle attefbtion to¬ wards annihilating claims all thofe I deli¬ vered had not power to eftablifh in the judgment of a cruel, infidious tyrant, who voluntarily fhut his heart alike to reafon, virtue, and nature ?—Devoted to felf-intereft, vain of a petty talent at deceiving, contemptible in every rank, but infamous in the higheft, he meanly watched the generous impulfes of my heart, and wrought out of them my ruin.—Yet why do I name myfelf?— Alas, of what importance is it to her who no longer wiihes to live where hea¬ ven or its arbitrary delegate fnall have ap¬ pointed her to die ?—it is for thee, my daughter S for thee alone my foul thus о ver flows with inexpreflible anguifh.— Refcued, in yet unconfcious childhood, from
from flavery, negle£t, and obfcurity, for¬ tune at one moment feemed willing to reftore all the rights of your birth, when a weak, credulous mother affifted the cruel wretch who was pre-determined to entomb you, and annihilate every trace, every memorial, of our dear and ho¬ nored progenitors. --------- Namelefs^ -------- » diibonored—your blooming youth muft wither in an unknown prifon—blighted by the tears of a parent who can never pardon herfelf the extravagant error produced by over-fondnefs.—I knew the King to be mean, bafe, fubtle, yet I madly deli¬ vered into his treacherous hands every thing on which our hopes, nay, even our vindication muft be grounded."------ " Hear me, in turn, my dear, my ho¬ nored mother," cried my fweet girl, " bath¬ ing my hands with tears of veneration and fond nefs. Alas, the order of nature is inverted, and I am obliged to become the monitor.—Recollect the maxim you have fo deeply imprefied upon my mind —that the malice of man would in vain ftrive to make us wretched, did not our own
own ungovernable paflions aid his attfuJ machinations. Oh, let us refpečt even error when it has its fource in virtue.— To have diftrufted the King were to de- ferve to be rejected—leave him then to the contemptible fatisfaction of having wrefted from the widow and the orphan the laft treafure of their lives, and let us examine what he has been compelled to leave us. Have we not yet the power of looking down on his throne, and all its fpecious advantages, even from that obfcure prifon where his authority con¬ fines us ?—Have we not the pride of reviewing our own hearts without find¬ ing aught in either unworthv of our Crea- DO * tor or ourfelves ì —For the vain gran¬ deur of that name of which he has un¬ fairly deprived us, can it be worth re¬ gretting while he lives to diihonor it ?— Fortunately no favorite view depended on its attainment, confequently no hope is blighted by the deprivation. Have I not often heard you fay, s n ;bie mind can become every thing to itfelf ?—Let us then rife fuperior to our fortune ; time will
will foon calm our fpirits—reafon will reconcile us to the inconveniences of our fate, and religion elevate us above them —Mourn not then for me, my much- loved mother," concluded the dear one, fweetly fmiling through her tears, cc fince I íhall never think that place a prifon which contains you, nor that fate a mif- fortune I owe to your fondnefs." Oh, virtue, how awful doft thou ap¬ pear, fublimed thus by generofity ! When I faw this half-blown human bloflom fupport the ftorm without ihrinking, I blufhed to have bowed my head before it.—When I heard her with Spartan cou¬ rage apply to her own fituation the no¬ ble tenets I had fought, not vainly, to imbrue her mind with, could I fail to profit by the principles I had taught ?— From the admiration ihe excited in my foul fprung that pure and elevated heroifm which calms in one moment every human weaknefs, and turbulent paflion; difpofing us to turn upon that fate it enables us to judge of. I now
I now recollected that by a fond va¬ nity in decking my daughter in all her valuable diamonds, I had inadvertently provided ample means to buy the fide¬ lity of our keepers ; nor were they aware of our treafure, as the feverity of the weather had made me wrap her in a long cloak lined with fur. I haftily ftripped her coftly drefs of its richeft embellifh- ments, and fecreted them. Ah, with what difficulty did I ftifle the tears and anguiih which ftruggled at my heart when I remembered the different views with which I adorned her ! Scarce had we executed this prudent refolve, ere the man I have mentioned prefented himfelf once more ;—he was young—not unpleafing—had an air of integrity, and profound refpect, that a little prepofieflld me in his favor, even under all the difadvantages attending oin meeting. Our countenances were now calmed, and our refolutions taken.—He appeared furprized alike with this tranfi¬ tion, and the beauty of my daughter, whole
whofe magnificent but difordered drefs had a İbare of his attention.—He was flattered with our civility, and affured us < f that every accommodation confiftent with the ftrict orders of the King he fliould take pleafure in fupplying us with ; and would, with our permifiion, make us acquainted with our new home." He then produced fome keys which opened double doors at the farther end of the large room we were in, and conducted us into a chamber neat ard commo¬ dious enough—The keys, he informed us, were committed folely to his charge ; and that whenever inclination or con¬ venience induced us to change our apartment we had only to touch a fpring he pointed out, when he would attend, and unlock the intermediate doors.— The purport of this extreme caution was very obvious ; it excluded every poffibility of winning over a female fervant, as all the domeftic offices would now of courfe be performed in either room while we occu¬ pied the other; nor was he fuffered to fupply
fupply us pen, ink, or paper. As the conveniencies of thefe apartments, and the air of refpečt in our guard, fhewed iome attention had been paid to our wel¬ fare, as well as the moft judicious pre¬ cautions taken to prevent our enlarge¬ ment, I neither imputed the one or the other to the King, but rather both to his cunning favorite. Our enquiries were in¬ terrupted by the entrance of two fervants, who fet out an elegant fupper, of which neither my daughter or myfelf had ipi- rits to partake. Refolved however to gather all I could from my attendant. ere another ihould be put in his place, or fufpicion make him dumb, I afked the name of the Cattle, and its owner; but to thefe queftions he declared him¬ felf enjoined to rcfufe replying ; never- t heléis, I conjectured from his looks that I did not err in fuppofing Somerfet di¬ rected him. The refined artifice of of¬ fering to introduce me to the King, and even remaining by my fide, while per¬ haps my ruin was effecting by his will. feemed
feemed entirely confiftent with the cha¬ racter Prince Henry had given me of that worthlefs favorite; though I could find no crime in my own conduct could pofi. fibly irritate him to bury us thus alive, unlefs indeed our attachment to that la¬ mented royal youth appeared a fufficient one. In the gallery leading to our apart¬ ment, I obferved a centinél planted, from whom we were íhut by double doors fafely locked : perceiving we were thus effectually excluded from every hope, and chance of freedom, I defired to pafs at once into a chamber, where I did not flatter myfelf I ihould find reft. My firft employment on rifing was to examine the windows, as well as the view hom them ; they were fo clofely grated as to convince me that however comfor¬ table our refidence, it was ftill a prifon. The apartments we occupied formed one fide of a quadrangle of old buildings. mofe probably barracks, but now en¬ tirely deferted. On making the fignal,
Dunlop (for fo was our guard called) rea¬ dily attended, and we paffed into the other room where we found breakfaft ready. Trunks containing all kinds of apparel had been placed there, and Dun¬ lop recommended to us to form our minds to paffing the remainder of our days in confinement. I did not fubmit to hear this without demanding the autho¬ rity by which he acted ? He produced an order, figned by the King, ftričtly en¬ joining him to keep us in fafety, and be¬ ware we neither wrote or received a let¬ ter, or indeed held any kind of commu¬ nication with the world.—While he fpoke I examined every lineament of his coun¬ tenance, but fidelity was v/ritten there in inch legal characters, that I dared not make any effort to bribe him, leaft if h failed he fhould publifh that I had the means, which might in a moment utterly impaverifh me. A few wearifome uniform days only had elapfed when every hope decayed, and my fpirits flagged at once.—Alas, 3 ™1
my mind had no longer the vivifying ar¬ dor, the inexhauftible refources of un¬ broken youth------its bloom had paifed away like a ihadow, and all its fire eva¬ porated.—The woeful realities of life had diffipated the bright illufions of imagina-' tion. —Every human good was, in my ef¬ timation, ihrunk into fo fmall a compafs, that freedom conftituted a very eflential part of my little poffeflions.—I was no longer able to rely upon contingencies, and funk at once under all the fadnefs of know¬ ledge.—Not denied the relief of books, I pored over them in vain ; every idea was ftill purfuing an abfent good, and my fenfes would reject the fublimeft au¬ thor, to follow the carelefs fteps of a weary centinél, or liften to his whiffling. Whether my daughter had really more refolution than myfelf, or only aflumed the appearance of it to fave me from defpair, was a point I could not afcer¬ tain ; but the complacency of her mind and manners was invariable. By a thou¬ fand little affectionate artifices ihe en¬ gaged me to work while íhe read, or Vol. III. X read
read while íhe worked, йбг would per¬ ceive thofe melancholy reveries it was ímpoflible to overlook. I was not, how¬ ever, thanklefs for the bleffing left me. That my eyes opened on her every morn¬ ing, ftill made me blefs it ; and in com- pofing myfelf to fleep, I nightly praifed the God who yet fuffered her to reft by me. Two tedious months elapfed in unde- cifive projects.—Dunlop ever prefent, vi¬ gilant, and refpectful, precluded alike complaint and and temptation ; but, as if to guard himfelf againft the latter, I took notice he now never remained one moment alone with us. The impoflibility of forming any judg¬ ment of our centinels while divided from them by double doors, and the danger of a fruitlefs effort to feduce one, had at intervals engroflfed my attention ; but the mind cannot dwell forever on a fingle idea, or a remote and uncertain project. Wearied out with this, another fuddenly came to my relief. Though yet early in the fpring, the weather was uncom¬ monly
monly beautiful, and the lenity with which we were treated left me not with¬ out hopes of being allowed, under rigid limitations, the liberty of walking in whatever gardens the caftle-walls ea- clofed. By this means I could examine the countenances of our centinels, and, if I faw one in whom humanity was noc quite extinct, I thought I might find fome means to íhew him a jewel ; thus proving I could largely recompenfe him, ihould he have the courage to aflift us. Nor did my lamenefs wholly deprive me of the power of walking, though it pre¬ vented my enjoying the liberty.—After confidering this plan in every poflible light, I faw nothing to forbid the at¬ tempt, and ventured the requeft.—A few anxious days elapfed ere I had the fatisfaction of finding it was granted, on as good terms as I could hope. Dunlop acquainted me we muft walk feparately, that the perfon confined might be a check upon her that was liberated ; who Ihould not remain in the garden more than an χ 2 hour,
hour, nor quit his fight one moment. Thefe reftrictions were as moderate as could expect, and I eagerly prepared to profit by the granted permifiion, ere I ventured my daughter : certain I Ihould at leaft difcover the ftrength, heighth, and fituation, of the Caftle.—Dunlop, followed by two other men, attended upon me. I caft an eager eye on the centinél on the gallery, but faw in him no trace of fenfe, feeling, or curio¬ fity. I found the little garden in fo an¬ tique a ftyle, and ruinous a condition as plainly proved that this difmantled build¬ ing was now only a prifon, whatever its former diftinction. The wall around it appeared decayed, and not very high— it looked down on a moat, apparently dry.—From one part of the terrace I caught the corner * of a tower I fancied belonged to Windfor Caftle, but dared not venture a word which might imply defign, and returned without aiking a fingle queftion. My daughter now took her turn ; and, as we continued to claim this
this relief whenever the weather favored, I fancied it improved her health as well as my own. It chanced at length, I one day found a centinél on guard whofe eye expreifed both pity and curiofity.—Mine addreifed itfelf to him in a moft pointed manner. Without altering the pofition of my hand (in which I always carried a dia¬ mond for that purpofe) I opened it, and the foldier, as I wifhed, furveyed the jewel.—I turned my head at the inftant Dulop was unlocking the door, and the centinél fhook his emphatically. Yet only to have been underftood revived at once my fpirits, and my hopes ; for to efcape did not appear fo impracticable to me, as to gain an afliftant. I faw him no more for a week, but foon found that day was the periodioal one for his at¬ tendance.—Involved in a thoufand plots, the want of pen and ink feemed to con¬ demn them all to inhabit only my brain, when at once I difcovered a fubftitute for thofe ufeful articles. From the middle X 3 of
of a large book, which we had unmo- lefted pofleflion of, I took fome of the printed leaves, and from the conclufion a blank one ; out of the firft I cut fuch words as fimply conveyed my meaning, and fewed them on the laft ___ <f Aflift us to efcape, and we will make your fortune," was the fubftance of this fin¬ gular but important billet. To afcer¬ tain my ability to realize this promife, I wrapt in it a diamond of fome value, and carried both ever in my hand, ftill hoping fortune would enable me for one moment to miflead the attention of my guards; but, alas, Dunlop, far from re¬ laxing his vigilance, continually increaf¬ ed it. The two men who followed him in the garden now attended to my door ; remaining as fpie¿ on me while Dunlop opened it. Thus circumftanced, I could not make the flighteft overture without being liable to detection, and I dreaded awakening the moit diftant doubt, left it fhould condemn us to a more rigorous confinement.—One favorable omen alone 4 PC-
occured.-—The foldier I had felected clearly underftood me. I faw his eye ever anxioufly fixed on my hand, as if eager to transfer its contents to his own ; nor had 1 ceafed to flatter myfelf I ihould yet do fo, when an unforefeen incident at once annihilated every hope and pro¬ ject, and plunged me in the deepeft for¬ row* I had always counted the moments of my daughter's abfence, and nothing but the conviction that the air and exercife were neceífary towards her health, could have enabled me to fupport it. What then became of me when one day I found her walk unufually lengthened!— I endeavoured to perfuade ijnyfelf that my fears foreran the danger.—But more than twice the ufual time had certainly elapfed; nor dared I venture an en¬ quiry, left I íhould fuggeft a hint to my perfecutors which hitherto had efcaped them. The hours thus palfed on, but Mary returned not—Ah me ! While my weak hand repeats this, I almoft expire X 4 under
under the recollection.—Every evil my untoward fate had yet teemed with be¬ came peace, nay pleafure, on a compa¬ rifon with this.—Though the turbulence of each fucceeding ftorm had fwept away invaluable treafures, fomething yet re¬ mained my weary foul might cling to.— This fingle gem, ths folitary relique of all my fortunes, more dear, more precious from becoming fo, a dreadful, a deceitful calm had at length fwallowed up even while I was fearlefs of the dan¬ ger.—Heart-ftruck—incapable at once either of diftinguifhing, or complaining, my refpiration became perturbed, and deep.—A ftill agony, more dreadful than the wildeft' umults of the paflions, numbed my very foul ; every hair feemed to ftart from, and pierce my too-fenfible brain; while drops, cold as thofe of death, chafed one another down my fcarcely throbbing temples.—When Dunlop prefented him¬ felf, I rofe not from the earth, I uttered not a fyllable j but lifting an eye to him which would have melted a favage, he turned
turned away, unable to fupport the ihock, and offered me fome order from the King bewailing at the fame moment the pain¬ ful duty impofed on him. This roufed my torpid fpirits—I tore it indignantly into a thoufand atoms ; refentment re¬ ftored my fpeeeh.—I called for my Mary in the moft piercing accents—nothing could fufpend, or mitigate my anguifh. I bitterly reproached Dunlop with tearing the beauteous innocent from her mother's bofom, only to deliver her up to aflaf- fins—In vain he declared himfelf inca¬ pable of fuch villainy, and acting under the orders of the King—In vain he af- fured me íhe was only removed to another apartment, fafe, and unhurt.—My foul rejected all his aflertions.—Mary— Mary—Mary !—was all my convulfed lips could ut:er, or my difconfolate foul dictate, Ah, God ! the folitude that fucceeded ! Food, light, air, nay even life itfelf, be¬ came naufeous and infupportable.— Stretched on the cold ground—drenched in my own tears, I gave way to the
deep mifery the tremendous void this barba¬ rous feparation could not but plunge me in.—How long was it fince ihe had been the very eflence of my exiftence ! From the forrowful moment which gave her into my arms, to that which tore her from them, ihe, flie alone, had occupied my every fenfe, and enabled me to fup¬ port every affliction.—Never, though I had led her myfelf through an admiring nation to the altar, and joined her hand with that of the incomparable Henry, never could even that advantage have compenfated to my yearning heart for the lofs of her fociety. What then muft it fuffer to recollect that a favage had wreft¬ ed her, for unknown purpofes, from my arms!—Nor could I, amidft all the hor¬ rors this idea teemed with, fix on any dif¬ tinčt one. Oh, that melodious voice !—Still it feemed to vibrate on my ear, but no longer could I hear it.—That unmatched form gliftered through every tear, but evaporated with it. The moft deadly glooms came over me—-a thoufand times I raife4
I raifed my raih hand to precipitate—the unfortunate Rofe Cecil alone withheld me.—I often thought I heard her aerial voice, and defpair flowly fubfided into re- fignation. I now exerted every effort to to gain up¬ on Dunlop; but, too faithful to his execra¬ ble employers, I never won more from him than that my daughter was ftill in the Caftle, not only unhurt, # but treated with diftinčtion and indulgence.—Yet, how could I credit fuch improbable af¬ furances ? or even if they were true, ought not an indulgence fo partial to a- larm more ftrongly a mother's feelings ? To every folicitation once more to be¬ hold her, I «received a pofitive denial ; nor was even the liberty of walking now allowed me. I often enquired why I was thus reftrained, if no injury was meditated to my unfortunate child ? To queftions of this kind he never anfwered, but left me to my own fluctuating conjectures: They were fo numerous and frightful that conviction could hardly aggravate the evil. Neverthelefs, as Dunlop feemed ever
ever anxious to compofe my mind by re¬ iterated affurances of my poor girl's fafety, and as there was an air of candour in all he uttered, I began at length to conclude that the contemptible Somerfet had afpired to the niece of his mafter, but from being already married to the divorced Countefs of Effex, had not dared to avow his paflion. I recollected too late the fingularity of his being with Prince Henry when firft we beheld that amiable youth ; —the afiiduous refpečt he had fhewn in waiting on me at Rich¬ mond;—the affected offer of his intereft with a tyrant whofe will he fo well knew how to make fubfervient to his own ¿ —the com¬ bination of refined arts by which we had been lead to throw ourfelves into the prifon felected for us;—and, finally, that the prifon was probably a houfe of his own.—Through the whole of this, as well as the manner we were guarded, there was a policy too minute for a King to plan, and too watchful to be the work of an indifferent perfon.—When by a juft turn of thought we infenfibly un-
unravel any hitherto inexplicable event, how does the mind difdain its former blindnefs ? I now confidered with won¬ der my long want of perfpicacity, and found fomething every moment to cor¬ roborate and ftrengthen the idea I had adopted. To fix on any thing certain appears to the exhaufted foul a degree of relief; and though, at fome moments, I dreaded art and violence might be employed, if o;entle methods failed to undermine the virtue of my fweet girl, yet I much of¬ fener flattered myfelf that ihe could not infpire a paflion fo grofs and unworthy ; and knew her foul fuperior to every other feduction. From the inftant I ventured once more to hope, all my plans for efcap- ing revived ; I had no longer, it is true, the privilege of paffing beyond my apart¬ ment, but miiery is ever ingenious, and I was pre-informed of the days when the companionate centinél guarded the door ; nay, I fancied I often heard him n draw near, attracted by my fighs and groans.—· The note I had formerly prepared was yet
yet in being ; I fewed it to a long thin flip of whalebone, and, on the day when he ufed to be attending, worked it gently under both doors, at a time when I judg¬ ed no other perfon near, and foftly rapped at the inner one. A fweet hope rekindled in my heart as I felt it drawn out of my hand. I watched in vain the whole te¬ dious day for a reply, and often fancied my effort had been betrayed to Dunlop ; but as I did not perceive any alteration in his countenance, I became reaffured ; and concluded that the foldier could not write, nor perhaps even read; and if fo, a whole week muft neceflarily elapfe ere I could learn his refolutions. The ex¬ piration of that time verified my laft con¬ jecture. With unfpeakable fatisfaction I at laft faw a billet introduced into my fo¬ litude, by the fame means I had fuc- cefsfully ventured. I was a long time decy- phering the almoft unintelligible fcrawl : €C I pity you, lady, from my heart, but I know not how to help you 5 it is true, you are rich, and I am very poor, but then it is impoflible to get at you ; if you
you can think of any way, Г am ready to aflift." Ah, God ! how did I lift up my eyes to thee, who haft thus ftrangely opened once more to me a communica¬ tion with that fociety from which I had been fo unfairly wrefted ! In moments like this every thing appears poflible ; al¬ ready I feemed to fee my prifon gates open, my daughter in my arms, and our honeft afliftant rich at once in our wealth and our bleflings. Having had the forc-- fight to prepare another billet, I convey* ed it in the fame manner. cc Worthy foldier, is my daughter fafe, and yet in this Caftle ? if fo, tear away all but the word, yes, and my foul ihall forever blefs you." How pure was the joy with which I received the precious monofyl- lable ! To prepare another billet, comprehend¬ ing my plan, was a work of time ;—with what perturbatation did I undertake it ! To condenfe my meaning to a few words, and yet leave it obvious to a common capacity, was not an eafy talk.—I thus at
at laft effected it : " Generous friend, win over him who guards my daughter's door, while you are at mine, and I will fhare with both of you the rich jewels I poifefs, of which you faw only the fmalleft. Ob¬ ferve the form of the keys Dunlop brings —buy many as near them as poflible, and fo various that fome may certainly fit.—Procure likewiie two regimental fuits, that we may pafs the gate un- queftioned ; if you can raife the little money neceífary for this, fear not to fpend it ; I will make your fortune in the mo ment our doors are opened.—Reftore me to my daughter—conduct us to the gate, and we will both befeech the Almighty to blefs the riches we will joyfully leave in your hands." Having difpatched this, I waited the deciding hour with the moft anxious im¬ patience ; and fcarce dared to raife my eyes from the ground, left Dunlop ihould read in them aught that might alarm his fufpicions. How
How to difpofe of myfelf, and daugh¬ ter, when out of the Caftle, was a quef¬ tion I could not decide upon ; but I flat¬ tered myfelf that as we ihould have fome hours the ftart of our perfecutors, we might reach London; where it.would not be eafy to apprehend perfons who had been imprifoned without any judicial enquiry or fentence.----A greater fear however than that occurred.—How if thefe fol¬ diers ihould not be honeft—the reward we muft beftow would prove what we pof- feffed, and our lives might be the forfeit. Yet fuch was my defparate ftate, that even this reafonable appreheniicn did not in¬ duce me one moment to hefitate. The appointed time revolved, and I re¬ ceived another billet. " Be ready when all is quiet—everything is prepared if any of the keys fit. My comrade and felf muft go with you to fecure our own fafety, but it will likewife fecure yours." Oh, how did my heart bound at this happy intelli¬ gence ;—my languor, my lamenefs, all was forgotten. Maternal love, and ha- Vol. III. Y bitual
bitu al fear, fêemed to wing me with fu¬ pernatural powers. As the important moment approached, I knelt and devoutly invoked the aflift¬ ance of heaven. Ah î not in vain; for the firft effort of the foldiers was fuccefsful. I reached out a rich and ready hand to each.—They received the contents with extreme fatisfaction, and, conjuring me to preferve the moft profound filence, lock¬ ed the doors, and led me to the further fide of the Caftle. At the threfhold of my daughter's apartment they gave into my had the difguifes I had defired, and a- greed to wai: till we were ready. The tender meltings mothers only know thrill¬ ed through my heart, and fweetened every apprehenfion, as I gently made my way through a dark room towards one where I faw lights ftill burning : but fearful of alarming my fweet girl, I hefitated at the door. What was my aftonifhment to per¬ ceive that the apartment was gay, magni¬ ficent, and illuminated !—I thought at firft that anxiety had bewildered my faculties, but
but their truth became evident when they centred at once on my daughter ; who, elegantly habited, had funk on a couch afleep. A writing table covered with due implements ftood before her, on which lay a letter it appeared to me lhe had been anfwering. The deadly cold¬ nefs, the namelefs fenfations this extraor¬ dinary fcene could not but occafion, at once fufpended even the moft powerful emotions of nature. A repulfion fo terri¬ ble obliged me to reft my head againft the pillar of the door, and ftruggle fome time with the ficknefs and confufion of my foul, ere I could gather ftrength to penetrate into the fact. She ftill continu¬ ed to enjoy a repofe, it feemed to me I never ihould know again, and I had now loft the wiih of awakening her ; of efcap- ing—alas, even of exifting ! Slowly at length I tottered toward the table, and catching at the two letters I mentioned, appeared to grafp in them my very fate. The fignature of the firft made its contents Y 2 almoft
almoft needlefs. " A few days, a very few days more, moft charming of women, and I íhall be able to indulge your every wiih —every thing is now in train :—pain me not therefore in thus prefiing an impoífi- bility. The heart of your mother is inexor¬ able to me—-it has ever been fo, and I nei¬ ther dare truft her with the truth, or you with one fo prejudiced, till the law íhall have annulled my detefted marriage, and the King agree to my union with yourfelf— 1 live but in that hope ; it fupports me under all thefe long and tedious abfences. Why will you call the fafe home in which you are enclofed, a prifon ?—The whole world appears fo to him who beholds with pleafure only that fpot where you dwell. To-morrow 1 íhall fteal an hour to pafs with you—fmile for that hour, my belov¬ ed, and blefs with a welcome your t de¬ voted Somerfet." Of what various, what manifold mife- ries is the human heart fufceptible ? none of all the exquifite variety I had hitherto known, ever furpaifed this new one.
one. My difdainful foul recoiled from even the dear object of its affections— hypocrify, that eflence of all vices, had ftolen into her heart under the name of love, and blighted the virtues yet bloflbm- ing—fearfully I perufed her letter, to end every doubt. ic What ages of folitude, of fuffering does your love, my lord, impofe on me ! In vain you would fill up that place in my heart, a parent fo juftly revered muft ever hold. But you ftill talk of to-mor¬ row, and to-morrow—alas, it is a day that may perhaps never come—you think me vapouriih, but you know not how ftrangely my illnefs increafes—it is acute and violent—Oh that I could lay my burn¬ ing head one moment on my mother's bofom !—Catharine gave me fome whey yefterday ; I don't know,—perhaps I wrong her, but I have not been myfelf fince. A thoufand gloomy images have taken poffeffion of my mind ! my eager ear is filled with imaginary knells : I could fan¬ cy myfelf dying : vou will laugh perhaps У j at
at this weaknefs, but I cannot conquer it«—if I ihould indeed judge right, re- leafe my mother, I conjure you, and con¬ ceal forever from her----------" Ah, what ? exclaimed I in the moft terrible agony, for at this unfiniihed fentence the letter broke off.-------Diftlain, fufpenfe, anguifh, contended within me, and fhook my frame like the laft ftruggle of nature.—Of all the horrors that be¬ wildered my mind, one, one alone, could my fenfes afcertain.-------My haplefs girl was indeed dying—wan and funken were thofe cheeks late fo florid—the icy fin¬ gers of death were imprefľed upon her temples, and the eyes ihe heavily open¬ ed, as her woe-ftruck mother dropt upon earth, had no longer either life, beauty, or luftre —Oh, that my foul had efcaped in the groan which followed this horrible conviction!-—She faintly ihrieked, and re¬ mained in a kind of ftupor; tendernefs, how¬ ever, foon predominated in my mind over every other fenfation.—I threw my arms round her in filence, and the tears which deluged her cheeks, alone dtiared what palled
paffed in my foul.—Still ihe uttered not a word, but griped my hands as though the pangs of death were indeed upon her. I in vain conjured, intreated her to fpeak; it was long ere ihe had courage to enter into a detail which íhe had neither breath or voice to go through. " Condemn me not wholly, my mother, at length cried the dear one, however appearances may incenfe you. I aik for only life enough to acquit myfelf, and will to my laft moment thank the God who reitores me to your arms, though only to blufli away my being in them. Yet have I no other crime to avow than that re¬ ferve unconquerably interwoven in my nature.—Alas, yefterday I thought it a virtue.—Heaven will, perhaps, give me ftrength to go through the ftory, at leaft, I ought to make the effort.—Oh, deign to pardon my compelled abruptnefs, and hear me with patience ! cc At die moment which firft prefented Prince Henry to our knowledge, he was accompanied by the Earl of Somerfet.—· How my eyes conceived the partiality my Y 4 reafon
reafon could never erafe I know not but they decided at once in his favor,— Whether the Earl perceived the involun¬ tary diftin¿tion, or was led by an equal one on his own part, is alike unknown to me; but I underftood the reluctance with which he gave way to the Princcj whom he left with us—the contempt with which you mentioned Lord Somer¬ fet ftrangely fhocked and alarmed me ; yet (may I own it)I fecretly accufed the moft upright heart exifting of pride and prejudice ; and found a thoufand reafons for fuddenly difputing a judgment which had hitherto been the rule of my own,— During the the frequent vifits Prince Henry paid you, when prudence induced you to fend me abroad ; alas, to what a temptation did you unconfcioufiy expofe me ! Somerfet availed himfelf of thofe opportunities, and, by diftant homage, confirmed the prepcffefiion I had already conceived.—What íhame, what forrow, what humiliation, has it coft me !—Can vou ever know a more exquifite miferv than to beftow your heart unworthily ? to
to be humbled without guilt------com¬ pelled to blufh hourly for errors not your own—and reduced to a perpetual con¬ flict with thofe powerful and natural emotions which form, under more for¬ tunate circumftances, the felicity of youth ! Senfible by the curious attention of others, how injurious that of the Earl might in time become, I requefted leave to remain at home ; and awed, in fpite of myfelf, by your fentiments, boldly refolved to ficririce the erroneous incli¬ nation of my heart, and received the vows of Prince Henry. To fee you happy, to flatter him with the hope of being fo, for a time elevated and amufed my mind ; but folitude foon reftored it to its favorite object : Somerfet ftill prefented himfelf, and I took pleafure in the tears in which 1 drowned his admired image. By fome means or other I found letters from him frequently in ny chamber.—I dared not enquire how, left I fliould awaken your fufpicions ; alas perhaps that was one of the fine-fpun webs with which love ever
ever veils its errors ! I found him regu¬ larly informed of all our defigns ;—I knew it was in his power to crofs them by a word ; and I began to efteem him for daring to be filent. During the laft progrefs of the King. Somerfet refolved to profit by the abfence of Henry, and, apprized of the interviews we granted the Prince in the pavilion in the garden, as well as of my habit of fitting there, determined to take the chance of plead¬ ing his caufe. My ftay was by the rifing of the moon unufually prolonged on the evening he had felected to prefent himfelf before me. The pale light ferved only to fliadow out his form—any human one muft at fuch a moment have appalled me.—I ihrieked, and was half-fainting when the found of his voice diifipated my terror. Surprize, perhaps joy, that inftantaneous confidence we ever repofe in the object beloved, doubtlefs reaíľured him. I was fcarce confcious I had granted the au¬ dience he demanded, till he fell at my feet to thank me. The manner in which he
he avowed his pafiion, made me fen¬ fible too late that I had ill-difguifed my own ; I know not whether I ihould have had refolution to attempt doing fo much longer, had not our converfation been fuddenly interrupted by Henry. The Prince, to my inexpreflible difmay, en¬ tered the pavillion.—My voice had drawn him thither, but the found of Somerfet's made him retreat in contemptuous filence. The Earl would have followed, but I caught his arm and obftinately withheld him :—then conjuring him to haften to his boat, I flew after the Prince. Henry had thrown himfelf on the feat near the terrace ; but, fenfible of the neceflity of feparating him and the Earl at fuch a crifis, I entreated the Prince to accom¬ pany me to the houfe. The light of the moon enabled me to judge from his bewil¬ dered air of the diftračtion of his mind. I had not courage to break a filence he voluntarily maintained : yet to part un¬ der appearances fo equivocal was impof¬ fible. I hefitated at kngth a faint expla¬ nation.
nation. cf Could you contradict the evi¬ dence of my fenfes, madam," fighed the Prince in a low and tender tone, £C I might wiih to hear you : as it is, fpare me I conjure you, on a fubječt fo hateful I have nothing to reproach you with but a referve which led me to deceive my¬ felf.—Adieu, I promife you inviolable filence.—He who once hoped to confti- tute your felicity, difdains to interfere with it. Yet one truth I ought perhaps to apprize you of: your happy, your fa¬ vored lover is married ; think not I wiih to reap any advantage from this in¬ formation—never more fnall I breathe a vow at your feet—Oh, Mary ! you have undone me!" He wrung my hands in an agony of paflion, and rufhed through the garden to conceal the fobs which continued to pierce my heart through my ear. W 7 hat a night did I pafs !—fad pre¬ lude to fo many miferable ones. I readily abfented myfelf the next dayat the Prince's ufual hour of vifiting us. I never faw him afterwards without pain, humiliation, and
and conftraint; though he omitted no¬ thing likely to reconcile me to himfelf. During the fatal illnefs into which he fell, how continually did my heart reproach me with increafing, if not caufing it? and how deeply was my injuftice to his merit puniihed, in the mortifying con¬ viction that Somerfet had dared to de· ceive me ?—What prayers did I offer up for Henry's recovery------What vows to atone for my error, by a life devoted to him ! Alas, I was not worthy a lover fo noble ; and heaven recalled his purer eflence, while yet unfullied. The fenfe of a hopelefs and unworthy paflion ming¬ led with the deep grief I could not but feel for his lofs. A ficklinefs and difguft fucceeded—rank, royalty, diftinction, every worldly advantage combined, could not have diifipated the gloom of my mind, or reconciled me for a moment to fociety. I took no pleafure in the hopes, you, my dear, my generous mo¬ ther, cherifhed for me ; but I would not be ungrateful, and therefore concealed my
my ideas. Thus impreifed, what merit was there in that philofophy which en¬ abled me to become your comforter under a reverie I fcarcely felt ?—Oh, that my errors, my misfortunes, had ended here—that I had breathed my lafton your revered bofom, while yet un¬ confcious of wounding it ! When the vain hope of freedom made you folicit for a limited portion of air and exercife, how could you forefee the fatal confe¬ quences of that periodical indulgence ! In the firft of thefe folitary walks, So¬ merfet prefented himfelf before me ; not the crefted, afpiring favorite ; but the felf- accu fing, the pale, the humble lo¬ ver.—My eyes refifted the impulfe of my heart, and turned haughtily from him ; but he hung on my robe, he intreated he conjured,—he would be heard.— ' feel I fhall not have time to enter into the long explanation of his conduct which won from me an unwilling pardon : fu fri ce it to fay, that he knew every, the moft fecret, tranfaction in our houfe, nor ventured to marry till convinced I was be-
betrothed to Prince Henry. But, oh ! the wretch he efpoufed !------ Ne per may you know the crimes of which ihe has too probably been guilty ! It was to Somerfet's interpofition we owed the pro¬ longation of thofe lives, the pride and rage of the King had devoted from the moment he read the papers he took a malicious pleafure in deftroying.—Still anxious for me, the Earl owned he had perfuaded James to imprifon us in this Caftle, as well to fecure our fafety, as to provide us thofe comforts and conveni¬ encies our royal relation would have de¬ prived us of. " I could not beinfenfible toferviceslike thefe; and, finding my wrath began to abate, he awakened my pity, by de¬ feri bing the domeftic miferies an un¬ happy marriage had impofed on him. The tears with which my wounded foul blotted this picture, induced him ftill farther to explain himfelf* His hopes of a divorce feemed rationally grounded, and I could not but enter into his views i on
on that head.—I was not however able to perfuade him that you would ever think as I did, and weakly promifed a fecrefy I ought to have feen the danger of.-------Yet, the prejudice which induced you to impute even our imprifonment to him, feemed fo fixed, fo unalterable, that though a thou¬ fand times the integrity of my nature tempt ed me to unfold to you the only fecret my bofom ever teemed with, I ihrunk be¬ fore a mind fo difgufted, nor dared to utter one fyllable might pain you. The delays of Somerfet, however neceífary, alarmed and diftreffed me.—I became cold and melancholy ; and, too delicate to confide to him the true caufes of this alteration, he foon affigned a falfe one, Peevifhnefs and altercation now robbed our interviews of all their fweetnefs.—He often reproached me with having opened my heart to yon, who alone could thus íhut it agninft him.—Difdain urged me one day to aflure him I wouid do fo, the firft moment I again beheld you.—He left me in a tranfport of rage. Alas, my heart became
became fenfible of one every way equal to it.—When I found that I was not permitted to return to your prifon, I refufed to admit him to that allotted for me, and gave vent to every extravagance fo un¬ forefeen an injury muft excite.—His an¬ fwer convinced me that this ftep had long been meditated. He aífured me iC he would foon er die than reftore me to a mother who had ever hated, detefted, and defpifed him without any reafon, till his claim took place of hers, and he could call me his wife." The cruel re¬ membrance of what you muft fuffer, foon reduced me to intreaties, and folemn promifes of continued fecrefy. " They were now, he replied, too late ;—that he could not fuppofe it poflible I Ihould be able to conceal from you the caufe of my abfence ; and this, juftly ftrengthening the unreafonable difguft and hatred you al¬ ready felt towards him, would make you go any lengths to prevent a union you muft naturally abhor." ------To this he added all he thought likely to foothe my Vol. III. Ζ em-
embittered fpirit, and folemnly afiured me your mind was relieved, by a conviction that this feparation was only in confe¬ quence of a new order from court.------ Although I faw in this mode of conduct a chicanery and little art my nature dif- dained, I was yet glad to imagine it lightened to you the heavy affliction our feparation could not but caule. I felt too late the error of mental refervation, and had fufficient reafon to think every evil might branch out from that little root. Having in vain contended with the man no lefs matter of my life than fate, I at length was wearied into for¬ giving him. The divorce was now in great forwardnefs, and the manifold iniquities of the fiend in human ihape he had mar¬ ried fuch as could not but ihock and in- tereft a heart difpofed to love him. A thoufand bufy projects paifed daily from his brain to mine, and often intervened between myfelf and a mother fo revered. Every hour that went over my head made it more impoffible for me to appear before 4 you
you but as his wife, and I became as eager as himfelf for a day which heaven had pre-ordained I ihould never fee. One who purfued her point more effectually, has feverely puniihed all my youthful er¬ rors—Oh may my premature death be re¬ ceived by him who made me as дп ex¬ piation !—How ihall I tell you !—and yet I muft—I have often thought my food tinctured with poifon—yefterday—Alas, my mother, where is now your fortitude ? —where is that fublime refignation I have feen you exert?—forget the vain hopes you once formed for me—forget that I am your daughter ; oh ! think the erring wretch this awful moment recais was born to embitter the days that yet remain to you, and adore, even in this painful moment, the mercy of the Al¬ mighty !—If I have not finned beyond for¬ givenefs, gracioufly extend yours to me, while yet I am fenfible of the Ь1еА^. : " As ihe threw herfelf into my arms, every feature feemed ihrunk, and moulded by the fingers of dearh—Alas ! what became Z 2 of
oí me at this crifis ! her paroxyfms were fcarce more dreadful than thofe that feized upon my foul—every emotion of love, friendihip, and kindred, appeared tranquillity, when compared with the wild, uncontrolable anguiih of the robbed, the ruined mother. Perpetually ready to give vent to the tumultuous execrations my heart pronounced againft the artful, infidious traitor, who had alienated her af¬ fections, and warped the rectitude of her mind, an intuitive conviction that fuch a tranfport would vainly embitter the little time remaining to her obliged me to confine to fighs and groans all the miferies of the moment. I drew her fondly to my bofom, and poured over her pale con- vulfed cheeks a heart-broken mother's folemn abfolution. One horror only could be added to a fcene like this, nor was it wanting. The cenrinels, weary of waiting and ftartlcd by our groans, now abruptly entered the chamber.—Scared at the fight of my daughter expiring in my arms, the fenfe of
of their own danger foon over-ruled every other; they urged, they conjured me to leave my Mary, now apparently lifelefs ; but they urged, they conjured in vain.—On her I was fo foon to refign to her Creator my whole foul was now fixed.—The dear one faintly revived ; but, ftruck with inconceivable horror at fight of the foldiers, ihe relapfed into con- vulfions, griping me ftill clofer. Ah, God, the cold chill that followed ! when I found her hold relax at once— the world vanifhed from before my eyes —they beheld only the fair form, which fought a grave on the bofom where it rift found a being.—Infpired with the fiercenefs of a favage, I grafped her yet clofer, Ihrieking tremendoufiy, and with a ftrength furely fupernatural. The con- fufed and incenfed foldiers, having ufed every perfuafion in vain, made the moft violent efforts to fever me from the laft, the deareft, the only object of my love. Threats, intreaties, art, and force, how¬ ever, were alike vain------nothing could Ζ β win,
win, could tear her from me. They prefented at length their bayonets to mv bofom, and beheld me with furprife dare the blow.—Perhaps they had really pierced it, but that fame women, attendant on my daughter, now ruihed into the room, Fear for their own fafety obliged the foldiers to forbear urging or enforcing me further. They feized the intruders, left any of them íhould efcape, and, hav¬ ing bound them, fought fafety in flight. A terrible calm fucceeded my intenfe defperation—the blood which had tu- multuoufly burnt along every vein now returned in torrents, to choak up, and drown my heart.------The black fumes mounted thence to my brain.—With a grief-glazed eye, I contemplated the pale and precious cheek from whofe rich color¬ ing I of late drew life, till ignorant that I either fuffered, or exifted.
Seldom
Seldom enough myfelf to diftinguiih the ihadowy forms that flitted round my bed, and always two indifferent to utter a fingle queftion, I opened not the cur¬ tain, nor cared who was beyond it.— Vague and ftifled exclamations alone in¬ formed me of the danger of that fatal fire which raged within my veins :— Danger did I fay ?—I ought rather to have called it relief. Durino; the íhort inter- vals of my delirium, I voluntarily funk in filence under the gloom and debi¬ lity it left. Suddenly I was feized with fuch flutters, and gafpings, as feemed to indicate an immediate termination of every human infliction.—My weary foul hovered at the gate of its prifon, and I felt as if a fingle word would releafe it; but I had neither ability or inclination to pronounce that word ; and though I per¬ ceived every curtain was undrawn to give me air, I raifed not my quivering eye¬ lids to diftinguiih the two perfons who anxioufly held each hand, as watching for Ζ 4 the
the laft beat of the faint and hurried pulfe. While thus in the very ftruggle and fluctuation incident to parting nature, a voice fuddenly reached my receding fenfes—a voice fo mellow, calm, and holy, that life yet lingered on it. I dif¬ tinguiihed thefe words : " Oh, Almighty God ! with whom do live the fpirits of the juft made perfect, when they are de¬ livered from their earthly prifons; we humbly commend the foul of this thy fervant, our dear fifter, into thy hands, as into thofe of a faithful Creator, and moft merciful Saviour I" A faint effort I made to releafe my hands, with the defign of raifing him towards heaven, caufed the prayer to ceafe. An emotion I could not refift made me lift my dim eyes to behold, if not abfolutely an angel* the human being that moft refembled one. At a table near my bed knelt a Clergyman, whofe reverend locks time had entirely bleached, but it had taken nothing from his fine eyes, which feemed to
to reflect the divinity he ferved—care and experience had worn traces in every perfect feature ; and the pale purity of virtue, chaftened alike by forrow and refignation, had fucceeded to the vivid hues of youth, hope and health. I ut¬ tered a figh, and faint exclamation.— A fweet, yet fad, pleafure wandered through my exhaufted frame, thus to be aífured that I had reached the very point of my being. Some women decently ar¬ rayed in black having affifted my infirm and venerable comforter to rife, con¬ ducted him to the fide of my bed, and retired. With a gracioufnefs peculiar to himfelf, he adjured me, fince the mercy of the Almighty had unexpectedly re¬ ftored my intellects, to profit by the indulgence in preparing my foul to ap¬ pear before him. An impulfe of grati¬ tude made me raife my hand to take his, that fympathetically trembled over me; but even this trifling motion made me fenfible I had on many blifters, which wrung my feeble fenfe even to fainting. The
The women, as is ufual in defperate ca¬ fes, gave me fome vivifying cordials, and again retired. The reverend ftranger once more addreifed me, prai fing the Al · mighty for the reftoration of my intel¬ lects—they were indeed reftored, for, oh ! the recollection of that difmal event which had rendered their lofs a bleffing return¬ ed upon my mind, and made me loath the fuccours I could owe only to the de¬ tefted hand that had confummated my woes ! <f Oh, you," cried 1, in a broken voice, " who thus feek to comfort the mi¬ ferable, inform me firft to whom I owe the benefit ?" He paufed a moment.— his gracious eyes glanced upward, and, having thus confulted with his Creator, he anfwered me with firmnefs ; c< that his name was De Vere ; the houfhold Chaplain of the Earl of Somerfet."— At that abhorred title I íhut my eyes as though I could have fhut out retrofpec- tion, and waved to him to leave me.—· tc Raib, unfortunate woman," returned he, in a folemn and yet tender tone, " religion does
does not permit me to obey you—would you bear into a better world the pride, the paifions, the prejudices, which have certainly embittered, perhaps ihortened, your days in this ?—Dare you prefent to the pure fource of good, your great, your glorious Creator, a foul yet fullied with voluntary frailties and human imperfec¬ tion ?—Are you not on the point of ceafing to fuffer, wherefore then ihould you not ceafe to refent ? Religion enjoins you to forget the faults of others, and contem¬ plate only your own.—Attend to truth, and I will impart it to you—refolve to be patient, and I will pour balm into the deep wounds of human calamity—con¬ trol your paifions, and I will elevate them, even under the ftruggles of part¬ ing nature, by hopes which íhall furely be realized, becaufe they centre in im¬ mortality."—The author of univerfal be¬ ing feemed to fpeak to me through his M in i ft er— the gathering tumult ftood fuf¬ pended. " You addrefs not an ingrate," returned I feebly, " I have walked in peace through
through life with my God, and fain would I die fo : though furely to remember the wretch, who precipitates me into eternity by a grief too pungent for endurance, with charity, or compofure, exceeds my abi¬ lity. If you have aught to reveal that may allay this irritation, be truly gene¬ rous in unfolding it—if otherwife, pre- fent fuch images only to my mind аь may drive from it that of a villain, whofe offences you cannot extenuate ; nor dou¬ ble the agonies even you cannot relieve." if It is my only intention, madam," re¬ plied he.— ff Alas, I would not probe your wounds even to heal them !—If it is ne- ceiTary to fuíFer ere we can feel, believe me, I want not even that power of fym- pathizing with you ; yet muft I recon¬ cile my divine and human character, by vindicating the innocent while I foothe the unfortunate ; though even the wealth of nations could not tempt me for one moment to palliate guilt. Have you courage to hear a letter, given me in hopes of the prefent opportunity ? I controled
controled myfelf, and figned to him to read. " In what words, moft injured, moft unfortunate of women, fhall the wretch who has unconfcioufiy deftroyed your peace and his own deprecate the wrath his very idea muft occafion ?—Alas, overwhelmed with grief, horror, defpair, every killing fenfation, (guilt alone ex¬ cepted) his punifhment is as acute as even malice could wiíh it. " To fill up the meafure of my afflic¬ tions, I am informed that the blow which has robbed my foul of its deareft hope, ftruck at your life—that even in the wildnefs of delirium your curfes purfue me, and you are ready to fink into the grave with unabated hatred.—If return¬ ing recollection íhould ever enable you to read, or hear, thefe genuine dictates of a breaking heart, do it, madam, I con¬ jure you, the late juftice of an acquittal. By the fpotlefs fpirit of the dear loft an¬ gel my fatal love deprived you of, hear, pity—if poflible, forgive me.—Can you
for a moment believe that I would have touched a life, dear, precious, to me, even as to yourfelf? The abandoned woman, to whom hea¬ ven, as a punifhment for all my fins, united me, difcovered by fome unknown means thofe views I thought impenetrable ; and, forefeeing in their completion her own difgrace and ruin, ihe took a deadly means to fave herfelf from both.—Alrea¬ dy but too familiar with poifon, and with death, ihe found, among the maids at¬ tending on my dear loft love, one bafe enough to aid her in tranflating an angel too early to the ikies. To fixy, that I hate, deteft, and ihun the execrable mon¬ iter, is furely needlefs—I even refign her to your juftice, nor do I wiíh to ihelter myfelf from it, if you ftill think me gu il tv. u The laft words of an expiring faint are not more ardent, more fincere than thofe I now utter.—Oh ! ftrive, then to live, madam, nor let my agonized foul have the additional misfortune of fhort¬ en in α
ening your days, and lingering under your curfe !" Alas of what importance are thefe late convictions ? When a ball has gone through the heart, we are incapable of heeding the quarter it comes from.------ I could not however refufe credence to this letter, and, accufing myfelf of having hitherto perhaps wanted candour towards the author, I acquitted myfelf to him, by affording him my forgivenefs. Nature, ever ihrinking from diflblu- tion, is eafily recalled to a lingering fuf- ferance ; but the exhaufted foul no more can recover its powers. The activity which once fupported me was gone for ever.------ The venerable divine I have mentioned ftill watched over me, and by the holieft confutations contended with the apathy into which I was finking.—But who could heal a heart broken by fo many forrows ì —That it was broken alone could confole me. Deftined to turn my dim eyes around this vaft globe without finding
finding one object on which they could reft, De Vere led them towards heaven; he bade me remember that my treafure was only removed, not taken wholly from me; and that every paffing day brought me nearer to recovering it. For the execrable woman who had, to the ruin of her own foul, murdered the only hope of mine, I ventured not to imagine a punifhment.—I dared not truft myfelf with fo dangerous a wiih—No, I configned her to the God ihe had offended, and he has, even in this world, fearfully- avenged me. The pious De Vere íhewed, by pre- ferving and reftoring my jewels, the equi¬ ty of his nature, and I made him fuch acknowledgments as muft flatter his heart, and eftabliih his fortune. As foon as I thought myfelf equal to the journey, I refolved to retire to France, that I might at leaft expire in peace, and be- fought him to accompany me.—Not able without ingratitude immediately to quit Jiis patron, he comforted me with the hopes
hopes of foon partaking my voluntary exile. How unworthy the man who won the innocent heart of my tranflated angel ever was of it I had foon another con- vincin g proof. Becaufe I refifted the impulfes of defpair—becaufe I liftened to the dictates of virtue and religion, and deigned to live out the days ap¬ pointed by the Almighty, his narrow foul began to believe mine fufceptible of human confolation ; he dared to intrude upon me, in the name of the King, late offers of acknowledgment, diftinčtion, fortune—Heavens ! how could either imagine I wouid owe ought to thofe I muft alike look down upon ?—The very idea had well nigh difarranged my feeble faculties, and deftroyed the religious com¬ pofure of my grief. It however con¬ vinced me that no oppofition would be made to my quitting that prifon in which I left, alas, all worth enclofing.------1 launched once more into the immenfe world, unknown—unendeared, and wil¬ ling tobe fo. Vol. III. A a My
My fever returned on my landing in France with the moft mortal fymptoms. -—Ah ! can I fail here to commemorate the fécond angel heaven fent to my af- fiftance ? The arrival of the Ambaffa- dor in his way toward England, though at firft an inconvenience, in fo narrow an afylum as an inn, eventually prolonged my days. His dear and lovely daugh¬ ter was informed of my ftate—ihe in¬ dulged the fublime impulfe of hmanîty, which led her towards the bed, where lay a forlorn wretch who appeared ready to draw her laft breath in filent affliction. She fummoned her noble father's phyfi- cian, whofe ikill relieved one it could not fave.— She even deigned to outftay the Ambaifador; and, by a glorious principle known only to fuperior natures, began to love the wretch ¿he fuccoured. A virtue fo exemplary almoft reconciled me to the world I am ihortly to quit.— Sweet Adelaide, when in this faint por¬ trait you furvey yourfelf, figh for thofe decaying powers which cannot render it more ftriking. й That
That my decline has been prolonged till this narrative is concluded I do not regret ; and by compliance I have evinc¬ ed my fenfe of your friendihip :—I have now only to die.—Yet, alas, it is with regret I prefent to your youthful eyes fo melancholy a chart of my .voyage through life.—Suffer it not to damp your hopes, but rather let it blunt your fenfe of misfortune : for have I not faid al¬ ready, that confummate mifery has a moral ufe, in teaching the repiner at little evils to be jufter to his God and himfelf ? ------Glorious though infcrutable are all his ways, and, íhort as my time now is, he has fuffered me to fee his righteous retribution. Condemnation, infamy, and folitude, are henceforth the portion of Somerfet and his execrable Countefs.—A fimilar crime, long buried in oblivion, has been proved upon them, without my having once difturbed the fa¬ cred aihes of my Mary. An act fo atrocious has broke the tye which bound De Vere to the Earl, and I every day expect him. I ftruggle to retain my laft breath till 4 can give it up in his prefence 3 affured that
that his fuperior foul will prepare my frail one for a long hereafter, and decently difpofe of the mortal frame I foon muft leave behind me. Dear and lovely friend, you are now in England.—Already perhaps your feet have trod lightly over thefe fpots where my happinefs withered.— Ah Ì if fenfi¬ bility fhould lead you more thoughtfully to retrace them, check every painful emo¬ tion, by recollecting that I íhall then be paft the power of fuffering.—Yet when your noble father reconducts you to the home you was born to embellifh, grant a little to the weaknefs of mortality, and linger once more on the fpot where we met : the pious De Vere will there attend your coming.---------Accept from his hand the caiket I bequeath, and fuffer him to lead you to the namelefs grave where he ihall have interred my aflies : drop on it a few of thofe holy tears with which virtue confecrates mif- fortune ; then raife your eyes with thofe of your venerable conductor, and in a better world look for MATILDA»
FINIS.
