Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The Recess; Or, a Tale of Other Times
ŤHE R E C E S Si &c.
PART III.
JT ROM this temporary death I Was át laft recalled by a found that made me wifh it had been indeed eternal ι the voice, the tremendous voice of Williams; Öf What horrors was my foul inftantly fufceptiblel What dreadful images iwam before thöfe eyes I hardly durft open! Fearfully at length I caft them around—I faw I had been conveyed into the great room of our Recefs ; facred once to piety and inno¬ cence, but now, alas ! the ihelter of ra¬ pine, perhaps murder. A number oí Ш- Vol. IL В looking
looking ruffians ftood ready to fulfil the worft commands of their ferocious confe¬ derate, who with malignant joy contem¬ plated two hopelefs victims unpitying heaven feemed to have delivered entirely to his vengeance. I gave myfelf up for loft— myfelf —I alike gave up Lord Lei¬ cefter; who thus difarmed and furround¬ ed, collected his foul in filence, and re¬ fumed the majeftic air. which once could awe even this villain to fubordination. I every where perceived a variety of in- ftruments, namelefs to me, which I con¬ fidered as the means of torture and of death; and only fupplicated the Almighty to fpare us the firft, fince to avoid the latter I fuppofed a fruitlefs prayer. You fee at laft, cried the exulting vil¬ lain, fortune's wheel has made its circle, and my turn is come, Lord Leicefter.-^- How could you hope'to conquer a man whofe all was courage ? Neither Sir Fran¬ cis, nor even Elizabeth, could long con¬ fine oné who dares precipitate himfelf into the ocean in fearch of freedom; noti added
added he in an ironical tone, that I fhall fail to requite my obligation to you. Lord Leicefter replied but with a look;. a look fo fuperior, contemptuous, and collected, that it wrought the rage of Wil¬ liams to a ftill higher pitch; who turned towards me, malignity burning in every fear of his horrid face, <c you are welcome home, fair lady, continued he, though your vifit is an unexpected favor, without the idle train too which once attended this idle favorite. You fee we have made a little free with your hallowed manfion, but the faints take all in good part. Do you not enquire after your fofter-father ? he would tell us no tales, nor will he ever now tell you one." Oh, Anthony, I ihud¬ dered for thee, thou venerable murdered friend in filence ! " Monfter, burft forth Lord Leicefter, haft thou with unexam¬ pled cruelty butchered an Anchorite?" " I always work fafely, returned he; you have only faved me the trouble, for never would I have refted 'till by fome artifice I had drawn you once more hither, and В 2 God,
God, you fee, moft gracioufly has feht you." Blafpheme not thy Maker, oh cruel wretch, fighed I in a tremulous accent ; juft, though fevere, are all his ordina¬ tions; and lo, with fad fubmiflion Itake the death appointed me even from thy hands. No, cried he, though you are not the haughty beauty I adored, yet, as the wife of that imperious lord, you become but a more perfect means of exquifite revenge. The nature of that revenge blazed in his countenance—my heart turned to marble within me. I raifed my eyes to¬ wards- heaven in fpeechlefs agony, and rivetting them on Lord Leicefter, found life recede too faft, for my ear to diftin¬ guiih one word of that bitter indignation, which the voice it loved fo loudly uttered. I almoft doubted whether my fenfes were indeed returned, when I found myfelf in¬ volved in impenetrable darknefs. The piercing figh of fome one near me was the only found that broke the ftillnefs of the night. <f If, cried I in a feeble tone, that is
is the voice to which my heart was born to vibrate, oh tell me, beloved Leicefter, whether the fcene which yet fwims before my fight was real or a vifion?" " Gra¬ cious heaven! returned he in a voice yet more piercing, you breathe again, my fouľs beft treafure ! the long, long faint¬ ing caufed by the threats of that execra¬ ble moniter, and which held during your removal into this dungeon, gave me hopes that you had finally efcaped a fate too hor¬ rid for reflection. Oh dire extreme of delpair and mifery when I am condemned to wiih you dead ! and yet what elfe can deliver you ?—yet think not, Matilda, I fear to follow;-*-ah no ! the beft blood burning in this bofom ihould joyfully em¬ balm you ; but the thoughts of all which may precede that moment, almoft urges. me to daíh my diftracted brain againft the ftones on which I lie, and ihorten my own fufferings, fince hopelefs of averting yours.'' " Call up your fortitude, your reafon, your religion, returned I in a firmer voice; (an emotion which united all thofe fentiments diíFufing itfelf through my frame) dare I accufe the Almighty of in- juftice ?
juftice? Will he, who firft gave my help¬ lefs innocence a hallowed ihelter within thefe walls, ordain that they Ihould prove its tomb ? the ihades of thofe who reared me will furely rife in its défend." " Alas, my love, fighed he in a defpairing voice, thefe vifionary hopes may foothe the mind 'till that fad moment nothing can avert— have you forgot that even in happier times you hoped nothing from the vil¬ lain? and is this an hour to expect a change ? Revenge and want have feared his foul to all humanity. How, how could it ever efcape my memory, that he was acquainted with the fecret of the Recefs ? how, under fuch uncertainty durft I ever venture within it ? but ihort. fighted man, folely employed in weaving # fnares for others,, too fate finds his own feet entangled, and falls an eafy prey to the ignoble. Not fatisfied with heading this fet of coiners, for fuch their apparatus proved them, his daring difpofition breaks forth in acts of plunder and barbarity, and even at this moment he is feeking new victims, though pofiefiing, unfoughr, thofe he would out of the whole world have
have chofen." <c Shall wc complain Heaven has quite abandoned us, refumed I, when it has given us but one moment to ourfelves ? Oh, Leicefter ! you have hitherto found me a tender, anxious, fear¬ ful woman ; but alas, I knew not till now the powers of my own foul—Abhor¬ rent of íhame and diíhonour, it tempts me to the moft defperate deeds; if yours is indeed congenial, it furely underftands me; aflume a Roman courage, and fave thy wife, thy fpotlefs wife, from horrible pollution." " So much I agonize at the idea, cried Lord Leicefter, that were thefe hands free, perhaps —-—" " and mine too, added I, feeble as they are, alike are bound; yet furely defpair will give me ftrength to loofe them." The violent efforts I made at laft broke the • flight thong they thought more than furficient to confine one in my feeble ftate, and encouraged by my fuccefs, I fought Lord Leicefter. At the moment I re¬ ftored his liberty, I half revived, while the fole ufe the tender Leicefter could make of his arms, was to prefs me a В 4 thou-
thoufand times to his fwelled heart, which almoft burft with anguifh. I ftruggled againft all the fad tendernefs which throb- bed at mine. " Oh, think no more of Jove, cried I with increafing heroifm, it has given place to death—to worfe than. death—rather imagine you hear this dun¬ geon once more open."—" But can I lift that hand, which pledged itfelf for thy protection, againft thy life, thy pre¬ cious life ? groaned he—can 1 deface that angel form, which ftill illumes my foul through all thefe complicated horrors ? And oh, our dear unborn ! for whom we gladly fuffered, can I, can I deftroy it ?" " Think, think my Life, returned I, we have perhaps this only moment—had thefe wretches left any means of death in my own hands, do you imagine I would fupplicate it from yours ? Strangle me now, while darknefs favours. Your wife demands of you this final proof of love and courage j hers will at leaft vie with it -, no groan, no ftruggle, ihall iflue from a heart which then will return innocent * to that duft from which it fprung, devoted alone
alone to the adored huiband with whofe image it is doubly inhabited." " Oh* matchlefs, matchlefs woman ! cried my Lord, flooding my cheek with tears of generous anguiíh ·, never, never, can it be; my finews relax to childhood ; your unhoped-for fortitude totally fubdue« mine, and melts my foul to woman's weaknefs.—Oh ! thou who gaveft me this angel, canft thou have abandoned her to brutality, and me to diftraciion !" A peal of thunder, which íhook the ruins to their foundation, feemed to re¬ prove his boldnefs. The livid lightning pervaded our dungeon through many a time-worn aperture. During every tre¬ mendous illumination I gazed awe-ftruck on the pallid face of my love; till fuddenly glancing around, I gave a cry which ftartled even myfelf—-glowing, gafping, ţranfported, yet ftill unable to fpeak, I funk before my Lord, and clafping both his hands, alternately preft them to my heart, and lifted them, with mine, to¬ wards Heaven. " What means my be^ loved? exclaimed he, in almoft equal fur-
furprife and agitation, has pitying provi¬ dence deprived her of her fenfes ?" <c Ah no, it is God himfelf who has illumined them, faltered I at laft; what dungeon has man yet difcovered the Almighty cannot ; you have, perhaps, forgot, my love, that you have often heard of one communica¬ tion from the Recefs to the Abbey: clofed up on the death of Mrs. Marlow, it was never opened after, nor was it known to that horrible villain ; this difmal den con¬ tains it, and we tread on the only fpot in the creation which could ihelter us from thofe ruffians. In the corner on the right hand, covered with lumber, placed long fince on purpofe, you will find a trap door ; if you have ftrength to raife it, ftrong faftenings will fecure it on the other fide, at leaft till we reach the Ab¬ bey. Oh thou, added I, devoutly raifing my eyes, who alone couldft preferve us, continue thofe flafhes, more welcome than ever yet the fun was." Impreffed folely with the prefent dan¬ ger, it was not till we had defcended into the vaults, and faftened that bleffed door
door between ourfelves and the banditti, that either recollected what we might ap¬ prehend at the Abbey. Affured that none but an opulent owner could refide in a feat fo fplendid, we vainly racked imagination to difcover its prefent poffeflbr; yet per¬ fuaded even our worft enemies would ref¬ cue us with pleafure from a peril fo near¬ ly connected with themfelves, we were obliged to defy every other. The houfe- keeper's room, into which the paffage led, was empty, yet fcattered furniture, &c. indicated inhabitants. I hailed, with true devotion, that power who gave me once more to fee the foft luftre of the moon, which on the fubfiding of the ftorm dif¬ fufed ferenity. Retaining in his hand the bar (which had been one fattening of the Abbey entrance) as the only weapon in his power, Lord Leicefter followed my trembling fteps ; they turned intuitively to the apartment of Mrs. Marlow; ah that there I could have found her ! I paufed at the door of the anti-chamber, and my heart fickened with defpondency— knowing there was an immediate neceffity for
for roufing and arming the whole family, yet convinced we muft at firft alarm them as preternatural beings, and afterwards, with the conviction our efcape introduced a danger to themfelves, while ignorant whom we were going to appear before, well might the firrneft heart tremble. Engroifcd by thefe various and affecting ideas, 1 hardly heard a found, which made Lord Leicefter ftart forward with an eagernefs, that might eafily have deprived me of the little ftrength Heaven had left me. The anti-chamber into which I im¬ mediately followed him was dark, but in the room beyond I perceived a light, and heard the voice of a woman apparently fupplicating. Scarcely had I diftinguiih¬ ed in that of the man who anfwered her, the dreaded Williams, ere I faw Lord Leicefter ftart forward, levelling the bar with fo defperate a boldnefs, that the fall of the villain afcertained our fafety. In¬ ftantly fnatching a knife from the wretch's hand, he pointed it at his bofom, but perceived a perforation in the brain,which made his puniihment terrible, as his guilt and
and his death immediate. " Execrable monfter, cried my Lord, dropping the knife, by unlooked-for means Heaven at laft has finiihed thee."—" Gracious God» cried the lady, do I hear the voice of Lord Leicefter !"—Amazed at this difcovery, and the preceding event, hardly could my trembling limbs convey me into the chamber. " Approach, my dear Ma¬ tilda, cried my Lord, never more ihall this wretch appal thee. Eternal juftice is fatisfied with one blow, nor need I turn affaflin even to him. Happy at the fame moment in faving this lady, endeavour to intereft her for thofe misfortunes in which me already feems interwoven."— <c Can Lord Leicefter ever know a misfor¬ tune in which I am not interwoven ? cried the lady; to have received my life from his hands alone could reconcile me to it." Had I not known thefpeaker by her voice to be the fair Rofe Cecil, fuch language muft have afcertained it : yet to find our¬ felves under the roof of our moft mortal enemy, was á cruel ftröke. "Isit poffible we ihould be in the houfe of Lord Bur¬ leigh ?"
leigh?" cried Lord Leicefter, difdainfully. She, fighing, replied, " he fortunately is abfent, nor can you ever be unfafe in any houfe where I am miftrefs. ,, " You know not to whom you fpeak, cried I, in turn ; alas, Mifs Cecil, do you (till re¬ member the friendfhip you have fo often profeffed for the unfortunate Matilda? Ever has fhe lamented the fad neceffity of veiling her fate from a heart fo noble ; accept then, at this unexpected moment, that confidence I always longed to place in you, and tell me whether you itili can refolve to love her who was the wife of Lord Leicefter, long ere ihe faw you ? her, who at this moment, renders him a fugitive in his own country?" Her dif· trefsful eyes wandered from him to me for fome moments in filence, then taking a hand of each, ihe firft kiffed, and after¬ wards uniting them, faid with a Spartan firmnefs, " my friend l" but turning in- ftantly from him to hide her glowing cheeks and impafiioned tears in my bofom, fobbed out, " my deliverer!" Her beauty (which was rendered more obvious by her dif-
difordered appearance, the ruifian having compelled her to rife andhalf drefs herfelf) her innocence and her generofity appeared at laft a little to affect Lord Leicefter, who had hitherto ihewn her an indifference almoft amounting to difguft. " It remains with you, Madam, returned he in a fofter voice, now to become mine. Mifs Cecil no longer fees the woríhipped favourite of an imperious Queen. United alike by , choice and law to the dear companion of my dangers, a chain of occurrences re¬ duces us to efcape by unknown means from England ; and with the utmoft dif- patch. Neverthelefs, thofe even Eliza¬ beth's rage might have fpared, were only an hour ago devoted by that lifelefs vil¬ lain. Efcaped this moment almoft from a den of flaughter, hardly can we tell whether the banditti, of whom this was the ringleader, are not now furrounding us. Summon all your courage and your domefticks, and while providing for your own fafety, I need not folicit you to re¬ member ours." "When I forget it, may I be condemned to fee you periih !" cried íhe,
lhe. Then turning to me, with that in¬ nocent candor which eminently diftin¬ guiihed her, fought a pardon in my eyes. Collecting all her thoughts,ihe continued, in a few moments—" Aftoniíhed as I muft be, both at your circumftances and your vifit, my noble friends, curiofity yields to friendíhip. With the morning I expect my father, nor is there any fafety щ . for you but immediate flight : neverthe¬ lefs, this danger with which you fay we are environed, muft be the firft confidera¬ tion." I then explained to her the fecret of the Recefs ; the direful miftake which had thrown us into the power of its pre¬ fent diabolical tenants, and the defpera¬ tion which the difcovery of our efcape, and the means by which it was effected, muft inevitably caufe : except indeed the lofs of William íhould abate their fero¬ city. While I talked, I frequently per¬ ceived her mind wandered on another fubječt. She furveyed the difguifed per¬ fons, and pale faces of both my Lord and me, a thouiand times over 5 by fits lhe fhook with horror at the ftory I was re¬ lating,
lating, and by ftarts ihe forgot I had been fpeaking, and obliged me to go back in my tale. Employed folely in concerting the means of fecuring our fafety, her own feemed hardly a confider- ation. Such is the nature of love in the mind of a virtuous woman, " I fee, faid ihe, (when I had finifhed) the necefiity for fome body's appearing, to account to my fervants for the difcovery of the vil¬ lains. I fee too, that Lord Leicefter can¬ not be the perfon, for who can fail to know him ?" The inference thus tenderly conveyed was obvious; one muft be feen, but I could not refolve to be that one without a difmay which furpafled com¬ plaint. "Yes, my dear Matilda, added ihe, we muft part with him for a little time ; but you will rejoin him for life. By the ordination of providence, as I could almoft fuppofe, the fon of my nurfe is now in the houle, a young man over whom that circumftance gives me a powerful influence ; againft the choice of his friends he embraced a fea-faring life, till he ac¬ quired enough money to purchafe a fmall Vol. II. С vef-
vefiel, with which he trades between the coaft of Devoníhire and that of France ; but dif^ufted at the profefiìon he chofe, it was only yefterday he arrived here to folicit my intereft with my father to pro¬ mote him in a civil line. Say not then Heaven frowns en your flight, fince it plainly points out a fecure mode of efcape. I cannot but difcern that every avenue to Holland muft be effectually doled, but who could think of tracing you to the diftant and obfeure coaft of Devoníhire ? it is true the journey is long, but to com- penfate for that, you muft recollect it. is fafe. The travels of Arthur have been confined to the road by which he conducts you, and his connexions are doubtlefs among people who will furniih you with every common comfort, without having curiofity, or underftanding, to penetrate through the myftery of your rank. I fee too what your expreífive eyes, my dear Matilda, would point out—the impofii- bility of long concealing the ihare I have had in your fate, fince how elfe can your miraculous appearance here, or the terri¬ ble
ble death of my midnight vifitor be ac¬ counted for ? but what ofthat ? íhe ge¬ neroufly added, after a moment's paufe, much ought to be ventured when our all is at ftake." " I have expected every mo¬ ment, faid my Lord, fome dreadful inter¬ ruption from the reft of thefe wretches." cc No, returned Mifs Cecil, I have every reafon to imagine he was alone in this en¬ terprize ; when firft, by his entrance, I ftarted from the flumber into which I was falling, I began collecting my purfe, and every ornament near me: he rejected them all, and compelling me to rife, command¬ ed me with terrible imprecations to con¬ duct him to the private cabinet, where my father concealed his ftate papers: hoping, doubtlefs, by poffeffing them to obtain many fecrets, which might enfure his own pardon, for that muft have been his ulti¬ mate objeci:. I knew the character of my father fowell asto debate whether 1 íhould not rather give up my life than a truft fo precious, when the terrible intervention of Lord Leicefter releafed me from the con¬ flict. Yet I agree with you, a moment С 2 ought
ought not to be loft; and firft let me lock up the room which contains fo ihocking a teftimony, that more than one man has intruded there at midnight." Confcious of her own merit, fhe encountered even the eye of Lord Leicefter without tre¬ mor, who could not but admire in her at that moment all the magnanimity and forefight which enobles man, with every fofter grace that half deifies woman. For my own part I clafped her to my bofom, declaring I could never love her more than I did long ere this proof of her me¬ rit. " "This is the only topic dangerous to either, returned flie, a tear beatifying her fmile, we will all love one another as well as we can. But now, my Lord, attend to the next ftep, if you dare rely on my direction ; we will conduct you to the door leading to the garden; make your way over the wall on the fide far- theft from the wood ; a mile beyond you will find a bridge; wait near it in filence ; Arthur ihall firft hide a horfe for you, and then fet out on another, to convey this lady, as if to her home, in fome ad¬ jacent
jacent village; the confufion attending the difcovery of the vaulted palTage will render the family, moft probably, inatten¬ tive either to her prefence or departure, and ere they can be enough at leifure to difcover Williams, or form any danger¬ ous conjecture, you will both be, I hope, beyond the reach of difcovery or purfuit. But oh, my Lord! if you would have either of the trembling wretches now be¬ fore you furvive this night of horrors, ufe the ftricleft caution in feeking your ap¬ pointed ihelter, nor leave it till you hear the voice of Matilda. Lord Leicefter promifed; and con- dueling him foftly through the houfe, we reached the door leading to the gar¬ den. All the horrors of the paft were fhort of what I felt at that moment. Af¬ ter the dangers I had ihared and ef¬ caped with my Lord, to fee him depart, was to quit my guardian angel, or to deprive him of his : yet convinced Mils Cecil was aduated by the fame fearful affection, I yielded to the defperate emer¬ gency. The clofing of the door after С 3 him
him fevered the hearts of both ; it was then only we knew the fupport we had derived from his prefence ; wan, fpeech¬ lefs, helplefs, we durft hardly turn our eyes on any object but each other, nor utter a figh but it fwelled into a groan; and the ghaftly body of Williams feemed for ever to impede our footfteps, floating the path with blood. Mifs Cecil took the only poffible method to divert our terrors, and foon roufing a few terrified domefticks, commanded them to fummon all the fa¬ mily: a command which needed no repe¬ tition. A few minutes gathered together eighteen or twenty men, fufficiently arm¬ ed to fecure us from any perfonal danger. I conducted the whole aftonifhed body to the private door, through which I had en¬ tered ; I defcribed the place to which it led, and touching flightly on my own danger and efcape, recommended to them that profound filence the villains had preierved towards us with fuch fatal fuc- cefs. During this time, Mils Cecil fe¬ leded the man fhe mentioned to us, and retiring into the next room, gave him her
THE RECESS, &c. 23 her orders unobferved ; fo entirely did both my appearance and ftrange ftory en- grofs the attention of every individual belonging to the family. Mifs Cecil re¬ joining us, ordered them to divide, and that while half remained to guard the houfe, the reft ihould defcend, and pafling into the dungeon from whence I came, wait the return of the banditti, and feize them one by one as they entered. This conclufion of the adventure greatly damp¬ ed the ardour of the group, but aíhamed to recede from a place, through which I had apparently efcaped alone, they depart¬ ed in fo numerous a body as might al¬ moft fill the den in which I was lately en¬ clofed, the few who remained hovering neartheentrance, folely intent on theevent of the enterprize. Arthur, in the inter¬ im, having the full command of the fia¬ bles, made ready two horfes in the man¬ ner already mentioned, and Mifs Cecil, with her ufual forefight, overwhelmed me with refreihments, which a little invigo¬ rated my exhaufted frame: nor did ihe for¬ get to provide Arthur with fuch as might С 4 re-
recruit my Lord; felečting from her own wardrobe, linen and every neceíľary the time and occafion admitted. Impatiently I expected the fummons to depart, which was preceded by a mefiage from the Re¬ cefs, that all was hitherto entirely filent, and the door faftened as when we left it, a circumftance which appalled my inmoft foul, as it feemed to leave us ftill in the reach of the mercilefs banditti. With mingled tears of grief and hope, I em¬ braced that generous friend I never more might fee, and quitting the once hofpi- table manfion, which feemed of all the univerfe the only home my heart acknow¬ ledged, I feated myfelf behind a guide, whofe fun burnt features foftened into a compaffion, few indeed could at that mo¬ ment have denied me. The moon ihone forth with refplendent luftre, and our road being in a contrary direction to that which before enfnared us, I recommended my¬ felf to Heaven, and anxioufiy expected the meeting with my Lord. We had not proceeded far when that dear protector (who had in fearful affection for me de¬ fied
fied his own danger, and returned almoft to the Abbey) ftarted from under a clump of trees, and with a voice that diffipated terror, welcomed my return to freedom, and fprung upon the horfe our guide be¬ fore led for him. Such is the effect of an evil efcaped, that I almoft forgot my excefiive fatigue, and could have fancied mvfelf fafe. Recent circumftances at firft occupied my thoughts, and during the intervals of filence, the addition of a ftranger muft naturally impofe, my imagination once more returned to the dungeon : it pictured the fear and horror the wretches them¬ felves muft in turn feel, when unknown hands condemned them to a fate like that they had allotted to us. Again I wandered to the Court ; I feemed to fee Elizabeth burning with embofomed rage, while the helplefs noble Ellinor became as its imme¬ diate, its only object. I greatly relied on the watchful friendíhip ofall the Sydneys, but hardly could I hope even that could refcue her from the Queen. I knew the letter Lord Leicefter had ordered to be de-
delivered to Elizabeth two hours after our departure, would infallibly explain to her the fecret of our marriage i which of itfelf confuted the tale he had advanced concerning our birth : nor could I doubt but every artifice would be practifed to unfold the whole myftery ; and, alas ! ungenerous minds too often faiten on the victim cruel fortune puts moft into their power. Yet in the hafte and confufion attend¬ ing our flight, we had found it impoifible to unite my fifter in it : neither at that unhappy juncture could ihe be found, and all the care we could ihew for her fafety, was to recommend her in the moft firenuous manner to thofe few friends we expected the difcovery would leave us. While Ellinor had the refolution to re¬ tain her own fecret, we knew the power of the Queen could not reach her, and the ftrength and forefight íhe had at many times fhewn, perfuaded me íhe was equal even to this hardeft of trials. Yet could I think of the infolent interrogatories, and contumely ihe muft inevitably encounter, with-
without a bleeding heart ? to be the gaze of every eye—the object of every tongue —oh greatly did íhe need the confciouf¬ nefs of innocence, the pride of royalty, to fuftain her ! It had ever been our plan, if fortunate enough to efcape fafely into France, to remain ftill in difguife 'till couriers from England could inform us how far the plot of Babington, and particularly Lord Leicefter's knowledge of it, had tranf¬ pired. If it appeared his ihare in that fcheme was undifcovered, my Lord might with fafety avow himfelf , as marrying privately was a crime only in the eye of Elizabeth. And knowing too well her favourites ought ever to confider their in¬ fluence as precarious, Lord Leicefter had long fince fcattered large fums in the hands of different merchants in various kingdoms, as a refource, he now found his only one: nor was it infufficient. If, on the contrary, we learnt Elizabeth had dived into that dangerous myftery which he was cenfurable only for concealing, by the charge of treafon, ihe could per¬ haps
haps affect his fafety in France, nay al¬ moft in Europe, and to preferve his life forne difguife muft ftill be maintained while her's lafted. Though feparated in infancy from every one allied to me, nothing could ever de¬ tach my heart from family claims ·, not daring to look towards my mother, I had always paifionately defired to fee the fole furviving fifter of my father, Margaret Lady Mortimer. Educated with the late Queen in the Catholick perfuafion, ihe had married a general, and with him held many diftinguiihed places under Philip and Mary. The revolution both in po¬ liticks and religion caufed by the accef- fion of Elizabeth, was fatal alike to her honors and her pleafures. General Lord Mortimer followed the widowed King to Spain, and raifed on his favor a fortune that gave him power to fix his own fate, when death fuddenly decided it. His re¬ lict retired to Rouen in Normandy, where his fifter was then Abbefs, leaving her younger ion in the fervice of Philip, and her elder in the army of Francis lid. Na¬ turally
turally of an active temper, Lady Mor¬ timer could not refolve to give up the world, though attached to it only by dif- gufts, and laviihed a large portion of the immenfe fortune her mother and huiband iiad united to bequeath her, in cheriihing every exiled enemy of Elizabeth. Elated with the vain hope of one day feeing her ill-fated brother throned in conjunction with the Queen of Scots, fhe had entered into all his meafures while that union was in agitation ; and emerging once more from her convent, journeyed to Rome, where ihe fpared neither pains nor money to win friends who might authorize and ratify it. She was among the few who knew the marriage fecretly took place ; ihe even knew it was likely to produce heirs of royalty and misfortune; when the difcoverv, trial, and execution, of the Duke of Norfolk, entirely cruihed her laft fond project. From that moment ihe had remained uninformed of the fe¬ cret foul of Mary, and the fate of her un¬ happy offspring. The avowed difguft íhe had ihewn towards Elizabeth, made it dangerous for her to return to her own country,
country, and hardly in it could ihe have arrived at fuch important intelligence, when once the clue was loft. Afpiring, rich, and reftlefs, lhe had always affect¬ ed to appear the patronefs of all oppref- fed Engliihmen ; and if I found it pru¬ dent to avow myfelf, I might fafely rely on a welcome from her who would find with joy every hope fo long extinct reno¬ vated in me. Our prefent journey con¬ ducted us to a coaft almoft oppofite to that of Normandy. I fancied a pleafure in having it in my power to claim my aunťs cares in the approaching melan¬ choly crifis, and was not without hopes Lord Leicefter might fafely appear in his own perfon, when once my fifter had ef¬ caped to rejoin us. Thefe various reflections fully occupied my mind till the dawn of day, when our guide affured us we might fafely reft in the hamlet to which we were near. Con¬ vinced by Mifs Cecil's confidence in him that he might fully be trufted, I entered with weary limbs a cottage from whence its laborious inhabitants were juft iffuing te work. They ufed their utmoft diligence to
to procure us a homely meal, and wc re¬ tired almoft ftupified with intenfe fatigue to a bed which had only cleanlinefs to re¬ commend it. Here both funk into a re- pofe fo profound, that the day was clofing when we arofe. Our watchful guide af¬ fured us we muft haften over the dinner which long had waited for us, as we had many miles to journey ere we could find another fafe refting place. Earneftly did I wiíh to remain with our prefent hofts 'till the next morning, but fubmitting to ne¬ ceffity, remounted in filence. Arthur well juftified the confidence of his lady, having felečted horfes that never flagged through the whole journey, and always guarding againft difcovery by conducting us thro' roads very little frequented; among which he found hamlets whofe inhabitants were gratified in merely feeing him, and who only attended to his companions in the hope of obliging him. I was aftoniíhed at obferving how little curiofity we ex¬ cited, forgetful that the mind is worn down with the body, and that a common laborer rarely confiders any thing beyond thofe
thofe common comforts inceíľaňt induf* try alone can procure him. Infenfible to the beauties of the coun¬ try through which we paffed, I was for ever employed in looking for the fea, and when at laft I difcovered it, ftrove to ex¬ tend my fight beyond, and dwell on that ihore where I alone could think Lord Lei¬ cefter fafe. The nearer we drew towards the coaft, the ftronger my fears became. It was inhabited chiefly by men hard by nature, and defperate by profefiion ; ac¬ cuftomed to murder as well as plunder thofe wrecked on the ihore, they fternly examined and defied every paflenger. I could hardly perfuade myfelf that fome of thefe were not ftragglers from the banditti of Williams, and bleíľed Heaven as tho' all peril had been paft, when we arrived at the homely dwelling of Arthur. It ftood on a lonely part of the ihore, where lofty cliffs íhooting far into the fea, gave fafety in the little bay to a few fiihing- boats and fmall veíľels. Ah, how do our awakened paffions entirely curb every prejudice. Thofe livid lightnings, at
at which my nature ever before fhrunk, appeared of late but the quivering lamp of love. Now I faw and heard undaunted the encircling fea (once the happy boun¬ dary of human purfuits) whofe reftlefs waves roar a proud defiance to all who dare approach it ; and my folefear fprung from learning that the wind was entirely contra- ! ry, and the watery chafm yet impaifabre. Too late we lamented departing unat¬ tended. Unable in this fequeftered fpot to difcover any part of what had paffed in the court fince our flight, and unwil¬ ling to truft, as well as unable to fpare our guide, or his friends to make an en¬ quiry at the next town, feveral tedious days elapfed in melancholy and conjecture. Arthur, not being able to go out in his own veffel, without fufpicions and exa¬ minations we durft not encounter," hired a large fifhing fmack, in which he ftored the few neceifaries our limited fituation allowed us to provide, and I watched without ceafing the playing of its ftreamers. On the evening of the third day, I perceived them fud- Vol. II. D denly
denly point towards France : reft having recruited my ftrength and fpirits, I ftart¬ ed up in a tranfport of joy. The few ma¬ riners being gathered at laft together, I ftept with a lightened heart into a mifer¬ able boat, which bore us fwiftly towards that deftined to convey us over, when two ftrangers riding full fpeed to the lhore, called to us to put back with the moft frantick eagernefs. I took the alarm, and offered the mariners imagi¬ nary worlds to row on, when Arthur in¬ fifting that he knew the voice, turned the boat. I threw my arms round my Lord, as though my heart would have opened to hide him ; and regardlefs of his remonftrances, that we could be in no danger from only two people, howe¬ ver hoftile their intention, my fenfes died away. Recovering at laft, I found myfelf in the cabin of the veffel, re¬ clining on the bofom of Lord Leicefter, while a youth who knelt at my feet, preft my hands alternately to his lips—" Look up, my beloved, cried my Lord, and fee whom fortune has united in our exile." " Ah,
cc Ah, rather do not look up, lovely Matilda, cried Mifs Cecil (for it was that fweet girl indeed in the habit of a boy) till you have confidered what re¬ ception you ought to give the felfiíh friend who has dared interweave her fate with yours. Yet hear, before you judge me, added ihe, rifing with a mild majef- ty, which gave unfpeakable graces to the bluíhes that every moment vifited, and retired from, her cheeks. I am going to lay my whole heart before you both. It is in vain to attempt veiling a weaknefs from Lord Leicefter, fo many circumftances have concurred to betray; it remains with me then to ennoble it. The difcovery of your marriage, my amiable friends, quenched the laft feeble hope which lin¬ gered in my heart. Convinced my par¬ tiality could never conftitute his happi¬ nefs, I inftantly refolved it ihould become his pride. Self-love expired before the elevated idea. Ah, what but this could have enabled me to lead him into the gar¬ den at midnight, and take a look I then thought a laft one, without dropping a D 2 fingle
fingle tear ? I faw in a moment all thè merit, the charms of her character whom he had chofen. Should 1 hate her then for being all I would have endeavoured to be ? for accepting that diftinčtion (which not depending on youth, beauty, merit, or fortune) is the deareft bounty of in¬ dulgent Heaven? Ah, no, my heart was jufter, and welcomed her as one born to divide it with Lord Leicefter. Solely in¬ tent on the profperous flight of both, I almoft forgot the fervants planted in the Recefs, and the monfters that infefted it. I fancied to myfelf thofe hours, when all your dangers paft, you would fome· times think of her who could only think of you. I heard both figh, and wiihing but to be enough remembered to foften without wounding either heart, I fighed myfelf; and ftarted from thefe pleafant reveries at the voice of our fteward, who rufhing abruptly into the room, difmayed my every fenfe with his recital. " Re¬ joice, Madam, rejoice, cried the man with honeft zeal, and think this ftrançer 'born for your fervice. Never can we enough
enough adore the aftoniíhing interpofition of Heaven ! It is not long fince when tired with watching in the dungeon, a variety of voices ftruck our ears, which foon approaching us, every man fum¬ moned all his courage ; ftiortly the door was unbolted, and a ruffian darted in, whofe daring look was changed to an icy palenefs (which lights from behind re¬ flected) when he found each arm feized by one of our people, while a third held a piftol to his head. Uttering a faint imprecation, he alarmed the reft, and both fides immediately fired. We then puíhed forward, without any regard for thofe who fell ; ana purfuing the reft through the various avenues of the den, fecured them all, as we have reafon to imagine,aftoniihment half depriving them of the power of refiftance. In the largeft apartment of this ftrange place, we found (guefs, Madam, how we were amazed) our Lord, with an unknown lady, and three of our fellow fervants, who were newly brought in by the ruffians, and bound ; nor do I doubt but a dreadful death was D 3 de-
deílgned them, but for this wonderful event." Alienated as my affections muft long have been from my father, continu¬ ed Mifs Cecil, turning the difcourfe to herfelf, I could not hear of his wonderful efcape, without feeling the moft lively fatisfaction. It was damped, however, by recollecting the body of Williams. I faw too plainly, that I muft now account for it to one inverted with authority to enquire, and refolution to convict me. Loft in a variety of plans, my father had been fome minutes in the houfe, ere I ftirred from my own anti-chamber, where his approach at once confined me. Faint and filent I arofe, and bending before him, wept forth my duty and my joy. " I know all you would fay, my child, cried he, eagerly, and how this horrible place was difcovered; but where is Lord Leicefter and his Lady ?" Struck dumb with a queftion, as clear and decifive as if he had been a íharer in the tranfactions of the night, my eyes were fixed upon him in terror and ftupefaction ; when my brothers impatient for the difcovery, made
made his way at once into my chamber j whither the loud exclamation he gave collected all prefent, nor could my father refift haftening, as faft as his infirmities permitted ; hoping, as I had reafon to imagine, he there ihould find that ene¬ my, who more engroifed his thoughts than the prefervation of his own life, or mine. How were all amazed when the lifelefs villain Williams, alone appeared? Some examined his pockets, while others fearched the chamber. My father fpoke not for fome time, when fixing an eye on me falihood never durft encounter, he pointed ironically to the body :" You killed him, doubtlefs, faid he, and re¬ lapfed again into his meditation. After a time, fome faint remembrance glanced acrofs his mind. He drew near, and ex¬ amining the dead man's features, feemed to recollect, and in recollecling to dread him ; for at once he ihrunk into himfelf, and repeated in a low voice, "that vil¬ lain 1" Not having, however, any clue to his thoughts, though he had to mine, there refted my idea of the matter. I D 4 col-
collected all my courage, and framing the moft plaufible tale the prefent fitua¬ tion allowed, refolved to abide by it what¬ ever the event. My father likewife fet¬ tled his plan of proceeding, and far from regulating the fervants, whofe every mo¬ tion fear made wild and eccentric, turned his attention folely on me. Rifing at laft witha ftern air, "Rife, faid he,follow me." I had of late been but too much accuf- tomed to that harih voice, and obeyed in filence. Seating himfelf in an adjacent apartment, he demanded an exact recital of all the horrors of the night. I com¬ menced with the being roufed by Willi¬ ams. I related his defign, and the threats which had almoft brought my life to the point of a moment, when fubftituting Arthur for Lord Leicefter, I affirmed that it was his providential arrival, guided by an unknown lady, and the defperate cou¬ rage fupplied by the emergency, which refcued me from the knife ofthat invete¬ rate villain. He interrupted me, eagerly enquiring for the lady. On my aíľuring him ilie was gone,—" think well, cried he,
he, in a terrible voice, think well, raíh, romantic girl, ere you venture again to anfwer me. I know the caufe of Leicef¬ ter's flight, I know too its companion ; I know that he efcaped a few hours be¬ fore from the dungeon in which 1 was found ; I know, if fo, who muft be his confederate. Stain to the name of Cecil, degenerate wretch, not content with the blind credulity of youth, to embofom, refcue, and abet a traitor, wilt thou con¬ ceal his wife ? Tremble at the vengeance of thy fovereign—tremble alike at that of thy father." Convinced (by whatever wonderful means he was fo fully inform¬ ed) that I could not hope to delude him, I ftarted up, my complexion changing every moment. I indeed find myfelf, my Lord, cried I, unequal to a falihood, but you will find me equal to the moft def¬ perate truth It was Lord Leicefter, I own, whom Heaven itfelf brought to my relief, and ihall I deliver him up to death who faved me from it ? Oh never, never ! Sheltered in a fpot lefs liable to fufpicion than that from which they lately efcaped, he
he with his chofen happy bride can fafely wait till the violence of the Queen gives place to juftice. Tortures ihould wring no more from me, and whatever my fate, it will always admit of one fweet confo- lation, in the remembrance that Heaven allowed me to recompence a benefit at the moment of receiving it. Why ibould I repeat, fighed our fair narrator, all the rage, tears, and altercation, that for a few days made life a torment to me ? Totally confined tomy apartment,and treated like a criminal, it was even hinted my conti¬ nued obitinacy would provoke my father into making that horrible den, the Re¬ cefs, my prifon. In one inftance alone was Ï fortunate : my myfterious fpeech impreíľed on my father's mind an opini¬ on, he had previoufly adopted, that Lord Leicefter, with his Lady, muft be fecret- ed in or near Kenilworth Caftle, whither his moft trufted fpies immediately refort- ed, and amufed him with various fuppo- fitions difpatched daily from thence. Opprefied with unkindnefs and feverity, often did my weak, my wavering heart prompt
prompt me to follow, and if poffible overtake you; but the inftant recollecti¬ on of the obvious track fuch a raih flight muft open to your inveterate purfuers, always fubdued fo unjuftifiable a wiih. My father at once changed his meafures, and releafing, carried me with him to every fufpected place in the neighbour¬ hood ; hoping from the alteration of my features he /ihould difcover that which contained Lord Leicefter. By a fatality which completed my misfortunes, in one of thefe tours we encountered Irton, that lover who coft me both the Queen's and my father's favour ; encouraged by Lord Burleigh once more he returned with us. Incapable of love, but infatuated with politics, his ardent defire of holding a rank in his favourite line through my means revived. Regardlefs of my tears, coldnefs, and difdain, he had always looked up to my father as the decider of his fate, and ftill continued to do fo. I had the mifery of learning a bargain was made, of which I muft be the uncon- fenting pledge, and that almoft immedi¬ ately,
atei y I knew my father's inexorable nature; I knew likewife that of Irton ; and had reafon to dread that the next fit of rage would confign me to legal infamy, unlefs by a defperation on my own part, I pre¬ vented this on theirs. Wonder not that at laft I yielded to a meafure fo long com¬ bated. I felečted a fervant in whom I had a confidence, who procured me this dif¬ guife, and offered to protect me. I bleft that faith I could never hope fufficiently to reward ; and winged alike with hope and fear, purfued your route with indefa¬ tigable diligence; having left a letter which fpoke of London as my afylum." To this generous recital, my Lord, and felf, replied with reiterated afiurances of friendíhip and protection, as well as the higheft encomiums on her courage and conduct. Shortly after which, my Lord quitted the cabin. " You who have long been the confidante, the fole confidante of my weaknefs, refumed MifsCecil in a ten¬ der tone, while her doubtful eye feemed to fearch my very foul, will be lefs furprized at its effect than its confeifion. Yet even that,
that, ftrange as it may feem, fprung from prudence. I had well confidered, my dear Matilda, every part of my paft and future conduct. I too plainly felt, that while 1 imagined my Lord a ftranger to the impulies of my heart, it might ftill adhere to him with a dangerous ten¬ dernefs. By the boldnefs of this ftep I have made him a judge over me, and ihall act with the fevereft prudence. I know your generous difpofition, feeing only the better part of mine, might have induced you ftill to wifh me near you ;— how could I refift fo fweet an invitation ? Ah, only by filencing the moft decifive pleader ! Lord Leicefter can now never urge me on the dangerous fubječt. In whatever place you fix your refidence, I will retire to a neighbouring monaftery as a boarder, where always hearing of, and fometimes feeing both, added ihe in a voice broken by fobs, my wiihes will be completed : nor do I imagine you will in the interim grudge me a (hare in Lord Leicefter's danger." <c Ah little do you know me, returned I, preffing her hand af-
affectionately, if you think I could grudge you a ihare in his happineis ; never, my j tender generous girl, never more will we part ; never could Lord Leicefter hope, or his mfefear any thing unbecom¬ ing from a foul like your's. Actuated but by one fentiment, counterparts by nature of each other, you and I íhould violate her laws were we to feparate." ' c To own the whole truth, my fweet friend, returned flie, with her ufual noble ingenuoufnefs, I expected this inftance of your generofity ; but it only confirms my refolution, and my own heart would an¬ ticipate the condemnation of yours were it poflible for me to waver." A fenfe of fafety, and of gratitude to my fair friend, diffufed itfelf through my foul as the evening clofed, to which I had for fome time been a ftranger: Lord Lei* cefter preffed us to enjoy the fweetnefs of the hour. We afcended the deck, and Seating ourfelves in a little boat laíhed to it, every fear, every hope feemed fuf¬ pended, and the prefent all of our lives for which any had a fenfe. The gentle breezes
breezes only played upon the white fails, and the veffel cut with a fafe and pleafant ! motion, through thofe green waves whoie I points the full moon exquifitely filvered, I as breaking they gave life to the ftillnefs of the night. 1 turned my eyes with the fweeteft fatisfačtion from my love to my friend, from my friend to my love ; the fame mild orb delicately illum'd either face ; a manly tendernefs marked Lord Leicefter's attention to me, a grateful de¬ ference that to Mifs Cecil, while the fair Rofe, rich in the applaufes of her own hearts and nobly confcious of her claims on ours, forgot there was any thing wanting to her happinefs. Thefe facred paufes in life, which lovers only know, invigorate the foul as fleep does the body, and alone can enable us to fuftain the paft and com¬ ing ills. Prepared by a mental calm for the happieft repofe, fleep afferted a claim to thofe hours fear and fatigue had long poffeffed, and my Lord infifted on re¬ maining above : the lovelinefs of the wea¬ ther, though the autumn was far advanc* ed, made this lefs dangerous, and Miíš Cecil
Cecil at laft confented to íhare with me the only miferable bed, which neverthe¬ lefs afforded us that reft a palace had often denied. The next morning entirely re- verfed the fcene, and deftroyed at once our comfort and tranquillity ; with the moon the weather changed, and the wind becoming entirely contrary, that deadly ficknefs incident to voyagers, feized alike on Mifs Cecil and me, abforbing even the fenfe of danger. With an ex- i aufted fullennefs we furveyed thofe roar¬ ing furges, whofe hollows fancy could not venture to fathom, and faw ourfelves driven almoft back to the ihoreof England, without ftrength or fpirits even to lament our cruel deftiny. My lord, happily, more ufed to the fea, refifted its influ¬ ence, and exerted himfelf equally in com¬ forting the fufferers and afli (ting the fai¬ lors : happily too they were alV well ac¬ quainted with the coaft ; while the con¬ trary wind, and enraged elements, confti- tuted in one fenfe our fafety, as every other veffel took ihelter in the neareft port, and waited in fafety more favourable weather.
weather. Toft about for near ten days, we at laft made Havre-de-grace early in the morning, when more dead than alive I was conveyed to the firft inn, and in- ftantly put to bed. Here my fatigues and apprehenfions were very near producing a misfortune I from the firft had dreaded. I had but too much reafon to fear that the poor babe who had been the innocent caufe of thefe calamities would never live to reward us for them, but urged into a premature ex¬ iftence, of all this mighty world would claim only a grave. The grief this gave me increafed the danger ; I knew the paf- fionate defire of offspring which poíľefíed my Lord. I had often flattered myfelf this wiih, if indulged, would fill up that void in his life the promife had caufed. What then ihould I fuffer to fee fuch a difap¬ pointment added to the facrifices and de¬ gradations I had already entailed upon him ? It was at this crifis all the merit of Mifs Cecil ihone forth : to the deli¬ cate attentions of a friend íhe united the foft folicitude of a mother. She foothed Vol, И. E my
my mind with the moft flattering hõpeí, and jealous left in any fretful momerit my fecret foul ftiould doubt her attachment, fhe fo entirely forestalled every fufpicion, that uninformed fpečtators would rather have imagined me the only fource of her happinefs, than the fole obftacle to it. At length I conquered the danger, and then my fpirits returnedfafter than my ftrength. Often I talked of England, of my fifter, and the expected difpatches. I wrote tó Lady Mortimer, and briefly related thofe incidents I have here explained in many pages 5 I claimed her alliance, her protec¬ tion, explained the prefent delicate fitua¬ tion of my health, and enclofed my pic¬ ture ih little, not doubting but that Would identify my birth : and part of the dia¬ monds we brought wi th us wfcre converted into money, to eftablifn our rank, if we found it prudent to acknowledge it. I continued a long time too weak tö quit my chamber, yet at intervals a new feardifturbed me. I perceived my Lord abfent and anxious ; an extreme palenefs often overcame the floridnefs of «ature, and
and trarerfing tha room for hours, he would give way to a chagrin the caufe of which hot all my tendereit intreaties could wring /rom hiñó. I often recalled the words of my fifter; I fancied he vainly regretted the diftinction of royalty, the pride of fplendor, and the pleafure of popularity. Accuftomed to be the ob¬ ject of every eye, to have every wifh fore- ftalled, to be obeyed ere he fpoke, I, figh¬ ing, owned the change in his fate might well appear dreary. Not daring to hint my ideas, I impatiently expected the re¬ turn of the exprefs fent to Rouen, hoping it would open new profpečts, and difperfe the heavy cloud between him and felicity. But oh how delufive is human perfpica«* city !—infolently vain of our bounded knowledge, we bòaft of tracing every thought and aâion of individuals feas di¬ vide from us, even at the very moment we misjudge all with whom we are immedi¬ ately furrounded. My fond attention fixed partially on Lord Leicefter, looked not out of himfelf for caufes of grief. Lady Mortimer's anfwer at length arrived; (he acknowledged her relationihip to me with E 2 furprize
furprize and pleafure, and kindly la¬ mented her infirm health did not permit her to pay, in coming to me, that defer¬ ence my regal birth intitled me to ; but that her train waited our permiffion to ef- cort us to Rouen, whither ihe urged us to haften, as well for our own fafety as to gratify her impatience. My expectations being fully anfwered by this letter, breath¬ lefs with joy I raifed my eyes to Lord Leicefter, who had been perufing it over my Ihoulder ; they met his full of a fad¬ nefs fo meaning, that it numbed my very heart. Long ufed now to dread every day would teem with fome horrible event, I fnatched his hand, and in broken accents only begged to know it. He funk at my feet, and hiding his tears with my robe, fwelled with fobs that almoft cracked my heartftrings. "You havetold meyouloved me, Matilda ?" faid he, in a broken and doubtful voice.—"Toldyou! re-echoed i I ; heavens and earth, can that, my Lord, remain a queftior ? have I not for you forgot the rights of fex, of rank, of every thing but love ?" " Have I not done all man
man could to deferve thefe facrifices?" again demanded he. " Debate no more admitted merits, cried I, with wild im¬ patience ; oh give me the truth, and all the truth at once; nor doubly torture me with this pomp of preparation. What¬ ever it is, I will remember there might be a worfe, fince my eyes ftill behold you : every evil but your danger my foul can furely cope with. You fpeak not yet : we are then difcovered, betrayed, delivered up, condemned------the fatal power of Elizabeth has reached us even here, for nothing elfe can furely thus af¬ fect you ?" " It has indeed," fighed he. " Oh why then, exclaimed I, forgetful of all my affurances, am I unprovided with poifon r for death muft now be the only mercy hoped. May the ocean, from which we with fo much difficulty efcaped, entomb us on our return, rather than re¬ fign us up to her licenfed vengeance. ,> § " The power of Elizabeth has reached us, added he, more mournfully, though not in our own perfons. Safe ftill in my arms, in my heart, you may, my love, long arraign and bewail a misfortune all E 3 Europe
Europe will bewail with you." Hts ŕyin- pathifmg eyes explained the truth—the agonizing truth—my lbul underftood hŕm —aghaft with horror, my eyes feemed to fet, and every limb to ftifFen to marble j á fenfation, to which fainting is e afe, con. denfed every faculty, and nature, power¬ ful nature, ftruck on my heart at the thought of my mother, with a pang per^ haps equal to that with which ihe bore me. The radiant fun of Love feemed to dip into a fea of blood, and fink there for ever. Unable to reduce the torrent of my ideas into language, I buried my head in my robe, and pointed to the door, that all might leave me. Happily, my Lord faw a prudence in indulging me, and laying down feveral letters, inftantly retired. A horrible tranfport for fome moments benumbed me;—how multi. plied, how complicate, how various, how new, were then my feelings ! feelings ^which ever return with the remembrance! feelings which opened a vein in my cha¬ racter as well as my heart—all fenfe of gentlenefs vaniihed, The firft paper I perufed
perufed confirmed my fears—I faw in the firft lines the decided fate of the royal Mary—I feemed to behold the favage hand of Elizabeth, dipt in the blood of an anointed fifter fovereign.—I felt ihe was my mother, my fond, my helplefs mother, and my heart floated in tears, which were hours working their way up to my burning eyes. The furies of Oreftes furrounded me, and thundered parricide, nothing but parricide, in my ear. What, groaned I, after fo long an endurance, fuch complicated evils, fupported with a patience that left not her enemies a pre¬ tence for facrificing her, that mifery was referved for her daughter ? Perhaps even üt the moment ihe laid that beauteous head, fo many hearts were born to wor- ihip, on the block, every agony of death was doubled, by the knowledge her daughter brought her there.—Why did I not perifh in the Recefs by lightning ? Why did not the ocean entomb me? Why, why, oh God, was I permitted to furvive my innocence ? In the wild nefs of my af¬ fliction, I pureed the hour, the fatal hour, E 4 when
when I ventured beyond the bounds pre¬ feri bed me. Yes love, love itfelf was annihilated, and (could I once have be¬ lieved it) deeply did I wifh I had never feen Lord Leicefter. Paffing from paper to paper, I faw friends and enemies unite in the eulogium of the Royal Martyr.— What magnanimity, what fweetnefs, what fančtitude did they affign to her—a bright example in the moft awful of trials —Sub¬ liming the idea of revenge infeparable from human nature fhe comprized in com¬ panion.—And what a comparifon !—call¬ ing off the veil of her mortality, to darken over the future days of Elizabeth, the radiant track of her afcenfion concentered, while it dimmed the eyes of thofe fur- rounding nations, who too late bewailed their ihameful inactivity. Spirit of the Royal Mary ! oh thou moft injured ! fighed out at laft my exhaufted foul, from that bleflednefs to which the wretch now levelled with the duft, perhaps too early tranfiated thee, beam peace and pardon ! Afíüage the horrors of the involuntary fin, and oh, receive my life as its expia¬ tion i
tion; or a little, but a little, foothe its fad remainder. · « Yet vain and uncertain were all my ideas reflecting the difcovery I imputed to Elizabeth. Convinced nothing had ever been intrufted to friendíhip, I was afiured nothing could have been betrayed. In the bofom of my fifter our mutual fe¬ cret refted, and there I imagined every motive muft bury it. I reviewed every paper once more ; alas, I only added to my affliction, by obferving the name of Ellinor induftrioufly avoided. Loft in conjecture it was fome time ere I per¬ ceived one letter my robe half covered : I prefied to my lips the writing of Lady Arundel. " Scarce dare I allow myfelf time to congratulate you, my moft honoured friend, on efcaping the deadly rage of Elizabeth, fo much do I know you long for news of your fifter. Alas, that I could return, in that information, the pleafure yours gave me. Called to vifit Lady Pem¬ broke, whofe danger was too fudden for me to be apprized of it, Ellinor came back to
to Court the very hour that my lord and you left it. Filling the place of my fifter (who ought to have been in waiting) by this means (he was unfortunately prefent ac the time the Queen perufed Lord Lei- cefter's explanatory letter. Unbounded in her refentment, Elizabeth levelled it all againft the unfortunate Ellinors and in feverely taxing her with treachery and guilt, dropt exprefíions by which ihe learnt the dangerous fituation your flight had un¬ fortunately placed her in, as well as the evils to which you bGth flood expofed.—· Grieft fear, and indignation ahnoftdepriv¬ ed her of reafon ; and the Qiieen infifting her filence proceeded from obftinacy, threw at hera large book ihe had been read¬ ing, which ftrikingthe fwectEllinoron the temple, ilie dropt fenfdefs at once. The other ladies cut her laces; and the eager eyes of the Queen were aí traded by a fmall pacjquet fufpçnded to the black rib¬ bon ihe abyays wore round her neck. Not even the furpriîing effect its contents took on the Queen, has ever enabled any one to gueis at them s jcojpur, fire.ngth, and fpeech,
fpeech, for fome moments forfook Eliza¬ beth, when recovering her faculties, ihe once more peruicd the memorials ; then deliberately tore them into atoms; and fummooing Walfingham and Burleigh, all her attendants, fave the olà Lady La¬ timer, retired. From the Count Ellinor wasconveyed that night, though by whom, or whither, is yet a ibcret. Love and friendíhip are however ineesffaatly employ¬ ed in her favour ; nor can 4er priíoa Joeg remain {о when опое ic is discovered. Were I tosarne the moft ardent aed anx¬ ious of her lovers I Ihould ftirprize you, but he ihall only be known, vihtn with confcious pride he prcfents ber to you, and claims his reward. The profound policy Elisabeth lias al¬ ways preferved withrefpeÄ co Lord Lei¬ cefter fince his flight, is far from being fatisfačtory to his friends, She fpeaks of him only in an indifferent light, and ss if employed by herfelf ; while all that pafíèd between them almoft every feedy «røåer- ftands, though no one dares Ш fey fo. it feems indeed as of ber rage had hem di¬ verted
verted from him by another object. I need not name her here. Alas, how fe¬ verely are you both revenged on the Queen ! The galling chain from which ihe has at laft enfranchifed Mary, writhes round her own heart j and ifit would gra¬ tify you to fee her tremble, believe me you need only fee her. Obliged to avow remorfe, to give an example in the feverity of her mourning, for a deed only her own will could have authorifed, íhe has the mifery of knowing her murdered royal prifoner enthroned in Heaven, and em¬ balmed in the tears of even her own peo¬ ple. Never more will ihe tafte of peace, for that indeed can only dwell with inno¬ cence." The full conviction Elizabeth had in¬ curred the abhorrence of all the world, by this horrible infraction of the rights of royalty, fociety, and fex, a little gra¬ tified my exquifite refentment. Yes, fighed I, Heaven has invented a puniíh- ment proportionable to her crime. Coun¬ teracting by one ftroke the policy of her whole life, íhe has permitted herfelf to be known,
known, and of confequence execrated. Deftined to furvive her youth, her virtue, her fame, and her happinefs ; although encircled with a diadem, her weary head ihall vainly feek one faithful tender bofom to repofe on. Thofe fiery paffions, fo often deftructive to others, wanting now an object, muft prey upon the heart that conceals them ; till envying the glorious end, as ihe ever did the diftinguiihed bloom of Mary Stuart, her fate is wound up in fears of her offspring. In vain her cruel care would extirpate them ; every crime will but give birth to a new fear, and the martyrdom of the Queen of Scots will multiply the caufes of her terror, fince íhe now knows more than one child furvives her. As the evening clofed, this billet was given me from my Lord : " The heart which has long bled by anticipation for your forrow, demands to partake it with you. Oh ! my fole love, deny me not a ihare in your compaffion. Fearful every moment left I ihould lofe the daughter, the fate of the mother ftruggled with
with that grief in my foul, nor durft Ï communicate it till concealment became impoffible.—I do not aik you to be com¬ forted ; weep on, my dear Matilda, but Weep in my arms, for what have I left in life if you forget to love me ?" This little billet, happily calculated to awaken the fofter paffions, drew forth my tears in great abundance. I reproached myfelf with violence and unkindnefs. Let me not, cried I, while {o feverely la¬ menting one error, be guilty of another. Loft to the duties, the claims (oh Heaven that 1 íhould befo !) of a daughter, thofe of a wife ought to afľume a double influ¬ ence. Yes, chofen Leicefter, I am yours, am ever yours; if this opprefied heart does not wholly diíľolve in forrow, you will one day be again its only object ; and facred from this moment be the rights of all united with me. I collected my wild afflicted thoughts, and raifing them in prayer, a bleíľed compofure overcame the agitations of my mind. Paffing into the next room, where I heard my Lord walk¬ ing, I threw myfelf into Jus arms. Oh you
you whom I have fo fatally loved, faltered I, you who are now nearly my all, fill up, if poflible, every avenue to my heart, and guard it from retrofpection. He an¬ fwered not a word, but prefling his cheek to mine, our tears mingled. I fee too plainly the truth, the fatal truth, faid I, recurring to Lady Arundeľs letter. Lovely, ill-fated fifter, it was you then who accelerated our haplefs mother's death ! That Elizabeth knew me for a daughter of the Stuart line, fhe took a deadly means to certify, but how lhe dif¬ covered it, muft ever have appeared mi¬ raculous without this letter;I plainly per¬ ceive my fifter indifcreetly wore the du¬ plicate proof of our birth, its deareft and beft teftimonial, while mine is yet trea- fured in the fecret cabinet at Kenilworth ; and this in one moment deftroyed her own peace, and determined the fate of her mother. Õh, moft inexorable! Could thy vengeance demand more than one victim ? Is then the daughter filently fa¬ crificed on the lamented grave of her pa¬ rent ? Never more, beloved fifter of my blood
blood and heart, íhall I behold thee! never more draw comfort from thy fweet accents, nor with thee pierce through the veil of futurity, and catch gleams of golden days. Doubtlefs Elizabeth ima¬ gines this the only authentic proof exift- ing ? Oh, if in confequence of that opi¬ nion íhe touches the innocent life of El¬ linor, I will offer incontenible evidence alike of Mary's marriage with Norfolk, and our birth, at the foot of Henry's throne. He is famed forjuftice and ge- nerofity j I am, alas, the helplefs object of both. The family of Guife will unite to protect me ; perhaps all Europe will aid too late the powerlefs King of Scots, and fave him from feeling his impotence of royalty. Unable entirely to íhare, unwilling in the leaft to controul, my tender feelings for my family, Lord Leicefter's life could not at this period be called happy. Mifs Cecil again appeared our guardian angel. As an intermediate perfon lhe felt for, ihe foothed both, till my irritated paffions meliorated infenfibly into fadnefs. I be¬ gan
gan to liften to the flattering hopes ihe con¬ tinually inftilled, that my fifter ftill lived* and fome fortunate event might yet reftore her to us. My Lord was affured, by the united teftimony of his friends, that Eli¬ zabeth had no pretence for impeaching him, and Henry learnt with pleafure his defign of fixing his refidence in France· Thus again our peace feemed re-eftabliíh- ed on a better foundation than it had yet been : and I devoted my attention, for the prefent, folely to recompencing my Lord for all he had renounced in my favor. Overwhelmed with the repeated folici- tations of Lady Mortimer, I at laft fum¬ moned refolution to fet out for Rouen ; from whence we had been fupplied with every accommodation fuitable toourrank. That city having long been diftinguiihed as the refuge of every noble exile, my Lord fixed on it for our refidence: my relation to Lady Mortimer enfured me every ho¬ nor, and Lord Leicefter's name would foon form us a little court. The crifis now approached very near, which both confi¬ dered with joy and terror, and it appeared Vol. H, F fome
íbme relief to be in the eye of a Lady, whofe experience and tendernefs might leiTen my fufferings. Lord Leicefter's unwearied indulgence and anxious confi¬ deration, every hour endeared him more tome, and I gladly on refledion com¬ pounded with fortune for all her other fever i ties, fince the firft object: of my heart was ftill unaltered. Averfe to being known ere we had formed a fuite, and felected a habitation, he gave Lady Mortimer notice that we ihould not arrive till night. As we paft through the gates of Rouen, efcorted by her train, my heart beat high with the idea of meeting the fifter of the noble Norfolk ; the only being (my own ex¬ cepted) allied in blood to me. She met me at the entrance of a faloon ; I clafped her hands with emotion; I wept upon, I preíľed them to my bofom. She em¬ braced me with extreme compofure, and holding me back a moment, ran over my features and perfon with fo keen a fcru- tiny, as convinced me fenfibility was not her charačteriftic. While due compli¬ ments
ments paíľed between Mifs Ceci!, my Lord, and her, f, in turn, indulged my¬ felf with an examination. Her perion was full-fizedj tall, and graceful, like all the farfiiiy of Howard ; her features vift- bly marked both by age, and decayed beauty ; her drefs fimple, being like my own, of mourning, and her manners ftrongly conveyed the idea of fuperi- ority. Dignity tinctured with âufterity, marked her converfation ; and 1 felt, to my great regret, I had gained a relation without winning a friend. Two monks, to whom ihe paid a profound deference ; an old officer of the Mortimer family, and his fifter, were introduced to us as perfons entitled to íhare our fecret; and we faw it indeed lodged with them, eré our confent wás demanded. Lord Lei¬ cefter was ftruck difagreeably at this dif«* covery, but ftruggled with his pride, and afiected good humour; while finding my* felf, after all my dangers, under a roorľ fančtified by alliance, and where my Lord feemed reftored to his proper fphere, pleá¿ fure dilated my whole foul, and I fat F 2 down
down to a fumptuous entertainment pre^ pared on the occafion, with an appetite I had long wanted. She avoided, in confideration of my ftate and fatigues, entering into our affairs, and brought her own before us with a kind freedom ; afiured us of the friend¬ íhip of her eldeft fon, Lord Mortimer, who had preferred the pleafure of liber¬ ty in both his religion and actions, by ferving in the wars of France, to feeking a precarious fortune in England, un¬ der an enemy to the Pope. The landed property, once the inheritance of the Mortimers, her Lord had prudently dif- pofed of ere the return of Philip to Spain, in whofe fervice he had ever continued : and that Monarch, famed as he was for meannefs and ingratitude, had ihewn a fignal fenfe of the attachment, by a grant to her youngeft fon of a confiderable por¬ tion of land in Jamaica, which he had cul¬ tivated under fuch indulgences, as made it every day more valuable. His marriage with a Spaniíh lady, had united him more firmly to their government and interefts: but
but having lately had the misfortune to lofe his wife, he had yielded to the in¬ treaties of his mother to vifit France, and was hourly expected. Occupied with her own narration, my aunt no longer remem¬ bered I was weary. Mifs Cecil however reminded her of the hour, and we were conducted to a magnificent apartment. Lord Leicefter nightly touched on the little difguft he had juftly conceived, and indulged a drowfinefs which I could not immediately partake. New objects had awakened my fancy, and invaded my reft; images more pleafing than had bleft me fince the moment I had quitted Kenil¬ worth Caftle now enlivened my foul. Yes, my Leicefter, faid I, foftly grafping the hand of my fleeping love, for me thou flialt no more be endangered, and de¬ graded ; beyond the reach of our enemies we may now laugh at all their impotent malice. Ah vain and prefumptuous ! a deadly fnare was at that moment winding round my heart, and a piÄníhment pre¬ pared which pierced it through the bofom of fecurity. Alas! madam, this night of F 3 pro-
promifed peace proved the æra in my life; and became fo by a misfortune which ab- forbed the fenfe of every other. How, how íhall I recall the fcene, and preferve recollection enough to paint it ? Drop¬ ping jnto that foft lethargy which fore¬ runs fleep—ah, why had I not been bu¬ ried in the deepeft? but I was born the fate of thofe I loved. It was my peculiar mifery to raife the hand which cut them oflf from all but my memory, and oh to weep thro' life the errors of too foft a heart!—Sinking, as I have already faid, into flumber, 1 fancied I heard a noife in the room—Starting up with a fear habit had made almoft intuitive, I awakened Lord Leicefter, who inftantly drew afide the curtain. I difcerned with inexprefiible horror, by the pale light of a lanthorn, many men furrounding the bed with le¬ velled arms, while one with an imperious voice called out to him to furrender to the Queen of England. At that fatal found my very foul recoiled, but my Lord not deigning to anfwer, drew a fword, always laid under his pillow, and haughtily com¬ manded
. manded them to leave the chamber. The men advancing, he aimed at the one near- eft him, who, by inftantly retreating, jarred the arm of his companion. The flaíh of death, the tremendous found, the falling of the fword—all, all, confirmed in a moment my fate ------ Lord Leicefter, the woríhipped of my foul—my all on earth ------alas, almoft my all in heaven, funk into my weak arms in a laft: convul- fion. ------That which, at thè appointed period, ihall annihilate nature, can alone furpafs the impreffion of the moment. Terrible too was the confufion of thefe wretches at fo unforeièen an event. The faint light they carried gleamed over thofe features fo adored. He tremulouily raifed my hand to his lips, and gave up his foul in filence on my bofom. But who íhall fpeak the mifery of my mind ? Precipitated, like the offending angels, at once from heaven to hell, an aw¬ ful filence took place of lamentation. Oh it was a woe too mighty for complaint ! Infenfible to fear, I at length defperately urged his murderers once more to unite F 4 thofe
thofe they had thus feparated. I bathed my bofom in the bleíľed crimfon which ftill flowed from his, and called alike on heayen and man to end me. Alas, the only object of my hopes, my fears, my cares, my wiihes, was congealing before the eyes pf the forlorn wretch condemned to furvive him. The entrance of Lady Mortimer wrought grief up to phrenzy, and for many days gave that relief to all my agonies. Reafon dawned upon my difordered foul like light through chaos. A dim re¬ membrance of what I had been, preceded that of what I was. Faintly I recognized even the weak hand with which I drew back the curtain. I found myfelf in a narrow cell, lighted only through an ob* fcure cafement of painted glafs. Intui¬ tively my lips pronounced the name of Leicefter—in vain------Nothing but my own voice returned upon my ear; and the lonely dungeon in which I beheld myfelf enclofed, overwhelmed me with fo deadly a chillnefs, that the ihutting of my eyes appeared a degree of relief. Thought rofe
rofe tumultuoufly on thought, till in one moment the terrible whole flaihed upon my mind. I feemed once more in that magnificent bed which from the peaceful afylum of love an inftant converted into the bier of death—once more I caught that laft, laft look, indelibly impreffed— and felt once more my heart congeal with the life-blood which fprung in tor¬ rents from his. I ftarted up once more in wild defpair ; and wringing my hands, groaned forth his name in accents fo pier¬ cing, that they roufed the withered atten¬ dant allotted me, from her undifcovered pallet-bed at the foot of mine. Hurry¬ ing towards me, íhe muttered fomething I did not underftand. Heavens ! cried I, furveying her habit in amazement, (for 'till then I bad never feen a nun) where am I ? furely in the Reçefs ; and the grave has given up its former inha¬ bitants for my relief and comfort?------ *' Jefu Marie ! cried ihe in French, which I very imperfectly underftood, will this poor thing ever recover her fenfes ?" • f Ah no, added I, anfwering myfelf, that fatal
fatal language confirms every dire recol¬ lection: inform me you, who are (I know not why) interwoven in my fate, where, where is my Lord ? if all that flaihes over my foul be but a wandering of intellect, and he yet lives."—She caft down her eyes muttering, " Yes, my poor child, you are fenfible by that queftion." " Vain, vain hope ! cried I, burfting into tears, and returning to my native tongue ; yet oh! alive or dead, he alone do I require; reftore him, but reftore him ! a dear, a facred duty attaches me even to his aihcs. Lead me to them, fince they are all now left me, and allow me to lament at leifure." She íhrugged up her fhoulders, implying that íhe did not thoroughly comprehend my language, and crofting herfelf, de¬ nounced eternal perdition on me if Honger thought of a heretic, who feduced me from the true faith, and who of confequence became a dreadful example of vengeance; charging me to adore the holy Virgin Mo¬ ther, who had by fo gentle a puniihment recalled me to the Catholick church. Yes, fainted Leicefter, in the infatuation of her bigotry
bigotry ihe dared to term thy death Agen¬ ţie puniihment. Indignation throbbed through thofe pulfes grief had nearly ft il led, and I gave vent to all the an¬ guiíh of my foul : abjured with an ag¬ gravated contempt the erroneous faith of my anceftors, bewailed too late the cre¬ dulity infpired by my own—execrated the cruel, the treacherous Lady Mortimer, and demanded my liberty with a fpirit that perplexed and furprized the Nuns. Alas ! I perceived at the fame moment, by the increafing number who now ga¬ thered round my bed, how vain either threats or intreaties muft prove in that in¬ ftance. The Superior approached, and in an authoritative decifive voice informed me, that Lady Mortimer, in right of her relationihip, had placed me entirely under their care and protection, relying on their pious endeavours both for the recovery of my reafon and my principles*, nor could I make fo good a ufe of the firft as to apply it folely to the recovery of the latter, in- ftead of idly lamenting a lofs which alone could have preferved my foul. They called
called the noble huiband, of whom their illiberal tenets had juft deprived me, an heretic ; an outcaft of fociety ; a wretch not worthy interment. I heard without replying, but my foul was not filent. I appealed to the Moft High, and he will not forget me. Oh ! in the awful day of retribution, dreadfully will he diftinguiih the bigotted dictators in religion ! Happily for me, they underftood lefs of my language than I did of theirs; which alone perhaps faved me from a haríhneís which muft have added the ruin of my conftitution to that of my peace. You will be aftoniíhed, madam, at my furviving fuch unceafingcomplicated mif- fortunes, and, above all, the lofs of my beloved. I regard it myfelf with wonder, and impute my ftrength both of body and mind folely to the knowing no interval in my fufferings. Driven from one fatigue to another, from one agony to another, lamentation was continually fufpended ei¬ ther by amazement, or that neceffity for exertion which gives a fpring to all but the weakeft minds, and counteracts defpon-. dency.
dency. Grief, I may affirm from fad ex¬ perience, cannot be fatal till it ftills and condenies every other paffion. Left at laft with only that miferable companion, my own heart, I ruminated at leifure. Deprived of Lord Leicefter, happinefs, revenge, name, fortune, every charm in exiftence, every right in ioci- ety; entombed alive, ere the aihes of my Lord were allotted a refting place, I re¬ viewed my whole fate with aftoniihment,. Often wearied with fuffering, did I me¬ ditate giving up a life no longer endeared to me, and quietly purfuing my fouľs better part. Alas, the unborn caufe of all my late dangers would ftill recai, ftill hold me down to fuffer ! Yes, precious remnant of my love, fole pledge of paft felicity; laft of the mighty Dudley line, fighed I, I owe thee the painful bleffing of exiftence; I owe thy noble father's me¬ mory juftice. I know the profound, the execrable policy of Elizabeth, nor doubs her efcaping the flighteft cenfure, unlefs I appear,—and ihall I, ihall I, oh Lei¬ cefter, living or dead, forfake thee } ihall ihe
Ihe who coft ťhee every worldly good, allow thy honour, thy fortune, thy life, to be annihilated without one effort to retrieve either ? No, fince revenge is the little all now left me, let me fecure that little. Difappoint, oh God 1 the weak and enthufiaftic views of my unworthy relation; permit me to convey from this unhallowed grave, the honoured afties of my love 5 let them overwhelm Elizabeth with.late contrition and fruiríeis íhame, and then, oh then, allow me to bequeathe to my trembling babe that life, I no longer wiíh to groan under \ To effect any part of thefe complicated defigns, I found it abfolutely neceffary to ftifle, in a degree, my feelings ·, and fub- mitting to a diifimulation my foul abhor¬ red, I requefted to fee that woman who was more terrible to my eyes than any thing human, Elizabeth excepted. This requeft flattered the Nuns with the hope of my converfion, and a little opened their hearts towards me. 1 now learnt that the wretches who robbed my days of comfort, imputed the event folely to ac¬ cident,
cident, nor pleaded a commiffion beyond conveying Lord Leicefter to England, and even that in fo private a manner as fhewed them without legal authority,— The whole had been conducted with fo profound a fecrecy, that neither the de¬ fign nor its bloody event had ever reached the knowledge of the police ; to prevent which, the body of Lord Leicefter had been immediately brought into an outer vault of the Chapel of the Convent, where it had been embalmed ready to fend over to England, if fuch íhould be the plea-. fure of the Queen ; which, as it appeared, was all they confidered. The jewels and money, both Lord Leicefter and myfelf poffeffed, when we entered the fatal gates of Rouen, feemed to have departed with him, as well as all information refpečting the lodgment of thofe fums I have al¬ ready mentioned ; and I faw myfelf, for all that fortune once promifed me, inhe¬ riting only a weed. As I endured with patience the religiou$ violations and homilies of the Nuns,as well thofe of various Monks, who united with them
them in converting me,Lady Mortimer in a few days confented to judge of their cares by feeing me. This infolent woman con¬ fidered the vifit as a condefcenfion, and hardly held out a hand mine ihuddered again to touch. Unmoved with my pale¬ nefs, my condition, or my habit, ihe calmly difcourfed with the fifterhood and the Monks, while I continued drowned in tears that no human effort could ftifle. A gentleman, who I underftood was her younger fon, addreft me with the voice of fympathy j uninfluenced by his mo¬ ther's pious prejudices, he fpoke of my misfortune as the firft on earth, and of Lord Leicefter as the man who moft de- ferved to be lamented ; and bewailed the delays in his paíľage, which had made him unhappily arrive too late to fuccour either. He fpoke too in Engliíh. The words, the manner, the language, funk into my foul, and a faint hope they (truck out en¬ abled me to fupport the enfuing conver¬ fation. Lady Mortimer addreft me with an air at once tenacious and haughty ; treated me like a mere girl, who to a blind
blind and unpardonable paffion, had made perpetual facrifices of every folid duty of religion and morality ; reprefented me as the fole caufe of my mother's martyrdom, a fin no penance could ever expiate; men¬ tioned with horror that union, which wanting the fanclion of the Pope> could not by her be termed a marriage : and valued herfelf ou the happy plan ihe had laid to feparate us. It appeared, the in¬ formation of our place of refidence had paffed from her to Elizabeth, who bar¬ gained for the fecret delivery of Lord Lei¬ cefter to her emiffaries : a requeft: Lady Mortimer complied with gladly, as the eafieft and moft effectual means of re¬ uniting me to the Church. The plan of feizing him at midnight, had, ihe owned» been concerted by herfelf, as that was a time when he could neither refift, nor I follow him, to create any alarm : a cir¬ cumftance lhe dreaded beyond any other thing. From the bloody confequence of this treachery ihe affected to acquit her¬ felf, though without exprefiing any for-? row on the occafion. Vol. II. G Oh,
Oh, negative fin Î groaned I inwardly i oh, dire collufion ! wanting courage to act an ill, are you, when pre-aequainted, lefs guilty in not preventing it ì the laws of England reached not hkher ; nor was Lord Leicefter amenable by thofe laws 5 wherefore entice and murder him, be¬ neath a roof alliance and hofpitality İhould have dou bly confecrated ? Wherefore, but that the commoneft inn would have pro«· tected him ? Tears and fighs being all my comments on her fpeech, fhe joined the monks in elaborate exhortations; in high promifes of prefenting me to all my mother's partifans, and rendering me the head of the Engliíh Catholic par¬ ty, whenever -I voluntarily recanted my errors; or if I perfifted in them, antici¬ pating the judgment of Heaven, me re¬ folved to puni İh my apoftacy by an abfo- ]ute feclufion within the walls which at prefent confined me. Faint, and over¬ come, I promifed to deliberate, and with difficulty obtained the only requeft I had ventured :— thè fad indulgence of weep¬ ing over the coffin of Lord Leicefter. ' 'I could
I could hardly fail to difcover, through this veil of fimulatiofl, pride and bigotry, a ftrong felf-intereft. The agreement for delivering up Lord Leicefter to Elizabeth very highly offended thofe laws which pro¬ tected Lady Mortimer, and to which ihe muft have anfwered, had the intention only tranfpired ; but when to that was ad¬ ded his murder, his midnight murder, in. a city chiefly compofed of Huguenots, hardly dared íhe guefs at her own danger. The narrow faith which embofomed her among Catholics, proved in this inftance her fafety, fince united in her danger as well as principles, they were refolved to venture the utmoft to fecure her. Every fubfequent day confirmed my opinion, and the abfolute neceffity of winning me over, or entombing me alive, made the Nuns omit no care or indulgence, after once I feemed to liften to them. Fearful of roufing all my paffion«, and reviving every prejudice, by conducting me to the dreary unhallowed vault Lord Leicefter was laid in, and not daring to bring his facrilegeous afhes within their G 2 own
own Chapel, the Nuns amufed themfelves with decorating his fepulchre with all the pompous infignia of Death.—Ah ! vain attempt to fadden anguiíh ! Can midnight tapers, fufpended black, or waving plumes relieve thofe eyes which feek in vain their only object ? or gratify a heart writhing under the iron hand of calamity ? Can mortal prayers enfure immortal happi¬ nefs ? or can felf-fainted wretches bribe the Almighty even with the ore his boun¬ ty laviíhes ? Prepofterous blindnefs !— Such were my mental replies to all their enthufiaftic harangues ·, and this ill-chofen moment of affailing me, only fixed my fluctuating religious principles. On the coffin of Lord Leicefter, my fecret foul pronounced a vow folemn and irrevoca¬ ble, to know no heaven but his, nor feek it in another manner. Thou too, oh moft beloved ! wert prefent—but not to me—no more my eyes were to imbibe pleafure from the lucid beams of thine ! —no more my foul was to mingle with thine effufions, which fo often had ena¬ bled me to fuftain the malevolence of for-
fortune 1 Ah, no ! thou, thou, alone wert by a ftrange tranfition become my fovereign grief ; and the cold lead which feared up duft fo precious, enclofed at the fame moment the heart of thy fad widow ! I had in vain enquired for Mifs Cecil ; the Nuns afľured me they knew only from my delirium that fuch a perfon exifted, and Lady Mortimer inexorably refufed to inform me, whether íhe ftill did fo. Deeply I lamented the lofs of the only friend who could have foothed by iharing my affliction. Death had hallowed her paifion with rights fcarce inferior to-my own, and my heart too frequently felt none but thofe who loved could lament Lord Leicefter as he merited. Mr. Mortimer foon became the medi¬ um between me and his mother ; defpair¬ ing to touch her impenetrable foul, I employed every moment of lonelinefs in fubduing her fon's. Slowly I un¬ folded my views, and flowly he too liftened to them ; yet he did liften. Fear¬ ful that every hour would add a new in¬ convenience, by the birth of that poor G 3 babe
babe for whom I fuffered fuch unremit¬ ting calamity, and dubious whether the pious policy of the nuns might not fnatch it, as foon as born, from mý feeble arms f as well tò enfure my ftay as my abjuration, nťw terrors fprung up in my foul. I Could not but perceive an interefted mo¬ tive actuated Mortimer ; reduced, how¬ ever, to owe my freedom to any thing, I appeared blind to a tendernefs every cir¬ cumftance forbad him to avow. A very few days determined him, and he in¬ formed me he had fecured an Engliíh veífel, the crew of which were to be his only aífiftants. How flowly is hope ex- tinguiíhed, and oh, how fwiftly does it revive ! actuated with the moft impatient defire of efcaping, I made even my grief fubfervient to it; and propofed to the Nuns periodically to watch in the vault with Lord Leicefter, (a fad ceremony their religion permitted, and mine did not forbid) being told it would be eafier to force a way into this than the interior parts of the Convent. Mortimer had himfelf directed iri conveying thither my de-
departed love, and allowed it to be an eâfy means ©f efcape, and ptrhaps the only one. I paft part of feveral preceding nights In the fame munner, accompanied by different Nuns, to lull fufpicion, were it poifible any íhould have arifen. What quick, what muldplied, what various emotions foreran the appointed time !—* Every eye feemed to dive into my defign, and every heart feemed intent to coun¬ teract it. I found к impoffible to obtain the privilege of watching alone, and ihi¬ vered left my deliverers ibould arrive ere my pale companion was fummoned ; or I ftiould want ftrength to prevent her alarming the fifterhood. Fortunately the night proved feverely cold, and obferving ihe was no iharer in my penance, I re* commended to her to retire to her cell, and rejoin me when the mattins were over. Difgufted with her employment, and already froft-nipt, íhe fullenly com¬ plied, leaving me alone with the cof¬ fin of Lord Ijeicefter—Loft huiband of my choice ! Oh, ever dear, and ever la- G 4 mented |
mented! fighed I, kneeling before, and invoking the fenfelefs lead, not for her¬ felf is thy Matilda thus anxious : to vin¬ dicate thy honor, to preferve the preci¬ ous earth which once was part of thee, and that which will foon become fo, is all the ufe íhe now can make of freedom. An awful filence, which feemed only in¬ terrupted by the throbbing of my pulfes, fucceeded. Regardlefs of all thofe em¬ blems of the grave, which harrow up the minds of the happy, I knew no fear but of the living. The bell ftruck upon my heart the decifive twelve. A jarring in the fartheft vault reached my ear ; ano· ther opened ; I heard the feet of men î another yet ; I was environed by my de¬ liverers, and one fpark of pleafure ran through my cold frame, as I raifed my head from the coffin of Lord Leicefter. <( Fly, fair Matilda," cried the impatient Mortimer, fnatching my hand to raife me.^- fi Stay, generous friend, and hear me, faid I, with firmnefs. You refcue only half of me, if you leave the allies of my Lord
Lord behind. Would you part a mifer from his treafure ? rather will he be maf- facred upon it. There is enclofed the whole of mine; bear that likewife away, or entomb me with it ; for never, I fwear by him in whofe prefence we were united, never will I, alive or dead, confent to part with my huiband." Offended at fo unexpected a demand, he urged the diffi¬ culty and the danger, with a haríhnefs I thought him incapable of; neverthelefs, the place and time allowed not of long deliberation, and finding me inflexible, he at laft ordered the failors to convey away the coffin likewife. An order they only complied with, from taking the me¬ taphorical phrafe I had ufed, " of a trea¬ fure," in a literal fenfe. Attached to Lord Leicefter beyond mortality, I always felt protected when he was prefent, and with ceafelefs care watched my deliverers, con¬ vinced they would be but too ready to leave fo great an incumbrance behind. They bore me with fwiftnefs to the banks of the Seine, where a boat waited j and the tide favoring, we foon reached a ihip
fhip of confiderable burden, which weigh¬ ed anchor immediately. Agitated with a thoufand remembrances, that òf Mor¬ timer hardly occured to me till the vef¬ fel was under fail, and I ftill perceived him on botrd. I had ever underftood he was to leave me äs foon as I was placed in fàfety. I reminded him of this pro¬ mife, " I will leave you, faireft of wo¬ men, cried he, eagerly grafping my hand, when you are placed in fafety $ if you ftill are cruel enough to defire it. But can I quit you now ? or venture to fet foot in a country where I have for your fake vio* lated the moft facred law, and expofed myfelf to condign puniihment?" I ihould have found reafon enough in this anfwer, but that is ftifled, ihort-breathed joy, his ungovernable ardor, impreíTed my fecret foul with terror, and robbed freedom of a}i comfort. 1 found in the cabin, to which he con¬ ducted me, a woman allotted to attend me, who ftrongly recommended that re- pofe my fate had long denied : the mis¬ fortunes from which I had efcaped, united with
with thofe that ftill threatened me, t& fill my whole foul ; and willing to avert the fearful anticipation, I entered into fome common difcourfe, with my atten¬ dant. I found, with infinite aftoniih¬ ment, that (he was a midwife, and pro¬ vided with every neceíľary for the expect* ed babe. I íhould have confidered this as the moft tender obligation, but that a fatal doubt had fprung up in my heart, and fufpended every generous emotion. Alas, it foon matured into certainty! The vain and eternal fondnefs which made me infift on having the coffin of Lord, Leicefter placed in the cabin, allotted for me, at firft feemed to infpire in Morti¬ mer that horror common to weak or guilty minds, at fight of fuch an awful tnemento : a few days, however, rendered it familiar to him. A paffion he no longer concealed, led him continually into my prefence j neither the unburied dead, the black which feemed to envelop my wi¬ thered heart as well as form, nor the fad circumftances in which I was widowed, any longer operated gn his imagination· I too
I too plai ply perceived, that he confidered me as his own, and only waited my reco¬ very to avow his unwarranted pretenfions. What dire viciflitudes of fear did my ti¬ mid foul experience ! I faw myfelf en¬ tirely in the power of this man ; forlorn of every human aid ! hopelefs, helplefs, fave in the mercy of the Almighty.—Oh, thou fupreme ! fighed I, hourly raifing my ftreaming eyes to Heaven, thou whofe omnifcient breath rolls on this mighty world of waters ! oh, grant that they may prove my fafety or my grave ! A little gallery ran before my cabin, whither I fometimes went for air. De¬ voured with reveries like thofe recapitu¬ lated, I one evening found them interrupt. ed by the voice of a woman finging. The elegance of her manner, and the fweet¬ nefs of her tone, convinced me it could not be my coarfe attendant ; nor did I know the íhip contained another female fave myfelf. Rapt in aftoniihment and curiofity, every fenfe fubfided into ear. I recognized a favourite hymn ; a hymn fo fwell ing, folemn, and fublime, that my
my charmed fenfe purfued the fubječt al- moft to Heaven* She changed to death, —one tone, one deep, one dirge-like tone, {truck on my vibrating heart, and al moft filenced every pulfe. A loud cry, with the name of Rofe, burft from me¬ the noife of a perfon falling fucceeded, and the ringing ceafed. J ran wildly up to the deck, and loudly demanded my long loft friend of the aftoniihcd Morti¬ mer. Confufed beyond the power of de¬ ceiving me, he opened a cabin immedi¬ ately over my own. Ah, with what tu¬ multuous emotions did I raife the much- loved, much-lamented partner of my fate ! flowly íhe recovered from the ftupor fur- prize had occafioned ; a thoufand remem¬ brances endeared the pleafure of the re¬ union; alas ! as many annihilated all fenfe of pleafure. Embraces and tears at length fubfided. As foon as alone, I qucftioned her concerning the interval, the dire de- cifive interval.—" Waked by the univer¬ fal confufion, faid the fair Rofe with bitter fobs, which fucceeded the fatal accident of the night that parted us, I demanded
you, my friend, with frantic ardor, but in vain. A man, I foon underftood to be the fon of Lady Mortimer, who was concealed in the houfe when we arrived, ihortly after entered my apartment, and ordered others who attended him, to con¬ vey me on board the ihip which brought him from Jamaica. Tears and intreaties were fruitlefs, and in the dead of night I was conducted to the banks of the Seine, and rowed to this veffel, in which I found myfelf imprifoned, without the leaft hope of meeting you. I foon learnt, from the coarie jefts of the failors, that their owner was an unprincipled villain in all refpects, and more efpecially where women were concerned : every hope of an efcape was finally taken from me, by my having the ill-fortune to attach the Captain, whom fear of Mortimer alone has kept within bounds. I underftood the veffel was bound for Jamaica, and only waited to take in a new cargo : Neverthelefs, I faw that completed without our fetting fail ; and hoped from this the hand of provi¬ dence would yet interpofe in my favor. Alas,
Alas, little did I imagine it was involving you in the fame hopelefs, defperate fitu* ation!·— t Judge then, oh moft unfortunate, concluded the amiable Mifs Cecil, what fate awaits us both—refcued from the li¬ centious wiihes of your coufìn, his worths lefs heart has only exchanged its object* and refigns mc as the more ignoble prey to his more worthlefs companion : the little decency Mortimer has hitherto pre¬ ferved towards you, this miferable meet* inğ will finally put an end to. He now knows you are infallibly apprized of your deftination, and how will you form your mind to it? The ifland to which we are bound is yet in the hands of a few fettiers» power is almoft their only law, and he doubtlefs does not want that, fince he ventures to defy every other. Never more ihall my aching eyes difcern the fafe, the pleafant ihores of England* thofe ihores they joyed to lolb fight of* —Alas, they then were fixed upon ад objeci, offended Heaven has puniíhed m« by claiimngľ' How,
How, how ihould we refift the numb¬ ing power of defperation, did not the fa¬ cred fenfe of devotion moftly fpring from it, and lift the foul above humanity! Although more deplorably circumftanced than my friend, by a courageous effort I refolved to foothe and confole her ; and gently preparing her tender heart for the fatal object it was deftined to encounter, I led her down to my cabin. Ah what af¬ fection itreamed equal from our hearts and eyes upon the cold memento 1 Mifs Cecil judged too truly, and the infamous Mortimer no longer deigned to veil his views ; perpetually ihocking me with free and haughty declarations of his paifion. It was but too obvious he knew his power, and confidered his intention of marrying me as the moft honourable diftinction ; even at the moment he fcofif- ed at every one cuftom or nature had eftablifhed. Mifs Cecil was not lefs im¬ portuned, by a wretch rough as the ele¬ ment by which he fubfifted, and both fo regularly vifited our cabin, that fcarce could we call it our own, even at the hours
hours facred to repofe. In the eternal conflicts, fuch a fituation muft caufe, def¬ pair would too often prevail ; and filently with dubious eyes we fathomed the abyis of waters on which we floated, confider¬ ing it as the laft terrible afylum. In the midft of thefe horrors the ap¬ pointed period revolved, and nature made her agonizing effort. In that awful mo¬ ment I loft every fenfation of fear, and refigned myfelf into the hands of my Creator ; befeeching him to recall the troubled foul which fo long had groaned before him, with that of the tender babe, whofe firft feeble cries pierced my every fenfe. As foon as my weaknefs allowed, they gave into my arms a girl, a dear, a fatherlefs girl, who feemed at her firft en¬ trance into exiftence, to bewail her un¬ known calamity. An impulfe new, ex¬ quifite, unexpected, took poiTeffmn of my foul ; an impulfe fo fweet, fo ftrong, fo facred, it feemed as I had never loved till then. Feebly ftraining her to my bo¬ fom, I enthufiaftically prayed the Al¬ mighty to beftow on her every bleffing Vol, II, H íhe
ihe had innocently wrefted frófn me, while my fond heart baptifed her in its tears. Powerful, powerful nature ! how did I worfhip all thy ordinations ! No fate can be wrought up to fuch a height of happinefs, but fome interwoven forrow chäftens us with the fad fenfe of imperfection ; nor any fo fteeped in af¬ fliction, but fome celeftial ray ftreams through this frail rrianfion of mortality, fubliming all our fufferings. While my eager eyes gazed unwearied on my new-born cherub, and traced in her infant lineaments her father's match- efs beauty, even till they ached with fondnefs, fancy pierced through the veil of futurity to unite each grace of perfon and of mind, and enduing her with all, every human claim upon my feelings feemed condenfed^ and révived in this new one. Oh, hope ! fweet fubftitute for happinefs, whole mental gildings dawn periodically upon the foul, like light upon creation, awakening and invigorating every active principle öf being; recalled by this irrefiftible influence evén from the
the dark, the dreary grave, each troubled heart arifes, and ihaking off the heavy dews of forrow, flowly refumes its wonted habits. The pale converts of experience no longer dare to appropriate the darling object of their wiihes, but meekly then receive the appointed pleafure, prepared alike either to enjoy or to refign it. As thus the maternal tye engrafted itfelf in my foul, I perpetually endeavoured to imprefs that of my dear unfortunate friend with the fame train of ideas. Alas, in vain !—Ra¬ ther furprized at finding me fenfible of confolation, than difpofed to receive it, Mifs Cecil gradually withdrew a confi¬ dence I did not eafily mifs, and delivered herfelf up to that cold and füllen defpair, which unfettles every principle. Intreaties and arguments foon loft all effect on her* Starting at times from an impenetrable reverie, a broken figh would overturn all I could urge, while my continued adjura¬ tions produced too often a marked dif¬ guft. Obliged at intervals to quit the cabin (left even my prefent fituation ihould fail to protect it from intruders) and liften to H 2 the
the hateful addreffes of her boifterous lover, often did the feat of reafon appear ihaken in this dear unfortunate on her return, and a vague and extravagant joy would fuddenly give place to the deepeft gloom and inanity. 1 faw thefe fluctua¬ tions with horror, and dreaded the mo¬ ment when a rude demand of marriage ihould bring her fate to a climax. Ah, not without reafon did I dread it ! One evening after a converfation of this kind, I perceived her more than ufually difturb- ed. Neither my prayers, nor the pour¬ ing rain could bring her from the balcony, where for hours ihe told her weary fteps. I ftarted at laft from a momentary flum- ber on her re-entering the cabin. The dim lamp burning in it, fhewed her with a flow and tottering pace approaching the laft afylum of Lord Leicefter j finking by this repofitory of her breaking heart, ihe clafped her hands upon her bofom with a moft fpeaking fenfe of woe ; while over it her fair locks fell wild and di- lhevelled, heavy with the midnight rain, and ihiveringto its beatings. The wet dra¬ pery
pery of her white garments floated far over the floor, and combined to form fo perfect an image of defolation, as froze up all my faculties. I ftruggled for articulati¬ on. A feeble cry alone efcaped me. She ftarted at the found from her icy ftupor, and glanced her eyes every where, with that acutenefs of perception which marks a difturbed imagination ; then with a long figh funk once more into herfelf. A fé¬ cond cry, followed by her name, my bounding eager heart pronounced. She half arofe ; the motion of her lips feemed contending with the drear filence of the moment, but not a murmur broke it,— amazement, horror, the wrings of death transfixed me. Springing up with ethe- rial lightnefs, even while her feeble frame ihivered with agony and affection, ihe fixed on my convulfed features a long, long look, then waving majeftically a laft adieu, ruíhed again into the balcony. Unable to move a limb, my harrowed foul feemed, through the jar of the ele¬ ments, to diftinguiih her dreadful plunge into the world of waters. A fomething H 3 too
too mighty to defcribe or endure came over me, and fenfe fled before it. How long it was ere my carelefs atten¬ dant returned to my relief I know not, but a fucceffion of fits, accompanied with dan¬ gerous ihudderings, and a raging fever feemed every moment to promife me, from the ordination of providence, that relief my loft Rofe had ventured to precipitate. Whether her fatal example, or my fuffer¬ ings, influenced my tyrant, I know not, but his perfecution entirely fubfided; in the fhort intervak of reafon my weaknefs pro¬ duced, he condemned his own conduct, bound himfelf by the moft lolemn promifes to convey me home, and conjured me to itruggle for life, if not for my own fake, at leaft for that of my infant. Alas, my babe ! when my cheek felt once more thy tender breathings, I accufed myfelf for wiihing to leave thee, and acknowledged the fad neceffity of living. My cruel malady robbing the cherub of her natural fufte- nance, it was with difficulty íhe received any other, and the propofal he made me, of having her baptized, was readily ac¬ cepted.
cepted. That ceŕempny was performed the fame evening. iUas, my precious in¬ fant, no velvet pillowed thy innocenţiace ! nocoftly canopies pre/erved it! np noble fponfors, with ready arms, cpnt^en.ded to receive thee ! no.father's bleffing followed that of Heayen ; thou wert, ajasj giyen jby a fordid nurfe, to a more fordid chaplain, and by a dim lamp, within a narrow ca¬ bin, thy woeful mother raifed her feeble head to fee the chUd of Lord Leicefter, a daughter of the Houfe of Stuart, con¬ fecrated by the name of Mary. Recovered a little from the effefts, as well as the impreffion caufed by the un¬ happy cataftrophe of 01y darling .friend, I could not fail to adore that .gracious providence with whofe decrees .ihe bad dared to blend her own, on learning $at the infolent Captain .had, on .that fatal evening, by a fall broke both his ar f ms, and loft the power of molefting her. At firft this appeared a bitter aggravation, but foon it funk into my foul, and regu¬ lated all my future conduct. Neveri alı never, from that moment have I ventured H 4 to
to yield to raíhnefs and defpair, but when unable to obey, I have refolved to en¬ dure. How feverely has this principle been tried ? How often, when over- weighed by the heavy hand of misfor¬ tune, have I been obliged to İnterpofe between myfelf and my fate, the fleeting form of the beauteous Cecil efcaping my helplefs will, and rulhing, uncalled, into eternity ? « The vain hope of returning to England, with which Mortimer had flattered me into health, daily diminifhed; and the alteration of the air, united with the dif- courfe of the mariners, to prove that the period of my difaftrous voyage approach¬ ed. I heard the fond, the univerfal ihout; and that fweet emotion failors only feel at fight of land, agitated every heart but mine. Averfe and gloomy I turned my hopelefs eyes towards a ihore where na¬ ture's laviíh hand had fpread a fertility, which feemed to fcorn the aid of art. Ah, where are now the barren hills, the chalky cliffs of England ? fighed I in filence. I perceived St. Jago de la Vega i and in the
the idea of interefting the Governor I refted my laft hope. I knew not that eager to poffefs the abundant conveni¬ ences my tyrant had brought over I ihould efcape the notice of the inhabi¬ tants, or be confidered as living lumber not worth enquiry. Confined within the narrow bounds of my own cabin, I had the mortification of hearing the cannon and mufick proclaim the arrival and departure of the Governor and Officers, after partak¬ ing afumptuous entertainment; and on the fame evening, while intoxication fecured the chief people of the ifland in their own houfes, I was landed, and put into a litter, which the flaves of Mortimer bore to¬ wards his plantations. The few idlers whom curiofity drew round me, disre¬ garded my adjurations, and with cold in- folence examined my features. Their re¬ marks were made in a language I did not underftand, and I plainly difcerned they did not wifh to underftand mine. I too late recollected my being unveiled might make them form a falfe judgment of my character. Meek by nature, and bowed to
to the earth by misfortune, I loft all power of contending with my fate j and fupplicating only the Almighty, awaited its dire completion. I perceived it was not without reafon Mortimer had boafted of his authority : with overbearing infolence he now de¬ manded my hand, and bade me remem¬ ber he was there a fovereign, nor did liée a being who dared even to murmur at his will. He prefumed to rally the anguiíh he occafioned, and even facrilegioufly to infult the cold remains of that adored huiband whofe rights he feemed every moment ready to violate. Imagination had long fince been exhaufted in feeking means of redrefs. Flight was impoifible in a country where I neither knew the roads, the natives, nor whether it fupplied an individual willing or able to proteft me. Many of his Spaniíh domeftics I was not permitted to feej thofe that were allowed to approach me appeared haugh¬ ty, repelling, and filent. I foon found they compounded with their pride for the fervile exactions of duty paid to him, by lording
lording it equally over his ilaves ; who, timid by nature,, and fubdued by cruelty, íêemed to have loft the very wiih of any other good than that of exiftence. Tears, fighe, and refufals, could no longer avert, or even delay the facrifice ; and having only a few hours of folitude allowed, to prepare my mind for the -cere¬ mony, I hulhed my fmiling babe at my aching breaft, and wearied alike with mi¬ fery and prayer, dropt into a fiumber. A dream reprefented me in the pofition I really was·—funk on the ground near the coffin of Lord Leicefter. Suddenly I per¬ ceived the lid was removed. I ftarted up, impatient to behold the chofen of my heart. I íâw him once more, tho' wrapt in the garments of the grave—once more 1 law rich life mantling on that manly cheek, and thole fine eyes, minenever beheld without pleafure, once more beam¬ ed brightnefs upon me. Surprized, en¬ tranced, I.made a thoufand ineffectual ef¬ forts to fpeak, and holding out my new¬ born Mary, I faw (oh fweet, thpugh vain delufion) a father's arms enfold her. My fenfes
fenfes feemed unequal to the ecftacy î im¬ penetrable darknefs fpread over my eyes, and a burft of ethereal mufick abforbed every faculty. Recovering all, however, inftantaneoufly, I looked upward. Alas, Lord Leicefter was afcending with his daughter in his arms. I demanded her with agonizing cries ; and, catching at a mantle which yet feemed within my reach, it fell upon me like the craíh of nature, burying me under an immoveable weight. I awakened at the moment. 'Tis but a dream, cried my facred heart, but fuch a dream as the horrors of the approaching moment aione could counterpoife. Scarce had I recalled my fhook fenfes, when Mortimer, attended by his chap¬ lain and domeftics, entered my apartment. While the latter were decorating it with Catholic pomp, I fummoned the fmall re¬ mains of my courage to addrefs the prieft, who ftood ready to mock the religion he profcifed.—" By that awful God, to whom you are confecrated, hear me, Father! cried I, finking at his feet, and oh, that he may gracioufly imprefs upon your heart
heart the fad proteft of mine ! by bar¬ barous hands at once widowed and be¬ trayed, it is no longer poflible for every human power combined to make me happy j you, you alone, may make me wholly miferable. If to complete thofe manifold evils which the Almighty (for ends I cannot judge of) has permitted me to furvive, with the violation of every right, both of religion and morality, can be called marriage, and you as the delegate of Heaven dare facrilegioufly to pronounce the ceremony, I ftand here a devoted wretch, the hopelefs, helplefs, victim of my duty ! But mark, I adjure you, my laft declaration. I have a will, which circumftances can neither alter or bend—delivered up to this abandoned man, it is in his power to make me any thing but his wife, and againft that title my foul will ever revolt, and my laft breath proteft." — " Unhappy, deluded young creature, returned the fordid prieft in French, were my confcience to pre¬ vent this marriage, it would be from a different motive than thofe you adjure me by;
by ; and fuch is the horror your obftinate herefy infpires, that did I not hope time, and a better huiband's cares would con¬ vert your erring heart, hardly ihould I venture to unite you with a memberof our holy church."— c< Submit yourfelf at Once to your fate, imperioufly cried Mortimer, for to end your hopes of the churclťs in- terpofing in your favor, I will frankly acknowledge ihe put you into mypower." I turned my hands, as well as eyes, in fpeechlefs aftoniihment towards Heaven. <f Hope not, my fair coufin, rejoined he with a malicious fmile, your fentimental innocence can cope with the arts of a fifterhood of Nuns. Wearied with your obftinacy, fearful of your efcape, they gladly refigned you to me to enfure their own fafety." He pauféd— my mind took in at once the dreadful truth—My innocence, ah rather fay ignoranct, groaned I mentally, that fatal error which ever too feverely puniíhes itfelf—-Hardly could I pardon myfelf the extravagant credulity. " Scarce could my mother perfuade me> refumed he, that you would be duped by
by ib obvious a collufion ; fince á fingle moment's reflection muft have convinced you that never man pervaded the laft retreat of difappointed women, but by their own connivance : and all the precious mum¬ mery of the bufinefs but heightened the pleafure of the triumph. How could I fail to fmile to fee the breathlefs fpoufe borne in the train of a living one ? who proudly clafped a timid heart which knew not then it throbbed againft its matters!" Alike unable to utter, or fupprefs, the burning indignation this unmanly boaft, this elaborate wickednefs excited, I fixed my eyes inflexibly oh the coffin of Lord Leicefter, almoft believing heaven itfelf would effect a miracle in my favor, by renovating my only protector. The ce¬ remony neverthelefs commenced; when a new event transfixed not only me^ but every perfon prefent. A yell, wild, deep, ihrill, and horrible, was fucceeded by a tumult univerfal and tremendous. The palenefs of death crept upon the cheeks of my late inhuman tyrant, who, with his confederates, turned around his hopelefs eyes
eyes for fome instrument of defence in vain. Impelled by defperation they all ruíhed out 5 but were inftantly driven back by the tide of exafperated flaves. Appalled by their ferocious eyes, and bloody hands, I funk into a fwoon, but revived as it were by heaven's appoint¬ ment to fee the laft, the deadly blow gi¬ ven to Mortimer; who reeling a few pa¬ ces, groaned his laft on the coffin of Lord Leicefter: thus fignally and memorably avenged. Surrounded with death in every horrid form, I expected continually the completion of my deftiny; which I had certainly found, but that a Spaniard, who was united in the plot of the flaves, with the gallantry incident to his nation pro¬ tected me in confequence of my fex and wrongs, and led me away to their rendez¬ vous ; aíľuring me I íhould there find fafety. Terror almoft annihilated my fa¬ culties as the ferocious flaves ran back¬ ward and forward, heaping in theie huts the bloody plunder new murders every moment fecured. Having gathered to¬ gether all they thought it expedient to fave,
•fave, they loaded the horfes, and each other, haftening to fecrete themfelves in thofe woods, which by narrow paíľes led to impenetrable retreats in the mountains. Many were the unintelligible difputes concerning me. Many a half-raifed arm, and inflamed eye, glared death upon me ; but the ftroke was as eagerly avert¬ ed by the interpofition of the generous Emanuel. Yet perhaps his utmoft in¬ tereft had been unequal to the occafion, but that one of the llaves they called Ai¬ mor, feemed fuddenly won over to my party. He was among the ringleaders of this confpiracy, and his decifion fi¬ lenced every murmur. Horfes were fo precious, that Emanuel could only pro¬ cure me one by refigning to his confede¬ rates his íhare of the plunder, which it had been allotted him to convey. Fury now began to give place to fear ; and the guilty wretches haftened their de - parture. The march commenced about midnight. Silent, bewildered, awe-ftruck, I had meditated on this fuccefiion of ter¬ rible events, without extending my views Vol. II. I be*
beyond the prefent moment, and fcarce dared look towards the future. To fee myfelf and infant led away thus fuddenly into flavery, by a wild and unknown peo¬ ple, feared by the oppreffions of their murdered mafter to all fenfe of humanity, through a country alike wild and un¬ known, expofed to the infults of two new- made lovers, and only fafe in the guard they kept over each other; how ftrange the tranfition in my fate ! I yet bent my foul to the power, who by fuch exemplary juftice, releafed me from Mortimer, and thought every other evil lefs than being confirmed his wife, fince that alone was without any remedy but death. Ere we had made any confiderable pro¬ grefs in our fearful journey, the rolling clouds became tinclured with a vivid crimfon, and my companions were feized with the confternation incident to guilt. Notwithftanding they had ufed every pre¬ caution to conceal their ravages, on the fpot from whence they had efcaped, till out of the reach of danger, fome unex- tinguifhed fpark had caught fire, and ex¬ tending
tending through the range of buildings, I faw the rich, though ravaged poffeffions, of Mortimer, one univerfal conflagration. The apprehenfion this diffufed through the reft of the wanderers, gave place in me to a nearer and more affecting remem¬ brance. Sad and filent tears itreamed down my cheeks, when I confidered that the whole riches of his bafe rival formed but the funeral pile of Lord Leicefter. Farewell ! a long farewell ! fighed forth mv opprefied foul. Oh, moft beloved! Oh, moft avenged ! Whatever fate Heaven lhall appoint thy perfecuted widow, hum¬ bly let her obey the God, who fo fignally interred thee!—Alas ! a few hours and no memorial of thy exiftence will remain, except that poor babe who feebly trem¬ bles to the beatings of her mother's heart. No faithful hand ihall feparate the afhes of the inj urer and the injured : Yet let me not complain, fince the fiat of the Almighty (hall awfully adjudge the fouls this fearful moment enlarges. As Emanuel itili walked by me, I fought from him to u ed er İt and the eau fe I г of
of the prefent infurrečtion, and the dif¬ ferent motives of himfelf and compani¬ ons. " Thofe of the flaves, faid that ge¬ nerous protector, are like their natures, wild and various—my own, fimply juf¬ tice and love. The tyrannic Mortimer, whofe fate no being will ever deplore, eftabliíhed himfelf in this ifland, no lefs by the favour of Philip the Second, than by marrying the fifter of the prefent Go¬ vernor, Don Fedro de Sylva. In that no¬ bleman he met a kindred mind; mean, mercenary, oppreffive, and cruel ; in one particular alone they differed; Mortimer was by nature bold and enterprising ; Don Pedro cautious and timid. The enor¬ mities of the firft, however, always found fnelter in the injuftice of the latter ; and Don Pedro not daring to carry on in his own perfon that piratical and illicit trade which alone can enrich individuals in the infancy of a fettlement, fecretly ftiared with his brother-in-law the purchafe and the profit, while Mortimer was the only oftenfible perfon, had any legal enquiry arifen. The arrogance, cruelty, and va¬ nity
nity of Mortimer, received a fatal increafe by the accumulation of wealth, and fet him above all reftraint. Don Pedro, confcious he was in his power, ventured not toqueftion, much lefs puniih his con¬ duct. The intervals between his frequent voyages deftroyed the peace, and ihor¬ tened the days of Donna Victoria, the uncomplaining victim of her brother's and hufband's rapacious league. I came with her into the family as her major domo, a poft, which rendering me a wit- nefs of the brutality of Mortimer, foon turned the difguft he generally infpired into hatred. I was the fofter brother of Victoria, and attached to her by a reve¬ rence fo profound, that I infenfibly adopt¬ ed her wrongs as my own. Ungoverned and licentious in every inftance, but more efpecially when women were the objects, force generally was employed by Morti¬ mer, where fraud failed to fucceed ; and thofe domeftics alone held rank in his fa* mily, who were readily fubfervient to his grofs and vicious purfuits. My views died with my lady, and I ihould gladly have I 3 quit-
1x8 quitted him to return to Spain, but that he meanly retained a confiderable fum I had been provident enough to fave, as well as a legacy Donna Victoria had be¬ queathed me. Every complaint, or even folicitation for my own, was filenced with the moft haughty threats of perpetual im¬ prifonment : a fentence I often faw in¬ flicted for no greater fault. Nor could I hope to quit the ifland, as the confent of the Governor depended on that of Morti¬ mer. The fenfe of undeferved oppreffion thus corroded my very foul, and prepared me for the incident which at laft nerved my arm againft the tyrant. Meanwhile the bafe accomplices of his pleafures and his crimes, aflumed a fo- vereignty over the miferable flaves, which they exercifedtill invention was exhaufted in cruelty and oppreffion. In vain my nature ihrunk at the fight of calamities I knew not how to remedy : unable to quit the ifland, or recover my money, two years elapfed in fruitlefs, and fometimes defperate projects. I faw the perfecuted flaves ripe for rebellion, and only waiting a favour-
a favourable moment to rife and facrifice their train of oppreffors ; and though I did not purpofe to join the confederacy, I concealed it with a füllen fatisfačtion > till the day which at once determined my conduct. Need I fay it was that which brought you thither ? When I faw you alike irradiated by innocence and beauty, led into thofe unhallowed walls—»when I faw the tear of misfortune fall on your beauteous babe, like the fpring's chafte dews upon the early bloffom, I was per¬ fuaded your nature intuitively ihuddered at the monfter ; and I fwore to preferve you at the hazard of my life ; nay even at the moment when hope ihould be an¬ nihilated in your heart. I joined at once in the confpiracy ; the hands were ready, the head alone had been wanting. By va¬ rious artifices I procured arrfis for the flaves, and fixed the infuŕrectiórt on the day appointed for your marriage ¿ as that on which Mortimer and his favourites would be wholly occupied, and of courfe unguarded. The hand of Heaven furely guided all our operations. The various I 4 villains
villains have atoned (as far at leaft as life can atone) for their complicated iniquities. But,alas! Madam, I did not fufficiently confider confequences. It is dangerous to arm the enraged and the ignorant. I know, too late, your life and mine de¬ pends on a frail tenure, and only folemnly aifure you, while mine lafts, yours íhall be fafe. The uninformed, defperate wretches, with whom we are furrounded, are not the fimple happy beings inju¬ rious tyranny firft found them. Inflicted cruelty has hardened their hearts, and the fight of untafted luxuries corrupted them. Their own wants have increafed with the knowledge of our enjoyments, and what they greatly defire, they have learnt to go any lengths to attain. Why íhould I conceal from you that your only profpečt of fafety is the hope of being overtaken, though that to me is inevita¬ ble ruin. The fatal fire, therefore, which now thefe entangling woods almoft hide from us, is of all the wonders of the late evening, the moft vifible interpofition of Heaven in your favor." The
The nobility of fentiment incident to the Spanifh nation, efpecially in what¬ ever relates to the fofter fex, prevented that furprize fo romantic a generofity muft otherwife have occafioned. To gratify a requeft made with the higheft refpect, I entered into a recital of my own haplefs ftory. Aimor, with jealous care, adhered to that fide of my horfe not guarded by Emanuel, and being ig¬ norant of the language in which I fpoke, depended on his rival for tranflating itj who, no doubt, gave it every con- ftručtion moft favourable to his own views. The information that I was the daughter of a Queen, ran through the troop, and fomething foftened their fe¬ rocity : but foon on that pompous dis¬ tinction, were grounded vain hopes of an imaginary good they were all to de¬ rive from me—from me, who was in fact, the moft helplefs and unprotected of all the miferable wanderers. I pondered much on Emanuel's re¬ mark, that my fafety could only be afcer- iained from our being overtaken -, but when
when I confidered the defperate ftate of all the wretches with me, ihould that happen, hardly dared I hope it. Still we journeyed onward, through woods the ftars of Heaven could fcarcely pene¬ trate j and when I recollected the fright¬ ful wilds and mountains beyond them, in which myfelf and babe muft infallibly be buried för life, how did my heart die within me ! But when to that fear was added the dread of evils yet more horrid ble, hardly could my fenfes fupport the oppreffion. Aimorj I was convinced, would not wartt the aid of his whole par¬ ty, and how could I hope one generous individual would be able to ftruggle with a tide of combining foes ? But even if Emanuel had the addrefs to manage them all, would not expectations in his own favor, hardly lefs fearful to my thoughts, arife in his heart? Through the chill windings of the deferì woods, I râifed my foul to him whofe eye pervades alike the gloom of midnight and the blaze of noorr, and fornething feemed to aifure Щ finking fpirits> that he refcued me not
not from the horrors of the Recefs, thus to abandon me.——I did not err in that devout confidence. The dawn of day obliging the body to be more guarded in their march, they chafe а lone hollow, and halted to fend forth fcouts, and re¬ frein themfelves. Alas. I fighed for the poor wretches, who, feduced by European crimes to a dire imitation of them, had wanted forefight to fecure themfelves the common comforts, which alone ren¬ der life endurable, though overwhelmed with gaudy trifles they knew not how to enjoy. The temporary calm into which they funk, was fearfully interrupted. The fcouts fent out preíľed back, with imme¬ diate notice that they were intercepted, and fo hemmed in that it was impoifibkr to proceed a mile further· Though by this notice my own fafety was afcertained* my very foul partook the mifery of my companions. The wretched women threw> their arms, for the laft tinne, round their defpairing huibands, and bathed them with tears fo bitter, as might waíh ous the
the ftains of blood yet recent. The men¿ thus totally devoted, with a ftern and unaltered brow, feized their arms, and refolved to ruíh upon the broken parties, gracing their own death, by making the lofs equal to their enemies. Even fome of their wives, rendered furious by the occafion, followed with fuch fcattered weapons as they could collect, and the reft, no lefs tamed, gathered themfelves and haplefs children round me, as if I could preferve them ; purfuing their friends with a cry that might (hake the throne of mercy. Aimor and Emanuel caft a lingering eye towards the foot of the tree at which I fat, apparently the Queen of Sorrow. It was dreadful to make a vifible diftinction at that mo¬ ment, and perhaps embitter their laft. Laying my babe upon my lap, I ten¬ dered a hand to each ; the boon was ea¬ gerly accepted. Even the favage became humanized, an impaffîonate tear fell on the hand that ihuddered at his touch ; while Emanuel, more gracefully obfe- quious, bowed to the earth, and remov¬ ing
ing his ardent eye from my face to that of his rival— cc Adieu, moft woríhipped of women ! cried the gallant Spaniard, adieu, forever! How many evils does death fave us all from!" During the horrible interval of blood and flaughter, I endeavoured to clofe my ears to the found of the firing, which was echoed by the agonizing groans of the wretches around me. The conflict was ihort; and bands of Europeans foon pierced through thofe ihades, where a few minutes had made fo many helplefs wi¬ dows. Thofe guilty but unfortunate wo¬ men, proftrating themfel ves before the pre- fented pieces, endeavoured, by the moft lubmiífive geftures, and offers of their children, to affuage the wrath of the in- cenfed victors. 1 feebly arofe likewife, and preffing forward to the apparent leader, aftoniíhed him with the fight of a white among the furvivors. I exhaufted my little remaining ftrength in foliating pro¬ tection for myfelf and child, and pity for my companions. He heard, without com¬ prehending me: his very foul was in¬ tently
tently fixed on the fcattered riches this reduction of the flaves put into his hands, and neither myfelf my daughter, or my fate, feemed an objeci worth regard. The whole party bufily employed them¬ felves in collecting the valuables of every kind, and afterwards taking into confi¬ deration the human plunder fortune had once more reftored to them, they drove off the female flaves, and their children, bending beneath the weight of mifery, fatigue, and manacles. Emerging from the depth of thofe un- wholefome woods, through which I had wandered, I lifted my eyes devoutly to¬ wards that rifing orb, which feems no lefs to give light to the mind than the crea¬ tion: and called on the pleafing profpečl of the future, to counteract the horrible impreflions of the paft. Reftored by this extraordinary means once more to civi¬ lized fociety, my heart acknowledged the charm, the fimple, the folitary charm of liberty, and fpringing forward toward England, overleaped every intervenins obftacle. Convinced, by fatál experience, at
at once of the fragility of human happi¬ nefs, and the perfecutions to which na¬ ture's deareft gifts too often expofe us, the bright forms of love, ambition and glory vaniihed, leaving no image for my fancy to reft on but Content. I faw her meek eye lifted to her heaven-born fifter, Refignation ; whofe hallowed beams itreamed through her earthy cottage, im- pearling every tear : and my foul fighed after the fad peace of which I found it yet capable. The dear, unconfcious par¬ taker of my wayward fate, with many an innocent fmile, revived my fpirits ; and devoted to this only object of my plea¬ fures, I fought in her to lofe the fenfe of every other care. The curiofity I had at firft excited among the whole party, extended not be¬ yond common enquiries, and as I fpoke no Spaniíh, and French was but indiffer¬ ently underftood by either them, or my· felf, I could hardly hope greatly to inter¬ eft them in my favor. I had made them comprehend, that I was a near relation of the murdered Mortimer, but that circum¬ ftance,
ftance, far from interefting, feemed rather to alienate and difguft them. It was night ere we reached St. Jago de la Vega, where we found the inhabitants univerfally under arms, and eagerly ex¬ pecting the return of thofe fent after the rebellious fugitives. Confounded with thofe perfecuted wretches— uníheltered from the taunts, infults, and execrations of an incenfed populace, I found myfelf yet the victim of angry fortune; and over¬ worn with fuffering, dropt fenfelefs at the door of a piiibn, where I underftood my journey was to end. 1 revived on a miferable bed, in a dark room, and with¬ out any companions ! but confcious of fafety, as well as (тее from guilt, I recom¬ mended myfelf to God, and funk into the happieft repofe I had known fince 1 paffed the fatal gates of Rouen. A black flave brought me fome coarfe provifions in the morning, nor did I know till the evening that it was meant to fuf¬ tain myfelf and child for the day. It proved, however, more than fufficient ; for my conftitution, which had hitherto re*
refifted every danger, had now received a Ihock of the moft defperate kind. Racked with intolerable pains through all my limbs, I was fenftble, too late^ ţ that my own imprudence had added a malady of body to all my mental fufferings. ¿Hir¬ ing the laft awful conflict, when the of¬ fending rebels expiated with life the ra> vages they had committed, I, in common with the females they ;had left behind* had thrown myfelf on the ground, alike through wearinefs and terror. The un- wholefome damps arifing from a ipot which yet the fun never penetrated, ftiff- ened every joint ; a rheumatic fever was the cruel confequence. Alone, uncom- forted, unaififted,confumed by an internal raging fire, I groaned, I fhrieked, with intenfe torture. The ftarts and cries of my little one, aJone informed me I had done fo; I huihed hér on a bofom I fear¬ ed would fcorch· her, and eagerly fwal- lowing whatever liquid was brought me, had hardly intervals of fenfe enough to fhare it with my babe, or fufficiently to provide for her nouriihment. The diys of Vol. II. К this
this excefiive mifery were unnumbered— infenfibly the fever fubfided ·, but left a lamenefs happier hours, and inceíľaňt care, could never cure. When returning reafon allowed me to extend my reflections beyond the prefent evil, I recollected from the time elapfed, that my imprifonment muft be decided and perpetual. Emanuel had told me the Governor was timid, mean, and avarici¬ ous; forgetful of this, I had informed my conductors of the family tie between myfelf and Mortimer; which rendering me his natural heir, this unworthy Go¬ vernor, I doubted not, had annihilated my claim to pofíeífions he was refolved to ap¬ propriate, by claífing me with the mur¬ derers, among whom I was found: and by an arbitrary proceeding, (not uncommon there, if Emanuel might be relied on) fentenced me at once, unwillingly, to ven¬ ture a judicial enquiry. The languor in¬ cident to fuch inceíľaňt fufferings, both of body and mind, as I had for a courfe of time endured,rendered me lefs mocked and grieved at this, than many other con¬ tingencies.
tingencies. It feemed in my power to die, and difappoint the malice of my op¬ preffors. It was only to remit a little, a very little care of myfelf, and my confti¬ tution would finally give way. Perhaps I ihould have delivered myfelf wholly up to this idea, but that the firft great tie of nature, ftill wound round my bleeding heart. My fate, faid I to myfelf, is fully, is finally accompliíhed. A fad inheritor of my mothers misfortunes, methinks they are all only retraced in me—led like her, a guiltlefs captive through a vindictive mob, the object of vulgar in¬ fult, and opprobrium—like her enclofed unjuftly in a prifon ; even in the bloom of life, a broken conftitution is anticipating the infirmities of age. And ihall the fi- m*litude end here ? No, let me like her, exttačt fortitude from each, accumulating injury, and if the will pf my Maker ihortens the common term of life alotted to mortality, oh let me come into his prefenòe a fpotlefs martyr ! and thou, fweet babe, permitted like the palm tree to flourifh under oppreffion, furely for К 2 fome
'fome great end haft thou furvived the fuc¬ cefiion of calamities which foreran thy exiftence, nor dare thy mother once wiih to defert thee í The days, Madam, thus ftrangely paft on. The female ilave I have mentioned appeared every morning, and performing the common offices of life in filence, placed near me the food allotted, and va- niihed till the next. Imagine not I ac- quiefčed, without attempting at leaft to afcertain my imputed crime, but I found the poor wretch was fo totally âcií, that not one word reached her, nor did ihe ipeak any other language than her Own, and very imperfect Spaniíh, to which I was a ftranger. Neither could I Convey to her by figns, ideas I Could find no vi¬ fible object to reprefent. The tender graces of my daughter, neverthelefs operated gradually on the Untaught foul of the Negro, and I had reafon to think lhe would even have connived at my efcape, but that fuch a meafure would only have increafed my misfortunes, while thu* without a friend, a home,, or a hope. One
One circumftance continually embit¬ tered my mindwithdiftantremembrances ; the tower in which I was confined adjoined to the fort, and had one window com¬ manding the fea, the other looked toward the inland country. The cannon coa- ftantly proclaimed the arrival, or depar¬ ture of every vefiel, and my eager heart irrefiftibly impelled me towards the win¬ dow. But it was not for me they came— no hope of releafe—no well known face to greet me—thofe fihips that departed impreifed me with ideas yet more painful and gloomy. The arms of England, diftant England, often enriched every itreamer, and my fick foul groaned un¬ der the conviction, that I muft never hope to view the port, which would reftore thofe mariners (comparatively carelefs of the advantage) to the local ties of coun¬ try, kindred, and friend ihip; to all that gives charms to exiftence.—Haunted by a pleafure which was always in my view, without being ever in my reach, I could not fubdue the killing emotions thus raifed in my foul. К г The
The growth of my child alone marked to me the progrefs of time. Ah ! mo¬ ment how fweet art thou yet to my me¬ mory, when firft her little voice ftrove at articulation ! The blefled name of mo¬ ther at length broke the drear filence of my prifon, and hardly the celeftial founds of hovering Angels, had I been launch¬ ing into eternity, could give me a fub- limer pleafure. I faw her walk with a tranfport fcarce inferior. Engroíľed by, and devoted to this fole object of my eyes and heart, which the gracious author of univerfal being permitted her to fill, I no longer repined at my unmerited captivity. Only anxious left any one ihould fufpect my poflfefiion of this invaluable gem, I felt ready to hide her, even when the old flave made her daily appearance. The common raiment with which we were pe¬ riodically fupplied, I became ingenious in fitting to her little form ; and by that in¬ fenfible contraction of our faculties, which extends through nature, although it has been remarked only in the organs of fight, J drew into this narrow bound, thofe fears,
fears, hopes, wiihes, and employments, which in rapid fuccefiion fill up our lives, and leave behind a remembrance we always revert to with fatisfačt ion, and often conceive to have been happinefs. Fearful, at fome intervals, left the want of air or exercife íhould nip my beaute¬ ous bloffom, I devifed a thoufand little plans to make her run within her narrow confines j and ftrengthen a conftitution born perhaps to trials, not inferior to thofe which had blighted her mother's youth. I held her to the window, morn¬ ing and evening, and found the winds of Heaven blew not lefs pure through iron bars than gilded lattices. Ah, furely my memory does not err, when I fay with the poet, that From the children of the firil-born Cain, To him who did but yefterday fufpire, There was not fuch a gracious creature born ; For nature's gifts lhe might with lilies vie, And with the half-blown rofe. I was one day holding the dear child to the evening air, her little hands now К 4 grafped
grafped the rough bars, and now were extended through them, while her inno¬ cent tongue beguiled her fond mother's attention, when I fuddenly perceived a black woman, apparently of diftinction, leaning under an awning, raifed at no great diftance ; and while ihe talked bu- fily to the flaves who were fanning her, the eyes of all were turned intently on my infant. I fnatched her away, with an apprehenfion the moft lively I had for years felt ; I even abfented myfelf from the window for a long time, then ven¬ turing a glance, without approaching near enough to be feen, I perceived her eyes were ftill fixed upon my prifon, and the repole of that night was wholly de¬ ftroyed by a vague fear the next day con¬ firmed. At the fame hour íhe returned again to the fame pavillion, and after watching the window in vain^ (as I no longer dared approach it) íhe ihewed manifeft tokens of chagrin and difap¬ pointment. Alas, this was not all. My old Negro appeared foon after, and de¬ livering me an unintelligible mefiage, de¬ manded
manded my daughter* I prayed, wept, intreated, groaned to» the poor wretch, whofe eyes alone of all her fenfes feemed affected by my agonies. After a thoufand incomprehenfible figns on her part, and refolute refufals on my own, fhe fnatched the child from thofe weak arms which wanted an equal power of refiftance, and left me ftretched on the floor from the lamenefs I have mentioned. It was long ere I had courage to ap» proach the window; but collecting every power of mind and body, I at length ventured thither. I faw the darling child feated on cuíhions at the feet of the wo¬ man, whofe power tore her from me, laden with toys and overwhelmed with careffes. This, however, was but a fmall relief to my maternal anguifh, while un¬ certain whether I had not loft her for ever: nor did my apprehenfions dimin i fn, when I faw the attendant flaves bear their miftrefs away on a covered couch, with my child in her arms. Ah then my pri¬ fon became a dungeon indeed ! I fmote my head againft the inclofing bars, and the
the air echoed to my groans. They were only relieved by the return of my old flave, who leading in my lamented che¬ rub, once more bleft my arms with the burthen. My heart rufhed fo impetu- oufly towards her, that it feemed to ex¬ tend through my whole throbbing frame. As I furveyed the recovered bleffing with added fondnefs, I perceived that the gentle black I had fo injurioufly diftrufted, had Javifhly adorned the tender object of a furprizing attachment. Imagine a girl between three and four years old, flight, graceful, fair, and blooming, whofe am¬ ber locks the hand of nature had twined into a thoufand fpiral rings, which fell over a loofe veft of filver muflin, girt with rofes: her little arms and ancles were encircled with fanciful bracelets, of differ¬ ent coloured beads, while her hand bore a gilt bafket, filled with fruits of the country. She feemed a being of another world, defcending to blefs this—While yet in the arms of her fable conductor, ihe appeared to me like new-born light, repofing on the bofom of chaos. I took the
the little luxuries lhe offered, and while indulging a fenfe time and abftinence had almoft annihilated, I woríhipped the hand which thus at length relented. Ah, Madam, it is only in the early fea¬ fons of heavy vifitation we dared to re¬ pine ; when mifery once reaches the ex¬ treme, it has always falutary effects. Pu¬ rified entirely from the vain wants and wiihes, our pride and our paffions for a long time reprefent, as the very effen tials of our being, we then fet a due value on the commoneft bleffings, and foon find in every thing an enjoyment. When I pondered over the infinite and various advantages my daughter might derive from the partiality of a woman, whofe authority was great enough to open the doors of our prifon, my heart became fenfible of hopes in her favor, I had long ceafed to indulge in my own ; and refign¬ ing myfelf to the profpečt, I funk into a repofe which might almoft be called hap¬ py. A ihort time habituated me to pe¬ riodically parting with, and receiving my daughter, always laden with fome little pre-
prefent, conducive either to my health or comfort. Our benefačtrefs too, ever kind¬ ly retired to the fpot I could command, as if defirous to gratify me, at the fame moment with herfelf; and greatly indeed did ihe fulfil her purpofe. I faw, in fpite ef that fatality which had long hung over my unhappy family, an exertion of Hea¬ ven in favor of my child, which encou¬ raged me to hope a favorable revolution at fome (perhaps not diftant) period *· while in the tedious interval, the means of health and comfort were amply be- ftowed on her, and the latter, through her means, on her exhaufted mother. At fome intervals, weeks, nay a month, would elapfe, without my daughter's be¬ ing fent for, by which 1 concluded fome one in ftill higher authority, controled the actions of her Negro friend: though the benefits, in a great degree remained to us; wholefome fruits, better provi fions, more agreeable cloathing, and a more watchful attendance. I fometimes won¬ dered the woman, who thus generoufly alleviated our fufferings, never once en* quired
quired into their origin: but having learnt, by painful experience, the impro¬ priety of judging without information, Ί ftill flattered myfelf with the profpečt of a releafe: which at the worft I confidered as only delayed, till I could perfect my daughter in the woeful tale of thofe later events, which: thus unj uftly confined us· In procefs of time, I underftood from my fweet Mary's improved accents, that our benefačtrefs was named Anana ; and never from that moment did my foul of¬ fer up a prayer, in whieh that name (how¬ ever unhallowed) was not included. The total ignorance in which my daughter's mind yet remained, íhocked and grieved me. Being wholly without books, Γ knew not any manner of fu p^· plying their place, and could only fubfti- tute principles for modes,* and inftil inta her tender mind the religious and moral documents, which yet exifted in mine. I endeavoured to give her-an idea of the nature and appearance of books. I every day made her repeat that word a hundred times i I charged her to do fo immedi¬ ately,
ately, whenever íhe vifited Anana. But whatever the reafon, I faw her near eight years old apparently, without having been able to procure her the advantage, or myfelf the relief of reading. Thus innocently and happily employ¬ ed, I one day faw my prifon door thrown open, and the interview fo long defired, unexpectedly granted me. Anana enter¬ ed in mourning. I incoherently blend¬ ed the dictates of gratitude and forrow. The amiable Anana told me in broken French, lhe came to comfort me. Charm¬ ed to find it in my power to render my¬ felf intelligible to her, I related briefly my ftory, which her complacency afiured me ihe did not half underftand. It was with the utmoft difficulty I comprehend¬ ed from her, that Don Pedro de Sylva, the unjuft Governor, who had condemned me without examination, was at length dead; that ihe had for fome time paft been his favorite, and ufed the influence that title gave her to indulge her fond¬ nefs for my child, and lighten my cap¬ tivity : that it had always been as much in
in her power to vifit my prifon as now, but not finding any certain crime imputed to me, and fure if I could acquit myfelf of the fufpicion, flie íhould become warm¬ ly interefted in my favor, (perhaps to the degree of cxafperating the benefactor, ihe might then be obliged to defpife) ihe had wifely forbore gratifying her generous cu¬ riofity, and contented herfelf with beftow¬ ing fuch marks of her attachment as would not interfere with the rights of the Go¬ vernor, or dimini İh her own. Finally, that death having fnatched away the only man who could reftrain her inclinations; who had bequeathed her a confiderable portion of his wealth, íhe beftowed a part of it, to obtain from the new Governor a remiflion of my fen ten ce ; and having fucceeded, now came to af¬ fine me, I íhould be at liberty to return to Europe; for which voyage her friend¬ íhip would amply fupply me with means, company, and attendance, as it was her purpofe to quit for ever a country, where fhe had loft her only connexion, and feek
feek another* protection, religion, and peace. During thb difcourfe, I thought my fenfes álmoft failed me. í made her a thourand times repeat the welcome, the furprizing intelligence, that I was free ; and the arrival of her flaves to convey me from the melancholy dungeon^ which I believed the day before, would at fome future one become my grave, alone gave confirmation to fo incredible an event. But when I really found myfelf at liber» ty; when I faw the varied Heavens above my head, and the green earth under my feet ; when the foft fragrance of the al¬ moft forgotten bloflbms indulged one fenfe, and the fweet founds of congratu¬ lating voices bléft another, I wonder I did not-expire with the tumult of mingled emotions.this happy moment uevived in my heart. I raifed my foul to, him who gave thofe fenfes, and breathed life into the elements which fuftain them, and be¬ fought him to moderate my feelings, or condente them all in gratitude. Blended
Blended once more, almoft miracu- loufly in the concerns of this world, I learnt with a thoufand fenfations no words can defcribe, that Elizabeth had a few months before paid the debt of nature ; and that my brother James, as well by her nomination, as the rights of his birth, and the voice of the people, had afcended the throne of England : happily uniting un¬ der his fway two kingdoms, fo many ages hoftile as hardly to leave a hope of the event which was now without bloodihed fully accompliftied. Time, grief, and misfortune, had fo far allayed the irrita¬ tion of my mind, that I blcffed the or¬ dination of providence which thus left my refentment without an object. Higher, happier, and dearer profpečts opened be¬ fore me, and I looked forward with im¬ patience to the moment, when I ihould prefent my fmiling Mary to my beloved fifter, and in the fociety of connexions fo precious, lofe the remainder of my days. Alas ! Madam, I required fentiments like thefe to fuftain me againft the con- Vol. II. L vičtion
vičtion that the intenfe heats of the cli¬ mate had united with the want of air and exercife to fix the lamenefs the rheumatic fever had left, and completely debilitate my conftitution, which has from that period been fubječt to a thoufand little wearying, namelefs maladies, that infen¬ fibly abforb the fpirit of youth, and bring on an early old age. Anana, actuated by a fondnefs for my daughter fcarce inferior to my own,ihared with me in every maternal care, and ear- neftly befought me to receive her under my protection on our arrival in England; where I had made her fenfible I held a diftinguiihed rank. Solemnly affuring me it was her intention to bequeath to my fweet child the wealth ihe derived from the Governor, alike to prove her own attachment, and as a compenfation for our long and unjuft imprifonment. The ftate in which ihe had lived with Don Pe¬ dro, fupplied an objection at which my pride revolted, but that almoft inftanta- neoufiy gave way to principle. I refolved to be above facrificing the duties of gra- tude
titude and benevolence to opinion, and remembering her untaught mind knew no tie in wedlock but conftancy, and per¬ haps in that inftance might vie with my¬ felf, I fought, by cultivating the wild but folid virtues of her foul, to bury the remembrance of her former error, and fortify her againft any future one. Open to the pure impreflions of religion and morality, the amiable Anana promifed to become an ornament to human nature; but alas, a greater power than 1 could over-rule ihortened her fpan, and at once determined for us all'. The fmall pox, always fo dangerous in the iflands, broke out fuddenly, and fwept off hundreds.-— The apprehenfions people of Anana's complexion ever entertain ofit, contribute, moft probably, to render it fo fatal. She threw herfelf into fuch agonies, that the eruption foon appeared, with the moft mortal fymptoms. Delirious alike with the dreadful malady, and extreme fond- nefs for my daughter, ihe called for her inceffantly j íhe ftrove to break from her attendants, and get out of bed in fearch L 2 of
of her. She intreated me in the moft moving, broken accents, once more to let her hear the little angel ihe could no longer fee; to fuffer her to give into her hand the caíket íhe was fo foon going to bequeath her. The terrified mother ihrunk in filence from fuch a conflict. Ah, what are the gems íhe will bequeath her, cried I, to that breathing one herfelf?— all now left of my promifed fortunes.— The dictates of gratitude then prevailing, I would cry, but can I refufe the laft re¬ queft, however wild and erroneous, of her who preferved the being ihe now would involuntarily endanger ? Finding reafon ineffectual towards conquering the dying wiih of Anana, I acquitted myfelf to her, by leading to the bed of infection and death, my little treafure, with a re¬ fignation I could only compare to that of Abraham, and like the innocent he would have devoted, my child was returned to me. The exhaufted Anana, confidering this with juftice as the higheft effort of gratitude and efteem, yielded herfelf pa¬ tiently to the will of Heaven, which foon called her hence. The
The fincere concern this lofs occafi¬ oned, gave way to one ftill nearer ; my child fickened with the fame horrible dif- temper, and centred in anxiety every fa¬ culty of my foul. It foon, however, took the moft favorable turn, and left me at leifure to endeavour to fecure the legacy our loft friend had put into my hands. The deceafed Governor had converted the principal part of the property he rea¬ lized into diamonds ; a common practice in countries where juftice is partially ad- miniftered ; nor did the new Governor know either their number or value : Anana having followed the directions of her benefactor in hiding a part,and bribing his fucceflor to acquiefcence by iharing the remainder. I had now gained worldly wifdom enough to adopt the fame plan ; and having fulfilled every duty, I joyfully embarked for England, accompanied by feveral flaves, who preferred attending on me to the precarious bleffing of liberty under arbitrary power. Ah, Madam, how different was this yoyage from that already commemorated ! L 3 —from
—from the fallen tree I then continually watered with my tears, a tender, a lovely fcion had fprung up ; it flourifhed in the ih ade ; it bloffomed in fu nih i ne ; with fweet, with gentle hopes, I bore it to its native foil. No barbarous hand was now lying in wait to deftroy it ; no peftilential wind blew from thofe cliffs which ihot their white arms into the ocean, and hof- pitably invited us to the bofom of peace. Ah, no ! a dear, though, fmall circle of fympathizing friends would receive the forlorn, the widowed wanderer, as one arifen from the dead ; would grace my woeful tale with many a lamenting tear. My fifter too, my darling Ellinor — how perfect, how pure, cried my fwelling heart, will be our re-union ! hov/ will fhe fondly fold to her generous bofom this dear child of the ocean—this foothing, unconfcious fellow-fufferer—this early partner in her Matilda's wayward fortune ! ------Paufe, Madam, over this fair prof¬ pečt, and let me reft a while my weary fingers and fpirits. THE
MI ■ ■■■'■ UH « . » '! »ШЛ ' ■ PI. —I l IJ.IHW WWH >». ' «.......
THE RECESS, &α PART IV.
I STRUGGLED with the fad remem¬ brances indelibly impreffed on my heart, when my eyes again beheld the ihore of England ; and folding to my bofom the dear offspring of love and misfortune, I ihut up every fenfe in her. Already alive to the anxious hopes and wiihes that ίο early tincture a being with which alone they expire, my daughter fondly flattered herfelf with the expectation of an unknown good, and impatiently wiihed for the ter- L 4 mination
mination of our voyage. I landed at Greenwich, becaufe the fpot where I could fooneft learn intelligence of the Sydney family, as the people who kept the chief inn, I remembered, had been fervants to Lord Leicefter: alas, 1 had overlooked the long term of my abfence, and the probability that they might either be dead or removed. Greenwich, which I had feen the feat of gaiety, empire, and magnificence, now appeared a dreary fo¬ litude. The tide in filence laved the walls of a deferted palace, which verging to decay like its paft pofleflbrs, feemed but a gaudy maufoleum. I paufed over thefe fragile memorials of human grandeur, as the boat bore me towards the ihore; and half furmifed the ftrangenefs that might await me there. I was prefently fur¬ rounded by a fct of unknown faces ; and after much tedious enquiry, learnt that my tender friend, Lady Arundell, ftill inhabited her houfe near Chelfea, whither I difpatched a meflfenger with a billet. It demanded " a welcome for a poor wi¬ dowed wanderer, and a babe, for whofe ex-
exiftence that dear woman was perhaps refponfible, as it was wholly owing to her indulgence. I added, I would not ven¬ ture one enquiry till I gained fortitude from her prefence, but doubted not that I fhould have as much to learn as to unfold. If, as my flattering forebodings informed me, my darling fifter yet furvived, I was perfuaded by whatever name ihe was now diftinguiihed íhe would once more an¬ fwer to that with tranfport ; and fold to her glowing bofom a weary heart which had long fought in vain a refting place ; but I fubmitted the difcovery, and meet¬ ing, folely to the care and prudence of our mutual friend." I waited not long in fufpence, for my mefienger haftened back with a billet, in¬ coherent as furprize and joy could make it. " Fly, faid the generous Lady Arun¬ dell, to my arms, to my heart, to my home—they will ever be open to you and yours—I fufpend all explanations till I fee you.—Ah Matilda, dear to my eyes will be that lovely face, however changed by misfortune." Grate-
Grateful as this invitation proved, my foul was fenfible of a damp and difap¬ pointment, from the obfcurity caft over the interval of my abfence, and her leav¬ ing unanfwered my enquiry for my fifter. I haftened neverthelefs to obey the re¬ queft. The fad meditations which would have engroíľed my faculties in paffing through London, were continually inter¬ rupted by the tranfports of my little Ma¬ ry ; the varying ftreets filled with gay ihops, and thronged with fine-dreffed people, were a novelty to her of the moft charming and interefting nature. Ere I could half anfwer her enquiry into each new wonder, it was loft in the next, and that chaftened pleafure a mother ex¬ traéis from blending the figh of know¬ ledge with the fmile of innocence, claim¬ ed its turn in my agitated bofom, fuf- pending more powerful emotions : but when my eyes refted on the gates of Lady Arundelľs houfe, thofe gates from whence I laft took my flight fo dearly accompa¬ nied, a pangfo pungent wrung my heart, that my feeble fenfe funk under ir, and I fwooned
fwooned away. I revived; and ît feemed rather by the cries and tears of my little one, than the remédies of the fervants who furrounded me. My fweet Mary had climbed up the couch on which they laid me, and clafping her arms round my neck laid her mant¬ ling cheek to my pale one, and ihed de¬ luges of tears. I comforted her, and feeling my hand preflèd by fome body who fat almoft behind me, turned, and fixing my eyes on the ftreaming ones of Lady Arundell, I threw myfelf filently into her arms, and felt my very foul dif- folve upon her bofom. Both were half fuflfocated with feelings too high wrought, and the prefence of my daughter proved a fortunate relief; for drawing me fondly down to her, " why do you cry, mama ? faid the dear one, and why does this lady cry ? I thought we came home to be hap¬ py.'* " And happy we will be, my dar¬ ling, cried Lady Arundell, preffing her to a bofom melting in her favor, who can be otherwife bleft with fuch a cherub? Can you complain, Matilda, when Heaven has left
left you her?"—" No, my admirable friend, fighed I, I do not complain,— my reafon reproves thofe tears my wound¬ ed heart will not ceafe periodically to pour forth ; this houfe, this room, even your tendernefs awakens a train of killing remembrances, I have in vain endeavour¬ ed to arm myfelf againft. Here, here, even here has my foul expanded towards her father with a pleafure of which her¬ felf, and this weed, are the only memo¬ rials." The entrance of fervants with refreih¬ ments, fufpended a little the agitation of both ; and Lady arundell obftinately re¬ fufed every kind of information concern¬ ing my fifter or friends till the next day, infifting I ihould devote the remainder of the evening to a minute recital of my own ftory. The aftoniihment its inci¬ dents every moment excited in Lady Arundell, feemed to make it more won¬ derful even to myfelf. Having the happy affurance from her that my fifter ftill lived, I gave way to the fweet hope of feeing her, and filled up with her idea a cham¬ ber
ber which now appeared more folitary than ever. My impatience concerning my Ellinor could no longer be reftrained, and when we met in the morning, I importunately demanded her ftory. The vifible reluc¬ tance with which Lady Arundell granted my requeft, confirmed my fears of fome dreadful cataftrophe, and had I not been afľured my fifter yet lived, I ihould have concluded her lofs the fatal event our friend feared to acknowledge: but fatis* fied in this inftance, and having no tie which could comparatively intereft me, I fortified my mind againft the impreffion of inferior forrows, by the deep fenfe of thofe I had already furvived. Whatever courage I had collected I needed it all, when with that fearful pomp of preparation with which friend İh ip ever binds up the wounds of fate, Lady Arun¬ dell produced a number of papers, moil of which appeared to be written by my lifter. 1 kifíèd the dear traces of a hand fo beloved. Alas, thofe iheets are yet by me, and I need only copy them.
The Life of Ellinor, addreßd ίο Matilda. ÓH, you! much loved, but little trufted, dear fifter of my heart, whom it fondly purfues through unknown climes, where yet perhaps you wander, the victim of a fatal attachment ; receive in thefe papers, if they ever meet your eyes, the greateft teftimony of an affection, which as it was the firft my foul became fenfible to, fo furely will it be the laft. Oh ! you allied to me in deftiny, no lefs than blood, (for we were born alike to be unknown, except to each other) lo, I lay my heart unveiled before you, its parlions, its pride, its prejudices; condemn them not my fifter, however they may contradict your own.—Eftimate duly the filence I have fo long preferved ; the facrifices I have made, facrifices fo much the more meritorious, as my foul ever revolted againft the mean impofer, and fubmitted but to you. 1 knew the delicacy of your mind, and would not add to the weight which hung upon its nobler faculties, by a confidence that might wrong at the fame
fame moment your duty. Ah! no, I remembered Williams, and was from that moment prudent, if not happy—yet as I know too well the horrors of myftery, in¬ certitude, and filence, (for have I not fpent ages in vainly guefling at your fate?) let me refcue you from a life of furmife, by prefervi ng this fad memorial. Perhaps this aftoniíhing feparation will prove eter¬ nal.—If then my heart no more íhall feel the throb of affection it has always given when yours preifed againft it, (and fome¬ thing feems to tell me that pleafure ihall never more be mine) receive in this reci¬ tal a laft proof of my tendernefs, and oh, my dear, ill-fated fifter, may it mitigate thekeennefs of your affliction, to learn that you have not been the greateft fufferer. In one part of this ftory I muft ever have been obfeure and infincere, but that fate has fnatched away the woríhipped object, of whofe character we judged in fo different a manner. Oh, pardon me all- gracious Heaven, if my opinion has been erroneous!— Pauíè here, Matilda, if your rifing foul has taken the alarm, and weigh well
well the love you bear me, for I ihall need it all, unlefs I falfify the fadt. On the memorable day, nhen Heaven decided the deftiny of the one fifter, and perplexed that of the other, by prefenting to the eyes of both the favorite of Eliza¬ beth, how diametrically oppofite were the impreflions each took of his character! Aftoniíhing that two agreeing in every inftance till that moment, íhould for the firft time differ in fo decided a manner ! more aftöhiíhing, that every following day only confirmed the feparate judg¬ ments. The darling alike of art and of nature, the eye, or mind, could demand no more than was comprized in the per¬ fon of Lord Leicefter—but here, in my opinion, the charm ended. His heart, not warm by nature, had been rendered in a great degree callous, from its hav¬ ing expanded in the chilling atmofphere of a Court. Unbounded in his pro¬ jects, timid and fubtle in his actions, tyrannic in his purfuits, the object he could not govern, never long attached him. Ambition, pride, and vanity, thofe lead-
leading traits in almoft every character, were in his fo exquifitely blended, and corrected by the froft of his nature, that they might often be miftaken for nobler paffions You were prefented to his eyes in early youth, a finifhed pattern of beau¬ ty, endued with royalty ; in the ten¬ der bloom of a newly awakened love. Uniting thus in your own perfon the ftrongeft powers of charming, with fuch as were peculiarly congenial to the heart you wiíhed to win, it laid itfelf at your feet. Oh woeful moment when it did fo, as it entailed upon you all the miferies of a mutual paffion, without half its enjoy¬ ments ! Alas, Matilda, had you really been adored—yet what could that have done, more than to feverely aggravate all you was born to fuffer ? and as the ap¬ parent paffion of Lord Leicefter had to you the charms of reality, I am to blame perhaps thus to reprefent it : but the fea- fon of diifimulation is paft, and my tor¬ tured heart will utter nothing but truth. So fixed was this opinion of his character, that though there was a moment of my Vol. II. M life,
life, when my fate feemed wholly in Lord Leicefter's hands, I could not then enough efteern him to venture his decifion. Yet ftill a tender pity for your unmerited and everlafting paffion ihould have fuppreffed this (in you- mind) haríh judgment, but that, I once more repeat, my own actions muft ever then have appeared eccentric and enigmatical. How deeply both father Anthony and I regretted the imprudence which intro¬ duced into our folitary afylum fo danger¬ ous a vifitor, it were needlefs now to repeat, Prudence was for once on the fide of paf¬ fion, and your fate was by the will of your only remaining guardian, for ever united with that of your lover. I foon found it vain to oppofe the afcendancy he had gained in your affections ; and as my own were yet unoccupied, I looked no far¬ ther than the prefent moment; and follow¬ ed you to Kenilworth Caftle without re¬ pining. Neverthelefs I admired the delu¬ fions of love, which in a moment recon¬ ciled you to a fituation apparently fo ob¬ jure and abject ; and ftill more that total blind-
blindnefs to your own exquifite perfection, which could make you fancy that low ftate would ever appear to obferving fpečtators your natural one. What then muft be my aftoniihment to fee Lord Leicefter's love impofe fuch humiliations, on an ob¬ ject nature and fortune had placed fo far above him, and meanly content himfelf with monopolized indulgences. Hardly were we alone, when the pre¬ emption of that wretch Williams filled both of us with a terror which required an immediate remedy. Every faculty of my foul revolted againft the abject com¬ pliances your entreaties exacted from me ; but even thofe only ferved to ftrengthen the contempt which began to predomi¬ nate in it. Lord Leicefter's return gave us a temporary relief, but his method of getting rid of the villain appeared to me alike unfafe and mean, and the only proper mode of ending our fears never once feem?· ed to occur to him. I mean, acknowledg¬ ing his marriage ; which perhaps might at that period bave been done without any great danger of offending Elizabeth ; M 2 whofe
whofe withering heart was becoming every day lefs fenfible of affection, and whofe vanity was fo highly gratified and poffeffed by the addreffes of the Duke of Anjou. But it was the intercfl of my Lord to break the match with the French Prince, and to that golden idol his every paffion bow¬ ed. We were again left to work tapeftry, and when he had fucceeded in his fa¬ vorite project, he left the Queen in turn, to bewail alone the lofs of her laft lover, and came once more to amufe himfelf a: Kenilworth. But he was not always to fucceed; the ìealoufy of Elizabeth had now juft pro¬ vocation, and in her fudden arrival at Ke¬ nilworth Caftle, fhe at laft over-reached her politic favorite. In vain he would have concealed us—in vain he would have reprefented us as the vaffals of his amufement : the fcrutinizing eye of the Queen, the univerfal voice of her more impartial train, pronounced this impoffi¬ ble. Reduced to frame a new ftory, tor¬ tured with the conviction that it had not gained credit, he was obliged to aggra¬ vate
vate every difagreeable circumftance of our prefent fituation, by delivering us un¬ willingly into the hands of Elizabeth. Alas, my fifter, I faw, I underftood, all this coft you on my account, while not one figh on your own efcaped you. I ftifled the painful and proud fenfations that fwelled at my heart, and ventured into the world under the doubtful and myfterious patro¬ nage of the Queen; who, better acquaint- ed with the finefies of her favorite than thofe now nearly allied to him, never for one moment was the dupe of his fiction, though unable to difprove it. Ah, how vifionary feems on recollec¬ tion our new fituation ! feen without be¬ ino- known ; adored, without being eíteemed ; puniftied without being guilty; applauded without being meritorious, we were all an illufion. Yet while furrounded with fpies, and acting for ever under an eye difpofed to condemn, ere it could half difcover, how difficult was it for us to avoid fufpicion and cenfure ! One fole advan¬ tage had either gained by converging into the fphere of a court ; a faithful friend : M 3 though
though even that bleffing was curtailed by the eternal policy of my Lord, who would not permit us to confide even to his own amiable nieces, the Ladies Arun¬ dell and Pembroke, any part of a fecret which might effect however remotely; his own fafety. Bounded as our conven¬ tions muft of confequence be, the charm òf attachment neverthelefs feized upon our fouls. Mine allied itfelf to Lady Pembroke, while yours equally inclined to her no lefs amiable fifter, and each took pleafure in paifing that portion of her time with the diftinčt favorite we did not fpend together. Ah, here Matilda, I approach the appointed moment, when the paths of life, in which we have hitherto trod hand in hand, begin to feparate; and every fucceeding ftep bears us farther from each other, till darknefs and diftance rob the ftraining eye of its firft dear ob¬ ject—In vain each now turns back, and feeks the accuftomed path, a thoufand various ones perplex the wearied mind; and while the impetuous paffions drag us onward, we give to the fweet memory of
of earlv youth a thoufand fond and hopelefs fighs, then follow with tremb¬ ling feet thofe ungovernable leaders. Lord Pembroke's partiality had long diftinguiihed a noble youth the policy of Lord Leicefter ftill kept abroad. I had feen many of his letters, through the me¬ dium of Lady Pembroke ; and my heart had learnt to flutter at the name of Efiex, ere yet I beheld him. Alas, even while î repeat it, I own the fame fenfation !— Oh, love ! exquifite delufion ! captivating error! from the moment the lips find pleafure in that word, till they lofe the power of pronouncing it, the charm, the inconceivable charm remains.—Whether cherifhed by the fun beams of hope, or chilled by the dews of difappointment— Whether the chofen object is faithful, or unfaithful—glowing with animation before our eyes, or feared up in the dark and filent grave; the paifion, the powerful paifion afierts its eternal in¬ fluence, and decides the character where it once has reigned. While I dwell on the moment which called to being M 4 this
this finer and more poignant fenfe, fen* fibility, memory retraces its dear emo¬ tions with a foftnefs time itfelf can never extingo i fli. Tinctured with the partiality of Lord Effex's friends j already acquainted with his fentiments on heroifm, glory, and every attachment except that of the heart; I fondly flattered myfelf the day would come, when he would receive from me that laft and livelieft impreffion which forms and finifhes the human foul. I inter¬ wove myfelf infenfibly in all his concerns; I deeply lamented the tie of relationihip, which fubječled his actions to the will of Lord Leicefter; and employed fome of the little time I fpent with my Lord, in endeavoring to bias his mind in favor of the abfent hero. Cold and filent on the merits, of Effex, Lord Leicefter often bantered me on being fo fenfible of them, and feidom failed to remind me of the family compact, which had bound Lord Effex to wed Sir Francis Walfing¬ ham's only daughter : to fulfil which, he purpofe d foon to recai him 3 and advifed me
me rather to turn my eyes on Sir Walter Raleigh, whofe talents he pronounced infinitely fuperior, and whofe homage was wholly paid to me. As this was a lover he knew I detefted, the converfa¬ tion generally ended when he was named, but a fuccefiion of fuch difcourfes, con¬ firmed me in the opinion of Lord Lei¬ cefter's felfiihnefs, and prepared me, per* haps, to decide in oppofition to it. Efiex was at length fummoned to Eng¬ land. He arrived. An idle, unaccountable apprehenfion at once overcame my reafon. I was perfuaded I could not fee him with indifference. I feared the keen eye of 'Elizabeth,and the colderand more watch¬ ful one of Lord Leicefter. I quitted the Court the day Eflfex was to be prefented, and paft it with Lady Pembroke. By a fin- gular chanceMifs Walfingham had chofen to do the fame. The party enlarged in¬ fenfibly as the circle decreafed. Efiex was the theme of every tongue, and while Mifs Walfingham's triumphant eyes ac¬ knowledged the implied compliments, my yielding heart received them. " He is
is here," cried Lady Pembroke, in the afternoon, looking out of the window, and kiifing her hand. I felt ready once more to run away, but that decorum re¬ ftrained me. Lady Pembroke indulged one of the gay whims which fo often were a fource of pleafure at once to herfelf and her friends, and infifted he fhould only be told his bride was amena: the unmar¬ ried ladies, from whom his heart muft fé¬ ket her. This was an ill-judged project. Mifs Walfingham had been contracted to Lord EiTex in childhood, rather to ratify a reconciliation between the families, than with any idea of a future affection. The rigid principles of Lady Walfingham had hitherto kept her daughter in total feclu¬ fion, and the death of her mother had now given the young lady unbounded liberty. Her paffions, naturally violent, had al¬ ways fpurned reftraint; but compelled for a time to fubmit to it, they marked her character even in early youth with haugh- tinefs. The beauty ihe eminently pof- feíľed, ibón drew around her a croud of lovers, which elevating her vanity, added co-
coquetry to pride, and united in her per fon the ftrange extremes of four referve and unbounded levity. Sir Philip Sydney was the only man fuppofed to have aj>y intereft in her heart, but as he had from the firft devoted himfelf to another, ihe affected to defpife him, and wait the re¬ turn of her allotted huiband, with a re¬ folution to accept of him. Mifs Walfingham feconded the propo¬ fal of Lady Pembroke, which rather per¬ plexed the reft of the company; and after much pleafantry on the fubječt of fympa¬ thy, Lady Pembroke fent for her Lord and the ftranger.—Ah, Heavens, that in¬ vincible ftranger—born to decide my de¬ ftiny—his youth had accuftomed me to expect to find fomething unformed and unfinifhed in his perfon and manners— how then was I furprifed to fee the height and majefty of Lord Leicefter united with a countenance no lefs perfect ; while every grace of figure, feature, and com¬ plexion, were lighted up by brilliant youth, an air at once elegant and inge¬ nuous, and an expreffion of fenfibility which
which heightened every grace. I have not half defcribed the dear, the deep impref¬ fion—1 would in vain defcribe it—he look¬ ed, and I then firft feemed to fee—he fpoke and I then firft feemed to hear.—Fear¬ ful left any marked diforder ihould betray me, I fixed my eyes upon the ground, but they had already borne the image into my heart : I ftill faw it within, and my charmed fenfe retained the found of that voice, regardlefs of all others—Smil¬ ing expreifively at Lady Pembroke's au¬ thoritative order, he kiffed the hand ihe had given him, and dropping it, knelt gracefully to me. - Gracious Heaven, how excefiive was my confufion at this unlucky miftake, yet how exquifite my filent plea¬ fure ! The over-powering mirth of the whole partydifpleafed him—kindly deign¬ ing to impute my diftrefs folely to that caufe, he folicited my pardon for having united me in the very excellent jeft the ladies were obliging enough to make at his expence. Adding in a lower voice, that wherever parental authority had de¬ ftined him to bow, he ihould always re¬ member with pride and pleafure the dif¬ tinguiihed
tinguifhed choice his heart had ventured to make. Then advancing to Mifs Wal- fingham, whofe readinefs faved him a fé¬ cond miftake, he made her fome cold compliment, which awakened every fiery particle of her nature, and paíľed on to pay the fame refpect to the reft of the ladies : while his eyes ever and anon re¬ turned to me with that pafiionate ingenu- oufnefs which through life has been his charačteriftic. I left him behind, and returned to Court ; glowing with the fame ardent paifion I had once dared to condemn in you, and flattering myfelf he was ftudy- ing how to break an engagement not ra¬ tified by his heart. How fweet were the hours, rich with that hope ! ready every moment to acknowledge the truth, and to indulge my paifion by repofing it in your faithful bofom, I found you over¬ whelmed with tears, apprehenfion, and anguiíh ; for it was at this very period the cruel and extravagant jealoufy of Lord Leicefter became apparent. Wanting courage to mention an incident remote from
from the caufe of your forrow, I buried the dear impreffion in my heart, and devoted myfelf to foothing a mind fo deeply wounded. By a ftrange tranfition in my own fentiments, 1 had learnt fairly to judge of yours, and the increafing fimi- lari ty interwove our fouls every day more and more ftrongly, though not one word efcaped me. Dreams of pride and gran¬ deur, which had fometimes embittered a fpirit I will venture to call noble, vaniih¬ ed at once before a ftronger paffion; which ftrangely filled up that void in my mind nothing yet had ever been able to fill. I no longer complained of the Queen—I no longer thought the Court a prifon—conforming from that moment quietly to my fate, I centred every wifh in one fole object. I even employed myfelf diligently in developing Lord Leicefter's fentiments ¿ and conciliating a difference both of you fuffered alike by, though neither would allow it. Lord Efièxj during thefe con¬ ventions, was ever near us—with watch¬ ful eye endeavouring to dive into the na¬ ture
ture of our connexion, and the myftery of our birth ; fo induftrioufly buried by Leicefter and Elizabeth. The diiguft your Lord already ihewed towards Efiex, became on thefe occafions more apparent, and as its caufe, I fought by every little diftinction to reward that dear lover's patience: a difiiké fo unjuft, heightened, however, that I already felt towards Lord Leicefter, though at the fame moment it fupplied a ftill more ur¬ gent reafon for concealing it, than thofe which had hitherto influenced me. The fufferings of your mind funk into mine; and profiting by the fad example of a paifion imprudently indulged, I call¬ ed myfelf to account for cheriíhing fo dangerous a weaknefs, and refolved by 2 courageous effort to govern, if I could not extinguifh it. But ah, how vain i& that attempt, when once we are truly touched ! Love, my fifter, like the en- writhed ferpent, only compreffes the heart more clofely, for every effort we make to İhake it off. In vain I turned my con¬ templations towards the obfcurity which had
had hitherto attended our lives, the dark and myfterious cloud which yet hung over them; love drew a vivid rainbow acrofs it, and every tear due to misfortune fell tinctured with Elfex. Ah, wherefore ihould calamity heighten that paifion ? without being able to define the caufe, I acknowledge the effect ? The heart for ever active, perhaps then ferments moft powerfully, and where love has once found room, every agitation co¬ operates to its increafe, however diftinčt its origin. Yet if the weaknefs of woman could be juftified by the merit of the object, the more I examined Effex, the more rea¬ fon I had to be fatisfied. That noble candor, which refifted through life the courtly artifice he would neither profit by or adopt, was at this period eminently con¬ fpicuous: while his warm heart, and po- lifhed underftanding, made him no lefs the friend than the patron of genius. Every indifferent fpečtator admired to fee even his youth rich with every promife fulfilled in the riper years of Sydney, and thought Sir
Sir Francis Walfingham the happieft of men, in being able to match his daugh¬ ter with either of thefe diftinguiihed minds. The generous Eíľcx fcorned to deceive her he did not refufe to marry, and paying his dcceafed father's will the deep refpect of appearing ready to comply with it, waited the operations of fortune in his favor, and adored me in filence. At this juncture the camp claimed Lord Leicefter, and the nobility accompanied him. I fhared the mortal chagrin with which you faw him depart in filence, and followed you fo truly through all your feelings, that I fought to perfuade my¬ felf Efifex might only want the power to treat me in the fame manner. This pain¬ ful idea operated fo ftrongly, as to make me afilime a coldnefs at parting, to which my lover was unaccuftomed, and which, to own the truth, I did not ceafe regret¬ ting the whole time of his abfence. The difperfion and defeat of the Ar¬ mada reftored gaiety and eclat to the Court. The fulleft reconciliation took place between you and Lord Leicefter. Vol. II. N My
My heart opened once more to hope, to happinefs, to b.flfcx; who now took cou¬ rage to unfold his fentiments to Lady Pembroke. She inftantly adopted his caufe, and promifed to find him an op¬ portunity to plead it. Nor was it long ere fhe drew me to her houfe, and telling me, with one of thofe happy fmiles which difpofed us to grant whatever fhe wiihed T " that from the firft moment íhe faw me, it had been one of the darling objects of her life to unite me with Lord Efiex, who alone appeared to her likely to deferve the heart ihe had fo thoroughly ftudied ; fhe had engaged her Lord to join with her in concerting that mode of intro¬ duction which appeared to me fo wild a whim. It had fully anfwered her hopes in fafcinating one of the parties, and, ihe added, fhe half believed it was not loft upon the other." Fixing her eyes for a moment on my glowing cheeks, ihe gaily ftarted up to throw open her clofet door, <c in ihort, my dear," cried ihe, " here is my Lord himfelf; allow him to plead his own caufe, and when 1 think I can fpeak
fpeak more to the purpofe, depend on my interrupting him :" plucking her robe from my trembling fingers, íhe ran out of the room. Diftrefled, irrefolute, and overcome with the arrival of a mo¬ ment fo long wiíhed for, I made an ef¬ fort to follow her, but ufing the fame means to detain me, I had unfuccefsfully tried with my friend, Lord EiTex grafped my robe more firmly. I turned, and not daring to fix my eyes on the graceful form, the fine face on which they fell, I dropt them, and yielded in filence to hear him. How deep, ah Heaven, how exquifite, is the remembrance of that moment, when the name of love firft reached my ear, from the only voice which could render it agreeable!—" İ will not imagine, moft woríhipped of wo¬ men, faid the Earl, I offer you any new homage in thus bending before you.— The moment my eyes firft beheld you, my too-ready knees offered up to you a heart, new to the paifion that moment made eternal. The higheft fenfe of duty to a father, whofe will in all other inftances, N % was
was govered by reafon, hallowed even the generous error which induced him to contract me to Mifs Walfingham. Def¬ tined to refign in the flower of his days, every advantage which makes this world dear to man, he ftudioufly fought to fe¬ cure them all for a fon, who watered his pale cheek with the tears of guilelefs childhood! and to fecure me friends at Court, who might fupply in fome degree his own place, alLed me nominally to the politic Walfingham ; whofe intereft alone could counter-balance that of our inveter¬ ate enemies, the Cecil family. The event juftified his opinion. A combination of circumftances would have buried me in obfcurity, had I not had the fupport and attachment of Sir Francis. Thus circum¬ ftanced, it would ill become me to re¬ ject the daughter of the man to whom I owe my fafety and diftinction j but early learning her character, and fearing to truft my happinefs in the hands of a girl whofe violent temper deftroyed her own, I yielded to the pleafure of Lord Leicef¬ ter in remaining abroad : not without a hope
hope (which time confirmed) that fhe would in the interim give her heart to fome more affiduous lover. I had reafon to believe this wifh was accomplifhed ere I ventured to return home. Her parti¬ ality for Sir Philip Sydney is indeed too apparent for me to think of uniting with her, were the friends of both willing to complete the match ; but as I cannot help flattering myfelf the determination of Sir Philip will regulate that of the Walfing- ham family, fain would I learn from your indulgence (if indeed you deign to inter- eft yourfelf in the fate of a man, born but: to adore you) whether Sydney has any thing to hope from your fifter. Accept in this explanation, my excufe for pre- fuming to hover near your fecret ; and do not imagine by uniting myfelf in it, I feek to intrude on engagements I fhal! readily yield to, whether I am permitted to underftand them or not." Charmed alike with the accents of that harmonious voice, and the paffion it ge- neroufly avowed—prepared by the open- nefs of his recital to indulge my natural N J can-
candor, 1 delivered myfelf wholly up to the impulfe of my heart ; and the im¬ plied acknowledgement of my affection, made when I condefcended to explain your fentiments refpečting Sir Philip, lighted up his fine eyes with new foftnefs and gratitude. Infenfibly led on to fpeak of Lord 1 eicefter, I recollected at once the error I was committing; and not dar¬ ing to violate the filence I had promifed, I broke off abruptly, covered with blufhes and confufion------a long paufe enfued— I raifed my eyes, anxious and irrefolute, to his—chagrin had dimmed all their luftre—he faw the conflict in my mind, and recollecling the fuperiority of his own character, he conjured me " to confider well all that I would fay, and to believe that confidence would be only a weight upon his heart, which mine Ibould ever reproach me with beftowing." His wound¬ ed feelings gave a perfuafive tremulation to his voice ; that, and the delicacy of mind which made him above profiting by the error of mine—the right a lover in¬ ftantly acquires over the conduct of a wo-
woman, who has once ventured to ac¬ knowledge her partiality—alas, the ex~ quifire fear fuch ever feel at appeanno· for one moment to diftruft the object of their choice, all united to authorifi, in my own judgiTient, that full confeifion the occafion won from me. The afto- niiliing ftory of our birth, the fecret of the Recefs, its difcovery by Lord Leicef¬ ter, your fubfequent marriage with him, the feint by which the Queen was influ¬ enced alike to remain filent on every point refpečting us, all was fully revealed —the veil of fiction fell at once, and pre¬ fented me to him the being í was born. This interefting confidence cemented our mutual paffion, and gave fuch charms to the moment, as memory ever returns to with pleafure. I impofed on him a vow of filence and fecrefy, till your decifive refufal of Sir Philip fhould fix his mar¬ riage with Mifs Walfingham; and more fortunate circumftances facilitate cur own : nor could the interval, I faid, ap¬ pear tedious to either, while we were daily permitted to meet, though in publiek, N 4 and
and read in each other's eyes a paifion tintinctured with doubt, and which every following day promifed to fančtify. Ef¬ fex found too many fources of wonder and pleafure in the mutual confidence, to oppofe her he from that moment looked up to, and we parted fo fatisfied with the interview, that either would have bought it with life. Neverthelefs, I was far from confider- ing Mifs Walfingham as the fole obftacle to our union. The politic Lord Leicef¬ ter, ftrongly, though filently, oppofed it; nor indeed without reafon. Confcious he had reigned fo many years without a competitor in the heart of Elizabeth, he might juftly dread theprogrefs of a rival, in whom all his advantages were united, with many he never pofiefied. Not fatif- fled with the reputation of beauty and elegance, Leicefter ever paifionately de- fired that of conduct and valor, and had given the kingdom but too convincing proofs how unequal he was to the military rank he held. EiTex was born a foldier. The rough and generous virtues of that cha-
character, were joined in him with the poliihed graces of a courtier, and the moft. refined tafte for literature. A man cal¬ culated to íhine in whatever light you examined him, could not fail to alarm all who valued and held the favor of Eli¬ zabeth. Add to this, that Effex was na¬ turally bold and afpiring; confequently would retain whatever he once pofleffed. Such were already the fears of all the fa¬ vorites of the Queen, and who could bound mine, when I recollected the du¬ bious fate of his noble father, and the laft warning he had given to this darling fon? The fudden and unexpected marriage of Sir Philip Sydney and Mifs Walfing¬ ham, revived thofe hopes in the mind of Effex, I had fo long ftrove to throw at a diftance; and with them too revived the vain project of confining his views to Lord Leicefter, with whofe approbation of them he ftill continued to flatter him¬ felf. Terrified left fuch an unguarded meafure íhould exafperate Leicefter to his utter ruin, who would ill- brook that this
this embryo rival ihould crofs his fate in every inftance, and dare to contend with him for a íhare of thofe advantages he was determined to monopolize, I ex¬ erted the utmoft care to charm my lover to filence. Alas, every day made that more difficult. The Queen and Leicef¬ ter, fearful of my finding among the many who profeffed themfelves my fer- vants, one whofe views would interfere with theirs, immediately allotted me that weak wretch, Lord Arlington, for a huf- band ; and in countenancing his addreffes, threw every other lover at a diftance : at the fame time giving me but too much reafon to apprehend, »hat if ever I was permitted to marry, it muft be as a fa- crifice to both. Not daring to confult you on a fubječt I had fo long concealed, and on which we muft ever think fo dif¬ ferently, and unwiiiing to blight the lit¬ tle gleam of funfhine love illumined your days with, 1 refigned myfelf up to a gloom which hardly the prefence of Effex could diffipate, A'very
A very fhort time rendered the inten¬ tions of the Queen and Lord Leicefter obvious to Effex. His impaffioned foul, fired alike with love of me, and difdain of him I was commanded to love, treated Lord Arlington with fo marked a con¬ tempt, that nothing but the irrefolution incident to weak minds, could prevent his rival from making a mortal quarrel of it. Poffeffed in my confidence of the means to render Lord Leicefter more tractable, the Earl of Effex folicited my confent to infift on that of your Lord, as well as his intereft with the Queen, if he valued the prefervation of his own fe¬ cret. The tender love which attached me to you, alone'could induce me to oppofe a defign of which my happinefs was the ul¬ timate object. But convinced an ecclair- ciffement of this kind would embroil me for ever with Lord Leicefter, and fill your fuffering mind withatrouble beyond all thofe you had already experienced, I confented to fee Effex once more at bady Pembroke's 3 and exerting at that interview
interview every power I poffeffed over his perturbed heart, to moderate his rage, and foothe his love, till the enfuing cam¬ paign in the Netherlands ihould be over, I promifed a fteady refiftance to every matrimonial propofal in the interval, and to decide his fate on his return. Know¬ ing it vain to hope to actuate him by any felfiíh confideration of his own welfare, I buried in my heart its deepeft fources of apprehenfion, and bound him to pa¬ tience by a ftrong reprefentation of the dangers to which any raíhnefs on his part would infall i by expofe me. Thofe in¬ flamed paffions no other being could ever control, were regulated by my voice; and when neceffity compelled us to part, I feemed to leave in his arms the dearer por¬ tion of my exiftence. Occupied by feelings and views diftinčt from each other, and agreeing only in watching the wind, and fending every wifh towards the camp, you and I fcldom entered into our accuftomed confidence and friendíhip. I had, however, fome¬ times the relief of a letter, through the medium
medium of Lady Pembroke ; by thofe I learnt your Lord ftill maintained an out¬ ward íhew of civility towards Effex, while he fecretly made him fenfible of all his power; yet with an art fo profound, as left him no apparent right to complain. He often reminded me of my promife, and vowed to preferve an undoubted claim to it, by ftill enduring for my fake. Over¬ whelmed with anxiety and perplexities, I hardly durft look towards the unravelling of events fo complicated, and waited in dreadful fufpence the will of Heaven. It broke in thunder over me—the cruel fitu¬ ation in which you foon found yourfelf, Lord Leicefter's abrupt and imprudent return of the news of it—the politick conftručtion he gave that return to the fick and doting Queen—her fudden re¬ folution to marry him, and the immedi¬ ate neceffity for getting out of her power, which rendered both him and you in one hour miferable fugitives, were incidents fo ftrange, rapid, and unfufpected, that I became their victim, ere I could any way account for it. The
The fatal morning of Lord Leicefter's return, you left him to attend the rifing of the Queen, which was on that day your periodical duty. I waited with im¬ patience the event of my Lord's vifit to Elizabeth, in which my own fafety, as well as yours, was immediately concerned, A fervant of Lady Pembroke's, in whom ihe repofed great truft, fuddenly brought me word that a fright had thrown her into premature labor, and the danger was fo imminent, that even while we fpoke ihe might breathe her laft ·, neverthelefs the mefienger, in her name, urged me to haften to her, if I valued the letters I had lodged in her hands. I gave way to the alarm without reflection, and accom¬ panied the mefienger inftantly ι nor did I meet in paifing through the palace any of our women, or friends, r to whom I could mention the caufe of my fudden abfence. Happily the danger of my much-loved friend was over ere I arrived. I preft her hand in filence, and took frorh it the packet relative to Efiex, íhe had kept ready to give me; which I put into my bo¬ fom,
fom, and was haftening back, when a ftranger, as I pafíed thro* the outer court, prefented me a note. The hand, my flut¬ tered fenfes owned for that of Efiex, But why íhould he return to England ? A confufed fear arofe in my mind, which hardly left me power to read it. It was anonymous, but I learnt from it, <c that he had been at the houfe of Lady Pem¬ broke, where, íhocked at the diftrefs into which her misfortune had juft thrown her Lord, as well as the whole family, he found it vain to hope their afiiftance towards obtaining an interview with me, which, neverthelefs, was highly eifential to the peace and fafety of both. He ended with conjuring me to follow the bearer, if I wiihed to fave him from defperation." — Perhaps on the decifion of this important moment depended the peace of my whole future life. Too furely my compliance in¬ finitely lengthened the fatal abfence from Court which enthralled me from many painful years; and dearly did I expiate that firft deviation from propriety and pru¬ dence. But are we always rulers over our feelings ?
feelings ? mine were agitated with almoft every poffible caufe, and coward reafon too often retreats from the dangerous conteft. I ftept into a hired boat the meffenger fhewed me, which was rowed down the river with the utmoft rapidity. During the little voyage, I revolved in my mind every probable reafon for this fudden and alarming return of the Earl ; but I was at Greenwich, ere I yet had fixed on one, I landed at a folitary garden belonging to Lord Southampton, and was conduåed to a pavillion which overhung the water, where I found Effex alone : pale, difor¬ dered, and undreft, with every fymptom of anxiety and fatigue. Overwhelmed with I know not what agitation, I funk upon his ihoulder, as he knelt before me, and gave way to an uncertain prefentiment of fadnefs, a few hours after fo fully veri¬ fied. Not even the charm of his voice could immediately foothe fpirits fo many concurring circumftances had deeply agi¬ tated : neverthelefs, on comprehending furmife, and not misfortune, had brought him
him thus fuddenly to England, I felt my opprefied heart breathe a little more freely. I by-and-by underftood that the fole mo¬ tive of this journey was the fudden one of Lord Leicefter ; that by means of friends who furrounded your Lord, he had always endeavoured to keep a watch¬ ful eye on his actions j and found a packet of letters, brought by a trufty hand from England, had agitated him fo ftrongly, as to make him refolve on leav¬ ing his command, and returning imme¬ diately. The communication of this myfterious refolution determined him to follow the fteps of his General, which he was enabled to do, as he fortunately acted only as a Volunteer. The impatience Lord Leicefter difcovered during his hafty journey, authorifed the fears of the rival who followed his fteps ; and perfuaded him either that the fecret of my birth bad tranfpired, or that fome manœu¬ vre was projected to difpofe of me as policy dictated. Rendered defperate by thefe fears, he had left every thing in train for an immediate return, if fortu- Vol. II. О nately
nately I was ftill at liberty ; or if he could be the happy means of delivering me, in cafe the whole truth had been difcovered; nor could he longer doubt but 1 would at laft confent to follow the fortunes of a man, who had never for a moment put all the hopes he might perhaps juftly form, in competition with the fingle one of poiTefling me. The generous error of his conduct could not offend me, but perfuaded my own fituation was not fo defperate as he reprefented it, I account¬ ed to him for Lord Leicefter's precipitate journey, by acknowledging the truth; and urged him to leave England directly; that even his having vifited it might ne¬ ver tranfpire. But I talked to one who no longer attended to me. His eyes wandered wildly over my features, while his whole foul was engroíľed by his favo¬ rite project. Poíľeíľed and diftracted wich the idea, that Lord Leicefter would in¬ fallibly ruin his hopes, by difpofing of me if ever I was again in his power, not all my. vows of everlafting love and fide¬ lity to him, nor promifes of the moft ob¬ ftinate
ftinate refiftance to every other propofal, could avail. " You are gone, you are torn from me for ever, if once thefe eyes lofe fight of you," was his impafiioned reply, a thoufand times repeated to all my arguments and intreaties.—" It is the crifis of our fate, my love, would he cry, —yield, oh yield to it ! Admitting you are proof againft trials you cannot guefs at till too late, how know you but I may be facrificed ? Sir Francis Walfingham al¬ ready repents confenting to annul the contract between me and his daughter ; ihe is already widowed ; a hint would en¬ gage Lord Leicefter to favor its renewal (for do not his views coincide with that project ?) a word from him would deter¬ mine the Queen in its favor ; and a com¬ mand from her, difobeyed, would exile me for life. Thus, my fweet Ellen, con¬ tinued this agitated lover, you not only put your own fate in the hands of a man, who will never confent to unite it with mine, but even Ihould you have refoluti¬ on to refift his will, you deliver up to ic a wretch you fay you dearly love, and who О 2 certainly
certainly loves you to madnefs." Bathing the hands he grafped, with precious drops of tendernefs and anguiíh, he held them alternately to his lips and heart.—What was the diffraction of my foul at that mo¬ ment ?—Inexorably to refufe was the hard duty impofed by my reafon, while my foul even melted with fondnefs. But the fear that I fhould entail misfortune on the dear choice of my heart; obfeure at once the brilliant fortune which feemed to fpread before his youthful fteps, and track them perhaps with blood; a juft remem¬ brance of the fevere cenfure I had paffed on your conduct, under circumftances not lefs trying, and a conviction that fuch a compliance would infallibly endanger your fafety, made me refolve to act up to my fenfe of rectitude, at whatever price. I collected thefe reafons, and many more, which have now efcaped my mind, to prepare EiTex for a difappointment, I was fure he would feel but too fenfibly ; and ftrove to reconcile him to the refufal, by convincing him his own welfare was the chief caufe of it. Perhaps, in truth, ir was j
was ; for hardly can the fun tinge the dew- drops with more various hues, than the foul ν ill caft upon irs feelings. I a thou¬ fand rimes affured him, <( that to be the fole objeci of his heart, did not give me more pleafure, than to fee him the admi¬ raron of the kingdom. The happy pro¬ mife of his youth, I added, had centred every eye, and every hope in him. What then would be my grief and difappoint¬ ment, if the coming years which ought to crown him with glory, were to bury him in obfcurity, or fteep him in forrow — that nature had formed me with a ftrength of mind to view every fituation in its true light ·, nor could I comprife all human paffions in love, though 1 thought it, perhaps, the leading one. Fill up the interval of our feparation, my Lord, cried I, with a long fucceffion of fuch heroic actions, as may give to our union, whenever Heaven permits it, the only happinefs not comprifed in itfelf—the facred fenfe of having deferved it. Gentler virtues of my fex ihall not be want¬ ing j time, patience, and fortitude, often О 3 conquer
conquer fate herfelf; nor will I ever yield to Lord Leicefter an obedience I do not owe him, though for my filler's fake 1 ihall condefcend to temporize, in inftances of lefs importance. Plighted to you by every tye, the rites of the church could only ratify a claim, which will from this moment make my accep¬ tance of another, an adultery of the worft kind. Haften back then, my dear Effex ; conceal, if poffible, that you have been . abfent, and beware how you expofe to the eyes of Lord Leicefter a fufpicion of his honor, he would never, perhaps, par¬ don." I broke from his arms, ftrength- ened, furely by fome fupernatural aid. —" Yet ftay, my beloved, my woríhip¬ ped Ellinor —Oh yet be perfuaded—you leave me for ever—thefe aching eyes fee you for the laft time—never, oh never, fliall I now call you mine."—Such were the pafiionate exclamations which vibrat¬ ed on my quickened fenfe, as I flew towards the boat, and ordered the men to row to London. My full eyes ftill fought that graceful form, which with folded arms, and
and a dejected air, hung over the terrace ; and my heart difiolved at the accents which ftill lingered on my ear. Alas, I knew not then how far they were prophe- tic ! Such was my conflict, fuch my deter¬ mination, durino; the bufv hours fraught with your fate, and mine, my fifter. The mind, however, foon recovers all its vigor, when it has dared to act up to its duties, and I had wept away my ten¬ der chagrin ere I reached the Court. Ah, let me ihorten this part of my recital, left I rafhly paufe to queftion Heaven, why the moft meritorious action of my life became the caufe of my ruin ? I reached London, Matilda, two hours after you and Lord Leicefter quitted it; and fearful of the appearance my long abfence might have even in your eyes, did you know how the time had been fpenf, I refolved to tell you that I had paffed the day at Lady Pembroke's bedfide ; and to avoid the enquiry of indifferent perfons, itole at the clofe of the evening through the back courts : thus fatally eluding the watch- θ' 4 fui
ful care of Lady Arundell, who had planted afiìduous friends in every other avenue to the palace, ready to intercept me when returning, after ihe had caufed London to be explored in vain to find me. Ah, gracious Heaven, what were my emotions when entering our apartment, I faw the Queen's women and officers in poíľeífion of it ! TKe diforder of our ca¬ binets and chefts; every thing indicated a dangerous difcovery—a terror, for which there is no name, ^ame over me. A joy¬ ful exclamation on the part of thofe into whofe hands I had fallen, and a difpatch to the Queen, gave me reafon to fear alike for my Matilda. To the enquiries I made, no other anfwer was given, than that they were employed to guard, and not inform me; and an officer of the Queen's immediately appeared to conduct me to her prefence. Unable to com¬ mand a fingle moment of folitude and filence to regulate my thoughts or ac¬ tions, the paft, the prefent, and the fu¬ ture, prefented only one wild chaos to my
my mind, which hardly the breath of Heaven feemed able to bring into order. Pale, horror-ftruck, and fpeechlefs, 1 was dragged like a criminal into the clofet of the Queen ; whofe burning cheeks, and enraged eyes, told me in one killing look all 1 had to dread. My conductors were ordered to retire, and Lord Bur¬ leigh, with the old Lady Latimer, were the only fpečtators of this dreadful inter¬ view. Scarce could my trembling limbs fupport me, or my funk íbul utt^r a fin- gle word. Death—death in the moft terrible form glared upon me—What do I fay, death ? Oh, that I had feared no other evil !—Grief, infult, obloquy, all that can add horrors to the grave, pro¬ mifed to forerun it. The packet of letters, the teftimonials of my birth, whatever was wanting to confirai the doubts of Elizabeth, or redouble her rage, were all to be found about me.— Matilda, Effex—thofe forms fo dear, glittered before my tearful eyes ; and I feemed in this perilous moment to drag down
down to the earth every human being I loved and valued. Elizabeth gave way to that coarfe vio¬ lence which marks her manners. Is there a vindictive or opprobrious epithet íhe did notexhauft? Lord Burleigh, apprehend¬ ing this ungoverned paffion, would rather give than gain information, folicited her permiffion to examine me, which ihe ful- lenly granted. To all his artful and infidi- ous enquiries í replied with truth, veiling only fuch particulars of your life and my own, as malice might conftrue into a crime ; always referring myfelf to Lord Leicefter, in whofe bofom the fecret of our fate was, as the Queen well knew, depofited. fC Ah, ha! then, traitrefs, cried Elizabeth, no longer able to contain her rage, her very eyes flafliing fire, fo thou wouldeft artfully feign ignorance of thy detefted filler's marriage with that vil- lain thou gloffeft over fo rarely j that in¬ formation, I thank him, he has thought proper to give me under his own hand, (pointing to a paper lying on the table near her) take that truth from me, and now
now unfold the reft, or tortures ihall wring it from thee." She continued to fpeak, but I had ceafed to hear------breathlefs, mute, af- tounded, my feet feemed to take root on the fpot where I ftood, and my tears alone proved I was not marble.—Lord Leicef¬ ter's marriage acknowledged—authenti¬ cated at fuch a juncture—and by himfelf too—Heavens, what a chaos did this news make in my mind !------ tc Speak, Jeze¬ bel! (exclaimed the exafperated Queen, in a tone almoft as inarticulate through paffion as mine was through fear) thou art ftill in my power—though the perfi¬ dious villain I had raifed from the duft, and loaded with benefits, though he, 1 fay, and his minion, have efcaped my vengeance, thou art yet within my reach —tremble left thou fhouldft anfwer, ihould fuffer for all." Alas her utmoft rage could hardly have added a pang to thofe which at that moment overwhelmed me. Another kil¬ ling truth had unwarily efcaped her — Lord Leicefter himfelf then thought there was
was no fafety but in flight—he was gone, and my fifter, it was plain, had accom¬ panied him—both had furrendered me up a hopelefs, helplefs victim, however unoffending—even tears, as well as Ian- guage, now failed me, and my brain íhot through with fire. Oh, Efiex, in this mo¬ ment I yet remembered thee. Thy laft words yet wrung in my ears, and my foul ftruggbd v/ith the deep regret I felt for having fcorned thy project, through a vain, vain generofity. Elizabeth finding threats and interrogations alike loft on a girl whofe abfent fenfes feemed to have wholly retired into her heart, now gave way to one of her violent tranfports ; fhe threw a large book of devotion which lay by her on the table, with fo good an aim, that it ftruck me on the temple, and I funk fenfelefs to the earth. The atten¬ dants were all called in, and my laces cut, as having fainted, the Queen not chufing to avow a refentment fo grofsly exprefied. A ribbon from whence hung the dearer part of my exiftence, thofe teftimonials of my birth, which were one
ойе day to fix my rank in life, attracted the eye of Elizabeth. The ready atten¬ dants difengaged and prefented them to her hand, together with the packet con¬ taining my correfpondence with Eifex. I was infenfibly reviving when íhe pe¬ rufed the firft, but forely that moment half avenged me.—Never did mind or body undergo a greater revolution—rage evaporated at once—furprize, grief, con¬ fufion, filence fucceeded; with a face pale as my own, trembling hands, and failing eyes, over and over again did íhe exa¬ mine the inconteftible proofs of fo fur¬ prizing an event : then wildly glancing over my features, íhe tore the papers into atoms, ihe never thought fmall enough. During this interval, I had fo far re¬ covered myfelf as to be capable of fpeak¬ ing; but fcarce had I uttered a found, ere ihe ftarted, in her turn, afraid to hear, " take her away on your lives, cried lhe, in a broken and inward voice ; con¬ vey her into my little clofet, nor let one foul fee or fpeak to her, as you value my favor." The fervile flaves of her will ex-
executed this order with the utmoft ala¬ crity; and the room was guarded by two officers, who took from me every means of efcape or death. Alas! I thought not of either. Yielding: to the defolatin^ flood which had in one hour encompaíľed me, I braved the future,—Betrayed, de¬ livered up by Lord Leicefter,—neglect¬ ed, forgotten by my fifter—the pair for whom alone I feemed hithertb to have lived ; had fate another blow in flore ? Yet even if fo, it muft fport with human mifery to level it at me, when thofe already given were mortal. A ftern and füllen defpair fucceeded the keen viciffitude of emoti¬ ons which had marked the laft hour of my life ; I confidered myfelf as the de¬ voted of Heaven and man, and refolved to oppofe a heart rendered callous by in¬ jury, to every future ftroke of fortune. Elizabeth forgot not her ufual policy even while overwhelmed with furprize; the room in which fhe had ordered me to be confined, had another door, which led to private paifages through the palace, and from this entrance a guard approached а с
at midnight, and informed me it was the pleafure of the Queen that I ihould fol¬ low them. I obeyed in filence, and get¬ ting into a litter I found at the garden crate, enquired not even my deftination. I travelled almoft without refting for two days and a night; care having been taken to provide relays, which were every where ready. During the firft day's journey, a guard attended, but all profpečt of my being releafed by human afiiftance then ceafing, I found myfelf delivered into the charge of Lord Burleigh and his fervants. My deep perturbations began now to fub- fide, and my foul inclined to its wonted habits : though to have been betrayed by Lord Leicefter and my fifter, was a recollection my wounded feelings had not yet courage enough to cope with. Alas, how ihould they ? When the paffions are permitted to decide our conduct, how¬ ever heroic it proves, we claim not thofe returns reafon tells us are due to every iüítance of virtue, which had no other in¬ centive than reafon. Ah, Efiex! dear prophetic EiTex Î fighed my heart at fome mo-
moments, why, why, did I inexorably reject thy generous propofal ? that un¬ grateful fifter to whofe fafety I facrificed the fweeteft hopes of my life, manacles thy devoted love ; and flies far away to take ihelter in that country I dared not feek even under thy protection. At the turn of the night, a dreadful ftorm of thunder, lightning, wind, and rain, broke over us ; and the terrors na¬ tural to my fex on fuch occafions, were doubled on finding the whole party were fet on by banditti. A moment before, and I íhould have affirmed I had nothing to dread, yet fo lively was my new fear, that even the vengeance of Elizabeth became a trifle in the comparifon. The fervants of Lord Burleigh made a defperate but vain refiftance; and the whole were at length led away by the ruifians into a wood adjoining : where all, no doubt, like me, expected to be murdered. The ftorm now began to abate, and the moon fometimes forced its way through the volumes of black clouds.which yet hung over it. My quickened fenfes caught its
its tranfient gleams to examine if any ha¬ bitation, or other hope of refcue was in view. In vain I ftrained my fight. The wood involved us entirely, and every fee¬ ble hope died away, when my eyes fud¬ denly refted on—ah, gracious Heaven!— ourownRecefs.—Yes, the well-known en¬ trance of the tomb prefented itfelf, and a thoufand vague ideas of fafety and dan¬ ger mingling in my mind, as the robbers approached the litter to take me out, I fcreamed and fwooned away. Alas, my fifter, call to mind your own feelings, and guefs at mine when I once more opened my eyes in the great room of our Recefs—that room once hallowed with the prayers of father Anthony, and the prefence of Mrs. Marlow—that room where once the portraits of our parents fmiled peace and fecurity on their now defolate offspring—how hideous was the change !—its bare walls, grimed with a thoufand uncouth and frightful images, prefented only a faint picture of the pre¬ fent poíTeiTors, on whole hardened faces I dared not fix my fearful eyes. Vol.11. Ρ Con-
Confidering me but as accidentai plun¬ der, they were wholly engroíľed by the old Lord Burleigh ; in whom fome im¬ portant view feemed to centre. I ihrunk from the terrible fcene, and called upon the awful ihades of thofe moft dear to me, to appal, in turn, the defperate wretches who made the time-ftruck walls rcfound with threats and execrations. My íhock¬ ed eyes fought the ground as a relief, and fixed upon a well-known object — It was that ring of Mrs. Marlow's, with which father Anthony wedded you to Lord Leicefter, and well I remembered that ring was on your hand when laft we parted. I ftooped impatiently for it— my fenfes more fully recognized its fet¬ ting.—The dreadful truth flaihed upon my mind. "Alas! my fifter and Lord Leicefter are alike enfnared, groaned I forth, without any confideration—well I know they muft be here—Oh, in what dungeon have you hid them ?" <c Your fifter, fair lady, returned one of the vil¬ lains, with an odious grin ; comrades, our Captain will thank us for this prize, this
this muft be ihe he talked fo much about when the other travellers threw them¬ felves into our hands.—Make yourfelf eafy, miftrefs, your fifter is locked up as fafe as cords can keep her." All the anguiíh I had before felt be¬ came nothing at this moment. " My fifter in this dungeon? cried I; oh, bom to fuffer with me, dear Matilda ! how will that foft frame, always unequal to the trials of life, and now entirely debilitated, fupport thefe horrors! Alas, Sirs, if there is yet in your hearts one touch of human pity, conduct me to this tender fufferer, and let her die in my arms." fc All in good time, young woman," replied ano¬ ther, with an air fo furly, as awed even my convulfed foul to filence. Lord Burleigh ftill was their great ob¬ ject ; threats, and oaths were exhaufted on him : when, to confummate the terrors of that moment, the name of Williams reached me. That name expounding both the paft and future, wrought my fears up to frenzy. I caft my wild eyes around in fearch of any means to die, Ρ 2 and
and could in that terrible moment, like Portia, have fwallowed fire ; when a tu¬ mult without the room, at once fufpended that within it. The found of piftols, the precipitate entrance of fuch of the rob¬ bers as were not already round us, fol¬ lowed by many unknown perfons, in¬ ftantly convinced me Heaven had deli¬ vered us from our oppreffors, by fome means lefs ihocking to humanity, than thofe defpair had filled my thoughts with. A dreadful conteft enfued, but our deli¬ verers prevailing, immediately began to unbind Lord Burleigh; who, almoft mute with excefiive furprize, found in them a train of his own domeftics from the ad¬ joining Abbey of St. Vincent, which I underftood was now one of his feats. Nor was their amazement lefs at meeting with their Lord in this newly-difcovered den. I comprehended the whole in a mo¬ ment; and plainly perceived the fervants of Lord Burleigh muft have come through the fubterraneous paffage, that commu¬ nicated with ihe Abbey; I recolleåed that it was unknown to Williams, and flattered myfelf
myfelf that you and Lord Leicefter had efcaped through it. Overwhelmed with the bleifcd events comprized in this deliver¬ ance, I forgot I had any thing ftill to fear; and not confidering Lord Burleigh as my keeper, I faw in him only a fel 1 ov/- fu ffe rer. I rofe with alacrity, and led the way to the dungeon which communicated with the Abbey ; thofe who newly came from thence following me in filent aftoniihment. I perceived the cords with which you and my Lord had been bound, and demanded you of the fervants with a joyful impati¬ ence. Lord Burleigh learnt from my in- coherent tranfports, a circumftance I had refufed before to inform him of: that chance had imprifoned us in the very fpot where you and I were bred. Wholly taken up with my own exclamations, and re¬ gardlefs of the filence of my followers, I hailed the entrance of the Abbey, fo long our happy afylum. Ah, Heavens, how cruelly were thefe lively emotions repelled and extinguiihed, when by the command of Lord Burleigh, his fervants once more feized me as a prifoner, and attempted to P j kad
lead me towards a remote apartment.— With a heart humbled and broken by fo many fucceflive frights and afflictions, I funk at his feet, not difdaining the moft fubmiflìve attitude, and only folicited to fee you. I reminded him of the dangers he and I had ihared together, and con¬ jured him to remember you alone could have opened the paflage which led us all to freedom,—unlefs he bafely refolved to become to me a murderer, as dreadful as thofe from whom we had juft efcaped.— Inexorably cold he replied, " my un¬ guarded acknowledgments only gave him ftronger reafon to imagine much was yet concealed ! and that whenever I would refolve to be wholly fincere, I fhould not want his intereft with his royal miftrefs." Breaking from thofe trembling hands, which every moment more infeebled, he >ordered his fervants to bear me into the grated room at the end of the eaftern cloifter. You cannot but remember the difmal place. Half funk in ruin, over¬ hung with ivy, and trees of growth al¬ moft immemorial, ic appeared the, very cxll
cell of melancholy. Alas, her pale repre- fentative took pofieflion of it in myfelf. The mafiy bars no fooner gave alTurance that I was imprifoned, than my conduct¬ ors impatiently flew to rejoin the reft, and learn the news of the family. To me that fmall relief was barbaroufiy denied. So near the caufe and partaker of my forrows, they were deftined to flow in folitude ·, nor could imagination decide whether you were yet enthralled, or had again efcaped. How terrible are the vague fufpicions of an impafiioned mind, when deprived of every means of certitude ! The pale gleams of the moon feemed every moment to people the dungeon they glanced through—my pulfe beat with redoubled ftrength and quicknefs—the whole cloifter refounded the long night with diftant feet, but they came not ro me—fearfully I often ftarted when fink¬ ing into a lethargy, rather than (lumber, by the echo of fome remote voice, which fancy continually told me I knew, but it died away ere memory could affign it an owner j and though my fertile brain ex- P 4 haufted
haufted poífibility, the dawning day re¬ alized no other objects, than thofe dreary ones my chamber prefented. The bats and owls began to retire to their haunts in mý neighbourhood, and the fhort vifit of the rifing fun, only fhewed me the limits of a dark and difmal room.— By this time both mind and body were alike exhaufted, and a mift appeared to envelop my fenfes, which ftill recall a thoufand fleeting forms, by turns fur¬ rounding me, till fatigue threw me into a deep fleep. It was at length interrupted by a maid who brought me breakfaft, and a meflage from her Lord, "That if I would inform him what was wanting to my comfort and accommodation, his orders íhould immediately fupply it." I caft my eyes expreifively around, and bid her tell him in one word, " every thing." The wo¬ man feemed affected ; 1 fnatched the for¬ tunate moment, and putting my purfe into her hand, afked in return only to know the fate of Lord Leicefter and my fifter. I learnt, to my inexprefiible re¬ lief,
lief, both had, by forne incomprehenfible means again efcaped, and that Lord Bur¬ leigh's generous daughter was confined as their abettor. A hafty fummons to the maid left me once more alone; but the news lhe had communicated, and the idea that the amiable Rofe might hereafter be alike ready to relieve my diftreffes, gave a new turn to my fpirits, which now ga¬ thered courage to retrace the paft, and look into the future. Although unable to comprehend what the urgent motives could be which impel¬ led Lord Leicefter and my fifler to fo pre¬ cipitate a flight, every thing implied that they were defperate: for that it was fud¬ den and without preparation, their inten¬ tion of taking ihelter in the Recefs ftrong¬ ly indicated; and whenever I recollected the dangerous fituation of Matilda, I ihared with her that compaffion felf is but too apt to engrofs. Was there a fpot^of St. Vincent's Abbey, however gloomy, which did not call to my mind fome in¬ ftance of that integrity, affection, and nobility of heart, which diftinguiihed my Matilda ?
Matilda? and could I remember thefe, yet doubt that by whatever chance I was deferted, your will could have no fhare in it? Believe me; my fifter, the firft prayers I addreíľed to Heaven in my prifon were for your fafety. When time and folitude reftored me reafon enough cooly to confider my own ttatp, 1 faw no immediate danger it could teem with. Though a victim to the fears of Elizabeth, and the policy of Lord Bur¬ leigh,! had not yetlearpt to confider them as mere murderers, and if they were not fo, imprifonmentwastheonlyevill could have to apprehend, nay even that might per¬ haps be fhort, as it was undoubtedly both illegal and unjuft. Malice itfelf could affix on me no other crime than that of being daughter to the Queen of Scots ; a fatal truth which Elizabeth would gladly forget, but furely never publifh. Could 1 refolve, therefore, to endure with pa¬ tience the piinifhment fo unworthily im- pofed on me, I might in time emerge unfullied to diftinclion. I called upon the example of her who gave me being, ta
to fupport my drooping fpirits, and íhould perhaps have vied with her in fortitude, but that one cherifhed grief wound round my aching heart, and often wrung forth its deareft drops. Efiex, the moft be¬ loved of mankind; that faithful lover, whofe ardent prayers, whofe generous pro- pofals, I had obftinately refifted, when his irritated mind feemed daringly to lift the veil of futurity, and pierce through thofe complicated dangers which followed our parting —Ah, what fhould guard him, when my lofs was difcovered, from giving way to his injured and exafperated affection ? If fortune ihould even feparate him and Lord Leicefter, how could I be certain Elizabeth herfelf would be fafe from his reproaches, and who was ever fafe from her vengeance, when once thus defperately awakened ? The premature fate of my much-honored father, the noble Norfolk, returned upon my me¬ mory—the tower, the difmal tower, fčaf- folds, axes, a bleeding lover,end a broken heart, daily paffed in long array before me, and
and peopled the folitude to which I was lo unjuftly condemned. The decency with which I was attend¬ ed and ferved, proved that both Eliza¬ beth and her Minifter had ftill terms to keep with me; but the fervant who had ventured a reply was impeached by thofe who waited without the door, and my purfe being found upon her, no doubt be¬ came a fufficient proof of guilt. Cer¬ tainly I faw her no more, and the women deputed in her place, were either too guarded or too ignorant, to inform me on any fubječt, had 1 left myfelf money to tiy their fidelity. I had once been fo accuftomed to feclu¬ fion, that it would foon have loft its hor- rors, had my misfortunes refted here : refolved, however, not to augment them by vain and fruitlefs repining, I demand¬ ed fuch books as might ftrengthen and amufe my mind : thus oppofing the wif- dom of ages to the pangs of the moment. By íharing a part of my food with the birds which inhabited the over-hanging trees, I drew around me fome mute aíľociates.
aíľociates, who more grateful than the fuperior beings that ventured to look down on them, are always attached by benefits. This lethargic tranquillity was íòon in¬ terrupted by a vifit from Lord Burleigh. With the fair language of an experienced courtier, he "commended myrefignation to an inevitable fate, and admired the wife ufe I made of confinement, in thus applying myfelf to enrich my underftand¬ ing ; affuring me he had exceeded his or¬ ders for my accommodation, but that an exprefs which arrived over-night from the Queen, had at laft put it in his power to reftore that liberty, he had by her com¬ mand deprived me of." My heart leaped at fo unhoped an alteration in my fate, but he intercepted the tranfport ere it reached my lips, and fent it back a dead weight into my bofom. " Think not therefore, fair lady, faid he, that her Majefty's indulgence is unconditional— She wills, if ever you pafs thefe walls, it is as the wife of Lord Arlington."— f - They will then be my grave, my Lord, returned
returned I, in bitternefs of fpirir ; fbamc on her indulgence, inhuman tyrant!" — if Moderate your wrath, refumed he in the fame equal tone, after your bold at¬ tempt to impofe on her by forged tefti¬ monials of an impoffible marriage, and fuppofitioue birth, you ought rather to imagine íhe treats you with lenity."------ C£ Forged teftimonials t retorted I with great acrimony, why then did fhe fo care¬ fully deftroy them ? but ihe deftroyed them, my Lord, in vain—look down bleft fpirits of thofe who once owned this noble manfion! look down thou dear de¬ parted fifter of the murdered Norfolk !— look down too, reverend Mrs. Marlow, thou gentle guardian of our youth, and fay to whom we owe our being?—but why do i call the bleffed írom their reward, to authenticate thofe rights the malice of Elizabeth cannot annihilate ? Oh, Royal Mary, dear unknown mother, how would the tender yearnings of thy bofom juftify the aíľertions of thy perfecuted daughter, did not a cruel tyrant, by a double in- juftice, enclcie in feparate prifons the mother
mother and the child ?—bring us but to¬ gether, and you ihall find"-—-" I am not commifiioned to parley on fo delicate a fubječt, replied the crafty Lord Bur¬ leigh,—ere you give way to thefe violent tranfpoi ts, remember how fatal they may prove—over the head of the Queen of Scots, the fword has long hung only by a fingle thread—it is now put into your hand—* confider well ere next I fee you, who, and what you will be ;" with thefe tremendous words he rofe and left me—left me— atu how ? Convulfed, annihilated, a terror hitherto unknown feemed to fix every feature, and freeze every fenfe. Oh, thou, whofe awful will alone could authorize this namelefs infliction, give me ftrength to bear it, fighed forth my fhocked foul! Can I then deferve the title of daughter only by renouncing all claim to it?— My mother, my gracious royal mother, who even when overwhelmed with woes, didft take fuch tender care of the little unfor¬ tunates to whom thou gaveft being ; ah, were their lives preferved but to ihorten thine? Meditations like thefe al moft íhook the
the feat of reafon : and I refolved to con¬ form to the moft inhuman command of Elizabeth, rather than fuffer the hor¬ rible fcene his laft implication prefented, to pafs another hour before my bewil¬ dered fenfes. It was furely at this tremendous crifis in my life, my fermented blood firft adopted and cheriftied thofe exuberances of paifion, which ever after warped the equality and merit of my character; that blood now boiling in my veins, joined with a difordered imagination to call around me a thoufand vifionary incon- fiftent forms, to whofe voices my burning heart refponded—now fiowly retreating to every vital fource, the very powers of be¬ ing feemed to congeal, and I remained for hours a breathing icicle. Whenever the firft fenfation actuated me, the ftrong de- fire of faving my mother ftill returned ; and in thefe dire revolutions of conftitu¬ tion, four and twenty dreadful hours elapfed. Lord Burleigh, at the fame time the next day, came once more to learn my final
final refolution. Scarce able to reply, or raife my heavy eyes from the ground, in which they fought, and faw, only a grave, my whole appearance ftrongly indicated how I had paíTed the interval. The defo¬ late acquiefcence my filence befpoke, en¬ couraged him to produce a paper. He be¬ gan reading it, while riveted with a new furprize I liftened to the incredible and difgraceful forgery, as if I had loft every other fenfe than that of ear. It was called, as I think, " the voluntary confeifion of Ellinor, on behalf of herfelf and fifter Ma¬ tilda -y and fet forth, that foon after Mary Queen of Scots fought ihelter in England, (under the protection of her fifter Eliza¬ beth) for divers politic and ambitious rea- fons, (as firft, in cafe her only fon íhould die, and leave her without iíľue, on which to fupport her claim to Great Britain, as well as to the kingdom íhe had lately aban¬ doned ; next to attach to her intereft the difloyal perfons into whofe charge íhe was given) fherefolved to pretend tohavemade a marriage with Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk ; and by the aid and confeder- Vol. II. Q^ асу
асу of his fifter, the Lady Scroope, (whofe Lord was her keeper) together with that of divers Scottifh fervants, as well as of one Gertrude Marlow (the baftard fifter of Lord Scroope) the faid Queen of Scots did feign a pregnancy, and in procefs of time a delivery of two daughters, who were, with the afiiftance of the faid con¬ federates, brought up in iecrecy, by the faid Gertrude Marlow, till fuch time as Mary ihould judge fit to produce them ; and that fundry teftimonials were invent¬ ed, drawn, and witneffed by faid parties, tending to legitimate faid furreptitious offspring at the pleafure of the Queen of Scots, by the names Dt" Matilda and Elli¬ nor. The faid Ellinor underftanding, in procefs of time, the above plaufible col¬ lufion, and forely repenting the offence againft Elizabeth, Queea of England, her lawful Lady and Sovereign, doth on behalf of herfelf and fifter Matilda, freely acknowledge, and folemnly affirm, that they do not believe themfelves born of the faid Mary Queen of Scots, but have reafon to know their parents of a low de¬ gree
gree, who, for the lucre of gain, refign¬ ed them for ever, to be done with as the faid Queen of Scots, and her confeder¬ ates, thought beft. This declaration is made and figned on the fpot whereEllinor owns herfelf and fifter were thus fecretly brought up, to wit, the Abbey of St. Vincent, the feat of the late Lord Scroope, in the prefence of, &c." Hav¬ ing concluded this notable memorial of villainy, he fummoned feveral domeftics, and put a pen into my hand. My un- fubdued, indignant foul, fpurned at the idea of villifying both myfelf and mothe^ even to fave her life. I would have fpoke, but ere grief and rage could be converted into language, he transfixed me with a look; and holding before my eyes an or¬ der for the execution of the Queen of Scots, figned, dated, authentic, com¬ plete in every form, my ihuddering na¬ ture could not endure the conflict. I rafhly fcrawled my name, and fnatching that tremendous mandate he yet held be¬ fore me, tore it into a thoufand atoms, and funk upon the ground in the moft Q^ 2 vior
violent ronvulílons. They were fo rapid and dreadful, that to have left me alone had been little elfe than murder. His do¬ meftics attended me with a humanity un¬ known to their Lord ; and thefe fits at laft gave place to a frenzy fever. Alas, during its raging paroxyfms, I doubtlefs rontinually confuted the infamous tale í had witneffed ; for every affecting remem¬ brance prefied upon my confufed and weakened mind.—My mother, my fifter, and my love, by turns bled before my eyes; and death prefented himfelf in every form dear to me, while I vainly invoked him to take my own. Exhaufted nature feemed to reft on the very verge of the grave—Ah, had I then funk into it, how many pangs had I been fpared !—the care of my attendants fo far recovered me, as to enable me to quit my bed, when pronouncing me well, they left me to my own meditations—a hide¬ ous train, my fifter—to add to their bit¬ ternefs, fancy had now thrown a new co¬ lour on my fate—how if this infamous forgery had been extorted from me, only to
to iHgrrurize my fifter and myfelf ?—A fiiî I TiDre ľ^gravating idea fprung from that—What fhnukl prevent Elizabeth (mm prefenting to the tyes of the unfor- tunate Queen of Scots a defamatory de¬ claration, which muft give her а ftab no lefs mortal than the blow it faved her from, though perhaps more flow ? how indeed, if fo, could I hope fhe would ever forget or forgive an inftance of de· praviry, apparently as unaccountable as it was ihocking? finally, (oh grief yet more pungent) might net the Queen take plea¬ fure in wringing the haughty foul of Ef¬ fex, by íhewing him the unhappy objeci of his deareft affections for ever ftigma- tized by her own hand ?------This painful afľemblage of ideas and objecis, was too much for my hurt brain—I groaned, I fhrieked, 1 relapfed, and very nearly ob¬ tained the relief I fo much longed for. Impelled thus by tyranny down the precipice of fate, my fwift courfe feemed ready to bury me in the gulph it over- lungs, when another projecting point in- terpofed, and fuddenly flopped me.—I CL3 re -
recollected that in thus refigning myfelf to the ftroke, I rendered the laft fatal Blot my own hand had fixed on my cha¬ racter indelible; that while I lived I had yet a chance of juftifying my intention, in an act which reflected alike on myfelf and ail dear to me. By a weaknefs for which I cannot account, I fuddenly be¬ came more willing to fupport all the evils of a life thus prolonged, than the idea of an unknown end, and unhonored grave. My confiitution, 'deftined to ftruggle with ftill greater calamities, funk not wholly under the impreffion of thefe; but the period of recovery was marked by a gloom and dejection I can never forget. Silence was now no lefs my habit than inclination, and I often fancied myfelf incapable of fpeaking. Lord Burleigh, by a fécond vifit, called together every enfeebled power remaining. Regarding my altered countenance with an air of in- fidious pity, he lamented the painful duty impofed on him by the Queen. Eftrang· ed from fympathy fo long, that the leaft mark I
mark of it affected me, I funk into lan¬ guor and tears. " Unhappy young crea¬ ture, refumed he, deftined every way to condemn yourfelf, hear all I am commif- fioned now to fay, and finally decide your own fate. I need hardly inform you on whatever grounds your connexion with the Queen of Scots is founded, a due re¬ gard for herfelf, and the peace of the king¬ dom of England, will not allow my royal miftrefs to enlarge one whofe high fpirit and diftinguiihed underftanding muft fo greatly aid whatever caufe fhe is a party in. But when the attachment between you and the Earl of Effex is confidered, (whofe ambition and daring temper fuffi¬ ciently alarm the prudent part of thr. Queen's counfellors, unaffifted as he yer. is by any imaginary rights) it is obvious that one way alone can you hope for free¬ dom." At the dear name of Eflex, to which my ear had been fo long eftranged, every emotion that had gathered flowly toward my heart, fpread in wild pertur¬ bation through my frame. I faintly re¬ peated it, but Lord Burleigh motioned 0^4 me
me to filence, and I confined to contemp¬ tuous glances my opinion of the re¬ mainder of his fpeech.— tf I ihall not conceal from you, returned he, that Effex has had influence enough over the Queen to make her for a while fupprefs her fen¬ timents on this error in his conduct. Perhaps ihe would have trufted to time for otherwife matching you, but that this hot-headed, rafh young man"·^I groaned in impatient filence—he caft on me an attentive eye and purfued his fubjecl.— " After finding it vain to hope he íhould difcover your afylum, (for which I muft tell you he fpared neither threats, intrea¬ ties, money, or aífiduity) he completely irritated Elizabeth by uniting himfelf in a plot to releafe the Queen of Scots. Providentially for my royal miftrefs it tranfpired in time, and the traitors are taken. The chief object of her indigna¬ tion muft of courfe be him fhe fo greatly favored. Convinced you are the only caufe of his rebellious practices, nothing but your making another choice can fave him from expiating them on the block. A fond
fond weaknefs rendersElizabeth ftill anxi¬ ous to preferve him. For my own part I confefs the fafeft remedy I ihall always think the beft." —" Ah, let him live, groaned 1, adopting at once the train of ideas he fo artfully arranged, though not for me ! Even Elizabeth is merciful, and ihall I then condemn him ? Rob the world of an unequalled ornament, only becaufe I am not permitted to poffefs it ? —I will no more haunt her flumbers— I will no more gild his—of what con¬ fequence is the name I am called by during the few days I linger in this miferable world? Inform me, my Lord, but how I can fave him."— ct The fame reafons that concur in obliging the Queen to feparate you and Effex-, faid the crafty Burleigh, will equally prevent her from matching you with any man gifted with his afpiring qualities: yet as it is not her wiíh wholly to debafe you, Lord Arlington was to me the mefifenger of her will ;" (1 fhud- dered at the fatal name) tc the bounded capacity he poffeffesis one motive for her chufing him, as it enfures her own fafety; and
and his titles and fortunes another, as thofe are diftinčtions lhe is not willing to deprive you of. You marry him, or he returns directly, and his return is the fig¬ nal for Lord Eíľex's execution." Yet weak and unrecovered, my mind wanted firmnefs to enter into all the rea¬ fons which ihould regulate my conduct. Alas, I faw no more of my own fate, than was infeparably interwoven with that of my lover.—Urged by the generous ex- ceiTes of which I knew his heart capable, he has for my fake then endangered his honor, liberty, and life. Perhaps that danger is exaggerated, hinted prudence— but oh, if not—if actuated by fear and rage Elizabeth ihould condemn him to the block, as fne already had my father, for no greater crime—my wounded foul ihrunk from the bare idea—long faintings and delirium followed—fancy realized every image fraud had prefented ; I feem¬ ed to behold every moment the chofen of my heart tried, fentenced, executed; I drenched the maimed, yet beauteous form my eyes for ever woríhipped in my tears, and
and hardly could be perfuaded, during my lucid intervals, that he yet lived, and that his fate ftill depended on my deter¬ mination. Lord Burleigh, faithful to the unge¬ nerous truft repofed in him, and weary of the taik of confining me, took a willing advantage of the weakened ftate of my intellects, to wring from me a compli¬ ance with the wiíh of Elizabeth. 1 was now releafed from my prifon, and the Chaplain and family being affembled, Lord Arlington was introduced, the con¬ tracts figned, and a tearful midnight mar¬ riage abruptly folemn ized, during which my abftračted mind purfued a thoufand diftant ideas. tiltil Wedded—loft—annihilated—the woful miftrefs of a magnificent folitude, where my inward eyes traced for ever the revered fteps of thofe who were no longer to be found on earth, one only confolation could my exhaufted heart fupply. " I die, that Effex
Effex may live—I figh, that he may breathe freely."—But oh ! fuch fighs, they feemed to tincture with blacknefs and melancholy the very air that received them. Lord Arlington wanted judgment alike to fubdue the deep regrets of filent fufferance, or to yield to them. My mind could never hold any correfpondence with his; and by this means alone was I igno¬ rant, for a time, of a calamity, which, when known, totally overwhelmed me:— Alas, my fifter, by a refinement in bar¬ barity, our fainted mother was led to ex¬ ecution, almoft at the very moment 1 was defaming you and myfelf to fave her. This climax of grief and misfortune was too mighty for my reafon—1 had paffed from fear to fear, from forrow to forrow, in fuch rapid fucceffion, that there were only intervals enough of time to render each more poignant. In one fhort month to behold myfelf deceived, defamed, and facrificed. How could I avoid blending the bitter tears of felf-love with thofe of filial duty and affection ? The idea of Effex remained engrained on my heart,and doubled
doubled every agonizing fenfation. Lord Arlington, however, returned to Court, which gave me the little relief of folitude. Severed at once from every tie both of nature and of choice, dead while yet breathing, the deep melancholy which had feized upon my brain foon tinctured my whole mafs of blood—my intellects ftrangely blackened and confufed, fre¬ quently realized feenes and objects that never exifted, annihilating many which daily paffed before my eyes. I fometimes obferved the ftrong furprize of my atten¬ dants when I fpoke of thefe vifions, but much offener I remained lethargic and infenfible. There were moments when I ftarted as from a deep fleep, (and oh, how deep a fleep is that of the foul !)—turned my dubious eyes around with vague re¬ membrance—touched my hand, to be convinced I yet exifted—rrembled at the found of my own voice, or raifing my uncertain eye toward the blue vault of Heaven, found in the all-chearing fun a ftranger.—Alas! my fifter, look no more in this fad recital for the equal minded rati-
rational Ellinor you once faw me ; fenfa¬ tions too acute for either endurance or expreflion, from this fatal period blotted every noble faculty, often fubftituting impulfe for judgment. Always fenfible of my wandering the moment it was paft, íhame continually fucceeded, and united every mifery of madnefs and reafon Spring reviving all nature, extends its genial influence even to the withered heart. My intervals became more calm and frequent. I gathered ftrength to walk into the garden—there I flowly retraced to myfelf the fatal whole, and began to find, or fancy it more fupport- able. That I had been a dupe to Eli¬ zabeth and her minifter, was too obvi¬ ous ; but I was willing to acquit the weak man, perhaps fuíficiently puniíhed in a wife like me, of having been a con¬ federate in their plots. I had long been ťhe object of his choice, and it is a com¬ mon error ?mong his fex to be carelefs of the means by which their views fucceed, provided they attain them. But my feeble efforts toward recovery requiring
requiring every indulgence, I wrote to Lord Arlington, affuring him* " 1 would make the beft ufe of mjr re* turning reafon, in forming my heart to the future performance of thofe painful duties, l a combination of fatal circum¬ ftances had impofed on it ; but that the tafle was too difficult not to claim every allowance on his part ; and concluded with hoping, folitude would enable me one day to meet him with feelings lefs embittered/' With my intellectual powers too re¬ turned my affections. The myftery of your fate, my fifter, and that of Lord Leicef¬ ter, racked my weary imagination in vain„ I enclofed in the letter to Lord Arling¬ ton a billet to Lady Pembroke. It con- rained only an enquiry for you. When thefe letters were difpatched, I bent my every thought to fulfilling the promife made in the firft. A thoufand times on my knees I befought the Al¬ mighty to confirm thofe upright fenti¬ ments he аюие could infpire; I ftrove to obliterate every remembrance of the hu¬ man
man means by which his will was effectr ed, and confidering it only in the light of his will, tried meekly to fubmit to it. Alas, the anfwer of Lady Pembroke fhook every juft determination—aftoniihment, terror, and affection were obvious in every line of it—eagerly fhe folicited news of myfelf, and the incomprehenfible means which firft reftored me to St. Vincenťs Abbey, as well as thofe which fixed me there by fo extraordinary a marriage. From her letter I at laft underftood a part of your motives for fo fuddenly ab- ienting yourfelves. I found too you had happily arrived in France, by the accounts many had received from you ; when all at once (fhe added) the correfpondence broke oft', and every effort at renewing it only increafed the fadnefs and perplex¬ ity of your friends. That Le Val, hav¬ ing obeyed the orders left by his Lord in haftening to Kenilworth, came on from thence to the Recefs ; which he found thrown open, as well as that his Lord had infallibly been there. Not able to gather any farther information, he came back to Lon-
THE' kc. 24Г London, there to wait Lord Leicefter's directions ; but none arriving, this extra¬ ordinary and alarming filence induced the faithful Steward to return to his native country, in fearch of his Lord. Fear and grief having however feized upon his heart, a bad paffage wrought both up to a crifis, and he died immediately on his landing. That every other meffenger and friend had been equally unfuccefsful ; though many had traced you as far as Rou¬ en. Nor had the myftery of your fate ever yet tranfpired, though Lord Leicefter was admitted to be dead by every body. It was given out he expired in his way to Kenilworth Caftle. Certainly he was there laid in ftate, and afterwards interred at Warwick : but notwithftanding this report was apparently believed, as hav¬ ing the weight of the Queen's credence, the ftrongeft doubts arofe in the minds of his friends and relations, upon her feizing Kenilworth Caftle, and various poifeffions of his, as a fecurity for fums due to her : a conduci little agreeing with the indul¬ gence ihe had for fo many years ihewn Vol. II, R to-
towards him. In fine, having bribed the fervants employed in blazoning this pom¬ pous ficlion, the family were indubitably affured, the body buried under the name of Lord Leicefter, was one procured for that purpofe. Almoft petrified by this myfterious and affecting recital, I ftrove in vain to ex¬ pound it ; that Lord Leicefter was dead could hardly be doubted, but when, where, or how, imagination could not fathom. Yet the conduci of the Queen proved her too well informed. Ah, where then is now my Matilda? Where then that more unfortunate being, than even myfelf? Convinced, by a comparifon of circumftances, that your death would alike have been publiihed, but that by fome undifcoverable event you furvived your Lord, 1 was led to conclude fome convent in France ftill fupplied you a grave to groan in : yet even if fo, why bury with you that information, for want of which fo many affectionate hearts have been racked r —Alas, my darling fifter, year after year have I vainly repeated to
mv-
myfelf this one affecting queftion :— Emerge, I befeech you, if yet an inhabi¬ tant of this world, and fatisfy a fearful heart which achswith fondnefs. Nay, if tranfiated to a better, and yet fenfible of aught fublunary, oh deign to inform me! How often, in the depth of midnight, when the happier world are at reft, have I called upon thee, impelled by an affec¬ tion incapable of fear—but all was awful filence—no voice replied to me—no form obtruded on the deep gloom where fight itfelf is loft—yet the days that elapfe in incertitude, pafs not in vain ; they infen¬ fibly urge forward one ordained to clear up every doubt. I dreamt of Efiex—Ah, what did I fay ? I dreamt of EiTex ?—Alas, I have dreamt of him my whole life long !— Something ftrangely intervenes between myfelf and my meaning.—No matter, I am too ftupified now to explain it.
R 1 Oh,
****** Oh, thefe cruel wanderings h —but I dare not attempt to correct or avoid them, left in the very effort reafon evaporate, and one inconfiderate ítroke íhould con¬ fufe my whole ito'ry. ****** Alas, Lady Pembroke, how could you venture to tell me that Lord Effex was married?—And to Lady Sydney too?— Gracious Heaven ! I made myfelf a wretch then only to crown her future days with unfpeakable happinefs!—At this idea, ovewhelming paffion breaks the fee- ble boundaries of reafon and religion, fweeping away inferior forrows—my mo¬ ther—my filler—alas thofe ties fo dear, fo revered, ferve only to fwell the flood that finks them. Hence, agonizing fenfations !—I have dr~3wn them up, Matilda, in one weighty figh.—Ah, furely my heart efcaped una¬ wares at the fame moment, it has left fuch a fear-
a fearful void v/ithin.—Yes, my fifter, Effex is indeed married; that very Efiex for whom I more than died,—and pri¬ vately too—the facred, tender union, had every charm but honor—for Lady Sydney he incurred the anger of the vindictive Queen.—Gracious Heaven, I thank thee for that thought—it was not forme. —No, I was dying, withering at the heart far from the moft falfe—Ah, ftill the moil beloved of his fex,—that little thought ftrangely confolcs me—rather indeed would 1 have died, than have been a fpot upon that radiant fun, my dim eyes no more muft look up to. ··* * -s % # % I perceive I have in the wild colourings of a difordered imagination, unfolded a truth my heart almoft burft with—this thunder ftroke concluded Lady Pem¬ broke's fécond letter.—How deep, how dreadful was its effect !—tranquillity, health, reafon all fled before it—to the evils fate impofes, however grievous, our R 3 nature
nature infenfibly accommodates itfelf, but oh, when the arrows of calamity are winged by love, and dipt in poifon by friendfhip the wounds they make always gangrene. The idea of deceit, ingratitude, and unkindnefs, irritated and preyed on me continually.—It brought on another Greenland winter's night, which lafted many lingering months ; and in recover¬ ing I feemed to acquire a new difpofition. —I had loft with my equanimity all fweet¬ nefs of temper—revenge feemed the only principle which fupported my being, and I nouriihed a project in fecret long ere I could bring it forward. Wonder not at this alteration, my fifter, misfortune ferves but to foften the foul, injury alone can render it callous. Ah, ftrange ! that we íhould at the very moment imbibe the vice by which we fuffer. Lord Arlington early in the fpring re- vifited St. Vincent's Abbey. My refent- ments being levelled at a dear and diftant objeci, I behaved towards him, when miftrefs of my intellects, with a melan¬ choly gracioufnefs which made him fancy them
them reftored ; and propofe taking me with him to London, when neceffity ob¬ liged him to return. I acquiefced with readinefs, as this was the very point to which I wiíhed to bring him, and my unexpected compliance, flattering the egregious felf-love that marked his cha- r aft er, he was charmed with the effect, without examining into the caufe. He was eafily perfuaded that decorum would demand my being prefented at Court, and undertook to propofe it to Elizabeth: while Lady Pembroke, amazed alike at all flie heard, and all ihe faw, fteadily op¬ pofed a project fraught with fo many painful uncertainties. But it was the paf¬ fion of Lord Arlington to mortify EiTex, and conceiving that in his power only by prefenting to his eyes, the dear object fa¬ tal circumftances had robbed him of, and others yet more fatal had wedded to him¬ felf, he foon became as interested in my wiih, as ¿f his own heart had dictated it. The Queen heard it, as 1 forefaw, with furprize, and declined it with fcorn; but ihe foon found I had fkill enough to ma¬ ll 4 nage
nage even the fool fhe had felečted for me; who perfifted in quitting the Court if flie denied him the compliment due to his birth. Elizabeth had now put her peace fo far into his power, that fne dared not entirely break with him : and fearful left the black hiftory hid in my heart ihould be publiihed to the world, were fhe to urge her imprudent refufal, fhe at laft reluctantly confented to receive me. I heard this with a bitternefs of fpirit I once thought myfelf incapable of, and brooded over the dreary triumph I had fo long projected. I âc ferrea appearing at Court from time to time, till certain Lord Effex was re¬ turned from the camp. Alas! the univerfal pleafure that return excited, aggravated my deep and increafing refentment. Dif¬ tinguiihed now with the fame partiality blizabeth once fliewed to your Lord ; loaded with honors in his own perfon, and the chief medium through which others obtained them, Ľfľex conducted himfelf with fuch noblenefs as endeared him even to thofe whom he failed to ferve : while the
the happy few who won his confidence, looked up to him as to a being of a fupe¬ rior kind. I, I alone dared filently to im¬ peach his generofity, his honor, his integ¬ rity. Wearied with an everlafling difcuf- fion of his merits in all companies, and not daring to utter one fylìableon the fubječt, left groans ihould take place of lan¬ guage, I often teftftičd an impatience Lord Arlington conftrued into an extinc¬ tion ofthat fatal paffion 1 once entertain¬ ed for his rival, and a due regard for the rights which he had acquired over me. Charmed with this idea, he became laviíh in the jewels, and other cuftomary orna¬ ments ; and the tranquillity with which I prepared to appear, lulled every fufpi¬ cion to fleep. Alas ! while they were adorning me with the cofily habiliments felečted on the occafion, I took a mali¬ cious pleafure in tracing the ravages grief had already made in my features, conftb tution, and figure ·, the firft, ihrunk, wan,. and withered, the latteremaciated beyond all concealment. I knew, however, thofe who faw me every day might deceive themfelves, in prefenting this íhadow ta his
his eyes, whofe ardent heart once touched with colours yet more glowing, a form then rich with the gifts of nature, youth, and hope—Oh, well I knew that vo¬ lumes of reproaches were contained in a fingle look 1 I entered the Prefence Chamber with an air of determination, grandeur, and compofure, aftoniih;ng even to myfelf. My foul found him ihe alone fought in a moment. EiTex was refting one arm on the back of the Queen's chair, in the fame familiar, gay, and graceful attitude I had fo often fee Lord Leicefter aflu me. His drefs, bold, magnificent, and mar¬ tial. His features (oh, thofe fatal fea¬ tures ! deftined to fubdue alike my wife and erroneous refolutions) lighted up by every emotion youth, foftnefs, pride, and pleafure ever blended. His fine eyes lightly glancing over each furrounding object, fixed at laft on me— fixed, 1 may well fay,—how deep, how deadly, was the effect of that fingle look!—his unfi- niihed fpeech to the Queen became anni¬ hilated, while his quivering lips, in broken founds»
founds, breathed forth unutterable an¬ guiíh. —Surprize, tendernefs, grief,—ah, more than grief !—agony—chafed away the bright expreflion of happinefs from every perfect feature, and flooded his eyes in a moment.------No longer remembering the place, the Queen, the circle, he ftarted forward, and almoft in the act of kneel¬ ing, felt the abfurdity, and vaniihed— with him too vaniihed every trace of that mifapplied reafon which had fo ftrongly impelled me to this ftrange revenge. They told me, I fuffered myfelf to be led to the chair of the Queen, who no fooner in the common form prefented me her hand, than I haughtily repelled it, and fixing my eyes on her with a dreadful meaning, gave a deep groan, and funk fenfelefs at her feet. Elizabeth ftarted up in high indignation, and reproaching Lord Arlington as not lefs mad than my¬ felf, in thus obtruding me upon her, retired precipitately to her clofet. Not much more fenfible than myfelf, through aftoniihment at a conduct fo unexpected on my part, he foon fo far recovered his faculties, as to take
take the advice of his friends, in trying to appeafe the Queen : committing me to the care of thofe around me. By this means alone he efcaped witneffing a fcene which touched the fenfibility of every fpečtator. My friends bore me through the great gallery, as the way moft con¬ venient ; in the anti-chamber leading to it, the unhappy lover X had taken a barba¬ rous fatisfačt ion in wounding, had thrown himfelf on a couth ю recover at leiiure. A prefentiment of the fact as the croud approached, made him eagerly ftart up, and refigning himfelf lo the impreffion of the moment, he ruíhed through them all, and fnatching me with impetuofity from thofe who held me, placed me on the couch, and kneeling befide it, fought to re-animate my chilled fenfes With burn¬ ing tears, and agonized embraces. A thoufand times, he called me Ci his dear betrothed love—his murdered, precious Ellinor,— here is fome black artifice, fome diabolical villainy in this bufinefs,"would he cry, ftarting up haughtily, and throw¬ ing his inflamed eyes around, in dread¬ ful
ful fearch of him who happily was ab¬ fent : " Oh, if I find it fo, added he, they fhall not 'fcape who fevered us !" By vague and raíh exclamations, he thus publiihed the chief incident in our un¬ happy ftory; while I alone, ftill infen¬ fible, heard not the well-known voice I once fancied the grave only could cloie ear to. This fcene, which every following mo¬ ment threatened to make fatal, was at lai? interrupted by the appearance of Lady Pembroke. The excellent underftanding of that amiable woman, had made her from the firft confider my defire of appearing at Court (even while unapprized of its mo¬ tives) as the wild ftart of an unfettled mind : ihe had employed intreaty and ar¬ gument in vain to make me give it up; finding the project alike agreeable to Lord Arlington and myfelf, ihe became filent on the fubjecl, but declined accom¬ panying me, and dreading fome ftrange event, retired to her own apartments iri the palace, to tremble for it in fecret. The news of my having frightened the Qîjeen,
Queen, and broke up the Court, imme¬ diately reachet. her there. However of¬ fended at my obitinacy, íhe was íhocked at its effects, and readily emerged to ferve and fave me if poflible. Preffing through the aftoniíhed croud, the fond extravagance of Lord Effex continually increafed, ihe beheld me in his arms, and heard his lamentation. Amazement in her collected mind is but a momentary emotion. " What are you doing, my Lord ? faid ihe, with an air which re¬ called even him—is this the way to reco¬ ver the fenfes, or reafon of this dear un¬ fortunate? remember the refpect due both to her and yourfelf, and leave her entirely to my care." Neither prayers nor anger warped her from rectitude : íhe com¬ manded her fervants to bear me to her barge, and followed me herfelf. The diftraäed EiTex held her by force, and vainly folicited leave to attend me. With a dignity which eminently diftinguiihes that charming woman, ihe chid him for a madnefs not lefs extravagant than my own, though far more cenfurable, and requefted
requefted her Lord to pay him an equal attention. The women who followed me into the barge fprinkled me with water ; that and the open air gradually revived thofe facul¬ ties, fo long dormant, they feemed gone for ever. I feebly lifted my head from the bofom of Lady Pembroke, and won¬ dered awhile how I came there. A thou¬ fand gloomy uncertainties occurred to me, and a flood of tears at laft fo far re¬ lieved me, as to fuffer my mind to fix on the fact. Lady Pembroke, perceiving I was capable of attending to her, fpared me the trouble of enquiring into the paft fcene by relating it ; with fuch comments as an enlarged mind and tender heart, would naturally dictate. My pulfes were yet low, and her gentle admonitions made a due impreflion. " Review the whole of this wild fcheme, my dear Ellinor, faid íhe, and I think you will unite with me in calling it fo. The Queen (beyond your revenge in this world) can amply retaliate on every one dear to you, for the temporary alarms and vexations you caufe her.
her. From the eyes of the noble EiTex you have fnatched away a bandage, which faved both him and yourfelf from danger. I have hitherto fuffered you to imagine him unfaithful and guilty, becaufe anger in vour fituation, muft be a much lefs dangerous emotion than love. His whole foul is once more awakened, and I would in vain now affect to deceive either—he will be heard—he will even be feen, if to the rafh ardor of his temper you do not oppofe the moft inflexible prudence— Alas, my fweet friend, what direful con¬ flicts do I fee before you !—conflicts, the ftrong and untried foul would wiih to fhrink from—how then fhall your wound¬ ed fpirit"------" Fear not, anfwered I, nerved by the occafion, my dear, my watchful monitrefs ; born for conflict, I feem only to exift by that mental action, and though 1 lament, with you, the invin¬ cible obitinacy which has once more thus involved me, yet believe me I feem bet¬ ter able to bear every evil which may re- fult from the vindication of Effex, than the dreadful weight of his fuppofed in¬ gratitude.
gratitude. For every other evil I had been accuftomed to prepare my heart. — That heart, cheriftied by tears and foft¬ nefs, ftarted not into excefs and infanity, till thofe fources were dried up. Ah, open again every fluice of pleafure !—Tell me Eifex is indeed innocent, unaltered !— Tell me he is ftill the incomparable being my youthful fancy firft woríhipped ! — Tell me, in ihort, the whole truth, and fee if my foothed fenfes are not equal to the confidence."—" How little reafon do thefe eager exclamations, thefe impaffion¬ ed tears, and glowing cheeks, give me to think fo, wiftfully replied the fweet Lady Pembroke ; perhaps were it yet in my choice, I ihould ftill refolve to deceive you, but in now revealing all, I am only before-hand with him, who, in tenderly urging a juft vindication of his conduci, would effectually re-eftablifh himfelf in your affections, to the utter ruin of the little peace Heaven has allowed you. The defperate ftate of my health at the time when yourfelf and fifter fo unac¬ countably vaniihed, made my Lord guard Vol. II, S againft
againft my obtaining that information with the utmoft caution ; and the firft alarm I received, was from the fudden return, and perpetual vifits of the Earl of Effex. Thefe were often at odd and improper hours, and generally began or ended with a private conference. A continuance of this conduct, even after I was able to quit my apartment, gave me a difguft to your lover, I did not conceal from my Lord. He pleaded the affličtionof Effex, as his only, and indeed fufficient excufe, and thus laid himfelf open to my enquiries, which foon obliged him to own the whole truth. Its deep effect on me made Lord Pembroke congratulate himfelf on having thus long concealed it.. My agitation and affection foon reconciled me to Effex, and united me in his views. Wholly en¬ groíľed by the hope of finding you, every day gave birth to a new project in one or the other. How many difappointments did v/e experience ! yet the fertility of his imagination being only equalled by the warmthof his heart, no toil difcpuraged him·, and adopting all his aerial plans, I urged
urged him to perfeverance, taking plea¬ fure in heaping fuel on a flame, pru¬ dence İhould rather have ftifled. News happily arrived of Lord Leicefter and Matilda, which renovating every hope in both him and me, I joined the deluder felf in affuring him he was deftined to reftore you to the noble exiles, and in receiving your hand, to unite himfelf at once in their happinefs and fate. The romantic heroifm interwoven in his character, made him readily liften to thefe pleafing delufions ; till a ftrange ru¬ mour reached us one day, that you had been married to Lord Arlington, in the prefence of Lord Burleigh, and left by him at St. Vincenťs Abbey. Impreffed with the ftrongeft reliance on your faith, Effex aflèrted it in the warmeft terms, and feemed ready to fly to the fpot where it was reported you yet exifted. The palenefs of my countenance reproved his implicit confidence. The name of Bur¬ leigh, the remembrance that Arlington had lately quitted the Court, that intui¬ tive fenfe which arranges and combines a S о thou-
thoufand important nothings, tending to- ftamp a fad conviction more inftantane¬ oufly than one can ртопоипсе a fen- tence, now proved^ the truth of this.— Lord Pembroke propofed going to the Minifter, and thus deciding the point. We gladly confented, and Eflex tra- verfing the room in great agitation dur¬ ing the interval, found a thoufand rea¬ fons to juftify his opinion; fo cautioufly collected, as ihewed he was not without a fecret fear. Lord Pembroke at length returned, and confirming the fatal news, added, Lord Burleigh had íhewn him the contract, figned by both. But what was the palenefs impreifed on my counte¬ nance, to that which fpread over the flo¬ rid complexion of your lover at this fatal confirmation ! The filent ftruggle in his foul, furely combined every pang of death, without affording its relief.— Speech and colour at laft returned ; his complexion now glowed with indignati¬ on, while his lips trembled with tranfports of bitternefs and grief. He quitted us precipitately, and my Lord devoting him¬ felf
felf to afľuage my forrow, was not im¬ mediately fenfible of the departure of our friend. Alas! could either of us poífibly have fufpected the fate, the untoward fate, that awaited him ! The moment Lord EiTex thus abrupt¬ ly quitted our houfe, he haftened to that of Sir Francis Walfingham ; where he found only Lady Sydney, who, fecretly as fenfible of his merit, as ihe had before been of my brother's, received him with equal furprize and pleafure. Without entering into the motives which influenc¬ ed his conduct, he eagerly tendered him¬ felf to her acceptance. Her objections were thofe of one who wiihed to be per¬ fuaded, and he would neither hear of de¬ mur or delay : his own Chaplain was quickly fummoned, and the marriage fo- lemnized in a manner, almoft as fudden and folitary as your own.—Ah, fatal marriages both ! beginning and ending in tears !—This news broke upon us with the morning. Lord Pembroke was af- tounded. I recommended to him to haften to the wretched bridegroom, and S 3 reconcile
A
reconcile his mind to the unlucky choice he had thus precipitately made, ere raih expreifions of grief or diíàppointment íhould roufe that turbulent fpirit which had made my amiable brother's philofo- phy-fo íòon give way to difguft. Well we knew the fiery foul of Eifex would fpurn at fuch a bondage, however voluntary. The contempt and coldnefs both Lord Pembroke and myfelf had always ihewn to this imperious woman, who firft intro¬ duced difcord into a family, before dif¬ tinguiihed by unanimity, rendered this a great effort of friendíhip. The time loft in reconciling our feelings to the conde¬ fcenfion, made it wholly ufelefs. My Lord found Sir Francis almoft annihilated with furprize, and underftood at once that his daughter was in fits, and Lord Eflex gone. Unable wholly to conceal the an¬ guiíh 'that preyed on his fpirits, and flat¬ tering himfelf a generous confidence in his bride might in time cement their union, by the charm of efteem at leaft, Eifex had laid open his whole heart to her. The mortal hatred fne ever enter¬ tained
с
tained both for yourfelf and fifter, ihe wanted judgment at this period to ftifle. The melancholy Effex, who fought for pity, not paffion, now incautioufly defend¬ ed her he had unwarily arraigned. The vindictive temper of his bride, blazed forth in all its littlenefs, and the quarrel rofe fo high, that early the next morning he ordered his horfes, and calling her at once, <c his error and his puniihment," he took his leave, with the bitter remark, that f< he followed in all things the fate of Sir Philip Sydney." A reproach like this might well ihock the moft callous heart: it threw Lady Eflèx into fits.—Regard¬ lefs of this, her Lord mounted, and de¬ parting with the utmoft fwiftnefs, was foon out of the reach both of friends and enemies. The Queen, who was every day more partial to Effex than íhe had been the former one, infenfibly had fuffered him to take, both in her heart and court, the place of Lord Leicefter. It was the opinion of many, that íhe intended to marry him, and the rage this ftep of S 4 his
u
his excited in her, lent force to the ex¬ travagant conjecture. Deeply refenting alike his hafty marriage, and abrupt de¬ parture, íhe baniihed his Lady the Court, лог did Sir Francis efcape a reprimand, however undeferving it. Eifex foon fitted out fome ihips, with which he joined Drake and Norris, and his fame daily endearing him more to the Queen, íhe could hardly fupport that ap¬ pearance of refentment ihe thought due to his temerity, and inceffantly languifh- ed for his return. We foon had letters from the Earl, ac¬ knowledging the raih ftep he had taken in marrying, and that to avoid bluíhing for it in our prefence, he had thus exiled himfelf. Though pride made him ftill fpeak of you with acrimony, it was obvi¬ ous from the tenor of the whole letter, that he had quitted England, no lefs to avoid feeing you, than living with the woman he had invefted with a legal right to make him unhappy. The generous anxiety he ihewed for your fifter in fend¬ ing, even at this juncture, Sir Walter Curtis
Curtis once more to Rouen, with directi¬ ons to fpare neither trouble or money to difcover Matilda, was another new in¬ ftance of that nobility of mind, which al¬ ways graces even his faults. Confecrat- ing his cares to a morenoble purfuit than love, he thus fought to fill up the void, the aching void, that blighted paffion had left in his heart. He was not born for inaction ; and foon his daring fpirit employed the thoughts of the whole nation; when Elizabeth, who knew too well its prefent exertions were but the wild efforts of difappoint¬ ment and defpair, relaxed at once from all her apparent rigor, and recalled him. Difguft had funk fo deep, that he ftill hefitated, and nothing but her peremp¬ tory command could induce him to re¬ turn. While in daily expectation of him, I received your firfl: letter. It contained not a word that could inform me of your real fituation, or the motives of an action fo eccentric, as your acceptance of Lord Arlington. Your long filence, your obfeure and laconic epiftle ; the ftrong de-
defire I had to fee tranquillity reftored to yourfelf and your lover, though happinefs had efcaped both, made mc refolve to íhew him the letter, in which he was not even named, if once the fubject arofe ; from this I guefíèd that he would moil probably conclude the union with your own free will, as well as the retired ftile of your prefent life. An opportunity foon offered ; nor was I miftaken in my judg¬ ment. Lord Effex perufed your epiftle in filent aftonifhment, and the conviction it conveyed produced a furprifing alteration in his mind and manners. No fymptom of either pride, paffion, or difappointment, from that moment, has been vifible in his conduct. Conforming at once to his fate, he profited by the indulgence of the Queen, and refolved to live decently with his wife, if not happily. Never fince have I heard your name from his lips—I knew not that it lived even in his heart ; and finding this artifice fo fuccefsful with one, 1 refolved to try it with the other. When you related to me the cruel fiction by which Lord Burleigh wrought upon your
your feelings, what purpofe would it have anfwered to inform you, that Efiex was never concerned in any plot—never im- prifoned, much lefs condemned. The high fenfe you entertained of a facrifice, appa¬ rently unvalued by him, made it impro¬ bable any explanation, or even converfa¬ tion, íhould take place between minds thus deeply and juftly offended with each other. How then was I chagrined to fee you, on your arrival in London, fondly nourifh fome unfathomable project, which threatened wholly to defeat mine ! Find¬ ing all advice inerľečlual, 1 thought it moft judicious to leave your mind to its own workings ; hoping the gentlenefs of your nature would counteract the irri¬ tation of your paffions. Alas, my dear, this fatal day fhev/s me my error, and its extent. In how many ways will you now wound the noble heart of Eíľex!— Tor¬ tured at once with the anguiíh of difap- pointed, injured love, the narrow doubts of his untraceable wife, and the arrogant vigilance of the Queen, his life will, from this
this moment, be as devoid of comfort, as it has long been of hope." The tender motives which dictated this late confeifion, as well as the paft concealment ; the melancholy inference wich which Lady Pembroke concluded, all made a deep impreffion, and opened every fluice of tendernefs, to the great relief of my oppreffed and burning heart; if No, my generous, amiable friend, re¬ turned lina moie equal tone than Lady Pembroke expected, I cannot mifconftrue conduct which has ever had the moft up¬ right intention; and in doing juftice to that of the afflicted Effex, you fupply me motives for an exertion I ihould otherwife fink under. The neceffity for prevent¬ ing a part of the evils my imprudence may occafion, will recai me to reafon, honor, and myfelf.—Oh, thou ! cried I, melting into tears, too dearly beloved, too deeply lamented, pardon me if I pafs a dark and dewy cloud over the bright ftar of thy diftinguiihed fortune : foon will it emerge with undiminifhed fplen¬ dor, while I alone fhall drop in tears, en·
enriching the earth that hides me.------ And thou too, moft favored among wo¬ men, in being born to ihare his fate, en¬ deavour but to make it happy, and ihe who has no ufe for life, but to weep thy lot, will join to crown it with every earthly felicity. I find my fluctuating mind unequal to entering farther on the interefting fubječt, concluded J, on arriv¬ ing at home. Adieu, my dear Lady- Pembroke, be this embrace the pledge of mutual pardon ; and if you have noc blufhed for the laft, as well as firft, time for your poor friend, her better felf muft again defert her." She ftrained me to¬ tne pureft bofom that ever beat, and left me once more alone with that imitable- counfellor, my own erring heart. The return of Lord Arlington, exaf¬ perated by the rage of the Queen, ani the furmifes of the Court, tried my firm^ eft refolutions : perhaps even thofe would have been unequal to the conflict, buz thai I remembered my promife to Lady Pembroke, and was determined to fup- ply a bright example to that noble lover. I n"ow
I now confidered as equally unfortunate with myfelf. I remained from this pe¬ riod wholly at home, yet not without ex¬ pecting fome intelligence from Lord Ef¬ fex; though I knew not how he could poífibly convey it. It reached me at laft in the moil extraordinary manner. Lady Pembroke feized the firft interval of Ione¬ li nefs to addrefs me. " Perplexed circum¬ ftances make ftrange emiíTaries, faid íhe, fighing,—who would have imagined that 1 ihould requeft to convey the letter of Lord tíTex to you, Ellinor ? but finding him determined on thus addrefiing you, I voluntarily undertook the truft, as well to judge of all that paiTed, as to prevent his humiliating himfelf and you to what¬ ever fervant he could bribe, and perhaps, if he erred in his choice of a mefifenger, it would be to the ruin of your peace and reputation. Hardly hearing this generous pream¬ ble, my eager eyes were fixed on the let¬ ter, and I gave the fair hand that held it the fpontaneous kifs I was at firft tempt¬ ed to beftow on the precious paper.— ' -Ab,
Ah, how affecting were the emotions produced by the fight of that well-known hand ! His language was impafiioned, and incoherent—he accufed himfelf, me, the friends of both, and the over-ruling fate which actuated all. He feemed af- fured fraud, myftery, and a thoufand yet unknown execrable arts had been com*- bined to feparate ns. He conjured me to difcover both the perfons and the means. He fpoke of Lord Arlington rather as a weak tool in the hands of his more crafty enemies, than the object of that deep and eternal refentment, which only flept till I fupplied it one. ť< Scorn.., continued he, the narrow prejudices of cuftom, and your fex, nor be wholly the facrifice of fituation. Dare to be fincere^ and think an adherence to your firft fa¬ cred vows (vows dear as inviolable) the true point of honor, of religion, and mo¬ rality. Oh, call to mind the fatal mo¬ ment when you tore yourfelf inexorably, from arms that beauteous form no more, perhaps, ihall fill.—A little confidence, a little faith, had then made fc-oth happy ¿ now»
now, alas, they can only make us lefs miferable. Yet fpeak, my betrothed love, concluded he—tell me all—Once more I conjure you, by thofe rights your falihood, or death alone can annul, tell me all ; and by your care of the life which throbs within this agitated bofom¿ give me a motive for wiihing it to linger there." As I perufed this touching tranfcript of his foul, mine melted within me.— Neverthelefs, I refolved to act up to the idea 1 had formed, and fnatching a pen* I thus replied to him : " In giving you my heart, my Lord, I own I gave you a right, in e^»ery action of my life, which though events may iufpend, they cannot annihilate.—Alas, the only right I referved to myfelf, was that of concealing aught which might render you unhappy. Suffer me then, to bury in this bofom, the combination of fatal events which tore us from each other. Need 1 tell you, they have wrung it even to phrenzy ·, for nothing lefs could have juftified the premeditated İhock I cruelly
cruelly gave you. The deep effect of my prefence—perhaps (for why ihould I conceal it?) that of your Own, join with a ftvere duty in telling me, while thus circumftanced, we muft meet no more. The world, a bufy, partial judge, delights in beholding the execution of thofe pain¬ ful fentences it impofes. Ah, chofen of my foul ! remember its afflictions can only be completed by your failing in the arduous trial, I am otherwife refolved to fuftain. Rob me not of the melancholy pleafure fortune itili allows me, in what¬ ever folitude I am henceforth buried, of thinking him I feledted from all mankind, was every thing but an Angel. Above the fiavery of opinion, I know no guide but rectitude : that tells me, Heaven itfelf will approve the efforts 1 yet make to charm you to life, to great- nefs, and to glory.------Oh, awful father of univerlal being! whofe will alone could fnatch from each the only object in cre¬ ation, fanclify to the nobleft purpofe thefe dictates of my reafon ; and form both for the feparate lots appointed us. Vol. II. Τ Elevate
Elevate the paffions of my Effex above the little motives of revenge, or malice— fublime his love into philanthropy, his rage into heroifm.—And oh, on the frail heart which now bleeds before thee, be¬ ftow patience and refignation, fo to pafs each long day as if the next were to unite me to him. I folicit not ftrength to ex¬ pel him from that heart—no, rather may he ever continue its fole object; but be his conduct fo ennobled, that when both are called with the whole world before thy dread tribunal, I may look down on the misjudging part of it, and truly fay,— Father* it is not Effex I have loved, but Virtue in his perfon." This pafiionate apoftrophe, however highly wrought, In the cool judgment of Lady Pembroke, was even in her opinion entirely calculated for the romantic fpirit to whom it was addreffed. I earneftly befought the amiable Effex to furier this to end the correfpondence, which ad¬ mitted not an indulgence beyond thofe conveyed i-o^JTP letter ; and gave it into the hands of mý friend, with that fweet fenfe
fenfe of felf-applaufe, which ever attends the confcioufnefs of having gone beyond a painful duty. Yes, ftill this dear fenfation remains to me—it irradiates at intervals the deep gloom which fteeps my foul, and anni¬ hilates my fenfes. ------1 fear I begin again to wander, for my hand-writing appears to my own eyes that of EiTex.------Oh, how tight my head, my heart feems bound!—will no one loofen the fhrunk fibres ? ------ Hark ! Is not that the Queen ? —No—It was but the deep voice of the Winter's wind. $ * * Φ * * Poor Efiex!—and did my letter thus deeply affect him? —Did he fo fondly prefs it to his lips?—Did he blifter in with his tears ?—Thofe I have ined for thee, my love, would have drowned thee had they been treafured,—" Unequalled Ellinor— Oh, molt adored!—Yes, I will purfue the bright wanderings of üiejmre mind I have afiifted to. uri&ttttr : 'á'ñd be Τ α r *lì
all fhe wiflies me from this moment."— (Who told him I wandered then, I won¬ der?—I am fure I always ftrove againft it before him)—Ah, dear and precious fentiments ! how my foul imbibes the charm!—Have you nota penknife, Lady Pembroke, to write thefe words in my heart—on my very heart ?—Oh I would have them fink deep—deep—would feel as well as fee them.—And thou too, me¬ mory, treacherous memory, for once do thou retain the pleafant tone of the voice that repeated them—not even Lady Pem¬ broke's own is fo harmonious. ****** Married to Lord Arlington did you fay ?—Oh, fuch a marriage !—What did he gain by villainy and fraud ? the in¬ supportable fociety of a wild wretch, whofe weary fpirit threatened every mo¬ ment to efcape, and leave in his arms the vile drofs he thus purchafed.—And yet they tell me it is fo—he drags me about
about with him itili, and calls me his— bis, Oh Heavens !—But I am nobody's elfe, mark that—mark that, or we ihall perhaps have murder; and I not there to ftep between the fatal fwords, and fee which will befriend me. Matilda, I have not told you about that I think —but I am not very able juft now, fuch a heavy fieepinefs feals υρ every faculty—and yet if I don't now, I never may wake more you know—but I have waked over and over again now I recollect, till I am quite tired, and fo for once 1 will fink quietly into a fiumber and dream of you. * * * * % * Let me fnatch a moment of reafon and recollection to forward my ftory.—In pur- iuance of the good refolutions 1 had formed, I requeued leave of Lord Arling¬ ton to refide for the future wholly at St. Vincenťs Abbey·, to which he read ily con¬ fented, If my offered retirement did not whollv obviate his fufpicions, it left him T 3 st
at leaft no pretence for tormenting me with them. His character I ever found of a common ftamp; credulous and mu¬ table, yet felf-willed and pafiionate: vain of the rights of his rank, without merit to diftingcifh them, he always conceived himfelf injured when another was pre¬ ferred; and the partiality of Elizabeth towards his rival, offended him almoft as much as that I had fo obvioufly ex- preffed. The generous Effex refpečted my peace and virtue fo far, that after another fruit- lefs effort to perfuade me to fee him, he confented to purfue the path I had traced out; and fatisfied of my fidelity, fwore facredly to cherifh the fentiments I had permitted him to retain. It was needlefs to aik partial intelligence of a man who employed the voice of the kingdom. I had fortunately difringuifhed one, fame had adopted. I therefore took a tender leave of Lady Pembroke, and mingling my parting tears with a thoufand un- fpoken bleffings, by an effort of virtue I admired in myfelf, 1 boldly encountered my
my fate, determined to ufe every effort to render it as fupportable as might be. St. Vincent's Abbey again received me. This manfion Lord Arlington had pur¬ chafed at the time of his marriage, lefs for any charms he perceived in it, than the advantages of the country round, which fupplied him every variety of rural diverfion. Here I at laft began to breathe, and forming my mind to that melancholy repofe, a decided deftiny however deplorable, allows, I called to my aid the fuftaining principles of reli¬ gion and morality. I turned my feeble feet towards every dwelling misfortune had pafled over, and raifing both with gifts and foothing the fad wretches (he had depreíľed, reflected back into my own bofom the comforts I had beftowed. I gathered into the Abbey fuch of their children as were weakly and deformed, and while thofe bleffed with florid health purfued the track of labour, the others were inftructed in tapeftry, point, read¬ ing, writing, and mufick, according to their fex and age. Surrounded by thefe T 4 affecting
affecting objects, who thus found in the liberality of art, a counterbalance for the unkindnefs of nature, I fometimes touched my lute with fenfations fo fub- lime, that fancy difperfed every bodily imperfection in my little auditory, and lighting up their cheeks with the fofteft tinge of the morning, I feemed to fee the human robes of wretchednefs drop off", and the light pinions of immortality wave towards Heaven.—Striving by fuch, and indeed every means in my power, to ihut out the fruitlefs wiihes for loft happinefs, which ftill beat fervently at my heart, I filled up with unceafing employments the long, long year. Often did my feet wan¬ der towards the cell and the Recefs. Often, in the well-known windings of that wood, where once we carolled toge¬ ther notes as carelefs and pleafant as thofe of the birds around us, have I paufed, my fifter, and watered with embittered tears the precious memorials of days that never could return. Confcious I could ill brook the leaft doubt or enquiry into my conduct, I made
made it an invariable rule never to pafs the gate unaccompanied ; yet Lord Ar- , lington conceived an antipathy to this folitary afylum every day increafed : I did not compliment him with a total for¬ bearance of the few amufements inno¬ cence and retirement allowed. Alas, I foon learnt from his conduct, that jealoufy, the moft reftlefs and infatiate of all our paffions, mingles in the habit, even when driven out of the heart.—Had his love known the refinements common to that paifion in a generous nature, he would have felt that an unhappy attachment is nouriihed by folitude and home: and that the perfon who once refolves to ven¬ ture abroad, ihews a noble refolution to contend with it. A thoufand times he haunted my footfteps ; he broke in upon my lonelinefs. You would have thought he had taken pleafure in beholding the tears and regrets he firft occafioned. The dotage of the Queen became every day more manifeft ; and even the blow, ihe in one of her wild tranfports gave Ef¬ fex, more difgraced herfelf than him.— His
His intrepid refentment—his uncourtly fincerity—his haughty retirement—every action of his life confirmed that admira¬ tion I ftill thought myfelf entitled to cheriíh. The unbounded power he af¬ terwards pofiefied when reconciled, (hew¬ ed the extravagance of her attachment ; and Elizabeth, cruel, inexorable to mein every other inftance, crowned to her own difgrace in this, the only wiíh íhe had permitted me to retain. After feveral ineffectual efforts to gain diftinction at Court, Lord Arlington con¬ ceived himfelf injured, and by retiring wholly into the country, perfecuted me the year round with his company. But not having a tafte for the fciences, nor any of thofe refources a ftrong under¬ ftanding involuntarily fupplies, even to the unfortunate, he exifted only while employed. Hawking, hunting, and fiih- ing fpun out the tedious years, and a ruf- tic company often clofed the evening with intoxication. That apathy my exhauft¬ ed paffions had now funk into, appeared to his undifcerning mind content; and as
as his own love abated, he fancied mine increafed; till he made a difcovery that his moft needy parafite never feconded—· that we were at length entirely happy. To confirm this furprizing happinefs, (which exifted only in his own fancy, and perhaps owed its creation to conti¬ nual inebriation) he refolved to exter¬ minate thofe ruins where I had owned I pafled my childhood, and which, he thought, ftill kept alive embittered re¬ membrances time would otherwife erafe. His Steward fuggefted that the materials were wanted to erect a manufacture in the neighbourhood, and that the cutting down the furrounding woods, now grown to valuable timber, would more than an¬ fwer to the expence incurred ; while new plantations would at once open the prof¬ pečt on that fide the Abbey, and deprive me of an inanimate object of affection, of which Lord Arlington ftill entertained a jealoufy as excefiive as prepofterous. This propofal met the ftrongeft oppo¬ fition from me on every account; it was dreadful to think of annihilating every trace
trace of my youth ; every object which could remind me I had ever been belov¬ ed or connected. To difturb the facred afhes of my early protectors, and leave them expofed to the winds of Heaven, and the hands of the laborer—But it was yet more dreadful to me to rifque the little peace I had been able to collect from the wreck of all my hopes—to wake wiihes, which were perhaps torpid, only becaufe vain—to tempt Lord Effex to break the promife I had wrung from him — in ihort, to take the moft remote chance of again beholding him—for to prevent the daily regret I might experi¬ ence at being a fpečtator of this difagree- able metamorphofis in my favourite fpot, Lord Arlington was determined to take me for that time to London. In vain I remonftrated ; the ftronger my difguft appeared, the lefs he imagined he had to dread; nor among his whole round of fuppofitions, once thought it poffible I could fear myfelf. Painful experience now reminded me that the leaft hint on this fubječt would be ruin, and every other
other reafon rather ftrengthening his de¬ fign, I was compelled to yield to it.— How readily, with every pafling mile, recurred the dear habitual impreflions ! My quickened pulfes were again animated by my heart, and I beheld even the palace without difguft, becaufe Efiex reigned there. Lady Pembroke met me with an embrace neither time or abfence had chilled. She furveyed my amended looks with infinite fatisfačtion, and fiattered herfelf, becaufe I was no longer a fpec- tre, I was happy. Ah, much erring friend, the embers of that fatal fire tears had almoft quenched, again were gradu- ally relighting !—I felt almoft difappoint¬ ed at hearing Efiex was ftill on the feas; that crowned with victory at Cadiz, his valour had only been furpaíľed by his conduct. The fenfation this news excited, rendered me fenfible of the precipice on which I ftood, and thanking Heaven moft devoutly for his abfence, I acknow¬ ledged in it my fafety. The
The few friends fortune had left me welcomed my return with ardor, and in their fociety my fubdued fpirits might have found fome relief, had I been per¬ mitted an unlimited ihare of itj but Lord Arlington faw the world in a dif¬ ferent point of view when mingling with it, and at a diftance. The habit of be¬ ing informed of every employment of mine he did not witnefs, had now grown upon him fo ftrongly that he laid an em¬ bargo on my time, and fuffered none of it to be paffed out of his own houfe, without he was of the party. Indigna¬ tion was by nature the marking feature of my foul.—Alas, what fufferings had it already entailed upon me !—This glar¬ ing infult at once íhocked my feelings, and ftruck at my principles.—Thofe traits of bitternefs and wildnefs I had ftrove to obliterate in folitude and filence, again appeared in my character. I became füllen and impenetrable—for my own fake I forbore violence and error, but I no longer cared whether I was fuppofed to do fo. — Perhaps Lord Arlington was not
not fo culpable as he at firft appeared ; for the hatred of the Countefs of Effex inexorably purfued me.—From the fatal moment when I fainted at Court, íhe be¬ lieved herfelf licenfed in her injurious fur¬ mifes; they had long known no bounds, and expecting her Lord home daily, íhe by remote and artful infinuations poifon- ed the mind of mine, to fecure her from any danger ihould Effex arrive. Weak and misjudging woman !—had íhe generoufly fympathized in the cruel events which robbed me of happinefs 3 to caft it away on her, my melting hear«: would have fpent its laft breath in wiih¬ ing that happinefs perpetuated. The pureft mind alone attracts the venom of the world, as the ether the vapors of the earth ; but like that, unlefs agitated to a ftorm, foon recovers its clearnefs, and infenfibly returns in bleffings the groffnefs it exhaled. Far from meditat¬ ing any injury to the Countefs of Effex, I refpečted too much the peace of her huiband's mind to recall to his re¬ membrance,
membrance, a wretch born but to de¬ ftroy it. Neverthelefs, I did not think virtue herfelf would refufe me one little fatis¬ fačtion, I could not but defire ; a picture of the ftorming of Cadiz had been drawn by a Spanifh painter taken there, and fent by Eflex to Lord Pembroke. Among the many portraits it preferved, his own was the moft confpicuous; and every one pronounced it the fineft ever drawn. It attracted the curiofity of all ranks of peo¬ ple, and the gallery it was placed in was fcarcely ever empty. It was fo much the topic of difcourfe, that fafhion muft have excited a defire in me to fee it, had my heart been uninterefted. Yet the unrea¬ sonable jealoufy of Lord Arlington con¬ demned me to filence ; nor dared I pro¬ pofe vifiting Lady Pembroke at this cri¬ fis, left the defire Ihould be conftrued into a proof of mental guilt. My na¬ ture fpurned at the conftraint to which I found myfelf fubječled ; and my amiable friend (fearful I ihould fuffer in my in¬ tellects
tellečts more feverely for the felf denial, than I poífibly could for the indulgence) planned a method by which íhe thought the ill-effects of either guarded againft. The Queen gave an entertainment at Greenwich, on the marriage of one of her favorites, to which ihe invited the whole Court ; and a variety of mafques, andotherentertainments were projected.— Lady Pembroke could not difpenfe with appearing there, nor could Lord Arling¬ ton. Convinced he muft for once be fafely abfent, ihe propofed calling in her barge ere íhe went to Greenwich, and conveying me to her houfe, to leave me in the gallery, with orders to her fer¬ vants to attend me home whenever I pleafed. In this project there was nothing dif- honourableor unfafe; and I embraced it readily. Lord Arlington, I knew, was to be at Greenwich in the morning, as the bridegroom was his relation, and I waited for the appointed moment with an impatience thofe only who live like Vol. II. U me
me whole years upon a look can judge of. Lady Pembroke executed this defign with as much facility as ihe had formed it; and paifing on to Greenwich, committed me to the care of her family, who were told it was my intention to copy a beau¬ tiful drawing of their Lady, fixed up in the gallery. How difdainful pf myftery is a truly noble foul ! I ftopt ihort on the threíhold, and could I with¬ out fingularity have ventured immedi¬ ately to return, I had not entered the houfe. It was filent and folitary; all but the inferior domeftics having followed ei¬ ther their Lord or Lady. The fervants who conducted me loeked the door by which I entered, to guard me from in¬ truders, to whom this picture had accuf¬ tomed them.—Ah, how lively was my emotion, to behold the features indelibly impreíľed on my heart, perpetuated with almoft the fame ftrength and truth ! In the act of wrefting a fword (the inflamed eye of him who held, it, Ihewed had a moment
moment before been pointed at the Eng- liih' General's bofom) Effex proudly looked down on the furrounding Spani¬ ards ; whofe impaflioned geftures fuppH- cated for the life of him who had thus immediately attacked the conqueror.— Ah, Heaven, cried I fearfully burfting into tears, have I thus long dreamt of glory—honor—immortality—nor confi¬ dered the dangers by which thou muft acquire them?"' " Wafte not thofe precious gems on fenfelefs canvas, faid a voice to which my heart was born to vi¬ brate,—behold thy Eflèx himfelf, thy faithful Eftex ; as truly thine, as when this foft hand firft returned his ardent prèfíure." ------Alas, my fifter, what a vi- ciflitude of powerful emotions took pof- fefîîori of my foul, and fet every feature at an event fo unexpected ! Fear and horror were however prevalent, and feem- ed to check the fweetnefs of again be¬ holding him ; for though my eyes fur- veyed his form, my heart for the firft time feemed to ihut him out, and fold Ü г itfeîf
itfelf up in utter darknefs. —" You fpeak not, my beloved, added he, oh, fatisfy my agonized heart, and let me think you know me !"—*-" Know you ? Ah Effex, faltered I, redoubling my tears, can aught but the grave obliterate thofe features from my memory ?—Perhaps even that wants the power—but a thou¬ fand namelefs miferies make me ihrink from the moment—make my terrified foul ihrink even from you."------" Col¬ led! yourfelf, my woríhipped Ellinor, refumed he, believe me I come not an artful, black feducer—chance, and chance only has crowned wiihes fo long fub¬ mitted to your will. It would not fuffer thofe facred fighs to become common air, thofe lovely tears to fall upon the earth , it fent me here to profit by indul¬ gences you were willing to beftow on my íhadow." ------" If I with-hold them from yourfelf returned I, endeavouring to collect my fluttered thoughts, impute it not to my will, but to the over-ruling fate which has torn us from each other. —Oh,
—»Oh, Effex, let us not venture once to look behind, but confider only the pre¬ fent—the time, the place, the perfon, would ftamp me with ignominy if difco¬ vered, and rob me of the only pride, the only confolation fortune has left me.— I have long ceafed to live to the world, and to myfelf ; but to my God, and you, I yet owe an exertion of the principles he gave, and you called into action." ------1 rofe deeply difordered, and at¬ tempted to draw away my hand ; but his firmer nerves obftinately retained the trembling prifoner-, and my heart yielding to his piercing folicitations for a few minutes, I fat down once more with him by my fide.—Good Heavens, while I relate this it appears a mere vifion !— Did I really fee Effex?—Were my fenfes really revived by that voice fo long for¬ gotten, except when fancy recalled it ?— Ah ! 1 have had but too fad a conviction this has been, however firange and im¬ ponible it appears.—" Wrong me no: with fuppofing I would entrap you, my fweet
fweet love, faid he, I am even now ar¬ rived in England; nor did I forefee in yielding to pique in a fecret return, how great a happinefs I íhould enfure to my¬ felf—difgufted with the injuftice of the doating Queen, (who has graced Howard with the laurels won by me) I refolved to call my friends fecretly together, and Pembroke is juft gone to collect them— at midnight all are to meet here, and agree on the way moft likely to puniih her un¬ fair decifion. By a happinefs in my for¬ tune, unguefled by him, and unforefeen by m y felf, we walked in this gallery while confulting, and when left alone, the fa¬ tigue of my journey made me throw my¬ felf on the couch in yon window,, and draw the curtain to indulge the drowfi¬ nefs with which I was feized. How fweetr- }y was my flumber difturbed, by her who has broken fo many with forrow ! Dear was the furprize with which I faw her enter; I faw the careful fervant, as if ac¬ tuated by love, enclofe her, and retire. Entranced with a pleafure which almofr. took
took from me the power of motion, I beheld her lovely eyes fixed on my inani¬ mate portrait. I faw, or rather I felt, the tender expreifions her unguarded foul uttered.—What dreary ages have elapfed fince my eyes have been thus permitted to fix themfelves on hers—fince in this dear hand I grafped the bleffing that was to have given value, as well as happinefs, to my future life!" ------ " Alas, my Lord,, refumed I, recollect that thofe pleafant days, thofe flattering hopes, thofe dear wiihes, a higher power has annihilated:— nor while the tie which robbed you of this trembling hand fubfifts, can I fuffer it to be thus preíľed in yours. Yet recollect at the fame moment, the influence you ftill have over my heart—an influence virtue alone contefts with you—Ah, gen¬ tle Eflex, fix not an angry eye upon me —you know not the wound you give>— the horrors you may occafion."——The wild accent of my voice ftruck even my own ear> and not daring to truft it with another fyllable,, I ftrove to bury ray agi¬ tation
tation and fenfibility in filence.—Alas, nature was too highly wrought.—A fufFo- cation more painful than fainting enfued, and agonized with furprize, tendernefs, and fear, EiTex would have called loudly for afiiftance. I retained juft fenfe enough to prevent him, and throwing open a window, he then fought to recover me by vows of implicit obedience. My fa¬ culties were almoft reftored, when a noife at the door made me wiih them for ever annihilated. No longer able to confider the juft or proper, I threw myfelf for Ihelter into thofe arms that gladly open¬ ed to receive me, and buried my face in the fatti n cloak of EiTex. The voice 1 dreaded rufhed upon my ear, and in- creafing my terror, caufed me to grafp my fafeguard more clofely.—A danger too preffing for apologies obliged that generous lover to throw me from him.—- I opened my fearful eyes, foon fixed by horror, to behold the fwords of Lord EiTex and Lord Arlington pointed at each other's bofoms. Why did not my frail
frail and erring reafon at this perilous moment forfake me ? Alas, I was never more fenfible of agony and terror ! I thought the cry I fent forth muft be mor¬ tal, but perceiving it infufficient either to kill me or prevent the bloody conflict, I ftarted up, and forcibly flung myfelf be¬ tween their fwords : that of mv huiband pierced my ihoulder, while his more ikil- ful adverfary wounded and difarmed him. Inured to every kind of mifery, fave this, I beheld my ftreaming blood with a dif¬ may unknown before, and from the faintnefs it occafioned, never doubted but that I approached the period fo often wiíhed for, and pronounced myfelf dy¬ ing :—Then raifing my eyes to the pale ftatue of Efiex, who refting on the two fwords, hung in filent agony over me, I adjured him to vindicate my fame, and befeeching the Almighty to receive my guiltlefs fpirit, and crown his future days with that honor and happinefs I alone had interrupted, I turned towards the er¬ ring wretch befide me, with whofe flow. Vol. II. X ing
ing blood mine mingled, and having at- tefted in broken accents my innocence, deigned to requeft his forgivenefs. I had no longer, however, power even to re¬ ceive it. Extreme weaknefs blended for once objects ever before fo diftinčt, and I ceafed to feel for the lover, or dread the huiband.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME,
