Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Feudal tyrants: or, The Counts of Carlsheim and Sargans: a romance: taken from the German
FEUDAL TYRANTS, Sfr. if c. Sfi.
PART THE SEľENTlI.
" TUE SISTERS WITHOUT Л NAME." Iľi itten bi/ tlie Alibet ofChisler-Curwald. OH! noble -Elizabeth! ypu to whom these leaves are more particu¬ larly addrest, have you had resolution sufficient to read thus far? will you possess sufficient presence of mind to enable yon to continue the pc vol. iv. в rusai
2 rusai of this writing, now that I have placed before you the most important and mpst crud transactions, which have occurred throughout your whole life, and by which your whole life has been embittered? and will you, when at length you reach the conclusion ofmy painful narrative, magnanimously sacrifice your long-cherished prejudices ; and daring to gaze steadily pn the light pf truth, will you learn to excuse and to pity, to regret and to forgive ? Before I relate the transactions, which followed the fatal interview between Ida and her lover on your bridal day, I must request your patient attention. while I rdate those inddents pf Henry pf Montfort's earlier days, which I believe to be still nnknnwn to ynu. It is thus only, that I can enable I you
ypu tp form a correct and unbiassed judgment of the case. Henry's father stood already on the brink of the grave, v, hen his son was born : he died, while Henry was still an infant. His wife soon followed him. The care of the little orphan .npw devolved upon an unde, who would have been much better pleased, if the deceased Count of Montfort had died without progeny, and had left him the undivided inheritance of his fertile and extensive domains. By his brother's will this uncle was appointed guardian to the young orphan, and destined to be his representative, till Henry should attain the age of twenty- one. This limitation of his power was by no means to Count Egbert's taste. He would willingly have disputed the в 2- legitimacy
4 legitimacy of Henry's birth; but the acknowledged virtue of the late Count¬ ess made it impossible to fix any suspi¬ cions upon her character. However, by dint of solidtatipns, of powerful pro¬ tection at Vienna, and (above all) of considerable sums of money distributed among the Emperor's favourites, he con¬ trived to get his nephew's daims set aside till after his own decease ; though the decree, which thus established Count Egbert's succession to the inheritance, positively exduded any children which he might have, and regulated, that they should only succeed to the estates of Montfort, in case of Henry's dying with¬ out heirs. Though Count Egbert was already advanced in years, and was still a bache¬ lor, nevertheless he was highly offended at
at the restriction thus established against his lineal descendants, in case it should ever please Heaven to bestow upon him such blessings. Tlie siglit of the child became hateful to him ; and in hopes of at once relieving himself from its presence, and of removing an objlade to his contracr ! ng a suitable marriage, he gave his little nephew in charge to one of his servants, whom he believed ' capable of executing any villainy ; at the same time telling him—" To do with the brat whatever he thought would be most condudve to his master's interests."—Some little remains of con- sdence prevented his declaring his wishes in more express terms ; but what he said, was quite suflicient to make his meaning very far from ambiguous. Count Egbert's servant was a native S3 of
6 p# Switzerland. He gave his Iprd to understand, that he perfectly compre¬ hended him, and made no difficulty of taking a solemn oath, that he would punctually obey his injunctions as ex¬ prest above. After an absence pf spme weeks he returned without the child ; his reward was ample; and he im¬ mediately employed it in securing a kind protection for the orphan Henry, whom he had neither murdered, nor abandoned to chance and the wide world, but had concealed him in a shepherd's-cottage near the Lake pfthe Fpur Cantons, in order the more effec¬ tually to secure him against the malice of his unnatural unde. The shepherd died, and bequeathed the child to the care of his master, the venerable Melthal. Count Egbert's servant (who occasion. ally
7
ally visited those parts in nrder tp inquire after the safety nf him, whom he had rescued from destruction) was greatly rejniced to find himunder the protectipn pf old Melthal, whp was uni¬ versally esteemed to be one of the wisest and best of mortals. He scrupled not to confide to him the secret of Hen¬ ry's birth, and they arranged together the means uf establishing him in his rights at a future period. The servant paid the debt of nature sppn after this disepvery, and the mystery pf Henry's rank and daims remained in the sole possession of Melthal. He spared no expence in rendering the boy's education equal to his future hopes ; and aware, that in all probability resolution and valour wo 1 be the only means of reinstating him fully in the б 4 possessipn
8 possession of his rights, at an early period of life he sent the orphan away from his retired and peaceful vallies, and took measures for his being brought up to a life rf arms. Melthal frequently forsook his cot¬ tage tp visit the ypung Henry, who now began to give tokens of a real inclina¬ tion for his profession, and was more distinguished in the Emperor's army, than any pther yputh pf the same age : bu' he never invited Henry to return his visit among tho mountains of Swit¬ zerland, Now, however, that the old man was sinking under the weight pf years, anc 1 "legan to feel that distant journeys were more than his debilitated frame could bear, he determined to send for the son of his adoption, that he might declare to him his real origin, and bestow a blessing
i) a· blessing on him, before they should part for ever. The young man obeyed the call : his arrival was honoured by a rural festival ; and the young people of tliose happy vallicä rejoiced in the ac¬ quisition of such a youth, who (as they supposed) was returned home in order to pass the remainder of Ws life among them, as their friend and fellow citizen. You are already acquainted with the mutual attachment, to which this festival gave rise by the meeting of Ida and Henry under the os.unied mines of Rosanna Tell and Erwin Melthal. Ί his attachment soon became public, and among others came to the knowledge of old Melthal. An union w itti tha d nigh- ter ot an Helvetian peasant (even though that peasant was William Tell, and though the maiden hersdf was the pei- 8. 5 fiction
lö
fectipn of loveliness and virtue) threat¬ ened the destruction nf all those exalted plans, which the old man had been sp long meditating in favour pf his adopted son ; and he thought, nothing more would be necessary to make Henry break off this unsuitable connection, than to discover his noble origin to the youth, and to exhibit before him his great expectations in their full splen¬ dour. He soon found, that real love makes the heart consider all obstacles as trifles, and believO every thing is possi¬ ble except abandoning the object, to whom its adoration is vowed. Henry of Montfort continued to love that Rosanna, to whom Erwin Melthal had sworn eternal fidelity: Ida, Countess of Werdenberg, (to whpm her real birth was discpvered abput the same period)
π period) preserved her attachment to the humble peasant, to whom Rosa -na Tell had pledged her hand and her affections. Each had been swprn to secrecy; both concealed the painful mys¬ tery in their respective bpsoms ; but neither suffered a day tp pass without repeating the assurance of fidelity be¬ yond the grave, though both were secretly cpnscipus, how mighty were the obstades which opposed their keeping that assurance. They were separated. The Emperor's commands summoned Henry to the army; and the old Melthal thought, that in the pre«ent position of things a slight falsehood would be justified by the intention, with which it was fabri¬ cated —Accordingly, a repprt was soon circulated, that his grandson Erwin had в 6 fallen
12 fallen at the siege of Bender It ob. tained universi! crfdit ; and Ida, (for whose sole use the artifice had been designed) doubted not, tliat her lover had perished on the field of glory. Jne person however (and that to his great mortification) was assured of the inaccu¬ racy of the report. No sooner had Henry left Helvetia, than Melthal set out tor the Castle of Montfort; he made known to the astonished Count, that his nephew was still in existence, and spared neither persuasions, nor threats to induce the old usurper to re¬ instate the true heir in his rights and titles. 'Ihreats and persuasipns from the mouth of a man of sense and probity came with a force, that few villains however hardened are able to resist & entirely..
13 entirely. Count Egbert ti embled in tlic presence of his venerable monitor ; and he piesumed not to give him such a reply, as he would willingly have done, had he followed his heari's instigations. He answered him with fair promises and professions, the trusting to whifch cost the pooi old man many a painful jour¬ ney ; till at length highly exasperated at having been made so long the dupe of his soft words and endless ddays, he assumed a tone of such authority, as. almost frightened the trembling usurper out of his senses, and made him solemnly swear to lose no time in acknowledging the daims of his nephew. Unluckily, this scene agitated Melthal so -violently, that the consequence was an 'llness, which sopn carried him to his t rave- Count Egbert did not let slip so good an oppor-
14 opportunity pf annihilating the hopes pf Henry ; he easily persuaded the un¬ consdous heirs of old Mdthal tp give up to him the papers, which attested his nephew's birth, and which, (as they seemed to relate entirely to the Mont¬ fort family), they made no doubt, were (as he asserted) his pwn peculiar pro¬ perty and np concern of any pther person's. Now then whp was so happy as the crafty Egbert ? in the full exultation of triumph he was persuaded, that the papers which he lost np time in cpm-' mitting to the flames, were the only proofs of his nephew's existence. But in this respect he was deceived. When Henry departed for the army, Melthal charged him to seize the first favourable pppprtunity pf laying his case before the
15 tlie emperor; for which purpose he furnished him with the authentic docu¬ ments pf his real birth, and tliose which fell intp Cpunt Egbeu's hands were nothing more valuable than mere copies. The favourable oppoitunity, of which Melthal had spoken, was not tardy in arriving. At the siege of Bender Henry behaved with such distinguished gallan¬ try as to make it the general opinion, that ifall his companions had performed their duty as well, the victory would have been wrested from the hands of the infidels. The emperor was npt the last ta ap- pLud his gallant demeanour. He com¬ manded him to name a reward; and Henry demanded tp be re instated in those rights, to which he cpuld establish his
16
His claim by proofs, that would- set all doubt at defiance. —" I do not wish," said he, " that my unde's conduct towards me should undergo too nice an examination ; nor during his lifetime do I insist, that my inheritance shpuld be restored to me. I only demand for the present to be acknowledged as a descendant of the house of Montfort, and for the future to be protected in obtaining those ad¬ vantages, to which I may be abb to substantiate a lawful claim.—I am nor. desirous of expelling the old Count from the station, which he has so long occupied ;«I only demand, that when his death shall leave that station vacant, I may succeed to that, which in justice is my birth right."— The
17
The Fmperor Albert, who was already aware that under the administrations of' the debauched Vcnceslaus, and the careless Sigismund (his immediate pre¬ decessors) much partiality had taken place in settling the affairs of the Mont¬ folt family, and who besides wished most anxiously to serve his favourite in every point that was nnt repugnant to justice,, hear d the above dedaration with pleasure, and praised the youthful warrior's generosity. Albert himeelf was generous, ^nd it delighted him, when others acted, as he would haye acted himself. On the next day Henry was dedared by the emperor to be a Count of Montfort, and was allotted a command suitable to his high rank and distin¬ guished services. This change of name contributed
18 contributed to support the erroneous belief, that Erwin Melthal had never been heard of since the battle pf Bender, and that in all probability he had fallen in the field. Ida therefore was sorrowing for his loss at the very moment, that he was hastening back to the beloved valley, crowned with bureis, and determined tp ■hare with her his honour« and his hap¬ piness, Alas! that beloved valley was пр longer to be recognised! dreadful storms had laid it waste; the mountain-tor¬ rents had dduged the country; and when he at length with difiiculty had reached Tell's habitation, he found it silent and empty—the dreadful pes¬ tilence, which liad moie than decimated tlie unfortunate inhabitants of those quarters, had raged with peculiar fury in
IO 'in the house of Tell; but he was in¬ formed, that a remnant of the family lud taken refuge (so at least it was rumoured) in the Convent of Engelberg. Thither Henry repaired without loss of time, but he found no one capable of giving him either present comfort or future hope. His apprehensions were converted into despair, when in reply to his enquiries Tell's humble grave was pointed out to him, and when he beheld near it two smaller graves, which (he was assured) contained the bodies of two of the old man's grand¬ daughters. It is probable, that this as¬ surance was given not without founda¬ tion, for several of the grand-children of Tell had followed him to Ergeiberg, and had there fallen a prey to t he inveteracy of the prevalent disease. The
so The wretched Henry was thoroughly convinced, that the bones of Ida and Constantia rested within those smaller graves. He knelt beside them; he watered them with his tears, and aban¬ doned himself to the most violent emo¬ tions of anguish, which love and db spair ever excited in the heart of man. It was long, before he attained any degree of composure ; and he employed the first hour, in which bis heart was sensible pf a melancholy resignation, in hastening to the Convent, and request¬ ing to know every particular respecting the death of the lovelysisters. He wished also to enquire, Why they had interred in the open church-yard the bodies of thosj angels, whnse virtues should have obtained for their tomb the most dis¬ tinguished
21 tinguished spot to be found jvithin the Convent's sanctuary. The high-sounding title of " Count Henry of Montfort" obtained for him an easy admission into the Convent- parlour; but he derived no benefit from his visit to Engelberg. The old Abbess, who had superintended the Convent during Constantia's residence, had paid the debt of nature. The present superior was totally ignorant of the history pf the sisters; and she could not help secretly suspecting, that the young-war- rioi's understanding was not quite as sound as it should have been, when with considerable impetuosity he de¬ manded as a matter of right, that the grand-daughters pf a common j ¡asant, who had conferred on tlie institution ndther wealth nnr honour, should be a!lptte4
22 allpted a tomb in the Chapd of St. Engeltruda ! Henry was at length made to under¬ stand, that Ida's remains appeared to be sacred relics in no eyes but thpse pf her lpver: the only comfort, which he npw felt himself capable pf enjpying, was to honour her in death, whom in life he had adored so truly : accordingly the greatest part of the wealth, which he had earned in the Turkish wars, was expended in raising a stately monument to Ida's memory in the Chapel of En¬ gelberg. He burned with impatience to see (united with those of the fair sisters) his own name engraved on the monument's white marble, as being- that of the person by whose directions it was raised; and he dedared, that his heart could never taste repose, till the
23
the work should be cpmpleted, and till the bones of Mary and Rosanna Tell (for such he still thought them) were removed to the honourable buiial-place provided for them by his affection. While the tomb was erecting, nothing could persuade him to quit the holy place even for a day ; and the whple ndghbpurhppd was lost in astonishment at the hpmage, which the Cpunt pf Mpntfort thpught it necessary to pay to the relics of Tell's daughters. Npthing was able to rouse him from that dangerous melancholy, to which he abandoned himself without reserve, till the emperor's commands necessitated his attendance. He arrived at Grans, and found, that while he had been giving up everything for the indulgence nf
24 of unavailing sorrow, his exalted pro¬ tector had not been equally unmindful of 1 h's favourite's worldly interests. The pld Count of Montfort had been summoned 1 to the imperial court"; where he was made I so fully aware pf the favourable posture of Henry's afiàirs, and was so thoroughly convinced, that to deny the authenticity of his claims would be fruitless, that his nephew nn sopner made his appear¬ ance, than he came towards him with open arms, and embraced him as his relation and his presumptive heir. He was then preparing to offer some ex¬ cuse for past transactions, which in their very nature were totally inexcuseable ; but the young Count interrupted his apologies, freely forgave him, and in presence of the emrieror assured his unde,
25 inde, that he might depend upon his buryinghis wrongs in silence andoblivion. Still, when the arrangements respect¬ ing Henry's succession to the Lprdship of Mpntfort came under consideration, Count Egbert earnestly insisted, that two or three clauses should be intro¬ duced, in order that the future heirs of his body might npt be left entirely destitute. Henry could npt conceal a smile, while he acceded to this pro- posal,"and the iest of the company in¬ dulged themselves without scruple in a loud burst of laughter ; tor the old man was still unpiovided with either wife or children, though tliere was scarcely to be found in all Get many a lady of beauty, birth, and fortune, whom he had not honpured with the ofler pf his hand and heart. · vol. iv. с On
26
Cn the other hand, Henry, whose agc would have suited much better with such proposals, seemed not to bestow a thought uppn the subject : amidst the throng df lovely women who graced the court, his heart remained cold as the marble, which covered the imagined ashes of his Inved and lamented Rosanna. But the emperor was not equally in¬ different, respecting his young friend's contracting some honourable engage¬ ment. —" Montfort,'.' said he, "I flatter myself, that I have omitted np means pf substantiating your daims, which lay in my imperial power: but fraud and avarice w41 frequently suggest such ingenious expedients for eluding the execution of justice, that (should I die before your unde) you might still find it
27
it no easy task to obtain possession of rour inheritance. While therefore I am still in existence and able to serve ypu, unite ypurself by marriage with some powerful family, whose connec¬ tion may support your claims, when death shall have deprived you of my favpur and protection.—Your enemies then will not dare to dispute your rights. Tell me, Henry; is the indifference, with which ypu seem to look on the beauties of my court, real or affected ? — li your heart has not as yet made its choice; suffer me to mention tp you the bride pf my selection "— Henry's reply assured him with great truth, that there existed not a woman, who possest any interest in his affec¬ tions. — " Well then !" resumed the em- с 2 peror,
28 peror, " take my advice, and offer yowr hand to the beautiful Elizabeth of March, the jewel of all our German maidens: in her ypu will find united youth, charms, spirit, sense, piety, and virtue; besides a thousand pther ex¬ cellent qualities, which are seldom to be met with but in men. Her family too is sufficiently powerfiil to secure you against the attacks of malignity and violence, to which ypu will probably be exposed after my death; an event, which increasing infirmities make me believe to be at no great distance."— Henry had frequently seen and ad¬ mired the noble Elizabeth. In truth, it was considered among the young cour¬ tiers almost as a total want of taste, and as a proof of a cold insensible heart, tn see Elizabeth and feel npthing warmer than
29 than admiration. Henry (who could make no reasonable objection to the match proposed, and who was unwilling tp confess the fruitless passion, which devpured his heart, for pne who had long since rested in the grave) could only assert the improbability of his obtaining Elizabeth's hand in preference to many suitors so much more dis¬ tinguished than himself; especially as it was reported, that her hand was already destined to the youthful Richard of Olmenhorst, her father's ward and near relation. __« Tell not me," interrupted the emperor, " of those reports, and of your pwn cpnsciousness of your de¬ merits. Go to the Casde of March ; become acquainted with Elizabeth's vir¬ tues, as well as with her charms, lam p ¡i certain,
so certain, that you will love her; I flatter myself, that she too will love you ; and what pleasure would it give me, dear Henry, could I see your hands united, before I dose my eyes in- this world for ever!"— An inteiest so warm, and expressions so- condesceudlng in the mouth of г· sovereign, could- not but produce the desired efect. Montiort obeyed, and visited the Castile of March. He beheld Elizabeth; he investigated her charac¬ tei; she inspired him with esteem, with admiration...... but not with love.— yet it was soon evident.. (will the Coun¬ tess of Torrenburg ever pardon myasser- türo r)that Elizabeth had nnt seen Henry withthesamemMfference- He felt, that he was preferred ; he could not but con¬ fess, that the possession of such an anget must be an inestimable· treasure ; and
31 and though the remembrance pf Ro¬ sanna rendered his heart incapable of any warmer sentiment than friendship, stili since that bdoved one was lost to him for ever, he resolved not tp let bis folly throw away the blessing, which offered itself to his acceptance, He de¬ termined to fulfill the emperor's in¬ junctions, and to offer his hand to tho only woman, who was worthy to fill Ida's place in his heart. But he hesi¬ tated sp long, and took so much time. before he made his declaration, that Eliza¬ beth's parents had already promised her in tL» most-solemn and positive manner to the rich and powerful Count of Torrenburg. In consequence, Mont¬ fort was given to understand (though with every ppssible mark pf esteem) that his absence from the- Castle pf с 4 Martı
32 March would be acceptable to its owner. Grieved and vexed at his having so long delayed to expiam himself, Henry departed; the heart of Elizabeth accom¬ panied him. Count Egbert had never seemed very anxious for his nephew's marriage, nnr had given himself any trouble, in order to forward his views uppn Elizabeth : the fact was, that in spite of the ill success pf his former ma¬ trimonial speculations,!« was at that mo¬ ment totally engrossed by a new-scheme pf the same nature; and the person, to whom his views were now directed, was no other than.... the Lady Ida of Werdenberg. He was not only en¬ chanted by her personal chaims, but he also took it intp his consideration, that after the Count of Tprrenburg's death she
33 the would ppssess very plausible claims uppn the valuable dpmains of Carlsheim and Sargans; claims, which (as the possibility pf his pwn death was an idea, which never by any acddent was suffered to enter into his calculatipns) this silly pld man proposed to inforce in their fullest extent. , He had already given the Count of Tprrenburg some hints of the honour, which he had it in contemplation to confer upon his family. The Count in return gave him to understand, that if his niece had no objection to the match, he should not oppose it : and as the old dotard thought himself irresis¬ tible in spite of former disappomtments (which might have taught him bettér) he was on the very point of surprizing Ida, with the agreeable intelligence, that с .5 she
34 she had made a conquest of his heart. It was at this juncture, that the news reached him nf hie destined uncle's feeing on the brink pf marriage with the Lady Elizabeth pf March. Nothing could be more contrary to his plans, than this intelligence ; Count Frederick of Torrenburg might have «hildren, and then there would be an end of all his claims in right of his bride, whom he loved not merely as the beautiful Ida of Werdenberg, but as the future co-heiress of Carlsheim and Sargans. Now then he had nothing more at heart, than to break off this, inconvenient marriage. To accomplish, this, no better means suggested itself, than to persuade his nephew to a re¬ newal pf his addresses to the intended bride; and since her hand was no longer
Sì longer to be pbtained by the ordinary methods pf splidtation, he resolved to have recourse to a little innocent arti¬ fice, which (he dpubted not) would spon bring the young people to a proper understanding. Aware, that Henry was nnt likely to enforce his suit with as much eagerness as the nature pf'the case required, the vmde in his zeal for his nephew's advantage, or rather for the »uccess pf his pwn interested views, resolved to examine himself into the state of Elizabeth's inclinations, and to place Henry's attach¬ ment to her in the most favourable light. He found ihe unhappy giti in tears; the day was already fixed, on which her hand was to be jnitedwita that pf the dreaded Cpunt nf Torren¬ burg- It was пр difficult task to'make о 6 her
36
her confess her disinclination to her antient bridegroom, and her preference for the blooming Montfort, on whom her heart had long fixed its affections irrevocably.. She alsp listened without any very marked signs of repugnance to the proposal of an elopement. Her heart and her reason both assured her, that to avpid the union which she so much detested, flight was the pnly re- spurce left her: her friend Ida had advised her adopting it without dday ; and npw the same proposal was made to her irom a quarter the mpst unex¬ pected. Elizabeth was at length per¬ suaded by the pressing entreaties pf Count Egbert to summon to her aid the youth, who (as she was assured by his unde) burned for her with the most ardent affection, and to whom l her
37
her union with his rival would undoubt¬ edly give a mortal wound. She wrote to Henry, and dedared her¬ self ready to throw herself upon his pro¬ tection. This important'step was taken by Elizabeth through anxiety and affec¬ tion, approved of by Ida out of friend¬ ship and ignorance of the world, and advised by the old hypocrite Count Egbert for the sake of his own private interest. As to Henry himself, he was perfectly ignorant of all that was going forward, till he received Elizabeth's letter : but what man with the feelings of humanity alive in his bosom would have disobeyed the voice of an angel like Elizabeth, pleading for aid, and confessing her attachment ? compassion, esteem, admiration, and gratitude, all united to produce a sentiment in his. 4 heart
38 .r heart which-, if not love, was at least very like it ; a sentiment, which doubt¬ less would soon have been love itself, had npt unfortunately.... Oh ! lady, you for whom I trace these lines, and for whpse decision (when rny task is done) I shall -.vait with such anxiety, this is a chasm, which I leave to be fiHed np by you ! Elizabeth disappeared—the lovers were overtaken—the Count of Tprren¬ burg, when the drcumstances were all made known to him, resigned his pre¬ tensions with a good grace. The en¬ treaties pf Elizabeth's brother, and some little apprehension lest her reputation should suffer injury by this elopement, induced her parents to withdraw their opposition to her unipn with young •a* Montfort. The marriage-day arrived: Ida
39
Ida flew tp congratulate her friend ; and instead of the enamoured bride¬ groom and the happy bride, she beheld Erwin Mdthal stretched pale and sense¬ less at the feet of the alarmed and asto¬ nished Elizabeth. As Elizabeth saw Henry's colour change, she sprang to¬ wards him, and clasped his hand. Has¬ tily he drew it back with a look pf horror, sank pn the ground, and closed his eyes as if to eternal slumber. She now turned to Ida, who (sup¬ ported by her sister) appeared more dead than living : she demanded th« meaning pf this extraprdinary scene. Terror and astonishment sealed up the lips pf Ida ; and Cpnstantia alsp was silent through, dpubt, whether an expla- nation just then would be adviseable. —" A strange instance nf lpve at first 2 sight!"
40 sight!" whispered to her next neigh¬ bour, a "irgin aunt of Elizabeth's aged forty-seven. —** And mutual too, as it seems !" replied the plump dowager, to whom this audible whisper had been addrest. Ha ! at those words how high swelled the proud bosom of Elizabeth ! How fiery was the glance like lightning, which she threw upon Ida, as she turned away! How contemptuous was the look, with which she eyed young Montfort, in whom the care of his servants had just produced some faint signs of returning animation. Her impetuous spirit had always rendered her top susceptible pf sudden and violent passion, and (to confess the truth) had already betrayed her into the commission of many a hasty and Ш -judged action. Without waiting • for
41
for further explanation she rushed out ofthe chapel, while her eyes flashed fire as she went. She was follpwed by all those, who envied the sisters ; and who were npw resolved to devote a day, long destined to happiness, to the nourish¬ ment pf suspicion and resentment, and who were prepared to use their utmost arts to render the wounds lately given to love and friendship incurable. I will npt attempt tp describe the state pf Ida's mind. Constantia (who, though npt more able to unravel the mystery of these unexpected occur¬ rences, was yet more collected than her sister) judged it prudent for them to withdraw as "soon as possible from the curious gaze of the by-standers. Ac¬ cordingly, she conducted the bewildered Ida to her apartment, and then hastened to
«2
to that of tht bride, in order that she might at pna offer explanations and receive thţm in return. She had not yet sufficiently ret over ed frpm her first astonishment tp cincdve, hnw strang an impression to her iistex'a prejudica the sçeoe, Yşüch had jus. taken place, must hiiWBKidsuponEUzateth: mucMesadid (hesupposeit possible, that her friand cpuld act so unjustly as to show resent¬ ment agamst herself for an actipn, which (even if wrong) had at any rate been committed by another. Her surprise therefore was great, when she -was refused admittance to Elizabeth, with every mark of harshness and indignation.—She returned sorrow¬ ing from her fruitless embassy; and she had scarcely regained her pwn apart¬ ment, before a Chamberlain made his appear-
4Ü appearance there to inform the risters ih the name ofthe Lord of the Castle, that in consequence pf Elizabeth's sudden indisposition, and of the late confusion (the cause of which was too well known to them to make any explanation on that head necessary) it wouldbe advise» able for them kmiediately to quit a house, in which certainly no bridal cere¬ mony wouldbe celebrated at present. In the mean-while, Henry pn opening his eyes cast his first glances eagerly towards the spot, where he fancied, that the spirits pf Tell's grand-daughters had appeared to him ; they were no longer to be seen. He was npw confirmed in his visionary nptions, and implicitly- believed, that he had really seen an apparition.—He inquired for Elizabeth : the answer was, that she had quitted the
44 the chapel evidently in displeasure; very little reflection was necessary _tp make- him aware, that the singular part which hehadjustbeenplaying,made itnecessary for him to hasten to his bride withput dday," and explain the cause pf his mys¬ terious behaviour. While approaching Her chamber, he considered with him¬ self, whether itwould, or would not, be adviseable to inform her of the vision« which had just appeared to him, and to lay open to her the secret history pf his early life ! His deliberations, however, were qnite superfluous; for he was denied admittance to Elizabeth with no less positiveness and contempt, than had been shown on Constantia's applica¬ tion. He felt, that Elizabeth had some rea¬ son to think herself insulted ; and in¬ stead
il stead of repaying her scorn witli scorn, he lost no time in justifying himself in the eyes pf his pffended mistress.—A personal interview was denied him ; the explanation therefore could only be conve /ed in writing ; but Henry was not sufficiently an adept in penmanship to permit his finishing so long an apo¬ logy with as much expedition, as the nature of the case made desirable. He resolved therefore to employ a secretary; and as upon inquiry no ready writer was to be found in the whole Castle except the family Chaplain (whom I have already mentioned as the secret ally of Father Hilarius, and as being entirely in the Count of Torrenburg's interests) he requested his assistance. He might have chosen from among ι thousand,
46 thousard, and yet could not have con¬ fided his affairs to a more improper instrument. However, Henry dictated, and the Friar wrote as follows.
47
Henry to Elizabeth.
You are offended, my beloved!— Nay, even to myself it scarcely appears credible, that when I stopd with you before thealtar, I shpuld have withdrawn my hand from yours ; that I should have hesitated to pronounce the words, which wuuld have made you mine for ever ; that when you looked upon me, with eyes of love, I could have looked on any pther than pn you. — Np ; this never could have happened by natural means ; the enemies of our love must have employed infernal arts to delude my senses and interrupt my happiness ! —What past this evening in the Chapd must certainly have been produced by magic ;
4β magic ; no ptherwibo can I account for it! Elizabeth, my heart was once ano¬ ther's : my heart would still have been another's, had not death torn her from me. But my Rosanna has iong been an angel in Heaven ; the truth which I swpre to her, and which (While she had 1 life) I never would have violated, could not surely extend beyond fhe precincts of the grave. Surely that happy-pne, to whpm npw all things must be known, must alsp knpw, in what degree I pnce loved her, and in what degree I now 'pve Ehzabeth : Surely, she cannot envy ypu, my beloved, the hand of your poor Henry; surely, she would not forsake her own mansions of peace and bibs, to forbid pur union and destroy our hopes of happiness ' And
m
And yet, Elizabeth ......! Mark, my beloved, and concave my astonish¬ ment, my horrpr !—And yet, Elizabeth, I swear to you mpst solemnly, that this evening as ypu stood at the altar, I saw the'form of the long-deceased Rosanna Tell approach, and place the myrtle jwreath uppn ypur forehead; while by her side stood a second apparition in a religious habit, the exact lesemblance of Mary, Rosanna's sister, who is buried with her in the same tpmb! But strange as this circumstance ap¬ pears, let it not. disturb ypur tranquil¬ lity, my EUzabeth, npr prevent an unipn, pn which I depend fpr all the happiness pf my future life. If the spirit of Ro- sanna really appeared, she came not to destroy the bliss of the man who adored , her, but to give her celestial sanction : vol. iv. d but
SO
bul for my own part, I am persuaded, trwt tute appearance wás some illusion, some contrivance of those who envy us, some Magies} appearance produced by monastiť atta in tne night and secrecy of the Cloister. « < - ia., Beloved Eliiabeth, admit me to your presence, and every point shaU be ex¬ plained most fully. At present I must break tiff, for the person (whose pen I «mploy to- trace thete Erres) his taken offence at an expression whteh acciden- tally escaped me, and refuses any longer to rertefcr me his' services.
51
I» truth, Henry's ôčcléslaíiical «««- tary was greatly displeased at the words *' monastic arts :" howev«, an apology and some pieces óf gold not PalybrbUght the avaricious Monk into good-lmmour ágain, bút éve» induced him tb offer to be the bearer Of his letter, in, case the yotirig Lord Pf Montfort should still think teroper tö send it, after lie'iring what hé (the Monk) ,had tö say upon the subject. Hemy gave him perrrti<sion to speak, and promised fö be attentive. -<-" You" believe then,?' begått Father Jacob, "thut the form, whose appear¬ ance so greatly Surprized you ht the Chapel belonged tp a deceased person? n 2 —Count
52
—Count pf Montfort, it was the living Rosanna, Tell whom you beheld ; Ro¬ sanna, who has now exchanged that name for the more Jofty one of Ida pf Werdenberg— Упи start?— Ypu believe what I tell ypu tp be impossible?—Nay, Count, with all my heart ! Number me (if yuu like it) among tliose, who wish tp impede you in the gratification of your new amours : it would be ill- breeding in me to force upon you the conviction of a truth, tp which ypu are evidently so unwilling to give credit!"— The crafty Friar rpse, as if about to quit the apirtment. It is superfluous to say, that Henry (whose head was now assailed by astonishment from a new quarter) did not suffer him to depart.— Father Jacob possest the whole of Ida's history, except in so far as related to her ad.
S3 adventure with Erwin MelthatVne re' fused to communicate any portion of hie knowledge, till this hitherto tuljiisptsted circumstance had been, rally exptøhédtri him. This demand waj compliedHVitrfJ evføry dreümstancä'Vai'COnfidedto Iubi; andwith' astonlehîiıg 'quickness nordlie cerned In ţhla 'narrative tbe means ofat* tainlng an object, which he and his honest? ally,the keeper of Count Frederick's con¬ science, had very nearly at heart, bur Which they had found themselves corul pellèd to abandon in despair, -id ' ' Montiert had finished;— Atid . now tbeMoilk exerted ι all his eloquence to' convince his auditor of that, which Henry's heart was already most anxious to believe ;''namely, that his first oaths pf love/ought to be the most binding; that it was no less necessary ¡to kçep his faith to Ida of Werdenberg than to Ro- *амп p S sanna
Sf
•алвд'ТеЦ! and that № giving that hand toi3wab#h, whisk h? had »wwä 1» g«» *»!»»Ьег-, y¿0ifW only fietv« tfí (рттщрйт тШ* ňiM> ahmim- Ьк,»п4ассиг«ее1, Η«ιμ7 was quite of tkt Monk's opj- tWHilçng brfpre his pratiQn came toan «sdi Of much more soneequcnce did it now appear to him № røiewbi? yo»s to ib» k»g-lo3t Ute-found Id», tinto to afrpeajK the aidigiiMio» of tJutoficnded EHaabsth. Joy and aasieţy almost bereft him of understanding· Tbat- Moivk wia commiesio ά to procure for ЬЪ an úntriodiíte interview with Idut. and when Father Jacob returned ta him with the lufornnation, that an hour had already elapsed, since the Damsels of ■Werdenberg departed from the· Castle, he forgot (ц hia impatience to rejnin i i hia*
ss
his mistres?) sq completely аЦ ideaj of prpprk'ty, pf conåderatjoa'for the feel¬ ings of hjs hrid,«, аоД, fif the miscon¬ structions to which he was making his, conduct liable, that without farther deliberation he sprang upon his courser, and pursued the way, which the Monk pointed Out to him as tha^ by vrhich Lê might the most speedily overtake the sisters. In the hurry of his enthusiastic affection, he forgot -every thing else ; he left no apology for the Count of March ; no explanation for Elizabeth ; he even neglected to remind the Monk to deliver his letter, or to desire him to clear up the mystery of his conduct. In fact, Father Jacob had other busi¬ ness upon his hands, than to extenuate Montfort's offence in the eyes of Eliza- D 4 betli.
56 beth. bunediatdy on the youth's departure, he lost dp time in transmit¬ ting the following letier tothe family- priest of Tprrenburg
57
Fethet· Jacob to Father Hilariui'. ' BzrORE this letter can reach)you, loubt less the occurrences of this evefiing wffl be, already known (to урц : but legra from me some ι drcumstanţe% which are as yet a secret до all but myself, and the, principal actors m them J -rErvyin, MelthaJ, that peasant ypu(h (tt whose perfecţiona and on whose attach¬ ment ypu have heard Ιφι dwell with such enthusiasm, proves- ta? be пр pther than Henry pf Montfort.— Euzabeţja is st^l ignorant of thjs, prevjqus.acquaint¬ ance, and must, remaja sp;. wjth the sisters she islikeb/ tp have no immedi¬ ate intercourse, and by my management; ' d S Henry
59 Henry has left the Castle of March in pursuit of Ida, thrnujh-to gain time, I thought fCBpid/Hit tcjgå^tn» ». false direction, and he и пот upon the road tp the half-ruined Fprtress, which the OŕmtťofTorrenburg possesses inThu- Jejiet· vetir patren lose ne» time i» Ьа* tenrflg hither—I will take care, tbt he shan fed trie family disposed te consider Ш renewed proposals as a most honour¬ able-«ind fortunate event ; and I doubt not, in the first tumuk of her pussions; ef disappointed love, violated friend¬ ship, and raging jealousy, Elizabeth may be easily persuaded to an tvnipn, which will make her mistress of i«at rival's fate, to whose pernicious beauty She »scribes' the less pŕ her ewn promised happiness. ' Be
Л» Be assured, it würbe greatly hMnfor your advantage and for mine, that Elizabeth should become Count Freder¬ ick's wife. He is advanced hi years; it is highly improbablf, that he should have children ; and a rich betraest is already secured to our convent in the event pf his dying without legitimate descendants. On the other hand, should he remain rmmirried, there is every probability of his acknow¬ ledging the Damsels of Werdenberg as- his heiresses ; a step, which would rttin all our hopes for ever, but which (you may depend upon it) he will never be· suffered to take, if trie jealous artd in¬ censed Elizabeth' becomes Countess of Torrenburg. ' With regard to thes* hated girls, whose intrusion в so-gready adverse tn D β our
60 pur interests, no means must be neglect¬ ed for expelling them from their guardian's house and favour. As to Constantia, I look uppn her as little dangerous, being (tn judge by every appearance) entirdy devnted to a reli¬ gious life: it would therefore be unnecessary to mplest her, were npt her fate sp dosely connected with her sister's, that it is impossible tp separate the pne frpm the pther. But it is against Ida that all ypur skill must be directed.—Doubtless, Elizabeth's letters are stiU in her ppssessipn—Seize them, either by art or violence, it matters not which: they must necessarily contain matter suffident to convince Cpunt Frederick, that it was by her advice, that her friend was perjuaded to dope frpm him with young Mpntfort : he 1 will
61 will lcok upon her as the traverser of his views uppn Elizabeth, and that will be suffident to banish her from his favpur—this will be greatly confirmed by the appearance of the sisters at Eliza¬ beth's wedding, which he~ cannot but consider as highly disrespectful tn him¬ self and his feelings ; but ypu must carefully conceal frpm him, that Ida con¬ fined in the solitude pf Torrenburg Castle, and Constantia buried in the silence nf her Convent, were both ignp¬ rant of the rejected lover's name till after their arrival at the Casde of March. The Count is noble-minded; but he is proud, irascible, easily induced to believe the worst of those who sur¬ round him, and obstinate in retaining prejudices once received—these are the parts
62 parts of hie character, upon which it muat be your care ω work, till you have kindled a flame against Idam his bosom, which all her tear* will be unable to extinguish. Oh the pther hand, you must assail Ida with terrors of her uncle's indignation, and with threats of an immediate union with her superanuated admirer, Count Egbert í ind when you have terrified her sufficiently to prevent her conduct from being regulated by her understanding, assure her, that there il no way of avoiding Count Frederick's wrath and pld Montfort's marriage- bed, except Sight from the Castle of Torienhurg.—That step once taken, Ida is mined; Constantia may easily be convicted oi* partidpation in her sister's. actions; the ungrateful girls will be· banished
аз banished from their uncle's favour irre¬ vocably, and then the game will be all pur own Farewell, and let me hear from you· with, alt ddtgeuce.
64
The unconsdous subject pf these abominable artifices was in the mean while journeying homewards with a heavy heart, doubly afflicted by the injustice of her friend, and the supposed perfidy of her lover. She had ascer¬ tained no more before her departure from the Castle of Maich, than that the man, whom she had so long believed to be a peasant's son, was Count Henry of Montfort ; but it still remained unex¬ plained, how Henry could have so totally forgotten his former vows, and have offered his hand to another. The more that she reflected, the less reason did there appear tpdpubt, that upon disco¬ vering his own noble origin he had aban-
65
abandoned all thoughts of an union with the low-born daughter· nf William Tell. In the ppinion of love thie fault was not to be excused ; she in some degree obtained a forced tranquillity by resolving, that his conduct had rendered him totally unworthy of her ; and that even should the inconstant Henry retura to her chains, it would be beneath Ida pf Werdenberg to accept that hand, which, he had insolently withdrawn from the; humble Rosanna Tell. Constantia accompanied her sister for some part pf her journey, but was at length unwillingly compelled to separate from her and return to her convent, attended by the vasSals whom the Ab» bess of Zurich had sent for her protec¬ tion . Ida reached her guardian's Casüa without meeting any adventure. ; but» mistake
ее mistake of ber íttendínts occasioned her № go№itdderabIy put of her road, aud. thb delay gave time for Father Jacob's letter to precede her at the Caed* of Torrenburg, Fither Hilariui tortuQ time in Kuehing fot Eliasbeth'» letter«; he found theffl, and found tbv4ß aba inch, ш he wished, Borne, which. would havs exculpated Ida, and made against Elizabeth, ha cornroittedfo th« fiamé·, and then lost no time in commu¬ nicating the rest to hi» patron. Count Frederick had returned home on Elizabeth's bridal-day, which he in¬ tended to pass wjth his niece in silent melancholy. He had resolved to inquire into her character with more attention, than he had done hitherto ; and as his late disappointment had made him give up all thoughts of marriage fpr himself, it
67
it was his intention tc declare that the damsels of Werdenberg were his future heiresses, in case they should prove to deserve to great a distinction. On his arrival he inquired for Ida; he was informed, that ebe was gone to the wedding of th« young Countess of March—iHe started in astonishment, and father Hilarius shook his head with a «mile. Frederick enquired, how thé girl could have ventured to sake й Itep, which he could not bnt look npon »s a marked token of disrespect ? or it' she we» ignorant of his having payed Ms r.ddretsei to Elizabeth, why had not father Hilarius prevented her from unconsciously offering him this public affront f the- worthy Chaplain shrugged his shoulders, and answered that— '* Good-lack I he was too old and to» simple
68
limpie to look after a young wanton girl with the devil (heaven bless usi) in her head."—. ' - ι —" Shei supped laway," continued ηβ,ϊ* without saying a'word of her in- tention ter mej or to any ónét— and as to bet ignorance of yourl.-adresses.. ¡ .*.· Blessed,St. JBatnabasl-ehelknewirlruch moreiabout «hem,.fian.lidld myself 1-^- Why,, my lord, I have just discoveĽed, that sheihaa fong kept up a seCr*t correspondence with the Lady Elizabeth; and I can bringyou the most undeniable proofs, that you would at this moment have been happy in the possession of ypitf bride, had it not been forilda, for the seif-CTeated heiress of Ţprren- burg, Who instigated her innocent friend to refuse yout band ; who fooled her inţg an imaginary passipa for, youpg Montfort ;
6ü
Montfolt ; and when she had entangled the poor Elizabeth too closely iu this intrigue tp admit of her retreating witli honour, who finally persuaded her to adopt the disgraceŕbl measure of an dopement.—Yet to say truth, there is some excuse for Ida's conduct, since she Conld not but heartily wish to pre¬ vent a marriage so extremely detri¬ mental to her own views and inter¬ ests."— Frederick heard every word with increasing amazement. In a voice of fury he demanded, that the proofs, of which the Monk had spoken, should be instandy produced.—Father Hilarius then gave Elazabeth's letters into his hand, accompanying them with some reflections on the danger of teaching women the art of writing; at riesame time
70
time reminding the Courtt T how strenu¬ ously and how frequently he -had re¬ presented to him, that in the hands of so forward a girl as Ida, there could not possibly be a^ more dangerous in¬ strument than-a pan ; and that to leave her to the fall as ignorant as he found her; wa« ad object most desirable both for the Cpunt and for herseif.-^-But his remonstrance» had been disregarded; Ida was taught to write ; and new seo the blessed effects pf it ! Elizabeth's hand was nnt to ba mis. taken; and whde the Count gazed uport the writing so well known to hiiflv the malicious Priest inflamed his resent¬ ment still further by relating various passages of Ida's aariy life, to' which he wdli knew how ts give that сЫош*- ing, Which 'suited IWSf wit* hilt designs ; 3 he
7t
he related, how during the time that sho was believed to be Tell's grand¬ daughter, Ida had greatly shocked her companions by her fite and dissolute 1 manners; he proceeded to state, that in consequence her guardians had been obliged to separate her from Constantia, lest the pne shpuld be perverted by the bad example 6f the pther ; that regret at finding alt ЬЫ efforts to reclaim her in vain, had broken the heart pf her adopted father, and sent him with sorrow to his grave: that she had carried pn an intrigue with a man of low birth, to" Whpm she was still at¬ tached; and that in all probability it was her intention to enrich this peasant with the valuable inheritance, which she expected to derive from Count Frederick's bounty. —« And
·?2
—" And then" continued Father Hilaňus, casting a malicious side-glance upon Ida's claims; " and .then how easy will it be for the young fellow to , vamp up· spme fine story pf an unex¬ pected discovery, and pf a rdatipiiahip to-some illustrious family long con¬ cealed, and thus qualify himself for assuming openly the proud name of Count ofTttrrenburg,in right of his wife, her generous unde's heiress!"— The Cpunt bit his lip: yet after a long silence he answered, that Ida's parentage and claims admitted pf пр doubt ; and that he wished most hearti¬ ly, that she were any other person, in order that in pronoundng his judge¬ ment upon hei. conduct, she might have been entided to less consideration and re'Tect. —" But
73
—" But in spite of all her faults," siid he, " I cannot deal harshly with a per¬ son, whp is the daughter ofmy deceased friend, and of the woman whom I pnce adored. Tet pn the Pther hand, such mean artifices, such acts of interested baseness, of such flagrant ingratitude, ought not to escape without due punish¬ ment.—Ida has destroyed the happiness, whicli I promised myself in marriage ; it will be no more than a just vengeance, if I destroy hers in return.—Should she fail to exculpate herself, she shall either be immured for life within the walls of a Cloister, or give her hand without delay to the old Count ot Montfort, from whom I this morning received proposals for her hand."— Vvhcn he pronounced this sentence, the Count was standing in an open vol. iv. e balcony :
74
balcony: as'the last words .reli from his lips,he saw Ida with herattendants riding slowly towards the Castle. He hastily drew back ; and feeling, that he was at that time too much incensed to give her cause an impartial hearing, he ordered Father Hilarius to fill his plate —the Friar exulted at this command : he knew well the generosity of his patron's nature, and dreaded that irre¬ sistible conviction, which ever acenm- panies the pleading of injured inno¬ cence: he therefore heard with great satisfaction, that the cause was not to be tried by a judge, the goodness of whose own heart would naturally in¬ dine bim to the side of mercy, justice, and compassion. Ida had scarcely divested herself of her bridal robes, when a procession l entered
15
entered her chamber composed of tr* chief officers of the doilnťä houséholek and headed by the reverend Father Hihrius. The formal manner of then- entrance, and the gravity wliieh reigned in every countenance, were alone suf¬ ficient to communicate to her mind some degree of confusion and alarm.— How greatly were these emotions in¬ creased, when tlie Chaplain began Irà examination, which was preceded by a terrible description of her guardian's »nger, andwhich consisted of questions so artfully worded, that taken by sur¬ prize and bewildered as she was, she found herself constrained either to re¬ turn ilo answers at all, or such as were apparently to her disadvantage.—Sen¬ sible of this at length, she entreated, that time might be allowed her for ' e 2 recollection :
ϊβ recollection: the' greatest part of her auditors were well inclined to the poor suppliant, and felt for her the moat- sincere compassion. The Monk there¬ fore did not dare to act towards her with all the harshness, to which hi» heart prompted him ; the further exa¬ mination of this aftair was postponed to three hours after sunrise of the next day, and Ida was left alone. It was midnight.—Ida sat weeping, while a variety of unpleasant images crouded before her imagination, and retraced the many singular and painful transactions, of which that day had been a witness. Interesting as had been the events which took place at the Castle of Marcii, still her mmd was most occupied by those more recent ones, which sur¬ prized her at her return home.—" Her guardian Elizabeth's rejected bride¬ groom."—
77
groom." —" Herself accused of having broken offhis marriage."—« Somt oflèrr ces laid to her charge, whidi were totally incomprehensible,"—" Otbert, pf which she was conscious, that her unguarded conduct had made her but too liable to Ъе suspected.'— 1 ' The Count's violent lesentment."—* His threats." —·" Expulsion from the Casde pf Tprrenbuig.'*—" The only choice, allowed her, the doister for life; or an union with the decrepit Count Egbert."——Poor, poor Ida ! how wilt thou find a due to guide thy bewildered steps aright through such a labyrinth of dangers I Buried in these melancholy reflec- ' tions, she heard not the door unlocked, by which her apartments communicated with the public gallery.—At length a hand gently removed the handkerchief, a__ в 3 with
та
«ţbb, vika. ihe had covered hee face. She looked up, and beheld Father Hibriu*. —* Alas ! my dear child," said the friar, » what avails your weeping?—- fcaiüevd me, your afiairs are not in ao Ш a Btate,i«»you may imagine ; though I can¬ not but confess, that appearances are greatly against ynu. Your secret corres¬ pondence with Elizabeth has been, inter¬ cepted: I have tried in vain to convince yonr guardian, that you were ignorant of his having any concern in theartair. Then he leoks on your presence at the marriage, as a personal and designed affront. It appears indeed from pn« pf her letters, that your friend herself was in great doubt, whether you wpuld ac¬ cept her invitation. At the very timé •ť her giving it, ahí pointed out the inconveniences
79
Inconveniences of your coming; she warned you, that you would incur your uncle's anger ......And yet in defiance ef this warning, you went !— As to the confusion, which your pro¬ since produced at the wedding, of that we can make put nothing ; you either will not, or can not explain the mys¬ tery -, one thing only I can collect from your account, which is, that you have made a number of enemies there, who will spare no pains to injur« you, atad to prevent your, innocence from being made clear to the Count.—For that you are innocent, I have no manner of doubt; and I will venture to assert, that in process pf time....But time indeed, Heaven help us I that is exactly what is refused you—the punishment of your supposed offences will be im· E 4 mediate !
80
mediate ! the old Cpunt of Montfort arrived here not an hour ago ; and your guardian is determined, that to¬ morrow shall dedde the destiny pf your future life. Of your guilt he is thoroughly persuaded, and you will be compelled to-morrow to give your hand tp Cpunt Egbert, if he will condescend tn accept it ; or if the old man thinks that ypur conduct haa now made you unwnrthy pf such an honour, you will be immediately confined for life in the Convent of the Grey Penitents near Count Frederick'sThuringian Castle."— — я And what then must be donei" cried Ida, wringing her hands in fear and agony í —" How can I escape so dreadful a destiny ?"— —" Escape ?" repeated the Monk.— " Ha ! right ! right ! my dear child, it was
81 was surely Heaven, that inspired you with the thought !—Yes ' ypu must escape ; ypu must fly frpm the Castle of Tprrenburg 1 "— ' —" Escape? fly?"—repeated the bewildered Ua; « and whither must J go ?"— " Tp a retreat," rephed the Monk; ** where you may wait in security, till ypur unde's resentment is appeased, and your innocence can be made dear to him.—But ybu shall knpw mpre, as we gp alpng. I know a secret passage,· by which you may quit the Castle unobserved. Follow me, for you have not a moment to lose !—Nay, come, come! away!"— Thus saying, he caught" the lamp from the table with one hand, and grasping Ida's arm with the other, he e 5 drew
№
drew her from the chaeiqei.—Bewil¬ dered, terrified, she had net presence •f mind sufficient to form a resolution ; and her exhausted frame was unable to resist th» farce, with whieh he urged ber forwards, a» she followed bim through the kmg galleries, rather pas- riydy subirattmg, tha» wUfutt/ ton- aatntingto his design. i formerly mentioned, that Count Frederick still resided, on the- spot, which had once been the habitation, of the antient Counts of Carlsheim and Sargans, Te this he had chiefly been induced by the beauty of the situation : perhaps top his pride was secretly grati- _ fied by the recollection, that his resi¬ dence was the same with that, whence hit ancestors were accustomed to extend the sceptre of command over the surrounding
83 surrounding provinces, and to set at defiance the resentment pf many a sovereign prince, who possest much more lofty-àoundmg titles but much less real power and strength.—Still the gloomy, half-ruined Castle of Sargans vras by no means; a mansion suited td the taste of its modern possessor. Ao cordingly he had levelled to the ground the remains of a wing of this· jigantio pile, which had formerly been destroyed by fire, and had erected in ¡ts place at stately palace, at once noble in its ex¬ ternal form, and convenient in its in¬ terior accommodations. This was called the Castle pf Torrenburg; while the forsaken halls and towers of Sargans were still eUstinguished by the name of the '* Dpnat-Fortress." the two build¬ ings were separated by cnurts pf con- ■ ε 6 sidei able
84 siderable extent ; the antient one was in a great measure suffered to gp to ruin, except a few apartments whidi were kept up for the accpmmpdation of domestics, when on solemn occasions the number pf guests was too great to be received within, the walls of the Cpunt's pwn residence. Superstition had not failed to ex- .tend 1er dominion over the Donat- Fortress.—Traditions respecting the for¬ mer Counts pf Carlsheim and Sargans, which had been handed down from father to son, and with which you, Elizabeth, are already well acquainted, furnished subjects sufficient for a thou¬ sand wonderful stories. In truth, the prejudice, in favpur pf the ppinion that the ruins were haunted, was so preva¬ lent, that not merely among the Count's. domestics.
85 domestics, but even among the inhabi¬ tants of the neighbouring villages num¬ bers of ghost-seers were to be found, who had beheld at sundry times (and with their own eyes) the spirits of Ethelbert and Urania, of Donat, Helen, and pther traditionary personages, wan¬ dering among those abandoned halls and moss-grown towers ; and they augured either favourable or inauspici¬ ous events to the rdgmng possessor, according as the vision represented a lady or a Monk, an innocent wife pr her haughty tyrant husband. Ida's character is naturally extremely timid, and she had not escaped the contagion of superstitious terrors. It was therefore with no slight emotion, that she found her conductor taking the way, which led to the ruins. —" Whither
86 — α Whither are you leading me ?" said she frequently, аз she followed him with trembling steps.— " Whither are you leading mei" she again de¬ manded almost with a shriek; and as she snatched her hand from the Friar's, her blood froze ia her veins at per¬ ceiving, that she had now past the hst ef the separating courts, and stood before the massy walk and lofty round towers of the Donat-Fortress, whose colossal portal seemed to stretch wide Its enormous jaws, as if for the purpose of devouring her. Father Hilarius was now compelled to stop for a rnoment, and support his fainting Companion. She reclined her head against his shoulder; and when she had in sor.ie degree recovered her spirits, she related to him, that happen.
87 ing once to be standing in her balcony at midnight, she had seen with her own eyes the apparitkvns of twp Monks come out of the very gate, berbre whidt they were at that moment stand¬ ing; that they went up to the old well in the corner, whose mouth is over¬ grown with moss and weeds, and there they seemed to vanish ; and that upon telat'mg what she had seen, the next morning, the old portress had related tp her a terrible history pf twp Mpnk» belpngmg to the Abbey pf Curwald, who were starved to death in a sub¬ terraneous dungepn by the order pf pne pf the tyrant-counts of Carlsheim ; that their bones were bvied in that ruined well, in which Heaven's retri- bution had ordained, that the murderer himself should perish; and that ever since
88 since that time, the place had been haunted by the ghosts pf the twp On- fortunate Friars. Father Hilarius, who frequently made use pf the deserted fortress, when he had anysecrei- business tp transact,could have easily removed the miraculous part of the appearances, which Ida had seen; but it did not suit his plans to quiet her anxiety by letting her into the truth. He cpntented himself with painting in the strongest colours the dangers, which awaited her on her return to the Count's abode ; and with reminding her, that her only chance of avoiding those dangers was an instan¬ taneous flight by means, whose terrors were merdy imaginary. The priest, in spite of all his seeming simplidty,
89 simplicity, was by no means deficient in eloquence. His descriptions were so lively, and his arguments came sp home tp her feelings, that Ida was soon con¬ vinced, that she could meet with no ghost more terrible or more hideous than the old Count of Montfort. She therefore resolved to follow her guide without further remonstrance, and only requested that she might shut her eyes, and clasp one pf hits hands with both pf hers in the -form pf a cross, which holy sign (she doubted not) would scare all evil spirits away. To this he cpraented, and promised to inform her when she should be arrived in a place of safety, and might relieve herself from this voluntary loss of sight. As they proceeded, the Monk lighted several torches of yellow wax, which were
90
were fastened at intervals against the sides pf a long passage, opening into a large hall; he tppk the same precau¬ tion, as he ascended a lofty marble staircase ; and as soon as he entered a spacious saloon, he lost no time in illuminating twelve large diandeliers of braes, which were 'suspended from the roof.—He npw desired Ida to open .her ayes, and lppk round her. He could not have pitched upon a better method for dissipating Ida'« fears of ghosts and goblins. Darkness is the mother of causdess terror ; with the return of light, cpurage and confi¬ dence return to the trembling heart. The lamp, with which the Friar was still busied in lighting the last chandelier, assured her, that there was nothing supernatural in the light, by which she found
91 found herself surrounded ; and her heart expanded with the agreeable im¬ pression, produced upon her by this sudden and unexpected splendour. She had always pictured to hersejf the Donat-Fortress, as the residence of crows, bats, and screech-owls, a gloomy chaps pf dirt, and dust, and fragments of moth-eaten furniture. How greatly, then was she surprized to find, that thpugh everything in truth was faded and antiquated, yet npthing could be more magnificent than the saloon, which she was then examining. It was hung with tapestry richly wrought and adorned with pictures, on whose frames gold and carving had been lavished most profusdy : and through the open door she looked put uppn the illumi. nated marble staircase, and down the long
92
long gallery, whnse vista pf lights pre¬ sented an pbject at pnce noble and agreeable. Father Hilarius advised her to repose herself for a few minutes, and conducted her to an elevated seat under a canopy, which seemed like a throne. —" It was here," said he " that the antient lords of the ten jurisdictions were accustomed to recdve the homage pf their vassals, while that anti-charribcr was thronged with their knights and retainers ; and it was from yonder side- chambers, that crouds of the noblest dames and damsels pf the cpuntry looked nut, and admired the magnifi¬ cence pf the ppwerfol Counts of Carl¬ sheim and Sargans."— Ida wpuld npt cast a single glance towards the side-chambers, where the dames and damsels pf former days used
^'93 used to assemble, for in these theie were no torches; and she could not help fearing, lest she should discover in them some inhabitant of the other world made visible by the light of his own burning brimstone. She therefoie con¬ tinued to look towards the illuminated gallery, and listened with pleased atten¬ tion to Fatlier Hilarius, while he dwelt uppn the brighter parts pf the family traditions, and by descriptions of splen¬ did feasts and statdy tournaments, contrived to beguile the trembling girl of her terrors. —" But we forget oursdves," said the Monk at length, suddenly breaking off his narration, " we must not suffer day-light to surprise us in these un¬ tenanted apartments, where we should undoubtedly be sought after, and then if
94 if found what would be the consequence? you would be consigned to the arms of the decrepit Egbert, while I should be sent back tp my Cpnvent with indig¬ nation by your unde. Come, lady, come! follow me, where peace and security await your arrival."— —" Lead on, good father Í" repHed Ida; " be you but my guide, and I will not hesitate to follow."— —" Gopd !" said Hilarius ; and then extinguishing some of the lights, he took them from the chandeliers.— " Then take spedai care of these tapers ; they will be necessary for us on the way, by which we must escape. Now then hasten pnwards, and be alarmed at npthing, which you may encounter. Be assured, the/e is no real danger."-- Thus saying, he gave her a small ' basket
95 basket, which already appeared to con¬ tain some provisions, and in which he npw deposited the tapers. These pre- paratipns for a long journey through glopmy ways were by np means calcu¬ lated tp preserve in Ida's mind that temporary tranquillity, which it had sn lately recpvered. An involuntary shuddering seized her ; and as he lighted her forwards, he assured her so often of his acting honestly by hei, that she began to suspect, that it must be his intention to deceive her. They at length reached the most remote quarter of the Donat-Fortress, which by no means corresponded with the magnificence of those apartments, by which she had approached it. Here noth¬ ing was to be seen but winding staircases, narrow passages, low ropfs, and gloomy vaulted
vaulted dungeons, without end or num ber, whose labyrinth bewildered her memory, and whose aspect "appalled her imagination. Most pf them bore the strongest marks pf the ravages, pf time : and now they entered an immense chamber, whi -h according to the Monk's account had at pne period been the beu- room of the Countess Urania, and of many pf the ladies, ber successors.—A kerge vacant alcp/e still decorated with the remnants pf silken curtains, appeared tp have Pnce been intended tn contain abed, and confirmed the assertion of Father Hilarius; an assertion, which the other ornaments of the room seemed calculated tp contradict. Swords, spears, and coats pf mail were fastened against the walls, and gave the apartment more the appearance of a well-furnished ar¬ moury ,
97
mpury, than pf a lady's bedchamber. Ida was pn the point pf asking the meaning nf such unusual decorations, when her conductor removed a part of the worm-eaten tapestry, and opened a concealed door, through which she des-ried a staircase descending to a far greater depth, than her eye could reach. — K Here ia Pur way," said Hilarius, " tremble npt, my child, but follow me without hesitation.—A few hours will place you in safety."— Ida shrunk back,and weeping through extreme terror, inquired, whether this waithe pnly means pf escaping ?—The Friar, whp had already found out the quickest method of removing her appre¬ hensions, descended part of the stair¬ case, and as he past, kindled spme tapers vol. iv. ν fixed
9fe
fixed on the ballustrade. Thb experi¬ ment succeeded, as it had done before— Ida ventured dpwn a few steps, and the Monk returned to assist her to descend the remainder ; when suddenly spring¬ ing past her, he rushed up the staircase, and passing through the door, closed it after him with a loud noise. Hpw the blood ran cold in the ppor girl's -veins, when She found herself forsaken by her guide; how she has- tened after him, in hopes of indüdnğ him by entreaties to release her from this Unexpected captivity; how she shuddefed at being able to discover no traces of the concealed door ; and how she at length sank down upon the steps in agony and despair, when she found no answer returned to her shrieks for relief and mercy, aU this I need not i desa ibe
θθ describe to EUzabeth : her own gppd and tender heart will make her fed for tlie situation of a young creature, by nature the most fearful pf her sex, ex¬ posed tp all the horrors pf night, solitude, and silence, at the entrance of a chún of gloomy caverns, whose exist¬ ence till that mpment had been unknown to her, and with whpse putlet she was totally unacquainted. Thpugh she received no answer, she was certain, that her entreaties for help were nnt unheard by the unpitying Friar. She could plainly distinguish his footsteps, as he hastened away from the chamber ; and the noise of dosing doors and of bolts shooting back into their fastenings left her no room to doub t her bemg totally abandoned. г 2 Ida
IÕÔ Ida washerself unconscious, howmuch time elapsed, before she could summon strength of mind sufficient to reflect, hpw it would be most adviseable for her tp conduct herself in this perilous situation. Undoubtedly, before she could recpver frpm the shpck, a consi¬ derable period must have elapsed ; for when she at length looked around her, she ƒ erceived, that the torches were on the point of expiring. The dread of being left in total darkness recalled her to herself : she sprang from the ground, •and lost no time in kindling one of the tapers, with which the Monk (who was far from wishing her destruction) had providently supplied her basket. —," He dnes not then desire my death?" said she, as she'saw the flame rbe bright and cheerful, and a kind of doubtful
ΙΟΙ
doubtful jpy infused itself into her almost frozen heart. This persuasion was cpnfirmed, when faintness compelled her to examine the contents of her basket. Father Hilarius (who was no enemy to the pleasures pf the table) had furnished it, as if he had been catering for himself : the prpvisi¬ pns were the mpst delicate pf their kind, and a small flask pf costly and cordial wine had nnt Ъееп forgntten. Now then she began tp think, what could have been his object in conducting her to this gloomy abode ? It was evident, that he had not left her there to perish through hunger : was it ppssible, that he had meant honestly by her, and that this was really the best path, which she could take to quit the Castle? Sud¬ denly, it struck her, that during their r 3 mid-
fóa lîıidnigBt wandering the Monk had fre¬ quently mentipned a cubtetfa'neous- pasSage, Which conducted to a email hamlet inhabited in former times by hply Hermits, and nnw the abode pf simple villagers scarcely less pure in manners than their predecessors. He had described this passage to her with sudi minuteness, that she could not VA suppose his account to have con¬ tained instructions for the direction pf her progress ; she had at the time paid but little atferden to his remarks, not conceiv ing that she was at all interested in thé subject ; but she nPW carefully mustered up every hint which he had let fall, and employed her whole strength pf mind in recalling the instructions, which he had given with such apparent indifference. Having
103
Having at length traced the map of her road on her imagination sufficiently to make her hope, that she shpuld be able to find her way through the gloomy labyrinth, she ventured to begin her journey. She carefully avoided various low-vaulted passages, which presented themselves on either side of her, and which Father Hilarius had already warned her not to enter ; as he said, that they Only led to small dungeons, in which many victims of tie tyrant Counts of Carlsheim, and Sargans had breathed their bst, and which now. formed the unwholsome abode of toads, snakes, and pther loathsome reptiles. Apprehensive that her light might fail her, before she could reach the outlet pf these caverns, she fled pnwards with all her speed, and hoped with every mo- F 4 ment
ÎO*
inent, that the next would show her the magnificent tomb, raised by Count Her¬ man of Werdenberg in honour pf his wife the lady Emmeline, whp had been long imprisoned in this subterraneous abode. The sight of this monument would assure her, that she had npt mis¬ taken the way-, and the Monk had told her, that she would there find three paths branching put, pf which the mid¬ dle one would conduct her withput a turnmg to the cavern's mouth. But still she hastened on, and still -øne taperafter the other was consumed, and still the tomb was not to be descried! Sleep, and fatigue from the length of the way, began to operate upon her with force almost irresistible; yet did she not dare to close her eyes, lest during her slumber the taper should burn out, and
105
and leave her in absolute darkness to wander through the long chain pf dun¬ geons and passages, till she perished. In this painful situation her only advan¬ tage was, that her imaginary fears gra¬ dually subsided. Custom and necessity are frequently the parents nf virtue; and Ida, the timid superstitious Ida, who so lately could Only traverse the cham¬ bers nf the Dpnat-Fprtress with eyes dosed, hands crost, and knees trembling, was now able to tread firmly, as she hurried along, and feared not to gaze steadfastly on the surrounding gloom, with which she was now become familiar. The poor wanderer could only judge from the consumption of her tapers, that she must have journeyed for a con¬ siderable time, and that the mouth pf a 5 the
ltô
trie caverns could be at np great distance -¿this belief was confirmed, when «he perceived a faint pale light glimmering through the obscurity of a narrow pas- sag·;, which lay before her. The sight inspired her with renewed vigour. She hastened towards the gleam : but how did her spirits fail her, when after pro¬ ceeding for some minutes dpwn tlie passage she found, that the light pro¬ ceeded (npt from the day, as she had fondly hoped) but from a lamp, which served to illuminate with its blue rays a place, the sight pf which a few days sponer woidd have made her swoon with horror, and upon which even now she had but top much reason to look with apprehension and disgust. It was a round vaulted room, whose sides were hollowed put into niches, in each
107 each of which a coffin was placed ; whil? here and there the eye rested nn a statdy marble monument adorned with carved work and statues.-^Ida shrieked, anel the taper fell from her hand, —" Now then," she exdaimed, " I am lost indeed I What sud the Mpnk? —Above all, avoid a narrow ¡passage, which lies towards the left ; it conducts into the burying-place pf a cpnvent. Should you stray thither, and be disco¬ vered by the Nuns, the pbject pfypur flight will be lpst irrecoverably, and ypu will only have exchanged one pri¬ son for another. The Abbess is entirely devoted to ypur unde's interest», and will npt hesitate tp restore you to his power.—Alas! alas!" she cpntinued, wringing her hands, " how plainly do I npw remember every word of his warn- ľ 6 ¡ng,
IOS
ing, though at the time I little thought of how much consequence it was to my safety!—Npw remembrance comes too late ! I am fallen into the toils : speedy flight indeed might perhaps ул save me ; but sleep sits too heavy on my eyelids, and my wearied limbs are unable to bear me further.—I must yield to the impulse, and repose for a few moments, for I am fatigued almost unto death!—then should np Pne discpver me during my slumbers, when I awake, I can re-kindle my taper at yonder lamp, and shall be able to pursue my pilgrimage with re¬ cruited strength and courage."— She then lay down upon the floor near her extinguished taper, resting her head against an adjacent tomb; nor was it long before she sank into a profound sleep. Little till then did Ida believe it possi¬ ble,
109
Ые, that she could sleep among graves and coffins I Still less was she aware, how near she was at that moment to safety and protection ! Oh ! hnw would her sorrowing heart have been light¬ ened, had she known, that a few hours must necessarily compel one of~her best friends tn enter her gloomy resting- place ; pne, whp at that moment was grieving at the relation of her flight frpm the Castle of Torrenburg, which had reached him under the most scan¬ dalous mis-representations, and who was in the most painful uncertainty respecting her fate and the- means of saving and supporting her. Ida had unconsciously wandered into the ceme¬ tery belonging to the Abbey of Cur¬ wald, which was under the direction of her friend and guardian, Abbot Conrad !-*
J 10
Conrad! — Oh! how eagerly would he bave hastened to embrace and comiort the poor forlorn-one, could some kind angel have whispered to him in a dream· ■—" Ida, the unfortunate much-mjured Ida slumbers among the mouldering bones of tbe Abbots of Cloister-Cur- wald !"— Conrad had dispatched messengers on all sides in pursuit of Ida, as soon as he received the news of her flight, wbich Count Frederick transmitted to him without delay. It seems, that what Father Hilarius dreaded with so much reason, had actually taken place at the Castle of Torrenburg. No sooner was the first burst of passion over, than the Count's justice made him resolve to give his accused niece a personal hearing —the morning had scarcely dawned, when
. ш when he sought her apartments. Her favpurite attendant was ordered to apprize her mistress pf his approach: great was his astonishment, when the mud returned extremely agitated, and informed him, that Ida was np where tp be fpund. Father Hilarius was im¬ mediately sent for ; and his explanation pf Ida's motives for flight of course was such, as served greatly to increase his patron's indignation, and throw a still deeper shade uppn the character and cpnduct pfthe fugitive. Elizabeth's bridegroom had disappeared, imme¬ diately after rejecting her hand at the altar ; Ida was now- become equally invisible: it required no great ingenuity to cpnnect these two events together. Nothing could appear more probable, than that ida had elpped with Henry, and
HS
and that she was gone to form an union built upon the ruined happiness pf her best friends, and to exult at having duped thpse, whose good-natured sim* plidty had prevented them from suspect¬ ing her designs.—Count Frederick's generous; heart was shocked beyond expression, when he thus saw the offences pf his niece presented before him in such gigantic enormity. —" Mpnstrpus!" he exclaimed! " in- concei vable! first she plunges a dagger in the breast nf her benefactor, by robbing him pf the woman whpm he adored ; next she stabs her dearest friend tp the heart by seducing away the bride¬ groom, into whpse arms she had herself delivered her! nnw then she·believes, that her infernal work is complete ; she knows well, that all ideas of an union between
ilâ between me and Elizabeth are prevented for ever; she doubts not, that vexation and disappointed love wilksoon conduct me to the grave ; and then she means to divide my rich inheritance with the partner of her iniquities, the false capricious perjured Montfort !"— Father Hilarius now stepped forward, and represented to him, that it only depended upon himself to ruin the plans of those, who had so grossly offended him; and that as to his unipn V, with Elizabeth, he for his part saw no impossibility in the case. The Count eagerly desired him to explain his meaning ; and the obedient Monk pro¬ ceeded to prove with the whole force of his eloquence, that Elizabeth deserved pity rather than blame for her share in these transactions ; that she had been
J H been seduced from her duty more by Ida's arts than by her own inclinations ; and he declared his perfect conviction, that if the Count would npw condescend to make the first advance toward; a reconciliation, he would find her as full pf penitence for her error, as grate¬ ful for his proffered affection, and as eager to unite with, him in a plan of mutual revenge, as even the Count himself could desire.—Nor did he make this last assertion rashly. Father Jacob had already apprized him, that every thing at the Castle of March was favour¬ able tp their views; and he advised Hilarius to send his patron thither without loss pf time, in prder that Elizabeth's resentment (uppn which he chiefly grounded his hopes of success) might npt be allowed time to cook Count
115 Count Frederick took the Friar's- advice, which was greatly strengthened by a supppsed vision pf the Patron Saint pf Tprrenburg, whp had conde¬ scended in a dream that very night to assure Father Hilarius, that the conse¬ quence pf a visit to the Castle pf March would be an unipn with the lovely EUzabeth. Accordingly the Count lost np time in setting put to renew his once-rejected proposals, habited as a bridegroom, and attended by a princely retinue. In the mean while the worthy house-chaplain did not even allow him¬ self time enough to say his paternoster, before he dispatched letters to the Bishpp pf Cpira ¡«id Abbpt Cpnrad, in which he rdated the flight of their ward, the Lady Ida nf Werdenberg, in all its circumstances; stating alsp thet alledged
ne
aliedged motives -and supposed conse. quences pf thb step, and above all not forgetting tp place every circumstance in the light most unfavourable to the Heroine pf the Tale. As they perused these letters, the Abbot and the good Bishop alternately felt indignation at Ida's errors, pity for her misfortunes, "and anxiety for the dangers in which. she had involved herself. Willingly would they have believed her innocent ; but appearances were too strong against her, and the Abbot little imagined, that the only person capable of removing the suspicions, which he was so anxious to efface, at that very moment reposed so near him. In the mean while Ida awoke greatly refreshed by a søund sleep of several hours. She re-kindled her taper, and resumed
117
resumed her anxious journey ; yet she delayed it for a few moments, while she endeavourrá to read the inscriptions on the monuments, and ascertain tp -what prder the Abbess belpnged, whpm Hilarius had described to her in such odipus and · terrific cpkvurs. These dearly exprest, that the tombs were raised in hpnpur of the former Abbots pf Clpister-Curwald, in whnse cemetery she was standing at that moment: what blessed informatipn for her agitated heart!—the door was unguarded.— A marble staircase conducted to the interior of the Abbey !—But alas ! the inscriptions were cpmposed in the Latin language.—Ida vainly endeavoured tp comprehend the meaning; and a few moments sufficing to convince her, that her endeavours must be vain, the poor wanderer
118
wanderer turned away from the neigh¬ bourhood pf her friend, and hastened to meet her ruin. With trembling limbs and an heart al¬ most bursting with anxiety, she pursued her gloomy path. She cpntinued to proceed for a considerable time; and her last taper was almost expiring, when its beams fell upon the object, which she had wished to behold so long and so anxiously. She was now certau pf having follpwed the right path, for she »aw at a distance the monument of her progenitrix, the nnble Emmeline nf Sargans. Tlie polished and shining surface nf the white marble reflected frpm afar the gleam pf Ida's taper—the pilgrim hastened tpwards it with eager joy, not untempered by religious awe and reverential
119 reverential terror. With scarce-heard foot-fall, as if she dreaded to disturb the dead silence pf a place thus sanctified, did Ida ascend tlie steps leading tp this memprial, raised in honour of faithful love and long suffering. It was some mmutes, before she could resolve pn venturing near enough to examine the statues, with which it was adorned. On one side stood a female angel (the counterpart of the lovely EmmeUne) whp trod under her feet the symbols of crudty and voluptuousness, and who extended to a kneeling warrior her right hand, on whose wrist was still fastened part of the chain, which he had broken.—On the opposite side ap¬ peared the same warrior, who with looks of gratitude held a ring towards Heaven, probably in allusion to the prophetic dream,
120
dream, which had guided Herman pf Werdenberg to the deliverance of his mistress. —" Spirits pf my ancestprs!" ex¬ claimed Ida, as pverppwered by her sensations she sank pn the loftiest step, and kist the hallowed marble ; " spirits of Herman and Emmeline, hear the prayer pf your forsaken persecuted daughter ! I suffer now, as yon pnce suflered ;— I am innocent, as you were then !—save me, ye blessed-ones I save the heiress pf your sorrows '"— Ida prayed fong and fervendy.— When she arosé, she found that her last taper was exhausted, and had left her in total darkness ; this however gave her litde concern. Ί he religious duties, in which she had just been engaged, had inspired her heart with enthusiastic
121 enthusiastic courage : besides, she knew well, that of the three ways branching out of the circular vault in which she was at that moment, she had pnly to chuse the middle one, which (as Father Hilarius had informed her) wpuld con¬ duct her straight to the outlet of the subterraneous passages. She ascertained easily by examining the walls, which of the ,three was the proper path to take, and then hastened bpldly forwards; for she was now persuaded, that the invisible spirits pf her ancestors hovered pver her, and she dreaded no danger, while protected^ by those celestial guar- dians. The Monk had told her true—the way was straight and unembarrassed with windings : it soon began to ascend, and the delighted wanderer could at vol. rv. g length
132.
length discover the faint glimmering of daylight, through the distant opening. Bnt alas! however near may be the gçal of pur wishes, whp shall dare to count himself secure pf reaching it !— Ida had for some minutes heard a dead hollow, noise behind her, and the ill- boding Spunds had already occasioned her suffident anxiety to make her double her speed· Still the noise became more audible: and npw she cpuld plainly distinguish the steps pf men, whpse arms clattered, as they past along. She Ippked back, and cpuld perceive the glimmering pf faint lights at a distance. She rushed forwards with increased rapidity: the sounds, which became every moment louder, convinced her, not only that she was pursued, but that her pursuers gained upon her.—Fortu¬ nately,
12S nately, the opening was npw· at hand; she summoned up aU her strength and activity to reach it, sprang through it, and found herself once more restored to air and light. —* Praised be Heaven, I am safe !" she exclaimed : when at that moment she felt a cpld hand seize her by the arm.—She shrieked, and fell nn the earth senseless. It was long, before her recollection returned. When she again undpsed her eyes, she found herself no longer in the ppen air. She was placed upon a kind pf cpuch, in what she supposed to be a'tent; a group of men pf terrible and savage aspect surrounded her ; and seated Pn a chest at nn great distance, she perceived a warrior in complete armour, whose raised visor showed a о 2 countenance
1S4
countenance wild, 'tis true, but still noble and commanding. —" At length then we have found her·!" said the warripr in a tpne pf exultation—^ the lpvely pilgrim is in pur power, whpm we so long sought in vain through ypn gloomy vaults and subterraneous passages.—You are wel¬ come, fair lady : Father Hilarius gave us nptice, that we might expect ynur visit; and I rejpice to Ijnd, that the description which he gave us of ypur charms, was far from exaggerated."— —" Have mercy on my distress, Sir Knight!" cried Ida, whp npw rose from her seat with difficulty, and sank at his feet, while she extended her fet¬ tered hands in supplication towards him. —" Father Hilarius assured me," she continued, " that I should find the habi¬ tation
125
tation pf someholy Hermits near the cavern's mouth: oh ! if any such habi¬ tation really exists, in pity guide me thither ľ'— —" Compose ypurself, ipvely girl," answered the stranger.— " Hilarius kas npt deceived you, neither has he de¬ ceived us. —He promised us the posses¬ sion pf a treasure, and he has kept his wprd, though we 'mean to make a better use pf it than that, for which he consigned it pver to us. He promised you, that ypu shpuld find here the habitation pf certain Hermits ; and he told ynu true, for you are actually in a Hormitage at this moment: many years ago was this the retreat of some fugitive Monks, whp were obliged to seclude themselves from the intercourse of mankind ;' and it still forms an abode о 3 for
186
for a band of daring and persecuted spirits, whom 1 tyranny and injustice bave banished frpm the world. We too are Hermits, though not quite such •hply ones ι as those, whom you ex- çepted ¡tCKţneet, ,But what does that signify? siujfs, or sinners, I warrant, £pu will iare hetteı ¡a pur society, than ypu would .with any company of Monks, -that .ever concealed hyppcrişy under sackdoth.—Take this as a specimen of the whole canting-tribe. Father Hila¬ rius har commissioned us, to remove you sp far ţiom this provinçe,..thaí your fece ,may never,obe sten here again : ¡wt ,have,iengsged to convey ypu tp a place,·where beauty hke yours is always a marketable commodity, and sure nf .fetching a heavy price : but you are too fait, too good, too noble, to be sacrificed
ist sacrificed to the embraces bf ttn bindel·. »о, child ! we mean to dp better for you. You shall remain with its, aud your priestly chemy shall be foiled in Ids treacherous designs."— —" First understarià," interrupted Ida, whoseitidlgtiatlon in Spite of grief ^and terror bttrtt forth upon hearing this insolent déclaration of the outlaw ; « Brit understand, to whám you speak ! lam rip ordinary captive, no kfw-bprn girl the ¿t associate for a band of rob¬ bers!—you sãe iti me tte niece of Count Frederick of Torrenburg '"— •-^'Indeed?" replied the uutlaw,— « are ypu then teally Count Frederick's niece?—why, tn let ypu into the whole. secret, We were told as much, thpngh we did not give the Mpnk full credit, and suspected that part nf his story tp o4 be
128 pe an invention for the purpose of obtaining a better price.—But -since ypu are in truth the person whom he mentioned, sp much the- better ; your rank and expectations make ypur ppsses¬ sipn doubly valuable. I have np sort of objection to exchange my precarious mode of life for security and Opulence, nor by laying aside the title of captain of a band pf outlaws to claim that Of Count of Torrenburg in right nf my wife, its lpvdy heiress. With the as¬ sistance pf my companions I will re¬ instate you in your rights; the previous possession of your hand and person will entitle me to share ypur gpod fortune; and I shall be indebted to you for my restoration to my proper rank in sodety, which necessity has for some time past compelled me unwillingly to resign.
129
resign. Now then you are apprized of my whole plan, which suggested itself as soon as Hilarius informed us of your rank, and in which I am fully confirmed by the powerful impression produced upon my heart by your beauty."— He paused : Ida only answered with her tears—after, a few minutes past in expectation- of her reply, the robber thus resumed his discourse. —" You are silent ' you weep ?— Ha ! perhaps you are offended that your hands are fettered ?—be comforted"; those white hands shall instantly be res¬ tored to liberty !—instantly undo those bonds, barbarians that you are! how could it come into your heads, that it was necessary to bind a poor defenceless girl,whose escape is so impossible'— ihame 'upon your flinty hearts, how g S could
rso
Свой, yoji beat Я? »eat so тЬигодрк/ Suçh„innocence and such charms !"— The other robbers now hurried to remove the fetters; bat their captain drove tbem away with curses, aad declared, that frpm that mement np one except himself should «clare to ap¬ proach his lovely captive pa pain pf instantaneous deatk-^He then kissed the unbound hands, cif Иа, Jed her respectfully into another tent, and there left her alone, after entreating her to compose her agitated spirits, and assur¬ ing her, that she might rely upon meeting from him with, none but the most honourable treatment. Iday equally overcome with mental and bodily fatigue,jiank into a state pf unconsciousness and stupor, which the sentinels, who were appointed to guard I the
ısı the entrance of her teht (and who frpm time to time Ippked İti uppn their charge) interpreted to be a tranquil sleep, and failed not tP bring this welcome intelligence to their captain.— He received it with thé highest satis- facrion, hailed -this refreshing slumber as the first step towaids the restoratipn Of tranquillity, dpubted nPt that he shpuld Jind Ida mpre cb'mposéd and resigned to her fate pn his evening visit, and fpund her almost frantic through despair. The peremptory manner in which Ida rejected his adresses, and the little progress which he made in recpndling her to her present situation, grieved the robber-chief to the very heart, but did ridt excite his indignation. He continued to treat her with the utmnst о 6 respect
ISS
respect and attention. Npthing was denied her except liberty ; and Randolf (for that was the name pf the enamour¬ ed outlaw) carried his politeness and deference so far, that he never eyen presumed to enter her tent-without haying -previously obtained her gr¬ amom Ida, whpse presence of mind gradu¬ ally returned, and who became collected enough to reflect on the best means pf conducting herself in such difficult cir¬ cumstances, could not but feel, that such attention on the part of Randolf required some return cm hers. She was tPtally in his power ; it was unwise to exasperate him ; and she therefore judged it prudent to allow him permis¬ sion to pay her a daily visit of an hour, since she feared with reason, that with¬ out
ISS out this vpluntary concession he might be induced tp allow himself greater liberties without asking her leave. —" May I, lady," said he pne morning, after she had past some days in his power ; " may I request permis¬ sion to present'to you pne pf my friends,' who holds in this society the nest place to myself?—he is a noble- nian,whom misfortunes have compelled like me to adopt a mode of lire, which we both look upon with' abhorrence, and which with the first opportunity we are determined to exchange for one mnre honourable."— t Ida was sufficiently aware, that the opportunity to which he alluded, was the possession of her hand, by which he hoped to give himself a, claim to the Count of Torrenburg's rich inheri¬ tance
- N 13i галсе. He frequently in conversation threw put hints pf this nature,-but which she judged it most-wise· tp let pass without observation. She now Only answered that part of his speech, witfch regarded the introduction of Ш - friand, and tp Which (at she feared tri irritate her jailor by a refusal) she gave an towilling-consent. Ш Ые new visit he was atctntia paflied by ä mat!, whose countenance was much more wild and hts manners much lets prepossessing, than those pf Randolf. The latter presented the new visitpr by the name oí Sit Gerb of ■Altheim. The captive soon understood from fhe conversation, which past between the associates; that Oe antipathy, which Gero's first appearance had exdted 'ta her
ts« hcrboapm, had not been exdted with¬ put gppd grounds. He possest not the smallest ibare of that delicacy and reirjectrtn attention» by which Jier kwwc waPidwactjerised.,, He permitted hhna self to make the most licentious »fid offensive observations upon the extra¬ ordinary charms of her person, and raised her origina} disgust to abhorrence hy blaming Randolf fot haying suflered his passion tp remain so fong ungrati¬ fied; assuring him at the same time, that he wpuld have dealt far .differently •with, his own lovely mistress, bad not her religious habit terrified him from using, force, and thereby drawing dpwn the vengeance of «flended Heaven.— Fpi it şeüinş». thjis wretch, though he trampled upon Λ lam human and divine, was still a slave to th« grossest . superstition,
1S6
superstision, and trembled at the very sight ef a veil or a ros-rry. —" She has now been some days in your possession," observed Randolf; " have ybu made any progress with tlie iairNun?"— "· - ν « Nor 11" replied Gero ; " she is a mirade of beauty, its true, but her obstinacy equals' her charms. Since the day that I captured her pn the road to Zurich, I have been able to obtain nothingfrom her bul tears and entreaties for her hberty - and as tp prpceeding to violence, Г am top much afraid pf the resentment pf holy mother church, or I should put an end to her resistance before fp-mprrpw morning "— During this cnn versatfon Ida remained x silent, and abandoned herself to the melancholy reflections excited by the increased
187
increased consciousness ofthe exea аЫе sodety, pf which she was sp unfortu¬ nately become a member. But now when she found that she had a com¬ panion in misfortune, and that a person of her own sex (a virtuous and perse¬ cuted Nun) was so near her, a senti¬ ment pf secret satisfaction and hope infused itself intp her bosom. —" Qh! Sir Knight," she exdaimed, addressing herself to Randolf, " how happy would you makeme,could you but procure for me thecompany of Sir Gero's captive ! it is disgraceful, it is dreadful, for a young maiden to be alone in a society entirely composed pf men and strangers ; and I feel, that the presence pf a person pf my pwn sex would be tç me a source of the greatest consola¬ tion ! it wpuld conduce beyond all else to
ш
to make kne endure my confinement with Tesignationl ohi good Sir Randplf, volead for me with your friend, and persuade bim to allow me tbis unex- t pected pleaiifre 1"»-. - Thè ornile, with which she accom- ipanied - 'this request ('tvtnas lhe -fint Vfbìcb stayed upon 'her lips, since she became a^captiirij^ïwai-irieilltible. As 'di» pronouncéa tilke kst 'wOtà.'sne ex¬ tandea hén hand towards bm, andhe kissed it "with rapture. A wish, ек - prest in г manner eo fascmatirig and so unlppked for, «tas a law to the enamour¬ ed robber ; and addressing himself im¬ mediately to his companion, he en¬ forced her request with so much energy, that Cerò though with a sorry grace found himself compelled to grant it. w Now then" said Randolf, te he left
«9
deft th« tent ,with :G«re," bow then .you can judgti for ypurjélf, which of pur modes of treating our captives is the most likely to succeed at the-fong rum,· When did your Nun ever speak tö ryç«; with,-such .gentleness, or favour yott -with só ¡sweet a imiloî when did she еУет bsttod her hand towaids you of h«r own accord, and suffer you ţp oprøs ; your lips upon rit i ¿redit -me, Gero ¡, send; her 'toimy mistres», and I wifl pet mty head upon ity that before long,half her obstinacy and aversion will have disappeared, Tpu see, how complaisant I have made the lady Ida; and it only requires a little kindness and /flattery well applied to make our religious ladies, just as tame and as obliging ad (heir sisters of the wicked world»",— In the Course pf the day Randolf ^_ returned
ш returned tb inform Ida·, that ske must not expect the visit of the-captive Mun till after midnight. —" My friend," said he, " i» obliged to keep it a profoupd secret from the greatest part of our compaiionsrthit such a prisoner is in his possession. That hehas a mistress, indeed, they are aware ; but it would make a terrible uproar in our comrnunity, Were it known that Gero had carried off a Nun; and many among our associates ; who would thmk nothing of half a dozen murders, would expect the rotks to fall and crush us the very next moment, for daring to lay sacrilegious hands upon a. damsel dedicated to Heaven. To be sure, we violated no sanctuary to get at her, for we found her trotting along the high road, when she aught to have
, 141 have been quiet within the walls of her Cpnvent: but still the very-dght of a veil has such influence over the common rabble, that Gero does not think it prudent to bring her to ypur tent except under the protecting shadow of night. He also implores you by me to reward him for this compliance with ypur wishes, by persuading her to lend a more ¡favourable ear to his passion-, he is abo desirous of learning her name, which hitherto she has obstinately con¬ cealed , and above all he is anxious, that she should lay aside her religious habit, wiich hourly exposes him tp danger from hia superstitious assodates. I know, what you ate going to observe : you believe, that it is npthing but respect for this habit, which preserves her from Gero's violence, but I swear to j you
14S" you by everything that is most sacred and solemn,' that ndth*r she nor your¬ self, have anything to fear from 1 ' the 1 men. who adore^ypu. Olir intentions towards ура are the most hotiCUrabte: we have great designi^in handi whoso nature L am not a» yet' permitted to dtídose- toi yon ; but be assuted, that should they succeed, the Countess pf Werdenberg and the fairNun wUl have reason to bles» the day whemAhey fell into nur handsa and thus escaped the being immured fpr hfe within, the gloomy walk of a Convent ; a fate, from which sbe has been rescued, and to which j/ea were dpomed."--, ( i ι г The ч prudent Ы»л (whp saw thať favours, which had cost her sp little, were so well rewarded by her grateful admirer) took good care, not to) con¬ tradict
1*3 tradict the robber. She answered him bya thousand thanks for his intercession with Gero, and for his. assurances of regard for her welfare; and she then dismissed him with a smile so gradous- and so sweet, as riveted his chains*for ever. When beauty, and sense are united in thé same woman, alas!_ what puppets in her hands are the mighty lords pf the creation ! Midnight arrived-'-the hearts of both the captives throbbed with impatience for the moment of meeting, though they knew not, what made them so impatient. Never seemed time to move so slowly with Ida, as while she waited" for the stranger's arrival ; and on her side'the lovely Nun quite trembled with joy, while she followed her con¬ ductors to the tent, in which (so Gero had
144 had informed her,) she should find a companion in captivity, whose heart was prepared tp sympathize in her misfortunes—-the robbers conducted her to thf door of the tent;,but thinking it wouìd be most agreeable to the ladies, that their fir* interview shpuld pass withput intrudeis, they suflered her to enter alone. It was well for both the captives, that this meeting tppk place without witnesses.—Ida was sitting in a inelan- chply posture, when she heard an ap¬ proaching footstep.—She started up, and beheld by the pale gleams of her lamp a tall light figure, whose face was covered with' a thick veji, advancing from the entrance of the tent. She hastened to meet her, but uttering a loud cry, she started back again. The religious
1*1 religious habit worn by the stranger was but too well known to her—It was the long grey garment decorated with a golden cross upon the breast, in which she had so often seen the Nuns gliding through the cloisters of Engel¬ berg , and the white veil, edged v. ith black and falling to the very ground, was of that particuLr foi m appropriated to the order ofthe Zurich Sisters- The \cil was now hastily thiown back, Idi gazed eagerly upon the Stranger's fea tures, and astonishment, joy, and ten derness were cairied to the highest pitch — M Constantia'" exdaimed Ida — " Oh' Heaven' it is my Constantia '"— —" Ida' my Ida '" shrieked the Nun, ind clasped «hei almost Uniting sister to her bosom voi iv n And
146 And now the Sisters wept for joy tp think, that they were pnce moie united ; and now they wept for grief at reflecting, that this union had only made each a partner in the other's cap. tivity. At length having suffidently collected their scattered thoughts, they made mutual enquiries as to the events, which had produced a meeting so un¬ expected, Ida related the long and fearful tale of adventures, which had so rapidly crouded upon her since Eliza¬ beth's wedding: on the Pther hand, Constantia briefly stated, that pn her way back to her Convent at Zurich, her party had been encountered by a band of robbers: the Clpister-Vassals, whpm the Abbess had sent to protect her, were soon put to flight ; and thus was she brought into the hands of Gero, whom
Н7
whom she had the misfortune to inspire with so violent a passion, that he pur¬ chased her from his Companions with his share of the booty arising from the whole produce of their excursion. The night past away in mutual con¬ gratulations on this meeting so unex¬ pected ; and when morning broke, tliey recollected, that tlieir plans for the future were still unarranged. Tliey had now only time to settle, that as the knowledge of Ida's rank had only served to make the robbers consider her possession as of double value, it would be most prudent to conceal Constantia's real title ; and accordingly she resolved to resume her former appel¬ lation of Mary Tell, an appellation under which she had past the only happy part of her existence. H 2 When
148 When Randolf the next morning inquired of Ida, what she thought of the fair Nun, she replied, that her society was extremely pleasing, and would be much more so, were it not for a certain coldness and reserve, which probably would wear off upon further acquaint¬ ance. In a few days she informed Gero, that she had discovered the name of his mistiess to be Mary Tell; and thus did Constantia avoid the dangerous import¬ ance attached to the tide of a Countess of Werdenbeig. By her sister's advice, she abated somewhat of the haughty coldness, with which she had hitherto represt the addresses of her ferocious lover; though they both judged it unwise for her to comply with his request," that' she should lay aside her religious habit. This had hitherto been , the
1*9 the means of protecting her against more violent means of enforcing his passion ; and they were of opinion, that too many restraints could npt well be im¬ posed upon an affection so ill-regulated as the sentiment, which Gero dignified with the name of love. However, gen¬ de looks and expressions of gratitude for his attentions were not occasion¬ ally refused by Constantia : Gero had been so little ^accustomed to be thus mildly treated by her, that even these trifling condescensions appeared to him pf inestimable value ; and when in return for his assurances of future respect, she one day deigned tp extend tpwards him her alabaster hand, the rob¬ ber was so transported, that he took the first opportunity of thanking Ida upon his knees for a change, which he attri- H 3 buted
150
buted entirely to her powerful influence, and which he implored her to exert still further in his behalf. —"Noble lady," said he, "you have often heard Randolf hint, that we have great plans in agitation, whose chief object is the promotion of ypur interests; nor are they unconnected with the hap¬ piness of myself and my adorable Nun. A dreadful path forbids my saying more on this subject at present; but rest assured, when the time for explanation arrives, that explanation will be such, as must perforce content you. fo the mean while suffer me to make to you one request. It is necessary for the success of pur undertaking, thatyoursdf and the lovely Mary (together with our jewels, gold, and all thmgs which We possess of value) should be removed from
ısı from this valley to a retreat at some distance. During the journey, and your residence it this new abode, pro¬ mise me, that you will keep a watchful eye over ypur fair companion, on whose attachment I can by no means rely with the same confidence, which Randolf places en yours. In this respect, he is iar more fortunate than his friend; since the kind reception, which he never fails to meet frpm ypu, in spite of the awe with which your modest air and dignified demeanour inspires him, leaves but little doubt, that you are sen- sible pf his worth, and will in time be .disposed to reward so steady an attachment. Besides this, I am con- , vinced, that you have too much solid understanding to think of escaping from a place, whpse very nature will convince h 4 you
J 52 you on your arrival, that any such attempt must be- unsuccessful : but np pne can say, what dangerous impossibi¬ lities a Nun may not be induced to un¬ dertake, animated by religious enthusi¬ asm, and confident in the supposed protection of the Saint, tp whom her service is dedicated. These illusions may heat her brain, till she desperately braves every peril, overlooks every diffi¬ culty, and will draw dpwn inevitable ruin on her pwn existence, while she leaves me tp lament over my bafHed hopes. Then mark me, Lady !—watch over Mary's steps with unceasing assi¬ duity : when we again meet, restore her to me safe and lovely, as I now leave her ; pr never hppe to see ypurself re¬ instated in ypur claims by the valpur nf my arms and thpse of my compani¬ ons,
153 pm, nor restored tp society by the acknpWledged tide of Countess of Wer¬ denberg, and heiress öf the wide domains of Torrenburg, Carlsheim, and Sar¬ gans."— This speech, which was begun in a kneeling posture and in the softest tone, which a voice so naturally rough could adopt, assumed as it proceeded an air of menace, and was terminated by Gero with a terrible frown and a lpud stroke upon the brazen pommel of his sword. Nearly the same discourse was repeated to her in the evening, (though conveyed in much milder language) by Randolf. She delivered such a reply, as circum¬ stances compelled her to give, and trem¬ bled, as she listened to some obscure hints and disjointed observations, which fell from the outlaw, but which no soli¬ ti S ' citations
154 citations could induce him to explain. However, she had heard enough- to excite in her mind the most painful apprehensions, though not enough to certify their being ν ell-grounded. The preparations for setting" out were sopn completed: the treasures were packed up ; and the Sisters were now informed, that the place of their desti¬ nation was a narrow valley situated in the heart ofthe Mountains of Hapsburg. Gero and Randplf took a tender but respectful leave of the fair travellers, whp were escprted by a small band pf soldiers, composed of such members of this lawless society as were unfitted by advanced years for taking part in that great undertaking, to assist in which, the young and active were detained. The ladies set forward, but not till Ida. had
İSİ had made some observstions, which rendered her dpubly impatient tp com¬ mence her journey. —" Oh ! my sister," she, said, as soon as she found an opportunity pf conversing without being overheard, " did you not pbserve among Ran¬ dolf's followers countenances, which you had seen before ? In spite of their change pf dress, I am certain, that the two who rode next to Gero were Friars, whp often visited the Castle of Torren- burg."— —" Alas !" answered Constantia, " »t is not now, that I learn for the first time, that г perfect understanding subsists between these robbers and the unwor¬ thy members pf some religious cpirrmu- jjity. During my confinement in Gero's .tent í frequently observed monks among я6 lus
156
his visitors ; of whose prindples you will judge, when I inform you, that they made пр scruple to counsel my encou¬ raging the licentious addresses of my jailor, though they were thoroughly per¬ suaded, that I was a dedicated Nun : _ they pffered to release me frpm my vpws, laughed at (what they termed) the absurdity of my prejudices, pro¬ mised me entire absolution, and advised me to pay no more respect to my veil, than they did to their cowls and scapu¬ laries. Conceive, dear Ida, mysufferings, while compelled to listen tosuch profane suggestions, and to repress the indig¬ nation, w4ich they excited in my bosom."— —" And have you then no guess," demanded Ida, " what is the object of an union so singubr ì —Did they never let
157 S
let fett a syttable, whence you could collect the nature of this mysterious ehterprize, on which they are nnw departed?"— Constantia dedared her perfect igno¬ rance on the subject. —" Alas! alas!" resumed Ida, " dreadful apprehensions force them¬ selves upon my mind ! Randolf fre¬ quently suffered hints to escape him, which the more that I reflect on them, serve but to confirm my fears the more. The robbers have a private understand¬ ing with the false Hilarius.—The Monks, whom I discovered in Randolf's train, are ofthe same order with that betrayer ! —Its true, Count Frederick has treated me cruelly and unjustly, and now little merits, that I should feel anxiety pn his account. Yet, nh ! that I were but near
49 158
near him for oné half hour, that I might warn him of the dangers, which hang nver him and his, and which I would willingly avert, though the price were the last drop ef my blood and the last breath of my existence."— "TheSisters had full leisure in.the wild solitude to which they were conveyed, to cpmmunicate to each other their mutual fears and melancholy forebod¬ ings. Ida's insinuating manners soon rendered her a favourite with her grey¬ headed guards ; and the persuasion pf Constantia's religipus VPcatiPn made tilem bpw with superstitious reverence at her approach, and hold it an honour to be suffered to kiss the hem of her sanctified garment. In consequence of these prepossessions in their favour, the Sisters had no Pther reason to complain o£
159
of their treatment in confinement, ex' cept the confinement itself. The place,in which they now resided, was inaccessible to all, except the robbers, and the rays 'of the sun. It was a flat spot surrounded by a chain of snow- covered mountains ; pne narrow fopt- path hewn in the rock was the- only entrance, whose windings were knpwn tn none except the ferpcipus inhabitants uf this valley; and which the sudden descent nf weights pfsnpwand pf ice- splinters* frpm the Pver-hanging rocks frequently rendered for spme time im¬ practicable even for them. The Sisters shuddered, as they gazed upon the gigan¬ tic masses pf rocks pf ice, which glittered coldly around them as far as the eye could reach ; and they could not conceal their terrors at reflecting, that a single motion
%во' motion pf those cloud-cdvered summits would he sufficient to convert the valley into their inevitable grave. The chief of their guards, hpwever, uppn hearing them make this remark, assured them, that this never would happen, because it never had happened yet. —" Ypu must knpw, fair, ladies," said he, " that I am one pf the most antient among the heroes, who have the honour to serve under the banners of Sir Randplf pf Mansfeld. While I was but a child, I fied hither with my pppr father, then the mnocent victim of monkish persecution, and we found a kind refuge in the bosom nf these mountains. The man, who was then at the head pf this hospitable commu¬ nity, had been acquainted with, the first institutor Of the hand, and had learned from
ICI
from him many remarkable particulars respecting this valley ; spme pf them in gpod truth enough· to curdle the young blood in your veins with very terror : but as to such an accident as that which you apprehend, never had such a thing been krown to happen. Therefore set your hearts at rest, ladies : the valley lasted out his time; you see, it has almost lasted put mine, and I warrant you, it will last nut ypurs also."— The Sisters had np better means pf passing the tedious hours of captivity than in listening to the old robber's never-ending narratives : besides, they thpught it by no means impossible, that in the warmth nf discpurse spme parti¬ culars might escape him, which might tend to the improvement pf their pwn situation. They therefore pften en¬ treated
162 treated him to relate the adventures of his father, who bad been so unjustly persecuted; as also to tell them, what hş had learnt, from his first captain, respecting the original founder of this society of freebooters, and to give them some account pf the various singularities of lhe mountains. They could „not be better pleased to listen, than the old man was tp talk; and he answered these inquiries at much greater length, than I shall repeat at present : with his per¬ secuted father we have np occasion for concerning oursdves; and as to the wonders pf the mountains, we are likely tp obtain a mnre particular description of them from another quarter : the only point then, which need be repeated for the gratification of the curious, is the manner, in which the habitation pf holy Anchorets
163 Anchorets became converted into α re¬ treat for banditti. Whoever is acquainted with the antient history of Sargans, cannot hut remember, that these private recesses of the mountains were inhabited by a society of fugitive Munks from Cloister Curwatd. The institution of this soci¬ ety took place in the time of Count Ethelbert pf Carlsheim ; and iti was continued by the occasional reception pf new members, as often as death reduced the number, to which it had been limited by its founder, Abbot Christian. That number was six ; but for want pf novices it was reduced to twp, at the period, -when Luprian, the licentious Abbpt of Clpister-Curwald, (flying from the vengeance nf Cpunt Herman of Werdenberg, and from the punishment due
16u due to his inhuman treatment of the Lady Emmeline) was conducted by chance to this seduded Hermitage. 'f he pious Anchorets received him with the most benevolent wdcome : they gave full credit to his tale of perse¬ cuted innocence, and fopked upon the virtuous sufferer as an angel conducted thither by the hand of Heaven, that he might comfort and sustain them under the infirmities pf age, and might dose their eyes, when death should draw nigh their stony couches; This last piece of service Luprian fost np time in rendering them. He imagined, that they possest concealed treasures pf im¬ mense value, winch would enable bim to lead once more a life of luxury in some foreign country, could be but obtain the inheritance of his hosts. In con-
165 consequence pf this persuasion, the pld hermits slept in the grave sonner, than nature had intended; and Luprian without an hour's delay ransacked every corner of the cave. His expectations were cruelly disappointed. He found nothing more than the usual possessions of an Anchoret ; cowls, scapularies, crosses, and a few relics of saints and martyrs. But of gold or jewels there appeared not the slightest vestige ; and Luprian had the. mortification to find, that he had committed one of the most horrible 'crimes ever perpetrated on earth, without deriving frpm it even the most insignificant advantage. Yet was it not its guilt, which made him lament the commission of this action ; no, 'twas its having been com¬ mitted withput reward. His con¬ science
166 sdence was by no means pf so delicate a texture, as to make him feel uncomfort¬ able, while inhabiting the scene of this atrocious murder. On the contrary, he resolved on makmg this well-con¬ cealed retreat the theatre- of fresh pffences, and immediately employed himself in collecting a set of men, whnse hearts were depraved, whose characters were blasted, and whose pros¬ pects in the world were ruined like his pwn. These he conducted to the mpuntain-valley, and became the found¬ er pf a band nf free-booters, which had 'now existed above a hundred years, and which had brought inexpressible calamity on all the neighbouring coun-1 try. The rich and the poor, the noble-1 man and the peasant, alike mourned I over their ravaged fields, and plundered I dwellings I
167
Iwellïngs, their murdered children and iishonoured wives ; and yet- did the luthors of all this mischief set punish¬ ment at defiance, protected by their secret caverns and their snow-dad im¬ practicable rocks. Their numbers had gradually increased. Hither fled for refuge many a ruined nobleman, no longer able by honest means to supply his pampered appetites with those indulgencies, which habit had now made absolutely necessary: many a fugitive Monk, who dreaded the chastisement so justly due to his violated vows : many a blood-guilty culprit, to whom the world oflered no happier prospect than the gibbet or the rack: and alasi many an innocent suf¬ ferer, driven by the persecution of the powerful or by the barm of the church to 2 this
168 this wild society, in whose polluted bosom he for the first time became acquainted with guilt. The numbers of these banditti now considerably ex- ceeded a thousand, aU of whom acknow¬ ledged as their chiefs Randolf and Gero. Besides the above information, the old robber communicated tp his fair questioner many particulars respecting the neighbouring mountains, every suc¬ ceeding pne pf which was more won¬ derful and terrific than its predecessor. The Sisters believed no more of these I extraprdinary tales than they thought I proper : however, they obtained much f more credit witli the one, than with) the other. Ida's solitary wandering·,! through the subterraneous caverns oil her uncle's castle had given her a degt ei
iso
of confidence in danger, which befoie was totally wanting in her character : and tlie experience which she had thus acquired, in addition to her natural high spirits and enthusiastic imagination, con¬ verted herlifrom being the mpst timid pf created beings ulto a kind ofdemi- lierome, ready for adventures, and dis¬ posed to set all perilu at defiance. —" All thmgs Wdl considered," saldı she to her sister, as they sat one star-light nightr before tho door of their cavern, round which'their guards lay sleeping; " ail things well considered, Iám convinced, that flight is absolutely necessary, and. by no,means unlikely to be attended with tsuccess. Whether Randolf and Gero prosper in their plans, or fail/ their return will equally bring with it our certain ruin. Then before vdb. iv. ι that
170 that dreaded Teturn takes place, let us summon op Our resolution/'and seize the first favourable opportunity tb ex¬ plore tlie way through yonder, chain of mountains, which old Hugo ha» de¬ scribed to us lh auch terrible- colours. The way, by which I fled from the Castle of Sargans,'was not vvithout itv horrors : yet î soon grew accustomed to them ; and how far inferior were they to those, which I had heard attri¬ buted to the caverns, and ;which I be¬ lieved to be real, tdl· experience con¬ vinced ine of my error ! Oh, be assured, Constantia! we shall find.that a sinubr déception has. been usedlin the present case. Yonder .mountains,! I« «n per¬ suaded, are not entireiyïjcöweredfwith ice and snow ; between! them may be found, nn doubt, many.a grein and sheltered
m sheltered valley, where we may rest occasionally, and recover strength suffi¬ cient to endure and to conquer the dangers and difficulties of the way, which stUlrcmains to betraversed. Whoknows, but their lofty heads conceal from us some happy smiling regions, where we may pass the rest of our lives unknown and /unnoticed in innocence and peace, and may become once more as happy, .13 we were in the morning of our youth pn the banks pf фе Lake pf Thun and in the green vajlieş pf Fru- tiger?—Dearest Cpnstantia, berespluto, and let us hazard the attempt 1 .For the worse, our situation cannot change: we can lose nothing) even should we fail ; we may gain every thing, if we succeed ¡ even at the worst, the attempt however unprosperous must obtain for 1 2 us
172 os oni advantage, a release from capti¬ vity by death withput dishpnnur."— - In answer to these representations, Constantia reminded her sister of the fearful traditions, which Hugo had related to them, respecting the moun¬ tains, and the fantastic beings supposed to inhabit them. She pointed to the Halsberg' Rock, whose 1 steep and lofty head rpse exactly opposite to them, glittering through the gloom of night like ari immense star ; and she inquired of Ida, to whit cause she attributed this extraordinary splendour ? Was- it by my means improbable (she asked) that these inaccessible heights were appropri¬ ated tp the residence pf evil spirits; who by night endured there the punishment due to their crimes in sul¬ phureous fires, of which that light was the
173
the reflection ; and who by day em» ployed themselves in leading astray such unwary travellers, as ventured too near the place of their mysterious torments, and in hurling them down frightful precipices into depths and abysses, never· to rise again? Ida replied, that it was by no means her intention to travel into the clouds so far as the pbce, whose dazzling brightness had induced her sister tp people it with such terrific inhabitants : and she added, that being determined on flight; she was better pleased to believe, that the brightness itself, which seemed like a crown of diamonds endr-. cling the brows of the venerable Hals- burg and his brethren, proceeded merely from the reflection of the moon and stars on the ice-covéied cliffs and crags, 1 3 than
1?4
than from brimstone and sulphur burn¬ ing in a terrestrial Hell. Constantia's long abode in a convent and her Visionary turn of mind, made itdifficult for Ida to get thebctter of these superstitions terrors: yet at length she succeeded. They began to make the necessary preparations for their.attempt. They lost, no opportunity ef secreting such provisions, as were not of a. very perishable nature and were easy of cpn' xeyancei; they slip endeavoured to accustom themselves· to taking but Utile sustenance in the course ofthe day ; and theý soon flattered themselves, that whatever! might otherwise be the dan¬ gers-lof their j expedition, they were af least secure against suffering from the attacks of dipse twp most cruel enemies of poor pilgrims, hunger and thirst. As
175 As to pretences for absenting themselves from tho, valley, they were easily to be fbnnd„m /Ле" robbers were too tho¬ roughly ^etsuaded, that flight waj impossible»! and top strongly imprest •with the idea, that women were too greatcowards to Jiazard such an attempt, fot them tp keep any very Strict watch over^thdriprisonersi > ii Constantin was particularly dexterous üt laying springes ibr snipes, wood¬ cocks, and other birds, which frequented these rocks in great numbers ; and the light-footed Ida would often explore placeyn search of their eggs, where the chamois, limself would scarcely have ventured to climb. Then when the Sisters, were successful, they knew sç» well how Щ prepare their booty for the tabic in a, manner the best calculated tp 1 4 please
176 please the palate, that even old Hugo did not think it beneath him to- accept a part of the savoury repast. ! Sometimes; the eagerness pf this pursuit prevented the girls frpm perceiving' the flight of time , and night was already dosing in, before theyTegained the cavern. How¬ ever, as they seldom returned with empty hands, and as they always did return at last, these long excursions •were sddom found fault with.—One of the robbers indeed thpught prpper in a mpment pf ill-humour to remon¬ strate with Hugo on the too J great liberty allowed the captives, and to represent the possibility of their adzing the ppportunity to escape; but the Old man was faithfuf also on thispcca- sion to the opinion, which he had formerly given respecting the fall of the
177
the ice-crags ; and continued to content himself with thinking,—" that which never liad happened, in all piobapility never wonld happen at all," indeed this was on all occasions a favourite maxim with him: and he frequently averred, that his adhering to it through ufe had saved his head many an un. necessary care, and his limbs, mapy an unnecessaryjourney, t ι In the couţse of diese excursions, tlie? Sisters had examined tiie lower part of most nf the mountains towards the north. They agreed, that a particular path, which seemed to lead/ straight over the Halsberg. Rpck,i appeared tq puer the mpst convenient passage and the greatest prospect of a successful end to their jpiymey. By this path then they determined to set forward, ι J as
178
aa soon as they could summon up reso¬ lution sufficient to enter upon so dan¬ gerous an undertaking ; but this was no easy matter, and they still thought it better with every succeeding day to postpone their journey to the next. In the mean while, it appeared that Gero and Randolf had nnt found their phms so easy of execution, as they had flattered themselves would have bťen the case. This was evident from their thinking it necessary to send for the greatest part pf those of their associates, whp had been appointed to watch pver fhetøptives and treasures concealed in the secret valley ; and whp, being chiefly men, whpse strength was considerably impaired by age pr wound», could only be required to give assistance in some case pf mpst urgent necessity. This unexpected
179
unexpected demand for their services produced much disturbance among the grey-headed miscreants. The Sisters thonght this a favourable opportunity for putting their design in execution. Their preparations were already com¬ pleted: each took a basket well-filled with wine and provisions in her left hand, and grasped with her right a strong and knotted staff to support her tottering feet; as she traversed the slip· 1 pery paths ' of the mountains: and them With hearts beating anxiously, and'Witii cheeks, almost as pale, as ths snow-hill* to which their steps! were andrest, theyi set forward to pursue a. path till: then never trodden by the foot of mortal, ι ι Each- was persuaded, that she wis thorcmghly acquainted with the nature of these mountains, becawfi itheyuhad; •"•■•ι 1 6 examined
180 examined the two or three first mues of them. They dreamed oÊgiéen-Vaies and silvery fountains, because they had occasionally found such, among thet lower parts pf the Halsberg· Rpüu 1 But how bitter were their ısenşatıons, when they perceived, that with every moment the path became· more-rough and difficult, when they, found, that their endeavours to keep sn the same level werfciu. vain, and that iheyiWBirei compelled to ascend into the mexe.hl«ak; and 4ofty regions pf the mountain 1 at length they ι stopped in despair : tliey· exchanged ι looks) of terror, .and muc-, muŕedua few broken words, respecting! the hopelessness of their attempt! anil the necessity pf returning. Thayjjehi- braced. each, other with a sigh of ад- giiialyarid then began,to retrace- tbek ι »mm ι way
181
way tP the robber's valley ; for even this-t now appeared to them an object less terrible, than certain death in this kingdom of frost and desolation. How¬ ever, they had npt prpceeded far,, before, they discovered, that (miserable as it was) even thisdast resource was dented ip them. It was evident, that they had missed tlţeir way ;> tp which ever side their, course, i was directed,, they still found jthe.nneţyie& cpmpelled.to ascend, lt seemed, as. if they were jnclprød. in some magician's cncle, frpm whence ldtererwas,np#K»Dingj pr as if )ncens,ed at their, invasion of (lis territories, the spirit of IthgijBountain had so fasdnated ţlleir eyes; that they, could pnly^see^the paths which led upwards to. his cloudy palace, hut noue which by descending into the vale would enable them to escape front his vengeance. ii 2 As
182 As yet they had not felt thertsdvee quite solitary iri these realms of terror. Sometimes a chamois bounded by them ; sometimes their fbotsteps, echoing frpm the frozen rock, seated' from ita 1 nest a screaming eagle : but ¿till the further that they advanced, thé more silent atad awful seemed all around Ihem, and thé greater that the'nuftiber became pf those gigantic misses of icé-, which theyleft behind, the ' greater iiuhibe» ¡ftill were seen towetúíg Befbre^trierrt in the dis¬ tance! Here all uttrmatibn 'seemed to end -.'hère the íftmnesslbf death appeared to' havte fixed its' èveHastiiig dwelling. rJd ľ šoHrary weedntfo^ngtøDbtade of grasi showed Mr from' 1*tw«jn<'th* fïozeiî hfl» Only «here 'айЙ' there appeared somé seaŕity patches -öf mosa, and'pf'aiiothet* pìatit' without Colour, taste, oı smetti 'tUin,' frail atid' white' ais «·* r tho
183 the snow, from which it 'was pro¬ duced, ι ι t Cpnstantia pansed for a moment : she prest her'sister's hand,arid silent tears streamed down her cheeks, while she pointed to a pair pf milk-white butterflies ; the 1 pnly living creatures to be seen in this melancholy place, and perhaps the last, which tóf· should ever see. It was dear, that not «heir own sport or inclination had brought th* insects 'thither, but that some >unlucky gust pf wind had forced them into, these inhospitable desarts. The poot little flatterers flew round each Pther for a while ih still contracting-circles, and then sank pn the ground, over· powered by thè kilting wind which blew from thé' Ice-hills The Sisters gazed upon them with looks of compassionate ■>' 1 anguish ;
194 anguish; in tha fate of-these two un¬ fortunate -wanderers they read their owrtv, Their &et were -already seized by theJİrest riií would have been im¬ possible 'fori ι them to have; proceeded much fUrtharţ had nob a ihetter path presented itselfibefore them. This,itis true, was: free Hrom ice;andn8npw ; but on. the - other hand iU> was 'inuch mors difficult; undi tough, on account of im. ■fenje^jnasses, øf , fidlen, rock, iwhich ecfcasaonallyibaiireri up the ipath -comt pletely. Over, these they^were iabUged tOfcUmbynpt without dangeriii,*eitl»er didiţjiey.s.uff6r themselves ι to be scared fron» proceeding by» the ipreiipices, which frequently yawned pn both sides of* ithem', and threatened the τ poor Bilgrims with death in their abysses. But ph ! jhow amply were theyj repaid for
185 for all which they hád suffered in traversing this path, when they-perceived some narrow planks laid from ope of those precipices to another. Here then were certain proofs,' that human beings· had past this :.way befpre them; «had performed the journey with success, and had left these 'memóriák to,assure any wanderers who might follow them, t tkiit Itwas.nobiimpossible.foripatience and perseverance -to i-òverooineo Ae obstades,-which opposed:their..painful progresul Nowthen the Sisters hastefied onwards withfresh-spirits; indrecruited hopes. Alas! it was not long, before each, separately perceived skulls, and other.· fragments pf human ι skeletons, whitihtoldthembuttoo plautly ,how vain was the attempt of escaping frpm these rocks with lifo ! each knew but too well
1S6 well» the" object, whidi «hocked' liei 4 each felt bub too ptónly the t futh, which the sight, of ¡that object conveyed : .but Bsüherıtbld what, she had зеел to tlic otlier, lest she should make bereister'» bpsom share; ithe anguish pf her OWn.^ i í t 4 - ! I * Л, { ^ Thus tlitlithe-poor, weary girls 'coBf tinói to .windel·· onwards, till divyJight faded; the iníilèasirigiglppm made «he siUToundiog objects appear doubly ter¬ rific. .At Jenglhthe тори .Tose. 'Ida ind Conştantit «fere (passionate admi¬ rers otthéichaa-nuijoflnatuiie : /iťistiue; that their hearts were too full pf anxiety; and their limbs tao much tortured hy the severity pf the frost; to admit of their feelmg in its wholer-strengtb. pf beauty the admirable scene, which the moon-beams now exhibited to their view :
«7
view ; yet w*s not tlu\t beauty entirely disregarded by them. Each called her sister's attention^ to the dazzhng and indescribable splendour, which npw un¬ expectedly surrounded thenn each, in hopes pf Imparting a gleam of тотед· tary*atilf»«fon to the nther, exagge¬ rated! her' admiration at the pampoüs showmand forced «n expression . öf pUajure into her countenance, which wat totally foreign -tO htr heart; The moon rose stili higher ; her image was reflected· л thoueand-fold from. -the enormous cryrtallizationB,'.which pre¬ sented themselves i Jon all sides,'hanging from the broken crags, and threatening every moment tp fall into the (profound gulphs beneath them, The objects around/seemed on a sudden like spme region described in romance, whete diamond-
)№>
diamond rocks and palaca of predous stones ar« raised in ari instant Ufa wild aiesart by the wand bf some arch magi- dim everything appeared enchanted, Îfad tile SisCèïs, as they now hastened Onwards, «eemed wandering in a flood Of siivet hght but alas ' that light was chajtulesi arid ünwarmingt It only eit- abled then! to contemplate Ae regions «f ¡frost around them, but gave them -no relief from thfe pain, which, that ftost inflicted 1 with ä sentiment of terroni Aot ítò)i)fe exprešt, they folded each Other m a strict embrace. ι —'■' AU around us is' so bright and fair ľ' sard Ida, -" alas ' and ice are sp wretched '"■*-? Coristantia pnlyanswered her withtears —•yet after remaining fora few moments in this attitude of tender sorrow, they were
189
were sensible, that a kind of cheering warmth had communicated itself from each bosom to the pther. Yet Cpn¬ stantia npw declared, that she found it impossible for .her to proceed onwards : but if any placţ could be found, npt so totally, frozen as to threaten any one, who shpuld rest there, with the sleep of death, she trusted, that after, a short repose she should be able to resume her journey with rţcruited strength and spirits, They had fanded for ,some time, that they ţould distinguish the distant murmur of a stream of water; and they npw naturally concluded, that a place, whete water was still, unfettered enough to flow, could not be iUtpgether destitute of warmth. n л ι Ida encouraged her fainting sister to drag herself a few paces further, in . hopes
190-
hopes of discovering that place of rest, which she had just declared so neces¬ sary^ ' ' They ventured'to enteTf one pf the enormous caverns, which the penetrat¬ ing mopnabeams deprived of, some part of« its datorai terror's. As thèy^rJrb^ ceeded, they 4vêrê sensible of a' different terrrperâture pf 'air from (*а»Г 7 **1егг ťhey'-brfeathed in the more exposed parts àf theJmountainsïbyJeftnpirisfJn they amid 'îitmöet call (he sensátieti, wmcri-ffiry nbW -experiended, 'by the pleasing 'name of warmth 1 J-'inď'the feel of something-like soft moss'Uhder their feêt erlèouragedHhetówatUtnê coiŕvic- гйг!?««,* líeŕé'tat'iíéasťall'veg'ítiitfon was not completely' 1 »* 'an 'endi" ' TTtêí foaťof the ШяЩ^Ш 'timé'was inmost deadening; bat no persuasions ' 'i" r could
«H
could'induce;the tiiiiid Constanti» to advance orie· ! step further mţo the cavern, than where it, was illurtiinated by the mooii-beams. ¡ , , Slie 'sank ι almost' insensible upon, t he mossy tjupet,; ¡ while the jngrjs-^ctive Ida bethought herself, ef eyery^ppssible means of:»uevtiatírigl the, sufijf4rigs„of her fellow-PUgrim <,Tfce Contents pf their! baskets rimained juntcvusjjed.-.for anxiety of heart bad, preyeiited ,them hMierta ι from ¡being sensi ble r , either, qf thirst, oli hunger,- u Ida,now,bathed her sister's pale lips witì» &одае .drops pf wuusi'l shet then splintered.the staves, which Ihad ¡guided theirr!»Q«esing, steps in ι this .hazardous: journey,! şnd^she hastened tbi.cullecbia. feyf preeiouft frag- nientsi.irffiU'oiæniWOodv-i whicli wjlile enteriiigiitheľcavérn· she ¿jad) rejmarked in
№
in the mooMime $· prdbablytuBy were the remaSns-öf apbnlťy whieMiad«irved some former traveller os.a>bridge ¡over the wide chasms between the rocké; / 1 With a flint and the steel'clasp, of her girdle Æé -contri vett to· Strike out a r^sfirks^rfÄÄ-^ittivraVtinoti Ibnfe, föfeiÏ"ir*ihad!itlrt* r eilisfi«tioii to see the wood 1 -blazing ; -and ätts Started in admiration' ind' astonishment nt the magnificent íhowrwhichithè sbreiţgthen- ing firèüiglf ť presented bafore İrer;, tlie Siáefes [ wíSfe4ttittliel entrftioeOÉ-an im¬ mense and vaulted cavern, whose sides and röof appeared tø be entirely formed of íCeá'frflrdPfl«' estreme-end pf it the rush L óf tin water-fall proceeded and was' repeated by^innumerable echoes: while the flames played sometimes on large sheets of crystal; smooth, bright, and
»93 and polished· as Vepctian mirrors, and sometimes fell upon the broken crags pf the reck, whence they were reflected in a thousand ways, and -л hieh thçy tinged with a thousand colours. , « But this was not the time for amus¬ ing herself with unprofitable obserla- tion, and Ida soon recovered herself from her momentary enthusiasm. Con¬ stantia lay by the side pf the little fire, still in great reed pf comfort and assist¬ ance; and it was long, before her sifter's, efforts to revive her produced the desired effect The first favourable consequence nf these endeavours was a gtntle slumber, as she lay redined npon the moss, whicht bjtuthis lime, had acquired a slight degree pf,warmth j Ida seated herself dose by the fire, vol. iv. к occupied
194 occupied fo feeding and preserving it, and determined not to allow her eyes to dose, in order that she might devote herself to watching the slumbers pf her sister. Yet the night appeared so long, that she would have found it impossible to resist her indination to sleep, if she had npt spught some more active employ. ment. Accustomed by her adventures in the Donat-Fortress to long wander¬ ings, in caves and darkness, she resolved to beguile the tedious hoius with ex¬ ploring the more retired depths of the rock, and tracing to its source the water, whose distinct roir assured her, that it could be at np great distance. The kindly warmth pf the fire had recruited her spirits and restnred her strength
195 strength in a great measure; and she found herself able to undertake the task of wandering through the frozen cavern, without being in danger of yeilding to the cold. Midnight was past, when guiding her course by the light of a blazing fire-brand she drew near the thunders of the cataract, and her Umbs trembled less with cold, than with expectation of the sight which she was now on the point of witnessing. Who can penetrate with¬ out emotion into the earth'« interior sanctuary? who çan presume to pry into Nature's secret abodes, where the great Mother brings forth those children of her strength the mighty Floods, with¬ out feeling awe-strnck by the bold and desperate undertaking? к 2 The
156 • The blazing fire-brand was here un¬ necessary. An ppening in the cavern's rppf gave free admittance to the moon¬ beams, and the whole extent was bril¬ liantly illuminated, Ida now behdd a spéctade, to which she dpubted whether the whple universe could produce a rival. From the summit of a rook of ice,jvhose height the eye measured with difficulty, and which was entirely formed of the river's own frpzen evaporations, did the rapid torrent of the Aar precipitate the whole vplume of its waters headlong, till it reached an enormous mass of broken pieces pf rock, the probable ac¬ cumulation of ages. Here it divided itself into more than twenty tesser riveis, which sought their passage into the vale below, in a va-iety of directions. —The
1&7
—The scene was most splendid, but alsp »tas most awful !—the inoon>light made tìxi foaming flood appear like'a torrent pf,liquid silver; vvhich produced t)ie most singular and fantastic leffects, as it Tushe t d. with rebellowing ,roar among the groupes ,θ£ colossal i rof4kj, around it, and. intertupted with jhe фш, gf its; Streams, the, deep gloort, рссдарП1|{1 by their shadows. Ida looked upjţp the awful height, whence· the torrrjnt descended,, cpyefing her with(ţhe-liglţt sprinkling QÍ its foam.-, she lqokedidown into the fearfu} gulplţ, ini which-its waters were ¡buried ; she Ippked upop the cavçrn's glittering' walls, coyeţed with incrustations cf Înn u rne!at!İÇ.,shap$ı and cploors, and upon the moving shadows, which fell from the surround- кЗ ing
198
ing gigantic rocks. The sight was too much for her ; she felt her head grow giddy; the fire-brand dropt from her grasp, and she sank upon the ground almost insensible. She soon recovered herself, and hastened to quit a scene, whose awful beauties were more than she could bear in the weak and agitated state of her nerves. She could discern the glim¬ merings of the distant fire, and hastened back to the outward cavern; Where she found Constantia still buried in repose. The flame was now getting low, and more fuel was not to be pro¬ cured ! but it had already warmed the cave sufficiently to remove any appre- hensipn,lest the sleeper shpuld be frozen. Since therefore her watching ceased to bo
199
be necessary, Ida no longer resisted the drowsiness, against which for some time past she had found it so difficult to contend. Besides, through the opening of their resting-place she could already discern the first faint reddening pf the approaching morn; she therefore laid herself down by Constantia's side with the pleasing re¬ flection, that the cave would soon be warmed and gladdened by the -power pf the sun ; and that when her still- slumbering sister shpuld open her eyes, she wpuld nnt behold those gloomy appearances, which during that long sad night had produced upon herself such deep and melancholy imprer- íions. Ida had not long dosed her weary к 4 eye-lids
200 eye-lids, before Cpnstantia awoke greatly refreshed. Unconscious pf the manner in which her sister had past the night, she lost no time in waking her, and advising the prpsecutipn of their journey. Ida was contented with her-short re¬ pose; and obeyed the summons, Yet before they quitted the hospitable cavern, to whose shelter from the night-blast they undoubtedly were in¬ debted for life, Ida led her Sister to the place, which had appeared to her so awfully splendid when viewed at midnight; but which (she doubted not) would produce a different impression than in those moments, when her fortitude was completely subdued by anxiety of mind and lassitude of body. The
201 The beams of the morning.sun now stained the waters of the Aar iwith crimson light : its streams, чхч they precipitated themselves ŕntp the vales beneath, glowed with a thousand beau¬ tiful colours. A shower of diamonds seemed to fall from the summit df tlie ice-rock, and the chfts, whicii during the night had thrown such deep^and solemn shadows around, them,,,now were gaily 1 arrayed iui verdant ¡noss and covered with sudu bardy plants; as «an enducu cold withQutu uicpnvenţ- ence, and which goneiajly festen tlieir roQts in the fissures, of stows and among the broken, mags of mountain·, The sight was at once majestic and enlivening! the two pilgrims sank upon their knees opposite to ι tbe newly- K 5 . risen
202 risen sun, and poured out the senti¬ ments pf pious enthusiasm, with whidi they fdt their hearts overflow. Not complaints, not murmurs, not sighs proceeded frpm the lips of these ppor forlorn-ones: no; they exprest their ddight at this wonderful creation and their admiration pf its Creator, though at that moment they were themselves struggling against calamities so despe¬ rate, as scarcely to afford them the remote possibility pf a rescue. Never perhaps was a npbler sacrifice pffered up by suffering humanity to the ppwer and magnificence of the Supreme ! Yet Ida's sacrifice was the greatest, since Constantia possest a source of satisfaction in her bosom, of which her sister was not yet aware. 1 —" To-day,"
203 --" To-day," said she, while her countenance was brightened with smiles, at the same time detaining Ida, who (having finished her orisons,) was on the point pf turning from the cave; " to¬ day it is my turn to be the guide through pur doubtful journey. Ida, I dreamt last night, that we were still wandering along the paths, which we traversed yesterday : methought, that you went foremost, and bewildered yoursdf in a narrow nook, where precipices on all sides impeded your further progress. I was lamenting pver your distress ; when Io ! pn a sudden f*. Engeltruda stood before me, such as she is repre¬ sented nn the altar-piece in her Chapel at Engelberg. A ray pf golden light detached itself from the aureôl, which κ β blazed
sos
blazed round her head, and guided me to a small opening in a rock,· ex¬ actly resembling that, which caught my eye in the first moment pf my entering ¿us cavern. I past through it : a narrow winding-way descended gradu¬ ally into the valley. Suddenly, ae if it had been by some magic spell, we Were transported into those happy plainsj where we past the years of infancy," and which I shall never cease to regret our ever leaving : there We became once moie Mary and "Rosanna Tell, and forgot m the humble tranquillity of Rutelis the sorrows and sufferings of our lofty hateful station."— Ida gave way to the enthusiastic hopes of her sister, and followed her, as with difiiculty she forced her way 2 through.
205 through a narrow opening, which she had discovered at no great distance frpm the torrent. After springing bpldly at the hazard of their lives bver a few wide-yawning chasms, they reached a kind of'green plain, where it was possible for them to proceed above a hundred yards without meeting any obstacle. A circumstance so new in their painful journey inspired Con¬ stantia with added confidence. She turned smiling to her sister, and pointed out two small white butterflies, who were sporting in the sunshine, and which (she was firmly persuaded) weie the very same, whom she Ь I seen sinking exhausted to the ground on the day before. —" Yesterday," said she with exul¬ tation,
206
tation, " yesterday they were the em¬ blems of our distress ; to-day they are the prophets pf pur speedy rescue. See, see! a favourable western gale*wafts them kindly to the lower values, where they may flutter through fields of flow¬ ers, and forget how much they suffered from' the frost, while they bask in the bright and cheering sun-shine."— Her long undisturbed night's rest, and her confidence in the protection of her Patron-Saint had greatly improved Constantia's spirits : Ida's on the con¬ trary were much more deprest than at the beginning of their journey. They soon reached the terminatipn pf their easy road; and as fresh obstacles seemed again to impede their progress with every step, Ida asserted, that the diffi¬ culties,
207 cuides, which they found in their pre¬ sent path were sufhcient to prove, that they had judged ill in altering their direction. It was in vain, that Con¬ stantia attempted to demonstrate, that the course, which she sp much regretted, would have led them into the most remote recesses ofthe Grimsel-Mountain, which towered abpve them pn the one side ; pr that she pointed out the Tem¬ pest-horn, which rose on the other like some threatening giant, and on whose ice-covered limbs no path was discern¬ able, which could possibly have been trodden by any mortal feet. A narrow passage between twp almost jpiningjpcks guided them tp the moun¬ tain nf Gemmi: and npw they per¬ ceived with jpy, that instead of being one unvaried acclivity, their road every now
■208 now and then suflered them to descend. bs true, this road seemed rather _calcu> lated for the clambering pf goats, than for the use of human befogs : but though it wasfrequently inter rnptedby extensive çhasmsjtlieyfrequently found themselves assisted in passing them by broad planka, already laid over them by some friendly hand. Where there were none, and the -Sisters were obliged to traverse the abyss with extreme hazard on some narrow shelf by dinging to the broken crags, still Constantia never would proceed, till she had discovered either an unemployed plank, which she brought from some other place, or tlie shattered branch of some wild fig-tree ; in order that she might stretch it across the chasm, and enable any future wanderer tp cross it with less trouble and risque. She also (as
209
(as they prpceeded onwards) begah to relate a wonderful legend, which had been told her by pne pf the nuns pf Zurich, explaining, why of all these mountains that pf Gemmi alone was observed never to be whitened with »snpw pr ice. But Ida was tpp much p^t of heart, ajad too fearful pf their being engaged ina wrong directipn.to permit herself tp <pay much attention tp the legend; and as she did r not think it worth notice, there can be nn "sprt pf Pccasipn for my repeating it herei Frpm a rock, whose height made their heads giddy, they had ventured at mid¬ day to cast their eyes dpwn mto the rçgipns beneath them, and which tlie sinking heart of Ida now made, ι her despair of ever reaching. They could perceive from hence several dark spots, which
210 which Ida pronounced to be abysses, in which tlieir path would at length termi¬ nate: and this decision she delivered with snch positiveness, that Constantia would undoubtedly have cpnsented to return, or else have chosen a different path, had either a leturn been now practicable, - ther path been tp be found. - be day advanced, and the road s ι. uontted tp sink itself lower and lower, with what rapture did they ascertain, that these supposed abys¬ ses in fact were parts Ofa village, whnse smoking cMmnies announced to them the neigbourhppd pf dpmestic cpmforts, and to whose peaceable shelter the cattle were at that mpment returning from pasture. The quick-sighted Ida was the first to make this disepvery. She sank weep¬ ing
211 ing upon the bosom of her sister, and entreated her to forgive the wayward humour, with which she had embittered their journey. Constantia folded the suppliant to her heart, and the Sisters united in offering up a prayer of fervent gratitude to the Saint, who had guided their wanderings so wonderfully and so welL They resumed their journey, and now how easy did it seem to them ! As they descended, the path gradually enlarged itself ; and before the shutting in of night they found themselves safe under one of the cottage-roofs, where they learned for the first time after a long, long interval, what it was to rest with. out anxiety; in truth the short and broken slumbers, which visited them in the robber-valley, were scaiccly worthy oí
212 of being called by the sweet name of rest. _ ι While the Damsels of Werdenberg were engaged in the above adventures; while one of them was anxipusly and vainly expected at the Conventof Zurich, andwhile-the pther was inostunjusdy censured and. despised for ber supposed dppement witli the acknowledged bride¬ groom of her· friend ; -Count- Henry of Montfort was eagerly pursuing . thè .wrong track, into which, he' hadsbeen enticed ι by the perfidious chaplain of Castle-March., Persuaded that heshpuld soon overtake Ida, he continued to rush forwards without allowing himself to rest for a moment ; til) in alitile village belonging to ithè Canton of Glarus he was. attacked by a severe fever, pro- duced by the violence pf his mental agitation,
213 agitation, and by the inconsiderate speed, with which his journey had been performed. Nature at length yielded, and Henry was compelled to stop, and make his option either of recovering slowly, or of dying at once. According to the established custom of aU knight errants, he had commenced his expedition, not ι -erely without forming a plan or co ■ ting common sense, but without fi · Mng himself with a necessary sup) .ash. He had left aU his attendant, i . und him; and as several days had eup л sir. -e his separation from them, and as he had not thought proper to inform them of the object of his journey, they were totally unable to form even a guess aş to the place, where it would be most likely
214 likel) for them to rejoin their master. Luckily for Henry, in the paroxysms of his fever he frequently pronounced the nime of Montfort. From this the good «imple people of the village (who in truth had rendered him all the assist¬ ance, which their sorry means could allow) cpnduded, that the invalid must certainly belpng tp the old Count of Montfort. A messenger was despatched to verify the fact : and Count Egbert lost nn time in sending able physicians tp his nephew's aid, by whpse care the fever was at length vanquished. As soon as the step could be taken without endangering his life, the Convalescent was removed to his paternal mansion, where he saw nnthmg but frowning cnuntenances, and heard npthing fiom morning till night, except reproaches foi
215 for his extraordinary conduct on his bridal day with Elizabeth. It seems, that Count Egbert now thought himself entided to assume a higher tone of authority with his nephew, since the news was just arrived, that Henry's firm friend and powerful patron, the Emperor, was np more. He perished, in consequence pf a malady which he contracted during an expedition against the Turks, and was no longer able to vindicate and enforce the daims of his favpurite. — "Ypu cannot but acknpwledge," said the old Cpunt pne day to his pale and still emaciated nephew, "that I have done every thing in my power to establish your happiness on a firm basis. Ehzabeth of March, young, lovely, wise, power-
218 jPWerful, and (abpye аЦ.1) enprmously rich, would have been ypur pwn at this moment, if you had not thought proper tp abandon her for the laudable purpose of scampering away after ,a wifl-o'-the-wispj—But now the business is over-! No regrets can now pnţ mat¬ ters «to rights again;!· Elizabeth ¡s Cøuntessof Tpirenbuţg, is lpst to you for ever, and what counsel to give, you npw, 1 protest, I know ¿iot !—Truly, your affairs are in a wretched condition :, your daims on my succession cannot avail you, till after my decease ; and even then, they stand a fair chance of being worth but little, since 1 1 am now seriously thinking of contracting a ma¬ trimonial engagement: though you thought prpper tp break pff my former match
217 match by running away with my in¬ tended bride, the light and wanton Ida!"— Here Henry assured him for the twentieth time, that he had not beheld Ida since the bridal day at the Castle pf Mardi ; and his uncle for the twentieth time replied, by assuring Henry, that in that сазе it was very extraordinary, that nobody else should know any thing at all about her. However, whether she had gone off with Henry or with any other person, fpr his own part he was de¬ termined, that anxiety about her should never turn one more hair of his head grey ; but that he would marry the fiist woman of a decent family, whom luck or accident should throw into his way. In the course of his reproaches the old Count .had mentioned LlUabeth's vol. iv. L max-
2)8 marriage : this was a fact. Within a few days after Ida's disappearance, Eli¬ zabeth became Countess of Torrenburg. It has already been mentioned, that Count Fredeiick set forward for the Castle pf Marcii, in all the pomp of a bridegroom, to renew his addresses, fortified by an encouraging vision of his patron-saint, and assisted by the prayers ofthe worthy Father Hilarius. On the other hand, the house-priest of March had managed to screw the indignation of Elizabeth and her relations to the highest pitch against the fugitive Mont¬ fort arid the Heiresses of Sargans ; and the lady's parents were proportionably penitent for the Ш -judged rejection of Count Frederick'» addresses. Finding his mistress and her friends in a temper of mind so favour l'ile to his wishes, the
219
the superannuated lover needed only tp make his proposals, in older to have them accepted. But little discussion was necessary; all parties were soon of the same mind, and Elizabeth in a few days emsred the Castle pf Tprrenburg as its mistress. From that hour her every word, her-every action was such, as proved her to be worthy of the high statipn, in which she was placed by the cimice of this excellent npbleman ; against whpm no possinle objection could be suggested, except that he was old enough to be the giand-father of his blooming wife. But to Elizabeth's disappointed heart his age was rather a recommendation than an objection. After Montfort's perfidy she felt it impossible fpr her ever to lpve another ' h 2 man
220 man as her husband, but she loved Count Frederick as her fither, she esteemed and reverenced him, nor from her conduct towards him would any one have supposed, that her happy hus¬ band was not still in possession of all the advantages and charms of youth. All affection for the ungrateful Henry seemed extinguished in her bosom, and the good old Count enjoyed with her a much greater share of happiness, than he had any reason to expect would have been the case. Nor was her behaviour towards her husband alone praise¬ worthy : she conducted herself on all occasions with so much discretion, v and displayed throughout such winning graces and enlarged benevglence, that she became the object of universal respect,
I'll respect, and was proposed as a mode, to be admired and imitated by all the daughters of Helvetia. In one point alone her prudence was in default. There was an individual in theCastle ofTorrenburg,whose influence with liei husband was omnipotent; but for whom she felt an aversion so insur- mountable,that scarcely could she endure him in her presence; and whom she was rash enough tp endeavour at re¬ moving, before she had ex4mined whe¬ ther her strength was equal to the un¬ dertaking, and whether this pffence offered to the antient household gods, might not draw down some heavy punishment npon her nwn unsuspecting head. This detested and persecuted object nf Elizabeth's efforts was no other, than c. 8 the
222 the keeper pf all the consciences in the Castle pf Tprrenburg, was no other than the devout Father Hilarius ! She was not aware, tha.t it was to him and Us saints, that she was chiefly indebted for the illustrious title which she bore, and the splendid station which she oc¬ cupied. Perhaps, even had she been conscious pf her obligation, she would have but little approved of the crooked paths, by which the Friar had contrived to conduct her to her elevated situ¬ ation. In fulfilment of his vow, Count Fred¬ erick had recompensed the patron-saints pf his twp derical allies mpst liberally for the possession of his adnred Eliza¬ beth. The chaplain pf Castle-March (whpse only capital fault was avarice) was well contented with the reward of his
223
his exertions : not so was Hilaiius ! He had formed far greater plans, md indulged more glorious eipectations. He had made no sort of doubt, that he should gain no less a share of the wife's confidence, than h» already possest of the husband's. Instead of this, he ob¬ tained from her nothing but avei sion and contempt ¡ and from the moment of his being convinced, that such v. ere her sentiments towards him, fury took entire possession of his misanthropic heart, and he brooded day and night over plans of swift-coming vengeance. His disappointment in the present was greatly embittered by his foreseeing the failure of all those hopes, which he had long grounded upon the future. Much time had not elapsed since his marriage, when the superannuated Frederick com- L 4 municated
• 224 municated to the diaplain in confidence certain dispositions of his estates after his death, which could nut fail to be highly disagreeable to the avaridous Mpnk. Every day more fasdnated by the perfections of his beautiful wife, the Cpunt tortured himsdf ' to discpver some means, by which he might express in the most striking manner his grati¬ tude to her, whose attentions shed a gleam pf such bright sunshine over the evening of his closing life. He secretly bequeathed to her every thmg, which it was,pp8sible for him to give, without entirely laying aside all justice to the ypung-Countesses of Werdenberg: since much aş he held himself insulted by their late conduct, still he was top gene¬ rous to deprive them of any thing, to which the name which they bore could enable
32 5
enable them to advance the claims pf justice. „ His cpnfesspr was initiated into all these mysteries. Scarcely while he listened to them, could Hilarius restrain his rage within the bounds nf decency. He saw all the fondhppes, which he had built uppn Frederick's want of heirs and attachment to the church and ¡ts servants, destroyed at pne bfow ; and he gnashed his teeth for spite to think, that it was out of his power to prevent the Count's benevolent intentions to¬ wards his wife from being carried into immediate and complete effect. As for Elizabeth, she wás entirely ignorant of those weighty proofs of his affection, which Count Frederick de¬ signed for her after his decease. She was equally ignorant of the spite and envy, L 5 whith
226 which this large bequest had excited against her in one of the most malignant of human hearts. She continued to pro¬ ceed in her stiaight-forvvard benevolent course withput turning to the right or to the left : she treated her decrepit husband with unabated kindness and attention unwearied ; and she denied herself no opportunity of convincing Hilarius, that he was the object of her fixed aversion, and that she was decidedly bent nn pro¬ curing sooner or later his expulsion from the Casde of Torrenburg. Oh ! that she had carried that design into execution before one pf the basest attempts, that ever was plptted 'by a villain's brain, was ripe enough for action! Yet perhaps the will of Heaven prdained, that this plan should be suffered to ripen, in order that it might effect 2 the
22Т
the pverthrow of its guilty author, and exhibit the merits of the npble lady of the Castle in the fullest blaze pf all their purity and lustre ! Oh I generous Elizabeth ! you for whom I write, and for whpin I trust, that I have not written in vain I Is it permitted me to relate your own glo¬ rious actions to yourself? Yet -why do I hesitate ?—She, who (I doubt not) while perusing these leaves has not hesi¬ tated to bestow many a tear of compas¬ sion on tlie undeserved sorrows, many a tribute of admiration on tlie heroic patience, many an expression of delight and gratitude at the fortunate escape, of those whom she calls— "■her enemies" —surely she need not aveit her eyes, while my faithful hand places her before the glass, in which she may behold the, L 6 reflection.
22ÍI reflection of her own excellence ! ■ She knows wdl, that I am пр flatterer. I have not concealed from her, that she is proud, rash, not disinclined to resent¬ ment for injuries, and obstinate in adhering to her determinatipns, how¬ ever incpnsiderately thpse determina¬ tipns may have been formed. But neither will I conceal, that I know her to be generous, benevolent, courageous, resolute, disinterested; an avowed enemy of vice, hpwever fasdnating be the shape which it assumes ; an enthu¬ siastic adorer of virtue, however humble be the station which it occupies, however lowly be the habit which it wears. Such iS the famt pprtrait pf her, whom future historians will paint in far more brilliant colpurs ; such is the pprtrait of Eliza¬ beth of Tprrenburg I l - Hilarius
229
Hilarius had long been secretly con¬ nected with a society of mountaineers, who (by means of the private entrance to the Donat-Fortress) might be reck- nned the Cpunt's nearest neighbours. The precise nature of this union between the Monk and the Banditti belongs to the secret history of these miscreants, in which we are not sufficiently well instructed to authorize our giving any account of it in these memoirs. Let it suffice, that the unipn was a very close one ; perhaps,_it was a long-established custom for the robbers to connect them¬ selves with some ecclesiastic, in memory of the original, founder of their society, the celebrated Abbot Luprian. Alas ! iţ is a very painful task for me, myself an ecdesiastic, the successor pf that Abbot Luprian, the cotemporary pf this 4 Monk
230 Monk Hilarius, to point out the stains, with which the vices of individuals have polluted the sacred habit!—Yet it is essential, that the whole truth should be laid before Elizabeth's eyes, and I will not hesitate to perform my duty tp the full. The avarice of Hilarius was insatiable. The custody of that deserted quarter of the Count's residence, which was now only known by the name of the Donat- Fortress, was intrusted to him ; nothing could be more convenient for the rob¬ bers than such a retreat, where they could either take refuge, when the pursuit afterHiem.was too hot to admit of their venturing back to their valley ; or where they could remain concealed and unsuspected of being in the neigh¬ bourhood, till the precise moment should arrive
231 arrive for executing their plans of devastation with the most complete success. Accordingly, no sum appeared to them to counterbalance the value of such a refuge; and Hilarius annually received an immense tribute for allowing them the use of the subterraneous pas¬ sage, and also of such of the apartments of the Donat-Fortress, as were best adapted to their purposes and profession. Here they had a well appointed ar¬ moury ; here they deposited their prey, till circumstances admitted of its removal to the valley ; and here (among many other precautions for their safety) they had not neglected to lay iná large stock of provisions, and above all seveial hogsheads of the best old Rhenish wine. But
232 But though they did npt neglect any occasion of increasing their wealth by the plunder of passengers and pfthe cpuntry at large, still there was one vast undertaking, which lay most at the hearts of the Warriors ofthe Mmntams ; for that was the title, by which the free-booters preferied being distinguish- ed. —Of this undertaking Hilarius was the original suggestor, and without his aid they were well aware, that it never could be carried into execution. The object of it was nothing less, than to put the Warriors of the Mountains in posses¬ sion of the whole domains of the Count of Torrenburg, with the exception ofsuch parts as his pious enthusiasm shouldhave induced him to bequeath to the Convent, pf which Hilarius was a worthy member. The
S'JS The plans were so well arranged, that nothing could seem more improbable than a failure : nothing indeed pre¬ vented their having been already carried into execution except tlie immoderate price, which Hilaiius demanded in recompense of his services. Matters, however, were so nearly con¬ cluded between the contracting parties, that Hilarius had occasionally introduced some of the prindpal robbers into the Castle in various disguises, in order that they might become thoroughly acquainted with the nature of the place, which they were to attack ; might spy put the weaker parts pf its defences ; and by being aware of the obstacles to their designs, might be prepared to overcome them. Confiding in the ter¬ rific tales respecting the ghosts, which haunted
234 haunted it, he had even ventured fre¬ quently to give his allies midnight entertainments in the deserted chambers of the Donat-Fortress. The supersti¬ tious domestics shook with terror, as they saw gleams of light streaming through the worm-eaten casements, and doubted .not, that the ghosts of the antient tyrants of Carlsheim and Sar- gans had invited all the other infernal spirits tp a feast in their former earthly residence. In this manner had the Count's enemies frequently been within a few hundred yards of him unsuspected; while he (good man) was dreaming, that his barred portals and lifted draw¬ bridge secured him against any possible attack. Yet his gppd fortune sp prdained it, that the striking this impprtant blow, was
235 was Still delayed from time to time : Hilarius too was of opinion, that the fittest time for making the long medi¬ tated attack would be immediately after the Count's decease, when the want of lineal heirs must necessarily produce much confusipn among the numerous claimants, and when in all probability the Castle's inhabitants would b'e found entirely off their guard. The impatient robbers were by np means satisfied with this opinion : they were for making the attempt immediately ; but unless they could convince Hilarius, their opposition availed them nothing. He consented to their taking possession of the Donat- Fortress; but he took care to keep it well locked and bolted, so that the supposed spectres could not by any means invade the inhabited part of the Castle,
236 Castle, till it shpuld be his pwn good will and pleasure to admit them. It was at this period, that the Coun- Jewes of Werdenberg were acknow¬ ledged by Count Frederick, and were immediately considered by the Monk as obstades to his designs. Looking upon Constantia as destined to the veil, his whole undivided hatred was mpnp- pplized by Ida; and he never rested, till he had ruined her in her unde'i good ppinion, nay (by meam of her mysterious flight) in the good opinion of the world. I have already related, in what manner he delivered her into the power of the robbers ; who grati¬ fied him doubly, first by relieving him from aflrson whose absence he wished, and whose blood he was not quite villain enough tn shed with his pwn hands,
237 ч hands, and secondly by rewarding him for the possession of so lovely a girl with a considerable sum of money. As to what became afterwards of the unhappy Ida, that was a matter of little interest to Father Hilarius : but it would have been a matter of very great interest, if he had guest Ran¬ dolf's intention of giving himself a legal claim to the inheritance of Sargans by the possession of her hand, and of reinstating tho detested Ida hereafter in those rights, of which the Monk had taken so much trouble to deprive her. The daily presents, which Frederick's generosity bestowed on his spiritual guide, made the latter by no means anxious to see the moment of his patron's dissolution. He had forwarded to
238 to the utmost of his power Elizabeth's marriage, not only on account of the advantages promised both to himself and his Convent by the superannuated lover, whenever this union'should be accomplished, but also from being per¬ suaded, that the affectionate care of such a wife would be giving the Count a new lease for many years of existence. But when the Monk perceived Eliza¬ beth's dedded aversion to himself, and that her rempnstrances had already produced a degree of coolness in her husband tpwards both his person and his counsels, he found it necessary to hasten the execution of his plans. The venom pf spite and vengeance, which had so long been working in his heart, at length overflowed; the glimmering sparks of treason broke into flames; his
' 289
his intercourse with the Warriors pfthe Mountain grew more close than ever ; and the peaceable inhabitants of the Castle were almost terrified out of their_ senses at the frequent feasts given by the ghosts of the antient Lords of Sargans. The reports relative to the goblins of the Donat-Fortress at length reached Elizabeth. She had the rashness on one pf these terrific nights, when all the other inmates of the Castle went about obstinately with their eyes and ears shut, as obstinately to keep hers wide open. Unattended, she ventured to approach the deserted diambers; and the sounds which reached her, as she 3tood without, convinced her, that if they really proceeded from spirits, those spirits must needs have retained a con¬ siderable
240 siderable portion of their former earthly habits. Not the most distant suspicion pf what really was the pccasipn of this uproar, was likely to suggest itself to her mind. She pnly concluded, and very naturally, that the belief in appa¬ ritions served some of her domestics as a doak to hide their midnight and dissolute entertainments from the knowledge of their superiors. This was á practice, to' which as mistress of the family she thpught it nbsplutdy necessary to put an immediate stop. Accordingly, without loss of time she informed her husband pf what she had pbserved, and of what she supposed to be the fact : the household was imme¬ diately summoned, and ordered tp attend their Lord and Lady to the haunted
241
haunted chambers, which they were determined to examine withput a mo¬ ment's delay. But the uninvited guests were already aware of their approach. One pf Eliza¬ beth's women was in the confidence of the Monk, and hastened to warn him by a signal previously agreed upon, that danger was at hand. Hilarius imme¬ diately insisted, that the lights shpuld be extinguished, and that the Banditti should retire with all speed through the secret passage, which (he asserted) would be the most spirit-like way of taking their departure. But the robbers, whp were beated with wine, declared, that it v.as high time for them to lay aside the characters of spirits, and that they never should find a mnre pros¬ perous moment for making their long- vot. iv. at meditated
242 meditated attack, than the present. The continual postponement of this attack had long made them suspe:t tlieir ally of playing them false, and they had prepared themselves for taking the power out of his hands with the very first favourable opportunity—the caverns below were filled with Banditti: those who were in the fortress were no inconsiderable number ; and confident of a fresh supply of troops if necessary, they rushed forwards to meet the Lord of the Castle, without deigning to summon to their assistance their friends in the cavern. Indeed, they looked upon victory not only as certain, but easy, when tlieir only antagonists were terrified domestics, headed by no better ¡ eneráis than an inexperienced female, ana а gray-headed man just escaped
343 escaped from the bed of sickness, and weighed down by the number of his years. Accordingly, without listening to the Monk's remonstrances, they rushed towaids the great pprtal; and Elizabeth with her followers no sooner entered the court, in which the Donat- Fortress was situated, than to their utter surprize they found themselves attacked on all sides. How lively were the colours, in whicli the enraptured Frederick de¬ scribed to me this the most glorious transaction of Elizabeth's life !—with what enthusiasm did he relate, with what enthusiasm did I hear, how in this moment of cpnsternation Elizabeth alone presejrved her presence of mind and the look of undaunted resolution ; how, when her terrified attendants re- M.2 coiled
344 coiled at the approach pf the supposed spectres, she showed them the sword, whicb gleamed in the weak hands pf their aged master, urged them to defend a life so precious, and shamed them by reproaches into following his example; how she wrested frpm the hand pf a beardless robber the weapon, which he already pointed against her husband's heart, and instantly buried it in the assassin's own ; hpw when the weak pld Frederick was at length struck to the earth, she threw herself before him, and made her breast bis shield; and how while occupied in this gener¬ ous office, and while thus devoting her own life in order to preserve his, she received a wound upon her brow, whose scar now forms the noblest or¬ nament pf the most lovely face in all Helvetia! Frederick
US
Frederick was wounded, and his attendants conveyed him away from the scene pf action; but Elizabeth still maintained her ppst, directing by her advice, and invigprating by her pre¬ sence the small but faithful body pf her retainers. The Banditti found by this time, that victory was not to be so easily gained, as- they had hitherto ex¬ pected; and they thpught it prudent tp summpn to their assistance thè lurkers in the subterranepus caverns, Elizabeth perceived, that the numbers of the assailants was suddenly and alarmingly increased. Every moment seemed to add to their strength, and it was evident, that unless soirie means pf preventing the fpe frpm profiting by this new accession pf power could be discovered, every thing was Inst, m 3 Fortunately,
246
Fortunately, in this critical moment the eye of the Heroine rested upon the portcullis, which on account both of its weight and workmanship was esteemed a master-piece of art. She sprang forwards; she stiU grasped the sword, pf whicli she had deprived the robber, and with a single blow she severed the sustaining cord. It fell with a heavy crash, and destroyed in its descent several of the new-comers, whp were pver-hasty in flying to the assistance of their hardly-pressed companions. —" Courage, my friends!" exclaimed Elizabeth with a sudden burst of joy ; " resist your enemies but for a few minutes longer, and we are sati. ! hark, how the alarm-bills make the air re¬ sound! and see! the castle-portals are thrown
247
thrown open ! rejoice ! rejoice ! our preservers arc at hand !"— It had been one of the Countess's first orders, that the alarm-bells should be sounded without delay, and as soon as any signs were observed of obedience to the signal for assistance, that the Warder should set wide the gates for the reception of those, who might hasten to their relief. She was obeyed ; but no one expected, that these pre¬ cautions would bring them any more powerful succour than the presence of a few bands of peasants, armed in haste, and unaccustomed to such midnight attacks ; or else perhaps the troops of some of the neighbouring noblemen, but who were all at too great a distance to admit of their reaching the Castle of Torrenburg, before the business should have been finally decided. M 4 But
24β But Elizabeth, when she gave these orders, was better aware pf their im- pprtance. The terrible event, which I have just beeri describing, took place pn the night preceding St. Martin's festival. St. Martin's day was also the birth-day of the Count of Torrenburg ; -a day, which Elizabeth now celebrated for the first time, since she became a wife, and wbich she was determined to distinguish by a most splendid enter¬ tainment. For many weeks had her messengers been employed in traversing the neighbouring provinces, for the purpose of inviting the most distin¬ guished noblemen and their families to be present at a tournament, to be held at the Castle of Torrenburg in honour of the nativity pf its Lord. Count Frederick, though he was now too much enfeebled by age to admit of his
249
taking a part in them himself, stilt delighted in witnessing such martial sports: they recalled to him many a pleasing and many a glorious occurrence pf his honourable life; and Elizabeth had not failed to select for his amuse¬ ment on his birth-day that particular species, which, her owh observation and the experience of others had given her reason to know, would be most acceptable to her husband. It was pn this very 'night, that the invited guests were expected at fhe Castle, accompanied by their wives and daughters with a numerous retinue. It had been settled, that they should not arrive till after midnight, in order that their being in the Castle might con¬ tinue unknown to the Count till the next morning; when it was Eliza- M 5 beth's
250
beth's design to conduct him (still ignorant of what was going to take place) to the prepared lists, where he wpuld unexpectedly find himself seated in the arde pf his best friends and well-wishers, in order to witness that kind of entertainment, in which he most peculiarly delighted. AU her preparations had been made with the greatest secrecy; none but a few of her most immediate friends and do¬ mestics were in her confidence; and therefore few except herself were aware, that the alarm-bells were sounded for the purpose of calling to her assistance those expected guests, who (she was certain from the lateness of the hour) must needs be at no great distance. Her hopes were soon verified. The draw-bridge had scarcely fallen, when 3 it
251 it re-echoed under the hasty trampling of horses'-hoofs. The court-yard was soon filled with soldiers, who withput staying tp demand what was the matter, hastened with drawn swords tp assist the Countess and her faithful sup¬ porters. Elizabeth was a heroine in the moment of need; but her heart was still that of a weak and tender female. She was anxious to rejoin her bleeding husband ; her wound was painful ; and still more painful to her feelings was the sight of the blood, which streamed around her, and of the mangled corses with whicli the pavement was strewed. Most joyful was she, when she found herself at liberty to resign her danger¬ ous and hateful post; her fiiend of youth, Richard of Ulmenhorst, and Count Oswald of March (her brother) M G took
252
took the command pf her forces; and she now flew tp the chamber pf that busband, who but a few minutes befpre bad been indebted to her for his life. She found, that his wound (it was but a slight one) was already drest; and that he was earnestly insisting, that his attendants should lead him to rejpin his glorious wife, and suffer him either tp conquer by her side, or perish with that dear one : they sank intp each other's arms, and melted intp tears pf jpy at finding themselves once more in safety. Seldom have youthful kwers, even in their happiest moments, felt such unmixed pleasure, as was now fdt by Elizabeth, while she clasped the decrepit Frederick to her heart. Before day-break the victory was complete. The knights, who had been 1 . invited
253
invited to a mock-fight, and had found pne sp serious, did not leave their work only half finished—the portcullis was raised again ; every corner of the Dpnat- Fprtress was investigated : the entrance to the subterranepus vaults was found ppen and unguarded, and these alsp underwent an examination. Here a considerable number ofthe free-bopters were discovered, and after an obstinate resistance slaughtered ; but a few pf them found means to effect their escape from the caverns, and carried the news of this disaster to their associates in the valley of Halsberg. Gero was one of the first, who fell in the assault; Randolf was taken prisoner : as to the author of all this mischief, the infamous Hilarius, he was found to all appearance lifeless in one of
254 of the caverns, whither he had retreated during- the heat of the combat. He had suffered so severely both in the conflict, and from the pressure of those, who (like himself) crouded to take refuge in the secret vaults, that though life was not quite extinct in him, he expired, before he had time to acknow. ledge his numerous transgressions, and receive their absolution. My know¬ ledge of his private transactions and views was gleaned from the writings, which were afterwards found in his chamber, and in his cell at the Convent, of which he was so unworthy a member. These papers were confided to me by the Bishop of Coirà ; and their content» were such as rendered them highly improper to meet the eyes of the laity, who are already but top ¿pt to. scoot
255 scoff, when a church-man slips, and from whom the servants of Religion ought carefully to veil the errors pf her unsteady children.—But the love, of truth, the interests of justice, and the welfare of tvvo poor persecuted crea¬ tures, made it necessary for me to place everything in the dearest light before the eyes of her, who (I am certain) needs only to be convinced, that they are really persecuted, in order to become their most strenuous defender. So entirely had their evil star the ascendant, that even this overthrow of liix'r enemies only served to make the Sisters appear in the eyes of the world in a stil' more odious point of view. Hilarius died without having time to Acknowledge the pains, which he had taken to effect Ida's rum : it was not till lately,
256
lately, that I pbtained the certainty pf the Monk's perfidy, and of the inno¬ cence pf my рррг wards ; facts appeared so strong against her, that even I for a cpnsiderable time was compelled to give up the fruitless office pf defending her ; and the proofs,which spcSe so lpud¬ ly in her disfavour, seemed to increase in number with every fresh occurrence. Several of the robbers had been made prisoners, and underwent a close exa¬ mination respecting the authors of their enterprize and its object. Among nther things, they confest, that a damsel, understood to be a Countess'of Wer¬ denberg, had made a long abode in their society; that she was evidently -the Pbject pf their captain's affectipn; and that it was repprted ampng 'he Banditti, that she had conccr.'.ed to become
257 become his wife, pn conditipn pf his establishing her daims to the domains nf Sargans and Carlsheim by force pf arms. Randplf, being questioned re¬ specting these assertions, in a great measure confirmed them ; he only denied, that Ida had ever given her consent in express wprds to the enter- prize; but he profest his firm belief, that pn those conditions he had every reason to believe her disposed to unite her fate with his. He had dropped such plain hints of his designs against the Count, that she could not possibly have misunderstood him, thpugh her dis¬ cretion made her prefer the appearing ignorant of a scheme, whose object was the ruin of her former benefactor: but as she must have gathered his intention from various circumstances, and as she still
258 continued to treat him, not merely with unabated, but even with increased complaisance, he had certainly good reason to suppose, that his meditated plan was by no means disagreeable to her.—Alas! poor Ida! had she dared to abate that complaisance, and to ex¬ press the sentiments of abhorrence, with? which the robber's views inspired her, what would have been her reward?— ill usage ; death perhaps ; or what would have been still worse, life with the loss pf honour ! But these reflections did not occur to Randolf pr his hearers; they believed his arguments to be well founded, and that Ida had approved of the design, which had so nearly terminated her benefactor's existence. That she had been privy to it, is true : she had not misunderstood
259
misunderstood RandolPs hints, though she was not aware of the exact nature of his intentions ; but no sooner was she in safety, than her first object was to provide for that pf the Count of Torrenburg. The village, which at length afforded them security and rest, was called Edel- Bothen : here they were compelled to pass the night and the succeeding morn¬ ing, in order to recover from the fatigues of their late painful journey ; and it was fiom hence, that a messenger was dispatched to the Castle of Torren¬ burg with a letter, written by Con¬ stantia in a disguised hand and vvithout a signature. Ida, who still tiembled at the thoughts of being eitlier compelled to give her hand to the old Count of Montfort, or to seclude herself for life v. ithin
260 within the dreary walls of a doister, was unwilling to let her incensed unci* know, where she might be found; and Constantia, though she had hersdf no motive for concealment, was afraid of being the means of discpvering her sister. With much difficulty, and after many unsuccessful attempts, the follow¬ ing lines were at length completed, and a peasant was dispatched with them to the Castle of Tprrenburg.
Ml
Cpunt of Tprrenburg ! Peruse these lines frpm an unknown but sincere friend, whp trembles, lest the warning should come too late. In your domestic priest, the worthless Hilarius, you nourish a traitor, whose plans if successful will terminate in ynur destruc¬ tion. He has already driven many innocent perspns intp the jaws pf ruin : and npw tP finish his career with a master stroke pf villainy, he meditates the pverthrow of his generous bene¬ factor. Secure him, and let him and his papers undergo a strict examination. Above all, set a watch over the Donat- Fortress, and let the private entrance be
262
be carefully closed up, which you will find on the left hand of the window in the large chamber, which terminates the southern wing of the ruins. That entrance communicates with a subterra¬ neous passage, well known to the rob¬ bers, wlio have so long been the terror of Helvetia, and with whom Hilarius carries on the most intimate correspon¬ dence. Hasten then to prevent their making any ill use of their knowledge of this communication ; and if this warning should be in time to save you from danger, the writers of this letter will thank Heaven as for a benefit con¬ feree J upon themselves.
263
This well-meant epistle did not reach the Castle of Torrenburg till several days after St. Martin's day. lt was read aloud at the Count's table, when the hall was almost filled with knights and ladies, who were assembled there on account of the festivities, with which Elizabeth thought it right to celebrate her Lord's escape from the perilous Banditti, llie letter, while reading, was frequently interrupted by loud burits of scornful laughter and expressions of derision from the whole assembly ; yet 'tis said, that Frederick and Elizabeth did not laugh, and were quite silent. It was easily
'264
easily guest, from A'hom this unavailing warning came ; and Count Oswald pf March, (whose family pride had been stung to the quick by young Montfort's conduct on the bridal day, and whose affection for his sister made him the inveterate enemy of any-one, who offered her any injury pr unkindness) insisted upon being allowed to answer the letter. According to her instructions, Ida's messenger had no sooner delivered the letter, than he hastened away from the Castle: but two horsemen were dis¬ patched after him in all haste, and the peasant was compelled to return for an answer. That answer pained the Sisters to the very heart ; they preserved it carefully; they read it over and over again, and every time with fresh pain ; and
265
and they at length showed it tp me, as a proof pf their total renunciation by their uncle. Count Oswald had written as follows.
vol. iv. »
266
The fair Ida's wdl-conceived letter arrived at the very time, which she in¬ tended ; that is, when it was too late to be of any use. First to invent schemes of treachery, and then when they fail, to assume the part of a warning friend against those very schemes, was cer¬ tainly one of the most dexterous arti¬ fices, that ever was produced by female ingenuity ! Unfortunately, there are some people, who are not deceived even by artifices so dexterous. The Count of Torrenburg has been rescued from the Banditti, not by the fair Ida's warn¬ ing after the event had taken place, but by the courage and affection of an angel, whpse
267 whose name was pnce Elizabeth of March ; whose name would have been Elizabeth nf Montfort, had it not been for the fair Ida's coquetry ; and whose name is now Elizabeth of Torrenburg, in spite of all the pains, which the fair Ida gave herself to prevent her ever bearing that illustrious title. Yes ! Eli¬ zabeth is Countess of Torrenburg: I protest, I cannot but pity the poor dam¬ sel Ida for so severe a disappointment, as this union must give to her * iews upon Count Frederick's inlierium e. Besides the loss of her benefactor's geod cpinion, she has also to regret that of her lover the robber Randolf, who inhabits one of the Count's dungeons ; so that all her hopes in that quarter are completely annihilated. It seems too, that she has not even contrived tp secure the light and N 2 wprthless
208
worthless heart of Henry of Montfort, vvho (probably grown already weary of her) hás returned to his unde's resi¬ dence ; as report says, a sincere penitent for havmg suffered himsdf to lose such a treasure as the hand and heart of Elizabeth through the artifices of a per¬ fidious coquette. Probably by this time the fair Ida has found out, that this maxim contains more truth than she supposed ; viz. " that ciooked paths lead to precipices." Randolf, the fair Ida's lover, is a prisoner ; Henry of Montfort, the fair ld i's dupe, has recovered his senses ; Gero and Hilarius,the fair Ida's friends, are both dead; and Count Frederick, the fair Ida's intended victim, is aware, that Hilarius is not the only snake, whom he has warmed in his bosom. Count
2С9 Count Frederick of Torrenburg sendi the fair Ida his best wishes for her speedy repentance, and ventin es to suggest, that a convent will be in future her fittest residence.—lie begs how ever, that this may only be considered as his advice; since looking upon her no longer as his relatipn, he has no longer any right to give her a command. At all events, he begs, that whether she takes that advice or not, she will not think it necessary to inform him of her proceedings, since he has now but one wish on earth respecting her j to hear of her no mpre ·
N3
270
Ida's tears streamed plentifully, while she read these cutting lines. She gave the letter in silence to Constantia, who felt the unmerited reproaches no less acutely than her sister. A long pause ensued, which at length was broken by Constantia. —" There is no mention made of me '" said she,— и no more, than if I were no longer in existence!—Well! well! it is better to be quite forgotten, than to be so remembered !"— —" How could they guess," ex- claimed.Ida, " that Iwas the writer of that letter ? -a letter, which He, who sees the heart, can witness for me, I wrote
271
wrote out of pure good will to m)> unkind uncle."— ■ —" And hpw strange," rejoined Constantia, " that they should misun¬ derstand your character so completely, as to believe you capable of such per¬ fidy ! And how cruel of them tp in¬ sult ypur misfortunes by such an un¬ feeling taunting letter !"— With such inquiries did they torture themselves during a whole tedious day; and they endeavoured in vain to dis¬ cover, what part' pf Ida's conduct could have authorised a man,' who had once shown her so much benevolence, to view her on a sudden in a light so per¬ fectly odious. It appeared too from this letter, that Count Frederick's ill ppinion of her was also the opinion of the world; and what had she done to ft * deserve
872
deserve tins universal ill opinion '—The Sisters were not aware, that a-prejudice once conceived gams strength with every minute, and presses into its services the must insignificant occurrences ; till the sppppsed pffence from a molehill is swdled into a mountain, and shade added to shade gradually makes the detested object appear in colours suffi? cientiy black, to justify its being; made the object of detestation.· Ь No mention had been, made of Con¬ stantia in Count Oswald's letter, because on the one hand her gentle inoffensive manners had prevented her having any enemies ; and on the other hand, her supposed participation in her sister's plans prevented the parties con¬ cerned from being her friends,—It appeared, that after quitting the Castle of
273
of March рп the memorable day of Elizabeth's intended wedding she had not thought proper to return to her convent. She had been way-laid by those robbers, jjiho (as it was now believed) Wereiatthat very time in con¬ federacy with her sister. No pne doubted; that the free^booters had acted under Ida's ılu-cçtions, and with Con¬ stantia's concurrence; that .the latter was totally under, the influence of ther former ί and. that if àie oue sister was not quite· so deserviag of ce»,3ure as the other, she war at least) equally un» worthy of protection, It was con¬ cluded, that she was at that momenti Ida's companion y and it was agreed by all, that the most propei mode of treat¬ ing hear,, vías riot to bestow on her even theslightest notice. и 5 Wheœ
274
When the bitterness nf the first shock waá pver, the Sisters fouhd, that they had no reason to consider their situation as at all altered for the worse by the perusal of this iásvihmtr, letter. ^ It had not been in their contemplation to effect a reconciliation with the Count pf Tor¬ renburg; after so much'as''^they had suflered, they ho löiiger indulged a wish for any thing except retirement and're- pose. Ida's 1 resentment against hei lover, for having Offered his hand to Elizabeth, was not yet appeased : and after the injurious suspidons, to whicli her conduct at the Castle qf March had fas she learned from Count Oswald's Jetter) given rise, she thought it highly incumbent cn her to make np inquiries respecting him. Shef accordingly re- Solved to verify the redminder pf he» I 2 u sister's
275
sister's fortunate vision, and re-assume the name of Rosanna ŢelL — Constanti» for a while refused to follow her exam¬ ple, and declared her determination of hiding herself for ever from the world in the Convent of Engelberg : but Ida besought her, with so much earnestness and with so many tears, ~" not to de¬ prive her ofthe society of the only per¬ son, who still loved her, and whom she still dared to love," that ConstandaiWiis compelled however reluctantly tp give way. , 1 ι ί ν A ring of some'value, whicli Ida. w'oie on the day, which made her a captive, and of'which Randolf's respect had prevented his depriving her, purchased a small hut and garden, in which the Countesses of Werdenbergwçre but tee happy to obtain a shelter. ^НещЛеп ν Θ they
276
they remained in tranquil obscurity, unknowing and unknown: till the decease pfthe Count pf Torrenburg and its consequences compelled them once more to take a part in the world, and again become acquainted with its splen¬ dours, and its cares. By the will of Count Frederick, the whole of his domains descended to his wifav; the Damsels of Werdenburg were disinherited, nor was this sufficient. A dauie ofthe most disgraceful import declared the Count's reasons for re¬ nouncing them, and thus held them .up to the world as proper marks for the finger of contempt. It seems, that there still existed a younger branch of the Iiouse of Werdenberg, but with whpse members the Sisters had never held any intercourse. The ignominious clause in Count
277 Count Frederick's will greatly offended the pride of these high-born noblemen. That any persons belonging to their family should deserve to be mentioned upon record in such opprobrious terms, appeared to them the most intolerable of all offences ; and they vowed never to rest, till they had compelled the delinquents to renounce their title to a name, which (till they assumed it) had never been stained with disgrace.— They agitated this > business with so rtyfch effect, that at lengdi an act was obtained from the Emperor, enjoining two Damsels calling themselves by the names of Ida and Constantia, Countesses of Werdenberg, to lay aside those titles, as having forfeited them by their dis¬ graceful conduct, even supposing that they really possest by birth a right to bear
278
bear them; a fact, pf which, the act pro¬ fessed to doubt the veracity.—It also forbade the reception of the saidDamsels into any religious community, except such as were specified by name, and which were those only, whose institu¬ tion (as was universally known) per¬ mitted the acceptance of .persons of dissolute characters ■ for the laudable purpose of reformation. The Lords of Werdenberg were so diligent in making this act public, that it even reached the obscure valley, in which the Sisters had sheltered them¬ selves under borrowed names. Little as they valued the pride of birth, and the empty boast of high-sounding title, the disgrace thrown upon, them by this so public act was too insulting tp be en¬ dured even by their humility. It was absolutely
279 absolutely necessary, that some steps should be taken to vindicate themselves frpm such undeserved aspersions. Ac¬ cordingly without loss of time they addrest letters to the Abbess of Zuridi and' to their guardians, Abbot Conrad, and the good Bishop pf Coirà. They disclosed the place of their concealment, asserted the> gross injustice of the Em¬ peror's act, and avpwed their willingness tp lay every particular respecting them¬ selves or their conduct before either of their, guardians, or the respected Abbess. / Till this 1 period they had neglected to apply 'to these firm friends ; because they felt a total indifference to she station, which they had fost; considered the pleasures of the great world as withdrawn from them for ever ; and only wished tp pass the remainder pf their
282 thoughts towards the grave, than the bridal bed ; but still though he was him¬ sdf no longer the hero of them, his marrying-plans presei ved their long- established dominion over his fancy. Henry was his undoubted heir; his attention to Count Egbert during his Ulness bad made adeep and very favour¬ able impression upon the 4 old man's mind ; he suddenly became a favourite, to secure whose happiness in life was now Count Egbert's chief and almost Only 'pbject; and in the, old man's opinion, happiness in life was tp he obtained by np other possible means, than by marriage. Henry was nearly of the same opinion with Mm· Un¬ luckily, the only point, on which they differed, was the only material point in the whole affair. Both agreed, that a marriage
283 marriage ought to take place ; but each proposed a different per.:on, and neither would give up the object of his choice. Henry insisted upon his engagement to Ida, and dedared, that while she existed, honour as well as love forbade his offering his hand to another : while Count Egbert protested with equal ve¬ hemence, that he never wquld consent to the union of his heir with a girl, whom the last will of her nearest rela¬ tion had deprived of her inheritance and devoted to disgrace. The bride pf his selection presented herself in a far more flattering light ; 'twas Elizabeth, the young and admired heiress of Tor¬ renburg, whose hand would confe wealth and ppwer pn her husband, and Whpse heart had formerly been warmly disposed in Henry's favour. As he listened to this eulogium upon Elizabeth, an
280 their lives in tranquillity and pblivipn. Their letters communicated the greatest jny to those,to whom they were addrest ; and Abbot Conrad lost not a moment in hastening to comfort the poor afflicted ones, and to assure them· of his unabated regard and anxiety for their welfare. It was np difficult taskďor thè Sisters to convince this partial friend of their innocence. He insisted upon the neces¬ sity of their returning to the world, and Constantia consented to quit her solitude : but Id» was resolute лазгег again to resume her proper station, till her honour and reputation were re¬ established in their full purity and with undiminished lustre- And howis this to be effected ì Oh ! EUzabeth, it is you alone, whp can answer
281 answer that question. You have seen, how these unjustly persecuted Girls have been deprived pf every thing, pf their inheritance, pf their fair fame, pf the very name, to which their birth entitled them : ynu have seen their in¬ nocence and ypur pwn error. Your generosity, your love of justice will tell you, what you ought to dp : to those noble sentiments, tp your own noble self, I dare trust my cause without a single terror.— Henry of Montfort's illness had been long and dangerous. He was scarcely recovered, when two successive attacks of appplexy convinced his unde pf a truth, whicli he had long been unwilling to confess to himself. He could no longer dehy, that it would be more suitable at his time pf Hfe to turn his thoughts
284 an involuntary sigh escaped from the ne¬ phew's bosom. Ah ! he felt -but too sensibly the whole value of Elizabeth, and was fully consdous, how dear she would have been to him, bad not Ida possest prior and more fordble claims on his affections. Now all thoughts of EUzabeth were quite unavailing: his heart by right was another's, and was np longer worthy of Elizabeth's accept¬ ance. This he declared to his unde, and exprest his resolution of keeping his engagements to Ida in terms so strong, that the old Count lost his patience completely. In the heat of passion, he ordered Henry to quit the Castle that instant, nor ever presume to come again into his presence. He was obeyed ; but the command was scarcely given, before it was re¬ pented of. He reflected, that this very banish-
285 banishment would leave his nephew at liberty tp contract the union, which it was so much his wish to prevent. The old man was little acquainted with Ida's character and turn of mind : he knew not, that delicate as were her notions on the subject of honour, the warmest entreaties of her beloved Henry would by no means be sufficient to persuade her to become Countess of Montfort. Count Egbert's guards followed Henry, overtook him, and brought him back to his paternal Castle, where he was ordered into close confinement. How little did the writer of these lines ever imagine, that he should live to see menaces and chains employed, in order to compel a youth to give his hand to Elizabeth of March ! Henry exdaimed lpudly against such injustice ! He demanded, that the opi¬ nion
28(5 nion of his proposed bride should bo taken in this affair. He declared himself convinced, that he could not possibly appeal to a more just tribunal, and that after what had past, a proposal of .marri¬ age would be rejected with no less firm¬ ness by Elizabeth, than by himself. The old Count denied this last assertion most positively. He maintained (and not without some show of plausibility) that in spite of his past offences Elizabeth was still weak enough to cherish a secret attachment to the man, by whom she had been so unvvoithily forsaken: nay, he even went so far as to piofess his firm belief, that the sevei ity, with whicli she had treated the Damsels of Werden¬ burg, had its origin in this attachment ; and that nnthing but female spite and jealousy against a successful rival, made her
287
her sp obstinately shut her eyes and ears against the justice of those claims, which in the opimon of many person» (thoroughly capable to decide upon such matters) were held to be most just, and founded on an unquestionable basis. Such indeed was now the general opinion. Time, and the exertions of their guardians had cleared up many suspicious circumstances, respecting the Sisters ; and the popular cry was fast turning to the side of Count Frederick's lineal heirs. Their uncle's testament underwent much censure, and created a kind of prejudice and ill will against Her, who had benefited by it so largely. Elizabeth herself was in some measure the cause of this loss pf public estima¬ tion, which in truth every day dimi¬ nished. She had accustomed the worn for
28S for so long to see her act with uniform generosity, and to consider her as a person totally exempt from the ordinary imperfections pf her sex, that as soon as her husband's will was made public, every one prepared themselves for some decided act of heroic self-denial in favour ofthe disinherited Sisters; and which perhaps they would not have expected from any Pther than Elizabeth, because they would not have believed any other capable of such an act. However, it is certain, that from Hei· they dtd expect it ; it is also certain, that their expec¬ torions were disappointed ; and unwill¬ ing to allow, that they had themselves required too much, they were extremely displeased with Her, whom they accused of not having done enough. Besides Cus, Elizabeth evidendy fell into a great error,
28Э error, in dealing with her inherited possessions, as if they had been her own purchased and personal property. Formed by nature to be no less rash than generous, ' she gave away whole districts, castles, and towns with as little concern, as if they had been of no more value than the roses, which encircled her head or bloomed upon her bosom. This inconsidenteEberality produced the greatest discontent among those subjects,' whom she bestowed away with? so little ceremony- She is already informed of the uproar and confusion; which ensued ; but she is by no means aware of the extreme danger, in which she was at one time involved. The discontented vassals denied her right ito mike them over to another, and declared themselves to be bwfull^l ι vol. iv. о the
290
the vassals of the young: Countesses of Werdenberg: they enterad into a secret correspondence with the neighbouring Switzers: they dispatched messengers tp tlie valley, where the Sisters had taken refugfj and assi« ed them pf thent firm resolution to support their rights. Conf tanti* was already departed; they found Ida atone m her humble cottage, and made the purport· of their coming known to her. Tears of'joy trickled down her cheeks as she listened, and her first wnrds were prayers pf gratU tude tp Heaven. — t* My worthy friends,!' said she at length, * your words have påven me the only comfort, which I now could krak for pn this side tlte grave.' The Ida, whom a whole good and honest •people demands fpr their sovereign, can
a»i
can never be that traitress, that unprirt- cipled wanton, that ungrateful snake, which I have been termed so publidy a*d so unjustly. Your application has given me ЬасЦ my honour, has reconciled me with mysdf : this is all I could v-4îı for ; now leave me, my friends, and bear with you my warmest tlianks. Be faithful to your liege-lady ; Heaven and myunde's will have destined her for your protrectress, and ypu wUl find her a noble pne. I know well her merits, and admire them ; I envy her not her good fortune ; but be assured, that even did my happiness depend on my establishing those rights, which you staterne to possess, the Ida whom your deputation has thus 1 signally lior.oueed, at (east deserves that honour too wtll, to seek any benefit however great by 1 · о 2 dan-
ees -clandestine, and therefore by unworthy jneans."— , ч The deputies listened to her with astonishment ; they requested her' to reflect coolly upon their proposals, and left her with a promise to return. And they did return, furnished with new and much more forcible arguments ; —and yet these arguments were em¬ ployed in vain. They had discovered Ida's former affection for Henry : they applied to Count Egbert, and laid their plans before him· As they appeared to reconcile all differences between his nephew and himself, he readily pro¬ mised his assistance : .¡and the deputies now delivered a letter to Ida, in which Count'Egbert assured her of Henry's unabated attachment : he magnified the fortitude, with whieh his nephew bad Re¬ sisted
243 sisted all attempts to shake his fidelity ; and he conjured her to accept the title of Countess of Montfort, since without the ppssessipn of her hand there was np happiness in life fpr Henry. The pppr Ida wept, astshe read this letter·: every lineiseeinedi an arrow in hen very' heartl She was coneeioiis, that in her presenti humble state ishe could never ibecome.1 Her lovet's hriHcL and that thei old Count's consent was entirely grounded ou the prospect pf hér succeeding to Count Frederick's inheritance.—Yet she stiU shuddered at the thoughts pf obtaining the accom¬ plishment of her fondest wishes by means, which she felt to be unworthy of her-, she still positively rejected the; proppsals pf the embassy,' and dedared: herself convinced, that Henry of.Mont- p3 fort
29*
fort was as little disposed as herself tp assist any plan, whose object was to injure Elizabcttu The deputies stil) pzest liver to comply-, they would take no refusal ; and at length tn free herself from their [importunity she kilt the valley privately, and took refuge within »Convent, the name of which she con¬ cealed from'every one except ber sister and the Abbot of CloisteriCurwald. Eliiarjetu's knowledge of thesétraiuv actions V.TB, confined to tbtir mejie Λίαν ward appearance. She knew, that she was calumniated by secret enemies, and justified by unknown friends ; but little did she suspect, that these favourable jţidges of hen conduct were »hose ivcry persohs, againtt suhorri'she had no№ ashed in her heart the most inveterato, prejudice. Its true, that she ινω not ι o without
29S without real friends, wflling even to risk her displeasure, rather than suffer her to labour under such gross errors : the-Abbot of Curwu'd often endeavmired to lay the history of the unfortunate Sisters before her eyes, but in vain t Noone understood better than Ehzabeth the secret nf imppsmg silence cm those, whom she suspected pf an intention to lay that, which it was by any means disagreeable to her to hear. Sht· suddenly thought £t to take up her abode in the Convent of Zurich, and there indulge her grief for the loss of Count Frederick without restraint. This was a step, which her differences with her discontented vassals rendered both agreeable to herself, and proper in the eye pf the world : into the bargain, it possest the further advantage (though 0 4, she
296 she thought it as well to confine th.s motive foe her sedusion tp-her own bosom) pf freeing her frpm the weari- some remonstrances of the Abbot, and from the truths, which he was so obsti¬ nately bent uppn placing before her eyes. Its true, she was still exposed to receiv¬ ing letters from him; but. those it was in her power not to answer ; ot indeed not even to read, if the JL-st lines gava her reason to believe, that the remainder would aflprdher but little satisfaction. "But Elizabeth was tpp gopd, too noble, to bc entirely deserved by -triad? and virtue, however sedulously,she strove to shun them. t ¡They pursued her to the Convent, and their iniplqring voices often spøke tq.her in the stillness pf her solitary cell. · I know from gopd authority, that many a sedd of good has fallen
297
allen upon her heart, whichsheliasvamly endeavoured to choak in brambles : and should I succeed in my attempt to seduce her unconsciously Into perusing the his¬ tory of the Damsels of Werdenberg, undenthe tide pf «The Sisters without a Name," (a title, which describes them but too' well, since injustice and error have robbed them of their proper pne) I shall, look "upnn the victory as already ffpn. And yet by such a victory, What will be gained ì Hpw is it in Elizabeth's power to benefit these persecuted girls ' Constantia, whp (unknown to her for¬ mer friend) now inhabits the same Convent with hef, demands' nothing in this world except permission tb takethe veil: Ida is ι contented with her humble habitation near the Lake pf Thun; o S and
193 aud .fer -from requiring from Elizabeth anything snore than mutual forgiveness, she is «¡Hing to compensate for the in- voluntai^mortiucatioiijwliichshecatisod ţo her omkèr bridal<iay,.by the sacrifice of everything ; even ef that, which she holds deires» í Yţs, Elizabeth; she "it witting tp sacrifice even-the hand arul affection« qf her Henry t > / 'The proposal made bythetWputiee of Elizabeth's rebellious vassals was laid before Henry by his unde» 'Vhe'plan, whose ajbject was the rum of the-aflisue- pectipg Counteas of Tprcenbtirg, was so well laid, and the preparations were in "such forwardness, that к seemed almost impossible for the design te faü . Henry- gave al· feigned compliance to· the old Cuunťs proposakv andı veas, rewsrďcd with his liberty» '-Ehe ftav. use, which 2 j he
tm fie made of it, Was to hasten to Richard of Uhnenhpràt, to whom Elizabeth had entrusted the government df het do¬ mains during- her sedusion in «he Con¬ vent. To him did yöüng Montfort discover the conspiracy agamis* thè Heiress of Torrenburg, and «hey agreed. topon measures for defeating it. The noble Richard had loved Elisabeth ift the earliest spring of his life; and had no reason to despair, till the blooming Henry appeared and; won the prize, almost before He himself desired it. Richard now first knew the real cha¬ racter pf his So Umg-hated rivai· aftd to know it, and admire it, v. ite. bat the« same. The oeflffrJiracjr «as defeated; the new* rriertds flcrsnrSMd ; and Henry hastened to the Lake-of Then. —- rt Ida!" he exdaimed, ·* I amUbme ) о 6 and
seo and for eyer! I have broken through every obstacle, which divided us ; I have severed every chain,which detained me from ypur arms, I renounce the name of Montiort, which has inflicted upon me npthing but misfortune: never shall the man, who so unjustly iPrds it over my possessio.^, hear pf his persecuted nephew more. You, Ida, must renounce the title of Werdenberg, which has been the eause to you of so much sorrow, and resume that beloved name, which you bore, when, we first met. Tins. cottage, this garden, and this little flock are enough tc content all the wishes of two loving hearts i and Erwin Mdthal and Rosanna Tell will pasa together such days, as even, the happiest might look. upta with envy."— Ida fdt in her bosom a painful con¬ flict
SOI flictibetween love and duty. She had renounced wealth and splendour for herself without a pang ; but ought she to renounce themifor Henry ? Oup-' e she to suffer him to quit for her a na¬ tion; on which he -was calculated to conferì such lustre? Such were her doubts; yet undoubtedly tove would at length have triumphed, had not äreport reached her; that Elizabeth's situation was iJbecomplmore difficult than even Нет vassals . ã given-up in despair all hopes of persuading the Sisters to com. tøt the Cpunt ¡of< Torrenburg's wilt Thcy found, that Elizabeth was destined tq remain their sovereign: yet they protested (with such violence as gave teajSoUj to apprehend the most danger- «us consequences from, a refusal) that , on
302 on one condition onlywauldiheyreturn peaceably to their obed'erice Thatcpn- eutioii was, that if Elizabeth was to be stal theurliegeJadyvJ Henry of Montfort should becottiB tben- leigo-lrad l· and they swore, that she never should enter the •Castleeŕ Torronbuig except as Henrys wife, unies« she chese- tot see; het way strewn with blecdmg cevses iLMteis uom Hathard;of ïafcaenhoest conarmedthisMport, aed-rii« generous Mais resolution vras' tolotn without i. momcnťs delay. t ι < ■u-4 tŞeemy beloved " she exclaimed and embraced Mm! for (the las« time. « Τβιί were .net bajrn' to wa»e you» days иг tiie obstvwUy of these srladé* Power and' spteaidosr rortfl tire propeif sphírt ierrpuito! móv« in,>end*9se it is
«03 is not in the poor Ida's power to bestow ! Gp then, Henry; protect Elizabeth'; content her people; make your 4vi&, make your vassals, make Jwttcif^happy^ ypur piaises will reach me even in this secluded valley ........Then I shall be happy too-!"— Henry obeyed her : to refuse was in futh impossible! With every hour and from every quarter fresh entreaties arrived, all assuring him, that if he meant to rescue the Countess of Tor¬ renburg from the fury of her rebellious subjects, not a moment must be lost.— He determined to sacrifice every other cpnsideration, to that of Elizabeth's welfare : he is arrived at Zurich : he has renounced his claims to Ida'b affec¬ tions ; Ida has renounced her rights to hr
her unde'» inheritance; and to-morrow will see Henry pf Montfort kneeling at the feeţ pf Elizabeth, and will hear him offer her his hand for the second time.
r
305
ЕЩАВЕТН ÖF TÓRHENBÜRG. _______ ! PART Tim EIGHTH I Elizabeth, Countess ef Torrenburg, to Cen· rad, Abbot of Çloııter-Curvıald. МИ Conrad ' Conrad I how was it pps- sibki/or ţue tp mistake for a moment the characters pf yçur pen, for thpse pf аду nfher ? Pf that pen, which hjte its maşier'ţ persuasive tongue, knows how to
see
to blend truth, raillery, and praise toge¬ ther so artfully, that the heart feels itself irttsisţibly ,subdued, irresistibly cpm- peUed to follow, whither soever it is your pleasure to conduct it' I was aware of your power · it was therefore tii^. I fled froin your presence, that I shunned your conversation, that I declined ypur correspondi. ice. I knew wel), that your eloquence could give {t fair appearance even tp the worst cause ; and at that time (da's cause was be¬ lieved by me пжЬсаше of the worst, otherwise l.would not have fled from its discussion. ' But now^how are my Sentiments changed' Helen, samted Helen' now then the timé is' arrived for my IrAîratîng thy glorious example: Ida is a second Amal-
807
Amalberga: Eüxabeth shall be a second Helen! Neţ: Helen's curse shall not faU upon mr head,: I will not hate those, whom ¡bi kas blest; I will not rob her beloved ones pf their inheritance. Look down on. oie, fair saint ! Behold; I sacrifies to ,Jda tlut, which is most prsdens lb tme, феаВесИо»1 of my heart, thethap. finess pf my fife, the hand ef Henry : aiidran youdoubt, whetitr I will restore to her that which I prize so littfav -лее* Aandŕuls of sordid earth ì ι Conrad, my «Ые sou! is In a storm ! I scarcely 'know, what I say......what I' Write...... what I think..... .'m the present moment, Г can only feel !— taTe* ere I dose my letter, learn thus much. Constantia is with me; yester¬ day
soe
day I clasped her. to my, heart. Alaa! for the gentle, innocent, suffering girl ' Never did my bosom· harbour against itn pne spark of ill-will : her intercourse would have been like balsam to the wpunds pfi my heart, even while Ihated Ua as the inflietbr óf thosei wounds. •It wascrud inypu, my good. Abbot, to letba· inhabit tha same dwelling with her for so kmg, and y rt heep me in ignorance, that such a blessingiwasio даас me. л . 1 ι' v In truth, you. have not dealt well with 'ttv th/ovghonţ ; neither yourself, Con¬ rad, nqr your confidante the Abbess of Zurich. The most secret recesje» of myxoid were .knowni ţo ¡yo»,, while I believed jthtim to be dpstid lagauist all theworld; you kflest*much, of whiçA I would
309
would have purchased the knowledge with my whple wealth, and which ypu cpncealed from me far too long. I thought, that I acted without being Pbservedl and ypu were busied in watching and numbering ever; step which I took. I cannot feel quite atis- fied with your proceeding; towards me; my heart involuntarily breaks ont into reproaches and complaints. Yet neither complaints nor reproaches can now avail. The dye is cast ; I cannot avoid following the path, which is pointed out by duty— ■cannot, did I say ?т-фр ; let me not Svrong my feelings : I would not, if I could ι Oh! that I could paint to you in toloura sufficiently ι vivid the stenes, which follpwed my perusal pf your, mar nuscript !—
»IO nuscrŤpt!— thf Abbess is Ш ......I fear UI unte death !—-I fiew to her sick bed, and with the enthusiasm pf my sensa· tions forcid her back from contem¬ plating (he fields of blessedness, to which she в already so near, that she nee* bet to dose her eyes in orcW tp behold the reflection of their glories I Shesmaed atwltattsakttoher.afidwhida must have· appeared to her se ťrŕflin. 9 tmworthy ofa thought, when coWpatt-d with- those images by which her mind had just tee» occupied.—Her words inscribed themselves upon my heart jit characters of flame; you wiH soort.be informed pf their effects. Constanta was smrmiorieoV-tlie Ab- bessjoined our hands; we sank upp« «acb -Other's bosom. . No explanatkm nas
311 waţ necessary ; no one spoke a word ; we understood for ........ we under¬ stood ourselves. —" Now then," said the invalid in a soft faltering voice, which seemed a middle tone between a mortal's and a spirit's : " now then nothing is wanting ...... but the presence of Ida !"— —" Of Ida," I repeated, " and of her Henry !"— «··- AndHenrycame; came the next morn- ing,as you had assured me that he would, and for that purpose whicli ypu men¬ tioned he has vindicated my cause like an hero, and has fully established my autho¬ rity and my rights : he has knelt at my feet; he has offered me his hand. He has named love as the reward of his services, and has obtained the boon : how could I refuse
312 I réfuse the reward of lose to the'most piire, the most tender, the most unfor¬ tunate of lovers?
<HS
Constantia, Countess of Werdenburg, to Abbot Conrad. Elizabeth's letter must already have apprized ypu, my kind protector, pf the favourable change, which has taken place in the situation of your wards. Count Henry has been here, and is again departed. He came by Ida's command to offer his hand to Elizabeth : he U returned at Elizabeth's desire to salute her rival as joint-heiress with myself of the rich domains of Torrenburg. —" I do po more than my duty," said Elizabeth, when Henry endeavoured vol. iv. г to
314 to express his gratitude. " Ynur heart belongs to Ida, and never ought to be another's, therefore never can be mine. As to Cpunt Frederick's inheritance, demand of this venerable man, whose claim to it is the most just, that of Elizabeth, or of the Damsels of Wer¬ denberg."— As she spoke, the door opened, and a silver-haired stranger entered the apart¬ ment. It was the Sage of Zurich, the well-known Albert Reding, tn whpm Elizabeth had referred her disputed claims, previous to ypur unveiling the truth of our history, and removing her prejudices against us. Yes, Conrad, yès! even had she still continued to abhor us, sp sure as I have life, Eliza¬ beth would still have acted by us with justicei The
The venerable Albert cpnfirmed Eli¬ zabeth's declaratipn ; he even cpnsented to accompany the enraptured Montfort to Ida's valley, and make known to her this sudden change in her situation. They would fam have persuaded me to join their party : but I could not endure the thoughts pf quitting my generous friend, at a moment, when she so greatly needs support after this difficult self- victory, and under the deep affliction which she feels at the approaching dis¬ solution of our worthy Abbess.·— Farewell, dear father, and believe, that the mempry pf ypur kindness shall live in my heart for ever ! '
r 2
316
Abbot Conrad to Sigabert, Bishop ef Coire* • Codnt Hsnrv of Montiort and his bride are established 'r л the Castle of Torrenburg. Their arrival threw the populace into an ecstasy of joy, and all inclination tp uproar and revolt seems to be completely annihilated. Neither is Elizabeth any longer an pbject pf aversion to her former subjects; you are already informed pf the laud¬ able manner, in which she past the month immediately succeeding the death pf the Abbess pf Zurich, and which she entirely dedicated to providing for the future benefit of those, pver whom she was so soon to renounce all jurisdiction, and
317
and who (while under her command) had been so little sensible of the value of such- a mistress. I "Ч-" í The few minutes,!' said she, when 1 she addrest them for r4e last time ; " the few minutes, during which I can still consider you as my subjects, shall be employed in convincing you, that you mistook my character, and that your welfare neithertie now, nol ever was,' indiffèrent to th4 (heart of •Elizabeth, с î 'am preparing to resigh my' authority into thö hafids of the Üamsels of Werdenberg ; but that authority shall be the only one worth having, authority over a free ptople." — What she promised, she has per- formed mpst amply. Everything in these regions breathes freedom and happiness ; she has established the privi- p 3 leges
sie
legts of tins people on grounds sp firm, that even were the antient Tyrants of Carlsheim and Sargaus to resume their ahused authority, they would be-com¬ pelled to-leave their subjects in posses¬ sion of their unviolated freedom. Henry and Ida would fáin have ex¬ prest tn her· their grîitiwde is periton ; hut she has dedined receiving them for tiie present, under colour pf too great affliction fox the bte loss of her i-iend, the Abfeess. Hew «ay you, my bord Bishop W fear, the heart of pur Ehza- -beth is by no rrraans healed, since she icannot prevail on herself tp endure the -sight ,of her rival's happiness, even although 'that happiness is a wotk Of her own creation. τ ι Welli well !— fime ΐ Impe, will do тиф; ahd (unless I flattet myself "with believing
819
believing too ardently what I wish) the attentions of Richard of Ulmenhorst will do more. This excellent young man is full of hope, that he may yet be able to establish his former claims on the heart of Elizabeth ; Ida and Henry encourage him in Iris sanguine expe-*a- tions ; and no efforts of mine, that can advance his wishes, shall be wanting, you may be sure. However, nothing can be attempted, till St. Helena's Fes¬ tival arrives ; on that day Elizabeth has promised to receive all her friends (Henry and Ida not excepteäi) and every pne looks forward with the utmpst impatience to this appointed day. Of cpurse Constantia did not fail to be present at the wedduig of her beloved sister. Methinks, her passion for the Cloister is sensibly diminished since her 1 4 re-establishment
320 re-establishment in her legitimate claims. With my whple heart shall J.say— " Amen '"—to her resolution to lay aside the veil: she is sp well calculated to form the blessmg pf an earahly bridegroom, that it would iie a sin to bury her withia the walls cf a Cpnvent. She already numbers many ppwerfol noblemen in the list of her admirers ; faut nn one hangs upon her smiles with more perfect adoi ation, than Count .Oswald, Elizabeth's brother. He has. confided· his ission to me, and I am best able to judge the nature pf his sent'ments. Np contracted views of interest (as many unjustly suppose, and as perhaps Cpnstantia herself suspects) induce him to kned at the feet pf the rich Heiress pf Sargans: no one can imagine such a motive, whp is ac¬ quainted
321 quainted'with thè. real character of the proud hut noble Oswald, the lustre of which is bright' and^glöripuajtó the light of the,$pn:l though ¡ИкедЬаг lumi¬ nary it is now and then obscured by a few dark sputs, moveable and insigni¬ ficant. No; he seeks the hand of Constantia from no other cause than the cpnsciousness of her perfections; except that he repents of his former injustice towards Jbe Sistei s, and is anxious to express his present respect m the most marked and striking manner.. I know not, what hopes lie is autho¬ rized to nourish. The quiet retired Constantia gives encpuragement to none J of her admirers, and observes an ob¬ stinate silence respecting her intentions even to me : however, Count Oswald ρ 5 possesses
332 passasses m. poràerful interest in her Opimon from his being the brother tjí lazabejh.— I expect that the festival of St. Шепа wiU decide much.
заз
Conclusion—written by Abbot Conrad. That the readers of the fore-going manuscripts may not be left with their curiosity entirely ungratified, I will endeavpur to fili up the chasm, which otherwise would appear in the Memoirs of Elizabeth. Let me obtain the» pardon, if I relate as briefly as possible the circumstances pf a scene, which produced upon my heart an impression very painful at the time, and never to be obliterated. St. Helena's festival arrived. AH those, whom Elizabeth had iaviţed, faded not to attend at the appointed place and hoar ; among them were thej Heiresses of Torrenburğ, Count Henry s 6 of
324
of Mpntfort, Cpunt Oswald pf March (Elizabeth's brother) Richard of Ulmen¬ horst, the Bishop of Coirà, and my¬ self. It is the pious and laudable custom pf our days (a custom, which I hope will be preserved even to the latest posterity) that all our most-distinguish¬ ed festivities should commence by offering an homage of adoration to the Supreme : it was therefore natural, that immediately on our arrival we should be conducted to the church belonging to the Convent of Zurich. Yet we could not help feeling some surprize, that Ehzabeth. as our hostess 43Ы npt wdcome ua at the church-door, and pbce hersdf at the head of our procession, while it moved through the cloisters tpwards the chapel ; that being μ ■ the
825
the established custom on sueh occa¬ sions. However, we had scarcely time to make-any reflections, before we found ourselves within the chapel. Itiwas most gorgeously adorned, as if set out for some great solemnity. The walls were decorated wifh wreaths of flowers, the reliques were exposed, the pictures were uncovered: the whofe wealth of < the: Convent, was displayed, and blazed on every side -, innumerable tapers in chandeliers of gold, inters mingled with silver lahips, dispelled the gloom of the long aisles, and clouds of 'incense rolled along the fretted roof, which echoed back ι the melodieus sounds of lutes and voices, as they swelled in full chorus from ithe ad¬ joining, choir. ¡А* that moment our knowledge, pf chufdvoustpms naturally made
326,
made fhe Bishop and myself-conceive a suspidpn pf the purpose, for which -we had been coııducted-thither : per¬ haps too, the same thought suggested itself to Constantia, for on a sudden iiei- tears began to flow. The situation cf Richard uf Ulmenhorst was most dis' tossing: he ceuednot to ençruire, why Elizabeth did sot appear ; and it was- with difiiculty, that Montiert, Ida, and Count Oswald (who preserved their presence of mind better than the rest.) could persuade him to observe that «alenee, which was necessary in so holy aplace. Unhappy Rkhard ! for many weeks past had his friends conspired to buoy him up with- hopes,-which this single moment was destined to destroy fot tv« : for now the curtain, wbich con¬ cealed
827
cealed from ns the chapd's sanctuary, was withdrawn, and aH pur worst fears wçre confirmed. EUzabeth, adorn¬ ed with all the pomp and splendour of wealth, and still more with all thb -charms, which nature had bestowed •upon her superior to her whole «еж, knelt before the altar, aad offered U P at the footstool pf the Almighty's throne the glreatest sacrifice, which a mortal can ever make ; the sacrifice of youth, love, beauty, liberty, and life! What impression thb unexpected, this unwished-for scene made upon the assembly at brge, it is neither in my power to describe, nor (I believe) in the power of «ny one of those, whp were personally interested about Eliza¬ beth. Each individual fdt so much upon his own account, that he was 1 rendered
398 reridered incapable of attending tothe «nations produced upon others., к -was not till the awful ceremony of pro- nounciiig die great- and total rehimdi- tfcn was im the point of tjiking. place, that I-turned п)У cy« upon-the coiuv tenaqce of the unhappy Richard; itwas ľpale β» that pf a parse; and.yet with •evert moment it seemed to grow still paler, till his eyes ckned^and he- sank into my arms without sentiment. r --«My toul," said Hizabeth ina firm voice^ " i bequeath to bun, whp gay« iti my body I bequeath to the, раж; my.weakhto the church; the domaina pf Torrenburg to its legitimate possessors.} the leccjfectkm ι of Henry Of Montfort to his beloved Ida ; Richard" pf UlmenhorsU.., Richard, my fiiend of youth, and the truest of aft lovera .. ,· ». , . Richard,,
329 .... Richard, whom I ought never to have quitted for ths sake pf any Montfort.... Ah ! tp what consoling Angel shall I consign the npble Richard, that she may heal the wounds inflicted by my caprice рп his honest suffering heart ?—Cpnstantia I friend pf my bosom,be thou that Angeli thou art far more worthy of hjs love than the iucpnetant EUzsbe};h,who x |n ţeaigning ¿M»„reşjgns { «'«ГУ prose**' ,of earjţldy happiness ; -who in sacrificing ¿im, offers up ţo Heaven the greatest sacrifice, pf which her nature is capable.—Be he thine, dear injured Constantia; accept from me -his hand, his heart! my in¬ justice to, Ida Jl have repaired by the resignation of Henry; but I still owed thee a mighty sacrifice, to efface the memory of many a bitter hour occasioned
390
occasioned by my obstinacy, my perse* -oution, my selfwilL— ^Npw then I have done -with the world for eve^' , — Bdeved-pnes' I bless yon "j— Pray for me.'anirarewen w — " The Bishópíthough greatly allected, tytlij^whcJëraiexpectîedscene)thpught it right tovait till the conduiion of the ceremony ^But anxiety for Richard, srhease indbpceitfon liad occasioned the bye^tanders to remove him into the open súr, brmshed rae -with an «sense for leaung thè chapd, which İ seited •with- esageimeas. Tp say the truth, Ί was -far from satisfied with ÎSîzabeth's determination. I ehâH no doubt be severely censured byjny-more devout successors; yet I needs must confess, that in sprteof my own -vews'fwhich I pronounced -with- -the most heirt-fek
SSI
joy, and never haye felt the slightest wish tn retract) yet still I say, in spite of my own vows, I never have seen with. out a pang sode ty deprived of a valuable member, and those talents bwied within die solitude pf the Cloister, whkih might have maovits' owner a 1 blessing to the world at large. ' * When tie first »hock was pa«, Richard recovered his résolution, and endeavoured! to conceal tk> »göfty of tts leelings under tbe veil oclserörtstteeti kndsilehce.: A splendid entettUnment was sprtad before β», at which none of the holy Sifters »ppeared, consequently, Dre were at liberty to «ommuHicaté puf , sentiments on what had just past with¬ but restraint. 'Twas the most melan- choiy&ast, at which I ever assisted; a feast, which I shall never forget, as long "'- as,
S92
as I posseis existence; it seemed tO ,me Elizabeth's funeral-feast ! we soon rose frpm the table, pn -which the viands remained untouched, anďwe prepared for лиг- departure; for we thought it-vain to expect admission to the nevvly- ptofest_Nun,.and indeed in put present temper pf mind that admission ; was scarcely to he wished—the^Bishop, how¬ ever, delivered it, as his opinión,· thit propriety required 4is at feast to^ive Efebeih.the løption! of ! seeing us. i A« CPrdingly.ai messsge informed he* rof our appröatbing departure;' her answer was, that she must dedine all visits, except those of o Constând» and of Richard of Ulmenhorst, They obeyed her Orders. Elizabeth, received them with joy and tenderness. • She
333 She dpubted not the success pf her proposal, and addrest Constantia as the heiress of Richard's heart : but she was speedily Undeceived. Richard dedared, in terms so express as left np doubt of his, decision, that since Elizabeth was lost to the world, no refuge was left for Mm but the Cloister; while pn the pther hand, Cpnstantia confest, that .her 1 heart was яо longer in her own ppwer. After a,long and unavailbg discussion, Elizabeth dismist them, whether satisfied pr displeased by the firmness pf her twp dearest friends, it may be difficult to say: but unless I am totally ignprant pf the female mind, she could not help being flattered by Richard's refusal to admit any rival tq her in his heart, but Ond; and probably
S3«
probably she was secretly not much incensed against Constantia for having bestowed bar affections else-where. Count Oswald, who had been by no means pleased by his sister's endeavours to unite Richard and Constantia, now feit his hopes revive : he flattered him· self, that he was the unknown object of Constantia's choice; but in this belief he was roiattken. There was i young knight, who had oflered her his heart and hand at a time, when she had nothing but a lieart and hand to offer in return. Conradm, an ill.portioned brother of the Landgrave of Thurmgia, would have loved her,had shebeen no other than Mary Teli; Conradin had been Mthftn to Constantia of Werden¬ berg under all the scorn and obloquy, under which she at one time laboured ; and
335
and Conradin was now the man, for whom the wealthy Heiress or Sargans rejected every other. He deserved the inestimable treasure of a wife like Constantia ; and ¡he was wdl worthy to be the mistress nf a heart, whpse tenderness and generpsity could pnly be excelled by her pwn. It was long, before Elizabeth ac¬ quired sufficient. firmness to receive the personal thanks of Ida and Henry fpr that felicity, of which she was her¬ self the authpress; but on the day when she wasf consecrated as Domina of Zurich, this long-ddayed interview took place. The impression, -which it made upon her mind, will be best ex¬ plained by the following letter.
Elizabeth to Constantia.
At length then this dreaded interview 1 is over : I have seen Ida and her happy husband.—Wrong ime not, Constantia, . by suspecting, that resentment or pique Has made me delay this meeting for sp long ; oh ! no ! it was the consci¬ ousness of my pwn weak heart !— Even Hden of Homburg could not at once resolve to witness the happiness of Eg-nhart and Amaloerga ; and alas-1 I am no faultless Saint like Hden !— the Cloister is the palace pf enthusiasm, is the native land pf visions ; its inha¬ bitants are only happy in proportion, as those vinöns are sweet and soothing. I
337
1 liad formed for myself a little cird« pf ideal companions, whom at my plear sure I could su' tion to dispel щу solitude. My venerable friend, by the side of whose death-bed I formed the resolution of dedicating my Uf« to the service of Heaven, was 4 among the dearest of those apparitions. The hand óf mortality had tom her from me ; Enthusiasm restored her to my arms. I saw her, as if she had been still alive.... I spoke to her, and laid open the most secret folds of my heart.... I almost fancied, that at times t heard her reply in words of comfort.... Alas! the fatal sight pf Ida and her Henry has dispelled all these visions, which were to me the »auree of so much happiness ! it seemed like a flash of lightning, which penetrates through our vol. iv. О dosed
SS8 dosed eye-lids, and wakes us suddenly frpm spme delightful dream.—Now nothing flits before me in my solitude, but those scenes ofmy melancholy life, in which Ida and Montfort bore so great a share.—Leave me, oh! leave me, ye cruel thoughts, which force me back to a world pf sorrow ; and thou, mild spirit of my sainted friend, return, and by thy presence aid me to prepare for that state of bliss, which you already enjpy, and to which I feel that I am hastening. The will of Heaven be done ; but the moment of dissolution will be sweet and welcome I TBE END.
Printed by D. N. SHUKY, Berwick-atrcet, Soho.
