Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Feudal tyrants: or, The Counts of Carlsheim and Sargans: a romance: taken from the German
FEUDAL ÏYRANTS, Xc. Kc Se.
Elizabeth, Counten of Torrenburg, ti Count Oswald of March. With this letter, my dear brother, you will receive a part of the manuscripts, which lengaged to send you: these leaves contain the memoirs ofthe unfortunate Urania Venosta, which have interested me greatly from a variety of reasons. I had erroneously supposed that the MS. was complete, but it proves to be nothing more than a fragment. Per¬ haps I imprudently included the second vol. п. в part
part of her adventures in the numbir of ¿jiote papers, which I was compelled to restore to the Abbess's custody; but I am rather more inclined to believe, that Time has destroyed the remainder of these memoirs, whose conclusion I am so desirous of terasing. It's true, I lurve found л few more de¬ tached leaves, and the last page or two; bút diese oirly servie to augment a curio¬ sity, which wtruldria ve remained totally unsatisfied, if J had suffered the labour of exannrmg Ле moth-esîen parchments to overeorne my oerseverancei t-have now no reason to regret the trouble which I gave myself, since I owe to it the pos¬ session of several other manuscripts, relating to persons ind circumstances already mentioned by Urania. The me¬ moirs
3 moira of Minila of Homburg and of Lucretia Mahapina are both lost; but I have found much respecting the two Ladies' of Sargans, to whom Urania's narrative is addrest; much too respecting the noble and ill-fated Adelaide; as also several letters written by the latter, one of which seems to supply tolerably well the chasm in Urania's memoirs. As soon as I succeed in-dacypherlng them (which, thanks to the dust and tire moths, is no easyitask) I «411 not fail to impart to you their contents. You will ask me, what impression the perusal of this history has made опту heart. Ah! my dear brother, it is but too certain,- that the unfortunate are apt to find their own resemblance every where! At first, how little simi¬ li 2 Ьц
4 lar do the fortunes of Urania and my. self appear! and yet how easily might it have happened, that we should have both been sisters united in the same misfor¬ tune! Might not Henry of Montfort, (whose loss has cost me so many tears,) in spite of hiš fair exterior, have proved at heart as great a monster, as Ethelbert of Carlsheim proved in spite of his' May not the prayers, with which I so¬ liciten Heaven to grant me Henry's hand, have pleaded for that, whose pos¬ session would have proved to me the bitterest curse of Heaven? Eternal Providence' never more will I murmur that you denied me a request, whose consequences w*re known to you far better than to myself. I besought you to bestow on me a blessing; you granted
Л'
granted it by withholding that, which if conferred on me would perhaps have made me miserable for ever.
6 Adelaide of tbe Beacon-Tower to Urania Venosta. Oh! tell me, unhappy wife of my unhappy father; you, whom I would so gladly call my mother, had not she to whom Nature bade me give that valued name, compelled me to blend with it no ideas but those of pain and terror; you, whom I already love, and whose future affection I r wish so anxiously to obtain; oh! tell me,Urania,was it but ? dream, or have I indeed found at length the friend and sister whom I sought so long in vain, and whoee counsels and whose comfort my tortured heart needs so greatly? , Yet
1
Yet alas! what ¿vaib it that we have met? AlreaUy are we separated, as I feared we should be, and separated (as I now Jear) for ever! Yet, much-as I grieve for what I lose myself by tlib event, still more do 1 grieve to think, that what you tose ie greater 1 How much do I now reproach myself, that wľ ai I stole to your tent at mid¬ night to warn you and the fair partner of your captivity of what waa alxnt to happen, I should have been so tardy in acknowledging,—-" Count Donat ef Carl- ¡heim is а кап not to be trusted." —Yet for¬ give me, Urania; Donat b my brother ; and oh I it is so painful to declare a bro¬ ther's dfagracei I charge you, dear friend, in the naine of Heaven and the Hoi/ Virgin I charge В 4 you,
8 you, suffer not yourself to be deceived by his perfidious friendship. On your journey to the Castle seize the first op¬ portunity of escaping; should you be once inclosed within the gates of Sargans, you have nothing to expect but a cruel death or an ignominious prison; and, alas for the damsel of Mayenfield I she has a still more dreadful lot to appre¬ hend! That hypocritical abbot Guiderius, or whatever be his detested name, who came to my brother's camp with his monks under pretence of pleading in yonr behalf, was skilful enough to dis¬ cover Count Donat's darling weakness. He promised him the possession of a young beauty, who (according to hisoic- count)wasentirelj) attheAbbot'sdisposal. My
ô
My brother, who never confides in the word of ecclesiastics, insisted on the immediate accomplishment of this pro¬ mise; and the poor Minna was betrayed into the seducer's hands. You accom¬ panied her, aad by your presence in¬ creased the ardour with which I had resolved to labour at preserving the inno¬ cent girl; a service which I had already rendered to many others, who found themselves enveloped in the same snare. I saw you, Urania; oh! how strong was the sympathy which attracted my heart towards you, my heart to which at this moment afriend is so neeessaiy! It's true I have asister; but she.... But you have already seen Mellüsina, and you shall now know her. в S Mellű-
10 Mellusiiia is privy to the designs of her faithless husband. Nothing but the promise of overlooking all his errors of this nature, and the temptation of her immense wealth, 'could have induced Donat to bestow un her the title of his Wife. She is neither lovely in person, nor amiable in manners; and she bears a mortal hatred to every woman, who possesses those advantages which Nature has denied to heiself. 1 cannot boast much of her good^ will towards me; yet I am compelled to pay my court to her, that she may not injure, me with my brothsr, pf whose powerful help. my dear unfortunate husband stands at present but too much in need. I trust a time will come when I may reveal to you the whole history of my sorrows;
11
sorrows; at present I can only repeat my warning. Yet surely some invisible power was disposed last night to give that warning in my stead ! What could be the cause of that singular aud terrific sensation, which we all felt at that mo¬ ment, when Melhlsina's sle-p at length fcft me at liberty to afford you the in¬ formation, which this letter contains? What was it that startled us all at the same instant, and made us utter a serdim of fear? What form was it that passed before us so swiftly? Whence came that sound, which seemed, like a distant bell tolling? Whose were tlie cold fingers which seemed to giasp my neck ? ■ ....... Struck with an universal terror, we sprang from our seats at once, and asked each other—" What was that?"-—Even в 6 the
i« the slumbering Mellusina was rouzed from her insensibility by alarm, and the hand with which she drew me from your tent was cold and trembling ! Surely, Urania, this must have been the warning of your guardian angel, who wished to accomplish that which - Mellusina's presence forbad my perform¬ ing without danger,... unless indeed I were to give this mysterious event a different, and a more dreadful meaning! ϊ know not why, but since that mo¬ ment of terror in which we parted, the thought of my father never quits me for an instant! I trust no misfortune has befallen him.—Is he not in the hands of his son?—Alas! alas! and is not Donat capable of violating even the first and most sacred rights of Nature? Oh!
13 Oh! good, good father! since I have seen Urania Venosta, how much moré warmly does my heart glow towards you with filial affection ! How despica¬ ble, how execrable was she described to be, for whose sake my mother was sacri¬ ficed; and how different did I und her from the description! Her dignified air, her interesting countenance, inspired even the savage Donat with respect! Oh! surely I have been equally deceived respecting Count Ethelbert; surely I shall still enjoy the blessing> of being clasped to the bosom of a virtuous father! Once again, beloved Urania, be cau¬ tious both with regard to your own proceedings and Minna's.—Fail not to let me know, as soon as possibley what passes
14 passes af tlie Castle, if your evil ge¬ nius decrees that you should be brought thither, and if an opportunity is afforded you of answering me by* the faithful meseehger, by whom this letter will be delivered. With ι egard to my¬ self, I shaUorily'inrormyou briefly, that my intention of warning you was sus¬ pected. Mellusina was commissioned to watch over me last night, as soon as it was discovered, that I bad stolen to your tent unknown to my brother and his wife. In order to førevent the execu¬ tion of my good design this morning, I was forcibly compelled to suffer you to depart without melbrthe Castle of Sar¬ gans, and I understand, that my absence was accounted for to you by the pre¬ tence of sudden illness. lam now set¬ ting
ıs ting out, by Donat's orders, for the convent of St. Mary, at Basle: the Ab¬ bess is my secret friend, and soon after my arrival ybu shall hear from me. I trust, that I shall learn what has hap¬ pened to jou at the return of my mes¬ senger; and I need not assure you, that nothing in my power to assist you shall be neglected for a moment. Tarewcl!
"6
Urama Venosta to the Abbeu ef St. Mary's,
The explanation which you demand of me, dear mother, would be very painful to make. For the benefit of my husband's grand-daughters, I have con¬ fided to paper the whole history of my misfortunes; and the first time that you visit our Domina, the manuscript shall be laid before you. For the present I shall only tell you thus rm.ch: From that fearful moment when an invisible agent ovarned me, that misfortune was at hand; when we all felt, saw, heard something, which even yet none of us have been able to describe or understand; when I saw my earthly guardian angel, your Adelaide
17
Adelaide and mine, torn from me, and felt (yet knew not wherefore) that a separation from her was the signal for robbing me of all my hopes; from that moment was I doomed to experience sorrows, whose bittenness was till then unknown to me, practised as I was in the school of suffering. The morning had' scarcely broken, when we set forward ior the Castle of Sargans; illness, as it was said, com¬ pelled Adelaide to remain behind, and her letter was not delivered till too late to be of use. Ere we reached the for¬ tress, intelligence arrived that my un¬ fortunate husband wis ilo more. Gui¬ derius, to whom the charge of him had been committed, had either been too remiss in watching him, or had trem¬ bled
ıs bled for his own miserable existence while exposed to a madman's-fuiy; or, as his enemies scrupled not to whisper (though tfae fact s>>ems too atrocious iot mi to give it credit), had himself been the means of " ridding the world of an utdes« crsatwe/' Such was the ex¬ pression used by die imolent vassal, who informed Count Donat that his father had perished by en untimely death: I had the satisfaction of seeing, that tht Count of Carlsheim rewarded the bos? wretch as he deserved! The body of Count Ethelbert was found in the ruined well, into which (so said th« Abbot) lie had precipitated ' himself in a fit of frantic passion. This story did not meet with implicit belief; even Count Donat was openly among the
19 the disbelievers. Yet (after I had passed some time in tlie prison, which I was compelled to enter on die very evening of my arrival at that castle, of which I wm the rightful owner) I waa assured by my jailor» that the Abbot of Cur¬ wald wai fully reinstated in Count Do. naťi favour, aod constantly partook oí tbe Hcenticmsf?aes, the noise of whose riotous pleasures pmetnted eveti to the depth of my subterraneous dungeon. Yet I was not entirely forsaken. My guardian angel, my kind protecting Adelaide suffered no circumstance to escape her, that might tend to my relief. On the first evening of our acquaintance (alas! it was the first and last, for never since have I been permitted to embrace the deai one!) I mentioned accidentally that
20 that the daughters of the Emperor Ru¬ dolf had been my earliest friends and playmates: from this trifling hint did Adelaide derive means for effecting my deliverance. 'No sooner was she per¬ mitted to leave the convent, vn which her brother at first caused her to be confined, than she made use of her liberty to procure mine ; and (since she knew that gentle means would be of no avail) she endeavoured with the strong arm-of authority to force me out of the power of my inhuman jailor. She, who in a single interview had been inspired with so much interest and compassion for the unfortunate Urania; she, who m spite of her want of power 'was still able to benefit me so much, could little suspect that six powerful Fi incesses
31 Princesses would remain inactive, when the business was to rescue from misery the companion of their ohildhood, the selected friend of their youth Alas! she found herself mistaken : five of Ru¬ dolf's daughters were the wives of sove¬ reign Princes ; the interests of Mngdoms occupied their attention, and left them no thought to bestow on her whom they had once treated as their equal, and to whom they had sworn at parting firm friendship and affection without end. One only of the five (it was Matilda, the virtuous Duchess of Saxony) listened to Adelaide's unwearied intercessions, and exerted her whole influence to obtain the Emperor's interference in my be¬ half. Her endeavours were at length suc¬ cessful;
22 cessful; but ere I regained my freedom many years had elapsed, and by all but Adelaide's ardent friendship I was be¬ lieved to be-hó more. During the first months of my captivity Minna of May¬ enfield had experienced a persecution, compared to which my dungeon ap- , peared a Paradise. Far its particulars i refer you tothe journal of her impri¬ sonment, as written ty herself: the Helvetian women even then were well skilled in guiding the pen, and did not yield in that noble art to many of (he highest dignitaries of rhe church. Dear unfortunate Minna! who can restrain their tears whue reading in your own affecting language the sad account of sufferings and trials, almost too difficult fbr the strength of a Saint to endure with
23 witb fortitude or even patience, much lest for an unprotected girl; andyet Mirju paased through the flames victorious! The enamoured Donat neglected no means of seduction, which might tempt hu virtuous captive from the path of honour, and in this shameful attempt Mellusina was his faithful assistant. It is shocking to think, that a wife should be so depraved as to aid in removing tbe obstacles, which impede her husband in his licentious pursuits ; and that a woman should forget her sex so far, as to aim at the destruction of female inno¬ cence! I am persuaded, since the world was created, there has been but one wo¬ man capable of such unworthy conduct; and that one was Mellusina. The fascinating arts of seduction hav¬ ing
ζ* ing proved vain, they were followed by violence'and ill-treatment; and when, after passing several months in ignorance of her frite, Lodowick or Homburg at length forced Count Donat's fortress in search of his bride, he found her in a subterraneous cell, similar to that in which I was myself imprisoned.' I heard the tumult occasioned by her deliver¬ ance, and doubted not that m, own was at hand.—Alas' my hopes were vain! My feeble cries could not reach the hear¬ ing of my friends; they knew not that those caverns contained any captive ex¬ cept Minna. Mellnsina managed to per¬ suade my adopted daughter and her deliverer, that I had paid the debt of Na¬ ture. -They shed unavailing tears upon the grave, (Which the deceiver pointed out
as out to them as mine, while buried alive beneath the castle's foundations I shrieked to them for help in vain; and I sank from the height of my deceived hopes into the deepest despair, till time and faith in God at length restored mc to composure. The only effect resulting to myself from Mmria's deliverance was, that the strictness of my imprisonment was in¬ creased. Tlie Count of Homburg's desperate enterprize could only have succeeded, while Donat was absent; and the latter now seldom left the Castle, lest Similar accidents should occur. They * say, that the fires of the infernal regions burn doubly fierce, when their monarch returns from his wanderings on earth; such too was the case in the Castle of vol. u. с Sargans—
26 Sargans —When their tyrant breathed the same air with them, the chains of the poor captives were rendered doubly heavy, and their sufferings doubly sharp! Yet was he not permitted to kill me, since Heaven had decreed, that I should at last see the moment of dettverance. Adelaide stiil maintained, that I vvas in existence; imperial majesty interfered in my behalf, and insisted on Donat's pro¬ ducing proofs of my death. My tyrant became embarrassed, and at length pro¬ posed to me that my Jiberty should be re- stored.prûvidedlvvouldvoluntarilymake over the whole of my possessions (which descended to me in right of my uncle)' tothe man, who had so long unlawfully possessed them. Ijoyfutty embraced the offer, I had long considered liberty as the
Е7
the only real wealth; I had long har¬ boured no other wish than to end my wretched life in the repose and security of a cloister! The sacrifice ot' my inheritance was completed, and Donat condescended to conduct me from my prison with his own hand ; he even carried his hypo¬ crisy so far (when he presented me to the nobleman who had negotiated with him by order of the Emperor and die Duchess of Saxony) as to call me " his kind mother, to whose affection he was indebted for the greatest partof Ms pos¬ sessions." Yesl the wretch dared to profane the name of mother! How ill would that sacred word have accorded with the marks ofhis tyranny, with which my wrists were still scarred, had it been с 2 . pro.
28 pronounced before impartial hearers! But the persons into whose charge I was delivered, were contented with having obtained my liberty, the only point ex¬ pressed in then· instructions. Far was it from the intention of my royal deli¬ verers, that I should have been compelled to pay so dearly for my escape from Donat's power, but I was myself pre¬ pared to make the sacrifice, and was be¬ sides much too weak to vindicate my rights against my powerful oppressor. Those who could have advised me and acted in my behalf, Edith and her daughter, were far from me, and stitt betteved me to be no longer in exist¬ ence. Under the protection of the imperial envoys (though in truth their manner of
29 of executing their commission had given me but little reason to believe them much disposed to protect me) I hastened to the convent, which I had selected for my future abode. Yet I left behind me in Count Donat's castle a treasure, with which I was deeply grieved to part, and which I would most joyfully have taken with me. During the few days which want of strength to begin my journey compelled to remain bis guest, the Count of Carlsheim thought it proper fo shew me every mark of outward respect, hb attentions, which he forced me to en¬ dure, excited in me only sentiments of disgust at his hypocrisy, till he presented to me his daughters, or (as he chose to call them) my grand-children, whom my о 3 bounty
so bounty had destined to be the future heiresses of Sargans. They were lovely innocent cherubB, born during the second year of my cap¬ tivity. The birth of these twin-sisters had cost Mellnsina her life; and the bsa of a mother so unworthy might have been reckoned their gain, had not Hea¬ ven abandoned tbem to the care of a father, whose example was likely to ruin them both in body and mmd. Oh! Emmeiine! oh! Amalberga! how closely djd you entwine yourselves round my heart, even in those few days of our first acquaintance' When I was about to leave you, you clung to me, wept, and begged me to take you with me! ph! could you but have known what I suffered,
31 suffered, when I tore myself from your Utile arms, Heaven knows how unwil¬ lingly!—I casţt a melancholy look on Count Donat, apd in the most humble даашгег hazarded a request: but instantly bis brow was clouded with frowns, and in an ironical tone he asked me— « Wjusther I could, not confide in his sincerity without hi? delivering up host¬ ages?"— Heaven be praised, his sincerity and his insincerity have been since then a matter of indifference to me; protected by these holy walls and tiie power of the good Domina of Zurich, I no longer tremble at the thoughts of Count Do¬ nat's hatred. Nor. have unexpected causes of rejoicing been denied me, even in this abode of pious seclusion- The с 4 youngest
32 youngest of the Emperor Rudolf's daughters, the gentle and pious Euphe- mii, whose grave and prudent air had made her an object of ridicule to her sportive sisters and the thoughtless Ura¬ nia, and who in the days of petulant youth had ever been excluded froni our circle and qui girlish secrets^ ïhiphehiia was the first, whose open arma received me on my arrival at the convent of Zurich. She congratulated 'me with a joy, which evidently came from the heart; on ray having reached a place of. security; and ¿be Offered me a friend¬ ship, whose value Γ now first learnt to estimate, when time and soirow had humbled and instructed nib. She hail learnt my story through her sister, the Duchess of Saxony, and had quitted
33 quitted the convent of Tull, where she fed the life of a Saint, to wait for my arrival at Zurich, and comfort me in person for the many sufferings which I had undergone. I have since had good reason to believe, that her approach to Count Donat's neighbourhood, and her declared resolution never to test till she had obtained my liberty (a resolution which slie took care should reach the Castle of Sargans), had no slight weight m influencing the determination of my tyrant t the wretched Urania would pro¬ bably have expired long since in Count Donat's dungeons, had not tiie eyes of this.benevolent Princess been fixed upon the forlormone'ş destiny 1 What have I not besides to thank her for ! It is to her that I am indebted for с 5 a re-·
34 a reunion with my beloved Edith and her daughter, who received mc as one just risen from the dead. It is to her too that I am indebted for your valuable friendship, Holy Mother, and for the hope of once more embracing my pre¬ server, my sister, my Adelaide! Till that wished-for moment arrives, never must you expect me, venerable Lady, to desist from entreating you to make me more accurately informed respecting the past adventures and present situation of my unequalled friend. I know, they are both strange and melancholy; and a cloister is exactly the place, where the relation of such histories nourish the emotions of holy pity, and produce a calm submissive adoration of the won¬ derful and mysteriousordinations of that Providence, which formed and which governs the world.
P 4RT THE ΪΊΙΠΙΏ.
MEMOIRS о? Adelaide ofthe Benron-Tower; Written by ilio Abbes* of St Млгу'я, ond actdrcttetl to Urama Venosta, Countess pf CaiKlicinj and Salgane, I миьт begin, noble Lady, by request¬ ing your pardon for having delayed so long to make known to you an his¬ tory, which I thought would have more interest in the mputh çf its heroine, than jt ccfljld possibly receive from my un- skjţfu) цеп. Fatal events (I grieve to. с 6 say
SG
say it) have for ever deprived you of that satisfaction; and you must either Ir-arn Adelaide's adventures from me, or from no one. Have not these few words alieady led you to guess the melancholy truth, which this letter is intended to break to you? Oh! that the painful task of being the first to inform you " that Adelaide is no more," had been imposed upon another! Yet surely it is scarcely possible, that re¬ port should have been totally silent at Zurich, respecting events which have excited the attention of the whole Ger¬ man Empire. Yet dry your tears, virtuous Urania ! they who have lived in the world so long as we have done, should not grieve fbr thè departure of our beloved-ones; the
37
the hope of speedily rejoining them in anotlier world, never to be separated from them more, should console us under this temporary deprivation. La¬ ment not, that you are prevented from shewing your gratitude to your gene¬ rous deliverer; she will find the reward of her glorious deeds in Heaven, alas! she found none on earth! Tell me, dear Adelaide, thou suffering Saint! Chaste martyr of the holiest love, say, with what feelings do you now en¬ shrined in glory review the sorrows, which oppressed you in your mortal pro¬ gress? Doubtless you review them not with surh tears as obscure the eyes of your friend, while in this mournful hour Of midnight solitude she retraces the transactions of your eventful life L Me¬ thinks
ss thinks I see your form radiant with light hoveri ound me, and hear you witha smile bid me weep no more over afflic¬ tions, whit.li now seem to yourself no longei deserving of a single tear! You see, Urania, how difficult I find the task of beginning a narrative, which must rend open anew many an old and cruel wound; you see how anxiously I endeavour to delay the executing so painful a commission. But I gave you my promise ' You shall be satisfied!— Permit me, however, to be as brief as possible, and to reserve the relation of minute particulars till the time, when I shall have an opportunity of ехгДадшпе them to you in persoin That whichl look upon as the first of our dear AdelaifJe's.inisforluna, washer 'being
39
being the daughter of Lucretia Malas- pina. Lucretia (you already know but too well) was not lovely-enough to bind Count Ethelbert's heart in lasting fet¬ ters; nor did she possess that generous and almost Saint-like forbearance, with which Urania supported the misfortunes necessarily entailed upon the wife of -.uch an husband. The discovery of an artifice, which her short-sighted policy had induced her to practice upon him, contributed to alienate Ethelbert's affec¬ tions, and to convert what already was indifference into the most positive aversion. Lucretia's wealth was a chief induce¬ ment with tlic Count of Carlsheim, when he offered her his hand. The birth of a son give occasion to a discovery, that the
40 the estates believed to be her own absr> lute property were only held in trust foi her eldest son, to whom they de¬ scended with tlie first breath of air that inflated his lungs. Within a year after Lucretia had been brought to bed for the first time, to Ethelbert's infinite sur¬ prise he was summoned to surrender his wife's estates to the guardians, appointed by her uncle's will to take charge of .them, till the new-born infant should ar¬ rive at years of discretion. Ethelbert's, rage was extreme; he was compelled to surrender fhe property, and in revenge was barbarous enough to tear tlie child from its mother's arms, commit it to the care of strangers without informing her to whom, and then to abandon her with «very expression of hatred and con¬ tempt.
•и tempt. Lucretia bore this parting (dearly as she loved her incensed hus¬ band) with the more fortitude, from her secret Consciousness that she nourished in her bosom another innocent creature, and from her fears that if Ethelbert were present at" the rime of hér delivery, the nevv-born babe would be'separatedfrom her in the same manner, that she had been deprived of its brother. The same apprehension, on being brought to bed of twins, induced her to conceal the birth of dne of them, in order that she might at least have the pleasure of seeing it grow up under her own eye, should Ethelbert's vengeance induce him to deprive her of the other. Accident di¬ rected her choice, which fell upon Ade- laide. The
42 -The event, however, proved her fears to have been for this time unfounded. At a distance from her, and totally en¬ grossed by his own libertine pursuits, Ethelbert scarcely cKigued to bestowf »род», her asuigle thought. Yet Luíate- tin's partiality for her sçrn Donat, which every day inereajert, pţeventedber from tevtahng the birth, of lus twin-sfster, who would then have had a joint and equal right with him to those estates, of which at that period the death of his elder bro¬ ther (while yet an infant) made him tq be supposed the sole inheritor. Thus Adelaide grew up under her mother's eyes, and was the play-mate of her bro¬ ther, without having the least suspicion Jiow nearly she was related to either of them. Ihis was of inconceivable ad¬ vantage
43 vantage to her in her early education. She believed herself to be a vassal's daughter in that house, of which she ought to have shone as the joint-heiress; and as the youthful Donat enjoyed all the advantages of his rank, and made his dependents feel the whole weight of his influence, many afessoaof humility and patient suffering did Adelaide learn in her youth, which was of material ser¬ vice to her in the painful scenes, which she had afterwards to encounter. Do¬ nat ruled his mother with the most despotic authority; his resemblance to herself, that violence of passions which he possessed in common with her, and the docility with wliieh he received her pernicious instructions had won Lucre¬ tia's whole heart, and left no room in it for
44 for her neglected daughter; who thus was early afforded frequent opportuni¬ ties Of submitting to injustice, without bemg conscious that her treatment was unjust. ' Lucretia bad been wise enough to foresee, 4 long before they arrived, that Buch' 1 events might very possibly happen, as actually did at length take place. Witb all her love for Ethelbert, she had discovered his faults sufficiently to make her take precautions for her own secu¬ rity; and she endeavoured to confine his actions by means, which though they still preserved her the tide of his wife, were nevertheless insufficient to pre¬ vent her suffering the extreme of misery and disappointment. She knew well, that little a» Count Ethelbert
45
Ethelbert loved religion, he greatly dread¬ ed it: she therefore (previous to their marriage) insisted on hk taking a<most solemn oath, that however they might disagree, or however his sentiments might alter, he would never attempt her life,.nor vrould (even in case of a-di¬ vorce) make the offer of his hand to a rival, as long as she herself should still be in existence. She thus hoped to bind her inconstant lover in eternal chains ; but she little dreamt of so tyrannical a subterfuge, as that by which the hypo¬ crite contrived to evade the consequen¬ ces of his oath. Though she found all endeavours to regain his affection were vain, she still watched her husband's conduct with jealous eyes. While he visited in turn every
46 every Italian state, whose reputation promised him new means of indulging his propensity to pleasure, her spies still pursued him wherever his footsteps strayed. Lucretia was accurately in¬ formed respecting his intrigues; and sel¬ dom did theobjects of Ethelbert's licenti¬ ous passions escape without experiencing the vengeance of his wife. His short¬ lived inclination once gratified, the Count of Carlsheim heeded but little what became of his victim, andLucretia was suffered to exercise her resentment unimpeded; but the case was altered, when Urania Venosta became the mis¬ tress of his heart. Her extraordinary beauty, her high rank, and her immense possessions made him- at the same time desirous of becoming her husband, hopeless
47 hopeless of gratifying die passion with which she inspii ed him, except by giving her his hand. It theitfore became ab¬ solutely necessary, that Lucretia should be removed. He contrived by various ivell-imagined artifices to lure her into Germany; where she had no sooner set her foot, than he-caused her to be seized privattjlyy and confined in Ravenstein Castle. A plausible story was then Spread of her having expired suddenly: no one was interested to dispute the fact, except her son, who in truth was fondly attached to her; but his youth and de¬ voted attention to licentious pursuits prevented Donat from inquiring mi¬ nutely into the circumstances, which at- tendpd his mother's death. Lucretia .was believed to be no more by all out Count
48
Count Ethelbert, whd was thus left, ад liberty to pursue his designs upon the lovely heiress of Sargans. Adelaide had accompanied her mis¬ tress (for such she was taught to believe, her mother) when she quitted Itaiy; she refused to be separated from her, fob lowed her courageously to the Casde qf Ravenstein, and shared with her the miseries of her long captivity. Then was it, that the mother's heart for the first time felt a sentiment of tenderness for her rejected daughter. Adelaide learnt from Lucretia's lips her real name and rank, and while she clasped her to her bosom, was permitted for the first time to call h τ mother. Yet was the severity of her rate but little alleviated by this discovery, ι Lucretia's heart was naturally
49
naturally hard; itwas incapable of har¬ bouring so pure a-scnt'iment as that of true parental love. Long sufferings and much disappointment had stitt further embittered her character. To that kind of moral delirium, which ever attends on a corrupted heart, was now frequently added a temporary alienation of the un¬ derstanding; and when 'Adelaide re¬ flected, tliat thé wretched woman, whose complicated misery (both mental and corporeal) was every moment before her eyes, was her own mother, the know¬ ledge of her birth only served to make her feel a double portion of agony. Day and night was Lucrotia employed in forming plans of revenge against her cruel husband, and the innocent usurper of her matrimonial rights. She had vol. п. d early
50 early taught the innocent Adelaide tc hate Urania Venosta: in the eyes of that deceived girl the heiress of Sargans was nothing better than Count Ethelbert's abandoned paramour, who had inso¬ lently forced herself into the place of his lawful w fe, and had been the principal and conscious cause of her mother's being confined in that deserted castle. But in despite of these prejudices against you, which Lucretia had infused into the heart of her daughter, she found it impossible to make her enter cheerfully into the plans,which she was continually forming for your destruction. Adelaide was well aware, that her mother was totally wi(hout the power of carrying her wicked designs into execution; but still she could not prevail on herself to assume
51 Tissume even the appearance of giving them her approbation. This obstinacy and incessant contradiction of her hopes and views at length made her ίο com¬ pletely the object of Lucretia's aversion, thit she insisted on her daughter's being separated from her, and confined in the deepest'dungeon, which the subterra- neous caverns of the Castle could supply. You are acquainted, Ufama, with the weakness of the man, who was at that time Castellan of Ravenstem. He pos¬ sessed a singular kind of conscience, which frequently made his actions con¬ tradictory. Lucretia had found means to send letters to her son in Italy, of which conduct (as it vŕas nôt formally prohibited in his instructions) he af- d 2 fected
52 fected not to'take notice; but as he had been ordered to confine her rigorously, she found it impossible to obtain from him the slightest alleviation of her suffer¬ ings. Again, as Adelaide had been de¬ livered to his custody at the same time with her mother, no entreaties could prevail on him to restore her to liberty; but it required but little persuasion to make him believe, that she ought to submit to the punishment, which the person (whom, he believed to be her mistress) thought proper to inflict on her. Adelaide therefore was separated from her Onriatural mother. She was removed to a subterraneous cell, whose strength proved the means of preserving her on that dangerous night, when Lucretia in despair
53 despair and frenzy enveloped the whole, fortress in flames. The fire raged above her; but she knew not what occasioned the confusion, whichseemedtohave taken place in the Castle. Her wretched mo¬ ther died without mentioning her name, and her corse was committed to the earth unknown to her daughter. Tht deliverance of Urania and the Countess of Mayenfield was effected ; the Castel¬ lan, who alone knew the place of her confinement, had been dangerously hurt during the conflagration, and hi his last moments was too much occupied by t je terrors of approaching dissolution to bestow a thought on his prisoner. No one knew what was become of the poor Adelaide; no one enquired, no one cared. в 3 Scarcely
s* Scarcely had you escaped from Raven¬ stein through the well-imagined device of Walter Forest and his followers, ,be : fore your jailors began to suspect the truth. A variety of circumstances com¬ bined to prove that they had been over¬ reached, and they were enabled to see the whole adventure in its true light. In truth, nothing but the rashness of the attempt and the rapidity of its exe¬ cution could have prevented them from making this discovery sooner. They were provoked beyond measure at the contemptible part,which they had played on this occasion; too much time had already elapsed to leave Лег any hopes of over-taking the fugitives, and to pursue them now had been only giving themselves unavailing trouble. When
55
When they reflected on the wrath of their tyrannical lord, terror almost turned their blood into ice. It was evident, that nothing could preserve them from destruction, but immediate flight from a place, whose natural hor¬ rors were increased tenfold by tho ravages of the late conflagration, and by the recollection of many a cruel action, which they had committed within those dreary watts! Flight then was resolved upon unani- mously; but they thought it as well, not to quit Ravenstein with empty hands. Its true, the whole wealth, that was to be found there above ground, vonsisted in chains, rusty armour, and instruments of torture ; but report had assured them, that treasures of immense value lay eon¬ ii 4 cealed
56
cealed in the subterraneous parts of the Castle, tnd these they determined not to leave behind them. They tore open the bosom öf the rock, on which the Castle was situated, with¬ out discovering aught but Adelaide's dungeon, in which she was found almost at the point of death, not having tasted nourishment for several days. They were humane enough to remove the unfortunate girl into a purer atmosphere, and to exert themselves in some mea¬ sure to effect her recovery. Her beauty probably was of some use in persuading the younger part of the garrison to assist her the more readily ; and what httle wealth she possest in jewels (the only presents of her unnatural mother) purchased for her the protection ofthe more ancient and flinty-hearted. While
ai
While they were busied in attending upon her, she heard them talk much re¬ specting the escape of two ladies, who as well as Lucretia and herself had been prisoners at Ravenstein: she ако heard Waiter Forest mentioned as their deli¬ verer, for Count Ethelbert's deceived soldiers had by that time discovered who their deceiver really was, and where he resided. On these hints did Adelaide build a plan for her escape from the so¬ ciety of these lawless ruffians, for whose temporary mercy (she saw clearly) she was only indebted to her illness and to the hurry of their preparations for flight. At the risk of her life therefore did she, in spite of her weak condition, take the advantage of a stormy night to escape from the Castle, and hasten to the tran- D S qu4
58 quii valley inhabited by that friend of the opprest, Walter Forest; who failed not to receive the poor Adelaide also with the same openness and hospitality, with which he had received ourselves. She rewarded his kindness by appriz¬ ing him of the attack, with wMch lie had been threatened by the soldiery pf Ravenstein in revenge for the artifice, by which he had contrived the escape of their captives. The warning however proved unnecessary, for the cowardly vassab of the Count of Carbheim had already'altered their plans. Adelaide's flight had ruined their hopes of falling upon Walter by surprize; theydid not dare to attack openly the brave inhabit¬ ants of the Frutiger Valley; and they judged it more prudent on many ac¬ counts
5!) counts to proceed without delay to re¬ quest protection of the Lords of Eschen¬ bach from the resentment of the Count of Carlsheim. Ravenstein Castle had originally belonged to the family of Es¬ chenbach; the protection asked was readily granted; the rebellious vassals of Count Ethelbert took the oath of allegi¬ ance to their new master, and the shat¬ tered towers of Ravenstein Castle were delivered into his possession. In the mean while Adelaide, under the escort of some of Walter Forest's peo¬ ple, arrived in safety at the place, to which she had desired to be conducted. She knew in what part of Italy Donat was then resident; andas the prejudices, with whicli she had been inspired against Count Ethelbert and his second wife, в 6 prevented
60 prevented her seeking a refuge m ber paternal mansion, there seemed for her no proper abode except with her bro¬ ther. Her reception was kinder, than she had expected from her experience of Donat's unfeeling nature. He was young, and indulged himself to excess in lhe pleasures of voluptuous Italy: if his dissolute mode of life had not bet¬ tered his heart, it had at least made it softer, and more accessible to compas¬ sion, when the indulgence óf that senti¬ ment did not interfere with his own gratifications. Therefore though he listened with impatience to Adelaide's melancholy account of her mother's sufferings in Ravenstein Castle, and suf¬ fered his pleasures to make him put off from day to day the afľorjing Lucretia that
Cl
that aid, of which her daughter (who was sliil ignorant of her decease) never ceased to assure him, she stood so much in need: still was he not without com¬ passion for the helpless situation of his sister, nor so blind to merit, as to reject the title of brother to a creature so ami¬ able and so deserving. Of their rela¬ tionship he had ho doubt; Adelaide had brought with her the acknowledgment of her birth written by Lucretia's own hand; and had other proofs been want¬ ing, the strong resemblance imprest by Natureon the features of Donat and his sister would have left the spectator no doubt, that they sprang from the same parents. Adelaide, however, soon discovered, that she could not long accept with pro¬ priety
62 priety the protection afforded ber in her brother's house. Count Donat was sur¬ rounded day and night by a swarm of youthful libertines, who sported in the sunshine of his wealth, assisted him in his licentious pursuits, and were his companions in all the excesses of his un¬ restrained habits of enjoyment. His lovely sister became the general object of their insolent addresses; and Donat had neither firmness of mind nor love of reputation sufficient to guard her against their importunities. She entreated permission to retire into a convent; but this was refused her witb too much anger and determination to permit her making the request a se¬ cond time. She therefore found herself compelled to give her hand to one of her
63 her admirers, who might at least protect her from the insults of the rest; and fortunately both for him and foi myself, the man who was least displeasing to her among the number, was Rodolpho of the Beacon-Tower; was my brother. I have to thank him for the happiness of calling one of the best of created women by the name of friend ; I have to thank her for having snatched from the jaws of ruin the dear but erring youth, whom I loved, though but his sister, with affec¬ tion not less fervent than a mother's! ч At that time I resided in an Italian cloister, sufficiendy near the theatre of Count Donat's exploits for the report of them to reach me, and to 'make me bewail the fate of those, who were drawn by his example mto the whirlpool of licentiousness. Alas!
64 Alas! the intelligence at length reached mc, that my unfortunate brother was one of the young Count of Carlsheim's most distinguished companions in his profligate career. Mutual friendship united them; and Rodolpho's warm heart and too yielding nature made him look upon it as the highest pitch of hu¬ man glory, when he trod in the foot- steps ofhis abandoned friend. My warnings and remonstrances had no effect upon the poor misguided youth. You must be well aware, dear Urania, that instructions coming from the mouth of a Nun are little regarded by the worldly, merely btcause it ts a Nun who speaks them. Very different was the effect of those reproofs, which the lovely Adelaide condescended to be¬ stow
I..Î stow on her admirer. I have already told you, that among the Damsel of Carlsheim's suitors my brother was the man who displeased her the least; and this is the strongest term wliieh tan be applied to her sentiments towards him at that period. It is true, Rodolpho was esteemed (and that justly) the hand¬ somest youth in Italy; but Adelaide's mind was too elevated to suffer her heart to be captivated by the mere glare of a pleasing exterior. The man, whom she now honoured with her choice, would undoubtedly have been seen by her with as much indifference as his worthless companions, had she not found some traces of manly sense in his bewildered brain, and in his erring heart some
66
some still surviving sparks of the love of virtue. What cannot female beauty, when United with solid sense and a feeling mind, effect upon a being, who is not yet totally lost to every sense of good¬ ness? Guided by the hand of Adelaide, already had Rodolpho retraced many a step in the paths of vice: she made his immediate departure from the theatre of his follies the only condition, on whjch she would bestow on him her hand. He loved her; he complied: Adelaide became my sister, and my brother was entirely rescued. Oh! dearest Adelaide, how heaitily did I thank you (when bidding you fare¬ wel) for removing from the dangers of Italy
67
Italy a man, whom I knew to be as safe in your arms,, as under the wings of his protectmg angel! Willingly did I part with him, since he left me but to follow the path of virtue, in which you knew how to guide him so wellt She was no sooner .Rodolpho's wife, than Adelaide insisted on his immedi'· ately 'performing his promise to quit Italy: she saw, that her personal remon¬ strances had no power to hasten Donat's departure for Ravenstein; and she was obliged to content herself with receiving from him the most solemn assurances, that he would proceed to liberate his unfortunate mother without further de* lay; assurances, which he had frequently made before, and which were performed on
68
no better on this, than they had been on former occasions. Adelaide advised her husband (who could refuse nothing to her entreaties) to accompany her to the Court of the German Emperor, where there was no doubt ofhis easily ob taming an employ¬ ment sudted'to his rank and talents. Ro¬ dolpho had but one objection to offer against taking this step. Rudolf of Hapsburg had been succeeded in the imperial throne by Adolphus of Nassau. This unfortunau monarch, who was long the friend and benefactor of our family, was cut off in the middle of his glorious career by the sword of Albert of Austria; and his crown became the prey of the powerful conqueror, whose brows it still
69 still decorated. My father lost his life in defence of his sovereign at the battle of Worms; and his last words com¬ manded his son Rodolpho (who together with many other young Knights made on that day his first trial in arms) to revenge the deaths of his father and his sovereign. This dying injunction was the reason, why Rodolpho had hitherto refused to accept any employment from the suc¬ cessful Albert; and as good intentions' frequently produce bad effects, the want of proper occupation had betrayed him into that dissolute course of life, from which he was snatched by Adelaide. This dying injunction was the cause also of his being still unwilling to lay him¬ self under obligations to one, whom he had
70
had long been accustomed to call by no other name, than that of the " regicide Albert." Adelaide however prevailed at length over all his objections; he entered into the Imperial service, and endeavoured to forget, that the man, whom he ac¬ knowledged as hb master, was the mur¬ derer of the beloved and still regretted Adolphus: yet frequently no influence less strong than Adelaide's would have been able to repress the ebullitions, of that struggling resentment, which'still existed in hb bosom, and to retain hint firm in the path of hb duties. How- ever, in spite of Ms disinclination to Al¬ bert's service, he proved himself to be a hero on all warlike occasions; and often did he express the warmest grati¬ tude
71 tude to his wife for having rescued him from his ignominious effeminacy, and excited the dormant flame of valour in his bosom. Still he lost no opportunity of show¬ ing, that Albert's yoke sat heavy upon him, and that he desired nothing more ardently than to exchange the Imperial service -for some other. Dissentions arose between the Emperor and his two sons, the Margraves Dietman and Frede¬ rick; Rodolpho failed not to side with the latter, and became their father's pri¬ soner. The unfortunate Adelaide could of herself do nothing to assist her hus¬ band, and hastened to implore for him her brother's powerful interference. Count Donat's situation had under¬ gone material changes during· her ab- 1 sence.
72 sence. She had left him, not -only in possession of the Urge domains be¬ queathed him by his maternal grand¬ father, but the fàvoui ite of a Prince who loaded him with favours and wealth. Sudden death had deprived him of this powerful protector; his unbounded ex¬ travagance had exhausted his treasures; and no mearis of rescuing himself from the most degrading state of poverty was left him, except an union with a person incapable of inspiring him with the least affection; and who had nothing to re¬ commend her to his choice except her immense property, and her childish passion for this handsome libertine. Shortly before Rodolpho's imprisonment had Mellusina become the wife of Count Donat; and on Adelaide's arrival in Italy, she
73
she understood, that her brother had at length set out on his long-promised ex¬ pedition to Ravenstein Castle. Thither she followed him, and was politely though coldly received by her new sister-in-law. Mellustna gave her¬ self out to be a natural daughter of the deceased Emperor Adolphus; and she believed herself entitled by so illustrious an origin to treat every one else with haughtiness and contempt. Had she had any other resource, never would Adelaide have accepted the protection which Was here afforded her with such insolent condescension; but friendless and destitute as was her present situa¬ tion, she now could do nothing but suffer and submit. She found her brother too much vol. п. г occupied
74
occupied by Ms own projects to bestow a single thought upon the affairs of others. He listened npt to the implor¬ ing voice of, hb sbter;; he heeded noc the misfortunes of his former friend. Grief for the untimely death of hb mo¬ ther, who had perbhed through his inattention to her prayers, and projects of revenge against those whom he ac¬ cused of her sufferings, engrossed hb every thought. Adelaide could obtain nothjng from him, except a promise of assistance when he should have satisfied hjs animosity against Lucretia's murder¬ ers, and instead of seeing him lead hb forces to the fortress in which her hus¬ band langubhed, she was obliged to fol¬ low him to Sargans, where she had many a painful scene to undergo, of which УЧ и >
75 you, doar Urania, were partly a wit- ness. Sorrow and self-reproach ; the disap¬ pointment ofhis too-highly-raisild youth- ful expectations; his union with a wo¬ man whom he hated; and above Jail the consequences of a Ufe passed in scenes of the most unbridled profligacy, a ru¬ ined constitution and an accusing con¬ sciences all these together had hardened Count Donat's heart, and embittered his tempet; had annihilated his few 4 good qualities, and had left his bad ones visible in the full extent of their enor¬ mity. His misanthropic heart longed for a suitable employments and only WMtedibr-iarrexctlse-td triake others feel the tortores, which preyed upon him- selfii THe sight of 'Adelaide brdught e 2 moie
7β
more strongly to his mind tlie recollec¬ tion of his wretched mother, whom he had şo long forgotten, and who had so vainly applied to her, son for help: lie remembered well, how often Jus, sister bad implored him to set forward for Ra¬ venstein, and bad wai ned him, that his mother's death might probably be the consequence of his dehy. The, more he reflected, the more fierce became his rage; and he determined to prqceed to Rhætia, revenge his mother, and exact from his father a severe account respect¬ ing her long imprisonment and miser¬ able death. It was also his design to enforce his right ţo his paternal estates, from which Count Ethelbert (incensed at the discovery of Lucretia's artífice in regard to het supposed possessions) bad disinherited
77
VHsinherited his children < by hb 1 first wife, ' 4 - - ' > ' ' '' Count Ethelbert and Uiania ¥er*>tSta had been described to Adelaide 'in the mirjst Odious' cbloura, not\viťhstandihg •which, she shuddered, While listenlrtg'to the threats Whieh her brother breathed against them. How did the sight terni fherrgentle faearï, whèh she savAthe ' a^ehger's sword rabed by the son against hb -father! ' Йег prayers, her remon¬ strances had no effect upon Count Do¬ nat knďhis ambitious wife, who founded lOhfehelbert'sruin plans for their own rfilture greatness. During her abode at Ravenstein, Adelaide discovered for the first time ťh* natural cruelty of her bro¬ ther's disposition: report cannot have perihitteďyou to remain ignorant, with E 3 what
78
what, torrents Qf bipod the furious Donat inundated the vales pf Frutiger. - The anxiety and terror, with which you re¬ ceived the news of his approach towards your residence, sufficiently prove that you were aware, how little hopţ you en¬ tertained pf fltcapii¡£ from Ju» frantic fury. V- Adelaide was wam of it also; and she txembkcLţf not for to unknown step-mother, at leastfor her unfortunate fither, who .(tyrant aa she believed, faim , ţo be) sheistill thought possest from Na¬ ture arf anohoiity pyer hb children, which no-conduct çf hb could forfeit, however irimwal· The dbtrest daugh¬ ter would have suffered, sp «pore se¬ verely fø»m aprehensión, founded «ι rewons but too strong; had she net seized
1*
"seized a lucty moment orunlfinï-U ¿oo'd humour to obtain a solemn oiťh rtom Dorüt, that Ethelbert's hib Shoiilä vie held sacred by hnjn, and that 'she never should éhâdteflfe agony of J seétng lier brother'á harids starhed Ш1Ь tiiètlrjèíl 'fif ttíeir¿ommonfaAer ' ^ Dreadful ú İt ίο think, fŕh'ät tófi'a promite should have evïrbeef, Рейсойск tıedessaty' Ih truth, »ulftlSim^irøin. self felt the Ktter rerlettíóri conveýérľm Adelaide's request, arid wbïre he^effik to her importunity, he chid her $irh Säe verity forharbourmg auch* íiegVöitóded suspicions I am -persuaded] that Do nat 4i/as not quite thfe itóister ať' that time, which he appeared lo bè w>fien sèèb ui "Ъа тйЙепШ öf íràiític passio», nay, lab mchnedtforri a bnety bï Шо ε 4 öves
80 tives to ascribe to him a very trilling share in that melancholy transaction, whose real circumstances are covered with a veil of impenetrable pbscuriţy, and whose execution was too barbarous for me to attribute it even to the bass Guiderius himself. Doubtless Count Ethelbert's miserable end was- effected by a/udden burst of frenzy; in aime- menţ,o£ terror and despahqhis own hand inflicted on himself the punbhment of ¡former errors, and (I fear!) of former crimes l u , TÇınj appeared at Count Dqnat's camp, Uránja, tq solicit the pardon of your wretched emìty husband. To see you was sufficient, to obtain for you Ade¬ laide's afiectioHf and to annihilate every prejudice, which had so carefully been instilled
81 instilled into her mind against you. She endeavoured to make you aware of the dangers which threatened you; but ob¬ stacles both visible and invisible inter¬ posed to prevent your preservation. Your friend's unwillingness to speak ¡11 of a brother; Mellusina's unexpected intrusion and persevering stay in your tent, and above all, that singular and inexplicable occurrence which made the whole society separate in such terror, all combined to retain you in the road, destined to lead you into long cap¬ tivity. Never could Adelaide mention with¬ out shuddering the mysterious adven¬ ture of that night. She ever anxiously avoided speaking on the subject, and re¬ ferred me to you for more accurate £ J informa.-
82 information. However, the account which in compliance with my request you forwarded to me, was nothing more than that, which I had already heard from my sister-in-law: anxiety to unravel this mj'stery made me even have recourse to Mellusina, but without success. Her account of the matter was no less ob¬ scure, strange, and unaccountable. Thenextmorning, herbrotherthought it adviseable to prevent Adelaide from accompanying you to the Castle of Sar¬ gans, and therefore gave out, that she was taken ill unexpectedly. In truth, this was- no pretended indisposition. The supposed interference of a spiritual being had made the strongest impression upon her imagination ; and when Count Donat's attendants delivered her up to my
83 " my charge (he was then ignorant, how closely she was connected with the Ab¬ bess of St. Mary's) her situation was such, that you cannot easily picture it to yourself too melancholy—The return of the messenger, whom she had dis¬ patched to you, only servéd to increase her illness; he communicated to her without sufficient precaution the news of her unfortunate fathers miserable death, and added to it the account of your ill-treatment and captivity. lake all who are possest of sensibility roor acute, she loaded heiself with reproaches for not having taken measures to peU vent these heavy misfortunei}·· and it was long, befoı.. the soothing orfrídnií ship could succeed in pacifyîn.^ het. To complete hk distress but one thing e 6 more
• 8t more was necessary, and it ai rived: a report pievailed (and was universally credited), that her husband had fallen a victim to the Emperor's resentment. As jŞuperior of St Mary's cloister, I could fhjive, afforded my poor sister a secure ,and agreeable shelter within these frajiquil.walls; but the desire to weep oyer, her husband's grave, and her anxi¬ ety ţo rescue you from the dungeon in whiph you languished, compelled her vo rgçurn once more into the hated world. She -уда conscious, that you were the captivo, of, a man, whose cruelty was hut too well-known to her; and she Vowed solemnly never to rest,, till she had broken the chains imposed upon you so unjustly. * ,, tShe«aw too plainly, that the united S forces
83 forces of the Counts of Mayenfield and Homburg would be unable to force yiu out ot the power of the mighty Lord of the domains of Carlsheim and Sargans·: besides both Tdith and her daughter were persuaded of your death, and looked on Adelaide's assertions of your existence in Donat's dungeons, as being the mei e effusions of that enthusiastic affection, whieh easily believes whatever it wishes to be true. But no ìepresent- atiotìs, no neglect could induce your protectress to lay aside her hopes of effecting your deliverance; and she ad- drest herself; tq the Emperor Rudolf's daughters, whose powerful interference фе ι trusted would easily obtain your release. Of all,those powerful Princesses, the Duchess
S6 Düchess of Saxony alone (the virtuous Matilda, whose own domestic misfor¬ tunes might have furnished her with a sufficient excuse in the world's estima¬ tion, for declining to embarrass herself with the affairs of others) exerted her¬ self seriously in your behalf. Her sister Euphemia, retired in a convent and for¬ gotten by the world, had little to offer toward your release except good wishes; yet what little she eould offer, she offered gladly, and shared her sister's joy at the news ofyour deliverance. I understand, that thb royal Nun Will soon exchange her cpnvent at Tull for that wfaižlŕyc-u inhabit, solely from the wish to end her life in your society. Oh 1 Urania, hpv? gready dpes all that I hear pf yoii ini crease my desire to kAow you person¬ ally!
87
»Hyi What unusual merit must that woman possess, who could obtain so warm and unabatlng an interest in the hearts of three ofthe noblest of created beings, Euphemia, Matilda, and my poor Adelaide.' Yet 1 forget too long the heroine of my history, while occupying myself with Urania; I resume the thread of my narrative. Adelaide found at Emperor Albert's court, (whither she -"-paired to plead in your behalf in person)- that art happiness was^ reserved for her, which she had never expected to enjoy again oflithidäde the-grave: her hosband-wa* still living. Thé same false report, which had/ persuaded her of his death, had taken no less pains to persuade Ro¬ dolphe, tbat sho was faithless. Her journey
ев journey to Italy for the purpose of per¬ suading her brother to interfere in be¬ half of her imprisoned Lord; the expe¬ dition to Sargans, in r which she was obliged to accompany Count J}onat;¿the lengthof time, which elapsed *ithout his knowing whaf had iiecome of her, and which she had past m my convent almost at the point of death; these and a variety of other circumstances had all been represented to Rodolpho in the most odious light. In his dungeon (Whence he had but lately been released on the reconciliation between the Em¬ peror and his sons) it was impossible for. him to detect the falsehood of these re¬ ports; but Adelaide needed but to shew herself to the man who loved her with such unbounded affection, and all his injurious
80
injurious suspicions were annihilated at once. A few words were sufficient to persuade him of the truth, a truth, whieh was confirmed by the testimony of those, under whose eyes she had been residing. What tongue is capable of describing the reunion of two lovers long separated; it is a fore-taste of. tliat reunion, which we expect to enjoy with the objects of our affection beyond the grave, in an¬ other world better and happier. The one saw ber belief in the untimely death of her beloved dissolved like a painful dream; the other saw those stains re¬ moved, whicli had sullied her purity on whom his soul doated, both felt, that the turbulent raptures of their early love were Jess sweet, than this renewal of their
90
their long-tried affection! Forgive me, Urania; a cloistered Nun ought not to describe such emotions, thengh-she can¬ not help feeling them: doubtless, you understand such things better than we do, who have been confined from put tarlíáít yea« withm the walls of a cpn¬ vent, arid shut out from the most pre¬ cious rights of human nature. From thb moment began the mos't fortunate part of our friend's Kfe. Ade¬ laide found her husband improved by years and cprrecfed by adversity; ab¬ sence and misfortune bad made bim still dearer to her; and she now first felt to¬ wards him the whole excess of love, of which her affectionate heart was capable. She now had Ho other wish, than to enjoy her happirieâs in quiet and retire¬ ment.
91 ment. Ťhe Lords of Eschenbach hod new-built the fortress of Ravenstein, and proffered it to her husband (who had long been united with them in amity) as afit residence, should it be no longer agreeable for him to remain at the Court of the offended Emperor. Gladly would Adelaide have hftstened -thither ; but .Rodolpho 'had contracted obligations,' wirich àtthat time prevented him from immediately quitting the Court. He was indebted -for life, for freedom, foropulènce, to fhe favour of a princely youth, whom it was only necessary to see in order to admire; and whoie Situation It was only neces¬ sary ΐ6 know, ih order to feel interested for him, even liad Rodolpho not been so closely bolind tø Jum by the ties of gratitude.
Е>2 gratitude 'Ihis man was the cause, why Adelaide's husbind fonnd it impos¬ sible to comply with her request., Needl name to yqu tins »oble, this dangerotís yøuth? Alas! vvjlio has not heard of the unfortunate John of Swa¬ bia; who does not pity and detest in him at once the injured Prince, arid the lawless avenger of J.those injuries?·^- Wretched youth! what bweyou gained by tbat rash ahd detestable, action,,to which you were guided hy evil counsel¬ lors? m what climate do you wander accursed like the ürst,murderer, without being able to fly froth your own consci¬ ence, and what witt be at last the goal to which your painful wanderings lead? The young Duke of Swabia< at the period when Rodolpho attached himself to
93 to his fortunes, was not the criminal, vvhich he is now become through pas¬ sionate rashness, and through impatience under the pressure of adversity: the epi¬ thet, which is now affixed to his name, and which probably will bc transmitted to the latest pdsteiity, at that time would have made him recoil with horror. Young, amiable, and unfortunate, he created an inteiest in every bosom. Even Adelaide (whose prudent fore- sight made her from the very beginning augur some misfortune to arise from this close intimacy between the Prince and her husband) could not prevent her¬ self from feeling well-disposed towards him: she was compelled to own, that in his complaints against his unjust guar¬ dian the Emperor, who withheld from him
9*
him his paternal inheritance, he had justice on his side; and she earnestly wished, that he might soon obtain the redress of his crying injuries. I told you, that Adelaide had from the firrt observod with uneasiness her hus. band's intimacy with the Duke of Swa- bia; in truth, when the situation and characters of both were considered, it was impossible for ber to feel otherwise on the subject. Prince John was fiery and impatient, an avowed lover of plea¬ sure, and provided by his crafty uncle with ample means for indulging in every excess. The Emperor Albert saw his own advantage in leading tlie youth (whose, happiness,he sought to under¬ mine) into labyrinths, whence ha,would fmdit anJiar ' .task to extricate himself- 1 He
95 He thought, that the errors, which he furnished Prince John with opportuni. ti"s of committing, would excuse his own unjust proceedings towards his ne¬ phew; and unfortunately to lead the youth into the snare was a task but too easily effected. With grief of heart must I confess it, in the principal features of his charat. ter Rodolpho resembled his friend very closely. Adelaide's influence, it's true, had for a time represt those inclinations to libertinism, which he so eaţly con- tracted in Count Donat's school: still had she not succeeded in extirpating them so completely, aş to prevent thçir obtaining their former mastery over his, better judgment occasionally, now, that,, opportunities for,their in^uUrerţce were '2 continually
эе
continually in his way. Rodolpho had a sufficient advantage over the young Prince in point of years, to have entitled him to be his guide in the paths of vir¬ tue; but instead of leading his friend to good, he too often suffered himself to be seduced by him into actions, whicli were very far from being the most re¬ spectable. You may conceive, howmuch - anxiety her husband's want of steadiness must have excited in the mind of our friend; and that anxiety was increased by the dark clouds, which she could perceive rising in another quarter. That the Lord of the Beacon-Tower was no partial admirer of the Emperor, was a feet well known to every one. fa unguarded moments hb own tongue had often avowed his real sentiments respect¬ ing
97 ing the regicide Albert, and the do- ceased Adolphus; the readiness with vvliicli he embraced the quarrel of the youpg Margraves had proved, that he was not unwilling to shew his resent¬ ment by actions as well as words ; and it was not necessary for him to connect himself so intimately with tlie young Duke of Swabia, in order to make him¬ self an object of hatred and suspicion at the imperial court. Albert was silent, but his silence was menacing and ter¬ rible ; and Adelaide had already acquired sufficient knowledge of the manners of the great to guess, that the anger (which regard for his own safety restrained him from venting on the prince) would one day burst оя the , heads of his unpro¬ tected friends ; among whom the Lord vol. n. r of
98
of the Beacon-Tower being the mosf distingubhed, would not fail to receive the largest share of vengeance. —" Oh! let us fly, my beloved!" often exclaimed Adelaide in her moments of apprehension ; " let us away to the tranquil vale of Frutiger. Here we breathe no air but such sultry parching blasts, as seem to warn us of an approach¬ ing tempest. With every moment the gloom increases ; the clouds collect together; the lightning will soon break bose and destroy us !"------- Rodolpho's answers to these remon¬ strances were seldom such as to give her cause for satisfaction; He talked much of the future greatness of his friend, never spoke df Albert without attaching the word " Regicide" to his name,
99 name,and frequently recalled to mind his father's dying command to revenge the murder of Adolphus. Adelaide's anxiety grew daily more acute : she redoubled her importunity, that her husband should quit the court ; and as she was now in such a situation as gave Rodol¬ pho hopes of an event, which he had long desired in vain, he trembled, lest the too violent agitation of her mmd should injure her health materially. He therefore determined for the first time to conceal his sentiments from the woman whom he adored, and to lead her into an error respecting the real state of afiairs, which became with every day more critical and serious· Among his dependents was a young man of noble birth but fallen fortunes, f 2 by
100 byname Russeling; he had formerly been in the service of the Duke of Swabia, and had been employed by him to effect Rodolpho's dettverance from the emperor's chains. 'This circumstance had greatly endeared him to his piesent patron, who did not perceive that he harboured in Russeling a seducer, whose object was to guide him to the commis¬ sion ofa crime the most atrocious. This man was one of those concealed, ene¬ mies, who are frequently more danger¬ ous to princes, than those whose armies ravage their dominions, and who open¬ ly threaten the subversion of their thrones. Ancient animosity,which had descended from father to son through a long Une of ancestors undiminished, lived in his rancorous'heart against the emperor :
юг emperor : he secretly fanned every spark of hatred, which existed in other bosoms ; his every word infused additional bit¬ terness towards his uncle into the heart of the Dnke of Swabia, to whose person he had still free access ; and he kindled again in the heart of my unfor¬ tunate brother that flame, which Ade¬ laide with her soothing had so anxi¬ ously laboured to extingubh» The betrayer perceived, that no one crossed him in his evil designs more than the wife of his patron ; he there¬ fore exerted hb utmost skill to effect her removal from the scene of action. Rodolpho had frequently advised her to quit the turbulent court, and pass the time of-her approaching confine¬ ment in the retired Castle near the Lake f3 of
'09 of Thun, which she had herself marked out as the future scene of her domestic happiness.- Hitherto his entreaties had been in vain : she could not resolve to abandon her husband while exposed to all tiie dangers, in which the Duke of *wabia's intimacy had involved him. But now that Rodolpho had prevailed on himself to use dissimulation with her, who had never deceived him hvthe slightest trifle ; and now that Russeling with his serpent's tongue had thrown out hints reepecting the views of the Duke of Swabia, which led her to suspect (perhaps unjustly) that his marked attention to her proceeded from a passion disgraceful both to her ahd to the prince ; Adelaide however reluctant¬ ly was compelled to give up her opinion. Flight,
103 Flight, she now thought, would be the only remaining means of destroying the duke's presumptuous hopes, without drawing down, his resentment upon her husband, Besides, she greatly needed some respite from the tumultuous and turbulent residenct of the court ; and every anxiety respecting Rodolpho was removed by his solemn assurance, that it should not be long, ere he rejoined her, never again to quit the repose and security of rural life. Yet bitter was the parting between these married lovers. Both were tor¬ mented by forebodings of misfortune ; both felt the pangs of an affection, which made them wish never to be separated ; and yet each was ¡till compelled to ac¬ knowledge, tliat to separate was neces¬ sary! r 4 With
104 With difficulty did they tear them¬ selves from «ach other's arms. By his patron's desire, Russeling conducted the Lady of the Beacon-Tower to the place appointed for her abode : but as soon as he had seen her established there, he hastened back to the imperial resi¬ dence, anxious to lose no opportunity of advancing bis projects; As unfor¬ tunately every circumstance combined to favour them, his detestable schemes were but too soon carried into execu¬ tion. In the mean while, Adelaide in the sohtude of Ravenstein led tbe kind of life best adapted to her melancholy situation. The present posture of af¬ iairs rendered her heart doubly acces¬ sible to every sort of inquietude: she had
tos had left her dear but unsteady husband entangled in a chain of circumstances, which authorized her to see the future in the most gloomy light ; nOr was it long before she discovered, that in fix¬ ing her abode at the fortress of Raven¬ stein, she had by no means selected a residence the best fitted for dissipating the melancholy ideas, which perpetually obtruded themselves upon her imagina¬ tion. In the spring of her hfe this Castle had been long her prison ; there had she narrowly escaped perishing by famine and by the flames, there too was the grave of her unfortunate mother. It was impossible, that these sad recol¬ lections should not have considerable effect upon a mind, which already was в 5 tortured.
we
tortured by * thousand causes for anxictý. It b true, the fords of Eschen¬ bach had almost entirely rebuilt the ruined fortress at considerable expence, and had made it so different from its former self, that it was scarcely to be recognized; but Adelaide's enthusiastic imagination saw less what was before tier eyes, than what sorrow had en¬ graved on her remembrance indelibly. The time of her delivery was at hand; and the presence of some sympathising friends enabled Adelaide to look for¬ ward to the moment of danger with less fear. Indeed, the laws of our order did not permit either you or my¬ self to leave our convents, and hasten to the assistance of our beloved Adelaide. The Countess Meluisina was no more ; ' ι and
107
and even had she been still in existence-, her presence would have been but Utile wished or expected by her sister-in-law. I doubt much too, whether (even had we been able to come to her aid) with alj. our good intentions we should have been able to afford so much real help and comfort, as she received from the female inhabitants of the vale of Fruti¬ ger: during the time which she past with Count Donat atjlavenstein, Ade¬ laide by her exertions to moderate the fury pf her incensed brother had won their hearts completely ; aAd no soonei did tlie grateful women hear, that their benevolent protectress stood in need of it, than they hastened to afford her tb$r friendly assistance.' Walter For¬ est's mother, and Ле wife of Hearic ^ ' v fj Melthal,
108
Melthal, (for Donat's increasing tyranny had compelled the family of Melthal to withdraw from his dominions) were among the first to proffer their services ; nor did Gertrude Bernsdorf neglect the daughter of her former lord. It was from these good matrons, that I received the account of the following transac¬ tions ; alas ! I was not permitted to hear them from the lips of the dear Adelaide herself ! The Lady of th> Beacon-Tower was- safely delivered of a son ; and the sight of this little smiling innocent was sufficient to relieve bis anxious mother from more than half the weight of her melancholy. — и Now then," she exclaimed'fre¬ quently, while'she kissed her baby with rapture, " now then-1 only need to see Rodolpho
100
Rodolpho partaking my delight, and every fear which now distracts my bosom will at once be destroyed for ever."—— Her wish viaß granted,sooner than she cpuld have expected Alas! it brought npl with it the joy, which (she fondly hoped) would accompany her husband's arrival. Reports which agitate the great world, are slow in reaching the dwel· lipgs of retirement, yet there are sume transactions, which fame spreads about with the rapidity of lightning, because they are strange and terrible enough to attract the attention pf the universal glpbe. Who trembles not at hearing the dreadful word, Regicide ! the emperor Albert was dead ; he had fallen by the 2 * hands
no
hands of the unfortunate lohn of Swabia and his friends I this dreadful report had been long circulated in whis¬ pers among the mountains, where Ade¬ laide had fixed her residence ; it at first obtained little credit, but with every succeeding day it seemed to assume more consistency. It had not yet reached the ears of Adelaide ; but her attendants saw, that it would be im¬ possible to keep it from her knowledge much longer; the prudent Gertrude therefore, as the person among them to whom the others looked up with the greatest deference, undertook to give the invalid some insight into these melancholy events; observing every possible precaution, that might weaken their effect, and carefully concealing the share, which the Lord of the Beacon- Tower
Ill
Tower was reported to have taken ία the business. Chance unfortunately pievented her from executing her kind intentions. One evening, Adelaide was sitting with her child at her bosom near a- window, which commanded the spaci¬ ous court-yard. On a sudden a single warrior rushed into the court on horse¬ back. Adelaide sprang from her seat with a cry of joy, and flew towards the portal. —" Whither would you go, lady ?" exclaimed Gertrude, and hastened to follow her. But Adelaide was already in the court, and before he had time to enter, had placed her child on the bosom of hb father. Rodolpho kissed hb baby and. its mother,
112
mother, and then amidst the joyful shouts of the domestics who crouded round their master, he followed Ade» laide into the great castle-hall: there was he received with renewed embraces, with questions, blessings, wondering), and all tho delightful confusion of un¬ expected and overflowing joy. Rapture at clasping in her arms fhe man, whom she had so. long sighed to- see, and at a moment so unlooked-for, prevented Adelaide from observing, that the rapture was not mutual. The eager prattling of affection concealed from her, that She was the only speaker; and many hours had elapsed, before she was sufficiently recovered from the de¬ lirium of her joy to ask the question— "Oh! Rodolpho, why thus silent? why thus pale?"— It.
113 It Was not so long,before his attendants had remarked this alteration in their Lord's appearance j and the alarming con¬ sternation displayed in his countenance seemed to confirm the reports to his disadvantage, which for some time had been so prevalent. The pleasure, with which his arrival had inspired them at first, soon vanished ; and all drew back with shuddering from the man, on whose hands they fancied that they could discover the stains of royal blood. — " What troubles you, my beloved?" Adelaide at length demanded of her husband, who sat with his eyes fixed stedfastly on the earth, and seemed not to hear her question ; " answer me for pity's sake ! what troubles you ?"— —" Oh ! nothing, nothing !" he exclaimed
114 exclaimed, then sprang up suddenly, and advanced towards the window— " all is as it should be; nothing has happened but what ought to have hap¬ pened. It is only my foolish heart, that cannot be pursuaded to let me be at rest"— —" All has happened, that ought to have happened?" repeated Adelaide, whose anxiety became more painful with every moment ; " and what then im happened?"— Rodolpho without answering her question, remaiked that night was com¬ ing on ; he then desired a domestic to take good care, that all the gates were well locked and barred, and ordered that the portcuffis should be let down to guard the narrow path, whose steps were hewn in the rock, and which was the only avenue to the Castle.
115 — " Dearest Rodolpho," aaid Ade¬ laide, while she took his hand with mingled tenderness and apprehension " what need of these precautions ? are you not safe in the arms of love ? surely, we now have no enemies to dread."— —" Adelaide, while Albert lived, we had but one enemy: now that he is no more, his death has created a thousand avengers, who wait with impatience for an opportunity to destroy us !"— —" His death ?" exclaimed Adelaide in a tone expressing the utmost horror, and betraying that she already guest the misfortune, which she was soon to hear confirmed; " is then the emperor dead ϊ alas ! and by whom ?"— ' Her husband gazed upon her with a
116
a gloomy frowning air, and without replying prepared to quit the apart¬ ment. Adelaide followed him, detained him, 'and in a voice scarcely audible repeated her question, Rodolpho bent himself towards her, and whispered somewhat in her ear ; yet not so gently, but that Gertrude (who was the only person then present) could distinguish the emperor's name, the Duke of Swabia's, and Rodolpho's own. —" Now then" said he, with a loud voice and terrible look; " Now then is Adelaide aware, by what rame she must henceforth greet her hus¬ band?"— It is easy to guess, how violent an effect
117 effect this dreadful explanation must have made upon the criminal's unfor¬ tunate wife ! life is subject to moments, in which a single word is sufficient to bring at once before the mind the whole wide extent of our future fate; in which with a single look and in a single feeling we embrace the whole ; and (be they of sorrow or be they of joy) in which fnan's feeble nature is compelled to sink beneath the gigantic strength of his sensations. Adelaide lay at her husband's feet deprived of animation. His caresses and the care of her attendants only awakened her to the sense of suffering. It is true, the total deprivation of her intellects for a time preserved her mind from feeling the wretchedness of her situation;
ns situation; but her health was.cruelly aflected by the violent attacks of a malady, which soon brought her to the yery brink of the grave. Many months past before she was pronounced out of .danger ; it required no less a period to elapse, before she was able to accustom her mind sufficiently to seeing all her gloomy apprehensions justified, without relapsing into that melancholy state from which she had just escaped with so much difliculty. While Rodolpho through his wife's illness suffered both for himself and for her, Iris situation had become more critical with every day. The favourable hour for flight had been consumed by the side of Adelaide's sick-bed. Willi no kind friendly hand to pour balm into
119 into the wounds of his conscience, their agony was become most acute ; and he was now compelled ţo see (what is seen by every criminal) the deed that was done with very different eyes from those, with which, he saw the deed while it was yet to do. He was without comfort, without hope; and already did the emperor's avengers tread close upon his footsteps. There was no longer any security for the unfortunate family of Rodolpho at Ravenstein Castle: concealment was the only chance for preserving his life from the many swords, that were in search of him. Adelaide's first care therefore on her recovery was to quit her abode, nor did her still weak state of health deter her from immediately execu¬ ting
- 120 ting her resolution. Rodolpho followed whither she thought proper to conduct liim, less from the hnpc of saving lib wretched existence, than from feeling it impossible to part any more from Adelaide. The horror, which had taken possession of all her faculties on first hearing of tlus dreadful act, had now given place to sorrow and compassion : she tortured herself to find some apology for hb crime ; and when she felt that the excuses of love avail nothing at any judgment-bar except its own, tliough she found herself compelled to confess Rodolpho guilty, she Still vowed, that all guilty as he was she loved him still, and that all guilty as he was she would perbh with him. Willingly did the grateful inhabitants of
121
of the Vale of Frutiger afford a shelter to her, from whom they had formerly received such essential services ; but it was not without much secret murmur¬ ing, that they granted the same favour to her blood-polluted husband. How indeed could that innocent and open- hearted race ef people willingly support the presence of a murderer ? In the shelter of their huts Rodolpho ran no risque of being betrayed; but it was clear < о every one, and most so to himself, that the sacrifice made by them in this instance to humanity, was a sacrifice whicli cost them very deaily. His own afflicted convcience too pre¬ vented him from long ι enabling quiet in the same place; and he at lengtli suddenly told his wife, thai he was de- vol. u. g tei mined
122
termined on hastening to Rome, and on soliciting absolution for his crime at the feet of the holy father. This, he believed, was the only balsam capable of calming the inexpressible anguish, which preyed upon hb heart. Unwillingly did Adelaide suffer him to tear himself from her arms. She would fain have accompanied him in his pilgrimage ; but her weakness which still continued, and the caution which it was necessary for a proscribed man to observe upon his journey, compelled her to give up her generous design. Rodolpho set forward in disguise for Rome ; Adelaide remained in the Vale of Frutiger with her little son, mingling the milk, which she gave him, witji many a tear of bitterness. A con-
123
A considerable space of time elapsed, and yet no news arrived from the un¬ fortunate pilgrim: her friends the wortliy matrons of Helvetia endea¬ voured to give this delay, which so justly was the cause of much anxiety to Adelaide, a favourable interpretation ; and their husbands solemnly promised^, should Rodolpho return with the Holy Father's pardon, they would refuse him no service, which an honest man could require at their hands. Adelaide's tranquillity bagan to return: absolutfon even from crimes, whose mention makes humanity shudder, is no uncommon thing in our days ι this is a circumstance, which gives the laity opportunities of throwing much re¬ proach upon the church; but on which, g 2 as
124 as belonging to a religious society, it becomes nu to remain silent—the hopes of our friend were abo greatly strength¬ ened by aaHsvent, which (when Adelaide communicated it in one of her letters) appeared even to myself as meriting no slight attention ; it was, that persons of inferior consequence having all de- sbted from tiie pursuit, the only person, who stttT demanded Rodolpho's punish¬ ment, was Johanna, the reigning "queen of Hungary, and daughter of the mur¬ dered emperor. We trusted, that the gentle soul of a woman would be easily awakened to compassion ; and this nat¬ tering persuasion received additional force, when Adelaide received an assur¬ ance, that it was unnecessary for her tp. continue in concealment, and that slie 1 might
might return to her abode at Raven¬ stein, in perfect security from meeting with injury or insult. Adelaide and her friends naturally considered this permission as a fore¬ runner of still greater favourb—" It is clear then," said she, " that the place of iny concealment was well known to my husband's enemies. It was ia their power, had they thought it to take the most severe vengeance, to have punish¬ ed Rodolpho's crime on me and on his son; but they molested us not, and I am now permitted to return -to my former residence. Besides, Rodolpho is in truth not so very culpable ; he was seduced into guilt by the artifice of others. He drew not his sword to revenge his own injuries, but to protect g 3 his
126 bis friend against injustice aud oppits- sion. Perhaps he was selected as an instrument of the Divine Vengeance, and commissioned by Heaven to punish Albert's crime, who was himself his sovereign's murderer."— Oh! Adelaide, how could your pure and generous heart persuade itself even in a single thought or by a single word to palliate an offence, too atrocious to admit of pardon ? vainly did you strive to deceive yourself; one serious glance falling on the veil, which affection would fain have thrown over the crime of your beloved, was frequently enough to make you tremble and blush at being employed in such an oflice. For some time theLadyof the Beacon- Tower resided at Ravenstein in a situ¬ ation,
127
átfon, whose apparent tranquillity wis more artificial than real, but which still was rendered supportable by the hope of better days. A thunder-dap sud¬ denly rouzed her fiom her pleasing Guims, and a tempest hurried her towards the termination of her sorrows. Every attempt to obtain intelligence of the guilty wandei cr had hitherto been unsuccessful. Adelaide's messen¬ gers returned not; Rodolpho was un¬ able to dispatch messengei s in roturn, for he had no sooner set his foot wit'rin the precincts of the Vatican, than he was delivered into the hands of aveng¬ ing justice. What was his present fate, and what would be that which was still reserved for him, was already well- known to every one in the neighbour¬ hood of Ravenstein. Concealed from g 4 her
128 her by the cruel tenderness of her at- tendants, her husband's situation was a secret to Adelaide alone. Surely it was cruel to hide from her an event, which she could not escape knowing in the end, till the whole condousness of her misfortunes burst upon her at once, and with the violence of the shock crushed her. The Lady of the Beacon-Tower en¬ tertained no apprehensions for herself; happen what would,she believed her own person to be safe. The inhabitants of the Helvetian mountains, in which she re¬ sided, had been long dissatisfied with the government of princes, who only-employ¬ ed their power to rob them of their li. berty ; and they had seaetly re, o'ved to seize the first opportunity of breaking their chains. They were prepared to run every
129 every hazard in defence of their adored Adelaide ; and they counted it unneces¬ sary to warn her of the approach of dangers, which they were firmly deter¬ mined to prevent from ever reaching her. But where are the mountains so inaccessible, the protection so powerful, and the valour so impossible to be subdued, that .-calamity cannot over¬ come all obstacles in pursuit of lier destined victim ! Johanna, the Queen of Hungary, who with the fury of a tigress burned to revenge her father's' death, demanded admission into these tranquil vallies, Whose inhabitants, from their having granted Rodolpho-a temporary asylum, she cohsidêred as adherents to the guilty Duke of Swabia. One fortress after о 5 ' another
130 another fell into her power : she became mistress by degrees of the whole country ; and at length Adelaide heard the sound of hostile trumpets, ere she had yet been made aware, that the most revengeful of all women had penetrated into Helvetia. Johanna's mildness towards the mur¬ derer's family had been only assumed, in hopes of discovering where Rodolpho himself was concealed. His seizure had renderedfurther artifice unnecessary,and she was now permitted to show the vio- lenceof her resentmentwithout disguise. She led her troops in person against Ravenstein. Though lately repaired and internally fitted up vith elegance and splendour, the fortres.i so longer possest those strong meant of defence, 3 which
ısı which iu its antient state had enabled it to set the attacks pf foes so often at defiance. Walter Forest, however, had engaged to undertake the command of it ; but at the time when Johanna un¬ expectedly appeared before the Castle, * this brave man was detained by patriotic duties in a distant part of the country. The garrison were capable of making but a sorry resistance; the gates were thrown open; and Johanna made her triumphal entrance into Ravenstein over- the bleedmg corses of those, who had fallen the innecent victims pf her thirst for vengeance. Oh I Urania, I know well, that justice required the punbhment of Albert's murderers ; I know well, that it was the remembrance of' her father's death, e 6 which
132 which transformed his daughter into a Feind ; but still.....still I feel it impossible for me without horror and disgust to unite a thirst for blood with the name of woman. Johanna, that Saint-like princess, that builder of clois¬ ters', that worker of miracles; that young and beautiful Johanna who, as 'tis whispered, is secretly by no means averse to the tender passions; even that very Johanna pursued her way over heaps of mutilated corses, and said with a triumphant smile to those who followed her,—" that it seemed, as if her path had been strown with roses."— The doors of the Great HaD were thrown open i Adelaide lay senseless in the
133 the arms of her attendants. She was half stretched across the cradle of her sleeping child, as if even in the moment of swooning she had still been aware, that enemies were approaching too pityless to spare even slumbering inno¬ cence. The pale countenance of tile Lady of the Beacon-Tower, the beauty of whose features even sorrow had not been able to destroy, and the helplessness of whose present situation served only to render her more interesting, would have touch¬ ed even the hearts of dæmons with compassion; but on the incensed Jo¬ hanna this very beauty produced quite a contrary effect. In the eyes of her who gladly would have seen all other charms eclipsed by her own, to be as lovely
134 lovely as Adelaide in itself was a crime of no inconsiderable magnitude; nor could the queen observe without ex¬ treme displeasure, that among the warriors in her train, many an eye (whose approbation she would gladly have engrossed entirely) dwelt with looks of tenderness and admiration on the fair lifeless statue, wliieh lay ex¬ tended in the dust, overthrown by fear and sorrow. —" Who is this woman?" demanded the queen. —" Adelaide, Lady of the Beacon- Tower."— —" Ha Ì say'st thou ? the Regicide's wife then ?—and yonder brat in the cradle ?"— — α It is Adelaide's only son," ex¬ claimed
135
■claimed Gertrude, at the" same time throwing herself at the feet ofthe Fury, whose arm was already extended to¬ wards the slumbering infant, as it lay half-concealed by its mother's robe.— " Mercy, mercy for the poor babe ; he has been guihy of no crime ; be satis¬ fied with revenging yourself on his unfortunate father !"— A scream uttered by the little Rodol¬ pho rouzed his mother from her insen¬ sibility ; she looked up ; she saw her baby in the arms of the furious queen, who childless herself and unworthy to have children, knew not and cared not, how such tender creatures should be tsr.í.cá. Gertrude had quitted her kneeling attitude, to hasten to the assistance of her
136
her awakening friend, who now took the place which she had left unoccu¬ pied, and embraced in Gertrude's stead the knees ofthe queen. —" My child !" she exclaimed ; " give me my-child! what would you do with it ? why do you grasp it so rudely ? oh ! it is tender, and you will HU it ! you will kill it !"— —"What wouldi do with it?" re¬ peated the implacable Johanna; " I would dash the little serpent against the ground, that it may not grow up to be a regicide like its father !"— —"Oh! mercy!mercy! whatcrimecan theinnocênt babeTiave committed?"— —" None, lady, none," replied Jo¬ hanna, while she cast upon the suppliant a look of mingled anger and disdain ; « 'Tb
137
" 'Tis out of mere compassion, that I use your infant thus. Had your hus¬ band the regicide been treated in his cradle as I will soon treat this screaming worm, he had not been at this moment on his road to the place of execution, where he must soon end his guilty life. upon the rack."— — " Say you ?—my husband..... the place of execution .... the rack too .... my child! oh! God, my poor child !" —thus shrieked Adelaide, who had now' sprang from thi earth, and was endea¬ vouring to force her infant from the grasp of this female Dæmon ; but her exertions were too feeble, and she again 'sank insensible upon the paiement. —" Lady," exclaimed one of the warriors, who seemed to be of most distinction
us elistinclion among her attendants, '· ν oir forget your sex ·"—at the same time he forcibly rescued the crying baby from her hands, and placed it on the bosom of Gertrude. This bold protector of innocence must have possest no trifling influence with Johanna, since she dared only punish his action by an angry frown, and immediately commanded (probably through fear of his making still further use of- his power over her) that the still fainting Adelaide should be re¬ moved from her presence. Tie poor sufferer was conveyed to one of those dungeons, with which you, unfortunate Urania, are-but too well acquainted; Dungeons, whose massy walls had rendered them impenetrable to
ш
to the flames, which had bid all above them in roins. But what fortress is so strong, what abyss of the earth is so deep, that its approach is inaccessible to the generous activity of friendship í Gertrude had no sooner clasped in her arms the poor ill-treated babe, than she lost not a moment before she quitted the Castle, and fled with him to implore the honest inhabitants of the vale to afford their assistance to his unfortunate mother. As more than half the attendants of the barbarous Queen of Hungary dis¬ approved of her late treatment of the wretched and the helpless, and were favourable to the cause of opprest inno¬ cence, Gertrude met with but little difficulty (when she secretly returned, to
140 to Ravenstein) in gaining admission to the dungeon of her friend: but she found the unfortunate in a situation, which made her escape almost imprac¬ ticable—the Queen had that morning condescended to enter her cell, possibly thinkmg that it was right to fulfill one of the most sacred duties of her faith, the visiting the prisoner: but what she brought with her was not, accord¬ ing to the divine precept, hope and consolation. No ; much, rather was it her business to heap on the head of her heart-broken captive an additional weight of «motives for affliction. An animated picture of the enormity of Rodolpho's crimes, and .an horrible enumeration of the tortures to which his sentence condemned him, nearly robbed
141 robbed the wretched Adelaide of her senses ; and she only retained recollée tion sufficient to feel the last stab in¬ flicted by her tormentor, when tlie unfeeling woman named the day, on which Rodolpho was to suffer. Well did she hear that cruel word, and that moment of horror inscribed itself on her bewildered brain in characters of fire. Gertrude, when she hastened to her friend's bedside, could not help fancying that she already embraced her corse : her feelings had „been strained beyond their utmost boundaries, and were followed by a total cessation of her powers both of body and of mind. Gertrude had received some plain hints, that the compassionate servants of an
It2 an inhuman mistress were disposed to shut their eyes to any thing; which. she might undertake in favour of the captive. Walter Forest's mother had accompanied her to Ravenstein; these two kind-hearted women raised the un¬ conscious Adelaide in tlieir arms, and not without much difliculty conveyed her from the dungeon. The guards appointed to watch the door appeared to be buried in sleep, while the fugitives past them; and they reached a nariow portal in the back part of the fortress without meeting any impediment. The good porter turned the lock for them in silence, and (conscious that the veil of darknesi would conceal his benevo¬ lent action from the queen, who would not easily have been persuaded to pardon
но pardon it), he assisted Gertrude to place lier îescued friend in the litter, which waited for them at a few paces from the Castlc-gate. Swiftly did they now descend the mountain-pass, and it was not long, before the Castle of Raven6tein was left far behind them. The good peasants, to whom Gertrude applied for shelter and concealment, granted it without hesitation : but many days elapsed, before they succeeded in snatching Adelaide from the shadows of the grave, towards whicli her un¬ broken stupor appeared to be conduct¬ ing her. On the fourth day, she dis- . covered the first symptoms of conscious¬ ness; she started up suddenly, and asked several hurried questions, which were faithfully answered. Adelaide
144 Adelaide again sank back upon her couch, and remained for some time silent, with her eyes staling wildly, and directed towards Heaven. —" Then it was not a dream !" she said at lengtli aloud ; " it was not in a vision, that I saw those dreadful scenes at Ravenstein ! it was but yesterday, that all this happened, and yet it seems to me, as if since then there had past halfa century !"— —" Pardon me, noble Lady. It is now three days, since you have been in safety: to day is the first Monday after the Nativity, and ......"— —" Monday, say'st thou' the first Monday after ..... Rodolpho ! oh ! Rodolpho!"— ,· She
145 She attempted to quit heť bed, bm? Gertrude prevented her. ■> ' —" Dear Lady," saidehe, " recollect your weak condition : the sudden chill of the morning-air would be enough to kill you."— — " Right, right! then İt is only mornmg yet f oh I yes ; I now' see my- self that it is nO 'more. Louk.-where the sun rises from behind yonder moun¬ tain' ha! how red and how gloomy he burns, foreboding that it will be a bloody day 1 "— Gertrude çomprelıten8edı not her meaning, and replied not! J Adelaide re¬ peated her request that she might be permitted to rise,l'with such earnestness that her attendants werei compelled to obey her. She suddenly drew her arm vol. n. h from
149
from Gertrude's» and walked a few paces without assistance. -—" Yes, it witt do well," said she, after apausewiţh a look of satisfaction. " Now then bring my child; let me once again embrace him.—But alas I it must not be. My boy is vety young, and needs much attention ; even in your hands, good Gertrude, hei will not be taken sufficient care of, and I must remain here. Oh!, my poor husband, I am forbid tp follow уоад but peace, peace to your tortured bones·;- repose and pardon ţo ypuţ ¡sfflieted spirit 14— Adelaide with folded hands had sunk on her knees beftajêjthe cottage-window, whose casement wa4 illuminated by the beams of thei morning sun. < She now 1 >, ,Ji i ι rose
147 rose up, and again demanded, that her baby should be brought to her. Her attendants delayed to obey the order. That delay alarmed her; she insisted with increased earnestness on seeing her child, and tliey were at last compelled to acknowledge, that on ths evening before it had expired. —-" Dead !" she exclaimed, and the tone in which she spoke it exprest by that single word at once all the feelings of agony, which a mother's heart can suffer.—" Dead!" she again repeated, after some moments of silence. Then аь if she had, suddenly discovered a ray of comfort, she added—" that is right ! quite light!—but still I must see it!— my child ! shovv me my child !"— They conducted her to the cradle, in ir 2 which
143 ■which the pallid infant lay, and appeared to smile even in deatli. She kist it w ithout shedding a single tear, and desired to be conducted back to her couch, and to be left alone. Gertrude was too much on her guard to grant the sufferer more than the first half of her request. She seated herself by her bedside, and for some time watched unremittingly.—But wearied with her long vigils during Adelaide's insensibility, she at length found her powers inadequate to fulfill her good intentions. About midnight sleep com¬ pletely overcame her ; and now was an opportunity afforded to the wife of my unfortunate brother, to execute that wild resolutipn whpse cpnsequences soon re-united
149 re-united her to the husband whom she adored. Adelaide rose silently from her bed', and left the house without being ob¬ served. Through the shadows of night she wandered towards the place, where her broken heart panted to arrive. Her weakness made her long in accomplish¬ ing this painful journey. On the day before her arrival Rodolpho had already undergone the torture of the rack j yet did Adelaide reach the place of execu¬ tion time enough to receive his last breath and his last blessing. His break¬ ing eyes recognized her well-known features, before they closed for ever; he murmured her name, and she sank upon his bleedmg bosom*.
I ÄO They forcibly removed her from the scaffold ;■ whether out of cruelty or compassion I cannot pretend to say. Understanding how closely I was con¬ nected with her, the new Emperor Henry of Luxemburg caused her to be removed to my convent, that she might end her days in my arms. God be thanked, they were ended soon ! death and eternal rest were all, that it was left us to wish the poor sufferer. Scarcely had she strength to reach the place
J51 place of my abode. The lay-sistor in- formed me that a lady ¡11 and weary requested to see ind. > I hastened to the cOnveno-gate ; it was Adelaide. Wearied in truth she was, alas ! wearied even unto death ! it was on my bosom, that the angel breathed her last All-merciful Heaven, was not trie burthen then imposed an me too great for the strength of ont like me, a poor weak helpless mortal ? the bloody death of my beloved though guilty brother was scarcely announced, when I was doomed to weep over tlie grave of that innocent creature, whom 1 called my sister not more with my lips than with my v, hole full heart ! Adelaide was herself unable to ex¬ plain to me the connection of those H 4 terrible
15Й terrible events, which cost her her ex¬ istence ι but it was easy to guess those which had happened ι lately. Her poor wounded feet convinced me,(that she had performed some long and painful journey, arid whither could the wife have directed her steps but to the scaf¬ fold, ion which her husband 'was .con¬ demned ' to breathe his last ? Poor, poor, Adelaide! the attempt to throw yourself into my arms was the last ex¬ ertion of your exhausted powers: words were denied you to explain your ex¬ cesa of suffering to your sister; but your looks so expressive of anguish and pious resignation spoke to my heart in a language most intelligible ! Adelaide's attendants had mist her soon after her escape, and hastened in pur¬ suit
153 suit of her : but ignorance of the way which she had taken for some time led them astray. At lengtli the report of Rodolpho's death reached them, and gave them a clue to trace the fugitive. From the place of execution it was easy to follow her to my convent; where else could they expect to find the un¬ happy Adelaide, but in the arms of sisterly affection ? I learned such circumstances which were still unknown to me from these afflicted women, who were almost dis- tracted at hearing the loss of their mistress, whose sudden death they at¬ tributed to their own carelessness in suffering her to escape. Not long after these melancholy events, the gentle and pious Queen of Hungary sent to re* h 5 quest
154
quest that the body of the noble suf¬ ferer might be delivered up to her mes¬ sengers; it being (as they informed me) her intention to deposit it in her newly- erected church of Konigfeld, which she had built on the spot where her father ' Albert had perished, and in which she had already ordered a sumptuous monument to be prepared for the Lady of the Beacon-Tower. Report was loud in praise of this generous act of tlie saint-like Johanna, who thus offered an honourable grave to the wife of her father's murderer. As it appeared to me in a light by no means so amiable, I scrupled not to give the Queen's request a positive τe^ fusai. My sister's bones repose in the vaults beneath our convent-chapel ; the marble
155 marble which covers them bears no in¬ scription except the name of her who is buried there, a name which will be sacred to the latest posterity, as an ex¬ ample of undeserved affliction and of love and truth unequalled. Come to thb place of sorrow, dearest Urania ; come, and bathe that hallowed stone with your tears, on which my own still fall in my most serious hours. At present suffer me to rest from the painful task of describing scenes, the slightest recollection of which is almost sufficient to break my heart in pieces. God grant that ere long it may break for ever ! Adelaide's smiling form eeems to beckon me away to the regions of light.—Rodolpho's shade I strive in vain to discern j it appears not!—oh ! H 6 tliou
156 thou my brother ! my dear seduced unhappy brother! may the Divine Pro¬ vidence grant me not to close my eyes, till my unceasbig fervent prayers shall have obtained the absolution of thy sins, and have gained thy admission into the dwellings of the blessed !
PART TUE FOURTH.
Count Donat's Daughters. Emmeiine of Sargans to Amabel Melthal. Perhaps, dear Amabel, you had good" reasons for quitting the Castle of Sargans, thougfa filial respect forbids my examining what those reasons were ; but have not I reasons equaUy good for lamenting your departure? oh ¡'never more term me your mistress; that name b painful to my heart and injurious to our friendship. You know well, that I' never treated you as really filling- that station,
158 Station, to which you were destined, when ifi the days of our childhood my father first brought you with him to Sargans. You were not my attendant ; you were my companion, were my sister ! away with the jargon of illustri¬ ous ancestry and of humble birth ; such distinctions disgrace the lips of Helvetia's daughters ; and in truth, dear Amabel, when all is justly weighed, she who is the daughter of Henric Melthal, or the relation of Walter Forest and the pupil of Gertrude Bernsdorf, has far greater cause to be proud of her origin, than one who is tlie offspring of Donat and Mellusina, and who must blush to name as her grandfather Ethelbert of Carl- slieim, the unfortunate and the guilty. , Yet take comfort, Emmeiine of Sar¬ gans!
159 Sargans ! you too can number some few among the connections of your family, who would not disgrace the best and proudest. The venerableUrania Venosta deigns to bestow on you the names of daughter and of grand-child ; what matters it, that her blood does not actually flow in my veins, since her heart feels towards me the affection of a mother ? Never can I prize too highly my good fortune in having gained an interest in the bosom of this admirable matron, and being occasionally permitted to pro¬ fit by her intercourse ! For this too am I indebted to you, my Amabel! its true, I can stitt remember well to have seen her in this Castle, while I was yet but a child; I remember well,
1160 well, that she bestowed on me the most affectionate appellations, that she suf¬ fered me to repose in her arms, and that vvhen she quitted Sargans, I wept bitterly, and begged, that 1 might ac¬ company her. But- the harshness with which -my father repulsed my dear bst sister and myself, whenever we ventured to express a wish that we might see Urania once more, aided by the hpse of years and the volatility of youth, had by degrees nearly effaced all recollection of her; when you, my beloved friend, arrived at the Castle, and recalled to my mind the noble image of Urania. You boasted, that you had resided for some time under her protection, and that she had taken tiie greatest pains to instill into your young
161
young mind lessons of the purest virtue, in order that you might impart them to the two poor orphan sisters, when your father should conduct you to Count Donat's fortress ; a step, to which nothing less powerful than Urania's influence could have induced Henric Melthal to consent. That step was the preservation of Amalberga and of myself. Orphans in truth we were ! brought up under the tuition of such a father, and associating with bis abandoned intimates, what was it probable would become of us? Heaven be thanked, you have saved us, or at least you have saved me. 'But you are torn from me ¡ and now that you are gone, how difficult should I have found it to remain steady in the way that I ought
1(32 ought to pursue, had yon not shown me the secret path through the wood which terminates at Urania's convent. I have already frequently eluded the vigilance of my attendants; I have visited Urania ; have always found the doors- of her sell open to me, and me¬ thinks have never returned, without feeling myself happier and better than when I came. And all this do I owe to you, and yet in writing to your friend Emmeiine, can you resolve to offend her by calling yourself her servant ? Amabel, you are my benefactress; while I exist, never will I cease to thank you.
Emmeiine of Sargans to Amabel.
I have just left the venerable Urania, but I have received in her society to¬ day less satisfaction than usual. I have gone through a strict examination. Though, Heaven be thanked, my heart is unconscious of harbouring any thing which I should blush to own, yet I could not help feeling, that surh close enquiries were painful to me, and that it was impossible for me to answer every question with equal readiness. • Explain to me, Amabel, what was the cause of these sensations; you are more intelligent than I am, and have frequently set me right, while I have been
ißi
been bewildered among tlie secret ave- nutj of my heart. Who was it but Amabel, who first taught me to look into myself, and to sit in severe and impartial judgment over my own thoughts and feelings ? Urania during my former visits had thought proper to enquire, how far I am acquainted with the annals of my family. I did not conceal from her, that Ger¬ trude Bernsdorf during the short visit which Count Donat suffered me to pay you in the Vale of Frutiger, had made known to us every thing, of which during fifty years she had been in eye¬ witness. Urania blames highly the good old woman's loquaciousness, and assures me, that above half what I have heard from· her was only calculated to do me harm.
165
harm. I can well believe, that Urania is in the right; it is at least certain, that Gertrude's narradve had almost robbed me of one virtue» respect for the character of my father ; how can I love and esteem that cruel Donat, who was the author of all those complicated misfortunes, which afflicted so many of the best of eartldy beings, and my ad¬ mirable friend Urania among the rest ? the benevolent saint chides me for en¬ couraging such thoughts, and bids me forget that, whjch she has herself long since forgotten ; but how is it possible for me to obey her? alasi I have already been myself too severely tlie victim of Count Donat's vices. I can¬ not forget that he abandoned my youth to the ill impressions of his low-born 2 und
166 and libertine associates; that he de-' graded me to be the companion of his Parasites and his harlots: I cannot forget, that it is he and his harsh treat¬ ment of her, that I must thank for the loss of my beloved Amalberga ! The subject of Urania's next question regarded the fate of my sister : on this point abo I answered her with openness. I did not merely relate those melancholy scenes, which never can be effaced from my memory ; I painted them with such warmth and in such lively colours, that the emotion with which my story was heard convinced me, that I had made them present to the eyes of my auditor. Stitt was she not contented with merely hearing me briefly recite those circum¬ stances, which made her mingle her tears
Ιβΐ tears with mine : she has desired me to communicate to her in writing all that has past in the most circum¬ stantial manner ; and she flatters me with the hope of her being able to found such conjectures on this nar¬ rative, as may be the source to me of much future consolation, and may even be the means of finally re-uniting me to my dear lost sister. Oh! were I but certain, that this would really be the consequence, with what pleasure should I undertake a task, whicli I shall now enter vnon so un¬ willingly ! Amabel, you saw how many tears I shed, when that unexpected and most inexplicable event took place; and you will not wonder, that sitting where I now do, those tears flow with renewed violence. It was in this very chamber, that
168 thatl saw Amalberga for the last time ! what pain did it cost me to tear myself away from hef ! in what distraction did I fall at the feet of my cruel father, and entreat him no longer to imprison my beloved sister, or at least to make me her companion iu captivity ! he repulsed me with frowns ; .and the innocent girl heard Count Donat's own hand turn the lock of this chamber, in which the next morning she was no longer to be found. My father and myself mutually accused each other of her flight; his accusations were curses, mine were confined to tears : whether both were equally innocent of Amalberga's disap- appearuig is at least to me still a mystery. And these events, which when even slightly hinted at gave my heart a severe
169 severe pang, must I compel myself to commit to paper calmly and circum¬ stantially 1—yet be it so! the painful task will cost me many tears, but they will not be the first tears, which have streamed within these walls. Urania informs me, that this very chamber was long her own; how severe weie liei afflictions is already known to you. I now come to the third subject of enquiiy, with which (I might almost say) my adopted mother tortai ed me this morning; and I am scarcely less unwilling to mention it even to you, than I.was unable to reply to her with fiim- nesb and sincerity. , You cannot have forgotten what past at the tournament, at which I sa the Bishop of Coira's nephew for the vol. ii, ι fjr b t
170 first time. Urania «ecms to be almost as well acquainted as you and myself with all that past oil that occasion ; and were I not thoroughly convinced of the discretion of my faithful Amabel, I might be tempted to suspect her of having incautiously suffered herself to be seduced into revealing the secrets of her friend. I was not so frank, as you might possibly have been in asimilar situation ; and my want of confidence in ber drew down upon me in some degree the matron's displeasure. I will endeavour on a future occasion to repair my fault, but I doubt being able to prevail on myself to do so. It seems to me very difficult, I might almost say quite im¬ possible, to lay before the eyes of a Nun considerably
171 considerably advanced in years those weaknesses, which she must have long since forgotten and have learned to despise and ridicule; even supposing, that she should ever have been subject to them in the same degree with my¬ self. I flatter myself, that I deserve to be forgiven, and that 1 should run no risque in discovering my secret senti- inents even before the most seveie tribunal. Who could see Herman of Werdenberg witliout emotion ? neither is it an object of slight importance, to obtap by marriage my deliverance from a family so constituted as Count Donat's. I am assured daily, that I might imme¬ diately obtain that deliverance, would I but insist upon being permitted to 1 2 assume
172
assume the veil; anďheaven only knows, what step I should not be ready to take, rather than remain longer exposed to such dangers as environ me at Saf- gans, had I not hopes of being released in a more agreeable wanner, by the hand of my beloved warrior. Do you think it possible, my friend, that Herman should persist in his obstinacy much longer, when his only motive is ground¬ ed on his aversion to my name, the melancholy and hated name of Count Donat's daughter > It would be superfluous to describe to you the mode of life at present followed in the Castle of Sargans; things go on in their old track. The female favourites of the Count my father resemble each other so nearly, 3 that
173
that the change is scarcely peiceptible, when one Sultana retires, and a new one commands in her place. Those days, which I might otherwise pass in tranquillity, whde Count Donat vvitli his wild companions are ranging among hills and forests in pursuit of game, those days are now made almost insup¬ portable, thanks to the insolence of the reigmng'mistress of the Castle. Besides this, the boon companion of my father's riotous pleasures -Abbot Luprian of Cloister-Curwald, through impatience "for the return of the hunters, never fails to make his appearance at the Castle too soon ; and then not knowing how to dispose of his time, he thinks proper to bestow it on me, a favour with which 1 could most readily dis- 18 pense
174 pense. This, man is odious to me beyond measure: the ostentatious pomp of his appearance continually reminds me of that worthless Guiderius, who made Urania pass so many uneasy hours. Perhaps, my aversion to the Abbot is merely founded on prejudice; God grant, that I may not find cause to be confirmed in my ill opimon.
175
Amabel Melthal to Emmehne of Sargans. It is not then necessary for me to apologize, or to justify my secret depar- ture from her father's Castle, before the tribunal of Lady Emmeiine : it seems, she is already aware, that it was abso¬ lutely necessary for me to tear myself away from one who is most dear to me, whether the name by which I call her fa that of mistress or of friend.—Oh ! would that my prayers could obtain from Heaven, dear Emmettne, that the many acts of kindness which you have bestowed on me, might soon be re¬ warded by your deliverance from the ι 4 snares
176
ф finares, with whicli your virtue is novv* surrounded ; by your deliverance from them through the affection of Count Herman-! Yet should you reach this utmost aim of your wishes, I doubt much, whether you would even then enjoy such complete happmess, as is mine at this moment. Fortune acts by the great-ones of the earth much Uke a step¬ mother. Their highest state of bliss is seldom any thing better than splendid captivity; and the pomp and state in which they exist, the throng Of shining courtiers who wait upon their foot¬ steps, the necessity of sustaining the dignity of their rank (an obligation, which frequently weighs upon them most heavily) all these are in fact ab¬ solute
177
solute fetters. We, more humble chil¬ dren of the land, are acquainted with no pomp except that of nature, which appears to us ever new ; no attendants are ours, except such as inclination and a similarity of tastes and feelings induce to be the voluntary companions of our steps, and no duties are imposed on us but those which are most delighful in the performance, domestic virtue and love for the land to which vve air indebted for our birth. Oh ' Lady, how earnestly do I wish for your presence in diese dwellings of tranquillity ! I deny not, that the vallies in which your father's lofty fortress 'stands, are fair and fruitful ; your castb on the Rhine, whose walls are bathed by that proud river flowing past them 15 in
178
in calm majesty, is a noble and stately mansion, and the shades of the Mun- ster-Vale remind me of those of Para- dfae: but compared with the days which I now pass in these calm and happy habitations, believe me, the pleasures of your more brilliant mode of life appear but as mere shadows. Yet let us have patience 1 the spirit of liberty will by degrees pervade every quarter of the land, and then will every quarter of the land be as happy, as that which I inhabit. Even among us, there are certain men (you will observe, that I say men, for we women are ever more easily satisfied with our condition than that haughty sex) there are among us •some men, who in spite of aU the free¬ dom which we enjoy stitt speak fre- 2 quently
179
quently of chains and task-masters, and make loud complaints against the pre¬ valence of cruelty and oppression. They call the emperor's representatives- (one of whom is established in our neighbourhood) by no gentler name than that of tyrants ; and they are by no means pleased, when these powerful lords condescend to honour us with their intercourse, and to take a part in our rural festivities. You know well, lady, that I am not disposed to like the society of persons of rank much superior to my own : yet in justice to our newly arrived governor,I must beg you not to imagine, that the Lord of' Landenb;rg in the least resembles either a voluptuous Abbot of Cloister-Curwald, or a fierce 1 6 and
İSO and tyrannical Count Donat oť Carí- shcim. - No I he is a man, who unites the agreeable polish of courtly manners to the frank and generous heart of ~a true Helvetian; he willingly adopts the plain familiar tone, which prevails among our retired mountains, and ís right in thinking, that it must be grati¬ fying to every one of us to obtain the notice of a man of such peculiar merit and who fills so distinguished a situ¬ ation. In our part of the country a thou¬ sand rural feasts are at present cele¬ brating, such as might be worthy ofthe golden age. The most illustrious of our people are assembled here from all quarters ; and the smile of joy and bloom of health, which animate the coun-
181 countenances of these numerous pilgrims of pleasure, make our society more gay and brilliant, than is ever found to be the case at the costly entertainments of princes. Every thing is pleasing and satisfactory, except that on the coun¬ tenances of some of the men (as I before informed you) I can sometimes discover the marks of secret discontent. Among them I must reckon my father and brother, Gertrude's husband (Ger¬ trude herself was prevented by indispo¬ sition from joining us) and Walter Forest, who is lately arrived from the Vale of Frutiger ; of all these, not one seems to, receive the attentions and "kindness of our worthy governor with as much gratitude, as his condescen¬ sion deserves. Its true, the numer¬ ous
182 ou» society at present collected in our valley, and the festivities which are every day taking place, are profest to be in honour .of the arrival of the em¬ peror's new representative ; but to me it appears evident, that their inten¬ tion is less to show respect for him, than _ to furnish an opportunity of examining his behaviour, and pf prying into the secrets of his heart, when thrown off his guard by gaiety and pleasure. Methinks, lady, what I write is not proper to be, seen by every eye: but the bearer of this letter is trusty ; and besides the characters of our pens are to most of our cotemporaries inexpli¬ cable riddles. The other day, when we carried presents to the Castle, ac¬ cording
183 cording to custom on the arrival of •every, new governor, the Lord of Landenberg singled me from the croud of girls of my own age, and enquired, whether I was a native of these vallies. On this my dear partial mother under¬ took to answer, for me; and in the course of her speech she found means to run over the list of my accomplish¬ ments (as she fondly called them) among which she enumerated the art of writing. The governor looked astonished, and acknowledged, th»t in this respect he must give way to me though a female; nor did he beleivé, (he added) that amongall his lay-atten- 'dants tliere was one who kttew how to g lide the pen, unlessHt were Wolfenrad, his Seneschal. —" Here,
№
. ι i_4 Here, Wolfenrad ŕ!* heitontimied, "motioning to him to advance; " this pretty maid iá Amabel Melthal, who T ,am told is well instructed in the arts of readingi and writing, Were you still unmarried, ι she would make a proper wife fori you, and both·· might be of" great use to me in' my family •affairs."— I blushed and retired hastily, and concealed myself amongmy companions; married or unmarried, Wolfenrad should never be my choice—the conversation too seemed to have laken a turn by no means to the taste of our matrons, for they lost no time in leading us back from the Castle; and when Walter Forest returned with my father and brother from an excursion, which they had
18Î had made among the eastern mountains, they blamed the conduct of the matrons in suffering the young Damsels to ac¬ company them on their visit to the governor. My mother was censured more than all the rest for not having at least ordered me to remain behind ; for they say, that my education in the convent of Zurich under the venerable Urania, and the polish which my manners acquired during my lesi¬ dence at your father's Casde, have given me a kind of foreign air, which distinguishesme from the rest of thegirls, and which in spite of my inferiority to most of them in point of beauty, makes it difficult for me to escape without observation. ! must now close this long epistle, by
186 by wishing you patience to endure your present difficulties, and recom¬ mending you to look forward to better times, which I hope are at no great dis¬ tance.
187
Emmeiine of Sargans to Urania Venosta.
I once possest a beloved companion, Who was dear to me as myself; Amal¬ berga was her name. She was my sister ; but the bonds, which nature had formed between Us, were slight in com¬ parison, with those of affection ; an affec¬ tion which 1 should bave felt for her, had I been a princess, and Amalberga a peasant's daughter. It seems to me as if whole years had dapsed, since we were separated; and yet all circum¬ stances, and particularly the unremitting activity which ί· still exercised in pursuit of the fugitive, combine to as¬ sure
188
wire me, that only a few months have crept away since herdisappearance. You desired, dear mother, to see the hbtory of the poor persecuted girls traced by my pen ; I novv send you tlie produce of several sleepless nights, for the night is'tfae only time wluch I am permitted to call my own. I suspect, you foresaw that the harshness of my jailors would ere long interrupt my perspnal intercourse with you, and that this, was the motive, whicMriiuced yo» to advise myirhaving recourse to tes pen-j , , ' , ι , г ι, Count DoqafosUfftred'his daughters tOügrowiijpiundér-hisjrovf -in total igporance, tøf ,what -уЛв pwirfg ito 4hem- selves and, to others. He believed, that he had troubled liimself about us quite sufficiently
189
sufficiently in making us over to the superintendence of a young governess, whose beauty and whose levity were her sole recommendations to favour. It was Clearly her interest totally to neglect the heiresses of Carlsheim and Sargans, in order that after our removal from the world she might entirely engross the attentions of our cluldless father, a considerable portion of whose inheritance she dpubted not being able to secure to herself. , In what regarded our persons, this neglect did us no detriment. In spite of want and oppression of every kind, the natural strength of our constitutions саг ried us through all difficulties, and we daily increased in bloom and stature: but the health of our minds was seri¬ ously
1ΘΡ ' 4· ously shaken. No principles of virtue were inculcated; no one explained to 'us the différence between vice and virtue ; and surrounded as we were on all sides by the worst examples, we already began to contract the bad habits of our despicable associates. Our father's enemies were almost_as many, us there were noblemen whose domains bordered upon his own. Not one was there amongst their number, who had not been offended by him either personally or indirectly : but of them all his most dangerous and deadly foe was Count Lodowick Of Homburg, the husband of that Minna of Mayen¬ field, forwhom your history has taught me to feel such unbounded 'love and admiration. How
191 How then was it possible, attergali the bitter causes of complaint which Minna alledged against Count Donat, both on her own'account, and on y durs and her mother's ; how ivas it possible, that in spite of Donat's unremitting enmity of which he daily gave fresh proofs, the noble Count of Homburg should liave condescended to sue for peace at a time, when he was the strongest; and that he should even have confided so far in the honour of his enemy, as to Hrust himself and his lovely wife at the Castle of Sargans f In this transaction is not your hand perceptible, Urania ? oh ! you had not forgotten, that within tliose hated walls were immured Wo forsaken children, the destmed victims of vice or of the grave.
198
grave. Your benevolent proposal of taking us under your care, which you laid before our father in Our earliest childhood, was received by him in the same manner, with which he treats every thing tending to promote the interests of vii tue; those frequent attempts, whicli you afterwards made to draw us within the circle of your power, proved with¬ out effect; and you now endeavoured through your friend tue Countess of Homburg to snatch us from the pre¬ cipice, on whose brink we stood. I am not unconscious, my kind protec¬ tress, how many artifices were tried in vain to entice us out of the precincts of the Castle of Sargans ; how often during our childhood, now one emissary and now another strove to rescue us by force
193
force from the dominion of our worth¬ less governess ; how once the Retainers of the Convent of Zurich had actually succeeded in carrying us to some dis¬ tance from the Castle, before we were overtaken and brought back to our paternal prison ; and how when Count Donat complained of this outrage and demanded satisfaction of the Bishop, the good Priest-returned him for answer, that he would do better to send his daughters of his own accord to be in¬ structed by the Nuns in piety and vir¬ tue, than to retain them in the Castle of Sargans in order that they might be edu¬ cated by his paramours, and become in time as worthless as their instructors. It is to you, dear mother, that we are indebted for all those endeavours to vol, и, к rescue
194
rescue us from ruin, and the visit of the Countess of Homburg was equally your work. This interview between Count Lodo- wick and my father possest,the merit of at leajrt wearing the appearance of friendly inclinations: whether it was, the means of inducing'them to live on better terms in future, than had hitherto been the case, I cannot pretend to decide: but it U certain, thab the Countess did not neglect the object, which had induced her to enter, once more the hated Castle of Sargans. Immediately on her arrival she requested, that my sister and myself might form the society of her daughter, whom she had brought with her. Count Donat could not in common decency refuse her
19Л
her tlut. maik of attention, 'fterefore· during the few weeks tHat- Count Lodowick's family'resided ι at Satgiros, we were seldom out or the compáhy ofthe Countess and her daughter, írom both of whom we, received a thousand undeserved testimonies- of interest and attachment. ■ It was »no ι slight! sacrifice,,which the Countess ínadé to gratitude and friend¬ ship, when she suffered us td associate so intimately with her well-educated daughter: itwas much to be feared, that she would contract some of the numerous failings, to which we had been subjected by our neglected educa- tion. ' But Helen of Homburg, though she was younger than ourselves, ever contrived to make us adopt her own к 2 proper
rde
proper mode of- conduct, instead of suffering herself to be drawn into errors by our example. The mother -of our young friend was not contented with having planted the seeds of morality and religion in our hearts; the was anxious not to give up her benevolent task, tht she had efiected our total preservation. She therefore proposed to take us en¬ tirely under her superintendance, and made her request in a tone and manner, as if she had not the least doubt of its being granted. But this very request furnished our father «ith an oppor¬ tunity of breaking off with Count Lodowick altogether, a step which he had only been prevented from taking sooner by the inconceivable genero¬ sity
tei
sity and forbearance of his illustrious guest. Count Donat's answer to the noble Minna's request was proud and insolent, her rejoinder was conveyed in that tone of delicate but cutting irony, which is peculiar to herself. Her husband commented on Count Donat's uncour- teous behaviour with more warmth and bitterness, than he is accustomed to employ ; and the consequence of this conversation was a total rupture between the two Counts, and the absolute over¬ throw of that edifice, which they had past so many days in raising. Without an hour's delay did the Count of Homburg quit Sargans ; nor would his journey home have been unmolested, had he not been provident к 3 enough
198 enough, when he visited the fortress of his antient foe, to bring with him a retinue well-armed, and in number not to be despised, I believe,that he vvould not have found it impossible at that moment to have carried us off with him : but even though affection for the poor children might have induced his lady to propose such a step, undoubtedly the Count of Homburg's high notions of honour and integrity would have made him recoil with aversion from the idea of forcibly taking his daughters from a man, into whose Castle he had been received under the appearance of friendship. . Thus did we lose this invaluable chance of preservation. It is true, we \v ere still too young.to undeistand, that preserva¬ tion
191
tion was necessary; but yet we felt most sensibly the pain of parting from the Ladies of Homburg· nor drd we ftel a little mortified at being replaced under the care of the unworthy women appointed to superintend us, whom respect for our illustrious protectress had compelled to keep in the back¬ ground during her residence at Count Donat's Castle. Yet though the Countess of Homburg's 'visit had failed in its grand object, it was not without its use. Vfe had past two weeks in the habits of decorum ; we had learnt to see our own 'failings, and to admire the advantages possest by others ; and this knowledge served us as a regulator for our future be¬ haviour. The manners of Helen of к 4 Homburg
soo
Homburg became the model, by which we formed our own : we were no longer in danger of adopting the evil lessons of our superintendents, for in the re¬ membrance of Helen we had constantly before us a lively idea of feminine delicacy and indeed of femmine per¬ fection. Oh ! Urania, unwearied discoverer of new means to effect the happiness of the two poor orphan-girls, I dare flatter myself, that when the Angel arrived at Sargans whom you sent thither (shortly after the Count of Homburg's visit) to guide us to the paths of gooduess, slie found that we had already advanced some steps : at least it is certain, that she found us willing and resolved to follow, where she, and Urania, and Virtue pointed out to us the way. Henric
901 Henric Melthal (one of my father's vassab, who had always shown too little willingness to advance hb' evil designs to be a favourite with hb master) one day brought his daughter to Sar¬ gans. He entreated, that she might be received into the service of the Count's daughters ; and either his chusing a moment when Donat fortunately hap¬ pened to be in an unusually good humour, or satbfaction at findmg tfae stubborn Henric at length inclined to perform willingly the duties of a vassal, or perhaps the observing glance by which he convinced himself that Amabel would in time be beautiful, made Henric easily obtain hb demand. Amabel was accepted as our atten¬ dant ; she became our play-fellow, and к 5 I may
202
I may say, our best instructress. It was yoti, who had educated the amiable girl, doubtless with a view to your adopted children ; you know well, how much service Amabel was capable of rendering us, and (God be thanked for it !) 1 trust, that her intercourse has not totally been without effect. The well-grounded and solid infoi¬ mation possest by that dear girl, her firm attachment to virtue, duty, andtruth,and the vast extent of her brilliant qualities, all lay concealed beneath the modest veil of rural simplicity, which hid from every eye the treasure we possest in her, and was for many years the means of preserving to us so ţnirahiable a friend. We grew up with Amabel in the 3 closest
S03
dosest intimacy; we even obtained permission to accompany her in one of her visits to her father, and there became acquainted with an antient friend of-our family. It was Gertrude Bernsdorf, who completed that part of our education, whicli was too difficult for the power of our young companion. Our eyes were opened ; we saw all the dangers of our residence under Count Donat's roof in their true light. We meditated an escape, whose object was taking refuge with you in the Convent of Zurich : but we were too well guarded to effect лиг purpose. Its true, no one suspected the open-hearted Amabel of deceit ; but still a variety of attempts to carry us off had put our rather on his guard, and we were к 6 seldom
204 seldom suffered to quit the Castle with«. out attendants. I cannot persuade myself that it was a sentiment of paternal affection, which made the Count of Carlsheim so anxious to preserve us under his roof. His behaviour towards us left us no doubt, that we might have perished without our loss costing him a single tear ; he had also frequently given us to under¬ stand, that he designed us for the Convent : but still he could not resolve to gratify those, who wished to take us from him, by suffering them to succeed; neither would he hear of our residing in that Convent, where we should have been so happily and so honourably situated, under the protecting care of the venerable Urania. Since
205 Since you, dear mother, abandoned the world, great alterations have taken place in our neighbourhood, of which you may not be aware: at least Gertrude has assured me, that for ten miles round the Castle of Sargans, every thing since the daţs of her youth is become so different, that she scarcely knows the place to be the same. Like most people when advanced in life, Gertrude was accustomed to find great faults with these changes: she hated the sight of trees, which thirty years before she had seen no higher than bushes ; she sighed to perceive, that the mountain-torrents had washed away this, hill at one time and tbat at another ; and she looked on it as little better than profanation, when she found buildings raised on places, which
206
which 'formerly were corn-fields or pasture-land. But nothing was more offensive in her eyes*than a particular Convent fbr females, which had been lately erected at no great distance from the Abbey of Cloister-Curwald ; and which on ac¬ count of the extraordinary privileges bestowed on it by the Holy Father, of the beauty of its situation, and of the advantageous manner in which its in¬ terior constitution was regulated, had grown rapidly into repute. Our father had pitched upon this Convent for the future abode of Amal¬ berga and myself; perhaps, it was the first time in our lives, that we had found reason to be perfectly satisfied with his decisions respecting us. We were
207 were convinced, that our wish to in¬ habit the same place with our benefac¬ tress Urania would never be gratified ; with every day we felt more sensibly, that any religious house whatever would be a much more creditable abode for us, than the Castle of Sargans. Besides, the Convent of St. Roswitha (for the Nuns belonged to that order, who had established themselves in the neighbour¬ hood of Cloister-Curwald) possest the charm of novelty, and our friend Ama¬ bel had exprest her opinion in favour of its establishment. In defiance there¬ fore of the prejudiced Gertrude's warn¬ ings· and admonitions, we determined (whenever Count Donat should seri¬ ously advise our taking such a step) to declare ourselves ready to assume the veil
208 veil in that Convent, vvhich he had himself selected. There needed nothing more than such implicit obedience to induce our father to alter his intention. His early intercourse with the worthless of both sexes, his misanthropic seclusion from alLgeneral society, and a glance thrown by him upon the formation of his own heart, had made him distrustful of every one else. He suspected hidden views in the most indifferent actions ; and he always suspected them most, when he found others most disposed to conform themselves to his wishes. ' Our departure for the Convent of St. Roswitha, which (had we disap¬ proved of going) would undoubt- edly have taken place the next day, was
20У was novv postponed; it was however judged espedient for us to remove for somo time from Sargans, an hostile attack being expected from one of his neighbours, whose views (so Count Donat imagined, though on what grounds I know ttot) were directed to¬ wards the persons of Amalberga and myself. It happened just then, though it happened but very seldom, that our ftilier was on good terms with the 'Bishop of Coirà. Count Herman of Werdenberg, a relation of our family, at that time filled this important office; his court was selected as. our place of 'refuge from a danger, which only ex¬ isted in Count Donat's imagination, and the nature of which he would in all probability
2Ό probability have been himself greatly embarrassed to explain. We set out, accompanied by Amabel. Our reverend relation received us with that respect, which was due to our station ; I believe indeed, he allowed us even a larger share of it, than we could ireasonably claim on the sole score of our rank. Hb manner ρ ' -onfidence and gaiety, and we ■· «came attached: to the Jsmddiearteii -Relate. We~*4W in truth but simple country-girbv ţuife unacquainted with the manners 0( the great world, and only wise enpugh to be sensible pf our deficiency. Accus¬ tomed to be treated with nothing but severity, Count Hei man's gentleness delighted us ; and hb protection en¬ couraged
eounged, us to enter willingly into those societies, where it was his pleasure that we should be inţi oduced. The Count of Werdenberg is quite я different kind of person from his pre- deceisors, the old Bishops of Coirà. When I recollect the portraits of the venerable Adelfried-Herbert, and of the pious Thomas of Planta, such as I saw them in your closet; and when I com¬ pare their austere and mortified coun¬ tenances with that of the penetrating,. the polished, the gallant, the martial Herman of Werdenberg; when too I reflect how different their simple Priest's habit appeared from the glittering and costly robesyin which our Cousm ap¬ peared when we were unexpectedly presented to him for the first time, though
212 though the day was not a festival; when I think on all these things, my dear mother, I can scarcely persuade myself, that he and the originab ofyour pictures ever have belonged to the same pro¬ fession. The manners of the Bbhop's court were entirely new to us, but were not the less pleasing. Certainly, our rather must have been little aware pf the nature of the place, whither he had sent us for shelter ; or ebe it must have been tfae most bitter hatred against hb daughters, which induced him to make us first acquamted with the pleasures of the world, in order that the recollec¬ tion of the enchanting scenes which they were now witnessing, and the hopeless desire of witnessing them again,
213 again, might make the cloister for which he destined them seem doubly hateful. Everything here appeared new to us ; not merely the amusements which offered themselves every day to our enjoyment, but the discovery which was made to us in a very few hours after our arrival, that we were beau¬ tiful. —·*' Beautiful ?" said I to \malberga ; K How could it possibly ir pen, that we should not have found ' out long ago ?—It is true, I always tl there was something uncommo 'asing ,in your countenance, my a. u jter ; but stitt your features were too much like my own, for me ever to have sus¬ pected them of being beautiful."— We
214 We consulted Amabel on this impor¬ tant point. She assured us with that simplicity which was natural to her, that we did not appear beautiful to her, foi that on the banks of the Lake of Thorn (vihere she was boin) the blooming tharms of the village damsels were far superior tú ours, at least as far as she could give an opinion; a confession, which we heard her make without feeling the slightest displeasure. Perhaps in time we should have re¬ turned to our former Opimon of oui beauty if we had heard them piaised by no one except the old Bishop, who was the first to make the remark. But among the young knights, Whom the love of Tilts and Tournaments had collected at Count Herman's court, there were
215 were many whose existence seemed to- hang upon our smiles, and who loaded us with compliments whicli we not only heard but too willingly, but even began to consider as a tribute, which ought4iot to bc withheld from us with impunity. Among the youthful warriors whom a splendid Tournament had attracted to the court of Coirà, were two who particularly attracted the attention of my sbter and myself; and it happened to be precisely these,two,'who seemed blind to that beauty, on which we had now learnt to set so high a value. It is true, Count Eginhart of Torrenburg, to whom my sister gave the preference, afforded us strong reasons for suspecting, that he was not insensible of the power of
2 IG
of Amalberga's charm»; yet his atten¬ tions to her were ever cold and con¬ strained, like those of one,who had already formed engagements, ar.d liad only just discovered, that he had been too hasty in making his choice. · As for me, my situation was still more unpleasant. The youthful Herman of Werdenberg, the Bishop's nephew, had indeed paid me a few unmeaning compliments on my arrival, before he was informed ef my name ; but after our first interview, be treated me with «tter neglect, and seized every excuse for avoiding my society. Nay; he carried his unjustifiable aversion so far, that when on the evening before the Tournament his Uncle gave hún a scarf of my colours, with a command to wear it
217
it at the next day's solemnity, it was not without difficulty, that he. abstained from insulting mc (whom this unex¬ pected mark of the Bishop's partiality for me had covered with blushes) by positively refusing to accept his gift. —* These are the colours of the Lady Emmeiine," said the Bishop, " of the future Heiress of CarUieim and Sargans. The permission to wear them publicly, whicli I now give you in her name, may authorize you to encourage hopes, whose completion will not be purchased too dearly with the most ■precious blood that runs in your veins." ------ ' I attempted to express my disappro¬ bation of the Bishop's inconsiderate conduct, aftd to disclaim the permission vol. n. L which
21«
which he asserted xtie to have given ; but vexation choaked my utterance, aftd I was obliged to quit' the chamber; unable longer to restrain nty tears" from gushing. : —" Thb is not to be enduttd'!" I said to myself, as I hastened : to take refuge in my own apartment?. " Good Heavens! then interese b tne' only motive, which can persUäde'Hermanitö' connect hb rite with that of Emmeiine ! let her be as fair, as kind, as aihiable as she can be, Emmeiine will still be nothingin tlio eyes of Herman, but the Heiress of Carlsheim and Sargans. > —Alas ' poor shghted girl ' falde your¬ self to-morrow in your thickest veil, nor let the pubhc «ye peiceive the blush of shame on your cheek, when every one
219 one who secs Count Herman's mail decorated' with the sky-blue scarf, will cast on you a look of congratulation, antl believe that your sex, are the most fortunate while you aie in fact the most wretched and despised "—· Much as il cojt me, I resolyed to deny myself tho satisfaction of witness¬ ing Count Herman's exploits, and under pretence of indkposition I absented myself from the Toui namert. My sister alone distributed the prizes ; but Herman had gained the first; and ac¬ coidmg to the regulations of the lists he was under the necessity of laying it at, tbe feet of the bay, whose colours he had thought proper to wear. I was compeled to go tluough this painful scene, and to see him kneeling before me. but it was evident, that L 2 he
220 he performed his task vv ith the utmost reluctance, and his manner provoked me to such a degree, that I could not refrain from assuring lum—" that I as¬ cribed no part of this compliment to my own ments, but attributedit entirely to my bciring the title of an Heiress of Cailshcim and Sargans."— —" Oh ' lady," exclaimed Herman with all that impetuous warmth wlncli is usual m young w ai nors, and which frequently borders on imprudence and rudeness, " how much are you mis¬ taken ' the title, w Inch y ou have men¬ tioned, his no charms for me, besides, you cannot be unconscious, that only in consequence of my Uncle's positive command did I tender my services to a daughter of Count Donat "— Could
221 Could any human being have spoken with more contempt and insolence? From that moment I really began to abhor the very sight of the youthful Count of Werdenberg, though the Bishop redoubled his exertions to in¬ fluence me in his favour. At length finding me deaf to all his insinuations, and that I persisted on all occasions in avoiding his nephew, he plainly declared his resolution of making me his niece, whether my father should consent or not ; since the gift of my hand would make young Herman lord of all those extensive domains, which are gencr.dly known by the name of the Twelve Cantons. In reply, I declared my father's in¬ tention of making mc take the veil; 1-3 I
I also mentioned, that my sister being older than myself had much stronger claims than mine to the paternal inhe¬ ritance ; but above all I dwelt upoi Herman's behaviour to me, which be¬ came more insulting with every suc¬ ceeding day. The Bishop treated the two first objections very lightly, de¬ claring, that the mild and bashful Amal¬ berga seemed designed by nature for a Nun, and that her embracing a re¬ ligious life, would leave me sole heiress to my father's possessions : but when I declared my full persuasion, that I was the object of his nephew's aversion, the Bishop gave way to an involuntai y fit of laughter. —" The youth is an ideot !" ex¬ claimed he. " Lady Emmeiine, I protest to
223 to you, that in the very first moment ot beholding you his heart was made your own, and he spoke of your charms vv itli rapture, as long as he was ignorant of your name : in truth, his passion was so ovidentj'that it was this alone, which suggested ito me the idea of making him happy by bestowing you upon him.' But no sooner was he informed, .that his adored -Lmmeline was the daughter of that Count 'Donat, whose cruelty and licentiousness have made him an object of abhoi rence throughout Helvetia, than he changed his intentions, and swore to extinguish in his breast eveiy spark ot affection for one, who from her birth and mode of education could not possibly be- woi thy bf the love of a man of honour. The youth spoke much i. 4 about
.ibout the dissolute manners of Sargans, about libertine associates, and unprin¬ cipled courtezans, to whom the care of j our youth had been committed : nay, (to conceal nothing from you) he even found fault with your amiable gaiety of character, which he called by the harsh name of levity ; and which (according to him) showed him but too plainly vi hat your husband must expect, fasci¬ nating as are the outward charms, with which you have been so liberally en¬ dowed by nature."— Such, Urania, were the Bishop's words ; but how shall I explain to you the effect, which they produced upon my mind ! at the outset of this convei¬ sation, the Uncle's unjust and interested views had increased my resentment against
225 against the nephew ; and I was prepared to express my disapprobation of both in the strongest terms, when this last speech gave a sudden turn to my thoughts, and rendered it impossible for me to utter a syllable more respecting the business, whic'i was then in delibe¬ ration. —" Herman's heart once was mine !" —Such was the sentence, which now occupied my vvhcie mind.—" His heart once was mine," I repeated to myself, as soon as I was alone ; " vv as mine, before he knew my name and expecta¬ tions ! and it is on this name and these expectations, that his whole aversion is now grounded !"—" the licentious man¬ ners of Sargans."—" My education committed to unprincipled courtezans." i-5 —Oh!
226 —Oh ! that is true, too true ; but yet Herman, does the mariner, who gains the land amidst the fury of winds and waves, deserve less praise, than he whom favouring gales have wafted mţo the haven ? and is it just, that Amalberga and Emmeiine should be objects of contempt and abhorrence, because even in the very bosom of vice, surrounded bya thousand snares, a thousand dangers, they never yet wandered for a moment from the paths of virtue ?—but it seem», my levity shows but too plainly, what my husband may expect from roe ! oh I Herman, that was cruel, was unjust! it's true, nature gave me a fight heart and a fondness for amusement, which (havingbut just escaped frommypaternal prison) perhaps I may have sometimes 1 - suffered
227 suffered to carry me too far ; but was this a reason sufficient for condemning me ? alas ! perhaps these very spirits, with which you now reproach me as a crime, are but a precious gift of Provi¬ dence to enable me to bear with forti¬ tude the weight of future woes !"— These reflections cost me many tears, and I hastened to communicate their cause to Amabel and my sister. With their assistance, I soon discovered that it was-absolutely'necessary to quit the Bishop's court without lpss, of time. Amalberga was not less anxious to avoid the Count of Torrenburg, than I was to quit the unjust Herman for ever. fts true, her gentle manners, her quiet and retired turn, of mind.had saved- her front thai prejudice against a child of ĺ 6, Count·
228 Count Donat's, which my gaiety had excited against me in the bosom of the Bishop's nephew ; but still her union with the man ot her choice was equally impracticable, though on a dif¬ ferent account. The Count of Torrenburg was already betrothed to the youthful Helen of Homburg, whom I formerly mentioned in such advantageous terms. He had never seen her; of course she was totally indifferent to him, while what he felt for Amalberga .....Yet how was it possible for the noble Eginhart to break his knightly word í and even had he been resolved to break it, how was it possible for Amalberga to rpb the friend pf her youth of an husband so truly deserving, that scarcely could Helvetia produce his equal ? 2 Amalberga
229
Amalberga and Eginhart had never ехргЖ their mutual sentiments in vvoids : but it appeared to me, that they had long understood each other sufficiently to render any verbal ex¬ planation needless. Oui* departure was determined. Our next letters hinted to our father, that he had but little reason to expect, that the Bishop of Coirà would assist his views respecting us ; and we soon re- reived an order to return to Sargan«. Amalberga and E¡ánhart made their adieus rather by looks than words : as for myself, I thought it unnecessary to take any formal leave of Count Herman. I felt sentiments in my heart towards him, which I insisted upon terming wersion, and grief that I had ever thought
£30
thought favourably of hnn, but Ann bel assured me, that I felt nothmg of the kind—she said, фе whole was nothing more than a misunderstanding, vvhich wis jjreatly to be lamented, and she vowed never to rest, till she hid Bi5tified me in the ppiiuon of a man, uho by lus endeavours to detach hmi self irom the womin whorn he adored, because he believed her unwo»thy of his love, had proved sufficiently, how totally his soul was devoted to tho cause of virtaie. We had managed ill respecting oui hints to Courjt Donat, lhey excited his suspicions against the l&shpp of Coirà, and he insisted upon a full ex pla^iajuon "this it was impossible to give, withput qetraying ajl our own seciets, and
231 md the embarrassment, Vţith which vve •piswered pui ruber's questions, drew dovyn a considerable slnre of h« sut, pieions upon ourselves Vie had soon the grief to witnc a the rcnewd of hostilities between Count Donat and the Bishop, and to accuse ouiselves of having furnished the oçca sion At tha sime time we were watthed with the utmost strictness, and on the pretence of suspecting us of carrying on together some secret inter course, (though with whom wis not mentioned) we were separated I had always been m a slight degree a greater favourite with Count Donat tiran my unfortunate sister, and my bejöved Amabel was suffered to remam with me Arnalbeçga w;as confined alone m, tins
292 this chamber, which I at present inhabit, and ordered to resolve upon taking that step, which she had formerly been for¬ bidden to think of: and which now was only insisted upon, because itwas fancied, th she discovered some symptoms of unwillingness. A day was already fixed, when Amal- berga was to take the veil in the Convent of St. Roswitha. She disco¬ vered more repugnance to this measure with every succeeding day, though for what reason I know not. Her love for the Count of Torrenburg was hopeless ; what then remained for her, except a cloister? the Abbot of Curwald past several hours daily in endeavouring to persuade her to obey her father's com¬ mands ; and the dislike, which I feel myself towards this man, makes me think
233 think it probable, that his interesting himself in the business made her still more unwilling to comply. Besides this, she received a letter from Gertrude Bernsdorf, which Amabel found means of delivering secretly, and which pro¬ bably was not favourable to the Con- vent of St. Roswitha. However, I am still ignorant of its contents ; since though whenever I was permitted to pass a few moments with my sister, she endeavoured to find means of commu¬ nicating something to me which lay upon her heart,so manyspies surrounded us, that the «^empt was always made in vain. I have already informed you, my kind protectress, on the last time that 1 saw iny sister, how I threw myself at my
234 íny father's feet, and implored for gentler treatment both for her and for myself ; how 1 entreated in vain to be at least permitted to pass that one night with her ; and how I had the agony of being informed the next morning that she was torn from me, without the least information bemg given as to whither she liad been conveyed, or the least hope held out of our oyer being re-united. Since tţiat time my situation hat become more painful in many respects. Ыу friend, my Amabel was compelled to abandon mc, because it became evi¬ dent that Count Donat thought her handsome enough to be raised, or rather to be degraded, to the rank of one of his favourites. You know well, tint Amabel's
23.5 Amabel's open nature never suspects villainy or danger, except where their existence is not to be mistaken ; and therefore you cannot doubt, that she had good cause for her flight from Sargans ; her departure and my sister's disappearance, following each other so closely, robbed me qf even that little share, which I possest in my father's con¬ fidence. It was evident, that I had as¬ sisted Amabel's escape, and from this he argued, that 1 was equaUy culpable respecting Amalberga's. Would to Heaven, that this charge were just ! willingly would I pay for the certainty thai my bister ib safe, by su Tering twice as much ,is 1 do on Amabel's account, and which I carefully conceal from my f ι iend,
2S6
friend, that the knowledge may not pain her gentle heart. Oh ! Urania, you may chide as you will, but can I fııvâ such a father? think, that to him alone I owe the loss of my sister and my friend; thmk too, that his misdeeds were the sole cause, ■which robbed me of the heart ofthe Irian, on whom my whole earthly hap¬ piness depended ! Herman hated and despised me only for being the Count of Cai'shenii's daughter; now (as I hear) he is the suitor of another maiden ; and all those hopes, with which Amabel so fondly used to flatter me, of one day regaining his good opinion, are lost, and lost for ever. I am at length -determined to take the veil ; fool that I was, for having delayed.
237
delayed to'take it long ago ! how easily might I have remained in your couvent at any one of those times, when I privately contrived to visit you ! who would have thought of looking for me there? or if found,who would have been able to force me from the protection of the powerful Domina of Zurich ? Alas ! these reflections come too late ! I dare not quit my chamber, unless ac¬ companied by watchful guards ; and no one is suffered to visit mc, except my attendants and the odious Abbot of Cloister-Curwald, He is the only person, who combats my resolution of obeying my father, and shutting myself up for ever in the Convent of St. Ros¬ witha. I could almost fancy, that he acts thus, because he knows me disposed to
2'58 tô do exactly the contrary of every thing, that he advises. In general these dignified ecclesiastics arc much more inclined to speak in favour of religious seclusion than against it. Yet whatever may be his design, it is certain that I sball take · the veil, or rather that Vniuit take it. My father's unaccountable determination of burying his acknowledged heiresses in a cloister, is decided and immoveable. I under¬ stand, that weary ofhis liotous mode of life and of the dominion of unprin¬ cipled wantons, he meditates a second marriage, and that he has selected one of the fairest and most viituous among the Helvetian ladies to enjoy the hap¬ piness and honour of enlivening days, embittered by age, infirmities, and remorse. - Oh!
239 Oli! pardon me, dear Urania, for expressing myself with such bitterness when writing of one, who with all bis faults is still my father ! my unfortunate situation; and the weakness of human nature must plead my excuse for what 1 have said above : neither did I mention Count Donat's future intentions'for the purpose of exasperating you against ! liim, buťof interesting you in the cause I of the innocent girl, on whom my father j has fixed his choice. In truth, I need ' I but mention the name of her, whom 1 every engine of force and cunning will I be employed to bring-into his power, to j induce you to exert yourself in defeat¬ ing his schemes : she is no other than ___Helen of Homburg ! she is the daughter of your friend and pupil, Minna; she is the grand-child of the companion
240
companion of your sorrows, Edith of Mayenfield ! she is the betrothed bride of the noble Torrenburg ! oh ! hasten, if it be possible, to prevent the misery of her, who in the days of my child¬ hood through her instructions and ex¬ ample purchased for herself the strongest claims on my gratitude ! for myself, I ask nothing but your blessing to assist me in that profession, which L shall shortly embrace iirevoeably, without bestowing one other lingering thought on all the pleasures,which I leave behind me in the world, and of which I have now taken my farewell for ever '
Amabel to Emmeiine.
Oh ! lady, that you were but with us! your sufferings in your father's Casde, and your melancholy resolution of taking the veil would soon be effaced from your thoughts completely ! GTeat- ones of the earth, do ye possess even one ofthose many unconstrained and in¬ nocent pleasures, which daily fall to the lot of us,yourinferiors? then Only do you enjoy the rights of Nature,(to whicl We, the favourites of that'kind motlier/hive ito better Claim than yourselves)'whiÊa you thr¿w aside your fetters, and dare to act liké the noble-minded Peregrine Of Landenberg. He, though' the repre, vol. п. , m sentative
242
«entative of our feudal lord the power¬ ful Emperor, esteems us as not beneath himself, and lives with us, as were he one of the same humble station. Last Sunday ..... never shall I forget that glorious day! when the first beams of the sun were discovered rising from behind the hills of snow, and began to tinge the lake with crimson, all the young maidens of our quarter were already assembled on the green mea¬ dow before my father's house—(you know, that Henric Melthal is univer¬ sally respeaed, on account both of his age and his wisdom.)~-We were to proceed to the neighbouring church in solemn procession, and as Henric's daughter the right of heading the com¬ pany was mine : but I resigned my place in
"243
favour of a stranger-damsel, who has lately arrived at our village, and who (however exalted лау be her proper rank) has become so well acquainted with its-disadvantages, that she has been induced to resign it, and seek comfort and oblivion for past sorrows in the bosom of rural tranquillity. Dear hdy, could you but see this un. known maiden .....She has adopted our simple dress, and her peasant's habit makes it as difficult to with-hold admi, ration from her, as to discover her : I mean to ray, that it alters her appear¬ ance so much, tiut whoever had known her in more costlyapparel,would scarcely recognize faer in her present garb. I saw her for the first time so drest on tiiis occasion; she has of bte been ι M 2 resident
244 resident' in the Convent of Engelberg, and..... But I am running on, forget¬ ful that I meant to describe to you the festivitiei of last Sunday. As we moved on under the guidance of our elected queen, our white robes and unbound ringlets fluttered krase m thè morning-air, whose freshness stained oi.r cheeks with a deeper red, and even spread a slight tinge over the lovely pale face of our Conductress. It was Easter-day ; with songs, pious and joyful such as suited the occasion, we reached the Lake, where a croud of painted boats waited to waft us to the opposite shore, on which the grey spires of the Convent-church were dis. cernable ; and thither was our pilgrim¬ age directed. ' 1 Long
245 Long ago, a Convent was established here respecting which there are still many traditions current; but now nothing of it remains but a heap of ruins. The church however is still in perfect preservation. It is never opened, except on Easter-day : and as the Friars hold this place in abhorrence as having been the scene of many monastic crimes and of Heavenly vengeance, it has ever been found diflicult to persuade any of them to officiate within these deserted watts. On these occasions, therefore, the short service is frequenUy performed merely under the superintendance of the two elders of our village. The service consists of nothing more than the expansion and humiliation of the heart before the Almiglitv for a few m 3 minutes
246 minutes in adoring silence, and a solemn hymn chaunted by the whole united congregation, the words and melody of 'which are equally simple to the ear and affecting to the heart. Walter Forest and Werner Bernsdorf, аз the two eldest, opened the holy doors for us, and we descended a few steps into the chilling aisle of the church : they commended us girls, for havmg shown our impatience to pay our service to Heaven by arriving the first. Soon after the matrons made their appear¬ ance, conducted by Gertrude Berns- -dorf ; oh f with what joy did this venerable woman, the counterpart of her former mistress and friend Urania, receive our conductress, the lovely stranger! I mean, how pleased she viae. to
247
to see, that we girls were sensible of our duties, and were arranged in the church before her arrival. "While we sank on our knees, and silently offered up our gratitude to Heaven, the men arrived.—I was still kneeling by the side of .'our conductress (our hearts were full ; much had we to return thanks fbr on that day) when the solemn hymn began around ns, and compelled us to change our attitude. The chorus of a thousand voices, whose united melody made the vaulted pave¬ ment tremble beneath our feet, informed us, that,the assembly had increased greatly during our prayers. "We hastily drew back, for all eyes were fixed upon us ; but alas ! I found it impossible to withdraw my attention from the objects m 4 which
248 which surrounded us, and restore my heart entirely to that devotion, from which the commencement of the hymn had rouzed me. Alas! dear lady,your poor Amabel, who past so grave a censure on tlie sud¬ den inclination conceived by yourself and your sister fbr two knights, with whose merits you were well acquainted ; that very Amabel has been stitt more weak and hasty in her choice ! it was a man who stole my thoughts from Heaven, and who made it difficult for me to withdraw my eyes from his countenance. In truth, it was scarcely possible not to look at him now and then ; for he was placed exactly opposite, and forgettiogthe motivewhich had brought us together, he seemed to make me the only object of his contemplation. It
249 It was now, Emmeiine, that I envied you one of the privileges of your rank ; I mean, your veil which we simple coun¬ try-girls', who love to look uiiUnpeded at the Almighty's lovely world, and who haye no reason to conceal our counte- nances, consider in general as an unneces¬ sary piece of dress. For the first time I wished for a veil at once to conceal my confusion, and to restore the man (who continued to gaze on fne with fixt glances), to that devotion, which he seemed to have lest-—However, he «oon recovered [himself ; but as for me, I shi! felt during tbe remainder ofthe service that kind of Uneasiness, of which 9 have so often heard others speak, and which I have so often treated with derison. Well ! say, that it be love, which has M О excited
250 excited such emotions in my bosom, why should I grieve ? the path of the humble children of the soil is not so rough ancFttneven,as that ofthe mighty- ones; the inclinations of the one are not so subject to difficulties, as those of the other ; our inclinations and acknow¬ ledgements are embarrassed by no super¬ fluous considerations of decorum and etiquette; and unless the eyes of my 'unknown friend have deceived me, I am far from indifferent to him, and we may hope for mutual happiness. Yet you will smile, when I di scribe to you the person, of whom I spe ak The youthful Amabel has given йег heart to no stripling: the noblplooking ex¬ alted man, with his heroic mien and with that юок of true Helvetian fìank- 3 ness
351
ness which attracts the observer's con¬ fidence so irresistibly, is already in the Autumnrof life ; and yet ....., But what am I doing? you cannot suppose, that this transient feeling can affect my heart seriously ?—Oh 1 no, no ! everything is forgotten, or must be forgotten, and it shall be done without a single tear. The object of my atten¬ tion disappeared immediately after the service, nor have I seen him since. Perhaps, the whole business was a fabrication of my fancy, for the fair stranger, who stood next to me, cannot recollect to have observed such a person- —But then she was so entirely absorbed m her devotions, that she did not even remark, that Peregrine of Landenberg never removed his eyes from her during M.6 · ther
252
the whde teremony; and when tlie procession set forward on our return, he followed her with looks.that were by no means equivocal : at least this is asserted by several of my village-com¬ panions. Emmeiine, how happy would it make sne,should such a heart as Landenberg's be bestowed on your.... I would say, on my fair and unhappy friend. She loves without hope ; and Peregrine of Landenberg, very handsome, very good, and very powerful, is in every respect calculated to make her happy. The persons, whom the good emperor sends among us as hb deputies, are not inferior in power to princes, and in biith are as illustrious as Count Donat; and Peregrine b so mild, so pious, ao noble ! iu
253
in truth, the condescending manner in which he treats all who are subject to his authority, and the little distinction which he makes between his station and ours, have won me to his interests completely. You will chide me for writing on no other subject than love ; but liberty, health, and the contemplation of the beauties of nature are the best nourishers of that sweetest of all feelings ! and be comforted, dear lady ; for you too shall one day bless the hour, when your heart first learnt to love. Let but this fair stranger be once the bride of Peregrine of Landenbeig, and we shall soon find means of rescuing you from your cap¬ tivity : then shall Herman of Werden¬ berg (in whose union with the Damsel of
25*
of Eschenbach there is not one syllable of truth, and to whom I am certain you are still as dear, as before he knew your name) be compelled to do justice to your excellence, and every trace ot misunderstanding shall for ever be clear¬ ed away. The word " misunderstanding" re¬ minds me, that the day whose beginning 1 have described to you, did not con¬ clude quite so well as was expected. While the youths and maidens under the care of some of our matrons past the evening witb songs and dances, there afose some little discord among the men. I mentioned to you in a former letter the prejudices of some of them, among whom I am sorry to count my rather. The Lord of Landenberg had prepared
255 prepared a splendid feast at the Castle ; but our elders thought proper to decline partaking of it, and Landenberg was obliged to consent instead to become a guest at their rustic table in the valley- Peregrine showedus this mark of con¬ descension with a'good grace. Unluckily during the entertainment there arrived the emperor's lieutenant of tlie next Province, by name Gessler ; and with him came the Abbot of Şt Gal], one of the most abandoned characters existing. These began to reproach our worthy go¬ vernor for bis complaisance, and to treat our elders with contempt; till the indig¬ nation of the latter was excited, and they gave the scoffers such answers, as they deserved. The worst treated however was tlie Abbot, who thought proper to • " defend
ase defenďGessIer's conduet without Having either eloquence or common sense in his discourse, nor mdeed even breath sufficient to utter it. Upon this several of our young men (my brother Arnold was one of the foremost) interrupted him by singing th chorus the ballad called " Bishop Ulric of Constance ;"' and
257 and at the end of every stanza they introduced an extempore chorus ap¬ plying the ballad to the present Abbot. This at length offended him so much, that he left the place almost distracted witi} passion ; but Gessler thought proper to remain behind, and is still a
258 a guest at the Castle, from which many of our wise-ones augur no good.— Farewett, dear lady, and Heaven's bless¬ ing be with you.
25»
Emmehne to Amabel. Difficult as it was, I have accom¬ plished my painful confession to Urania, and I feel my heart relieved; I abo made another important dbcovery to her, but alas ! without effect. It related to Count Donat's views upon the youth¬ ful Helen of Homburg. As was ex¬ pected, her parents rejected his suit, and it was not concealed from him, that she was already betrethed to Eginhart of Torrenburg. My father's spies brought him intelligence, that on Easter- Monday Helen was to be conducted to her bridegroom's Castle; and Count Donat chose his time so well, that it was
260 was almost impossible for his unfortu¬ nate victim to escape him. He set forward suddenly «dth the greatest part of his soldiery; and this morning I heard with horror* that Helen has fallen into his handt! she has been carried by Wm to the Castle of Upper Halbstem, where he is determioed to make her his wife either by fair means or violence, before hef friends have time to effect her rescue. My beirt bleeds for the poor Helen ! _ I have alreidy received orders to prepare for my departure to the Con¬ vent; it is thought desirable, that as- soon as the nuptial festivities are over, i should до Jonger make the Castle of Sargn-is my residence, Count Donat supposing that my presence would be' disagreeable
261
disagreeable to his new bride. Alas ! dear Helen, my presence disagreeable to you? though I could not relieve you from the weight of your cruel destiny, surely the society df the friend of your childhood, of a companion in sorrow, would enable you to bear them with greater fortitude. ' ' Methinks, Amabel, it seems to me now more difficult to resolvè on enter¬ ing a Convent. Heaven knows, I wished not, that Helen should be so unfortunate as to become my father's wife; 1 spared'no' pains to rescue'her from this impending danger; yet if in spite of my efforts she should be compelled ito 'become the Countess of Carlsheim and 'Sariganš; might not that event produce thé most desirable con- 1 sequences ?
263
sequences? might not her virtue and charms work a blessed change in Donat's nature? might I not in her society and under her protection again look forward with pleasure to living in that world, which had once such charms for me, but which of bte I have con¬ sidered as an object of such disgust? oh! what blessed effects might the presence of such a mistress produce throughout the domains of Sargans ! In Continuation. Where shall I look for help! how shall I fiad some means of changing my father's determination respecting me? This Convent.... Oh,! Amabel, call me not capricious, for I have now good reasons to dread and shun that Convent» I
26.3
I have been warned, warned by some supernatural being, not to take the step prescribed to me by my father : and skill I be disobedient to the vence of Heaven ?——Hear, what has happened to me I I went this morning to walk with my usual guards for a few minutes on the battlements. I left my chamber- door locked. Yet on my return I tound a slip of parchment fastened on my tapestry frame, containing these words : —-" Fly from Sargans! destruction awaits you il the Convent."— I had scarcely time to conceal this writing, (whose import, while I read it, had made my blood run cold) before the Abbot of Cloister-Curwald entered the
1ÍC4 the room : I have already mentioned, that he pays me a daily visit. The impression made upon my mind by what I had just read, for some time prevented me from attending to his conversation: I believed, that in this late* occurrence I had received a con¬ firmation of that delightful idea, that there exist guardian Angels, who at times condescend to snatch poor mortals from destruction ; and my heart, al¬ ready half estranged from the Convent by the hope; which 1 grounded on the exertions of my amiable' step-mother, began to search for additional rsasons, why I should dedine taking the veil, once so much the object of my desires. On isudden something whicli fell from the
265 tlie Abbot in discourse, caught my at- tention ; and I now first discovered, that the conversation vvhţch he had been ad? dressing to me, agreed entirely with the warning of my guardian Angel. I drew, back in astonishment ' its true, he had before frequently exprest his disappro¬ bation of the Convent; but he now spoke with more energy than ever, and advanced such stiong arguments, as could only have failed of their effect, because advanced by km. It immediately struck me, that the mysterious warning was an artifice of this man, who by means of that cunning (which is univci sally ascribed to him) had managed to obtain entrance pu- vately into iny chamber, and who nqw, by his taking this artful method to give vol. и. m his
.286
hfe aTgtímetes thé greater weight with mé,*becaföe «lore than ever an object of suspicion, Uiider this impression, I fhreto the writing towards him witk contempt ; and asked him— β whether he knew, whose hand had written the Wmiihg, which agreed so wonderfully with his discourse ?"— - I was prepared to vh,ear him deny positively any knowledge Ofthe parch¬ ment, and pout out a long déclamation to prove, that it must have come straight from Heaven : how was I astonished, wheü on the contrary I saw the most lively Surprize and indignation exprest upon his countenance. With a stam¬ mering tongue he asked me, how I came by the writing; and before I could answèï, he hastily enquired, whether I ν was
267
was sure, that my chamber-door had been fastened, and whether I knew mything of a private entrance? to these questions I made no reply; I wished to obtain information, not to impart it. With every moment he became more uneasy. He examined the windows; tried all the locks, stamped upon various' parts "of the flooring, and then resumed hïs Seat Opposite to me, and for some time appeared to be lost in 'bought. After a long silence— " and so then" I beganl," the wprtb Abbot Luprian denies, that this wr ting camo from him, apd tha* it was intended to give my mind that impression, which his wgu» ments werq unable to produce ?"— —" And even suppose," he resumed after-a ctwladerablU'pause, " suppose n 2 thai ,
263
that I should ^confess your suspicion to be well-founded ; vvfould you therefore accuse me either oi treachery, or of vievvšvirdmicál to yout intetests i. well then, lady ; since the attempt t» dereive you would be vain, I own} that these ijaracters were traced by me. Take the adviney which they give you ; take mine with it, and fly from Sargans !"т- —'' Fly, say you ? my Lord Abbot, this is the first time, that I ever heard that word from your lips,)"— —* Yes, lady, I repeat it ' Şy from the irŕšolenceof youryoungrstepnißtbet, from tiie tyranny of your wiftehng father '"— —" And whither should I fly ?"—· - —".To the ConvenfV— -rj-« What? of St. Roswith*?"— —« Oh I
869 . —" Oh! no, no, ho! ;any where 1 , but thither ! fly to ι Zurich,-to tlie proi. tection of ,yöuri adopted irrotliery of thè venerable iCõuntéssi of Cariiheim."—- > í Sweet as his words sounded, X knew too well tb^'linipracticability. iOf ,this advice^ toiindulg» ţheideaifor.ainpment. It,was plam, that herwas. onlyj trifling with me ; 1 1 turned from the 'hypocriti¬ cal Friar with contţmpt, and requested hiaiabseuce^ ι f i (л щ · η > r. Aniabsiíi you· ^already., kilQW,..what dujgtaceflil', reports ι afe -çircubıted j¡é- sfecting-thisiman,; reports, of whose jjJsţice his conduct, towards myself has left me no doubt ! the modesty of hu поеей«е is always ashamed to own, thab she has heen, írtadé tlie object oil ад improper attachments Irhavetherefoi» 'i N 3 hitherto
270
hitherto avoided the confession, that Luprian (whose religious vows forbid bis hying any claims to the indulgence of honourable love) has been daring •nought to avow »-passion for me I this it is, which makes his advice so hateful to me; and this it is, which makes me so determmed to watch every wrord which falls from his. lips', in order that I may act exactly contrary. The neighbourhood of his monastery would make me averse to entering the Convent of St. Roswitha, did not his endeavours to put me out of conceit witli it convince me, that my abode there will lay obstacles in the way ofhis designs: he naturally foresees, that I shatt be better guarded against his im¬ portunities when protected by the good Abbes?
271
Abbess and heı pious train, than in this Castle where there is no compassionatţ being to listen to my entreaties and complaints. Before he left nie, the Mécréant again mentioned the Convent of Zurich, he again advibed me to hasten, thither, and had the insolence, to propose ţo be tiw companion, of my fbght,!'yo,u «тЩ до{ therefore wonder, that I repeated, mý commands tpbe left alone in a tone the most perernptory-rl was obeyed. ,, I past a grejt part of the night in melancholy reflections. Itwas late, when I retired to bed, but after the adven¬ ture of that evening ppt thinking mj¬ self in safety, I took care to fasten every window most carefully, ana trebly turned the key of every lock. N * 1 started
27S
. I started from my slumbers in alarm : methought, a cold hand had touched me ' I uttered a loud scream on per- ceiving, that the gloom of iny chamber was_ dissipated by a glimmering light, and that a tall figure was standing at the foot of my bed. My first thought was, '' this is a new artifice of the Abbot;" but there was something in the appearance of tbisfigure so singular, tbat my earthly terrors gave place to others of a much more awful nature. It was i tatt pale man, his counte¬ nance bearing the marks of extreme old age, and wrapped in a monk's habit, The blue faint glare of a lamp in his right hand'gave so strange and frightful an appearance to the deep cavities of his cheeks and eyes; that I was certain of being
273
being in the presence of a Denizen of the other world, and in terror I con¬ cealed my face beneath the coverlet f ' The fearful vision stood long by my bedside. It muttered much iu avine- lancholy and imploring voice ; but the bed-cloaths, in which my head was enveloped, prevented my distinguishing what was said, till I caught something which sounded like " Amalberga :" that beloved name brought me in some measure to myself. After a few mo mentsMiesitation I ventured to lower the «overlet, and to look up. —" Whal t" cried 1 ; " com'st thou to tell me, that Amalberga's spirit stays ibx me ? speak, awful vision,.. ."— ' ılt heardme not ! it had left my bed- ■side ; I still saw at tlie further extremity N5 of
274
of my spacious chamber the glimmering _ of the lamp; but in a moment after¬ wards .all disappeared. I consumed the remainder of the night in examining, what could be ithe" meaning of this midnight visit ? I put together the few fragments of thé Spectre's discourse, which had reached my hearing; and at first I concluded, that the Abbot (from some motive or other, but from what I vainly strove to form a guess) had falsely accused hirrtself of being tile author of the mysterious warning, and that the parchment and the spectre, which had both been con¬ veyed into my apartment so unaccount¬ ably, must needs have some connection. However, more mature reflection 'eft me no doubt, that both the one and 1 " the
275
tlie other were artifices employed by the detested Monk to betray me into his power ; and I resolved »eveţ again fo sleep in this suspicious repro, which so easily afforded entrance either to corpo¬ real villains or to inmaterial appall' tions. My resolution was taken, and I exe¬ cuted it. The insolent, house-keeper was well pleased to heai, that I meant to quit this handsome aparfrncut with jts noble prospect over hill and dale, arid which she immediately apjprcıpıiatçd tO her own use ; while 1 wîţs contented to taj«: hers in exchange. ,f have #ft· cordmgly established myself in a small chamber in the Western Tow cr, where the only attendant who is suffered to approach me is an old house-maid, who я 6 has
016
has out Uved two generations of the family of J Catlsheim. She is a kind- hearted cieatute, and frequently en¬ deavours to beguile me from Weeping över my doubtful and gloomy prospects by many a tab of events long past, and which now onl) exit in her recollec¬ tion. Part ôf what she has tokl me, 1 shall now repeat, since it ecems to have some connection with my midnight visitor. The old Bertha listened with great attention, while I recounted what had happened, and paused for some time, before she made any obser¬ vation. —" Lady," said she, " it is clear to me, that you are deceived in supposing, tbat what you saw on that mys¬ terious
277
tèrious night was either the delusion, of a dream, or the artifice of some villain ; no, lady, no ' as sure an you sit there, yøu have been visited by-the real spectre ot a dead man ! t " Long ago.... (Lord forgive me ! it is long indeed, since I came to live in this Castle 1) long ago was that very apartment the bed-chamber of the good Countess Urania, who (they say) is still living in some Convent or other. Her husband Count Ethelbert was a cruel man, almost such another as mylord your father, whom Heaven mend, I pray it ! well ! the Monks of Cloister- Curwald expelled their Abbot and the . good Prior ţtatthias, who took refuge with the Countess ; and by means of a subterraneous passage she enabled „j them
87β them to escape. Unluckily Count Ethel¬ bert was among the number of their enemies; in a.passion be sent his wife away from Sargans, and then descended into the subterraneous chambers to seek for the fugitives. An old servant of Connt Ethelbert's assured me, that his lord discovered two of them, and brought them back to that very cham¬ ber, where they were tortured in hopes of making them confess some secret or other, though what I know not, At length they were put back into one of the subterraneous dungeons, whose en¬ trance the Count caused to be walled up, and there they were left to perish with hunger. Ah! lady, lady! the dead, it" they choose it, could reveal many a cruel act, of which we'little dream!
279 dream ! many of my fellow-servants, when afterwards Ethelbert lost hia senses, could not comprehend much of his ravings ; alas ! I comprehended them well! I ťew much that must have prest heavy oi his conscience, and which now is known 4 o few except my¬ self. " After ji time the bodies qf the good Monks were removed from the cavern, because rt was said, that their spirits appeared in that chamber, and wept, and wailed so piteously, that nobody could sleep for the noise! yet they were not allowed Christian burial, but weie cast into that ruined draw-well in the little back-court, in which finally Ethelbert himself lost his life, being thrown into it by the Abbot Guiderius. So you see,
28<3
iee¡ lady, erivhes feVer' meet with their jüst punishment, while innocence eften к- rewarded, and always is avenged; which I mention for your own consola¬ tion? But as I was saying, doubtless it was the blessed spirit of one of these good Friars, which appearedto you the other night; and truly it is a pity, that your fear preveftted yoU from listening to what he said, for I warrant you, he had good cause for corning. However, it is now too late ; and methiriks as matters stand, you will do well to take the only means of security now left you as soon as possible and enter into the holy sisterhood of St. Roswitha, <vhere you will be well taken care of, both in body and souL"— Such
'281 Such Was the discourse of my old attendant, which in truth was not cal¬ culated to abate the woful impression made on me by this mysterious visit ! however, v/helher her explanation was right or false, it is certain, that the ad. vice contained in the conclusion of her speech was the best that could be given. I have just received an Order from my father to hasten my departure, since in a few days he means to bring home his young .bi ide, and will be displeased to find me still at Sargans. In Continuation. Then my father has renounced me, 1 and for ever ! renounced me for Helen's- sake, and as- they ι tell me, at Helen's persuasion í
282 persuasion ! oh I how much must she be changed, if she knows and counte¬ nances the. severity, with wbich I am treated. Then farewell my paternal mansion, and welcome, ye holy watts ! yet wh} should I grieve to go? what do I tose in the ope ? what have I to few in the other ? And yet methipks, I do not feel quite satisfied in seeking the Cpnvent of St. Roswitha. Oh! if it were but possible to escape to Zurich, where Urania .....But alas I this is imprac¬ ticable. A strong guard is appointed to conduct me, not whither I wish to go, but whither my father «huses me to be carried. farewell, ye gloomy walls, which have
£83 have witnessed so many of my tears ! farewell too, thou my good kind-hearted Bertha I weld I had known sooner, that among the Castle's inhabitants there existed one such honest creature, whose simple counsels Would have frequently stood me in much stead, and whose maternal sympathy would have cheered many a heavyjhesvy hour ! The moment for my departureiscome; every thing is prepared. 'The insolent domestics ofthe Count of Carlsheim, and his still more insolent paramours (rit· ν are not banished for Helen's sake !) laughed evenunow, when they saw me weep, whib> I embraced poor Bertha. From my window I see the litter ready, and near it stands Abbot Luprian with that inexplicable
284 inexplicable look, which he alwa) s wears, when there is mischief iii-the wind. 1 will not honour him even with a single word I oh ! were I but safe wdthin the holy walls of St. Roswitha ! were I but sure, that on the load no artifice will be cmriloyed to' betray me into the power of. this Miscreant! Bertha's account both of him and Ms predecessor Guide¬ rius have .taught me thoroughlyr,nhbvv much is tb be apprehended from men of hjs character. 4 „ l^'.n ώ FareweH,rarewell,myAmabel! Berthi has undertaken to convey this letter to you : write a few lines to inform my adopted mother, whither I am gorie.- I ¡have not yet answered/ уои» but letter-J it wis- too gay, and too un¬ important
28S important to require an immediate re¬ ply. In the Convent I shall have leisure enough to discuss it fully.—Again farewell.
286
Amabel to Emmehne. I am anxious to receive your answer to my las' ; yet I will not wait for its arrival, before 1 continue die narrative of rural events : my heart is too full, and I reproach myself much for having wrapt my meaning in such mystery, when I last wrote to you. Shame upon me, for having trifled with your good heart, and made myself a cruel sport of throwmg out hints to awaken your curiosity, when I had it in my power to make you happy by cummunicating the most agreeable intelligence. Wt surely you must have gue^t my mean¬ ing; your heart will long ago have resolved
287
resolved your every doubt on the sub¬ ject. No sooner shall you have asked yourself the question.—" Why does Amabel write all these trifling parti¬ culars to mc? What have I to do with the stranger, of whom she talks so much'' what concern is it of mine, whether Landcnberg loves her, and what influence can her becoming the bride ofthe emperor's lieutenant have upon un/ fortunes'" —no sooner shall you have asked yourself these questions, than a voice within shall whisper the name of Amaïbeiga; and the letter which I now write, will give you the assurance, that the voice spoke true. Yes, dear lady; your sbter is now an inhabitant of this Valley; she has hitherto been sheltered ih the neigh¬ bouring Convent of Engelberg, which she
ш»
she only quitted on hearing, that, the festivities, which are at present celebrat¬ ing in honour of liberty, would give her an opportunity of embracing her friends, the venerable Gertrude and your Amabel. Slie earnestly desired to discover to them her situation., and more particularly wished to discourse with me, from whom she hoped to obtain the latest intelligence of her beloved sister. I am quite vain of the friendship, with which I am honoured by the illus¬ trious stranger, who meets» here with universal admiration. Yet in spite, of the preferenctäj whjch/ she shows me aboye the rest of my companions,(whpm she, ahjo condescends, tq, call her ¡own,) still I am nqttjier r confidante, r You know, that she is nafujally reserved :
-29Э what was the. cause of her sudden re¬ pugnance to taking the veil, which had once been the object of her wishes; why slie fled from Sargans ; what induced her to remain so long concealed at Engelberg ; all these points are still unknown to me. Gertrude probably is better informed: probably too the packet, which your sister sends with this, contains an explanation of all these mysteries; I flatter myself you will with your usual goodness impart so much of the packet's contents, as will satisfy your Amabel's curiosity. In hopes of inducing you to comply with this request, I will not delay to communicate to you all, my own little secrets; though I fear your interest vol. n. о about
290 about your beloved Amalberga and your impatience to examine hei letter, will leave you but little concern to bestow on the afiairs of the humble Amabel. Know then.. .. that I am a bride ; yes, the bi ide of a man, whom I love with my whole soul—and yet he is not the person, who made such an impres¬ sion on my silly heart during the Easter-service. Fool that I was ! I cast my eyes on the noblest amorg all the sons of Helvetia, and thought, that he was just good enough for the simple Amabel Melthal ! Has the name of William Tell never struck your hearing ? Helvetia boasts no citizen more virtuous, no patriot more zealous, no seaman more expert, no husbandman
291 husbandman more industrious, no coun¬ sellor more prudent, no warrior more brave ! And this very man was it, this iden¬ tical William Tell (who into the bargain has long been „named, and has several children) who because he happened to throw a few accidental glances on the weakest and vainest of our country-dam¬ sels, made her conclude forsooth that the man's heart was hers, and that ho desired nothing better than to possess her heart in return. I should bc a thouund times more ashamed of my folly, had there been no cause at all for my falling into such a mistake. In truth, William Tell's eyes, which-put all my devotion so completely to flight at church, were not fixed on о 2 me
S92 me without some meaning ; nor were they entirely without that expression, which I fancied them to contain. He really was more struck with my appear¬ ance, than with that of any of my com¬ panions ; it was affection, which made him consider me with such earnestness ; and after making a few enquiries res¬ pecting me, he did not disappoint my expectations; he actually came, and de¬ manded me in marriage.—Only, he did not demand me for himself. No ; it was for his half-brother Edmund Bloomberg, who in a few days more will become my husband. Ah ! dear lady, 1 could say much on this subject. Certainly, love and court¬ ship are very different things in our station and in yours. The important ι " yes"
293
" yes" is drawn from your lips by the authority of parents, by convenience, or perhaps by a sort of preference, which you dignify with the name of love; but when we acknowledge the noblest and the chastest of all human affections, our feelings are exhilarating and pure as'the gales, which blow from our mountains ; we look boldly towards the distant futurity, which love paints in colours as much more beautiful than the present, as the views from the summit of yon lofty rocks are superior to any thing to be discovered in the Valley. But you,. . ! Its true, my present engagement is the disappointment of my first love ; but yet it b really love, which I feel for Edmund. He was already no object 0 3 of
29* of indifference even on Easter evening, when he was my partnerin the dance : I discovered in his countenance features, wliieh reminded me of the unknown, and his discourse betrayed a thousand traces of generosity and benevolence. But when he declared himself to be the brother o£ the brave William Tell; when WiBiam came to make proposals for me, and I blushed to recognize in him the object of my admiration; when he told.me in words, which never could have sounded so «eli in arty other mouth, that he selected me for his sister with as muth care and as much affection, as lie had formely selected another maiden for his wife ; then did my heart resign itself fully to his direc¬ tions,
295 tions, and I withdrew my love from him to bestow it upon the man, who will soon call me by the name of Amabel Bloomberg,
Amalberga to Emmeiine.
Ат length then the time h arrived, when I am permitted to give you some intelligence of your lamented sister, for well I know, that my Emmettne must have lamented for me much : my heart would have assured me of this, even had not Amabel informed me, how many tears the ignorance of my fate had cost you. Gentle, feeling soul, receive now the narrative of my adventures, of my free¬ dom, of my happiness ! at the same time receive the assurance, that it depends on your own pleasure entirely to become as free and as happy as myself. The means
297
means too are the easiest imaginable, ana ^though unknown to us) have long offered us the opportunity of escaping from an abode, where we have ex¬ perienced nothing but sorrow and per¬ secution. Yet be it remarked, that things had never been carried to so insupportable a pitch, till the period when I was com¬ pelled to take that most hazardous measure of flying secretly from my father's house. Observe then well, my sister, what I am going to relate, since I fear, you will ere long be placed in the same dilemma, and find no other means of escape, except that by which I pro¬ fited. Oh ! how earnestly have I. wish¬ ed to communicate that means to you ; but I could find no security for a letter's о 5 reaching
298
reaching you, till Amabel informed me, that she had a secret and certain channel of communication with the in¬ terior of Sargans. You cannot have forgotten, how foil was my heart of grief and affection, when we quitted the Bishop's court; and that we both had soon ample reason to repent our having laid our hearts open to a man so stern and violent as our father. Fprtunately, pur mpst pre¬ cious secret was still in our possession; our attachments, both so unprosperous, had not escaped our lips, or we should undoubtedly have met with treatment still more severe : yet what could wett bè more severe than to be separated from you, my sister, and confined for ever within the gloomy walb of a convent ? 2 These
29!Т These ideas were not to be endured. You know, how dear you are to me, and how much it wpuld have cost me to tear myself from one, whom I should have missed at every moment of my life. You know too, that it was «asier for you to reconcile yourself to exchang¬ ing the unjust Herman for the veil, than for me, on whose heart impres¬ sions naturally engrave themselves more deeply ; besides I possest the melancholy but sweet recollection, that Eginhart of Torrenburg parted from me with sentiments like my own, and was only prevented from avowing them by the solemn promise which he had given, and by the chains of knightly honour. Oh ! Emmeiine, it is much easier to sacrifice a rejected heart to Heaven, than α 6 one
300 one whose affection is returned, even though that affection be unfortunate. The very thought of a convent was hateful to me; even had it been the Convent of Zurich, to have entered it would still have been misery ; since my heart yet cherished worldly hopes.which even under tlie most gloomy circum¬ stances never fail to accompany that love which is mutual. But now came the moment, when the Sanctuary of St. Roswitha (to whose service I was des¬ tined) appeared to me of all others the most odious ; and I was firmly resolved to endure every possible misery, rather than suffer myself to be immured in the dwelling-house of hypocrisy and cor¬ ruption. My acquaintance with Abbot Luprian and
30 t
and with others the most distinguish¬ ed among the Monks of Cloister- Curwald, had long ago eradicated from my mind that respect, which is generally entertained for the mem¬ bers of religious communities. Still, female prejudices made me restrict my censure to the one sex, and I fondly flattered myself, that vice could never have insinuated itself into tbe habitations of the brides of Heaven- Methought, it was to the chaste and pious taughters of the church, that ,Vir«.ue had fled for refuge ; and I ever united with the name of a Nun, the highest idea of human purity, of intense devotion, and of unsullied truth. Conceive then my disappointment, when I was convinced beyond the powec of doubting, that the Convent of St. Ros. witha
302
witha was the most licentious temple, that ever was yet raised to unhallowed pleasure! You are well aware, what sort of re¬ putation the Monks, who in latter times have been Abbots of Cloister-Curwald, have left behind them. They were the founders of tím Convent ; knowing this, you may woll guess at the nature of the institution. The endowments of this bese are immense: the indulgences, with which they have been gratified by the Holy Father of Rome, are as numerous, as its inhabitants could them¬ selves desire. Nothing can be more beautiful and picturesque than the Con¬ vent's situation, nothing more conve¬ nient than the regulation of its interior. As to the garments of the Nuns.. .... Yet that is a subject, upon which I will uot
303 not trust myself to dwell. That excel¬ lent friend (whose name for fear of consequences I will not confide to paper, but which you 'vill easily guess) whose letter warned me of the abyss into which I was so near falling, inclosed a sketch of the dress usually worn by the sisters of St. Roswitha. To convince you of the impropriety of their customs, I need onlymention,tbatthesewretchedwomen refuse to make to Heaven the trifling sacrifice of their ringlets, which hitherto every Nun was expected to cut away on the aay of her reception. It is true, when they are in the choir, or engaged in a solemn procession, or, when at any time the publicity of their appearance makes it necessary to play the hypo¬ crites, the holy veil conceals their hair curled
so*
curled with care and decked with wordly ornaments ; but the veil is but seldom worn except on such public occasions. Besides, would you believe it, Emmeiine? they wear shoes with high heels and long-pointed toes fastened up by silver chains; things which to wear, would be reckoned both a sin and a disgrace even for us worldly damsels ! judge from their dress what must be their morals, and spare me the pain of a description more circumstan¬ tial.. The uneasiness, which my knowledge of these particulars (contained in that letter which you privately conveyed to my hands) excited in my bosom, was raised to the highest pitch by the dis¬ covery, that Abbot Luprian was induced to
305 to influence my father to fix his choice on this Convent for my future abode, because he had views respecting me the most improper; views, which he thought could not fail of success, were I once inclosed within the walls of St. Roswitha, where (let him dissemble as he pleases) to my certain knowledge he is omivpotent, Here was a discovery ! oh ! my Em¬ meiine, how anxiously did I long to communicate to you this information so important to us both ! I wished, that you should be made aware of every¬ thing, which could ever be in the least detrimental to you ; tliough from your having always been my father's favourite, I concluded, that he would •not insist on your taking the veil so. peremptorily,
30&
peremptorily, as was the case with his rejected Amalberga! You must have remarked, that when- ever we were suffered to pass a few moments together, a secret trembled upon my lips, which I was onlyprevented from revealing by the vigilance of our jailors. I frequently resolved tp dia¬ close everything to myfather: I thought, that he could not have been so unnatu¬ ral, so inhuman, as consciously to drive his daughter into the jaws of perdition ; the Abbot and hu accomplices would have been unmasked, and myself rescued from the dreadful Convent. But alas ! whenever I attempted to address him, that dread of him, which we both of us imbibed with our mother's milk, over¬ powered me, and I sank at his feet unable
307
unable to pronounce a syllable.— Be¬ bides, I had no proof of the guilt of the Nuns of St. Roswitha except the letter of my friend, who had always been the object of his peculiar aversion, and whose interference would have drawn down upon her his anger and re¬ venge. You know her weH, tliat excellent courageous woman ; yet while she ever exprest before us the utmost abhorrence of the Convent of St. Roswitha, never could she prevail on herself to sully her lips and our ears by declaring the true grounds of her aversion. At length my extreme danger made her resolve to sacrifice her delicacy, and she sent me that intelligence in writing, which slie had never dared to reveal in speech. It
308 It was not the anger of my father, which she had alone to apprehend on this occasion ; it was also the Abbot's power, who (if publidy accused)'she knew well, would be supported by the Pope and the whole monastic commu¬ nity of Helvetia. You are not now to learn, how closely all Monks unite, when one of their order is attacked by lay¬ men. I knew not what to do; the day drew near, which was to decide my fate ; the roost painful distress preyed upon my mind, and slumber seldom visited my pillow. It was in one of these uneasy sleepless nights, that I heard a low murmuring sound at the wainscot of my chamber. I listened ; at intervals the sound was repeated ; I thought,
309 thought, that it was but the gnawing of vermin, and I again reposed my head on my pillow, when on a sudden I heard a loud crash. The flames of the night-torches streamed towards me, as if impelled by a strong current of air ; I was struck by a pieťcing dullness, which seemed to breathe from the habitations of the dead, and before I had time to collect my thoughts, I felt myself encircled by two arms. In this situation, not to be in some degree alarmed was impossible; yet I had of late been so much accustomed to terror, that this fresh trial did not overpower my senses. I was aware, that the arms, which had seized me, were those of a female ; and I soon recovered resolution sufficient to examine the person,
310
person, by whom I was thus unex¬ pectedly visited. I beheld with rapture the dear friend, who had already warned me ; and with her was an old Monk in the habit of Cloister-Curwald, whose э-^ягагапсе had something in it so ex¬ traordinary, that I doubt much if he had approached me atene, whether I should have received .iim with as much fortitude, as I now did,when I saw him accompanied by my excellent protec¬ tress. It was indeed the consideration, what terror might have been excited by his visiting me by himself, which had induced my friend to become his companion. Oh! how can I sufficiently express my gratitude to that dear woman for tlie unwearied care, with which she watched
311 watched over me. It was not enough to have put mc on my guard : she -iw, that I needed more to be done, and she hastened to do it. Deep in the bosom of the hill which rises to the north-west of Sargan , there exists a smalľsociety of pious Hermits, Their community U indebted for its ongin to a deposed Abbot of Curwald, who, accompanied by five partners in the same calamity, found shelter and tranquillity in this unknown solitude. The excellent Urania was their preserver. Two of their companions who lost their way while following them through the subterraneous caverns, which they traversed in their flight from persecu¬ tion either fell into the hands of their pursuers, or must have perished acci¬ dentally
312 dentallyby some miserable death; since no tidings of them could ever be ob¬ tained. The rest reached the place of refuge in safety, and commenced a tranquil and holy life in the wilderness, which their industry soon converted into a terrestrial paradise. Here they long existed unknown to any one. Some travellers, whom chance con¬ ducted to their abode, were struck by the air of innocence and happiness which prevailed around them, a, d con¬ sented to fill up the chasms left in their society by the loss of their two unfor¬ tunate brethren, and by the death of the eldest of the fugitives named Mat¬ thias, which shortly followed. The three, who first offered themselves were accepted; but the founder's rules having restricted
313 restricted the number of Hermits to six, the others were compelled to withdraw their request. Yet ever as death gradually removed those, whom Urania had rescued, the will of Heaven still conducted to them some new associate; so that it almost seemed, as if the society was kept con.· plete by a kind of miracle. Of those who belonged to the original institu¬ tion, only one now remained in exis- tertce. Four years before her paying me this midnight visit, had my protectress ac¬ cidentally been bewildered among the mountains, and found her way to these holy Hermits, who received her kindly, and made her acquainted with the origin and constitution of their ^rder. These vol. π. ρ circumstances
31* circumstances were already brawn in part, to my friend, who had shared with Urania in the good deed of saving the persecuted Monks from destruction. She declared her name to them, and promised them eternal secrecy on the one hand, as they did eternal friendship to her on thp other. The banished Abbot and two of his companions were at that time still alive ; and looking on the power of once more thanking one of their preservers on this side of the grave as a signal and most unexpected blessing of ι ovidence, lhey earnestly entreated her to make frequent visits to their solitude, and enjoy with them a foretaste of that tranquil happiness, which awaits the blessed in another world. She
315 She gladly accepted the invitation, and (except to her husband, on whose discretion she could depend) mentioned to no one the existence of that Her¬ mitage, whither friendship and reve¬ rence attracted her steps so willingly and so often. The pious men became the confidents of her most secret designs ; and I was too dear to her, for her not to mention my name to them and the difficulties in |which I was in¬ volved. This proved the means of my preservation. The principal Hermil, the oidy one of the six fugitives novv existing, remembered well the pubter- raneous passage, by whicli he had fled from destruction ; and it was resolved. that this passage should now furnish me also with the means of escape; that . ρ 2 Count
316
Count Ethelbert had walled up thi· entrance to the Castle was no obstacle to this scheme : the three youngesc of the Brotherhood provided themselves with proper tools ; and their labours were carried on with so much effect, that I now saw myself under the pro¬ tection of my friend, and the road to escape open before me. One only reflection embittered my flight : oh ! my Emmeiine, hov/ gladly would I have made pu the partner of it ! surely, some indiocinct suspicion of what was to happea must have floatedbe- fore your mind, and made you entreat myfather with such extreme earnestness to be permitted to ρ*ει> only that one »ight iu my apartment. Your prayer was refused, and my wish
wish to rescue you rendered fruitless. The day was breaking ; expedition wa9 necessary. My friend too comforted me by the assurance, that your situation was not so immediately dangerous as mine, and that at all events your escape could be effected by the same passage, should such a measure be hereafter found adviseable. While we within the chamber were ¡busily engaged in arranging my flight, the assisting Monks had been employed in the outside in repairing the broken all and the wainscot, through which 'as the passage to my room; and they tad performed their task so dexterously, hat though to enter it from without ivas still easy, it was almost impossible For persons unacquainted with tlie me¬ ii 3 chanism
318 chanism to discover from within any door leading out of the apartment. Nothing however can be more simple than this secret. On the south-west side of our chamber, there runs a sort of frame of carved ornaments round a picture of the " Flight from Egypt."— Count the seventh pomegranate: from the bottom,and using some little strength to force it back, you witt possess the key of the whole mystery. A slight push will make the pannel recede ; a broad staircase of five-and-twenty steps will then present itself, and ifyou keep always to the right, you-cannot possibly miss your way. Yet the pas¬ sage is long, and fatigue or anxiety.Jest you should have mistaken the road, may give you much disquietude, shoultl " ym
319 you traverse the caverns without a guide V¡ comfort and sustain you. I advise you therefore , only to escape alone, bhould you be in some most urgent danger. The good Hermit has pro¬ mised also to watth over your safety ; he will keep a spy continually in the Casde, who can inform liim of all that happens to you ; and (should he find it unavoidable for you to take so desperate a step as the quitting your father's pro¬ tection) then lest his unexpected appear¬ ance should seriously alarm'you, ne will prepare you for flight by a written warning, and afterwards assist you to carry his Warning into effect. Yet in spite of these assurances, I could not resolve on parting from you, my beloved girl, without many a tear. p4 I
suo I still loitered, wishing that 1 could at least leave sow token behind me to convince you, that I was in safety, and thusspare you the anxiety, -which doubt¬ less my disappearance must have cost you. But my deliverers insisted, that any such measure was too pregnant with danger to be adopted,and a t length I was compelled to obey and follow them. I will not describe to you what I suffered during my pilgrimage through the long and gloomy passages^nor my satisfaction at finding myself at length safe inthe dwelling of the holy Anchorets. Oh ! what can surpass the sentiment of liberty, and the consciousness of being surrounded by none but those, who are virtuous and humane ! how. different, my
321 my Emmeiine, from our feelings in the- Castle of Srrgans! there we met at every turnirg with nothing but present sorrow md anxiety for the 'future ; with nothing but hypocrisy, perfidy, the cruel necessity of concealing our real sentiments from every eye, and above all the terrific toil of wandering along a slippery path, where we dreaded with every moment to lose our footing, and to be plunged into the same gulph with those abandoned creatures, whom we saw endeavouring to drag us down with them to perdition. Wben we quitted the Hermitage, Ger¬ truds conducted me into these vallies. She was well-known to the Nuns of Engelberg, and easily obtained a refuge for me in their Convent ; and so happy' r 5 did
322 did I feel myself among these pious women, that had it not been for one consideration, I should have become a member of thtir sisterhood. Can you not guess that one '—Alas ! that even impossibility should be unable to vanquish the power of love. Could I but once accustom myself to unite inse. parably the name of Eginhart of Torren¬ burg with that of the happy Helen, I should soon succeed in convincing my¬ self, that to take the veil was now the only option left me. Gertrude wrote jne word, that the Abbot of Curwald's suspicions respect¬ ing my flight having fallen upon her, his secret persecution had compelled her to repair to Stein; wheie her hus¬ band was occupied in constructing a 2 house
323 house suited to the improved state of his income, and which displayed tho good taste imbibed by him in his youth¬ ful Italian travels. í was delighted to have my friend so neai me ; and my joy was increased, when I he»rd, that the great meeting of the Helvetians on the borders of the Lake of Thuti would not only furnish me with an opportunity of seeing Gertrude and her husband, but of embracing our mutually-beloved com¬ panion, Amabel Melthal. . Oh I what a blessed day was that oi our re-union ! as I lay before the altari. the most fervent prayers of gtatitudo for my own escape, of entreaty for yours, flowed from my heart,, and left me no leisure fbr observing the little incidents which occurred during the· p 6 service.
S24 service.. Tbe lively Amabel assures me, that the eyes of the most distinguished person present, of no less; a man than the Emperoi's Vice-gerent, were fixed upon me from beginning to t,he*end. It was her prejudice in my favour, which. made her imagine this : there was nodiing, which could have led him to. distinguish me from the other village- maidens, not even my dress ; since not only prudence but my natural taste ha» induced me to adopt the usual garments of the Helvetian country-lasses. Still Amabel asserts, that there was а юок of distinction and nobility about me, wliieh attracted the eyes of the Lord of Lan¬ denberg; and it is certain, that durmg the whole of that evening he seldom -»offered himself to be away from me for
SİS
for a single moment. Unluckily, his attentions by no means flattered me ; and should I find Amabel's suspicions likely to be verified, I shall lose no time in regaining the Convent of Engelberg. Any further explanation of what has happened to me I shall reserve for our meeting, which I now look forward to with impatience. The search after me seems to have been given up; and Gertrude has at length permitted me to disclose the secret, by which you may join us at your pleasure. In spite ofthe good Monk's sermons, and of advice more savouring of prudery than sound sense, I charge you, dear Emmeiine, «at to wait for things being carried to the greatest extremities, before yo« make use
S2Ö use ofthe secret disclosed in this letter- and yet to fly from a father's house without the most absolute necessity. .... Alas ! I know not what to advise ; I know only, what I wish. Yes! earnestly, most earnestly do I wish to see you once more my com¬ panion, not only for your sake, but for my own. I dare not entirely confide myself to our good Amabel: hew is it possible with her talents, that should be so partial tó persons so ün-j worthy of her esteem; and how can she be so blind as to repose such im¬ prudent cbnfidence in those, wbosci intentions are (at the best) extremely! to be suspected ? yet 'tis her own| open guileless nature, which misguides! heil
327 her respecting others; and unfortu- tunately, those others know but too well, how to turn her weakness to their own "advantage.
328
Amabel to Emmeiine. How long a period has elapsed, since- a letter from your hand reached the inhabitants of these vallies! is it not wrong to mingle so much anxiety w ith the pleasures of your friend, or is Bloomberg's wife less dear to you, than the playfellow of your childhood, Mel- thal's daughter ? I really begin to suspect, that there is something in wedlock which frightens all unmarried persons away from us sober matrons. Since my wedding, Amalberga seems less at her ease with me, though I spare no pains to make my house agreeable to her. Peregrine ef
329
of Landenberg, the good-hearted unas, suming Landenberg, frequently honours me with his visits ; and it quite vexes me, that he should so seldom find my society made delightful by the presence of the " lovely stranger," for in our valley Amalberga is known by no other name. I confess the Lord-lieutenant (whose gentleness of manners prevents his rank from being felt as a constraint) would be a more welcome guest to me, did not his seneschal Wolfenrad follow him every where like his shadow. Yet I know not why I should have taken such a dislike to this man ; he is sensible, and nothing can be more proper than his behaviour ; and yet somehow or other, I carlnot endure his countenance. How¬ ever,
SSO ever, 1 try to conquer this antipathy, since he is in high favour with my husband, and Peregrine has commission·. ed Mm to settle with me the best means of enforcing his suit with Amalberga : for you are to understands that he has avowed himself her suitor, and that in express terms. For Heaven's sake, dear Emmeiine, persuade your sister not to throw away her happiness. Eginhart of Torren¬ burg ia now quite out of the question : the whole countiy rings, with the re¬ port of the splendid balls and tourna¬ ments wbich are shortly to be given, in honour of his union with the youthful Helen of Homburg.
331 In Continuation. Emmehne, what dreadful tiding? have reached us ! it is said, that Helen has been earned off by your father, and compelled to espouse him ; and that you are alreadyordered to depart for the Con¬ vent of St. Roswitha ' Heavenly powers, should these tidings be true!-—What can be done for you ? what can I do ί" And yet Amalberga assures me, that she informed you of a means of escaping, that could not fail.——Could I but con¬ sult with your sisteť, or with Gertrude Bernsdorf! —but even in these once tranquil, vallies there is but too much uproar and disturbance carrying on. Disputes have arisen between the Go¬ vernor and the elders of our people ; in consequence
SS2 consequence of which, the most distin. guished of the south-wet,tern deputies have hastily quitted these parts ; Ger¬ trude and her husband have also left us unexpectedly ; and neither Landen¬ berg's tears nor my entreaties could prevent your sbter from returning to her Convent. In my anxiety to do something to¬ wards your rescue from this impending danger, I have conquered my preju¬ dices against Wolfenrad, and applied to him for advice ; for his patron the Lord ef Landenberg is too much occupied with public affairs to permit his listening to my difficulties, and my husband declares himself incapable of advising my proceedings in so delicate a business. Wolfœrad's counsel is, that Edmund should
333 should arm a body of his young com¬ panions, hasten to Sargans, force you from the guards who will be appointed to escort you to that abominable Con¬ vent, and then convey .you hither or else to Engelberg. I was m terror and anxiety ; this must plead for me, when I confess, that my fears get the better of my prudence, and that I have made Landenberg and his Seneschal acquainted with more respecting you and Amal¬ berga, than was by any means necessary. And yet what harm was there in making a confident of the man, who (I sincerely hope) will one day conquer Amalberga's unjustifiable obstinacy, and give my dear Emmeiine a brother's protection and a sister's name ?—oh ! let but this one step be taken, and all your difficul- * ties
"SS4
ties will speedily be at end) Landenberg is powerful ; let but Landenberg once be Amalberga's husband, and she and you will be both as happy, as your Amabel would be now, did not anxiety upon your account embitter her every mo¬ ment. In Continuation. Misfortunes follow each other so dose, that grief bewilders me ! I know not how to collect my thoughts suffi¬ ciently to writç down the number ot wounds, which have been inflicted on my heart vrithin these few days.—And for whom should I write them down? not for thee, sweet" Emmeiine, for it is but too probable, that thou art in a better world! not fbr thee, Amalberga, for thou art gone, gone no one knows whither ! yet will I commit to paper what
335 what has past, and what I feel, in hopes that should the grave hide me without my ever again embracing my friends and sbters, they may see how much I have suffered on their account, and may do justice to the fond heart of their lamenting Amabel. And that the grave will hide me, and that soon.... Oli! is it not most probable ? all around me is confusion, is uproar! all are furious, though wherefore I know not: yet surely the most pious and peaceable of all people, that the earth holds, can never be so blind to its own interests, to its own happiness, as to rbe in rebellion against the Lieutenant of their imperial patron, against-the most gentle and benevolent of created beings, against Peregrine of Landenberg ! What
336 What have we to do with the evil reports, which reach us from that un- happy Province, where Gessler rules and rages ? we are secure un Jer Landen¬ berg's protection ; we can even expect from his generosity succour and com¬ passion for our less fortunate brethren. To all of them, but above all to my venerable father and to my brother's family, (who consider themselves as no longer safe in the neighbourhood of Gessler's jurisdiction) has Landenberg voluntarily offered an asylum among our mountains, which (I trust) will still long remain the abode of peace ! I must lay down my pen! my heart is too full at present to admit of my writing in¬ telligibly ; besides, I see Wolfenrad ap¬ proaching, who (now that my husband has
337 has departed to see .what can be effected towards your preservation) is my only comforter, and who doubtless comes to tell me, what has been done on your behalf, and whether anything remains ftr me yet to do. In Continuation. I am something more composed ţ there are hopes, that my Emmeiine may have escaped from thhrdreadful scene ! Wol¬ fenrad'has promised to hasten a person after nty husband, and assist him in the researches, which are making respecting you: he engages also, should you be found, to deliver this and my former letters into your- hands. Heavens! how one may be deceived at first sight! there vrås χ time, when I could not vol. и. a endure
S38 endure this man, and now that all others have forsaken me, he proves the most active of my friends ! There are many parts of my former letters, which will appear to you mys¬ terious; I will now explain them. I received on the same day your written narrative of what had ^»ast in your father's Castle, and further tidings re¬ specting you, which overpowered me with horror. Your letter, which you left with Bertha, must have remained in wrong hands for whole months together; and the condition,in which it at length reached me, has left me no doubt, that its seal has been forced, and its contents perused by more persons than myself. Scarcely had I recovered from my 2 , alarm
S3»
alarm at finding, that you must have set forward long since for St. Roswitha's Convent ; scarcely had I received my good kind husband's promise, that he would immediately set out and make closer enquiries respecting you, when the dreadful report reached me, that flames had consumed that very Con¬ vent ; flames not kindled by chance or the vengeance of offended Heaven, but by sacrilegious cruel men ! nor was the sword less active than the conflagra¬ tion; it is said, that few have escaped with life from this horrible outrage, whose instigator's name is still unknown to us. Much too is said respecting the secrets of this Convent, by no means to the credit of its inmates ; we have even been assured, that the Abbot of Cloister- Й 2 Curwald,
S 40 CurvvaW, and tlie chief part of his brethren were involved in the Convent's destruction, though whether they came ther* on the news of the danger, or were found with these wretched Nuns at the moment when their habitation was at¬ tacked, I will not pretend to judge. Every malicious speech, "which relates to the Convent in which (according to all accounts) you must necessarily have past two whole months, seems to plant a fresh thorn in my bosom. Bewildered by these dreadful tidings, I believe, that I must for a time have lost my senses : for I suddenly found myself at the gate of Amalberga's sanc¬ tuary, without being'comcious how I came there, or what was my object in coming. Probably I wished to unbui- S then
341
then to hei my full heart, and indulge myself in bewailing with her our mutual misfortune, but I could iwt hope to obtain either assistance OT advice from her, whorh the tidings which I had to communicate must heedb «iahe, if ipos- siblo, still more wretched and tetire helpless than myself. I rang the bell, and the Porterên appeared» Conceive what I felt at hear¬ ing from herr, that that very taorning during -matins a band -of armed men had rushed into tlie 'church,, had seized Amalberga, and hadfcrcibly bome her- away. By· whom- this aHoe*es outrage was committed, 'no ,οικ^ yet knows j. the people on hea*i% oft-k broke into universal uproar, and raved against this violation of the Saneţuaţyi! ς 3 now
S42 now, all voices but mine unite in laying the blame upon Landenberg; and to prove the probability of his being the offender in this instance, innumerable deeds of infamy, said to have been secretly committed by him, have been alledged against him ; some of them of a nature, that makes even Gessler's most infeniilactioes appear but, trifles. Alas! is it possible, that I have teen so grossly deceived by the simplicity of my heart? —Even Wolfenrad, the most faithful of his vassals, does not venture to asiiert pontively, that he is innocent : but let who may be guilty, that worthy man ha promised to assist us, and I hasten to finish this letter, that' I may commit it to his care. Oh ! should he be so fortunate as to find you, hesitate not to ι τ confide
343 confide in him, and follow him to these vallies ; alas ! I can no longer call them these happy vallies, for peace is banished, and discord and confusion have usurp¬ ed her place. Its true, as yet open hostilities have not taken place ; but the cry against Landenberg is loud, and the public voice'scruples not to compare nini to Gessler, the inhuman governor of Uri. —" Freedom ! freedom !"—is now 1 the word in every mouth; but it sounds no longer'so melodious, as when it ibrmed the burthen of our Sunday- songs ! it seems to me, as were it spoken in the dying groans of'those, who must purchase with their blood the small portion still left of this treasure ! To complete my misery, my good old father and my brother are arrived Q 4 at
34« at my cottage in a condition, that makes my heart bleed. My father has been cruelly mis-used by Gessler, and his lands are confiscated ; Arnold has been obligedlo fly, on account of having com, mined the mighty crime of striking the officer of justice, who seized our father's ; охел,4ци1 theníontemjjtuonsly bade theppor old man yolu. hmself to the plough in future, and do the oflice ofthe beasts which Jie had 1од,-(»С^ ! dear Îmmeline, I jink henead» the weight of griefs, which my Жавща'щ. absence wakes me feel doubly heavy.
S45*
A năbel ta D и Ime I şoiFcţp deíiye spmeicomforli uqm the presence <pî доу relations* but ipy Sopeias pnoKsd vain. My father bes ill and belphvis on hts bed * гат tne consequences pf Gessler's nl-usage, and Arnold You will suppose, that I can receive hut little augmentatifla of my 4ranquijhty from this impetuous ypung man, when you recollect, with how much violence apd passion-he u/ed to watch over me in formertimei. Jf he ţur prised, a youth gaiingon me with rajthqr too much earnestness though buí for a moment, that moment wai sufficient to make him almost frantic with recent ment,
* 346 ment, and vow vengeance against the offender; nay,he evendared to extend his vigilance to yourself and Amalberga. Do you recollect a particular evening, when you had both privately stolen with me to my father's cottage in hopes of pas¬ sing a few gay and pleasant hours, which. seldom occurred at the Cattle of Sar¬ gans? it is as present to my recollection, as had lbs icerie past but yesterday I— it chanced; that some stranger-knights, wh» were going to a tournament at tiie court of the Bishop of Coirà, had seen us on the -road; as we were aH three arm in una, they supposed us to Ъе of thr same rank ; they delayed their journey, got themselves introduced into our joyous circle, and proposed to us to dance; but Arnold..., Ah ! you cannot
8*7
cannot have forgotten, how sharply he answered them; how bluntly he gave them to understand, that their depar¬ ture was desirable; and how (as he conducted us bade to ibe Castle) he made no scruple (without heeding your rank) of reading you both a severe lecture upon the necessity of reserve towards strangers, and the propriety of living retired under your paternal roof. Well I the part which he then thought proper to play, he- has now taken up a- fresh, but with more warmth than ever. One would think, he might find other things to do new, than to watch his sister's conduct; but not tbe most trifling of my actions passes unobserved by bim, and very few of them pass un- i , censured.
34S censured. He forgets, tliat к is solely en your auteibft, that I have any inter- coursfc With-Wolfetirad; and that jt is absoluteb/ necessary-for an intercourse toi be- kept up, tm long as he, jour¬ neys, -bacJrwurds and forwards about . your af$urt,i«ed brings me tidings re- specting ayou, Which hitherto (Heaven; be thanked!) have been favourable. 'My brotiier insists upon it, that I ought never to exchange ä syllable with, this man; although he is much t do old and too ugly to be an object öf dinger; or suspicidn^evenwerel not protected by, such good- preservatives against the arts· of a. seducer, as an heart full of love fot- Edmund, and veins full of that blood, whoseevery drop is true Helvetian ! ■ ι . What
3*9 What Arnold may think, I cannot say ; but I know, that love is never mentioned in my conversations with Wolfenrad. He is married as well as myself, and at all events it would be unwise to offend him just at present, when he bas the power of doingms so much harm ; for during Landenberg's absence he can act exactly as he pleases. However, I have given up the point. Arnold has taken a cottage near me, and as my own is solitary and unsafe during Edmund's absence, I have re¬ moved to my brother's, where I share with my sister-in-law the office of nurse to my poor sick father.' Here there is no chance of seeing Wolfenrad, for tliere has lately been an open quarrel between
SSO between him and Arnold, whose thresh¬ old be Jus sworn never to cross again· Yet I am impatient to find an oppor¬ tunity of conversing with him ; for I collect· from some hints (which he has occasionally thrown out, though there was noti time to explain himself) tbat he hau not only-proofs of your having escaped from the conflagration, but that he has actually conveyed my letters to your hands. As to Amalberga, he re¬ ferred me to a Nun at Engeiberg, who is better informed than liimself ; but he said, tbat in what regarded you, dear Emmeiine, the intelligence, wbich he had to -communicate, could be given by no one but himself, -and was of a nature too debafc to be conveyed through я third person. I have
351 < χ I have told every thing to my sister- in-law, who is my confidante : ahe dis¬ approves of her husband's strictness, and agrees with me, that I ought to take the earliest opportunity of going to Engelberg, and learning some news of your sister. She cannot approve of my having any intercourse with Wolfenrad in defiance of my brother's positive commands; but she has kindly con¬ sented to see him herself, and endea¬ vour to learn from him the good tidings respecting you, which I am too anxious to hear, to permit my waiting for them with patience. Whatever may be the consequence, I must be informed, and that speedily, how and where you are at present, and by what blessed means
Щ з «
тпеапв you esaped fhnrp the hands of yottr persecutorsV tmď írom ttie fiery deatli which menaced you in the Con¬ vene:
ţMB QF ŢH£ SECOND VOLJUMl!,
ΡβΐίΚβ by D. N. S11URY, Bervvick-Miucl, Soho.
