Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The witch of Ravensworth: a romance
'the W ITCH OF StAVEtfS WORTH. CHAPTER I. description of the Hag. Oto the extremity of a wild heath, known by the name of Ravensworth- M'oor, in the county of Westmoreland; and in or about the time of the second enisade, stood a miserable hut, consist- VOL, I. »
2 ing but of one open. to the rafters; which were \n fact nothing more than rough-hew n poles sloping from the wall, covered with soot, and curiously embossed with cobwebs. The chimney vvas little else tkan a large hole made in the side, for the smoke to issue ; and the window, if it could be called one, was so completely stuffed vvith hay, to keep out the weather, that but a few particles of light couid be seen through the aperture. Yet in tliis miserable hovel lived one solitary human being, an old woman named Ann Uanisay, but better known
3 by the utle of the Hag. She was httle, thin, bent almost double, and very aged; her fiesh was of a dark brown, aud so lean and skinny, that it bung in a variety of folds from her arms; her face wus wrinkled all over; her eyes small, and Jie sockets red, as if inflamed by disease, or anger; her head was long, and sunk between her shoulders ; her nose was prominent and crooked, besides that it was constantly smeared vvith snuff; her lips were pale, and her single tooth, for she appeared to have but one, stood projecting its black are over the front of her wide mouth: iu short, she vvas so horribly ugly, thai n 2
4 no one would come within two yards of her> when she approached. Such was the faithful portrait of the Hag of Ra¬ vensworth, The furniture of die cottage of dame Ramsay, was well suited to her mise¬ rable dwelling; it consisted of a straw mattress rolled up in one corner of the room, and covered over with a dirty and ragged rug, an antient carved wain¬ scot-table, and a three-legged stool, al¬ ways placed by the fire-side, and on which the old witch used to sit; a bro¬ ken piece of glass, of a diagonal form, with a small remnant of quicksilver,
a
placed upon the basso relievo of a part of the wall, its plaster mouldering with age; a pitcher, a birch-broom, and a large iron kettle, or cauldron, com pleted the inventory of the effects ir» this wretched hovel. 1 The Hag might be seen, sitting on her three-legged stool, the greater part of the day, bent nearly double, with her elbows fixed upon her knees, and her chin resting upon the props made for it by the palms of her hands. It was in this attitude that it was supposed Dame Ramsay designed her mischiev¬ ous machinations, as it was then that B 3
frequent unintelligible utterings were hestd to come from her lips, by such as happened to pass near; at these times, the witch appeared to be either threatening or blaspheming. Indeed there were not any who entertained the smallest doubt, of such appearances being caused by her being engaged in communications with the evil spirit. In the opposite corner, by the fire¬ side, was usually seen seated, and look- I ing the Hag full in the face, a large, meagre, slender grey cat, the constant companion of her evenings. The body 1 of this creature was of an uncommon X ! i 1 i 1
7 length, its neck and loins pinched in with w*nt, its eyes large and full, start¬ ing, as it were, from the sockets, its immense whiskers were constantly spread abroad, as to scent the blood which it was its delight to lap, its tall slender legs raise*! it above tho usual size of those animals, and its long ta¬ lons eould draw, with ease, the flesh from the tortured rat which had become its prey. A large black raven was aKo an inha¬ bitant of this miserable dwelling, aud might bo ^een hopping about the fbi-r, and flapping oneof its large jetty winps
the other being cut close to prevent its excursions on the heath* The Hag Ramsay was so much the terror of all the country round about, for several miles, that neither man, woman, nor child, would p^s near that part of the moor, on the borders of which was her dwelling, unless it were from absolute necessity, or from an ig¬ norance of the road. It was current among the poor people of the nearest village, that the witch of Ravensworth had come invisibly to take possession of the hut, which had been empty for a great many years before; the tradition
9 was, that nobody knew how she had come thither, nor from whence she eame; that she appeared all at once; that she had no father nor mother; that she had no relations ; that she had given herself the name of Ann Ramsay, but that she had never been known to be called by any other appellation, than that of tbe Hag. Many were the strange stories re¬ lated by the country people, of this extraordinary woman, and out of num¬ ber, the instances of her powers of witchcraft. It was stated by them, that innumerable children had been B 5
10 missed by their parents, in the neigh- hourhood of the Hag, and had never been seen or heard of afterwards. They were ready to swear to their belief of these infants having been carried away by the witch Ramsay, and destroyed. It was, besides, currently reported, and attested by many, that the Hag's incli¬ nation was to feed on the flesh of young babes; and the cries of little children, being whipped or tortured to death hy her, had been frequently heard, It was in vain that th* wardens of the forest had endeavoured to bring the witch of Ravensworth to justice: there
11 was not any thing, that could be esta¬ blished by certain testimony against her, although the presumptive proofs were strong enough to convince all It was necessary, however, that witnesses should support the circumstantial evi¬ dence, from their own knowledge of facts; such evidence was not, however, easily obtained. One man, who had ventured to bring a charge of witch- craft against her, was stated to have been seized with dreadful convulsions in the audience-chamber, at the very instant he was about to open his mouth, and soon after expired, without being able to give his testimony. Another, b G
12 who had spoken of her wicked arts, :' became suddenly possest of an evil spi- 1 rit; and a third * was reported to have been struck dumb by her potency in the black art. Her skill in magic was, indeed, stated to be such, that she could with ease transform and alter the features of man, woman, or child, in so great a degree, that they could not be known even by their nearest rela¬ tions, and that she could, if she pleased, •hange any*, who were weak enoagh to oflend her, into loathsome reptiles, sueh as bats, or efts, or lizards; in short, every one felt terror and horror, at the hare mention of the name of the Hag,
13 and the blood of the boldest of the vil¬ lagers turned chill at her approach. Many never recovered, who had met her < in the lane by accident, and some, who had been rash enough to visit her hut, had never been known to return. Even the air, surrounding the dwell ing of the hag, was pestiferous: snakes, vipers, and large loathsome worms, might be observed gliding through the rank weeds, and about the dunghill at her door; and, in summer days, a toad of the largest size might be seen bask¬ ing itself in the full sunshine at the threshold of her hovel.
14 The herds of cattle and sheep, which fed nigh the dwelling of fchewitch* were said to die daily of the rot; and round the h«t itself, not even a blade of grass would grow. The other cottages on the heath had little gardens attached to them, in which might be seen the rose and the jessamine, with the wholesome vegetable for the humble board of their owners; but the hovel of the Hag was a waste piece of ground, filled with hemlock, and other poisonous, rank, &nd unwholesome weeds; a stagnant pool was in the midst, over which myri¬ ads of the transparent-winged Libellulae might be seen darting from side to side.
15 The dearth around this spot was no other way accounted for, than that ^ was near the dwelling of a witch; while, though t^ a other cottages belonged to poor people, yet they were honest.
16
11 ^ ______....... ^ i CHAPTER IL An account ofthe Baron de la Braunch,
WiTHm the distance of a mile westward of the hut of the Hag, amidst an assem¬ blage of hills, and fells, shadowed on the side by an extensive forest, stood the castie of La Braunch accessible
M only by its draw-bridges, of which th. 4 s we^e seven in number* The scenery around was grand and majgitte, The thkk4>odied oak* and the tall fir, stood stately above the other treed; a fall from the rapid and impetu¬ ous river Eden, enriched the landscape, and the numerous flocks of sheep, which covered the surrounding fields, pre¬ sented, at once, a picture of the. wealth and happiness of the soil, The castle of La Braunch, had been built by one of tlie ancestors of the baron, about the time of the Norman
csnquest, and was the only part left,'of the pitiimony which 'he had received from his father, The baron de La Braunch was re¬ markable for th** height of his stature, which measured more than seven feet six inches, his limbs were formed with a fine^ though athl' % proportion, his eyes were Wg« *ull, and beamed with tbe strong glances of pride ahd defiance; his countenance was ferocious, and the smile which sometimes ap¬ peared, was little eke than the sarcastic expression of contempt, or of scorn; when he warked, he trod on the grotud
19 with a firmness, and dignity, that com¬ manded awe and respect. The baron de La Braunch bore his head with a lof f y superiority, above the other knights and barons of tbe court of Edward, The haron was the heir of a parent who had squandered away nearly the whole of his fortune, in the lavish and profuse expenses ^ of his household and table, and at play. The greater part of his princely fortune, had been lost at the game of chess, a favourite amuse¬ ment of the knights of the crusade,
%0 when relieved from the duties of the soldier # The baron was educated under the eare of the monk Velaschi* * The monk Velaschi was a perfect judge of the human heart, and knew all its folds and recesses, he was master of an uncommon share of prudence, and of reserve; none could decide upon his actions, which at times appeared noble and disinterested* but more fre¬ quently were enwrapped in a dark veil of mystery, that seemed to conceal some
21 malignant design-, or mischiefc Ve^ laschi was a scholar, md skilled in the cabalistic aft. - iThere were very few> but who, while they courted his friend¬ ship, trembled fotf fear of his displea¬ sure. They knew thfc hi^i favour m which he stood with the greatest barons of the time, and the means he had to do them service, or Velaschi would have been neglected, or shunned, as the ob¬ ject of mistrust and dread. Such was the monk Velaschi, and such the master of the baron, who, as he grew to manhood, became the slave of an inordinate ambition; he had, bow- ever, at an early age found the way to
22 bend his haughty and determined spiri* fo Ins views whether from the ingeni¬ ous precepts of the monk, or from his natirrai character, could not be easily developed; he had accustomed himself to srnile alike at the contempt, the e->teeai, or the hatred, of the worid; any means appeared to the baron de La Braunch as praiseworthy, which could le&d to the circumstances of fortune ; eowardiy, yet rash; vindictive, over¬ bearing, and ambitious, ytt, when it suited his purpose, kind ami courteot s; haughty to thosefrom whom he expected ?iothmg, and abject and mean enough to submit to any thing, from tho#e
■vi
whose protection and favour he wished to obtain. Not yet bold enough, of himself, to commit great crimes, but depraved enough at all times to be will¬ ing to commit them, whenever the fear of detection did not prevent him. Base, grand, mean, and proud; the baron showed those strung impulses and dispo¬ sitions of mind, which, well directed, might make htm famed, or infamous. Ii a word the baron de La Braunch was a complete and highriinishod Hypo¬ crite, and to such a degree of perfec¬ tion, through the diabolical maxims he had established, had he brought the artof dissimulation, that he could affect
24 mildness, sensibility, or forgiveness, at the very instant that his mind wa$ raging with the most discordant pas^ sions, enmities, and enormities of thought of which the human heart fe incapable. The baron de La Braunch wasa mas¬ ter in the art of deception, and a cow¬ ard at heart; * he had, nevertheless, owed many of the honours he had re¬ ceived, to the display of an undaunted prowess; for though mean enough to take every unfair, ur cruel advantage, yet he was, when compelled to fight, desperate in encounter, and had signa-
25 lized himself much at the holy war; hts figure was indeed of the noblest stature, his strength prodigious. The buckler which he bore, made of osier, was of uncommon dimensions, and on its sur¬ face was carved and painted a lion, en¬ raged, and springing on his prey. Hi;- casque, which vvas of gold, bore a crest of horse-hair dyed red, and the arms he carried were the javelin, and a pon¬ derous battlc-ax. Ia the field, at the tournament, and in the crusade, the baron de La Braunch vvas esteemed a brave and gallant knight. At home, antl among his vassals, he was known to he mistrustful, suspicious, and cruel, de~ VOL* U c
55 lighting in the combats of animals, in- sensible to pity, and regardless of the complaints and sufferings of the poor, The baron de La Braunch had never married, though a confnsed tale of his infidelity to a lady of the name cf Ger¬ trude was sometimes spoken of, but there were not any who seemed to be sufficiently acquainted vvith facts, to re¬ late how that matter had terminated. The baron, whose proud and over¬ bearing spirit could not brook the su¬ perior condition of other knights, suf¬ fered continually the most agonizing
27 znd severe reflections on the insuf¬ ficiency of his fortune to support the high rank he held. Thus, then, wealth vvas the great ob¬ ject of his ambition, and his lively and turbulent imagination was never at rest an instant, on a subject which he con¬ sidered so material to his happiness; he therefore promised to himself the full possessson of his darling wish, though to be purchased at any price. At length the brightest star in the baron's horoscope, shone forth in its full radiance; he savv, and found means to
c. 2
28
ingratiate himself into the favour of, lady Bertha, the relict of the brave and rich lord Edward of Martindale, who vvas killed in the second crusade, after sustaining the combat with two infidel chiefs for more than two hours and a half, and after having slain one of them and wounded the other. ** The lady Bertha was of a tall ma¬ jestic figure, her form every thing that could be imagined of symmetry and grace, her face was expressive of the purest chastity and dignity of mind, her eyes beamed with the glances of charity and mildness, her manners
29 were the most gentle and courteous, afKi when she spoke, the sweetness of her discourse was such, that every one dwelt in silence upon her utterance. The kdy Bertha appeared more an angel than a woman, and her surpassing virtues, ranked her among the first of the ladies of the British court. Lady Bertha had had one child, a male, by her late lord, and which was born a few months before the death of its father. This infant was the tender object of her care, and it was in con¬ sequence of the situation of the child, that she sought the friendship of the c 5
baron de La Braunch, who> under the colour of that sacred character, sough! to improve the suit he had in view* The baron however showed so much kind attention to the infant, and paid so high a respect to the lady Bertha, that she suffered his c t proaches without suspicion of the design he had formed the very first instant he had beheld her, and which lurked in his bosom, waiting only a fit opportunity for its execu¬ tion. The baron, versed in all the arts of falsehood, and skilled in persuasion,
31 found means, at length, to make the lady Bertha believe, that the love he professed for her was honest and sin- cere> that it was grounded on friend* ship and esteem, and, as the strongest inducement, urged that the best pro¬ tection she could give her child, would be to confide it to the care of a man of his high character, and consequence at court. The pride, and known prowess of the baron de La Braunch, kept at a distance the other numerous knights, wl. would gladly have made offers of tl. o s,s 1- to lady Bertha; he watched lier t>o v i
32 closely, aud attended so assiduously td her, that no opportunity was left for the less adventurous; the baron there¬ fore courted the lady Bertha unmolest¬ ed, and with success. A month had scarcely elapsed beyond the usual and proper time for ladies to mourn for their deceased knights, before the baron obtained a promise of her hand, nor before a day was fixed for the actual celebration of the nuptials,
33
CHAPTER III. Preparations for a Wedding-
The household of the Baron de La Braunch,, consisted of the following character's. Hathbrand, his esquire; a servile and cringing courtier, devoted to the interests of his master, and c ;>
34 uarped from every sentiment of ho¬ nesty and honour, by the promises and prospects held out to his ambition. The noble frankness required, and re¬ sulting properly from the nature of man, had yielded to a tacit and contemptible obedience. Doric, the old steward, purveyor and miuerintendant of the castle; honest enough, but so from mere habit, and the necessity required by his condition for that virtue. The mind of Doric was, besides the daily performanc- s of his dutv. constantlv engaged in t\\e * > * Oct stodv of the mathematics, with which
35 he confused himself at times to such a degree, that his disorder appeared very like drunkenness, Doric was for mea¬ suring every thing by the square and cube; and as the baron was much too lofty to look at any one of his house¬ hold below his esquire, or to observe their actions, old Doric was- left at liberty to study geometry and trigono¬ metry, as much as lit pleased. Tlie next servant of consequence, in the castle of La Braunch, was Jona* the butler, who, happily for him, had the art of being perfectly sober when he was drunk; that is, by habit, he
a 6 always appeared cool and collected, le ihe degree of his inebriation be vvhat it might. This presence of mind was ne¬ cessary in the presence ofthe baron, of whom Doric, as well as the rest of the domestics, stood very much in fear. Jonas never looked so wise, nor talked so wise, as when he had taken liberal po¬ tions of wine. The meanei dependants of the castle were numerous, antl the entire vassals of their lord. The female attendants were, old Ruth ^iq housekeeper, Guinefred the waiting-
37 woman, hired on purpose to attend the ladv Bertha, and numerous other do- mestics and servants, whose duty it would be to serve their new mistress, Guinefred was a virtuous and ho¬ nest domestic, which qualities the baron never suspected she possessed, as she appeared so perfectly humble that he thought her a creature fitted for the station he designed her, from the awe and respect with which she viewed her master, and the implicit obedience she paid to his inclinations and com- mandsv
38 The greatest preparations, ever known at the castle of La Braunch, were now making for the reception of the lady Bertha. Hathbrand was engaged in procuring from all parts of the king¬ dom the richest jewels, and ornaments ' of apparel, foi the bride of the baron his master: Doric, the old steward, did not neglect, on his part, to make the neces¬ sary searches and researches in the cellar, for the choicest wines; and the fiaggons were already filled with rhe- nish and burgundy. Old Ruth the hou^k^eper, had pre*
39 pare4 the most delectable fruits, arid pre¬ serves, and Guinefred, on her part, was engaged night and day, in making ready for flie display of the magnificent ward¬ robe, which the munificence of the ba; jn had ordained for his consort. Old Doric and Jonas were however the most rejoiced of the family, at the thpught ofthe approaching event; they had, for so many years, witnessed only the gloomy grandeur of the castle, and the reserve and haughty deme&. our of their master, that they were almost frantic a£ the change likely to take place
40 so soon. Thebaron*s manners, too, were altered to his domestics, he smiled graciously when he gave his commands, and mentioned the name of his intended bride, with such affection and respect, that they anticipated a house, and sea¬ son of joy. What made them most sure of this,- was, that the baron had given orders that the castle should be open for a month to every stranger, and that his tenantry and vassals should be entertained during that period. Few or none of these had experienced any munificence before, and the conjecture was, that the baron was, in truth, *
41 good and liberal master, but that hin wealth had been insufficient to the noble bent of his nature. The castle itself assumed a different appearance. The seven draw-bridges had been raised, and every gate was thrown open to the traveller, the pil¬ grim, and the minstrel. The bugles were sounded night and morning from the battlements, and the approach of the gay and happy time that was to ce¬ lebrate the nuptials of the baron de La Braunch was announced by the music of the clarion, the virginal, and the trumpet.
49
CHAPTER IV. The Bridal Day,
Early in the morning of the bricfo! day, the servants and vassals of the baron were industriously employed in preparing the Gothic hal] of the castle for the reception of their lady, Tho
43 trophies apd banners, the achievements of the baron, were displayed from the arched roof, and the swords, battle- axes, and lances, crossed in various devices against the wall. The tables were spread with the most sumptuous and noble fare, and the most delicious wines were ready to be served. Every domestic was dressed for the occasion: old Doric had studied a proper mathe¬ matical arrangement, in the disposition of the tables, chairs, and lights, and Jonas seemed to have made a reserve of intellect, sufficient to enjoy the gra¬ dations of the coming festivity.
44 The morning was fine, and the land¬ scape gay with the fresh verdure of the spring: Nature seemed pleased with the joy that was revived among the ho¬ nest villagers surrounding the castle, and as unwilling to disturb, by lowering clouds, or inclemency, their promised sports. About the hour of twelve at noon, when the shining beams of the sun gilded with their full radiance the tur¬ rets of the castle of La Braunch, the bride and her train of attendants were announced, by the distant sound of
45 the bugle in the still air, which was answered from the battlements, and at a distance, winding round the hills, were seen the cavalcade bearing the banners of the lady's former lord. The baron de La Braunch, preceded by minstrels, and attended by twenty knights, went out to meet the bride. Among the number of these were, Bertrand the bold, of gigantic stature, who bore die device of the blazing star on his shield, and whose helmet was of gold. Alerias a renowned knight of Gaul, of small stature, but so active, that by his agility and prowess he had discomfited six
46 knights at tournaments. Palmerin the accomplished, who spoke seven lan¬ guages, managed the horse with con¬ summate skill, and threw the lance from his hand with such dexferity that it was seldom known to miss. Athel- bert the strong, who could wield an iron bar of many cubits, with as much ease as a common spear. Roderic the brave, of the red cross, Roland the noble; and indeed all of them were knights famed in chivalry, and of great prowess. The bride approached, attended by twelve ladies, and followed by twelve
47 knights and their esquires, bearing in the midst of them, above their own de- vices, the banner which displayed the device of the fierce and terrible dragon destroyed by the hand of the father of the lady Bertha, who was a brave knight^ and who had defeated several champions of England and France at different tournaments. The Infant child, the son of lady Bertha by her late lord, lord Edward of Martindale, was borne on a litter on which was abed of the finest linen, co¬ vered with a canopy of rich silk, wrought with gold; three attendants on each
4S side, threw flowers, and sprinkled rich perfumes over the infant as it lay, at the same time the minstrels sung the melodies of joy; the servants and vas¬ sals of the late lord Edward followed the train. The trumpets and bugles sounded, when the two parties met, and the baron advancing his white courser to the pal¬ frey of lady Bertha, took his helmet from his head, and, extending his arm, saluted his bride with the grace peculiar to a courteous knight. The lady Ber¬ tha at the same time touching her fin¬ gers with her lips, and extending her
49 hand, received the baron % when at the side of his bride he turned his hotfse toward the castle, and his train joined that of his lady. Tlie domestic^ ofthe castle, who knew of tlie approach of the party, hy the sound of the trumpets, as they passed the draw-bridges, ranged themselves on each side the gothie hall, and the numerous tenantry without, rent the air with their rejoicings. The ceremony of the marriage took place in the chapel belonging to the VOL. I. D
SO castle, and was peiformed by father Yelaschi, who could not help view¬ ing the bride with admiration and esteem,
,ii ; .. . i i i^ g i
-LIIAPPER V. Tke !f\'ddhi£ Dinner. — Thv uinnrit*>d
Ones
The sounds of ihe cymbal, the clarion, and the trumpet, announced that the lmn>n and tho ladv Bertha were iu-n seated at the table. i> 2
■ / *J
The lady Bertha was on the right of the baron, clothed in white silk, her fine auburn hair bound vvith a fillet of odd-work; on her right shoulder vvas placed the escutcheon of the baron, and on the left that of her ©-.vn familv. The baron de La Braunch was incom¬ plete armour; he had a belt round him, on which were devices of frightful and terrible animals; his cloak, which was thrown over his shoulders, vv as-blue and cold, and a plume of ved feathers was in bis helmet,which was placed beside him ; he bore on his buckler the motto of his
53 father, who had often conquered at Palestine. It was, eo triompht. The lady of each knight was seated next her husband, sumptuously ar¬ rayed ; nor vvas there any thing that could exceed the grandeur and bril¬ liancy of this banquet. The gohlen n ses, which decorated the board, were each of them filled with th l richest Burgundy and Rhenish, and every cup was also of gold. The meats were of i, the most savoury and exquisite kinch, und the greatest care had been taken to provide for the noble guests every thing n 3
64 that was rare, and tlie produce of fo¬ reign climes. Delight and joy were upon every rountenance, and tfie minstrels played and sung their nio-^t popular ballads together, with some written in honour of the illustrious, bride, and which were received with nioturous nnnlause. * * i The windows and doors had beeu thrown open, to let in the soft breezes of the summer south wind ; and in the outer halls, were the vassals of the baron, regaling themselves with unusual festivity.
55 A delightful day added to the plea¬ sure of the scene. The guests at the baron's table were all in harmony with each other, and nothing was heard, but the gentle dialogue of courtesy and invitrtion. One seat only had remained unoc¬ cupied at tlie hoard, and one plate only was covertd. Some knight had ne¬ glected the invitalion, but that was a circumstance scarcely noticed by any present, and which did not at nil interfere with the festivity of the guests. D 4
50 At a moment when the conversation had had a pause, and vvhen every ear vvas engaged in listening to the sweet plaintive measures of a ballad sung by a minstrel, the harmony of the meeting was interrupted. A loud shriek was heard from the lower end of the table. Terror was in every face. The music stopped. The singer ceased his melody.
5? AU was surprise and terror. The vacant chair was filled. It was a wretched misshapen figure that occupied the seat. It was wrapped up in a black mantle and hood, which covered all but a pale meagre face, so ugly that no eye could look upon it. It had taken a golden cup from the board, and had raised it to its lips. D 5
58
It drank—not a health-—not a bless¬ ing,— It uttered a curse—a horrid curse:—■" Misery to the Bride." All eyes were turned at once, but for an instant only on the loathsome object. It kept its seat, It smiled. It was recognised. It was the Hag,
59 The lady Bertha, ^ oon as the im¬ precation came from the lips of the witch, fainted away in the arms of her attendants; while the baron, in a stern voice, that made tremble the foundation of the castle, demanded how the Hag had found au entrance to her presence, and, in a lofty tones ordered her in¬ stantly to depart. The Hag arose, and walked slowly from the table. In going out, the witch turned ronnd, and looked sternly at the baron.
D 6
Co The Hag burst into a loud convulsive laugh. She muttered some imprecations to herself. She withdrew. The Hag had no sooner left the hall than the beautiful face of day became overcast, large black clouds arose swift¬ ly from the horbon, and the big drops of rain beat in torrents against the gothie easements. The festivity of the guests vvas at an
61 end,—a pause of doubt, and of asto¬ nishment, continued for a considerable time.—It was in vain that father Ve¬ laschi used his pious ejaculations to overcome the impression the maledic¬ tion of the witch had made on the guests. The lady Bertha had withdrawn with her attendants, after receiving every consolation and encouragement the courteous manners of the company could suggest. The baron, immediately after his bride withdrew with the other ladies.
G2 scoffing at the interruption which liad occurred, poured out copious draughts of Burgundy, to enliven himself and his guests, which answered better to restore festivity than all father Veiaschi's pious exhortations. The recollection of the flag vvas drowned in plentiful libations, and loud and riotou-. mirth -uicreeded, in vvhich wa- lost everv other sensation ; and the ill-timed visit of the uninvited and unexpected guest, troubled them no more.
S3
CHAPTER VI. The baron recollects the circum¬ stances of the Hags intrusion and re¬ flects*
The next, dav, the baron withdrew to his closet, that he might recollect the circumstances of the Hags intrusion. There he gave a ^sious consideration to the mystery of her visit, and to the
64 nature of her imprecation. At first, indeed, in the natural fierceness of his teni]>er, and impetuosity, he would have dispatched the wardens of tho forest to have seized the old wretch, and to have brought her to immediate justice; he paused, however, and on reflection found reason to alter his mind. The intrusion of the Hag was an heinous offence, but the curse that had come fiorn her lips was not for him; he knew, indeed, that he ought, out of courtesy to lady Ber¬ tha, to make a parade of punishing the witch, but he had no desire to let it go further than mere threat; orders for her
6b apprehension were therefore issued, and countermanded with the same breath. The baron, however, soothed the dis¬ tressed mind of lady Bertha with every kind and endearing expression of love and affection, andassured her of hisdesire to punish and remove esery object that could give her uneasiness; somehow. notwithstanding this apparent prompt¬ ness to punish the offender, he cer¬ tainly entertained a secret desire to know more of her. Whether he con¬ templated the possibility of the Hag bein<* one day or other useful to him* t> •* or whether, being naturally superstitious,
06 he wished to be acquainted with the mystery of her visit, or with the secrets of her art, it vvas uot easy to judge; something however certainly constrained him from awarding to her the imme¬ diate punishment which his natural proud and impatient temper would have suggested in any other case. The baron used more than com¬ mon assiduities to overcome the 'im¬ pression made on the mind of his lady, by the mysterious visit of the witch; he indeed attempted to persuade her, that that wicked oki woman was mad, and that she did not know vvhat
67 she had said ; he took also a great deal oi pains to premiso to his attendants and domestics the fact of her insanity, and then artfully inquired of thern, theiv opinion as to the real or pretended m-ulness of the Hag, and which he was sure would; tlius prepared, bo congenial with his own, He took occasion, there¬ fore, to ask Hathbrand, his esquire, in the presence of lady Ikrtba, what he thought of theaffair?" Hathbrand," cried he, in a lofty, but courteous tone, " do tell us what vou know of this foolish eld woman whom the country people call the hag? is she not a maniacT
66 " TFiere can be no doubt of it, my lord," answered the suppliant Hath¬ brand. "Tell lady Bertha the stories which you have heard recounted of her/* Hathbrand was preparing a long recital. " Do not," said the baron, whisper¬ ing to him as lady Bertha walked to¬ wards tbe window, " do not say a woid of the supernatural powers of this woman, lest it should alarm your lady's susceptible mind, I would have the im-
f>9 pression of this disagreeable accident to wear away." The assiduous Hathbrand took the hint at once, and recounted only those things which served to establish the opinion of the' Hag's insanity, after which, the baron, having secured his point, cried out with a haughty tone, u For my own part, I think that this old wretch shouid be severely punished, and I shall give orders to the wardens of the forest to have her dragged hither.'* " Alas! do not let me see her," cried
70 the lady Bertha; I am terrified suf¬ ficient! v already, and tremble at the ** j ^ bare mention of her name; preserve me, blessed saints, from the conjurations of that wicked woman ! but pray, my lord, exercise no vengeance upon her, lest the poor creature should indeed be mad, all that I wish, is the love and favour of my lord and husband, and I will be happy, notwithstanding the imprecation of the hag. It is not, after all, in the power of the wicked to oppose the will of Heaven/ The baron, with a countenance of concern and comp!acency, entreated
the \ady Bertha to compose hex mind. "If it is your desire," cried he^ ft that the old witch------" " Witch!" repeated the lady Bertha, <( is she then a witch r' u The foolish ignorant people call her so," replied the baron carelessly, though chagrined enough at the inad¬ vertency ofthe expression, " but she is, in truth, only a poor childish old wo¬ man, who inhabits a hut on the heath, that no one would live in but herself. " Well, my lord, answered the lady ii
72 Bertha, I thank you for your courtesy to me, and for your regard for my hap¬ piness, but unless we were sure that she spoke in malice, w from the wicked inspirations of the devil, let not this poor creature be molested. She may be mad, let her not, therefore, my lord, be molested. The baron bowed his head, and looked at the obsequious Hathbrand, in a way so significant, that he understood it and withdrew, The baron had now gained his point.
v
73 The Hag was not to be disturbed, but he grew every day more and more restless in his mind on the subject of her visit, its motives, and the meaning of her malediction § he was superstitious enough to believe in the power of the spirits of darkness, because he trusted that those powers could bestow on their favourites the gifts of wealth, and of ambition. If, indeed, they had not beeu thought to possess those powers > he would perhaps have ridiculed the super- stition, which on that account he per¬ mitted to enslave his mind. It was, it is true, mixed up with terrors of the future punishment of crimes, but the VOL. I, K
baron, whose mind vvas constantly oc¬ cupied in plans of enjoyment, and se¬ curity for the pleasures and ambition of this world, gave no time for the con¬ templation of the destinies which one day or other await the bad. The child Edward, tlie son of the lady Bertha by her former lord, advan¬ ced hourly in beauty and comeliness, he wu-5 now about fifteen months old, and extremely engaging/ Nearly the whole of the time of the latly Bertha was taken up with her ten¬ der care of this infant, for she vvas u
75 kind and affectionate mother, as well as a noble and accomplished lady. . It now happened, however, that the lady Bertha gave some promise of a child to her present lord, the baron, and which promise became daily strength¬ ened by the appearances her shape evinced. The baron de La Braunch, as it ioav be supposed, was well pleased at tin- possibility of its proving to be a male; for though the rich demesne-* of the late lord of Martindale would descend to the child Edward, yet the baron B 2
76 thought that it might happen that the child would die, and he being the next heir, in right of his lady, the whole fortunes of either house would descend to the promised offspring of his loins; such were at times the flattering, proud, and brilliant hopes, which occupied the mind of the baron, he managed nevertheless to govern his temper ad¬ mirably towards the Httle Edward, nay, he even at times caressed the growing object of hm hate.
77
* CHAPTER VII. The domestics? account tf the ap¬ pearance of the witch, with their re¬ flections thereon*
The appearance of the witch at the dinner had had a wonderful effect on all the servants, they would not any of them venture alone into the apart¬ ments, and their conjectures about the £ 3
rs v; U of the lh<r vu-re ually curious, liny nss.su'ul Ik r denunciation into a ct,ne on the whole family, aud each 1 <gan already to discover in themselves the effects of her malice. Old Doric uas the fir-^t to declare, that, by the moamrementof his doublet, he was poi^ned, and had increased sensibly many de^Kc? in hulk ; Jonas, too, frit i xtra* sdinary efiects, and had, since the v rit of the Hag, worn away in an **qual ratio with the increase of his friend. The maids also felt uncommon symptom*' and each be^an to calculate on their approaching dissolution. Jonas, however had recourse to spirits to drive
ro away tiie «oicere^s, w hich tbey did so very cvnqdetely, thathe was perfectly persuaded, by the time ni<;ht arrived, that his feaiM were groundless and that he enjoyed the same state of health as before, Nor was Doric without his means of consolation : he applied to the mathematics, and as he eould not find any thing like the demonstration that the sides of a right-angled triangle are equal, in his mied, respecting the Hag's infcinal quJ./riefUkm , he esta¬ blished the proportion in h'.sur.nci that shewas actually mad; ergo, a.:y body mu*>t ke mad \\\ia th .y^Li her a vviuh, and that il did not ss-tp/uv any to;.j-.rcr , E 1
BO io fmd out that she was only a poor Ud woman* Notwithstanding, however, the self-re¬ conciliations jf these ingenious domes- ties, after the battle of their opinions in their own minds, they nevertheless, in their sober and thinking moments, used to dread the consequences of the Hag's interview at the castle; and these senti¬ ments of consternation were daily kept uo by the country-people at market, who never failed to produce evidence diat very nearly shook the logic of old Doric himself.
$1
CHAPTER VIH. The Birth of' a Son.
The time approached fast for the ac¬ couchement of the lady Bertha. The, bugles sounded only the softest notes from the battlements, the drums were muffied, and the watch walked tlieir E 5
$2 rounds gently through the courts ofthe castle. At length the time arrived. One night the domestics of the cas¬ tle were awakened, and their lady vvas safely delivered of a boy, to the un¬ speakable satisfaction of the baron. The next day, the bugles sounded cheerfully from the turrets, and couriers were dispatched round the country, with the glad tidings, to the different knights who vvere in friendship with the baron. Nor vvas that proud lord neglectful of
83 conveying the news to the king, which he did with his own hand. The baron dc La Braunch viewed this infant as the firm guarantee of his future good fortune in life; the more however, he reflected on this rising pro¬ spect of honour and of wealth, the more, strong grew his enmity to the little Edward. Lady Bertha, on the other hand, was so rejoiced at the birth of an infant whieh promised to htr.the in¬ creased affection of her lord, that her assiduous regard for her former child became divided t she loved the httle Edward still, yet the pretensions ot K 6
84 that infant to the regards of its mother, were, in part, superseded by a claim of a more immediate and necessary atten¬ tion. The baron de La Braunch already gave notice of the intended preparations for the christening of the infant, vvhich event promised another day of festivity to the domestics at the castle, and to the numerous tenantry of the surround¬ ing country.
85
CHAPTER IX.
Tlte Preparations for the Christening,
The most officious and busy on this occasion, as well, indeed, as ou all others, was old Doric, the steward, and purveyor of the castle; he rightly con¬ jectured, that an increase of family
86 would, by arithmetical progression, ne¬ cessarily inter an increase of the stock of provisions; and he took care to lay in enough to have served the household for a month. Ranetrude wa- not inactive ; she was employed in preparing tlje splendid decorations of the bed of the infant, and the raiment in wlheh it was to be clothed ut the font. Jonas was as much pleased with the promise of more festivity; to say the truth, he resisted every thing like du!-
ness, or melancholy, and was never so happy, as when every body was «o too.
88
CHAPTER X. The Christening.
The day of the christening at length arrived.
Numerous guests were invited. Father Velaschi was sent for; the
89 minstrels again prepared their harps for the songs of joy and festival, and the sumptuous board was again spread vvith the choiceit delicacies. The gates of the castle were thrown open, a train of knights and their ladies appeared, passing over each of the * seven draw-bridges, but the baron had, on this occasion, more illustrious visi¬ tors than on the former. The prince Ethelred honoured him with his pre¬ sence, and the princess Argalia, with the white hair, the most renowned beauty at court, had signified her inten¬ tion of becoming one of the sponsors.
Father Velaschi arrived in time io perform the holy ceremony of bap- tUrn, The most splendid entertainment was served np in the hall, on this occasion, and the baron and iady Bertha were seated as before, at the head of the table, whe>c both of them did honour to their illustrious guests by their courtesy and attention. The infant, wrapped up in a mantle of gold cloth, on which was the escut¬ cheon of the baron, was shown to tbe company, and received tho caresses
pi of the princess Argalia, and of the other ladies, who were delighted with the opportunity of fluttering tlw Jwiw* aud ambition of the baron. The hour of dinner passed over with¬ out any interruption of the harmony of the guests, and the news of the chapel having been lighted up for the cere¬ mony, was received with general de¬ light. At length the party arose from the table, and the ladies, attended by their knights, passed through the long avenue from the hall of the c^tlo to the oratory.
91 Tl.ro. targe wax-tapers, in golden CMidlc-sli. k», stood before the altar, nnd Eeven catuen filled with burning AwikiiiMnM, diffuted th«irodoriferc-« pcrAitnci.
I
s$>
WTB^P
CHAPTER XL
The Font
Father Velaschi was employed in the holy preparations for the baptism, the vespers of the virgin Mary, were re¬ peated, and the hymn of the holy sacrament, Corporis mysterium* sung;
94 the attendants vvere dispatched to bring the infant. Some time had elapsed, when pre senlly a horrid scream was heard. Terror was in every face. Opposite father Velaschi, at the font, stood a figure wrapped up in a dark mantle, It held the intiint in its arms, and, with a maiieioiii grin, attempted to cross xU forehead with the holy water,
95 It vvas the Hag, The lady Bertha uttered a dreadful shriek, and fi/.l prostrate on the floor of the chapel. The baron advanced a lew steps, but the witch, seizing the child by the arm, held it up in a menacing attitude, as if she would, on being interrupted, dash the innocent to the ground. The baron, however, seized the arm of the witch. The Hag resigned her prey.
$6 It was delivered to the women. Father Velaschi uttered a prayer. Benedietns Devs* The baron with a stern voice de¬ manded the reason of this second in¬ trusion, and in feis rage ordered the hag to be seized. Several of the knights' would have prevented ber departure, but the witch placing her withered hand on the breast of Velaschi, the monk involuntarily gave way and suffered her to pass.
07 The Hag smiled, with a look of de - fiance that showed the whole of her one tooth, and mumbled to the baron, a*- she went forth; <( When thou hast need of the Hag, thou shalt seek her." The baron revolved the sentence in his mind. Father Velaschi was at prayers. The lady Bertha was, with the at¬ tention of her attendants, restored to herself. vol. i. r
9» She had taken the infant in her own % arms. She wept over it. . The dreadful perturbation this acci¬ dent had produced, prevented, for some time, the ceremony of baptism from taking place. It was at length permitted to go on; Father Velaschi read the Oremus —he approached the font—he blessed the in¬ fant, which at the desire of the baron, was christened Hugo. The hymn, Lads Creator Opt Ime, was sung*
<& The guests returned to the supper- table, when the baron gave orders that the draw-bridges should be raised, that every stranger might be excluded. The night, therefore, passed without any further interruption, and the lady Bertha, as well as the whole company, were prevailed on to believe that the witch was mad.
v 2
%w
CHAPTER XII. The rejections of the Baron on tfhe, Hag's second intrusion. The next morning, the baron took an opportunity to ruminate alone, in his garden, on the remarkable words of the Hag; u When thou hast need of the Has, thou shalt seek her."
101 He considered the sentence of the witch, partly as the expressions of re¬ sentment, and partly as an invitation, and knowing the wickedness of his own heart, began to think that he was a fa- vourite of the witch, and that she would readily assist any mischievous design he might entertain, against the lady Bertha, or her child Edward, against whom his ov*,a dislike grew stronger every day, for he suffered all that misery of apprehension, which painted the probability of the chikrs living to succeed to the rich demesnes of his father, lord Edward of Martin-
f 3
10$ dale^ now enjoyed by himself, in the right of his marriage with lady Bertha, and to which, in case of the infant Edward's death, he and his offspring would succeed. On the subject of the child Edward* therefore, the baron vas ever restless and disturbed; he found that he could not altogether wean the affections of lady Bertha from that infant, delighted as she was with her second child, and desirous to show the offspring of her it present lord every tender mark of maternal affection, yet she could not
103 altogether forsake the little Edward, who was an engag.ng and sensible child, and the image of his father. Now the baron de La Braunch, al¬ though bold iu his carriage, and like a lion ia the fight, was superstitious in the highest degree, and trembled at the thought of supernatural intelligence, which might inform him of bad fortune, though he longed to know the secrets of futurity i he ^ould not account for, nor reconcile to himself, the second appearance of the. Hag, and began to think-that she must have meant some¬ thing beyond what her words implied. r 4
104 In short, though an abject old woman was beneath even his contempt, yet, when that old wretch was believed to bo a witch, he entertained some fears of her resentment, as well as a secret desire to know more of her. The baron, therefore, took an oppor¬ tunity, the next morning, to walk to* wards the heath; he was careful in making more particular inquiries con¬ cerning that extraordinary old woman, and found both his hopes and fears partly realized concerning her; it was told him that she was so wondrously skilled in magic, that she could divine
105 every thing that would happen in future, to those who applied to her for infor¬ mation, and that her prediction never failed; that she could raise up the spirits of the departed, that she could give riches and honour to any on whom she pleased to bestow thera, that she never forgave an insult, and that, hav¬ ing the power, by means of the fiend she worshipped, to torment and perplex, she could produce, by the power of her art, any accident of mischief or evil th?t she pleased. The baron, on the recital of the ca- f 5
io6 pabilitics of the witcli, began to be sorry that he had treated her with so much harshness and contempt; yet, as he could not have done otherwise, from respect to lady Bertha, he reconciled that circumstance to his mind, and thought only how he conld make her some aton :wnt* The baron entertained thoughts that the Hag might be useful to him, and he returned to the castle, occupied vvith schemes and fancies, apparently as wild, as they vvere in their design mon¬ strous, and wicked. Among others,
io7 the most extraordinary thathe proposed to himself,, vvas a visit to the Hag, at her dwelling, that he might know more of her from herself, and judge of her potency in the art of magic.
i 6
108
semi- iti 1 , "iirj. n ..... ..pi. ... mi i ..... , _ , _. , „ ■-,, CHAPTER XIII. The Illuminated Castle.
In an almost impervious part of the forest, near a place known by the name of the Fell of Ravensworth, and close to the dwelling of the Hag, stood an antient castle, almost entirely iu ruins,
and uninhabited by any living creature, which indeed was partly owing to a tradition of its being frequented by devils, who held within its walls a nightly rendezvous, and partly to its being so near the dwelling of the witch. This castle had formerly been inha¬ bited by the family of La Braunch, but had been forsaken for a great many years, on account of its decay, and the superior accommodations of riie other residence; it was not in the recollection of any person then living, that it had been occupied.
lio It was attested by numerous inha¬ bitants of the villages adjoining the heath, and those of. the most discreet, and sober, that at night this castle be¬ came sometimes suddenly illuminated; that music was often heard at those times, and that, in an instant, the lights seen through the casements of the turrets would be extinguished, and every thing left again in total dark¬ ness, No one of the villagers around would venture to develop this mystery. There was not any who vvould approach near enough, day or night, to convince
Ill their own senses, nor indeed could they very well reach the castle, as the way to it was overgrown with underwood and no path whatever presented itself. The baron, however, had formed frequent resolutions to himself, of go¬ ing to explore this antient dwelling of his ancestors ; he might, indeed, have easily caused the ground to have been cleared, by the help of his numerous tenantry, but he had been always di- verted from that object by circumstan¬ ces and events that more immediately claimed his attention.
It Was now, however, that the baron began to think seriously of a visit to this deserted spot, where he thought that he might possibly find some curi¬ ous relics* of his family. It was re¬ ported to contain a valuable gallery of old and curious arms, spears, and bat¬ tle-axes, with the armour of its antient possessors. The baron considered that he could include in his journey a visit to the Hag, whom his curiosity, and the an¬ swers he had received to his inquiries, made him more and more desirous to
113 see. He therefore gave orders to his esquire, Hathbrand, to be in readiness to attend him, and chose the next evening for the purpose. In the meantime the baron occupied himself in the consideration of the questions he would propose to the Hag; as ambition and riches were uppermost in the barons mind, and the constant objects of his contemplation, it may be easily conjectured that his intended inquiries had that tendency. The object of disgust to the baron, and the stumbling-block to his future
greatness, was the little infant Edward. " Cruel circumstance/ cried the baron, as he revolved the future probable events of his life in his mind, ** cruel circumstance, that that little brat should, in a few more years, strip me and mv house of its wealth and lustre; that a child of lord Edward of Martin- dale should dim the greatness of the family of La Braunch, and that my own offspring should be left poor and dependant. Wherefore," said he, "did I marry lady Bertha, but to obtain the splendour and advantages of wealth ; I was not enamoured with her, 1 had no true regani, It was t j answer the pur-
115 pose of improving the fortunes of my antient house, that in my mmd I con¬ sented to this alliance ; I wished forthe grandeur-of riches, that I might display tbe habiliment* and equipage of wealth, that I might have tha notice of the king.—Yes, I will inquire, of the Hag, mv future destinies—I will ask if the little urchin is to live ; perhaps it is m the book of fate that the child may die soon; the poor little thing may go to heaven, and then the baron de La Braunch will he undisturbed in the en¬ joyment of his wealth and grandeur, yet may not this witch tell me some¬ thing that may contradict those hopes ?
116 Yes, but my eager curiosity will not suffer me to rema, > in a state of un¬ certainty, when the information of which I stand in need for my happiness, may be so easily obtained. The baron, indeed, could not dismiss the subject from his thoughts; and, though coward enough to dread the chance of a disappointment from the Hps of the beldam, yet so strong was the desire of visiting her, that it ob¬ tained the ascendancv, and he vvas de termined to risk the inquiry ; his tem¬ per had become, of late, violently irri¬ table, in consequence of these sugges-
tions and fear p woiu.n 's yi c m.nd; for though the baron was ahvays haughtv, proud,and imperious,yet, as he disdained to speak at all to his vassals, they were out seldom troubled with his anger; almost every command was communi¬ cated through his esquire, Hathbrand, and he found it his interest to bear all the insulting irritations of his lord; he was alwavs obsequious, and, as he never presumed to answer, the storm necessarily died away. Lady Bertha was possessed of that mild dignity of character, which, though it had not obtained her the love of the
baron, yet preserved her from incivility; indeed the baron was too accomplished a knight, to behave with rudeness to a lady, much more to a lady of rank; the strong workings of his mind, and of his passions, never betrayed him iuto my indecency of behaviour.
H9
*mm**ff~!!m U ____ " ' * ■ IJ ™ ' iS l ! !! ?Ji: '* ■■ ".- ' - l ; ,l "-" * 1 ! l , J * "i" 1 " »'* !! '*' JJL1„ J ST CHAPTER XIV. The Baron's first visit to the Hag.
It was about the hour of seven in the evening, in the Autumn of the year, when the baron set out for the habi¬ tation of the w itch; the broom on the heath was in full blossom, and its yei-
120 low heads forr * .. »-.iful and pictu¬ re que landscape, which received a se¬ cond tinge from the rays of the sun descending towards the horizon. The baron de La Braunch, attended only by his esquire, Hathbrand, crossed the heath, and approached near the dwelling of the Hag; aud heieabouts he thought proper to dismiss his com¬ panion ; he did not, it is true, much re¬ lish the idea of an interview with this minister of the devil, alone, but he knew the wicked purposes of his heart, and the end he would effect by it; he knew that he dared not trust any living erea-
121 ture to be a witness to the conversation, and to the questions that he might de¬ mand of the witch. It was almost dark, and the smoke from the hut of the witch ascended in a black column from tbe cavity made in the ride of it for a chimney. The door, too, was open, and from thence also issued smoke, but of a lighter hue. The baron had desired his attendant to wait within about an hundred yards of the spot, under a pretext that he wished for an hour s solitary meditation in the forest, voh* i* G
123
When the baron approached nigh the door of the Hags dwelling, he dis- covered her vvithin, stooping over a large kettle, or, cauldron, and stirring some materials with a stick. It was from this cauldron that the smoke issued; aud, on the baron's entrance into the hut, he thought the vessel seemed to contain large pieces of hu¬ man flesh; had not his heart been hardened b}^ the frequency of his cruel imaginations, he would have shuddered at the sight; he did not feel, however, any sentiment of the kind, though an unaccountable*dread of the supernatu¬ ral intelligence of the witch took such
123 hold on him, that he would gladly have withdrawn from the settled purpose of his heart, had he not been noticed by the witch, who had observed him and mumbled forth a welcome from her skinny lips, as she skimmed the broth from her kettle with a large wooden ladle which she held* " Aye aye cried she as he approached, I thought that you would come, well what is it y^xx want with me ? The baron attempted to answer her with all the courtesy he was master of, * G 2
124 yet, the malignant smile of the witch, the sight of the cauldron, the wretched¬ ness and misery of the place, the horrid appearance of the half-starved cat, thirsting as it were for blood, and screaming with hunger at his approach, the one-winged raven, altogether struck him with a panic of terror ; a cold palsy seized his limbs, his majestic frame trembled, and he viewed the witch with a superstitious dread and horror. The baron's first inquiry of the Hag was the way to the castle in the wood.
125 » I would go thither, Hag/* cried he, " thou canst direct me to the path/* ** Thou mayst spare thyself the trou¬ ble of that visit, replied the Hag, its turrets are all that thou wilt be able to see of it, the path to it has for these many years been choaked up by the growth of brushwood and underwood ; besides, what wouldst thou do there ? none venture near it, it hath ev\\ «pm ts haunt it." '« And with such," replied the baron, '< thou art, Hag, unless report belies thee, well acquainted ; but fear not me, c 3
126 I wilt not disturb thee, Hag—thou shalt have my protection/' " Rather say that thou needest mine," answered the witch* u Thine!!* u Mine, baron ; I know the purposes of thy heart, and am prepared to serve thee." fC Art thou indeed ?" « Yes—but thou wilt not favour the poor Hag/*
127. « By the------* « Beware of oaths------No------thou didst command that I should leave thy presence" "Why didst thou choose, then, so untimely a visit—And then thy impre¬ cation/* « It will happen/' " Lady Bertha —..... « Will be wretched." £ 4
128 " Show me, Hag, these things/ u What wouldst thou give to know them ?" " Ask what thou wilt, of money or favour; thou shalt have rich gifts from my munificence, show but the secrets of futurity/* " I want not riches/ 44 What is it, then, Hag, that thou wouldst have ?**
The Hag paused.
1 \ .-•I 129 " Say," repeated the baron. " Blood!" was the answer of the Hag. » Blood!! r * The food of mischief, of calamity, of agony, of distress. " Execrable wretch!" (exclaimed the baron. aside)—Well, Hag, show me. some - specimens of thine art, produce me, if thou canst do it, one of the powers of darkness whom thou servest. Show me the treasures of the world, g 5
130 how to attain, and keep them ; con¬ vince me that thou canst gratify the vast appetite of my ambition--ar4 then thou shalt not want for food—show me now—I come prepared for horrors." " Another time," answered the Hag, « at present I am busy; wheu thou next coroest, I will unfold to thee the crets of my art, but thou must be
se stout.
" Fear not me" returned the baron, « Well, then, visit me," replied the Hag, " when the moon shall haye made
131 her conjunction with the planet Saturn.. It is but a few days to wait for that configuration—Come to me when the high tide of mischief is up—When the fiery vapours dance along the ground at rnidnight—When the envenomed toad is lighted by the glow-worm, to its damp chamber, beneath the leaves of the purple violet—Then the time will be near, the spectres will abound upon the earth, the demons and fiends wjll be active, strong, and numerous, and alert in mischief, then mayst thou |ippe fof the accomplishment of th* wishes of thine heart/' 6 6
132 £< I will attend thee, Hag, 1 * returned ihe baron* " Be it so. M Immediately a thick cloud of black and noisome smoke ascended, and filled the cabin—The Hag was lost to the sight of the baron, and it was with difficulty that he found the door, al¬ though it was in his reach ; he was in the open air again; he crossed the heath, towards the spot where he had left Hathbrand, he looked round about him; he saw no one; yet he fancied that he saw shades, which flitted gastr
133 him, and were lost in th« ,) ; gh broom that grew on the common ; he feit ter¬ ror, but a malicious satisfaction filled his breast; he halloed Hathbrand ; a voice answered; it was his esquire. " It is dark," cried the bason, *' let ¥s go to the castle.* u Very dark,** replied Hathbrand. There were some remains of terror in the face of the fearon. The moon, now and then, burst from behind the huge black clouds, that
134 travelled swiftly by, and indicated the approach of a storm. They travelled onwards; the castle appeared at a distance. During thi* absence of the baron, the lady Bertha via* engaged, watching over her infants ; it was late, she was !* ay in spirits : she looked at her children, and righed ; she kissed first the infant Ed¬ ward ; she thought first of poor Edward who luul not a father, and then she kUsed Hugo; she sung theui to sleep, it vvas with a ballad.
135 The wind Mew high, the night wa* du\k. AsyetuppoiirMno ehe* ring ray, The fci-'iimtm of the shipwreck**! bark De^wiring wuit ti/ appiouch of day. Poor^Ittr; views, with frantic eyts While the Mack cloud* tlu* skv deform, Kent sail* and tackling, drifting nigh, Tin 1 horrid trophies of tho &tmm. And nowovith cruet ilorbt> oppro^ She st-t-s otic ln*!i\r the billow'* io;ir ; She ruub lu cltop hnn to her bm^t- It wa* htr l-2.;*ar*l rtnch'd the shore The bugle sounded ; the walch-word was ^iven and the drawbridges raised; the baron entered. The lady Bertha tried to recover her spirits; she could
136 not—she received him with a heavy heart. , She seemed to have some super¬ natural evidence pressing on her mind, of the baron's having been in some mysterious danger. The baron retired to rest, thoughtful and.gloomy. After the visit the baron had made to the witch, he grew sullen and reserved, his time was usually passed in his libra¬ ry, or in parading, for hours, the tur- * rets of his castle; he now gave a loose to the imaginations of his heart, and dwelt incessantly on the great object of his anxiety, the secure possession and enjoyment of the wealth he had in pro-
137 ^pect, which vvould place him on an equality vvith princes; he knew that expedients must be Used ; he knew that the Hag only cciuld help him ; that she would readily do it, from ttw natural enmity she had to the good; he only hoped that she was equal in wickedness to his purpose, for he had contemplated the past events and actions of his life, and he preferred the agression of sue* cessful crimes, that might lead to the accomplishment of his hopes, to the sad work of repentance, when enjoy¬ ment was so near at hand.
The baron was in this mood one day
138
when the little Edward came lisping to his knees ; the baron stampt, the infant fell to the ground; the baron recollected himself, took it in his arms, fondled it, and gave it to tfte attendant who was by; " I was in thought," cried the baron, " poor little wretch, take it h$uoe* M
139 CHAPTER XV. The Condition of lady Bertha* Lady Bertha, who was altogether un¬ suspicious of any change in the baron, must liave "been ina^vi.'-'-ibl©;, if sh*^ had not noticed the gloom that hu.ig over the brow of her lord ; yet she was suf¬ ficiently discreet not to interfere with *r the subject of his thoughts* She did
140 indeed, one day, ask if any thing had happened to cause him uneasiness, but the answer that he gave her was, such, us tt, prevent any further questions, and riie was too obedient to hii humour! to press a subject that was disagreeable. The baron de La Braunch, though he began now evidently to neglect his no¬ tice of the child Edward, yet caressed his own infant with all the becoming tenderness of a parent. This circum¬ stance of affe«tion, in a great measure, eased the mind of lady Bertha ; she gathered from thence, that the baron still loved her, and that he would con-
Ul tinue to do so, while that little pledge of their regard was in existence. She was, besides, happy in the attachment and obedience of her domestics, who adored their mistress; Ranetrude, who was a sensible and lively companion, would not suffer her mistress to de¬ spond, nor permit any little circum¬ stance of the barons irritability of tem¬ per to press on her mind, she amused her as much as lay in her power by her pleasant discourse, entertaining stories, and the ballads she had learnt, and could sing with sweetness and melody* These endeavours of the hand maid of
142 lady Bertha to amuse, were kindly ac¬ cepted* The little Edward was the favourite of old Doric and Jonas. The first per¬ suaded himself that he would come to be a great mathamatician: that he sliould have, some day or other, the pleasure of teaching him how to solve a problem, and of inaking him com¬ prehend the elements of Euclid. Old Jonas was delighted, on the other hand, with the childs regani for a drop of Tlhenish, with which by the bye the .old butler never failed to supply him slily,
143 when out of the sight of his lady mo¬ ther, and of the attendants. On these occasions Jonas used to place the boy on his knee, and sensible in his mind that wine was good for every thing, and for everybody, he used to pour it down its throat until it went fast asleep in hi*. arms, by which consequence the ser¬ vants used to say that the little Edward was never so happy and quiet as with old Jonas. The baron de La Braunch used now to pass the greater part of his time in hunting. The truth was, that he wished
U4 to amuse away the interval of time which had to come before the day of his visit to the Hag, for which he was very eager. He had fixed his mind on prying into the vast volume of futurity, and wished to know even the bad, as well as good, which awaited him;-he had, too, seen the monster, and had be¬ come acquainted with her blood-stained thoughts, he had no longer a doubt of her supernatural powers, her dwelling, her appearance, her language, altogether proved her to be a witch, he was flat¬ tered by his superstition, since he be¬ lieved that the powers of darkness had
145 the gifts at will to bestow, for vvhich he longed with so insatiate an appetite. It w T as not the baron's disposition to look further than to the enjoyments of this hfe.
VOL. I.
146*
CHAPTER XVI. The Barons second visit to the Hag* The time approached for the baron's second visit to the Hag—he had at¬ tended carefully to the signs. The day arrived; the hour; it was about the rising of the moon. The evening was gloomy; a mist overspread the heath, and the setting sun had left no gleam as the promise of its return.
147 The lady Bertha was low, and r \h~ turbed in mind. She had isut riept the night before: her rest had been broken by frightful dreams. She dreamed that the baron stabbed her to the heart. She screamed and awoke: " What," said she to herself, ** could make me dream anv thing so horrid' the baron loves me, and treats me with respect; dreams are idle things, and it is wrong to brood over them." Such were the wise reflections of kdy Bertha, and it vvas not until the baron retired for the evening, that she grew melan¬ choly. The good have always a remedy on n 2
141 these occasions; she flew to prayer, and to practise those duties which are al- vtay* pieasmcr to the Deity, the duties of a tender and affectionate mother; riie had fow.ken her fears as ungrateful to Pi orid< nee. The hi ron left the cattle, attended onlv by his e-snircs H 1 u^cd the «amc ]irecauti(»i.-i a^ before. When he ap- u-'oached the hut, hv ih^irtd tint he :i;i^'iit proceed alone. Tliy baron ob^erve<l a lijjit in the hovel: it wai o*dy the glimmer ofa fire, which, every now »»:d then, flashed and d; ippcand. He lifted up the latch, and entvicd.
He found the Hag 'alone; she was seated on the three-legged stool, by the ■fire-side. It was a considerable time before she spoke. The cat mewed, and walked slowly round the room. The raven flapped his loni; wing. The Hag sat doubled, with her lip* chattering, and hor mouth working. She seemed busy ii> some conjura¬ tions. The baron stood with hib arms folded, observing her. He addresr-cu hris The Ha^ answered not a word. n 3
160 He addressed her again. She made no reply, lie addressed her the third time. At length she looked him full in the face; (i So you are punctual/' " I am ever so/' replied the baron. u Yes, I know, vvhen great lords want any thing they can be punctual/' i{ Thou art out of temper, IIag. M i( It is my way at times; thou must not be offended. I have to deal with fiends, and devils; and sometimes they cross and vex me. I am but a servant/' " h it a fit time for our purpose?" li So. It is too soon : the gloom of night, the time of vapours must first
151 come on. Nothing is yet abroad but what is wholesome. You are too eager, sir; but it is ever so. The most unruly of the devil's subjects is man/' The Hag arose; she tottered to one corner of the hut where was a bundle Of WOcd. She drew forth a ragged splinter; she put it into the five* The point of the splinter kindled into a flame; she lighted with it the wick of an iron lamp, that stood on the floor. She seated herself again, "Is it vet dark?' 1 cried the Hag. The baron looked from the door. The gloom of night had come on. a 4
153 " It i& dark," answered the baron, The Hag arose, " Now, then, we wrill begin our work. Are you staunch ?" cried the witch, " I disdain fear," replied the baron. "Aye, aye, it is mighty well," re¬ plied the witch ; c * it is mighty well; it is mighty well." The baron was bold; but the grim visage of the Hag, illumined only by the pale glimmer of the lamp, struck him with disgust and horror. "Arc you ready," cried the witch, " to witness the terrors of this niffhtr"
153 " I am prepared," answered the ba¬ ron. " Now, then, follow me," cried the witch, holding tbe iron lamp in her hand. « Follow." " Whither ?" a No matter; thou needst not fear. Thou art under the protection of the Hag." fC I can defend myself from barm, 1 * cried the baron, drawing a massy sword from his side. " Ha, ha, you are wonderfully bold," cried the Hag, with a short convulsive laugh, " you are wonderfully bold ; but you will see none but friends/* n 5
154 " I am ready to follow thee; lead the way/* At these words the Hag stamped with her foot; a thick smoke filled the hut. She stamped a second time. The baron fixed his eyes attentively upon her. The Hag stamped a third time. The space of the cabin vvas filled with flame: it encircled the witch. " You must throw this mantle over. your face," cried the Hag to the baron, as he stood in wonder as to what was to follow. " Fear not," reiterated the Hag.
155 The baron permitted the mantle to be thrown over him. He found hintif self led by the corner of his cloak, which the Hag had gathered into her hand. He was led about tvventy paces. A dismal groan was heard as he moved forward: he desired to see whither he was going; and refused to proceed further.. Tlie mantle wir* removed from before the face of the baron, when he found himself in the midst of a vaulted chamber, without any other light than that in the hand of the witch. Jn exploring every avenue and recess ii £
15f> of this dreary place, the baron beheld only gloom and darkness. The Hag placed the lamp on the ground, The baron's eyes were iixed upon a dark recess in the chamber, from whence he had heard proceed a dismal moan. He beheld a stupendous object arise* It was mishapen, but had something of the appearance of a human being. It was huge in form, its body black, and its face jaundiced, and smeared with blood. It roared, as it arose, like a lion which is roused from its den. The baron startled at this object of terror; but how was his horror in-
157 creased, when he saw that the monster held in one hand a javelin imbrued in human gore, and in the other a cup full of blood, and vvhich it iiugged close to its bosom. A distant scream now reverberated through the chamber, at which the spectre started into a recess of the vnslt, and was seen no more. " What vvas this?" cried the baivu, the hair of his head standing on end. u A demon,'* answered the Hag. ■*t u His name r" "JJgali/* " His purpose r" " To inspirit the murderer/' * e Ila!" repeated the baron*
158 •* " Art thou satisfied of my power } WoukUl thou see more, or wouldst thou spare thyself the rest V* " I would see more; show me the spirit of the dead." <g Whose spirit wouldst thou see r" (i I would," cried the baron, vvith a hanghtj' and contemptuous sneer, <e see the spirit of Harold." H Of Ha.-o!d ! Why of Harold! I will convince thee better of my power. The baron forgets that he knows not the figure of Harold. I will show thee the spirit of one whose figure thou. knowest." " Proceed," replied the baron*.
159 All was still in tlie chamber. The Hag drew a circle three times round the lamp, which gave a pale and dismal light. She muttered some unintelli¬ gible words The baron watched the Hag atten¬ tively. At length from a corner of the vault glided a figure ; it seemed formed only of transparent ether. It was not Ha¬ rold. It vvas the form of a female, with a light robe thrown over her: her fea¬ tures were angelic though pale. It car¬ ried a cup in one hand ; it waved the other to the baron. For an instant he stood aghast!
I ft) " Hide me," cried he, dreadfully convulsed, « hide ine from that horrid sight! Deceitful H>g, in this the spirit that I would have seen!" As he spoke the spectre retired. " I have seen enough." cried the baron. cf And you acknowled t rt * the power of my art :*'
ii
i do:
** Yes, yes; the Hag thought that riie could see thee." (i We will return then," cried the Hag, throwing the mantle over him. They trod some paces; the Hag
Iti I withdrew the mantle^ they were toge¬ ther in the hut. The baron supported himself, with his arm against the rugged wall. The Hag had seated herself on the three- legged stool. The baron was wrapt up in medi¬ tation. He was sick vvith horrors; but he vvas pleased and gratified with the power of his agent; he was willing to become a servant of the fiend's, that he might be the highest among men. Yet he had not recovered from the panic which the supernatural powers of the witch had produced. The Hag spoke. " Baron 1 know
thy thoughts; 1 know the machina¬ tions vi ihy l>y.\:t ; thy wi-hes, thy hop* ■;, and tl:y tL:r.-. I have riiown thie more than ihnu (i*.d;.l esp*.ct, iliat ihou mif 1 •!.:•*. jc jatit*ktl of no' id;dh No°5 then eonnnand me; but I must he richly paid/' '* I will notbe ungrateful; vvhat is the price r" " Shall I have it ?" " Thou shalt/ ** Swear it. Swear by hell/* " I swear; by hell." 4 * bring me, then, the child/' " Ha! Say vvhat child r " Lady Bertha's/'
Iti3 « Which of them T> " I care not which, so it is lady Bertha's/* The baron's countenance brightened, at this explanation; fo there was an infant that he would willingly have ex¬ posed to all the horrors of the ev^nt. " And what wouldst thou do with the baber" inquired the baron. " Trouble not thyself, baron ; brin^ it me to-morrow: thou hast bworn. It must be done to-morrow/' As she spoke these words, the Hag laughed. It wsis an hysteric laugh. " Now baron," cried the Hag, " what are thy thoughts, thy hopes 5 Thus
devils gratify each other. The offerings they muke are human being?. Riches and honours shall he thine; let us be friends ; give me thiiie hand/* As *-he spoke, the hag put forth her shrivelled palm. *. t Unwillingly the baron touched the palsied and venomous fingers of the witch. ci May I depend on this thy pre¬ sent ?"' CK Depend on me," replied the ba¬ ron. Ave; and then I will take thee whvre the power resides, that can give thee wealth, and honours, aud fame.
t65 That can harm and destroy, and make thee busy ir ! bold iu niisehief. That can gratify thy desires, thy l;^t-% thy ambition, ha, ha, ha; vve will h,r~c fine sport: we vvil v\hip and scourgt life silly, mild, and humane, vrith cala¬ mity in plenty; we wiil mortify, and disappoint, and plague, and fra^c, aye, that we will: it will be fine sp^rt/* it Then the Hajr he^an a son^, vvith all the horrid gestures of fury: th** notes were shrill and loud; her eves glistened; she danced with her feet, and seemed drunk with the ce-sta^y of her thoughts. " Farewei, Hag," cried tho baron, u the infant Edward shall he thine."
lGG " Thanks, noLU: baron/' replied the Hag, vvith a horrid grin, " Farewei— to-morrow." iC To-morrow/* Thus ended the discourse between the baron de La Braunch and the witch of Ravensworth. The baron returned towards the cas¬ tle, across the heath ; his mind occu¬ pied with the dreadful images he had beheld, in agony and misery, blended vvith the delightful promises which flat¬ tered his ambition.
16'7
CHAPTER XV1I. The Baron's return to the Casth',
The baron de La Braunch withdrew to his chamber the iustant he entered its gates. lie desired that he mijiht not he in- terrupted, and threw himself on a couch beneath the rich canopy in the audience- chamber, which was used for state oc¬ casions; his thoughts were encased
16s w ith the consideration of the homage, and re-peet, whieh vvould be paid him, the instant he f hou hi be in possession of the wealth of the boy Edward, and Vvhich vvould be sufficient to place him on a footing vv ith princes, or to obtain, from the consequence it would give hirn in the realm, additional rank and honours from the king; he savv that by the cruel offering he was about to make his views vvould be realized. The child would doubtless be immolated; it would be presented as a sacrifice to the fiend ;, and then, the wealth and principalities of lord Edward would be his. But how to manage this diaboli**
{69 cal plan so secretly, that lady Bertha should have no knowledge how the in- fant had been disposed of; how to re¬ concile her to its mysteiious disappear¬ ance, in case that event could be brought about; how to soothe her into silence, and peace, were master-piec^ of art, that required his most exquisite work¬ manship, yet, so vast, to him, was the object in view, that, with all the teme¬ rity of a bold and desperate mind, he determined on putting his design in execution.
VOL. i.
t
170
CHAPTER XVIIL Tht Baron presents the Infant Ed¬ ward an offering to the Hag.
The next day, the baron, who had ar¬ ranged every circumstance in his mind, appeared to lady Bertha with a face of unusual kindness, and, complacency; not only to lady Bertha, but to his do¬ mestics. Nay, he had even address enough to caress, on that day, the little innocent which was his intended victim ; and more, in conversation with lady Bertha, and her woman, Ranetrude, to
17* plan out to its fond mother ihe future management and education of the child ; the course of its studies ; its future for¬ tunes ; its initiation into chivalry - 7 its introduction tc the king. The lady Bertha, sensible of every word of kindness and of tenderness, pressed the babe to, her bosom. It is true, she heaved an involuntary sigh. The evening had come, and* the glorious sun had withdrawn its gladden¬ ing presence from the castle. The attendants of lady Bertha had taken their young lord, Edward, *o rest; his mother had said her prayers over its little form, as it lay fast bound in refreshing sleep. The apartment where tlie child reposed, was next to lady Bertha's, and not any came near it, I 2
172 but herself and the most confidential of her women, nor could any pass into it, but through her own chamber. The baron, who frequently slept in his own room, went early to his chamber, and desired thathe might not be disturbed ; he complained of being ill, and that he \\ anted repose. 'The lady Bertha reposed on her own bed. Ranetrude, who slept with the infant, usually retired at an hour later than her mistress ; the duties of her situation re¬ quired some few arrangements previous to her going to her chamber; not any of the domestics had yet retired The baron, watching a fit oppor¬ tunity, stole gently from his own room into lady Bertha's chamber; lie ob-
1?3 .served that she was asleep; the infant Hugo lay at her breast j he found that she was not disturbed, and passed on> gently, into the chamber wherein th* infant Edward slept; all was still. The child lay with its hands clasped, in an attitude of prayer. It was in a sweet and composed sleep. The baron put down the light; he walked backwards and forwards; he listened.; he paused; There was no further time to lose. The moment suited: he put his hand underneath the mantle on which the child was laid, he raised the poor infant to his bosom, and, covering it with his cloak, crept gently through the chamber wherein reposed lady Bertha-—he had taken the taper in his hand. As he passed by, he 1 3
174 heard her moan ; the rest of lady Ber- »f tha was disturbed, but' she vvas un¬ conscious of the theft of hor belvwd child. The baron, who had taken care to make fast his door, listened for au instant, fearing even the approach ofone of his own servants. He walked gently, the length of the gallery; all was silent; he descended the stairs. There was a secret and subterraneous passage beneath the foundations of the castle ; none had passed through for years ; The key had always been in the possession of the baron; the passage led to the heath. The baron, as he descended, felt the chilly moisture; the taper which he held, lengthened its blue flame, and
175 quivered in the damp air; he proceeded some steps further, and came to the subterraneous passage, which narrowed as he went on. The child slept thv whoie time. The baron paced on briskly; h« thought that he heard voices behind, and his imagination presented before him the foul spectre, with the javelin, end the bowl of blood; now he fancied that some one was treading briskly after him, along the avenue, but he was more afraid of detection, or of disap¬ pointment in his plan, than of spirits. At length the baron arrived at the iron door, which, concealed beneatii the fnrze and underwood of the covered part of the heath, was unseen by the
t 4
1/6 passenger, and -unknown to any of the neighbouring villagers. Tlie baron only knew of such an ascent; he laid the infant gently on the moist earth; he placed the key with¬ in the jaws of the rusty lock ; it would not stir. The baron had begun to think that all his labour and con¬ trivance had been in vain j hy a strong effort it turned. He unlocked the trap, but the rusty bolts which had become fixed were yet untried ; nothing but the gigantic strength of the baron could have moved them; that, however, pre¬ vailed, and the heath appeared above. The infant, which had been roused by the reverberating sounds occasioned by forcing thebolts, awoke, and began to cry. The baron endeavoured to hush
177 the child, by every note of tenderness, and by every gentle caress ; he put the half slumbering infant to his bosom; it thought that it was in its mothers arms, and was still. The baron ascended the few steps that led to the trap, and pushed it back with his hands, but could find no space large enough to get through the furze, which grew up to the entrance. This was a new difficulty, but when once set on mischief, the bad, who arc always im¬ patient, are not to. be easily disturbed, The baron was not to be impeded by obstacle^; he placed his shoulder against the stems of the young saplings, aud, treading the brushwood and brambles beneath his feet, forced his way through, to the open part of the heath, but not i. 5
178 without his limbs being torn in the contest. At length the baron found himself in xi valley, which he knew to be beyond a branch of the river Eden, under the bed of which was the subterraneous passage. Here he stopt an instant, to muflle himself up in his cloak, and then, quickening his pace, went on, hy the most secret winding paths, towards the heath. In the way, the travellers met with but one solitary passenger, at man who vvas laden with a bundle of faggots on his back, tied round with a withy. As they passed, the child set up a cry, and the countryman called in a surly tone to the baron to know who and what he was, and what he did out with an
179 infant at such a time; for the night had begun to be stormy, and gusts of wind and rain intercepted the way of the pas¬ senger. The baron made no reply, but hastened his steps ; the countryman- passed on. The baron could discern the solitary hovel, in which dwelt the Hag, at a distance, by a pale glimmer of light from the window. He hastened his steps; he arrived at the door of the hut; he, halloed, and the witch ap¬ peared at the entrance. The eyes of the Hag sparkled, as he approached ; she said she had been expecting him ; she looked with a malicious smile under his cloak; she chuckled at the sight. The baron presented the child to the Hag. She took'it within the grasp of t 6
180 her meagre hooked ringers, as a spider encloses in its fangs the helpless fly. She laic the infant on the red floor¬ ing ; in one corner of the hut lay a large knife, which she gathered up in one hand; she mumbled some sentences to herself; the baron stood still, observing every action of the witch. The infant ^woke at this instant, and, fixing its little eyes on the foul and deformed figure of the witch, uttered a piercing cry. It was a cry of terror. The witch was employed sharpening the knife on the floor; she took no notice of the crying of the child. The baron was agitated; he asked if his presence vvas longer necessary. " Doubtless," answered the Hag, t( dost thou not know that thou must
181 work thy way to the favour of Unfriend Askar, the prince of darkness, whom we worship: thou must use thyself to scenes of blood ; thou must become familiar with horrors, they must be thy pastime, thy amusement." The baron was silent; the Hag stooped down ; she lifted up the large-bladed knife; she took hold of the arm of the child; she pointed tlie knife downwards to its breast. In an instant a luminous appearance, like a cloud of flame, tilled the hut; a rushing noise was heard ; the Hag trem¬ bled, from the taper ends of her long fingers, down even to her toes. She sunk by degrees to the ground; the knife fell from her withered lingers ; she lay prostrate on her face,, making the
182 most hideous bowlings, and convulsed in every limb ; she was entranced. The baron stood aghast, lost in wonder and horror, at the sudden affection which disturbed the witch ; at length the Hag recovered by degrees. She took asinail piece of broken stone, in tlie shape ofa triangle, from a corner of the hut—she placed it carefully in the centre ofthe floor; Mie gathered «>,oinc live embers from the health ; she drew st me cabalistic characters on the fctone with the fore finger of her right hand ; .sae threw on the embers; she kh Jt down ; she blew tho embers away gently; she clapped her hands, as with joy; she arose; she took the child in one hand, and the knife in the other. She danced vvith the infant in her arms,.
XB3 and then, with the most frantic gesture-, ran three times round the hut. The baron paused—he wondered what would follow : the Hag vvas in¬ censed ; the infant screamed, and the third time the Hag disappeared with it in her arms. All was silent as death. The baron was left alone; he meditated on the event; there vvas not a whisper heard. IVo, three, four, five minutes, had elapsed ; at length the Hag a^ peared before him ; thero was no child : the large-bladed knife v.a: bloody. The Hag seated herself on the threc-lcggcd stool; she vvas silent. " Wretch " cried the baron, (with an excellent dissimulation) " vvhat i§ its
184 thou hast done ? the knife is bloody— Is it murdered then?" " It is/ 1 " And is it for this, that I have brought the infant to thee : " cried the baron. "Hypocrite/ replied the witch, c< thou well deservest the regards of Askar!— didst thou not see how I was tor¬ mented; I would have had this choice morsel to myself; but the power of Askar overcame me, / have most rea¬ son to complain, / am robbed by the greedy fiend, robbed of my prey, not a finger of it has the Hag been allowed to touch ; not even tlie thumb of the left hand—thou and he are both served, and I—I, the instrument of thy con-
186 venience, and of his pleasure, am dis¬ appointed; well, ho matter, I dare not grumble in his presence j but I must have mischief—I am famished—I will have my glut. The baron having gained his point, would now have willingly departed; wicked and hardened as he was, be had had his fill of horrors. He desired tc depart, that he might give perfection to his villainy, by soothing the lady Ber¬ tha, and reconciling her to her loss. The Hag was not disposed to let the baron go. " Thou art now,'* said she, " a servant of the mighty Askar. On the fourteenth day of the ensuing month, our sacrifice is held, at which the mighty Askar himself presides. If thou wouldst be lucky; if thou wouldst be
186 rich; if thou wouldst have all the wealth and pleasures of the world, thou must be there, I will be thy conductor* Then wili be the time to ask and to have ; he will doubtless heap his favours on theo." " I will come," answered the baron* u Aye, thou wilt come, and see our midnight festivals; our games \ out sports. Then will be tbe time for thy courage to be tried; thou must not then be woman-hearted. Well, well; go home, and try to comfort poor lady Bertha ; she will suspect the Hag; thou wilt do well to gratify her resentment: cause me to be brought before thee; there is no proof against me, I shall be acquitted/' " Even so; I thank theo for this,"
answered the baron, " all will then end in conjecture, Farewei/* Tlw b%m\ left tho hut. It blew a tempest: the rain swept, in torrents, the heath. The baron walked forward,—he ap¬ proved the storm ; it vvas not likely that any would be abroad to notice him. It lightened;—horrid images, of va¬ rious fanciful forms, flitted by, or danced along the heath before him! He heard the wolf. He heard the wild cat. The baron arrived at an empty hovel, he sought an indifferent shelter beneath its roof. He beheld a white figure rise from a corner of the hovel! It was a white
heifer, which had sheltered in thesam« place* '* Ideot that I am,** cried the baron, €( to be afraid of spirits; have I notbeen used to horrors! and bad spirits will not harm the man who seeks their as¬ sistance." It lightened. The thunder roared immediately over the head bf the ba¬ ron ; he saw the heavens open, with the convulsion of the storm, and emit li¬ quid sheets of flame. , The baron hastei-°d his steps; lie was even yet undaunted; he had been prac¬ tised in greater horrors. He knew even of the mysteries of hell, Presently the castle of La Braunch
189 presented its turrets, through the ob¬ scurity of the tempest. The baron had to seek for the en¬ trance to the subterraneous passage ; it vvas with difficulty that he found it. He had left the trap a little open; he entered, and closed it after him. The lamp which he had left was yet burning. He stopt in the middle of the pas¬ sage, to consider for an instant,-how he eould best make his way to his cham¬ ber without being "seen. He sat down on the steps which led to the private stairs of the gallery, to listen ; all was still. " All will be weil," cried the baron, " the great difficulty is disposed of; the brat is destroyed. I have only to
lOO net a litt!-, and the ufftir wih pa-s off a- a rir*dov\. The horrid mvstery will rexer be di^covere*!/* Tlie baron aseended the private stairs* aud entered the gallery where was his room. He had the taper in his hand. If he had been seen, by any of the Jcnie<ti<>. thev vvould not have dared :*> a^k him questions, He retired, not to rest, but to suffer perturbations of mind, the conflicts of ambition and remoise.
191
CilAPEil XIX. V7*€ agony of Lady Bertha at Ihe io«6 of her Injani. Tke trial tf thr
The attendants of hdv Bertha had no sooner missed the child Edward, than thoy began to make the most busy and anxious inquiries. Ranetrude was the first who mauc the fatal discovery : -he had entered the chamber of her mis¬ tress, and had passed throngh to pre¬ pare herself for rest; she looked at the bed for the ehild, and missed its little form which lay usually in one place.
192 She imagined that lady Bertha had removed it to her own side. She ap¬ proached the bed of her mistress, and found her asleep; the infant Hugo at her bosom, but little Edward was not there. Lady Bertha awoke; she in¬ quired what was tfie matter. Ranetrude inquired for the child. " It sleeps," replied lady Bertha, " it is in its bed;" " Not so, my lady," answered Rane¬ trude, " tho child is not there." The lady Bertha arose hastily from the bed on which she had reposed. Sh€ sought the infant in the adjoining chamber; it was not there. The at¬ tendants were now summoned, and Ranetrude began to make the most busy and anxious inquiries; every ser¬ vant was asked, if they had seen, or if
193 they knew any thing of their young lord Edward. Not any could afford the desired in¬ telligence ; and in the countenance of every domestic, wore to be noticed evident marks of doubt and surprise. Difficult was the task of returning with the news that the child was nowhere to be found, and this they did repeat- edlv, after the renewed searches they made. The child was missing. The un¬ happy lady Bertha received ihis distress¬ ing intelligence, with all the agony of a tender mother. The horrid sentence of the Hag, Misery to the bride, rushed upon her recollection, and she fainted away in the arms of her attendants. It was needless to go to the baron's VOL, I* K
194 todm; they were satisfied that th<3 child could not be there; and after the command he had given, not to be dis¬ turbed, no one dared acquaint him with the accident which had happened. All was confusion and distraction. The baron beard, from his chamber, a rumour of the distress, of which he * too well knew the cause, and was wrapped up in contemplation on the passing events ; his mind vvas too savago and ferocious to lament the death of the poor infant; all his thought were en- ^aiied on the success ofthe plan, which had so secretly and effectually put an end to the baneful object between him and his towering ambition. It is true, that sometimes he trembled at the re¬ proaches of his conscience, and reflected
i that from all he had read in history, the wicked were in the end deserted by iheir guardian devils; however, this vvas remote, and the long wished-for hour of riches and honours was arrived* The baron trusted in the power, and supernahr 1 aid ofthe witch of Ravens- worth, to protect him from the adver- - sities of this world, and did not look further. At length the baron de La Braunch, glutted with success in his horrid plan, and full of the prospect of enjoyment of all he valued, considered that he could not have a better opportunity to exercise the plausibility of which he was so complete a master> than in the confusion which then reigned in the castle* He therefore arose, and de- K U
196 scended to the chamber of the lady Bertha, prepared to meet, with coolness and affected ignorance, the history of tjie misfortune. Lady Bertha, as soon as the ^baron entered the chamber, threw herself at his feet, and taking his hand in hers bathed it in tears: she related the hor¬ rid story of the infant Edward's being taken from the castle, and the ineffec¬ tual search which had been made, in all the colours vvhich a frantic mother could give to such an event. The baron, a complete master in dis¬ simulation, stood as it were petrified with astonishment. For a minute he uttered not a syllable, but appeared enwrapt in consternation ; at length he stamped his foot on the ground, and, in
197 a voice that made an echo through the castle, demanded who had that night entered the castle. The obsequious Hathbrand, Doric, Jonas, the porters, the guards, were all ofthem separately examined, but no one of them had seen a stranger enter. The kdy Bertha, in her agony and affliction, now first mentioned her sus¬ picions of the Hag. The baron started, " But why the Hag ?" cried he. ■ " Her horrid curse," answered the lady Bertha, " has never been absent from my mind." ** True.' it was remarkable; wretched beldam ; yes ; it shall be so." The baron recalled his attendants, and gave instant orders that Hathbrand, and six chosen vassals, should instantly seek K 3
198 the witch, take her into custody, and at the same time explore her cabin, that they might find the infant, if it were there concealed. The lady Bertha's face brightened with hope at this command. Sbe fan¬ cied that she should see her child once again, and expressed a grateful acknow¬ ledgment of sensibility for the gallant conduct of the baron on the occasion*
*99
CHAPTER XX. The trial of the Hag in the dudieme- chamber.
Manv hours had not elapsed, before the sound of the trumpet announced the arrival of strangers: they were Hath- brand, and his followers, with the Hag in custody. Lady Bertha was looking out with eagerness, and with frantic despair and hope. There was no infant. The domestics of the castle shouted with joy, when, they saw the Hag K4
200 brought into the castle. The lady Ber¬ tha was disappointed, and sorrow was in her face, yet she hoped that some intelligence might be extorted from the \Uteh. The baron and lady Bertha ascended the throne of justice, in the audience- rh..inber. The Hag stood before them. The baron sternly demanded, " If she recollected her intrusions at the castle, and the expressions which had come from her lips ?" The witch answered, with a ma* li&iiant smile, u Yes." c< We have strong suspicions," said the baron, " that the misfortune which has happened in the castle has been brought about, Hag, by thy wicked art and contrivance ; and the sentences
201 which, at thy unwelcome visits, came from th) lips, amount almost to proo against thee." " What have I done?'* cried the Hag, " what is the matter now ? always accusation, always unwarranted crimi¬ nations against the HagT* " Dost thou know any thing? an¬ swer me directly and truly," cried the baron. u Dost thou know any thing of the infant lord Edward, who is missing from the castle :" u No:" answered the witch. " What, isit lo'st? Truly you take great care •f . o of your cherubs I where were the at¬ tendants ? where the mother? why am I to be accused? who saw me? why hadst thou not brought the pretty baby to the Hag ? she would have nursed it K 5
202 carefully : sweet poppet! It was doubt¬ less taken away by fairies." As she uttered these words, the Hag showed a malicious grin on her face, that made the unhappy lady Bertha shudder with horror. She could not discover whether the witch was guilty of the theft, or whether her taunts were the reproaches of a mind angered at being falsely accused. She only heaved a heavy sigh. The baron, as it might be expected,- pretended to find the proofs insufficient to the charge against the witch; he ap¬ pealed to the lady Bertha herself, who answered, t; Heaven forbid tliat I should ask for punishment, where there may he the most slender chance of inno- ecnce. Fray let the Hag go/* The
203 * witch retired; and, as she left the au¬ dience-chamber, murmured some unin¬ telligible jargon, and burst out with a convulsive laugh. The baron studiously endeavoured to console the lady Bertha, anci to divert her attention from the object of her thoughts, to the care of the infant Hugo, the most likely method for hirn to succeed; in addition to which he •oustantly gave her hopes that the child was yet alive, and taken care ot by some persons unknown, as other¬ wise if it had been their intention to have destroyed it, they coukl have ef¬ fected their purpose without taking it fyom the castle.
204
CHAPTER XXI. An interval of some years.
Time, which engages the mind to fresh objects and pursuits, might have acted with like effect on the lady Bertha's disposition, had not the chaste and gen¬ tle deportments of that lady, prevented her from seeking consolation from amusement: her only relief and conso¬ lation was derived from her attentions to the child Hugo, and in observing the gradual progress of its understand-
205 in£. This m some measure obliterated . from her recollection the loss of her other infant. Her duty to the baron also, and her studious attentions to his will, kept her constantly engaged. She was never at case but when employed in her domestic duties; and was n-rver seen to smile, but wheu it was with sa¬ tisfaction at Iiaving pleased her lord. The ladv Bertha, although she saw the proud i*nd tyrannical disposition of the baron, yet was so unsuspicious, and un¬ conscious of any wicked views agitating in his mind, that she considered her own happiness as fixed and permanent, as far as respected his conduct towards her. Every thing was now at peace at the castle. The witch was almost forgotten,
206 or served only as a gossip's tale, for the domestics' fire-side in the hall. The mind of the baron was, however, ill at ease; at times his conscience raised ap¬ prehensions and horrors, whHi disturbed his repose in the midst of that indulgence*, and security for wealth and grandeur, which his cruel immolation of the in¬ fant Edward had procured. The sight of the injured lady Bertha was often painful to him, and called him to an artful reconciliation with himself, grounded on the consequence that the other child Hugo would inherit the demesnes after his demise. This com¬ promise lulled, at times, his conscience to sleep, and he began to think tlmt there might be hopes even of pardon for him in another world.
sror The baron de La Braunch, having succeeded in removing the innocent object of his fear and aversion, had ialy and falsely thought, that he t4iould en¬ joy a course of uninterrupted days; he was astonished r therefore, to find that it could not be so : for at times the recol¬ lection of the means he had taken, for the security of his wealth, came across his mind, in a way that made him uneasy. Iu addition to the restless sting of remorse, the baron felt another sensa¬ tion disturb his mind: he began pri¬ vately to dislike lady Bertha ; she some¬ times, accidentally and unintentionally, reminded him of the mysterioi * loss of her little infant Edward; he was angry, too, that the child had not died of som*
308 disorder of nature, that he might have been spared the reflection of having been the instrument of its destruction. Eleven years passed away in a same¬ ness of occurrence at the castle, which, in a good family, would have consti¬ tuted one of the most striking features of !*s Jomestic peace. Old Doric frequently descanted on the strange and mysterious event of the infant Edward's loss and endeavoured to account for it in various different ways; sometimes he insisted that the child was taken away to heaven; some¬ times, that it was still alive, and had been ravished from the castle by some of the house of lord Edward of Mar¬ tindale, who would rear it in obscurity, without a knowledge of its parents; so
209 far, however, is the imputation of guilt from the great and powerful, that not the slightest suspicion fell on the baron. During this time, the child Hugo grew up with all the fierce dispositions of his father, who caressed him chiefly on that account: be was bold, mis¬ chievous, ill-tempered, and obstinate. The servants of the castle, who all of them, at times, suffered from the pro¬ pensity [he had to tell tales and lies, began to have an aversion for him ; not even the mild and tender manner of his iady mother could alter his perverse dispositions. The baron would not allow, on any occasion, that he riiould be thwarted, and his will was never to be contradicted by the domestics. The
210 little Hugo was very cruel in his treat¬ ment of the poor animals who were about the castle; many of which were tortured for his amusement. He was, besides, so excessively indolent, that he would not be at the pains to learn any \g of the masters, who were engaged to teach him the accomplish¬ ments usually expected to be found m the young nobles destined for the court of Edward. Old Doric had taken a dislike to hk young master Hugo, because he laughed at the mathematics; but Jonas enter* tained some respect for hira, as he waa never backward in drinking large quan¬ tities of sack and Burgundy, whenever offered him, which Jonas took as a
good sign, and as a promise of his be» coming a great man. Tlie lady Bertha endeavoured all she could, to correct the unseemly habits and dispositions of the ehild, but in vain ; he grew up in the proud and sullen disposition of his father, and promised to be like him in every fault; an event, however, took place, which prevented the mischief such a temper might have done in the world. The child Hugo fell sick, and which was occasioned by a wilful exertion which he chose to make in the noon^day heat; not all the maternal care of the lady Bertha, nor all the skill ofthe first physicians ofthe king, could avail to check the raging fever that ensued, which baffled every
512 endeavour, and triumphed over life; a circumstance vvhich unfairly lessened the claims of the lady r Bertha to the esteem and affection of her husband.
513
CHAPTER XXII. Tlie palace of the lady Alive na.
Within a few miles of the easJe of La Braunch, near the brow of a high mountain fringed with underwood, stood the gorgeous palace of Alwena, which was known from afar by the height and beauty of its turrets, whieh were of the purest white, and of the an ost perfect architecture.
214 The palace of Alwena was the seafc of pleasure. The way to it was through lanes of rose-trees, by the side of a serpentine brook, which was one of the branches of the proud swelling Eden t whose banks bear the maiden primrose, the sweet-scented violet, the white lily, ^nd the narcissus. The front of the palace of Alwena was adorned with a hundred pillars of Parian marble, with pedestals and bases of red Corinthian stone, and entabla¬ tures of the most finished and exquisite workmanship. The porticos were dou¬ ble, with a two-fold range of columns-j the gates were of ebony, and the bal¬ conies, from the windows of the pa¬ lace, of the purest white ivory,, as were also the galleries within this taste-
513 ful temple, the flooring of which was of the highest wrought mosaic. The walls were covered with the richest ta¬ pestry, and the furniture was the most elegant and superb. The lady Alwena was a Dane by birth, but her education had been ^ nished in the courts of Italy and France, and her manners partook largely of the licentiousness of thos:e countries. The lady Alwena vvas of uncommon stature; she was six feet four inches in height, and formed with an exquisite proportion, her limbs were in perfect symmetry, ami she trod the ground with the grace and dignity of a prin¬ cess; her countenance was as open and beautiful as the rich and luxuriant face
216 of autumn; her'yes resembled spark- lino- gems ; her cheeks were as the lily Mower, tinged with the red rose ; her lips vvere of a rich crimson, and her fine turned neck aud bosom, were fi¬ nished with tlie most exquisite work¬ manship of the hand of Nature, and outvied, in colour, the whiteness of the breast of the swan : her whole form vvas luxuriant, and teemed with the full ripenesss of womanhood. The lady Alwena had constantly re¬ fused every offer of marriage, since the death of her husband, lord Robert; which perhaps had been owing to her desire of reigning uncontrouled mistress of her indulgences and caprice. Many reports, not at all favourable to the chastity of this lady, had been
217 circulated during the life-time of her lord, while absent in the Holy-land; but since his death she had given loose to the reins of her passions, and had •mohdged herself in indiscriminate a- mours with several knights, who had become enamoured with her person; and who were discarded, as soon as her voluptuous appetites for variety had been gratified. The lady Alwena was not only aban¬ doned., to the lust of uuritaste desires, but her mind also was impure and tricked. She was proud, lofty, arro¬ gant, overbearing, and revengeful; she could smile, and with the fascinating looks of love, but her heart was full of hatred, and bitter reproach of virtue; her mind was prostituted and debased ; VOL. I, t
tin $he was eter busy, and seeking to de* molish the fair structure of female chastity, wherever she found it erected, md was constantly active in spreading calumnies that might destroy the good fame and reputation of the virtuous la* dies of the court. The lady Alwena, who had only just taken possession of her splendid pa¬ lace, vvas soon made acquainted with the baron's close neighbourhood to her, anil with tbe character of the amiable lady Beruta ; she had long known that of the baron de La Braunch, his high rank, and achievement**.
219
MMMIMMm
CHAPTER XXIIL Tlie Baron's interview ivith tke Lady diiwena.
The lady Alwena desired to become acquainted with the baron de La Braunch, both from her wicked pro* pensity to disturb, if possible, the hap¬ piness of the good lady Bertha, and from her inclination to enlist the baron in her train of admirers; and she had already formed in her mind the cruel h 2
220*
project of rivalling tlie lady Bertha in the esteem and affections of her lord. Occasion and opportunity is not long wanting to the wicked; lady Alwena froquentcd the hunt, where she di¬ stinguished herself by her astonishing intrepidity, and skill in riding, whieh was unequalled. One day the baron happened to fall in with the chase at which she was present, and beheld her perform asto¬ nishing feats of horsemanship, in the pursuit of a gaunt wolf. Tlie baron became enamoured with her figure and beauty, and approached her with all the gallantry of a courteous and well- bred knight, The lady Alwena was not wanting, on her side, in that finished
221 courtesy which is displayed by the ladies of the court. The baron, after the chase was over, offered to conduct the lady Alwena to her castle,, and the offer, in the presence of several other knights, was most gra¬ ciously accepted. On her arrival at the palace, the lady Alwena retired to her apartment to dress, and left the baron to visit the gardens, accompanied by her esquire. Every thing that could charm and delight the senses, was collected in the apartments and gardens of the palace of Alwena; birds of the most beautiful plumage were displayed, and the sweet¬ est sounds of the different songsters of the grove vvere heard, as well as of music, concealed from the sight, but l 3
222 which resembled, in harmony, the lyre, and the harp. The orange and jessamine trees formed lanes through the entrances, and spread a gentle and odoriferous atmosphere; soft music was made to play in the avenues, as if by magic, and fountains of transparent fluid played wantonly in these apartments of pleasure, where the richly decorated couch gave invita¬ tion to repose, or voluptuousnes. The luxuries of taste, and splendour, were well suited to del ight the disturbed and restless mind of the baron, which was never satisfied, unless pampered with some new invention, or grati¬ fication ; his depraved appetite required to be excited with something beyond
223
the refreshment sought after hy pure and elegant minds. The lady Alwena descended from lier apartment, attired in the most bewitch¬ ing manner; her woman, Constant^ versed in all the arts and mysteries of attraction, had so disposed the drapery of her dress, that her elegant form was seen through the fine texture of her linen ; her bosom, which was rich in ihe luxuriancies of nature, was enough uncovered to show the perfection of its form ; her head was adorned with the richest jewels, in the form of a star, composed of the chrysolite, the green emerald, tlie sapphire, and the onyx, and her arms were adorned witli rich bracelets of diamonds. The baron, who was naturally of an
2$4 amorous complexion, was astonished at the display of so many charms ; his imagination teemed with such rapturous images of the beauties of the lady Alwena's person, that he dwelt upon it in amazement, and immediately longed for the possession ; he did not, how¬ ever, knovv the price that he was to pay; he had to deal with a woman versed in intrigue, and who knew how to tantalize her admirers; her grand and majestic air supplied the place of mo¬ desty, for her protection, and forbad the too near approach of her admirers; and after some conversation, and taking re¬ freshment of the most exquisite fruits and wines, the baron returned to the castle, fired with a fr*al passion that nothing could extinguish.
22& The baron had now fresh engage¬ ments and occupations to fill up his time; he forsook his accustomed habits, and his former pursuits were neglected; he used no more the exercises of the chase, unless the lady Alwena was pre¬ sent, and the achievemente of the tour¬ nament were surrendered to the study of the decorations of his person, the splendour of his equipage, and his at¬ tendants; he made daily visits to the palace of Alwena, and, delighted with the enchanting beauty of its owner, and with her fascinating conversation, began already to neglect his usual attentions to the lady Bertha, who began to notice the alteration of the behaviour, and the increasing coldness and indifference of her lord, but vvas too unsuspicious, and
2$6 good, to attribute it to any dishonour¬ able cause. The circumstance of the death ofthe infant Hugo, which the baron would at any time before have mourned as the most cruel of events, lost all its bitter¬ ness, in the contemplation of the de¬ lightful solace that he could now iftd iti the comgany of the lady Alwena, Lady Alwena was well informed of the extensive demesnes of the baron, and of the principalities he enjoyed if* the right of his wife, and which had now absolutely become his own, by tlie death of tlie infant Edward ; she knew, too, that hii ambition was never at te%t 3 and began to feel that, were it tiot for the family of lady Bertha, he would gladly forsake her, the first opportunity
22? that offered ; nor was she wrong in her coi^jectures, for the baron had already begun to contemplate the possibility o: one day or other getting rid of her. The affair, however, was difficult: some of her illustrious relatives were alive in the Holy-land, and he feared that in case he should use her ill, his conduct would be one day severely called in question. The artful Alwena had, by degrees, acquired an entire ascendancy over the inind and actions ofthe baron. She had forsaken the reserve and delicacy proper to her sex, and had, by her endearments and caresses, as by magic, overpowered the functions of his mind. The baron was so great a slave to his passion, that he vvas determined to 'Vik" pv i *'V e* ^yiele vy*M to lfl - 'rvbo
225 gence, and to the attainment of the ob¬ ject. The lady Bertha, full of health, and as serene in mind as the good, in sorrow, always are, promised no early determination of her relationship with the baron, The Hag, therefore, oc¬ curred to his mind, as the proper per¬ son to consult on the occasion; he knew that she had the most horrid aversion to that estimable woman, and that she would gladly assist in the ac¬ complishment of his ends, and which seemed to promise the fulfilment of her own prediction. END OF THE FIRST VOITJME.
Printed by R. Juigne, 17> Margaret-street, C a ven di s h-sq u a re.
