Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Romantic tales: by M. G. Lewis
JL Ж,ЛИМ~* Л.М.А.Ч J.3L~XS *Vr JL *Ч JL^XÄ.1
^iV JSJST-JNnjJtf ТЛЕ
** As those w с love decay, wc die in parí ; Siring after string is severed from the heart, Till lengthened life, «it last but breathing cía) , Without one sigh is glad lo fall away. Unhappy they, \.ho lato-d meet the blow, Condemned fo weep o'er many a Friend laid low, Led slowly on from partial death to death, Till dying* all, they can resign, ЬЪгеаШО* Thomson
VOL, ID
**- Ŕumhwiih BüoaoTUEfi UlCuBLwv /
Л J» a J «¡i 4, V iV «t л Vw \_/ * ^ŕ JL·? * % # »» "ч »«МИМИ ..... ι «g ν · Sh/ speaks poníanls, and every wer! зга,Ь>/* Γ·/*''/: -Λ/ιι abitui Sot ы κ¿. fí> The Lord in heaven forbid!" oxelűmed tlie ok! nian, while every limb was convulsed with horror—the blood forsook his cheeks, and he clasped his hands in agony: i6 but the thing is impossible ľ 5 he resumed, afiera few moments pa-st in reflection, 4w absolutely im- pos/iblo!**—What! La orarci? aimy, whose vhildhootl was p ist under шу own roof, under mv vcrv eve?..,. wdioşe manners aro so mild.... who uas over so gentle, so grate¬ ful, so kind. . « . vvIkiso heart 1 know as well as f do my own. *. . Bless my soul, Sister Mib man, wdiat а fright vou have given me! Вы i* "s qn groat matter now, fot when 1 в 'J
reflect upon this history of yours, I see clearly that the thing is quite impossible, and so there's an end of it/*— *-~« 4C Now was tliere ever anything so pro¬ voking! Brother, Brother, let me teli you^ that at your time oflife it is quite a shame to sufler yourself to be so blinded by prejudice— His childhood was past under your roof, forsooth! But where did he pass his youths I should be glad to know? why, among tigers and alligators that swalicnv up poor dear little children at a mouthful, and great ugly black» а -moor monsters, win) cat nothing but human flesh, heaven bless us! and where's the great wonder, that living in such graceless com¬ pany, Everard should have picked up some of their bloody tricks? Nay* Brother, to tell you a bit of my mind, for my own part I always suspected, that there was something awkward in the manner, by Λνΐιχοΐι he came by such a sight of money; though to be sure I never imagined, that thc business was half so bad as it proves to be/'— «*^ <δ Proves to be, Sister! proves to be, in-
deed? Let me remind you, that yon have proved nothing, though God knows you have asserted enough to make every hair on my head stand an end: and as to his fortune, I make no doubt, that Everard can give as satisfactory an account of his making it, as the honestest mau within the bilk of mor. tality/'— — 4i I shoukl be glad to know then, why he so obstinately refuses to give any account at all? It's above a year, since he returned from the East Indies, and yet there шЛ a human being a bit better informed on the subject, than vve were on the first day of his landing; though Гт sure, it's not for want of asking, for many and many a good hour have I past in pumping, and pumping, and yet here do ï sit at this moment no whit the wiser! He always puts on such a solemn look, and takes the first opportunity of turnmg the conversa¬ tion to something eise ι nay, the other day when I wouldn't be fobbed off with a cock and a bull story about heaven knows what,and put tlie question home to him in so many woods, в 3,
*' Ну what means chil yoa, :worard Brookp, get ы) much money?"--lie turned his back |Дшлр «{чт me, imd.-talKoil out of lho room; whieh was no great proof of his guod-brced¬ ing, you'll say; but mercy upon us! guod* breeding ishit wdiat the gentleman values himself upon, for it was but last "Friday, that .fie bounced out oí the room to call Towser off, who was barking r ': а little dirty beggar- boy, though he saw· that ï had dropt my tea¬ spoon, and was obliged to stoop for it myself! a groat bear! but indeed«! expected nothing better from а шап,, who has Hved so long among Hottentots/'«— ™ 4 * Well, Sister! 1 ciare say, that hc ought to have stopped to pick up your tea-spoon ; though to be sure» í car/t find in my heart to blame him very much for having gone first to rescue the beggar-boy, being afraid, ι vt I should have committed exactly the t hhh fault myself. But you know 1 never pict ended to good-breeding, and in all mat? tors of politeness«, Sister Milman, 1 must give \\ ay to your better judgment and experience.
However, I cannot be equally submi^ive n* pecting the material point; ardın spite ni all that you have advanced» I imut still nnin- tain my opinion, that Everard came by hk money honell}-, whatever you may ha\e lieard to the contrary/'— ~ 4< Then wdi y W4>nt he let a body know, how he :,ame by it? Let me tell you, Bro¬ ther, that wdien a man has any thîi g good ί о tell of himself, he isn't so fond of holding hib tongue j nay, for that matter, to hold one's tongue at all isn't natural, and I warrant you» whoever does so, has some good reason at bottom for submitting to such a disagreeable restraint, if one could but get him to own к ; and so think the Williamsons, and the Joneses and my Cousin Dickins, and all the family of the Burnabys: for ƒ am not of so Wueomnnmk cative a temper as your dariing Everard. Iieaven be praised for it ! No ; if I get a bit of information, lam too generous to keep it to myseif, and have no peace, till all my neighbours are as well informed as / am. »So this morning. 1 no sooner got possession of Б 4
ilds bloody story, than I ordered my chariot, ли! drove round the village to communicate ît to all our friends and relations. To bc sure, they were mightily shocked at ihe '¿ccouht, as who wouldn't be? But they сов« fest, that they ahvays expected to find some* thing wrong at the bottom of this mystery, and they think it a mercy that I should have discovered the truth, before things were gone too far between Everard and your daughter Jessy."—· **— 4t And ьо you have been carrying this fine story all round the village? I protest now, Sister Jane, it seems to me, that you have beea giving yourseif a great deal of very unnecessary trouble; aiid if, after all, /our asser-dons shouid prove to be unfounded, ï know not, what recompense you can make poor Everard for this attempt to blast ins character—the most innocent circumstances may be ю construed as to wear an awkward appearance: there are always enough ill- natured people in the world ready to spreatl about scandalous reports^ and Everard has
too much merit uot to have excited plenty of enemies ; arid here you have just now pick¬ ed up a strange, unaccountable, rigmarole tale from one of theso, and...... 5 "~ —-"From oneof his enemies!" exclaimed Mrs. Milman, fanning herself violently; " very fine truly! when 1 heard the whole story witJi these ears of mine from thc mouth ofhis own fittle coffee-coloured barbarian! Yes, to be sure! Mirza is a violent enemy of Mr. Ever ard's, that cannot be denied!"— The old merchant's face underwent a con¬ siderable change at hearing tliese last sen¬ tences : he looked distrest, and rubbed his iorehead for some moments in evident anxietv. —-"Mirza!"' he repeated after a pause— 44 Sister jane, recollect yourseif; thk is no trifling matter! are you quite sure that Mirza asserts the truth of the story, which I have just heard you relate?"-— —"I tell you, Brother, for the second time 3 that 1 heard him tell it with my own ears! not indeed all at once, for tho wicked Hide lì Ô
Heathen knew too well, how little it was io his maţ tor's credit, that the fact sliould got abroad. Ah! he is a cunning hand, 1 pro¬ unse you ! But I went round about, and round about, uud wormed, and wormed,, and kept beating the bush«, till ì geo it all out of him. I confess, I was obliged to promise faithfully, ihat his master should never know a syllable about it, for (he said) that it would give him pain to hear it mentioned, as to be sure well it may; but when I found, what a horrible secret it was, I had a great deal too much conscience to keep my promise, and iust no rime in making the monster's guilt known to the whole neighbourhood/'— — u Well, well, Sister! I wont pretend to say, that you did wrong, and î doubt not, you '¿cted from the boat motives; but yet I cank help wishing, that you had acted otherwise ! This Everard... · poor, dear, wicked fellow, lie vvas once so good*... so aflect ionate.... I would have boited all ΐ have in the world, ihat it wasn't in his nature to kill so much as a fly—and to murder а womaa i
*. *. a woman too, that lie had promised to marry.. *. !"— —"Aye! and to murder her in such ashock¬ ing mannex too! first to shoot at her fu oca bt *ud а hedge, and when he found the poor creature was oniy wounded, to have the heart to run up to her, and actually boat lu r brains out with a club ! Why, Mirza saitl, that he verily believed, that sho was above half an hour dying!"— — 4ς 1 never heard of anything so horri¬ ble!"— ~ u But what is worst, he wasn't contented with destroying the poor girľs body; he had previously ruined her precious soul! к scorn- ? that her name was Nancy O'Connor; an Irish family, I suppose, i once knew an Irish oflicer of that name myseîf. I was buf a giri then, and danced vvith hhn at the ILicknev Assembly, and a mighty genteel comely >· looking man he was, tir ugh ho liad but une eye ; but thaťs neither here nor there. Λν /cih as I was telling yuu, this Nancy was ehher the daughter, or Uie wife of a 'rich piám or; в 6
with whom Everard lived as clerk, or factor, or something of that kind. Well! and so^ this poor girl fell in love with Everard, and lie on his skle was wonderfully attentive to Nancy; for Mirøa says, that he passed whole røye» and nights in watching her, and ogling her^ so that she actually could hardly stir without his knowing it ; till at last lie worked himself so totally into her good graces, шга got such an influence ол^ег her mind, that (knowing his patron to luwe made a will entirely in Nancy's fiivour) he persuaded her to poison poor Mf. O'Connor, in order that she might share his wealth with her abomin¬ able lover/'— ™ 44 Poison her rather? monstrous!"-— —"Her father,or her husband,for (as 1 said before) ï am not certain which; but Ishould rather suppose, it шю her father, for it seems the poor deceived old man made it his dying request to her, that she should make Eve¬ rard her husbands as soon as ever the funeral was over: so you may judge, how artfully tbe hypocrite mmt have played his cards! 2
Well ! now* it was supposed, that Everard would immediately have made Nancy Aksı Brooke ; the settlements were aii drawn up ; the cloaths were bought ; the w T edding-day was fixed: wdien lo and behold! what da you think the ungrateful monster did? He persuaded the poor your * creature to dispose of all her property ; and when it was con« verted into money, and jewels, and such iike^ he enticed her into a wood, wdiere he robbed and murdered her in the manner which you have just heard; and then gettmg on board a vessel with his plunder in all haste, he managed to escape from Ceylon, before the ofiicers ofjustice had time to discover what was become of him ! The oniy thing, wdikh surprises me is, that he should have brought away Mirza with him j but as the young Heathen was then quite a child, I suppose, his master thought it probable, that he knew nothing of this bloody business, or would certainly forget it during the voyage. And now. Brother, what have you to say ín behalf of your fme Mr. Everard ľ Ah! how often Mve I toid you, over and over again, I wab
certain, that something bad would come out against him all in good time! But you w yre obstinate; you still let him come dangling about your house, and keep hankering and hankcrm 0 ** after your dausrhter Jessy ; and now you may think yourself well off, if the girľs heart isn't fixed upon having the vaga¬ bond, and getting her brains knocked out in her turn, like poor Miss Nancy O'Connor/'—<■ Partial as the old man was to Everard, he couid not but feel his faith in him a good deal shaken by this long string of horrible circum¬ stances, and by the positive manner in wdiich thev were advanced. And now flocked in one after another the Joneses, and the Wil¬ liamsons, and all the family of the Burnabys, with their wondering, and their blessing themselves, anci their exclamations, anc! their pity for poor Miss O'Connor, and their having long suspected nothing better. The good ok! man listened in silence, and sighed, wdiile they assailed him thus on all sides | but though he cotdd not venture to contradict them, he could not find in his heart tojóin iu their censures of the man, whom he had
so long esieemc d, and whom lie still loved so tenderly. But wheu at length Соаыи Dick¬ ins made hb. appearance, (a man of great im¬ portance in this family, fur he was rich, a bacheior, ad anced In years, and Jessy hs gud* father,) and announced hk thorough belief in Mrs. Milmaiks story, it was no longer in old Elmwood's power to remain neutral in tlie business, lie declared his submission to to Cousin Dickins* better judgment, and liis intention of declining any further communi¬ cation with Mr. Brooke ; for lie no longer dared to call him by the familiar and affec¬ tionate appellation of Everard· This declaration was received with great satisfaction by all presents and the resolution was pronounced nem: con: to be extremely judicious : tlie delinquent was al this time in London, whither he liad repaired fas it was suspected) for the purpo.se of ascei taining thc exact state ofhis property, in order that os his return he might lay it before iimwood, accompanied by a formal demand of his daughter's hand. This absence was thought
very fortunate by the company, as it afforded the best opportunity for putting Jessy upon her guard ; and it was determmed to sum¬ mon her without loss of time, make known to her the true character of the man, with whom she had so imprudently been suffered to associate, and insist upon her making a solemn promise in full convocation, that she would from that moment give up all com¬ munication with him. Jessy made her appearance. Alas ! the fate of her heart had been long decided. As she ¡istened to the strange and horrible tale, she sometimes coloured with indignation against the accusers, and then again her cheeks grew pale through fear, lest the accusation should prove well founded. The charge was con¬ cluded; the promise was demanded; yet still Jessy spoke noL but sat absorbed in terror and grief. In vdn was her lover's guilt re¬ peated ; in vain was she called upon to de- dare her abhorrence of him ; 'dll Jessy only answered with her tears. Her friendly rela¬ tions turned up the white of their eyes at her
blindness and delusion; Mrs. Milman was loud in exclaiming against the obstinacy and wrong-headedness of young people, who would fancy themselves wiser than their parents ; and the formidable Cousin Dickins, assuming one ofhis most severe and dignified looks, insisted upon her giving an immediate answer. Terrified almost out of her senses at this formal address, the trembling Jessy now con¬ trived to sob out " a hope, that her aunt had been mistaken. «. * that Everard would still be able to prove his innocence/**. *. 4i Inno» cence ľ* so impossible a supposition was of itself sufficient to set the whole assembly in an uproar: the Wilkinsons, the Joneses, Cousin Dickins, and all the family of the В irnabys gave tongue at once ţ and above a dozen voices were still busy in affixing the least flattering epithets possible to the name of Everard, when the door opened, and Eve¬ rard himself stood before them« He was just returned from London, and had hastened to assure himself of Jessy's welfare. In the
next moment you might have lieard α plu drop· The debate had been carried on in too loud a tone to permit his being ignorant of the nature of their discourse j but at all events, the evident and universal embarrass¬ ment, whkh his presence created, left him no doubt, that liimseif had been brought upon the carpets and that in a marnier by no means to his credit» His sun-burntchcck glowed with indignation, as he gazed round the circle, and requested to know the meaning of those ap¬ pellations, by which while ascending the stairs he had heard himself described. The question being genera!, no person thought it necessary to take it to liimseif· Each iooked towards his neighbour, as if he expected the answer to come from thence, and consequently all continued silent. Eve¬ rard now found it needful to particularize, and turning to Cousin Dickins (wdiose voice had been supereminently loud) he demanded of him thc desired explanation« —* u Why really, Sir/' stammered out Cou¬ sin Dickins, adjusting his neckcloth, in order
conceal îıis embarrassment ; ťť really, Mr. Everard. .. » as to what was .said.. , » I can only say.. » » that / said nothing—that is iu say, not that 1 quite said /w/tó^— though to say truth, it was almost as good as nothing*·— for it was nothing from my own know» lodge—I only repeated.... I only observad ... s that, if what Mrs. Milman said wás true.... "— — 44 Mrs, Milman ?" interrupted Everard ι 4< that's enough—now then vve get a step nearer to the source of the business.—Will you then, Madam, have the goodness to explain your reason for applying such oppro¬ brious epithets to the name of Everard Brooke? a name, wdiich, I am bold to say, deserves ihem as little, as that of any person in this «society—I wait for your reply, Ma- itatn* ,,mB » ~ 44 Welk Sir, and by my faith, you shall have it," answered Mrs. Milman, who by tliis time had recovered lierself, and was now resolved to carry the business through with flying colours, by assuming α double quantit у
of assurance. a You shall have it, never fear ! and if it turns out, that your name is really as good as any one's in tlie company, and that you really did not poison the old gentleman, and beat Miss Nancy's brains out, why then so much the better for you, that's all, and there's no harm done/*-— —·* <4 Poison the old gentleman ? Beat out Miss Nancy's brains? What Miss Nancy? What old gentleman ? Why ş in the name of heaven, Mrs* Milman, where did you pick up this farrago of nonsense ? ? ™ —" I pick up, indeed ! Let me tell you. Sir, that I never picked up anything, or any body in my life; and that if you talk of pick¬ ing up, you are the much more likely person to pick up of the two. And now ľm about it, ľll let you into another piece of my mind. It's extremely rude in you to call my conver¬ sation a farrago of nonsense : but truly iťs no wonder, for Fm not the first lady that you have treated with rudeness, heaven knows! and more's the pity—Miss Nancy for that/'—- ~ 4S Miss Nancy again I" exclaimed Eve-
rard, 4v * and wdio the devil then is Miss Nan¬ cy ?"— -—" What then you don't know Miss Nancy? No; never heard of Miss Nancy O'Connor, I warrant?'*·— — Ci No, Madam; I never did."— —" Well, come, now, tliat is a good one ! To beat a lady's brains out, and then to cut hcr acquaintance, and pretend you know nothing about her, is the finest piece of modern good-breeding, that lever heard of! Nay, indeed, I never expected much good- breeding from уощ Sir, ever since that afiair ofthe tea-spoon. Dut one thing I can toil you ; your liitle copper-coloured hottentot, Mirza, sings a very different song from you on this occasion ; for I had ihe whole story from lis own lips/*— —" From Mirza's? Impossible!'*—*· —" It's not mighty polite in you to con¬ tradict one so plump, Sir, but no matter for that; I repeat it; Mirza told me himself, that you had poisoned a gentleman, and beat his· daughter's brains out 5 and now so much for
liiat, and butter for fish. Nay, if you doii4 chuse to believe me, call the boy hither, and ask him; 1 desire no better, and î see him playing in the garden at this moment/*— -—" And it shall be done instantly!'* cried Everard, at the same time throwing up the window—- 44 Mirza! Mirza!'*— Mirza was soon in the room, —«" Pray, Mirza, what is the meaning/' began Everard, but Mrs. Milman immedk atelv/ interrupted him« — a Silence, if yon please, Sir; ii! examine the boy myself. Come here, Mirza ; well, and how d'ye do, my dear ? Pray, Mirza, what was that pretty story you told ine this morn¬ ing about poisoning somebody, and killing somebody with a club, and.. .. **— —- ft Oh! Missy, Missy/* cried Mirza, "you no say dat l Massa tell me no talk·.. . Massa grieve,... Massa angry. * « · **·— " No, no, child; he'll not bc angry, He wants to hear how prettily you tell the story, /and so you must iell it al j '\ mustn't he« Mr. Brooke V 3 Everard gave a sign of a*sem $—.
ct Yuu know, Mirza, it was all about how your master made his fortune; welk and so. Mirza, (upon my word, you're a very nico Jad, and there's sixpence for you.) well, and so you say, Mirza, and so you say, my dear, th.it your master killed her in a wood: what? did he kill her quite ?"— ™ S£ iss, quite ! slie quite dead ! Massa beat brains out wid great dub!"— ~ a ƒ, Mirza r" exclaimed Everard ; u Bid —· 44 Iss, dad you did, Massa ! and God him bless you for it !"— •—"Bless him for iti" whispered Mrs* Mil- man to Cousin Dickins; " there's fine mo¬ rality ! the wicked little Heathen ! but youi! hear more presently !" then turning again to the boy ; α well but, Mirza, you told mo something too about poisoning~v.'h*t 9 1 sup» pose, before your master killed Miss Anne O'Connor. ·..··.."— —" Conda! Conda!" interrupted the boy, ~" Condor, was it ?" repeated Mrs, Mil* шап :— 4C \усИ э well, Connor or Condor, tlie
name makes no great difference* Well, Mir za, and so you say, that this Anne O'Coiulor instigated by учш r master, I suppose*, .. "— -— α Ohî my massa î røy massa ί" shrieked Mimi in л reme of agony, at the same time pointkig to Kverard ; wdio pale as death, and with a countenance expressing the most pain fui agitation, rushed to a table, on wdiich btood a decanter of water, of wdiich hc hastii\ swallowed a draught ; tiiough so violently did his hands shake, that the goblet was carried io his Hps with difficulty. ~— 44 forgive my leaving you so abruptly/' said he, in a faltering voice \ u I will ret m î ¿n a few minutes */' and he hastily quitted the apartment, followed by Mirza. Now then his guilt was past doubting f Mrs. Milman spread out her petticoats, fanned herself with an air of triumph, antl began a sermon upon the wonderful effects of conscience. Surprize had checked the course of Jessy's tears ; the blood had de¬ serted her lips and cheeks, and she sat mo tionless, looking like ?, marble statue· 'flic
'jnod old Ehmvood telt in hin own tii^ wound, wdiich his darling's heart had iust received: but he had nothing to offerier her relief, except а fond presvare ot hcr hand, and a sigh iff compassion. The re^t of the company shrugged up their shoulders al the depravity uf human naiure, and nodded their head significantly at one another, as if they had been so many Chinese josses— Suddenly the door opened; and Mrs. Mil- man was still in tho full flow of her elo« quence, when Everard re-entered the room, to all appearance perfectly recovered írom lds late disorder. — 44 Mrs. Milman/* said he, u I am now master of the whole of this business. Your ignorance of circumstances peculiar to ihe East, the singularity of my adventures, and the broken English in which you heard them rekted, have led you into л most ex¬ traordinary mistake. Ì cannot clear it up, without subjecting niyself to tho most ago. nizing recollections, anci rending open afresh those wounds, whkh (k's true·) are scarred VOL. П. С
o\ei, hi ι wìiuli are too deep and too deadly iole ewer then oughly healed. If, theiefore, 1 lie opinion of ihe woild were alone con¬ cerned (that opinion, winch is so hide ne- ee.vavy í о my own каррншчч), l should leave you in your error, rather than subject my¬ self 1 о thc pain of an explanation—ikit 1 see in this circle two persons, one oi' wdiom possesses too dear an interest in my affec¬ tions to permit my leaving α single r horn m her gentle bosom, wdikh I have it in my power to remove ; wdiile the paternal kiml- ness, which thc other showed to me wdiile ì wab stili a boy, demands that I should convince him, that it was not shown to one unworthy. To calm their feelings, 1 will Facrifice my own ; and much аь ï shall suffer while making the recital, the recital of my adventures bhall stilt be made—Be atten¬ tive then«, and every thing shali he ex« plained."—--*- Curiosity now became the predominane expression— -Elmwood breathed freecr, held up his head higher than before, and shook
his daughter's hand affectionately : a roseate blush stole Over ihu lûv d y fair íace of Jo^>y, while a look of silent gratitude thanked her father—tho rest of tho company drew their duks closer together, and prepare/ to listen wilh all their ears* Lverard seated himself, and thus began.
с ΰ
гик Xsifì/i.mrt<;
OF ÌCVKKAR Π BROOKE,
_.«.<Ό!ι! S biuobuŕľerod With those, 4\hom Ì .saw Miller ľ' Tempest.
YOU are already aware, that my for¬ tune was macle in the Island of Ceylon. It was there, that 1 wsis so lucky as to find employment in ihe house of a man, wdiose virtuos rondorod him as much the object of universal esteem, as the favors, wliich hc conferred upon me, entitled him to my pe¬ culiar gratitude—1 was engaged by him as lis secretary ; but all other names were soon iorgotten by us both in that of friends.
Ile was an Lnodishman as well as mvself, «.I r 'md perhaps this had no slight iníhťonco in producing so strict an intimacy between ih, A variety of untoward circumstances liad compeUed him to abandon his native land, and sail in pursuit of fortune to the East, His teil had not boon vain: the capricious goddess, who fled from him with sueh dis¬ dain in Europe, полу showered her favors upon his head with the most unwearied profusion. He had consumed but a few years in Ceylon, and was already- rkh anci possest of a distinguished situation. It seemed, as if fortune was at length resolved to convince the world, that siie was not always blind ; ibr had she «searched the whole island through, she would have found it difiicult to bestow wealth and honor up¬ on a wiser or a better man. But of all his treasures, that which he counted most pre¬ cious, that for which he thanked 1 leaven's bounty at every moment of his existence and vvith every pulsation of his heart, was a wife, who united all the beauty and grace*
«f hev sex with all the firmness and judg· и unit iff ours. One only blessing was de¬ uied them : Louisa was not л mother. My friend arid patron [his name was Seafield]. posy/st a villa at a small distance from Columbo* The place, it's true, \*\\ь of no groat extent ; but it unitod in their fullest per fei i ion all those charms, wdikh render Nature ш that climate so irresistible an enchantress, This was Seaffekľs most beloved residence, and hither he hastened^ whenever the duties of his station permitted his absenting himself for a few days from Columbo : in particular, there was a small circular pavillion designed by his own lund**. aud raised under hk own inspection, to whkh lie was par ticularly partial, aud in wliich he was accubtomed to pass the greatest portion of his time· It stood some few hun¬ dred yards from thc» dvv dling-house, and was bkuated on a smali eminence, whence the prospect over land and sea v/as of a de¬ scription richj varied, and extensive· A« round il towo red a thick circle of palai-
trees, resembling a colonnade; their leafy- fan s forinovi a second cupola above tho roof; and while thoy proveniteti a sugle sun beam from piercing through the cuoh ne¿ > of their embowering s!iavk*>, ihrir í afl and /onder stoms pormîttoci nut tlio eye tu loso ou : ofthe innumerable charms а Kurd* d b}' the surrounding landscape. This delightful spot happened to bo iho residence of Seafield's vvhole family, when accidental business uf importance required Louisa's presence at Colombo. Conscious that her husband considered every day as lost, wdiich he was compelletl io pasi at a distance from liis beloved retreat, she positively refused lis attendance, but ac¬ cepting me as her escort, slie departed for the city. Diligence and impatience to return homo enabled lier to dispatch her af- fairs in leštime, than she hacì expected them to occupy ; and in the very first moment that she found ЬегяоЬ' onoo more at liberiy, slie ordered tho palanquins to bo prepared, and Iter '*ktves io hold the ras: elves in rcaclu с 4
noss for departing. Our ¡ourney vests per¬ forinoci by night for the double purpose of reaching home the sooner, and of e «caping tho ardour of the noon-day suu. We arrived an hour after ď-y-break; yet Seafield was already abroad* — 44 As usua!, he ascended the hill to enjoy thc beauty of the rising sun"—-thus said Zacli, Seafield's old and attached domestic ; in whose favor his master made an excep¬ tion to his genera! opinion, that in ali their transactions wkh Europeans, the natives of this island were totally devoid of gratitude, honesty, and good faith. — 4C We shall find him in the pavillion, then ?" said Louisa* ™ Сё Not a hour ago I left him there wri·* ting,"— was the answer. „<« We will go thither and surprize him," she said, addressing herself to me— u wait here while 1 change my dress ; a few moments will suffice for my toilette, and I shall expect to fmd you here, vvhen I re¬ turn/'™
in the телп wdiile 1 remained leaning against one of the columns, winch support- vd the smali portico, by wdikh the door was sheltered. From hence 1 enjoyed an unin¬ terrupted vkwofthehiil and its pavillion, whkh, surrounded by its light and beauiitui garland of palm-trees, attracted the sight ir- resistibly. While my eye dwelt with *auisfae- tion on their broad sheltering heads, 1 fan¬ cied, that I coukl discover a large excres¬ cence upon the stem of one of them ex* tremely unusual in those trees, which in ge¬ neral rear themselves perpendicularly to- w r ards the sky, regular and straight as the pillars of a colonnade, it resembled a large branch extending from one stem to ils neigh¬ bour ; and w hat puzzled me the more in this appearance was-, that it seemed occasion¬ ally to bc waved backwards and forwards, thougli the breathing of the sea-gale* was so gentle, that it scarcely moved the leaves on the neighbouring branches. I made а va¬ riety of guesses to account for this pheno¬ menon ; but every t lung wdikh my memory. с 5
ur my imagination could suggest, seemed inadequate to solve this difficulty entirely to mv satisfaction« i was still puzzling myself with conjee» turen? when Zadi drew near me with some slight refreshments, I pointed to the branch, whose apparent motion had excited so mudi ot my attention, and inquired, whether hc could at all account for the strong effect produced upon it by the sea-breeze, whik tiie slighter boughs were so gently agitated. ! ïe immediately turned himself towards the palm-trees : But no sooner did his eye rest upon the spot ia question, than the silver basket with its contents dropped from his hands; the paleness of death spread itself over his swarthy countenance ; he caught at one of thc columns to save himself from falling on tho ground ; and while hm eyes exprest the deepest horror and consterna¬ tion, lie pronounced wiih difficulty— 44 The Anaconda ¡-—that is the Anaconda !~— Wc are undone P'—— What coukl have produced m efiect so '2
sudden and so violent upon a man, лу ti .* J well know to inherit from Nature the most determined courage and most remark« able self-possession, was to me abíí'.iutcly Incomprehensible : But though I was igno¬ rant of hs cause, the sight of his extreme alarm лл -as almost sufikient to sh^ke my own presence of m inch I saw, that he лл г ав on the point of hiking on the earth, overpow¬ ered by his emotions : ï sprang towards him, and caught hiu* in mv arms, ~ 44 Forthe love of Ьсалч-п " í exclaimed, 44 compose yourself, old man ! Tel! mo, what terrifies you thus ? W f hat mean vou b v the Anaconda? What сап occasion these complaints, and this alarm?"-*- He endeavoured to recover himself--he strove to speak, but* in vain ; anci before 1 could understand the accents of hk stam¬ mering tongue, Louisa joined us,and witliout observing the slave's agitation, put her arm whhin mine, and advanced towards the·'pa* vľdion——This action seemed to restore la Zadi the lost povcers of his bodv and ilinek с a
"With a loud cry he threw himself on his knees before us, and in words interrupted by sobs and accompanied by tears, he for¬ bade our crossing the threshold. —> cc Your first step without these walls/' ho exclaimed, a leads to inevitable destruc¬ tion* Every door must be bolted; every window must bc barred. This mansion must resemble a sepulchre, wdiere nothing living is to be fouod î? ~— And while he spoke, \e hastily closed and locked the folding doors, through wdiich we Iiad a prospect of the pavillion* Louisa ob¬ served his singular behaviour and the agi¬ tation of his countenance, wdth looks, which exprest the most lively astonishment· —* C4 Are you distracted, Zadi?" she asked after a few moments,— 44 What mean these tears, and these expressions so alarm¬ ing ; and why do you forbid our going to your master ?"— 44 Your going to ..... ? Almighty God! My master 1—\Ы is yonder !—Oh ! He is 1
lost ! -— He is lost beyond the power of saving P— —- 44 He is lost, say you?—Answer me, old man ! What mean you r Wiiat fear you ? — Oh ! how my Iieart beats with terror !"— Her frame trembled with anxietv, whik she gazed with wide-stretched eyes upon the messenger of evil tidings, and prest my arm with a convulsive grasp. — 4 * Recollect yourself, my good Zadi !" said I, 44 what h this Anaconda, which you speak of with sucli terror ?—I liave seen no¬ thing except the branch of a palm-tree, wdiich the wind moved backwards and for¬ wards, singularly enough iťs true, but stili there was nothing in it alarming."— ~ 44 Not alarming ?" repeated the Indian, wringing his hands ; " not alarming ?— the Lord have mercy on me, miserable old man ! Alı ! Mr. Everard, lhat branch of the palm-tree........Alas ! alas ! it is nu branch, , , » « ! it is a snake ! а terrible
snake! We call it an Anaconda, and its kind is in size the most enormous, in nature the must fierce, anc! in appetite ihe must ravenous, of any to be found througli aii Ceylon !—See ! see!" ho continued, ap¬ proaching ono of tho windows, u See ! how ilio munsi or plays araong the branches! It always twines and twists itself into those folds, and knots, and circles, when it pre¬ pares to dart itself upon ihe ground like lightning to seize ils prey !—Oh ! my mas¬ ter ! mv poor dear master ! He never can escape ! Nothing can save him !"-— Half of this alarming explanation was more than enough to throw the wretched "Louisa intoa state of distraction. 11er fea¬ tures so distorted by terror, that she was scarcely to be known for the same woman, her eyes stretched almost to breaking, and her hands foldod together wiili as strong a grasp, as if she meant them never lo bo again separated, sho exclaimed in a voice bu hollow and so expressive of suffocation, that it pierced hcr heat\;rs to the very heart
~ u My husband ! — My beloved ! —Old help me to save hinn mod, rrood men ! j'brsakc him not ! *— Oh ! forsake him not!'"— But at this moment, the wife required assistance not less than the husband. Over¬ powered by her sensations, she fainted in my arms ; Zadi fiew to summon her female attendants; and 1 bore the pale insensible Louisa back to her own apartment, thougli Zadi's dreadful narrative had almost de¬ prived me of animation mvseif. Our endeavours to re-kindle the extin¬ guished flame of lire were at length sue* cessful—Her eyes opened ; she cast around her a look of apprehension. —- 4fi Oh ! why are you still here i n said she to me in a feeble voice— 44 is his iife then of so little conséquence? liy to his succour ! Rescue him, or \o\ mo die ! ín preserving him, you will preserve me: if he perishes, I am fost ľ'— —■ ** lie Uves! ho lives! Heaven bo thanked ! lie still lives ¡"—thus shouted the
faithful /adi, as he rushed into Louisas apartment« His anxious vigilance had in¬ duced him to examine every part of the mansion, and ascertain with his own ewes, that it was perfectly secure against danger. lie now returned out of breath from the balcony, whence he had discovered to his great satisfaction, that his view was unim¬ peded over the whole pavillion. He re¬ marked, that the door, and all the windows (as far as the power of vision extended) were closely fiistened ; and hence hc very reasonably conduded, that his master had been aware of the enemy's approach in full time to take every necessary precaution for his safety. — 4ς Hear you that, my dear Lady i" I exclaimed, while I took Louisa's hand · 9 u Surely, this intelligence is alone sufficient to restore your si rengt h and tranquillity«, We had nothing to apprehend for Seafield, except his being surprized by the monster while unprepared. But you see, that he has had time to shut out the danger ; He
has now nothing to do but to remain quietly within his retreat, and tlie snake will ei¬ ther not discover his being so near, or at any rate will be unable to break through the bulwarks, vvhich separate them. The whole business therefore is a disagreeable blockade for an hour, or perhaps loss ; at the end of wliich the Anaconda will grow weary of waiting for its prey, and by tiring to seek it in some other quarter, will release our friend, and then we shall all be quit for the fright."—- The satisfaction with which I thus en« deavoured to re-assure the agonized heart of Louisa, was thorouglily established in my own. But Zadi, wdiose own feelings were too much agitated by Jiis master's situation to permit Ins attending to those of others, hastened with too Httle consideration to de¬ stroy the hope, wdiich I so fondly indulged, and with wdiich I strove to soothe the af¬ flicted wife. — 44 Oh ! no, no, no !" he exclaimed ; *"* wc must not reckon upon the snake's kav-
ing us so soon ! When tho Anaconda has onto chosen α groupe uf ireos for her abode, and is soon to sport among their branches, in t lie mamı er in wiich we saw her aimisinir herseik sho will remain tliere for whole days and weeks watching patiently for her prey, till every chance uf success fails her, and absolute famine compels her to emi¬ grate : Rut her capacity of existing without food is alinosi inconceivable, and till she re¬ moves of lier own free will, no human power is able to drive her from her re** treat."— 44 Almighty Powers !" stammered out the trembli; g Louisa ; :c then he is lost indeed ! Even should those slight barriers be sufii¬ cient to protect him from the monster's fury, he nmst still at last fall a prey to the assaults of hunger !"-— My frowning looks easily macie ilio oíd man aware of the imprudence, which lie had just committed : But thc mischief was irreparable. Every thing, wduch his imagi¬ nation couid suggest to soften the eflect pro«
duced by his ill-judged confession, was un¬ able to blunt the arrow, which had carried vvith it into the heart of his iiiktress the poison i/ d spair. — a But after ull/' said I/ s why are we le¬ take it for granted that our friend is actually exposed to this urgent danger ? By your own account, Zadi, above an hour had elapsed between your leaving y our master in the pavillion, and your discovery of the Ana¬ conda : and what then cau be more likely than that the day being so delightful, he should have gone out to walk, and have quitted the pavillion before the snake's ap¬ proach r"-— — u Angel of-comfort Г' exclaimed Louisa, wlnlc she seized my hand, and prest it to lier lip-3 ; α blessed, ever blessed be you for dial suggestion t -—Why should it not be, as }ou buppoae ?~Why should not his absence iiave rescued him ?"— "—- 4C Ah ! dear Heaven !" sighed the old man, and shook his head —- u the doors closed» * * · the windows all fastened. ·, * "«—*
—" Prove nothiug/* í interrupted iıim ; *-— 4С wdien did Seafield ever kuve his fa¬ vorite retreat, without taking those precau¬ tions Í-— Perhaps, at this very moment that wc are trembling for his safely, he is at the distance of miles from the place of danger ! Perhaps; nothing more is requisite for his full security, than that wc shouid take the precaution of warning Inm in time, lest he should return to the dangerous pavillion instead of coming straight to the house, Come, come, Zadi % let us hasten to find him ! Summon together all the male do- mesties as well as our palanquin-bearers^ let us divide thein into small parties and send them into every path, by wdikh it is pos¬ sible for Seafield to regain the hill/*— — y - Yes, hasten ! hasten !" cried Louisa ; u the thought, that you may come too late, pierces mc to the very soul : Yet on his having already quitted the pavillion hangs my whole, my only hope ¡—Hasten, friends! oh ! hasten to find him !"«—* Her eagerness would not suffer us to re-
main a moment. We consigned her to tlie care of her female attendants. We then collected the male inhabitants of tlie house together with all speed, and having armed them in the best manner that time would permit, we approached in différent quarters as near the fatal hill, as the protecting shelter of trees and branches would aliow us, with¬ out running the riscme of being discovered by the Anaconda. Zadi remained with me. On our w r ay, I endeavoured to compose my thoughts, and to make myself master of e\ ery particular, respecting the clanger, to w hich the friend of my heart was exposed. My own alarm, and Louisa's presence had hitherto prevented my obtaining a thorough knowledge of the nature of Seafield's situa- о tion, and what he had to apprehend : But now that I was alone with him, I lost no time before I questioned Zadi. —* 4f - You see, old man/* said f, u how vour fatal outcry, 4 An Anaconda,' has *i * 7 palsied every soul through excess of terror. Now your imprudence will have been most
unpardonable, should it turn out, tliat you spoke without being quite certain of the fact, or if you simuld be found througli your own natural timidity to have exagge¬ rated tho danger. Recollect vourself there- fore, and then answer me calmly and frank¬ ly«— 44 Are you positive, that what you saw was really an Anaconda ; and ín the dread¬ ful rxount which you have just giw n of her. have you not in some degree overstepped the limits of truth ?"— " — 44 Sir/' answered the good old man, ce tliough it were the last word wdiich I have to utter in ihis vvorld, I should still repeat my former assertions« Why, the very uame of this creature is enough to make every native of tliis Island feel the blood freeze in lis veins !—and that. I have not docoivod myself, is alas ! but too certain. 1 have already seen thc Anaconda twice at no greater distance, than now; though never one of such a monstrous length and thick¬ ness, as that vvhich is at present before us« This country would speedily become a wilder-
ncssj if fortunately these reptiles were not very rarely met with ; for in general they remain concealed within the recesses of the deepest woods—tliere clinging round the branches of some ıriçantic tree., thev remain waiting with inexhaustible patience for an opportunity of darting down upon their prey, the first oran or animal, wdio is un¬ lucky enough to pass beneath them. How it happens, that this snake should have ad¬ vanced so far into the open country, is wdiat I can least comprehend : But as the rainy season is but just over, it is most probable, that she has been swept away by the irre¬ sistible violence of some of the mountain* torrents/'— Durine* this conversation we had conti- mied to advance under favour of the thick- woven underwood, til! we were scarcely more than an hundred paces distant from íhe monster. We could now examine it uith the most perfect distinctness, and the eye was able to take in at once the whole extent of its gigantic structure, it was a
bight calculated to excite in equal degrees our horror and our admiration : it united thc most singular and brilliant beauty with every thing, that could impress the beholder with apprehension ; and though while gaz¬ ing upon it I felt, that every limb shuddered involuntarily, I was still compelled to own, tliat never had I witnessed an exhibition more fascinating or more gratifying tq the eye. The Anaconda was still employed in twisting itscif in a thousand coils among tlie palm-branches with such restless activity, with rapidity so inconceivable, that ii was frequently impossible for the sight to follow her movements. At one moment, she fiis¬ tened herself by the end of her tail to tlio very summit of the loftiest tree, and stretched out at her whole length, swung backwards and forwards, like the pendulum of a dock, so that her head almost seemetl to graze the earth beneath her : then in another^ before the eye was aware of her intention, she totally disappeared among the
leafy canopies. Now she síid dovvn the stem, winding herself round and round it ; and novv again only the extremity of her tail remained twisted round the root, wdiile she stretched out her body upon the grass, and with elevated head and high· arching neck described a large or a smaU circle, as her capricious pleasure prompted. These latter movements gave us an op¬ portunity to discriminate vvith more exact¬ ness (during a few seconds at a time) the singular richness and beauty of her tints. The long slender body was covered with a net-work of glittering scales, girdling it round with rings above rings, and eflectu- ally securing it against every attack. The head was of a yellowish green, and marked in tlie middle of the skull vvith a large dark spot, from whence small stripes of pale yellow were drawn down to the jaw\sv A broad circle ofthe same colour went round the throat like a neck-lace, on either side of whicli were two oîive-coloured patches, in shape resembling shields· Along the back voi. # in и
ran a chain of black waves with sharp- pointed edges, from whence on both sides, narrow flesh-coloured rings and broad bands of the brightest yellow (alternately and in the most regular order) descended in zig* zag fashion towards tlie silver-white sto* mach, wdiere they lost themselves impercep¬ tibly: but wdiat served more than all to dazzle the eye with the brilliance of varie¬ gated colouring, were innumerable spots of a rich and vivid reddish-purple, sprinkled without order over the wliole surface of ihe up« ier skin : for with tlie animaľs slightest movement all these points, and spots, and contrasts of variegated hues, melted toge¬ ther in the sun beams, and formed one uni¬ versal blaze composed of ail the colours of the rain-bow. Much as I admired the splendour of its garment, not less did I wonder at the enor* mous thickness of this terrific creature, which did not yield in bulk to that of a man of moderate sbe. Yet by comparing its thickness with its length, Zadi was de-
cídedly of opinion, that the Anaconda mibt have been greatly reduced by a fast of unu¬ sually long duration,—But the tranquillity of our observations was suddenly disturbed * by perceiving, that she desisted abruptly from her airy gambols, and remained mo¬ tionless at thc foot of the palm *t ree with her head elevated and turned towards the pavillion, as if in the act of listening ! At that moment, oh ! God ! with wdiat violence did mv heart beat against my bosom !—If (as from every circumstance appeared but too probable) my friend was really shut up within the pavillion, it was beyond a doubt, that the monster had dis« covered his being so near her, and was now on thc point of making a serious attack ! We could see distinctly the shape of her hi¬ deous head and the flames of her great pierc¬ ing eye-balls, reflected from the glass-win¬ dows, wdiose shutters had been closed front \\ ithin*—But thc sisht of her own terrors о u-emed to scare even the snake herself, for die instantly recoiled 5 and then laying her- 1
self down close to ihe threshold of tlie cir¬ cular pavillion, she encompassed it entirely«, as if she was determined to secure her des¬ tined victim iirevocably, by inclosing him within the impassable limits of her magic ring! Deeply penetrated with the sense of that danger by which my friend was menaced, I forgot my own, and seizing my gun, placed it to my shoulder the ball whistled through the air ; I was an excellent marksman, and was certain, that 1 had pointed my piece exactly at the monster's head: and yet . · ,. whether too great anxiety made my hand shake, or that the animal at that very moment made some slight change in her attitude, 1 know not. *. · But it is at least certain^ that not the slightest shrinking gave me reason to believe, that she felt herself at all injured. In the mean wdiile, Zadi had seized my arm, and drawn me forcibly into a deeper part of the thicket. —■" Ah! Mr. Everard Γ sighed he ; "í wai wel aware, that the Anaconda can set 1
all our lire-arms at defiance. Her «scaly hide renders her invulnerable, except vvhen one is quite close to her ; and all that you Iiave done is to put your own safety in danger, without advancing a single step nearer to my master's relief/*-— However, it did not appear, ihat our enemy had paid much attention to my assault upon her. On the contrary, she only busied herself in renewing her attempts to gain an entrance through the pavillion*s windows ; till at length seemingly wearied with her unavailing efforts, she retired slowly, and concealed herself under the ver¬ dant umbrella of the palm-trees. We also had regained our former lurking-place; tliough we were now more irresolute than ever, as to the means most proper to be adopted towards the rescue of my friend. While we stood thus vvitli our eyes fixed immoveably upon the pavillion, we observed the door to be slightly agitated. After a minute, the lock was gently drawn back ; slowly, and with the utmost caution, did
the door expand about the breadth of halt' α loot, and out sprang the little Psyche, a beautiful italian grey-hound, Seafield's fa¬ vourite play-fellow and inseparable compa¬ nion. As if conscious of her danger, bhe ruslied down the hill vvith her utmost svvift- ne\ss : But wiih siili greater swiftness did tlie Anaconda in one monstrous spring dart rattling down from its airy covert* The poor little animal was seized : we could just hoar a short half-supprest cry, which marked its dying agony ; for the dreadful jaw-bone moved but twice, or thrice, and lo ! tîıe dog's chine was broken, and every bone in its body splintered. The snake then dragged her prey to the foot of the palm- tree, (for in order to produce the proper exertion of strength, it seemed necessary for her to liave the stem or strong branch of sorr e tree to ding to,) where die stretched herself out upon the grass at her ease, and began with her black tongue to separate tho flcbli from the bones of the crushed little animal« Tho distress, occasioned in nn mind by
this sîglıt, în itsdf so painful and disgust¬ ing, was converted into agony by tlie re¬ flections to wliich it gave birth, after the first moments of liorror and surprize were past ! That fact was now confirmed, which till this moment (in order to preserve at least a gleam of comfort however faint) I had obstinately refused to believe-—Seafield then was actually in the pavillion ! — tlie discharge of my musquet had in all proba« bility made him aware, that his friends were at no great distance. No one but he could have unclosed the door so cautiously, in order to leave his fittle favourite at liberty to quit their common shelter ; and Zadi was positive, that he had observed a ribbaneï fiistened round the neck of the animal, to wdiich something white appeared to be at¬ tached, in form resembling a letter. It was then a message to us ! a cry for assistance ! a sacred injunction, that vve sliould not abandon him in tliis season of his utmost need ! What agony of soul must he have endured,.. · What agony of sou! must he d 4
олтп at that moment be enduring ! To vvhat a pitch of desperation must his mind liave been worked up, before his trembling hand could have resolved to draw back tîıe bolt, wdiicli was the only barrier between himself and annihilation ! How bitter a pang must it have given his tender benevolent heart, when he drove out his fond and faithful companion, and exposed her to such danger ì and then flattering himself (as no doubt he did) that the fittle animaFs Rpeed would surely enable her to escape.... Oh ! what a cruel wound must Psyche's expiring halt heard cry have given to his feelings !™These reflections, or at least others nearly similar to them, almost deprived poor Zadi of his senses altogether. — C4 Oh ! powers of mercy !" he exclaimed repeatedly ; u what did his letter mean to tell us ?—that at this moment he is strug- glingwith despair ?—Alas ! alas ! we know- it, we feel it ! and yet here we stand inac¬ tive, without counsel, without resolution, without hope !"— <*—« α Patience ! patience Γ said I, inter«
ruptîng him : u it is evident, that our wait¬ ing here is of no advantage* Let us return home, and endeavour to fmd means of giv¬ ing some more effectuai assistance, than our tears/'— We found the domestics returned from their unavailing expedition, and the greatest part of them assembled in the court yard, whose lofty walls afforded them a secure re« fuge : Being all natives of Ceylon, they were well acquamted with the nature and pursuits of the Anaconda, either from their own experience, or from hearsay : But al¬ most deprived of the power of thought by their terrors, no one was able to point out any means for attacking her vvith success, I immediately dispatched two of them to Columbo, to explain our situation, and de» mand assistance. I also desired, that me¬ dical aid might be sent to Louisa, and that if they could possibly find one, they should bring back with them a speaking trumpet. I then repaired lo poor Louisa, and endea- voured to comfort her heart with a faint
D 5
gleam of hope, which my own was incapable of admitting. I failed in the attempt ; she was a prey to the most abject despair : nor was I more successful in my endeavours to persuade her to withdraw from this scene of horror, and accompany my messengers to Columbo ; a measure vvhich was advisable boih on account of her own security, and because her absence would leave us at liberty to bestow our undivided attention upon her husband. But finding her resolved not to remove from the scene of Seafield's danger, I returned to the court-yard, where the de¬ jected domestics were still lamenting over the situation of their master, and expati¬ ating on the dreadful propertiei^of thc Ana* concia. -— α Friends !" I exclaimed, cc there is not one among us all to whom the master of îhîs house has not been a benefactor ! Novv, that he is threatened with destruction, novv ib the time for us to show our gratitude for his kindness ! Come then ; let every one follow røe, wdio loves his Lord, and wdio
boars an honest heart in his bosom. Let us despise the danger of the attack, anc! set forward in a full body to deliver him by force! Wi are armed; in numbers, in re¬ flection, in skill, the advantage is on our side. The bolder that we rush upon our enemy, the less dreadful will «she appear to us. My life for it, she will be alarmed at the attack, will fly before us, and thus we shall enjoy the inestimable pleasure of res- cuing our friend from death. Now then ! let all who are of my opinion, show them¬ selves to be men, and range themselves on this side of the court/*— Alas ! Zadi was the only one, who obeyed this imitation : thc rest, poor timid wretch¬ es (in number between twenty and thirty) stood tliere trembling, gazing upon each other with doubtful looks, and whispering together, as if desirous of discovering an ex¬ cuse for tlie cowardice of each in the igno¬ miny of his neighbour· After a few minutes, one of them, whom thc rest had at pointed to be spokesman, advanced towards me, D 6
mul stammered out their general assurance— u that to attack the famished snake with force would be nothing better than absolute madness/'— This hope disappointed, I next resolved îo try, what effect of terror might be pro« duced, upon the monster by the united shouts and outcries of so considerable a bodv, assisted by the general and repeated dis* charge of our lire-arms. Our preparations were soon made; Louisa was apprised of the clamour which was going to be made : and in truth, we raised an 'uproar so loud and so well-sustained, that it seemed almost capable of waking the sleepers in the grave* From all the casements we discharged at the same moments our musquets provided with a double charge, and a hail of bullets rat lied about the head of the gigantic snake, who afforded us a fair aim. Yet still she continueel to play her gambols quietly among the trees; nay, she did not give any sign, by which we could judge, that she was sensible of our attack—After a few
moments spent in this manner with no bet¬ ter effect, we found that our provision of ammunition was exhausted t Besides, we were ourselves too much fatigued to con¬ tinue any longer an attempt, which afforded us so little prospect of producing any ad¬ vantage. By this time the day was drawing rapidly to its close. By dint of turning the painful subject frequently in my mind, and making every possible conjecture, one means of scaring thc Anaconda had suggested itself, which appeared to me well worthy of atten¬ tion ; but in order to put it in execution, the darkness of the night was necessary. I had often read in books of travels, what powerful aid had been derived from fire against the attacks of wild beasts, and how lions and tigers had often forgotten their thirst of blood, and betaken themselves to flight, like the most timid animals, wdien scared by a fire-brand whirled round, or the blaze of a flaming heap of straw* Armed wdth such weapons, I was determined, ан.
soon as night simuld be set in, to approach the Anaconda, and put her courage to the proof, even though the faithful Zadi should be the onlv one of sufficient courase to assist me in my venturous design. The night arrived : an awful stillness reigned all around ns—Our enemy, how¬ ever, still was watchful ; for from time to time we couki hear her rustling among the branches. I past thc twilight in endeavour¬ ing to comfort Louisa with the prospect of a serious attack to be made upon the snake ihe next day, from wdiich (as ï assured her) much better success might be expected : but I judged it prudent to conceal from her our nightly enterprize, the effect of whkh ap¬ peared even to myself too uncertain to make me venture to ground upon it any premise of advantage. Besides, her ex¬ hausted strength made it absolutely neces¬ sary, that she should pass some moments in tranquillity ; a state, which seemed to me absolutely incompatible with the tumulu of expectation, wbich tha knowledge of our
proposed adventure would naturally excite in her bosom. At length a sign given by Zadi made me aware, that all our preparations were com« pleted. Louisa was reclining on a couch with her eyes closed, mid seemed to have Allien into a kind of lethargy. I stole softly from the apartment, and was on the point of quitting tlie house, when a means sug¬ gested itself to me of communicating my design to my friend, even before the arrival of the speaking trumpet, wdiich I expected the next day from Columbo. I recollected, that I had lately taught Seafield a common Kuropean trick of combination, by wdikh two persons separated from each other (hav¬ ing first agreed upon their measures) could convey their sentiments without the help of words ; a certain number of blows, corres¬ ponding with the number of the place wdiich each letter of the four and twenty holds in the alphabet, enabled the striker to form words and sentences, by which the hearer without other communication
was made aware of the steps, wdiich with¬ out his knowledge it had been settled for him to take—this trifle had but lately served us to puzzle Louisa, and pass away an idle evening hour ; and I flattered myself with the possibility, that it might still exist in Seafield's remembrance. At any rate, I resolved to make the trial without loss of time, and the stillness of night seemed to afibrd me the most favourable opportunity for executing my plan with success. A thin smooth board, well calculated for reverberating sounds, and a strong hammer were easily procured. With these 1 nas« tened to tlie balcony, and began by striking as many blows, as the alphabet required (that is, one to A—two to B—twenty-four to Z, &c.) till I had gjne through it regu¬ larly* I trusted that thi/ orderly manner of proceeding would awaken his attention ; and having completed the aiphabet, I told him (ir the same maimer) if he compre¬ hended my meaning, to strike three blows wiihin the pavillion 7 as loud as he possibly
umici.—Oh ! heavenly powers ! 1 had not kng to wait ! Itwas notlung, before three faint sounds informed me, thai í was under. stootl, and never did music seem ъо s wey -, to my ear!—-I hurried to tell Louisa, thai ! had found a means of communicating vvith her husband, and that I was going to command him to be of good chear in ¿vr name and for her sake—A silent melancholy smile, a convulsive pressure of my hand were my reward ; and I novv hastened again to the balcony to assure the poor prisoner, that I was labouring for his relief ; that Lou¬ isa was well, and begged him to be patient and composed ; and that I requested him to keep up hk spirits, and resist the attacks of despair, since lie might depend upon it, that I would either rescue him, or perish ín the attempt. I conduded by desiring him to assure me, that he wouhl confide in the activity of my friendship, hy repeat¬ ing lis former signal— ï nov suffered my fummer to rest—-I listened ■— Again«, inure ludtbly than before, did í hear the tliree
wkhed-for blows given from within the pa¬ villion, and I now hastened to prosecute my nightly plan with fresh spirits and reno¬ vated ardoui. Excited by 'Zadbs remonstrances, about a dozen of the bravest among tîıe domestics and palanquin-bearers were assembled with torches in their Iiands in the court-yard. My design was, to steai as near the bill as lhe underwood woidd permit, under favour of the darkness, and only guided by a single dark lanthorn. When vve could approach no further without hazard, we w ? ere to light our torches as fast as possible, ant! whirling them round and round, to rush towards the pavillion with loud shouts, in order ihat our attack might be accompanied by all the terrors and advantage of sur¬ prizes Zadi, to whose care the guiding Ian t horn was confided, went foremost ; 1 followed close upou his footsteps, and thus with ex¬ treme caution and in profound silence did we press through bushes and brambles, till
vve arrived above half as near again to thc »ti* ,| ·,· ï * I 1 J pavillion, ан tue position wrucn we ¿ыи oc¬ cupied during tlie clay. The Anaconda novv lay right before us, quiet and unsuspecting ι uor could vve liave wished for a better op¬ portunity for executing our plan with every probability ofsuccess. We now turnee! to our companions...,. But just Heaven ! who can express our astonishment and vexation, and liow did our heart sicken at perceiving, that the faithless cowards had shrunk from the danger now that it was so near at hand, and had profited by the darkness to steal away one by one I I was alone with Zadi : we concluded with justice, that for only two persons to make the attempt must be unavailing, and tlie old man flattered him¬ self, that lie bhouid be able to díame his comrades into a resumption of their more manly resolutions. I had but little hopes <>f his success; vet no dioico vvas left me but to follow him and endeavour to give double strength to his pinsmšions and reproaches. Botli wore employed in vain : their 1er* ■■uis lud Mibdueel all sense of díame com-
pletely. They called us madmen for wkk ing to expose ourselves to the fury oí the famished Anaconda ; and instead oî promising any future assistance, they de- dared, tliat tliey woukl only wait, for day¬ break to secure themselves by flight from ;i danger so imminent* In the rnean wliile Zadi was busy in fastening several torches together in pairs. — α Come, Sir!" he cried to me: u let us lose no more precious time in endeavour» ing to inspire these heartless knaves with courage ! Let us leave the cowards, and try, whether perhaps the glare of these torches, doubled as you see them, may not of themselves be sufficient to dazzle and ^scare away the monster. At the worst we can but perish with our dear master, and it is better to die, than not perform our duty !"— I obeyed him : we hastened back to the pavillion. Already were we on the point of ascending the hill, when I felt my arm seised by some one with a convulsive grasp*
1 turned hastily round : a thin figure, breath¬ less througli speed and anxiety, and vvhose white garments fluttered in the breeze ôf night, stood beside inc. It was Louisa! Our dispute vvith the slaves had not past so quietly, but that our voices had reached the ear of Seafield's sorrowing wife, whose couch anguish of heart permitted not slumber to approach. She questioned her attendants; by artful interrogatories she contrived to draw from them the peculiar nature of tlie enterprize, on which we were engaged. Sho feigned to sleep : and as soon as her women were ihrown off their guard, she stole from her apartment, seized a torch, and followed us determined to share vviih us the danger and its reward. My wliole resolution failed me, wdien I recognized the new comer, and when she made known in a few short expressive words her desperate resolution. In a low voice I conjured her to return to the man¬ sion-house ,; I protested, that lier presence
robbed our arms of strength and our hearts of courage r, and 1 asked her, wdiether ir was not enough agony for us to tremble for an existcrce so dear as Seafield's, without being obliged to risque the loss of anotlier life equally precious ? ™" My Hfe for lus V 9 was the only re¬ ply, which she gave to my remonstrances ; a wy life fbr his !«—What I shall I rest my hands idly before me, while strangers are active in his defence ? Shall I have to blame myself during the remnant of my existence, for having done nothing for him in the time of his extreme need, Nothing ! Shall my husband actually be rescued by his frienels, while his careless wife has not even attempted to preserve him ?—No, Everard, no ! my life for his ! my life for his!'— I listened with admiration to the over¬ flowings of this noble heart ! How to resist her vehemence 1 knew not : 1 was compelled to give way to her, and yct was conscious, that her presence must entirely destroyer ery chance of our success» it would have beeu
madness to venture in her company to that extreme point of danger, to whkh Zadi and myself had before not scrupled to advance· The Anaconda too appeared at this moment to be more restless, than formerly : doubt¬ less, the sound of our footsteps, and our whispering dispute must already have be¬ trayed our being in her neighbourhood. Nevertheless, we hastily kindled our fire brands, one of which we held in each hand, and as we whirled them rapidly back¬ wards and forwards, we sent forth shouts «md shrieks with all our strength, the dead stillness of all around us rendered our outcries doubly dreadful. A rushing sound among the tops of the palm-trees, as if branch by branch they were forcibly snapped asunder, was the answer given to our challenge It was thc Ana¬ conda, (wdiether excited by fear, or by an* ger, I will not pretend to decide.) wdio darted herself from tree to tree with Ue- mendous leaps, wdiile the slender stems were bent and shaken by her burth :n. At the
same time w^e w r ere alarmed by a loud bis¬ ing, so piercingly sharp, »that it seemetl close at our ears, and her eyes, blazing with their own vindictive fires, shot lightnings through the gloom of night. In truth, this appearance was in every respect so dreadful, that it required no or« dinary courage to witness it without agita¬ tion· I cannot deny, that while gazing on it I felt my hair stand an end and my blood run cold : and ï observed that Zadi strove to keep his teem closed together, in order to prevent me from hearing them chatter.—I turned wdth apprehension to Louisa. Alas ! there lay the wretched wife on the earth deprived of consciousness. This sight was sufficient to banish every other considera¬ tion· 1 threw away my torches hastii;, clasped the unfortunate in my arms, and with Zadi's help, bore her with all speed back to the mansion-house ; prosperous in this alone, that we retired unpursued by thf Anaconda-—Here after a long interval ot
insensibility , we at length succeeded in re¬ calling Louisa's flying spirit—Slie revived ; but ir was only to dwell upon the midnight scene, from which vve were just returned, and wdiich her inflamed imagination painted in colours, if possible, still more dreadfu! than ihe reality. She called without ceas¬ ing upon lier husband and upon me : and since it was out of my power to give more active assistance elsewhere, it would have been barbarous in me to leave her, with¬ out endeavouring by soothing and per- suasion to dissipate the gloomy ideas, by which her heated brain was distracted. Thus past away the remainder of tho night, which loft us even with less Ik pe and resolution, than vvo possest, when it arrived. The mciancholy mornmc at length dawned; but the sun was .scarcely riser,* vvhen Zacli rushed imo the apartment. His eyes sparkled, and tho beatmg of his heart almost choaked lis words, befoie he was able to give them utterance. —* b Oh ! Mr. Everard /' he exclaimed , ood. ih i·;
лс my master.... my dear master!-—He lu still hope!— -He has still courage!—He en¬ deavours to communicate with us !—We shall soon know, how matters go with hin: .... what he wishes to be done. ·.. wdiat he expects us to do»... Yes ! yes ! we will soon know it !"— It was some time, before he was suffici tartly calm to explain to me the cause ot ihis emotion. At length i learned, that in -examining the pavillion, he had just disco¬ vered a sheet of paper thrust througli the crevice of the door, and whkh, apparently detained by one of its corners, fluttered loosely in the air, unable to eflect its escape* Doubtless ît was a letter, which Seafield hopee!, some favourable gust of winti would carry within our reach, but whicb he had not sufficiently disengaged from its narrow passage. As to reading the coib tents, even if the distance had permitted it, Zadi was not possest of the knowledge requisite· He therefore had liastened in all diligence to communicate to me tliis disco* 2
very, from wdiich I also derived some hope ? thougli fainter than thai wdiich filled the bosom of the faithful Zadi· We hurried io die hill, approached still nearer than we had ventured to do hitherto, and with the a sistance of an excellent tele¬ scope, I endeavoured to decypher the cha¬ racters traced upon the important paper, Alas! that tliere actuallv were characters traced on it, was alî that í could distinguish ; for the light paper fluttered continually in the wind, and was never sufiered to rest for two seconds together. My inexhaustible pa¬ tience, my unwearied exertions, long strug- gled against tho evitlent impossibility of suc¬ cess : í gained nothing by them except tlo/ conviction, that to prosecute the attempi further v/ould only bo to throw away а greater portion of mj time. Zadij in breath les¿ silence and his eyes fixed on mv face unalterably, watched my every movement. ~ 44 Then you give υρ the point ?" said he at lengtli, wdiile a livid paleness over« spread his dark countenance, and such a
trembling seized him, that 1 could see his «very limb shaking; "well then, there к no more to bc said ! Let us return to the house, and take courage : I will fetch you the paper/'-— — 44 Old man !" I exclaimed starting at this unexpected assurance — α What say you ?—Your good intention is worthy of your good heart; but you would makean unavailing sacrifice to your fidelity—you may bring destruction on yourself, but you never mill bring the paper from thence« To do that is out of any mortal power !"— — ζζ May be so ! may be so !" repeated the Indiali; " but at bast the trial shal! be made, It seems, as if my master's voice cried to me, ihat his safety depended on that paper ; and should I be worthy to be^ long to him, if 1 were deaf to my master's cr y ?_By the God of my fathers, I will ei¬ ther come back to you witli that paper.... or never will come back again/'-— And with every word that he spoke, his tone became stronger, his step firmer, and
■fî. ĺi fir." 5 f ,A ' »"ί 4 "·\1"·-* í î «■>·«■* *tï^f>\1 naf Aí 1 hiti ϊ'ίΓίΤΡ dark eves· During riiis contention we reached the court-vard—In silences and absorbed in him- Felf, did this unequalled servant make the necessary preparations for Ids undertaking. Iiis plan was to conceal his'whole person from head to foot under a covering of boughs and cocoa-leaves resembling as much as possible thc broken branches, with which the snake's gambols or indignation had strewed the hill all around her. Under this verdant shield, he flattered himself, that he should be able to creep gradually to the pavillion door, unperceived by the Ana¬ conda. — C4 I have been accustomed/* said he, 44 to this kind' of work from my earliest in¬ fancy. In my time, 1 was reckoned an ex¬ pert elephant-hunter, and by means of this artifice have frequently made those enor¬ mous animals my prize/ , -— But afew minutes were past, and already was Zadi accoutred in this singular disguise-
lïe provided himself with no weapons ex« rept his dagger. He obstinately refused to su Йог me to accompany him, assuring me, thaï ï should only put my own life ip dan¬ ger, without being able to afford him thc least assistance. He was so positive, that' I was obliged to give up the point: but I was at least determined to accompany the noble- minded fellow wkh my eyes, as we!! as with my fervent prayers and wishes. From the balcony of the mansion-house î had an ex¬ tensive and unimpeded view ovsr the sur* rounding objects ; aud from hence I saw Zadi sot forward on his perilous adventures taking through precaution a wide circuit İn order to reach the hill itself. With equal prudence he made hk ap¬ proach on that side, where the pavillion would screen him from ihe enemy's Ob¬ servation. From time to time, I lost sight of him among the underwood ; even when he was before my eyes, 1 occasion* ally doubted, whether it was he indeed, so cautiously and so artfully did he make
his approach, creeping on his haıicîs and knees, sometimes remaining witliout stir¬ ring, sometimes stealing forwards with a movement so imperceptible, that it almost eluded the keenness of sight·- He was a liv in g example to me of the discretion, assi¬ duity, and skiil, wdiich the. savage employs in laying his ambuscadei, and stealing upon lis unsuspecting enemy· And now favoured by the long grass and fragments of boughs, with which the ground was covered, had Zadi by a thousand serpen¬ tine movements reached the w^all of the pa¬ villion. My heart beat violently, as I saw- on one side the Anaconda, as yet (it's true) suspecting nothing, but still dreadful from hcr appearance, and exhibiting every mo¬ ment awful proofs of her strength, by the povverful leaps with wdiich she darted her¬ self from bough to bough ; and on the other hand, separated from her by the distance oí ten yards at most, I beheld a poor infirmând aged man, whoso force consisted only in hk courage and liis discretion. E 4»»
/adi in the mean while remained ьо Паи quii and so motionless in hk present position near the pavillion-door, that the monsto* could not ш! of being deceived by so unsuspi dons an appearance. Tho Indian's» ey e wa** uxed immoveably upon the snake, aud ibi* lowed all hcr twistings and windings will· incessant application, while she swung her sek with unwearied activity backward*- and forwards, now here, now there, now «move, now below ; till at thc very moment wdien she shot herself over him in abound or prodigious extent,! suddenly saw the invalu¬ able paper disappear from its place, without being able to perceive the means, by which it was brouglit into the povver of tlie successful lurker, 1 clasped my hands in ecstacy, and poured out niy thanks to God from the very bottom of my heart.—But all was not yet clone. It required no less caution and dexterity io ι etire, than to approach; and never did I ofier up more fervent vows, than at the mo* meni} when the animated thicket begap to
sci itself again in motion. Slower than the hour hand of a dial, now moving forwards, novv backwards, now right, now left, it stole itself down the hill. Still it went on·... and on..., and lower.... and lower •.. · till with inexpressible delight I saw it almost at the very foot of tlie hill—and now at length I began to draw my breath with¬ out pain— 44 tiie noble feilow is safe," said 1 to myself.·—At that moment, ... whether joy at the successful issue of ins attempt had deprived him of part of his former caution г , ,. or whether some accidenta! derange » nient of the sheltering branches disco vered enough to excite the reptile's suspicion· » » . at that moment 1 saw the Anaconda darl: from above, and in the quickness of a tliought she reached« tlie. bottom cf the hill and enveloped the unfortunate in her folds ! a piercing shriek of horror burst from me ! 1 felt ail my blood сошгеа! itseli within my veins ! Yet even in this dreadfu! situation woid derful was the presence of mind, which Zadi A*« 1.Ì
still preserved ; wonderful was thc courage, the activity, and the skill, with wdiich he defended himself against the monster« Grasping his dagger with firm and steady hand, he struck It with repeated blows between the impenetrable scales ofhis enemy, sought out with inconceivable address the most tender parts to strike, and at length Succeeded ín giving her so deep aud «so well-placed a wound, that it must need.*? have worked her up to ihe most extreme pitch of pain and fury 5 for suddenly I be¬ hold him only girdled by a single foki of the Anaconda's tail, with which (in ihe same manner, that one who has unexpectedly grasped a nettle, throws it away) she hurled the poor wretch into the air far away, till 1 lost him among tim surrounding bushes» As for tue snake, she hastily regained her former hiding-place, where she lay quiet and concealed for -some time, before she re¬ sumed her usual sports; though when she did resume them, it was evidently vvith loss sprightliness than before«
Му agöny is not to bo described ! No« thing was to bc soco uf the unfortunate Indian. What was become of him? Had he been killed by the violence of the fall ? or was he at that moment struggling in the pangs of death ? His preservation 1 consi¬ dered as beyond the limits of possibility; and yet it seemed to me inhuman and. un¬ grateful quite to abandon him to his fate, without having first exhausted every possible means of assisting him. Irresistibly carried away by these sentiments, I rushed from the balcony, and hastened towards- the hill by the same course, which he had pursued him¬ self, and which I could easily track by the depression of the dewy grass. Towards that side also had he been thrown by tlie Anaconda, and it was probable, thar the thicket might shelter me, til! L could reach the spot, where he lay dying. In the eagerness of this hope, t totally overlooked the extreme riscme of an undertaking, tlie very idea of whkh but four and twenty hours sooner woukl have made me shudder.
1С if
through e^ory limb. So true is it, that violoni emotions communicate a force to the mind, which enables it to rise above itself, and gives it courage to encounter danger and even death without the shrinking of a single nerve. Suddenly my attention was arrested by a liim murmur í —It came from a thicket at no great distance : 1 listened again !—Oh ! Heavens ! it was the voice of Zacli™! lost noi a moment in hastening to the place—- Hv heard me; he opened his eye-lids, which seemed already closed in eternal, sloop, re¬ cognized me as Ì raised him iu my arms, лис! а faint smile ctole over liis countenance, as he stretched out hk hand to me vvith difiiculty. ~~« Take it V* he said ; « God be thank¬ ed, that 1 am able to reward yuur kindness •«so weil !—even m the monster*;**- grasp, I still kept fast hold of it—-Oh ! take it, take ίί ! '*— к was the paper, which he hacì purchased ьо dearly, and whkh the faithful cteatiuo %\ tended towards mc.
- ~ C4 Read it ! he continued—* 4 Lose no lime ¡—Before 1 am deprK ed ci rooy senses* airain. . *. and for ever..., at least let me havo the satisfaction to know.. * * what my master wished me to do !—alas ! alas ! novv vou will be left alone to assist him ! v — —" And assist him 1 will, doubt it not, ihou noblo İıeart/' I replied, vvhile I strove to raise him from the ground \ 4C but my first assistance must be given to yourself/*«—* It was in vain, that lie conjured me to leave him to his· fate, and only think of ef¬ fecting his master's rescue. Without heed¬ ing him, 1 managed to lift him upon my shoulders, and ι ottering beneath his weight I endeavoured to effect our escape from the dangerous vicinity of the paviUion. With difficulty 1 succeeded in regaining tho open giound. Fortunately some of the other domestics saw ns fremi the hoube, and İı istened to relieve me froni my wretched Hntheiu Assisted by ihem, 1 at length saw Zadi saiciy deposited omi sofa in ihe man- soishoiue : he was again on tíľ- point ci
losing al! sensibility; but a cordial of power¬ ful virtue being administered without de¬ lay, his strength was restored sufficiently to preserve him from a relapse. It's true, none of his limbs were fractured. but he was dreadfully bruised by his fall ; his breast and ribs had been almost crushed together by tîıe dose-drawn folds of ihe serpent ; he was totally unable to move so much m a finger, md his condition wai such as would have excited pit} even in the most insensible nature. As for me, I almost sank beneath this addition to that general calamity, which Deemed to increase with every succeeding moment. ï was now" a single man, to whose hand Pru. vidence had committed the lives of throe afflicted creatures ! never diti mortal pray to Heaven with more fervour or more unaffect¬ ed zeal, then I did wink imploring th*. divine grace to assist me m fulfilling a mission so sacred and so difficult. But as for Zadi j he seemed to have'already forgotten himseif, hk past dangers, and pro·
sent pains. He implored me to waste no inore time in striving to mitigate his suffer¬ ings, and assured me, that the letter of hk deir afilicted master would be the best balsam for all lis wounds, In compliance with his earnest entreaties, I prepared to peruse the paper ; but the tears gushed into my eyes on recognizing the well-known hand-writing, and it was with difiiculty, d:at 1 decyphered the following words : *— u Oh ! í understand you well, my friends, my beloved-ones ! your voices.., · ыШ more your unremitting and desperate exertions to relieve me.... all convince me, tbat you are near ine ; that you feel for ше ; that you «spare no labour to effect my rescue ! - Alas ! you will labour in vain !—Death has 'dready enveloped me in h к dark circle ; ìhero is no escape; I have already bade my farewell to fife—I cannot long survive in thk atmosphere, corrupted as it is by the pestilential vapours, constantly exhaling from the monster's jaws.™—I die resigned ; but do not embitter this last and heavy
hour by the apprehension, lest your ex* ertions in my behalf should be the means of involving you in my danger. By all that is sacred and der.r, I conjure you, abandon me to my unhappy fate ; fly ! oh ! fly far írom hence ; it is my last, my only, my пиы earnest request ! u Kverard !—Oh I Everard, nry poor wife ! •—Donot abandon my Louiia !"— A coki shuddering ran tlirough my bones *. the poisonous air robbed us even of our 1ач wretched hope, that the Anaconda miglit at length retire wearied out with her vain expectations, and leave my friend at liberty to quit his retreat* But now ii was evident from his Jettet tliat long ere this could hap pen. Seafield would be no more i i.vwìcJitU* help must save hirn, or none /——Zadi sob¬ bed aloud : it was an addition to my own grief to think, that Ί hac! been obliged to give a fresh pang to his faithful bosom, and it wrung me to the very soul, wdien I saw him give way openly lc this burst of sorrow«
•uddojìiv Ito uttered a shriek ьо loud, that it * inled all whu heard him. ~- i4 No! ao! 4 lie exclaimeel in the most vjulent agitation*—* 4 No ! no! he shall not it! far evveli to life for ever í —there are still means.. ,. Oh ! wretch that i am ! curses, •'te-mal curses on my old head, that 1 did not vilink of it till now, and now it comes too Lite !~! might have saved him · I night .have saved him !—Had I but thougiit of it iooner, my master would have been safe at. this moment ! now it is too late *—He must c!ie 5 and f tis my heedlessness, which kills him Ì"— ~ e4 For mercy sake/* I cried, 4C explain yourself, old man !*-—You see, that our mes* sengers are not returned from Columbo—*· every moment, that vve lose, is inestimable í —If you really do know any means of res¬ cue. ... toll it... · discover it ¡—Delay not an instant ! — Speak ! —· To what means do you allude ?'*— ~ gi It ís too iate ! it is too late !" he repeated ; u No one but myseif could have
carried it through ; and here î He, without the power to move a limb, and no one else wdll undertake a task so despe· ,ie V' *~" The means ! the means I" I exclaimed again, almost frantic with agitation. -~-" Well then I" he resumed, his words frequently interrupted with groans ; u the Anaconda is, as I told you formerly, the most voracious animal in nature. She is invincible, while stimulated by hunger ; but she can be overcome by a very child, as soon as she has satiated herself with food.: thea she loses the flexibility of her joints, una instead of her restless activity she seems plunged ie a benumbing torpor, and re* mains unable to move, overpowered by the burthen of her immoderate meal/*— — u Excellent dear old man I" said I,.· in rapture at the ray of hope, wdth which his words inspired me ; u h what you say certain ?»~ -Could we but satiate this Ana* conda. ·. ·.. "— —·" My master were rescued!'* he re¬ plied :~" but to eflect this requires the.
risque of л life : and who will venture that ? —-Oh ! were but these old limbs, as they were two Iiours ago,. . Could 1 but remove the mountain load, whkh weighs upon my chest, and prevents my breathing* * * * "— ~~" Oh ! if I am but right in my guess !" 1 interrupted the old man ; tt you would have driven her prey to the Anacon» da P'— — c * The whole herd ! the whole herd ľ* shouted Zadi ; and he sank back exhausted by the %iolence of his emotions.— 44 Thk thought/* he continued in a low voice after the pause of a moment—** this thought sug¬ gested itself to tny recoUection long ago * but wretch that I was, I believed its exeau tion to be impracticable*—the plague, which lately prevaUed here among the cattle, has occasioned them to be removed from this part of the country, and they w r ere gone toa far to be recalled in time to afiord the required assistance—In despair therefore J banished this scheme from my thoughts ;
but uow that I am rendered unable to put it in execution, I remember, *.. «~ ec What î What ?" I inquired, almost breathless with anxiety.-— u You know well Van Derkel, the rich Hoi- lander, whose estate joins this? He is the most positive man breathing, and having once de* clared our fears of the plague to be groundless, hc refused out of pure obstinacy to suffer his cattle to accompany those of his neighbours —they remain on his estate at this moment ; au herd might easily be procured, and then .. ·. but it is too late, now it is too late ί none but his faithful servant would -dare 1 99 « » β » ******** -— w What ?" said I, interrupting him ; " wu! not his faithful friend ?"— ZadPş looks met mine ; they burned with røw fire, while he confest, that on me alone now rested his only hope. The flames in his eyes seemed to have communicated them¬ selves to my heart ; and the blessings with wdiich he loaded mc, and the cflusions of gratitude to Heaven and to me whkh he
poured forth, confirmed the resolution, wdikh I hacì already adopted, — C6 Be of good comfort, friend I" suidl, as I turned to leave him; 4ς the тап э whom you sought, is found ! I will tread that path which no other will tread, and I now leave you for the purpose of seeking it/'— Zadľs eyes were now r filled with tears of —-" May the God ofmy fathers bless you !" he said, raising his eyes to Heaven ; 4á now- then I can die contented ! Now f then the hour of my master's deliverance will strike at last."— I lost no time in hastening to Van Derkeľs. I offered his herdsman the whole sum in my possession, if he woulel assist me in driving the beasts under the palm- trees: but he shuddered at the proposal, and rejected my proffered gold, ϊ w r as not yet discouraged. By his master's authority I promised him freedom, provided he would but venture so far, as to advance with the herd to the extremity of tlie little grove,
which on the north-side separated the hiU froni the open country. He hesitated; again 1 presi him 5 and at length he stam» mered out his consent, but in a voice so faint, and with a look of such irresolution, as convinced me, that I could place little dependence upon his promised help. However, I at least neglected none ofthe means, wdikh might contribute to our mu¬ tual bäfety : I caused, the slaves to prepare with ail diligence a couple of machines si¬ milar to those, onder wdikh Zadi had per¬ formed hi.s hazardous undertaking·. Cover¬ ed with these, we began to drive the cattle blowly be* ľA e us; and as the general agita¬ tion had caused them to be totally neglected by their keepers dining tlieir confinement in a place, wdiich afforded no herbage for their nourishment, hunger made them more obedient, than we sliould probably have otherwise found them—and thus did we advance towards the hill, though the little resolution of tuy companion evidently grew still less with every step wliich wc took for-
wards. To encourage him, I bade hirn ob¬ serve the tranquillity of the Anaconda, who had gradually withdrawn herself into her green shelter, so that we might almoft have doubted her being really there. — ςζ That is the very thing, whicli alarms me !" answered the trembling slave ; 4δ 1 am sure, that she has already discovered us, and now lurks concealed among the leaves, in order that she may make her prey the more secure. Now then, not one step fur¬ ther will I advance; wdiat I have already ventured is enough to merit liberty ; but at all events, I had radier pass the rest of my days io fetters, than purcliase my freedom by advancing a single foot beyond this spot !"— Aud with tliese words he hurried away. However, I was the less disturbed at hk forsaking me, wdien I perceived, that with¬ out him 1 could manage to drive the cattle forwards, and that no natural instinct made them aware &ff the neighbourhood of their enemv. it was not long, before we arrived at the hill-foot· I was now obliged
to leave the animals to tlieir own guidance feeling themselves no longer annoyed by my goad, they gave way to thc impulse of hunger, and dispersing themselves carelessly, began to feed upon the welcome herbage : but how gTeat was my joy at perceiving the bull separate himself from the rest of the herd and begin to ascend the hilh We arrived near the groupe of palm- trees : every thing was hushed and tran¬ quil·; not a sound was to bc Jieard, except the noise ofthe scattered branches, as the bull trampled them beneath his feet: the Ana¬ conda seemed to have disappeared alto¬ gether* But on a sudden a loud and rattling rush was heard among the palms, and with л single spring the snake darted dov/n like a thunder clap and twisted herself with her whole body round her devoted vktim. Be¬ fore the animal was yet aware of his dan¬ ger, ho already felt his dewlap inclosed be· tween the wide-expanded jaws of the mon¬ ster, and her teeth struck into it deeply.
Roaring aloud he endeavoured io fl), and succeeded in dragging ids tormentor a few yards away with him ; but instantly she coiled herself round 1dm in three or four wide folds, and drew these knots so close together, that tlie entangled beast was inca- pable of moving, and remained as if rooted to the place, already struggling with the terrors and pangs of death. The first noise of this extraordinary contest had been sufficient to put tlie remaining cattle to flight. Unequal as was tlie strife, stili it was not over instantly. The noble beast wanted not: spirit to defend liimseif, nor was his strength easily exhausted. Now he rolled himseli on ihe ground, and endeavoured to crush the enemy with Iris weight ; now he swelled every nerve and exerted tlie povver of every muscle to burst tlic fetters, in which his limbs were enveloped ; he shook himselt violently : he stamped ; he bit ; he roared ; lie pawed up the earth ; he foamed at iîıe mouth, and then dashed himself on ilie VOL* II· F
ground again with convulsive struggles. But with every moment the Anaconda's teeth imprinted on his flesh new wounds ; with every moment she drew her folds tighter and tighter; tül after struggling for a full quarter of an liour, I at length saw the poor animal stretched out at full length and breathless, totally deprived of motion and of life. Now then I expected to see the Anaconda gratify the hunger, by which she had so long been tormented : but 1 was ignorant, that it is not the custom of this ani¬ mal to divide its prey, but to swaUow it in one enormous morsel. Thé sixe of the murdered bull made thk impossible without much preparation; and I now .¡earned from the snake's proceedings the necessity which there was for her always remaining in the neighbourhood of some large tree. She again seized the bull wdth her teeth, and dragged it to the foot of the stoutest Palm. Here she endeavoured to place it
«pright, leaning against thc trunk. Hav¬ ing eflected this, she enveloped the tree and the carcase together in one great fold, and continued to draw this closer, till she had broken every individual bone in her victim's body into a thousand pieces, and had actually reduced it into a shapeless mass of flesh. She was still occupied in this man¬ ner, when I hastened bacie to the mansion- house to rejoice Louisa and Zadi with the assurance of my success The roaring of the bull had already pre¬ pared the latter for my tidings· He limped to meet me at the door in spite of his bo¬ dily agonies, and overpowered me with thanks and benedictions. He also informed mc, that the expected succours from Co* lumbo were at length arrived, and that a physician had accompanied them. I imme» diately requested to see the latter, and com¬ missioned him to impart the good news of Seafidcľs approaching deliverance to Louisa with such precautions, м might prevent her enfeebled constitution froni suffering through v 2
excess of joy. î also recommended Zadi to his care, and then liastened back to com¬ plete my work; Zadi having assured me, that it was absolutely necessary to watch for the moment, when the Anaconda should have swaflowed her prey, and be enervated and overcome by the torpor of indigestion· — 4i You w ill be in no want of assistants/* he added ; u my fellow-servants are all ready to accompany you, not only because 1 have succeeded in convincing them, that all danger is now at an end, but because among the natives of Ceykm the flesh of the Ana¬ conda is looked upon as most delicious food/'— In fact, on entering the court-yard I found the whoie body of domestics, women and children as well as men ş prepared for the attack with clubs, hatchets, and every sort of weapon, wliich had offered itself to their hands« The party from Columbo were well provided with ammunition; and we now afl set joyfully forwards for the hill, though
mı approaching it, we judged it as well still lo use some little precaution. í advanced beyond the rest. The Anaconda had by this time entirely covered the car¬ case with her slime* and w r as in the very act of gorging this monstrous morsel This task was not accomplished without violent efforts: a full hour elansed, before she had quite finished her dreadful meal ; at iength tlie carcase was entirely swallowed, and she stretched herself out at full length in the grass, with her stomach distended to the most astonishing dimensions. Every trace •pf her former liveliness and activity had dis¬ appeared! Her immoderate appetite had novv yielded her up impotent and defenceless, a prey even to the least formidable foe. I hasten to conclude this long and painful tragedy. 1 discharged my musquet at thc monster at a moderate distance. This time the ball struck her close by her eye. Sho felt herself wounded : her body swelled with spite and venom, and every stripe in hcr variegated skin shone with more hrik I a
Hant and vivici colours. But as to reveng¬ ing herself upon her assailant, of that she wa«* now totally incapable. She made one vain attempt to regain lier oid retreat among the boughs of the palm-trees, but sank down again upon the grass motionless and helpless«. The report of my musquet was ihe signal agreed upon to give notice to the expectant ero* . d, that they might ap¬ proach without danger. Every one now rushed towaids the snake with loud shouting and clamours of joy. We all at once attacked her, and she soon expired under a thousand bkms : but I did noc wait to witness this ca¬ tastrophe. A dearer interest occupieci my mind: I hastened with all speed to the pavih lion, and knocked loudly at thc door, which wa. ί i «ened within. — "Seafield! my friend ľ* I exclaimed; is I ! 'tis Everard ! -— Open ! open ! 1 1 Ing you life and liberty/'™ A minute past». ·. another«,.. * and still I listened in vain for an answer—Haei fatigue overpowered him ? Was lie asleep, that he
answered not ?*~I knocked again ; I spoke л second time, and louder—1 listened so atten- tively,that 1 could havedistingubhcdthc hum¬ ming of a gnat within the paviUion—Heaven and earth í —was *** possible, that after all I had come too late ?—the thought was dis* traction!—1 snatched an axe from one of the slaves, and after a few blows the pavil¬ lion door flew open. I ru.*hed into the room, and looked ca» gerly round for my friend—I found him.. *, Oh ! Heaven * —his eyes were closed... * his cheeks pale.... every feature of his no¬ ble countenance so changed, that he was scarcely to be recognized ! He lay extended in his arm-chair, and the noise of our entrance seemed to rouze him from a long stupor. He saw me; a faint smile played round his wan Hps, while he attempted to stretch out his hand to me, but it sank down again from weakness : T threw my arms round him, and prest him to my heart in an agony of joy* ~ 4 You are safe ! ,¥ İ endeavoured to say ; F ê
but thc attempt to repress my gushing tears choaked my voice, and the sounds were un¬ intelligible. ™ ť£ Yes !" said he with difliculty, b4 tliis is being a friend indeed ! ~ But tell me î Louisa, ·.. r"~ --" She lives, and expects you/' 'Í replied ; "come, come! my friend ; rouze yourself! Make an eflbrt, and shake off this, lethargy ! Look upon your danger as no more than a frightful dream, and awake to the real happi- ness, whkh awaits you !"-— — u It waits not for me P he answered faintly : 44 í have received my death-war¬ rant in this chamber. My minutes are counted ! — Louisa · · · · Oh í bear me to Louisa ľ*— The chamber was hot and close even to suffocation. W e removed hím w ith atl speed into the open air, four of ihe slaves bearing him as he «sai in hb arm-chair; but as we conveyed him down the hill, we look care to turn his face avvay from the :pot, where by the breathhss but sliti hor-
rible Anaconda. — Thc purer atmosphere seemed immediately to produce a beneficial effect upon the sufferer; and his strength was still further recruited by a ft /~ ""ops of a cordial, with which I had taken care to provide myself, and which I administered with the utmost caution. On our arriva) at the mansion-house vve found, that Zadi's attention had already provided every thing, whkh his master could possibly need. His bed was prepared ; every kind of refreshment w r as in readiness, am! the physician was waiting to afford his much-required assistance. But we soon found, that the most effectual medicine for Seafuid would be tlie sight of Louisa ; anci as the physician was of opinion, that the lady was more likely to sufler from anx¬ iety to see her husband, tlian from the agk tation of the interview, my friend was in» dulged in his wish, and we supported Jiim to the chamber, where his wife so anxiously was expecting hk approach, I will not attempt to describe this inter-
view, nor thdt wliich afterwards took place between Seafield and ihe faithful Zadi; the feeling heart of itself will fill up this chasm ~~ yct I cannot omit mentioning, vhat it was not tii! I had explained to tny frknd tîıe whole extent of hk obliga* tious to that faithful Indian, and till the re¬ peated orders of his master compelled him to appear before him, that Zadi induiged his ardent wish to throw himself at the feet uf hm beloved Lord—And why then did he deprive himself so long of a pleasure, which fie disked so earnestly ?«—The noble fellow was unwilling to afflict lis master by show¬ ing hîm, how much and hovv severely he had suffered for his sake! I cannot tell you, hovv much both the re-united couple una mysdf were affected by this uncommon mark of delicacy and consideration. Oh! how happily and how swiftly fled away the first days, which succeeded the deliverance of my friend: alas! those first days were the only ones destined to pass happily* It was soon but too evident, that ι
Sea field's sufferings hv that fatal pavillion •O * had injured his constitution irreparablv. With every succeeding day hh si rengt h vi¬ sibly decreased, and the bliahted flown bowed itself still nearer to the gre -und. i lis malady defied the power of medicine ; he seemed to perish away before our eye·*; ; and tlie physician was at length compelled to ac* knowledge, that all the powers of art were insufficient to sustain any longer Soafielďs exhausted frame. Not the unsatisfied do« mands of nature ; not thc hunger which gnawed his entrails, nor the burning thirst which dried up his palate ; not the agonies of his mind, and his painful wrestling against despair—none of these had affected him so fatally-—No ; it was the pestiferous breath exhaling from the jaws of thc Ana¬ conda, which had penetrated into Scafield's close and sultry prison ; and whose force concentrated and increased by confinement, had fallen upon his constitution Икс a baleful mildew, and planted tlie seeds of F 6
dissolut h »n in the very marrow uf hk 1кл What Louisa and mvself endurcck wdiile v -ai chi ne; кь slow bui constantly prt-grcssk« journey to rive tomb, no words can utter. He gave Zadi and his three sous tluir freedom, :md madi* over f o hiin л small estate near Co¬ lumbo, fulîy suílkient to secure the com. (ort oí the genu! uld unn for the remainder of his existence. During the last days oi his illness he frequently reminded me of the letter, wdikh he had written in the pavillion, and of which Zadi had obtained possession at such extreme risque—This paper he frequently charged me to consider as Ins dying testament ; he as frequently re¬ peated the same thing to his wife, wdiile «she wept by his bed-side—His last words were like his letter, " forsake not my poor Lou¬ isa ľ*— Ilk last action was to place her hand in mine—he sank back a corpse on his pil¬ low, and Louisa fell lifeless at my feet· Yet she saw him once more ; she insisted on pressing her lips once again to his. í
trembled for the convulsivo agumos, which her delicate frame w «mid u.ku-r t yO econog this last and must painful stone: vol wa*. í still more alarmed, when I witnessed iho composure of hor afiUcíium iľ-he lohi hu hand in hers; she spoke noì une word, she heaved not one sigli ; nut a single tear escaped frum her burning eyes, bhe stood long motionless by his bed-side; sho bent clown, and prest lier cokurkss lips upon his closed, lids; and then «slowly and silent* y she withdrew to hcr widowed chamber, I diose for Seaield's sepulchre the place, which he hack always loved best, and where he had suffered the most : his tomb was raised in the fat al .pavillion. Zadi and my* self laid our friend in the earth : we shouhl have thought his coffin profaned, had vve sufiered any other hands to touch it. Sea¬ field and. his sufferings slept in the grave ; lis less fortunate friends still lived to lament him. My benefactor hacì left his property joint¬ ly to LouLa aud myself 5 and hk wishes re-
specting us had been exprest too clearly to be misunderstood. Louisa was among the loveliest of her sex ; but I should have counted it profanation, had my heart suf¬ iered itself to harbour one thought of her less pure, than is offered at the shrine of some enfranchised saint, I îoved not Lou» isa; no, 1 adored her« Alas! ît was not long, before she became a saint indeed. Slie complained not, but she sorrowed t she suffered, but it was in silence. In vain did she forbid her lips to confess the pro- gress, whkh grief made in her constitution ; her emaciated form sufficiently betrayed it* A few melancholy weeks Jiad elapsed since the death of mv friend« when one mornine; lier terrified women informed me, that she was not; in her apartment, nor apparently had been in bed all night—My heart in¬ structed me well, wdiere to seek the unfor¬ tunate. I flew to the pavillion; she was stretched on the marble stone, which co¬ vered her husband. In the agony of grief she had burst a blood-vessel, and her Umbs
were already cold —- her countenance was cahn, and a faint smile seemed to pixy round her lips : it was the only smile, which I had seen there since Seafield's death. —She was deposited in the same grave with her husband ; for myself, I was unable to sustain the weight of grief imposed upon me by this second calamity^ and a long anci dangerous illness was the conse¬ quence of my mental sufferings. The skill of my physician saved my life ; ane! no sooner was I able to quit the house, than I resolved to withdraw from a land, rendered hateful to me by such bitter re« collections—-In consequence of Louisa's de¬ cease, the whole of Seafield's property by his will devolved to me—I endeavoured to prevail on Zadi to accept some part of ît, but he declared, that his master's liberality had gone beyond his utmost wishes. —~ 44 Yet one request," saki he, u I will venture to make. My two eldest sons are grown up and able to take care of them¬ selves ; but the third is yoimg, and I feel,
( that Diy death сап be at no great distanse* I lis brothers may treat him ill, or at least may neglect him ; but condescend to take him into your care, let him be your ser¬ vant, and ï shall not have a wish in thb world left unaccomplished. Under the pro tection of an honest man, my boy caunot lail to become an honest man himself/'-— Miraa (for that was the lad's name, the same wdio is now with me) was in the room, and joined his entreaties to his fa¬ ther's with such earnestness, that I could not refuse their request. ï soon after ieft Ceylon, followed fcy Zadi's blessings; the good old man is still alive, and by a third hand í hear from him frequently ; but the letters, wir .h he dictates, embrace but two topics, anxiety for the welfare of his son, and regret for the loss -of hk beloved mav ter. ~ 4С You are now informed/ 3 continued Everard, after а moment^ pause, addressing himself to the whole society, a you are now informed, by what means I acquired шу
fortune. It was the gift of gratitude : but never can I recollect the dreadful service which 1 rendered Seafield (and alas ! wdiich 1 rendered him in vain Í) without feehng my frame convulsed with horror, and my mind tortured bv the most painful recollée· tions—It is this, wdiich has ever made me unwilling to discourse on the means, by whkh I became possest of my wealth. Yet I cannot but think it somewdiat hard, that mere silence should be construed into posi¬ tive guilt ; and that 1 should be treated as if convicted of thc most atrocious crimes, be¬ cause I have not thought it necessary to make public my private life, and to rend open anew the wounds of my heart for the gratification of idle and impertinent curio* feilt У* "*"*"""· Kverard was silent : so were all around him. Confusion blushed on e\cry cheek, except on Jessy's, ivhose tender heart Lul been deeply aifected by the mournful story, ard whose mild blue cyis süli floated in tears, though every now and ihen armile.
beamed througli them in approbation of her lover's conduct—Her father at length mus¬ tered up his courage, and broke through this embarrassing sJence· —" My dear good Everard/' said he, 44 ì know not kow* to excuse my friends here for telling me so many slanders of you, nor myseif for having been credulous enough to believe them—In truth, there is but one person in the room, whose lips are ivorthy to convey to you our apology : there then, let them make it" — and with these words he placed the blushing Jessy in Everard's arms. And Jessy's lips wisely exprest the apo¬ logy in a kiss ; and Everard acknowledged, while he prest her to liis bosoni as Jiis bride, that the apoîogy was not only suf· ficient, but a reward in full for the suf¬ ferings, which /'■ had experienced tlirough the vicissitudes c. 'i; wdioie past life !
IUNÍS*
A UALLdl·.
~-—" If Dtiath Contort vvith thee, Ikuib iis te nve as Life ', %i MUU·*.
117
THE DYING BRIDE.
**-*' Speech speeds my cou wer I й —Albert .-said, And swiftly onward hied : He went to vsee his lovely maid. And claim her for his bride. How to the castìe-gate he eame ; Now entered he the hall ; And there he saw an antient danie¿ Who many a tear let fall. *— if Good mom, good evening, Dame/* he said. The matron when he spied ; m Where shall I find my lovely maiti ? Why tarries my sweet bride I"«·»
--'** Oh ! she i.s on hor drallı >bod laid/' That ancient Dame replied ; fí Go love, Sir Knight, so. ne other maid, And chuse some other bride. " Oh ! Bhe is sick at heart, at heart ! Is .sick, uud like lo die* ! And iii ilie gloom of yonder room Expiring dot h «she He* ľ'«*** The warrior went with steps oť woe, Nor dared a word to speak, While oft a silent tear would flow Adown Iii« sun-burnt eheek ; Ye?, strove he, when he reached her door, Hís teará concealed to keep, For well he knew, hii* lady .sore Woidd grieve to see hiin weep* He entered, and he «softly said, (And n hile ho said, hc .sighed,) »=■/·* Are you not better, gentle n*aid г Kot betler, my sweet bride?"—- — fť Oh í iiever shall í beller be! Ко пюге your bride am í : Ли hour, and yoa my grave shall iee A momeli, und I die I
ŕ * Tb ι. i hearts« fond auist boat ио mors Tht*.**- с*уеч mo more must shine" ; Nor loiig wilŕ tbou ber loss dupioríy Wliole iove ьо ton g was thine*. " Dy fhis dom* л*» ìiì they bea»* ше out ; By tiuit will guests comt· in ; Aiid soon forgetting me, ио doubt A second bride you'li wiu. ( * Ttie self-same bells,, which mourn my doom, Shall hail your marriage-morn ; Tho sci f -samo flower», which deck my tomb, Your bride-maids shall adorn : u And on your couch of damask laid, Сю^е by your new love's side, No more you'll think on mc 3 poor maid ! You'll kiss your second bride !"«— she said ; his hand she fondly wrung, While painful came her breaih ; ■— <f Adieu!" still inhered on her tongue» Jiut >ank, unsahb in death. Toe hciuhling Knight, her lips he past * Colti were Ним: Hps so swett! The trembling Knight, hu touclied her breast ; lier heart had reused lo beat !
Whieh roses lately ti yct!, Autl гШ he love anot her mahl Aiid chuse another bride r'"«— No, Lady, irø ï Death's gathering misţ Obscured his tai hug eyes; Thc beauty's lips once more he kissed, Then sank, no more to rise ; Close to her cheek his cheek he laid, And murmured, as he died, ■*— # ' See, love í I loved no other maid. And chose no other bride !"—«
>з«»вЩЙЗЯ^ШЬ&&#'>
ТИЕ FOUR FACARDINS, AN ARABIAN TALE.
FART I.
.—. ςζ On a banni les Démons ef tes Fées ; Skusla raison tes Grace.·« ¿toutì'ée^ Livrent nos e<XMirs à Uin.sipidité ! Le Iiîiisonner tristement s'acr&Hte ; On court, hélas ! apres la vérité— Ah ! eroyez moi, l'erreur a ron mérite. ' »
Ol.TAïWÏ
O^, i >v
THE FOUR FACARDINS. PART I.
.^-*» Oh ï wonderful,, wonderful, and again mo»l woiiderluî vvonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that eut ofall whooping."-— Aff mu likt* it.
At the Court of Schahriar, (that Monani:, whoso method of preserving lis honour by cut tmq; lis wife's head off, has rendered him so justly celebrateci throughout the world,) was educated tho heir ofthe small principali iy of Trebizonde. At an early age he eie- parted in search of adventures ; and having consumed two years in tliis pursuit, he un¬ expectedly returned to lhe capital of India. Hearing of his arrival, the Sultan was dc- ,· о
sirous to know the history of his travels* In consequence, one ел ening the Prince >vas ordered to attend thc Monarch, Λνίιοιη he found already in his bed-chamber ; the fair and wise Scherazade reposed by his side, and her sister Dinarzade occupied as usual a snug little campjjed in the corner. This latter was not the person least anxious to hear the Prince's history; she had perceived, lhat he was young and handsome, and had even been kind enough to let him know, ihat she thougiit him so. To her great burprize he had taken no notice of her hints, and, anxious to know the reason of his back¬ wardness, she waked for his narrative v/ith impatience. At the Sultan's request he be¬ gm it in the following words.
Histo-y 0 f the PRIXCE or' TP^niZONDE. —-It is no« the ears of your most august and sublime Majesty, that fictitious tales should be related. For my own part, valuing myself upon the most scrupulous veracity, I shall follow your beautiful Sul¬ tana's example, and inform you of adven· tures no less true, than they would appear fabulous from any other lips than mine. I shall only mention my birth so far as relates to my mother's strange superstition, that the happiness or misfortunes of my life vvould depend upon my name. Accor¬ dingly, not finding one to her taste among those adopted by my ancestors, she was on the point of consulting the oracle of Baciria, when her favourite parrot, for whom she had a great regard, took it into its head to repeat 44 Facardin," several times. This was enough to fix her irresolution, and she de¬ termined to honour me with this illustrious О 3
appelli tion« í proceed to that period of my liie, wdiich is remarkable for the adventures about to have the happiness of being related to your majesty. î quitted your court some days before the revolution* which took place on account of your first Sultana. "When the news reached me, I had still two days'journey to perforas before I could reach my own dominions ; and 1 must take the liberty to say, that I then dis¬ approved your leaving court no less, than I have disapproved your conduct since your return. In my opinion you had better not have married again at aH 'han have secured your wife's fidelity by not giving her time to be unfaithful ; that is to say, by behead¬ ing her on the morning after her nuptials. I stayed at Trebizonde no longer, than w r as necessary to restrain my vassals within the limits of their obedience ; for they were on the point of rebelling agamst your edict, by which it was supposed, that all other Sovereigns wouki regulate their conduct. I assured my subjects, that I had not thc
kast design to introduce the fashion at Trebizonde, Then having purchased the list of tournaments for tiie present year, as also a description of the most dangerous- adventures to be met wkh throughout the universe, I set out with the design of ren¬ dering my singular name as celebrated, as it appears uncommon. Without vanity I may venture to say, that I have not quite failed in the attempt. My preparations were quite different from those made by adventurers in general : in¬ stead of a squire to carry my armour and reíate my exploits, I took with me a secretary to write them down ; and never had poor secretary so much to do ! Fortune favoured me, wdterever ï went. No beauty coukl resist the graces of my person, and no hero the valour of my arm, However, ï soon grew tired of being ahvays beloved without ever loving ; and if luckily 1 had not found every day some monster to kill or enchantment to destroy, I know not, wdiat I must have done for amuse-
ment· My secretary, who was naturally a man of sense, and who was much improved by living in my society, endeavoured to comfort me by demonstrating, that there were misfortunes in life, even greater than those, of which I complained. -— 4I Heaven grant," said he, 4C that the happy Facardin never may know them, and that fortune may guide his steps, far from the fertile plains and dangerous climates of Astracan !'*-— It was mid-day, and eve found ourselves in the midst of a thick and pleasant forest. 1 was on the point of selecting some shady tree, beneath whose boughs I coukl seat myself to hear at my ease my secretary's account of this same Astracan, when we per¬ ceived two strangers advancing towards us, mounted on camck. The first attracted my attention, as well by his appearance as by the action which he performed, as soon as he саше near us. His figure was the most nuble and elegant that I ever hael beheld ; and his features were so beautiful, that
although accustomed to see me every clay, my secretary could not forbear expressing his surprize and admiration. We had full time to examine him; for, stopping his camel opposite to us whom he did not observe, he* took his helmet from the hands of his atten¬ dant ; but instead of putting it on, as I ex¬ pected, he sighed severa! times, and fixed his eyes tenderly upon a bird sparkling with gold and diamonds, wdiich I took for atı eagle, and whose extended wings over* shadowed the helmet. After contem nîating this image for some time, he kissed it respect¬ fully; then returning the casque to hk Squire, he passedon, still plunged in the same profound reverie, which liad prevented his observing us. It was then, that I reflected upou the words of my secretary ; I could not but own, that a man really in love must be extremely dis¬ composed at finding in hk way such a rivai as ihis stranger. I coukl not resist my curiosity lo know his name ; and my .secreta¬ ry Iraving stopt the Squire to ask the question ^ u 5
returned in dismay to inform me, that he was called Facardin ! ~» a Jubt Heavens !" cried 1 in astonish* mcnt ; u Facardin ?"— At this exclamation, the handsome knight dunking that I had called him, turned his uimel'û head, anc! inquired my business. ~~ C4 l would nnly ask/* said I, "wdiether i*> it possible, ihat your name sliould be Facardin ?"~ — 44 It is but too true," he replied ; йй would to Heaven, that it were not, since I attribute to a secret fatality attached to this villainous name lhe greatest part of my misfortunes/'— — ' й May I inquire," demanded Í, ùù w hat ihose misfortunes are ?"— £e You shall know/' answered he very politely : 4C I shoukl be the most constant man upon earth, ifl were not as unfortunate in iove, as for some time past my heart har, be*Mi susceptible. Still í cannot complain that my mistresses fiave deceived me, for none has ever pretended to love mc ¡j j^ mie, th*· mosi adorable of mortais.
the only woman wdio ever beheld me without aversion, seemed for a moment to return my passion ; but aîas ! she only proved her regard by putting me to a trial, whose remembrance makes my blood run cold. But to return to wdiat I was saying, it is impossible, that although I want all other recommendations, my assiduity, attention, and complaisance should be unsuccessful everywhere, if this ridiculous name did not brino: me bad luck !"—- — 44 How/" «said 1, c< can a man like you have offered his heart in vain, and can a person of so much sense as you seem to ,pob:»csSj. imagine, that your name is the cau;» of your rejection ?"—- — 44 ît Is the p-ain truth/' continued he ·, * 54 to convince you of it, I nted onlv relate my adventures ; but doubdess you must have more weighty employment, than listening to the history, of my disappoint¬ ments/'— 1 assured Jiim, that jusc :ho;i I lia J iv; thing bctrertodoj aud to give hini son**; '-· 0*
little hope, that his fortune would change, 1 addressed him as follows : — u Be assured," said Ι, α noble stranger, that a name is oidy lucky or unlucky, accor¬ ding to the fortunes of the person who bears it. I know not from what country you come; but to judge by the wonders wdrich you relate of their rigour and cruelty, the fair-ones wlio inhabit it can be no other than wild cats. 1 am called Facardin as w^cll as your¬ self ; but to show you how little the name signifies, know, though I have met with a hundred beauties in my traveis, (some of whom were of the first distinction,) none of them ever cost me more than a single sigh. My secretary shall give you the Hst of them, with their address : pay them a visit, and when we meet again, you will tell a very different story. 55 — -— 44 Alas P' replied the unknown, a thougli you found them lambs, to me they will prove tigresses ! in every woman whom I address, never have I failed to excite disgust, the Matron of Mount Atlas excepted, ι
who must have excited disgust lierself ín hearts the least dainty and most sus¬ ceptible. Listen to me for a few minutes, and you will be convinced of the truth of this assertion."— We now quitted our camels, and while our attendants gathered dates and pome¬ granates for our refreshment, vve chose in the thickest part of the forest a convenient place to repose ; the stranger then addressed me as follows.
The History ofi FACARDIN of Mount Atlas. I have vowed never to discover myself, so long as my heart shall remain thus ri¬ diculously susceptible of first impressions, and my person thus universally scorned even by those very damsels, who to all others are very far from being cruel· You must ex» cuse therefore tlie concealment of my birth ;
neither vvill I mention tlie kingdom, whkh í quitted with the design of «signalizing niy¬ self by some remarkable action. Suffice it to say, that my first object was probably the same, wdiich has brought yourself and so many other adventurers into the field : I mean, the conquest of Moussellina the Seriom, Heiress of Astracan. But although (as you already must know either by experience or by report) she is the most perfect of mortals, I undertook this adventure, less from cu¬ riosity to behold, or wish to possess her, than froni ambition to*· perform a task su difficult, I may say Indeed, so impossible,, Glory wa'* then my heart's onîy passion r on the subject of love I felt the most absolute indifférences As yet I have met with no more than tvvo adventures, whkh can merit your attentions the first happened in the Ые of Lions, and gave rise to ilie second, which took placo apon Mount Atlas : the circumstances wore as follows.
At two days' journey from that famous mountain, on kv hose summit, if poets toll the truth, Iieaven and the zodiac recline, a vast forest extends itself to the very brink of the sea. This forest is filled with animals of every kind, those of prey alone excepted ; anc! we met' them in such multitudes, that it was frequently by no means easy to force a passage through them. The inhabitants of a small town, whkh is situated on its con¬ fines, afterwards informed us, that all the lions of the surrounding deserts used former¬ ly to quit them for the sake of hunting in this forest, and that having cat up the stags, goats, anci hares, thoy proceeded to eat up ihc men, women, and children. In this distress the people had recourse to the en¬ chanter Caramoussal, who resides on the mountain's summit ; by whose spoils the whoie lion-nation was banished fo а small Island, whitii f easily saw from that part of tho shore whore tfie sea bathed the foot of Mount Atla*i. Unluckily, in consequence of this emigrations tho staps auri Inres had
multiplied so prodigiously, that the distress was nearly as great as during the reign of the lions ; the enormous herds, whkh I had observed in my way through the forest, spreading their ravages to all quarters, and devouring the whole produce ofthe country. To remedy this complaint, a hunting-match was made every year into the neighbouring isle, not with the intention of disturbing or hurting the lions, but of taking a dozen, and turning them loose in the forest. I was also informed that this hunting-match was to take place in tvvo days, and that if I chose it, i might be present at it. By any other tlian a knight-errant, a lion- hunt might not have been thought a party of pleasure ; but I accepted the offer vvith great joy. The rendezvous of tlie hunters was on the shore opposite to the Isle of Lions : the isle seemed to be tolerably extensivo, ofa wild aspect, and much wooded. The preparations for this eliaco surprized me not a little. I expected to find plenty of huntsmen
armed with darts, aitows, and clubs, besides dogs of alksorts and sizes, instead of tliis, í only saw twenty men accompanied by the same number of girls, young and by no means ugiy : each girl held a cock upon her wrist, and the boats m which we embarked, were well supplied vvith strong nets. As vve approached tlie isle, vve could hear roaring and howls so loud and terrible, that my Squire, tliough naturally brave enough, was evidently by no means at his ease: yet not one of our nymphs was in the least dis¬ concerted. The shore was &oon entirely covered by troops of these pohte lions, who waited im¬ patiently to receive us. I did not see the possibility of disembarking, in front of an enemy so tremendous : but three of our vessels touching the shore before the rest 2 three stags were instantly turnod out, whom the lions pursuing, the entrance of the isle was left dear for иъ* As soon as we landed, we advanced into the depth of the forest ; mid hero, while the men spread thoir
nets, the women covered the cocks with small hoods, similar to those which are put- on falcons* Scarcely were the nets spread, when the lions returned to us at full speed : there were about two dozen of them, and all, as far as ï could judge, were lions with good stomachs. But as we only wanted three or four at a time, one of the girls unhooded her cock, and pulled him twice or thrice by the tail. The spot, in whkh we stood, was so dark, that the bird imagined that day was breaking, and began to crow with all his might. The lions at this were so terrified, that they fled from us with all expedition, one excepted, who fell into our toils. He was immediately embarked with one of the huntsmen, and the girl wdiose cock had just crowed. Though the Hon was sufficiently entangled in the net to prevent his doing any harm, it was thougiit right to put a kid into the same boat, to prevent his thinking the voyage tedious. 'Ihis mode of hunting;, wdikh appeared to me not more novel than entertaining,
listed, till every sportsman had embarked vvith his lion, his lady, anil her bird. I in¬ sisted upon being the last, the person who hrought up the rear running the greatest risque ; and I sent off my Squire in the last boat which ieft the island, the one, which had brought me, remaining for my own use. Being a stranger, thc girl of the best courage, and the cock with the shrillest voice, were assigned to me for fear of accidents. The damsel began to instruct me respecting the best means of retreating; but enraged to see thc cocks carry off all the honour of the expedition, 1 begged her to keep hers silent, till I liad measured my strength against one of the lions, .observing, ihat in case several attacked rae at once, she would always have time enough to conio to my assist nice, and interrupt a combat so unequal. I saw by her looks tliat she did not above half like the proposal ; but at the mo* ment that she prepared to repiy, tho lions returned to tho attack. Draw ing my bword, I advanced to moot
them : at their head was tim most formidable monster, that I ever beheld; his mane bristled, and his eyes glared with rage. By accident too this lion was deaf as any post ; vvhich 1 soon discovered, for my companion, (terrified at îıis enormous size,) made her cock crow without a moment's delay, and its cry was so horribly discordant and so shrill, that it went through and tlirough my head completely. All the fions, except that which 1 have just mentioned, were im. mediately seized with a sudden panic, and tumkled over each otlier in their hurry to escape. The girl and the cock squalled and crowed dll they were hoarse, and the noise which thoy made was even more disagreeable, than ihe company of the Hon. Without vanity the beginning of our engagement well deserved the observation of more cahn aia! illustrious spectators. î soon drew blood frum my an togonist in several places : but 1rs return he gave me a scratch, wduch be» ginning at the right ear descended like a scarf, to the extremity ofmy left heel. î had
but fittle skill, neither indeed had my adver¬ sary ; but then he was furnished with a tail, wiich annoyed me even more than his claws· As it grew iate* I took my sword in both hands, meaning to end the contest at once, before the night arrived: the lion, vvho, according to all appearance, had tlie very same intention, rose immediately upon hk iind legs, at the same time opening for my accommodation a mouth so enormous as to exceed all measure, all rule, all probability ! ín her terror at thk sight, the girl let the cock slip from lier hand; the lion left me to run after the cock, and I ieft iho girl to run after the lion. I soon overtook him, but not time enough to save the unfortunate cock, whom lie had already seized, and whom he swallowed before ray eyes, as you would do a sugar-plumb* This affront added fresh fuel to my wratli. So much was I transported with rage, that without observing tho attitude into whkh the lion had put himself, I struck off his right paw ¡, with which he endeavoured to
make me understand that he was willing io capitulate. The ground was deluged by the bloods which gushed from the wound. 1 still kept upon my guard, not doubting that the violence of his attacks would be re doubled by the thirst of vengeance ; but vengeance was the last thing in his thoughts : on the contrary, supporting himself against a tree 3 he cast on me a piteous glance, and sighed—" Ah ! Facardin ľ'— This appeal affected me, and I w~as on the point of approaching to assist him, wdien the cries of my companion summoned me to her succour* She was exerting all hei strengtii to retain the boat, which had broken its cord during the battle; andas she knew this to be our only resource, she made every possible effort to prevent its escaping. Finding, vis soon as I joined her, that instead of embarking i prepared to fasten the boat again to the shore, she was ready to go distracted. I told her, that 1 would sooner die than abandon in such a forlorn situation the unfortunate lion, who had
addressed me in a manner so affecting ; that I was going in search of him, in order that I might transport him with me to the continent ; and that it was my firm resolution to give him all the assistance in my power* She exclaimed vehemently against a proposal, vvhich appeared to her the height of ex* travagance, and besought me on her knees, not to expose her as well as myself for the sake of an old dead lion to the fury of all the living lions in the islands. She talked In vain : I returned to the place, where I had left him ; but it was without success that I sought him both there and in the adjacent parts of the forest. In consequence I was obliged to regain the boat, heartily ashamed of not bringing back a lion, like the other hunters. But my companion's distress is not to be described. She told me, that the loss of her cock had dishonoured her and her whole family for ever, and that she never could survive so signai a disgrace.
Ì was still endeavouring to alleviate hei despair, wdiich I thought not a little ri¬ diculous, when we readied the foot of Mount Atlas* It was almost dark* I had lost much blood, and sufiered greatly from thirst* Having, in spite of his request to stay 5 had the attention to send back my Squire, I ex« pected that he in return would have the attention to wait for me on the river's banks or else at *he foot of the mountain ; but nobody appeared. My companion, grow¬ ing more desperate with every moment, resolved to attempt gaining' the summit oí Mount Atlas, and implore Caramoussal^ assistance ; or in case tlie magician refused his aid, to precipitate herself from such place, as might seem to her most convenient To prevent the execution of the latter de· sign, I followed lier as long as it was possi bk ; but losing her in the obscurity, which prevented my observing the winding pat b tlirough which slie passed, after much wan dering about the clifts, I was obliged to sen
inj self in that part wdiich seemed to me most level, and resolved upon passing the night io that situation. Scarcely had í taken my place, when I heard the distant and agree¬ able noise of* a rivulet, which^flpvved among ihese solitary rocks. So' tormenting was my thirst, that heedless of fatigue, or the clan¬ gorous precipices by which I ^,:äs surrounded, I bent my steps towards the spot whence the sound proceeded, I was certain, that í approached it ; still I should have found it difficult to reach, if, by dint of examining, I hail· nof discovered just above me a faint ray of light, I took ihis for my guide. As I approadied, by degrees the light grow stronger, and i fancied, that ! could distin¬ guish 'the nuke of spinning-wheels. 1 was nat mistaken. By iho b!a*/.e of tvvo large torches, placed on each side of the dour of a wretched hut, I perceived two lean aud withered arms, wh h hands sukible, which, passing through tvvo holes in the door, managed a wheel, and spun with mose grace, t Irm their appearance prørakuh *"Ob. ID if
Having admired for some moments tins discreet and mysterious mode of woi king, I pushed against the door without knocking» ît opened without difficulty, and I beheld tdie spinner, the rest of whose person was certainly worthy of the specimen, which I had already seen. Her face was like an old parchment p^ 0 !ed upon a death's head ; she was naked to the waist, and never was corpse more dry or wasted than her miser¬ able body, I turned away my eyes, and demanded something to quench my thirst. — u In this abode/ 5 she replied, 44 you shall want nothing, if you will but have patience, and can resist your inclinations and conquer your dislikes/*-»- Thus saying, she embraced me, before I was aware of her intention. Then placing me by her, she perceived, that my cloatb were bloody· She shuddered, alarmed at my situation, of the clanger of which I was myself ignorant. — u Your death would have been inevi table," said she, u had the succour, which
ï am going to give you, been delayed another hour/*-—" Thus saying, she begart to undress me, ?nd examining my wound from top to bo 1 * torn, she pressed где in her odious arms most affectionately, every now and then kissing the piace from whence she wiped the blood. The intolerable disgust, with wbich her endearments inspired me, did not escape her ; but in spite of tliese marks of aversion, she continued to anoiut my wound with an essence, vvhose odour perfumed the whole hove!. ™ 44 Senseless youth !" said she ; " knew you the treasure vvhich you reject, and which, ΐ see, you will lose, how fervent would be your gratitude, how different youi f motions Γ-»- I was so much recovered and refreshed by this first dressing, that ϊ needed not it second to be in perfect health, ϊ novv only wished to quench my thirst, and free myself from my disagreeable hostess* I therefore requested her to satisfy the first and must η 2
urge'il of my necessities, since the succom, wdiich she had just given me, would be unavailing, if she suffered me to die of drousrht. — 4i f must put you then to that trial/* said she, u which ï foresee, you will be unable to sust aio. Foliow шс/— Sc) decrepit was sheş that she raked her¬ self with the utmost difficulty ; and he r person gave me so much disgust, that f could not bring myself to afford lier any sup¬ port. Pdie was quite bent double, and in spite of the crutch on which she leaned, í thought, sho never could drag herself out of the first apartment, the most dirty and miserable one that ! ever beheld. The next was rather bettor, and the third mudi larger, and tolerably furnished; but the last was the most magnificent room perhaps inthe universe. It,appeared to be rat her the fabled habitation of some fair}, than the apartment uf a mortal. No¬ thing was to b* seen but triasses, admirable pictures, and furniture the most costly.
On one sitie stood an elegant toilette, dis¬ playing a variety of jewels ; on the other, a bed, covered wilh Chinese gold and oriental pearls in embroidery, seemed only to wait ϋ e Divinity's arrival, for whose use tliey were nrcnarod : not far from the toilette I perceived an undress, fit for the wearing of an Empress of eighteen. It took us a considerable time to roach this chamber; for besides that ťne old lady moved very deliberately, she never sc ffered mc to enter any apartment, before she had passed her Iiands througli two holes in the door, and spun for a few moment", as 1 found lier doing on my arrival. My thirst was much irritated by this delay ; still iu violence uv.s suspended for some instants, while I gazed on the objects contained in tiie hitter chamber. But my companion toon interrupted ihis examination. —- 44 Come !" taid she, taking my hand; "let гь tu the fountain. What voa bo- hold horo can only servo to excite flames in yourboocm, and what you want k w ate,- ρ* •r- í'
coo! those whicii burn there already. Fol¬ low me, and you shall be satisfied/'—« It was unnecessary for her to say this twice ; I followed her eagerly. The foun« tain was within a few yards of the magni* ficent chamber, and from thence had the pound proceeded, wdiich first induced me to search for water· As soon as I beheld it, I rushed open-mouthed towards the largest sheet, which foil from the rock above \ but the provoking old woman detained me by the arm. ~- w Hear me for the last time !" she cried ; u if resisting your inclination to quench your thirst, you can resolve to pass a whole hour in my arms without tasting this water, I will reconduct you to the chamber through vvhich I led you, and you shall hc at liberty to pass the remainder cf the night with me on that superb couch, whidi you have just beheld·"— Wishing to accompany this proposal with a tender glance, she turned upon me two little pig's eyesj whkh rather resembled л
dog's just dead of the mange, than a human creature's ! As for me, in the perfect in* difference to beauty which I then felt, and in the violence of thirst so immoderate, I should have preferred three glasses of cold water to the three graces. I therefore shook off her hold rather rudely, ran to the fountain, and began to drink as eagerly, as if I feared seeing the stream fail, before my thirst was satisfied* The lady, to whom I had not thought proper to sacrifice this pleasure, retired v/hile I was drinking, and probably not in the best humour. That, however, was to me a matter of absolute indifférence· I novv found myself perfectly easy and contented j sleep came upon me, and I accepted its ad¬ vances without hesitation. It was broad day, wlien I awoke, and much waa I surprised to find myself in a spot, the most horrible tliat I had ever seen ! 1 gazed around me, striving in vatu t > com¬ prehend, how I had got into such a desert, or how I should get out of it· The stream- uf II 4
wdikh í had drank the night before, gushed Ьтни tiìQ summit of a rock seemingly de- îa:hed írom the rest of the mountain, and í found myself stationed upon this summit. ï í oidd perceíve the roofs of the hut and ofthe encbanted palace, which had excited in me s uch admiration : but I was separated from them, by a precipice so tremendous, that ï shuddered, whenever my eye dared to measure its depth j and on every side I was surround* rd by beetling rocks, which, instead of of¬ fering me a passage, seemed leaning forward for the express purpose cf tumbling them¬ selves upon ше. Fully persuaded that Ihad not been transported to this place through the air, ΐ persisted in my perilous search after some out Jet, and at length I succeeded in my inquiry. It was the entrance of а cavern equally obscure and deep, which seemed radier the retreat of some wikl beast, than a passage to scenes less tremen¬ dous. However, I resolved ro examine it, and drawing my sword, 1 descended into thk gloomy cave ; hopeless of finding щу
ΤΙΤΕ FpUR FACARDINS. other issue, than tliat by which I had en¬ tered. But after many difficulties, I felt, that the ground rose, and perceived a feeble glimmering of light which guided me to the spot, wdiere day penetrated into this subter¬ raneous abyss, ' This second outlet was to¬ tally different from the first : it was а spa¬ doni grotto, ornamented vvith shells and marble statues: a bow of polished steel hmvr on one side ; on the other was a quiver, ornamented v/ith gold and jewels, and filled with arrows ;* and in tîıe middle of the grotto a large ca^e of iet inlaid with О О О J ivory was biispended from the roof. 1 was so eager to got out'of the scrape in whkh í found myself, that without staying to re¬ flect oii what/I валу, I liastened out of the cave, and was near treading цроп some¬ thing sparkling wliich lay a few paces from the door. It was а shoo, vdiose budde vas formed of four diamonds, tho most pe/tect aud biillkiii dia: I tyvt r bdıeîd : but tho snoe itself was so snbll, and so exquiitcly shaped, that Ì bestowed no thout 1 lit uno л the II о
'immense worth of the buckle, Having read., that Pailas when slie walks^ rockes the earth tremble and ihe forests shake, and chat the im¬ mortal Juno takes but one stride from Mount Ida to the Ые of Samos, I was tolerably cer¬ tain, that I had not found the shoe of a god¬ dess ; but I determined to discover the mor¬ tal, if it were possible, whose foot could be worthy tc wear so delicately formed a slip* per. I brought it away with nie, thougli I did mot expect to retain its possession long ; for I guest it to be the lady's property,whose hunt¬ ing accoutrements I had scen in the grotto, or else that it belonged to the other invi¬ sible nymph j for whom the toilette was pre¬ pared in tîıe old woman's hovel» I was still hesitating, wdiether I shouid return there to seek her, or had better wait in the grotto, till some one should come thither to look for the shoe, when i was induced to aban« don both designs by hearing cries and la* mentations proceed from the rock above. I ascended It juv haste ; for th« voite seemed
THE FOUa FACARDINS. to be a female's, and since my finding this slip¬ per, my heart was wonderfully softened in favour of a sex, for whkh till then í had felt thc most perfect indifference« I soon discovered, that the mourner was no otlier than my nymph of thc cock ί As soon as she saw me, she fell at my feet entreating me to plunge my sword hi her bosom, i was by no means disposed to grant her this favour, for she had already inspired me with a tender'inclination. I raised her respect¬ fully, and having assured her, that I would hazard my life in the attempt to extricate her from her difficulties, I was on the point of seating myself by her, m order to hear at my ea,se the cause of her affliction ; when she gave me* a lock of surprize, eyed me from head to foot, as if she had never seen ше before, and removed immediately to some distance. *— 44 Be good enough/' said she, "to sit a litde farther off, for you seem to nie so dis¬ agreeable, that i cannot suffer you to come· so near me/'— χ * £ *
1 obeyed with all humility, and the im¬ pertinent creature, turning away her head, that she might not see me while she spoke, addrest nie as fellows : ~7- €6 Before I disclose the cause of my despair, which perliaps appears to you ridi¬ culous, you must know, that thc cocks. wdiich you have seen, are only entrusted to those damsels, who like myself are distin· euished cither for rank or merit. Three grand hunting-matches are held every year« similar to that unlucky one, at which you were present yesterday, and those young women, who in four years bring home twelve lions are united to the lovers, who attend on them du rin it those four years. In the mean time they see their admirers at all hours ; but 'tis as much as their lives are \\orth, to grant the least favour, till the twelve lions are taken. Should a cock make his escape, 'tis а sign, tliat there has been some little impropriety in the conduct of his mistress ; hovrever, If the bird is found airain, the crime is nui capita! ; but at thc
end of three days, if he is still absent, it Is a convincing proof of a criminal intercourse, and the seceder from virtue is iinmediately. buried alive, it L· this, wdiich causes my despair : my cock never can be found again, since I saw it wdth my own eyes devoured by that brute of a Iiom Wretch that f am ! Why did he not devour me at the same time ? "Why did 1 not perish without know¬ ing the most amiable of mankind ; or why did not aH the men whom 1 have ever known appear . to me as ugly and disagreeable as you do ?"— Insults so broad would have offended most people ; but the worse that she treat¬ ed me, the more did I admire her, and í was still endeavouring to expres -i my grow¬ ing passion, when Jier lover made his ap* pc-arance. í immediately recognized him for one of our Jiu nt ers, nor was my com¬ panion slow in showing his recollection of him—Shu instanti) flew towards him with open arms, and professed herself h ippy, be- ture she was deprived for ever oí the ϊίφχ
of day, once more to behold the beams of his bright eyes. Now this lover of hers was bandy-legged, pug-nosed, and copper- coloured; and. the bright eyes, which she rn\ed about (like a Chinese pig's), never had known what it was to be quite open. Hav¬ ing embraced her tenderiy, he told her¿ that guessing her distress, he had provided a boat, which then waited at the foot of the mountain, sind that he could easily carry hcr off, if 1, wdio had reduced her to this ex¬ tremity, would for one hour protect them from the Matron's» monster. — 4t And who is the Matron's monster ?" said L~ ~ u You will know but too soon," he answered, lb for he is looking for his lady'j slipper, which I se * in your hard/'-— Ti Js said, he claspe 4 his nistrcss in his arms, and hastened with her towards thc sea with all expedition.. At first 1 felt a litde jealous, b t å o aooner were they out of bľ ght, ıhan í tí ought no more of them» Adventures had succeeded each other so ra-
pldly on this mountain, that scarcely could I persuade- myself, that I was not in a dream ; but more were yet behind, for it now happened. «— u 'Tis you, who dream," interrupted Dinarzade impatiently ; 44 you are desired to relate your own adventures, v/hich in the present posture of affairs you should have told as concisely as possible; and instead of ihis you weary us viiih another person's, accompanied wkh details so uninteresting,. that it is a doubt, whether they are most te¬ dious or trifling/*— — u Åna whit does it signify/* cried thc Sultan, 44 whose adventures he relates, so that they amuse mc, and last out the night ì What hdve 1 better to do, than to hear them? Goon, Facardin/ 3 he added, 44 and heed not thc remarks ot th^e chatterboxes^ 4vho never are satisfied, but whea they arc talking t heir sel ves/'— Dhiarzade bic her lips with impatience, The fair Sultana, who had now passed s thousand nights in bed, whh nothing bet-
ter to amuse her, than tales only fit to se» one a sleep, raised her eyes devoutly to heaven, and Facaidin of Trebizonde prü¬ fe ceded thus % —" If I remember right, 1 was interrupt¬ ed in that part of the stranger's hi&torj, where he informed me, that he fancied himself to have been dreaming, while re¬ volving the variety of events, to which sc bhort a space of time had given rise. 44 \ now endeavoured/ 3 he continued, 44 to re¬ gain thc grotto ; but instead of taking the path by wdiich 1 had ascended thc rock, î followed one, which, after a tedious journey, conducted me to the Muroi/s abode. The door was open; the spinning-wheel was stiU *hciv, bet no hands w ece empîujcd in tinning· iı. Fiildin^ ьо loneer ьо iır-upeı able an aversiou for a female, whose first appearance had ьо much disgusted me, I n (/íved ίο enť-r* and review die wonder tí the bt aul iful apart n erit. I held tî íoľtpper in my hand ; 1 teased not íor a m u niefít to admire it, and I Irecruently preat i
to my fins as fondlv as if it had beon the portrait of a mistress most passionately be- loved· Just as I prepared to enter ilie hut, I was stopped by an enormous giant, armed with a huge club, and covered with rough hair from liead to foot. His manner of accosting me «surprized me considerably, for hk gestures were much less gentle, and his looks much more savage than the lion's, whom ΐ had the honour of killing the day before. The first thing, wdich lie did on seeing me, was to take his club in both hands, and gnash his teeth like a wild boar : the second was to thank Heaven for throw¬ ing the thief in his way, who had stoku lus lady'a slipper ; and he thou proceeded to as¬ sure ηκ?, that ho «should already have dashed out tlie few brains which the gods had kven me, ii the Matron his mistress had not commanded "him to reserve me for torments the mo :t excrv.riatiHíľ. hrom tho sound ofthe voice wiiich uttoied İt, 1 fancied, that ¿ume bull wai pleased to make mo this civil
speech; after which the giant continuing his discourse, ordered me to surrender the «dipper, and follow him without delay.. -~ 44 1 should find it less trouble/ 5 sak! hc, 4i to take it from you by force, than to ask you lor it ; but my mistress has commanded me to make you restore it through fear of my prowess., and therefore down upon your knees this moment/'-— ™ " Are those ycur mistress's com« mands ť' said 1 ; 4ς ihen pray, present my best respcc ts to her, and tell her from me, that urither yuu nor all your fedlow-mon* sîers put together shall make me surrender a shoe, whose beauty has charmed me, and v/hich ï cid not obtain by dishonourable means/'·— As I said this, I saw, that the wild dro¬ medary had already raised his dub to crush me, and I instansi y drew my sword. His strength was prodigious ; but as he was not very expert, I easily avcidod lis blows, the gentlest of which was sufficient to shiver the rocks m pieces, and overturn the sur-
rounding trees. However, as I contrived to draw blood from him every rime that he missed me, I shouid probably have finished the combat unhurt, had it not been my fate to get scratched in this land of wonders. Jt seems, that: the giant liad a nail on the great toe of his right foot, which the Ery- manthian boar might have been proud of* This ï did not discover for some time, but at length I had good reason to perceive it ; for as I stooped to escape a blow from his club, which he pretended to aim at me, he found an opportunity of giving me a slash by no means inferior to that, which I had received from the lion the day before. Ihis incensed me so highly, that with a furious blow I lopped off the leg, to whose foot was attached the weapon, which liad favour¬ ed me with so respectable a wound. His tali was like that of a tower's, and the earth trembled a.s he touched it. I threw myself' upon him intending to strike his ugly head from his shoulders ι but a voice, which
proceeded from ihe !mt ? made me hold my hand. *— 44 Valiant knight/' cried the voice, 44 kill not my monster."— Ì obeyed, and quitting him, entered the hove!, intending to present ihe matron with the slipper wdiich force could not oblige me to surrender, and to explain, that 1 had not obtained it by discreditable means. I now supposed, that it must belong to some daugliter or niece of hers, for wdiom in all probability the ' chamber and clothes were prepared, which I had seen the night bc« fore. But m vaiti did í traverse the vaiious apartments; no one appeared ; and part of the garments, which I had scen near the toilette, had been taken away. Hoping to oblain fiom him some intelligence of hk mktrcss, 1 returned to the place where I had left the giant ; but ho also was gone, and had carried away his leg with him. Though 1 had lost a considerable quantity of bloods 1 did not find myself much weak-
^ncd, and w r as only sensible of hunger to s decrree not less violent, than had been the thirst, wdiich tormented me the nirfit be- fore. I resolved to look for something to appease the first, where 1 had so lately suc¬ ceeded Ín appealing the second ; but the hovel door closed at my approach, nor coukl all my efforts süflice to open it. The grotto was now mv onlv resource—I soudit it for some time without success, nor per¬ haps should I ever have found it, had I not been conducted thither by the agreeable smell of roast meat—With an appetite like mine I could not have met with a guide more acceptable ; í followed it with joy ; and no sooner did 1 reach the grotto, than ï was more tlian ever convinced, that í must certainiy be dreaming. How beautiful was the form, wdiich on my entrance presented Itself io my admi- a» tion ! A nymph in a hunting-dre*iS was re¬ clining on а magnificent sopha, and looketl in that attitude, as if the queen of love Lad borrowed Diana's garments to follow ю йы
drace some new Adonk» Part of her bosom was uncovered ; and that part was in my opinion worth all ihe treasures, whkh the caverns of the earth, tlie billows of the sea, or the women iu the universe carı possibly manage to conceal. lier petticoat was tucked up on one side, and fastened above her knee by a diamond buckle, rinfilar to that whkh ornamented the beautiful slip« per ; and the leg, which by this means wa·' displayed, was so exquisitely turned, as to make mc certain, that it could not possibly be the property of a mortal. As soon a- she saw me, she gaged on rne for a few moments with attention. «— u Though the aversion with whkh your ridiculous deformity inspires me/ 5 sakl shc t α and the esteem which I cannot deny io your valour, are now combating within my bosom, I am still willing to ofler you the means of securing your own happiness, and at ihe ьате time of contributing to mine. You have found iny slipper,'* she continued, u and your presumption in touching it is
expiated in some degree by the intrepidtt), with which you asserted your claim to it, Had you surrendered it to the giant, there would have been an end for ever of your hopes and mine, for in the man, who would possess me, coixrage is an indispensible qua¬ lification. But before ï proceed, let me prove to yoft, that tlus shoe is really mine ; here is my foot \ approach, and put it on/' I obeyed with mingled tenderness and res* pect, and while kneeling before her, my transports were so violent, that I scarcely knew what I was about. The shoe was put. on with all imaginable ease ; afier wliich she bademe take it off aeain, and then in* quired, what had conducted me to the grot- to. I now for the first time recollected my necessities, and I told her, that î vvas dying; of hunger, with a look as fond and lan¬ guishing, as if I had told her, that I was dying of love, —~ 4 * What !" she exclaimed; α ever these gross and sensual desires ? Last night you visited the Matron, because you were drv* **** 4 g 9
and ihis morning your only reason for visit¬ ing me is because you are hungry ! But no matter ; I shal! soon discover, whether yon deserve tîıe misfortune, wliich you have drawn upon yourself by drinking, and wdie¬ ther you will make yourself worthy of that glorious fate which will be yours, as soon as you shall have eaten sufficiently. As I am impatient to know, whether you realk merit the advantages, which the stars ap¬ pear to promise you, take ihh bow with¬ out delay, and let me see, whether you e ж bend it/"™ 1 obeyed, persuaded that í should ink this task a? easy, as the putting on her slip per : but it was not without considera!) I efforts, that 1 at iength succeeded· Me sooner was tho deed performed, than the * t ring of the bow produced a sound so tifo lodious, that it could only be equalled by tliat, which proceeded from tlie cage of Jet : whose door opening at "that moment, s large bird flew out with such swiftness, a^ lo provent my distinguishing its species
Surprized at tlie adventure wdikh ï had just accomplished, the nympth surveyed me with attention, but almost instantaneously turned away her head again, as if her eyes had been shocked by some disgusting object. «·-" Take an arrow from yonder quiver/' said she ; 4C look upwards, and aim at what¬ ever you see in the air."—· I left the grotto, and thought I could distinguish a fly far above me. As nötning else was to be seen, I discharged my arrow at it, whkh was soon out of sight : but just when I supposed it to be in the middle region of the air (so long was it ere it de* .scended), 1 saw it: fall at my feet, loaded with the largest cock that I ever behold. The nymph ran towards tîıe bird, kissed if rhrice affectionately, and drew out the ar- row ; on which the cock sprang into the ai¬ as if nothing had happened, and disappeared în a few moments, This exploit seemed to inspire the fair huntress vvith more respect ior me,thougli not enough to abate hvľ aver /Ion. •τ »j., in
—·" Yes/' said she; 4C you must certainly bc the person destined to release me ; yet ifl owe my deliverance to you, how can I endure to pass my life with a man, whose appearance is no less disgusting and ridiculous, than his ac¬ tions are glorious and sublime ? Prince, bc careful of my slipper ; seek throtigh every region ofthe earth, nor present yourself again before me, til! you have found a foot that can fit my shoe, a woman that can love ytm, or a cock that can fly as high as that which you have just scen. Having pre¬ sented me with one of these three wonders, you will only need to obtain the Matron's favours, to entitle you to mine : but with¬ out this last condition, and one or other of the first three, I shall always be unfortunate, and you never will be happy. However, before y r ou set out in search of these adven¬ tures, I .must put you to a preliminary trial. You remember, I suppose, tliat in spite of all entreaties to the contrary, you insisted last night upon drinking : to punish vou for this obstinacy , I now inform yoih
that however great may be your disgust, y r ou are expected to eat whatever may be set before you, without being desired at au» *—» I asked no better: I thought, that no¬ thing could be served up at the table of a person so elegant, that could possibly baulk an appetite so voracious as mine : but wdien 1 examined what was placed before me, it was a wonder that I kept from fainting« You never could guess, valiant knight, vvhat composed tbis diabolical ragout ; I am there¬ fore obliged to explain, ihat the dish con¬ tained, the gianťs leg, not forgetting tlie foot, and the large nail that adorned it ! The sight made my hair bristle with hor» hor ; I turned sick, and was leaving the grotto, anxious to escape from so disgust¬ ing an object, when without speaking the nymph heaved a deep sigh, and gave me a look no less expressing pity, than resent¬ ment. That look was sufficient to deter¬ mine mv conduct : í dosed m v ovo.y iure ofi' a morsel, from the leg, and
swallowed it. liaving obeyed thus far, again prepared to retire, assuring шу hos. tess, that 1 should feel no desire to eat for at least the next four days. She seemed nmzh softened by my compliance, fixed hcr eyes upon me more steadily than before, and so much delighted me by the change whicii I perceived in their expression, that I got down a little bit more. On this she drew nearer, placed hcr band familiarly up¬ on my shoulder, and told me, that al¬ though she would not ask it of me, it was necessary for me to pick the whole leg to the bones. ™ 44 I feel the charm's effect/' &a;d she ; tc m y l iear t tells me, that the first spell is on ihe point of heing dissolved. Persevere, and you need not go far to and а woman, who loves you ; but if you leave this place, or i í your meai îs interrupted, before you can empty the dish, you will become, if pos- ¡ЛЫе, more disagreeable to me, than you •дге at present/'-— These words touched my Iieart, and pro-
duced no slight effect upon my head ; they animated my courage, but alas ! they did iiot augment my appetite. Iiowever, thougli the leg was sunicient to feed ten famished persons, since such was thc condition of my trial, I resolved to use every eflbrt to fulfil it | and I determined either to swallow the whole, or to burst bravely before the eyes of my Divinity ί It w^as in the very midst of this magnanimous attempt, that my con¬ founded Squire, wdio probably had been seeking me for some time, made the rocks re-echo with the name of Facardin. Sud¬ denly the nymph changed colour ; she seem¬ ed irresolute for a few moments, and then Iinding that I was the object of pursuit, slie hastened into the subterraneous passage, leaving me more confounded,more surprized, and more afilicted, than î have power to ex¬ press. I had perceived, that her glances grew milder ; the wound given me by the giant closed, while í was employed in eating his leg ; and thc presence of the most lovely cre.u inre in the universe, who reclined affection-
aie*y upon my shoulder, had enabled me to support the horror of my trial. But no sooner did she leave me, than forgetting her injunctions I forsook my horrible re- past, and flew towards the passage, by which she had departed : the moment that I approached it, a strong and rushing wind uot only opposed my entrance, but raised me with violence from the ground, and blew me out of the grotto» As soon as í was on the outside, the door (which had tvro holes in it similar to those in the door, which protected the Matron's cottage) closed of its own accord ; through these holes tvvo arms, whiter than snow, and more beautiful than Cytherea's, immediately passed themselves ; an ebony spinning-wheel inlaid with gold placed itself spontaneously before i hem $ and the spinning recommenced with inore diligence 'ihan ever. I was now con¬ vinced, that the Divinity whom I had just seen was the Matron's daughter, and that spinning was a favorite occupation in this enchanted family* 1 drew nearer, vuth the
intention of throwing myself on my r knees before the nymph, of whom I saw nothing but the arms, and of conjuring her in pity to open the door ; when my Squire, hav¬ ing at length discovered me, began to bawl uut my name louder than ever. Immedi¬ ately the beautiful hands disappeared; the grotto-door opened with violence ; and the giant putting out his head, blew in my face with such force, that he rolled both my Squire and myself down to the place, where I had first distinguished the ray of lights which had guided me to the Matron's cot¬ tage. When I recovered from my fall, my Squire informed me, that it was high time to be gone, and he conjured me to descend with all expedition, w^hile it was still in my power to escape. _<* What could put it in your head," said he, ζς to climb this confounded moun¬ tain, which is crammed full of sorcer¬ ers and enchantments, while all the inha« bitants of the neighbouring villages were in search of you ? I waited till midnieht bv \ 4
the river side; and then supposing, that while I was looking for you there, утш umst have landed somewhere else, m hopes of finding yoa 1 hastened to the next vil¬ lage ; but here I was told rare news of you : it was reported, that you had either seduced or ravished the girl, who was left with you on the island ; that her cock v/as lost ; that you had disembarked with her, and that both had concealed yourselves in the cavi¬ ties of the mountam to avoid the punish» ment of your oflence. In consequence all the inhabitants assembled this morning at day-break ; a council was held ; the troops were ordered to march ; and one part of them undertaking to surround the moun¬ tam, and bar every avenue, the odici ascended it,and dispersed themselves through all the various paths, b*r which it was possible for you to have passed. Now then, my dear master, I gave yoa up for lost. They had secured me, fearful lest I should apprize you of their designs; and .they as¬ sured me verv seriou-sh\ that I should have
the honour to share your punishment. î vvas ahnost distracted to think, that a matı, who had always been sö prudent and so in¬ different respecting this sort of frailty, as you have been, should at length throw away his life thus foolishly for the sake of a vulgar hussy and her dunghill cock. In tlie midst ofthese melancholy reflections, й loud shout, proceeding from that side of the mountain wdiich w^as nearest the sea, augmented my distress; for it was immediately reported that you had been seized in the very act of eloping with your new mistress. How great was my joy, when I beheld the cap¬ tives. The companion of this unlucky girl was one of the hunters, who it seems had been long attached to her. Thtir doom was pronounced without delay : and though they continued to assert their innocence, ih© lover was compelled to dig a pit, into which he put his mistress up lo tho neck, after tc lerly embracing her, and taking a most affectionate farewell 'ihe pit was then iilled up again; but at the very moment
that nothing of the damsel wns visible ex« cept her head, and which w^as also on the point of disappearing, a cock w r as heard to crow in the air above her. AU raised their eyes J the noise w 7 as heard again, but still nothing could be distin¬ guished. At length one of the principal persons drew a telescope from his pocket, ana declared, that it was a gnat mimicking the crowing of a cock : on the other hand the lover asserted, that it was the identical cock which his mistress had lost, and swore by the great Caramoussal, that he recog¬ nized him by his manner of crowing. Wliile they were still debating this question, a real Hve cock, whicli had raised itself higher, than ever cock had done before, descended, and perched upon the damsels head. The universal acclamations gave him not the least alarm ; he kept his place w ith great intrepidity, while the whole company agreed in thinking, that this prodigy was effected by the great Caramoussal, and wab α convincing proof of the girľs innocence
but no sooner did they approach in order to restore her to liberty, than the cock stretch¬ ed out his neck, clapped his wings, crowed thrice, and then darting into the air with the swiftness of a faulcon, in a moment was out of sight. This persuaded the spec¬ tators, that her conduct Λνίίϊι her lover had not been perfectly correct ; but as the cock in clapping his wings, had put out her left eye, he лvas supposed to have meant this as a punishment for granting trifling favors, and she was declared fully justified of any capital offence. In consequence, she w^as immediately released both from the pit and her apprehensions ; she was conducted home to her parents ¡n triumph ; and while they were busied in dressing her eye, I has¬ tened hitherto conjure you tc leave а coun¬ try, where the mountains are inli of sor» cerers,the klaiick of lions, and the viľagesof men, women, and codes, wlio for an v thin·»' tliat I can see, are not a jol better than the sorcerers or th* liona/*—- The truth of this account was confirmed ι 6
by my adventures on the mountain. I re¬ solved therefore to follow my Squire's ad¬ vice, and we left this repository of prodigies and incomprehensible events witliout meet¬ ing any further impediment. The more that I revolved upon what liad passed, the less was I persuaded, that it had really hap¬ pened. The lion, vvho had called me liy my name ; the old woman, who loveel me so tondcrly; the young one, who hated me so inveterately ; the nymph of the grotto, who enjoined me to do, what could not be done; the water, wiiich î drank with such eagerness, and the moat, whkh I eat with šuch disgust ; all appeared to have been equally delusions : but the precious slipper was still in my possession, and that was suf¬ fit ient to establish the reality of all the rest« I caused this helmet to bc made at the near¬ est city \ and this cock enriched with dia¬ monds, clapping his wings', and in the act of crowhi<r, conceals the wonderful shoe, vdiieh I shall now offer io your admira- iku/**—*-
Here opening the crest of his helmet, the courteous stranger drew forth the shoe, which he had praised so highly ; it was concealed within the golden cock, which í had at first mistaken for an eagle. I con¬ fess, most illustrious Sultan, the sight of it filled me with surprize. This slipper was in truth a master-piece, no less in respect to shape, than skc and elegance. I could not look at ît without emotion, though 1 was convinced, that it was made solely to dis¬ play the artist's wc kmar.ship, and could not have been designed for the use of any human being. In vain did the stranger pro¬ test, that his own hands had placed it on the foot of the fair huntress: I persisted in my incredulity. Having examined it for some time, and with the owner's permis¬ sion prest it íespect fully to my Hps, I at length restored it to its former conceal¬ ment : after wdiich Facardin of Mount Atlas resumed his narration. ~ 44 The insignificant adventures/ 1 said lit*, 44 which I met with afier this, are un-
worthy your attent iim * nor will I iroubio you with the tedious list of refusals, insults and disdain, whicii fell to my lot, wherever my vows were offered· I thought every woman deserving my affection, anci every 'woman thought my affection undeserving her acceptance. They, who were no lon¬ ger in the bloom of life, preferred their ser¬ vants, and they, wdio were, preferred nine. However, if all refused me tlieir favors, none refused to iry on the shoe ; but here, alas ! 1 w¿s no lo^a unsuccessful : not one oould get in a single toe* No hope now re¬ mained for ше but to find а cock which could raise kself as high as that of the fair huntress; that is to ьау, acock, that could iiy like an eagle, lo my sorrow, 1 find, that this is no less a rarity, than a woman who can love me, or a foot that can fit the beautiful supper, 1 had already traversed Asia and Africa, and was on the point of embarking for Iku rope, when the amb/j- sadors of Fortimbrass with the great mouth, king of Denmark»
arrived at tlic port of Sidon. Thoy told us, that they were in pursuit of a mouth pro¬ portioned like their master's, and expressed their fears, that their search would be un¬ successful. To justify these apprehensions. they drew from a golden casket the exact measure of the royal mouth, and a most enormous one it was in truth ! í owned, that though 1 had travelled far and wide, 1 never had met with a mouth at all to be compared to it ; and 1 bogged to be in¬ formed, when ho had found it, wdiat in the work! their master meant to do with a mouth so monstrous. 1 was answered, that this desire was excited by a most strange and unfortunate adventure, whkh tliev had not then time to explain ; on this the chief ambassador, wdio seemed a person of no small consequence, sighed several times, and at iength burst into learn. Tho eyes of his compauions immediately overflowed; and both mv Squire and mvself were too wdl bred not to follow their example,
though vvhat these venerable persons were crying about, vvo could not conceive. — iC Adieu ! rny beloved country ľ' ex¬ claimed at length the chief ambassador ; tő we bid you an eternal adieu, forbidden to re¬ vl ît vour happy climates, tiil two things are found, neither of which the earth can furnish."— Guessing, that tho large mouth must be one of those tilings, I bogged him to in¬ form me, what was the other. He replied, that his master had a daughter, on whom he doated ; she was extremely beautiful, and called Sapinelia of Jutland. This dam- sol, not being able to get slippers co fit her, had gone mad in consequence, and per- suaded hcr father to hang up all the colliers in the kingdom» Informed of the difficulty to please her, and dreading t he fate of their comrades, the foreign shoe-makers had re¬ fused to work for her ; and at length things wore brought to such a pass, that yielding to his aflection for her, the king had pub*
fished throughout his dominions, that who- ever could shoe the beautiful Sapinelia, should marrv her for his trouble, it v/as however specified in the bargain, that such is failed in the attempt, should be hung with as little ceremony, as had been shown to their predecessors, ™ Çí And thus," continued the ambassador, u thus are we, wretched slaves of a des¬ potic master, and a capricious mistress, con¬ demned either to find the little slipper and the large mouth, or never to re-visit the fertile plains of Denmark ; Denmark, that beloved country, which gave us birth. Such are the curious commissions, whkh we are enjoined to execute; and you can easily conceive, that we have but too much reason in thinking, that we have bidden adieu for ever to our native laud !"-— While making these reflections the tender hearted ambassador cried üke an infant : those, which his narrative liad suggested to me, wore iff a very different nature, and акт meditating for some rime upo.n the
conditions stipulated in the king of Deri- mark's edict, I asked, what would be the consequence of presenting Sapinelia Avith a shoe too small — u For/ 5 said I, " though I suppose her in size to be no bigger than a doll, yct a slipper may be made so small, that even a doll cannot get her foot into it/*·— Highly oflended by this observation, thc chief ambassador bestov/ed on me a look of most profound contempt» ·*— 4C Young man Ρ said he, u when you have seen a little more of the worid, you will learn to treat a fair one with greater respect, whose fame can only be unknown to yourself and such as resemble you. Should chance ever lead you to the feet of our Prin¬ cess, you will see wdiat sort of feet they are, and be obliged to confess, that (Mous¬ sellina the Serious excepted,) she need yield to no one in point of figure. 'Tis not therefore so much the smallncss of her foot (that being perfectly proportioned to her commanding height) wdiich гглказ the fit-
ting her wdth shoes a matter of difliculty, as its shape, elegance, and form, no less sin¬ gular than beautiful/*— •— a But, my good lord ambassador," said Ï, " suppose the person, who produces a slipper perfectly adapted to the shape, ele¬ gance, and singular form of this beautiful foot, should by no means be inclined to marry your Infanta ? What would be the consequence of his refusal ?"— — u Should any one be found," answered the Dane, u (but it appears to me impossible, that there should) so cold, so stupid, so weak in judgment, and so deficient in ţaste y as to renounce Sapinelia of Jutland's lawful possession : she is then obliged by oath (her honour and all belonging to it being out of the question) to grant him whatever favour he may think proper to demand/'— My reasons for asking this question, I doubt rot, valiant stranger, are already known to you : this answer determined my conduct, for till then mv scruples had kept
me în suspense· Though tîıe charming huntress still reigned in my bosom, not to fall in love witli every woman, wdio came in my way, was to me utterly impossible ; hove ever the moment they were out of bight, I forgot all others, and only remem¬ bered the beautiful unknown. The Prin¬ cess offered her hand to him who could ac* compJkh a task, which she despaired of ever seeing performed ; on the other hand cer¬ tain death was his punishment, who failed in the attempt« I had long sought a foot worthy the most beautiful shoe in the worid; Sapinelia had long sought a shoe wortny the most beautiful foot in the universe, whicii (as she thought) belonged to her own person, lf on the one hand, I feared, lost the sensibility of niy heart bhouid mako ше forget every thing but her beauty, while ï gazed on а Princess, who had boon painted lo me in colours so fascinating ; on tlu. other, the aversion, with whkh í had al- vvi)s inspired the whole sex, seemed lu promise me a safeguard aa/ikst ш> owu
weakness* 1 hàd t rávered two quarters of the world witliout finding a female, who would accoiit mv heart ; nor had I found any cocks except dunghill ones, wdio knew no more how to iiy, than 1 did myself. I determined theiefore to embark on board one ofthe ambassador's vessels, to try my slipper on the foot of the Danish Princess, and should 1 succeed in my attempt, then to lead hcr to the grotto in triumph, where dwelt the nymph with the steel-bow. The ambassadors, who really >vere mighty good sort of people, opposed this design wich much earnest noss« Thoy represented to me all the difficulties of such an enterprize, and tliey assured me, that I should find it very inconvenient to be hung in the flower ofmy ago, a fate which í coukl not escape, should 1 handle Sapinclla's foot without success· 1 was obstinate; and as 1 hail not divulged to him the mystery of the beautiful slipper, the chief ambassador, wlio was much ad¬ dicted to blubbering, actually burst into tears, on seeing mc ascend tîıe voi : sci·
llie w ind was so favourable, that ¿»even months after my embarkation, 1 reached the Scandinavian coast so favoured by na¬ iure. Having traversed those immense pro» •vinccs, í at length arrived at the court of Fortimbrass with the wide mouth. Here it was, that I expected to meet with adven« tures much more worthy your attention, than those which you have just heard ; judge then how great was my disappointment, wdien upon inquiring for the Princess, 1 was informed......" In this part of his histoiy, the handsome stranger was interrupted by an unexpected flourish of cymbals, tymbals, fifes, trum- pets, flageolets, bag-pipes, cow-horns, anci drums, whkh suddenly resounded through tlie forest, Λ Ve looked eagerly round ιλ and our eves for some time rested in ναίι on the spot, whence the noise proceeded The nearer that this singular concert ap proached, the пюге was our surprize ani; mented, as we still were unable to disami the cause. Suddenly my secretary and th
stranger's Squire, who had climbed two lofty trees, and who by this means enjoyed a more extensive look out, rejoined us in terror, and announced that a troop of Arabs, wdiom tîıe hills had till then pre¬ vented us from descrying, was seen has¬ tening towards us, no doubt intending to surround our fittle party 7 ". On receiving this intelligence we took our camels from our attendants, and having mounted them, advanced boldly towards the robbers, whom vve could now perceive : but w f e soon dis» covered, that the new-comers were neither robbers, nor Arabs; and that as to sur¬ rounding us, nothing could be farther from their inclination. Still their appearance sur¬ prized us not a iittle. As far as our eyes could reach, we discovered an ever-length¬ ening chain of camels, horses, mules, and elephants, heavily laden with litters, palan¬ quins, and baggage of every description. They were escorted by a numerous body of soldiers and slaves, a!! habited in chintz, die colours of which were so lively and bril*
fiant, that the whole appeared to us a mov¬ ing parterre, enamelled with the choicest flowers of spring and summer. We stop¬ ped to observe the progress of this singular convoy, ín whose middle a palanquin» sparkling with gold, and adorned with de» rigns of ihe most exquisite fmish, failed not to attract the chief part of our observation. This palanquin was shut up on all sides, Four slaves of gigantic stature bore it on iheir shoulders, wdiile of four satraps on horse-back each supported an umbrella ovan it, to protect it from the heat of the sun The satraps, tlie slaves, and the palanquin, were all covered wiih chintz; but tha' chintz was of so fine a texture, so admirabh painted, and magnificently embroidered, iîu liiy secretary (than ■ whom nobody unde; stands these matters better) has frequenti assured me since, that it could not be wort i less, than tvvo talents an ell. Round th« palanquin thc musicians were Stationen ! vvhose concert Ir/d been the original mean of engaging our attention* Unluckily ;
soon as they approached us, the concert be» gan again, and we soon discovered, tliat in order to remain in its neighbourhood, it was absolutely necessary to be well used to it. This unexpected musk made us start one and all ; but it appeared so terrible to our camels, that after all the extravagant actions which sudden terror makes those ani¬ mals perform, they fairly ran away with us. Every effort to hold them back only re¬ doubled their impatience to be gone and the impetuosity with which they hurried us away, My secretary's beast and my ow r n, who stuck close together, turmng short round as if by agreement, dashed like mad things through the rear, which came loiter¬ ing after the rest, and trampled upon all, who happened to be in their way· The ge¬ neral confusion, whkh this occasioned, anci the cries of such as found themselves attack¬ ed in this impromptu manner, increased still more the fury of these infernal animals, who slackened not: their speed, till they reached the banks of а large river, Uere voi.· и, к
for à inomen t they stopped to take breath ; but the recollection of their fright soon re¬ turning, they plr nged into the water, with¬ out giving us the least hint of their design« All that we could do in this moment of sur¬ prize, was to hold fast by the ears, and en¬ deavour to reach the opposite bank of the river, which was botli deep and rapid* We -were now above fifteen stadii distant from the forest, where we had caused so much confusion. Gladly would 1 have returned thither, being equally anxious to know what was become of the handsome Facardin, and to hear the conclusion of his adven¬ tures* But my secretary representing to me the danger and difliculty of repassing thc river, the near approach of night, and the fresh disturbance which our camels would occasion, should the same infernal clatter recommence on our arrival, 1 gave tip thc point, and suffered him to conduct me to a cottage, which we descried at some dis¬ tance. I past the night in all the agonies of impatience: no sooner did the morning
dawn, than I again set forward, anxious to learn wdiat could be meant by this tri¬ umphal procession, in whkh chintz- furni¬ ture made so conspicuous a figure, and stíl! more rieskous of rejoining Facardin and his shoe, from whom I hoped to hear the ca« tastrophe of his adventures. Unluckily a dreadful tempest which had not ceased du¬ ring the night, swelling the mountain tor¬ rents, had caused such an overflow*' of the river, that it would have beon useless to at¬ tempt to pass it or to wait till the waters should abate. The people with whom I lodged, assured me, that all the plains on that side would bo inundated for at least a inonth : thus then was I separatoci from this amiable stranger, of w hum I have never since been able to obtain a sight, in spite of my anxiety and efforts to rejoin him/'— Hero Dinarzade heaved a deep sigh, as if just relieved from some great oppression. — u A thousand thanks/ 1 sho cried, rais¬ ing her hands to heaven, 44 α thousand thanks to the satraps in chintz, the gilded Χ "2
palanquin, the bîave.s who bore it, the um¬ brellas which, shaded it, and above aH to the flageolets, fifes, cymbals, and bag-pipes, which by frightening your camel, separated you froin Facardin the Second ! and oh ! for ever blessed be the river, whose well- timed overflowing prevented you from fall¬ ing in with him again i Had it not been for that fortunate accident, 1 doubt nof, you would have wearied us as intolerably with the end of his adventures, as you have already done with the beginning. For Heaven's sake, my dear Prince, tell me at once, how many years it will take you to relate your history, and how many volumes may be made out of your secretary's jour* Bal ; since though you have now trespassed upon ont good Sultan's patience for a very considerable time, as you have employed it entirely in recounting the mibfortunes of an¬ other person^ while of your own 1 have not heard une syllable, I confeas to you, that I begin to despair of ever hearing your his¬ tory conclude."·—
Luckily Schahriar (whose custom it was to have the soles of his feet tickl d by his Great Chamberlain) had just then fallen in¬ to a gentle slumber, and therefore his sister- in-law's remarks for this time escaped him* Had it not been for this accident, there is rea¬ son to believe,that she would not have got off with a simple reprimand. Facardin indeed, who to give him his due was extremely good-humoured, hastened to prevent the Sultan's being aware of the interruption, and rescued Dinarzade from his displeasure by resuming his discourse. —-" As during the latter part of my nar¬ ration/' sakl he, " the attention of your most august and victorious Majesty seemed to be drawn off by some meditations no doubt of very serious, public, and political importance ; in order to connect the broken threads of my story, I vvill just repeat the heads of vvhat escaped you, while buried in your own profound reflections/*— —-"Don't give yourself the trouble/ 1 an¬ swered the Sultan, 44 1 have not lost a syk К 4#
lable ; and to convince you of ît 5 I remem¬ ber, that while I meditated on the means ot preserving the tranquillity of my subjects, and the prosperity ofmy dominions, you re¬ cited, how the palanquins, elephants, chintz curtams, and umbrellas, took to their heel: 1 , and dashed into the sea, as soon as your Squires and their camds began to play upon their fifes and bag-pipes/'— —" Exactly so ľ* exclaimed Dinarzade ; u the Prince of Trebizonde need only con¬ tinue his history ; and if ever your Majesty should take it into y cmr head to repeat the whole in ihe stylo of the specimen, whkh we have just heard, I'll engage for its being the most curious narrative, that ever was related in mortal hearing ľ 3 — — te Siklice !" said the Sultan ; " 1 wkh to give all шу attention to the Prince* Tu.· bizondc, proceed/'—* _.<* í was considerably vexed," continued Facardin, sfi at my abrupt separation from the handsome stranger, not only because i had already imbibed a sincere attachment io
him, but because I meant to have requested him to diange his name ; lest tlie exploits by which I intended to make mine illus¬ trious, should be ascribed indiscriminately to one or other of the onîy two Facardins existing. However, but a bhort time elapsed, ere I discovered, that this precaution would have been of no avail. Some persons have minds so inactive, as to pass whole Iiours v/ithout opening their lips, and this more particularly happens, when they are alone. For my part, never having been afflicted with that supineness of imagination, vvhich leads people to medi¬ tate on the various objects which present themselves to travellers without discussing them by word of mouth, whenever i had nobody else to converse with, í hold a conver¬ sation witli myselfi, Sometimes 1 repeated a scene or two from «some new play ; some¬ times 1 hummed a favourite air, and at other times I whistled it* In short, I made use of every source of amusement, which talents and an excellent education cotdd sup- % é
ply, instead of wasting my time in building castles in the air, like the stupid dreamers, io whom ljust now alluded. Itis true! my «secretary did not come under this descrip¬ tion; but ihen he had another whim, whkh v/as net a jot more sensible or entertaining. Every twelve yards he halted, and drawing out a port-folio crammed full of his remarks, lie busied himself with the utmost gravity in chalking down all the rivers, castles, wind-mills, mountains, and pigeon-houses, which he saw from the road. One day in particular he put mo out of all patience. — <c I wonder, Jessamin/* said I; 44 I won¬ der, iliat with such a long beard hanging down to your girdle, you are not ashamed of being so childish as to keep eternally scratching and scrawling, vvhen you might employ yourself so much better in remain¬ ing near me, Ustening to my discourse, and replying to my questions. Pry'thee, put up tliat bundle of trash, and look in your list of perilous adventures^ for that whkh happens to be nearest at hand ; for in fact I
am heartily weary of wandering about, as I have done for these last three weeks, with¬ out knowing where I am, or whitlier go- mg. — As I said this, we approached a bridge, which he was just then in the very act of drawing ; nor was it without infinite reluc¬ tance, that he consented to lay aside his em¬ ployment. However, my orders being re¬ peated, he prepared to obey me ; vvhen sud¬ denly our camels began to wdiine, and snuíľ, seemed to be seized with some violer t panic* A moment after we heard the tuning of instruments, and immediately about half a dozen persons appeared ae the other end of the bridge. They were all drest in a sort of chintz uniform., and no sooner did they descry us, than they began to get their in¬ struments in order and tune 3 by way of doing honour to our approach. Per¬ ceiving these musicians to be of the same kinti with thcbe, whom we had left în the forest, we begged leave by signs to dc dine the serenade, with which they were
preparing to compliment us. They easily discovered by thc violent agitation of our camels, that we made this request on their account« Unluckily the distress of these beasts appeared to the musicians so enter- raining, that as they staggered across the bridge (for they were completely drunk) they thought proper to heighten it by an additional symphony. No soonc; wero tha first notes audible, than my secretary's ca¬ mel, recollecting the means by wdiich he had just escaped, dashed into the river with¬ out hesitation ; and while in hopes of gain¬ ing the opposite bank his master held fast by the neck, the curious memoirs of our travels, which he had not had time to put up, floated down thc stream to our great discomfiture. With respect to my camel, the principal musician had seized him by the bridle, and tîıe others prevented him from rejoining Ids companion. W« s /;n the poor beast found, that all avenues to escape were barred, he dropped upon his knees trembling like an aspin ; he shut his eyes. 2
not being able to shut his ears, and sent forth SUeh mpl y**rbnbr гг]лс inri íri'oans« fhat I found it impossible to refrain from laughter; especially when I heard the other camel, affected by his friend's situation, ansveer her in the same pathetic strain from the opposite side of thc river· I sprang upon my feet ; anei the principal musician, wdio still held my cam e/s bridle, having persuaded his companions to л\ ith- divrw (for he dreaded, lest they should oc¬ casion some ïiew alarm), he conducted me across the bridge, frequently tpologking for the insolence tff these drunkards* He in¬ formed me, tiiat they belonged to a band, with the other members of which, he sup¬ posed, I had not cenno in contact ; since to judge from my camcTs turn cf mind, ho thouüht. tliat had he heard them, the ani- mal must Leve died of í hef: kirt. the* bo- ing very muncrous, and being pnshkdy ordered to play on «11 tlieir iustrun 'en* u ai soou a*» »ι ît ι /ugxr appeared in skht. ue uddecy that he had staid behind hi υ, cler to
collect these rascals together, who had sepa* rated themselves from the convoy, in order to drink at the different ale-houses on the road, $nd that he must hasten to rejoin the train ofthe Princess. ~" What Princess ?** said I. —" Moussellina thc Serious," answered iny new acquaintance j " who is returning to her father's dominions in hopes of laugh- ing."- fe6 Of laughing ľ 5 1 exclaimed ; tc what can you mean ?**«— — u 1 mean,' 9 replied he, u that she has been travelling about for these three months for the sole purpose of laughing, and it is for the sole purpose of laughing, that she now returns to her native land. But what a simpleton am I," he continued, " to think it necessary to explain to you, wdiat you must know so mudi better than my- self."—■ Thus saying, he hastened to rejoin his companions, as fast as he could lay legs to tlie ground» It was ín vain that I called I
atter him, begging him to come back, and satisfy my curiosity : he turned not his head towards me, and nothing could persuade my secretary to let me mount my camel and follow him ; for Jessamin protested, that he had rather die, than be again in the power of tliat unmerciful music. We has¬ tened therefore to escape from it ; he la¬ menting the loss of his journal, and I, that of an explanation respecting the Princess of Astracan. I might have passed the time till midnight, in these reflections, had I chosen it, for my secretary kept at a consi¬ derable distance behind, probably endea* vouring to set down the heads of the ad¬ ventures which had been contained in his journal : but the silence which his reverie compelled me to observe becoming intole¬ rable, I stopped, and waited till he came up with me. — 4i Jessamin,'' said I, as soon as he joined me, u look among your papers for the list of places, of which the enchantments and perils are likely to furnish me with some
employment ; I wish, as I told you before, to go immediately to those, wliich are Dear¬ est at hand/'-— — ίς Look for ít yourself/' answered he peevishly ; a all my lists, journals, and pa pors of every description arc following tho course of the river, while 1 am followirg your Highness on this dovil oť a camei, who, makes nie every moment give myself up for lost ; nay, he is even a great obstacle to niy salvation, so often docs lie put me mi¬ der the necessity of cursing both hin sdì and our great Prophet for introducing him into the world. It you like it, my Lord, you are perfectly at liberty to follow the:.' 1 papers, vdiieh in fact are commentaries ui our illustrious actions : for my own rart, i am not quito so groat a foci as to run tío.* risque of drowning in the attempt tu iv-h them up. Ľut for Heaven's sake, where is the uso οΐ beam poring attor adventures ia your present equipage? L it uot ď -*, that however great may be yuur coui;;*;\ ihore needs but a fiddle w mak/ you iun
from one end of the world m the other ? î vvould really advise you to restrain this violent thirst for glory whkh torments you, till you have a better chance of satisfying it. We are now within three days journey of the PeTsian gulph. In the city whkh is en¬ riched by the commerce of that sea, you may find the most beautiful horses in the universe : there, if your Highness will take my advice, you will got rid of those un¬ lucky camels, and mount yourself accordino: to the established fasliion of knights- o r rant, instead of trotting about the world like Ar¬ menian merchants, or pilgrims on their vvay to Mecca/'— 1 took his advice. On tho third day aller this passed, we discovered tho banks of the Red Sea, having travelled withou- meet in? 1 with any fresh accident ; that is to sav. without falling in wiih any mude by the vvay. The sun was iust setting; and Ibe- hok! with Infinte pleasure the varici) oí brilliant hues, witli whkh its rav > tîo -пч! 4 <* J the surface of these waters. I twud iiave
sworn, that a purple carpet had been spread over them ; for the colour of the sea, and that of the light in which it sparkled^ were mingled together in a manner at once the most splendid and beautiful. My secretary, who now kept close to me, asked, whether I knew how these waters had obtained the appellation of the Red Sea : I answered, that î supposed, it had been given them on ac» count of their colour, — u Quite the contrar)/' said he ; 44 they are no more red than you arc* ; and since it will be an hour before we reach Floris* pahan, the capital of Arabia Petroea, I may as well employ the time in explaining this in atter/*— He had not time to begin his story, be¬ fore something glittering wdiich appeared on the water at a considerable distance, attract¬ ed my attention. Thc sun was already sunk beneath the waves, and his last beams illuminating this object, we imagined at first, that a golden hillock was floating to¬ wards us. As it approached, w e couki per*
ceive an infinity of streamers fluttering in the wind, and at length ascertained, that a bark was drawing near us, which was co* vercd with gold from the extremity of the mast to the very surface of the ocean. It was conducted by two dwarfs extremely black, and extremely deformed. As soou as it touched the shore, there came out a kind of nymph, more ornamented than heaven, and more liideous than htih While 1 busied myself ín conjecturing, how it w r as possible to be at once so young and so ugly, she threw herself at my feet, and embraced my knees, before I could possibly prevent her. ™ 44 Invincible knight !" said she, " follow me, and preserve the most precious life, that ever yet was given to a mortal ! But first swear to me, that however dangerous may be the undertaking, that however dis¬ agreeable may be its conditions, you will not hesitate to attempt the deliverance of a beauty, more perfect than til! now the universe could ever boast."—
Here as she began to weep, I raised her from thc ground, anxious to spare myseli the wry faces, wdiich she then tliought it proper to make : nay, I had already opened my mouth to give the oath required, wlien my secretary clapped his hand before it/*—- — 44 Stay one moment, my Lord," said he ; a before you engage yourself, let me ask this young lady a few questions/' Then taking off his bonnet, and shaking his lorn heard, a Either my name is not Jessamin/' he continued, 4C or you come from tha Chrystal Island—am I right, sweetheart ?"— —--" Hold your tongue^ child/' answered she ; * c my business is not with you, but with your master. Yes, amiable youth / she added, α it is to you, that I am sent. The paragon of beauty has just entered the bath, and unless you are so condescending as to see her come out of it, never must slie enter it aíyűn ! Γα defiance therefore οΐ your page jessamin, swear to follow me I Swear to me this, and in return may ihe dew of morning cool your sweet slumbers i
may the zephyrs of evening breatlie gently on your cheeks; and may the accents of your well-beloved be as favourable to your wishes, as the cock's crow is grateful to thc ear of him, whose couch during the night sleep hath denied to visit !"—* These prayers were so extremely kind a&d acceptable, that I could not think of re¬ jecting the nymph's request, i took the oath, which she tendered, and swore, that: happen what might, I would not only see the lady, wdiom she mentioned, step out of the bath, but afterwards would do my ut¬ most to eflect her deliverance* My secre¬ tary no sooner heard me make this vow, than lie judged it expedient to tear his hair, pluck out his beard by the roots, and utter groans and lamentations the most deplor¬ able. —" Unhappy Prince !" cried he; u what ,·» r * evil star conducted you hither to engage in an enterprize, wdiose event must cither prove your ruin, or entail on you everlast¬ ing dishonour. None but a &atyr, or the
oflspring of some Spanish fly, would dare- even to think of an adventure, which you have sworn to attempt, but which I will take my oath, you will never accomplish ! However, I have still one means in my power to release you from the vow, whidi you have just ruade so rashly !"— Thus saying, he drew his dagger, and rushed upe»n the ambassadress, no doubt in¬ tending to kill her. I had uo difficulty in preventing ihis act of passion, or in finding words to express, how much I disapproved of this unmanly transport. However» so far was I from exciting his contrition, that seeing me on the point of embarking without him, (such was the law of this adventure,) and findirig, that I positively forbade his ac¬ companying me, lie gave way to an impulse of passion not less violent than unavailing. — - u May the sea/' he exclaimed, u swal¬ low up the gilded bark, the furbellovved monkey who is just oil the point of entering it, and the unfortunate Facardin, who is now preparing io follow her/'»—
On hearing my name, my conductress examined me Λνίίϊι a look of surprize, and asked me, if in truth my namo was Fa« cardın. —" Why should it not be so ?" said I· However not satisfied with this answer,. she addressed herself to my secretary, who was still weeping by the water's edge* — <e Venerable Jessamin !" said she, u tell me the truth % is your master really called Facardin ?**— Hoping, that this would be of service to me, he called Heaven to witness, that such was my real name. — 4fi Then let me away without loss of time/' said she, "since f po.ssess the invin¬ cible Facardin ; but if this stranger is reallv he, what is become of the other half of him ?"—- Mot understanding this questior^ î dici not attempt to answer it. The gilded bark made ks way with incredible swiftness, and soon losing sight of that shore, on wdiich the inconsolable jessamin was still voitin^
ids lamentations, a quarter of an hour land* ed us upon another. This was an immense rock, which rose in ihe midst cf the sea. It appeared to bo transparent^ and as soon as we disembarked, I perceived, that it was entirely composed of chrystal. A female, more advanced in yoars, more splendid in dress, and mor«- frightful in feature thm my conductress, саше in all haste to receive us, ~~- C4 Take courage !' s cried the nymph o\ the bark, as soon as the new-comer wsu within hearing; u í bring whal our charming mistress has sought for so long in vain This is the great Facardin ! ! !**-— -—«The great devili" answered the other, ,c why, you must be mad, Harpiana, to mistake this shrimr for the invincible Fa carditi ! Bui no matter. We shall soon se/ of vvhat stuif tliis daring youth is composeet . and as he seems likely io fail in the vcrv preliminaries, we sballar least have the com ibrt of seeing him flayed, while they huro
the unfortunate Chrystallina ! Has he taken the oath . ?,î ™ — t; He lias/' answered the first scare» crow, "and so readily, that I am almost sorry for his fate/*—- — i€ Disarm him then," rejoined the other, u wdiile I announce his arrival to our charming Mistress/'— ™ cs Softly," said I ; a a moment's pati¬ ence, if you please, Miss Monster ; let me inform you, that if you pronounce the word, a disarm/' a second time, I sitali whip both your ugly heads from off your shoulders."*— Thus saying, I displayed my sword : ihey seemed not. a little confounded at г pro¬ ceeding so unexpected. —" Conduct mc," I continued, u imme¬ diately to this lady, whom I have sworn to protect, in order iliat without loss οί time I may deliver her from a danger, whicli appears to be so pressing» Truly, it would be extremely well-timed to eive away mv
stilis, when 1 come here for the sole pur- j/ose of fighting !"—- — c4 Flower of chivalry !' f said she, who haei cume to receive us, uQ do as we re* quests since resistance will be vain. Give up your arms, and I swear to you by the prophet Ali, the origina! inventor of green turbans, that if you meet a single enemy with arms, yours shall be restored to you/'— ï suffered mysdf to be prevailed upon ; and retaining only my sword, which no¬ thing could induce me to relinquish, 1 followed, wherever these damsels chose to lead me* ln my way I observed a number of persons, the singularity of whose appear¬ ance surprized me not a Httle: they were men in female dresses, wdio being each pro¬ vided vvith a spindle and distaff, were spin¬ ning with great application, as we past along· í inquired the meaning of this hu¬ miliating masquerade* I was answered, tlut ï was unlucky in not being permitted to in*
crease their number; that all these persons had been adventurers like myself, w ho hav¬ ing taken the same oath, preferred passing their Uves in this degrading situation to en¬ gaging in the enterprize at the risque of be¬ ing flayed, if they failed to accomplish it ; but that no choice was left for him who sliould present himself on the last day of the year (that space of time being allotted for the trial) except to attempt the deliverance of the lady, or be flayed without further delay, —" May 1 ask/* said Ι, ζί the nature of this perilous exploit ?"— ~™ 44 Our lovely Mistress will iniorm you," answered one of my guides, u as soon as you are presented to Iut/*— ît woidd have been difiicult to walk, and indeed to keep one's feet on an ibland of chrystal, if the roads had not been «ştrown with diamond dust, ft was already night ; nor sliould í have been able to distin¬ guish the seven?! object wduch presented themselves,, had not tlie rock been hollowed VOL, lb L
out wiíh much labour in various pLuw wiiore orauge-trc*t-s were introduced, froin whose branches large chrystal chandelier^ aiul a preťusíon of burning lamps depended ; thb made the whole ibland as bright, as if it had been day, W' с were situated directiv under the tor* rid zone, scarcely four degrees removed from the equinoctial line. The sun during the day had darieci his rays full upon this immense mass oí chrystal ; the air was con- «sîdentbiy heated, and not a breath of wind was stirring after twilight. Consequently, I was aînıos t buílbcaicd vüth heat by tlic time, that İ reached the other end of the rock« On the blink of it 1 perceived a bcjuare pavillion, Îïî whkh both my guides advised ше to take some repose. I found there all borts of refreshment, aud hastened to enjoy that ol* bathing at tlie rc*quest ot my attendants, who assisted me to undress. hut who failed io persuading me to commit my «sabre to ι heir care, as 1 scrupled nol to do, iuy gannciitá. Ib vaiu did tliey twat
iheir lungs in assuring mo, that nobody in this world ever bathed sword in hand. All their remonstrances proved fruit lobs j I not only entered the bath, but came out of it in tiiis waiîike posture. A magnificent night-gown was immediately thrown over my shoulders ; and wdiile ï eat of what was set before me, and appeased my thirst with coo! and delicious wines, my clothes were carried off by my conduc iresses, The day broke» Afler demanding niy clothes without success, ί was desired to set forward, and also was entreated once more to lay asîde шу clumsy UUooking scymitar, which would be tot ally useless in Uie business, for which J was preparing. — u PryYiiee/* said I, u talk no more about my scymitar. As it is, 1 want only α clo.se cap, а distaff instead of a sword, and a jacket and petticoat, lobo eh est like those wretches, whom 1 saw in my way hk ther!»'-- iinding mo deaf tu all ош rea ite- respect* mg thu sword, of whkh tliey уулх su aux- L 2
tous to deprive me, thoy conducted mo wilhout more delay to a bridge, which connected the chrystal rock vvith the most delightful meadow, that I ever beheld. Here the two ladies left me, AVhen I had crossed the bridge, two lktle negroes, even more deformed than those who had numaged tlie bark, closed behind nio a bra/aju banier, and with a low bow demanded my sword. I answered that this request being particularly disagreeable- to mo, if they mentioned it again, í shouid be under the necessity of cleaving tliem from the head io the navel This throat put tliem in such terror, that away tliey ran over the meadow like two black kids. I followed them withont framing myself, ťu» í came nesr а palace, which could not w eli avoid being transparent, for the walls wore* fonned of the clean st and most boaiu liíul plate glass, th« the world ever pro duced· Near this palate was raised by means of guidon pegs and cords of purple ι magnificent pavillion* I have-since heard,
that it belonged formerly to the imfortu- nate Darius, of whom Ì have the honour to be a lineal descendant· In this tent, whkh was open in the front, i perceh'ed a bod, if possible, more rich rmd elegant than that, wdich uow contains the charms of the divine Scherazade. Ί drse objects would nut ha\ e inven the mos ι distant: idea of а perilous ud » enture, had they not been placed in а very disagreeable nchdi- bourhood : for to the right of the transpa¬ rent palace there was erected a pile of wootl evidently intended to burn some criminal; and on the left I observed a kind of altar, the four corners of whkh were provided with iron rings ibr the purpose of fastening the victim, and wîth sacrificial knives for the purpose of cutting his throat. Though 1 never couhl even foun an idea what к was to be afraid, í confess, а little kind of inquietude passed through my head like a vapour, \idien I remembered, wdrat I havi hoard respecting tho chrystal rock, iiow¬ ever, no person being In the tout, though
lhe bed seemed prepared for somebody, i approached the little palace, and here the first Hght was thrown upon the singular ad¬ venture in which T was engaged. Chance had conducted me to the bathing room. To enter il would have been unnecessary, since I could distinguish perfectly well through the walls, what was passing within. Four ne¬ gresses, more dingy, more flat-nosed, and less dressed, than any to be found in the iieart of Guinea, surrounded a marble ba¬ son, in wdiich according to all appearances their mistress was waiting for my arrival to begin the adventure. As soon as they per¬ ceived ше, those ! adies in waiting ranged themselves in a line ; and immediately the admirable Chrystallina stepped out of the water with as few clothes on, as it was pos« síbie to have without beino: stark naked« She remained in the midst of these four ugly ok! loads a considerable time, before they rosiki imd any thing with wdiich to cover her» Tliis piece oť art did not escápeme; but though ï conceived, lhat hcr complexion
must be heen to ^reat advantage wdiile coib tnisicd with the horrible figures around her, *y> f í own, I was much sì ruck with ihe claz/ikg wdiiteness of her skin ; and 1 looked with contempt ujwn tlie perils of the enterprize while I reflected, that this uncommon beauty would certainly feel some grat ilude for the service, which I hoped shortly to render her. While such were my reflections, the lady and her attendants disappeared, I know not how. In a few moments after one of the 4 negreases came to say, that her mistress, the heavenly Chrvstallina, that divinity wdiom I had just been so fortunate as to see bathing, waited for me in her apartment, where she was just gone to bed, and hoped, that I would make liaste to preserve her life by my politeness and generosity. Scarcely could I believe, that this message, at on.ee ко fiattering and so free, was not sent for Ihe purpose of making a je*»t of me. — u The adventu re шау end as it pleases/* said İ to mvself, ^ provided it begins, as
this obliging ambassadress tives me hopes tlied it will."—- I iollowed her with great eagerness, and on hor part she lost no tirno. ] guessed, that sito was leading me to the tent of Da- rins, ana! no sooner had î entered, than it waa surrouuckd by a troop of soldiers com¬ pletely aimed. The nymph Chrystallina dosa cei ¡ue to sit clown for a moment at her bed's liead, and being obeved, she next rang a golden bell. Immediately an old man appear t d, whose beard was at least three loot knoer titan mv seeretaiVh : in his kit *» у 4 *f hand ho held а sc v t he, olc! în his right ч small doei*, havi' g* pkt „d wdich cm the oihţ.i* rick* of the boti, ho retired. Ί u him succeeded two figures .still unie extraordi¬ nary* 'Ilio [ahi was a suri td high-priests respektable kuut his kiny butoi au aspect tlie most k/i'ckius among Lis ме red oni u ments was hn liukd a groat butcher's knife, vvhîdi was .suie h !n h к gb Mo, and his beard WAA" even loopy r ıhan tho ι ι /, \\ hid; t had. шч ьеет lho ui Ιου* wa i a hiathsinUh, h
loa U so 1 supposed frum hk having а ham¬ mer, ά filo and ί ba -1 * of naib: beride*· -hk he hoki а brazen hoop, on whkh. was strung a variety ofrings of difierent sorts; this hoop he fastouod to an iron staple, vvhich was fastened to the Hoor bv a broad plate от eold. Tlie ladv, from whom this mum v.*· * ? mory li ad drawn my attendue, now cksued mo to make the Гл >t eflbrt towards her do- ikerante bv bringing her uno oí those ring, ; hit dune, the adventure v.ould be aCeotn jlklkd, and i «shuidd ют Ли м>к misiei o\ ht*i регьоп autl lier tre bur* s 'ihese w uuk n ado me «waminc her agnu ; hot he y«, y, uow tciu tlose for me tu ho r> much tini ri· d w irit her, .t, 1 hul bien at ksi ridit, iu S'ito ui ι îıo art w hu h sho hid iee 1 io < οι ít.d hor beauty's екс iy, * he * :αη · I lu b* -.auch jK)ïu* b), 1 · uj pu '*, he thm»ďk sha 1 \W' su »[iciun of k r bsn » j aim* ,1 * t· ι iuned mv sın pri '·, iui iu oid-sr s» ίι · v y - .lut -de* \\,h nit, 'Λ,ο ¡ıımcvUiUt) uj/ 'Sv. It I alu j {'? ui p» y* 4ϊ0ί ,Ο. í f í í J i i ui) » 0|1 'lis U. ÜV UK tel ? * fo^UUii i 'hu r % t·»
bhe was daubed from head to foot', and sho novv disgusted me as much, as she had en¬ chanted me on her first appearance» How« < г/л% as í had promised to undertake this adventure, and as all she wanted was one of these rings, î advanced towards the Ih a zon hoop, on which they were strung. ~ %i Hold, my little friend/' said the long-bearded archbishop, who now" perceiv¬ ed, that 1 was armed; "Hold!" said ho in åtabk ; t,s wlio taught yuu to appear «sworri in haini iu a lady's bed-chamber ? Down un yon/ knees, young наш, and give ше that nse!ey; weapon without deiay,"— 1 turno! desia ibey magnanimous Kmperor«. tho tury, which ! iolt at hearing this piece iff hisukrAo, Iiowever, İ strove to repros» и, lost I should botra у im selt into sume İm- pi opi ku. — u Mr. Falsou ľ 1 said I, 4ť v/hal y ou liave just said, has boon dinned into my oars by /11 tho rauhie of this phice ; and i oow us uro y ou, thai ii such another speech tumos um oí that burii, which covers yuur t
face, I sha!! strike off* your head, and cou¬ vert ii into ά scrubbing-brudi /'— In finishing this compliment I wide my «sword whistle twice or thrke about his oars. I soon perceived, that as all t lioso i danders made the same requests my an¬ swer produced the same efiect upon every one ofthem; for after ducking snyr/i times under my sword, шу friend the high-prust took to hk hecis, and the okeksmhh ehd not stay lung behind hhn. Ыо sooner weie thoy elegük/, than I hastened to cud th** adventr.ro bv hriugkg a ring to the fairy Chrjst ilk д, lu. i lu p* poşeti, th¿t I might kne one k-e th·* u*« о blo of taking* But though i pv*** υλο. " strength than tîıe gods к .tow apon m/my, il w\b in vaio, th't Ι οκ. ni d it. and tii» d euh ring sopu ilely ; Lut one cuuld 1 move 4 . Piquedat a n ; tanto w hhe ï dii! r.ot ι v peck ! redoubled my oi/uls, but vvith i«o hotter success. At lougth u tollerine /î ,. audtikn ¡oud Οχ tľuiding ΐΐ,ο (íojdhm kiìot I wv* g< kg tu ty ui uu. ui с к ile I u
bUck*-mit!/s filos, when the nymph desired mo to resumo my placo near her. *—>*· ít is not on exertions t i' thk naturo/* said she, when i had obeyed her, a that ui) safety«, and also yuur own depend. It к evident, that as vuu ran/ employ it, no -.trongt li can obtain for me one of these ring*; however«, there is а way of clisen- g.igimg t hem with as much ease, as if tho brazen hoop were upon» Tike breath, while I explain it to vou, and in tho mean¬ while examine with attention tlie furniture uf thk Lent/ 5 *— ï threw my eyes round, and perceivoci beides tlie clock and thc brazen hoop, а do/ysul wardrobe\ and two spinning wheels* lhe Jady fy-raiving, that 1 was read) to hear heig addretsed me iu the follo win о «, ι е л уууу *
History of CHlirSTJLUXJ. Naturt bestowed on me those sentimento or pruuonoe and viilut?, which in others are merely the effects of education; but with ι hem lako possessed a degree of cuiiosity, whkh I never could succeed in repressing* My motlier, who wished to preserve me In all the purity ck original innocence, buffered nothing male to approach our dwelling. în α short time my curiosity had no otiier ob¬ ject ıhan the siglic oí a creature, of whom 1 only know tuo uame. lu vsán was that u'eaturo described to me as a horrible* шиь .1er, wlio would cievou r me the monunt that I met Ms eves. Mv curiosity tlak, rf « éj grow mure urgent, and at t vvoi ve ycais old, it was so violent, that I resolved u> run avvay, and see a man, cost v/hut */ might. Accordingly, out* light whoa tie* family was buried in sleep, I dropped ironi my window into the gardı ry uf whkh ' .>
next scaled the wal!. 1 jumped down on the other side at the risque yf my life ; and all this trouble did 1 take in hopes of finding an animal, whom 1 expected to devour me ! I ran like а mad thing across the plains* trembling lest I sliould be pursued and brenıgîıı back; nor was it tiil my security was certain, that I sat ciown under a bush to reat myself, and wait for day. Under this sanie bush, a young pilgrim, whom the night had surprised, had also taker» s h eker. This ï ciki not discover, till the dawn per¬ mit ted in*· to distinguish the surrounding object ά. lie woke at thc same lime with ше, and showed no less surprize, than I did on f iiidhit: iıimself near me. In spite of mv curioşii y í was then so uninformed, that ì look him ibr а girl of my own age, 4vhom f conjectured to be a foreigner from the difference of her head-dress, and strange cut of her clothes : as to features, I thought (tiiough 1 was quite as handsome then as I am now) tliat the strainer's face wab
even handsomer than my ow T n. For some time we examined each other in silence. — w Amiable stranger !" said he at length«. 44 if you understand iuy language, deign to Inform mo, where I can find a woman. My father, who inhabits a desert abounding with wild beasts, and who has bred mc to the chace from my childhood, permits my engaging bears, wolves, tigers, and wild- boars ; but he forbids my trying my strength acrainst that most dangerous of animals, tlio *.i ». > *** woman, for he assures me, that notliing can defend mc against the poison, which it. carries about it» I bogged him to tell me hovv this creature is made, in orelor that I niav avoid it.. but he woulel not oblige ше : I then requested, that I might have a voung one brought up tame in the house, but this also was denied nie. At length his re¬ peated refusals augmenting iny indination to see one of those dragons, about a month \ s ·* ago I escaped from nry father, and have ever since been wandering through the most gloomy woods and frightful deserts in hopes
oí finding this animal. My search has as yet been fruitless : but as your dress declare.*, you to be a foreigner, should there be an\ «f О " 4 women ia your country, be so good as to tell ше, how 7 ϊ Шау get a sight of one."— — α And are not you one yourself?" said h much surprized.-— - — α No truly !" answered he; " so voit need not be afraid of mc ; and even should one happen to pass this way, my bow ami arrows will he sufficient to protect us/'— --- r4 But ii you are not a woman/' said 3. " wdiat are }Our b — ~— a A man like yourself, 5 ' answereo he.— ín short, Sir Knight, after much sürpriz^ and many questions on both sides, our alam. was dissipated ; we found what we hac" been «seeking, and withont шу beiug de¬ voured, or his biing poisoned, otu* curioşii) was satisfied. This discovery pleased us so iuuch, au/ we tliought the deceit of our parents sue: %n affront to our imdcriîtanding-, that wc
resolved to return to them no more. V/e concealed ourselves for some time in tlie yery depth of the forest, persuaded, that a strict inquiry would be made after us* AVe knew no other fear than that of being sepa¬ rated ; and I submitted widiout difliculty during the two or three first days to sub¬ sist on the produce of my companion's chace, aud to have no other retreat for the night, than a tree or a cavern. But my curiosity was not extinguished ; it revived ín niy solitude, and I grew tired of my situation. 1 fancied, that my new acquaintance was not the only man in the world ; thai though he was more· beautiful lhan the day, the worid might possibly fur* ι ish somebody even more to my taste ; and this idea having once got into my head, I took care to case my heart of it. Accord¬ ingly I proposed to my companion, that vve should leave the wood, and see a little what was going on else whore. He desired no bettor, and we proceeded together, till we Arrived at the sea-shore. Neither uf us had
ever soon that immense element. You must certainly know, that it is a very striking object when behold fur the fikat time, and we wore both of us occupied iu admiring it, when suddoidy its surface was disturbed by а swell, v. hich seemed to extend itsdf fur* ther than our eyes could roach. At length a dark vapour ascended; which at first raLii gi-self in the air, grew thicker as it fell ag.in, aud furming a duuci was driven ■e * f u b} a strung gust of wind to the place, whi re we wore standing, it wrapped itself round me like a cloak, and then hurried me away with it in spite of my lover's cries, whom I was compelled to leave behind» I perceived, that ! was borne along with great rapidity, but this gave me not ihe least uneariness. I am naturally courageous, and v/as only angry with the fog, which, 1 doubted not, prevented mo from seeing many things wor¬ thy my curiosity. Suddenly it dispersed ; tlie scsi opened, and Ì veas swallowed up without suffering the least inconvenience. I now found myself iu a spacious grotto, or-
iiamentcd with that infinite variety οί shells; which the -ea produces, and enriched with enormous pearls, as wdl as every sort of coral which к conceals within its bosom. Before ! could look about me, and recover from my surprize, f saw the faithful Har¬ piana, near mo, the same person who brought you in the elided bark from the shores of Fioľkpahan to the chrystal island. She was dressed much after the fashion of the attendants of Thetis ; that is to say, alio was hardly drest at all· This by no means sol her off to advantage, foi at that time she was if possible uglier, than she is novv. She informed me with а low cour¬ tesy, t J ut 1 was welcome to an empire, whose sovereign had commissioned her Lo show me its wonders, and afterwards to conduct me where my arrival was anxiously expect ech Having said tliis, sho led me to a long gallery of dir ys tal, wiiose roof was supported by tvvo rows of columns coverai vuth coral-branches and mother-of-pearl, When we had traversed ii, niy conductress
iiujuired, whether before I ascended, I chos^ to see tlie gallery of shipwrecks. Perceiv¬ ing that I did not understand her, she im formed me, that we were then standing un¬ der tlio Red Sea ; and that this sea being tho channel, ihrough which by continual navigation the treasures of India were coo.» veyed to the other parts ofthe globe, it fre¬ quently happened, tlut such as had ему ríched themselves by ¡ong labours, carried the i ruit of them to tlie bottom of the sea, wiiere the different presents made by tem¬ pests to the most greedy of elements, were carefully collected, and arranged vvitli order in a particular apartment. Í, who never could deny my tiling to my curiosity, eagerly accepted this proposal Vve now entered a room, where heaps oi gold, silver, and precious stones met ns eves ou aH sides : this saloon was «so !arp<s that I could not conceive, how the who 1 / oarth had contrived to furnish tlic immer«·-' 1 wealth, whkh filled it. Having admired this mairazme for some time, l was conductor
Into anotlier still more gratifying to my cu¬ riosity. Thk was a chamber loss wide but much longer than the first. On one side wore statues of gold, silver, bronze, and marble, widi furniture of all kinds, and arms of every fashion, either valuable for their quality, or exquisite workmanship. On the other sido of this saloon stood a row of wardrobes, over each of which were the portraits of a man and a woman, with an inscription underneath. The dresses and ornaments of these portraits were all of dif¬ férent countries. I bestowed so much lime upon the first, ihat the nymph Harpiana in¬ formed me, that her master's impatience to see me elsewhere, would not admit of mv making so long a stay, as vvouki be ue- о о *· 7 cessary for mv examining the rost. Slu* Jé О added, that in each wardrobe wore tho erar« niants of those, wdiose portraits were on the outside; that thoy were all illustrious persons of both sexes, who had perished by shipwreck; and that likenesses had been ukon of the most distinguished, sume hav-
ing been restored to life, and others painted after their death, — ^ For example/' said she, si two and iwenty years have passed, since I was drown¬ ed in company with the Sultana Fatima, tîıe Grand Signor's favourite, who was car¬ rying presents to Mecca. What followed ? Sho was reanimated on account of her шь common beauty, and 1 had tiie same good luck, in order that I might wait upon her, The Lord of this island loved her passion¬ ately, but all his power and skill could not long preserve her from the grasp of deatii ; at the end of six months she was carried off by the small-pox, the only malady, over which my roaster las no power. That is her portrait/' added she, " and her clothe» aro In the same wardrobe/ 7 — Ык* opened it, and showed ihem to me ; nothing could be more splendid and elegant. While í examined them, she considered me with no less attentioib „ " it is the very thing!" said sho ι u your dross is unworthy of your person.
and the Sultana's uîîl be much more suit- abh. One v/ould think, thoy were mack for you ; I have already measured you vvith iny eye, and on these points í never am mist aken / , -— The proposal was accepted. No sooner w ? as I dressed, than my lady in waiting thought me so lovely, thai she pressed mc io hasten io lake command of the empire, of wdiich I was soon to be mistres**, and with which I could not fail to bo tmohautech —- 4i You will there see the genius of Genii/" continued sho, £ * anci will see km at your foot/ 5 ·*— *■— 4; Shank 1 soo a man too r 1 ' interrupt- ec* i»"****—· His question surprised her :i little; but before sho couki reply, my demand was an¬ swered hy the appearance of the personage whom she had meririoneeL this ironins of Genii himself in his owu person. Impatient to examine hk new acquisition, he had transponed himseli- (though ho%v I kyyy not) to the plac/ whore we wore, iu toad ut
waiting for us above, as his dignity re¬ quired. His looks surprized without alar rn¬ ing me ; thougli his make w 7 as very different from the pilgrim';», whom 1 had found un¬ der the bubh, 1 had not the least doubt of hk being a mau, b îs true, the other wab much handsomer, but then the otlier was not halt so large* Rcfle-cting therefore in mv own mind, that man of wdiom í had heard such terrible things, was an animal in his kind so excellent, í concluded, tha* the more there was of hirn, the better h must be ; this í elea induced me, the fibi compliments being over, to accept thc ofler> of the Genius, so ignorant was I at that rime, tlmt it was necessary to preserve ар- реагапесь. 'ilıîs ceremony, the only one used in om marriage, being over, he gave me his hand. (or rather his paw, for it was covered with long hair to the very tip of his fingers)», and aided me in ascending а magnificent stab case. We stopt not, till we found our elve*. on lhe ьате chrvötal ruck, which you tia
VClbCCi. Ill J UUI \"V ity ¿İ1LIIC1 « lAAVl'Cu: I waa» conducted to this island, and our marriage was celebrated in this pavillion» I was soon disgusted with my new bargain, for the Genii are in general a very whimsical, cruel, ill-made sort of people, and above all are abominably addicted to witchcraft. Though my spouse was naturally fickle, to me he was so eternally faithful and so insupport¬ ably fondi that I was ready to die of vex* ation* To this constancy he united an ex¬ travagant degree of jealousy, though of,a kind quite peculiar to himself: he wished every body to admire me ; but it made him violently angry, if he suspected me of in¬ spiring any more tender sentiments than ad¬ miration. He locked on me as a treasure, of wdiich he was resolved to be the sole possessor; but he by no means chose to be flie only person, wdio cnikl еь /uuate that iri-a&ure's real value. i paSSCCi iUV i i tliv; VCi'V uruîîyViyùnV \дШ1 ** β 1 ¡φ 4 У g dai wretch, wdiose caprices constrained and whose fondne^a disgusted ше* I larpiaiu VOL. iL M
was iny only consolation. She warned mc to conceal an aversion, which her master and mine (dull as he was) night at length dis¬ cover ; and she advised me by redoubled complaisance to persuade him, that I was distractedly in love with hira, both on ac¬ count ofhis personal and mental accomplish¬ ments ; by which means 1 should find it an easy task to dupe him, wiienever I found a proper opportunity· í took her advice ; and I soon established myseif so perfectly in the confidence of the Genius iny spouse, that by degrees I became the mistress of his dearest secrets» Among other things, he informed me, that there were only ihree enchanters in the whole universe, whose power v/as equal to hi:- own ; that all three were his inveterate ene¬ mies ; that each of them possessed а magic spinn -ng-wdieci, whkh in order to rendes them his slaves, it was necessary to put inte* the hands ofthe throe most beautiful prh: cesses in the world ; and that as soon a-*- these beauties should have spun long enoug.\
to make a cord abk to reach from the top of the loftiest mountain to the surface of the sea, he should attain the utmost summit of his wishes. But till this desbable event could be accomplished, he was in danger of losing the talisman, in which consisted the whole power of his enchantments. How¬ ever, he added, this talisman was a mvy tor v so w r elî concealed, that there eik! not exist a human being, who had the most distant suspicion of its nature* He had no sooner said this, than I was dying to know, in what ihis talisman con¬ sisted ; and I flattered him so adrouly, and timed my caresses so well, that at length 1 became possessed of а «secret, whkh till ihen he had concealed whh the greatest ел uiou irom everv one. krom the Halo toe of one oi îis feet ho suddenly displayed a monstrous and terrific ?\y7, or rather d.\\\\ which he h.ui tho power ef hiding ut will, after iho nunuer í/ Поп-*, liv- then informed nu-, that ьо Kyy; .ь tliis .rul remained attached tu his оууыуу Λ υ ione M í!
w ль he invincible ; and that even in tase oí Ib being separated, it woukl be easy for Ium to rejoin it, and thus preserve hk power undiminished, unless before he could produce ît, some one should swallow the vi holo separated limb down to the nail in question. Ho told ine besides, (for he was disposed to »til me every thing, so perfectly Учан uo fasriinted by my caresses,) that he had contrived to insinuato hhibtif «so arifulh ï ut о the society or the possesbor.s of tliese important spinning-wheels, that Uvo ofthem v/ere already the reward or Ins exertions ; but tiuit those wore of little η^^ unkss he could gain possession uf ihe third, which of all tho three vvas the point most difficult tu compas·*. Upon receiving ihis mark of confidence f displayed siu h unbounded oratitude, that ui) husband knew not by what moans to express to mo fas delighi and satisfaction sufikkntlv. -Perceiving that the sky wa** ovena.T, Ài\d that the winds wore hegirmhu; to whistle, he transported me to the sum- nut of t lie dirystal-rock, in order that I
might enjoy tììe PîUcrîainment of some ship · w redi or olher, wdikh (he doubted not) would be the fruits of the approaching storm, lie told me, that It \ν*$ from the top of this rock, that he discovered me for the first time, and caused his spirits to carry me off from tlie shores of ihe ocean, li .» tuen put into my haud а telescope, not so longas my finger, and yet so miracul nidy pov/crfu! that Ì could mike ou« tie* η чье dknínutko obpcTi a-s di и İnci !y, ;ь if ť ŕ ь ; had h* ч. n dose to my feet. I lad no *y*c4ií-L placed lb* insti unie ni to ua ewe, than 1 beheld а \емЛ in the с pen «4 i, the whole ere w o» v huh boonucl t»í be already în extreme ternu" at the storiti whkh thu'itt-ned thorn, а in. Ic Luiyhr e\ cepted. The dec of thk straiunn* v. ıs iu the full a.s Loautitul a> that oi my link pi! j;iim, »nd lis ./izo v /.ь almo Λ α> uhanu lyotb α«, that ui mv eroat boiJ>v ţ the ih*niu Sıddenîyy the stupn hvi mie so \kl ei tkj ihe vosmJ was ''V/ailoweci up by t¡, * ν. % ,\*^., whose fui у coibpiiod with the r ^,m 0 ut t ле
winds» Not a man of the whole crew w. caped, except thai stranger, vvho had ahead}' fixed my observation, anc! wdio still dis puted his life against the assaults of the hostile billows vvith efforts almost incre¬ dible. Ί he degree of interest and compas- ion, with which this bight inspired me, was sudi, that í was almost out of my senses» Tho Genius thought that my transports wen e o?* ì-ioned by the excessive delight, wiiich I received from this species of entertainment, orci was the better pleased with me. Ib told cue, tli.it what I had soon wa-; roriirg, ívni dut кг would íaenkh mc whh л macii superior kind ut amusement : with thk rn- липшее, he placed mo m a small oar upey wheels, taking hi-» seal beside me* it vv ι not wit ho Λ experiencing sumo tiueasy ьеп - Kit ions, that I íelt íí.i·» nudine pat i tseif in motion, and precipitate ш from a plico, w ich 1 ι η tied to botho loftiest ирип carili, into an abv .л whose depth I nernbkd и intasine. However, I ii:A not time to\
ïo.anv reflections: In an instant î found my- self in the cbrvsiakca'krv ; vve Iiad en- torod it at the same place, by wdiich I pene¬ trated into it on m v fusa" arrivi. From this oallory wo coukl soo rikiiratlv everv thing w licit passod, as far as tho surface ol the sea; îlrıtîs, when the va к cairn, fiu" a.t that fimo it was too mudi agitálod tu permît my distinguish- ng any thing* Some time after, we were informed, that the tempest had produced nothing but α small bark, ten or twelve mariners, some naval stores, and а hortx* of value. The Genius my spouse having cast his eyes on theso pi юг wrote lies, gave it as his opinion, that such sorry knaves were not worth tho trouble oí re-animating; he then bogged my pardon for havitig giveu too an amusement ьо little worthy my attention ; and îo re¬ compense me for tuy trouble in comings') far for it, he sufiercd me to examine tka magazine at leisure, on which at iuy iir^ visit ! had only been allowed tinte tu cast ■à passing glance·—This was an employment m %
exactly bitiîc'd to my natural cmksity ; лгл ytter examining tho portraits and ναι fom habits of tlmse, vvhose spoils w vre deposited i »ι tho thr yst ai wardrobes, I found infinit« t r.ít rtainmont in perusing tho histories ot thei/ owîKiss Charmed wuh the attention with which. í examined ihose difierent re. fiques, the Genius would gladly IiaiS'q multi* plied his treasures and Jus curiosities, solely for the purpose of furnishing mc with a* musement; for to say the truth, though he- was immoderately jealous, he v /аь by im moans dkoliigkm On the cunt rarv. yuu could not havo found α Genius m the whole world raore easy to live whh, ex¬ cept when the ton/or pasiou vvas con» corned* Ilo ľe ir mo în thc magazíne, the faith¬ ful Harpİan.ı being comimuioned to explain to me such points, a.> would otherwise have been unintelligible. 1 was gratified by t his per* шкьша to prolong my * ; vmiination of tlio wardrobes and í heir content sufor it was selden ? 1 1 îhat he would trust rue out of lis sigli»! ;
■md when he JU leave mo for а few mi¬ nutes io myself, к was only for the pur¬ pose of preparing for шо sume entertain¬ ment or other * width sometimes astonished, but never was able to please mo. I cannot toll >ou, huvv aielenriy i wish¬ ed, that tho sea would bring to us dhàã or alive that unfortunate sti mgci, who nono Ind survived for α low minuted tiio riipwretk, in which hii companions had perished. í h.id the gieat e A dosii о to take a nearer'S kw uf л man, whu even at such a distance had .ippxirod su cham ing; lor 1 have already told yuu, to v.hat an execs. ! am governed by turiosit} i f luwever, h was îu vain, that í raided my eves everv mom/oi tu t Ja — ^ mi ujj ei îhe waten, 'ìlio с dm , u iodi nee/ smofOks! them, still oflered juoíhmg i 'teitd.t** to my sight; and mv hmkyoľs iU'^cng^ns ? who examined every pari í í the suirouudin τ divs.os, return* d vrithuut riistuvu rim» ììììaw t!» tO the uis'-Kiik íeu ű i> ul L t * *h J( - *>l \L,d V* , İ
Vi.o í*utoriainmont, prepared for ine b) еле Genius, dttainod us in the chrystal gallery the whole of that night. The next day, we amused ourselves with fishing fot dolphins, on the coast of the ehrystalislmcl Nothing can he moro diverting than thb mode of jkhing. A band of excellent musicians, (per h api* die best io be found in the universe, a* w eli in point iff voice as instruments) was mi board the vessel, by which you, Sii Knight, W4"*e convoyed hither. As soon ла it reached tho cpon sea, the music struck uy m portoet harmouy. The dolphins, who ei the whole fishy tribe have the most cuiiosity, саше flocking from all quarters round tht glittering bark, iu order that they mighi have а nearer view of it ; and as thoy hav: α still шоге ekekkel taste for music than oven for shows, thoy í olio w еч! the concert, in piofound silence, without perceiving (so attentive were they to the sweet sounds) tliat the baik insensibly conducted theni into .
lone chain of nets, wdiich lined the whole extent of the shore. However, this adventure did not produce any very bad consequences to them : it only cost a few of the most beautiful tlieir libertv. The Genius ordered them to be deposited in some superb reservoirs, wdiere he amused himself wdth superintending the educalion ofthese illustrious fish. AVhen the bark returned for the third time wdth its capture, one ofthe fishermen came to inform us, that in this last Irawl he really believed, that they had caught the king of the dolphins; so heavy were t hck nets,and sobrilliantwere the variegated heale·'., wdiich they saw snarklmsr through the wa* ter,— But what was my surprise, when In stead of this magnificent fish wdiich v/e e*s pected, 1 sav/ enveloped in the nets the ve; \ same straneer, whose comro.sure during tlic tempest, and whose courageour:- c\enion afterwards, ϊ had witnebed with sucli admi radon : die armour, in w Keh lie w js arr гчо.. w;u eii^melicd v. uh goM ,y t ^l ligure, ич! и i)
ornamented with an infinite number oí precious stones of all kinds and colours* The Genius my husband, who know uo¬ ihing about generosity, immédiat ciy ordered the fishermen to despoil him of his brilliant anus, and then cast hint back again into the soa t ~I кюкес! round for my faithful Harpiana to implore her by looks, that she would find some means of evading tlio ex¬ ecution of this command ; but she was not to be ^eeiiş anc! 1 was on the point of inter¬ fering myself, when we wore informed, that thc stranger still possessed some remains ot life. Upon this, the Ge-nius, who wished to learn his hktory, in order that it might be engraved upon the wardrobe in whkh his spoils were to be deposited, ordered his atten¬ dants to assist in recovering him.·—To rescue his life was to preserve nine, so warmly did compassion interest mo m Ins behalf. The Miccour, vvhich was given him, provei! s·; fükacious, that he soon opened his eyes, recovered his spirits, and was upon hk legs hi less lhan an liour*
2
The sight of the Genius appeared to sur¬ prize, but not to alarm him. ile easily comprehended, that every thing, which, he saw in these enchanted regions, belonged to rhis extraordinary figure. He cast Jiis eyes upon me, but instantly turned tliem away again, aware, that both of us were in thc povver of one, who was near enough to ob¬ serve all lis actions : what eíiect t his single look produced upon the stranger, 1 cannot pretend to say ; but as to myseif, it did my business effectually ! He now returned my imsband thanks for the assistance, which he had just received, in a manner, which widiout having any thing degrading or ser¬ vile, was full of gratitude and insinuation. It quite ¡softened the Genius. For my part ; this compliment appeared to mo so ingenious, that I almost fainted awav through admi- ** о ration, lho stranger now pro. eedied (v,ithout giving us time to que tiou htm; ívj inform us, that his desire \o atchkve o tauií/os m undertaking, had induld км го tmknL
atthe port of Florispahan, for the purpose u visiting tho Court of Moussellina the Seriou * . less indeed from any inclination excited by hoi reputed beauty-*, than on account of tho glory to be acquired in an adventure so peiilous tliat on the fourth day of his voyage л dreadful tempest had destroyed his ves.sri and all his attendants, without his bein/ ** v) able to comprehend by what means he ha I been brought near enough to these hosp! table shores, to receive assistance; and fina! Jy, that he should feel but little regret a- having been shipwrecked, since this triflin; accident had been the means i.f his rt-achh\' the dominions of thc most magnificent ane best-made sovereign in the universe, if i- were not that Le saw а woman In his Com¬ panys of all creatures upon earth t ¡к one*, for whkh he had ilio greatest au tipathy. This speech, aided by the btrarger*sa t gr/«· able mau. л r», tould not fail to bo vv«./ reck ot. no) Geriu·', for the biute v.. ţir << -ıh tl flatter/, than ^i j <i to
jealousy j and from that moment he took such delight in the stranger's conversation, that he could not exist without him, On the other hand, the stranger aftected to shun mc on all occasions ; nay, vvhen the Genius (who seldom quitted me) desired him to join our party, he always turned his back towards me, and during the wliole time that he remained with us, never addressed to me a «single syllable of his conversation. This behaviour made me cjuite desperate ; for the mure that such marked uupolitenoss proved that ho detested me, the moie ekstrems waa î ci' pleasing him. The Genius vvas ready to die with laughing, when ho saw the constraint, which his guest seemed tu sufler in my presence* He sometimes rated him severely for his aversion tu а sex, whicli makes the v/hole happiness ur mankind, and repeated, till he was hoarse, the assut- ance, that if the knight would bui once look me full in the face, he was persuaded, that his aversion woukl bo overcome, ľhe very idea was suilkknt to make the.
stranger run away from the place where î was, as if somethmg most horrible had beet \ proposed to him. At last, so much impor tunity was used with him, that he consented to look at rne once, on condition, that lie should never be asked a second time. Kor did I neglect to make a great many objecti¬ ons ; as well to mark to the stranger, how much his conduct had displeased me, as to impose upon my husband by thc /ppearance of extreme delicacy : so that the Genius wse> obligee! to hold my head forcibly betweeu both his hands, io prevent my avoiding tlie glances of his favouiite. Oh ! if Ì had avoided them, how much I simuld Lau lost ! While my jolier-head of a Geniu laboured vvith both lis body and soul to give his frknd a fair look at his wife's charm.*·,, tho eyes of the ciiarming sl ranger wei»· doing their duty: ihey assured me, that Io¬ was dying for love of me, and that all thus'* marks of aotipathy w ero assumed. 1 his \\\< scene over, its inventor exultingly enquir-
ed, what eflect the sight of me had pro¬ duced upon his guest ? ~ 44 An effect so disagreeable/* answered he, " that if it were to happen frequenti} , i sliould utterly lose my senses ! I even doubt, wdiether in the violence ofmy deliri¬ um, the goddess, your wife, would herself be secure against iny transports i' 9 — I thought ΐ understood the meaning of tliese threats, and from that moment I felt the greatest isdination to see myself the object of one of tliese frantic fiis ; and all tliis ihrough pure curiosity î The Genius, however, was exceedingly surprised to find, that ihe sensibility of th«* stranger's heart, instead of yielding on t hi-; r rial, had only been converted into frenzy lie told him, that hc was ixsoîved to carr) the point ; that he woukl prove to him, that ι woman like me was not a person lo be despised; and that since the charm of iuy face had failed to produce tlie expected ek feet, those of niy whoie person. from ¡ìojaì to foot, must be calkd in io thoir a^ktauce,
Was ît possible, Sir Knight, for a jealo. Imsband to carry his extravagance funher Our charming guest appeared to clian^ colour at this declaration, and requested per. mission to depart that instant, since he preferred leaving the island, rather than consent to give proofs of his complaisant; so extremely disagreeable« The better to deceive him, ilte stupid Gonitis gave him a. promise» that in future he should be ia ahme, and that no further mention shoiJJ be made of me and шу charms, since he was so horror-struck at a proposals wliiJ- lie would not have made to any other гал. in the universe.—-But all these assurances (as 1 said before) were only made for tho purpose uf deceiving hk friend the more «artfully ; aud this was the plan, whkh к adopted,. He caused a cabinet of chrystal to к made, exactly similar to that vvhich you see yonder. He placed it in the mag/.zine οι sliipwrecks among the otiiers, after coverai. It with a turtain of green taffety emorokkr/i
with gold. This clone, he disclosed his plan to me, which was to shut me up stark naked in the cabinet ; but for fear of ac¬ cidents he took care, that no one but him¬ self should be abk to let me out« ! was ready to die with desire to commuuicate this fine project to the stranger; but I never could contrive it, so eternally was 1 teased by ihe presence of my everlasting Genius, But as the stranger had more wit and penetration than all the strângerii in thc vvorld put together, ï have no doubt, but he guessed something of thi.s premeditated surprise, and you will soon boo the conse¬ quences· jivery thing bting prepared for this new scene, the Genius, in order to bring it drmţ the more naturally, thought proper to ask his illustrious guest, whether according lo the usage of other kniglit errants, ho bad not provided himself with armour previous to his setting out on Jiis expedition, The other replied, thai he well remembered being completely accoutred on ihe day uf
hîs shipwreck; but he wtis ignorant whac had since become of his arms, his sword onlv excepted which those* who found hhn, had kindly left in his possession. „« Well then! 7 ' said the Genius; 4i to» morrow I will show you the only place in the island, whkh you have not yet seen since your arrival hei e. Perhaps, this place шау afford you some news of your armour. at any rate, you will see something or other well deserving your attention. I will leave you alone there, lest my presence should oblige you to hurry over the c^auiuiation ь: Tiianv rarities, wdiich ouirht *o bo advised ^ ïa'. vw - viu«! 1 would lay a wager that yoii never binv anv thing raore curious, than wL·*. is contana d in thc glass cases, whkh you w!U find ornaurnited with portraits, and inscribed with the names of those w hou ì hey i ep resent. -*— —* c And í would lay a wager," replied tly stranger, c( tliat there is not among ai' those naxiios a name half so curious as m\ own» ·******
*~" 4 And pray then/* '* enquired the Genius, 4C what makes this name of yours so curious ?'*—*· — 4¿ Its novelty/* lie answered ; a I am called Facardin, and i do not belie vo, there is another person of that name to be found in the universe/'-— — 44 Oh ! as to that, I am quite of your opinion," said the Genius *, 44 but my good friend Facardin (since Facardin, is your name,) in every other respect, 1 am sure, thai you will be emite of mine/'—· The next clay, my jealous spouse locked me up vvith his own hands in the chrystal cabinet. I was m tho state wdikh I before mne* tioned ; and the Genius failed not to expa¬ tiate upon the astonishment, whkh the sight of me would give the str tinger, m\d the amusement whkh I should receive in wit¬ nessing hk consternation. í was quite in despair to find, that tlie cabinet was trans¬ parent to no puľpo;e, since there was no possibility of unlocking it, either trom wkh¬ in, or from without, Tlie curtain v/as drav/u
before it ; and now the Genius without Ιο*?* of time conducted his guest meo the apart* ment, wheie I w r as inclosed, and according to his promise immediately left him to him¬ self. In spite of my vexation at finding my¬ self shut up without any means of escaping, my heart palpitated with impatience, princi¬ pally from reflecting, that while occupied İn examining thc other glass-cases, the hand* some Facardin might pass mine over, or might not think of drawing away the cur¬ tain, by wdiich ϊ was concealed. But my uneasiness was soon rcmo\ed: he саше directly towards it; and without 1о*Лпц the time wdiich my brute expected him *o be&tow upon the survey oí ihe rest, he tlrew away the curtain, and appeared so much char¬ med with the maimer in wdikh I was present fá before hîm, that alter a iew unavailing eflbrts to free me in a more peaceable manner. in two blows of his swoid lie broke m\ fragile prison into a thousand pieces, Л$ he tlid not intend to render ше í hi-.
service without reward, and as my heart was filled with a decent sense of gratitude, his curiosity confined itself to those wonders, vvhose knowledge had been forced upon him vvith so much perseverance ; mine too wa* ьо perfectly satisfied, that I tliought, tlie whole merit of all the pilgrims and all the Geniuses under the sun, must certainly be contained inthe only Facardin, whom theuniversecould produce. We soon arranged the characters, wiiich it was necessary for us to play, in order to account for tho demolition of tlie cabinet, and we settled our proceedings for the future : though this last precaution was cjuite useless, as you will soon see. The charming stranger now took his brilliant arms from the place, iu which I told him, that they hadbeen deposited : arrayed in them, he seemed to be the Gocl Mars, who, quitting the Queen of Beauty, carried avvay with him aU the loveliness ufher son. I already mentioned, that he was almost ш tall as the Genius ; but tiis towering stature was bv no moans a disadvantage, vvhen ac-
companied by «such admirable proportion í i limbs. He now left the saloon of shipwrecks, jus sword in his hand. The Genius was extremely surprized at seeing him in com« plete armour; but he was much more «so, when after complaining bitterly of tlie trick which had been played him, he proceeded to toil him, tliat as soon as he had removed the green curtain, and seen behind it the statue of a woman without cloathes, he was so much shocked, that in the first move¬ ments of his indignation he broke the nidio in pieces, and was afraid, that he had done die statue some injury by a heavy blow, which he hud given it with hk sword. Nothing more was necessary to frighten η -j amorous Genius almost out of his senses, and witliout repl) ing he ran to my assistance, When he arrived, ho found me extended upon thc Hoor, und apparently in a «swoom However, on seeing lhat 1 had not received any wound, his feats were tranquillized* and as soon as 1 did him tho favour oí Cum¬ ing to myself, he lauglied ready to split hi*»
fiideíí at :he recitai, which î gave of the stranger's fury, snd of the terrible fright into which his bruta! behaviour lud thrown me. However, he was by no means pleased, that Ms guest hud not given himself suffi· cient time to examine the v/hole catalogue of my perfections, before he broke the chry¬ stal cabinet; for my husband's ruling ab¬ surdity was an anxiety to make the whole world know the value of a treasure, of whkh he was himself the sole possessor. 1 could read in his countenance the determi¬ nation to bring us together again by some new stratagem : but fortune ordered things differently. From that day, the charming Facardin was not to be found, either on the island whicli we inhabited, nor on the chry¬ stal rock, though during a whole month both v/ere searched for him with the great¬ est diligence. The vexatkm, which his loss occasioned me, was so violent that I was scarcely to be known for the same person* The merit of him, whose absence I regretted, was of VOL, II. M
itscif sufikient ío produce this effect upon me ; stil! î fancy, that curiosity had a still greater influence ; and I strove in vain to console myself for having lost the opportu¬ nity of ascertaining, whether this stranger would have been as agreeable in a second interview, as I had found him in a first. As the complaisance of my Genius was cjuite inexhaustible, the ennui, to which he saw me a prey, afilicted him extremely. He took it into his head, that change of air wouki be good for me, and that in order to amuse me' and restore me to my former state of health, nothing would conduce so much as travelling. I was delighted vvith the plan ; but I w r as riot equally well pleased with the precautions, which accompanied its exécution*. 'He caused a chrystal cabinet to be maele similar io that, in vvhich I had dready been inclosed ; it is the same, wdiich you вее yonder. He shut me up (but for rids time with my cloaths on), took me upon his shoulders, and commenced 'his travels by traversing ihe bottom of the ocean, Oc
cisionallv wo latu led Dì i enose ourselves, and take refreshments in the most delightful spots, whkh the shores aíforded. On these occasions lie never failed to let me out of my glass-case, and resting his head upon rny lap, he generally sank into such profound sleep, that I had the greatest difliculty to rouze him, wdien it was time to recommence our journey. I had flattered mvself at setting out, that during my travels fortime ndght enable me to iţain some intelligence of the excellent Facardin; but on rhis liead 1 obtained no kind of satisfaction : and as 1 was out of all patience at being of no other use in the world, than to serve this brute of a Geniu« for a bolster, 1 called to mv succour that curiosity, with whkh Nature Iras so plenti¬ fully endowed me. it suggested to me the doubt, 4C whether I could possibly contrive to deceive а jealous husband, who ahvays car« ried me upon his hick well packed up when he was awake, and wdio when he was sleeps Ьщ. ahvays slept upon my lap?'*' 1 answered
my curiosity, ££ that I would immediately satisfy it, whether the thing was practicable, or not." With this view ï tried, whether I coukl manage to draw my knees from under his ugly head. Finding that I effected this without the least difliculty, and that I could go whither í pleased, for whole hours to« gether without his ever stirring from the place where I had left him, I sdzed the very first opportunity of trying, whether I could not carry the remainder of my project into effect. I succeeded ; and this appeared to me so amusing, as well from the singular¬ ity of the thing as for the gratification of my vengeance, that my curiosity (vvhich was dways fertile in novel ideas) persuaded me to persevere in these innocent trials of my skill in artifice, till I arrived at the hundredth infidelity. I guest, that I should fmd infinite entertainment in the different excuses and cowardly terrors of those, whom the pre¬ sence of ihe Genius, would of course inspire with extreme alarm* í always carried with me yonder hoop, whkh yon see loaded ¿3
with rings ; they belonged to the persons, who assbted me in tricking the vigilance of the Genius, and of whom there was not one, who was not heartily terrified* But above all, the two last were the most cow¬ ardly chicken-hearted knaves, that I ever met with in the course cf my existence, ~ <4 Trebizonde, my good friend/' cried the Sultan, interrupting him, u what was that you said last ?"— 44 Mighty Lord," replied the Prince, 4f î said, that the virtuous Chrystallina informed me, that having carried her adventure as far as theninty-cighth, she received the two last rings, which completed the hundred, from two poor cowardly deviis, who almost expired through fright."— •— 4î She lied !" said the Sultan ; 4e but go on with your history ; vve will discuss that point another time/*— In obedience to his Sovereign's commands the Prince of Trebizonde proceeded to state, that the Nymph of the Rock continued her narrative as follows t
U У
--*"" 'Ilio iioí'p being now furu k hed with riio completo number ofring*, whkh 1 had ••evolved to accumulate, 1 grew weary ot ¡ íã) mı; uliks io aa arimai su jealous and ьо -α/ι id, and i determined to lind some new * Оегекешу^Ч i en- my curiosity. But ΙΌι- ΐ ι '\ wiio İMcî 1л\ они d mo so long, turned ha' kkk ujon uaC. when I \\дь lea»t pre« [..I'd. "«« '· Ibai iOtrruv 1 home four months and a h ,/ mhiutes ; and 1 was not sorry to find и yy li ín л d, km 1 Sj narrow than thai, iu un ¡s [ ч ¡ * *· omu during пь iravd> Ì ±i% у », c· x s ì m iá, iho pavidi iii m wh .ut w - .ч ■ ..ι pí*< im, ,ãd f he pala, o ot « hip- ■» .i ku ., w» io all yho e^ w ho, о \ niet) ρι\ <»eiì» ι» ! ι л» ,ο evtry цип with tho most untimal ti»/.:ni . belt aboev ail the io**t, the saloon %riiKÎı eontaincd tiie dnystak abinets, www tho jiio't agieeable to mo, un act omu ut its îot.düpg tlie rotuhoetîun uf ι he adii hable İ aca:du.. Gne day i Па«! simt mvsdî up in it -./¡th Harpuna, in urder that we mighi -d-*. »t thai ıv^ıuud 1. ω wltioui iiiui«
ruption. Harpiana had nover soen him ; but being entirely in my intei ests, she was extremely anxious to obtain a л -ght υί him, charmed with tho wonders whkh ϊ related, both respecting Ik. poroon, and the very genteel maimer, in whkh ho unuiuetod himself towards ше. We were quite" at a !o 5 s r how t u obtain amy intelligence ofhim,: for though riio had an infinity of sense, and my ca fiorii y iur- -nished me with а thousand expedient.., still «we never could eflect our purpose, sun omitl¬ ed as we were on all sides by tho ouv m — 44 If we had bur a sword," said «she, " I woukl go in pursoif of hiui myseif/'—· — 44 And vvhy is a sword ьо necessarv i u I inquired. —"Botau.so/'replied î larpiana, t4 the golden bark is tho only vessel to be found bore ; and this always remains motionless, except when the Genius himself touches it with his wantb *>r when any person enters it, sword in hauch Mow as wc have neither the onenor the other,
it is useless for us to think about the gokk-u bark/'™ I know not, wdiat I intended to do with the- rings, of which 1 had made such a fine cob lection s but it happened, that I always car¬ ried them about me, without ever thinking of examining them. One day, I took it in¬ to my head to satisfy this unlucky curiosity, and while I was thus employed, the Genius surprized me. I was extremely confused, My embar¬ rassment appeared suspicious to my husband, He was astonished at ihe number of the rings, and asked me, Iiow 1 came by them. As Ì observed the strange and sudden alteration of his countenance, I was thoroughly aware, that this question was dictated by the true spirit of jealousy; and as there is no animal in the whole work! so ugly and so terrible, as a jealous Imsband who asks questions, 1 threw myseif at his feet without delay, and requested his forgiveness of a crime, which I had not committed, in order to conceal
from him the hixit^ of which I was reaîiy pnilty. Accordingly, I confest, that I had stolen them from the cabinets, in which the spoils of persons shipwrecked were depo¬ sited. This confession augmented his suspicions ; for he had himself laid all those rings aside in another place, and he was certain, that there were not above fifteen of them or twenty at most ; луЫ1с on the hoop whkh he had taken away from me, the num¬ ber amounted to a full hundred. He exa¬ mined them one after another, without find¬ ing what he was in search of. However, I was so frightened after the defection ofmy first lie, that ï scarcely knew what. ï said afterwards ι and he at length guest so dex¬ terously all the circumstances of my trans* gressions, that he pronounced my sentence upon the spot. He condemned me to be burnt alive at the end of a year, unless in the course of it I coukl find some adven« turer, who wouki remove from the brazen hoop in a single night all the rings, wdikh î H 5
had acquired during the whole of my tr.i. vels. No human effort could get them off except one after another ; and it was only in tho same manner by which thev were ob- tained, that thoy could be made to move from the places, in which before the trial was made, the Genius took care to fasten them. Such was the monster's decree! Ills ser¬ vants were charged to see it executed, lie tlií appeared himself, being engaged by some u n dort aking, whose nature 1 have forgot- t oiu Ever sm co, 1 have sought for a person, who by rendering mo so slight a service, wonld save my life ; but all those, whom t lie goklen bark has couducteel hither, have ba ely roí used to try the adventure. 1 al¬ wa >s hoped, that among those whose sue* •conn Harpiana implored without intermis¬ sion, she might at length meet with the in¬ vincible Facardin. He, í am persuaded, * woukl accompli 0 h this adventure; but in vain have 1 flattered myself vvith those fond .hopes; l'Ori míe refosos liim to my prayei s«
and hitherto has only conducted to this pa¬ villion the miserable wretches, vvho profer¬ red the occupation and dress, in vvhich you saw tliem, for the remainder of their effemi¬ nate existence, rather than even hear of the enterprize in question, after they had «seen mc come out of the bath. Doubtless, you are already informed of the other condi¬ tions, and of every thing whicli relates to them. Time presses ; you are informed ol the whole afiair ; it is now only necessary to know your determination, in order lhat the dock may be set : for twelve hours only are allowed you to finish the adventure. Yot surely to judge by your appearance, to so valiant a Knight twelve hours will be more than sufíieient, and I dial! eternally confess mysdf indebted tu you кл* my life/'— Such was the narrative of the modest Chrystallina; such was the proposal, with wdikh she finished it, and my answer was word for word, as follo vv s :— ~— 4 * Fair lady, I promke to do all hi my Ïh u
power to deliyer» or at le«ist to assist you, My object is to fight your enemies, not to make love to yourself, Withont vanity, 1 may say, that I shouhl find it 'as easy to finish this adventure in anotlier way, as by the force of arms : but as glory invites me to employ my '.abre, and as yonr beauty, all wonderful а? İt h, does not tempt me to display my prowess in ;my other таптТег, 1 «shall immediate] y cut myseîf а passage through your butcher, your clock-maker, your blae kîïiî-kb, your female Moors, your convenient Harptana, her hideous compa¬ nions, and the whole mob of your spinning ugga-muifms. Now tlun, make up your mind, whether you will accompany me, or not. 'if you ι huse to вплп, шу fortunes, 1 vv iii save yqu from the perils, with whu h у mı aie meiia-ced, at the hazard of my lile* On the other hand, if you prefer remaining here ? in inder that you may betray me, I give you my word of honour, that in case of my being attacked, the first head wdiich 1 cut off 3 sitali come from your shoulders/'—
ΊΊκ 4 lady between the sheets seemed al¬ most frightened out of her semes at this threat. She sprnng out of bed, embraced my knees, and assured me, that she desired nothing better, than to follow me through the world. Iiowever, she implored me to listen to her advice, which would facilítate my enterprise. She then returned to her bed, and told ше, that she was going to ring the bell at three different times : that at the first tingle, the person, wdiose busi¬ ness it was lo set the clock, wouhl not fail to make Ids appearance, iu order to perform his office ; that at the second, the locksmith would arrive to see how many rings were already taken off from the brazon hoop ; and that at the third, the sacrifker with the long-beard would come running to release ше, ïn case I had accomplished the adven¬ ture, or (supposing me to bc found unable to complete it) to deliver me over to his servants, till he had leisure to flay me him¬ self : that these three personages were the most extinguished, the most cruel, and die
mosi dangerous of aH those, whom the Gc nius her husband liad left to guard her and execute his orders ; and that having enticed them into the pavillion one afler another in the manner which she had just explained^ 1 sliould be able to cío with them whatever might seem to me thc best to be done,— ~—"But still," continued she, "though you are sufficiently convinced, that violent means cannot enable you to open the enchanted hoop, you may have some doubts, whether gentle methods would or would not be more effectual. Tïierefore, if you like it, you may satisfy your cuiiosity in this respect, before you have recourse to tlie other extre* míty.''-— — " My curiosity?" said I; "Ring, ring, my Lady Chrystallina ; niy disposition ь uot quite so curious as yours."— - — ét 1 never heard a better thing in iny hfe !" cried the Sultan; 44 that is exactly what f ihould have baid myself in your situation ; ior the шоге that vyomen are curious, tho more İt bciiQxeş us Mçn to show, that wt
are exempt from such a weakness !— But pray, go on ; your narrative is so entertain* ing, that I could pass all my ufo in listen¬ ing to you. Wei! then î vou were stand- ing by the bed-side of the nymph of Chrys¬ tal, in your night-gown and slippers, and vvith your sword in your hand, vvhen you told her to ring the bell : you see, tint i forget nothing ; now let us hoar, what happened afterwartls/*— ~—" Being accoutred," resumed the Prince of Trebizonde, 4C exactly as your most saga¬ cious Highness has just described, I placed myseif near the door of the pavillion; but í chose such a position, that the gentlemen, whom we expected, coukl not possibly see me,till they shoukl have passed the threshold. The curious fair-one now tingled her bell; the dock-maker did not fail to make his appear¬ ance, and I did not fail to chop his head off I served the locksmith in tho same maimer ; and I signified to the nymph by signs, that she should now summon the grand-sivcrificer· In reply she raided tier
light hand, and talking with her fingers, she explained to mc™ u that the two offi¬ cers, whose business I had just done for them, were appointed to enter the pavillion much about the same time to execute their several functions ; that is, ihe one to set the clock, and the other to count tlie rings, as they came off the enchanted hoop. They had also the privilege of remaining in the pavillion during the wdioie adventure; but she gave me to understand, that it woukl be ridiculous to ring the bel! a third time so soon, since the sacri ficcr could not possibly believe, that the enterprize was already ac¬ complished, and still !ess that if the attempt was abandoned in despair, that he should be summoned, before there was any necessity. She therefore represented to me, 44 that it would be most prudent to wak three or four hours, whkh would allow us sufficient tirae to make an opening in the back part of the pavillion, through which we might escape during the obscurity of the night with less difficulty, than by tlie door which was al·
TUF FOUR FACARDINS*
ä* KJ *
ways surrounded by a multitude of guards in complete armour/' Having given this advice, she iet fall the hand, with whidi she had been discoursing. As my right-hand was employed in hold¬ ing my sabre, I was obliged to make my an¬ swer with the left ; but indeed I can talk as easily with the one as with the other. I re¬ plied, " that Facardin of Trebizonde was not used to make his escape, by breaking out of a back-door, through fear of danger $ that I would have nothing to do with her aforesaid opening ; and that if she did not immediately ring the bell for her Jack-ketch of a Pontiff, I was determined to set out in feearch of him; anc! send him to join his two scurvy companions/* I no sooner ceased to speak; (that is to say, to move my fingers,) than hers resumed the conversation—-She said, that if such was my determination, she at least conjured me to take one of the spinning-wheels ia my left* hand by way of a buckler ; for that the «sa¬ tellites of th*- Gemu-? (who would infallibly
oppose sny passage) bore such profound ve¬ neration to these machines, that they would sacrifice their lives rather than run the risque of breaking, what they knew to be so precious to their necromantic Master,— This piece of advice w r as not so disagreeable to me, as her former counsels. Accordingly I laid hoki of the spinning-wheel, which was nearest ; and the virtuous Chrystallina, juţnping out of bed and seizing the Other, implored me to set forward without waiting for the enemy's arrival ; since by this means we should stand the better chance of taking .them by surprize, and when they were least prepared foi; an attempt so desperate. I did not contradict her«, We quitted the pavillion of Damis : and the astonishment pf the guards., who surrounded it, was so great, tfrat ! cut down five or six, before they had time to recollect themselves. The rest betook themselves to flighc, howling most horribly, and I pursued them with father too much ardour ; for the grand sa¬ crifica* (whom í happened to have left bc-
.THE hind, wdiile I went forward to look for him) quitted the altar which he had pre¬ pared for me, and came running after me with a dozen of his attendants, each .pro¬ vided with a great chain for the purpose of binding me neck and heels. Chrystallina warned, me of ,my danger by a loud excla¬ mation, vvhich made me turn round. No one dared to approach her, because she took care to cover herself with the awful spin¬ ning-wheel ; and besides rhis protection, she spun with all her might and main, when she found her danger become very urgent» Thk was an action, which the boldest of cur ei. omles dared not behoid without prostrat¬ ing themselves upon the earth : and during oue of those humiliations, I took an oppor¬ tunity of slicing οίΓ the head of the con¬ founded high-priest, without respect for the; length of his beard, or tlie sanctity of hk oflice. This once accompli.died, what fullowed .was rather a rout, than a combat* î kii loci as manv, as í coukl roach, without trhting
away my time in making priseners; and .having traversed the chrystal-rock without meeting with the slightest obstacle, I assist¬ ed the wife of the Genius to enter the golden bark. î followed her into it ; and no sooner was I on board, than the ve&$el sailed away as if it had been mad, without asking us whither we chose to be carried» I must not conceal from your Highness, that my joy at having accompliflied this adven¬ ture was so great, that till we were out at sea, I did not recollect my armour· It ap¬ peared to me cjuite disgraceful to leave it be¬ hind me by so precipitate a retreat· And being unwilling, tliat the Genius on his re turn should convert my arms into a trophy of my flight, I endeavoured to steer the vessel back to the place, which we had just quitted. But the bark paid no attention to me, and in spite of all my exertions we soon reached a landing-place, where we fou ad an abundance of good company, as you wi!! see in the progress of my шггз riom
Ì told you, that I was extremely vexed at not having been able to regain the chrystal rock, in order that I might have rescued my armour : but my distress was very dif¬ ferent, when 1 perceived,, that the bark sailed straight towards a shore, which v/as covered witli a multitude of people, some on horse¬ back, some on foot, but most of them su« perbly armed and accoutred. I could abo distinguish in the distance a number of tenis and pavillions, raised in the middle of an extensive plain, and surrounded with lofty trees, whose boughs formed over them a shade, cool, thick, and delicious. Ihese Knights, as well as the populace, astonished at the sight of us, wero all assem¬ bled on the margin of the sea, and employ¬ ed in contempla ring us with their telescopes, while they exprest increasing astonishments in proportion as vve drew nearer to the shore. I was so completely out of humour at find¬ ing myself obliged to disembark in the mid¬ dle of this assembly (my companion a lady in hcr shift i myself wkh a drawn s word
ane! in my night-gown and slippers, and our vvhole freight consisting in ? couple of spin» ning-whcels), that I was tempted to throw myself into the sea, rather than land in α Siluation so nuicuious« To Lmd at last, however, tliere was no avoiding. So groat was my confusion, that ) was really -to be pitied. I hung down my head ; I dared not lift my eyes from t he- ground, and ! knew not, wdiere to conceai myself: but the lady was not in tlie least put out of countenance. She no soonet landed, than she began to put her spinning wheel in motion ; and though this action diu not inspire sucli extreme respect, as was tlu case in ihe Chrystal Island, nevertheless those, who had witnessed our disembarka¬ tion, did not fai! to assemble round her, I expected, that our reception woukl have been accompanied by loud bursts of laughtei and a thousand jests ant! sarcasms : but finch ing Ш) beh mistaken, 1 took courage, and uo raking шу eyes, 1 was surprized to see, that dl die men of distinction were accoutred iu
a mode to the full as ridiculous and extra¬ ordinary as myself, though in different man¬ ners* Three of those, whom í had seen on horseback, now alighted, and advanced to receive us. The sisdit of two of them first Ö drew a cry of astonishment from Chrystal¬ lina, and then threw her into such fits of laughter, that she almost burst her sides: í could not resist following her example. 1 he Knight, who first addrest me, told me with great politeness, that ï did nothing to any purpose, unless I fell to spinning with my own hands. This person was the tallest and best made man, that 1 ever beheld. On his head he wore a fish-kettle instead of a helmet, and by way of a sword a huge spit was dangling at his lett side: but the rest uf his dress was brilliant with azure, gold, mid gems of incalculable value/ His strange dress, and the gravity» with wliich he deli¬ vered his remonstrances, would have forced ι smile from a criminal upon the rack, —- « I need not ask/' he continued* * -if
" whence you now come : the golden bärk ? t he Princess vvho accompanies you, and your sv/ord still crimsoned with the blood of a terrible adversary, sufficiently assure me> that both in war and love you are one of the most valiant combatants in the universe j and I congratulate you on your success. But your present adventure, it is not enough to bo a hero ; you must also be a buffoon. To hv able to make blood flow, is a great point ; rant it is а much greater, to be able to mak- ŕaces ! Let me therefore advise you to take the wheel from the hands of your compa¬ nion, and favour us with a specimen oi your spinning."— 1 was in doubt how to take this sarcastic counsel ; when my companion (as he called her) саше running towards him with open arms» — u Ah ! ,э she exclaimed, u my ever- adored Facardin! Does then fortune at length relent, zñd restore you to the una» bated impatience of my first curiosity ŕ"— ·—*' Chrystallina the Curious/* replied he,
repulsing her caresses · 9 u different objects suit difterent seasons : at present your affairs are not the point in question. What cli¬ mate throughout the world is ignorant of the conditions of a charm, vvhich this re¬ nowned warrior has broken, and what cu¬ riosity would not now at length be satis¬ fied ? —·*· The kind-hearted Chrystallina seemed to be somewhat mortified by tliis reception«, However, she was not cast down« On the contrary, with equal rapture slie ran to em¬ brace the second Kniglit, though with no better success. He did not even honour lier with a look, but repulsing her even more harshly than thc other, lie turned round and addrest himself to me. He was mure lovely than clay, and his dress was as follows* His brows were encircled with a leather band in tlie shape of a diadem, from which rose an innumerable quantity of streaniin·· feathers, lie wore a cuirass of polished steel, and round iiis waist was fastened a VOb, u* u
leather apron tolerably dirty. In one hand he held an aw!, in the other a cobler's last, and at the end of a rope all daubed with pitch hung a shoeing horn, just as he opened liis lips to address me, the third ap* proached to make his bow. I easily under* stood, that Chrystallina had no knowledge of this last Knight, for her curiosity fur¬ nished her wdth nothing to say to hhn : still his dress and appearance wouid have ex** cited thc curiosity of any other person. His stature was by no means lofty, not to say that it was extremely low. He wore a casque which imitated to perfection the head of a cock, the comb forming the crest. On each arm was a kind of buckler covered with feathers, and wdien these two bucklers met upon his back, you would have sworn, that they were the wings of a cock. His cuirass, also covered vith similar plumes, represented the bird's stomach: a thick tuft of long feathers bending backwards, seemed to rise from his chine ; each kg wai armed wiih a gilt spur, fastened just above hi-
ancle ; and in order that nothing might bc wanting to the resemblance wdiich he wished to produce, he clapped his wing-looking bucklers three times, and imitated the crow of a cock so perfectly, that any hen in the universe vvould have been completely taken in* As I could not imagine tlie meaning of all this, I stopped the questions, which they were going to ask, by entreating them to tell me, in what part of the worid vve were ý why so many persons thought proper to wear such different disguises ; and wdiat whim had induced tliese three in particular to assume iheir several characters* -~> 4 it is not very probable/* answered the tall Facardin, "that vou shoukl bc roalk îr- ■f »о uoıaııt inthis respect,since tu judge by vour own dress, lho s/me design muu uTtaink have conducted vuu liither. ftl ill as vvo ai о lhe last arrived except yourseif, it is он r duiv io inquire, whether vou ;ue wiliiiu* uj eng »g'* :n ritk adv «-outre«, -mpporing u ·-
that you either are or are not ignorant of iis nature. If you consent, you shall be admitted into our company ; otherwise, you shail Ы furnished with every thing neces¬ sary to enable your prosecuting your jour* ney elbcwhere/*—- I replied, that I desired no better, than to signalize myself in any adventure whatever ; and I gave them my promise to make one among tiiem« -~ 4i hi that case/* sakl the Knight, wbo was decorated with the shoeing horn, u it belongs to me, as being the last comer, to receive you, conduct you, and instruct you, as to wdiat is going on in tliis quarter. I shall begin by making known to you the first of those adventures, wdiich guided my¬ sdf hither; but with your permission I w ill defer my narrative, till you shali have rested and refreshed yourself a little in one of the pavillions, which you may perceive beneath yonder trees. Few people are igno¬ rant of the enchantment of tlie Chrystal Rock : you have finished thc adventure of
the brazen hoop, by delivering the gentle« woman who stands near you. Come then, and refresh yourself after your fatigues \ and while the lady spins beside you, I will tell her an anecdote or two respecting tlie (je¬ nius her husband, which will astonish her not a little/'«— Having made tins compHment, the three Knights called for their horses, and ordered one magnificently caparisoned to be brought for me : the cock was on horseback tho first ; and as soon as he was mounted, he began to clap his wings, and to crow with all his might and main. When I saw such a figure on horseback, I tliought, that I should have expired with laughing : for his steed, frightened out of his wits by theso unexpected proceedings, kicked, and jump¬ ed, and frisked, and made such a clattering, that tho nymph Chrystaluna (who, accord* ing to the custom of the place, had been placed cm a pillion behind me) laughed herself into so violent а lit of the vapoury
that we had the greatest difficulty in bring¬ ing her to herself* *™ €C Fair Lady/' said the cock, as soon as she was recovered* u I am extremely flattered by your approbation : but still when we come to the point, 1 am terribly afraid of failing. As for you, valiant stranger," he continued, addressing himself to me, α 1 would advise you as a friend to take the wheel from this lady, and spin away as usual."—· —-^ As usual r" I exclaimed; 4ť may I be called а traitor and a scoundrel, if ever i spun a thread in the wliole course of my Ufe!"— —·- u ^лу^ it docs not signify I' 1 replied he, who was to be my master of the cere¬ monies, and vvho wore tho leather apron ; ^ only it is as well to practice before¬ hand."— This said, he gave orders, riiat the rest of my equipage should be brought after mo (moaning the other spinning-wheel), and thai the golden bark should be conducted to the о
mouth of the river, on whoso bauks the pa¬ villions were pitched. As soon as we were in motion, thc stran¬ gers and myself began · to examino each О rf о other again from head to foot. 1 had al« ready opened my month to inquire, why thoy chose to wear their masquerade dresses so long after thc carnival, but thc Knight of thc Awl guest what 1 was guing to ask. — u I perceive/' sait! he, " that you are come hither from во premeditated design, though in this extraordinary apparel, lhat is not thc case with us : and since you ap¬ pear to feel such astonishment at the sight of our arms and drosses, you probably are ignorant of thc nature of the adventure?, wliich you have just engaged yourself to attempt. î will therefore instruct you in every particular, and lay before you ull the dangers which it presents, and tlie recom¬ pense which it promises.
О 4
Uistory if MOUSSELLINA THK SERIOUS, Princess qf Astracan.
THE King of Astracan (it was thus^ that the Knight of the Awl commenced his narrative), one of the most powerful sove¬ reigns of Asia, not only on account of his extensive dominions and the gold and silver mines contained in them, but of the valu* able chmt'A manufactures which have ren* dered his name celebrated throughout tlie universe ; the King of Astracan, I say, in spite or all his splendor and prosperity, still considered himself the most unfortunate uf mankind, for he had no children, to whom he might bequeath his sceptre. Ihc Queen, hU wiio, was young, handvome, and well made ; indeed, her whole appearance was so promising, and her flow of hoakh so uuiiUen upted, that you would have taken
your oath, that the King's affliction was oc¬ casioned by no fault of hers. Accordingly, he never exprest the least displeasure against hcr personally on this account ; and as he loved her passionately, he was not even of¬ fended at her laughing ali day long at his extreme impatience, and the infinite pains vvhich he took to procure a successor. So many vows were made and so many sacri¬ fices were offered, to obtain a blessing thus ardently desired, that the Priests were per¬ fectly worn out with fatigue ; anc! as the King believed the vvhole fault iu this business to be his own, there was no end to lik baths, and his medicines, anci his drinking mineral waters ; for in short he fairly went tlirough all the ceremonies, which are prescribed to women in order to produce fertility. At alî this the Queen laughed ready to kill her¬ self, as wdl as at the vows, thc offerings, aud the sacrifices, wdiich were lavished vvith su iittle effect : yet no one took it amiss, that she shouid be tho only person* who appeared to be amused bv what was considered by the o u
nation as a pubfic calamity. The people know well, that the poor Princess did not act thus singularly out of ill-natttre, and that her only dofoct was that of being thc* most incessant giggier of the present age : every thing macio her laugh, and nothing enter¬ tained her. The King, her husband, had been engaged in several wars with the neigh¬ bouring Sovereigns on this very account : for whenever tliey sent to announce some .melancholy event (as for example, the death of an only son) she answered the Ambassa¬ dors with iheir long black trains by such bursts of laughter, that they immediately left the hall of audience in high displea* sure, and жрЛ ofi* dispatches to their master, fided with indignant complaints at the gross violation, which the respect due to К opro- sentatives ol Sovereign Majesty had cxperi- < nc'^i in their neisons. Tliis malady ofthe Oucei/s daily strength¬ ening aud adv.mdŕig towards perfection, by rii*'- advùc- uf his colludi ihe King re- i
solved, that slie should make a pilgrimage- to the famous Oracle of ihe Cock, and that she should only be accompanied by a small number of attendants, as is usual on these occasions. The temple of this Grade is at the gates of 1 fourchimena, capital or the kingdom of Bactria. She arrivée! tliere without accident, concealing her name and rank, in order to avoid tho ceremony and expence ofa public reception. The King, who ind followed her Incog nito, thought fit to explain the ubje-ct of Iris voyage to the Priestess of the templo iıim¬ self: and while he was earnestly consulting the holy Matron respecting lis wife's em¬ barrassment, her Majesty was ready to split her «sicks with laughincs Tho Priestess wa*. extremely scandalised at this hahcurois be¬ haviour; however, after ι few skips iy t h * air, and sumo fright foi coruoiriot. >, * ho drib vereri tho following orado из io o's/ '^ the ; aer xi CuCxC, hoc ma а i с* и β
Ьь That, which is wished by the /fo-ľil»ri*m, ï -Ы! happen ere iong io the »VAc-.l'ilgniu î \ш1 bolh shall {¡шцЬ, Wher thc cow hus a calf: but tho season, whieh nuits íhe best with laughing, I Uy \*\houwlvt-.s the iiilant 1 au gli, Shall lililah the loıuloşt ldugh by half in !"-—— The beginning of this answer was suffi¬ ciently explicit ; but the second part was. rather embarrassing, and aíforded the spec¬ tators ample room for exercising their powers of argument and conjecture, The event, however, proved, that tlie Oracle was as good as its word, and indeed better ; for at thc end of nine months the Queen pro¬ duced a son aud daughter, of which it was difficult to decide wdiich was the most beau * tiful ; thougli it was certain, that they wero both more beautiful, than any child ел'ег was at its first appearance in the. world. Unfor» fortunately, the birth of their children oust the poor Oueen her life, for in the very act of being brought to bed she died of laughter,
Nothing couki have consoled the King for her loss, except the children whom slie left behind her, and thc pleasure which lie found in being able to sit cuaktly in his palace, without being stunned every moment by immoderate bursts of laughters But ho was not long permitted to enjoy such а happy state of tranquillity. At the end of six months the chamber, which contained his dearest treasures, was discovered in tlie night to be on fiie. On the first alarm he hastened to the place; but thougli every one followed hk example, and though num¬ bers threw themselves into the flames in hopes of saving the children,the conflagration was so rapid ant! so dreadful, that it was only possible to rescue the little girl. The greatest part of the officers of the royal household, who remained in the midst of the tire and smoke till the very last moment, returned at length half roasted, but with¬ out being aide to save iho unfortunate Prince. This calamity threw the whole kingdom
into the deepest affliction. As to the King, he absolutely refused to admit of any com¬ fort; but Time, whois the universal consoler, insensibly demi nished the father's grief, wdiile he gradually increased the daughter's beauty. She was the living image of her mother, except that she was taller, better proportioned, had a feirer skin, a finer com¬ plexion, and eyes more brilliant a thousand vîmes, in short if we are to credit those who liave seen her, she is at this moment a thousand times more beautiful, than all the other Princesses in the world put together ; but alas !" he continued, heaving a profound sigh, ci it is evident, that they, who speak thus rapturously of Moussellina, cannot have seen all the Princesses in the world !"— After making this reflexion, the Knight oi' tfie Awl remained for some moments absorb¬ ed in a deep reverie ; from whence he no «sooner recovered, than he resumed Ids dis¬ course in the following manner» — u The King, more dazzled wdth hev ι harms than even his court aud his whole
people, was never weary of admiring him¬ self in his performance; and believing her to merit all the crowns in the universe, he was determined not to deprive her of his own by contracting a second marriage. But as it was his fate never to enjoy perfect happiness in his family-affairs, tliis ad¬ mirable Princess, whose every glance show¬ ered darts of flame arrouud Jier, and whose whole person and slightest movement dis¬ played graces the must lively and animated, had never yot been known to open her mouth either for the purposes of laughter or conversation ; and it was only wdien she yawned (wliich site was much in the habit of doing) that she exhibited gums of a bright¬ er vermillic-n and teeth of a purer ivory, than over wore till then behold by the eyes of murtals. The good King, (who vvhile his daughter was a child, was continually thank¬ ing his stars that sho was freo from her mother's defect,) as soon as .she was grown up, would have given hut hk kingdom to have soon her laugh through tho whole four
and twenty hours ; so heartily w 7 as he wearied ofa gravity, wdiich appeared to him even mose insupportable than her mother's incessant laughter. No means were left untried, which might possibly induce her to break this silence wdiich distrest every body, and to overcome her solemnity, with which she was out of all patience herself: for it was quite evident from her manners, that every thing entertain¬ ed her^hotirfinothing could make her laugh: but all means were tried in vain. Philoso¬ phers, chymists, masters of languages, and instructors of parroquets, all exerted their talents to make her speak, and all threw away their time ; nor was her gravity leus obstínate than her silence. In vain did thev collect together all the buffoons and jesters of the kingdom, good, bad, and indiflerent ; thc King even sent for the best company of comedians to be found in all China, wdiere farces are acted in «reatei* nerťecíion than in any other country oť the universe ; bur thev miyht as well have remained at home.
Ihey were not able to twist the Princess's mouth into so much as a single smile. As it often happens, that misfortunes wdiich appear to be past remedy, are fre* quently followed by*others stiU more difii¬ cult to support, so it proved in the present instance : an event at length occurred, which made the King, the court, and indeed the whole kingdom look as grave, as herself. She was fond of all kinds of amusement? but particularly of the chace : a magnificent castle, embosomed in a wide and agreeable forest, and situated at scarcely a day's journey from the metropolis, was the aboele, which she had selected for the purpose of enjoy¬ ing this exercise in perfection. She managed her horse like an Amazon ; and in her hunt¬ ing equipage not only looked as lovely as Diana herself, but was without comparison more dexterous anci active«, Ouo day, when the ardour of sport had carried her further thau was lier ibual cus¬ tom, and when tbe exertion uf killing and pursuing the íoresťs inhabitants kui near!/
exhausted her strength, she found herselt on the banks of the river, whkh traverses the forest : it is the same, by which your kirk is to rejoin ш at the shore, wdiither we are now proceeding. The waters of this river are full as clear, as those in which Alexander the Great was so near losing his life, but are by no means reckoned so dan¬ gerous. As their qualities were well known* no objection was made to the wish, which lhe Princess made to refresh herself by bathing. Accordingly she hastened into the water, all covered with dust and perspiration, without eivins· her attendants time to raise the magnificent pavillion of chintz embroi¬ dered with goid and silver, whkh was usually erected on these occasions* Her male attendants of course withdrew to a considerable distance, before Üıe Prince-*- ; beoran to undress. There onlv remained with her two of her princip«)i ladies and foui maids of honour, who by the King's ordei i\^\hï leit her, because they were the greatest talkers to be tound in ali Astracan, The ν
followed their mistress into the river, a#d having placed themselves near her, the neighbouring; woods and rocks soon rung with such a clack, as never was heard before, nor will he again. For my own part I am persuaded, that instead of being induced tq talk by listening to these damsels (which was her father's design in placing them about her person), the poor Princess, over-pow r ered by tlieir flux of words, hacì made a vow never to open her lips from the fear of re- scmblinsr them» Whether this was the case, or not, it is certain, that the King w r as soon under thc necessity of forming a new household for his daughter : for while she was refreshing the loveliest limbs in the universe in tlio moit transparent and delicious of all possible rivers, these chattering women began to praise her beauty, all at the same time. One exclaimed, thai the irod of the stream must needs be о thíí foolishcbt fish that ever swam, to see so ρ-'ΠνΤί a beauty iu his bed without invino? iny -ign of hn being in CMbtcnce. Another
declared, " that poor Jupiter must certainlv be grown lamentably old, since he did not think it worth his while to metamorphose himself for the sake of a mortal more char¬ ming than all the goddesses put together ; he who had formerly transformed himseh into bulls and swans in honour of creatures. who would have looked like so many scul¬ lions by the side of a beauty, who discovered through the thin gauze (which formet! her only covering) ten thousand charms of the most dazzling lustre/'— It is still a question in dispute, wdiether the god of the river was out of patience ar their chattering, or the Deities of Olympus were offended at their impertinence; but whichever was the case, it so happened, tliat ail on a sudden the waters raised theni «selves to an astonLlmiec height. Terrified at the prospect of being drowned, th j females hastened to regain the bard: ; wdiea they beheld close behind them a monster, whose enormons bulk occupied the w hol· .space between the opposite shores* In vaia
did they endeavour to climb the nearest bank, though the waters nearly placed them upon a level Λνηΐι the land: they\veie car¬ ried away by the impetuosity of the current, and soon swallowed up like so many frogs by the immense throat of the crocodile, who followed close behind them. The Princess, who had seen but too dis¬ tinctly the tragical adventure of her ladies and her maids of honour, had now less in« clination to laugh than ever ; espcdally, as the monster, as soon as he had got his teeth picked by a particular fish, Λνϊιο follows him every where for tliat express purpose, made towards her at full speed. Her first Intem tion wiis to gain the nearest bank by favour ofthe ΛΛ -aves, whkh had already made their way over it ; this point once carried, she might easily seize her Ьолу and arrows, wdiich lay at no great distance, and defend herself against the crocodile's attacks» Un¬ luckily, all her male attendants, who upon her preparing to bailie had withdrawn out of respect, weie now assembled on the banks
of the river, whither the cries of the unfor« tunate maids of honour had attracted them; and the Princess's modesty made her judge, that it would be by no means, becoming to expose herself to their view, covered wdtli nothing more than a few yards of w r et mus¬ lin. In this extremity, she could think of nothing better, than to endeavour to escape from the crocodile by swimming, anci ac¬ cordingly she lost no time in throwing oil* her shift, wdiich would have embarrassed her actions. She now exerted herself to thc utmost ; but as the monster was but a few yards distant from her, her hopes of escaping were very faint, when her shift floating upon the water attracted his attention. Instanti ν he seized it ; and as if lie liad been perfecţi) satisfied with this precious spoil, he ceased to pursue the fair Princess, and sank undei the waters as expeditiously, as he had mad t his appea f ance. The river, wdiich had overflowed tin banks, wdiile lie occupied the bed of it, im* mediately reverted to its place ; this mad
the spectators conclude, that the monster would not return, or at least not tii! another time : the Princess, who was now stark naked, sufiered nothiug more than her head to be seen above the water; for in conse¬ quence of what had just happened, her whole suite consisted entirely of men, whom the cries of the poor ladies on being swallowed up by the crocodile had drawn thither. She made signs to them, that they must prepare one of her magnificent tents at some little distance from the river ; and her orders be¬ ing obeyed, «she again macle signs, that thoy should withdraw, and leave her at liberty to quit the bath. She soon reached thc pavil¬ lion ; and having drest herself (tliough without a shift), she í ook her bow and arrows, rejoined her attendants, and mounting her horse, repaired to the magnificent palace, which she had quitted that morning, ín the mean while couriers wore dispatched to the court, who informed her fat lier of this melancholy adventure. The king hastened io rejoin her without
losing a moment ; he w r as followed by tlu whole court ; and by day-break the next morning he found himself in the presence of a daughter, whom he loved as dearly as his own existence ; and for whom the dan* ger, from which she had just escaped, seem¬ ed to have redoubled his affection. He wept through joy while clasping her to his bosom ; then he fainted away through terror, on hearing the description of the crocodile- That very day he insisted upou the Prin¬ cess's accompanying him to the capital, lest the monster should take it into his liead to pay them a second visit, and do as much damage on land, as he had already done io the water. The rejoicings, w hich took place- in honour of the Princess's escape, wore not universal. Those persons, who wore con¬ nected either by the bonds of relationship or aflection with the beauties, wdiom t Ik- monster liad swallowed, were perfectly in consolable for iheir loss: the lovers in parti¬ cular besieged ihe king with requests, hke thoy miirht be permitted to examino the Ьш
eiers and environs of the river, even to it? Very ьоигсе, in hopes that an opportunity might be found of avenging the death of their divinities by that of the accursed cro¬ codile. At length he gave his consent, hav« ing first resolved to send a body of his best engineers to close up tlie mouth of tlie river and prevent by strong embankments the monster's approaches ; at the same time he commanded them to leave the access to the sea open, lest instead of d"-N--hnr him out ot his dominions he should enciosc tiiecrococlib within them. The adventurous lovers, who formed an escort for the enp;mccn·, marched in two bodies on the opposite sides of lhe river, and cursed their stars at having already pro¬ ceeded above half-way without finding any vestiges of that, of which ihey were in marcii. At lenglh those wdio parroted along die right bank, arrived at a morass whkh obliged them to go considerably out oi th, direct line of maixh. At the v ei vmomen· ■s nhen they were pieparing w rltai««¿e t L/ı r r OL, íl. í ¿
direction, they saw their companions on tlu oppo ilo shore precipitate thomsolves into thc u* ver. Casting tluir eyes on the waters, t hoy plainly disco vered a piece ot muslin Iloating there; not doubting that this was the Princess's bli!·, and that in consequence their allies had discovered riie monster's re¬ treat, without h hi of time they followed their example: when tho perfidious croco¬ dile, who lay concealed among the roods, with which ihe marsh w as bordered, rushed upon thein, and treated every one of them. as ho had already treated their relations and thoir mistresses. Tho engineer.- and their workmen, whoso busines was not elktingukhing themselves by aérions oi' valour ur temerity, returnou homo just as ihey came: k ii had not beeu fur thcm 4 no one would over have known tiie fke ci tí aso unfortunaie adventurers· While the puhik vas employed in Lo и г b/mg th ir !*--, а -j ihey lud already I hi nUd thit oi tluir deceased mistres-e* ¡melikene e au ¡veck that this confound« ι
crocodile во longer kept any bounds in the mischief, which lie committed: he had al¬ ready laid waste both sides of the river, swallowing up without mercy tlie cattle and iheir herdsmen, wdio (not having yet heard oí this strange incident) continuée! to water their flocks and herds there as usual. In a short time after, it v/as perceived, that there was an alarming diminution in the cily of all kinds of provisions, as vvell as of all those articles which ace necessary to maintain the luxury and magnificence of a '-mtropolk, and vvhich wore usually brought t híí hor bv lhe river from all parts of tho globe. Ou inquiry, it appeared, that thc monster, lurk¬ ing (as 1 said befoie) among the гечЬ nod rushes, with a skgk spring from tlie maush mio iho river, sent all the vosse» , full eť ımr- rir.uidize to the botťnn, wheu* the inor wretches on board of diem immediately be- eamo lik prey, it к not ascertained, wh *- ther lio liad, boen uid, í ku worn -u по nt turally morc t/nder ıh m mey ; ko y к y r.
tain, that he had quite another kind of gree· 3 diness for the fair sex than for ours. The King of Astracan vvas so completely overcome by such a rapid succession of mis¬ fortunes, that hc scarcely knew where to turn himself: however, he did not as yct know the wdioie extent of his ill-luck. The lovely Princess, wdien she quitted the capital, had no less than three hundred and seventy four dozen of shifts under the care of her deceased first lady of the wardrobe. At her return, not one of them was to be found, nor could slie by any possible pains over get any more made to suit her. After ransacking ail the shops both in town and country, and trying every kind of muslin, cloth and linen, she was at length obliged to make up her mind to wearing no shift ж ali, ihough nothing in ihe world appeared то her more uncomfortable : however, there was uo resource, for all the news shifts which she tried on, ьеетес! to be bewitched : those, which she wore during the day, took away her appetite, and thoae, which she
wore during the night, would not suffer her to get a wink of sleep. The King, more affected by this new dis¬ tress of his daughter's, than by all his other afflictions put together, thougiit that in this extremity notliing better coukl be done? than to send the great officers of the crovvn with magnificent presents to tlie Oracle of the Cock. The priestess of the temple received the officers extremely well, and their present*? still better : but she informed them, that some time had elapsed, since the Cock set out to pay a visit to the great Caramoussal, and that it was only in the vicinity of Mount Atlas, that they could be satisfied respecting those matters, which they had come to in¬ vestigate in thc vicinity of Fourchimena. Though the King their master was ex¬ tremely vexed at this delay, he kept up his courage ; and only allowing them llie time absolutely neeesbaiy for making preparation*» for this second journey, ho dbpaiuieri the
same ambassadors with three liundred ele¬ phants laden with presents of the finest chintz and linens to be found in his domi¬ nions. To give the embassy a still greater Interest in the eyes of the Enchanter Caramoussal, he caused it to be accompanied by his own band of musicians; though (as those say, who have heard them) these same musicians aro moro liked y to turn the heads of those who are not accustomed to them, than to aíľord them any entertam- ınent.-— " u I was on the point/' said the Prince of Trebizonde, " of telling him, that I could speak from my own knowledge on this sub¬ ject; but my companion did not give шо t mio, continuing Ids discourse as follows/"— —- - 4ς The Satraps of Astracan/* said the Knight of ihe Awl, " set forward with their b dea of chintz, their throe hundred ok- pliants, and the same number of monkkb" Thoy skirted Jong the boundaries of íhç Tanrkan Chersouesas, traversed the tvvo Ar¬ menias, Mid at length anived at a fore a,
•»vue í с UiOy Vvci и \ ci ý ììihii btì*Ug CIOpj ПЧ Cí UI a great part of tho presents committed to thoir care, i already îı; formed yuu, that the throe hundred ekpkmis carried iminent«; bales of the most beautiiul chintz, that the universe tould furnish: uu the tup of each of these packets was p-a;cd a monkey ; though what the King their master imagined, the wise Caramoussal could possibly do with throe hundred monkies, is more than I con tofl vuu. lío wovor, whatever were his mo- tives, he liad commanded his satraps above aî! things to be careful not to lose a single monkey by the way, The forest, which it was necessary to tra¬ verse in order to roach the place of their des« tînation, was so full of deer, hares', and other beasts of chace, that thoy wore obliged to have recourse to their untie for tho purpose of obtaining a passage. No sooner did the band strike up, than thc animals scampered Π * 1 1 * I î * away on an shu í, anci vamsueti m a mo¬ ment, to all appearance mure alarmed, thin v 4
if all the hounds and huntsmen in the uni¬ verse Iiad been hard at their heds. How-» ever, this first success was shortly after very near producing the greatest of all possible disasters« by procuring for them an entrance into the forest ; for no sooner were they in the midst of it (the trees being all either apple, walnut* or almonds) than the mon¬ kies, who from the backs of their elephants required only a single spring to reach the very topmast branches, as if by general con¬ sent, skipped away in a moment« One of them alone remained behind ; a baboon, the most noble in his manners, and tlie most elecrant in ins shape of all baboons, past, present» and to come ! Unfortunately, he vvas so melancholy in his disposition, that eluring the journey the Satraps could not occasionally refrain from tears at contem¬ plating the sadness, in whkh he appeared to be plunged. Far frora skippinp; about, and imitating the tricks and gambols or his couu panions, ho past the greatest part of his time in reading if lie was 'mterrupted by any
accident, immediately he was observed to rechne his head upon one ofhis paw;, rink into a profound reverie, and then suddenly cross his arms upon Iiis breast, rake his evts to heaven, hoave die deepest sighs, and shed such showers of tears, that the spectators found it impossible not to keep him com¬ pany. lie had qifktl y resumed hk book, as hc reposed upon his elephant, while hk com¬ panions scampered about the forest, making sudi a noise and uproar, that all wit lii n hoar- uog wore icadv to go distracted. The с a- ravan was obliged to halt during three whoi % days, for the purpose of re-assembling them : nor could they bo persuaded to quit tlio trocs, till thoy were perfectly glutted with all kinds of fruit. Aker all, the vrimle num¬ ber did uot return, for throo died of an indigóidon produced by C4th*g too many ai- montk, and in a few days afterward*; dio gtipes tarried off ihree more, who iiad stm« h d themselves vvith «aoon apple·.·, hi ihh iuner.uncv, /Ii '.hit rie amla id'" s л«ч v J
do, was to flay them, and stuff their «skins wîth straw, m order that the number might be complete, vvhich ihe king had charged them io present lo the celebrated Clara** moussai. As soon as thoy reached thc fort of the mountain, a courier was dispatched to give notko of their arrival, and to inquire, .whe¬ lher the Knchanter wished them and their whole equipage to set forward for his dwell¬ ing; or whether lie preferred their making ■vJ ** i О die caravan encamp in the neighbourhood, till ho should ksue his commands respecting tlie maimer, in which lie chose to receive the prosents, with which thoy were en¬ trüste ch At the em! of three days the cornier ro turned, and iuionnod ihem, that Caramous- ьа\ was uoi to be found at the place, w Iiich fio usn al! у и babiu d: ho was in retirement at tho very miu. mit of Mount Atlas, а diu* alior, pc riot ily inaccessible to all ot them* twuMt the monkUs: he comiuded by say* ini?, tliat he thought it necessary to mako ι
thus much known to tliem as soon as pos¬ sible, in order that they might determine on their proceedings. Uoon hearing ihis, the ambassadors re- solved to leave the presents under the tare of their attendants at thc foot of the moun¬ tain, and to endeavour to reach, as well as they coukl, ihe place whitiicr the Enchmter was supposed to have withdrawn. Thoy travelled during a whole fortnight, ahvays going higher and higher by iho most difiicult road that ever was known, witliout finding any tiling but rucks and precipices. Åt length, after having bestowed many a hearty curse upon the crocodile, vvho was tlio ост bion of giving them all this trouble-, as weil as upon his Majesty's prdorenoi which had caused him to select ih'*m for this honourable om? bymeui : at leucth, f say, thoy portói ved tîıe ruad iu betumo loss didkuh and clangorous, though they sti 1 ! continued ι u а -»cenci, i e re auri th j/o tliey iound little; valli/4 uaSTod by екчк ht ful 'Treams, vvhole Leds were embelkk/dby э
profusion of wild flowers. Arriving stili higher, they observed birds of a kind per¬ fectly unknown to them, and even small pavillion s were scattered about in various places. At the distance of six hundred fur¬ longs more, they found, that there was no means of mounting higher ; and here ît was, when they could see notliing above them but the clouds, that they encountered the far-famed Caramoussal. He came from a pavillion considerably larger than those, which they had observed by the way : on- one side it was shaded by an innumerable cpiantity of orange trees, and surrounded on the other by varions ma¬ chines sustaining quadrants, telescopes, and all kinds of instruments, wdiich are used in contemplating the movement of the stars. He wa-3 followed from the pavillion by a man, whose arm was supported by a scarf* JH the ambassadors were evidently in doubt, wdikh of the two was tlie person cf whom thev were in search, tlie linchanter advanced towards them, and inquired very politely.,
wdiat the great King of Astracan desired of Caramoussal ? On hearing this, they pros¬ trated themselves before Ыш, as if he had been some divinity ; for his appearance in¬ spired them with quite another kind of re¬ verence from that, wdiich the report of hini imi prepared them to conceive. The) ex¬ pected to see the hideous form of а sorcerer^ or at best some oid man whh a lonpj beard. and bent double by extreme decrepitude. Consequently, ihey were greatly surprized to see a tall personage, wdio, though some- what upon the decline of life, had still а most noble air and majestic figure, which was displayed to considerable advantage by the magnificence of his habit. lie immediately caused them to rìse : after * wdiich thev disclosed their business, e-oylalib ed the nature of those misfortunes, respect¬ ing wdiich ihey came to coasult him, and finished by enumerating the presents«, wdiich ihey were commissioned îo lay at his feet. After listening to thc hi atb-nrively, he condiu ted them (Leh >re h^ ga\e 'in*, an-iueij to л pai ί oi/he lüOirnuin, whea e tbc осело
was visible, and wdience indeed the whole earth would have been visible, if human eye¬ sight could have stretched itself so far. They were quite terrified at lhe prodigious hcitrht, at which they perceived themselves : the islands, which rose above the sea, appeared like little black spots, and the largest ves¬ sels like so many floating atoms. It was now r , that the Fnchanter addressed to them the follow шй discourse :— — iu I am (лг írom being, what î am be¬ lieved to be by the greatest pan. of tlio-se, \Лю only know me by a reputation, which 1 ceitainly by no means deserve to luve ob¬ tained« itis true, that long reflections con» lineal speculation, and perliaps the proximity ot th<* cele-.ii.d bodies«, hace enablul me to acquire grent insight into what«\er is most iufdiihle in astro'og) . 1 will even allow, that theie is ics,-. ccit<dnt) It* the aiiaWeA' returnetl by most oracle л, ih.m 'm pay con- |et í ui4S ttitd presnet H*i.' *, ivtVfpcCtlilï^ tnal uf íhe Covk.. írom w luin t!'tylia\e »vlcfret! vou to nie, or ι at hev v /илд vcu have
been advised to seek in my abode, hk divi¬ nity is henceforward out of the question : other cares and other estimations engage his attention. ~ 44 Observe/' continued he, " the dis¬ tance hoi ween the place whicli we now occupy, and the billows", which break against the mountain's base. If the King your mas¬ ter could collect three certain spinning-wheels vvhich aro dispersed about the world, hc might ihen possibly obtain a chord long enough îo reach the surface of the ocean from the summit ck' Mount Atlas, on which we now stanch This accomplished, he* would enjoy the completion oí' aîl hk wishes: tho monster vvouki disappear ior ever; the Prin¬ cess vvould laugh and taik ; aud t host* suki* oing wheels would spin for hor a shift ovou «J 4 finer ıhan that which she ha-j lost, and wliich she uight wear without danger to ufher hov appetii y by (hty, or her u puso by nkht· But as ît is impossible, that ihe kiin uf As- * racan 4huuki vy* r иъ^.у/ Uitso eudaiuîed
sninnm^Avheels all at the same time, listen to the ad vice, which 1 shall now give him, in order tliat he may preserve Ids territories from total desolation, ană may give tbe most lovely Princess in the world the only thine;, wdiich slie wants to render her the hapoiest and mo-t accomnìished. Let htm publtvsh every where, that who-evev can vanquisïi the cTocouiIe, or make his daughter laugh, shall be rewaided either v.iih the hand of thc adorable Moussellina, together with the kingdom of Astiacan, or with the wliole strength and povver of ihc King her fat iier to enable him to complete any other conquest, wdikh he may have in contem¬ plation. Should the adventurers fail in making the Princess buçdı«, ïhey шау stil! be permitted to encounter the momtor ; fur whet lier thev beyin bv the monster, or by the Princess, is a uraner of absolute indiffer¬ ence. All persons, of whatever rank or ap¬ pearance, must be allowed aect.-ss to the latly ; a«id once in two years t.he irm*t not lad tu v akea jemnicy c/ a couple yf month·*, far
the purpose of exhibiting her divine beauties in the different provinces contiguous to the dominions of the King her fallier. Novv then farewell, illustrious Satraps/' continued lie; "restore to thc Sovereign, who sent you, the magnificent present, with which he lias thought proper to honour me : Cara¬ moussal desires no other reward for the services vvhich lie performs, than the pleasure of having rendered them/ , -~ *—" But suppose," inquired his compani¬ on, vvho carried his arm in a scarf, " sup¬ pose, the bow and arrows should be among iheir presents, or in the possession of their attendants ?"-— The ambassadors, who had paid no at¬ tention to him,till hematíe this speech, novv east their eyes upon him, and wore struck all on а heap al beholding a mouth so pro« digiously largo, that in point of enormity thai uf the royal Fortimbrass coukl nut pus- ribly exceed it. Caramoussal, w it hum at- ti-udiiig to their astoukhmeui, pi evented tho
