Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gwelygordd: or, The child of sin: a tale of Welsh origin
GWELYGORDD.
CHAPTER L
İT is proper that I should now notice a nobleman of high rank and attainments, who had been for two years an admirer of Miss Chamont, though not a profess¬ ed admirer, or a regular visitor at lady Apreuth's. Lord Delhoran was, three win¬ ters past, introduced at a private and very fashionable party to her ladyship and her young friend; having a short acquaint¬ ance also with general Maurice, which commenced immediately after the gene¬ ral's return from India, who brought let- VOL. in. _ Ľ
ters to lord Delhoran from a gallant young officer, his lordship's heir-at-law. Since this introduction he had occasion¬ ally called at lady Apreuth's; and, first of all, by the general's desire, who was anxious to offer his lordship civilities for his young friend's sake. Lord Delhoran was sometimes invited with a large party ; but merely as a distant and fashionable acquaintance was lord Delhoian consider¬ ed by the family. His lordship had been married in early life to a woman of very large fortune, a Roman Catholic, and of the same faith his lordship had been. They had resided abroad. They had se¬ parated. It had been generally under¬ stood that she had ictired into a nunnery, where she died. Lord Delhoran had been about eight years known in the London world. His company was very select, and he was in no point a character of any notoriety. Thus, being a man of the highest fashion, and of the old school, whenever he min¬ gled with the world, his person, dress,
manners, and language, were so superior to the modem fashionables, by whatever name of coxcombs, beaux, fops, or dandies, they may be ealled, that, in comparison of any of these, he, certainly appeared a superior being. It was no wonder, then, that every sensible woman, young or old, like Miss Chamont, had a more ready ear for his lordship than any of the wretched characters of ton, with their ennui, shrugs, slang, conceit, frivolity, or any of the va¬ rieties of wearisomeness, and disgust, and ignorance, with which rational ladies and gentlemen, who go into public, are an¬ noyed. Therefore, at a concert or a play, lord Delhoran was often a very welcome companion, because he possessed informa¬ tion and knowledge, while few of the dandy-breed could ever get beyond a cer¬ tain set of modern hackneyed names and phrases. His lordship had long heard, with plea¬ sure, from his flatterers, that he was a great favourite with the beautiful Miss Chamont. в 2
Smitten with her person, he had re¬ ceived the civilities of general Maurice, with high professions of esteem and de¬ sire of acquaintance, and had requested, as if casually, to be introduced to lady Apreuth. Quite in raptures with Lucy Chamont's sense and accomplishments, he had for two years been an interested spec¬ tator and auditor of every thing that came to his knowledge concerning her, and had been unceasingly plotting to make him¬ self agreeable and useful, and thus neces¬ sary to her happiness ; and that he might masque his battery, he professed great pleasure in the society of general Maurice. He could, at this period, boast more than any other lover of Miss Chamont— he was favoured with her correspondence. It had first commenced with trifling pre¬ sents of choice flowers, and sometimes fruits, which his letters expressed had been received from his country-seat ; and botanical remarks, and other seientifical intelligence, ostensibly introduced them. Till this season, the idea of a lover in
his lordship had not entered the fair maid¬ en's imagination, and the supposition was most gradually introduced. Lord Delhoran availed himself of a com¬ pliment which Lucy had made upon some of his learned remarks to reply—" I con¬ sider this as the first personal favour I have received, and I shall treasure it as the pearl of great price, which the mer¬ chant having discovered, sold all that he had, and purchased it." The scriptural allusions were not un¬ common with his lordship. Whatever reports might have reached the ladies, of lord Delhoran's excesses in fashionable immorality in early youth, seemed to have been at once crushed by the whole of his moral conduct, and virtuous and re¬ ligious discourse. His lordship lived at Bath, as a single man, in very handsome lodgings. The gentlemen, vvho alone visited him, were of the first rank and character. His lordship, most Sundays attended at the Octagon, and occasionally received the sacrament—a proof that he
now conscientiously conformed to the established faith. Sneb was lord Delhoran, as he appear¬ ed to the respectable inhabitants of Bath ; nor was it possible that his distant ac¬ quaintance, like lady Apreuth and Miss Chamont, should listen to, or give any credit to vague stories of intrigue, even if such stories reached their ears ; nor could any one but the parties themselves know, so vigilant was the prudence of lord Del¬ horan, that a widow lady, in a small re¬ tired house of her own, was an old mis¬ tress of his lordship, and that any seeming visitors of the lady were credulous females of tbe same character. The following concise conversation of his lordship with this widow lady will best shew his feelings and hopes :— Mrs. Marling —Does your lordship expect soon to take a trip to the Conti¬ nent ? " It depends on many circumstances, Mrs. Harling. Every thing is against me, and every body watehing me, I
cannot get a friend in the garrison, After all, I fear it must be a business of parade and ceremony. Indeed, if it must be so, the greater the ceremony and parade, the better—a special licence—a lord bishop to unite us—a public breakfast, or a jete champêtre. I want this Welsh family to encourage the suit of some rival : let them advocate the cause of some modern fa¬ shionable, with his whiskers and crop- head, his half-a-dozen starched neckcloths and false collar, his tight stays and narrow waist. Let them, I say, encourage this modern ourang-outang of a man." " And your lordship," concluded the accommodating widow, ťť carries off the lady on your own terms before the end of the week ?" " Even as you say, Mrs. Harling," said his lordship, " I verily trust and believe." There was something very pleasing and imposing in every thing tliat appeared of his lordship's establishment—his carriage, horses, servants ; and one day, when Miss Lucy and others had made very favour-
able mention of tbe same, his lordship took the earliest opportunity of describ¬ ing what he wanted to complete the es¬ tablishment, sketched in the most artful and elegant language, in which it clearly appeared, tbat a companion for life, in manners, habits, sentiments, and person, most like Miss Chamont herself, was alone wanting to take the command of the whole. Our young heroine's eyes were opened ; but it was now in vain that she ceased to answer his notes, that she avoided his company. He urged forward more im¬ mediately to the point ; and at length so earnestly addressed her, like a man vvho felt himself ultimately sure of success, that Miss Chamont found it would be impossible again to reduce his lordship to the standard ofa common acquaintance. A circumstance at this time hastened lord Delhoran's conduct. He had called one morning at lady Apreuth's, and was sitting with the ladies, when Mr, Thom¬ son was announced. The gentlemen had
never met. At the coffee-house, library. or a very few and small private parties, was Mr. Thomson to be seen. Lord Delhoran at any of these was never visible. Mr. Thomson walked the streets; lord Delhoran rarely. Lord Delhoran rose to depart as Mr. Thomson entered. They looked, they paused an instant; they passed without the least recognition. Lord Delhoran politely bowed as to a stranger, and en tered his carriage, as pale ая death on his white horse. Mr. Thomson's colour rushed over his whole countenance, and he almost threw himself into a chair for breath, which agi¬ tation had deprived liim of The moment he recovered himself, he said — " My dear Miss Lucy, permit me ίο speak one word alone to lady Apreuth ; it is concerning lord Delhoran. You still retain my heart," continued the old man, as Miss Chamont left the room, " though I cannot tell you all my secrets." Then
turning to her ladyship — " One word, my lady— beware of lord Delhoran ! I have seen more than seventy-five years— that blooming lord is sixty-and-five." " Is it possible?" said her ladyship, who, in her fifty-eighth year, proved that a virtuous life, and serene temper, perpe¬ tuate youth. " Yes," said the plain old man, " if your ladyship, without art or disguise, appear as now I see you, vvhat cannot all the skill of dress, and care, and cosmetics, achieve ? vvhat impenetrable disguise can¬ not hypocrisy- throw over tbe human mind? But, my lady, this is my secret— that I ¡mow lord Dcllwran, for he does not, he cannot, he never will, know me : if fancy has struck bis mind, it is a spectre that he has seen. Reason and reflection will soon set him right, and, even if his mind indulges in any idle fancy, he dare not express it. Beware of him, my lady ! If you please, I will now ring the bell, and call to us again your most ami¬ able foster-daughter."
It was immediately after this meeting with Mr. Thomson, of whom lord Del¬ horan was never known to speak, that his lordship wrote to Miss Chamont a most insinuating and plausible letter. To this she replied—'' I hope 1 mis¬ understand your lordship ; but your pro¬ fessions are in every way unpleasant to me, and which I positively decline. 1 must also give up all acquaintance with your lordship. Looking upon you as an accomplished gentleman, and a conscien¬ tious Christian, believing that your wis¬ dom had increased with your years, I felt pleasure in receiving information from you ; but I find I have been deceived." Still his lordship urged his suit. It may be asked what was tbe object he aimed at ? The possession of the lady by marriage—by a private marriage, if possi¬ ble ; if not, by a hasty public one. Then away would the lady have been, probably for ever, removed from her friends, and carried abroad ; for marriage was a mere cloak, yet never used without necessity ;
for his first wife was still alive, and there were, besides, one or more credulous fair ones, who had already matrimonial claims on his lordship. These things were not known to Miss Chamont ; but his too guarded and artful letter betrayed the baseness of his mind, and she laconically replied, that her in¬ difference was turned to contemnt. Miss Chamont's passions of anger and dislike were now roused, and she could not be satisfied with a silent dismissal, after all the fine letters that he had ad¬ dressed, and was still addressing to her. But my lord Delhoran also felt indig¬ nation ; and, as if the lady had ever given him hope, he desired that she would re¬ turn his letters, as he was willing to re¬ sign hers. To this again she replied—" Your lord¬ ship asks for your letters. The very ques¬ tion shews, that however inconsequential they are, you wish to make them appear of note. What, by accident, I have not destroyed, I shall now make a point of
keeping and exposing, to prove how tri¬ fling, how contemptible, and I fear some¬ thing worse, your lordship is. As for my letters to you, I here give you my hand and seal, with full permission to make them as public as you please. I hope I write to no one any thing I am ashamed should be known. I am sure I have written to you nothing that I can wish to conceal, even if it were possible that you were to sink low r er in my estimation than at pre¬ sent. It has taken you two years to build up the little fame that you possessed in my mind. If your lordship will but pub¬ lish my letters, with comments on the parts whence you drew your presump¬ tion, I think your lordship will do a ser¬ vice to other females who now behold you with indifference, and put them on their guard. As a prudent young lady, I ought not to reply to you; but, as I dissent from your lordship's opinion, that our correspondence should be secretly sup¬ pressed, I send you this, as a worthy con¬ clusion, to make the whole complete;
and, if your lordship should be in want of copies of your very elegant notes (and ¿n manner, though not matter, I really think them not unworthy of notice), I will, tho' I decline parting with the originals, get my lady Apreuth's maid to copy them for you ; probably she may already know them, for they have, till I found the value that you affixed to them, lain exposed on my writing-table, and her ladyship has generally seen them at the time you ho¬ noured me with them." There was indeed no need to tell lady Apreuth the tale ; she had seen all his notes, and been minutely informed of the latter part of his conduct, as it occurred. - It was not, certainly, by the direct ad¬ vice of her ladyship, that Miss Lucy had so spiritedly resented his overtures ; but that young lady was accustomed to think and to act for herself, though her thoughts and actions, in things of any moment, had never been in opposition to those of her dear patroness ; and at any time, had lady Apreuth said—' 4 1 wish you not, Lucy,
to write any thing to lord Delhoran," that wish had been immediately obeyed ; but when her friend remarked—"T think you had as well not write"—" I think other¬ wise, my dear lady, and you must com¬ mand me to the contrary, if you are de¬ sirous that 1 shall not give this vent to my offended feelings." But let us conclude with this Irish earl. His anger was equal to the young lady's indignity h but be had no legitimate means of giving it vent. Again he wrote, and accused the coy maiden of inconsistency, misinterpretation, capriciousness, vanity, and half the catalogue of female passions, and then tore his letters to pieces, till hav¬ ing composed very elegant satires, from 10 P. M. to 4 A. M. he at length took Wis¬ dom into his counsel, if ever she was there ; at least, he acted by one of those substi¬ tutes which his lordship held in lieu of the virtues, and, availing himself of a let¬ ter by the morrow's post, ordered his car¬ riage, with four post-horses, directly tp town, coolly telling the people of the house
that he should return in a few days, and mentally resolving not to stay in England another week. The elegant establishment of the widow lady was broken up at the same time, and has never since made its appearance at Bath. I have related the origin, progress, and event of lord Delhoran's passion, episodi¬ cally. His lordship never recovered the spirited rebuke that he received from Lucy Chamont ; and a man, who, in rank, fashion, fortune, and accomplishments, ri¬ valled the celebrated lord Chesterfield— who, in successful gallantry, or rather, in his snares to entrap the w T eakness and vanity of the fair sex, had proved a very Lovelace—who, in his conduct to more than one wife, had ever shewn a total want of a single generous or affectionate feeling or principle—whose life of hypocrisy, it might have been supposed, had extin¬ guished every mental sensation, was baffled by a beautiful girl, with the simple wea¬ pons of native innocence and mother's wit, driven from his country in the de-
cline of life, and, as his lordship did not live many months afterwards, it has been confidently asserted, died broken-hearted in a foreign land. Tbe honourable and reverend doctor Sidney Wardine is the authority for the last report. Hè was with lady Gertrude at Rome, where lord Delhoran had flown, and, being a relative, by his wife, fre¬ quently called on him during his conclud¬ ing illness, and clearly ascertained, that one of the last acts of lord Delhoran's life, was tearing to pieces and burning the notes that he had received from Miss Chamont, and the copies of some of his own.—" I give my honour, sir," said he to Mr. Bereton, after his return to Eng¬ land, which was some months from the present progress of this history, " it is a fact, and lord Delhoran's valet has since confirmed to me the continual restlessness that his lordship evinced for this most impenetrable of her sex when at Bath.— ť My lord never had a momenťs peace
afterwards,' said he ; ' and he absolutely forbad me ever to use her name.' " So you see, lìereton, that I was not singular in my opinion of this innate Bil¬ lingsgate." " Doctor Wardine, what do you mean ?" " As her friend, I beg your pardon," continued the doctor — " Termagant, I must say. Conceive me, sir.» undoctored and undea/ned, with this fair lady at my parsonage." " Knowing Miss Chamont, I cannot conceive it," said Mr. Bereton ; " nor do 1 exactly comprehend what to think about her killing lord Delhoran. Your heart, my dear friend, I am sure, is not so hard as his, and yet you survived, and was mar¬ ried within twelve months afterwards." " Mr. Bereton," said the doctor, very gravely, " may I beg you never to allude to that era of my folly, that season of mad¬ ness, that period of mental imbecility, and of incomprehensible infatuation." i; Your own remark upon the lady, as«
sociated with the doetorship, deanery, and parsonage, introduced the subject ; but I must defend you in the act, if I can't in the consequences, from all infatuation and imbecility." " Well," replied the doctor, with a sup¬ pressed sigh, " peace be with her ! I only wish her as well married as myself." Mr. Bereton could scarcely restrain a negative exclamation. " I met her the other day, riding with some other ladies, and the old general, and Glynne, and, upon my word, I thought I saw tbe very figure of Camilla, tbat Virgil has drawn with such a masterly hand. Now, Bereton, I'll grant you the grace divine and heavenly beauty, the ethereal spirit and the celestial mind, if you'll allow the Amazon and virago, the dedicated maid and predestined virginity ; tbat is, if you'll allow that the fates have decreed Lucy Chamont to be an assured old maid." *' I'm satisfied," said Mr. Bereton, " whe¬ ther her picture be conscientiously drawn
by friend οι* foe, which you grant, is; vvhat you require to be granted, remains in the womb of time. Good-morning to you! Present my compliments to lady Gertrude, and accept my good wishes for your gaining a bishopric." The gentlemen parted. The latter part, the good wishes of Mr. Bereton, require some explanation. The reverend and honourable doctor had lately been bringing himself into notice, in a very reverend and honourable way. At an English nobleman's table, in Paris, he had met with some learned Frenchmen, philosophers—infidels, in the full sense of the word. There was a very large company, and these savans were cutting up by the roots all that Christi¬ anity holds holy and good. Doctor Wardine wanted not for mo¬ dern or ancient scholarship, and said-— * 4 Gentlemen, you know I am a Christian priest; but perhaps you'll be astonished to hear that I actually believe what I pro¬ fess. Now, I have no objection to argue
a few points with you; but, for you to speak English, or me French, would be unfair; therefore, if you have no objection, 111 take you either in Latin or Italian." The challenge was of course accepted, and it was, rather strangely, agreed, that the learned Frenchmen and Englishman should each speak their own language, the edification of the company being the reason alleged for not conversing in a different tongue. In this conference doctor Wardine so well acquitted himself, that the French savans, instead of being the assailants, be¬ came the defendants. He asked what they did believe, as to God, and the world, and futurity, as to the heavenly bodies, and the changes of this globe, and its present state, until he clearly proved that their belief was ignorance, whatever their unbelief might be. He exposed their conceit, be ridiculed their studies, and held them up to shame. Count Guilfill was present, and so as¬ tonished at the learned remarks and apt
references of doctor Wardine, whom he had before considered as a very trifling character, tbat he afterwards addressed him—" 1 am highly obliged to you, doc¬ tor Wardine, for having opened mine eyes. I believe there is nothing un¬ known more credible than the faith you profess. You have introduced a renova¬ tion of ideas into my mind ; and if you will point out to me a few concise works upon the subject, I shall esteem it an ad¬ ditional favour." Count Guilfill from this day made an open, though general profession of the Christian faith, and he himself favoured Mr. Bereton, first of all, with the foregoing account, which was afterwards corrobo¬ rated to him in some of the first circles in town. There are always hopes of a man of sense — always a prospect of amendment, when a man's pride will listen to his faults; and a change is always taking place for the better, when a man can dis¬ tinguish his friends from his foes.
CHAPTER II.
Mr. Glynne vvas married to the lovely Caroline cle Morsone in the beginning of the following week, and the young couple, wâth her father and general Maurice, de¬ parted for Wales. At the end of tbe same week, lady Apreuth and Miss Chamont, and Miss Ffloyd, who had long before received an invitation from sir David, set off to the baronet's seat in the neighbourhood. Miss Ffloyd was thus enabled to take a per¬ sonal view of the improvement and altera¬ tions wiiich sir David had executed -md, by her consent, was still carrying ¿, 'o execution, in altering a road across a part of Miss Ftìoyd's land, and in building a bridge for the mutual accommodations of Miss Ffloyd's tenants and himself. Mr. William Kemley, vvho had mar-
ried Miss Ffloyd's niece, and his wife, were at the same time invited, and so w r as Mr. Gwyllwes, being the nearest relatives of Miss Ffloyd, to have their approbation. The latter gentleman was unable to meet the party, from other engagements, but bis brother-in-law, and Mrs. Remley, ar¬ rived there the day before lady Apreuth. Another inmate of the family was doctor Bufton, a distant relation of sir David, whose character it may not be amiss pre¬ sently to give a sketch of, and who, being now in the vale of years, a bachelor, and in very moderate circumstances, the baro¬ net had generously induced to make Ford Castle his home. There was more than one trait of cha¬ racter in which the Athelings and Ap¬ reuths united, but particularly were they conspicuous among friends, relations, and dependants, and indeed the whole neigh¬ bourhood round them, for generosity. Sir David's board was not indeed ever sumptuous, but it was plentiful. His charities were never ostentatious, but
general: for any good cause, sir David had an open hand; a doubtful one was re¬ gularly examined: common beggars, which very rarely were seen, were carefully deli¬ vered over to the care of the overseers, and industry and competence enlivened the whole country around. About a month before the present pe¬ riod, the second Morrison, Charles, had departed from this world ; his curiosities were left equally between bis brothers, re¬ questing tliat all triplicates in their pos¬ session might be given to sir David, to whom, with high expressions of esteem, he left a third of his monies. The other brothers, so far from feeling any displeasure at the bequest, declared their satisfaction; and the baronet, at a very needful time, received an accession of income of two or three thousand a-year. The arrangement of every thing was left to the messieurs Morrison ; and late¬ ly, twenty packets of books, pictures, coins* medals, and curiosities of all kinds, had ar- VOL. иг. с
rived ; and Miss Glynne came every fine morning to the castle, to assist sir David's lady, Miss Chamont, and doctor Bufton, in a proper arrangement of the same. This was a time of harvest to the doc¬ tor; but it cannot be said that he expedit¬ ed the w T ork of arrangement ; for one white lie occupied their attention by a disserta¬ tion upon some curious subject—again he took dow r n from its just-selected place a certain book; then came references to some others—away went the doctor to compare it with a favourite author of his own ; till, instead of dissipating, he had created a mass of confusion of his own, or, as Miss Cha¬ mont called it, a literary Utter. But literature with the doctor was a mere temporary hobby ; he mounted it for want of a better. He was a schemer and inventor, upon a very extensive scale. You might find him among the anxious promoters of charity, running wild after his object. At one time he instituted a society to enrich certain poor widows, by the waxed seals of letters. The doctor
called upon every acquaintance. that he had in London or Bath, and five miles round, and he wrote plans and proposals to the rest, earnestly enjoining them to be very careful of the sealing-wax attached to their letters, and to transmit it to their charity friend; and then occasionally in¬ formation was given of the quantity of wax by these means accumulated, and the pecuniary benefit derived by the poor wi¬ dows. It is scarcely necessary to notice, that half the care and attention, not to speak of the loss of time, might have instituted a reasonable and permanent scheme ; and that the very many small sums paid and repaid in the postages of letters and par¬ cels, &c. exceeded the profits; and, spite of the doctrine, that every saving was an ac« tuai gain, the concern was soon bankrupt« ed. Some time after, the doctor was most earnest that every bit of paper should be saved, with the veneration of a bigoted с 2
ţo be preserved, the whole rqţiţeri^lş gcoiţpd down, ад4 worke4 up ar^ew. It ^ rgtlıçr wonderful, in this scheine, thftt dpetQr Bufton ha,d ^ot thought of the ink, şo that paper and ink injght have \>ещ renewed together; for^s the extraction qf ink would, have renewed the paper, the very ink it¬ self would have been regained, by only separating the extractor from it. At length it was discovered that the acid employed was pot worth th§ materi¬ als, ajud that rottenness w ^ a ve iy urţţcv ward vpmfity by which to form % combi¬ nation. We have had old wornen ge4ttog a fortuns by picking the kennel&r-rwett and goöd -ттта pin is a pin, iu^d ş, пад! a nmk and а Ьо1ш a bone ; but who ever beard that there was any preparatory measure used-rr-any need of advertising, combining, &c. any capital to be raised and ex¬ pended, whose per centane must be, first of all, recovered* But doctor Bufton, Hke the phUose,- phers in Lagado, persevered. He, as many
othêris did, changed putrid flesh into фег^ macetí; but the èxpeneë wttš grauter than the gain, arid his employers gave up the affair. Upon this sübjëét, his toenail aš well äs hihlself, were Very sanguine; ahd Ut. Arthur sir David, and even ládý Apreuth, produced specimens of the speŕ- iftaceti-like sübstáftée tò their Visitors, After this he travelled about, analysing peculiar waters iri various places; and new Bath, Hárrowgate, Cheltenham, ace. ke. ke. waters, were discovered in every part of the kingdotn. All these failed, but not till spéculation, without eáietilatioft frorn faet^ hád built puiflp-roofns^ lodgîng-hotıses, and baths; and this was the chief cause of the failures —the patients could tídt easily swallow enough to make an effective dose. It was said that ä Bristol aldetman, instead of go¬ ing to Bath, endeavouring to bring a rival place into vogue, swallowed enough to produce à dropsical complaint, ih lieu of Ш intended fit of thè ğoüt : arid к certain Speculator, tö óbMh reputation 4 fòr šoŕňe
baths, upon which he had risked a consi¬ derable sum, attempted to do that by ficti¬ tious heat, which ought to be achieved by natural, and strangely disfigured himself by parboiling his skin : this gentleman has not yet recovered a violent cold that he caught. Again, doctor Bufton invented escapes in the stable, to release a horse from the danger of an entangled halter ; these were presented to the world by a subscription. Mr. Glynne, as a friend, subscribed for six ; but hearing of an accident that oc¬ curred in sir David's stables, lie contrived to have his own so firmly adjusted, that they would not act; for it was a lucky es¬ cape to a horse, if he neither broke his head, nor knocked out an eye or tooth. Doctor Bufton also prevailed on a pa¬ rish in Wiltshire to take the old lead oñ* their church, and supply its place with new copper ; and the consequence is, that the plumber has an annuity for keeping the copper water-proof, though the rain has, as yet, defied his exertions. This was
indeed verifying the Arabian tale, ex¬ changing old lamps for new ones. The doctor is for doing more wâth the present means than any one else can ; and yet his favourite and first measure is to raise a subscription. His own simplicity, for he is no wilful impostor, may be ac¬ counted for ; but the credulity of others is as unaccountable as it is astonishing. He has some experiments always going on ; one is what he calls the imitative organi¬ zation of bodies, and, as an inventive lapi¬ dary, he has partially succeeded. These ideas had their origin in the doc¬ tor's bead, from reading in some novel (and he is wonderfully fond of novel-read¬ ing) of young ladies taking off correct im¬ pressions of seals by bread. With bread, therefore, he succeeded, and with bread he mixed, more or less, every kind of sub¬ stance that he could acquire, wâth various success ; till one day, at dinner, seeing a very firm pudding, he asked the composi¬ tion. He was told flour, and eggs, and
sugar, and milk ; in short, it was a hard batter-pudding. He begged leave to take a piece into his study, and from this aus¬ picious day he performed wonders, the stamen of which was batter-pudding. With this has he mixed every animal, ve¬ getable, and mineral substance, grinding down tbe hard ones into a powder, and giving firmness to the softer ones. He, in a little time, imitated every kind of mar¬ ble, and gained one point, namely, of mak¬ ing his composition withstand the effects of fire ; but he found it not so easy a task to get it to resist the insinuating powers of water, though in this point also he was at the present time very sanguine of suc¬ cess. Again, in the perpetuation of motion, he is always within a little of the mark, name¬ ly, like the Grecian philosopher, be only wants that little spot of ground on which he must stand while he moves the earth ; in early life he injured his own health by trying experiments to produce greater sa-
nity, and sirice, aš a rfíedicaí fŕiari, he is generally allowed to be a very safe practi¬ tioner. There was a time when We was* sfnitťéri with craniology ; he read Sputzheim aM Gall, and went about practising. Then he wrote a treatise fo hnprove the scuffe of infants, by pressure in sorhe cas^s, and giving them room to expismd in others. This he read in mairøKcrr|>t to sir DkviVï, soon after the baronet was rnarried, who set steadily to Work, to convince thè doc¬ tor of the impracticability of his' po s 5ťíorH In this sir David, by practical reference 4 , completely succeeded ; and it is a point now in which doctor Bufton always foels a little shame, that he suffered hiuiself tò be seduced by these German, or, too often in the present day, Anglo-German charla¬ tans. The doctor has also a manuscript of the Ä History of С hosts and Witches," in which there are ihany original stories. He has investigated tbe particulars of the ajW с â
pai ition of sir George Villars, told by Cla¬ rendon, and separated the additional from the original matter in Glanville. He seems to be of opinion tbat a ghost must Ik? prophetic to be credible to any other person than the spectator himself v and lie bas a great deal of new matter concerning the two spectres seen at different times by that renowned infidel, lord Lyttleton. But as he is only waiting for a favourable op¬ portunity, till the weathercock of fashion 1ms veered to a credibility this way, to publish his work, it will not be fair fur¬ ther at present to notice it. One point of Ins character is too remark¬ able to be omitted ; he is, in most compa¬ nies, very silent, though never attentive ; yet, if you put him forward to speak, he is an incessant and indefatigable talker, and regular sentences then come from his tongue, till he has confused, dumbfound¬ ed, and convinced all who have the pa¬ tience to listen. General Mack, the Aus¬ trian rlţodomontado, Ц is said, was so eh> quent, that be could argue and prove
enough» at least to silence every other ge¬ neral and statesman in the Imperial domi¬ nions ; and the eminent Mr. Pitt hail such powers, that it is not to be conceived tbat Cicero or Demosthenes were for a moment to be compared to him ; doctor Bufton*s oratory was nearly as wonderful, because he had little practice, and seldom exhibited. But these wonderful ]x>vvers became fully known and established ; at a contest¬ ed election a speaker upon a particular occasion was very much wanted ; the doc¬ tor, vvho was wandering about the town, was applied to.«—" I have no idea of the difference between you," said he. " Oh, speak upon the purity of elec¬ tion !" said the gentleman vvho asked him. The doctor spoke for three hours, till his friend came to his elbow, and told him it was sufficient. *' And in whose favour shall I say all this is ?" whispered the doctor* Tlie friend informed him ; upon which
he wound up his discourse in a very per¬ sonal and particular manner, amid the highest applause. To the thanks that were offered him by the party he coolly answered—"This is the only time I ever made a regular, speech in my life, private or public ; and I hope I never shall be asked again ; though, to oblige my friend, I would speak twice as long to-morrow." He was very odd in hb behaviour to the fair sex. He had always been partial f о the company of Miss Glynne; but, though he greatly admired Mis« Chamont, he w r as very much afraid of her : uo ridi¬ culous was bis behaviour in this point, that he never would remain in the same room alone with her. The young lady Apreuth asked him the reason, to vvhich he replied—* I am afraid, my lady, that I should make love to her ; and if she was to accept me, you know, my lady, it would be a very foolish thing, for I have no fortune or establishment worth her acceptance."
His reason was conclusive, and he eter did as he pleased ; neither did any friend remark tbat his person, which was very much like that of the renowned doctor Slop, or bis years, which were sixty and five, although they might not preclude the offer, would surely preclude the acceptance. In the company of all the ladies of the Apreuth family, he was quite at home; and he firmly believed, that if general Maurice w r as not as great a commander as Julius Cæsar, it was only owing to want of in¬ clination, though general Maurice never professed to have seen any other active service than the desultory warfare óf the East Indies : and, to sum up his charac¬ ter and history, he regularly w r ent to town once a-year, and as regularly spent every farthing that he possessed; and then, draw¬ ing upon sir David for ten pounds 1 , went quietly to sojourn in Wales. It rhay not be amiss to remark, that he now appeareď in an eminent degree to be impressed and pleased with the manners, conversation, and the whofe nasvete øf Hf iss ffloyd,.
against whom the joke ran, that she would certainly eclipse her favourite Lucy. Among the many interesting characters which could be now produced, which bud and blossom, and bear perennial fruit, un¬ seen, unknown to what is vulgarly called the world, one, a Welsh matron, a rela¬ tive of bliss Ffloyd's, must not be omit¬ ted. This lady was the daughter and the widow of a clergyman ; she had been a very eminent beauty in her youth, and at present in her eightieth year ; both in her person and mind, she was an object of most pleasing adrairation. Mrs. Jolmes, whose maiden name was Ffloyd, lived in a sequestered and delight¬ ful glen, to which there was no carriage approach, and from which she bad never departed since the death of her husband, but, in the full exercise of the Christian virtues, patiently awaited for her own sum¬ mons. One morning the ladies of the Apreuth family, accompanied Miss Ffloyd and Mr. and Mrs. Remley, to pay a visit to
their relation. They were all very gra- eiously and cheerfully received by a most mild, yet majestic and still upright lady ; and though the widow continued to wear her mourning dress, they saw religion, with all its heavenly attributes of peace and content, innocence and cheerfulness. Mr. Ilemìey and bis wife, who had never seen her before, were in raptures. She made her young cousin a present of some very fine lace—" Which," said the old lady, smiling, " I offered my cousin Ffloyd twenty years ago, the last time that I had the pleasure of seeing her; and she candidly told me, with a compliment to myself, which, though I am fourscore, I shall not repeat, that she begged to de¬ cline my offer, because it would only make her an object of more notice and less ap¬ proval than unhappily she was already. Mr. llemley," concluded the old lady, sharply, " you will not say so of your wife." t( Nor of Miss Ffloyd, madam," said Mr, Reraley, in his blunt way ; " for the
more I harve occasion to notice her, the more I Hke her."' ** Yon are right, cousin," said the old lady ; u I am glad you know one another." Duringf the vvalk back to Ford Castle, Mr. Ilemìey expressed his pleasure and astonishment from his visit to Mrs. Johnes.—'* I shall never read again," said he, " of Arma, the prophetess, the daugh¬ ter of rbamerl, without thinking of the Widow Jolmes, of the principality of Wales : but how am I to account, ladies', for her very courtly manners and innate fashionalitv ?" " Mrs. Jolmes," said lady Apreuth, 4S had a fashionable education, lived with her father in the gay world, was a cele¬ brated beauty, you know, and might have beefi the mistress of a prince, ór the wife of a lord." " The mistress of a prince 1" said Mr. Kemley. " It is a Welsh anecdote," said Miss Ffloyď, & utiá, as you áre a cousin, you áxall luve the particularl The late duke
of —*, brother of his majesty, saw her at a public ball, was smitten with her beauty, and danced with her a whole even¬ ing. She told her father and mother the particulars. The next morning the duke drove up to Mr. Ffloyd's in his phaeton {in those days a new-fashioned carriage). " Mr. Ffloyd, a clergyman, immediately said to his footman—' Whomsoever that gentleman asks for, shew him into my room.' " The duke inquired for Miss Ffloyd, and was much confused, as well as disappoint· ed, when he was introduced to the old parson, who, with great formality, Set his highness a chair, " The duke declining and apologizing. mentioned the pleasures of the last even¬ ing, and hoped to have the honour of the young lady's company to take an airing with him. " Mr. Ffloyd's Welsh blood glowed in his heart, yet, with a studied profusion of bows and compliments, and seeming ignó* ranee, he answered^—* I, and my wife, and
my daughter, and my whole family, are under obligations to your royal highness, which we can never repay. We are simple people, your highness, natives of the Welsh mountains, and are here out of our proper sphere. My daughter, I am happy to say, is a very good and notable girl ; and her mother being rather lame and infirm, she undertakes the family du¬ ties, and she is at the present time, your royal highness, very busy indeed, and can¬ not have the honour of accepting your gracious offer ; but if your royal highness will be pleased to treat my poor old wife with an airing, it will, I dare say, do her a great deal of good, and still add to the very great favours which we have received from your royal highness.' *' The prince felt the reproof, and looked very foolish. He saw, from Mr. Ffloyd's looks, that there was no joke or ignorance in the business; and he very expeditiously bowed himself away, assisted by the judi¬ cious bows of the Welsh parson, as fast as possible.
" Miss Bridget Ffloyd had before and afterwards many splendid offers, whicli she refused, and married her father's curate, the wisest act of her life, I have often heard her say, ønd one that she never re¬ pented." Mr. Glynne, with so able a coadjutor as Mr. Remley, entered into many gallant sporting scenes ; and the clergyman proved himself as famous a shot as fame had de¬ clared him to be. To some remark of this kind from Mr. Glynne, Mr. Remley replied—" Though I have so strangely experienced the jea¬ lousy of ignorant lords and mean esquires, 1 am convinced that all the game that I have ever killed, w r ould not pay for my li¬ cences, my powder and shot, the keep of my dogs, and my labour at a crown a-day ; and you'll be astonished at the anecdotes tliat 1 could tell you, of envy, spite, and apprehension, base plots, subterfuges, and conspiracies, that have been raised against me ; but I have dissipated them all with as much ease as the last that has occurred,
while 1 stopped à few d&yš With ä friend in Somersetshire, in my Way into Wales." Mr. Glynne, ever fond of arı anecdote, asked för İt í and Mr. İtemley replied— " This iá a story of pride, folly, and igno¬ rance. My friend in Somersetshire is no sportsman. I went out alone, and not knowing the country, I erred in my morn¬ ing's ramble from the tract that had been pointed out to me ; the consequence was, that a coxcomb of a gamekeeper came up, and asked for my licence and name, which I gave him, with my present residence, and in thé afternoon I received this let- ter." Here let the narrator of this history re¬ mark, that he is conscious enough that he loses a great advantage with his learned readers, because he writes his dialogues, &c. in common English. The literary il¬ luminati of reviewers, cracked poets, and young Jadíes and gentlemen of all taste and fashion, he cannot be ignorant, would be far better pleased, if they only under¬ stood a part of his language, and were per-
mitted to ще their own superior genius ip guessing at the rest ; for there is a great advantage in guessing---people gçt their own idea.s a,nd sentiments. He must al¬ low that the greater part might hare been in the Welsh* Wiltshire* ^«d Somerset* shire dialects; and the French (which every body understands, whether written, by Montaigne or 4ouşseau) might havş supplied the language of tlie inore fashion¬ able conversations ; and they røuat allow, however, prejudiced by the sweet notes of Scotland, that Welsh, Wiltshire, and So*· merşetshire, have the greatest dialectical advantages ; tbe first is^ in aU points, one of ţţie most perfect tongues ; it unites \kß stability of şţitiquity with the fluency or mocleriiism-r-4t alone comprises all the ad¬ vantages of Greek and French ;.tbe two last, particularly in tiieir compression of sentenciami terì&inaftk«! of words» would wopdcrfuJty delight the rømtMo investi¬ gator of novelty. Indeed, a pure. Welsfc novel, interspersed with a plentiftil diu- sion of th? mtìonal tonguç, which к by
no means obsolete in the principality, would be, from its Hebrew affinity, a very high treat to the learned ; and, if to tlie really learned, what would it not be to the innumerable tribe of pretenders, from the royal English savans, through all the yearly, monthly, weekly, and daily critic hirelings and volunteers, from our most memorable fame-stamping booksellers, through all their employed, down to the very printer's devil, there is no need to expatiate on the celebrity that would fol¬ low. But the present narrator, exclusive of ignorance and trouble, is not disposed to enter largely into this kind of wit or wis¬ dom, or to be over-anxious for that kind of praise and fame; yet he is about to offer to his general readers a specimen of a native's writing (the cause of this digres¬ sion ), which, though not pure Somerset¬ shire, for the writer wasted no time, even in home education ; and, though coming from a gentleman who despised all modern learning, yet had the highest notions of
family pedigree and hereditary rights, was penned by a Somersetshire squire, of in¬ tuitive sense, and five thousand a-year.
" SURR, " Mi gamskipr toul I—tha ther mannur waus Iez—an hu daunt ge mee thaw yowzitch* aw a jemmaun tu shout moi pattredgees. Plaze let hu no I be aw won aw tha owl faumelees—an moi sun whent tu Lunnen —an fund hout hour owl cutsharms—an gaut hus a nu mottow witch 5iu maw zee pon hour cutch—" Honor virtus antiquitas." Sow I'll form—an mak hu pey peneltee—be az ou hu pouch moer. " Sow naw moer frau " Ure umbell sarven " Jno. Troubador. " Puzcrip — Moi whif an moi sun baint hat ou m —saw I cunderzen tu rite hu— thof hu be unlee pasun."
This was brought to Mr. Remley's friend's house by the gamekeeper, without any direction. Since the foregoing letter has come to hand, it has been said that this is the same gentleman, who having been taught a cer¬ tain portion of reading and writing, when a little boy, found many a pleasant year pass over his head before he was called upon to practise ; he then signed Jko. ; but, by some unaccountable means, being at last asked liis Christian name, he applied to the minister of the parish. " Surr, I've bin alwaw cauld squire, saw daunt naw wither I bee Jams or John ; du e luk in the rudgistur, becas owl Dik skowlmustr taut î to rite Jno." The clergyman informed him that he was christened John James; and if he ever should meet with the smallest litera¬ ry inoculation, he will some day or other sign both. Oh, if some philosopher should come to
his ear and whisper, that he was the verit¬ able namesake of the immortal Rousseau ' The very knowledge would renovate the whole system ! ßvery idea, sense, and feel¬ ing, would be open to the inspiration of that magic name : easy afterwards would be the work ofthat philosopher. The one would surely imbibe learning, yet even faster than the other could teach: in truth, a more fit subject for the theories of Jean Jacques cannot easily be found than this his namesake, because the practical appli¬ cation of all theories, studies, and changes, though they possibly might not do him any good, positively could do him no harm ; yet, in point of common sense, our squire certainly surpasses the Genevan philosopher. While lady Apreuth and her foster- daughter were at this time in Wales, they were agreeably surprised by the appear¬ ance of Mr. James Howel and his wife, with their two fine children. This was the first introduction of his wife to his own vol. m. d
relations, and they were all mutually pleas¬ ed wâth one another. We have before seen that soon after his marriage, Mr. Howel converted his wife from keeping a public stall in Billingsgate market, but in other respects the conver¬ sion has been made by the fair Sarah ; for the fishmongery business was very thriv¬ ing, and James preferred it to the cabinet¬ work, for three reasons : he has oftener the pleasure of his wife's company—it is not so sedative a life—and it is a more lucrative concern. He soon also, of his own accord, saw the impropriety of his preaching, though his religious habits are not dimi¬ nished ; and as he has convinced his wife that the third commandment makes part of the moral code, so she has^ convinced him that it is a wrong method of cultivat¬ ing Christianity to begin by schism and scepticism; they are therefore most regular¬ ly, morning and evening of every Sabbath, to be seen at their parish church. Sir David and family greatly notice them. Mrs. Howel is a wonderful favourite with ail
the ladies. Mr. James Howel is already highly respected by the body of fish¬ mongers, and has acted on two occasions as their scribe and orator upon general and important concerns, being already a deputy of his ward.
CHAPTER III, The day before lord Atheîing's departure, having taken leave of the Apreuths when they went into \ Vales, he engaged Mr. Bereton alone to a late dinner with him. After dinner the conversation commenced. " My dear friend, the hour is come, vvhich I believe you prognosticated, that I should tell you that, in spite of my father's principle, and all mine own prejudices, the first wish of my heart is to possess the love of Miss Chamont." " I am very sorry to hear it, my lord ; d â
^^^Ш^Ша^е^Ша^тт^Шш^а^^^^,^ , „
I liave watched you, and could not see tliat you had this increased love." ** Bereton, you did not come to Bath till count Guilfill had departed, or I am certain your keen eye must have made the discnvery/' " Has the lady any intimation ?" "Oh, assuredlj r not ! In taking my leave of the family this morning, Miss Chamont, I knew, was not at home; and I left my kind compliments without expressing any wish to see, or any intimation to call again ; and when, some months ago, lady Apreuth asked my sincere opinion of the count, I appeal to my own conscience if I gave it not too favourably." " Do not act in tliis way, my lord, for the lady's sake." " I cannot, my dear friend, answer for my preserving the due mean, while I am forcing myself, as I go along, to the ex¬ treme opposite to my inclination." " I must say, my lord, I think you have acted very foolishly towards yourself, in playing this moth-like garnet
" Myself I regard not, if I act honestly towards the lady, for you cannot blame my want of proper resolution more than I do. Well, it is all past; I shall pro¬ bably never see her again." But the idea overpowered his lordship ; he arose from his chair, walked a minute or two about the room, and drank an old remedy for the effervescence of the blood, a tumbler of cold water.— M Come, Bere¬ ton, I am ready to hear every thing you can say." " If what I have further to inform you of the disgraceful birth of Miss Chamont should make no deeper impression, what is your intention, my lord ?" " I had then resolved nothing. I had thoughts of telling my father the whole, and indeed, in every case, I must tell him the whole, to account for some inconsist¬ encies in my conduct." " The earl has remarked to me your great attention to the Apreuth family, and your regular visits at Bath ; he has also heard of Miss Chamont." " Has my father heard of her ?"
" Yes, and the impossibility of your failing in love with her has been men¬ tioned" " I am rejoiced to hear it ! I have pass¬ ed the Rubicon : the very impossibility proves the danger ; and though I never, never can hope to address her in that lan¬ guage which my heart yearns to give ut¬ terance to, I will eonvince my father, that to gain her love would be a glorious—a noble attempt. He shall not be twenty- four hours ignorant of this—he shall do her merit justice, and lament with me over my necessary forbearance. Proceed, dear Bereton." " After the violent fever, which about ten years ago so grievously afflicted the Ap¬ reuths, when Lucy Chamont shewed the sincerity of affection, and other excellent traits of the mind and heart, which indu¬ ced the whole family with one voice to adopt her, lady Apreuth desired me to go with sir David to investigate every parti¬ cular of her birth. We went together to the Philanthropic, and we copied from the minutes of the society what I have
written out upon this paper for you to¬ day, after you gave me the intimation of the present conversation: there are also other remarks, which we collected from the sources mentioned. I have, from mo¬ tives of delicacy, suppressed the names of every one of the parties, lest the paper should fall into improper hands, but you will easily supply all you want to know." His lordship, with very great agitation, took the paper—" I cannot read this paper, even before you, Bereton ; I will keep it till I am quite alone. Have you any thing further to say ?" " That this was the only account that could now be had. We proceeded to Newgate; we there understood that the" man, her supposed father, having been apprehended for a petty theft, spoke of a child (his wife being dead) that was left alone in the room where he had lived, which was only three years old, and would be starved, if not provided for. We saw the woman who fetched the poor little girl to the prison, within the liberties of
which she lived about а -year, till the father, having accepted tbe lowest office of justice there, did himself perpetrate a capital crime, and came to a fatal end. We next found out the wretched spot whence the child was brought to the prison, and in¬ quiring at every lodging and shop in the neighbourhood, we discovered a woman, who declared that she remembered the man, and the woman called his wife too. She gave a shocking account of them, not necessary to repeat ; but the paper inves¬ tigates every point. There was no further clue to any thing ; there was not, in short, any supposition that required further in¬ vestigation. This, my dear lord, is all that ever can be known ; further investigation now would not produce such clear testimo¬ ny. Oh ! if this were a feigned novel story, how easy would it be to find some mark on the infant—invent some tale of child- stealing—discover some embroidered man¬ tle, curious ring, or wonderful crucifix. and make Lucy Chamont as great almost as she is good ! Ay, if a proud man
married her, he might invent all this if he pleased, and who would—who could say him nay ? Yet, my lord, I am certain that that most lovely, most deserving woman herself, would not be ennobled by a falsity. I assure you, my lord, that every year when she is in town, she goes to the Philanthropic —says who she is—regularly subscribes to that charity ; and, to tell you a secret, if she dies unmarried, has left her fortune to that institution. I have been, more than once, with her there—attended her when she read the account of which I have given you a copy, and while she wiped the tear from her eyes, if ever a prayer from the heart ascended to heaven for the living or the departed, it was then ! My lord, you don't know—you have no con¬ ception of half her worth ; but what am I saying ? I am fanning the flame I meant to smother ! No ; I trust I am crushing it here on earth, to make it all perfect and divine, where earthly subtleties, cares, re¬ finements, and distinctions, have no place." D $
" Bereton, lei me now ask you a ques¬ tion of a circumstance that has often cross¬ ed my mind, but something prevented me. One day, walking with you and Miss Chamont, a rude-looking fellow bowed very low to you.— ť Do you know him ?' said you to the lady.— 4 What, do you forget my uncle ?' was her reply." Mr. Bereton gave him the account of the man in London, but could not tell any thing more of him. βί Do you think she will ever marry, Bereton ?" " If she were ten years older, my lord, I might doubt it, after the offers she has refused; but I think that there is little doubt, if she Hves. Had it been for your sake only, lord Atheling, I wish she had married the count or Sedley ; but for her own sake, I do not hope that she will ever marry. I know no one who deserves her ; I know no one who will make her half so happy as she now is, in the bosom of a fond and grateful family " " Your last remark, my dear friend,
alone ought to be decisive. Really, Bere¬ ton, I do think that I could live happier than I ever shall be, if I were only to see and converse with her daily, were I assur¬ ed she would never marry any other." " Now, my lord, you are romancing. 1 begin to be pretty confident that your love will not hurt you." The young lover felt his finest feelings on the rack—" Bereton, Bereton, you can¬ not conceive what my sensations are. Ifit were not for my duty to my father, and if Miss Chamont would accept of my offers, I would willingly renounce honour, wealth, and country, and unknowing and un¬ known, begin my career in America with this ever-dear helpmate." Though there was little novelty in the paper which Mr. Bereton had given his lordship, yet when he had dismissed his servant, and wa? alone for the night, he took up the fatal particulars, with that de¬ sponding sense a poor, lost suicide may be supposed to feel. He read it with that inanity as if he knew not what he read.
He read it repeatedly—he took it up fre¬ quently, and seemed in the act of tearing it to pieces, then carefully folded it up, and deposited it in his pocketbook. He thought—he reflected a long while what he should do with it. At length—" Why preserve it ? why keep an additional trace of vvhat can be of no service ?" He then calmly and deliberately tore the paper into small bits, and as carefully consumed them by the candle in the fire¬ place, as if, by so doing, he could have cancelled away the most fatal forgery against the peace, happiness, honour, and life, of his most beloved friend. He actu¬ ally felt relieved by tbe childish, lover-like act; and if there were another thing in the world alike dreaded and hated in mental abhorrence, which y r et more willingly and eagerly he would for ever have obli¬ terated from memory г and consigned to an eternal oblivion, it was the rich and glorious, glossed and illuminated vellum pedigree, where, from the body of some Saxon king, ascended the trunk and
branches of the Atheling name, even from the bottom to the very top of his father's library. The earl of Browover and his family will soon be brought more forward in this my picture of pride ; it will not be amiss, then, if I give a fuller description of their state, as it was generally known in the neighbourhood. The earl was born, and had lived for many years, a lower branch of the very noble race of which he was now the head. His title had been sir Clement Atheling when he married his lady, who brought him a very large fortune ; but before she presented him with a son and heir, he suc¬ ceeded to the title of Browover. The late earl had been a great philosopher, in one of the best worldly acceptations of the term, and his country was indebted to his philosophical researches, his zeal, and his liberality in the cause of useful knowledge. He had been an honorary member of most of the learned bodies in Europe, and he had been more anxious to visit their ca-
pitais than their courts. His politics had indeed partaken too much of the révolu« tionary east, while his morals were of a very ancient standard ; but, alas ! his reli¬ gion w a* not yet determined; therefore the social intercourse of domestic habits and society had no temptations to keep him in his own country, and folly, and fashion, and dissipation, insensibly work¬ ed their way. He liad been some years abroad in France and Italy, before the account ar¬ rived of his death, which took place in Russia, out of doors, in the coldest wea¬ ther, from a philosophical investigation. The experiment was proving quicksilver to be malleable, for which purpose it must be, ñrst of all, frozen very hard. He was a little man, of slight habit ; and whether this was the immediate cause of his death could not be ascertained, as it happened in the interior of the empire, many hun¬ dred miles from the metropolis. But the English envoy's account was the authority fbr his death ; and by tbe command of the
emperor in whose reign it occurred, sir Clement received his few effects at the time he took possession of the title, ho¬ nours, and estates; for large sums bad been disposed of out of the funds, some time be¬ fore his death. Now, this part of the family history was often brought forward to lord Atheling, when he was a little boy, by his fond mo¬ ther, who could not more oblige her hus¬ band than by inculcating into her son hi.s consequence in life—" Remember, my dear Frederick, you were born to yet greater honours than your father ; you have one generation more on the family pedigree. You came into the world the heir apparent of a British peer ; your fa¬ ther, though lineally descended, was only heir presumptive, and succeeded to the title for want of male issue from the for¬ mer possessor." The last time her ladyship had used this argument, Bereton, a youth, a few years older than lord Atheling, and his school¬ fellow, was present, and rising up very
gravely, went into the library, and return¬ ing with a book, said—" I think, my lady, I can produce a case in point from the Persian history, which will instance the argument that your ladyship has been using, if you will permit me to read it to you.— f After king Darius's death, two of his sons, Artabanes and Xerxes, disputed their right to the royal succession. Arta¬ banes alleged, in his own behalf, that as he was tbe eldest of all the sons of his fa¬ ther, the right of succeeding devolved upon him, according to the custom and practice of all nations, preferably to all his brothers. But an ingenious Grecian sug¬ gested to prince Xerxes the following argu¬ ment—that Artabanes was indeed the eld¬ est son of Darius, but not of the king, while he himself was the eldest son of the king —" For my brother," said he, " was born when his father was but a private person—-a mere subject, and therefore all he can pretend to, on account of his seni¬ ority, was only to inherit his father's pri¬ vate estate; but I, Xerxes, was born when
my father was in full possession of empire, am the first-born of the sovereign, and by my birth have the best right to the crown. ' The right of succeeding was ac¬ cordingly determined in favour of prince Xerxes ; and it is by a parity of reasoning, my lady, that lord Atheling is naturally gifted with greater honours than his fa¬ ther." From greater honours the young gen¬ tleman began to insinuate a greater right, till lord Browover, who overheard the whole argument, finished the subject— " Why, Bereton, you'll make an excellent lawyer ; you have almost proved that I ought in justice to give up the estate and title to my son." Her ladyship, who rarely could bear to view any subject in a ludicrous light, henceforth, among the numerous seeds of pride which she, with an unsparing hand. w r as scattering over the mind of her son, forbore making any further use of that superior sample which I have just noticed.
CHAPTER IV.
ίτ was soon after lord Atheîing's depar¬ ture from Bath, that count Guilfill and* his lady arrived there. Lady Apreuth and her family were among the first to call upon the young countess. She was about the age of Miss Chamont, and was the only child of Mr. Malvern·—a man whose parentage is little known—of ec¬ centric habits, and a remarkable character on the turf, at the more respectable gam¬ ing-houses, at the opera, and in the Park, and supposed to be of considerable pro¬ perty. Mr. Malvern had prevented some ho¬ nourable, though right honourable I may fairly say, swindlers from fleecing a young incautious nobleman, whose simple father, by the world called a wise man, because he was bold in assertion, and fluent in
oratory, so far from guiding his son into habits of wisdom, would have seen him, without a check, roast his gold repeater, make nine-pins of the most beautiful china jars, give guinea after guinea for a squail at a glass-shop, ride in the vis-ci-vis of the most noted demirep, and bet and lose to any amount upon a race of maggots, or drops of rain on the window, half asleep, or intoxicated. The marquis had already paid one hun¬ dred thousand pounds as debts of honour for his son before he was twenty, and the youngnobleman himself felt grateful for the preservation that Mr. Malvern had afforded him from a most formidable combination —formidable indeed, if high rank, talents, and power, can make villany formidable. The marchioness, his mother, a woman of a better understanding than her hus¬ band, wished for an opportunity of shew¬ ing her sense of the favour, and under¬ standing that Mr. Malvern had one daugh¬ ter brought up in a very secluded situa¬ tion, she called on the young lady. Tbe
notice of the marchioness was very accept¬ able to Mr. Malvern, and very agreeable to the fair Julia, who had been well edu¬ cated in France. At this noble mansion count Guilfill saw T the young lady, and having no time to waste upon an unreturned passion, or to spare for preparatory sighs and inqui¬ ries, addressed her in glowing language, and met with no harsh refusal. Julia re¬ ferred him at once to her father. In the plain and concise language of truth, the count spoke to Mr. Malvern.— " Well, sir," said the sire, " what can you and the child know of each other ? What have you to live upon ? She h but a ten¬ der one, not fit for a soldier's wife. She has been rather delicately brought up. I have enough to support her in her pre¬ sent modest way ; but as your wife, the wife of a gallant soldier of fortune, I see nothing but disappointment, and perhaps poverty." " If I had become acquainted with your daughter, sir," said the count, " some years
ago, I would then have told you, that I would support her by my sword, and I should not have spoken rashly or unad¬ visedly ; but I can add now some pro¬ perty of my own, and what you can give her you may bestow in every respect as you please, and my signature shall be at your service in this point, without any reservation. As for our knowledge of each other, what inquiries you please, I beg you will make t on my part : her peace¬ ful life requires from me no investigation, at least I shall not make it. I believe her to be of virtuous principles. You find me on honourable ones. We must therefore, if you approve, take one another for better and worse." u I don't like to lose my daughter." " Probably you must soon. Youth, beauty, and sense, have all wings. By your daughter's desire, I wait upon you, sir. I am not come to make a bargain or barter. Wherever we live, I can, and trust I ever shall, see no objection to your living too ; the more so, let me add, from
my profession, should I earnestly wish the father or mother of my wife, if it please them, to be upon the spot." The gentlemen soon understood one an¬ other. The young couple, without hear¬ ing the name of a lawyer, were married in less than a month. On the morning of count Guilfill and his lady's departure fbr Bath, Mr. Mal¬ vern called early. — "I shall probably soon see you both again. Julia, I have brought you a necklace, I hope becom¬ ing the count's wife ; and, my friend, I beg your acceptance of this snuff-box; 'tis the first wedding present I have of¬ fered you." The father departed. The countess looked at her necklace ; it was of small diamonds ; and a check for a thousand pounds on his banker accom¬ panied it. The count opened his box of plain gold ; it enclosed another check for a thousand pounds, with this concise note :— " Tis hard to wife and thrive in a year,
my dear count ; I therefore beg you and Julia to make what use you please of the two thousand pounds, and that you will on this day annually draw upon me, ac¬ cording to the check, for one thousand pounds, which I trust you will ever have with my hearty blessing." Miss Chamont found the young count¬ ess very agreeable, good-natured, and well- educated ; but with a mind not at all vers¬ ed in the intricate manœuvres of the world. The fair bride was highly gratified by the attention of the Apreuth family; and, though not ignorant of her husband's for¬ mer attachment, became more and more pleased with the society of Miss Chamont. About this time, many other traits of the character of lord Atheling came to the notice of our heroine, which gave addi¬ tional interest to the feelings of her heart, and bestowed on his pride at least a more reputable appearance. Walking with him and some other company one morning in the fields near Bath, a plain man, in a naval dress, ap-
proached, and, with evident pleasure, ex¬ claimed—" Ah ! my lord Atlieling !" and at first was rushing forward, as if to shake hands with an old acquaintance ; but lord Atheling, appalled at the humble appear¬ ance of the man, hung back, with a dis¬ tant bow, which the other returned with great reverence; but, by this time, the young nobleman bad fully recovered him¬ self, and he now walked forward, and shook the plain sailor heartily by the hand. After walking apart with his old acquaintance, they separated. ** A very worthy man," said bis lord¬ ship, as he joined liis party, " who was once master of a vessel in which I sailed." To a superficial observer here was pride concealing itself under the mask of civili¬ ty; but it was really pride overcome by principle; for lord Atheling had sailed with this man. The vessel had been at¬ tacked by a French privateer. The rough captain and the fashionable lord Atheling had fought side by side, and both distin¬ guished themselves by their bravery. The
man, therefore, felt the highest respect for his gallant passenger, mingled with grati¬ tude ; for his lordship had been a volun tary combatant, and, without any doubt, by his own courage and example, had roused tbe exertions of the other passengers and the crew, and saved the vessel. His lordship, by his reserved maimer of noticing him, shewed that he did not at first recollect him ; but the instant he did, the sailor's courage and behaviour gave the first title to his esteem. Tbe conversation apart was to inquire into his circumstances, and, finding that he was out of employment, his noble friend in¬ stantly put him in the way of it. A few days after this meeting, Miss Chamont saw Mr. billsley speaking to the same person, and from him she heard the particulars of his lordship's former and Subsequent conduct. There were manv characters at Bath whose origin nobody knew, or who bad been in low stations, but, by a steady VOL. III. E
moral conduct, were to be met with in the best society — such as Mr. Thomson, who was almost every day with general Maurice, and always an acceptable visitor at lady Apreuth's ; and there were also many professional men—music, dancing, drawing masters. To all these, whose cha¬ racters were respectable by their eondtict, lord Atheling did behave without any hauteur, or even seeming condescension. if he met them in the public street, or any public promenade, his notice had none of the timidity of shame, and he had been known to walk a considerable distance with a person who carried a parcel under his arm, to take a turn on the parade with an artist of Httle eminence, and to pur¬ ebase a trifling article, and carry it to hk lodgings in his own hand. His acquaint¬ ance with Mr. Thomson was considerably increased ; and the strong remarks of that gentleman against every species of pride never appeared personally applicable to lord Atheling. Yet often were there many indirect allusions to the state of his
feelings for Miss Chamont ; and lord Athe¬ ling did certainly oftentimes avoid Mr, Thomson, lest he should hear too plain a truth. " I am astonished," said Mr. Thom¬ son one day, M that any sensible modest woman will remain at the mercy of an¬ other man's love." " What do you mean ?" said the gene¬ ral. " I mean waiting, in hopes of an offer, and perhaps refusing many better ones." " You don't allude to Lucy?" said ge¬ neral Maurice. " I can't say I do," replied Mr. Thom¬ son. *' She not only knows her own mind too well, but she has got too much sense, and too good principles, to be entangled in this way." *' Yet a man of the highest honour," said lord Atheling, " may be in love, and not be able to make an offer." " Certainly. I spoke of the folly of the women. As for the men, my lord, I can E å
only wish that they knew good from evil" íť What is the use of knowledge ?" said lord Atheling, " in respect to forbidden fruit ?" " I have lived long enough in the world, and suffered enough," said the old gentle¬ man, " to own no other forbiddance than this—good and evil. But, my lord, I am conscious that I am at present rather talk¬ ing at your lordship—I v\ ould rather, if you wanted an adviser, talk to you ; but you know all í can possibly say ; and indeed 1 am not very fond of so talking, unless 1 cau talk to the purpose, which you vvill. I wish you well, my lord ; but there are uthevs who have my much warnar wishes." Mr. Thomson generally spoke with much point and emphasis, but at this time he seemed strongly afft-cted; but re¬ covering himself, with a sinile, he politely bowed to general Maurice and lord Athe¬ ling, and, offering his hand to the latter, who took it with great feeling, and with that respect whicli a sensible young man
always pays to honourable age, he left the room. Lord Atheling was very thoughtful. General Maurice addressed him.—" You are acquainted full well, my lord, with the warm heart of my old friend, and I am sure feel no displeasure at the free de¬ livery of his sentiments." " From my first acquaintance with this gentleman," remarked lord Atheling, who appeared evidently affected by his man¬ ner, " he has taught me to avoid him, if I was afraid to hear odd kinds of truths." This conversation took place a few weeks before lord Atheling left Bath, to proceed to his father's, where we will soon follow him, first noticing another anecdote of his lordship, which occurred when he, early in life, went to the Continent, and before he had attained tbe age of twenty- two,'but which only, at this period, be¬ came known to Miss Chamont. Sir Thomas and lady Gastere had been this season at Bath. Sir Thomas was a
relative of the Apreuths, and the baronet and his wife visited in the family. Lady Apreuth remarked to Miss Cha¬ mont, how very much the manners of lady Gastere were improved, since she had the last time (some years before) been in her company.—"A free and fashion¬ able, and giddy woman, of an unhappy though very noble family. I confess, I thought her ladyship would have fallen one of the miserable victims to the § a d examples of relative frailty, of fashionable notoriety, and of the want of correct prin¬ ciple. I gave her the best advice in rny power, She treated it with self-confidence and indifference ; but I have now reason to hope it has been of service to her." Lady Apreuth soon took an opportuni¬ ty, when lady Gastere paid a morning visit—for she was now on the most sociable habits of intimacy with the family, and no other person than Miss Champnt was pre¬ sent— ţo express the pleasure she felt from the great improvement, which, she could
not fail noticing, and, as a relation and friend, expressing—'* You know, my dear lady, I thought you rather wild, and took the liberty of offering you my advice be¬ fore you went abroad ; and it is but fair to you, that I should acknowledge that I feel that your ladyship has gained an ac¬ cession in wisdom as well as years. I can easily perceive the increased confidence of sir Thomas, and yours and his increased love, as well as the increased respect in which your ladyship is addressed by the other sex, and therefore by our own." Lady Gastere shook her head. — t% 1 could tell your ladyship a tale or two, in which you would find little room for my praise." " I confess candidly to you, lady Gas¬ tere," said her friendly relative, " that 1 have made inquiries since your absence, and with pleasure I add, that I have been assured that your conduct has been such as your manners now exhibit." " I'm glad to hear, my dear lady, that so favourable an account has reached you.
and probably from a source that might have told you a different tale ; but it has been my good fortune to meet with the greatest liberality, and chiefly from my ever dear sir Thomas. I trust that I have seen my errors, and having been convinced of tbe greater worth of my husband, I hope henceforth to escape the fate of the butterfly, by avoiding the blaze." " I know not," said lady Apreuth, " a more likely w r ay to well regulate our con¬ duct, than to endeavour to get a know¬ ledge of oneself." ·' And first I am indebted to your lady¬ ship, whose kind notice and admonition I bhall now never forget ; yet you will be surprised to hear, that I am peculiarly in¬ debted to the interference and personal ex¬ ertions------" Miss Chamont arose to leave the room. " Don't leave us, Miss Chamont, unless you bave a dislike to hear the praises of lord Atheling, who indeed was very young at the time I am speaking of." After a few general allusions and ap-
propriate remarks from lady Apreuth, who knew well how to elicit confidence, lady Gastere was induced to tell her story. " At Nice I met lord Frederick Slang- ton, who paid me great attention, and with whose style and fashion I was highly interested ; so that I was very often in his company, riding, dancing, singing, and flirting. One morning, lord Atheling, with whom neither I nor my husband were acquainted, surprised me, by send¬ ing up his card ; for, in truth, he had be¬ fore rather avoided our acquaintance. I received him. " After apologizing for introducing himself, he said—* I was in company, my lady Gastere, yesterday, for the first time, with lord Frederick Slangton ; and I think it my duty to inform you, that he boasted of your favour towards him, and offered to bet upon his final triumph. Strange as your kdyship and the world, if it should be public, may think of my conduct, I was determined to mention E 3
the circumstance to your ladyship. J feel interested, ma'am, for your situation. I have the honom to be intimately ac¬ quainted with sir Thomas's relations—the Apreuths, and have no doubt of the puri¬ ty of your heart, if any thoughtless be¬ haviour may have given him encourage¬ ment. I conceive you indeed to be the best guardian of your own honour, and have no intention, for both your sakes, of mentioning the subject to your husband, though I have no doubt of the will or ability of sir Thomas.' " I omit, lady Apreuth, the deMcacy with which he introduced the subject, and the complimentary encouragement of my; youth, beauty, and innocence, with, which he softened it. In short, my lady, my pride, or my principle, í scarcely venture to say which, roused a proper spirit* and, for once, I acted right. I thanked lűm from my heart, and would never after¬ wards speak to lord Frederick; but by bribing my maid, who had listened to the conversation, in a short time he discovered
the cause, and challenged lord Atheling, who gave him the meeting, and before they fired, told the whole circumstance to the seconds, and remarked— ť Now, gentle¬ men, if either of you think lord Frederick ; i a gentleman, and man of honour, I am willing to stand his fire ; but if you think otherwise, I vvill not give lam that satis¬ faction ; but. whatever may be your opi¬ nion asto that point, I wish lord Frederick Slangton, and every man, to know, that no one shall make me privy to a villany ? " Upon this, lord Frederick's second took him aside; and at length lord Frede¬ rick actually apologized ; and every thing was so amicably adjusted, that they have been acquaintance, though very distant, 1 believe, ever since." This additional trait of lord Atheîing's conduct could not fail to set the whole of his character in a fairer view than family pride had so often Warped it. How far it overcame this appalling sense 5 for, from her earliest youth, no sense had ever been
so appalling to our fair heroine as pride, the history will soon shew.
CHAPTER V.
The earl of Browover and his son were seated in his library, at his country-seat at Castlerock, where Mr. Gwyllwes was the vicar. The earl, without thought, was fronting the family pedigree; and lord Atheling, with horror at the thought, kept his back so directly in parallel, that not a side-glance would agonize his heart, as he unfolded to his father the rise and pro¬ gress of bis unhappy passion, and his firm determination to sacrifice to that idol, whose portrait was suspended behind him, every idea that the sweets of love the bliss of matrimony, and all the temporal comfort, and the eternal hopes that arise from the reciprocity which pure, virtuous,
and congenial minds could create in his soul. " We live not for ourselves," he con¬ tinued, " I well know, my dear father. I trust my disinterested conduct will prove my duty to you, to my country's hon¬ ours, to tbe world's established opinion, and to tbe nominal advantages and en¬ tailed rights of glory% whence our succes¬ sors are to derive additional consequence, and which are decreed for the sake of ex¬ ample, as the incentives to all worth. While I thus devote the tenderest feel¬ ings of my heart to appearances of good, I must as resolutely not offend in the humblest reality; therefore, mylord, I re¬ sign all thoughts of matrimony ; and. since I am forbidden to enter that holy state, where truth, sincerity, and sacred conscience are, let me resist all worldly temptation to enter it where these are not!" " Acting right in the first case," replied the father, taking up the remark, " you
will find that the impediments on the other side will weaken every hour. That lady, the honourable Arabella Estray, (pointing to the pedigree), the third on the paternal üne from whom we are line- idly descended, before she was married to my ancestor, was engaged ------" " Oh, sir, enter not into that tale of broken faith and shame! You yourself have ever condemned-—~" " Well, well," continued the father, per¬ ceiving his error, and interrupting his son in his turn. " My allusion merely arose from the instance before me—an instance, certainly not, in its full detail* to be fol¬ lowed by any vvho bear the name, or еЫщ the affiance, of an Atheling, Yet, my dear son, I will not despair of living to see the day when, from a far-spreading branch» another name, venerable, renown¬ ed, and noble, shall be united to yours, and make the------" (There was a reason, which will soon be given, why the earl paused, and did not name the number,
but turned the sentence), ίν and make a worthy addition to tbe memorial of our honorary pedigree." It was impossible for lord Atheling, aş his father now directly pointed to the pedigree, to keep his seat. Had a spectre, vvhich he knew stood behind Uis chair, at this moment laid his cold hands upon his shoulders, he could not, with a more in stantaneous shuddering of the Ueart, have shrunk from its contaminating proximity. He was obliged, in self-defence, to turn round. It was an absolute challenge that dared him. Looking, therefore, boldly at his foe, yet with a kind of contempt, hß answered to his father's remark, if any thing was the matter ? " Nothing, my lord, but 1 do not wish to perpetuate that honourable roll of per- haps double victims to pride, to perfidy, and to principle. To the demands of the? first I now acquiesce." At that moment, a short conversation of his father's with Mr, Gwyllwes, before
either could sufficiently moderate the pace of his hobby pleasantly to accompany to¬ gether along the higu road of life, crossed his mind ; and it is to this that I have just alluded, as lord Atheling added—" But, 1 fear, my dear father, that the latter will be often violated before our families can equal the honourable boast of the vicar of your parish." There was a sarcastic meaning in his lordship's speech which the earl could not mistake ; and lord Browover perceived at once, not only tbat argument and illustra¬ tion had weakened his cause, but that he himself was attacked in his very camp : and therefore, that his wisest proceeding was to be satisfied wâth the point gained in his son's present conduct, to keep his» ground on the defensive, and not to rouse the pros and cons in this momentous busi¬ ness; for discussion always weakens the worse side. The circumstance to vvhich lord Athe¬ ling alluded was shortly this :—Mr. Gwy 11-
wes, having one day carefully noticed the family pedigree, said—" Thirteen regular descents, I see!" " Yes," replied his lordship, " all clearly attested." " There is a legitimate doubt, my lord,** observed Mr. Gwyllwes» " in the reign of the first Charles, an historical one in tbat of the sixth. But, my lord, I am no judge in these eases, though 1 must pro¬ test, according to the authority before me, against proceeding further than AV r illiam the Conqueror." " It has been allowed," gravely remark¬ ed the earl. " Where?" the parson was about to ask, but, politely checking himself, he said —" Your lordship would be highly pleased with our Welsh pedigrees. In the prin¬ cipality, there is no comparison between that of an ancient Briton, and one of these pseudo- Britons. You know, my lord. that we are the undisputed descendants of the aboriginal Britons. Dr, Stukely,
(I only refer to him as a modern, one of your own writers) plainly gives the na¬ tional pedigree, from Noah and Abraham, to Phryxus *, who gave name to Britain. Saxons, and Danes, and Normans, and Germans, liave inundated your lowlands since we kept ourselves to our mountains. I counted thirty descents in my father's pedigree, which were proved and allowed at the assizes held by * * *, at the court of * * * *, and at * * * * *." This was beyond all reply to lord Brow¬ over; he could only affirmatively bow the head ; and, spite of his feelings, there was, no doubt, an additional respect in the act. Family derivatives were never again brought forward, as an argument, before Mr. Gwyllwes, to any circumstance that occurred in the mansion ; and the earl al-
ways sat uneasy, if at any time be saw- Mr. Gwyllwes fronting his family pedi¬ gree. When the before-mentioned conversa¬ tion took place, lord Atheling was read¬ ing in the library, but it had not been remarked that he noticed the circum¬ stance till the present discussion with his father. There is no man, whatever his passions may be, that has so many subjects that lie wishes to avoid, as the proud man. A single look upon this point was all that took place between the earl and bis next Qty the genealogical tree, after his soi f s allusjon to the vicar of his parish, when lord JJrowover wisely veered the course of tfie conversation..—" Satisfied that your conduct, my dear son, will Le right, it is not necessary I should dilate upon a sub¬ ject that in every ppint of view is un¬ gracious ; for what sacrifice of his passions can any man make to principle and to liopour, without feeling pain at the mo¬ ment, though the remembrance of bis vie-
tory over self must be cheering and con¬ soling? 1 * So ended the converse upon this most interesting affair between the father and son ; yet, without one hope, on the part of the latter, of a cheering and consoling remembrance. For the approbation of a man's own heart is not to be purchased by every sacrifice. The approbation" of a man's own heart will not follow every selfish resignation ; the approbation of a man's ΟΛνη heart is only to be obtained when holy duty is obeyed. Let the con¬ scious soul feel that tbe action will be an acceptable service to its God, and whether the forbearance of a selfish gratification bo for the service of its country, its friend, or its foe 9 it may be assured of the testimony of the heart. But let not an offering at the shrine of pride fancy that it has this glorious feeling ; it is but a bribe to the world, and from the world alone let it look fbr its reward. Lord Atheling remained month after month at his father's mansion. He en-
tered eagerly into the sports of the field, of which indeed he had always been fond. He went to town fora few days, but it was on purpose to view some famous hunters, which were advertised for sale. He made a purchase of two celebrated ones, and, without calling upon a friend, or even looking in at the Apreuths, who he knew were now in London, or transact¬ ing any other business than that wiiich took him from the country, he retiene J, to the earľs great surprise, immediately. The country gentlemen, among whom he had been always a favourite, were re¬ joiced to see liim partake of their sports with such avidity ; for he had long been a constant subscriber to tiie hunt, and gene¬ rally, in the course of ihe winter, if he was in England, joined them. Soon, very soon, every one remarked— '* How very thin lord Atheling was be¬ come !" and some friends saivl, that be had beeL 'Ю much accustomed to a warmer climate; and others, that he bad not been used to so much exercise.
But it was neither of these: bv diffe- rent and frequent change of elimate he had been hardened ; and the exertion was nothing to lord Atheling, who was yet in the morning of life, and had always de¬ lighted in riding gallantly ; and who, be¬ sides, had rode post-horses, in preference to the ease of a carriage, over the greater part of the Continent. In truth, lord Atheling was become thin — from the worm that preyed on his heart. Long was his father before he would see, and longer was his lordship before he would acknow¬ ledge it. At length, one evening, after rather a long chase, his lordship fainted away the moment he entered the dining- room. He himself attributed it to the rich steam of the victuals, after having fasted for я great many hours. He attri¬ buted it also to other causes, which, at other times, would have been trifling. Probably it was owing altogether to the fatigue, the fasting, and the smell; but such fatigue, such fasting, and such odours, would not have had so serious an
effect upon lord Atheling, if he had en¬ joyed his usual state of health and spirits. There can be no doubt but that the elas¬ ticity of the spirit is one of the springs that temperate the regularity of the health, and the suppressed love of Viola might he parodied to his lordship's case—" It fed on his manly cheek." But his lordship despised these trifling symptoms of debility, and continued his usual exercise. Thus, he rode much, and he read much, but he could not converse much. The father and son had always been ac¬ customed to take great delight in each «»ther's company and conversation : still lord Atheling, when at home, was gene¬ rally in his father's company; but con¬ versation, before so buoyant and versatile, now always flagged on both sides. If either went out, it ever had been, and still was, immediately on his return—" Where is the earl?" or, " Where is lord Athe¬ ling?" They met and spoke; affection brought them together, but now the sweet
flow of converse died away ; for there was a theme, and, though not likely to in¬ trude, it was ever present to memory. Thus, were there a hundred dishes upon a table, and only one of the whole whose cover it was forbidden to raise, yet tluit one would soon occupy the attention, and, more and more, day by day, excite the wants of tbe guests. How could the conversation pleasantly stray to Bath, to the Apreuths. to the* intimacy of the Atheling family with the Apreuths, and not lead the fancy in an instant to the forbidden Lucy Chamont? How could the theme turn on the state of the poor, upon Britibh charities, upon the amelioration of the poor-laws, and not conduct the thoughts to the Philan¬ thropic—to that blessed institution vvhich snatched Lucy Chamont from the paths of wretchedness and wickedness? How could the loveliness of youtli and beauty, the excellency of virtue, the advantages of prudence, the comforts of social life and domestic ease, and the ineffable dignity
of religion, be the theme, and not enchant the whole mind with the full portrait of Lucy Chamont ? Or how could the great world be moralized upon, its supposed advantages, and its known cares and trou¬ bles, its follies and its fashions, and its shows, and not present a contrast to its insufficiency and weakness, in the natural and rational accomplishments of Lucy Cha¬ mont? Whatever subject made the attempt to interest, full soon lord Browover saw re¬ straint, with an hectic ray, flash across the countenance of his beloved son : he conld have said—" Son, leav3 me," but he feared yet the more if his son should be absent from him.
vol. in.
F
CHAPTER VI.
Ат this period Lucy Chamont vvas at Bath, and Mr. and Mrs. Marsham had just arrived at lady Apreuth's in their way to sir Davids in Wales ; while lady Apreuth and her foster-daughter purpos¬ ed, in a few days, to go to Mr. Arthur in ] Devonshire. The Apreuth familv had lately received the agreeable information, that sir James arid lady Stolander would return from India in the following year; upon which occasion lord and lady Vescule had pro¬ mised to leave their beloved residence in Ireland, that a general meeting of this worthy and happy family might again take place. At the same time, all their letters ran upon the settlement in life of their adopt¬ ed sister, the little pet of their youthful
days. Lady Stoknder talked about a rich nabob, who was to come to Engknd in her train ; and lady Vescule begged that she would enter into no hasty engage¬ ment, till she had seen Mr. O'Shannon, a cousin of lord Vescule, and a hero worthy of Ireknd. Lord Vescule had, upon his marriage, taken up his constant residence on his principal estate, in a very populous and riotous neighbourhood. He and his beauti¬ ful wife had devoted their time to the no¬ blest service of tiieir country, the amelio¬ rating the condition of the poor. For this purpose he instituted day and Sun¬ day schools, Bible societies, and saving- banks; he appropriated land to every cabin ; in every parish he lent small sums, which were continued or increased upon the honesty and industry of the borrowers ; and every advantage was correctly regu¬ lated by tlie morality, sobriety, and peace¬ able conduct of the several applicants. Their labours of love were quickly çrown- F Ž
ed with success ; vice and ingratitude, ac¬ cording to the system* wove its own fate, and the blessings of virtue blossomed over the whole soil. In whatever family they perceived active usefulness to be establish¬ ed, that family was immediately provided with the increased means of independence; and wherever habits of vice seemed to have taken deep root, lord Vescule acted with vigour, yet as a friend ; he advised young people to separate, to go into the army and navy; the old people he re¬ moved from the habits of temptation to evil ; and be invariably found, that when the males bad left the scenes of iniquity, the females w r ere always willing to yield to domestic, social, and moral customs. In peace and quietness, in sobriety and industry, in moral duties and Christian principles, seeing his neighbourhood con¬ firmed, he, with his family, had now re¬ solved for a few months to leave scenes formerly all intemperance, but which their efforts had converted into those of a para¬ dise.
Mrs. Marsham, having read a letter from her sister Vescule, and made her comments upon the same, suddenly chan¬ ged the subject, as she sat near the window behind the viranda. —" And now I have read and commented upon my letter, 1 must tell you, my dear mother and Lucy, what a curious trio I saw this morning, as I came by the pump-room. There was a young couple, lovers, or rather, by their innocent freedom, a bride and bride¬ groom, and a middle-aged gentleman, of that good-natured, wise, and somewhat simple look, whicli is always so interest¬ ing. They paused opposite our august edifice of fashion, and deliberating, like strangers, as if ignorant whether they might enter, I could not help giving them a good-natured nod of my head, and said — e Certainly.' We understood one an¬ other; and the whole party favouring me with a very respectful and grateful salute, entered the pump-room." Mrs. Marsham now described the young
lady as very pretty, with the utmost nai- veté of person and manners, far superior to that which her most fashionable, honour¬ able, and travelling friends in vain at¬ tempted to assume. The young gentle¬ man looked very mild, genteel, and like a foreigner.—" I saw," she remarked, "half a dozen dandies envying his appearance." The elder gentleman was certainly an Englishman ; and Mrs. Marsham decided that he was as certainly a philosopher, but of w r hat sect she could not determine. *' If you were making use of your ey r es, niece, instead of your tongue," said gene¬ ral Maurice, who was present, ** perhaps you might see the party taking a view of my sister's house." " Bless me, they are the same !" " And my old acquaintance," said Miss Lucy ; " and, with your permission, my lady, Γ will ask them into the house." " Tell me, my dear Lucy," exclaimed Mrs. Marsham, with her usual impetuosi¬ ty, " this instant who they are ?"
" You have heard their history," said Miss Chamont; " and one of the party you ought to know," " If you can't guess, Susan," remarked her husband, who had been attentively observing them*, " I believe I can prove myself the wiser of the two." w Oh/ don't tell me," exclaimed the fickle lady r , " but ask them to come in, and in the meantime let me guess." The servant was sent to invite them to walk into the bouse. " Surely," exclaimed Mrs. Marsham, " that dashing young man is not Stephen Russel." " So I guess," said her husband, " for I remember the elder as your brother's clerk." " You are both right," replied Miss Chamont." " Excellent!" exclaimed Mrs. Mar¬ sham. " Here are all our fashionables eclipsed by a country youth, who, a few months ago, was living as a pauper, and was considered not many degrees removed
from an idiot ; aud now we perceive, tbat if he had but a little less sense, just that deficiency which would give him the ex¬ tra polish of impudence, there is not one in Bath to compare with him. But I do the young fellow an injury to compare him with these made-up things by tailors and perfumers, grooms and shoemakers." (i If you think these feelings of pauper¬ ism produce modesty and humility," said her husband, u I wish some of our urcat paupers had the feelings. Here is the canon Leog, and halfa dozen more I couki mention, civil and ecclesiastical paupers and beggars, as much, or more so in their way, as ever Stephen Russel, esq. was— ay, and legitimate, hereditary, sturdy beg¬ gars. Tracing their pedigree backwards and forwards, as well as I am able, I find grandfathers, fathers, sons, and grand¬ children, incessantly at work, making in¬ terest and petitioning, unabashed, and taking no denial, for some charity-school benefit, established on this eleemosynary foundation—we see them getting, by aH
the arts of mendicity, another lift to some college-charity. Onward in the same course they proceed, still begging and bowing for livings, prebends, and canon- ries, or places of all names, under the go¬ vernment at home and abroad, and with¬ out end. Why, their children so born, and with such notions incessantly instilled into them, have no more idea of getting forward in the world by common honesty, industry, and talents, than Jews and gyp¬ sies, without the aid of their peculiar craft. 1 lived six months in a cathedral town, and half their conversation was, * What can he give? or, what can I get ?' —* I am promised this or that—first, se¬ cond, third, or twentieth turn for my son ; and if I can't get it for my son, he himself will have very good interest another day.' Their freedom is only the yet-indeter¬ minate will of their patron ; and their in¬ dependence the produce, not only of cha¬ rity, but of absolute beggary. Then you know my cousin, the secretary to ------; BS-
he gained the office because his father had been one of the government directors of the ------; and the last time that I saw him in town, he told me that he had a place in reversion promised him for his son, now at Eton, and aged twelve years; and if the old Latin word pauperes is not applicable to the children of real poverty, I think it comes home to these needy gentry*, always living upon ancient or modern doles ; so that no parish pau¬ perism was ever entailed on a wretched race, more completely than church and state pauperism is on these less-independ¬ ent, and yet more-craving, families." " My g°°^ nephew !"' said general Mau¬ rice, astonished, " I never heard such a philippic from your mouth before " " No philippic, my dear uncle," replied Mr. Marsham ; " it is, alas ! too general, as it is too true ; and when I further see these church and state paupers, searching about for a rich wife, living up to their means, and still carrying on their system of pauperism, I think that trait in Cati-
line's character, * alieni appctens 9 sui pro* /usus; should be the motto of the tribe." " Which," said general Maurice, " as Mr. Marsham disproves my use of the word philippic, I will tramiate for the ladies, to prove my scholarship—* profuse beggars." " Now I hope you have finished your learning and your satirizing," said Mrs. Marsham ; " we are detaining these wor¬ thy people, who have at least thrown off their mottled skin, got rid of their un¬ happy cast, which I wish some of our high beggars had clone. Come, Lucy, intro¬ duce me to them." " You need not, my dear daughter," said lady Apreuth, " be in any unu¬ sual hurry. They have already found in this house many old acquaintance, vvho rejoice at their good fortune, to whom they have much country news to tell, and vvho, I suspect, in despite of theii* fashionable appearance, are rather more conversable acquaintance than we olir-
selves shall prove. But I'll restrain your impatience no longer." After the commonplace " How do you do?" by rfame, to Mr. Stephen Russel, Mr. Giles Bradford, and his daughter, and the usual return—** This is Mr. Arthur Apreuth's sister, Mrs. Marsham, and her husband," said Miss Chamont, lady Ap¬ reuth and general Maurice being very well known before, the bows and curt¬ seys were repeated, and Mr. Stephen Rus¬ sel, whose good fortune had already begun to loosen the sinews of his tongue, with a proper spirit, replied—" Ma'am, I be mar¬ ried to Miss Betsy Bradford ; and my good friend, Mr. Bradford, and my wife, and myself, are corre to see Bath; because, la 7 dies, I have got an estate very near Bath ; and that lawyer gentleman, Mr. Lawn- som of Brittleford, my agent, ladies, wdio is a very good as well as wise man, advised me to have this here estate near Bath settled on my wife ; and so now, ladies, we be come to see it ; but I live in Hamp?
shire, and I keep the home-estate in hand ; and my father-in-law, Mr. Giles Bradford, is my steward and bailiff; and we all live very happy together, ladies ; though Mr. Giles and Mrs. Bradford have got a house. of their own ; for they live in the farm¬ house, which they like very much, la¬ dies." " Thank you, Mr.Stephen Russel," said Mrs. Marsham, " for telling us so con¬ cisely your history, which you rightly sup¬ posed that we all wished to know. I am very glad to find that you have married this young lady, for your own sake, fbr her sake, and for her worthy father and mother's sake." Mrs. Marsham began to think tbat she was proceeding too far, considering that it was the first time of her seeing the par¬ ties, and she paused; but the language was not unpalatable, and they all looked pleased. Lady Apreuth now spoke kindly,friend¬ ly, and considerately to them ; and Miss Chamont took up the conversation.—
ιί Mr. Arthur Apreuth had informed my lady of your very proper behaviour, Mr. Hussel, and of your intended marriage; and she remarked that there was no doubt of your all going on well, as long as God's word was the rule of your conduct." " My lady, madams, sirs," said Mr. Giles Bradford, with great precision and gravity, " Mr. Stephen Bussel has won¬ derfully experienced God's goodness ; and it would be ungrateful, as well as foolish, to forget his I^ord and Master; as we heard a poor .unfortunate gentleman say in the playhouse last night—* if I had served my God with half the zeal that 1 have served my king, lie would never hav e forsaken me in my old age.' But I don't mean to say a word against our king ; this was the wicked old Harry, that had, like Blue Beard, so many wives, and killed them all." Lady Apreuth bad been speaking to Mrs. Bussel ; the other ladies now joined her, and soon found that the young bride neither wanted mother's wit nor father's
sense. She informed them, tbat both her husband and self did not neglect improv¬ ing themselves in their education—that they had both of them plenty of employ¬ ment—-that she, with her household, made her own bread, butter, and cheese ; and that he was always employed in his gar¬ den, when he had nothing else to do; while her father was already become the general friend and assistant to the whole parish. Lady Apreuth found that their stay 'm Bath was very short, and she provided them with tickets to a concert that even- ing. Mrs. Marsham and Miss Chamont, with general Maurice and Mr. Marsham, accompanied them, and it proved an inex¬ haustible fund of amusement to Mrs. Mar¬ sham. To the inquiries of her very fa¬ shionable friend, " Who are they?" sive truly described Mr. Giles Bradford as one of the first natural and practical philosophers of the day—" He derives his science from the fountain-head; doctor Wilkinson is nothing to him. That elegant sylph-like
figure, the very child of naïveté, is hh daughter ; be is the particular friend and late tutor of that young gentleman, Mr. Russel, who, by inheritance, has lately taken possession of the ancient family estates in Hampshire and other counties— a family every body knows; it traces its pedigree to the dukes of Devonshire." Upon this information, all the young ladies exhilarated tiieir sweet countenances with hope ; here and there an eye was turned towards Miss Chamont with sus¬ picion and jealousy. A dowager, who was very anxious for the future welfare of her daughters, and who would not have felt dispppoinment, if her favourite Miss Clo¬ rinda had married a youtli lately extricated from the poorhouse, if he had now owned three thousand а -year, and was enabled to make a settlement of one upon her dear Clorinda, was already remarking if the party made any stay at Bath ; and as they were all so fond of music, she should be happy to see them at a private party ; when Mrs. Marsham crushed all her anti-
ripatioîis of glowing fancy, and lowered every animated feature of maiden beauty listening around her, by her answer— *' They are highly obliged, my dear ma- dam ; but this is a mere flying visit to Bath, to inspecta beautiful estate at Sum- merfíeid, which Mr. Russel had settled upon his wife." " His wife !" was unconsciously repeat¬ ed in half a dozen tremulous notes of dis¬ appointment and indifference. " Yes, didn't I say that he is just mar¬ ried to the young lady, his friend's daugh¬ ter." " He has not been his friend, then, for nothing," remarked the fashionable Mrs. Salter. " Matrimony is a lottery, ma'am," re plied Mrs. Marsham, " in which we can¬ not all draw prizes; and when we have drawn our matrimonial ticket, it is some time before we know whether it is a prize or a blank." " The lottery is all before marriage, I conceive," said a widow lady, with a large
jointure; " for when once the ways and means of the parties have been ably inves¬ tigated by their friends, when the settle¬ ments are determined upon, and duly signed and sealed, after the celebration of the nuptials, there are few chances, or changes, or lottery adventures, to be ex¬ pected." " I believe you are right, ma'am, and 1 am wrong," replied Mrs. Marsham, " ex¬ cept as to those secondary considerations which arise from certain uncertainties, gratifications, and disappointments, botti of the head and heart ; but in the case be¬ ibre us, which has occasioned all our vtry wise remarks for the edification of the un¬ married ladies around us, I have only to mention, that the parties have known one another from clìildhood, and that the good fortune of the young lady is well deserv¬ ed by her family, who were the friends of her husband, when he had not a farthing or another friend in the world." But Mrs. Marsham's attention and amusement were now more pleasantly di-
rected towards her new acquaintance; and the consequence of all three was highly enhanced among the fashionables, by the great notice taken of them by that lady, who, ever afterwards, declared that this was the most agreeable concert that she, at any period of her life, attended, from the native effusions of mind and feelings in Mr. and Mrs. Russel, and more parti¬ cularly from the criticism of such an amateur and connoisseur as Mr. Giles Bradford, himself a vocal and instrumental performer. Tiie day before the Apreuth family left Bath, general Maurice dined, by appoint¬ ment, with Mr. Thomson ; and lord Del¬ horan's death becoming the subject of con¬ versation, the oiu gentleman gave some particulars of his history, which, in the fullest and most offensive light, shewed the baseness of his lordship's conduct, and his total want of principle. Mr. Thom¬ son had seen doctor Wardine in the morn¬ ing, who was going through Bath to his living, where he resided. The doctor had,
from conscientious motives, resigned his other living, and was now become as san¬ guine in promoting acts beneficial to his neighbours, as he once was in making him¬ self the object of ridicule. From doctor Wardine, who knew every body and every thing, Mr. Thomson had heard of an oc¬ currence in the Atheling family, a subject of more notability in the world at large than at Castlerock. The honourable Hen¬ ry Atheling, whose poetical mania had been lowered to a cooler temperature by the exposure of Mr. M*Tweed, or Twa- dle, had burst the demoniacal fetters of reviewing fears, put his manuscript of se¬ lect poems for awâiilc aside on the shelf, and taken a flight of another kind : he bar 1 just set off to Gretna Green, with Miss Florinda Forester, the only child of George Forester, esq. of Woodland Park. A let¬ ter from the susceptible youth had inform¬ ed the earl of Browover of the circum¬ stance two days before, on the very morn¬ ing of the commencement of the expedi¬ tion ; and when the exclamation of lady
BrowOver, and the tittering of the honour¬ able ladies Julia and Matilda Atheling, had subsided, lord Browover remarked— " Had you any idea of this, Frederick ?" " Not the least idea, my lord, that Henry would have taken the Scottish jaunt ; that he was one of the lady's ad¬ mirers, was very well known in town." " Then you consider this momentous business in the same light that I do," ^aid the earl, " that Mr. Forester proba¬ bly would not have withheld his consent, and that there could be neither any objec¬ tion on our parts, except as to the youth of the parties." " Henry, my clear father," said lady Ju¬ lia, "is of age." " Within a month, my dear," replied the earl. " And what is the age of the lady, Frederick ?" " Seventeen, I believe, my dear sir," an¬ swered lord Atheling. " A very proper difference," said my lady. u Then, as far as it concerns ourselves,
the thing is settled," said the earl. u í will write to Mr. Forester ; and I think he may rejoice concerning his daughter, as I do concerning my son, that he has done no worse."
CHAPTER VII.
Many months had passed, and the new year had commenced, when Mr. Bereton, according to a promise made in the sum¬ mer, arrived at the earl's seat. He was instantly conscious of the alteration in hiv friend, but forbore with prudence from making any hasty remarks. There arc- few persons in life vvho have not felt that disgust which arises from vulgar and in¬ judicious personal remarks, of looking thin, or pale, or ill ; happily for lord Atheling, the persons with whom he associated were not so deficient in sense or manners to
give this additional sensation to his real ill health. " Will you hunt to-morrow, Bereton ? í can mount you," were the closing words of lord Atheling, to a desultory conversa¬ tion, before the gentlemen retired to their respective chambers for the night. " The distance, I think, is too far," an¬ swered Mr. Bereton, reflecting upon his friend's debilitated appearance. Nothing further passed; and greatly was Mr. Bereton surprised, at the break¬ fast-table, in the morning, to hear that lord Atheling had set off early to meet the hounds. After breakfast Mr. Bereton ordered his horse.—" I'll ride out, and endeavour to find them," said he to the earl ; " perhaps I shall prevail on his lordship to return the sooner with me ; for indeed 1 had no thought of his lordship's going so far to cover, or í certainly would have accompa¬ nied him." 44 Why had you no thought?" asked
the earl ; " do you think my son looks very ill ?" The question, thus directly put, he fair¬ ly answered.—" My lord, I wall not one moment conceal my mind from you. I do think my friend looks ill." u He is very ill," said the earl, suppress¬ ing his agonized feelings. " It is impos¬ sible that this sudden love-affair can have affected him." " Not sudden, my lord ; I have watch¬ ed its progress for above these three years, and repeatedly warned and cautioned his lordship." " I know you have, sir," replied the earl. " Our opinions, Mr. Bereton, are different on many subjects ; but so convinced am I of your sincerity and friendship towards me and mine, that I receive more satisfac¬ tion and benefit, I may say, from your ho¬ nest disagreement, than from the ready ac¬ quiescence of many most obsequious ac* quai n tances, I am very anxious to know more of this infatuating Miss Chamont»*
fí Your lordship bas heard she has every disadvantage of birth, but that her person is most pleasing, her manners most agree¬ able, and her conversation most fascinating; so it may be said of a thousand other wo¬ men; you cannot, therefore, mylord, easily know more of the powers that have charmed your son, unless you were per¬ sonally acquainted with her." " That is not very likely, nor very easy, ыг. But 1 cannot induce myself to sup¬ pose that that grace and dignity which are conspicuous in persons well-born and well- bred, can accompany all the other beauties and virtues of this heroine." fť The lady, my lord, is well-bred, if you mean otherwise than well-born ; and tho' we are approaching the points iu which w t c differ, my lord, I think you will al¬ low that good-breeding without birth îs more likely to create grace and dignity, than a noble birth without a liberal edu¬ cation. It is my opinion, and I can have no doubt tbat it is your son's, that this VOL, II L о
young lady is as much, in manners and in person, endowed with the grace and dig¬ nity of real fashionable life, as any lady of our acquaintance." " Impossible, Mr. Bereton !" a Your lordship might easily be con¬ vinced if our opinions coincided in these points. Miss Chamont will be soon re¬ turned to Bath, and she generally attends lady Apreuth to the upper rooms ; she seidom^—I know not that sbe ever, dances. 1 have heard your lordship say that you are not personally acquainted with any of the family, except Mr. Arthur. He is still, and likely to remain, after they leave him, at his living in Devonshire. I could easily introduce you casually to the young lady at the rooms; for my respect for this young lady would never have gained the present height, if my opinion did not raise her above all form and concealment ; and I could even mention the circumstance to hdy Apreuth, that you might converse with Miss Chamont unknown for some time alone."
<ť No, no, not by any means, Mr. Bere¬ ton ; if my own opinion was to be the cri¬ terion of my son's conduct, I would avail myself thankfully of the offer ; but, ex¬ cept this unhappy, this shocking, this con¬ clusive objection, of the most degrading birth, my son's own opinion must judge of the amiability, beauty, and each accompa¬ nying talent and grace of the lady that he takes for a wife. But 1 come to the pur¬ pose for which I arn now detaining you írom your ride. Dearly as I value the hereditary honours and dignities of my house, I will not put them in competition with the life or with the health of my son ¡y " Your lordship," hastily breaking upon his speech, Mr. Bereton spake, u is fully aware who Miss Chamont is?" " Not fully, perhaps," bis lordship an¬ swered, Mr. Bereton told him all. The earl held his hands before his face, yet more and more covering it, as the counsellor proceeded ; and then, without G 2
removing them—" Oh, this is indeed im- j>ossible ! this is no subject of considera¬ tion ; here are barriers as appalling, as in- vincible, as unnatural, to a truly noble mind, as the horrid and unprincipled idea of love for a man's own sister, or his fa¬ ther's wife ľ' " Nay, nay, my lord í your feelings bear you out of the line of reason ; love for this sweet lady violates no principle of natural feeling; rather, my lord, it is most na¬ tur ai that every man should fall in love with Lucy Chamont ; yes, most natural to the mind most noble, for surely that mind maast feel most pity, most love, and most hope, Horrid and unprincipled it cannot be; for beauty and virtue never yet created horror, and worth and wisdom are the foundations of good principle." " Refine not on my words, sir; takerne as I mean—take me as the heart, mind» and soul feel." " Well then, my lord, I vvill suppose your meaning ; but let me, at least, uso correct and appropriate terms, 'Tis dread-
ful as to the world, the great, the ignorant world—'tis appalling as to a proud pedi¬ gree—'tis invincible to most minds, though not to every truly-noble mind; for many a noble mind has overcome greater obsta¬ cles than these. But what is the whole in the sight of God, and to the well-being of the soul and body, your lordship, as л Christian, can say." " You are encroaching on Mr. Gwyll- wes's province, sir. If your lordship would like to bear him upon this theme, I would willingly resign my argument." *' A truce, sir! I must consider it in д worldly view ; if mere pride were the con¬ sideration, I would candidly own to you that Mr. Gwyllwes has shewn me my error." " Take the tale then, m v lord, as I have told you, with all its horrors, and I assert. without apprehension, that not an indivi¬ dual can be found, who ever vet had the honour of knowing Lucy Chamont, but will assert, agree with me, that the whole is actually, sincerely, and solemnly nothing
to that poor, innocent, and most lovely young woman, as a worldly character." "What, sir! do you mean to argue that her beauty, or the propriety of her conduct, or I know not what accomplish¬ ments, can supersede the claims of birth, or annihilate a parentage of infamy and guilt?" ťí I mena, my lord, that she has, by her own merits, gained a station in society, where relative disgrace can never reach to soil her. The birth, indeed, my lord, is not quite certain; and let it be granted, the breath of evil can proceed no further. Yet take this birth, my lord, with all its depravity and horror, void of all fashion, fame, and honour, and let me see whether your lordship would prefer some great, and noble, and fashionable alliances, which 1 could point out to you, instead of that of' Lucy Chamont." Tlie earl had drawn his chair nigh to a side-table, upon which his right elbow- leant, wliile tiie hand still covered his brow, as lowly and deliberately he spoke—
" Proceed, proceed, sir ; patiently impati¬ ent I attend to you." " Ώο you know, my lord, tliat beauti¬ ful, charming, delicate creature—she is an actress—to-day a queen, to-morrow a sul¬ tana \ and every day has slie been off the stage the idolized mistress of some of the richest and noblest lords; in short, take her from her theatrical greatness, and ber fashionable character, and she is a prosti¬ tute. Would your lordship ratlier that your son married this all-desired wanton than poor Lucy Chamont ?" " No, no," said his lordship, hastily. " Yet sbe is now, my lord, the wife of the marquis------ . I present you another, my lord. Here is a very gay and witty lady; she is well-born, well-bred—she is an heiress of vast possessions^—she is in¬ deed married, but she hates the sober, mo¬ ralizing simpleton—she is ready to fly into the arms of some youthful gallant lover. Shall your son catch the blooming prize to his bosom—pay twenty thousand pounds for a divorce, and gain two hundred thou-
sand with the lady —shall he take to his honourable marriage-bed this rich and no¬ ble adultress, rather than poor Lucy Cha¬ mont ?" 6i Oh, no ! God forbid, Mr. Bereton, that ï should ever entertain such depravity of sentiment !" " My lord, cannot you recognize this lady of rank and vice in the wife of the accomplished lord ------? But here, my lord, is a lady of high rank, pedigree, and most ennobling alliances ; her father is an earl. The lady too has beauty and wit, and an independent fortune—part of it in¬ deed is an annuity from pensions and set¬ tlements, rather of a strange nature." *' Sir, I understand you.—No, Mr. Bere¬ ton. I know not vvhat you lawyers call this kind of evidence, but it is too conclu¬ sive for me. Sorry indeed should I be that my son, though he is not an M. P. or boasts the superior virtues ofa modern re¬ former and philosopher, should be the hus¬ band of that lady." Mr. Bereton continued—" But, my lord,
all is not vice. Let me offer you a dif¬ ferent choice—another, and yet a greater heiress. She is neither witty, beautiful, nor vicious, but she has boroughs, manors, and monies enough even to increase your lordship's rank as well as possessions. Would you rather that your family should be perpetuated from this all-great and wealthy stock by your son's alliance with the lady, vvho is not entirely an idiot, than with poor Lucy Chamont?" " Again, Mr. Bereton, I say no.—What father, what honourable man would ?" " Pardon me, my lord, many honour¬ able fathers would—a friend of vours would, but he did not succeed ; fbr the la¬ dy's friends listened to the treaty of the carl of—— for bis son, and that dutiful son gladly acquiesced in the choice. I have many other fair ones to submit to your lordship's notice—the daughter of a duke—need I name her?" " No, sir." " The widow of a duke." 6 3
" I understand you." " The daughter ofa foreign prince?—the widow of a foreign prince—an independ¬ ent princess in her own right—ay, a mo¬ dern Mary queen of Scots ; they may be all but virtuous, for what I know; but with tbat trifling deficiency, which would you prefer for your son, instead of the poor and virtuous Lucy Chamont ?" si Neither, neither. I am not ignorant of either of your meanings, sir. Oh ! give me your girl in her rags, and out of the house of infamy itself, so she were yet pure, than either of these." 4i Äly lord," (his lordship had taken his hand from his countenance, and, leaning wâth both hands upon the arms of his chair, entered fully into the strength of the young counsellor's argument), ťí I could present to you these actresses, harlots, adultresses, and idiots, in many a different character and fashion, and all of them in the haut ton, desirable, and with eminent celebrity—I could clearly point out to you noble families and societies of very high
rank, where, if your son led his wife—that wife, if she were Lucy Chamont, would have reason to start back and say, c What¬ ever are my disadvantages, I hope ever to be above such company as this ; shew me, nay husband, tbe bouse of poverty, and I will enter and relieve it—shew me wick¬ edness penitent, and I wall administer the balm of peace—or shew me conscious sin, and I will endeavour to reclaim it But I have not been bred to associate with suc¬ cessful and self-glorious vice, though adorn¬ ed with talents, graces, and dignities ; and if this is to be my introduction to high life, leave me, I pray you, sir, to my indiffer¬ ence and my solitude.' I go a step further, my lord. I believe, if such an introduc¬ tion was proposed to Lucy Chamont, taut she would say something very like vvhat I have fancied. Pardon me, my lord," con¬ tinued Äír. Bereton, 4i if I have uninten¬ tionally made free with any of your ac¬ quaintance; I wished to shew you, that the degradation of an alliance with Lucy Chamont was not so debasing ia the ev e 5
of wisdom and worth—I mean, without a strained compliment, in your lordship's own eyes, as you might imagine.** The earl smiled at the compliment, and Mr. Bereton proceeded—" Yet, my lord, I have one word to say concerning many of these more loathed and contemned by your lordship, than the young innoeent lady whose case I am advocating, though she is unknown to you—I mean that, bad as they have been, they are not only ennobled, but they are changed characters ; and where- ever the good change has taken place, we find the better part of the world is wil Hug to forget the former evil of their ways. So your lordship very properly visits my lord ~—; and last winter the ladies of your family were introduced to hisnom-amiable wife; so the duchess dowager of —— in* traduces —. But, my lord, I hurt my ease by any comparison, and I have done; yet I think, my lord, that I could produce another argument, if you will excuse my go personally addressing——" " I beg>" said lord Browover* interrupt-
ing him, " that you will advance any kind of argument you choose ; a choice of evils is but at the last a bad choice, and assured¬ ly it would be wiser not to choose at all." " Indeed, my lord, I think there are few choices without vvhat some one or other would call an evil ; therefore, if I shew you an evil where you did not expect one, or the evil you conceive counteracted by a greater good, I prove the superior claim of Lucy Chamont to be the wife of the great and good." " I wait," said the earl, with recovered self-possession, " your further argument, sir," and his lordship looked with renewed complacency to his long honourable pedi¬ gree. Mr. Bereton arose from his seat, and walked up to the same spot.^—" I think> my lord, if I were to begin with these no¬ ble dames, and, one by one, investigate whether you had rather your son had so married wâth such as many of these highly- dignified ladies, than with Miss Chamont^ tbat I could make out a good case " His
lordship felt the blood rise in bis autum¬ nal cheek, at the recollection of the very honourable lady whom to his son be bad before noticed, " But," continued Mr. Bereton, " J have been too severe a sati¬ rist already ; your lordship does not doubt my respect for your family, and for the no¬ bility ; nor are you ignorant that I could produce noble, amiable, beautiful, wise. virtuous, charitable, and religious women, who adorn many a coronet, and select some of them from a very low station ; yet I do not believe, my lord, that there is one of these, however noble her own birth or alli¬ ance, who would not sooner hail tlie poor Lucy Chamont as the wife of your son, and introduce her as such to the king and queen of the land, than they would the most preferable of all the noble, accom¬ plished, fashionable, beautiful, and witty actresses, harlots, and adultresses, whom I have noticed; and, if they knew Miss -Chamont, they would as willingly intro- ацсе her, as any of the right honourable aftd noble ladies now before me."
Mr. Bereton kept his ground, still look¬ ing with a scrutinizing eye at the pedi¬ gree. The eari walked for a few minutes up and down the room, then—*' You have touched upon all these points before now, Bereton, but I'll acknowledge that you ne¬ ver argued them so well. What more have you to say, that may set this Miss Lucy Chamont in her true light ?" " I know but one argument more, my lord, which I think far surpasses all tbat I have used ; but probably you have often beard and read it far better than I can state it. I approach, my lord, with reve¬ rence the table, and touch this book ;" and he pointed to an old family Bible, that al¬ ways laid upon a desk, from whence fami¬ ly-prayers were read : " let Lucy Chamont be judged, be comj>arcd by this. I believe your lordship w ill allow that there cannot be a better test; and I think, as you are reced¬ ing from this world, and trust that you are approaching a better, you will often put your hand to your heart, and feel yourself
less and less ashamed, if this poor yoim«· woman should ever be your daughter-in- law." The eari drew himself up, and spake de¬ liberately—-(how well it is when we can turn pride to the right side of the question I) —" If my son were not ill, Mr. Bereton, I would say, * Let him do as he pleases; 1 but ill as he certainly is, and periiaps from the cause we have been speaking upon, I beg of you to tell him, that he has my free consent to address Miss Chamont, and that I with pleasure give it, with a full view of the whole of the subject."
CHAPTER VIII. APTERavery pleasant and very satisfactory, though very short interview with his fa¬ ther, lord Atheling lost no time in seek¬ ing the fair enslaver of his heart. The change of scene, or rather the release of
mental sensation, gave vigour to soul and body ; and the earl, in the few days his son remained at Castlerock, saw an in¬ crease of his health. When lord Atheling arrived at Bath, he was greatly disappointed to hear that lady Apreuth had, a few days before, left the city, and it was doubtful whether the ladies were at sír Daviďs in Wales, or at Mr. Arthur's parsonage in Devonshire. At length it occurred to lord Atheling that he probably might gain the requisite information by inquiring at Miss Ffloyd's, and luckily she was in Bath and at home. There was a time when the company with whom he found Miss Ffloyd would, most of all company, have appalled his honourable feelings ; but this dross of greatness, which is never allayed in some minds, but keeps them always in a turbid state, had been often agitated through his, for some good purpose at length, and had now subsided for ever. There were in Miss Ffloyd's parlour at the time a low tradesman of the place— ä
busy, prating fellow, very well known, and not щ little avoided by those troubled with this tender sensation—and a female of little delicacy, and rather superior rank» who aőecfced to know every body. Thes*" good people, for I huve nothing to say against their goodness, were tenants of Miss Ffloyd,and living in adjoining houses, саще together to pay their rent. Т1ю par¬ lour-door, not unfrequently the case when the parrots were in their cages, was open at the time lord Atheling inquired if Miss Ffloyd was at home ? Miss Ffloyd heard him, and knowing his voice, exclaimed, as she generally did, before slie reflected— « Oh, it's my lord Atheling ! Pray walk in, my ford; I shall soon be at leisure—only writing a couple of receipts. The Apreuths are in Devon¬ shire." " You are a conjuror, Miss Ffloyd," said lord Atheling, not yet entering the parlour. " I called to ask you where the Apreuths were?" And though bis lord¬ ship, at the sight of her visitors, felt a little
alarmed, yet he received their ready civi¬ lities with a very good grace. "I know,"said Miss Ffloyd, laughing- she was dressed in a strange kind of old- fashioned, spotted bedgown, and her hair was entirely hidden by a large naormng caj>—" there are many who think I look not unlike a witch," very leisurely, as she spoke, viewing herself аз if she had been in a masquerade dress, in a glass ; " but I did not-expect such a compliment from your lordship." The company, whose polite vulgarism, and vulgar politeness, had laboured to sup¬ press a laugh, now burst forth, with yet more disgusting apologies, and bis lord¬ ship himself could have done the same, when Mr.Pettit spake—" I believe,ma'am, there be no witches in the present day but young witches, and the younger, and the handsomer, and tbe prettier they be, the greater witches for me." " Well, Miss Ffloyd," said the lady, *' you and I will give up our own claim to witchcraft. Must we not, my lord?"
" Certainly not, according to Mr. Pet* tiťs definition," said his lordship, not even affecting not to know the man's name, and who, on his part, felt that proper no¬ tice which every man owes his fellow- man, and which kept him in his right sphere more correctly than supercilious and distant manners could have done ; and he civilly bowed—·*' I am much obliged to your lordship." Miss Ffloyd added at the same moment —·" I beg, Mrs. Travers, you will only answer for yourself." His lordship, who was not ashamed to stay, but wished to be gone, said-—-" As I have got the information I wished, and have had the pleasure of seeing you well, Miss Fffoyd, you will, more particularly as you are engaged, excuse my running away ; but, if you were not engaged," perceiving the good company were about to make excuses, " I could not sit down at present, as I leave Bath to-morrow morning—am going into Devonshire, and shall be happy to take any commands for
you, if you will be so obliging as to send them to the York Hotel. Good-morning, Miss Ffloyd; good-morning, Mrs. Tra¬ vers and Mr. Pettit." " What a ñne gentleman lord Atheling is !" said Mrs. Travers ; " he used to be reckoned rather proud, but he is quite the true nobleman now. You see the great good of travelling." " If there is any change ín his lordship," said Miss Ffloyd, " it is not from travel¬ ling; his travels were nearly passed over, 1 believe, before you or í knew his name, Mrs. Travers." " Λ Vell, be that as it will, Miss Ffloyd, he is a prince of a man ! I wish be would stand for the county of---------. I know the freeholders would have him, and I'd write to my two nephews, who, I am sure, would both give him their votes." " Indeed he is a true lord," said Mr. Pettit ; " and he dealt at my shop when he was in lodgings, and he always paid ready- money ; and his groom and his valet were as civil, well-behaved men as ever I met
with in my life, and gave him then an excellent character." I need not further prosecute this con¬ versation ; I have said enough, if it furnish a practical lesson to any great man. That affected conversation that pretends to re¬ member a person—that hesitating at tbe name, not to dwell on that conceit w r hich wilfully or indifferently miscalls a person, often speak very plainly, as well as rudely, to the person addressed, and sometimes subject the condescender to cutting re¬ tort. " Mr. Spriggins, I believe ; I am sure I ought to know." " No, my lord, I am not acquainted with any reason why you should." " I think, sir, I had the honour of meet¬ ing you at------- —." " If you did, my lord, the honour was mine." In truth, great men are too fond of con- descending—-condescending so that it may be felt, and little men of receiving any honourable notice, rather than none at all.
It cannot be supposed tİR*t the names of casual acquaintance are to be always and readily remembered ; and many a noble memory is taxed for a great deal more than is at all necessary; but wherever uni¬ form politeness guides tlie conduct, and the great man comes forward on even terms, social intercourse will take place, with less apprehension on one part, less intrusion on the other, and less restraint on both. A diffident man is often con¬ founded, and confusion is mistaken for freedom : while a great man is wishing to get rid of his companion, his companion is often most heartily wishing to make his escape. I could prosecute these remarks to the edification of us all; I have prosecuted them, I trust, to a greater liberality of mind in many who read these pages. Many a thoughtful hour of vexation had that gentleman avoided, who is the chief subject of my story, if he had, earlier in life, sifted through his mind the principle of pride; but though "better late than
never," is a good adage, " to prevent is better than to cure," surpasses it. Let us hasten on with lord Atheling into Devonshire: borne on the rapid pinions of love, he arrives on the very spot where, if ever any man could have preferred a particular situation to declare all the sen¬ sations of his heart to the maiden most be¬ loved, his lordship now had gained his choice. His arrival was a surprise to all his friends. During his winged voyage, he had cm- ployed bis thoughts upon some plausible excuse for his presence, before the real cause could wâth propriety be developed, and he wisely resolved to proceed in the simplest way. In the evening, after the ladies had retired, he opened his mind to his friend Arthur-—" Arthur, you cannot be ignorant vvhat are my opinions of Miss Chamont. Every thought of my heart upon the subject is known to my father ; every prejudice has fallen before the know¬ ledge of her worth. I wish to speak to her alone to-morrow morning. Have I
best ask your foster-sister herself for tbat favour, or am I likely to meet with an opportunity? The latter would be most desirable," " Lucy generally," said Mr. Arthur, i: walks alone in the garden in the morn¬ ing till my mother comes down to break¬ fast." " I'll not lose the occasion," said lord Atheling; and not feeling himself equal to further discourse on the subject, he arose, and with the best wishes of his friend, and with an unusual pressure and glow of his band, retired to his chamber. His lordship was up early, and in wait¬ ing, but Miss Chamont made not her usual appearance. His lordship was the first in the breakfast-room, and not till the breakfast-hour did any one approach, when Miss Chamont first joined him. Had not bis lordship felt the greatest agitation, he had probably remarked something of the like nature in the lady. There w f as no time at present for an éclaircissements and vol. т. л
after the morning salutation, his lordship could only say—** I wish particularly to address you, Miss Chamont; will you favour me with your company in our friend's garden after breakfast ?" " 111 attend your lordship," said the lady, rather consciously. Secrecy ! how often art thou nothing but a name ! Such for no short period of time had been the love of lord Athe¬ ling for Miss Lucy Chamont. He had not been acquainted with this interesting fair one a month before lady Apreuth disco¬ vered it, and carefully keeping her secret, wisely countek acted the gro wirig effects of it on tbe mind of her beloved and dutiful fbsteiNchild. The second season at Bath, Lucy Cha¬ mont herself, without giving way to fe¬ male vanity, considered lord Atlieling as one who loved her, but to whom it was impossible for her ever to be united. It was contrary to the natural feelings of human kind, in her or in any woman to whom he should pay attention, not to like him ;
and though that liking increased, it never exceeded that sentimental feeling which her heart experienced for sir David and his brother, and fbr Mr. Bereton. Indeed, though she might be moet pleased with the company of lord Atheling, her affec¬ tiv flowed wherever gratitude opened her heart. The candid and liberal conduct of count Guilfill, in his affair of the heart, injured lord Atheling by the contrast. Had the count been no worldly soldier» and like the lady in religious feeling, he bad surely carried off the prize: for that opposite feeling, which the sense of the whole of his lordship's behaviour naturally inspired, would, in a weaker mind, or one not fortified by the purest and noblest of precepts, have decided m favour of the count. In the next season, the sensations of Mim Chamanta mind were yet moré easi¬ ly ruled ; for such will be ever the efteet, when resolutions emanate from correct principle, Her mind was become the for. Hi
tress that had often repelled the foe. His lordship, it might be said, was become yet more agreeable; not an unpleasant symptom of pride was now visible ; but every proud obstacle, Miss Chamont knew, still remained in the back-ground. Her confidence in commanding her own feel¬ ings was increased, and wâth greater ease she conversed—with increased pleasure she associated with his lordship; and while the temptation was become stronger to his lorcbhip, her resolutions were strength¬ ened. Tims, among all the admirers of Miss Chamont, no one had so many obstacles to encounter as my lord Atheling ; his dearest friends ever stood opposed to him ; the favourable opinion of the lady was di¬ rectly turned against liim. The impedi¬ ments that hindered the attempt on his part were all arrayed hostile to his success m the lady's mind, and the phantoms that he had created, he could not again lay. It is unnecessary to add how clearly all her and his friends perceived the real state
of his lordship's heart ; but not so clearly could any of them divine hers. Mrs. Marsham once attempted to sound it in search of this quicksand of love— " Have you not one kind feeling, Lucy, towards the all-delightful lord Atheling, that you are ashamed to confess ?" " í should be ashamed if I had." « Why so, my dear?" " Because lord Atheling has never given me the smallest reason," ťť Not directly, perhaps, Miss Lucy, but indirectly, you cannot deny, to which, of course, my question led." ** T should be as foolish as vain, if I did not deny it." ·* Fie, Luev !" u Nay, fie, Mrs. Marsham. If you were not married------" Bhe did not finish the sentence. " What then?" sharply asked Mrs. Marsham. " Why, I would say, Mrs. Marsham, that though you may scrutinize my eon- duct, and judge of me by your own con-
science, after all you may be wrong in your judgment." " You are severe on me, my young friend." " Deservedly so," said lady Apreuth. Miss Charnont left the room—-Mrs. Marsham ran after her, and in an instant brought her back, in the most affectionate manner—" I beg your pardon, my dear Lucy, ten thousand times ; yet it is all my love for you, you know well enough ; but I'll never forgive you, if he makes you an offer, and you ever keep the secret frora me." ** If I fancy that I am ever likely to hear one, am I, my dear Mrs. Marsham, to "-ell yon my hopes or my fears concern¬ ing it before I know it myself?" ** Certainly : I insist upon it." " You certainly ask, my dear Mrs. Mar¬ sham, what I shall not promise to grant. You have many fancies, I doubt not, that you would hide, if possible, from your very self, and I do not pretend to be wiser than you are,"
" Don't you, you little hussey ? but if you don't pretend, I have no doubt but you think so : but, mind me, Miss, and when these amatoria! fancies arise, reveal them to me, as, if not the best, the most busy of your friends ; because, wise as you are, you pretty mixture of the serpent and the dove, two head*; are better than one," Now my story proceeds.
CHAPTER IX. Without any prudery, but with what inward agitation it is more easy for any mind to conceive than for the most deep- searching to describe, Miss Chamont ad¬ justed her hat and shawl, and walked into the garden. His lordship had left the breakfasc-room some time before, and from his own chamber beheld her. He was in a few seconds at her side. After the not-unusual prelude of thanks
for acquiescing to his. request for the meeting, his lordship began—** You have some time known me, Miss Chamont, in one character most anxious to be consider¬ ed yoixrfriend, though, from your early worth, and the judgment of this most ex¬ cellent family, you happily have had no need of putting my humble services to the trial. But it has long been the first wish of my owrn heart, and it is now the wish and desire of all tbat are dear to me, tbat you would accept of my addresses to you, in a yet more honourable and more holy character." *' I am very grateful for tbe favourable notice of your lordship. My life has been a pleasing life of gratitude, and my only difficulty seems to be for me not to suffer my mind to be buoyed up beyond the re¬ membrance of what I have been; nor, in : my acquaintance with your lordship, whom I most highly esteem, is it proper that your lordship should forget that I am the child of sin and of misery—of wretched¬ ness and of sorrow."
"Lord Atheîing's first address was too palpable for any sensible woman to mis¬ take; Miss Chamont, therefore, did not with affectation avoid the meaning. His lordship replied—" Whatever your disadvantages of birth may have been, Miss Chamont, they cannot affect your worth, and they are more than counterba¬ lanced by your education, and by your na¬ tural, even far beyond your acquired graces. I can solemnly assure you, that knowing the whole of your earlier history, it now enhances my respect, my esteem, and my most devoted love." " You overwhelm me with praise, my lord, most undeservedly." His lordship interrupted the lady to at¬ test again solemnly his sincerity,and Miss Chamont proceeded—" Indeed, my lord, my natural graces, as you are pleased io call my endowments, arc very few indeed : my person, sheltered from adversity, and a rude manner of life, is almost the whole I can boast of from nature. I have been на
versed, from my earliest youth, in sup¬ pressing thefeeEngsof my heart*—ín con¬ cealing the thoughts of my mind-*4n form¬ ing myself to a certain character of steadi¬ ness and correctness. I have (thanks to tny friends Í} again known what I was born, and I have laboured unceasingly to preserve that deportment that might af¬ ford no harbour for the least injurious re¬ mark, and that might counteract the evil tendency of nature.** *' Nay, nay, Miss Chamont," said lord Atheling, breaking in upon her^nÜuished speech, ** injure not the heaven-stamped purity of your character by stich harsh re¬ marks, which are at variance alike with my reason and my feelings. That you have improved, both by example and by precept, on natures Ьооп^ I will not deny; but I must deny that you are the compo¬ sition of art, or that you are in any degree otherwise than what you seem to be* There is not a woman, Miss Chamont, that I would marry, on the face of the earth* with¬ out looking forward to something beyond
this world; and when I presume to address myself to you, I am confident that I have ever seen you as you are.'* «· No, my lord,** very seriously the young lady replied ; « you know not my natural temper or natural feelings. Re¬ flecting on my strange birth, and gracious (heavenly-gracious I mean) state in life, I have assumed a deportment not congenial to my sensations^—I have suppressed the laugh when with others I could have laugh¬ ed—yes, sir, I have stifled the tear, when others have given it a free vent—I have concealed my sentiments, when my heart has beaten to give them full utterance, and I have thought it proper that I should speak, when my inclination would have led me to silence· I mean mot to say, my lord, that I have concealed a necessary truth, or uttered an intentional falsehood ; but with sincerity» I must avow to you, that I scarcely ever yield to the impulse of my native feelings — I act from deliberate thought, and if I err, it is the error of tlie mind as well as of the heart. This assum-
ed character may not always have been preserved before my dearest friends : my dear, open-hearted Mrs. Marsham has often, joking beibre you, but seriously to my conviction, accused me of these things, and often too has she proved the truth of her assertions, by calling forth my angry pas¬ sions. With the excellent Miss Ffloyd I frequently have associated with that kind of company, low and honest, I confess, with delight and satisfaction have 1 asso¬ ciated with them—with whom your lord¬ ship (I do not mean to arraign, but to shew the dissimilarity of our tastes), with whom your lordship would bé ashamed to be seen.** ** Oh, do not wound me !" bis lordship broke upon her speech, " I vvill not say so erueîly f and ungenerously, but ini what has been my weakest point, I confess : but this weakness I have, happily for myself, if unhappily I fail in interesting you, trod¬ den fbr ever under foot. I may be sur- prised to a proud sense, but I will not de¬ liberately indulge in one» I own, and shall
always own, tbe respect that is due to ho¬ nours and rank ; but I wiil not withhold that respect from learning and worth. I .will treat every man as my equal, if bis manners and conduct make him so ; and 1 shall feel no shame in joining any so¬ ciety but of the vulgar and the vicious. Pardon røe, my dear Miss Chamont, for thus expressing, rather defending, myself. I know not how to reply to you as to the character you give of yourself; I can only say, that I am assuredly convinced that there is no deception in you; and if you will but accept my addresses, my fidelity in every way shall attest my sincerity aud devotion towards you." 64 My lord, there are so many, many obstacles on yrour side, and (pardon me) on mine, which prevent me for a moment entertaining the idea of listening to your very obliging notice of me, that it would be a hard and futile task to attempt to mention them." " Ipray you,my dearest Miss Chamont, open to me at least your mind; hear at
least my plea—listen at least to what 1 have to answer to you. I pray you, by that friendship you profess for me, give me but a hearing—-oh ! give me, for our friendship's sake, a favourable hearing. Let me first ask, what are the great ob¬ stacles on my side? Will you favour me with walking into this alcove ? my agita¬ tion cannot restrain itself." They entered the alcove. u Why sliould I trouble you, my lord Atheling," said the lady, " to speak of your father or mother—your family, con¬ nexions,, and expectations—your relative wealth, contrasted with my worse than bankruptcy of kin ?" " I have not, my dear Miss Chamont, an obstacle opposed to me ; by my father and mother's full approbation 1 now wait upon you* Deliberately and judiciously weighing every circumstance concerning you, my father willingly—most willingly, acquiesced to the dearest wish—I can al¬ most say the only wish of my heart. Fa¬ mily expectations, and connexions, and
all that the world holds in repute, are con¬ sidered by me as nothing, unless you will partake in the consideration : I only value them as mine, in the hope that they will be yours." " I feel very grateful indeed^ my lord,' ; replied the young heroine; " but with gratitude I can no otherwise express my¬ self—I can see no pleasing prospect beyond, to you—to me: the condescension of your family would be a weight pressing every day more and more heavily upon me." '* Oh Γ I must interrupt you, ever-dear Miss Chamont I Let· my heart plead. though my words cannot ; let the steadi¬ ness of my heart plead the length of at¬ tachment" "It is,, my lord, that length of attach¬ ment, if you please to call it so—that length wiiich never till this day induced me to suppose that I ever should become thus an object of your preference, which convinces my reason at once, that this mo¬ mentary triumph of female vanity should never.be put in competition with years of
failure. In the sanie light that your lord¬ ship has beheld me for many years till the present day, it is most probable you will very soon again. There is not an obstacle against me which is not in its full force on my píart, on your part, and indeed I rather think every obstacle has gained strength, particularly concerning myself, since every investigation of my early situation has shewn that obscurity is my highest hope." " It is with that conviction I address you, most dear, and ahvays-dear Miss Chamont. Let obscurity dissolve, and the most hideous certainty appear; it is a phantom I can look upon u nappal led ; the spectre once might have bewildered me ; it is now the phantasmagoria that can only interest children and frighten idiots; its identity has no more to do with you than with me. Yes, madam, I liave thorough¬ ly tried and sifted my heart, and I can declare its sincerity towards you. Let not my delay in addressing you be a moment considered unaccompanied with the cause ofthat delay, my respect; let it not ap-
pear to you, then, in any other light than the true one, namely, never to offer you an uncertain mind for uncertain heart; I could not. I have indeed paused before I ventured to speak to you, but it was that I might speak fully and determi- nately. There were obstacles—I have first completely overcome them, because I would not involve you. I now offer you no doubtful, no divided homage. There is not—there cannot be in me a dis¬ tant thought of a contrary nature; there cannot be in others, for the triumph of rea¬ son has been complete ; and if I have long doubted and demurred—if the most ago¬ nizing love has not escaped from my lips, what were the motives that influenced my conduct, but tbe purity of my attachment, as I said before—my inviolable respect" " My lord, I arraign no part of your conduct: my lord, I thank ymi—I un- feignedly thank you for the very honour¬ able manner in which you have always conducted yourself towards me; yet, my
lord, your arguments are but the result of your present feeling." ** My beloved Miss Chamont, ratlier say the development of my constant^my eternal feeling. I presume not to come before you with my addresses, as if I were a suddenly-enraptured youth ; I do not fidi upon my knees, to press you at once to grant all my devoted heart could wish—I do not urge you to consent to an immediate alliance, as if I were fearful of the perpetuity of my love—I can feel, and earnestly wish all this; but with yet more powerful feeling—more anxious wishes, I exdaim —* Beloved of my heart, my mmd, my soul, hear me! admit me to your presence as one who hopes—with patience and deference hopes to be your husband." He gently and respectfully offered to take her hand ; overcome by her feelings, slie did not harshly refuse it ; but the re¬ sult of calm deliberation aroused her, and she steadily, though determinately, with¬ drew it from his ardent grasp ; yet with
trembling and half-despairing efforts he proceeded— u I have presumed to try you, and I am convinced of your worth. Oh î do but condescend to try me, most lovely of women! give me but hope. I speak not of time—I hurry you not; know, Miss Chamont. and be you known to my fa¬ ther—all my friends and my connexions. I will pledge myself to you, but I ask, as yet, no pledge in return—all I ask is, give me hope." Methinks his lordship pleaded his cause witli humility, and with proof of sincerity; but however he pleaded, it was not to the satisfaction of Miss Lucy Chamont " My lord," she replied, " I wish de¬ cisively to close the present subject. From my first acquaintance, I admired your lord¬ ship's manners and conversation ; with my acquaintance you won my respect and es¬ teem; those noble sentiments have con¬ stantly increased—they have increased to considering you as my friend; and tbe more I ventured to rely on you as my friend, the more able was I to eradicate
any intruding ideas that you ever could be my lover. I never thought btit of friendship, and I was resolved, and I have kept my resolve, 'never to think further of you. I have ever been convinced of the folly of young ladies forming romantic friendships with the other sex ; that, your lordship knows, has never been the case here ; the word friendship has not been a commonplace phrase, nor otherwise than rarely and sacredly used." " Too rarely," said lord Atheling, with great solemnity, but yet more sacredly. Miss Chamont proceeded—" Yet, my lord, the whole of this family might at¬ test my ingratitude to them as well as you, if f denied the term. In truth, my lord, friendship has been to me no prelude to higher hopes —no decoy to my feelings, but a prudent check—a constant warning —an awful caution to my mind. * This is not prudery, but simple prudence;'on the bounds of our friendship the world has placed an impassable gulf. I must there¬ fore be#—earnestly beg, that you will never
ашпп trouble —for it is indeed—I vvill not о conceal my feelings—troubling me. It is unnecessarily raising a course of thoughts and remembrances, that reason has con¬ vinced me of the futility of. It is, I re¬ peat, my lord, indeed troubling me with this ill-suited attachment. I am at pre¬ sent happy. Lucy Chamont has many friends,.and among them with pleasure owns your lordship. Lucy Chamont, in despite of every r natural disadvantage, has been raised to a station in society, by the never-ceasing love of her friends, which she supports with steadiness, and on equal terms every acquaintance associates with her. Your lordship, I again with pleasure say, has ever treated her as an equal ; Ъ at no period of our acquaintance perceived you to remember her as the daughter of indigence and obscurity. What then has Lucy Chamont to hope? I have never yet made a rash resolve ; my lord, I liave never bound myself -, to any conduct, be¬ cause we none of us know what circum¬ stances may arise, and the mind that is re-
solved on good, is enough bound by its own principle; but, my lord, it is not my intention—my wish, ever to marry*." u So cold a resolve, Miss Chamont, is as appalling to me as a vow." " On you, my lord, I would have it produce the like effect. Forget me, but in friendship. Consider well my present happy state. I have not concealed my opinions in your favour, sir, and say, if I w r ere your wife, should I, unalloyed, have the same feelings ? As Miss Chamont, I may be above the proud finger of scorn ; but would I, as lady Atheling, be so ?" " Oh, assuredly! — undoubtedly you would," said lord Atheling, most warmly.
" No, my lord, I should myself soon perceive my degrading birthright pointed out by my lofty station. I should consci¬ ously know that the wife of the eldest son of the earl of Browover ought not to be myself; and though I now, on an equal station, meet and converse with your lord¬ ship, I should then feel not only a degra¬ dation in society, but that I was lowered even in my own estimation." " Enough !" rather hastily, though not haughtily, his lordship spoke, overpowered by his feelings ; yet striving to recover a resignation foreign to his heart, he made, with difficulty, a further reply— u Enough of cruelty, Miss Chamont! enough to me, not of humility, but of ruin to my hopes. However powerful my own sensations, I must yield to yours. You state your pre¬ sent happy condition with so strong a con¬ trast to all that I can offer, that I should presume indeed—I fear offend, if I pro¬ ceeded further." " Accept my thanks—I am now yet happier, my lord."
I will not enter into the degree of com¬ parative happiness whiJi Miss Lucy seem¬ ed so clearly to define; but I am convin¬ ced that ao one who saw the young lady at the moment would have given her the epithet in its humblest state. Who could have mistaken the flushes o'jed and white which tinged her lovely cheeks, as bhe sup¬ pressed tbe agonizing throes of her bosom? yet she had anticipated this day and hour, and was prepared for it, and her spirit felt no depression as she лету deliberately pro¬ ceeded—" Witli lady Apreuth I have ever been happy ; if I changed my situa¬ tion, the chances of the world, even with the most favourable prospects, give me no similar hope." His lordship bowed despairingly—he could not speak—it was impossible. She, with heroism, bade him 4< good-day !'* and with a quick, though trembling step, has¬ tened to her chamber. I cannot stronger describe the feelings of each than by saying, that neither per¬ ceived the conflicting pains of the other.
CHAPTER X. Lord Atlieling walked away to the sta¬ bles, and called for his groom, as if he would mount his horse, and ride away in¬ stantly. It was an old remedy that he had tried as a preventative, and he now wished to take it as a cure. But it so happened, that his lordship had come in a postehaise, and had brought no servant with him ; and his horses, which he had ordered to follow him, were not yet ar¬ rived. In any case, after a momenťs reflection, he would certainly not have gone away in this hasty manner. He now, avoiding the coming m contact with any moving object, took his path across the fields, and vol. ш. ι
summoning reason and reflection to his aid, they produced one effect—he w r as en¬ abled to recover a plausible exterior de¬ portment. There is this in an education of pride—it certainly can suppress many an emotion of the heart; indeed, at its best, pride has some of the merit of hy¬ pocrisy—it is a species of the homage that vice pays to virtue. After a hasty and desultory walk of about an hour, lord Atheling felt a wish to see his friend Arthur, and to tell him that all his hopes were flown. He re¬ turned, therefore, by the straightest path to the house, and soon met with, and thus addressed him·—" Arthur, it is all over í your foster-sister refuses me." Mr. Arthur gave him the cheering looks of friendship k*nd of doubt. " No," continued lord Atheling, " her very arguments preclude my perseverance. What I once flattered myself w r as her in¬ creasing love for me has been diminishing, has been centering into a more correct and refined esteem. I use not her words, but
I tell you at once the fact. I am, most truly, my dear friend, grievously disap¬ pointed. Though I came here sans pride, it was not without some vanity ; but I am discomfited at all points, and I deserve it. I shall certainly leave England imme¬ diately ; and, I believe, I shall go over to India to my relation, lord Loyala. There is a wide field open for doing good in a thousand ways. If it were not on my fa¬ ther's account, I should, from my heart, wish that there was some truth in this strange, though ridiculous report, of the late lord Browover being alive, and com¬ ing to England." Mr. Apreuth did not attempt to break in upon these feelings of his disappoint¬ ment. He had seen, a day or two before, a paragraph in the public paper—" It is reporced, by a gentleman just arrived in town, that the late lord Brow r over, whose death was supposed to be clearly ascer¬ tained by the family to have happened in Russia, was banished to Siberia, whence ι г
he made \¿ b escape, and will soon be in England." But neither Mr. Arthur, nor any of the family, thought it worthy a second ro¬ ía ark. An escape from Siberia five-and- twenty years ago î and now an arrival in England î Mr, Arthur gave it no atten¬ tion, but he at length spoke to his friend upon the only subject he thought en¬ titled to any notice.—" Do nothing hasti¬ ly, my dear lord. Even if the worse be¬ comes true and certain by time, a disap¬ pointment in love is neither to a man, to a philosopher, nor to a Christian, an irre¬ mediable misfortune. You have no rival Lucy С fiamon t is a woman.** ** As the Venus de Medicis, always the same. But can I wish to change her de¬ termination ? She says, she is happy now, but should not be happy perhaps if she were married. In her present station she is loved and respected; she doubts tîıat she sliould be equally so as my wife. I will not leave you to-day, from the great respect that I have for you all ; but to-
morrow I must say farewell. I will meet once more, at your most friendly and т«»Д happy ljøard, this more lovely than the statue of Pygmalion." It was not very polite of í us lordship to give vent to his disappointment, by calling the fair object of im love паше* ; but it must be recollected, that Mr. Ap¬ reuth was an old school-fellow, and his lordship bad been for years accustomed to speak before him the first impress:««u of the thoughts of bis heart. In the meantime, Miss Chamont, who had exerted to the utmost every feeling of heart, mind, and soul, and subdued them, who never in her life had an hys¬ teric fit, found no method, by a sudden burst of her feelings, to recover lier usual composure in a little time. A violent headache oppressed her, ami therefore she bathed her fair forehead with cold water, applied salts and hartshorn, and the com¬ mon remedies ; while no relief was afforded her.
At length kdy Apreuth came to the room.—" My dear child, 1 have missed you ; why do you stay ? What is the matter, my love?" " I wish not to disguise from your lady¬ ship, nor from any of my dear friends, how greatly my feelings are affected by the course of conduct I am compelled to pursue, because I am obliged to refuse the addresses of lord Atheling." %i My dear child, explain yourself. Obliged ! vvho—what can oblige you ?" " Reason, prudence, all my mind, if not all my heart. I cannot, my dear lady, accept them. I wish never to be separated from you." " Oh, this is childish, Lucy ; this bor¬ ders upon affectation." Her ladyship paused, and looked up, and beheld the agonizing tears straying from her beloved Lucy's bright eyes. Na¬ ture had before refused her this relief; and almost at the same instant, ere her foster- mother had done more than take her
hand, threw her arms round her neck, and spoke a few kind words, tbe blood gushed forth in a stream from each nostril. Lady Apreuth, though a very sensible woman, was very much alarmed at a symptom that ought to have removed alarms. She rang the bell violently, brought herself a tason of water and a towel, and with the kindest endearments assisted her. Mrs. Apreuth, who was in the nursery, upon hearing the beli ring violently, ran down stairs, and the maid-servant was dis¬ missed. " Fray be under no concern, my lady,"* said Bliss Chamont ; " the bleeding is of great service to an excruciating headache, under which I before kboured. I feel røv head already much relieved." But the bleeding continued without any intermission ; and Mr. Apreuth, vvho came to the door, and was informed of it, ordered his servant to saddle a horse, and to go for the family apothecary ; but, by the time the man and horse were ready,
the bleeding began to subside, without the parade and trouble of any of the fa* culty. But Miss Chamont had lost an unusual portion of blood, and, feeling very- cold sensations succeeding to the warm ones which preceded the bursting of the blood-vessels, her kind friends insisted upon her going into a warm bed. The gentlemen w r ere informed of the circumstances, without entering into par¬ ticulars ; and the dreadful meeting at din¬ ner that day did not take place. Though lord Atheling had resolved to leave the family on the morrow, he was unwilling to depart with the smallest uncertainty concerning Miss Chamont's health. His friend also was very earnest to see, at least, a friendly meeting on the accustomed terms, and his lordship was induced to delay his departure another day. The next day at dinner, such is the povver of fashion, where a little philoso¬ phy is addcii that the lady and gentle¬ man met without any unpleasant symp-
tom on either side. Conversation flowed with tolerable ease ; only Mr. Apreuth and his own good lady were obliged to be the leaders of it, which, though very capable of being, they were not over fond of tak¬ ing upon themselves, even in their own house. In the course of tbe evening, lord Athe¬ ling took an opportunity to address the young lady alone.—** May I presume, Miss Chamont, that you will favour me with ňve minutes conversation upon the former subject before I leave this place to-morrow ?" " You must excuse me, my lord; it can be of no service to either of us. Pray spare me; it will be only increasing my sufferings." Yet, spite of this forbidding answer, did bis lordship rejoin—" Yet, let me be permitted coldly and shortly to state to you in writing my present mind, upon all that you have said, and all that I feel.* " No, my lord, I must, tii lugli with ι 3
the highest respect for you, return any letter you send me, the instant I perceive it is upon that subject." " Indeed! your cruelty is deliberate, Miss Chamont. Yet will I never part with you in anger. Think upon me sometimes, at least, as I at all times shall upon you, though I must forbear further intrusion on your resolves." Miss Chamont had written, the very morning that she refused lord Atheling, and before she had seen lady Apreuth, to Mrs. Marsham, as she had promised, if ever such an occurrence took place, to inform her very anxious and hasty friend. Mrs. Marsham was at her brother sir David's, on the other side the Severn. On the third day lord Atheling took his leave, to the unwilling sorrow of all his friends, except the resolute refiiser of his love; but though not unwilling was her sorrow, it was the most severe to every sense, corporeal and mental.
Lady Apreuth remarked how ill she was. " I do not pretend, my dear madam, to conceal from you the conflict that has oppressed me, I know I have acted right. Of what consequence can it be, beyond the momentary feeling, to the earl of Brow¬ over and his son, that Lucy Chamont is not honoured by the marriage ? But, once his wife, no time could obliterate from the family tbe degrading alliance. There hath been, my dear lady, an age of arguments against the match; are they weakened, because inclination hath more strength? Yet, my ever kind and consi derati ve more than mother, could I, by accepting his lordship's offer, find any plea by which I could benefit him, or his family, every other consideration, which borders upon self, had vanished—I would have forgot¬ ten how lon¿ our feelings inclined to¬ wards each other, while he said that they must never meet—I would have disre¬ garded the contempt of his relations, and the pride of the great world—I would
willingly bave offered any sacrifice, en¬ countered every repulsive throe; for, in making him happy, I should have felt the greatest joy to my own heart. But now, 'tis past ; every day shewing the impossi¬ bility of the alliance, will increase thai sensation of brotherly love which we have both felt for each other* and which 1 have ever felt for every one of your fami¬ ly, yet with greater affection for yourself, whom I never wish to leave." Lady Apreuth accepted, with kindness, the warm effusions of her young foster- daughter, who proceeded—** Yes, my dear lady, í look forward to the day when I .shall see his lordship married to an ami¬ able woman, his equal in birth and rank, as well as in all natural acquirements— when I may converse and play with his children—when, still finding a happier home in your maternal bosom, ï shall smile at the remembrance of the womanish feelings of this week, and doubly rejoice, that so early in Hfe I have been convinced that perfect happiness cannot be on earth."
Lady Apreuth could make little reply. The medical gentleman who attended the family had, by a private note from Mrs. Apreuth, ealled, as if by accident, and inquiring for Bliss Chamont, and re¬ marking her appearance of ill health, and feeling her pulse, and having received all necessary information on the subject, had prudently sent ber a few febrifuge pow¬ ders, chronic pills, and antispasmodic draughts, and calling again the second time, had thought proper to take a few ounces of her pure, though ignoble blood. He now called the third time, and pro¬ nounced his patient doing extremely well, after a few more powders and pills, and a little alteration of the other medicines. Mr. Lenitive had scarcely departed, when Airs. Marsham, who had set off upon the receipt of Miss Lucy's letter, arrived all alone. Mrs. Marsham's hurry was not passed away with the journey.— " Where's lord Atheling?*' said she, as the carriage stopped.
" He left the place, ma'am, three days ago," said Mr. Apreuth's servant. " Where's Miss Chamont?" continued Mrs. Marsham, walking through the hail. " Your inquiries, my dear," said lady Apreuth, '*■ cannot be so urgent, as to ap¬ ply to the servant, before you see if any of vour friends are at home." 66 1 beg your pardon, ma'am ; I hope I see you well," said Mrs. Marsham; " but I have been in a close carriage alone fbr nearly two days; for my husband was gone а -shooting, and my maid had asked my leave to go to the next town upon an errand, when that sentimental simpleton s letter arrived ; and, of course, my dear mother, I could not wait a moment." " Your course," said lady Apreuth, gravely. tť Well, ma'am, I set off immediately, and now I find I am too late to undo all the mischief. Oh, here comes the Miss that knows better than all the whole worhl besides i What, my giri, am you mad ?"
Mrs. Apreuth hastily shut the door, Mrs. Masham continued—** Why, child, what can you say for yourself? You know that you always loved him í Will you ruin your own happiness and his, for I know not what of pride, conceit, and af¬ fectation ?" " I cannot say a severer thing to you, Mrs. Marsham," said Miss Chamont, with great firmness, " than that I expected this." * ς You did î Oh, then you can see your folly, though you are too stubborn to rectify it? Mercy me! what an abuse of reason, and of sense, and of principle, and of love !" " This is your friendship, Mrs. Mar¬ sham," replied Miss Chamont. " Am not I η better judge of the whole of my feel¬ ings than yourself?" " Yes, child ; yes, to be sure î No, no, no, I say ; for it is your vanity blinds your mind. You allow reason, reflection, pru¬ dence, judgment, to none but yourself. Lord Atheling did not offer himself
sooner ; hence your proud feelings. Lord Atheling honestly waited till every ob¬ stacle was removed, and thus you reward his care and conscientious dealing." " You are a cruel woman !" said Miss Chamont. " Oh, cruel ! cruel ! am I ? I wish my cruelty in words could have prevented your cruelty in action. Cruel !" again ex¬ claimed Äírs, Marsham, letting loose lier passion beyond all bounds. "It is you, you revengeful little hussey, that have planted a dagger in tlie breast of every one of this family !" Miss Chamont indignantly turned away, as lady Apreuth spoke—" Mrs.Marsham, if you have your senses, leave immediate¬ ly the room, and go to your chamber, till you can conduct yourself with reason, and with respect." " Indeed, mamma," said Mrs. Marsham, a little recovering, " that—Jady has al¬ most deprived me of them. I beg your pardon, dear mamma! I beg all your parens, but that—gMV»*·who does not
deserve a name. I vvill say, I could beat her with pleasure, even if I was sure that she would beat m<? again, as you all know- she once did." They all smiled at the remembrance of a ridiculous scene which had formerly oc¬ curred, when Lucy Chamont was only twelve years, and Mrs. Marsham, in a violent passion, had thought proper to strike her, though not with impunity from our equally-spirited heroine. " At least, ma'am, I know better now,'' said Miss Chamont ; " and though your words lose their effect by their violence, I would rather have your blows." " I do believe you despise me, you chit!" " í should be sorry that you created, Mrs. Marsham, such a sentiment; but, in truth, I liave that kind of feeling for you that you ought to have had for me—I pity you." " What then, I am come all the way from rny dear sir David's, in Wales, with¬ out my own husband, or my servants, to
scold, and to condole with you, and I am to be treated with your pity Γ This violent anger was now really as¬ suming a burlesque form, when Mr, Ap¬ reuth, who bad often taken an opportuni¬ ty of calming bis too-irritable sister, by some play upon words, not at all congenial to his accustomed steady manner, and therefore more effective, as producing the greater contrast, going up to her affection¬ ately, and taking her hands, said—" It ¡s a pity, my dear sister, but you should ; therefore, for my sake, as I am the only gentleman present, and your spirited ex¬ ample can do me, a meek and patient parson, no good, hear a few werds from Lucy before you proceed any further." " That I did not dislike his lordship," said Miss Chamont, speaking at once, when she perceived that Mr. Arthur Ap¬ reuth desired her, " I never would have denied to you, Mrs. Marsham, or to him, or to any one who could have asked the question. Was Í, therefore, to be the watchful love-sick maid, waiting for the
opportunity of accepting his love ? or do you think, if superior motives towards him and himself had not influenced my mind, I would have refused such a man as my lord Atheling? Yet, great and good as he is, I believed, and still believe, it to be my duty, Mrs, Marsham, to re¬ fuse even him." " Can you ever expect to have again, young woman," said Mrs. Marsham, re¬ covering some temper, and trying to keep it by assumed consequence, " so desirable an offer ?" " ^ever, ma'am," replied Miss Cha¬ mont, keeping the distance at vvhich Mrs. Marsham had attempted to place her; " yet I did not think that this desirable marriage was to be accepted, in defiance of every other consideration, I did not wish to be, ma'am, what is ealled mine own mistress. I did not wish to take prece¬ dence before Mrs. Marsham. I am hap¬ py, very happy, under the control of your most excellent mother, No, Mrs. Mar- riiam, I do no' etend to be like you ; but
had I possessed your station and advan- tages in life, had / owned an humble friend, dependent, fatherless, and had she acted contrary to my wishes for her own worldly fortune and happiness, I miglit have flown as you have ; but it would have been tp have pitied, not insulted, those errors of her understanding, which, while they disappointed the sanguine expecta¬ tions of ber friends, could not fail to dis¬ turb her own peace of mind, and to leave the barbed pang in her heart." Having thus spoken, Miss Chamont prepared to leave the room ; but Mrs. Marsham sprang up, rushed to the door before her, caught her in her arms, and in all the paroxysm of contrition, with audi¬ ble sobs, and abundance of tears, entreated her pardon arid oblivion. The first was as readily granted, but the latter, Mrs. Marsham herself was the last person in the room that would have suffered it to take place.
CHAPTER XI.
Lord Atheling, when he left Mr. Ap¬ reuth's parsonage, proceeded leisurely to Bath. It appeared the most disagreeable, frivolous, and uninteresting place he was ever at in his life. lie called on nobody. lie avoided seeing any body. The next morning, he set off to the most convenient and agreeable receptacle for all the wants and disappointments of life- the metropolis. The day after his arrival, be resolved to call in person at the news-office, to investigate the strange paragraph that had appeared in the pa¬ pers. To bis inquiries, he received the information, that a person who was em¬ ployed to furnish news for the paper, bad, in a certain coffee-house, been addressed by a gentleman—" Sir, you are in search of news. I'll give you some," and imme-
diately he gave him the strange intelli¬ gence, that the late lord Browover was yet alive, and would soon make his puh¬ lic appearance in England. The person who had addressed him, as soon as he had spoken, left the room. He inquired oí the waiter who the gentleman was. The waiter could only inform him, that the stranger had arrived the preceding night, and was now departed in a chaise on the northern road. He was an elderly man, of a small person, but ofa very mild and commanding aspect, and his very appear¬ ance indicated a gentleman of rank, man¬ ners, and respectability. Lord Atheling walked to the coffee¬ house, but he could get no further intelli¬ gence, except that the gentleman knew the coffee-house, and spoke of a former landlord, who had been dead thirty years, though he himself was not known by any of the family. It was rather remarkable, considering his years, and dignified appearance, that he came in a hired chaise, went away in
the same kind of vehicle, and had not a single servant to attend him. When his lordship returned to his fa¬ ther's house, he found Mr. Billsley had called, and finding that be was in town, promised to call again at the dinner-hour. He came, and shewed him a letter that he had received from his father, upon the individual business that had occupied his morning. Mr. Billsley had returned the earl the same information as bis son bad obtained. Since Mr. Billsley's first call, a second letter had arrived from the earl, wishing to see him directly upon particular busi¬ ness. " I shall be off, my lord," said Billsley, *· very early, by one of the coaches to¬ morrow." t( Wait for me till the middle of the day, and I'll go with you," said lord Athe¬ ling ; " for I wish to sec my father once more, I mean to see him again before I go abroad." " Go abroad, my dear lord ! I thought
that you had left off going abroad, and was going to settle at home." The word settle was used with such an emphasis, that lord Atheling perceived, that not only the secret of his heart, but of his intention, was, by some means, come to the knowledge of Mr. Billsley. " No, sir," said lord Atheling, " if my friends understood that I was fool enough to build such visionary mansions, they might have conjectured that a light wind might easily overthrow them." " My lord," said Billsley, " honoured as I am by the name of your friend, and as a friend the earl himself does not disdain to call me, I had a hint given me, which, not only for your sake, but that of others, also dear me, induced me to form the idea that you intended------but if cool delibe¬ rate thought tells you, that grandeur and greatness, and their accompaniments, are the most desirable things of this life------" " My good friend," said lord Atheling, impatiently, " deliberate thought tells me no such thing ; and as for the vanity of
grand and great things, I know them as well as you ; and I believe a great deal better do I know their vexation of spirit. But I beg your pardon ; I am talking in a foolish strain, when, in my mind, I was accusing you of the same. One word of sense is worth a twelve-hours' speech— Miss Lucy Chamont will not accept my addresses." Mr. Billsley looked up at lord Atheling in amazement and incredulitv. " Your young friend," continued his lordship, " will not accept my addresses. After a two-hours' hearing me, with the whole history of my long attachment. 1 may almost say hers, after hearing all my arguments, and rebuffing them, .she, from first to last, decided against me. and left me no hope." " Thus woman is a contradiction still f " exclaimed Mr. Billsley. " It is impossible to judge any woman by her appearance '-— it is impossible to judge her by her man¬ ner, her habits—by her principles (if slu- VOL. III. К
has any—by her opinions, however freely she may vent them—ay, most impossible to judge her by her former conduct. Why, my lord, a friend of mine made a woman fa widow too) an offer six times, and she married him at last. Five cool and deli- herate offers were refused positively, and then she had him ; and, upon my soul, my lord, it is true, she is a very good wife. Miss Monson, my lord, the great heiress, was addressed by a rich baronet and an earl. She would not dance with Mr. James Sinclair, because he was not a man of fa¬ mily and fortune, because (as I heard her ьау myself) he had not one recommenda¬ tion. That day week, my lord, she went off to Gretna Green with this very Mr. James Sinclair, on the very morning that the lord and baronet were a-going to fight a duel about her. I could tell your lordship a hundred stories as inconsistent------But there is not one of the sex that deserves " I have not a word to say against Miss Chamont," said his lordship; "spare the
sex still for her sake, and hear me, my friend. I cannot bear to stay with my fa¬ ther; I hate to see all my old acquaint¬ ance—I ought to be ashamed to see any of you, because for years have I been upon the verge of all that man can wish, and ne¬ ver had that upright mind and decided re¬ solution as to grasp at it, till the shadow only remained. I now look upon the pru¬ dence and caution of my friends as folly— I look upon mine own irresolution as yet greater. Thus, thinking of you all, and angry enough, as you see," trying, as he spoke, to treat the subject jokingly, " I am determined to live alone, till I can get a right understanding with myself, and am become reconciled with my friends. Now, if you please, not one word more upon the subject, until I shall beg the favour of you to tell the event /to the earl ; yet, though I speak lightly, my heart bleeds." He grasped Mr. Billsley's hand as he spoke. They soon parted for the evening.
ж â
CHAPTER XII. Lord Atheling was up, and out early, to settle some affairs before he set off* with Mr. Billsley to Castlerock ; but, eager as he was to meet his father, and take the long farewell, he was delayed a day longer in town by a case of humanity, which, in jus- tice to doctor W ardine, must be noticed, tbe frivolity of whose character, we have lately seen, began to dissipate, and his good sense, and his excellent abilities, to take the lead—thanks to two of his friends, Mr. Bereton and his wife. The first had ridiculed, exposed, and, apon some serious remonstrance from the honourable and reverend divine, reasoned liim in a great degree out of his vanity and opiniativoness ; and the second, proving a most amiable and sensible woman, became primarily a ballast to his actions, and nití-
mately to his opinions ; and now, when he praised the goodnessof his wife to the barris¬ ter, Bereton was ever ready fully to allowjt, though not at the expence of the lady who had refused him. But the doctor talked of that affair in a very different strain at present, and honestly confessed his former folly ; though Miss Chamont was still irre¬ vocably the goddess of chastity, the queen of the Amazons, and Saneta Lucia. Lord Atheling was hastily passing along the street, when a chaise and four drove furiously along. Suddenly a voice cried out to the postboys to stop. Then— t( My lord Atheling !" His lordship paused, and looked to the carriage. Doctor Sidney Wardine appeared—*' My dear lord, y ou can assist me in a work of glo¬ rious mercy, as you personally are acquaint¬ ed with the secretary of state. Will you step into this carriage, and accompany me? Perhaps you can tell me where immedi¬ ately to find him," Lord Atheling^ without a demur, got into the carriage, and ordered the Ьоуч a
ver/ different road from the one they were at the time pursuing; he hastily wrote a few lines in pencil for Mr. Billsley, and put them in a twopenny post-office as they drove along. He then turned to the re¬ verend doctor for a solution of his conduct. ťí I think it my duty, as a magistrate," began the dean, *' to inspect the prisons in the county ; and when any thing particu¬ lar occurs, to examine the prisoners. I have, by an investigation of this kind, rea¬ son to suppose, that two men, now under nen tence of execution, in the space of two days, have unjustly had their lives sworn away for the sake of the reward. I took a chaise and four, therefore, immediately, and, the judge being at present at the ex¬ tremity of the kingdom, I could not run the risk of his approval, but set ofi? at once to apply to the secretary of state for a re¬ prieve, while the case is undergoing a fur¬ ther investigation : luckily seeing you, and too well knowing that the secretary has had some reason to consider me as an impetuous and inconsiderate man, i thought
you would be an excellent person to vouch for my reform, and to second my poli¬ tics." Not a moment did the mind of lord Atheling demur to assist in the good work. He found the doctor had formed suspicions upon very rational foundations; and he went through the whole case, and was com¬ plete master of the subject in a little time. Doctor Wardine soon turned the conver¬ sation towards a point, from which the mind of lord Atheling always returned, after every forced aberration, Bath, the Apreuth family, and then dwelt upon the object of attraction there. His lordship found that the doctor was resolved to con¬ sider him as a lover.—" You have before now said to me, Atheling," continued doctor Wardine, " that not a word or ac¬ tion of your life, as a lover, was ever ad¬ dressed, directly or indirectly, to, or con¬ cerning, this bewitching lady, of low birth, high blood, and inexpressible beauty and accomplishments. You don't go so far at present ?"
νί i wish, Wardine, totally to avoid the subject." " My dear lord, upon my word and ho¬ nour, I would not intrude, as I know I do, the conversation, but from my respect and friendship for you. I have studied this charming little sorceress's character ; she is the most consistent creature on the face of the whole earth ; sbe is more aware of her own advantages and disadvantages than the very wisest of our sex. Disappointed iu love, in despair I rushed upon the pin¬ nacle of ambition ! Thank God ! I do from my heart, my dear lord, say so î — Thank God ! I v/as not hurled headlong down again, but have met with the most amiable and excellent of wives. My am¬ bitious career is passed; I am courting no ruling powers—I am as tìxed as ever Tucker was at Gloster, or Watson at Lan- daff; nor do I wish to go any further—I begin to feel the blessings of independence and conscious rectitude. But I am getting into my old strain of egotism ; you know that I always was an egotist; it is a strain, I
fear, that I shall never thoroughly get out of; but I hope to chant to a better tune I was speaking of that wonder of wonders, Lucy Chamont. You may rely upon it, my lord, she will never marry——" " So I thmk," his lordship could not help ejaculating as the other proceeded. " Therefore I mean to caution your lordship, if you have one single feeling towards her good grace (for 1 know you had) in your heart ; she will never marry, unless she could realize the fables of anti¬ quity, and the fancies and follies and im¬ positions of modernism—(Oh î by-the-bye, my lord, I will tell you я curious story of a man that I met with abroad, as we re¬ turn, for I see we are near the secretary's), she will never marry till she become a fe¬ male Prometheus—till she has made and animated a helpmate, according to all the ideas of perfectibility which have been, from the commencement of her education, treasured in her brain." They now arrived at the house where £3
lord Atheling knew that the secretary of state was on a temporary visit, He receiv¬ ed them with his usual urbanity and po¬ liteness, heard tbe whole with the utmost patience and reflection, and ultimately agreed to their request. The men were reprieved, the ease was investigated, and, to the satisfaction of all the parties (except the thief-takers), the innocence of the men completely established, and a full pardon graciously bestowed by the regent. On tbe return of lord Atheling and doe- tor Wardine, the divine entered upon the story that his Promethean remark concern¬ ing Miss Chamont had started up in his mind. He said—" When I was in Italy, ï met with a remarkably tall, sallow-look¬ ing fellow, the whole of whose appearance, indeed, induced me to make inquiries about him ; and at length I found, from a very in¬ telligent native, tliat he was the very person who had planned, and so successfully car¬ ried into execution, the Promethean trick upon some of our English nnd German illuminati."
íS I don't yet understand you, doctor Wardine," said lord Atheling. '* You have read the * Adventures of Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus," continued the doctor ; " because the work was written by a lady ; but ladies don't invent such pretty things. I wont deny that a lady's handwriting sent the manu¬ script to the bookseller, but the illuminati were more fools than knaves in the busi¬ ness. So, my lord, this man is now living on the profits of his wits, highly esteemed by most of the dignified characters of the Romish church, who applauded his inge¬ nuity in thus exposing the false philosophy and affected science of infidelity." * ť You must begin your story, doctor Wardine, for I am still at a loss." " I will, my lord, as 1 had the story from the man himself. " At the age of sixteen, some strolling players discovered me in my native vil¬ lage, about six miles froni Rome ; and as I was remarkably tall, tempted me to go about with them for a show. Here I learn-
ed a knowledge of the world, and of charac¬ ter. 2*4 ier wards I travelled with a moun¬ tebank, and with a showman of wild beasts, and I got a smattering of the French and German languages, till one day at In¬ golstadt, being out of employment, a man, vvho had known me when I was with the mountebank, came and asked me, if I was inclined to make my fortune ? Of course 1 assented.'— s My master, Mr. Franken¬ stein,* said he, ŕ is a great philosopher.'— ς Why your master is an English lord,' said I._ 4 Pho! pho !' continued he, * that's his phiiosoph içai name. Well, he has been try¬ ing for some years to make a man. He has attended ail the German universities, and cut to pieces, I can't say how many bodies, in hope at last to make a new man ; and now he has formed a figure, and, by means of Galvanic batteries, and electricity, and the air-pump, and animal magnetism by the hour, and I don't know what else,thinks to give it life. Tjie figure has been cloth¬ ed aôme time ; and one day some mice got at some bread and cheese, which my mas-
ter had left in the pockets, and he, per¬ ceiving there was motion as he entered the room, thought the monster was come to life before its time, and ran down stairs frightened out of his wits. It was some hours before he ventured to send me to see if every thing was right. If something is not speedily done, there will be life enough very soon in the house, and we shall be aU poisoned. To-night, as soon as he is asleep, the figure goes into the river that : uns under the window, and, if you'll come in the morning, in the place of it, 111 bring you clothes of the same colour and fashion, and substitute you in the place. Then, as his son, I am sure you may frighten him out of what monies you want, of which you can have no objection to give me a share.' " I argued upon the improbability of deceit, and the danger of detection. • There is not the least danger,' said he. 6 Out of his studies he is such a fool, that if he once sees you start up in the pkoe where he has placed the figure* he will nevsr
know the difference ; he will attribute all changes to the mere action of life, and your height will sufficiently satisfy him ; only to make sure of him, that he may not pry too close, give him a confounding box on the ear, as the first proof of motion.' And an admirable good blow did I give him, which always gave him a high respect for me; and most completely the whole of the scheme succeeded, as the book tells you, sir. Milord Mr. Frankenstein was fully convinced; and all the philosophers and philosophesses, English and German, be¬ lieved every word that he had uttered.' —* But how came you,* said I, * to act with the cruelty that he describes?'—* * There is not one word of truth, sir, said the man, f in those things ; they are his philosophical conceits, in what he calls his symbolical language. My object, sir, was to get money from him ; and some¬ times i coaxed him, and sometimes threat¬ ened, and sometimes complained of the bnrth whkh he hsd driven me. As for the meetings in woods and wildernesses, they
were all in his own laboratory ; and as for the journies round the north pole, they all took place, in a very cold winter, in his bed¬ room, as, after two interviews with him, he sat up in bed and composed the whole.' — ť But the father, and brothers, and Henry Cierva!, and Elizabeth, and Jus¬ tine Moritz, and the captain, and crew?' —* Not quite ideal personages, but suppo¬ sititious characters, sketched from real life. Elizabeth was a kind lady, that would, if she could, have been a wife, but I exposed her character, murdered her fame, and she was contented to be a mistress ; and the like of Henry Clerval and the rest. At last, sir, having gained a certain sum of money, under promise of releasing him from all his troubles, ï told him ot the whole deception. Thus Henry Clerval, the faithful valet, was intellectually de¬ stroyed ; and I also, to use his only lan¬ guage, became dead to hím, and he to me. So now, upon new terms and names, he, and the ladies, and the rest, being all dead and departed, are living again in all the
elegance of a new and superior kind of ma¬ trimony, and virtue, and wisdom. The lady Elizabeth, like a chrysolite, throws off her old skin, and comes forward adorned with all the rights of another, in a matron¬ ly character. I had almost forgot, sir, to say, that Mr. Walton himself was a thick¬ headed (I beg your pardon, sir) English man, who brought the work over to Eng¬ land, and introduced it with these trum¬ pery letters." Doctor Wardine having finished his tale, set lord Atheling down at the earl's mansion, and proceeded on to finish his work of mercy. Lord Atheling found Mr. Billsley wait¬ ing for him, and they resolved to proceed on their journey the next morning.
CHAPTER XIII. It vvas nigh the middle of the day on a delightful spring morning, when the earl of Browover, vvho was alone, at his fa¬ vourite residence at Casti erock, perceived a person at some distance looking towards his noble mansion. The earl soon after¬ wards walked out into the park, and ob¬ serving the same person seated under a decayed elm which bad lately been felled, he took a vvalk that led him towards the spot. Great was lord Browover's surprise when he approached near enough to notice an aged stranger, vvho appeared, írom some cause, in deep affliction, and plenti¬ fully shedding tears. The earl came near to him, and politely asked if he was un¬ well, and if it would be agreeable to him
to walk into the house, and take some re¬ freshment ? " First, my lord," said the gentleman, ' ť let me inform you that the appearance of great grief, in which you find me, solely and suddenly originates from many con¬ flicting sensations with which recollection has overpowered my mind. This place, though strange, is not new to me, neither is your own person, as you must perceive. I accept your courtesy, and will walk into the house,and there more fully address you." The gentleman arose, and for the present studiously avoided any further converse. The earľs mind referred to, and dwelt upon, the paragraph that had appeared in the papers, concerning which Mr. Billsley had sent him an account from town two days before. They both entered the li¬ brary : the earl ordered refreshments. " Wait," said the strange gentleman to the servant, " till your master rings." The man looked at the earl, who gave him a look of obedience, and retired. " You respect, sir, the memory of the
old earl," said the unknown, beginning the conversation, and pointing ţo the for¬ mer earl's picture over the mantlepiece, " and you have seen the paragraph in the newspapers. I wish not to keep you in suspense, sir Clement :—look at me." The earl trembled exceedingly—** Who, sir—what, sir, are you ? What do you insinuate ?" '* Nothing against your worth, or your honour, or your happiness. If the old earl lives, it is as the friend of sir Clement and his friends. If the old earl lives, that whirlpool of a Chancery suit for the great Suffolk estate is destroyed—if the old earl lives, he may teach you a lesson, sir Cle¬ ment, that few of the earls of Browover have ever learnt, and the want of which yourself and son have experienced^—that personal honour is superior to family pride." « That, sir, is not wanting to my learn¬ ing : but, sir, come to the point. What do you mean ?" ** Have you not yet recollected me, my kinsman ? my noble, good, and, spite of
all thy faults, my most worthy and ever- beloved kinsman !" The earl of Browover staggered to a chair; the old earl caught him by one hand, and with the other rang the bell. " Bring your lord a glass of water," said the stranger. It was brought immediately. Sir Cle¬ ment drank it, and motioned to the ser¬ vant to retire. Then, grasping the hand of his guest in both of his own, he spoke —" I acknowledge you, sir. my kinsman, the late, the present, the only earl of Browover ; and 1 thank the great God of salvation that you are yet alive, not cut off in the midst of your follies and your sins. With this hope from my heart, I willingly resign to you the honours, titles, and estates of Browover." " Ah, sir Clement!" warmly spake the old earl, and returned his pressure, " these indeed are the dictates of a voice superior to pride ! Yet, how comes this mental change ? I left you almost as much blind¬ ed to the humble beauties of Christianity
—from worldly consequence and advan¬ tages, as I was from actual vanity, dissi¬ pation, and vice. I have since and lately heard of you as unwilling to sacrifice-—— but I forbear a while, till we are both of us more calm, to speak upon a subject near my heart, from the knowledge of the noblest virtues. For the present, let me give you yet further proofs of my identity, than it is possible for the mutilated frame oi'a very aged man to recai to your re¬ collection full youth and vigour and strength, and perhaps then some manly beauty, though now the whole is withered, decayed, and blighted by the jealousy oí an inhuman tyrant, more than even by old age." " Yet the same," said sir Clement, affec¬ tionately, " I can plainly trace; the sto¬ ries that were secretly whispered of the emperor's cruelty, alas! then were true? But how were you able, my dt*ar lord, to escape with your life ?" " When 1 was recovered from his bar- barity, he sent mc to Siberia : the emperor
himself soon afterwards fell. My immo¬ ral and dissipated life had left me few real friends. I was now abashed and ashamed of myself ; I could not bear the sight of an individual that had known mein health, spirits, prosperity, and gallant manhood^— 1 wished to avoid all mine acquaintance— I invented and gave credibility to the ac¬ count of my death—I transferred all my personal property in different banks in Europe, to the fictitious name tbat I as¬ sumed. This was bestowed in the regu¬ lar form of a will ; to this I administered, and took possession, and then changed the money into the English funds. The ac¬ count and the proofs of my death, which you received from the British ambassador, were all arranged and sent by myself, or by my particular intelligence to others. When these things were settled, I travel¬ led through France and Italy ; I remained some time in a monastery ; then I travei¬ le İ with a worthy missionary, till, in a few years, tired with foreign scenes, under another new name I came to England."
The old earl went cursorily through his history, and left not tbe possibility of a doubt on sir Clement's mind of his iden¬ tity—" I know every room, every picture almost in this house—ay, almost every oak in the forest. I can give you the his¬ tory of the very elm on which I sat, which, when you were a boy, and I a wild young man, I well remember tempting you to inount in search of an old crow's nest." Sir Clement smiled at the anecdote, and the old gentleman, with somewhat of the garrulity of age, gave him further parti¬ culars of his history. " Now, sir Clement," said the earl, " some refreshments if you please ; then introduce me to the servants as I am, for 1 must be publicly known ; for that pur¬ pose have I revealed myself." It is needless to relate the astonishment of the whole household, tbe cautious man¬ ner in which the mystery was unfolded to lady, now Atheling, and her fair unladied daughters. Great care was taken to let them all know that eight thousand pounds a-year
would eventually accrue to the family by the public discovery that the earl was yet alive—" Yet," proceeded the old gentle¬ man, " ï have great doubts if this certain advantage would have determined me to have adopted the present measure, and to have encountered royals, highnesses, and graces, and ali honourabtes, and the scru¬ tiny, obloquy, and satire of all ranks, and statiob ,, and sexes; but there is a subject 1 have far more at heart." To the great surprise of sir Clement, he now entered into a detail of his son's at¬ tachment, irresolute as he called it, to Miss Chamont; but it appeared that the old gentleman, however he became acquaint¬ ed with reticulars, knew none of the lat¬ ter part of Mr. Atheîing's conduct, nor did the father at the moment know of the ill success of the son. It was on the third day that that son arrived witli Mr. Billsley from town, to hear the confirmation of the mysterious report, but not to see the old earl, who had departed in the morning of the same
day upon urgent business into Scotland, on the borders of wbich he was to meet a legal gentleman of very great eminence, who had particular knowledge of the Suf¬ folk business. It was contrary to every principle of human nature, that the ci-devant earl should feel the disappointment of his son, like a father who had personally known the worth of her whom his son had lost, or who had looked forward to fortune, high alliance, or political advantage from the connexion ; yet the earl's heart tew.? changed ; he did feel for his son, while Mr. Atheling studiously avoided the sub¬ ject. Again, in a yet more serious light than his father did Mr. Atheling consider the return to life of the old earl, and though be abhorred the principles of sir Mercer Havar, who disputed sir Clement's right, for want of a signature of the old earl's, he found no consolation from the settlement of the lawsuit, and he could perceive no clue VOL. Ш. L
oí connexion of the old earľs to a know¬ ledge, and an anxious knowledge it ap¬ peared, of Miss Chamont, and an eager interference in her fate. ** Surely," thought Mr. Atheling to himself, " this venerable relative has been making inquiries into the family affairs, and, from his own sufferings and fatal prejudices, and the imbecility of age, con¬ ceives himself entitled to regulate the con¬ cerns of every individual ia the family ;" and he thus opened his mind to sir Cle- ment :—" His interest, my dear father, in my alliance with Miss Chamont, I cannot divine ; and if I could divine, it would be now futile. If he were to prove even her father«—grandfather I ought to say, consi¬ dering the period of the report of his death and his age— сип I suppose such a know¬ ledge would influence her, when the fa» Yourable notice of all the Apreuth family towards me has been in vain ? and further, if he could influence her, I not only would not accept the influence, but it would dis* parage that almost all-perfect woman in
my opinion ; for, if individually I failed to succeed, I will not owe my success to another. Every thing we have bad, my dear father, except our patrimony, is now dependent on a strângea* —a strangei of whom I can understand enough from you, that he has no favourable opinion of mc, and whix,e information of my aftairs must jome from very imperfect sources. My stifled passion, my dear sir, I own under¬ mined my health; my disappointment, great as it is, for I do not wish, for her worth's sake, to conceal how great it is, has restored me to myself. I feel, and you must perceive, my dear father, that my usual health and strength are returned ; but if I am to experience constant mental fluctuations here, they will not remain." Hence be opened his intentions as to going to India, and for some days, tül his father had given a reluctant consent, ar¬ gued upon the expediency, declaring that he had determined to surrender the very handsome property which his father had La
made over to him, and that he would not accept an income of the old earl, even if lie was disposed to give it; but that his honour, his independence, bis youth, spirits, and abilities, demanded of him that he should join his great and noble kinsman in the East; and to soften the whole, he spoke also to his father of flattering hopes of returning home with that gallant relative. Mr. Billsley, upon fully considering the subject, was disposed to second the argu¬ ments of Mr. Atheling; and Mr. Gwyll¬ wes, who was become a very particular intimate with sir Clement, was so highly pleased with the independence, patriotism, and liberal spirit of Mr. Atheling, that the objections of the whole of the family died away. The rather-sudden preparation ofa veiy eligible vessel, commanded by an officer well known to Mr. Atheling, had hasten¬ ed his determination sooner than the fa¬ ther had supposed, or the son had hoped. Mr. Atheling washed to avoid a meeting
with the old earl, who was soon expected frora Scotland ; he therefore took leave of his family, and went directly to Falmouth, to prepare for the voyage ; there engag¬ ing a lodging, he paid a short visit to town, to get some books and necessaries ready; but quickly returned to Falmouth, waiting impatiently. Mr. Billsley had been but an indiffer¬ ent spectator of these things, and, his own business having called him from the par¬ ties, he had promised to meet Mr. Athe¬ ling at Falmouth. From Falmouth he had since arrived at Bath, on purpose to deliver to Miss Chamont a letter from Mr, Atheling. His friend Bereton, in tbe meantime, was professionally and busily engaged in another part of the kingdom, though ho had contrived to give his friend Atheling a meeting for the few days be was in town. In vain bad he offered an argument of de¬ lay and patience; and he had written to sir David and Mr. Apreuth, and received their answers, which proved that all inter-
ference between the parties vvas alike in vain.
CHAPTER XIV. The Apreuth family were now returned to lady Apreuth's house at Bath; Mr. Arthur and his wife joined them the fol¬ lowing day. They had scarcely received and paid the usual ceremonial visits, when lady Apreuth and her daughters, Mrs. Marsham and Mrs. Arthur Apreuth, and Mr. Apreuth and Mr. afarsham, went to hdy Macquarrie's concert; but the head¬ ache of Miss Chamont still persecuted her, and she declined accompanying them. General Maurice also was absent on a visit out of Bath. Miss Lucy was seated alone in the drawing-room, when Mr. Billsley was an¬ nounced. After general inquiries and
awkward apologies on his part, that he had very particular and urgent business con¬ cerning some property of the duke of ------, vvhich impelled him to leave Bath early in the morning, and after putting down his hat, as if he wished to make some stay, and taking it up again the next minute, pulling on and putting off his gloves, he rose abruptly to go away, and then turn¬ ing round, entered upon the very business tbat be came most anxious to unfold— " May I venture to speak to you of lord Atheling ? May I express my sorrow r ^— my surprise—what possibly could induce you so to act ?" Calmly Miss Chamont heard him—" it gives case to my mind, sir, clearly to tell the motives of my conduct. There are but few people whom I think it worth telling them to: even your cousin, the sensible Miss Ffloyd, cannot bear the de¬ tail. To my friend, Mr. Bereton, I have given a very concise written answer ; to you, another valued friend, I have no ob-
jeetion to speak; yet, sir, hear mc patient¬ ly." He threw his gloves into his hat, and bis bat to the further end of the room, and seated himself near the table. " Mr. Billsley, with all your good sense, you are an hasty, impetuous, too-irritable man ; therefore interrupt me not; command your temper, for my own has been too often—too cruelly harassed for me to bear the effusion of passion, instead of those of reason, or, sir, I shall leave the room im¬ mediately, and will not return to you." " Why, here now, Miss Chamont, have I considered you as the most mild, most patient, most passionless—pardon mei —of all human creatures, and y au threaten me; but I bave done: from this moment I change characters with you." lie paused absolutely with apprehen¬ sion, and his mind was completely fixed to a deliberate and mild temperature. Miss Chamont proceeded. She honest¬ ly confessed her feelings, but declared that they should not influence her actions
against what she believed was right SI;e pointed out the character of lord Brow¬ over (Mr. Billsley could not help saying — " Indeed he is as worthy a man as his son—ay, and as reformed a man too"), his conduct, and that of his son ; she adduced, as an effort on their parts, a difficult effort of a sacrifice to pride. She considered ŕ ив tbe greatest generosity towards herself, to which, on her part, it would be the height of impropriety and weakness to accede. She then declared that she had no doubt of the permanency of lord Athe¬ îing's love fbr her, but she greatly doubt¬ ed ifit could compensate for a perpetuity of disappointment on tbe most serious points of ambi tion. She went over every ground for her rejection that she bad stated t.> lord Atheling, and desired Mr. Billsley to consider himself a man of rank, fashion, and consequence, living among the great, and wishing, in every respect, to keep up Iiis own greatness, Mr, Billsley twisted about in his drain, L φ
in a most uneasy and uncomfortable way, and did say—" That is impossible, ma'am." But Miss Chamont added—" With the same heart and mind and soul that vou now strive and wash to preserve your cha¬ racter for honour and honesty, consider birth and station ; then, sir, you may pre- Ьл\й to form some opinion of vvhat others feel for legitimate claims and hereditary distinctions." Mr. Billsley sat quiet, when Miss Cha¬ mont began to prosecute the subject, hy shewing how mach stronger her iea$ons for rejecting lord Atheling would every day become, and how much weaker all those for accepting him must necessarily be, when Mr. Billsley broke in on her dis¬ course—"Excuse my interrupting you, for. ma'am, your very ingenious arguments are already lost. Your very considerate conduct has by no means insured these hopes of hap¬ piness to his lordship from permanent pro¬ spects of greatness; he is disappointed, if he did entertain them, for the present ; and he has taken care that they which have so
long crossed (of course, I mean his high re¬ latives) his dearest hopes, shall never mo¬ lest his future fortunes." " What do you mean, Mr. Billsley ?" " That the vague, incredible stories that the old lord Browover was alive, are true ; and that lord, now Mr. Atheling, has taken a final leave of his father, (for from his father's age, there is no probability of their meeting again,) h as engaged a passage to the East Indies (lord Loyata, you know,is his kinsman,)and probably within twenty-four hours will be under най/' Miss Chamont started up, and clasped her hands together—" Is he flying as an alien from his native .shore? Is he leav¬ ing every dear connexion and beloved friend? This is incredihle, sir: the title and fortune are but delaved; they mmt revert to him." ** It cannot be denied by his friends that he lias other stronger motives fbr leaving England : this is but the excuse for the world. He was going to Italy be-
^■^^ta^.^^.
fore the knowledge of the existence of old lord BrowOver w T as ascertained." *' He hates me !" exclaimed the young lady. 6i I fear, ma'am, you never will create that sentiment in bis breast : but I have a letter that can best explain his feelings, ?f now the forbiddance of writing to you may be revoked ; and in hopes you would not refuse it, I have travelled sixty miles out of my road to see you this evening.'" Miss Chamont took the letter, and was leaving the room—" Will you wait till 1 have read it?" but recovering herself, add¬ ed—" Sir, I vvill read it here." She read— '* MY DEAR,EVE1NDEAR MISS CHAMONT, " I am well assured that the prohibition to address you did not ori¬ ginate from prudery, or conceit, or caprice, and that the information of my worthy friend, who delivers this, will remove the cause. I feel confident that you will accept my farewell vvhhes, and bless me with
yours on my way. With these fond hopes I sail, and the idea that your kind thoughts and prayers accompany me wherever I go, shall not only cheer me in my voyage, but be in every clime and station bound to my glowing heart. The motives which induced you to refuse me, I own, were most noble and just; and though my selfish feelings opposed them at tlie time, I am, by imperious circumstances, con¬ strained to say, that for both our sakes, 1 think it was a fortunate result ; for situat¬ ed as I now am, I would not, with greater hopes than I have ever dared entertain, attempt at present to interest you in my favour. I confess also that my. own con- duct has not r by any means, been correct, open, and decisive, accocding to ray feel¬ ings; yet pardon me when I add, that tliis irresolution was not unmixed with reference to your situation,, your feelings, and that devoted respect, which you will do me the justice to own, I never violated towards you: but I cannot acquit myself tbat I did not sooner resolve right,
for I never shall repent of the offer, though I have failed in offering myself to you; for I know you judged my heart, and saw it ever yours, yet too much influenced by the prejudices of pride honestly to yield. No wonder then that you doubted its sta¬ bility, when your virtues having overcome every opposition, you at length had com¬ pelled it to surrender ; no wonder that you considered it unwilling to be con¬ quered, and therefore you were unwilling to iake the command of it. You see, my ever-dear Miss Chamont, I presume to di¬ vine your motives,and even your thoughts. and, I own, your justice. Am I wrong. if I further clare to fancy to my heart, that you did— that you long ago did esteem mc; but that while I, wrapt up in pru¬ dence and reflection, ungracious and un¬ grateful, delayed to make a candid and honest return, your good sense and judg¬ ment recalled this transient feeling from its unworthy object. Again I stand self- convicted. Tbc blame of my failure rests on myself. Whatever my prejudices of
birth, education, habit, and interest were, I ought to have been ruled by reason alone, and deliberated only between actual good and evil. I sacrificed to the world, and my offerings have produced the natural result Farewell ! ever-dear, deservedly-dear Miss Chamont, farewell í Every earthly bless¬ ing attend you, as a foretaste of immortal joys. I do not think you will ever change your station here ; I am presumptuous enough almost to hope that you will not ; and if I ever return from this eastern pil¬ grimage, and you vvill permit the friend of your youth to live within the sphere of your social attractions, where he may daily hear of, and see, and converse with you, as be has, seeing and conversing with you, passed the happiest moments of his life, you will raise to perfection that idea, never absent from his mind, ofa blissful, boly, and eternal union, and you will thus soften, and in the best manner prepare for this» his declining days. w F. Atheling.*
chapter xv: Ат the end of the last chapter, according to modern taste and example, the curtain of the drama excludes my characters from further view ; and the great poetic mind, " in a high frenzy rolling," dwells upon my heroine, standing with Mr. Atheîing's farewell fetter in her hand,, and Mr. Bills- ley sitting at a proper distance, not for¬ getting his hat, at the further end of the room ; and, as it is a very easy thing to conceive a window in that room, through tbe window, maugre night and space, is seen the ship· sailing to India with Mr. Atheling, who is waving his white hand¬ kerchief, and taking a last look of the British shores* Now, as all mental feelings, and all con¬ sequences, are left to the imagination of the enrapt reader, haw far superior must
every one's own cogitations be to any fur¬ ther description of the author's ! As for the other characters of a novel than the hero and heroine, they are ever below a moment's consideration from the veritable novelleger —they are the hecatomb, which is to be sacrificed to the manes of the demi¬ god or demi-goddess. Here then this history takes its leave of the sons and daughters of the modern po¬ etic gôut, whether of the German drama, of the English poesy, or of the Anglo- Gerrnan novel, with all the illuminati ; it is not that the thing be well done—it must be (according to, not their ideas and feel¬ ings, but principles) rightly done. At ------'s table, we know all the dishes are seasoned according to the fashion— L e, if you find yourself overpeppered or salted, it is the fashion ; if there be no pepper or salt, it is the fashion ; if it be all pepper and no salt, or all salt and no pepper, or be there all or none of every other kind of spice and seasoning, known or unknown,
approved or disapproved of by your palatc 5 be contented—ay, more, be pleased and highly gratified, for it is the fashion. So genuine novel-writers write, and novel- readers read; and thus I give them (In¬ cluding every reviewer in his majesty's dominions) fair notice, that this history lias closed to them. But, like myself, I confess, there are a few commonplace matter-of-fact people. who are anxious to know the real end of a story—they like knowledge better than conceit; Southey reformed better than Southey a reformer ; Crabbe's Tales better than lord Byron's Childe Harold, and Humphry Clinker better than Caleb Wil¬ liams: for their gratification I proceed steadilv to the old-fashioned conclusion of this history of the Child of Sin. Indeed, now the author is at home with readers of his own cast, he would like to take ad¬ vantage of this necessary digression ; and, having got rid of these novel-dilettanti, before he proceeds, expatiate on a few
points, where, confined by the trammels around him, he has not given free vent to the effusions which he had to record. Here too are the three children of the worthy baronet, sir David, and one babe of the reverend Arthur Apreuth, whom he has no more nctieed, than the philoso¬ pher Rousseau did his own children, or Hume and Gibbon did any of their neigh¬ bours ; but he must plead the sweet babes' youth ; and, though rejoiced that he has got rid of the conceited, sneering, critical tribe, he must not, like Dogberry, be dis¬ posed to bestow all his tediousness on his friends. The instant Miss Chamont had read Mr. Atheîing's farewell letter, she walked to¬ wards the door. She returned. She put her hand to the bell-rope, paused, but did not pull it. She pondered ; then turning to Mr. Billsley—** Is there no reason, no argu¬ ment, are there no affectionate pleas, sir, that can prevent this ? This is a sacrifice to my ------Can I do nothing ? You and all my friends think me a compound of prudence
and of apathy. Where is lord— Mr. Athe¬ ling, if I am to say so, at present, sir?" " At Falmouth. The wind which we hear whistling round the house vvill pro¬ bably suit before the morning. All hands were ready when I came away, and he sails immediately." Miss Chamont looked at the letter again, read a few lines, then, deliberately folding it up, she put it into her pocket, and thus, with unusual dignity of expression, ad¬ dressed Mr. Billsley— u Sir, I have acted in this business from my own sense of propriety, and from the best efforts of my reason. I will act so now.** Mr. BilLley was alarmed.-—" What is it you mean, m/ dear Miss Chamont?" " I know that there is not a moment to be lost«— I'll go to him directly ; and, if I am too late to convince him that any other motive than want of affection swayed my former conduct, the world, at least, shall know how ï respect him." " On my life !" exclaimed Mr. Billsley, jumping up, " am I awake? Pardon
me, my dear Miss Chamont ; let me not misunderstand you, and indeed I never did misunderstand y'ou ; for you speak not in enigmas; you have no deception in your character. I hear you right ? You will go to Mr. Atheling ? you will yield to the first, the most earnest, the ever-pre¬ sent (whatever he may say to the con¬ trary) request of his heart, and take him for better or worse, now he is at the worse ? and, by so doing, you vvill bring him to the best and happiest days of his life—ay, and of all his friends, and, I trust, of your own, my dear lady." " You do not misunderstand me, Mr. Billsley: if your friend's mind is not changed------" " If he is changed í No, ma'am, wher¬ ever virtae is the foundation, there never is a change. I may have been wrong—I have no knowledge of the hu¬ man heart—I am a strange compound of ignorance—I will never again, as long as I live, exclaim against the inconsistency of women. If they are ever contradic*
tions, they have always good reason for being so." Then recovering himself—" I have not the most distant idea of saying that you are inconsistent, or that your conduct can be contradictive. No, wo¬ men have superior reason and sense ; they are always heroines, and break the gor¬ dian knot, where we clowns would at¬ tempt to untie it." Mr. Billsley might have continued his eulogium, or philippic, without any notice from the young lady, if her own thoughts had not interrupted him. 64 Is there not a mail, or some coach, that will, in less than an hour, go off into these parts ? It will be to me a quicker and safer conveyance than any other. I shall disguise myself in some clothes of Mr. Arthur Apreuth, which are in the bouse—a travelling great-coat, and a man's hat, will completely hide me. Will you take me a place instantly ? or, if you can¬ not, order a chaise ? Ill meet you at the White Hart in half an hour, if you'll wait for me at the coaeb-office door "
** If you are resolved to depart (and I never in my whole life doubted of the re* solution or perseverance of a woman), let me accompany you." " There is not the least need. Yet willingly would I accept your offer, had you not been so urgently engaged to¬ morrow. If indeed I must take a chaise, and you can provide me a steady respect¬ able man for a servant------but I had ra¬ ther, for many reasons, go alone. I am under no apprehensions—my disguise will conceal my sex, and one revolution of the nm will close my journey. Mr. Billsley, I know you are my friend ; if you will not act fbr me, I must act for myself. liet me hurry you away—I have πα time to spare." Mr. Billsley departed. Miss Chamont immediately dressed her¬ self as she had said, and arranged for her departure. She left α few lines for lady Apreuth.—" Pardon, my best and dearest friend, my rash conduct ; there is no other that I can consider right. Mr. Billsley,
will inform you the particulars of the re¬ verse of the affairs of the Atheling family. Mr. (late lord) Atheling is at Falmouth, preparing to go to the East Indies. I have not a moment to lose, to convince him of my affection ; and I should indeed be ungrateful and unfeeling, if I did not now offer myself as the companion of his cares and his banishment." When Miss Chamont was ready, she rang the bell for lady Apreuth's maid, and, in answer to her surprise, said—" Tell lady Apreuth, Seymour, of my disguise. Why I have put this dress on, and where I am going, this letter will inform her. I leave it to your prudence to let me out of the house, that 1 may not be subject to the idle notice of any of the servants." Mr. Billsley was in waiting for her at the coach-office door.—" I have got a place for you, sir, in the inside. There was no vacancy, but I made an exchange with a gentleman for a share in a chaise with another, going to Exeter in the morn¬ ing. You will remember, coachman, that
this young gentleman's place is booked and paid for all the way to Falmouth." She entered the coach immediately, an¿ in less than ten minutes it set off.
CHAPTER XVI.
It were unnecessary to present the detail of Miss Chamont's journey to Falmouth, to describe the feelings of the young tra¬ veller, with the curiosity and queries of her companions, two ladies and a gentle¬ man ; her own prudence, politeness, and reserve, baffled and silenced every thing that could be unpleasant. Great indeed was her agitation when she commenced the journey, yet greater, and more and more great did it increase, the nearer she drew to the termination of her journey, lest that journey should be in vain. vol. m. m
It was dark when the coach arrived at Falmouth. The young gentleman's in¬ quiries, after Mr. Atheling were directed to the King's Arms Hotel. The whid was favourable. Mr. Atheling was gone out— bis luggage ivas all on board; but tbe landlady assured her guest, who was for proceeding immediately to the vessel, that she expected his return before he finally embarked. The young gentleman was shewn into a room, and three anxious hours were jiassed. Often was the landlady question¬ ed as to the certainty of his returning, and as often did she answer, that if the young gentleman was very desirous to see him before he went finally on board, tbe most certain method would be to re¬ main at the jwesent place. Why she did not tell the plain truth/ that Mr. Atheling had left her house to depart with the ship, which was by this tiine under sail, and leaving the harbour» will soon- appear; and why the quick- sighted young traveller could tfôt^ per-
cei ve, that tlie only object of the landlady's answers was to detain her guest, must be attributed to the agitation, and present novel situation, of that guest As the inquirer was returning from one of these repeated efforts to reconcile sus¬ pense, the well-known voice, at the en¬ trance of the house, vibrated through every nerve.—** Waiter, I am strangely sum¬ moned from on board ship, just as it is sailing; let me instantly see the person who is waiting for me. Is it not Mr. Biilslev himself, who left me a few davs ago ?" " No, sir, a very young gentleman." " A young gentleman ! How provok¬ ing. What can all this mean ?" thought the trembling expectant. " Summoned from on board the ship! Had a letter!" Mr. Atheling was in the room. Faltering, yet resolved, the young stran¬ ger turned round, as the waiter closed the door, "Yon, sir! quite a stranger to me ! May
I ask —-" Mr. Atheling was proceeding. Miss Chamont could not immediately speak. She approached the light.— íť Oh, Lord Atheling ! Mr. Atheling, I should say—for to Mr. Atheling do I come— do you not know me ?" The voice, the appearance, in spite of the disguise, yet the improbability, an almost-moral impossibility, baffled all thought, and created a confusion like a dream, when, as she spoke, she threw off her man's hat, and the golden tresses, no longer concealed under a plain Welsh wig, in their native ringlets, flowed over her fair forehead.—" Atheling, will you take me with you ?" She said no more. In an ecstacy of memory and jo) he caught her in his arms.—·*' Take you, dearest, dearest of women ! Have I got you ! Will I ever be separated from you ! You are noto¬ vou never were cruel and unfeeling. Lucy, my dearest Lucy, speak again. Say I am not in a dream. Have I lost rank, consequence, and fortune, I have
gained you ;" and, as he pressed her in bis arms, delighted, he looked on her sweet countenance. " I would give, willingly give up from my heart, from my most de¬ liberate thought, every hope of ever possess¬ ing fortune, consequence, and rank, sooner than lose the blessing thus, miraculously almost, bestowed me in you. And were you apprehensive, my dearest Lucy, that I should ever repent the offer of making you my wife ? 'Tis true, I have beer» most irresolute in giving vent to all the feel¬ ings of my heart towards you ; but never yet have I uttered one feeling that equal¬ led half that my mind conceived, half that my heart imbibed; never have I had a feeling that did not increase upon my further knowledge of you, my own dear Lucy, my dearest wife !" c< Oh, Atheling !" said the alike delight¬ ed yet agitated fair, as, extricated from his warm embrace, she gave him her hand, and her beautiful forehead yet rested upon his shoulder, ** see, 'twas not the prudery, the vanity, the coquetry, of Lucy Cha-
mont, that before influenced her conduct. I waited not for further courting, or for further proof of your faith to me. Even now had I offered myself to you, on board the very vessel in which you were about to sail, as the companion of your travels and your cares, had I not been strange¬ ly detained here by tbe mistress of the house. See, dear Atheling, a whole life of precaution and prudence at once ship¬ wrecked on this wild act, and the fair character of Lucy Chamont pillaged by the merciless gossips of Bath !" He broke upon her speech—** Would all the city now saw her, she should neither feel aliarne, nor I sorrow." She proceeded—" This, Atheling, was the only means to shew timt I was not insensible to your love. Instead of Lucy Chamont, all cautious and reserved, you have got a fugitive from her friends, a stranger, wandering alone a dreary night and day from her home, and voluntarily offering herself to a flying lover.'* u If flying," said that tover, somewhat
archly, " it was not from her love, but from her cruelty ; and I take her as my wife, though acting contrary to all her former theory and practice, by which she won my lieart ; and yet more dearly and affec¬ tionately, for what the ignorant world may call inconsistency, do I take her to that heart, and I see her still consistent, and more lovely, wise, and virtuous, by the breach of that very practice and the¬ ory. Fool indeed should I be, my love, not to own that circumstances govern all rules of practice. I own, my sweet be¬ trothed, that if you had at first accepted my offers, I might have found the want of some pledge on your part; but this generosity, this sacrifice to me, hath set my heart at rest. You will now say, my beloved Lucy, that you assent to this my last, my only request, tliat, on the morn¬ ing of the morrow, the blessing of our God and Saviour shall be invoked to sanc¬ tion the union of our hearts; and then to India with worldly hopes, or here, at home, in poverty, humility, and content,
I care not. Br> you the arbitress of my fortune, I turn which way you please ; for you, in giving me this dear hand, have lift¬ ed me into the car of happiness." " Here, here, dear Atheling, we will stay, at home, in beloved England—here, where friends of all kinds surround us, and kinsmen and kinswomen, I will add, when I am irrevocably yours ; for whom you own, no friend or kin of yours will deny.—Here, dear Atheling, we will stay ; my rash act of the last day and night, I am certain has not lost me the long-experienced love of one friend, and your temporary, or be it eternal, loss of honours, titles, and wealth, will not estrange one look of affec¬ tion from, will not occasion one want to you or yours." The ebullition of reciprocal love so long confined, and now so suddenly and won¬ derfully brought to perfection, at length subsided in the alembic of common reason ; and Mr. Atheling began to express his wonder at the strange summons he had ré¬ ceived from on board the India vessel
A man had come off from the shore in a boat to the ship, and had brought him the following :— " A stranger, with the most ur¬ gent intelligence, is now waiting for you at the King's Arms Hotel. At any risk of your passage, leave the vessel in the boat that brings you this. « J. B. Baihr
" These are the initials, and it is the handwriting of Mr. Billsley," said Mr. Atheling. Miss Chamont seconded his conjecture, by relating what had occurred at Bath ; and sure enough it was his handwriting, not left to a chance messenger, but, that there might be no mistake upon a subject in which Mr. Billsley was more interested than in any that had ever occurred to him, he had himself^ as an outside passenger, Mİ
faithfully attended Miss Chamont all the way from Bath to Falmouth, not quŕre so much disguised as her fair self, yet enough to elude her recognition—he had instruct- ed the landlady in what manner to calm the young gentleman's anxious inquiries— he went out to employ a proper person to recall his friend Atheling, who carried an¬ other more urgent and satisfactory letter, in case the first bad not succeeded ; and Mr. Billsley was now full of joy, and with¬ out doubt, waiting the result in the house. To Mr. Atheîing's first inquiries, Mr. Billsley, in person, made his appearance, wbich explained every thing, and brought forth the heartfelt thanks of the hero of my story. Mr, Atheling immediately in¬ troduced him into the room to Miss Cha¬ mont, and he received her tribute of gra¬ titude ; yet she lamented his trouble and inconvenience, and his own disappoint¬ ment, and that of others, of considerable moment, upon the very urgent business that he had spoken about. ťt And this which I have now executed
is yet more urgent, and, without exception, the most agreeable concern that I ever had upon my bands. I have indeed broke an appointment with his grace the duke of * ■■■ -.-, with a noble marquis and very ho¬ nourable baronet; and when I bave the honour to make my apologies in person, and to explain my motives, if tliey do not applaud those motives, I will henceforth believe tbat honours uncivilize a man, and debase the genuine feelings of his nature. I sent an express to them and others that evening; and I write to them to-morrow morning; but having thus taken Miss Lucy Chamont under my protection, I will never leave Miss Chamont" The lady and gentleman clearly under¬ stood him. Our heroine now expressed her wish to appear in her proper person ; for which purpose, Mr. Billsley, by the de¬ sire of his friends, immediately informed the respectable landlady of the house of the circumstances that had taken placed— " For I believe," said he, " it is ever the wisest and the bebi way, irt every honest
case, to tell the simple truth;" and he begged the favour of her attendance in tbe morning to the parish churdh ; to the rec¬ tor of which, be, with M:. Atheling, was, without loss of time, directed to get the necessary licence. The parties being of full age, and Mr. Atheling having resided l trafficient time in the place, and Mr. Billsley being a very eligible bondsman, there was no impedi¬ ment to prevent the desired union on the morrow. As Miss Chamont waited their return in the parlour of the inn, she ad¬ dressed a line to her most respected friend, lady Apreuth. She had just finished, when the gentlemen returned with a plain gold ring, and a marriage licence.
CHAPTER XVII.
Miss Charnont had retired early to the immediate care of the landlady, who had provided a bed for her in a room approdi.
ated to her own and only daughter, when at home; and sweet and refreshing were her slumbers. Lucy Chamont had not taken the pre¬ caution of providing a new, or even her best dress, for the occasion ; but, as her be¬ loved Atheling saw her enter the break¬ fast-room in her usual morning-gown, he thought that lie had never beheld any wo¬ man so well-dressed in his life ; and if mo¬ desty, convenience, and cleanliness, are to be considered as the criterion of the excel¬ lency of a virtuous female's garb, he cer¬ tainly never had beheld any woman in more honourable apparel. Nine o'clock was the hour appointed for the ceremony ; and, as Mr. Atheling was expecting the carriage that he had ordered, a postehaise, with four foaming hor&es» drove hastily up. Mr. Billsley went to the window— #f It is Mrs. Marsham, and Mr. Arthur Ap¬ reuth," said he. Miss Chamont, a little agitated, started up.
Mrs. Marsham was out of tbe chaise be¬ fore any one of the gentlemen could offer her his hand; Miss Chamont met herin the passage. In an instant they were in one another s arms. Mr. Atheling anil Mr. Billsley appeared. " Oh, my dear Lucy!" said Mrs. Mar¬ sham, " you do know better, and you act better than us all—you are always right at last. My dear lord Atheling, I give you joy ; yet I'm not now too late for the ceremony ; and my dear, clear Mr. Bills- lev- ! we are all so much obliged to you for taking care of my dear child here, that if 1 had been born twenty years sooner, 1 would almost as willingly have married you as my own goodman." " I thank you, iu your husband's name/* j>aid Mr. Arthur, who was shaking haiuls with Mr. Atheling, u for that ahmst; but liad you been born these twenty years be¬ fore, I think that he would have dispensed with it." " Come mto the parlour, my dear Mrs. Marsham," said our heroine, "and then
I'll tell you how very, very much I am obliged to you for this post-haste pursuit of me," " I see your prudence, you little hussey, is afraid that I shall publicly expose my¬ self; and 1 don't care if I do, if I can tell ail the world of your goodness." They were all now in the room. Mr. ВИЫеу sent an apology to the clergyman for a little delay, and ordered the carriage that was readv to take them to the church to be in waiting. " Now then for all my news !" said Mrs. Marsham, seating herself; "and you, Lucy, give me and my brother some breakfast, and let me have all the talk to myself.— My mother is coming; and who do you think is coming with her ?—Miss Ffloyd (general Maurice is not returned from the fishing-party), and my best of husbands— yes, best of husbands always—my lord Atheling—Oh ! but I have a letter to you from my mother !" Miss Chamont read, but Mrs. Marsham continued talking—praising Mr. Billsley
-—asking to see the licence, and then laugh¬ ing at Mr. Atheling about tbe favourable wind for India—-" Well, I declare I thought I never should have borne to have ealled you Mr. Atheling; but they may call you citizen, if they like—I don't care what, provided you stay in England, and marry Lucy." Miss Chamont read lady Apreuth's letter :-—
" MY DEAREST LUCY, " I have no doubt that you have, and will act right. May the Almighty pour his blessing upon you in every state and condition ! as you have mine, and my hearty consent in your present intend¬ ed change. I hope to be with you before the close of the day in which you'll receive tliis. " Your loving and affectionate mother, " Matilda Apreuth.**
" And I thank God," said Miss Cha¬ mont, with an humble reverence of her head, as she pressed the paper with her lips, ** for having given me such a mother! and I should be sorry to know any other, though she exalted me to the highest rank, and bestowed on me the largest property, for I never can love any mother likelier." " And I hope," said Mrs. Marsham, " you are equally well satisfied with your brothers and sisters ?" Miss Chamont held out a hand affec¬ tionately to each that was present. At this moment the waiter entered, and said that a gentleman wished to speak to Mr. Atheling. At the door he met Mr, Thomson. Mr, Atheling looked surprised. " It is no idle curiosity, sir," said the old gentleman. " May I ask who are your company ?" The satirized lover had completely reco¬ vered himself—" Certainly, sir," «aid he, taking Mr. Thomson's hand ; ** you know
all tlie company; and there is one for whose sake, I trust, you will forgive me.** u Forgive you, my dear fellow !" said the warm-hearted old gentleman, pressing bis hand. They entered the room ; with evident pleasure the whole company received him. He went up to Miss Chamont, and, taking her hand in his*—" I ask no explanation," said he. Mrs. Marsham in a moment told him every thing necessary as to the present state of affairs ; and, with her usual volu¬ bility, she was proceeding, when the atten¬ tion of the company was directed to Mr- Thomson, vvho, evidently exhausted by his feelings, sunk back in a chair, yet mo¬ tioning with his hand that he wished to speak, at length said— " It is my joy that overpowers me. Come here, Frederick Atheling and Lucy Chamont." He took a hand of each, and joining them toge- ther—" I bave a right thus publicly to give you my blessing ; you are both my
adopted children ; and I am, my dear chil¬ dren, one of your best friends, though I am the old earl of Browover." The company looked with astonishment and incredulity. The old earl continued—" Your father, Frederick, is now in the house. I wished to introduce myself—I knew not there was so happy a seene awaiting me. We liave both been to the further end of the coast, and boarded your ship in search of you, but little thought what more powerful con¬ queror had borne away the prize before us." Mr. Billsley immediately went out of the room, made inquiries for sir Clement Atheling, aud gave a clear, though concise explanation of all tliat had taken place. He soon returned with a personal message, most kind and respectful, from the late earl to Miss Chamont. Mr. Atheling too was now wâth his father, and most happy and satisfactory was the interview on both sides. In a little wbile he introduced his father to his fair betrothed ; and sir Clement, af-
ter thefirst moments of agitation were pass¬ ed, said, with great good-nature, and some little point—" Among the kind things í feel already disposed to say to you, Miss Chamont, I must not forget to give you, in the name of all the Atheling family, our thanks, in that you have restored my son to us. I have long been most willing and desirous to give him to you ; but I little thought that this affair of the heart, and of every good and noble sense, I may say, was to end in your giving him to me. Per¬ mit me now to order the carriages for the road we all wish you to pursue ; and I have a favour to beg of vou, which, though I have competitors, more respectable from age and long acquaintance, here present, I hope you will grant me—ay, if you have even promised that favour, I must beg that you will break your promise to oblige me. Need I add, that you will permit me to act in the coming ceremony as you*-father, before you entitle me to the honou of claiming you as my daughter." " I do, indeed, sir, already experience
your kindness," with a glowing lieart, and without a moment's pause, the fair lady answered him, "and gratefully accept your offer, which you have made yet more va¬ luable by the manner in which you have presented it." " I resign my rights, sir Clement," said the old earl, " with great pleasure, and fed most happy in being disappointed in what J considered one of the first wishes of my heart." " I believe, my lords and gentlemen," re¬ marked Mr. Billsley, " I may be permitted to make a kind of protest as to my own claims and rights, though I do not mean to stir the question, and most willingly acquiesce. " And these rights and claims shall ne¬ ver be forgotten b v me, m v dear friend ľ' C* «r'» * said Miss Chamont. ** Nor by me," said Mr. Atheling, as they each gave him a hand. " Yet, after all, Miss Chamont," said the old earl, " I think \ve are giving you praise where you deserve a little scolding. A pretty dance to the Land's End have you
been the means of giving to sir Clement and myself, and a fine gallop against time to this worthy clergyman and his sister." "Which sister, my dear lord," said Mrs. Marsham, glad of an oj)portunity to speak, " has had many races against the old gen¬ tleman wâth the lock before, but never one so charming and delightful, in vvhich she felt confident of wanning the prize; there¬ fore, as far as it concerns her, not one word of scolding, but all of praise. I beg your f lordship to proceed, for I am all attention." " Now I fancy, my dear Mrs. Marsham, that I have some little knowledge of the female character, and the instant 1 returned from Scotland, and heard what had taken place, I said to my noble kinsman—* My dear sir Clement, this must not be; Fre¬ derick Atheling shall not go to India, and Lucy Chamont shall marry him, or I am most completely deceived in them both. Not that I suppose myself to have more influence over him than yourself, or over her than your excellent family, all, Mrs Marsham. But even you, my wise lady,
knew notbing of these affairs, in compari¬ son of me, or instead of scolding this dear child for refusing the man she loved best, you would have laughed at» and humour¬ ed her, till she was tired with her own folly, and you would have advised Athe¬ ling to wait a little time with patience, and a certainty of success; then Luey r knowing that he was constant, and verv penitent, and always ready, and humbly hoping for her consent ; and you telling Iter, in pure friendship, that the longer she held out, she only proved her own unkind¬ ness, and resentful temper, and proud spi¬ rit—that she aU the time was merely ha¬ rassing and sacrificing him, would, by de¬ grees, have relented, and his father and myself, by a proper course of coaxing and humouring, would have soon restored the voun£ kdy toliar usual suavity and sweet- ness ; for I knew it was impossible that she could be hard at lieart. I was eon* ν im*ed, at the verv first interesting mo- nient, all her feelings w^uld be roused for- h'run and yon see, Mrs. Impellent, that I
am right. Had my Lucy only heard of his loss of title and fortune, without this India scheme, she would never have had a moment's peace till she had received a let¬ ter from him, or had found an excuse to write one—that is, till she had signed a carte blanche of forgiveness for him. Am I not right, Miss Lucy Chamont ?" " I hope you are," said she, " for you talk with some reason." " But this India scheme was a very rash resolve of yours, Mr. Atheling. You proved yourself more of the hero than the man of the world ; you have onb learnt half what Ulysses did by your travelling —manners and cities, rather than men and minds. Now, when little Lucy thought pro¬ per to give you such a decisive and determi¬ nate refusal, you should not only have con¬ st Jered that it was very natural, and that you deserved it ; and so, my dear fellow, you must be conscious you did, for not speaking your mind, and heart, and soul, åooner ; but you should have reflected that young ladies like Miss Chamont, who have
been well brought up, and bave a little of tlie Christian in their composition, are not altogether high-spirited and remorseless ; all, therefore, you had to do, was to have said to the indignant and injured lady— * I confess my sins, and patiently wait till you think proper to pardon me ;' and then, though you could neither speak nor write, every friend of the lady who approach¬ ed her ear, would, in all manners, and ways, and phrases, and sentiments, have poured in contrition, patience, and pardon.** Sir Clement took this opportunity of breaking in upon his discourse^—" That you know better than us all, my dear lord, I'll allow ; but 111 get tbe start of you iu action—Miss Chamont, tlie carriage is rea¬ dy," and with all that dignity and polite- ness for which tbe earl of Browover bad ever been remarkable, he handed Miss Chamont to the carriage, and, following her, drove off with her alone to the church. " This, my dear fellow," said the old earl, pressing Mr. Atheling's hand, " is just VOL. III. N
as it should be ; but there is no man who knows these things better than your father, and wdiose practice in what is good is ne¬ ver behind his knowledge." Then turning to Mrs. Marsham, " If you please, ma'am," lie handed her into the next carriage. Mr. Apreuth, Mr. Billsley, and Mr. Athe¬ ling, followed in the third. The clergy¬ man had been summoned, and was ready, but he very willingly resigned his office to Mr. Arthur Apreuth. Immediately after the ceremony, the happy bride and bridegroom, with the whole of tbe company, setoff on their jour¬ ney to tow r n, intending to take Bath in the way ; and, before the day closed, the heroine of this story had the greatest plea¬ sure now necessary to her happiness, of throwing herself into the arms of her most affectionate more than mother, lady Ap¬ reuth.
CHAPTER XVIII. Mr. Atheling, with his bride and friends remained a few days at Bath ; to which place, their speedy return and temporary stay there, had dissipated into the regions of falsehood, tales, many idle and imagi¬ nary. The whole of the party, with the excep¬ tion of Mr. Billsley, who was called away by urgent business, and Miss Ffloyd, who, though rejoicing at the termination of her hopes, could not be prevailed upon to ac¬ company them further, now set off to town. Here sir David Apreuth and Mr. Bereton were to meet the new-married couple. Letters, of course, had been immediately sent to all their friends—mutual friends İn every case, it muy be said ; in London also the bride was to be introduced to lady Atheling and her daughters.
There is a trick in all trades, and they vrbo are perfectly skilled in the same, may¬ be called the initiated. This, in the novel- line, has become almost a gift—I mean, that it seems to partake of a certain kind of spirit of inspiration. I readily conceive tiiat many a one of this iniţiaţi, with all tlie rashness of a false prophet, have anti¬ cipated the conclusion of my heroine's his¬ tory, and that not a doubt remains in their minds, that the nobility of her birth, iu spite of every former investigation, will be '■ s evident as her beauty and her virtues have already been. But desirable and ad~ vantagcous as a good parentage is, and re¬ spectable and commendable as family con¬ nexions undoubtedly are, my whole history would lose its moral, if, highly as I have ever prized the character of the present Mrs. Atheling, this had been part of the fortu¬ nate lot of Lucy Chamont. Her history I had then consigned to a more regular no¬ velist, and searched the archives of the Phi¬ lanthropic for another heroine. I have, in¬ deed, failed in my endeavours to represent
virtue as the true nobility, if high birth, in itself ever to be respected, be absolutely ne¬ cessary ; and while shewing that my heroine did not require this advantage, I conceive, that if I had at length added the ornament CD to complete the picture, I had violated the Horatian rule—" Nee Deus inter sit, nisi dignus vindice nodus" which may be pa¬ raphrased— Have no recourse to super¬ natural aid, unless a circumstance occurs worthy of godlike assistance ; or, let not a god interfere, unless the difficulty ís worthy of him. I consider birth, it is true, as having very great advantages, and that it isa bless¬ ing to be born of a noble family ; and I agree with doctor Jarrold (who has in all points ably replied to Mr. Malthus), that the virtues are most congenial to tiie soil of nobility; but these blessings and ad¬ vantages, so far from being the natural sub¬ ject of pride, ought to be the cause of sor¬ row and regret, if the possessor make an ill use of them. We should pity, not con¬ demn, the devils, had they not been angeb;
and I know no more legitimate object of contempt then a reprobate man of rank* ; fbr there are two prides, as different from one another as the two loves ; the one is a shadow, the other is a sun. This last is not wanting to the Browover and Apreuth families, or to our heroine herself. That spirit which scorns the name of any ill, which fulfils the apostolic command^— " Avoid every appearance of evil," which boldly meets calumny and suspicion, and annihilates them wâth its brightness —that principle which a pauper exhi¬ bits when he turns aside his gaze of ho¬ mage from splendid villany —all these shew the contrast. Pride, as a principle, may be a noble and praiseworthy senti¬ ment—the homage that virtue demands, the unbending virtue that ΛνίΙΙ not bow the knee to a great, mighty, rieh, and flou¬ rishing BauL The true and noble pride may be known by conscience, independ-
ency, impartiality; in all the minor con¬ cerns of life, it wears, but not as a disguis \ the mantle of humility, and it is never un¬ robed but on urgent and great occasions. All that was ever correctly known of the parentage, birth, and early life of Lucy Chamont, appears in these papers. She had herself endeavoured to prosecute the sources that might lead to a further deve¬ lopment of her origin ; for that purpose, she bad employed the man who had for¬ merly endeavoured to pass upon heras her uncle, and who had trustily executed the commission that she assigned him. Upon perceiving in town that he no more in¬ truded himself, she spoke to liim ; and, finding that he was endeavouring to get an honest living, she gave him a small sum, and sent him into Berkshire and Wiltshire» to make some inquiries, according to the little information that he was able to ac¬ quire in town. After that he came to her at Bath, got regular employment as a por¬ ter and occasional chairman ; and she had at least the satisfaction of seeing him a re-
formed character, a good husband and fa¬ ther, and an industrious man. Lady Apreuth snd general Maurice knew of every thing that occurred ; and it was chiefly by the instrumentality of the general that she employed and conversed with the man. By this person's investiga¬ tion there was some reason to believe, that her supposed father was only her unde^— that her mother had privately married his brother, upon whose sudden death the mar¬ riage was discovered—and that she fled away, through fear of her friends, to this man in town, ignorant of his real character. In his house her mether was brought to bed, and soon after died, leaving, as this in¬ vestigation seemed to explain, a daughter, the heroine of the foregoing history. But here was no certainty ; most of the alleged relations were dead, and among the living, not one was found who would have ac¬ knowledged her as the child of poverty, though, had they been put to the test in her presentsituation, without a shadow of proof, they would all willingly have owned her.
Mr. Bereton was informed of these parti¬ culars i and, while he bestowed great praise on the diligence and honesty of the maiv he agreed with the young lady that the same uncertainty remained as before. I have a few words of favourable men¬ tion to make of most of the characters in¬ troduced in these volumes ; and I have no plotters of evil to exhibit in an auto da Je, as a contrast to my general scenes of nup¬ tial joys and blisses. This year sir James and lady Stolander returned from India, and lord and lady Vescule came from Ire¬ land, on purpose to meet them ; and lady Apreuth had again the happiness of seeing all her children assembled under her own roof. The Browover affairs, by the excellent judgment of the old earl, were extricated out of the mazes of the law, and were all clearly arranged, and put upon a proper foot¬ ing. Mr. Atheling had no more thoughts of an eastern life and adventures, but with the wife of his heart, practises at home and
abroad, each public and private virtue-*-! need not add, the union of the whole fa¬ mily, for where virtue is the foundation, the building will ever be correct. Mr, Bereton is at the top of his profes¬ sion, creating a noble and independent for¬ tune ; he has declined the honourable office of a judge, from some political motives. Mr, Billsley's upright character shines yet more conspicuous by every action of his life ; and he is not only doing good himself, but shewing his superiors the right road. He has lately seconded the efforts of many of our most honourable legislators, in endeavouring to abolish pauperism and mendicity, and to reform our prisons. Count Guilfill, who is now in parlia¬ ment, has gained additional respectability, hy openly recanting his religious errors ; and the honourable and reverend Sydney Wardine now never writes in a review, but employs his learning openly, imparti* ally, and zealously, in his Christian duties. His head and heart, like two spoiled chil¬ dren, ever in opposition, now come up to
manhood, have extricated themselves from the follies of their parent ; they understand one another's worth, and unite together in every good ; and the correct judgment of the one, and the sound feeling of the other, are proved by the value and love that they are always shewing towards the little and excellent lady Gertrude. The doctors Parrón and Jacks are still the ornaments of their neighbourhood, and the scourges of folly and vice. During the present summer, Mr. Ava¬ riali Pakinger returned from America, v/as married to Miss Glynne, and took up his final residence in her brother's neighbour¬ hood in Wales. There is not a more honourable trades- r i,a more praiseworthy couple, I should ьау, than Mr. James Howel and his wife ; he is an alderman of the city, and has fre¬ quently spoken, with general applause and effect. Stephen Russel, esq. is become a very respectable country gentleman ; he has some positive, and many negative virtues;
he îs kind to the poor, hospitable yet sober, very fond of planting and improv¬ ing bis estate, and a good husband and father; he is never tenacious about his ""me, nor disputing about his tithes, nor neglecting his church duty, nor injuring bis neighbour's property as a sportsman ; neither has he any wish to become a jus¬ tice of the peace. His friend and father- in-law, Mr. Giles Bradford, lives near him, in the farm-house. Mr. Giles is his bailiff* —-is the acting churchwarden of the parish, collects all the taxes, and is always ready to act as clerk to the magistrates ; and hav¬ ing a small smith's and carpenter's shop in his own mansion, is ever willing to assist his neighbours, in all offices of kindness and use. Mr. Arthur Apreuth received the offer of an Irish deanery, which he declined, not choosing to be a non-resident ; but he has accepted a prebend, which employs his time when he comes to town, though he has refused a second living. Miss Ffloyd is an evergreen, yet more
and more flourishing. Mr. Atheling was seen with her at the opera (when she came to visit him and his wife in the winter), with the very handsome shawl, which is still in high preservation and in constant employment. The old earl is very much pleased with her company, and declares that in all his travels he never met with a better natural specimen of the human heart. Sir Clement Atheling and Mr. Forres¬ ter are very well reconciled to the match of their son and daughter, and the young couple are gone to spend a few honey¬ moons at Paris. He bad some idea of ac¬ cepting an offer that his brother had made him, and building a house by the Lakes ; but he luckily understood in time that Mr. M'Tweed had, either by protecting a certain nobleman's muse, or by taking another fair off his protection, got a de¬ lightful cottage in the same neighbour¬ hood. The great northern Cerberus may thank me for this information, if he should again travel that way, or he might have
found a brother of the tribe a more fatal companion than the poet*. Mr. and Mrs. Marsham, when they mar¬ ried, bad resolved not to provide them¬ selves with a regular home, till the calls of a family compelled them. This call has not yet occurred, and they remain as unsettled, good-tempered, and wild as ever, having a perfect knowledge of the best lodgings in London, Bath, and most of the fashionable watering-places. Mr. Gwyllwes has married Miss (late lady) Julia Atheling, sir Clement's eldest daughter, and all parties look upon the beautiful vellum pedigree in the library with a smile. Mr. William Rtmley is as
good a shot as ever, and has unlimited range over all the Atheling and Apreuth estates. The old earl of Browover has com¬ pelled sir Clement to keep possession of all the family property, and he chiefly spends his time with his adopted daugh¬ ter, and his favourite kinsman, her hus¬ band. By the death of William Morrison, sir David Apreuth came into a moiety of his property, and he immediately built ano¬ ther wing to Ford Castle, that he might have the means of yet further increasing the hospitality of bis Welsh residence. The lady dowager Apreuth finds, in the affection of Mrs. Atheling, the duteous conduct of a child of her heart ; and the return of her good deeds into her own bo¬ som, is to ber a blessed foretaste of the rewards of another life. From some fiction, much truth has been recorded, and with pleasure a retrospect is taken of the characters in this history, and it appears that amid the sophistry and ir- religion —the bigoted intolerance and ac-
œmmodating vice which obtrude them¬ selves upon the public notice, individual knowledge can glean, from warriors, and lawyers, and priests, from the highest and the lowest station—from all trades and professions—from both sexes, and aliens as well as foreigners, many an avowed Christian, independent of power, interest, influence, education, or custom, who, trust¬ ing in God's mercy, through Jesus Christ, and his support by the Holy Spirit, yet believe that all gifts and graces will at length fail, without tbat faithful obedi¬ ence which acts upon the conviction that there is no respect of persons with God, and that He will reward every one as he has (not fancied or professed) but done good or evil, according to his works. THE EXD,
Primed Ъу J. D^riiug, LeatkuhaU-Street, bondou*
