Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Gwelygordd: or, The child of sin: a tale of Welsh origin
GWELYGORDD.
CHAPTER I. vJNE fine morning, Miss Chamont set off with Mr. Arthur to walk to an adjoin¬ ing hamlet, about a mile distant, where was a large inn by the roadside, and at which all the letters were left They had not proceeded far, before they met the pa¬ rish-clerk running knvards them—" Ah, Giles! what i^it? where do you coaie frora ?" " They wanted a man to brew at the George and Dragon, your reverence, so I undertook it; arid a gentleman traveller is taken dangerously ill, so his friends wished vol, и. t в
fm the parson, and so, wdiile the wort was cooUng, I took a run over," A parish-clerk in the country is a cha¬ racter of some celebrity, and necessarily requires a variety of talent. Mr. Ap¬ reuth's object Avas to get a sober man, for sobriety is a much scarcer virtue in the t ountry than honesty; and in this he Avas, in a great degree, successful ; for Giles Bradford had so many temptations, he Avas entitled to no little credit for his victories over them. Giles AA*as a short man, no older than his master : he Avas a thatcher liy trade, which, as it cannot always be in nse, or is always in request (and he had from his youth up folloived other avoca¬ tions), he Avas glad to remit ; of course, to his clerkship he added singing and ring¬ ing; he Avas at the season of sheep- shearing a shearer, and at harvest-time a reaper; and indeed he could apply his hand to any point of agriculture, and to any trade earried on in the parish ; more¬ over, he undertook refractory clocks and watches; and there was not a musical in-
strument he had ever seen* that he would not attempt to play on, and also to clean, repair, and tune. To say in what his forte ky was impossible, for in the last novelty he most excelled by more earnest application. Now, to be the principal in cleaning out the great fish-pond once in five years, or to remove the sacrifices from tbe temple ofthat goddess whose idolatry- was so long unknown among our northern brethren, or to ascend, in a case of neces¬ sity (for the regular practitioner lived at a distance) the interior of a chimney, Avere ever employments eagerly caught at : in short, if a pig or a sheep were to be killed, or on an emergency a neighbour wanted a Uttle blood-letting or tooth-drawing, not to add his weekly employment of hair cutting and shaving, Giles was ever at hand; and though unused to riding, he mounted a young squire-farmer's fine hun¬ ter at a moment's warning, to fetch the midwife ; and he would as willingly have acted as midwife, if the young squire had в â
asked him. Yet Avas this universal cha¬ racter more taciturnly disposed, as to prose effusions, even than his master, though he could persevere in his piping and sing¬ ing, amid all the vocal and instrumental discord of the parish. If there was an office Giles disliked, it was that of school¬ master, Avhieh Avas the only one he was ever known to have refused, for till his time it had been annexed to the clerkship; but Giles hated regularity in both teach* ing and to be taught ; *' Ko timo did be in education vaste, lf.*pjHİy he'd ;ut intuitive taste." Giles had a wife (a notable talkative woman, as good-natured as himself), and a familv of children, and his house was the rendezvous of every idleton in the parish.—" Why do you encourage these fellows ?" said the parson. " I try to instruct them in somewhat, vour reverence, if they would but learn." But the truth was, from whetting a knife and cutting a stick* hc was willing to do every job for them; and he kept, with
plenty of potatoes and grot-luck, a kind of open house for all the parish ; and I re¬ cord with pleasure, that in this respect all the parish Avas alike disposed toAvards him and his, and they Avere Avelcome to every larder and every kitchen, Mr. Apreuth at once agreed to visit the sick stranger, and to leave Miss Chamont at a farmhouse in the yyay, and call for her at his return. Continuing their walk, a boy comes run¬ ning after them.—"Mother thought it was you, Giles ; so sent me to tell you that the pig is got loose, and we can't catch him." Giles Avas going off.—" Giles can't go,'' said Mr. Apreuth; " why you will spoil the beer, Giles; you ought not to have left your brewing, but to have sent some one else after me." " I cut him and rung him, your reve¬ rence, and I'll catch him in a minute." " You shall not go ; perhaps I may want you." Giles, and the boy, avIio departed ahme, looked alike disappointed.
" Here's another wants me? said Giles. Up came one of the idletons—his fre¬ quent attendants.—" There's a man wants a glass to his watch, and I want a rattle to frighten aAvay the birds." " Let the man's watch Avait," said Mr. Apreuth, " and go you back to your bu¬ siness, and shout lustily, and run after the birds, and it will do yourself good." " IVe got a rattle at home," said Giles. " TeU the boy where it is." " Parson can't spare me? said Giles, goodnaturedly, with a nod ; " go and ask my Avife—make haste, good boy." "Good boy Γ said Mr, Arthur, as the lad Avent ал -vay ; " why, he's twenty; and Avhat is he good for, Giles ?" " He never does any mischief, and пел т ег swears, nor gets İn liquor, sir; and he's of a good family; and really, sir, he dances very prettily ; and considering he is but a simpleton, surely he's very good." " I believe I must allow this nega¬ tive goodness," said Mr. Apreuth; " of the dancing I am no judge; but the
young man is to be pitied ; and when you can get him to read—you have been try¬ ing, I know, two years—I'll give him a Prayer-book and Bible,—That youth/' continued Mr. Apreuth," addressing Miss Chamont, " was, four or five years ago, left an orphan by a dissolute father and mother, who had once a handsome for¬ tune; but they spent more than they pos¬ sessed, and this poor felloAv came to the parish. His parents had taught him no¬ thing, his relations refused to assist him, and if he has an antipathy, it is to work and study." " Consider, sir," said Giles Bradford, " his birth and education were to hate them." " What is his name?" said Miss Cha¬ mont. " Stephen Russell ; and the parish-offi¬ cers Avould have put Stephen to plough, if my good clerk here had not promised to employ him ; and they Avould, have forced him to attend the school, if Mr. Giles luul not promised to teach him."
" Before Christmas, sir, lie shall win his Bible and Praver-book ; and he can say his catechism, and has joined the singers." " This is going backward in his educa¬ tion—I wish him well. 1 * " And you liave done him w r ell often, vour reverence." The conversation turned to indifferent subjects, till a gentleman walking very fast approached.—" It is lord Atheling!" said Mr. Arthur, as he hastened to meet him. If Miss Chamont had recognized him before her foster-brother did, she had not faid so; but they met w r ith no conceal¬ ment of the pleasure it aftbrded both par¬ ties. It was now settled that Miss Cha¬ mont should return with lord Atheling, who hastily told them tliat he was just arrived in the mail to inspect, and pur¬ chase from, a very valuable stock of cat¬ tle, that v/ere about to be sold in that neighbourhood. Farming was now the hobby-horse of every man of taste, learn¬ ing, and judgment; and lord Atheling held a farm that was conducted on the
highest and most improved principles of cultivation. His lordship avowedly farmed on an i experimental plan, fqr the benefit of EngUsh agriculture, and during his tours had collected great varieties of foreign seed, whicii he had sent home to his bai¬ liff; but this was the first time that he had wished to be personally active in the pur¬ chase of any kind of, cattle. He could not come into the neighbourhood without calling at the vicarage; but whether 1ю would have come into the neighbourhood, if the vicarage had not held certain inha¬ bitants, is a question not so easily solved. .But, leaving him and the young lady to their w r alk, instead of faint dreams of love, wliich all that this world holds dear forbids to be realized, w r e look towards a sečne of endless hopes and fears. As the parson and clerk entered the inn- door, the latter exclaimed—" Shall I at¬ tend your reverence?" and ere the former could answer, " No," half-a-dozen voices cried out of " cooling wort," of " tunnel- £ S
"mg? of" hopping-time;" to all of which GUes answered in one Avord—" Directly." Two elderly gentlemen now mtroduced themselves to the clergymen as Bristol merchants, the father and uncle of a young midshipman, who was ill in an adjoining room. They apologized, they hemmed and haAved *{as it is emphatically called), and полу evidently wished that thcy had not troubled him to come over; yet, as they could not decently offer an objection against introducing the mental physician whom they had called in, they begged Mr. Apreuth that he would not mention to the patient that they had thought the case so urgent as to send for him, because they did not now think that their kins¬ man AVötild die directly, and they did not wish to intrude imnecessarily upon their relative such an alarming subject as death Mr, Apreuth's looks spoke his mind at such futile appearances of religion; ho made a slight ansAver, and Avas introduced into the sick-room, The young sailor л -vas Æeted av ith a violent asthmatic seizure,
originating from an unhealthy climate. The morning had been close, and brought on strong spasms. Mr. Apreuth heard him gasping very loud before he entered the room, snd the scene that instantly met his eyes shewed that there was little sense of feeling and propriety in the minds of the father and uncle, upon temporal as well as spiritual subjects. He beheld the af¬ flicted midshipman in his naval uniform* lying in the arms of a rosy and plump young girl, who sat on a sofa by the win¬ dow, while an old woman of a strange countenance,from the ludicrous cast of one eye, with a very large fan, poured un¬ ceasingly the refreshing gale upon his open breast and face. The contrast between the servant-maid of the inn, full of robust health and ani¬ mal spirits, and perspiring with her exer¬ tions, and the scarce-alive youth, strug¬ gling from restlessness in her arms, and panting for every gasp of breath, and ready to drop from her hold—add also the ear¬ nestness of the old woman with her fan,
and the unmeaning, uneasy, yet accom¬ modating looks of the fatlier and uncle, while the clergyman stood by, totally un¬ able to offer any aid of body or of mind, m\ã the reader may sec at once the ridi¬ culous light in which a scene of sorrow was exhibited, by a combination of help¬ lessness, ignorance, and total want of a correct principle, Conversation of any kind with the af¬ flicted young man, much less the serious and reflective discourse of futurity, could not here be offered.—" lías any medical man been sent for?" was the minister's first question. " We thought," said the uncle, gently, " that İt had been all over—none lives within ten miles—my nephew is recover- ing—we hope lie will be able to get on in the pure air and open carriage" Mr. Apreuth at length approached the sick youuíí sr.ilor, and in broken sentences expressed his sorrow at seeing him un¬ well—told him that he was the clergyman of the parish, and hearing that a stranger
wm taken suddenly ill, he had called to inquire after him, and to кполу if he could afford him any service? The other could only Ьолу his thanks ; and difficult was it to say, in the midst of the panting of the sailor, the fanning of the old woman, and the аллкллага exer¬ tions of the young one, who did not seem to know verv well what to do with her burden, if the minister was clearly under¬ stood. Mr. Apreuth snw it was worse than useless to stay, and soon took his leave; the elderly gentlemen attended him out of the room. At this moment came up Giles.—" Sir, if I was to let a little blood ?" " The wisest scheme I have heard yet, said Mr. Apreuth. " If you think so, sir," said one gentle¬ man, with polite inanity. " I have heard my son say it has done him good before," said the other, with simple gravity. The clerk was instantly ready, Mr,
Apreuth determined the quantity. The patient saw the preparations with visible pleasure. The father and uncle, not liking to Ik? present at the operation, walked out in the garden; and Mr. Apreuth, having seen the orifice judiciously made, followed ihem ; und being much hurt at the scene, and struck at the impropriety of the elders' behaviour, in Avishing for his presence mere¬ ly as a passport for the ease of their own consciences at the moment of death, thus addressed them—" I am very sorry, gen¬ tlemen, to see your kinsman so ill ; as for шу offering him any spiritual assistance, you knoAv it is totally impossible. You think it is not so much needed now ; İioav could it have been, then, had he become worse ? But I entirely differ from you in opinion—I think, that in the fulness of health, strength, spirits, and youth, Ave are the most able to turn our thoughts to the revelation of God; we are then the most able to shew our zeal and faith, and to practise obedience. You and I, gentle-
men, can see and understand, and may put forth the fruits of hoUness ; but how can your unhappy relative, if at the point of death? Can I tell him any more than I can tell you, what either of you do not кполу already ? A want of knowledge, as in the case of Agrippa, is almost the last thing that prevents any of us from acting as Christians. If I were caUed to address a dying Indian, who never heard of the Christ Avho suffered for the human race, I might create, by God's blessing on mine office, пелу thoughts, hopes, and resolu¬ tions. But here I turn from the dying to the living ; I call on you, gentlemen, to think and act as Christians ; I cannot speak to him. If, therefore, there are any of the truths of Christianity of Avhieh you think your relation ignorant, any of its duties you think him imperfect in the performance of, it is my serious advice tiiat you lose not a moment, but that he and you may avail yourselves of his bet¬ ter health, and enter, all of you, fully into the subject of eternal life and death. Sirs,
we are ail well assured we cannot deceive (¿od— why then should we try to deceive one another?" The gentlemen bowed, and bowed, and bowed, and looked very foolish, not liking even to look at each other; but the pre¬ sence of the clerk relieved them.—" The young gentleman is a deal better." "Get the curricle ready," said the uncle. *' ï wish you a very good-morning, gentlemen," said the minister. *· Good-morning! good-morning !" was repeated with a joyful emphasis, and a profusion of thanks and bows. Mr. Apreuth departed, while the father, being actually convinced that his son was a man again a little longer for this world, paid his bill and tîıe attendants liberally, and giving the successful and joyful ope¬ rator a one-pound note, resolved thorough¬ ly to know his man before he again sent for a spiritual director. Thus, spiritual as well as temporal scenes often annoyed the father of the flock ; but let it not be supposed that the cures and
vexations of the country-priest ?irose from the ebullitions of wealth, or the mere time-serving tricks of the conscience; the poor and the simple were often as hard to be pleased, and often more indifferent in creating displeasure. There were many who considered it their minister's duty to try to coax them to go to heaven his way ; and in this respect they were very sus¬ ceptible of affront, nor spared they threat¬ eiiings.—-" I'll turn Methodist," (this was the anti-church note through the parish), " I'll turn Methodist," was no uncommon threat, not only when their sittings were monopolized by the great farmers, but if the singers did not wish the discordant note of some timeless ear—if the ringers objected to some awkward handy-man—if the arrangement of a christening or a burial did not agree with individual requirement, still the cry was—" I'll turn Methodist." An affront from any one of or belong¬ ing to the church would bring forth the threat, and to the last gentleman who officiated it was an appalling one ; but Mr. Apreuth, by treating it with the con*
tempt it deserved, had weakened its sig- nificaney, and held it forth to reprobation, " If the singers wont let me practise with them," said a young fellow of im¬ moral habits, " I'll turn Methodist." " If you turn to any good, I shall be glad of it," said the pastor. To a great farmer, who was indignant because he could not enlarge his seat, and said—he'd join the Methodists, he coolly answered—" You had better not ; you'll oniy expose yourself the тоге." Others he told that the Methodists wouid be ashamed of them, and would not own them. Threats are the common recourse with weak people; and sometimes a Dissenter, if offended about a church fee, or trifling tithe demand, would say—>" We have a society in London on purpose to protect us, and we can have lawyers and coun¬ sellors, and all the law, for nothing; and ľll write up to them." " Do, and they'll know more than you mn tell them, before you'll get law for no* thing."
None of these things were causes of vexation to the vicar ; but he had a great dislike to scenes similar to the one I have just described at the George and Dragon. He indeed willingly visited the sick, but he could not reconcile it to his conscience to endeavour to induce those to join in religious exercises, who, at the hour of health, were indifferent ; and for this rea¬ son he felt apprehension, because such temporizing piety only engendered hypo¬ crisy, and, like the case of Pharaoh, hard¬ ened, when it failed to reclaim. Yet this palavering before men was much liked, even by those who were ashamed to di¬ rectly send for the parson, lest they should be subject to the foolish sneers of those similar to themselves ; but if he came and asked to pray with them, it was no concem of theirs ; it pleased their feelings at the moment, and they had no Avorldly tie for their future conduct. Mr. Apreuth also began his religious admonition not exactly where some zealots wished. He began Avhere John the Bap-
tist and his divine master did—" Repent? Some wouid send for him at once to come and administer the sacrament, as if they believed it a sufficient passport to heaven. To one of these, who had never shewn any other sign of religious sense, he an¬ swered—■" I can have no objection to ad¬ minister the sacrament to you, or to anv other person ; but as you uever have re¬ ceived it in health, I wish fìi-8t to have a little conversation, and to pray with you." " Oh ! if that's all," said the penitent, " I can get some of the women to pray, or to read to me." In short, so fearful was he of encou¬ raging hypocrisy, that it may be doubted if he were not too guarded. His general address to persons of whose spiritual state he was ignorant, was-—" What is good and what is evil you of course know, iis well as myself. I trust you so repent of any evil that you may have committed— so iix your mind to continue in that which is good, that, trusting in God's grace, in the merits and mediation of your Saviour,
and in the assistance of the Holy Spirit, you are firmly resolved, if it please God to restore you to health, not to yield to any sin ; and therefore, as you value your salvation, you must give up every evil habit and custom, every inducement and temptation to wickedness, and henceforth judge and approve yourself by no other law than the law of God—the gospel of Christ God alone knows your heart; be sincere; cultivate that frame of mind— that change from all evil, which is resolved to persevere in well-doing ; and then you may confidently look up to God foľ the forgiveness of your sins through Christ, and death will be to you a joyful opening to another and a happier state." The danger of promoting conciliation too far, and yielding to the threats and displeasure of mercenary and proud men, who carry all their evil passions even into the house of God, and exercise them there, was wofully exhibited in the adjoining parish to Mr. Apreuth, The worthy rec¬ tor laboured to practise every christian
duty, but he varied not for times and cir¬ cumstances, and men and manners. He preached the plain gospel, ^and the meet« ings were almost deserted; the conse¬ quence was, that the zealots who remained in opposition, knowing his mild disposi* tion, and that no reaction was to be ex¬ pected on his part, came and assembled before his house, followed him to church, and even cried out in the church—" He does not preach the gospel !" In the mean¬ time, great numbers of his farmers and rich men quarrelled about their seats, sold and bought them of one another, and turned out the poor ; one while their evil passions keeping them from the church— another time disturbing the congregation in the church itself; he, preaching peace, and acting peace, and trying moreover to purchase peace, found his difficulties in¬ crease every week, till lie was actually ob¬ liged to leave his parish. Buch an unruly, unaccommodating, and Utigious set of parishioners, now met with it шу· different pastor, tn a spirited and
conscientious-in-liis-way young Welsh¬ man, whose first memorable ecclesiastical act was to fight his way up to the read¬ ing-desk, wdiere, victorious, he read the service to a very numerous and unusually- quiet congregation, and marching without opposition into the pulpit, laid doлvn the church as well as Christian 1алу for his own and their guidance. After service, having with his own hands placed two of the most notorious and refractory cliarac- ters in the public stocks, to луЫсп he af¬ fixed a new strong lock, and kept the hey himself, he, within two hours, received proposals for peace and a general amnesty, to which he acceded, released the culprits, ^nd in six weeks became the most popular parson, if not preacher, in the county. Д little summary justice, with the utmost impartiality, achieved the Augean work; and all disputes about seats and sittings are happily put an end to. The most fu¬ rious schismatic has not breathed a hint that lie does not preach the gospel.—* If you were to tell him he did not preach it/*
«aid a parish wit to one of them, " you have, no right to expect that he would practise it"
CHAPTER II. Lord Atheling had arrived a few days before the sale, that he might have an op¬ portunity of inspecting the stock. " I have a neighbour," said Mr. Arthur, " who ΛνϋΙ be happy to ride with us ; we will call on him, and he will shew you, who are so fond of agriculture, a few spe¬ cimens of his farming." " I am not exclusively an agriculturist," said lord Atheling; " but I wish to en¬ courage, in every trade and profession, the utile dulci? Though lord Atheling was a legitimate «on of pride, he was far more independent than most of her children were (for pride always creates active or passive slavery),
and he was come to his friend's house, Avithout feeling the necessity of liaving a carriage, a horse, or a servant, with him. —" I know, Arthur, you can lend me a horse for the few days I stay in the coun- try* and we'll ride over to Leonessa Lodge to-morrow." The gentlemen now Avalked out toge¬ ther, and soon met the person they луеге about to visit.—" Good-day, Mr. Northing¬ ton í My friend, lord Atheling— луе shaU l>e glad of your company, to ride with us to Leonessa Lodge to-morrow, and shaU be obliged, at present, by looking over your farming system." Mr. Northington ansAvered—" I shaU be very happy, gentlemen, to shew you ; though the season of exhibiting my stock is rattier unfavourable, not only on ac¬ count of the weather, but of the great ploughing-match, the prize-premiums, and the she wing-day s of our society, which took place last week." " Where, I understand, your work- vol, и. с
men and cattle got many prizes/' said Mr, Arthur. " Yes, sir; but it was a considerable distance to send my horses and oxen tt and hheep and servants ; and лус are scarcely settled at home yet." Mr. Northington must have been a deep physiognomist to have interpreted lord Atheling's smile, that, from the appear¬ ance around him, he thought the labour¬ ers little deserving of the prizes ; and that the custom of such meetings was badly exemplified, by putting the peopie out of their regular farming habits ; for they were now in the farmyard, naturally large and extensive, but rather incommoded by buildings of various kinds, for cattle, ma¬ chinery, ke. A plain-looking, old-fashioned farmer, of the name of Edwards, joined them.— ** Good-morning ! Good-morrow ! Ser¬ vant, your reverence! Your humble ser¬ vant, sir ! Why, neighbour Northington, î here's 'em there oxen look deadly caddled after their journey. Why, how many
d** ploughing have you lost, reckoning up hoav, going and coming, taking so many men off their work, and you and the bailiff both leaving home to sixes and sevens ?" " What have I gained on the other hand, Mr. EdAvards, by the knoAvledge of new and various implements of husbandry —of comparison of stock, of inventions and improvements of ploughing, soAving, reaping, moAving, threshing, soiling, steam¬ ing, and many others?' " I/' said the old farmer, " can calcu¬ late the first better than the last. Well, if you make debtor and creditor balance, vou have done more than I ean under- stand. But what are you going to do with those sheep in the pens there ?" " I intend to sell them all—to change my stock. These have been to be shewn." " Why, Mr. Northington, you havent half tried these yet I didn't like 'em much at first, but I now don't think they do amiss," с я,
*' I have tried them to my own satis¬ faction; nor should I be disposed to change," said Mr. Northington ; M but I have met with another sort, that I yet more approve of." i% I hope they'll suit your own land some'at better than your present ones; that's my only objection to 'cm now ; and if they liad but little longer legs, to gfet out of our dirt, I should be willing enough to take these off your hands ; but as it is, I must jog on in the old way." " " You run your race like the tortoise," said Mr. Apreuth ; "you don't sleep on the road." ** And pray, neighbour Northington," continued the old farmer, " what be that there machine thing, that the poor oxen have so much trouble to drag along?" ** It is a machine, 51 replied the scientific farmer, " for digging up turnips, and weighing and cutting them at the same time. Indeed, it may be called an uni¬ versal turnip-machine ľ " Oh," said the old practitioner, with a
kind of a grin, " it's no use to I ; I have done weighing every thing, since I used to weigh the guineas at our bank. I should cut no figure at your societies— though I went once to the great meeting at Bath, with my neighbour, Dick Wor¬ thy, before you came, Mr. Northington, to live among us; and there was a pig without a head, dressed like a sheep, or a wether, with the wool singed off, to look like a pig—I can't say which, for I was actually ashamed to look at such trum* pery ; but 'twas thought a good joke there to puzzle the squire-agriculturists; and after dinner, they did nothing but talk about tithes, and cutting at the parsons, till neighbour Hearty took the part of your reverences, and got up and said—' Why our, parsons, gentlemen, never take their tithes in kind ; but you squires, or your bailiffs, or your tenants, do; and you have got among ye most of the great tithes. Now, gentlemen, if you'll put your heads toge¬ ther, and tell us farmers what you'll take for 'em, and push the business forward,
with might and main, in the houses of lords and commons, I believe the black- coated parsons won* t object to your own terms. Give and take, gentlemen; give them what you'll take of us, and they won't stand out.' So they all laughed, and said no more about it; and we had a tolerable pleasant day afterwards." " Who is this champion of the cloth, Arthur?" said lord Atheling. " One of my present churchwardens, and a very honest fellow, you perceivé, 4 the vicar answered. " So I have done with your agricultural tricks," said the old farmer ; " I can call a plough a plough, and a spade a spade. As to weighing food for the cattle, neigh¬ bour, a bellyful they must have; and it | were f G W eigh ¿ül the turnips and pota¬ toes, and corn and hay, on my farm, I couldn't bave the turniiiir of the scales to make the bellyful less. But I thought vou talked of giving up the large turni}) system?" «< Why, not exactly so," said Mr. North-
ington, " I allow that our strong wet clays are not so suitable a soil for turnips as many others; yet, deep, лvet sticking, and hilly, as our land is, I shall try, next year, to draw my turnips home on sledges," " ΝοΛν, don't ye try any such thing, neighbour," said the old farmer, good- naturedly, and simply enough. " You had a mortal loss last year. The weight is so great, and the difficulties so many, that you had better try to improve on our practice than to invent new plans," But the scientific agriculturist was not to be so easily turned aside from his theo¬ ries ; he smiled at the ardour of his neigh¬ bour, and answered—" But, Mr. Edwards, if you had seen 1юлу the turnip system has flourished in Scotland, and in Nor¬ folk, and, nearer home, in Wilts and Berks." " I have been in Wilts," said the for¬ mer, " to the great fair at Weyhill ; and, to be sure, 'tis a famous thing that turnip fashion, and so, you кполу, I ahvays have
a few. But as ï tokl yon, Mr. Northing¬ ton, when you first came among us to form your own estate—* Don't y* have more than you can easily spend, for every way is not our way; but we have a good way enough, if we will but follow it;' so btill I say, a good crop of barley or oats is better than a bad one of wheat ; and a little hay in the yard is better than loads of turnips in the fields, if you can't come at them." " If I were easily discouraged, Mr. Edwards, I'll allow that I have had cause enough to try no new thing; but I should be very sorry, on account of my indivi¬ dual ill-luck, obstinately to close my un¬ derstanding against the advantages vvitli which scientific research, in this enlighten¬ ed age, favours agriculture," " I presume," said lord Atheling, "that the alterations and im entions, theoretical plans, and practical illustrations, are not necessarily in all cases advantages; and that many old-established habits of agri« culture are worthy our notice, though
their origin is lost to us, and Ave cannot philosophically trace the effect back to the rational cause." The farming veteran evidently shewed by his looks that he did not clearly under¬ stand Avhether the gentleman's argument was for or against him ; but as it came from a gentleman, he rather supposed the kist Mr. Northington replied—" I must cer¬ tainly alloAV it, my lord." (The oid far¬ mer stared ; but having seen a lord or tv/ о before, he was not much alarmed.) " Bnt you AviU also grant, that if I meet AÜîh an evident improvements I ought to en¬ deavour to avail myself of it. Thus, the turnip system, mangel-wurzel, machinery, the drill-husbandry , ploughing by two oxen without a driver, florin-grass, Me¬ rino sheep^—I need not trouble you, my lord, with any arguments to prove either of these points." " Certainly not, sir; if my opinion is worthy notice, I am convinced they are all actual advantages in the system of but- с 3
bandry : but, sir, an advantage may be¬ come a disadvantage; thus, if I cannot properly use my turnips—if I have not the means of making my machinery re¬ pay its expence—if my soil is not adapted to Merino sheep, florin-grass, mangel- wurzel, or Ught ploughing—or if in any way it costs me more to get or to keep these good things, than it brings me ad¬ vantage; for I must take every expence, labour, and loss, into my calculation." " You consider the point close, ny lord." " I w oidd take the whole in a general light, sir," said his lordship; M and as to Merino sheepy there is not a doubt in my mind, that the interest of the manufactu¬ rer is the best interest of the agricultu¬ rist. Thus,. I object to a duty on impor¬ tation of Spanish wool ; because the cheap¬ er Spanish wool is to tlie manufacturer, the higher price he can afford to give the English agriculturist for his wool t*> mix with it, and the larger quantity of cloth wiil he be able to sell at foreign markets :
and English wool some years ago fetched a very high price, when Spanish wool \угл cheap." Neither of the farmers could answer this fact, but both shook their head, as un¬ willing to acknowledge it His lordship proceeded with his argu¬ ments upon the propriety of following old experience before new theory—upon try¬ ing experiments on a very small scale— upon leaving well alone, and sticking to the advantages of practical knowledge. " I am afraid, my lord," said Mr. North¬ ington, " this prudent scheming would suit my neighbour Edwards better than myself. We are rather extremes İn the system; but you must not think, my lord, that I am altogether unfortunate in my novelties. You have heard some uf my mishaps—will you take a look at my fiorin-meadow ?" " Ay, there, neighbour," said farmer Edwards, " you have set us a good ex¬ ample—an example I am going to follow,, as soon as I can get a workman to my
mind to set about it; but this fiorm- seheme will onlv do for landlords to un- dertake—-tenants can have nothing to do with it. Tenants indeed like to move the ground about ; they are not very fond of land at rest—and here is nothing but a gross crop." ** But enough to make any man satis¬ fied," said lord Atheling, for they were by this time come to tlie spot. Mr. Northington here received and me¬ rited great praise. " Now I'll shew vou mv fat oxen," said Mr. Northington. о As they passed by his house, thcy met a boy Λνί t h a couple of ducks.—" Who are you, my boy ?—and w here are you going with those large ducks?" ** Aw ! don't ye know me? 1 he plow- hoy to farmer Edwards ; and madam, my mistress, sends me to madam Northing¬ ton, knowing you haven't got any, with these 'em here ducks." " Tins is very kind of you and Mrs. Edwards," said Mr. Northington ; " and as
I have com'erted you to fiorin, you have made a convert of me here. 1 am deter¬ mined, in spite ofall philosophical reckon¬ ing, or rather narrow calculation, hence¬ forth to keep ducks, foAvls, geese, turkeys —yes, even roasting-pigs, for the benefit of myself and my neighbours, to sell and to give away; for I am convinced that there is no good done here, Avhether there be a saving or not. It is someAvhat a-kin to feeding my cattle upon the stubs, in¬ stead of letting tlie poor people glean ; for I am convinced that the pigs, sheep, and cattle, waste themselves more by being driven backwards and forwards, and de¬ stroy more by treading the wheat and barley under foot, than thoy gain ; not to .say, that Avhiie Ave are making it conve¬ nient to pick it up, some way or other, ourselves, the birds get nine-ten ths of it." The subject of charity, and the rights of the poor, as to gleaning, were here dis¬ cussed, and Leviticus and Deuteronomy quoted by the vicar, and Blackstone by lord AtheUng,—" Yet after all/' said
Mr. Apreuth, " the law of trespass gives every man a right to exclude whom he pleases from all parts of his land. They who get in the harvest have surely the first claim ; and I think the farmer gives effect to the charity, by giving it to those who have a prior right ; I mean, the la¬ bourers in the harvest have the first right to the gleaning." " Certainly, sir," said Air. Northington ; " and by letting my land be gleaned, í think I give treble to what I could save for myself." " I hope all your cak-ttlatiom," said lord Atheling, " will be as much to the pur¬ pose as this." The old farmer smiled, and shook Mr, Northington by the hand.—" Why, I'U stock you in poultry; and I believe my mistress has as good a breed as any in tlw. country/' " J have got some turkeys coming from Norfolk," replied Mr. Northington. .*** Tis too far, if ever so good," said tlie farmer, shaking his head*
Now the fat beasts claimed their atten¬ tion.—" These oxen have got the prize this year for their superior fatness," said Mr. Northington, with great satisfaction ; their parts and qualifications were ably discussed and duly admired. " And two years ago they got the prize for plough¬ ing," said he. " You take a deal of trouble for thesie prizes, neighbour; but with many 'tis all a trick," replied farmer Edwards. " There's Sam Net herland, Esq. bought my cousin Welsh's fat beasts t'other year, then put them gently to plough for a week or two, and in nine months time got a prize for them, as oxen which he had taken from plough, and fattened in nine months ; and then he ploughed for another prize with high-fed coach-horses, just skimming the land ; and when the umpires weighed tS*e draught,, his driver, a clever felbw, up to any jockey at Newmarket, set his plough to the heaviest weight in the field. And we all know how he got the prize for a
fat pig, by bribing the butcher to mix the lat of another pig Avith his oavu." Mr« Northington could say nothing to this ungrateful account ; and Mr. Apreuth, trusting that practice Avould be better than such theory, said, very innocently—" Noav, Mr. Northington, let us look at the rest of your oxen." The winner of prizes did not wish to exhibit beyond the candidates.— " I have nothing further of any particular notice/' said he. Thoy found liis words too correct, as claiming the notice of praise, but not in the contrary Mght ; for if the prize oxen Avere very fine fat beasts, the others, not intended for public show, were far other¬ wise, having been negligently treated. The cotujKtny made their remarks very freely, A\hich лл^еге received with great good-humour by the scientific farmer, who endeavoured to account for the appearance of his cattle from his late absence-—from a scarcity of the best food,, and other ex-
cuses, which, upon a general system, make bad worse. The gentlemen did not see the larger flock of sheep—they were in the field ; but the shepherd, in the absence of his master and the bailiff, had rather injudiciously managed them ; for they could not very conveniently leave tlieir present repose, the regular way being impassable to their short legs, from the rains, and the wheat being too wet to suffer them to tread over it : add to these impediments of the coun¬ try a natural one of their own, the foot* rot ; therefore, at a great deal of labour and trouble to men and oxen, the hay and turnips were draAvn up hill to them. One team of horses, to carry the corn to mar¬ ket (for it had been experienced that the oxen could not perform it on account of the roads), were in a miserable plight, having been worked regularly, and kept on turnips and bran ; these had been pur¬ chased from coaches and post-work, and tiie contrast in their food made them suf¬ fer the more.
Mr. Apreuth could not restrain his feelings here—" If this is not bad manage¬ ment, my friend," said be to Mr. North¬ ington, aside, " it is cruelty." " I am afraid it is both," answered the other, honestly ; " and therefore a double reason to have done Avith it." The implements of husbandry next claimed their attention, and they луеге very much amused by many ingenious contrivances. The thrashing and Avinnow- ing machines met Avith great praise. Lord Atheling's proposal, that the stagers sliould be corn-fed, and put to луогк here, where a quicker pace Avas required, met Avith Mr. Northington's attention ; but the new ploughs луеге universally condemned, as being too slight for the soil. " It is not the Aveight of the plough, but its pressure against the earth, that oc¬ casions the draught," remarked his lord¬ ship ; " and, therefore, to break the earth easily and completely, is, in my opinion, the great desideratum." Thev next examined a smaU lot of Me- r
rino wool.—" But where is the carcase?" said the old farmer—" where are the fat lambs to take to market ? They teU me that they can never make good mutton— never will get fat—rank, tough, and lean." " That the best meat in Spain is mut¬ ton, I am very weli assured of," said Mr. Arthur; " in this country the Spanish sheep are not yet fairly brought to the butcher. I have cat some of the Anglo- Merino as good as any sort." " And I have eat pure Merino raised in this country, and fattened in the com¬ mon way, remarkably fine," continued his lordship; " and I can answer for the ex¬ cellency of it in Spain ; but at the present unhappy period, the flockfe. are too often mingled; and meat, at other times not inte n vied for the table, is hastily killed, and oifered for food. Yet in this, as in every thing else, the stock must suit the soil and climate; and I think Mr. Ed¬ wards's former remark about the length of the leg much to the purpose." From the objects beibre them, aH spe-
eîmeïis of novelty, the amateurs agreed to walk to Mr. Edwards's farm, to see his treatment of the old stock. The conversation by the way turned upon the laws favouring the mercantile interest, and ever hostile to the encou¬ ragement of agriculture-—that commerce is the restive hog which cannot bear to have a bristle touched, and agriculture the patient sheep, whom you may easily shear close to the very back. The scientific and the practical farmer were, on this subject, of the same opinion ; sugars ought never. to be distilled, that the cultivation of bar¬ ley might be encouraged without restraint ; horses for farm-work ought not to be taxed; the importation of foreign com ought to be subject to a heavy duty, and the exportation of British corn freely suf¬ fered, and a handsome bounty allowed. " A steady liberal price for his com will assuredly," said Mr. Northington, '* be the best means to induce the farmer to raise large crops. If consumers wish to have corn upon the best terms, it is their
interest to adopt regulations to encourage the growers ; and if they are certain of be¬ ing w r ell repaid for their care, trouble, and expence, we shall never (unless the seasons are against us, which God forbid!) have any fears of a scarcity, as the whoie coun¬ try will flourish through all its vital parts." " Yes," replied lord Atheling, with an ironical smile, " we have been cruelly used for a long while ; our farms have not doubled nor trebled their rents for the last twenty or thirty years—our lands have not risen to a higher purchase than any person hath made a valuation of—the pro» duce of ail kinds has not increased in price, corn, cattle, and timber especially ; nor has improvement had any encouragement to increase the produce ; and it is solely for the purpose of benefiting the community at large, that, above all plans, we objeet to lowering of our rents, because we shall not have so much money to lay out with tradespeople of all kinds, if our tenants pay us less ; therefore we look rø his ma¬ jesty's ministers to lower all the taxes that
press upon the tenant, that hoAA^ever cheap things may be, Ave may not have less means of doing good ; for we, of the landed interest, are poor, tame, silent creatures. with not a friend to speak a word in our favour in either house; much less have Ave a host of science, practice, and speculation in the one, and a bodv of interested advo- cates, Avithout an exception, in the other, while the king himself has been the great¬ est farmer in the land. But, seriously »peaking, gentlemen, I cannot see how the high price of corn is to be the great inducement to the common farmer to raise large crops; for, in the first place, the landlord will be sure to keep up his rent accordmg to the price; and secondly, if tenants must pay their rent, and corn is cheap, it follows, by the rule of necessity, that they must raise as large a quantity as possible, to enable them to do it; but if corn is dear, and a small portion Avill an¬ swer their necessary demand, they may scheme and speculate, and do as thcy please. I'll readily grant you, that most
people will get as much as they can ; but you'll allow, that every body must get Avhat they want; in one case they have a choice, in the other there is no choice at all. I wish to see the farmers get rich, but not by the poverty of the other parts of the community. A British merchant, or а Λ Ves t India planter, gentlemen, would probably shew you the complaint was on the other side. But from speculation let us go back to practice: pray, whose ex¬ cellent field of broad-cast wheat is this ?" Farmer Edwards was the owner. " Why, this," continued his lordship, turning to Mr. Northington, " is an ad¬ mirable lesson upon the method of farm¬ ing in this neighbourhood. I doubt if sir John Sinclair's head-bailiff* could fur¬ nish a better." " If this had been drilled," said Mr. Northington, " there would have been a saving of some bushels in an acre." " But what loss in the crop, young gen¬ tleman?" said the old farmer. " I should hope," continued Mr. North-
ington, not liking to dismount fiom his hobby, " that there Avould be no diminu¬ tion in the produce." " Hope," said Edw r ards, " never raised a blade yet. But tell me honestly, neigh¬ bour, do you think, if I had drilled the wheat, I should have had half so fair a prospect? for the crop, as you said, is all in the hand of God." " Why, I don't think you would have succeeded so well, because you are not used to the drilling system." " And I don't think that I shall very soon, if this continues to be the Avheat- fashion here at home." The gentlemen полу perceived lady Apreuth, Mrs. Apreuth, and Miss Cha¬ mont, coming across the fields from Mr. Northington's house, Avith Mrs. Northing¬ ton, and Avalking up to them, found that they were all going to see Mrs. EdAvards. " Ay," said farmer Edwards, after a few commonplace speeches, " this is some'at of old fashion turned new, to my best fancy. Why, ladies, you do your-
selves cicdit by the manner you make use of them. I hope most heartily you'll con- л г еИ; my daughters;" he alluded to the pattens with which the ladies all walked. " Well, madam Northington/' he conti¬ nued, " though 1 don't follow all the squire's fine inventions. I never saAv one of yours yet that I did not wish to see adopted in my oivn family." Mrs. Northington felt a common farmer could be polite, and returned the compli¬ ment not forgetting the ducks ; and the company found tho same present had been sent to the vicarage. The appearance of so much fine com¬ pany occasioned great confusion at farmer EdAvards's, as thev entered the yard. The shutters were hastily pulled down from the parlour-AvindoAvs—the Misses Edwards ran up stairs to take their hair out of paper, and otherwise adorn themselves — Mrs. EdAvards, Avho was ahvays neat and clean, made haste to ehange her apron. Farmer Edwards noAv clearly saw that vol. 11. n
^
his guests could clearly see these awkward proceedings, and was resolved to read his genteel daughters a lecture upon that pro¬ priety of dress that is always fit to be seen. He Tecollected the contrast at Mrs. North- ington's, and at the vicarage, when he had called there without being seen, and had been admitted immediately; and nei¬ ther of the ladies, he was sure, were above doing any necessaiy work, or spent more time or money in dress than his own daughters.
CHAPTER III. Lord Atheling having so able a compa¬ nion to attend him to the sale of farming stock at Leonessa Lodge, Mr. Apreuth excused himself, and his lordship, since he had not his friend with him, promised to return to dinner: as he lmd no rational excuse to delay his visit beyond the next
day, a place was taken in the mail for his return to town. The agricultural amateurs had just de¬ parted, when a strange carriage, with four post-horses, drove up to the door, and two gentlemen desired to speak with Mr, Ap¬ reuth.—" My name is Lawnsom—I am agent for the Russel family, of Brittleford. Hampshire; the last proprietor is dead. and the heir-at-law, we understand, lives in your parish ; this gentleman, Mr. Smi- thers, is intimately concerned for the next in succession, and I have, therefore, beg¬ ged him to acconipany me, that we might see and form our opinion of the young heir, whose father, we know, was all that is bad ; and we hope also to be favoured with your opinion upon the subject." Mr. Apreuth informed them wdiat he knew of Stephen Russel, his ignorance and simplicity, but that he did not consi¬ der him either as a lunatic or an idiot.— " He lives with my clerk," continued Mr. Apreuth, " who informed me, last night, D2
that he would bring the young man to my house, to shew me that lie could read, whenever î pleased, as, in that case, I bad promised him a new Prayer-book and Bible; we will therefore send for him directiv, for that purpose, and you may then, gen¬ tlemen» both of you, ask him such ques¬ tions as may satisfy you concerning his sanity." With a light heart came Giles Bradford with his pupil, anxious, but not alarmed. Bow anxious, how alarmed had they both been, had they divined the full purport of the trial ! " Come, Stephen," said Mr. Apreuth, kindly, " you may read before these gen¬ tlemen. Don't be hurried; they will make allowances for you." All parties were agreed that Stephen read well enough to entitle him to the Ггауег -book and Bible; and his friend the cierk was very earnest with his minister to question him in the Catechism, in which he proved himself quite an adept. The gentlemen now told him that they
had known his parents, and his grandfa¬ ther, and asked him many questions con¬ cerning his remembrance of them, and about his former and his present way of life. But with difficulty they could get any answer, though nothing irrational came forth. Here again Giles came to his assistance. —" He is very shy, gentlemen, before strangers ; let me ask him лу!^ you want to know, and you'll find he does not луа^ for 'cuteness." Their interpreter acquitted himself much to their satisfaction, and to the cre¬ dit of young Russel ; till after a full in¬ vestigation, Mr, Smithers said^—" Young gentleman, did you ever hear that yon луеге the heir to a considerable property in Hampshire?" " Ye», sir, father told me so when 1 was all alone wiith him before he died; and he said, if Д was wicked and drunken, as he had been, that the next man, лу1ю was worse than himself" (here Mr. Lawn¬ som looked significantly at Mr. Smithers)
" will shut me up in a mad-house, and take all the property from me; so I am sure I don't want to go into that country." " No one can hurt you," said Mr. Lawn- .>om, speaking very deliberately, " if you obey your father's last words, and no one can ever take away that property ; for we are come here to-day on purpose to see whetiier you do make a proper use of your senses, and to tell you that the estate which your father told you of, is in that case now all your own." " God be praised !" said Giles. " What!'* said Stephen; « and if I go on well, I may do what I like with it?" " Certainly," said both the lawyers. " Then Giles Bradford shall be a gentle¬ man !" exclaimed Stephen. The poor youth cried with joy, as with both hands he took hold of the hand of his friend Giles. Giles's eyes too were very moist, though he had not a word to say. But Mr. Stephen Russel, having given vent to tlie first impression of joy by the warm feeling of gratitude, to the credit,
at least, of his heart, noAv further prose¬ cuted its good intention, to find that the possessions of the world only produce fur¬ ther wishes and wants.—" And 1 Avish, Giles, I could make you a parson ;" at the same time having some confused ideas that hehad encroached on another friend's rights, he turned round to Mr. Apreuth, and making his very best bow, added, " and your reverence a bishop." But I am not about to shew that the intellectual acquirements of Mr. Stephen Russel kept pace with his temporal ones ; suffice it to say, that he knew something of a bishop, having been at a confirma¬ tion: introducing, therefore, the parish tailor, who promised by the morrow to provide а пелу suit of mourning, such is the decorum of joy, and leaving to the reader's imagination the felicity and con¬ gratulations of all friends and acquaint¬ ance, particularly Mrs. Bradford, the two Misses and master Bradford, let him re¬ tire with the gentlemen of good news to the neighbouring inn. Twenty guineas
were given to treat the parish, and a boiled rump of beef, and two plum-puddings, sent smoking hot to Mr. Giles Bradford's; and the next day, yvhen Stephen Russel, Esq. left the village, by his own desire, by the approval of Mr. Apreuth and the strangers, and by the ready consent of Giles Bradford himself, the latter, in his Sun¬ day clothes, accompanied him, the vicar undertaking to provide a substitute during his absence. The next day also lord Atheling took his departure ; and hoav all the feelings of his heart upon holy and virtuous love, all the deliberations of his mind upon real worth and goodness, which at Bath, amid its pleasures, allurements, and varieties, had interested him in Miss Lucy Chamont, were rivetted in the calm and peaceful scenes of the country. Yet this was not the life for him-—here he must not stay ; that idol to whom himself and his fore¬ fathers boAved—svhose worship made a part of all that hc enjoyed, and of all that he dared hope for, commanded his depar-
ture, and he arose early in the morning» indin the mail-coach, as he silently offered up the excruciations of his soul, he proved the sincerity of his devotions. Did no congenial sensations agitate the lady's breast? No. Whatever were the thoughts of her mind, she owned no such false principle, and she had no obedience to pay but to the pure and plain dictates of the God of truth. The superior desert of lord Atheling, and the pleasure she re¬ ceived from his society, were not subjects upon which her gentle heart fluttered, and her fond mind indulged, because she was convinced, that so to conduct herself would be contrary to her first and bounden duty. Her sense of propriety came from mo¬ desty—her modesty from religion—and her religion emanated from each will, wish, and thought; thus, though she could boast no worldly pedigree from corporeal inhe¬ ritances, she possessed the superior pedi¬ gree from the acquisitions of the soul. That same morning the Apreuths, with d3
Miss Chamont, paid a visit to sir Row¬ land Mount. There they met the two doctors, Jacks and Parrón, and the latter was in a friendly argument with the ba¬ ronet, a widower, who had adopted the fashionable methods of education. " He that spareth the rod spoileth the child,' is a well-known and most ancient adage, sir Rowland," said doctor Parrón ; 44 and it is one of the very highest autho¬ rity ; and it has been practically acted up¬ on through revolving centuries with the greatest success and applause. Yet it is out of fashion in the present day. That would be no argument among the liberal, the virtuous, and the good, were it not that it is out q f fashion among those who are nobly zealous for civil liberty, social concord, moral conduct, and religious pu¬ rity. How can these things be ? How is it that these good people get over the Bible maxim—-' He that spareth the rod spoileth the child?' The Quakers, who certainly, in outward obedience, most con¬ scientiously and most laudably approach
nearest to the Christian law, avIio SAvear not at all, but keep to the literal ť yea, yea, nay, nay/ Avho are strictly men of peace, yet have never satisfactorily given an answer, when St. Paul's injunction has been urged against them, that the луотеп are not to speak in the public religious assemblies of the Christians: so exactly is it with you enemies of corporal punish¬ ment You cannot answer the adage— ť He that spareth the rod spoileth the child.' I allow the ingenuity of your ar¬ guments—-the plausibility too, and noble view you take of human nature; but you want two things— scriptural authority and practical efficacy? He looked towards the ladies, but they professed that it was not a subject on Avhich they could pretend to form an opinion ; but that they were no friends of fighting, either on a large or a small scale. Doctor Jacks knit his brow, and said nothing ; at length sir RoAvland answered —" It is not against the scriptural pro¬ verb that the opposers of corporal punish-
ment act ; they conceive that correct dis¬ cipline, such as Abraham governed his family and household with, is the real thing meant" " This may be all well enough, and bet¬ ter far for men ; but for boys, I doubt its arriving at the point required so easily and so simply as actual corporal punishment." " As for ease and simplicity—" began sir Rowland, as if he had got some strong ground to debate upon, when he was in¬ terrupted by the entrance of his eldest son, and the company gained a little prac¬ tical illustration. " May Jane have the cap taken off, sir ? May William come out of the corner?" " Where is Mr, Molles worth ?" " He went into the study for a book, sir—and-—and——" "What, Henry? what, Henry?" said the kind father. " 1 went to hiin, thinking that he and you had forgotten us, and—he is asleep." ( Asleep—asleep !" continued the baro¬ net ; " it is no wonder—Thomas kept him
up so late last nights-six hours in a stub¬ born fit, but Mr. Mollesworth's persever¬ ance got the better of him at last." " And I" would in six minutée? said doctor Parrón, warmly, w må have cured the fits for ever : but I beg your pardon, sir Rowland, for this interruption " " My dear Henry," continued the fa¬ ther, " I don't exactly understand the me¬ rits of the cases; but go back to Mr. Molles worth—perhaps he may be awaked; and if not, I am certain he would wish to be awakened : awaken him, and say I told you to do so." The young gentleman seemed irresolute, but departed, " You'll excuse us," said sir Rowland to his company ; " and you see we have discipline enough without flogging: my children, except the eldest, whom you have just seen, are very high-spirited and self-willed, but we manage them." " Yet not without considerable trouble and care," said lady Apreuth.
" What is your number?" said Miss Chamont. " Eight," answered the baronet; " five sons and three daughters ; but I have now resolved to educate the daughters by them¬ selves." " I should have thought it less neces¬ sary, if no corporal punishment was to take place," said the lady ; " pray, how many have you at present under disci¬ pline ?" " I really believe five," replied the ba¬ ronet. " A very large proportion," said the fair investigator ; " but we take your speci¬ men unfairly—I presume it is seldca so?" " Why, I cannot answer in the affirm¬ ative." " At least," remarked Mr. Arthur, « y 0lïrs i s a continual system of punish¬ ment." " Sir Rowland," said Dr. Parrón, warm¬ ly, " these stubborn fits, like a thorn in the flesh, once discovered, should be ex¬ tracted at once. It must be granted, that
on the point in dispute you are right, and your child is wrong. What then is the matter to be debated—to see whose spirit will persevere the longest ? This last was a hard-fought battle : why, your boy will get the victory another day. Shame ! shame ! There ought to be no contention ; your duty is to command—his to obey ; you must conquer^—he must be conquered ; and the longer the contention, the greater i? the evil." Sir Rowland Mount, with little argu¬ ment and less reason, yet with ready me¬ mory and declamation, gave half-a-dozen pages from some fashionable Review, Doctor Jacks, crossing his legs and smoothing his brow, at length thought proper to give an opinion.—" I have re¬ marked the progress of this new system. Mrs. Crespigny, Miss Moore, Miss Ha¬ milton, Mrs. West, and I know not how many more sensible, virtuous, religious ladies, have thought proper to write on education, male as well as female. Now, of course, fair ladies could not recommend
flogging; a friendly review follows, know¬ ing every thing but human nature. Then come forward the champions against mili¬ tary flogging—a species of punishment carried at one time to a shameful height in our armies* The abuse of it here was clearly proved. Next the new method of instructing a large number of boys луав one continual attention, and carried its punishment along with it : the boys sepa¬ rated, and there was no need of further discipline. Therefore, because in these eases it was not needed, a community of children луеге not to be punished. I will add one more reason—private tutorage. When I was young, no man started for the office of private tutor, but a man of known pre-eminence in classical ability: now, every college youth, at his own pleasure, who has interest or impudence to obtain pupils, sets up for a private tutor, and this is the first of his qualifications—sub¬ serviency both to the parents and to the children ; and hence there must be no cor¬ poral discipline. Yet substitutes for cor-
poreal pain must be provided. Do they answer? I greatly doubt. One of these ladies tells a story, how a boy playing Avith some water, his father ordered him from the dangerous spot. The so» dis¬ obeyed. What did the father? He went up to him^-took him by the collar, and dipped him over head and ears, and then sent him home to get dry clothing. The lady gives full praise to this new and rough discipUne; and, as a punishment, there's not a pedagogue, 1 believe, who will not own it was severe enough. But can any one fancy that the boy w r ouid feel himself less degraded than by a good flogging ? If it was intended to frighten the boy more, it Avas a bad method of managing him. But if the boy had been well brought up before» a smart stroke or two of a walking cane Avould in an instant have brought him to his reason* without such alarming violence, and the unnecessary expence of spoiling his clothes. But the boy could not have been well brought up» or he would ha^ e minded what was said to him,
and particularly as his father was in sight. This punishment had all, and more evil than the beating, without the good, which is quick and summary. A boy is beat, and it is past, except the remembrance that bad conduct brings pain : but here is a long process, and plenty of time to in¬ dulge all the turbulent and stubborn, fear¬ ful and fretful, passions." " And what would the boy think to himself?" remarked doctor Parrón ; "what would other boys say of it ? I can easily tell—* He must be a foolish fellow,' they would say of the master or parent, ť to spoil the boy's clothes, and, no doubt, he made himself w r et enough—he must have been more uncomfortable than the boy. I'd rather have a ducking than a whip¬ ping. Unless he stops to strip off his coat, waistcoat, and shirt, I think he would soon be sick of ducking us.' Boys always condemn a process where the punisher gets self-punished." Sir Rowland, though another case was taken to give him an answer, felt the ar-
gument too strongly to be so calm as he wished, and evidently hurt, replied—" Is the infliction of that corporal pain by which only the vicious and the violent of the brute creation are constrained to obe¬ dience, no insult to the human mind ? are the civilized nations of Europe to have recourse, for the government of their chil¬ dren, to the very means by which the wretched and ignorant Africans are in¬ structed in their work of slavery? Can Christianity make no improvement in the paths of learning; but must she follow the corrupt and beaten track which hea¬ thenism has for ages soiled by her bloody whips and implements of torture? I hope otherwise, for the honour of human na¬ ture, and for the glowing prospects of an immortal soul. It can scarcely be called learning, when it is forced and compelled by the whip; and, being constrained, it must surely be quickly lost again, when relaxation of this discipline takes place. Morality and religion so acquired are un¬ worthy of the divine designation of mo-
rality and reUgion ; it is an abuse of terms, like the forced volunteering of tiie French republic. If self-restraint and selfdenial constitute virtue, here is nothing of these—it is the mere child of necessity. If free consent and a wiUing mind make an action good or bad, Ihere is no mo¬ rality, no merit due to any case that is governed by the rod, There cannot be a doubt but that flogging of children tends to harden their feelings, to brutalize their nature, to degrade them before their fel- low-ereatureSe and to bUght the tender germ of selfapproval. It encourages an¬ gry and revengeful passions; it makes bad childreii worse-*«the good indifferent, and takes from aU the conscious and vivi¬ fying principle of shame." " You are warm, sir Rowland," said doctor Parrón; " I shall only mention what you» living in the country, must ob¬ serve, the wretched state of those poor families where tiiere is no corporeal disci¬ pline ; and, such is the fashion of tbe day, ifa master or overseer strikes a selfwiUed
ploughboy or lad caught in any mischief, the fond parents fly to the magistrates for a warrant: aud so now the parish-officers on their part apply also for warrants to set them in the stocks, or send them for a few weeks to prison, for offences which might be, and used to be, settled Without loss of time, expence, and many dangers, in a feAv minutes. I have not only had much personal experience on the subject, but have, of course, many interested feelings. I will leave, therefore, the further answer to our friend, doctor Jacks, who is fuU as луеН informed as myself, though he has not been so active an agent in that part of our system of education, which we are both defending." Doctor Jacks, without much prelude, began.—" Sir Rowland, you have not stated the double quesion, but only fa¬ voured us with a philippic against the one; yet the forcing and compelling, and the want of self-restraint and denial, is appli¬ cable to both, This appears to me to be the question-—which is the best way to
manage boys—by corporal punishment, or punishment of other kinds ? for you go not so far as to pretend to let them run loose, as Nature suggests, and to trust to the good dame, and her sister, Chance, for reproof and correction. So we have been told, was the home education of the celebrated Charles James Fox, who was suffered, unrestrained, to indulge every humour of his mind; he might sweep down from the table bottles and glasses, to see how they would fall together on the ground; and the poor cook was turned from her place, because she was unwilling to roast a repeater-watch at the young gentleman's desire. I can fancy what Charles Fox might have been, had he re¬ ceived from his fond father a Httle corpo¬ ral discipline in his youth ; but educated as he was, he, with the noblest head mul heart, soon gambled away his patri¬ mony;, lived upon the annual charity of his friends, married his mistress—-1 say no more. Let me, without further digres¬ sion, proceed to the argument. Flogging
is a bad thing—it is not meant to be other¬ wise—it is a choice of evils ; so is hang¬ ing—so is imprisonment. But, surely, sir Rowland, flogging can never affect the head and the heart in an equal degree Avith those punishments that immediately appeal to them. A youth does what he ought not to do, and the consequence is immediate pain ; or else he is to linger under reproof, and ridicule, and contempt with other mental agitations. Is it a de¬ gradation to human nature to inflict pu¬ nishment on the body ? is it not a greater to inflict it on the mind? If mental fet¬ ters are more debasing to human natuie than bodily slavery, what say you to this mental scourging? The freest nations have always had their punishment by cor¬ poral pain : chains, imprisonment, and degradation, ever accompany tyranny. Which would a noble-spirited boy prefer, if his mind had not been warped by pre¬ judice, to suffer pain for his folly, or have the fooľs cap on his head, the ring of slavery round his neck, the badge of con-
tempt upon his back, and to be pilloried hy the finger of scorn ? ť Sufficiënt for the day is the evil thereof:' let punishment be sure and short—-forget and forgive ; and let the consequence of evil be a sting up¬ on the memory, not a weight upon the spirits, » The thing to be avoided in all punish¬ ments is unnecessary cruelty. Flogging- may harden the body ; how it is to harden the heart more than ignominy without bodily pain, I cannot say ; mere flogging at each offence may check a perverse, wicked one—-mere bodiless ignominy, I should think, would not. Why was Der- mody (and many others) sober and cor¬ rect in his deportment as long as he re¬ mained a soldier? It was not his mind that wanted to be convinced, but his body to be restrained. He w T as a brave man—did he fear shame? No; but he feared corporal pain. Burns and Mor¬ land, and other clever fellows, might have been useful and worthy members of so¬ ciety, liad they lived in fear of a little bo-
dily discipline. Did they want for men¬ tal coercion ? As for flogging brutalizing human nature, that can only take place by acquiring the callousness of a want of shame, which contempt of any punish¬ ment may occasion : the degradation and blighting of self-approval also concern both ; if it be indelicate, that ought to be provided against. Its encouraging anger and revengeful passions is ridiculous— against whom? Impartiality prevents tliis—a contentious quarrelling is more Ukely to promote anger and revenge ; and as to the making bad worse, that is the very thing to be proved. But this I will¬ ingly grant, that young subjects are the fit objects of corporal punishments; and the moment that they wül listen to the voice of reason, there can be no longer any need of inflicting it. I have been told of large families well brought up without a single blow. I do not doubt it ; and I am as well convinced that a deaf and dumb fa¬ ther and mother, by constant care and at- VOL. il e
tention, may achieve the same. But to these solitary instances I can shew you thousands of families where ruin and con¬ fusion reign triumphant, because the pa¬ rents have ' spared the rod, and spoiled the child.' We are told, that freedom, and independence, and liberty, and no re¬ straint, are carried to such a pitch in Ame¬ rica, the land of free opinions and practical slavery, that it would be a kind of petty treason to strike a child ; and see the con¬ sequence ! An American gentleman told an English one, that he did not believe that there was a father in one of their largest cities who did not lament tliat he had a son. What then are the imagina¬ tions of the thoughts of their hearts? Sir Rowland, I only argue for scriptural dis¬ cipline; I confine corporeal punishment to the young, and I would not inflict it on those of full age. With your unceas¬ ing caie, there may be no need; but I think you go a very roundabout way to your work ; but where your example is followed among the ignorant, I see the
door thrown open to every kind of wicked¬ ness. Every brave and noble boy, if asked, Avould rather suffer on his body than in his mind. JMrs. Maunby induced my friend, the captain, to send his sons to a seminary which professes never to inflict any bodily pain ; and this is his opinion— c I am not afraid of having my children's spirits broken ; but if they had remained here, they would have been bent and Avarp- ed Avith strange fancies, conceits, and vaga¬ ries, lf my sons behave Avrong, I have no fears from judicious corporeal discipline» where punishment takes place, and anger and displeasure soon pass by ; but I have many apprehensions of Aveakening the mind, and creating a spirit of stubborn¬ ness and ill-will, by a continual system of worrying, and teazing, and domineering ; here a constant irritation was kept up— not a noble and liberal principle had free play—the manly virtues had a very con¬ fined scope—and at the end of the half- year I found my boys quite out of heart. е %
They went no more. This was the dis¬ cipline to give high notions and cowardly feelings.' Spartan discipline," continued doctor Jacks, " was no mental bauble. To bear pain w r ell, even merited pain, is a species of heroism ; but to suffer an igno¬ minious punishment can rouse no noble feeling. Inflicted pain is a certain punish¬ ment, but intended ignominy may not be so certain. If--------had been pilloried, it wouid have been his triumph, and the effigy of another great character w r ould have borne the ignominy. If two boys, of a brave and a cowardly temper, were to choose their punishment, which would prefer pain—which ignominy ? In short, sir Rowland, I have no doubt, that for boys under a certain age, personal chas¬ tisement, as it is the most equal, expedi¬ tious, and conclusive punishment, so it is the least humiliating to the temper and debasing to the mind, and the wisest in its effect." The baronet dropped any further de¬ bate on the subject, and thanked the gen
tlemen for their remarks, and the Apreuth family took their leave. Passing over other scenes and occur¬ rences in the country, this history returns to Bath, where other characters claim the notice of the reader.
CHAPTER IV.
The dowager lady Apreuth's family had been a few days at Bath, from the third season since the commencement of these pages. Mr. and JMrs. Marsham were there before them. Lord Atheling had not yet made his appearance ; but he had lately met Mrs. Marsham at her brother's in Wales, and told her that he should soon see her again. It will be necessary here to introduce a character or two more, who will be fur- ther noticed as the history proceeds,—There
was a Miss Ffloyd who had always lived at Bath, but whom lady Apreuth did not become acquainted with till this period. Indeed Miss Ffloyd's person, manners, station, and acquaintance, were not likely to have introduced her to lady Apreuth's notice, but fbr the following circumstance: this lady was in possession of an oid fa¬ mily estate in Wales, adjoining to sir Da¬ vid Apreuth. Sir David had built him¬ self an excellent mansion, in a different situation from the old house, and he had now discovered, that if he might be per¬ mitted to cut a road through part of Miss Ffloyd's estate, that he should lessen the distance, increase the convenience, and produce a very desirable effect to the whole of his present situation. His solicitor soon discovered Miss Ffloyd's; but the latter could agree to nothing, without the ap¬ probation of his principal. Miss Ffloyd herself was therefore applied to, and she addressed sir David :—
" SIR, " I am willing to consent to any thing, that I think reasonable, to oblige my neighbours ; but in a case of this kind, I'll make no bargain or agreement with an attorney." Sir David most eagerly and politely an¬ swered her, and entreated his mother, with a carte blanche, and with more ar¬ dour than if it had been to get a vote íbr a contested election, to call on Miss Ffloyd, and lay the plan of the estate before her. Upon this business lady Apreuth had now ordered her carriage ; and having heard an odd account of Miss Ffloyd, would not suffer her daughter to accompany her, but set off with Miss Chamont. " Well," cried Airs. Marsham, as soon as they entered the drawing-room from their return, " how have you succeeded ? What kind of a creature is she? If you have not prevailed, I declare I'll order tho chariot by two o'clock to-morrow, and
bribe, wheedle, trickj or frighten her into this consent ; for I'll give half my fortune sooner than David should be disappointed; fbr it was all to oblige me and his wife,, that he built the house on the other side the river." " Then I'll certainly go with you/' said her husband, " lest you should give all your fortune ; and also for the poor lady's sake, lest you should do her any injury." 46 Come, mother, you fell me ail about it ; you tell a story a thousand times bet¬ ter than Lucy, she is always so much on her guard, unless we are by ourselves." " Indeed, Mrs. Marsham," said Miss Chamont, " 1 did not know that sly part of my character before." " No, child, no; î mean no slyness; you speak better, and more fit to be heard, when nobody is by. But come, mother, begin." " As soon as the footman's rap was si¬ lent," said lady Apreuth, " the door be¬ gan opening immediately, and we heard a voice from above squeak out— 1 I'll be at
home, Ruth, to nobody.' I told my ser¬ vant to tell the young woman that I wish¬ ed to speak to her. Any thing but a young woman carne up to the carriage.— ■ Is this Miss Ffloyd's house?'—* Yes, ma¬ dam.'— 6 Present my compliments,' said I, giving her my card, on which I had hastily written, s I called by desire of sir Da¬ vid ;' and I will wait on Miss Ffloyd any other day, if more agreeable to her.' As slie hobbled in, without closing the door, we saw a strange dishevelled creature, in a loose bedgown, reach over the banisters, and take the card. In an instant— ( Ruth !' — ? Ye% Miss.'— ť Beg her ladyship to walk into the parlour. Ill be down in a minute.' Miss Ffloyd, whatever her ec¬ centricities be, is certainly a well-bred wo¬ man, foľ she did not make us wait, but, before we were seated, joined us. And here I must explain myself. We had no little difficulty in being seated; for two large parrots carae waddling towards ns, upon our entrance into the room ; and as E S
<шёыь»^.
often as we attempted to approach a chair, the one or the other was up in it in a mo¬ ment, as if to say—* That is my chair;' and indeed the chairs all bore marks of belonging to them. But the hostess soon relieved us. She appeared to have hastily drawn the papers out of those parts of her hair that had been twirled up the over¬ night ; and having given her dark locks, uncombed, three smart pats with a pow¬ der-puff, at the top and on each side, but not a touch behind—to have thrown oft' her bedgown, and wrapped round her a spacious old damask négligée ', and tied, in haste, what seemed to me«-----" " Certainly, my lady," corroborated Miss Chamont, " a variegated platted cord of a bell-rope." " You see, Susan, 1 don't paint too high." " No, my dear mother; but you draw- to the life and soul! Oh, I wish 1 had went with you ! It was very, very unkind indeedof you to prevent me; but do, do go on, my dearest mother!"
" She very easily received us—wiped a chair for each of us quickly, with a very large, old-fashioned, and handsome shawl that was thrown carelessly across her arm, and which had been intended, I suppose, to hide the omissions of the toilet—gave a nod to her feathered favourites—' Oh, you rude creatures, shall I never teach you manners?' and again thanked me for the honour of the visit— e And this young lady, I presume, is your ladyship's daugh¬ ter?'—* My adopted daughter, ma'am.'— ť Well, I hope she is as good as she looks to be ; and I hope some are better, or we are sadly off indeed ;' and she glanced a side-look at herself in the glass, and laughed transiently at herself and her joke. We could scarcely keep our countenance." " Oh, I'll answer," exclaimed Mrs. Mar¬ sham, " that my adopted sister did ! Here you had the advantage, mamma, of not having me with you." " And what is more, my dear Mrs. Marsham," said Miss Chamont, " I can of¬ ten suppress satire when it is most de-
served, and it is upon the tip of my tongue" " Go on, dear mother," continued Mrs. Marsham ; " í get nothing by interrupt¬ ing you." " Not wishing to enter upon my busi¬ ness too abruptly, I remarked the beauty of the parrots, which carried us from the object of our visit; for I found 1 had touched upon a tender subject—both were purchases of humanity; the one adver¬ tized from among a bankrupt's effects, Miss Ffloyd had found, on a frosty morn¬ ing, half starved, with its water frozen; upon representing the circumstance to the auctioneer, and walking out till the sale commenced, she, on her return, perceived that the cage had been placed upon the mantlepiece; and some papers having been carelessly thrown into the fire, the poor bird's wings were actually singed; she, of course, could not do less than pur¬ chase it, henceforth to protect it from the alike dangerous extremes of cold and heat The other parrot belonged to a bird-fancier,
and by some accident had lost the claws of one foot; so the man was just about to kill it, and stuff it for its beauty, when its good genius came in, in the person of Miss Ffloyd—luckily heard the decree, and made a purchase of it. There were a great number of birds of all kinds ------But I need not tell you any more of these things, as I trust, Susan, you may be permitted to see them all. At length bu¬ siness commenced ; the plans of the two estates were produced ; she minutely exa¬ mined, and we explained. Lucy was here very eloquent.-—' Why, young lady, you seem to know the bearing and the distance, as if you were the heiress of my estate, and sir David a bachelor.'—* I was brought up, ma'am, on the estate in Wales from the age of four.'—' Indeed! Are you of Welsh parentage, may I ask ?'—I shortly explained my dear Lucy's history, and looking at our hostess, we found the tears flowing in abundance, which the convenient shawl soon cleared her from.— * Poor dear creature !' said she. * WeU,
I'll make no apologies for having asked the question, for it seems you do not your¬ self Avish to forget, my dear, good young lady, whom you were ; and while that is the case, nobody will ever be able to make you remember it to your disadvantage. Is the good old admiral in heaven yet, my lady ?'—I answered, I humbly trusted he Avas. I now made another digression, that Ave might return to the original subject Avith more effect, and expressed our grati¬ tude to the reverend Mr. Remley, who had married her relation.— e He is a great favourite of mine/ said she, ' tliough 1 have never seen him ; and I shall like him the better for both your sakes. He is a no¬ ble-spirited young man; and his wife's bro¬ ther, Mr. Gwyllwes, avIio is also a clergy¬ man, loves him as a real brother.' But her mind, I clearly saw by her looks, Avas turned towards Lucy ; frequently her eyes glistened, and once, though talking of other subjects, she took her by the hand : but all at once she shut up the plans-—she seemed so full of the more feeling and
pleasing subject.—' ľll not delay you here, my lady, by doubts and demurs; let your son do what he wants—I'll trust to liis honour, if he'll trust to mine ; of course, he will put up some gates at the entrances of my estate—he will pay a small annual acknowledgment, and take care to provide that it is only a private road to his house. I am not ignorant, my lady, of your son's character. Is he not a true- born Welshman? And in parliament 1 have seen his name as the friend of my friend—of my country's friend—the great Pox!'—I found now that my new ac¬ quaintance was a violent Foxite, and sir David had not lately voted with that pa¬ triot. Whiie I was planning a reply, Lucy answered for me, and candidly told Miss Ffloyd the real state of the case.— 4 You are true Welsh, I sec,' said the little politician ; ť you'll not be misunder¬ stood in your own favour. But I am very sorry to hear that sir David does not fully comprehend the exalted politics of that great man. I hope sir David is on his
guard against that degenerate son of the great William Pitt What excuse can be given for his deserting the cause of the peopie ? You may rely upon it, that Mr. Fox is not fairly judged, in being accused of vrishing to give undue authority to the commonalty. It is only his independent voice that cries out against aristocratical grievances, of sinecures, pensions, corrup¬ tion, and bribery, and to cultivate the blessings of peace.'—' In these points/ said Lucy, who saw the proper opening quicker than, myself, and caught at the trait of humanity луЫсп so strongly marked the lady's character, ť sir David, î can assure you, ma'am, ΛνϋΙ never for¬ sake the politics of Mr. Fox—every in¬ vestigation for the purity and liberty of the state he always votes for ; you might have seen his name in the minority upon lord Melville's—'—* Yes, I did, I did, my dear,'·—* And he has supported Mr. Addington, ma'am, throughout the pre¬ sent peace.'— 4 Indeed ! — ť I heard sir Da¬ vid say himself, ma'am/ continued Lucy,
* that he told Mr. Pitt, that the more prosperously the war was conducted, the more ready we should be to offer peace to our foe.''— ť An excellent sentiment/ said the lady ; ' and I wish all that minister's friends had given him the same advice ; this was Foxean-—quite from the school of Fox Γ Having vented this rhapsody, luckily for us the lady recovered herself— c But I a thousand times, my lady, and my dear Miss, beg your pardons for in¬ truding my politics ; I do so admire the great Charles Fox !' and up the Uttle lady started, and snatched, with some difficulty, on account of her short stature, a spacious bonnet, of a dingy red, from what we now perceived was a white marble bust of that statesman." " This indeed was a critical moment," said Miss Chamont ; " my mind was all alarm with ideas of jacobinism and demo¬ cracy, for I unhappily mistook the good covering which occasionally adorned her own head, and which she afterwards told us
was her gardening bonnet, for the all- HORRiBLE cap of liberty, and the scenes in the ť Infernal Quixote,' of mak¬ ing converts, and all the initiating pro¬ cesses there detailed, rushed into my ima¬ gination." " The author of that work, who is a friend of mine," said Mrs. Marsham, with more than usual seriousness, " would little thank you for burlesquing that perform¬ ance, any more than myself for interrupt¬ ing, by your witticism, my mother's ad¬ mirable description." " As for that, my dear Mrs. Marsham," said our heroine, with unusual tenacity, " I have the pleasure of ranking the au¬ thor among my friends, as well as your¬ self; and I am certain your dear mother wili excuse me; nay, I T >elieve that your own displeasure arises from a double envy of my partaking of this scene, and of my subsequent remark." " My dear mother, proceed," was Mrs. Marshanfs only answer.
" You arc such ready disputants, la¬ dies, that I must beg you'll tell me Avhere I left off." " Miss Ffloyd," remarked Mrs. Mar¬ sham, " had just caught her bonnet off the bust of Charles James Fox," " And Aviping the head of the bust, on tiptoe, Avith her shawl, though it was the only thing in the room that did not re¬ cluiré wiping, and her shaAvl Avas disposed to give rather than to take away any dust, I really thought that she would have sa¬ luted it; and Avithout making an unfair supposition of my new friend, I do believe, from her attitude, that the enthusiasm of political consanguinity has frequently be¬ stowed the fraternal embrace." " The spirit of satire^ my dear mother," exclaimed Mrs. Marsham, " seems the go¬ verning principle of the day !" " It too often is, mv dear child. Avhere you are present," ansAvered lady Apreuth, " I am silenced/' said Mrs. Marsham ; " for really, ladies, I am the shuttlecock between you."
" Miss Ffloyd having exhibited to us the bust of her favourite politician," con¬ tinued lady Apreuth, " now elosed her speech,—* Surely there is no other man so wiUing, so able, to staunch the Avounds of bloody Europe, and perpetuate the blessings of peace to the Avorld/ But if our sentiments were not exactly congenial before, Ave, on the nex* theme, had not a different sensation; peace led us to reli¬ gion. The amiable curate of St. James's was her favourite minister." ** Oh, of course!—he's her brother poli¬ tician !" exclaimed JMrs. Marsham. " But wbo are her favourite religious authors?" " J asked her some bookish question of the kind,-—* I very seldom, ray lady/ said siie, ť read any other divinity than my Bible; it is so plain—-it is so good—it is -]o wise!' and her eyes glistened with rap¬ ture. ' The good man is merciful to his beast. Do as you Avould be done by.' With hearty approbation Ave prepared to depart; and I now again thanked her in ! »y son's name, and hoped, in my олуп,
that an acquaintance, so auspiciously be¬ gun, yvould be continued, on her part, as it Avas honestly desiied by me.—* I am a strange creature, your ladyship, and a strange fright (both very true, indeed; and the only reason, mal-à-propos, to au acquaintance that I have discovered in the good lady, and you, Mrs. Marsham, 1 кполу, will think these none at all) ; but I am so prepossessed that your ladyship's sincerity exceeds your politeness, that I will certainly put it to the trial." " Excellent!" exclaimed Mrs. Mar¬ sham ; ( " when do you think avo shaU see her?" " My love, hoAv can I guess !" " I'll stay at homo every morning for this Aveek," " But/' continued lady Apreuth, " you Ьал г е not heard her concluding speech to Lucy, which, I assure you, Avas the acme of the whole.— ť And for you* my dear young lady/ taking her hand, * you hap¬ pily do not want any comforting from røe.
Blessings on your kind friends î you arc prudently secluded from the cold chill oí penury, and sheltered from the voluptuous blazes of luxury. God ever bless you. my dear! While you remember (as I be¬ lieve i said before), with pious humility, what you tvere, you will never want gra- titude towards him, and the favoured in¬ struments of his grace, for vehat you noti are" I assure you most seriously, my dear daughter, that the good lady's tone and manner did not take off from the ef¬ fect; and tliough we both perceived that the useful shawl had left part of its dust upon the moist part of her eyelids, a ri¬ sible muscle, I am convinced, did not burlesque the scone in tlie heart of either of us." &i { declare," said Mrs. Marsham, " I could have laughed and cried at tlie same time, without a sentiment of ridicule to upbraid the purity of my heart. My tear would have been the tear of gratitude and love, and my smile the smile of delight
and approbation, to see that so odd a little creature could have been so brimful of honest sentiment and goodness." The next day Mr. Arthur and his wife arrived, and lord Atheling made his ap¬ pearance on the following. On the third day after the interview with Miss Ffloyd, his lordship called early, that he might accompany Mr. and Mrs. Apreuth, to give particular orders about a new carriage, according to some conve¬ nient plan which he had met with abroad. They were about to depart, when Miss Ffloyd was announced with hesitation by the servant—" A Miss Ffloyd wishes to speak to your ladyship." " Shew the lady in," sharply spoke lady Apreuth ; and meeting her at the parlour- door—" We are much obliged to you, Miss Ffloyd, for this favour. Permit me to introduce my brother, general Maurice ; Mrs. Marsham, my daughter, and her husband ; Mr. Apreuth, my son, a clergy¬ man, and his wife ; and their and our friend, lord AtheUng."
** I c«me thus early," said Miss Ffloyd, drawing her large handsome old shawl around her, " that I might escape visitors ; but it is only a family party, I see," and her eyes joined together lord Atheling and Miss Chamont, yet in so delicate a man¬ ner, that whoeAer fancied they perceived it, could feel no unpleasant sensation that another might entertain the same senti¬ ments, but would give themselves credit for the juggestions of their own fancy. To analyse the multitude of conjectures that, on the slightest occasion, pass the mind, would be to entertain as vain a task, as to try to reckon a given portion of flakes of snow ; yet a few may be no¬ ticed ; but many assume a complex form, and »ow and then there is one not ob¬ served by the mind itself, that leaves a tinge that makes it memorable some time afterwards. Miss Ffloyd continued—" Your foot¬ man did not know what to make of me«— no discredit to him; and, unluckily for his judgment, a poor old fMiwomaii of
my acquaintance had followed me up the steps, and would sell me a bargain ; but, 1 assure your ladyship, I am arrived in your parlour with much more ease than I expected." " And as our acquaintance proceeds, it shall not be my fault, if you do not find it still more easy and more pleasing," Miss Ffloyd made a very proper an- SAver ; and after a few minutes lord Athe¬ ling and general JMaurice, Avith Mr. and Mrs. Apreuth, and Mr. Marsham, pro¬ ceeded on their business. Miss Ffloyd asked—" Is not lord Athe¬ ling lord Browover's son ?" They ansAvered in the affirmative. " He does not appear so" (the Avord came out) " proud as his father." " We are little acquainted with the earl," said lady Apreuth, " who lives much in the country ; he is a very excellent man, and he gave Arthur his living in Devonshire/' " Oh ! most excellent man, I knoAv, my lady, though, of course, I have no per- VOL. IL e
sonai acquaintance with hirø ; but I have a cousin in Yorkshire, who is the vicar (it is a coUege-living) of his lordship's parish, and I have heard him speak of tlie earl." " Yes, ma'am," said Mrs. Marsham, who was anxious enough to address herself to the Httle lady, ** your oousin and yourself are most correct in calling him proud^— nay, he is no proud, that with all his good qualities, your compHment to his son I doubt if he would feel the approval of Your cousin, Miss Ffloyd, is Mr. Gwyll- wes?" Miss Ffloyd assented. " They are excellently matched—Mr. Gwvllwes's Welsh blood flows as high as the right honourable earldom/* " I won't defend my kinsman—lie has too ranch of the national susceptibility. As we are aU Welsh," continued Miss Ffloyd, smiling, '* I am guilty of no trea¬ chery ; he never meets with a proud man but die is upon his Cadwallader stilts im¬ mediately" " I have heard «ome cursory story of
the earľs first acquaintance with Mr. Gwyllw r es ?" Mrs. Marsham spoke ques- tioriariiy. " I do not think/' replied Miss Ffloyd, " that it was the right behaviour towards the clergyman of his own parish, though he only arrived the same week, to send his servant as he came down from the pulpit, vrith—' The earl of BrOAVover's compli¬ ments, sir, and hopes to be favoured with your company to dinner at five o'clock.' Said my cousin instantly—' You must make a mistake, sir -Л have not the ho¬ nour of the earľs acquaintance/ Lord BroAvover's carriage, you must recollect, my lady," continued Miss Ffloyd, looking round to lady Apreuth, " passed and re¬ passed the vicarage in the way to and from church, and his lordship might have con¬ descended himself to have spoken to Mr. GAAylhves in the vestry." " It was inconsiderate, at least," said lady Apreuth. " Proud men, mamma/ remarked Mrs. F2
Marsham, " are never inconsiderate. Let them keep up their consequence as high as they please—let them exact from others what deference they can possibly obtain, but let there be no omission on their part, and, aboA'e aU excuses, tnconsideraieness can never be granted them." " I spake very thoughtlessly of the earl, as I ever do upon all subjects, and all oc¬ casions/' said Miss Ffloyd ; " my kins¬ man says that he is a blessing to the pa¬ rish, to.the neighbourhood, and the whole country round. His benefactions are li¬ berally given to all the charitable and re- Ugious societies ; he is an exemplary mo¬ ral character, and a very active, impartial magistrate. Indeed it is a great misfor¬ tune to be a lord; I have only had any acquaintance Avith tAvo, and they were most shockingly ignorant" " In what respect, may I ask ?" said Mrs. Marsham, gravely. " In common knowledge and learning, ma'am. Would you believe it, ma'am, that one of these noblemen, a youth of
three or four and twenty indeed he was, did not know that Mr. Fox had been prime minister to his present majesty, or that Mr. Pitt had ever actuaUy advocated, in the House of Commons, the glorious cause of parliamentary reform, under the co-operation of that very Charles Fox ? This poor feUow belonged to some whip or carriage club, and they said, for a lord, he was very clever at it; but that was smaU credit, for he had all his life been learning it" " I lmve heard," said Mrs. Marsham, eagerly catching the subject, " a sensible man assert, that he would bet a thousand guineas, that take,without selection, twelve of these boasting whip and coach fashion¬ able clubmen (I don't know the distinc¬ tion, but I understand that there is not the difference of an old lash's worth be¬ tween them aU), and take twelve hackney- coachmen, even old men or boys, as it may so occur, and that he would bet that the hackneys beat the fashionable club¬ men hoUow, at reading, writing, and arith-
metic, tobacco-chewing, spitting, and all the whip and bridle, and slang business,* But I beg a million of pardons, Miss Ffloyd, for interrupting you; pray de¬ scribe to us your other noble acquaint¬ ance." " Such interruption, ma'am " said Miss Ffloyd, " is great edification and comfort, for nothing can yield greater pleasure to such an old maid as myself, than to hear in the other sex of those ridiculous quiz¬ zical characters;" and laughing heartily, she proceeded—" The other was no youth, and he really had abilities equal to a mo· derate dancing-master; then he would hum part of a tune, and knew some of the phrases belonging to music and paint¬ ing; he was a bit of a soldier too, wrote
a pretty hand, and could speU tolerably. Indeed he was more of a genius—an ori¬ ginal, I mean—a superior scholar to the noble whip; more entertaining too, but not half so ridiculous." ** In fashion," said lady Apreuth, " there are always a set of notorious characters, who are in vogue as long as their day lasts. I have for many years remarked how greatly tliey degenerate; so that the fa¬ shionable Tom-fools of tlie former age were even men of sense and ability in comparison with the present. The last you mention, Miss Ffloyd, was, I suppose, of the old school of fashion ?" " No, my lady, lie w r as a cut above the Тош -fools of style and vulgarity, and fa¬ shionable notoriety, of any period." te The nation,** said Miss Chamont, " lias been laughing at these poor whip-wretches for some time, but I think they ought rather to pity them." " Rather pity their unhappy relatives and connexions," said Mrs. Marsham ; " I would sooner have a brother of mine go
upon the stage, keep a puppet-show, or even turn merry Andrew, than thus write sans heart and sans head upon his own back." Miss Ffloyd proceeded—" This last no¬ bleman whom I have mentioned had the sense, where he was not much known, to keep himself from contempt. He never presumed to determine for himself, but selected, with some judgment, his stew¬ ard, attorney, doctor, and valet. But the other had not this merit, for, in his full age, he built the most foolish, useless mansion near London, according to his own taste or approval, full of Egyptian, Russian, Turkish, Grecian, Indian, Chi¬ nese,.Etruscan, and I know not what else, ornaments. I had a ticket, and saw it ; it was a raree-show for all the idlers of fa¬ shion while it was rearing and furnishing; but about a week before it was to be inha¬ bited, the creditors became impatient, and all the trumpery was put up to the ham¬ mer, and produced scarcely five per cent. He, poor simpleton ! has changed his club,
I hear, but carries on his follies and his vices on a lower scale; for wicked enough were they both, as far as their means could lead them. In point of honest conscien¬ tious principle, I do think a poor African or a Hottentot must greatly surpass them both." " I wish lord Atheling was present, to hear your description of his noble bre¬ thren," said Mrs. Marsham. " My dear madam," exclaimed Miss Ffloyd, lifting up her hand quite high, " I would not for the world î I cant think how I came to let my tongue run so fast before strangers." " He is very Uberal-mindcd," proceeded Mrs. Marsham, " and, I will assure you, is much superior in every respect to your t v\ о former acquaintance; indeed I think, as far as my own knowledge reaches, that you had not a fair criterion in your speci¬ men of modern nobUity." Miss Ffloyd now rose to depart, and lady Apreuth asked her if she was fond of на.
music? and receiving an affirmative an¬ swer, hoped she should see her soon to a private concert, of which slie would give her due notice. Miss Ffloyd now began to depart. To have a proper view of her at the moment, it must be noticed, that her oratory, urged on by the earnestness and conciliating manner of Mrs. Marsham, had thrown her off her guard of decorum *, and as she sat with one knee across the other, her right hand extended on her lap, and beating time almost w r ith the upper knee, her little body bent, yet with lifted-up countenance, fixed and expressive, so that her forehead and nose formed a straight line with her extended right foot; while all the time the left side had not been idle, but the liand had been twisting and whirling the fine long shawl, whieh the shoulder in vain every moment attempted to catch, till it had ascended on the back of her chair, slided adown the arm, fell upon the floor, got entangled in the feet of the ehair, and wdien she at last arose, and took a step or
two to depart, the extended shawl, still held by one corner in her hand, was very unwillingly trailing after her, and had left a rather uncouth bib and tucker, and not well-tightened w r aist, exposed. Luckily there were no gentlemen pre¬ sent. Miss Chamont, as quick as possible, assisted in the gathering-up of the shawl, and in the adjustment of the same; and with a lively and pleasant nod and good- day to each young lady, and recovering herself with a low and polite courtesy to lady Apreuth, Miss Ffloyd departed. Lady Apreuth called to her footman, after he liad let out the lady.—" Thomas, I wish you at nú time to doubt wdio my visitors are This lady, though you de¬ murred from a superficial opinion, is a person of superior worttţ. I can always. without any disrespect,:desire a visitor to be shewn into the other rWlour, the house- keepér's-roorø, or even the servants'-hall, if I think it wiU be more agreeable to them. I am not displeased with you, but I had rather you decisively committed
an error, than put f\n the ungracious' ap* pearance of doubt'
CHAPTER V. ■******■***■# ** **φ ψ Аь I have already opened ihe character of the earl of Browover in the foregoing con¬ versation, it Avill not be amiss morc closely to describe his present situation. His lordship spent the whole of his time, AA'lien not employed in parliamentary concerns, at his favourite seat in the coun¬ try, where Mr. Gwyllwes was the vicar. If the carl's son, season after season, at Bath, was unconsciously courting daily lessons for his pride, the father had met witli unceasing excitation, which, though it could not extract, shook to the very barbed point, this thorn in his fiesh. After the iicav minister had arranged himself under the banners of etiquette, the carl prudently thought proper to leave
his card tlie very first day that he * as as¬ sured that the clergyman was not at *.ome. The compliment in due order was returned · and in about a month Mr. Gwylfwes re- ceived ш formal and regular invitation to dinner at the castle. In the влеап time Mr. Gwyllwes hatl steadily pursued his ministerial course in the parish ; fae had instituted a Sunday- school—hc had gained a personal know¬ kdge ofall his parishioners, for Mr. Gwyll- wes's pride (which was rather spirit) was never raised but by the offensive wind of some other; Christianity had brought it to its present temperature; andi so pleased were the parishioners with the de¬ meanour (for as yet they knew no more) of their new parson, that they had already acceded to his wish in building a gallery for the better accommodation of the poor, that, at least, the want of room should not be an excuse for any schism. His lord¬ ship had been regularly applied to, ap¬ proved, patronized, and willingly contri¬ buted towards these innovations; so the
noble earl and his vicar met vrith a more favourable opinion of each other than the first approximation produced. But all at the dinner луав fonu and or¬ der. My lady was ahvays silent of a slight character; an excellent wife—in that she was a faithful copy of her husband ; and the two young ladies, Matilda and Julia, scarcely spoke, and soon left the company. A year had passed over before Mr. Gwyllwes was honoured with a more fa¬ miliar intercourse w r ith his lordship. Many trifles of the clergyman's independency had annoyed the earl; for it is the unhappy nature of pride to be most nicely suscep¬ tible of the least touch of independence. Mr. Gwyllwes chose to take out a li¬ cence to sport, but did not ciioose to be accompanied by any of the earl's game¬ keepers. Upon a hint about forbiddance from one of his lordship's tenants, Mr. Gwylhves waited not for an opportunity to say—* If by law I have a tithe of the produce of the farms, ha\ r e I not a right
to the tithe of the game ? But I am not going to law for it ; if any farmer object to my trespassing without injury upon his land, I shall require all my dues in kind. If the whole of the tenantry are obliged to combine against me, I will openly purchase game of any man ΛνΙιο wiU trust to my word that I will not inform against him." This speech, with additions, was car¬ ried to his lordship ; for here again, pride keeping at a distance fwm social truth, must always hear through the medium of degeneracy. The prouder any man is, not only the further removed is he from his circle qf happiness, but qf truth, and qf wisdom too. His lordship once afterwards speaking of poachers to Mr. Gwylhves, the latter remarked—" I never bought a smuggled article, or a poached one, in my life, and never wish to buy ; but if, unhappily, I am ever situated in a neighbourhood where any arbitrary obstruction is raised up to prevent my satisfying my wants, according as by common law I have a
right, I must provide in another way, still respecting the letter of the law, and mine own security ; that is, my lord, if I cannot openly kill, I will fairly buy."* Mr. Gwyllwes had no occasion to du the last, for the earl of Browover was un¬ like his cousin Ffloyd's two lords, or his brother-in-law's (Mr. Kemley's) patron·, after a few twitches of the hereditary gout of pride, the saneness of his lordship's head and heart generally returned. Mr. Gwyllwes was also in the commis* sion of the peace ; and here, at times, in¬ dependency would start some trifling sub-
ject of disapprobation. But at the com¬ mencement of the third Lent of Mr. GAvyllwes's ministry, which brings us nearly to the period of our history, a cir¬ cumstance had taken place, which roused, harassed, and put to the trial, the earl's fortitude upon his most tender point. Mr. GAvyllwes often addressed his congrega¬ tion in a clear and familiar manner. On the Sunday before Ash-Wednesday he said from tlie pulpit—" In this, and in every parish in which I have ever preached, there are many, who, if their faAOurite sin is arraigned, and its points and its ligaments closely unravelled, are ready to complain that they are person¬ ally preached against. It may be tme enough, but is it their fault, or the mi¬ nisters ? It is my office to hold up every sin in ten % orem ; I avíU ever do it as com¬ pletely as I am able ; and I more particu¬ larly shall attempt the same during the Sundays of Lent. But it is not my oflice to hold up any individually—I wUl never personally describe, though I cannot pre-
vent others applying my description. If, therefore, you fear these things, and will not rejoice to hear the close bearing of your own sin, that you raay root it out by repentance and amendment, you may spare me the accusation in your heats, and avoid the ungrateful hearing by shame and absence; and if, feeling the convic¬ tion, you tliink of it at home, you may probably, by God's grace, be more affected than by my words. That I may not, therefore, take any of you unprovided, I give you all this notice, that for the fol¬ lowing Sundays my subjects will be regu¬ larly—on theft and adultery—on covet¬ ousness and extravagance—on pride and meanness—on anger, hatred, malice, and all uncliaritableness, up to murder—on lying, swearing, and bearing false witness. As these are my breaks and bearings on the several subjects, I trust to introduce them all as moral offences under that sin to which they are most nearly allied " Noiv, as the congregation had already found that Mr. Gwylhves painted from
the life, there was not one in the church, who thought at all, across whose mind this suggestion did not glance—" Can he borrow any part of the picture from me Τ His lordship did not want the feelings of a man, nor the feelings of a Christian ; but there is a kind of back-game that every man plays in his own heart, thus^— " Pride is a sin, I allow, but not everv kind of pride; and the pride I entertain is of the unsinful kind-—it is the heredi¬ tary right of glory, honour, and station— it is the distinction of rank and of public character—it is due respect-—it preserves order, regularity, and propriety." Now cannot the murderer, the adul¬ terer, the mbber, argue as weli—" Mur- der is a sin, I allow, but not every kind of murder ; and the murder I have com¬ mitted is of the unsinful kind. I am no warrior, hero, or conqueror; my deed was self-defence, to ensure my own safety— to satisfy my wants, &e." So the adul¬ terer writes to the partner of his sin— (i What sin have we committed ? I am
îhe object of your choice and your affec· tbns^—I am your real husbmd." See the Letters of îjyrd W, В. and others. But there is no need of comparing one sin with another; view any sin that you entertain with but a shade of difference ; then exchange situations, do as you would be done by, and fairly and honestly take a view of your own sin. His lordship certainly was not inclined to allow the identity of the un in himself, yet he thought of going from home for a week or two, that he might casually be absent on ihe pride-sermon Sunday. At length the tone of sense harmonized his feelings, and the earl of Browover was at church. His lordship, with his usual attention, heard the text—" Is not thts the carpenter's son ?" Twice he leant forward, and partially lifted his right hand iurther to witlidraw the green curtain, but without any change he returned to his usual posture, as the preacher proceeded : —·" There was a sin by which angeb of heaven feU—liow then can the greatest
and noblest of the sons of earth hope to escape from its contaminating influence ? that sin is pride. Yet we may escape it —we may tear It from our heart, tumble it to the dust, and crush it for ever be¬ neath our feet, through him who, for our sakes, was the object and the victim of it Christianity is the only safe and sure an¬ tidote to pride, when we renew our hearts by the balmy influence of the gospel of him whom the children of pride designated as the carpenter's son. Jesus, the reputed son of Joseph the carpenter, had made himself very conspicuous, by words and deeds of superior worth and wisdom ; but he did not offer to attach himself to the great, the rich, and the powerful, nor proffer any worldly advantage to his own town's-people of Capernaum, that they might all hail him as the Christ. So far from it, that he dispraised earthly glory, honour, wealth, ambition, and victory, and gave the sole praise to humility, patience, charity, contentment, and peace. The people of Capernaum beheld his mighty
miracles, and heard his pure doctrine, %vith worse than indifference ; all entered their hearts and minds through the medium of pride—* Is not this the carpenter's son ?" But what lia\ r e we novelists to do with sermons ? One of the greatest of our kind hath indeed set us an example,: but let it pa*s, at least for the present—the digres¬ sion has been long enough from the scene of the history, and has ansAvered the in¬ tended purpose of shewing the situation of the father of lord Atheling, as to that hereditary evil Avhieh ruined the peace of mind of his son and heir. Miss Ffloyd either felt herself more on an equality, or else more tenderly attached to Miss Chamont, than any otiier of her new acquaintance; it seemed to be rather a compound sentiment, arising alike from Miss Chamonťs hapless birth, and Miss Ffloyd's pity; for it is most true that " pity is akin to love;" and they who hate to be pitied, have rarely a heart adapted to pure and genuine love. It was with this sensation that Äliss Ffloyd, when she
had dropped her curtseys to each of the other individuals, as she entered lady Ap- reuth's morning-room, had shaken hands with Miss Chamont—a familiar acknow¬ ledgment, not unnoticed by lord Atheling before he left the room wdth the Ap- reuths. It could not otherwise than cross his lordship's proud mind, how naturally " like cleaves to like/' His lordship continued pondering on Aliss Iľŕloyd, as he walked with his friends to the coachmaker's.™ ťí What í could not a bit of a road be made across a field, without an intimacy with this woman ? What a fool have I been to come here every season İ How do I know- to what acquaintance I may subject my¬ self! And she talks so freely, and looks so keenly, one cannot help knowing her. To reflect upon Miss Chamont-—to know her reserve, her beauty, her dignity—it might be thought that she was the last person to be familiar with; yet she ac¬ cepted the little shrivelled hand witii her usual complacency. Why do I not look
out for some plausible excuse to be gone —for ever gone, and at once ? If I go on at this rate, I shall be like the felloAv луЬо prayed to Jupiter to turn his beauti¬ ful cat into a Avoman, that he might marry her ; but he found to his cost that she was still at heart all the cat, as soon as the first oppoitunity for mousing arrived." His lordship paused to revieAV the last sentiment, and fairly shook his head, and stepped quickly forward, as if to get rid of such daring, intruding, and ungracious thoughts ; then accused his own heart, as guilty of the basest calumny. With a sigh, recovering his former thoughts, he calmly asked himself the question—" Have I ever, directly or indirectly, entertained the idea (greatly as I admire, esteem, and respect Miss Chamont) of paying my ad¬ dresses ?" He was very Avell satisfied with the an- SAver which he received, by considering the Avhole of his conduct to her. At this moment Mr. Marsham called his atten¬ tion, by remarking that he Avas passing
by the coachmaker's, and the strange phan¬ tom of love vanished from his mind. But this was but the beginning of proud sorrow ; a day or tAVo aftenvards the con¬ versation at lady Apreuth's turned on Miss Ffloyd, when lord Atheling was pre¬ sent, and he found that Miss Chamont had called at her house that morning.— " You are quite intimate with this little lady ?" said lord Atheling. " Oh, very intimate," said Mrs. Mar¬ sham ; " she has been telling Lucy her fa¬ mily history this morning, how that she lost her parents in her childhood, and an only brother, at the university, just as he Avas one-and-twenty: in short, they are already double cousins." " Double cousins !" repeated lord Athe¬ ling, quite off his Pfuard. " Yes, double cousins—Cousins, in the first place, because they Avere both brought up, though in a different part of the cen¬ tury, in the same parish in Wales; and secondly, cousins from a philanthropical consanguinity of sentiment" VOL. IL G
His lordship, at the AA'ord philanthropi¬ zed, felt the colour mount in his cheeks; hi vain he tried to suppress it, and Avished to speak—he only laughed louder than he usually did, and bowed towards the lady as ith his most thankful Ьолу for her an¬ swer. This touch of pride couid not escape any observant eye in the company; his loidship turned it off as Avell as possible, by some question to Miss Chamont, about the concert on the foregoing evening, most respectfully addressed, as if he had said— kt Your knoAvledge and judgment can give mo a decisive ansAver." Miss Chamont replied with great pro¬ priety, ay h en lady Apreuth remarked— " My dear, are you certain that you have Miss Ffloyd's name in your list for my concert ?" " Yes, mamma," said Mrs. Marsham ; 4C the card shall be sent to-morrow in due order: and will you, my lord, excuse me presenting you yours now, for 1 have only to add your name to a card—the tickets
are all on the mantlepiece ; and my list, in which, owing to your late arrival at Bath, your name is not inserted, I have left in my dressing-room." She arose as she spoke, and, without waiting for a reply, wrote his lordship's name on a card ; who, if he could have commanded the proper tone of voice, would have answered the lady in her олуп care¬ less and ceremony-dispensing-Avith way, and have added^—" And leave one, as I go to the pump-room, at your friend, Miss Ffloyd's." It is no hard thing for the proud to con¬ descend, for they actually indulge the sen¬ sation of pride by the contrary semblance ; all vice is stimulated by hypocrisy; ay, they very often, by that means, more strongly exhibit their real feelings. A gentleman, who was a Johnson in li¬ terature and in person, perhaps also not unlike him in wit and sensibility, was in company with a very haughty, high- minded lady, to whose company his abili- Gâ
ties had been his passport The great lady so plainly shewed her condescension, that the gentleman very honestly said—" In¬ deed, my lady, you are too easy—I know not how to reply to you. I am afraid that I shall forget the difference between us. I beg, my lady, you wiU keep your dis¬ tance." But though any proud fool finds it a simple task to condescend, it is not so simple a one to play that part properly, which their judgment may tell them is best, and which even their inclination may incline them to play. Lord Atheling was a very sensible man, and he was very willing to have joked upon the subject; his mind was generaUy at his command, but his heart was a rebel. Yet when he thought, when he saw, when he spoke to Miss Chamont, then the heart was true enough, but the mind was the rebel. In spite of his philosophy, his fashion, his knowledge of the world, and even his knowledge of himself, he began to own to his secret soul, that he more than admired
Miss Chamont. —" I will break through this annual fascination-—I will ieave Bath. Where shall I go? I will not go; it is owning my weakness to go. I will see her less. I will regularly attend the York Club from this very day. And why so? Will that be consistency? I will take excursions round the neighbourhood. I Avill visit Bowood, Badmington, Cor- sham-House, Longleat, Stourhead, Font- hill, Wardour Castle; I will view the Druid's Temple at Avebury, Stonehenge, Stanton Drew, No, no ; I have seen all I Avish to see of fine painting, houses, and antiquities. She will soon be married ; I haA r e expected to hear it eveiy day, when I have been absent from her. This infa¬ tuation of mine for appearances will soon be past. Appearances! No—'tis real— true enough. I will certainly attend this concert, and from that evening Ьал г е the pout, or the rheumatism, if nothing imme¬ diately occurs, tiU I leave Bath." His lordship came late to the concert,
and did not forget his bow to Miss Ffloyd, who w r as splendidly arrayed. Nothing particular happened till the company partook of refreshment. Lord Atheling had not yet spoken to Miss Cha¬ mont, and had endeavoured also not to notice tw r o gentlemen wdio had for some time wished to make themselves agreeable to our heroine. As he addressed her, he lightly said^—" Which will be the happy man ?" for tlieir pretensions were not un¬ known in the family. She as lightly answered—" Which does your lordship suppose?" He casually mentioned one; upon which seriously she replied—" Did your lordship fancy you perceived any thing preferable in my reception ofhis attention? I can scarcely think it, I am so much on my guard; 1 lmve ever been so from a child ; my situation is so«-----■" Recover¬ ing herself, she added—" Rather, I think, O' 1 am like Miss Ffloyd—I speak my thoughts aloud."
His lordship could not restrain himself from answering—" I am certain you might at all times, with the greatest safety and propriety, Miss Chamont; for it is impos¬ sible that you can harbour a forbidden or improper one. But really, in speaking of the two gentlemen, I made a distinction where I saw no difference." Miss Chamont, making a very lovv curtsey to the compliment, was silent; when she saw Mr. Glynne enter the room —" Here comes a friend," said she, warm¬ ly, and going to meet him, " whom I prefer to-^ -----" The sentence was not finished : his lord¬ ship had heard of this gentleman's preten¬ sions. What then?—he had none of his own. Lord Atheling walked with her up to Mr. Glynne, and shook him by the hand in a friendly manner.
CHAPTER VI. To reconcile the resolution and the feeling of lord Atheling, in remaining at Bath, and to afford him, at the same time, the means of greater absence from his Apreuth friends, Avithout encouraging idie suspi¬ cions of the real motive, or other fanciful cause, the arrival of a gentleman, Avith Avhom lord Atheling became acquainted on the Continent opportunely occurred. Count GuilfiU Avas a perfect English¬ man, though his title was of foreign ho¬ nour. GuilfiU was partaking of a very excellent literary education, yet Avith all the ardour of youth and heroism, Avas so urgent with his guardian (for he had no rather or mother) to purchase him a com¬ mission at the age of fifteen, that he would not hear of delay.—" Study, sir !" said he, in answer to his guardian's objection ; " let
me see my path in life, and then, I shall best know the course of my studies." Unlike our youth, who purchase in a home regiment, look out for recruiting parties, and waste their time and morals i' i the idle and confined society ofa coun¬ try town, or the more narrow, debasing, and degenerating society of barracks, he made it a point to go abroad, and to see actual service. In his seventeenth year, a young cornet, he was in action, where his regiment greatly signalized itself, and honours and preferment already flowed upon him. The grace his courage gained, his knowledge preserved : in his twentieth year he had a company, and every officer who knew him, allowed that he was fully equal to the command of a regiment. Stil 1 signalizing himself by his abilities and his spirit, he would act as aid-de-camp to some foreign general among our allies—he would volunteer into service where his own re¬ giment was not to be employed ; he was also very ready at his pen, and his supe- G 3
riors always fonnd a personal benefit from his presence. At the early age of twenty-one, he re¬ ceived the honourable title by wdiich he was now designated, for his successful bra¬ very in the defence of a German potentate, which distinction, by the favour ofhis own court, he was permitted to assume in Eng¬ land. At this time he fell in love with the maid of honour of a foreign court, and, in despite of many rivals, won and mar¬ ried the lady. He thus became allied to great honours and wealth, and acquired a kind of civil as well as military rank. But rest and civil honours were not to his mind; and the loss oť his lady, who died in child¬ birth, with the child, urged him forward with more avidity in his military career. He now signalized himself as a man of honourable workPy principles. After the death ofhis wife, with whom he had lived in the utmost harmonv, he went down to take possession of a very large estate, wliich had fallen to the lady during the year of marriage* and which
she had immediately insured to her be¬ loved liusband. He questioned the head- stewrrd—" Who would have been the heir, if my countess had died unmarried?" The steward informed him, and he im¬ mediately sent a servant, to beg the favour of the gentleman's attendance at the castio on business. The young count did not keep him л moment in suspense.—" I understand, sir, you would have been the undoubted heir- at-law, if I had not married lady Amelia Lhaff' hausen ; I Avish to arrange affairs, that I may put you in immediate posses¬ sion of the Avhole. You have a large fa¬ mily, and by living here, as I understand from your character and habits you aro likely to do, you may be a blessing to tho whole neighbourhood. Row, I shall raise and mount a troop of volunteers for the empire, who have already offered them¬ selves; therefore, sir, the only question i% what sum of money can yon give me?" " My lord," said the other, " 1 am un¬ der an obligation that I never can suffi-
ciently repay. The estate is free, and ean be mortgaged to any amount; the timber is also very valuable. I request, therefore, yon ΛνίΙΙ mention any sum you please, and I shall be most happy and grateful in rais¬ ing it for you." The count mentioned ten thousand pounds. " I can double it, Avithout the least in¬ convenience to myself or family; and I Avili give your lordship my bond for double that also, if your lordship should have any want of tlie money." " Oh, no bond, my dear felloAv ! A bullet may, the next campaign, put an end to all my Avants ; but I'll accept your larger sum, if you can make it a matter л of ease, I don't mind taking away your ready money, for I knoAV Avhat to do with it«—and there is the timber at hand ; but you shall have the estate free." The gentleman felt, and strongly ex¬ pressed his obligation, " Well, this is settled/' turnmg to the
stoAvaKİ " Get the necessary papers as quick as possible, for my motto is com¬ pressed in one Avord— Forward. —And полу, âir," turning to the пелу proprietor, " Ave A TT ill ride out, if you please, intro¬ duce you to the tenants^ and arrange the volunteer business." " Hoay do you approve of your estate ?" said the great mai v when the young offi¬ cer leturned to his court. "It is no longer mine, sire; I found it Avell adapted to the otium familias digni¬ tatis, and I have resigned it to a faithful veteran, whose ancestors possessed it be¬ fore." It is almost needless to add, that tlie great man, his courtiers, and all who knew the circumstance, Avere pleased Avith it; and that the count was universally re¬ ceived, in the highest circles, with the greatest respect; for this virtuous action humbled pride; and some,.who.were Avill¬ ing to consider him before as a fortunate adventurer, were полу constrained to ae knoAvdedge him as a hero.
He was lately come to England for a few months, to consult with the English ministry, and receive his own sovereigns approbation towards some warlike designs which the count had planned with a fo¬ reign force. Count Guilfilľs acquaintance with lord Atheling was rivetted by an adventure in whieh they were engaged. Lord Athe¬ ling having joined the British and their allies on the Continent as a spectator, thought himself obliged, as a military man (for he was colonel ofa militia regiment), to volunteer his services. He had been in a very warm action, and the day was dosing, wlien GuilfiU rode up to him·— ** That body of French are carrying oif prisoners some very worthy emigrants; tliey will be all sacrificed. Will you ask the German commander, with whom you know 1 am no favourite, for his permis» sion that this regiment of cavalry may charge them, and endeavour to recover the prisoners ?" The request was granted to lord Athe-
ling, who proceeded with the party, great¬ ly signalized his own courage, and com¬ pletely succeeded in his object. The cir¬ cumstance was never known to lord Athe¬ ling's friends till count GuilfiU came to Bath. Neither was the count a great favourite with his majesty's ministers, because he was not enough of a party-man for their peculiar interests. Like such characters as lord Cochrane, count liumford, sir Syd¬ ney Smith, and sir Robert Wilson, count GuilfiU owed his fame and honours more to his own merit, and foreign notice, than as the reward of favouritism and ministe¬ rial grace.—" I am afraid," said lord hen- deep, when he was in the ministry, " you are not one of us." "Assuredly not, my lord, in talent; but in heart, wherever my humbler ser¬ vices spread, I am as faithful as your lord¬ ship to my country." " If, count," said another minister, " you would but give us a little assistance. Stand for the borough of Foxbury ; a po-
pular military character, with government support, will certainly carry the election. We don't ask your constant attendance iu the house; follow your military career; but when you do come to England, give your assistance to those ΛνΙιο ΛνίΙΙ assist you when abroad." " I am too young, sir, and lack л\^1от to play, like Philidor, favo games at once. 1 should then be a trifling politician and a trifling soldier. I trust now that I am consistent in my profession. Some time hence, perhaps, л\ г Ьеп my years are ma¬ tured, my principles formed, the high- day of my blood gone by, when my capa¬ bility ΛνϋΙ be more adapted to judge and to act, my ambition may rise to the ho¬ nour of being a British senator." The premier of either party argued in vain—a wariike ambition was as yet pre¬ dominant in the heart of the count; and as ministers chose to fear the impractica¬ bility, and to be apprehensive of the ex¬ pence of his plans, the count was now come down to Batb> while they considered
upon the subject. The count was twenty- six years of age, tall, thin, handsome, Avith great expression Avhen be spoke, and a light heroic look, that stamped the gen¬ tleman more than all rank, education, Avealth, and birth can ever bestow. He arrived at Bath a day or Uvo after lady Apreuth's concert, was immediately intro¬ duced to that family by his friend lord Atheling, and began very quickly to pay a marked attention to Miss Chamont, yet Avith that gentlemanly deference, that not one of the party could perceive it with displeasure. In compliment to the count and his friend, lady Apreuth invited them to a family dinner, and the gentlemen soon joined the ladies in the drawing-room. The conversation among the gentlemen, after dinner, took a mUitary turn, and Avas very pleasing to the old general Maurice ; it Avas continued in the draAving-room; and the count entertained the ladies with a description of the Turk, the Mameluke, the native Egyptian, and the Bedouin
Arab, their dresses, manners of life, fa¬ milies, and religious prejudices. " Was it correctly true/' said Mr. Ar¬ thur Apreuth, " that Buonaparte made an open profession, and conformed to the Mohammedan faith ?" " Politically," ansAvered the count ; " I never heard practically. Though, by-the- bye, one of his generals actually professed himself a conscientious proselyte, and Avas neAV-christened—baptized rather, neAvly- named upon the occasion." " It was the more honourable conduct of the two," said Mr. Marsham. " I think/' said the count, smiling, "that neither conduct had any thing to do Avith the code of honour." " A proud claim to veracity," continued Mr. Marsham, " such as the Quakers pro¬ fess, I have always considered as a Per¬ sian and Median article of that law Avhieh altereth not from any inducement ; and I eould easier make an excuse for Buona¬ parte's cruelty and perfidy, than for this false and public attestation of faith, While
the world at large condemns him for his perfidious breach of parole to the Turks, and for the poisoning of his own men, it more generally, and I think justly, con¬ demns him, for his total want of principle, in declaring himself a disciple of Moham¬ med." " I cannot conceive," said the count, " that there was any need of his professing one way or the other; toleration was all that was required—the finesse was too gross. After all, 'twas a mere ruse-de· guerre, and assuredly, my dear sir, not to be put, in comparison of iniquity, with the poisoning and the massacring." " Grant, count," continued Mr. Mar¬ sham, who was fond of a close argument, " that Buonaparte's shameful violation of religious principle was a thing of light consequence, and I think that the great man may make a plausible defence." The count said nothing ; but the ladies were all anxious to hear Mr. Marshanfs statement for the imperial villain ; for not even count GuilfiU could more heartily exe-
crate the w r hole conduct of the Corsican than Mr. Marsham himself. Mr. Marsham proceeded—" I will sup¬ pose then that all religion is a farce—that no other point than the consequence in this world is worth reasoning upon ; and that the proofs of Buonaparte's poisoning his own soldiers, and shooting his Turkish prisoners in cold blood, the morning after they had surrendered at discretion, are ad¬ mitted by that renowned hero himself. Here then is his defence—* I look upon it to be the paramount duty of every gene¬ ral to provide, with the utmost humanity, for his soldiers ; and by poisoning these men at Jaffa, I have sacrificed my own feelings, and I have dared to brave the ignorance, prejudice, malice, and calumny of the world, that I might, in the very best, and indeed only, way, carefully pro¬ vide for them. These, my beloved sol¬ diers, were at this time, more or less, la¬ bouring under their wounds; they were, in a dreadful and alarming degree, afflicted by the plague; and, to consummate their
, afflictions, in the utmost danger of falling into the hands of an enraged and vindic¬ tive enemy. What then have I done ? I have given them rest, and peace, and ob¬ livion. And what other motive could way the feeling of my heart than their benefit ? Now, if I had left them to be taken prisoners, already under the torture of disease and wounds—then in misery and wretchedness of mind and body, neg¬ lected and half-starved, they had lived, or by inclves died, still spreading among themselves, and even among their very enemies, the quickly-contagious pest. Not only to them, therefore, was my mercy extended—-my foes experienced it; and were their heads and hearts of noble na* ture, they would confess it too. Aş for the other case, it was an equal mixture of the highest attributes, justice and mercy. I had given orders that no quarter should be given these Turkish wretches—they had never given quarter to my soldiers ; hence it was justice; and mercy, in every point of view, towards the other Turks,
in that it taught them henceforth, if they expected it themselves, to shew it toAvards others; and it was, of course, also mercy towards mine own men, in that I shewed mine enemies how severely I would reta¬ liate, if they neglected the golden laws of mercy and humanity; and mercy again towards all, lest I had kept so many to be starved all together. There was an error, indeed, that arose from my excess of love toAvards my warriors in this ease. 1 ought to have ordered the whole of the officers and soldiers Avho took these Turks priso¬ ners to have been shot at the same time, fbr violating the most sacred of all orders, those of their commander-in-chief; and an error of the same kind in the other affair, in that, yielding my mind to the igno¬ rance and prejudice of the world, I did not, when I gave ease to my afflicted comrades, make a purifying conflagration of Jaffa and its neighbourhood, and en¬ deavour to exterminate the accursed plague, whicii the filth of these barbarians perpe¬ tuates/ Now, ladies and gentlemen," con-
eluded Mr. Marsham, íť I submit to you, if I have not made good my proposition, that if a total dereliction of all religious principle can excuse the Corsican's profes¬ sion of Mohammedism, that he may make a plausible defence for hurrying, in an in¬ stant, friends and foes out of their worldly cares and pains, though the method may be not according to our vulgar opinions, manners, and prejudices."* The company partly acquiesced, nor said the count any thing to the contrary, but—" If ever I despair of my own cause, sir, or want a defender, I can only hope to meet with as able an advocate as you." Lord Atheling now led the conversa¬ tion to the Imperial court, and the count appeared in a more pleasing light, as a lu¬ mini ry of no inferior honour and influence, whose rays his lordship was pleased to own. had conducted him into the zenith of fashion and military information, I have noticed the foregoing conversa-
tion, as it gave the ladies a little insight into the counťs liberal sentiments on reli¬ gious subjects. The young philosopher found no one in the present company from Avhom any pleasure; could arise, either from a reciprocity of opinion, or from the exertion of contradictory ability ; and he Avas by no means inclined further to ex¬ pand them. The steady religion ofall the Apreuth family he had quickly noticed, superior, more consistent, and conscien¬ tious, than, as he candidly said to Mr. Ar¬ thur, he had ever been able to perceive among professed champions of the faith and hierarchs ; and of the mighty magnet of attraction herself he spoke to lord Athe¬ ling the day ofhis introduction—" If that sAveet lady be a Quaker, my lord, she Avill certainly make a convert of me. I will go to her meeting ; and if it should prove a silent one, I shall learn more from her expressive countenance, than from all the doctors in the land : but no Quaker's ap¬ parel has half the sense and propriety ; her dress, my lord, is a perfect English trans-
lation of the long-desired simpleæ mundi- fås of Horace. So some author—I forget Avhom, but not Hume or Gibbon, for they had not the feeling to describe it—dressed tlie primitive Christian virgin. Now the comphment to Miss Chamonťs dress Avas a compliment to his lordship's taste, who had repeatedly asserteu^nat he had never seen any woman, in any court of Chris¬ tendom, so well dressed, in his opinion. And here be it remarked, that this is no common (what a lady might call) error in many men's minds, to admire a dress for its plainness. It is trifling to say, that there is equal pride and vanity in humble unassuming attire, as in the finest and most attractive mixture of colours ; for as луеН may a puffed-up and haughty wretch say to a worthy and honest man—" You are as proud and conceited as I am, for you take as great a pride in being good as I do in being great." But if the plainly dressed are choice and particular, earnest and anxious, sacrificinir VOL. IL H
time, care, and profit to the object—if they are not satisfied with cleanliness, neatness, and moderation, in the price of the articles, but earnest to have them va¬ luable, and the very best of the kind, and made after an exact model—there can be no differente, in point of conceit and va¬ nity, betAveen the superb lady with rib¬ bons, laces, plumes, and flowers, and the busy, bustfing, and formal Quaker. It is the Avaste of time, of mind, of care, and of expence, that forms the e\il of dress; and it is the saving of time, of mind, of care, and of expence, that makes a plain dress commendable; while, if the plain dress be more cleanly, modest, and useful than the other, it proves the superior Avis- doin, and deseives the superior praise; add also, in the case of our heroine, that her attire was more graceful, and mere fashion, in comparison, becomes complete foiiy. These remarks are given as peculiarly applicable, in all that is amiable, excellent, and commendable, to the apparel of Miss
Lucy Chamont. The uniquity might, by the strength of contrast, perhaps, add to the pleasing effect on the minds of both the count and lord ; for few young men of their age had had the like opportunity of seeing the variety and splendour of taste, and vanity, and wealth, in the dif¬ ferent courts of Europe; but the same motive might have a contrary effect on others, daily hackneyed in the routine of fashion in Bath and London, whose nar¬ rowed opinions and prejudiced concep¬ tions rarely expand into pure reason and sense. The young ladies of the Apreuth fa¬ mily had often ridiculed their beloved Lucy on her unaffected attire, and Mrs. Marsham could easily be sarcastic.—" It succeeds," said she, one day, when Äliss Chamont had had an offer ; " it is like a mousetrap, that appears plain and open, but has the bait and the snare neverthe¬ less. Well, it is lucky for us that we are all married, or we should have been all overlooked." H 2
Miss Chamonťs eyes said to her— " Why can you be so unkind?" but she steadily ansAvered — * '* Rather, ma'am, if you and my other young ladies had not been married, I should have been over¬ looked ; nor do I ever wish to be noticed till after you all, I have toki you often, my dear Mrs. Mar&ham, that if I had your birth and advantages, I should pro¬ bably dress more like you ; and if you really mean to say tbat tiiere is any thing particular, any obtrusive appearance of singularity, any bordering upon affecta¬ tion, I will adopt the alteration that you shall suggest." " No, no, child ; but when I do say ill- natured things, I would rather you should scold me with your tongue (which, by-the- bye, you can do when you like), than your eyes." Neither could it be said to be the per¬ son of Miss Chamont that would set off any dress to advantage—her friend Miss Glynne was memorable for the same mo¬ desty and plainness of attire, and, like our
heroine, was admired for the same; but neither MissGlynne's person or face wouid of themselves have attracted admiration. But return we to tlie count, who was by no means the hero of his own tale, or intruding of his conversational knowledge, but as wUUng (in most cases) to learn as to teach ; the gentlemen, therefore, were as much pleased with the unassumption of his cliaracter as with his anecdotic in¬ formation. If he was of no party in the state, so had he no confined principles in any point. He would boast his glory in being an EngUshman, yet he would not exclusively, and without discrimination, allow praise to his government for her laAvs or ecclesiastical poUcy. He was fond of considering himself a citizen of the world.—" At Vienna," said he, " I am a good Catholic ; in Egypt I have no objec¬ tion to be taken for a friend of Moham¬ med ; if I went to India, I would study the laws of Brama; if the Chinese empe¬ ror will admit me into his country, I'd promise to be faithful to Confucius; and
at home ΙΊΙ be obedient to the Protestant reform. But you'll be satisfied, sir," con¬ tinued the count, looking at Mr. Arthur Apreuth, " without my attestation to the Thirty-nine Articles and St. Atlmnasius's Creed." There are idlers enough in most com¬ panies, to whom a man who talks in this луау is an object of admiration ; there are fools enough willing to object to every thing that is holy and good, though their ignorance chains their tongues, and there¬ fore a laugh of approval was easily ob¬ tained. In the earliest days of his life captain GuilfiU, so far from acceding to all religions, had thrown out the gauntlet against all ; but as he had learned worldly Avisdom, so had he imbibed a little spiri¬ tual prudence; and he had adopted a more .ingenious method, by the rule of con¬ traries, of asserting fhe same tenets ; but in the present company there луеге none of these fools and idlers, whose conscience, matured by self-conduct, is ready to ap-
plaud an (if I may use a correct term) atheistical sentiment, Mr. Apreuth coolly replied to the fore¬ going rbapsody—"Your philosophy,coimt, is above my mental stretch; I am satis¬ fied with every good man in his proper state, if he be but what he appears to the world to be." " But you'll grant, sir," said the count, " that in all religions there is more meant than can be understood—more required than is really expected of us." " No, count, no ; I'll not grant you an inch, lest you fulfil the old proverb against me." This philosophistical play of his friend Guilfilľs conversation was very unpleasant to lord Atheling ; he endeavoured to turn the conversation, and easily succeeded. The count quoted Horace and Homer— laughed at Jupiter and Juno—shewed himself a good mathematician ; and the whole company (judges or not) were satis¬ fied, as well as entertained, with his mili¬ tary knowledge and information.
Every one of the ladies in the Apreuth family were very much pleased with his unassuming manners, pleasant temper, and general conversation. The old general shook his head at his religious flights, but thought him a perfect hero. He yet more particularly addressed himself to Miss Chamont ; and one morning caUing early on lord Atheling*—" My dear lord, who is this Miss Chamont ?" His lordship told him. " Now I'U believe in angels ! happily this Avant of ancestorial dignity is nothing to me. My father was a worthy good man, I know, because he taught me the early part of my education ; but, losing my parents ere I was ten years of age, how far he could reckon up the family pedigree I cannot say. My lord, I mean no disrespect to your very noble and truly honourable house. I am talking like a lover now. Your lordship, I presume, has no prior pretensions to the sweet creature whom I am alluding to ?"
His lordship never gave so heart-tear¬ ing a negative in his whole life. " Then wish me success ! I want no¬ thing but a good woman, Avhose person and mind I like. I am the first of my house ; if I live, my career is dear enough before me ; if I fall—for that every bullet has its billet, is the finest doctrine in the world-—I leave my widow and family rank, dignity, and twice ten times the worldly mammon with which I commenced the soldier of fortune and honour." There was a trait in the count's charac¬ ter not to be omitted, though it has been remarked always to accompany no religi¬ ous opinions—I mean superstitious ones. Thus, he did not disbelieve judicial astro¬ logy, and would give an instance of the turn of his faith from the effect of the moon on the tides. He thought at one time that he had learnt and he at least tried to learn, animal magnetism ; he was in possession ofa pair of metallic tractors,, and a secret charm or two. Ridicule the &3
count upon these, in ansAver to his reli¬ gious doubts, and he would reply—" I believe nothing—I judge only by actual proof; it may, or it may not be; Avhat is more wonderful than the powers of the loadstone ?" It is impossible to describe lord Athe¬ ling's sensation, Avhen the count, with marked expression, said—" I am agoing to pay a morning visit at lady Apreuth's— I'll not ask you, my dear lord, to accom¬ pany me." His lordship immediately ordered his horse, and once more endea you red to ob¬ literate the traces of love from his brain by a full gallop. He checked not his steed till he came to Bathford ; then calling to his servant, he alighted—gaA r e the man his horse—walked a little way up the hill— took his horse—complained of a violent headache (it was true enough, but more true had he said a heartache)—mounted, and rode back. As he Avent toAvards his chamber, he said to his astonished valet—" I am very
unwell—I shall lie down on the bed— don't let me be disturbed by any one." He entered his chamber—locked his door—walked hastily up and down the room, till he fancied that his servant, alarmed, was waiting at the door. He now roused his mind—rang his bell— asked for a glass of water—drank it—said he was better—dismissed his man—again locked the door, and threw himself s in all the agony of despair, on the bed. " And for what have I lost ел г егу hope? Hoav man rivets his own fetters! We boast our civilization—'tis another Avord for our follies and prejudices. What if all my proud incumbrances had been for ever throAvn aside, should I not be the same individual, alike blessed with strength, reason, fortune ? Might not / have been the first of my house ? and so might my son, and my grandson, also of theirs., if the old house had been to them, as it is to me, an incumbrance. But I Avant strength of mind—I am the slave of pre¬ judice. Oh ! hoAV happy should I be, if
Avith the hopes of this sweet creature's love, I began the world a mere adven¬ turer—served a volunteer under this free- minded, easy-hearted count-^-ay, enlisted a private, carried a knapsack, an ď ■- ^ oh ! 1 Avould serve twice seven years, as Jacob did, so she smiled on my toils, and was to be the reward of my service. What is there in the whole world, that I regard in a moment's comparison with her ! Avhat can afford me the least satisfaction ! I have now but one wish-—that my father could transfer to some other the gorgeous Aveight of his honours and dignities, that he might cultivate this genealogical tree of misery, and I could retire to some si¬ lent house of prayer and mourningwsome La Trappe society, wdiere, at peace with all the world, I might think only of meet¬ ing her in a betUr, und exclaim with Eloisa— ív Oh, Grace seiene î oh» Virtue heavenly fair î Dn me ohlhioii of low-thoughterJ care! Ft esh blooming Hope, py daughter of the sky, Λΐίχϊ ľtitth, our eaţlji mutlos tality !
Enter each mild, each amicable guest; Reeene, aud wrap me iu eternul rest." The violence of the paroxysm gave a temporary relief to the pains of love ; his lordship again summoned his servant— " Give me a glass of strong lemonade," " I hope your lordship is better ? Will you permit me^ my lord, to call------ ?" " No, no> my good friend, I thank you ; I am better, I did not think, an hour ago, that 1 should have been able to have dined in company to-day. Get me my things—I shall dress presently." Shame and pride were now come to the assistance of his lordship ; for let pride have its due—it is for a time able to smother the pangs of the heart ; but it generally, in these cases, comes in bad company ; for where a generous, noble, virtuous, and religious motive can influence the heart, it does not require the aid of pride. With the help of some of these auxiUaries, who would have managed it better, had they had not been headed by pride, his lordship
Avas able to join the company, with his usual pleasing manners, at dinner. Count GuilfiU AA^as present. Nothing had occurred to depress his spirits ; and the conversation turning upon the female cha¬ racter—" Women," says he, " are the only real comfort of one's life. I would com¬ mence hermit, or invent an air-balloon, and break my neck in trying to reach the moon, if there were no Avoman on earth. Unscx us, anil I do not think that there AA'ould be one virtue under the sun. If there луеге no other proof that Charles of SAveden was a madman, it is this-—that he Avanted the sense of love. Even the Cor¬ sican feels this; and I do not think that he Avould value the conquest of the ллч>гк1, if he could have no empress to partake of his glory." Was this like disappointment, or doubt; or suspense ? or was it possible that Miss Chamont could accede to his hopes at the first question ? she, who Avas all thonght and prudence—who owned, Avho prided
herself—'twas a more valuable pride than his lordshfp's own—in being thoughtful and prudent. Though, during the evening, lord Athe* ling had many opportunities of addressing the count, he could not think of alluding to the morning adventure. He had little but perturbed sleep during the night ; ir¬ resolute upon every point—one moment fancying himself most anxious that the count should succeed—the next resigning himself to despair. He arose late ; his friend Arthur came in луЬПе he луаз at breakfast. Arthur be¬ gan—" We are likely to lose our dear Lucy—your friend, the count, will carry her off. He is a strange man ! he has un¬ doubtedly conducted himself remarkably луеН in this business. I am really \ r ery sorry—we are all so attached to her—I vrish sir David had been here. It луав greatly in the counťs favour that he луа$ introduced under your auspices." This was a home thrust. His lordship aniiwered—" My dear Arthur, how could
I——" and not finishing the sentence— '· the counťs character and situation arc before you all—he is no adventurer—-he is no hypocrite " " My uncle has a very high opinion of him, and he is such a favourite too with the ladies," continued Mr. Apreuth, " yet not so much with my sister, as my mo¬ ther, my wife, and Lucy." His lordship again began speaking as to his feelings—" Your sister is a very sen¬ sible™" but recovering his mind—" she is quicker than most other women. Give your motlier time and discrimination, or Mrs. Apreuth, or Miss Chamont, I should ~™~But the count has three things in hi.s favour besides his all-winning heroism— hi.s youth, his good temper, and good sense." A nd this justice would lord Athe- liîiiî have done his friend to the ears of the fair lady herself, though his friend had been his rival, and that fair lady his ac¬ knowledged mistress. " Well," proceeded Mr. Apreuth, " I think Lucy will be happy ; her cliief cause
of care will be—if she marry him—upon his own account. If he cannot think on some, the most material points, as she does, he wiU respect her opinion." The count was at this moment intro¬ duced.—" Good-morning î good-morning ! Our friend—may I be permitted," bowing respectfully to Mr. Apreuth, " has told you, my lord, of the opening of the cam¬ paign. I am a soldier, and I am obliged to act somewhat in my foe, Napoleon's way—I cannot wait for long sieges ; but I hope, sir, that you, or any of your re¬ lations, or the friends of your family, will make no scruple of using all inquiries you may think proper concerning me ; and I assure you, that I shall personally consider it a favour, by having any questions put to me." " With that candour you act, sir, and therefore doubly deserve," said Mr. Ap¬ reuth, " I think it right to say, that there is one point in which I consider you and Miss Chamont ought not to misun¬ derstand one another-—! mean religious
sentiments. Miss Chamont I believe to be conscientiously attached to the revela¬ tion of Christianity. Do I lie under any mistake, count, in supposing you at least indifferent on this subject ?" " A perfect infidel, if you please," ca- A'alierly enough ansAvered the count ; " I have never affected othenvise: but as I claim exemption from persecution, so I religiously forbear persecuting others. I do not conceive a variance in opinion up¬ on these points ever yet deeply concerned the female mind ; for even the supposed case of lady Clementina must be resolved into the pride of papa and mamma, rather than any heretical denunciation of popes and confessors ; but if it Avere my fortune to marry a Roman Catholic, I would con- ф scicntiously allow her the full enjoyment of her religion ; though, I must say, I had rather have my hous^ filled Avith five hundred friends of a* our cloth, than one father-confessor prowling about it; and so highly do I admire Miss Chamont for being unlike other ladies, that I'd prefer
bubscribiııg for fifty copies of Macklin's Bible, sooner than present her with a dia¬ mond necklace." " A simpler edition, count," said Mr. Arthur, smiling, " I think would be also more to her taste." " In every edition, sir, I most willingly allow," replied the count, " without bring¬ ing religion into the question, this is the very best book that any good woman can be acquainted with. The very arguments of some of my brother infidels are, in my mind, above all other books in its favour— I moan its sincerity, its honesty, its speak¬ ing the whole truth, its arraigning the characters of its own worthies : sir, I allow you it always must do good, for it never deceives—it never flatters. Here is a point, Mr. Apreuth, in which I can most heartily, if not spiritually, agree with your sweet foster-sister. I hope you see no¬ thing, my dear sir, but what is favourable to me in this?" " In this, as in every other case," said Mr. Apreuth, " the lady must be the
judge of her own happiness. Though I love her as a sister, I shaU not intrude ray opinion ; and I have not a word to say concerning you, count, that I should not wish you to be present to hear it," " In point of the present world," said the count, smiling, " we are not far apart in our sentiments; and neither your prin¬ ciples, nor mine, sir, believe that the ma¬ trimonial contract will last any longer than this worid : but, seriously, I must confess that I had rather my opinions were first opened to Miss Chamont by myself; con¬ trast, suddenly exerted, often effects what moderation and reason would fail in per¬ forming; and as I hope to have the ho¬ nour of again addressing myself to Miss Chamont in about half-an-hour, I promise you, Mr. Apreuth, before I leave the lady, that any remarks her friends may think proper to make upon my deficiency on subjects of belief shall not be a novelty to tl 3 lady." " I would have you, count, remember," said Mr. Apreuth, " that not oniy on sub-
jects of religion, but on worldly concerns, and even on philosophical subjects, what is of great moment and interest to one person is of little regard to another. There are soldiers who have no teste for study, and students who dislike w'arfare. The mathematician, the astronomer, the aeronaut, may be inclined to give the greater credit to his own employment ; but every liberal-minded man will consider that as good a reason may be given for the pursuit of another, thougli it may be very unlike his own, I hope, therefore. by this rule you ауШ judge that Jľ do not set an undue value upon the congeniality of religious opinions." " Certainly, sir," answered the count, " I agree Avith you ; and by that same rule I wish you all to judge of my prin¬ ciples." The count soon left them. " He is a Avonderful man !" said Mr. Arthur. " I never heard you so eloquent," said his lordship.
" I could not speak as my mind willed, and my* heart wished ; but, to tell you the truth," continued Mr. Arthur, very in¬ nocently, " I dread the success of your friend, and 1 thought it was hoav or never the time to say something. He is such a hero, that when he talks of doing, I think the thing is done." " This is—I believe !" said his lordship. " Our pleasing recollections of her will be like a dream," continued Mr. Arthur ; " she Avili go abroad Avith him, and Ave shall see her no more !"
CHAPTER VII. ^f^*-************** Let us more immediately view the love- fortune of the gallant soldier, who, Avhen he called at lady Apreuth's, gave a note to the servant to her ladyship.—" Count GuilfiU begs the favour of a short conver¬ sation with Miss Chamont upon a subject
that he wishes not to be a secret to lady Apreuth, or any of her very respectable family." Miss Chamont received him alone. The count never whined in his life, nor was he subject to fits of hasty displeasure. He addressed Miss Chamont with great respect and deference. — " I have first, ma'am, to thank you for thus acceding to my request tlirough your dear friend. Will you permit me to hand you a chair, as I have many things to submit to your con¬ sideration, before I can further presume to call your attention to my pretensions?" The lady spoke^—" Your notice, and your very honourable behaviour, count, í leser ve my thanks, and ever grateful re¬ membrance ; but I have no wish, and I must beg that I may not have------" " As most indifferent to my pretensions, MifcS Chamont, you may peruse the pa¬ pers, I mean, as honouring me—may I, at least, hope this—with the good wishes of a friend ? it will be of service to a ge¬ neral knowledge of my character, for I
have no hereditary establishment of fame and honour. I am so little known to you, it is but justice to grant me this ; and I beg, through you, to submit these papers to the rest of the family. You will acquit me, I hope, of every trait of pride in pre¬ senting them, though I cannot say the same in my addressing you. If Pope said —* An honest man is the noblest work of God/ it was because he was little ac¬ quainted with the other sex; from my heart I say—a virtuous woman is the highest prize that God can bestow upon man. There is, Miss Chamont, alloAV me to say, a great similarity in our circum¬ stances. I am perfectly acquainted with yours. Your birth, so far from lessening you in my eyes, proudly exalts you. How is the A r alue of any worth to be obtained, but K A r comparison ? I should have been very sorry that my father had been a lord —I shonld have less ambition in calling you mine were you a princess ; nor do I think the attempt would have been more difficult. You have now that knowledge,
those thoughts, not to speak of superior education, you could not have had as a princess. But I beg your pardon—you Avili think that I wish to win you by flat¬ tery ; but if I do, it must be by flattering myself, and humbling you to myself; for I do wish to prove a similarity between us—I do aim at a congenial, a reciprocal feeling, and therefore it is, that as I am not unacquainted with you, so I Avish you also to be acquainted Avith me." Such was the substance of the counťs address, with a feAv breaks, but with in¬ numerable additions of amatorial graces, which a Avriter cannot describe, but everv sensitive heart can supply. To all Avhieh the lady replied—" I could not re¬ fuse hearing you, count ; but I am giving much needless, unnecessary trouble; I Avould rather you ------" " Let me, iu this, appeal to your jus¬ tice, your lovely candour, your friends." The lady retained the papers. The young count proceeded—" You A4)L. π. ι
must not judge me, Miss Chamont, as a military man, as an adventurer on the sea of glory—I am an Englishman, and reve¬ rence her laws; I am an enthusiast too in every thing that I believe truly honour¬ able and great. I would sheath my sword, пелтег to draw it again, so I could sheath it in my country's peace and safety. I have no general ambition—my warlike ef¬ forts are directed against the enemy of mankind. No little ichneumon more in- A eterately pursues the destructive monster of the Nile, than I Avould pursue and de¬ stroy the cruel tyranny of that imperial monster. If I am so blessed as to interest you in my fate—if it may be permitted me to weave our fortunes in one Aveb, it shall be my first care to throAV around you and yours a SAA r eet and certain shelter from every Avorldly storm, to which retreat of peace and happmess my ultimate hopes, my ambition, my glory, shall ahvays look forward as their highest reward. Where knowledge to certainty leads me, I can clearly shew you my mind« Miss Cha-
mont ; of principles arising from opinion, it is not so easy to speak ; but yours, I can say, shall ever be respected and inviolate, and your conduct arising from tbem, guid¬ ed and governed by your own pleasure— so let my own be. I venerate your golden rule—' Ώο^ as in like case, you would be done unto.' I have been, ma'am, in a great degree, a eitizen of the world, and I presume only to make the distinction between the good and the bad, as to the performance of all religious, relative, so¬ cial, and civil duties; and this, my dear lady, is my firm faith ; and as you see my motive, so you will give me your appro¬ bation for addressing you on the subject— no bigotry, no persecution, but tempe¬ rance and forbearance; for the object ofall religions should be the making mankind wiser and better." Soft and gentle negatives on the ladys side occasionally broke in upon the former part of his address ; but so general and so guarded were his religious remarks, that ι 2
any direct opposition could not be made to them ; thus, Miss Chamont by no means decidedly objected to the subject upon which he had requested her company, nor had she refused his offers. So favourably did the count open his matrimonial preli¬ minaries—so far were his overtures re¬ ceived. " I am glad to hear, my love," said her affectionate foster-mother, " you have not hastily refused him ; you have acted with your usual good sense and discretion. The count's addresses are an honour to any woman, and his conduct in this affair raises him yet higher in my esteem. Still, my dear Lucy, shall I be most sorry to lose you, as one of my олуп daughters; I can even say more sorry, because you are the last and the youngest, and will be fiuther removed from me." " 1 cried my eyes out, you all know," said Mrs. Marsham, " when my sisters married; and you then laughed at me, and said, it л\аз because my own turn w ao not come, Lucy, I shall cry my
heart out if you marry this most complete man of the world, though, instead of the honours ofa count, he had won those ofa prince." " I have no wish, my ever-dear friends ; your dutiful Lucy has no desire ever to leave your roof, my more than mother, my protectress, my guardian !" Mrs. Marsham broke through the tide of affection—" But let us look at these papers ; if we must part, I am resolved to know to whom I resign you. The grace, the ease, the candour, the heroism, the dignity of this favourite child ot fortune, shall not blind to me the frailties of the mere man. I do think you all are too partial to him. Lucy, you are a wise girl ; if he had made me an offer, I should not have acted half so prudently at the first." " I think, my dear," said her husband, " that you have no reason to accuse any of us of partiality for the count; and it appears to me, that I ought to expedite this business for my own sake," " ifthe count," said the wife, empha-
tically, " has got your vmrth, I most heartily wish him success." The husband felt the compliment. " Come, come, the papers," said Mrs. Marsham. They were very honourable testimonials to the hero's character; from his school¬ days, by tutors and schoolfellows; from his first entrance into the army, by the colonel of the regiment, the duke of York, the prince of Wales, and his royal master himself; from his foreign services, by many of the tìrst generals and potentates of Europe, a rich assemblage enough to bedazzle the proudest alliance in the king¬ dom. General Maurice could not with¬ hold his approbation ; and the last paper ivas a candid and modest apology for the others, ΛνΗΙι the generous statement, that if Miss Chamont and her friends approved his addresses, he would, as soon as they pleased* give security for a settlement of one thousand pounds a-year, in case of his demise. If Miss Chamont was at first pleased
with his person and manners, tins liberal conduct, with the many proofs of his worth, could not fail in every breast to raise an interest for the truly-gallant sol¬ dier. The next day, when they again met, and she delivered him the papers, she ad¬ dressed him—" I assure you, count, I am not insensible to your merits ; and I feel yet more for your very liberal and gene¬ rous behaviour towards me. You are de¬ serving of far more noble prospects than an alliance with me can ever present to your view." The count was not a man to neglect this opening—" No, my dear Miss Cha¬ mont, there is not a man in Christendom deserving of more, for there is not a great¬ er desert. But I will not express my feel¬ ings for you—I trust I have proved them to your friends ; but, above all, and before all, and, if it be necessary, exclusive of all, would I prove them to yourself." " Count," replied the young lady, *· 1 am greatly obliged by the whole of your
noble conduct; I should be totally un¬ worthy your very favourable notice, if I encouraged sentiments towards me which I cannot adequately return ; I say ade¬ quately, for Ι ΛνίΠ not deny to you my high esteem for you ; but kindly as yon have assimilated my station to your own, you must Ьал г е noticed our different ha¬ bits, manners, and, in the most serious ef¬ fect, opinions." " Do you, niv dear Miss Chamont, stiU allude particularly to religions senti¬ ments?" " I do, sir." " And there is nothing of custom, habit, and opinion, of so much consequence in vour eyes?" " Certainly not, count, if I am not a mere hypocrite in my profession." " Then I trust, my ever-dear Miss Cha¬ mont, I shall, by destroying the great im¬ pediment to congenial feeling in your fair bosom, remove every minor foe. I so¬ lemnly protest, by that honour which is the life and soul of every worthy man's
appeal, that you, unrestrained, unbiassed, shall freely indulge in and practise such sentiments and ceremonies as you may ap¬ prove of; and that I will cause, wherever my authority extends, your religious opi¬ nions to be treated with respect, as I would mine oavii," " I do not disbelieve you, count; but surely it would be impossible for tAvo per¬ sons, living together, and disagreeing on Avhat the one believes to be the most ma¬ terial of all points, and the other as an in¬ different subject, not to endeavour to in¬ fiuence each other, and set in a right point of A'iew what they consider to be the truth. We all saAv this the other day, when you and Mr, Marsham argued, not Avithout Avarmth, though both of you, all the time, professed to be unwilling to continue the subject." " My dear Miss Chamont,** said the count, " I have before now fought and ar¬ gued too, more with thoughts of learning than of victory, And do you think I 13
could not argue with you, and preserve an equal mind—and perhaps yield, pleased at being conquered ?*' " You are too insidious a reasöner," the fair one replied, " for a moment to allow me thus to think. No, count, your prac¬ tice at present is according to your prin¬ ciples ; if you thought as I do, would it be exactly the same?" The count felt the argument more se¬ riously—" I am to suppose, then, Miss Chamont does not approve of some part of my conduct," " Pardon me, count, I speak generally ; and my question naturally arises from the subject. I do not presume to disapprove of any part of your conduct; I would only shew, that contradictory opinions will necessarily lead to contrary conduct, and that a ehange of the one would pro¬ bably occasion a change of the other ----- * But I am proceeding too far." " By no means ; you cannot allude to any subject concerning me, for which I do not feel grateful for your very notice.
I AA-ould have you read my Avhole heart ; I Avould have you knoAv my most secret thoughts; I Avould ! ave every sensation of my soul, that can possibly be supposed opposite to any one of yours, brought to light and sifted, till you Avere convinced, hoAA r eA r er unequal to your own, it Avas in¬ nocent, and impossible of offence toAvards you. May I presume, then, that my opi nion upon subjects which can have no ac¬ tual proof, which have nothing to do with our social or relative state here on earth, Avhich belong only to that part of the con¬ science that reposes in one's олуп bosom, Avhich no other can feel, and therefore no other can кполу, is not required to be pro¬ selyted to any particular point ; for surely not in vain to you 1 cry Avith the poet— ' That mercy I to others shew, That mercy bhe w to rae." " Yes, indeed, sir," the young lady an¬ swered, " I am most desirous to avoid such themes ; but İioav ungrateful would it be for dear friends, living together,
to have such themes to avoid! Even now I cannot agree with your expression ; to me the subject is not that which no other need know, which belongs only to tlie inward conscience, which has nothing to do with our present state, and wants actual proof. I mean not one moment to argue the points, but to shew you, on the first view of the subject, how different our sentiments are; in addition to the two lines you quote, I w r ould give these as my explanation of mercy—not merely passive, but active mercy : * If I am right, oh, teach iny heart Still ία the right to »tuj ! Ir' I am wiong, thy grace imp; ri, To find tîıe better wy." " Then every view of these subjects," said the count, " will we forbear, except your kind prayers for me." " ï must not, count," said the lady, very seriously, " permit you to think that I can so far blind my reason, as to acquiesce in your statements. I do, with respect,
and great esteem, and gratitude towards you, feel the honour, the value of your offer ; but I cannot, Avith propriety, accept it. I hope you will not further press me —that you will ever remember me as your friend, in Avhich light I am indeed flattered in acknowledging you." The count took the lady's hand w T ith great respect ; he looked, but saAv not in her countenance the smallest deviation from her Avords.—" You are an enthusiast, indeed, my ever-dear JMiss Chamont; so am I, and I Avould convert you to be an enthusiast in love; but persecution, in Avhatever portion of the globe my fate may bear me, will never be a part of my creed. Yet think not that I will resign you ; you кполу me an ambitious man ; as long as you are neutral, I will not cense to influence you. And will you make a treaty of neutrality with me ? Nay, think not that I Avish to bind you against any more favourable alliance. My treaty's short—'tis like my time; I may be re-
moved from England to-morroAV, Will you permit me to Avrite to you ?" The young lady declined receiving his letters. The count, still holding her hand, con¬ tinued—" Are you not a little prudish ? Do you think at all Avell of me? May I then ask this favour, that if you think proper to confer this dear hand irreAOcably on any other, you will guide that hand to tell me the awful truth? I ay ish not my terms to be secret—I Avish to conceal no part of my respect tOAvard you. One line then—one shorter/" The lady promised, and the count's re¬ spectful salute sealed the treaty on her hand. The lady was about to Avithdraw, but the count gently prevented her.—" 1 Avas in hopes, JVIiss Chamont, that you Avould have asked the same terms from me ; if then it be possible that I can so think of playing the truant, Avill you give me per¬ mission to tell mine own story?"
She ansAvered —" That I feel a concern and interest in your fortune, I will not deny ; but I had rather you did not write, for I------" " If you do feel any concern and inte¬ rest," pointedly spoke the count, and was proceeding, wdien Miss Chamont, reco- Acring herself, continued—" Let it be as you think proper ; fbr not only shall I be ever glad to hear of your welfare, but as your friend, I shall be yet more happy to partake of it," The lady left him ; and as the gallant soldier Avalked out of the house, it Avould Ьал г е been a very difficult thing for the most scrutinizing observer to have noticed the least appearance of dismay or defeat in his countenance.
CHAPTER VIII. All of and belonging to a treat) of mar¬ riage may meet with comparison in the purchase of a horse. Not to dwell upon what is so striking and so common, from the making up, the coming out, and shew¬ ing off of the animal, to the for beth r or ìeo?*$c conclusion of the bargain, a few re¬ marks on the similitude of the minds of the two kinds of bidders will here only occur. He who has a good horse, aud does not wish to sell, will be sure to meet witli plenty of persons inclined to buy.; the voutiif ladv who is in no haste to be married, will also find that the refusal of one offer is rather an incitement to an¬ other. Why it is so in the case of the less noble animal, it is not necessarv to consider, though no degradation, it will be evident throughout these pages, is intended to-
wards the ladies by the comparison ; but in the case of a lady refusing an offer, it appears that an ambitious man will glory in making the attempt, because others have failed—that the desire of wealth, the admiration of beauty or accomplishment of any kind, is increased by the conviction that others acknowledge that there is the thing desired and admired, and also an opportunity of obtaining it ; add to these reasons, that where others fail in possess¬ ing themselves of what we are anxious af¬ ter, we can readily suppose it is because they are not like ourselves^ and therefore that we have a better chance. We hear of the emulation and compe¬ tition which often take place at a public auction ; it is not only an opposing passion that creates a desire of possession, but eve¬ ry bidding is an additional voucher for the worth of the article,—" I had no idea that it was so scarce, or so useful, or so valu¬ able, until I heard the different bidders," says an indifferent spectator; " and con¬ ceiving so many favourable opinions must
be right, I Avas induced to become the purchaser," Count GuilfiU, though a very prudent, sensible, and honourable man, could not help hinting to a French nobleman at Bath, that the religious principles of lady Apreuth's beautiful orphan had been an impediment to his success; and the noble¬ man, though a man alike honourable, eould not help expatiating on this hint in a select company, in whieh was present the reverend sir James Westcar. Sir James had long admired Miss Chamont; the marquis's ridicule of bigotry and reli¬ gious prejudices was the most pleasing nonsense he had ever heard. The reverend James Westcar had en¬ tered into the holy office Avith the best of principles and intentions. As soon as he took priest's orders, he Avas put in posses¬ sion ofa living that his provident father had purchased for him; and he not only resolved to amend and to benefit the Avhole parish, but to reform, or (as he called it) rogenerate it ; therefore the discourses Avere
adapted by him to the peculiar doctrines of Calvin ; and while his friends of the like persuasion told him that his parish had been totally ignorant of the gospel till he came (though the former incumbent had been what is called a very worthy and re¬ ligious man), he seemed to think that every person in it was still in ignorance, who did not make profession of the marked particularities of the avowed faith of the intolerant Genevan. His father's younger brother had been a very successful mer¬ chant, and was the squire of his parish ; lived at the mansion-house—was a moral, amiable, though plain character; aud hav¬ ing married rather late in life, his family were, iis yet, very young. Mr. Westcar was frequently at his uncle's, and the whole household was steady in its religious avocations; but still that peculiar phraseology was wanting. Yet this was not the young priest's fault, who never omitted an opportunity of ex plaining, in his own terms, the full bene-
fits of the grace of the Gospel Dispensa¬ tion, as he called it; and as his uncle's general ansAver had long been—" My good boy, I believe, and try to go by, my leíble and Prayer Book," Mr. Westcar's arguments Avere obliged to be confined to the original data. One day, when his uncle had heard and concisely answered him with the greatest patience and good-humour, he said, as his nephew began to get to the end of his ar¬ gument—" Jem, iioav, in return, let me catechize you a little," and he opened his pocketbook. " After reflecting upon your conversation, I have put down a few questions, your answer to which will much assist my information." " I shall be very happy indeed, my dear sir, to reply to them Avith my best ability ; and the more the better." His uncle began—" Are you a Calvi¬ nist ?*' " I believe, sir," said he, hesitatingly, u in the doctrines of Calvin ; but I don't
pretend to say that I go the full length with him. Perhaps, sir, I may be called a moderate Calvinist? " This would be," replied the uncle, " but a shabby kind of answer, my boy, upon a plain question at the Old Bailey. You talk a great deal about this Calvin, or at least upon the subjects that he Avas knoAvn to expatiate on ; the question there¬ fore seems to me to be, is he right or is he Avrong?" " I must say, sir, I think him right in his attack upon the shameful perversion of the sacred Scriptures, and in his expla¬ nation of original sin, freewill, justification, election, and reprobation." " That is enough, nepheAv ; then you are Avrong in being a moderate Calvinist, as you Avould be Avrong if you olyected to his explanation of these subjects in being any Calvinist at all. Again, if you are right in your opinions, you act wrong ín making them the subject of a party ; you are thus schİsmatical, if not heretical; but while you belong to the schism of Calvin,
you are a heretic against him ; for if you only partly agree wdth him, why applaud him ? We partly agree with most known heretics. Is there no error in being a mo¬ derate partisan? Though you ΛνίΙΙ not rash through thick and thin with him, he would have thought your going so far, and no farther, луаз a great error, and pro¬ bably would have convinced you that his practice was as unchristian as his doctrine, for so you кполу he did his moderate friend Siroctus. Now, my dear nephew, I know but one name we have any thing to do with—Christ; then let me ask you, if it iras an early Christian error to call, or be called, moderate or not, Paulite or Peterite, or building upon any name but that one?" " Certainly, sir, in those days; but we do not intend ίο make any schism by using Calvin, or any other name." " And is this, nephew, your answer? Why, don ,f you think that the early Paulites and Cephalitcs would have given the ьате? And you must allow, that a division has been made by those who in-
trude these opinions. You have separated yourselves from all other Christians, and you call one another evangelical ministers and gospel preachers in your conA r ersation and authorized writings ; in contradistinc¬ tion, you so call one another to your other brethren of the church, though his own modesty may prevent any one from calling himself by what is clearly meant an exclu¬ sive term. This modesty is wearing алуау very fast; the Avrapper of the Christian Observer will every month produce ar¬ ticles against this modesty-— s Wants a place, a house, a servant, a curacy*, ac¬ cording to the principles of this magazine ;' moral and religious character and conduct are j ust meted by the standard of the editor of the Christian Observer ! But pass Ave these things. You think your moderate , Calvinism true Christianity; and one of your tenets is, that they who do not be-, lieve on certain points as you profess, can¬ not be in a state of election ; that is, they must be in a state of reprobation."
" í do not presume to give judgment of others." " Not directly, as Calvin did, because you are moderate ; but if you mean what you say, every person, to be saved, must, in like manner, think upon these peculiar subjects—must trust and believe accord¬ ing to your explanation." " But does not tiie church, in many of her articles and expressions, say the same thing, sir?" " You are very modest, in taking upon yourselves the same authority as the church; if you used the same salving terms, it might be the more excusable, according to the sixth article and else¬ where. I wish not to accuse you, ne¬ phew ; but I have made up my mind at length to give you an answer, as to what you have plainly enough, and often enough, in and out of church, told us are our wants; not that we do not all of us need amendment; we all require to be made better and better, in and through
Christ, but I think not in the way that you mean, for you allow no actions to be right, unless opinions are so too, that is, unless opinions are as those you maintain» These are evangelical in the preacher and in the congregation. I know you your¬ self are too humble and modest to say that the late Mr. Lamber did not preach the gospel, yet numbers of your partisans do not scruple to say it. He preached mere morality, say they. Was not the preparatory preaching of John the Bap¬ tist, and our Saviour's sermon on the mount, mere morality ? Not that, as far as the Scriptures reveal to us, we are to abstain from converse on divine subjects, but a knowledge of these matters is never insisted on as necessary to salvation. " My dear uncle, are you not cutting up faith by the roots?" " I hope not ; this I believe to be faith —a trust in the merits, mediation, al¬ mighty power, and means of grace, of and through Jesus Christ, with a life conscien- VOL. il &
tiously obedient to the duties and doc¬ trines he had commanded and revealed to us, ever relying upon God's influence over us by his spirit." " I make no objection, sir, and I trust I never preach a contrary doctrine ; but do you mean, sir, that this is all that is to be said on the subject?" " Certainly not ; I only mean to say, that if a person make such a profession of his faith, the most conscientious minister need not call for more. Was the faith of Peter, of the nobleman, of the Samaritan leper, of the Syrophœnician woman, of the centurion, of the thief on the cross, or of Thomas, which you will own were all saving faiths-—was any one of these so full and particular.as your sect would con¬ fuse the mind and burden the conscience with? Yet I am defending myself rather than arraigning you ; for I have nothing materially to object against your preach¬ ing and practice, except that in judging of others you would be more charitable, and not go beyond the yery words of
Christ —I say Christ himself, because the words of the apostles, being arguments and reasons upon particular cases and circum¬ stances, cannot fairly at all times be ap¬ plied to ourselves." w Is not a minister always, sir, to en¬ deavour to instil those doctrines that he believes essential to salvation ?" " Yes, but with care and caution, lest he err himself; but not always dwelling on the same doctrine, or straining every doctrine, to support a party explanation ; and the language of Mr. Calvin, or Mr. Scott, or the bishop of------, is no autho¬ rity for you." " Will you name any, sir?" ** Why depreciate morality ? has our master done so ? hypocrisy was the theme of his condemnation. There is an hypo¬ critical affectation, which I heard uttered against Mr. Lamberg excellent character ; and I have heard you give the same explanation of the text from which it is borrowed."
4( I should wish much to hear it, sir." íť Every really sincere, moral, holy, and virtuous action is said to be no merit in the sight of God ; that it is ail as filthy rags." " These very words, sir, are in Isaiah, sixty-fourth chapter and sixth verse," " True, nephew ; and I say you per¬ vert them. Please to take down the Bible ; you'll see I have been looking—the place is doubled down-**-* All our righte¬ ousnesses are as filthy rags,' says the pro¬ phet But is not this the meaning—* We (the nation) have been all so wicked, that tiiere is no real goodness, truth, and sin¬ cerity in any part of our conduct ; even our righteousnesses are as filthy rags ; but real righteousness is not so. Read the verse before, nephew." He read—" Thou meetest him that re¬ joineth, and worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy w r ays: behold, thou art wroth : for wc have sinned : in those is continuance, and we shall be saved. But we are all as an unclean thing, and
all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our ini¬ quities, like the wind, have taken us away/' " There, young man, don't you see the distinction between true and false righte¬ ousness? I need not tell you that God meeting him tliat worketh righteousness, is encouraging and rewarding it, and, in short, the very contrary from throwing the slur upon it, as in the next A r erse." " I will not object to your explanation' of this passage, sir : yet, after all we can do, are we not sinners in the sight of God?" " Here I agree Avith you, my dear ne¬ phew, generally, for the best of us cannot be perfect ; but do not call good evil." " I do not mean it, sir, but only to sheAv that there is no merit in any thing that Ave can do, and that we must trust to Christ, and not to our own merits." " All this is at once allowed, if you mean any merit in opposition to, or in¬ stead of Christ's merits ; or if you mean
to say that it is impossible for us to get one step towards heaven without the aid of that God, without whose approval not a sparrow falls to the earth ; but I must deny that it is true, if you mean to say that every real good deed that we perform is not commanded and approved of by God. There are good works that may or may not depend upon a right mind, and these your friends would confuse with every kind of goodness. Thus, to receive the sacrament is doing a good work ; but to receive it for a mere qualification is doing wickedness ; so all the acts of religion may be worse than nothing, by being performed from hypocrisy. But when people, from a good motive, are kind and charitable, overcome their evil passions, and labour earnestly to promote the spiritual or tem¬ poral good of their fellow-creatures, it is confining the meaning of terms, mere play¬ ing upon expression, and deceiving of many, to make use of terms denying and depreciating the goodness of the action. And we, in common life, who use the
words trust and merit in application to the moral good actions, have no more an idea of taking from the trust and merit due to Christ, than any of you have." " You think, sir, that I indulge too freely in a confined sense of expression?" " I do ; and from my last remark I will give you one more phrase, which I consi¬ der a partial truth—a complete party- dogma, which probably is equally true, if an ex-parte man was to deliver it ex¬ actly tlie contrary." " I cannot conceive, sir, how that can be possible ; if the contrary to my doc¬ trine can be true, my doctrine must be false. Pray, sir, favour me with it." " Certainly. Noav if a preacher said-— * How many persons trust to the Lamb of God, as if he would carry them to hea¬ ven, instead of trusting to their олуп good Avorks Γ you would be alarmed !" " Undoubtedly, sir, with great reason, I think." " Yet the sentence is not untrue, in that -—' trusting to the Lamb of God Avithout
good Avorks/ you must alloAV, ' will be in vain.' But modify the sentence, and you cannot object to it— ť How* many trust to the Lamb of God, as if he would take them to heaven, instead of doing the things that he said, shewing forth works meet for repentance, and being found faithful, obedient, and diligent, through him !' which is the same almost as the Avords of Christ —* Why call ye me, lord, lord, and do not the things that I say ?' Now, remark, nepheAv, this sentence, first and last, is the contrary ofa favourite one of you and your moderate Calvinists-—' How many trust to their own good lives, as if these would carry them to heaven, instead oí trusting in that Lamb of God that taketh алуау the sins of the world !' Your sen¬ tence, I say, requires modifying as much as my first did ; for you cannot mean a trust in Christ without a good life ; there¬ fore a good life is a part of the trust, and vour doctrine is erroneous, because it is partial." Mr. Westcar uoav explained his own
meaning, which w r as all that he could do. After this conversation, the uncle and nephew became apparently more accom¬ modated together upon doctrinal points ; till, in the course of a year or two, the father and two elder brothers of the reve¬ rend James Westcar died, and he became possessed of the baronetcy, and a consider¬ able landed estate. From this time he employed a curate, and officiated the greater part of the year at another living, which came into his own gift with the family title, and which was near the mansion-house where he re¬ sided. A wife was the only thing want¬ ing to his worldly fortune; he was ac¬ quainted with the Apreuths, had seen and admired Miss Chamont,. and raised him¬ self a flattering prospect of love from her refusal ofa man so unlike himself as count GuilfilL Sir James made his offer in a letter ; he spoke of " the congeniality of religious sentiments," of" evangelical principles pro* к S,
ceeding from a devout heart," of " matri¬ mony being the earthly emblem of the purity and perfection öf spiritual love;" and having drawn a strong picture of the vanity of the world, he set Miss Cha¬ monťs beauties and virtues in opposition to it, and himself by her side, as her spi¬ ritual champion and orator. The lady politely thanked him, but, leaving him no hope, declined the alliance. However lord Atheling had not any pretensions of his own to encourage, yet secret joy gladdened his heart when the count unsuccessfuHy left Bath ; and when he heard (for these things, will transpire) of the unfavourablo effect of the reverend baroneťs letter. A few mornings after he had received intelligence of the lat¬ ter, ford Atheling met lady Apreath and Airs. Marsham in the Crescent. Mrs. Marsham said—" Has your lordship seen my husband? if you meet him, pray tell him to call for Miss Chamont at Miss Ffloyd's ; she is there waiting for me, and
I am in a great hurry to go to the milli¬ ner's with my mother." His lordship could not resist giving way to his feelings by a condescending im¬ pulse.—" If you will inform me where JMiss Ffloyd lives, I will myself call for Miss Chamont." Mrs. Marsham gave the necessary infor¬ mation ; and his lordship, without reflect¬ ing that condescension is a very danger¬ ous experiment for a proud man, walked, with his natural good-nature now height¬ ened to good-humour, to Äliss Ffloyd's residence, in not the most fashionable part of Bath. Miss Ffloyd's old woman opened the door. His lordship began to look about him.—" Will you inform Miss Chamont a gentleman called to conduct her home." The parlour-door was open, as the fe¬ male delivered her message in that note which deaf people use ; and she was an¬ swered in that whieh they are accustomed to—" Ask the gentleman, Ruth, to walk* in."
His lordship could do no othenvise than enter. Miss Ffloyd began apologizing at the siglit of his lordship, then ansAvered her¬ self that there was no need of apology— —" For I could not, nor Ruth either, knoAv it was your lordship. This is my uncle Summers, and this is Mr. Billsley, my lord/' introducing tAvo plain-looking men, the one old, the other about fifty. His lordship not uncivilly received the introduction. Mr. BiUsley, with a plan before him, seemed more intent upon some subject that he was explaining, than noticing his lordship. Miss Chamont rose to depart. " Stay a moment, Miss," said Mr. Bill¬ slcy, " I shall soon have finished my story —perhaps you may, some day, have ma¬ nors of your own, as probably you have already, sir," boAving towards his lordship; " and to preserve the game, Avithout hav¬ ing recourse to those Kiavs of tyranny, is no bad lesson for any one. Well,. Miss," still directing his discourse to Miss Cha-
mont, the company all standing—" Mr. Morrison took my advice ; so I Avent to the felioAVs hc suspected, and said to them, plainly— ť Mr. Morrison suspects you of killing his hares and pheasants, and in¬ stead of setting his gamekeepers to Avatch,. in hopes to catch you in the flict^ he will have recourse to a kind of law that is as open to you as to him. This is your cot¬ tage and garden, and if you choose to for¬ bid any man coming here, he dare not trespass ; and if he come after you have gi\*en him notice, vou may prosecute him: and there are knvyers enough who will take up your cause for the job. Now, Mr. Morrison, instead of having you and his keepers firing at one another, as some of you did last year, sends you this no¬ tice not to trespass on his land. He has sent my lord Shallow pate, and, all the gen¬ tlemen of the Numskull-hunt, the same ; so if any of you are seen, you'll be prose¬ cuted for the trespass ; and if you like to give Mr. Morrison the same warning, I'll take it back for you/ One of tlie men
said, laughing—* If you are disposed to do me a service, ask Mr. Morrison to give me employment/ I did. Three of tliese poachers are as good labourers as any the squire has on his farm ; one went for a sol¬ dier, and another is one of his game¬ keepers." The company all applauded the means. " It is fair enough," proceeded Mr. Billsley : " some of your high ones calletl my liberty-and-equality principles in ques¬ tion ; but I believe most of them, at least all worth caring for, have made the dis¬ covery, that I moan equal laws, and every liberty of doing good; but I beg pardon. Miss, and I must make haste to tlie agri¬ cultural dinner. Good-morning, cousin Ffloyd—good-morning, Mr. Summers— good-morning, sir — and good-morning, Miss." With an easy nod he spoke to Miss Chamont, and yet more to the surprise of lord Atheling, the beautiful object of uni¬ versal admiration extended that hand which kings might press with rapture, and which
this rough man, as he respectfully took, felt inspire him with some chivalrous phrase, and brought a smile into her coun¬ tenance; for though Miss Chamont had arisen to depart immediately w r ith her no¬ ble attendant, well knowing this was not the company agreeable to his notice, yet had she too much good sense, and too good a heart, to hide its feeling, either to pay deference to his pride, or to encourage her own. Miss Chamont and his lordship departed Lord Atheling had formed a very low opinion of his new acquaintance, but cer¬ tainly without any other reason than the total want of a supercilious exterior; and he had walked a street by the young lady's side, with his head filled with the old intruding tale of the feline meta¬ morphosis^ before he thought of offering his arm> which his fair companion declined ; while Mr. Billslcy had conceived a better opinion' of him, for though he had not attended to his name, he had noticed the pleasant and sensible countenance, the
conciliatory manners, and had never trou¬ bled his mind, intent on things, not men, hoAY deeply his lordship's thoughts of him¬ self had corrupted himself. After their departure Air. Billsley staid a moment, to be more correctly informed Avho his lord¬ ship Avas. The same evening lord Atheling Avas en¬ gaged to attend the theatre with the honour¬ able Misses Laurey, lord Fooling's daugh¬ ters, the near neighbours of the Apreuths, and young ladies of celebrated beauty and very great fashion. Cooke, the greatest na¬ tural genius of the age, Avas the attraction— Cooke, a wonderful instance, among others, that the self-command which governs the mind by common sense is the noblest ta¬ lent to the individual·—Cooke, Avho never played hie artificial part on the stage ill— Avho never played his real part on the Avorld Avell ! Oh, ye geniuses ! take warn¬ ing here—let not your fancies be unduly lighted up by the gift of God, whether tliat gift be painting, sculpture, poetry, elocution, mechanism, languages, &c. If
God hath blessed you with any mighty talent, be not lifted up, but let your first prayer to him be fbr grace to bear it mo¬ destly, and to use it reasonably. Of all the follies under the sun, the greatest ap¬ pears to me to see wisdom supported by weakness. How many geniuses have I known, who v/ere not equal to their own guidance ! It matters not how superior the mental powers of any one may be ; if vanity buoys him up above his strength, or vice undermines him, all will be weak¬ ened or corrupted. There are very few of these clever fellows that ought to have a will of their own ; they should be treated like the wonderful ones that are carried about for a show : these remarks forcibly apply to early geniuses. Happy for those who have some quiet, unaffected friend, whom they have sense enough to suffer to manage them. " Grent wits, ihey sny, to fools are near allied, And tiiin parut ious do the parti» divide." The egregious fatuity of superior intel¬ lect may be ofttimes pitied ; but the in-
fat itated adorers, Avho AAwshíp the demi¬ god till he becomes a mere monkey, are deserving of no pity, when his godship, as is often the case, plays his monkey tricks with them. Of all parasite plants, these idolatrous flatterers, these BosAvells in their Avay, that entwine round and be¬ numb genius, are the most cursed. The last scene is hoav closed on two of the most Avonderful orators the world ever saAv and heard, yet as unlike to each other as can well be conceived—William Pitt and George Cooke. Startle not, ye sons and daughters of pride it my instancing together the loftiest of politicians and the mere player—the one as literally played his part as ever the other did ; I believe off 1 their stages there might still a compa¬ rison he drawn. Cooke performed, în an imitative theatre, feigned characters, with that ease and simplicity, that the charac¬ ters appeared not overstrained to what our fancy supposes tliem to have been : Pitt, in his олуп character, in a real assembly of counsellors, so spake Avith all the arts,
of oratory, with all the figures of rhetoric, Avith all the powers of mind and body, that it Avas impossible for nature alone so to feel ; nothing but the deepest reason¬ ing and reflection could have produced such an assemblage of action. He seemed not to have studied what human nature ought to do in himself, but to try what it could bear in others; so far from follow¬ ing nature, lie tried experiments on na¬ ture. Nature is the impulse of the pas¬ sions, and must be compared to that which Ave see and know ; now Pitt's oratory had nothing to be compared to it. In short, Cooke gave you the idea of reality—Pitt lost all sight of reality, and greatly suc¬ ceeded, because he was more than human. But it is time to introduce my lord Atheling in the playhouse. All that Avas on the stage delighted him ; but off the stage every sense owned that beauty, and wit, and birth, and fashion, may yet leave a void in the heart. At the end of the play, having handed the ladies to their
carriage, he was induced to turn back, to see a certain character in a favourite farce. He was scarcelv reseated in his box, when the door was again opened, and in eame, for there was now plenty of room, the free-spoken stranger whom he had seen at Mks Ffioyd's, Mr. Btllsley. His manners unconstrained, he strided across the seats up to lord Atheling, without at the first knowing him. Then—" Oh, my lord! how do you do this evening? I am much disappointed in losing the play, though they tell me that I could have got no room; yet perhaps you might have squeezed out a corner for me. I have the honour, my lord, to be acquainted ------" But lord Atheling was visibly deranged by the familiarity—-there were people of fashion still in the adjoining boxes look¬ ing at them—Billslcy spoke loud, for he was flushed with wine, as well as aided by his natural flow of spirits ; lord Athe¬ ling therefore slightly and repulsively bowed, and immediately, without being
able to suppress his feelings, and before the other could finish his sentence, left the box. Billsley could not fail to perceive his lordship's distant carriage, and his rude departure, but seated himself like an in¬ dependent man somewhat offended, and muttered—" A damned proud fool, I fear, after all!" This was the beginning of a severe con¬ flict between his lordship and his pride, and but only the beginning. He met Mr. Bereton in the lobby ; and they had scarcely spoken, Avhen up came a gentle¬ man-farmer to Bereton—" Ah, counsellor ! Avhat, don't you кполу me ? I remember you Avell enough, for I have good cause. though you have not the great wig on, and look much the better for my fifty guineas at our county assizes." The squire spoke this with no displea¬ sure at the other's not knowing him, and offered his hand at the time, which Mr, Bereton shook very civiUy. Tlie idlers in the lobby laughed. Lord Atlieling
stood back, quite hurt, by sympathy, for the feelings of his friend ; for this attack Avas a much more violent one than his oavii from BiUsley. But Mr. Bereton himself partook of the scene with no injury of consequential sense, and only wished to get rid easily of a troublesome stranger, who appeared very much in liquor as he spoke—" Well, my friend, for my friend I find you are, I see you are İn good case; perhaps I have helped to put you in this high keeping." At this instant he recollected his client— " Oli í you are squire HarroAvby, Avhom I i£ot the cause for at the Wells assizes. You got your money by thousands—I by fifties — Avhy, man, you ought to have given me fiVe hundred pounds for that business." " Why, so I would, lawyer, and will, Avith all my heart," said the farmer, seri¬ ously ; " and here, before these smart ones, ï promise you, it is at your service when¬ ever you Avant it. You managed my cause nobly —you are an honest fellow, and
you'll be lord chancellor, though I mayn't live to see it." After all, lord Atheling saw that there was nothing very degrading in all this. Mr. Bereton replied, shaking his hand warmly—" You are proving your friend¬ ship. I thank you heartily, though I have no need of your offer : I have been amply repaid for my trouble. You have nothing better now to do than to go to law again, with as good a cause, and, drunk or sober, I shall be happy always to see you, though I confess, for both our credits, I had much rather it should be in the sober state—then also I should recol¬ lect you the sooner." " Why," said the farmer, not uncon¬ scious of the reproof, " we have all been dining at a great agricultural meeting; but 1 hope I have said nothing amiss, for tliough you are too good a fellow to stand upon your fine speeches, and so forth, some of these bucks here (and he looked full at lord Atheling, who stood back) may perhaps draw themselves up for want
of the trumps and trumpery. But I'll have you remember, counsellor, that the five hundred or thousand are ready at your call ; and 111 defy a man in his ma¬ jesty's dominions to say that Dick Har¬ rowby, drunk or sober, rich or poor, ever failed to stand to his bargain. Well, good-bye, my friend ; 111 take your hint, and get home to my quarters, though, I assure you, %ve had a very pleasant meet¬ ing, and parted as soon as we weli could v«ith decency. But I'll be off, before I expose myself any further," Mr. Bereton took hold of the farmer's arm, and telling lord Atheling that he would be back in a minute or two, con¬ ducted the other kindly out of the theatre, and said that to him İn that way, which induced him to go quietly home to his inn. Lord Atheling's cogitations were soon interrupted by Air. Bereton's return»—" 1 am glad I met this honest fellow," said he; ** he might have got, with his warm heart and head, mto some miscliiď; he is a much
superior character than what he appears in this disguise. I saw you with Billsley, and came round to you. I fear Billsley is not much better. There is some ex¬ cuse, for it has been a triumphal day for Billsley, and this squire Harrowby, and some others. They have succeeded in an inclosure business, against some haughty domineering gentry. Among other good things, they have succeeded in appropri¬ ating one hundred acres to the exclusive use of the poor of the parish. But is Bills- ley still in the box ?" " I'll tell you candidly," said lord Athe¬ ling, M I never saw this Billsley till the present morning, by accident, nor know I who he is ; but from what you say, I suppose him a man of some consequence, or, what is better, of real worth. Not knowing him, and seeing him in liquor, I have avoided his conversation, and left him rather cavalierly : for the future, I hope to follow your lesson to that free and drunken farmer. Go you to Mr. Billsley, VOL. IL L
make the best excuse you can for me ; be sure and teU him that I am naturaliv v' proud, and begin to understand what pride is, and to be ashamed of it, I'll see him to-morrow, and speak to him myself, if he be a cobler. But you may as well teli me who he is ?" " He is the best land-surveyor in tho kingdom; and, what will astonish you not a littie, the first time I ever saw him was at your fatheťs table; that day he had increased the earľs rent-roll two thousand pounds a-year, without displeasing a far¬ mer in cither of the parishes, by having judiciously changed and arranged the land, purchased some tithes, and taken offa few useless corners of the great park. Your father said to me— ť If all the commonalty would speak to the point like Mr. BiUsley, ΐ should never be above asking them to my table.' Mr. Billsley has introduced mc to many respectable clients at the as- fciaes, and, among others, to squire Har¬ rowby, of whom you have seen enough to convince you that he Ь my friend ; and
for half-a-dozen as well disposed towards me, I might give up all the acquaintance I have in the world." His lordship went to his lodgings. He could not fail to see the contrast, in a very similar case, between his own conduct and Mr. Bereton's. Billsley was no more know n to the one than Harrowby to the other, and Harrowby's behaviour was the most repugnant to every fine sense. The scene in the lobby, too, was more gross and pub¬ lic; yet, without a proud symptom, had his friend easily extricated himself, nei- their receiving nor giving offence, because no offence was intended. His lordship now seriously called him¬ self to account for his fine feelings in the morning.—" Could 1 not give the fair credit to Miss Chamonťs motives, when she shook him by the hand, instead of un- justly accusing her, in my mind, of kw notions? ought I not to have argued— ' This plain-spoken man is a man of real worth by her notice of him ;' and then I
should have acted accordingly, and have acted right Do I suppose no one acts from correct principles but myself? Miss Chamont surpasses me in just discrimina¬ tion* and I believe also in proper beha¬ viour, aad, probably, in the true principles of pride. I was born noble—I have had a good education—I have seen the Avorld: for what purpose ? For Avhat purpose, in¬ deed, if 1 cannot discriminate between real good and evii—if I must be a slave to appearances—if I know not how to con¬ duct myself rightly upon a sudden emer¬ gency—if I am more apprehensive of the momentary fancies of fashion and folly than of the deliberate judgment of the Avise afid good ? What have I not suf¬ fered already by the trammels of pride ! Shall I never be able to speak and to act with true dignity, Avithout being blinded by a phantom ?" His lordship viewed the circumstance in every light, and was tho¬ roughly convinced of his having too much ofa certain kind of feeling, and not enough of another.
This evening lord Atheling analysed his mind, in a manner few men or Avomen ever dare to attempt, and he certainly separated many base and deleterious par¬ ticles from some of the noblest and most salubrious, and he cleansed and purified some excellent principles, which Avere be¬ fore clogged and impregnated with much heterogeneous matter. In the morning, with the ardour of an honest convert, more than that of an over- zealous proselyte, he sent the following note to Mr. BiUsley :— " SIR, " My excuse and apology for the rude manner in Avhich I left you yes¬ ternight, I have no doubt your liberal mind has accepted from our friend Bere¬ ton, Avhich I begged him to make to you, befoie I knew you were a gentleman to whose exertions my father, and therefore myself, are greatly obliged. I have had a letter from the earl this very morning, wishing me to consult you upon some par-
ticular business, for which purpose, will you dine Avith me alone to-day, or call on me in the evening? or would it be more convenient for me to call on you? Avhen and where í Avait your answer, &c. kc. " Atheling." His lordship, in his Avhole life, had never before written such a kind of letter, so plain, so much to the purpose, so ex¬ pressive of his feelings convinced by rea¬ son; and Mr. Billsley, perfectly satisfied, nay more, highly pleased, never wrote before so courtly an answer. " MY LORD, '* I am ver) highly honoured by your message and letter. In trying to do me justice, you have not done it to your¬ self. I am convinced that I was wanting in a proper demeanour to your lordship yesternight from the momentary effects of a too-jovial heart. I am your lordship's debtor in liberality as weU as courtesy,
Your noble father treated me like a gen¬ tleman, while like a prince he remune¬ rated me—I perceive you aie of the same noble stock. I cannot presume to men¬ tion my time, but will wait on your lord¬ ship Avhen and where you please. " I am, kc. ke. " John Billsley." Mr. Billsley dined with his lordship that day, settled some affair that pomp and pride might Avith no difficulty have de¬ layed for years; and the gentlemen parted late in the evenmg, mutually benefited, and Avith the best and truest opinion of one another. There is an argument against reforma¬ tion that is certainly a very good one— " If you once begin, you don't knoAv Avhere you'll end." It Avas exactly so Avith lord Atheling, Having cleared his mind, he found, more than ever, that his heart wanted the same kind of investigation. So also, if our parliament were once proved incorrupt, our courts of justice would, in
the next place, receive a little close in¬ spection. What a number of laws might then be found worse than useless—what a number of retainers of the law doing more iiarm than good î Perhaps then some judges might be found to be no better than Scroggs and Jefferics ; and even some juries mere packed juries. What a fine rate should we soon be going at! We come then to our bishops; and though there can be no doubt they would stand their ground, there would probably be a ñne scattering around them. Then would come the cry and the answer— " Bishope» deans» doctors, prebends, canons, rectors— The church is in danger, cry—the mischief's brewing. itou^e, drowsy cm atea, rouse, mind, mind your lectures, Tlie church is in danger— 'пь our сошшоп ruin." " Nay, gemmen," quoth a curate, " we've no fear, Yours ih the only danger—be yours the care." In the similitude there may be a deal of pro and con, but in my tale there is no con. Which is right, the reformer or anti- reformer? the answer may be— neithbr. Yet not such an answer will arise as to
the propriety of his lordship's mental in¬ vestigation ; nor was it doubtful whether it were right that the reformation of his heart should follow that of his head.
CHAPTER IX. ****** **** ****·** At this period the honourable Henry Atheling, the younger brother of his lord¬ ship, made his appearance at Batb, with a strange kind of a companion, whom he had been introduced to in town. This social friend had obtained the young men of fashion's notice, like (let me use the old simile, for it is most apt) as the devil is honoured by the Indian, or as a noto¬ rious rogue of an attorney, and other ser¬ viceable rogues too, receive the flatterer's bows and cringes, or as the hangman is very politely treated by the condemned criminal, or— Ьо change my simile—as L3
some monstrous or noxious animal is oft- times petted, ofttimes shewn about : but to explain, or rather cut short all simile at once, and account for the union of these two opposites (for opposites they most completely were), I have only to say, that young Atheling was a poet, and Avas about publishing a specimen of the precocity of his intellect, and his companion Avas a re¬ viewer, Mr. M'Tweed, after not a feAv very cut¬ ting adventures, was doaa% among a cer¬ tain set of people, in high reputation. His anti-literary career had commenced at a very early age, but he first became noted in the neighbourhood of the Thames, Avhen he Avas the private tutor of a young man of fortune at a public school. The ad¬ vantage that a young man of fortune at a public school has over the other boys is this—he has a person to teach him his lesson before he attends his public tutor; to correct, alter, amend, or make, as he may need, his themes and verses for him, before they are shewn to any of the mas-
ters ; to take care of him out of school ; and to counteract that amalgamation of ideas in which some think the excellency of a public school consists, and which will arise in a republic of boys, among whom learning, sense, judgment, skill, courage, agility, and strength, alone lead to emi¬ nence. Now Mr. M'Tweed was gifted with universal learning, but he not very nicely understood Latin and Greek—to write in the Ciceronian style ear^e not very readily from his fingers, though he would describe that style to a nicety ; and he was not always exact in his own metre of a Latin verse, though he had a method of arraigning that of another. The exercises of young men of fortune at a public school, who have a private tutor, are expected to be supereminently excellent ; but it was rarely so with those of the pupil of Mr. M'Tweed. The mas¬ ters often smiled, and recorrected; Mr. M'Tweed felt hurt ; but when one or two exercises had been returned the young man, for being borrowed compositions, Mr.
M'TAveed would, if he had dared, been very angry. For his breeding and social parts he had been for some time less and less noticed : but at length an opportunity for his revenge occurred—it was in the rc- vieAv of a small work of one of the mas¬ ters, Air. M'Tweed had picked his ft?AV pounds for some months as an anonymous critic; and this review, from an old inve¬ terate blunder, often noticed in the school, proved his identity at once. It was im¬ possible to prevent the boys slyly remark¬ ing, as Mr. M'Tweed passed along—" How careful ought a. learned reviewer to be! not careful about his reviewing, for thé greater natural dunce and blackguard he is, the more likely is he to succeed ; but how careful ought he to be ks* ¡* discover himself Γ Then another Avould ask some little boy the rule that rectified Mr. M'Tweeďs error: in short, he could no lerker. Avith any peace or pleasure, stay in the vicinity of the school, and he lost his pupil at the same time. His next resource was to enter among
the regulars enlisted by the bookseller, who always found him something to do ; and as a feAv choice scholars corrected these lucubrations before they were offered to the public, not even an inveterate error was likely to pass. At length, such was his whispered reputation, that he was in¬ vited to the public parties of one or two timid fashionable authors and authoresses. Among these, a certain lady, who had ad¬ mired the poetry of young Atheling, and earnestly advised the publication, intro¬ duced the redoubtable revicAver to his no¬ tice, and had advised him, for the sake of an opportunity of private conferences on the weighty business (though to get rid of a too-frequent visitor is supposed to have been the lady's real motive) to take a trip to Bath with this dealer in fame. What kind of a trip, whether literary, scientific,, romantic, pleasurable 9 or in search of the picturesque, it may be called, it is not necessary to dilate on ; this we all know, that it often adds· to a great man*s reputation to make himself scarce. UI Xo
change the scene," ¡s a golden rule for poetical effusions, and why not critical ones? and if an anecdotic sarcasm from the vicinity of Bath could be slipped into a review, there could be no doubt of the effect. Well, behold the poet and the reviewer appear upon the world's great stage—the scene Bath—enter lord Atheling and his brother.—" Who, my dear fellow, is this Mr. M'Tweed? Where did you pick him up ?" But my scene is rather for acting than for theatrical description ; for though no one was present when the question was asked, Henry applied his mouth close to his brother's ear, and whispered—" He is a very eminent reviewer, writes for the ---------, and all the great booksellers say that he is equal to any thing." " I suppose he carries a pocket Ency¬ clopaedia about with him," said lord Athe¬ ling. " Reviewer ! but what have you to do with reviewers?" Another whisper------" Introduced to
me at Mrs. Sonnet's—reviewed her trifle in the .----- ." " Then at least he is an abominable ------." Lord Atheling paused; he Avas never known to use the Avord that полу so imperiously demanded its right place in his life ; but he added, very seriously— " I cannot notice him. You did very Avrong to introduce him. You don't knoiv the general contempt in which these fel¬ lows are held, and such a one as this too !" " Yes, yes," said the brother, " I know луеН enough how these critical gentlemen are considered ; but nobody can say who they are. This is all a secret—an inviol¬ able secret to you,, brother. And what if he be » quiz ? Puff him. off as some¬ body mysteriously wonderftil, and all the Avorld Avill give him admiration enough. We cannot do Avithout tliem. All I am afraid of, my dear brother, is this—that my literary bantling will die still-born; this gentleman (let me caU him so) Ave will suppose to be the midAvife or nurse. Now I hope to prevail upon him, as a private
friend, to give to my first-born life and publicity; then this brat of the brain must stand his chance: but if one re- vieAver, as doctor Logic says, bepraises well, the rest, if they mean to condemn, must at least answer the praise—hence comes notoriety." " Oh, brother!" said lord Atheling, "it is such (exeuse mc) fools as you who give these wretches half their consequence ; the other half is given them by their sapient readers. I have obseded them for some years, and I have divided them into tAVo classes; the one, which solely Avrites for its bread ; and the other, slaves of party, mer¬ cenary wretches, full of pride, envy, am¬ bition, and meanness ; the first I pity— the last I despise—both I blame and avoid. Your friend raay, perhaps, partake of both. I never yet knowingly associated with a reviewer; and though he may be your reviewer, I would rather, I assure you, sit down at a Aventure with your tailor or shoemaker, in the hopes of finding a gen¬ tleman."
I have described lord Atheling through these pages as being troubled by an here¬ ditary malady, which worldly habits are apt to increase. I have exhibited him suffering from this mental complaint, and I have shewn that by good regimen he had Aveakened its inveteracy, and did not find himself so frequently and so grievously af¬ flicted. I must therefore, at this time, do him the fair justice to say, that it Avas no temporary attack ofhis old complaint, that induced him thus strongly to express liis antipathy to a revieAver ; but on the con¬ trary, it arose from that nausea Avhich a sound mind feels toAvards a plausible ap¬ pearance, that it thinks is but a cover to each base and degrading passion ; and his lordship's brother had been inclined to form the erroneous opinion, till the tailor and shoemaker Avere brought upon the tapis. The young poet, therefore, though in his heart he hated the cast as naturally as a terrier does a badger, endeavoured to defend it generaUy by particulars.—" Were not Smollet and Johnson, kc. kc. ke. re-
viewers of high credit and great esteem ? * " Not of credit or esteem as anonymous critics; tiiis part of their literary fame they Avere ahvays ashamed of. Here and there an individual unknown critic may deserve credit for an honest revicAv ; but it is so rare, that it is an exception that proves the rule. Eminent men are often employed to write upon a certain subject: this is put into the hand of the Procrus- tian revieAver, and he stretches and man¬ gles it to suit his oavii editors, publishers, political or religions party, private prin¬ ciples, or peculiar emolument ; and hence springs the iniquity : this last often gets undue credit, is the author ofall the evils 1 complain, and is the object of my satire. A fair, candid critique on any луогк, un¬ biassed by political and religious party, by the author's connexions, by the book- seller's interest, and by many other con¬ siderations independent of the л -vork itself, is no more to be expected than that if Mr. M'TAveed himself were to overhear our conversation, and to state it literally. No,
no, Harry; you have in this business played the fool, or something worse, and I will have nothing to do Avith your com¬ panion: but I'll give you one Avord of advice, my good brother—if you do not provide yourself with more respectable helps to mount to the temple of fame, you will certainly remain all your life stuck, with these revieiving gentry, in the muddy moat that surrounds its base." Mr. Atheling tried once more to inte¬ rest his brother to give some countenance to Mr. M'Tweed, under the plea of fa¬ shion.—" Why, my dear lord, I assure you that among men of the highest rank and literal y fashion, a reA'ieAver is almost as necessary an appendage to his comforts, his instruction, or his taste (I do not ex¬ actly кполу which), as a led captain used to be in former times. Not only the great booksellers have their favourite reviewer, but every great man. Why, if the Talents had continued in office, all our secretaries and clerks would have been ci-devant re¬ viewers. There is my lord G ------, and
the marquis of L—, and lord H——*, and sir J, B~——, the right honourable G. C~—, and honourable Mr, F ------, are seldom to be seen at their literary hours without a reviewer. Whether it be from the same principle that a Bow- street officer attends to keep off improper company, that the critic deters poor au¬ thors and poets, I know not ; but as an incipient one, I already shudder at the sight of them ; and I have thus taken one to my own keeping, that I may become rather more familiarized to tliem." " As I never mean to turn author, I can have no concern with him." The young bard made yet another trial. —" But are you ignorant, brother, that half our eminent Avriters, to sheAv their respect for the fraternity, sometimes con¬ descend to be critics ?" "T have heard so; they are seduced in¬ to the critical gang, that their good-will may be insured ; and they are tempted by a rival publication, a contrary party, and above all, by envy; and their shame of
the society shews the infamy of it. In the present day it appears, "poeta fit, non nas¬ citura in contradiction to Horace's rule. If therefore you will proceed, the next best and wisest thing you can do is to build a house near the Lakes ; for this also, I understand, is a practice of literary fa¬ shion. Now I have got a piece of ground, which is of little agricultural worth, close to these expansive waters ; it has till this century been considered a dismal, dreary, damp, unsociable, and not very healthy spot ; but as it is now become picturesque, romantic, isolated, unique, and wonder¬ fully salubrious, I will fairly make you a present of it, if you can prevail with your reviewer to pack off there with you. The spot is equal, I think, to a Scotch review¬ er's idea of superior culture ; and with the Lakes there are highland hills, Copland woods, living floods sweeping a spread of pines, lonely vales, and rough copse-co¬ vered cliffs, with evergreen lawns, and ge¬ nial sun and shade—or there may be ; and when the winds are warm and still, and
the sun from the meridian, after the ver¬ nal equinox, shines without a cloud, î have not the least doubt that the poet and the painter may have some idea from na¬ ture of an Italian climate and sky." ťť I thank you, dear brother; but my classical taste, tiil î can follow your ex¬ ample in going abroad, ΛνίΙΙ be contented with Bath and London, Cambridge and Browover Castle. But if you will not meet Mr. M*Tweed, will not the company of our vicar, the reverend Mr. Gwylhves, and his brother-in-law, Mr, Ilemley, who both came to Bath yesterday, sir Harry Curragh, young Vescule, the Irish coun¬ sellor, Mr, Morrison the younger, and a few more friends, tempt you to dine with us to-morrow ?" " Ho, my brother ; but give me Mr. Gwyllwes*s address, and ϊ will call on him in the morning." Ci Perhaps, my lord, more agreeable so¬ ciety you have in view," u Sir, after the dinner-hour I shall be аюпе må at home the whole evening, on
particular business belonging to our fa¬ ther; and I hope you and your company will spend a very pleasant day."
CHAPTER X.
My lord Atheling caught at his brother's words — " more agreeable society/' and they mutually understood one another, tliough not a former allusion had ever passed betAveen them. The case Avas, that the younger Atheling, like his brother, had been particularly impressed by the first interview with Miss Chamont, and the lover's feelings in an instant divined the real motive that tempted his brother to Bath ; but upon a closer obser A r ance of the parties, he could perceive nothing to justify the ideas ofa love affair; therefore fancy directed his mind (for to see her season after season, and not be in love, he concluded impossible) to secret interviews.
As for his own amatoria! sensations, they had been easily aUayed by giving them vent. Two sonnets, and " The Doubts and Fears of Love," in twelve Spenceriaii stanzas, had set his mind in comparative ease ; but no such resource was found for his brother; him the wiry god had pierced with a small and secrc f , though most sub¬ tile arrow, whose barbs, at every attempt to extract it, buried themselves the deeper in his heart. The young poet, finding that his great authorial secret had been so unfavourably received by his brother, resolved hence¬ forth to keep it to himseif; and Mr. M'Tweed found hhnself in company, at the York Hotel, with nine gentlemen, all raen of fashion and rank ; two had escaped giving or receiving, whichever it may be, this honour—lord Atheling and the ho¬ nourable and reverend Sidney W r ardine. The latter gentleman hau been also in¬ vited; but seeing at a distance Mr. M # Tweed with his brother-poet, he had found urgent business, which induced him
to send an excuse. It has been said, that Mr. Wardine had initiated himself among these anonymi-critical-dictatorial Ulumi- nati ; and thus it happened he already had Uie honour of knowing Mr. M'Tweed. But here Mr. Wardine was a novice, while the other Avas a high professor. When the mania of political revolu¬ tionizing was at its height, many ardent youths, rather too full of liberty and equa¬ lity, joined themselves to secret societies. At their meetings, they met with vete¬ rans of tlie French and German school, ready to carry a pike, and to cut off a head, and place it on the top of it Their language, upon all points, went gather farther than these liberty-heroes could cor- diaUy approve ; but they were initiated— they were sworn—they were bound one to another—and, " willye nillye? as the old adage says, they could not avoid the regular party meetings. It would also come to pass, that these well-meaning re¬ formists would occasionally meet their po« VOL* II. M
Utically-sworn brothers in the world at large; but there never was an instance known in which they did not endeavour to aA 7 oid any further contact. How much stronger, at the present day, might I il¬ lustrate this, by our place-despairingWhigs, and the all-place-destroy ing Radicals í Look at the York meetings, from the golden link of the right honourable Fitzwilliam, to the iron one of the vagabond orator Mitchell ; and which Avas the brazen link of this wonderful chain ? So, at the pre¬ sent mania of revieAvmg, the amateur- revieAvers, who haA^e unhappily entered into the fraternity, are alike shy of their brethren, the per-fas-eUnefas connoisseurs. But return we to Henry Atheling's dinner-party, remove the cloth, and see our reviewer, with nine gentlemen, drink¬ ing his wine ; and if filling a bumper, and taking it off, will constitute a gentleman, hc was the best of the ten. Hear now the fashions and scandal of Bath—hear the praises of dogs, horses, curricles, and la¬ dies. Our reviewer hitches in his remark
now and then; but what thought his au¬ ditors? At length a scientific opening appeared-—" A Copy of Verses, on the Death and Embalming of a Lady of Fa¬ shion's Lap-Dog/' Mr. M*Tweed now- brought forward two or three very pretty things, and dressed them up just as he liked. His young admirer was not be¬ hind hand in pointing out tlieir beauties ; but fortune led him, as she has done many other great men, beyond the mark. He had just repeated an approved trifle, when a gentleman present said—" May I ask, sir, if you knew the author ?" " Perfectly well, sir/' replied Mr. M'Tweed, with that easy assurance that seemed to give the honour to himseif The gentleman whispered his neighbour —" I don't know who this Mr. M*Tweed is ; but I know that I wrote these Unes myself, and sent them, with some more, to a monthly publication, which did not idmit them." " I am afraid," replied the other, " that m 2
ï do know something of this Mr. M*Tweed, .*ut not exactly in the character that he now appears," This last gentleman had been at Eton, and began to fancy that he recognized the old private tutor in hfo metamorphosis, The young Irish lawyer, Mr. Vescule, came round to them, and asked them con¬ cerning Mr. M'Tweed, who was now talk¬ ing learnedly away, his discourse full of dogmatism, paradoxes, and all that was wonderful and contradictory. Some one called Buonaparte the greatest hero of the age.—" Hero, sir ï any thing but a hero. He is the shrewdest of poUtieians, the wisest of philosophers, and the ablest of legislators." The superstition and slavish torpitude of Spain was noticed—" Rather true reli¬ gion and liberty are coming to maturity in that country; and if the beloved Fer dinand» whom I have been informed is a superior genius and most liberal-minded youth, should return, England and Ame-
rica may take lessons of government from him." But the Etonian, Avishing to sound the new gentleman, introduced the subject of reviews, and, purposely to try his feeling, vented a furious philippic against the Edinburgh Review. Mr. M*TAveed was too wise to reply to it ; but the young poet thought it a good opportunity to ingratiate himself in the Avay he wished with his friend ; but he only collected fuel for the Etonian to kindle. " That there are good articles in the Edinburgh RevieAv, I am Avilling enough to allow, but they are all warped by a want of principle; by principle I mean common truth, honesty, morality, and re¬ ligion. Now, sir, I'U let you into a secret of this mighty review. There are four kinds of writers support it. First, there are learned men hired by splendid offers, who compose all learned articles. Secondly, lie ostensible editors, w r ho cull and alter the original critiques, till they are enough stuffed with Edinburgh conceits and cm-
dities, and party puffs, and interested re- marks. Thirdly come a hired set of Grub- street writers, who are in constant pay ; these venture on the most daring asser¬ tions and paradoxes, both in church and state> mixed with scandal and falsehood, to suit the taste of their employers. Fourthly, a political party of lords and commons stand behind the curtain, who occasionally write articles ¿frati», but who constantly give intelligence in politics, in fashion, and on foreign subjects; among these are as pure disciples of Voltaire, Gib¬ bon, Hume, &e. &c. as any that at pre¬ sent exist; and irréligion and immorality, properly disguised, they particularly excel in." The young poet endeavoured to rally, and to ridicule the intelligence.—·" Your informer has given you a very horrific ac¬ count of these dreadful reviewers ; these art 1 , ï suppose, the remains of the Encyclope¬ dists, illuminati, and philosophists of Eu¬ rope ?" " You come nearer the mark, my dear
sir, than you suppose; for Avhether my in¬ formation of the combination of Avriters be true or false, I cannot say; but I take up an Edinburgh Review, and assert, here are the very sentiments of the Encyclopae¬ dists, Avith the §kme thin disguise, namely, stating tAvo opinions, as alike worthy of* consideration, when one is directly con¬ trary to religion and virtue, confusing re¬ ligion with enthusiasm, with politics, and philosophy—putting different kinds of faith upon a like respectability and credi- bility-^-making religion answerable for the errors of its professors—and accommodat¬ ing morality to the temper and habits of the people, the laws and customs of the realm, and even to the climate and to the convenience of individuals. These pretty articles I can point out to you repeatedly, and therefore is it not to be deprecated that we meet in the libraries of so many of our nobility and gentry complete sets of tlie Edinburgh Review, before any other review ? In the next edition of noble au¬ thors, 1 Avould recommend an appendix of
noble writers in the Edinburgh Review, It has been a kind of crack point to our fashionable literatists* that they have writ¬ ten an article in the Edinbugh Review ; and the adorers of this north star are very eager to whisper this credit to any young man of science, ability, and fashion. How true it may be of individuals, I presume not to say ; but this I assert, that many accused deny it, and others are heartily ashamed of it." Mr. M'Tweed was very awkwardly si¬ tuated, in that he could not reply to these oalumnies against his acquaintance, with¬ out raising suspicions; but at length he entered into a general praise of the Scots, which no one was inclined to disprove; and wishing to shew his impartiality, and finding there were Irishmen in company, he talked of the wit and genius of the Irish. But when a satirist is constrained to pay the heavy debt of praise, he labours to get an offset somewhere; and from Scotch and Irish he unluckily came to the Welsh, and ridiculing their torpitude,
hauteur, and self-satisfaction-—" At home or abroad," said he, " a mere beggarly set" Now Mr. Gwyllwes, at the first view of Mr. M*Tweed, had taken a strange an¬ tipathy—he had avoided his looks and conversation—he, for some time, had been attending to a very instructive conversa¬ tion between his brother-in-law and sir Harry Curragh» upon brood-mares, shoot¬ ing flying, and the different hunting of England and Ireland, when " Wales, Wales, Wales/* sounding in his ears, he turned, and heard the words—" At home and abroad, a mere beggarly set."—" 1 must be permitted/' said he, starting up, " to interrupt the gentleman who cannot know the meaning of the word ' beggar« ly, which is mean, spunging* /¿órneles*, pitiless, subservient, cringing* swagger- ing? and lying ; and to prove how inap¬ plicable it is to any of the Welsh* I will refer you to that extensive and minute in¬ vestigation made by individuals ofall parts ма
of Great Brifcain, and of the first respecta¬ bility, and also made by a committee of lhe members of the house of commons, into the state of mendicity and vagrancy in the metropolis and its neighbourhood." Mr. Gwyllwes here opened his pocket- book, took out a small printed paper, antl read— £ * At least fifteen thousand two hundred and eighty-eight Irish, Scotch, foreign, and parochial beggars daily infest London and* its vicinity, and amid this shocking list of offenders, not one single Welshman has been found. I will only add * Eæ pede, Hercules *? Mr. Gwyllwes sat down, without suf¬ fering his eyes to fall upon Mr-, M'Tweed, who explained, that he merely meant in¬ tellectual genius in works of celebrity ; but the other condescended not to give him. a look or an answer. After Mr. Veseule had spoken to the two gentlemen concerning Mr, M'Tweed, he walked out of the room» and wrote· a
note to Mr. Wardine, and returned im¬ mediately. The waiter now brought him an answer. " You are right in your conjec¬ ture. Don't mention my name. Yonng Atheling is deceived—he knows nothing of him. You see why I didn't dine with you. Be careful. Burn this. " S. W." The Irish counsellor being well assured that he knew something of Mr. M'Tweed, coolly took out his pencil, and while the reviewer, having taken a bumper or t avo more of Madeira (for he hated claret), was again launching forth, Avrotc— " A friend has just corroborated my surprise, that you bore the name of Twadle at the university of Dublin some six years ago. I Avas a student there at
the time, Yery unwillingly I shaU allude to it ; and I promise you I will not, if you take care that Ave do not meet again/' Mr. Vescule, when he wa^ writing, thought of handing it across the table; but changing his mind* he went out, and sent it in by a waiter. The revieAver read; a flush crossed his sallow cheek ; he pre¬ sently arose and left the room. Mr. Vescule returned. Mr. Atheling asked—" Did you see Mr. M'Tweed?" " You lmve been imposed ou, Mr. Atheling, by that person ,. or some otiier; his name is not M'Tweed. I beheve him to be no Scotsman—I know him to be no Irishman." " It is impossible he can be a Welsh¬ man !" said Mr. Gwyllwes. " Impossible !" said all the company. " We must take him, in the general lot, as m Englishman," said Mr. Remley ; " for his knowledge of the vulgar tongue proves him the king's aibjeet"
" I think," said sir Harry Curragh, " you are served as a church somewhat as you are as a nation ; every rogue and he¬ retic is readily enough disowned by each denomination of dissenters, and set down by them all as a member of the church of England; and if he come to be hanged, he is turned over to the minister of the establishment, as a lost sheep from his fiock" A curious dissertation now took place among the three gentlemen who knew something of him, to make out who he really was ; that he had acted as a preacher in and out of the establishment—had been a doctor of physic—had been suspected as a spy and as a Romish priest—had been a collector of charities and inventor of pa¬ tents, weľe strong conjectures; but the only positive knowledge, except what Mr. Vescule did not think proper to refer to, was,, that he was a reviewer. As a re* viewer we leave him. In a free country,. it is desirable that there should be such an employment. Here the clever rogue,.
hunted through every sin and Avickediíess, may find a resource ; he may work un¬ known—he may, under plausible autho¬ rity, vent his venom, by calumniating the highest in the land—he may use the mighty language of royalty—and in spite of all that is known, he certainly may earn an honest livelihood. But for a man who has any credit or principles to be ashamed of his name—to enter into an union of conscience with the most noto¬ rious rascals—in short, to partake of the wages of iniquity, Avhen his violated feel¬ ings must be lacerated with shame, is a combination of paradoxes, Avhich, as none but a revieAver can commit, I leave a re¬ viewer to reconcile. The revieAver set off by the mail the same evening to town. Mr. Atheling never saAv him again, nor visited the lady Avho introduced him; and what name he now boasts I cannot say.; but tbe publica¬ tions that are enriched by his lucubrations may very easily be ever distinguished. Since the days that young Phaeton
mounted the chariot of the sun, and created such confusion in eartli and heaven, there is not a greater evii that can attend a lu¬ minary, than to be taken out of his natu¬ ral course. The zodiac of a reviewer (as correctly as the Fleet-prison of a debtor) has its confines in London ; and there are certain houses which are the signs of has progress : let every Tw r eed or Twadle re¬ member this, and not attempt an erratic course, " Where Pegasus no beaten track has made." * But to his brethren I leave him ; all alike —all honourable men î Mr. Henry Atheling called on his ac¬ quaintance, Mr. Vescule, the next morn¬ ing, to hear more of his Zoilean friend;, but Mr. Veseule told him, that as Mr. M'Tweed had wisely left the company, he considered himseif precluded from offering all further remark. But the young men of Henry Atheling's party.soon whispered the story about, of his bringing down a reviewer to Bath, and he was anxious to
escape from the ridicule which it every Avhere occasioned ; this induced him hastily to accept an invitation from a felloAV-colle- gian, to take a trip with him to the Isle of Wight, and he departed the folloAving day. The next morning, Avhen lord Atheling arose, he found his brother had enclosed and left for him the folloAving verses.
THE HOSE. How lovely blows Thnt beauteous rose ! Gather it not, for charity. It charms the tye with its bloom- It fills the gule with perfume ; Why should.it die? Why should it die ? Ofe, gather it not, for charity ! Now, now, it sh«ds its sweets, And stiU creates A fresh and plenteous store ; Then, then, its treasure draining, Nor bouree, nor hope remaining, Wither'd, exhausted; Its bloom, A «d perfume,. ikt created no more !
Oh, let it live, Its bleikings give, And ťeast the eye; Gather it not, for charity ! The blood mounted into lord Atheling's cheeks as the allusion struck his mind ; and had the poet seen him at the moment, he would rather have encountered the ut¬ most severity of the whole tribe of re¬ viewers, than the explanations and expos¬ tulations which his brother had ready for him, and which he instantly gave vent to in a very long letter, beginning—" I must insist, my dear brother, that if you value the friendship betAveen us, or have the least respect for the purest feelings of my heart, that you never again------" But as his lordship, having written and consi¬ dered the whole, thought it the Avisest way to tear the letter into a thousand pieces, I also, on full consideration, think it is not necessary to trouble the reader with it.
CHAPTER XI.
Among the friends and acquaintance, or rather relatives, of tlie Apreuth family, were the Morrisons. The father had been possessed of a moderate natural inheri¬ tance, and he had accumulated an im¬ mense fortune, by unceasing habits of ap¬ plication to any business in which there Avas a fair certainty of gaining money. He had lived in a plain style ; he possessed a good house, manorial rights, a well-culti¬ vated farm in the country, but he took lodgings always in town ; and when-net engaged, constantly boarded at a tavern. He had stept into a respectable borough, through the credit of Avealth and near neighbourhood; and though, being very parsimonious, he had disappointed many expectations of his constituents, he had never otherwise, by his vote in parliament
or his conduct in county politics, dis¬ obliged them, and therefore kept his seat. He had lost his wife, after bringing him three sons, and died himself in his seventy- first year. His sons had had a private education ; thus, whoever had been the curate of the parish officiated as private tutor, for which Mr. Morrison allowed a hundred a-year, the young gentlemen boarding and lodg¬ ing at home, and the tutor at his ΟΛνη lodgings, but regularly attending at the mansion-house from nine to twelve, and three to five, on the six leisure days ; but луЬеп Mr. Morrison was in town, the tu¬ tor had his board and lodging gratis at the squire's, that he might have the con¬ stant inspection of the young gentlemen. Their education may be easüy conceded, by considering what the man must be who would condescend to this arrangement. He had indeed little trouble in his charge; such a prudent system produced the ne¬ cessary result. The boys were constantly provided with
lïioney, to be taught the value of it ; they had no objection, at any time, to dispose of the same, for an improving considera¬ tion; but the zeal, the activity, the ad¬ venture of business, being wanting, they went a little while to the university, slip¬ ped out of England, and came back again, and pu ťFued no particular avocation. Upon their fatheťs demise, they divided five hundred thousand pounds between them. " Some natural tear? the; droppM, hut wip'd tliem s юп; The world was ail before theni, where to choose Iheir place oí* rest." Mr. Joseph Morrison took possession of the family mansion, where he always lived, a justice of the peace, and farmer upon a large scale, but according to tlie old safe fashion. Mr, Charles's house was in Lon¬ don ; he was a dabbler in every kind of learning, a member of all the learned so¬ cieties, and, after a year or two, took a large house* for the sole purpose of having a sufficient place to arrange his books, maps, pictui'cs, and curiosities of all kinds.
The third brother, William, had the same pursuits, and pretended to study the law, attending, now and then, at the county sessions and assizes; but he was as mucli afraid of having a brief, as ever the most anxious of the profession entertained fears on the contrary side. This last gentleman was now at Bath, and, if it be possible, was in love with Miss Chamont; but it was impossible: he therefore only sighed and admired her; for though he gave thousands for books and pictures, useless, and often of less and less value, yet to purchase a wife, unless it had been a valuable speculation, was as much forbidden to that sense of propriety, which made a part of the adoration of these brothers, as it would have been to have turned Mohammedan for the advan¬ tage of polygamy. ît was truly deplorable to see the wretchedness of these gentle- men; with the means of every earthly blessing for themselves and others, they denied gratifying their own honest incli¬ nation, and effectually serving others,
through a perversion of the good words* prudence and propriety. Their father had divided and entailed his landed property from the one to the other ; and in failure of issue, on sir Da¬ vid Apreuth and his heirs. This, at first, rather offended them ; but so liberal was the conduct of sir David, that soon they all actually took a pleasure in considering tlie future greatness of the Apreuth family by their means, indeed economy was a very necessary virtue among the Apreuths; hence the dowager lady and her son had one house in town, and no unnecessary carriages, horses, or servants, луеге re¬ tained ; but honesty, liberality, and inde¬ pendence, were the characteristics of the family; and the Morrisons could reverence wdiere they would not imitate. The brothers would have been shocked if their annual expenditure had exceeded a certain sum ; and as their book-demands yearly increased, they actually curtailed their former necessary expence, that they might not be deficient in properly support-
ing their hobby ; and it was thus that they frequently exhibited, in their own charac¬ ters, the extremes of poverty, extravagance, and meanness. What would their father have said, to have seen their collection, and heard the sums it cost ! What would he have thought of the old mansion (for the elder brother partook of the same ma¬ nia), with two new wings for books and curiosities ! А луа^ was thus created that \vas often difficult to allay, because it could not always be known. It was of no consequence that they possessed most things good and desirable ; ifa connoisseur had examined their collection, and asked fcr one thing wanting, the value of the whole was gone at once. We read of Aladdin, or some such gen¬ tleman, in an Arabian tale, ΛνΙιο had the possession of all that fancy could conceive, the chief delight of whose princess луа§ in shewing and in boasting the possession of these appearances of good, лл г Ьеп, lo! an old woman came, and asked if she had a sock's egg? Instantly the princess felt
the want; and though she knew not what a rock's egg was, and had never seen or heard of such a thing before in her life, she became completely wretched and mi¬ serable ; and at length found, that to de¬ sire the possession of it had endangered tlie whoie fortune and life of herself and husband. But I need not fly to fiction for corroborating instances ; did not Ahab, ting of Israel, fall sick, because he could not get one of his gardens enlarged, and acquired it at the immediate sacrifice of his peace of mind, and by the quickly- eventual danger both of soul and body ? What wretch is he entering that shop of second-hand confusion ? He is in search after a desirable portrait. W T hy desirable? Because his collection is not perfect with¬ out it What is his object in the acquisi¬ tion ? To say he has it. This is Charles, the second brother; and he with the large folio under his arm is William. Thetr appearance is the same ; and that folio is old English wordsand characters, of which he neitiier understands or can read a single
word. They have both of them many an old volume, very valuable, and yet moré valuable because the leaves have never been cut open. They have other books, not of the least value but on account of the er¬ rors contained in tliem. Thus, without enumerating further, it is become a neces^ sary want to them, and to half the col¬ lectors in the kingdom, as much as tlie want of food to the hungiy and clothes to' ťhe naked, to gain the possession of things of no intrinsic uäe or worth, at the pre- 1 sent fate of meanness and wretchedness : and if they would think of the future, certainly they might soon be convinced that the whole of their collection will not be worth—will not really sell, I mean, for one-tenth of the money expended, exclu¬ sive of the an&iety, care, and labour, in tiie acquiring and the preserving. After this sketeh of the Morrisons, there is little interest to create concerning them, aud no adventure' of sufficient note to de¬ scribe. One or the other generally came vol. n. W
to Bath in the season, but of late years it was William's lot ; and if no likely sales were about to take place, his stay w^ş only a week or two. The brothers were prematurely aged, by habit, manner, care, and perhaps hy intensely following an im¬ becile pursuit; for there are stamina of virility in the mind as well as body, which refresh life, and keep off the encroaches of age ; it is needless to add, how much these stamina were wanting in the minds of the brothers Morrison. About this time there were some books to be sold ; one of these, of a known and not scarce author, and apparently of no value, was the object of Mr. William's earnest desire ; he contrived, the day be¬ fore the sale, to get a view of it; there was a peculiar error in the titlepage, which, after five impressions only, was noticed and rectified; and, thus being scarce, it was most desirable, though they had three other well-bound perfect copies of the same, Lord Atheling, who was extremely fond
of books and of paintings, but who never bought one of the former for any other purpose than to read the same, or the lat¬ ter, except from admiration of its excel¬ lency, was astonished when Mr. Morrison ьроке before him to Mr. Bereton of the object that brought him to Bath ; yet even to them Mr. Morrison did not mention the name of the subject of his anxiety. Mean while his lordship had also his phantom ; for from what (he had repeat¬ edly owned to his friend and to his secret heart) the reality never could be; yet from this phantom had he raised, and was still maturing, a subject of aggravating cares and thoughts. Every interview with Miss Chamont staggered the impossibilities; yet more and more lovely and amiable did she iippear; and when he began reasoning with the wavering tenant of his bosom in his retired chamber, he could no longer, with resignation, contemplate the irre¬ movable bars to his hopes. Every argiw ment,at length, turned only upon his father.
If it were possible that the earl could be induced to approve the connexion, Avas the result of every thought.—" I am above tho prej udices of the world í Is she a found¬ ling ? What if her relations were crimi¬ nals, are all the world to be informed of it ? and if it were universally known, wdiat then? As long as she is all-lovely and good, it cannot affect me or her ; as long as she is all-gracious, elegant, and fashion¬ able, it Avili not affect the world. As my Avife, she will have her station ; conducting herself properly as my Avife, she will keep her station." But let it not be supposed that these liberal notions at once made lord Atheling a professed юл^ег; they had plenty of cus¬ tom, and habit, and fashion, and Avorldly opinion, to contend with ; and the result, in the end, was to avail himseif of the presence of Bereton, and to come to an éclaircissement Avith him, according to what his friend had said—" If ever your love increase to the most distant wish to
possess an exclusive right to Miss Cha¬ mont, give me the first notice." Counter-charms are said to be excellent remedies for love. How far are they al¬ lowable? h the question. Lord Atheling had been a member of the Bath Club, from his first arrival* and aimed to unite in his character the paradoxical inconsistency of a man of religious principle, and an ho¬ nourable gamester. To play high is often a very easy passport to the most fashion* able company; and there are some societies where a man would rather be admitted on a minor than a major plea. Mr. Bereton was one season a member, and in his Very early manhood had freely played his rubber for five-guinea points, had betted his ten pounds а -game at billiards, and occasion¬ ally frequented a faro-table with his friend Atheling, Yet both had ever reprobated the extreme of gaming, and had held suffi¬ cient command over their passions in this particular not to commit themselves to a serious loss. It is astonishing that men, because they have self-command enough
to play with an evil temptation, and over¬ come it, will not at once grant that it is an actual evil, and accordingly totaUy avoid it. There are serpents in India, wdiose bite is a deadly poison ţ if you seize one by the head, he will coil his tail and body round your arm, force his head from your grasp, and give you the fatal bite., A young officer has been known to creep up to it, seize it by both head and tail, hold it a space, struggling, at arm's length, then firmly throw it to a distance. But is this true spirit and courage? is this an example for his brother soldiers? Yet meh h the conduct of a prudent game¬ ster; he may escape; but his conduct hi the best light, is a wanton waste of hero¬ ism, and it is a dangerous example. Lord Atheling and Mr. Bereton had often seriously discussed their gaming pro¬ pensities; yet still their own self posses¬ sion led them on. At length Mr. Eire- ton resolved to break the vicious charm on Ids part; and the first season after with¬ drawing his name from the club, loid
Atheling was so enrapt with the Apreuth family, that he also very seldom attended, and, such is the charm of virtue, never once from the company of his heart-beloved, closed the evening, or, more properly, continued the hours at the club. This season had he tried gaming, as a counter- charm; and often, when he might have been in the company that he most loved, forced himself to the York Club. About this time, having dined with his friend Bereton, he said—" Will you go to the club with me, after the rooms ?" " No, my lord, I withdrew my name from principle, I mean after reflecting on the nature of all gaming ; and I am great¬ ly confirmed in my principle since." " How so ? I have no objection to be proselyted. I have gone often more through civility to my acquaintance, and perhaps to keep myself from a very dif¬ ferent temptation, than any desire of amuse¬ ment. Though I like play at times well enough, there are many men whom I do
not like to win frora, and none to whom ï wish to Ime." u There are many men, my lord, with whom wc ought to be asliamed to asso¬ date." * s Yoii mean tlie known blacklegs, those who have no outward means of subsist* mce than their success by gaming." u Chiefly I do, my lord." ** Yet I confess, my friend, that they are, in general, very pleasant men to play with. They are less inclined to dispute and cavil than others; and we need not be acquainted with any of our company i)ut oťthe room." i6 I am glad that you allow that there are such who frequent this choice assem¬ bly, for it is more, my lord, than any other member will allow. But do you think that these gamesters of business play bet¬ ter than many of ourselves?" " I cant say that I do." " How do they subsist-~how succeed?" " By good fortune."
" You are trifling with me, my lord— answer to the point" " 'Tis a bad answer, I own ; but I can give no better." " I think I can explain it to you ; for though they may not play with greater skill than others, they make it iheir busi- ness; they are always on their guard— they play the whole game ; for they must win in the long run, or be ruined. Equal play, or equal fortune, must eventually be their destruction, by the common expenees of the play. You do not suppose that they, or any systematized gamester, would have an objection to take any advantage, Avhere it would be impossible to detect un¬ fair play." " I am afraid not—I mean if it -ere impossible to expose it ; for I cannot fancy that the adulterer, swindler, eager duellists or ready suicide, not to add professed infi¬ del, and we have some of these among лг honourable gamesters, own any other thair the public law of honour."
" You grant that they may, with rank and fashion, be all very honourable men, yet not swayed by any secret heart-prin¬ ciple. Need I ask—do you think eon- science, unseen, unknown to mim. influ¬ ences you and me, and many otliers, луЬод wc play ?" " î trust it does." " Then we do not really play with theni on even tenus. But let me come more to particulars : if you held down your hand—if they knew a card by a mark —if you offered an injudicious bel —if an unequal match was made-—they would, you will allow, readily avail themselves ; and from discovering advantages, the next ¿top is making them. I observed one day, m the rooms, two blacklegs of high repu¬ tation playing a rubber, I fancied they knew r one another's play, and gave one another secret intelligence of tlie cards in their hands. After the party was over, I approached one of them, a noble member if your club.—»* Do you think Mr,------ plays a good game?~*A very steady
game ; but I never played with him be¬ fore,'— ť You don't know him ?*—* Not in the least ; and it is rather remarkable that we should not have met before, as we are both such consfant players; but he is a great Newmarket man—I am tired of horses, and hate Newmarket.' A day or two after, the same gentlemen played to¬ gether again, and I cut in with them. After the rubber I became a spectator, and paid particular attention. They were partners, and I drew my chair beside one of their opponents, and could at pleasure see both their hands. I wiU give you a few particulars. Our noble friend drew his fingers across his forehead ; the other blew his nose, shewing only his forefinger and thumb : neither, as I perceived, caught the other's eye. ' One has four, the other only two trumps,' thought I, and so it proved. At another time, one I found had discovered that his partner held two honours, but I did not observe the signal. I fancied tliat the initial of a first word had allusion to the hand, and my fancies
were always confirmed by the event,— 4 A great cold comes in at that door ; wai· ter, bring me a screen.' He that spoke held the ace of trumps.—* Do let me, sir, take up the tricks,' and hfe partner di¬ rectly played a diamond-. In short, they never seemed to speak during the game without a latent meaning. To some mi¬ litary remark of a byestander~~* It was a gallant action,' said Mr. «—*·, and imme¬ diately a trump was laid. I iteed not add any more—our veteran right honourable acquaintance was the most venturesome —the young Newmarket gentleman was always very guarded. The eyes, the mind^ index, which speak an universal language, but with which we cannot discourse before the suspicious and vigilant without be¬ traying ourselves, and confirming their suspicions, never committed them ; these adepts cautiously avoided that language; as I remarked before, their eyes never met together, but watchful enough were they for the telegraphic signals, and in taking every advantage of an incautious
movement of the hands of their adver¬ saries, by which they might look over their cards. Without any collusion, they seemed to depend upon one another's prin¬ ciples, and both acted accordingly. Aner all, the whole was conjecture, and neither could have given information against the other; but my suspicions have convinced myself." " From such fancies," said lord Athe¬ ling, " what would you further argue?" " That gamesters collude without agree¬ ment. Of course you understand me, my lord, that unless we are willing to be up¬ on equal terms, it is the wisest and best way to have nothing to do with them. These suspicions did not originate Avith myself, though I have for years had faint and temporary ones ; but never, till I ap¬ plied my mind to the subject, were they so fully corroborated," " But it is not only reputed blacklegs that you bring the charge against, you have mentioned a man of rank," " Yes, and I don't know one regular
gamester, how high soever in rank, who is not a mere novice, that I do not more or less suspect. There are lord Paulton, lord Charles Dauncey, and the honour¬ able general Gang, who are equal to any blackleg in the kingdom ; colonel Looton, captain Slacke, and Mr, Wily, are even marked characters; and you may remem¬ ber, some years ago, we discovered five or six men of fashion, fortune, aud station, had made a common purse for the season; we demurred at that time ; and can you think that these, or other partnerships, do not play into each other's hands ? If they oppose each other at the same table, I should be unwilling to riska high bet with either. So men and their wives play to¬ gether, till they are even angry if their hints are not understood.". " What Breslaw said in joke, in answer to those who, seeing him deal the cards as he pleased, asked why he did not make his fortune by gaming, you would seri¬ ously argue is correct enough—' W hy, to own the truth, I once attempted it ; but
I soon found that they knew more tricks than myself." " Something like it, my lord. I do not believe any man, who has passed his ap¬ prenticeship in gaming,, and continues the trade, is other than a fool or knave." " Mine is up, Bereton ; and this only I ΛνίΙΙ add,, that you have perfectly convert¬ ed me'from this idolatry. Though I have never risked my peace of mind, or even my present vrants, I'll no longer, directly or indirectly, countenance gaming. It teas my folly—it would now be my vice." From the rooms lord Atheling, having handed lady Apreuth into her chair, and declined an invitation to supper, came alone to his home, and thus soliloquized —" Bereton,. the first notiee you shall have, but the wish has been long—long ago formed. What more can Bereton say? What do I not know ? A birth of infamy is enough !—are there degrees of degrada¬ tion here ? Ι ΛνίΙΙ see Bereton on the sub¬ ject—I am gone far enough to кполу the whole. This week I leave Bath, to flee
her enchanting presence for ever, or to open my wdiole heart to m v father." But all this resolve ended with the so¬ liloquy ; he looked, and talked, and heard, but he dared not sigh. He envied every lover, every disappointed lover; and when he saAv hope to any one, h* was ready to fulfil his олуп words, and to flee from her, and Bath, and England, for ever.
CHAPTER XIT.
So correct Avas the conduct of lord Athe¬ ling at all times* and so well convinced was lady Apreuth of the good sense and prudence of Miss Chamont that she had no apprehensive fears of any of those love entanglements in whieh some novellists abound» and of which sentimental ladies and gentlemen 1 are so very susceptible. Every man- who knew Miss* Chamont
could not fail to admire her—every woman who was acquainted with lord Atheling Avould naturally be pleased with his con¬ versation, person, and manners, all of which invariably improved upon acquaint¬ ance; yet ел т егу thing that occurred, which more determinately convinced her that his lordship could never be considered in the character of a lover to the child of her heart, was not unpleasing to lady Apreuth, and she wished to see some desirable cha¬ racter a candidate for her dear foster- daughter's affections. Mr. Sedley about this time came forward in that light He Avas of a respectable family, with a small private fortune, and great expectations in the church. His abilities Avere good, his education had been excellent, and he had lately taken deacon's orders. Sir Thomas and lady Sedley, his parents, had long vi¬ sited lady Apreuth, and the Avorth of both families was well knoAvn to each other. Lady Apreuth therefore saw, Avith the greatest pleasure, the peculiar attentions of the young clergyman, which attentions
soon exceeded the utmost that lord Athe¬ ling had evinced in his most unguarded moments. That mental expansion and cultivation which Mr. Glynne Avas v not conspicuous for, Avas at once evident in the conversa¬ tion of Mr. Charles Sedley, and there was no circumstance to prevent Miss Chamont from listening to his pretensions ; and when, coming to the point, he asked her permission to declare to sir Thomas and his mother, the first wish ofhis heart, the young lady replied, that he was certainly at liberty to mention his own mind to sir Thomas and his lady, but from the short acquaintance with her (alluding to the^č- culiar acquaintance that he Avas anxious to cultivate, for the parties had always been known to one another), she must beg that no opinion of her ovra was expressed. An early lover could expect nothing more, and with this his good sense Avas perfectly satisfied; and while affairs re¬ mained in this train, lady Apreuth thought it right to inform her own family upon
the subject Mr. Sedley returned to Bath for a few days before he went to Oxford, but nothing as yet transpired concerning sir Thomas and lady Sedley's approbation. At a private concert, Mr. Sedley intro¬ duced to Miss Chamont a røvrend friend of his, a prebendary of ------ , and a highly- beneficed clergyman. He was a man of forty in years, but much younger in man¬ ners. He talked fluently on musical sub¬ jects ; and a gentleman coming up, con¬ gratulated him upon his being chosen a canon-residentiary at the cathedral. The subject turned upon the duties of residence, and lady Apreuth, Miss Cha:- mont, and other ladies, were listening with much attention to this dignified clergy¬ man, when he remarked—" Every part of life has its good and evil ; for my part, I thank God that I have a very musical ear, or I never could encounter the cold damps of that venerable old cathedral. Every canon should be a natural dilet¬ tanti, for faith, I Avould at once renoilnce the trifling emolument, and aU its ho*
nours, were it not for the sweet and sooth* ing strains of the pealing organ, and its vocal attendants." Lady Apreuth turned round and sat down immediately; Miss Chamont did not venture to look at her admirer, but fol¬ lowed her ladyship's example.^-" Don't forget, Lucy," said her ladyship, " to tell the footman, that if this canon Leog calls at my house, that we are not at home, for I am certain I speak your feelings as well as my own." Mr. Sedley soon after came up to lady Apreuth, and she addressed him — " I don't like your dignified friend." " indeed, my lady, he is very thought¬ less and inconsiderate ; but he is a man of abilities and attainments, and he is likely to have considerable preferment very soon in his own gift." Air. Sedley was a young man, about four years older than Miss Chamont, and he really did not rightly know the cha¬ racter of the musical-eared canon, who, being a man of family and political in-
terest, by a mixture of intrigue and job¬ bing had gained his preferment, and whose conceit generally overwhelmed his abili¬ ties, and burlesqued his attainments. The next morning Mr. Sedley set off to Oxford ; the canon Leog called at lady Apreuth's; the ladies were denied, and he left his card, which was never taken any notice of. From Oxford Mr. Sedley wrote to Miss Chamont. She answered his letter with general expressions of esteem, but added —" I must beg, sir, that you do not again write to me, as from many motives, which I need not trouble you with, I have no wish to enter into any hasty engagement," All these circumstances, by some means not hard to divine, came to the knowledge of lord Atheling before he left Bath, who, totally different from his behaviour in the case of count GuilfiU, merely expressed his wish for her happiness, without any remarks upon the subject. Lord Atheling about this time went to his father's at Castlerock, and Mr. Sedley
returned from Oxford, Λνίίΐι an A. M. ae* gree, and in priest's orders. He took the first opportunity of a private conference with Miss Chamont to enforce her prefer¬ ence. He alluded to his now-certain pro¬ spects in the church, described his future residence and manner of life. All these things indeed луеге quite to Miss Cha¬ monťs taste; but nothing was said of his father's and mother's hopes and encou¬ ragement, though the prejudices of the луогИ, and the allowances to be made bv every liberal mind, and the partialities of birth and habit, and the customs of civi¬ lization, were often brought forward. In short, it appeared to the mind of Lucy Chamont as if he had said—" My parents do not approve of your birth, and it is to myself a very ungrateful theme. I love you more than I ever can love any other woman, except for the one impediment, which I think my increasing love will very soon entirely overcome, when Ι ΛνίΙΙ speak more plainly and fully; but till that
time, it is prudent that I should be upon my guard." Whether Miss Lucy was right or wrong, she did not attempt to strengthen her case. She spoke of hey early life without any shame, but with the height of gratitude to the whole of the Apreuth family, and of her present state with humility, deference, and fove towards them ; and as she often probed the mind of her lover, and he shrunk from the truth, so her esteem weakened. But it was otherwise with Mr. Sedley ; as he perceived the young lady more and more withdraw herself from his attentions, so the more his love increased, till the fear of losing the glorious prize constantly in¬ fluenced his mind, and the value of that prize became greater every day. From the family-intimacy he had every advan¬ tage ; he was at lady Apreuth's almost up¬ on the same terms as at his own mother's; general Maurice was now at Bath, w T ho was his godfather, and an old schoolfellow of his father's. At length, in the fullest and most energetic language, he made a
direct unconditional offer of marriage; fo Avhich Miss Chamont replied—" Such a match, I am certain, sir, would not be agreeable to sir Thomas and lady Sedley, on account of my birth; and Avithout troubling you Avith my олуп sentiments, I must positively decline your particular notice." Mr. Sedley was prepared to answer, but the die Avas cast ; he had demurred ; and however near the delicious сир might have seemed to his lips, wdiile he paused to look upon the little fly that sat on the brim, it Avas dashed from his hand for ever. It would be difficult to say Ьолу lomr this affair was in taking its rise, but it soon arrived at its height, and met with its termination. Lady Apreuth confessed to Lucy Chamont her disappointment; but at the same time she approved of her fos- ter-daughter'*· conduct. Lord Atheling returned to Bath, where he had agreed to meet his friend Bereton, from whom he had received the intelli-
gence of the disappointment of Mr. Sed¬ ley's hopes. Äliss Chamont heard, at this time, that a former admirer had asserted that free¬ dom which Mi$£ Lucy had liberally be¬ stowed, and attached himself to another fair one; it was well kno avii that count GuilfiU Avas soon to be married to a young lady that he had met at the marchioness of Gadefley's parties; the lady was also said to be an heiress. Lady Apreuth's parties were very much enlivened by lord Atheling's introduction of a Cossack officer, Avith whom his lord¬ ship became acquainted, when he served a campaign in the Russian armies as a vo¬ lunteer. This officer Avas just arrived from London, and brought letters of introduc¬ tion to general Maurice ; from him the re¬ port Avas confirmed of the intended mar¬ riage of count GuilfiU, the expectation of which prevented the count from accom¬ panying captain Romanskof, Avith whom he was on terms of great intimacy, to Bath, VOL. IL О
This officer was under a matrimonial en¬ gagement to a lady of his own country, but he eould not see the heroine of our histoiy without being struck by her beau¬ ty. In a large company, where Miss Chamont was the subject of conversation, he expressed himself in a very remarkable manner.—" Your great poet, Milton, I can believe, wouid have made his portrait of the angehe Eve, in her pristine state of irmocence and loveliness, yet more worthy of our admiration, if he had lived to see and to hear this fascinating lady." While the Cossack officer remained at Bath, lord Atheling received many invi¬ tations to lady Apreuth's, as an old ac¬ quaintance of captain Romanskof. His stay was about a fortnight, and afterwards lord Atheling only occasionally saw Miss Chamont; but he still waited at Bath, to see his friend Bereton, who was at this time on the circuit. As this Cossack soldier was the first who made his public appearance in Eng¬ land, it might be expected that a further
account should be given of his manners and opinions ; but this history cannot so far digress from the incidents more imme¬ diately connected with it, unless by in¬ serting a letter here, which count GuilfiU a few weeks afterwards received from cap¬ tain Romanskof. The letter will indeed labour under a modern disadvantage, be¬ cause the original incorrectness of language is not retained—the phrases, which were rather incomprehensible, are made clear— the erroneous spelling of the foreigner is not introduced—and, above all, the sen¬ tences in his own natural language, which were understood by count GuilfiU and by lord Atheling (who presented it to the Apreuths), are no longer preserved, for the amusement and delight, the blunders and cacophony, of those who see additional wit and amusement in the difficulties of their own ignorance; but the letter is really presented in an intelligible fonn, to give a clear view of the gallant foreigner's opi¬ nion of the subjects that he discusses. о 2
ft FRIEND OP МУ RIGHT ARM, " Thy countrymen have received me according to thy merit; that I was known to thee was enough, wherever I went. Let me first congratulate thee on the increasing glory of the good cause. We heard in the North, that Britain had the sinews of war to strengthen us ail in the discomfiture of the tyrant of Europe ; but I find ye have the head and the heart also—we Cossacks are the feet*. We'll talk of these things when we meet again ; 111 now redeem ray troth, and tell thee, without flattery, my opinion of thy coun¬ trymen, ay, and countrywomen. " 1*11 not dwell on my wonder and sur¬ prise at ail the novel scenes of fine palaces and buildings, of coaches and carriages, oí' mechanical arts and manufactories; nor what disgust I felt at that unnatural sing¬ song» called the Opera, at the indecent so* ciety of your theatres, at the mercenary showmen of your great men's houses and
picture-galleries—nor what delight I ex¬ perienced at your public balls, private con¬ certs, and parties of endless names—what amusement at other exhibitions: but in public your liberty is licentiousness—in private we find the English character. I love human nature, and men and women shall be the theme. I begin, where ho¬ nour is first due, with religion—I see no¬ thing to object to, and suppose I should have heard nothing either, if I had fully understood the language, for I saw no signs of feelings alarmed or outraged ih any one of the auditors. Yet, as a stranger, I felt the irksomeness of the length of the service ; but I was told this had increased by degrees, and that a dread of any change prevented an alteration. " Surely it must be a great benefit for thy country, that the priests mingle with the people, without any difference and discrimination. The higher ranks of so¬ ciety must certainly find the benefit, when the teachers of morals, virtue, and reli¬ gion, are ever among them, to set a right
example, to check the intrusion of vice — to be, like a guardian angel, at the elbow, ready to breathe the suggestions of a Christian spirit, and dissipate every spirit of evil. 1 have been often astonished, after many conversations that I have held with strangers, when, upon inquiring about my new acquaintance, I have found that he was a priest of the country. I'll tell thee honestly, my friend, I have tmt found lhe full good that I expected; but I have been edified other ways; one, a high priest, whom I met with the hounds, gave me an admirable history of the sports of the country, and, as far as he had an opportunity, practically exemplified it; another taught me the art of boxing; and, faith, brother warrior, without mine own arms, I should not like to contend with him. A third, whom I met at the great Bath, I found perfectly versed in ail the games of skill and chance. Few troubled røe on doctrinal points* or questioned me of faith; one indeed was for converting me, as you caU it, to his own fancies ; but
he only the more and more convinced me of his own ignorance, for he did not know that we were Christians. When he found that we adopted the Greek mode of wor¬ ship, he wished to prove me an idolater; but I said—' Thou dost not seem to me to understand the distinctions between forms and faiths; as yet 1 have only ex¬ perienced one thing in thee, ignorance; so PU converse no more with thee on these subjects, I believe -that Jesus, the son of Mary, was the Messiah— J. believe in the Holy Bible, If thou hast another revela¬ tion, prove it by the test of prophecy and nrwraeles, or I shall rank thee no better Christian than a Tartarian brother,' " PU speak one word of thy physicians. England is the land of patients, and this profession is one of the lotteries of your island* Here money (according to the words of your favourite poet) doubly blesses * him that gives and him that takes.' " There is another thing also here re- markable-^your nobles and great men, who, in church, law, and state, push their
fortunes and their fame, never venture here. What can be the reason? Though learning, abfiity, and influence would be more sure of success, the sons of the higher orders are never induced to practise physic, while tovelve thousand pounds a-year is easily acquired, with gentility, indepen¬ dence, respect, and honours, " But I have been most entertained vrith ymr lavryers, under the principle, perhaps, that I ran no risk myself. What a mighty humbug of wigs ! And are ye in such an uncivilized state after all, that folly flies off as the wig goes on ? These are the an¬ cient magi—a mixed character of states¬ man and conjurer. While your priests, as if detesting hypocrisy, are lessening their outward appearance, we see girls' faces, with bushy hair enough for a savage that has run wild aU his life. The first I &B.W was in the street, and I took him for a vender of mysteries; and perhaps I was not far from the mark. Doubtless, my friend, every man should wear a dress to designate his office; and it ΛνοηΜ be a
good thing for the honest part of us, if we had our caUings and our characters writ¬ ten upon our foreheads; but this mum¬ mery of hair is contrary not only to nature and reason, but to the progress we boast of civilization and refinement. I have heard some of you talk of respectability, awe, and dignity. A young rogue may be astonished and confused, and so may an honest witness ; but a veteran in ini¬ quity wUl only feel the greater exemplary propensity to play trick upon trick. I can conceive but one plausible reason ; per¬ haps neither judges or counseUors wish to be recognized out of court by prosecutors, witnesses, and criminals; if so, why not add to their masquerade disguise? And I think, brother warrior, they might bor¬ row from us many advantages-—beards, whiskers, and helmets, ofa formidable ap¬ pearance, with complete concealment. Yet, in public company, I generally re¬ cognize many a member of the legal and also medical profession, by a golden ring о 3
and powdered ears; but these are gene¬ rally the lowest of each profession. ** If your nobility and high gentry study not their brethren's bodily health, they have no objection to the knowledge of taking care des materiek, though the rich prisses în the law lottery fe not to be com¬ pared to those in physic for number; and the toil, and the agitation, and the disap- pointment in the great branch of the law* is injurious to the health, spirit, and temper. Yet I know that there are half-a-dozen high chances that lead to farn^ and for¬ tune, and futurity, here on earth, " 1 add no further ; the higher ranks of life are most disposed to gaming, hence they would rather encounter the greater risk ; though this be not the case ш the church, where* without any risk at all, they are easily provided for. " What! noi a woîcd» you say, concern¬ ing the English ladies? Be patient, friend ; if I do not satisfy thee in tbm par¬ ticular, deny me all taste and judgment beyond the mere soldier's machinery, and
consign this epistle tø the flames. My discourse may be but the skimming of the surface for trifles, but the trifle of all trifles is a woman. " Among thf ranks of society, I think you surpass the rest ofc the world in your middle rank : 'tis a wide term» for I con¬ fine it to the highest mm without a title of rank, down to the humblest famüy that is not liable to be supported by the parish. I have dined with a duke and a farmer, with a bishop and a curate, with a judge and an attorney, at a club of select esta¬ blishment and at a public ordinary, at the Mansion-house and behind the shop of a retail trader; and the comforts that I found among the great ®§ good victuals and wine, of warmth, of cleanliness, of attention, met with no «»pleasant con¬ trast, no deficiency, w& want, among my humbler acquaintance. ** When I travelled down to Bath in the mail-coach, there came on sueh a snow as етеп to make a Cossack stare at the ig¬ norance» and bad management and im-
providence of coachmen, hostlers, innkeep¬ ers, and turnpike-managers. Well, it was impossible to proceed, as I am not yet recovered of the wound that prevents my riding on horseback, A farmer in the vil¬ lage, who came to the public-house, re¬ cognized an acquaintance in a gentleman in the coach, and finding me a stranger, invited us all three (tor there were no raore in the coach) to his house.·—* We have killed a pig/ said he, ' and you can¬ not come at a better time.' " This was the greatest contrast I met to the system of fashion and politeness elsewhere ; and yet the dinner was good, the plates and cloth clean, tlie room warm, with carpets, and every eomfort. At his grace's of Millsbury, the servants wore white gloves, and removed my plate, with¬ out, and often against my wishes; num¬ bers of the dishes I knew not and no one toid me; I once ventured to ask, and found my question was against all know¬ ledge, rule, and order ; many things were removed that I wished to eat, and others
brought in their place; and I had made my dinner, when Avhat I preferred came afterwards; and whüe the paraphernaUa of eating were in many respects irksome, I think the affectation of ease and indiffe¬ rence was yet more unpleasant. At the farmer's, one female attendant, with a hand adorned by the late culinary act, did as she was ordered ; and, in addition to my host and hostess, the young ladies of the house not only invited me to eat, but wiUingly offered me any requisite atten¬ dance; and yet they were as weU dressed, and I think, if modesty and humility have any thing to do with behaviour, be¬ haved better than my most noble host's daughters. In your higher circles, I have found ease, and gentility, and fashion, and profusion, to use an English phrase, quite a bore. I have wanted for every necessary in the midst of abundance; and have been constrained to add to my delicacies broAvn bread and old butter. " In the next place, friend, I must con¬ fess that the females of the lower orders
are mueh cleaner than those of the higher, Yeu see the great with their wide silver forks or spoons, or even a sop of bread smeared along their plates, fairly gobbling up tibeir møuthfuis!, and the contents of one dish following another, so that it re¬ quites a servant or two to change* their very plates (which makes these servants so over-active to strangers); and jeUies, ke. åre. &C. are swallowed whok, amid the re¬ peated changes: while at farmer Down¬ ing's board, he and his wifo, two sons and three daughters, to my astonishment, eat every thing fiom their aoubîe«eö^ed knives and two-ponged forks; and so fer from cramming either of these formidable wea¬ pons down their throat, it had been an act of danger for the knife to have touched the Hps, much less entered the mouth. Here was no exhibition of teeth, tongue, and gums, with all the half-masticated contents—*no appalling sight of a spoonful of lobster sauce upon globules of turtle soup, or raw oysters swallowed whole, as if they were the a^theeary's bolinaee» or
«—but enough. Here, at my frknd the former's, the simple morsel, judiciously taken from the knife's point, entered with decency, and no masticating exhibition foUowed. Indeed, among the young ladies, there is not a point of comparison but what is in favour of the farmer's daugh¬ ters, Avho eat slowly, cleanly, simply, and moderately. Let me add also the appear¬ ance of the plates, where every thing was cleared, as if the eaters found it good, and thought it wholesome; while among the great you might almost suppose» from the picking and leaving, that îhey lothed their food, and were afraid of being poi¬ soned. In short, thou knowest, at the tables of the high ones, how great a need there often is for that rinsing ofthc mouth, picking of the teeth, washing of hands, and spitting, that takes place, though it surely ought to take place out of the room; but here wehadno rinsing, picking, washing, or spitting» nor did I see any need of it. I could add many more fashionables» of snuff-box, handkerchiefs, &e. &e but I for-
bear. I see thee smile, and, with a philo¬ sophic look, thou sayest—' These remarks are natural, because the manners of thçse clowns approach near to the Cossacks.' Granted, mine honourable friend. Now answer this one question—Do not the eat¬ ing manners of your great approach near to the Russians? And I need not refer thee to the writings of doctor Clark, to know which nation, the Cossack or the Russian, bears the palm of decency. Two things thou must allow, that such endless preparations of cloths, napkins, towels, doyleys, gloves, and I know not what, with hot and cold waters, prove that clean¬ liness is needed ; and next, that these ha¬ bits of filth are contracted by licentious- ness f indolence, and extravagance, added to travelling, novelty, variety, and a want of self-controul. ui I have an odd remark to make to thee my friend, concerning the food which 1 eat at this farmer's ; if I am guilty of trea¬ son against the higher orders, let it be a secret between ourselves. The food, thou
hast heard, was pig's-meat; there were griskins, and spareribs, and chitterUngs, and blackpuddings, and a delicious fry. Now, among all the great and grand din¬ ners of which I have so plentifully parta¬ ken, none of these griskins and spareribs, kc. kc. ever made their appearance; in short, no pig-meat did I ever see, but the mere leg of the animal, in so palpable a form, that its very name seemed written upon it. I have heard talk of the progress of Deism and Unitarianism among these higher orders; what, my friend, have I made a discovery ?—are many of the great ones of this land, like the Portuguese no¬ bility and part of Poland, concealed Jews f I conclude it must be as I conjecture, or this fashion against pig-meat, and particu¬ larly the most tender and excellent part, with its sauces of apples, and sugar, and sage, and mustard, could not otherwise be so general as I found it. Politesse here makes great sacrifice to the appetite ; but your fashionables might, after all, receive their visitors of this secret Jewish cast, and
eat their pig-meat too, if they would in¬ troduce another custom, of telling the company the contents of the several dishes. You and others may say, that this would expose the Jews incognito to the suspicion of the rest. You are right, and I can only say, that since things are of this strange nature, they must even remain as they are at present, and your dinner-parties of the superior orders be content, without the ad¬ dition of this sweet and palateable food. " One word more on EngUsh eating. Where, amid aU the good feasting, did I fare best ? At a London tradesman's table, who was not too great to cuU his own food, too Uttle the master of his own house to look into his own kitchen, and too ignorant to select his own wine; who was not so needy as tobe obliged to buy where he could receive credit—who was not so fashionable as to substitute name and show for flavour and substance—who knew every dish at his owm table, and had no affectation that prevented his imparting that knowledge for tbe benefit of hb guests-*—who did not
require his servants to think for himself or his guests—and who was more anxious to please than to astonish. * " From the feast I come to the dance. Alas ! I have Uttle to praise. Why do so røany of thy countrywomen copy the garb and the grace of the prostitute ? Is it ci¬ vilization, or gentility, or politeness, or taste, to make a shew of the limbs ? No, it is only fashion. Or to exhibit a nudity of arms, and цеск, and breasts ; and, ridi¬ culous ! of back and shoulders too ! I saw with pity some poor creatures dance the waltz.—' Have none of these,' said I gently, to our friend, ' parents, brethren, or hus¬ bands ?'—* Probably аЦ have," said he.— c Then against these parents, brethren, and husbands, I turn my contempt,' said I. A satirist remarked, that such conduct could only be compared to the dancing strumpets in different parts of the globe ; . and though poHcy might restrain the feel¬ ings, and no necessity urged these Eng¬ hsh ladies' departure iroiţi ţnodesty, yet their feelings and their minds were alike
depraved.—* Probably/ said I, < action shews the mind and the feelings may be the same ; yet the amorous ones must be as weak as they are gross, which require these stimuli to rouse them, or------' I did not finish the sentence, but the sati¬ rist smiled his understanding; and indeed, my friend, if these female exhibitors knew what the young men think and say of them, they would not be so lavish of their charms. The matron who disapproves of these proceedings, should not only prevent her own young ones from being partakers in any of these vicious fashions, but should avoid the assemblies, and leave the com¬ pany where such things take place. " I began my epistle with my mind full of love and affection for all thy sweet countrywomen; and after wandering to I know not how many subjects, I am be¬ come their satirist This, oh friend ! sho\vs the purity of love ; I would not see a fault, and I am too quick-sighted in seemg them ; but if I do not now, I will, when we meet, do them justice for their modesty of man-
ners, their cleanliness of person, sweetness, elegant symmetry of form, vivacity of tem¬ per, quickness of intellect, learning, infor¬ mation, accomplishment, and goodness of heart, so conspicuous in private and social life. When I was in the West, I was in¬ troduced, to an Abyssinian gentleman, who is married to an English lady, and is set¬ tled in this country. They have a noble family of sons and daughters, who, I doubt not, will do credit to the name of Britons, At his house I met with a fine assemblage of women, whom our mother Еле, in her state of innocence, would have rejoiced in caUing her daughters, of whom his wife is worthy to be an example to every matron in the kingdom. I un¬ derstand that you have been an old ac¬ quaintance of his, though change of scene, of years, and of fortune, may have almost erased him from your memory. " I have been also introduced to others of your female acquaintance at Bath. There is one whom, since your genial sun could not melt, it would be in vain for a Cossack
to try. [An allusion to Miss Chamont the count had here erased.] I am but a spectator here; you know I have a fair one of my oavU tribe to whom my vows are pledged, and whom, while I admire and praise the British ladies, I think upon as the modei to judge by. What would your English fair ones say, if they saw this letter?—' Compare us to a Cossack woman!' There is many a philosopher Avill tell them, that they ought never to forget that they are women. " Farewell, friend í thy fortune excels that of most of the sons of men. Thou hast had two throws in the chances of ma¬ trimony, and both times won a glorious prize. Remember me, &c. kc. kc. " P. ROMANSKOF."
Caroline De Morsone and the general were now at Bath, from whence it had been agreed that Mr. Glynne shoiild carry his bride into Wales. Mr. Ažariäh Pakinger was at present in
America; 4 his attachment to Miss Glynne was cemented to the strongest pitch of af¬ fection by their epistolary intercourse. He had paid his intended visit to her in Wales, and was so well pleased with the sister and brother, the neighbours and the neigh¬ bourhood, and they aU were so well pleased with him, that he was settUng his affairs in America, to make Wales his home. His last letter to Miss Glynne said—" You know, my dearest Jane, I meant to re¬ serve an extensive property in America. My mind wavers—I rather think of sell¬ ing it. France is more free than America now is. Slavery is rooted in the soil; for where the actual slavery of negroes does nöt exist, there is a human proscription that separates the blaek man from his fel¬ low. I have been to Jamaica, the mu¬ latto» if free, has a higher station in the human race than among us. We are be¬ come so proud of our freedom and inde¬ pendence, that Wê are eager to keep these blessings to ourselves, and envious of aü others. Unless liberty be a virtue, it is ■si
not worth the efforts of the enlightened race of man. But true liberty is a virtue, ' it blesses him that gives and him thnt takes;' 'tis mightiest in the mighty. It is not hberty that refuses? the ^eedom of another; true liberty begins its work of freedom by setting others free. There is no liberty without equality ; and what is equality, but doing as you would be done unto? There is no liberty without inde¬ pendence ; and where is his independence who violates the independence of another? I have searched for these blessings in Ame¬ rica, but in America I can find them not ! Neither do I like the administration of our common law ; we want that check upon check which England so pre-eminently possesses, and which, I fear, it requires centuries of liberty to rivet upon the ju~ dicature of the country. In short, I think no freedom of people, laws, and the very atmosphere, equal to Welsh freedom. To know his own freedom, an American must stay at home. I have heard the contrary remark of an Englishman, that he knows
not how free he is till he visits other coun¬ tries. Till the freedom and independence o£ America is of a reciprocal nature, it is no country for me; and we already con¬ found it witli Ueentiousness, and self-will, and pride, and contaminate it with fashion, and extravagance, and corruption; and, I must speak the whole truth to you, the herald of liberty is, as a national officer, unknown to America, for neither presi¬ dent, senate, congress, or people, know liberality of sentiment" Among the preparatory concerns which Mr. Glynne had to execute at Batlı, the week before his marriage, was to match a favourite coach-horse. A new carriage was arrived from London, and to suit himself with a horse, he had advertised in the country papers. He luckily suc¬ ceeded; sir Simon Thicket produced a fine hunter, that in all pointe suited, and for which Mr. Glynne willingly gave one hundred and twenty guineas. The ladies went to the riding-house to see the horse> VOL. ÍL Ρ
which was universally approved of. The ladies were in a gallery ; there were many gentlemen in the area below. Suddenly Mr. Glynne dismounted from the horse, and coming up hastily to lady Apreuth, said—" My lady, pray notice that gentle¬ man's (in the light blue coat) key, ap¬ pending from his watch." *' Sir!" said lady Apreuth, with some surprise. " He is parading about," continued Mr Glynne, " and hangs the chain of his watch from his waistcoat button-hole, for the purpose of attracting notice." " At least he shall not have mine," said Miss Chamont, sitting down; u for I see enough of him to know he is the duke of Whitelock." " But is it proper," remarked lady Ap¬ reuth, " that we should know the history ofthat key?" " Very proper, my lady ; for it is the only anecdote that Ì know of him, where folly, extravagance, and ignorance, are not
combined with something yet more con¬ temptible." J? I remember seeing some of his love- letters in the newspapers, upon a disgrace¬ ful crim. con. affair," said lady Apreuths ** which makes true your remarks; but proceed, if you please, Mr. Glynne." The ladies were all seated. " He went to a public book-sale, and purchased for some thousands, which with difficulty he raised, an old book, of an old Italian poet, written in the obsolete Ita- lian language. Of course, ladies, he can¬ not read a word in it ; and its contents, correctly given in modern Italian, or in plain English, you may purchase for five shillings ; but it was a fashionable folly to bid for it, though it has neither printing, picture, nor embellishment, worth notic¬ ing ; its only value is, it is a unique—and such a unique, that fifty years hence y when the present Bibliomania ------" " What is that?" said Caroline De Mor¬ sone. " A name invented by these men of ρ %
taste for their own folly, and the wisest thing I know of any of them—book-mad¬ ness. When this Bibliomania, I say, ì$à$ f»assed by, probably in some fifty years this unique will not be w<?rth ten shillings ; but yet more probable his grace will not be able to keep it ten years *. Well, lad¬ dies, proud of his bargain, what is he to do next? He has it splendidly bound, and put it into a gilded case, with glass pannels." w And I suppose," says lady Apreuth, *' sends the cryer round the country, to in¬ vite every one to come and see it.'*
w Rather the contrary, my lady ; he puts a padlock on the case, and his vanity affixes the key to the chain of his watch ; and if any unlucky savan comes to see the work, he must^ be satisfied with inspect¬ ing its exterior, through the glass and gilded case, and hearing the wonderful story of the then marquis's courage, in being the successful bidder ; and no silly» wretched story-teller ever repeated his tale oftener, and with more vain egotism, than; his present grace." " Poor man !" exclaimed kidy Apreuth, " Avhen I consider his perversion of talents waste of property, decay of health, and loss of reputation, even in his purlieus of fashion and notoriety (as I have heard my son, sir David, say), I do not knoAv one object more deserving pity." The unlucky son of folly perceiving that he was unnoticed, had very soon left the area. The ladies now descended, and agreed to walk in the Crescent with gene¬ rals De Morsone and Maurice* where Мгл, ι? 3
Glynne promised to drive the пелу horse with his companion, that his friends might see İioav well they matched and paced t@* gether. The party had taken bait one turn on the Crescent, when Mr. Glynne made his appearance in a heavy phaeton, which луаз used on purpose for a break, with Mor¬ gan, Avho Avas already Mr. Glynne's coach¬ man and head-groom; the memorable French dog had taken his station on the foot-board, between them. After passing and repassing a few times, Mr. Glynne pulled up the reins.; the young ladies Avent to the carriage—the dog and Morgan dis¬ mounted, and the sensible animal imme¬ diately recognized a countrywoman, Avhen mademoiselle Caroline addressed him in her native tongue—" Zani ! mon petit Г for though she had heard his history, she had never seen him, till Miss Chamont pointed him out to her in the carriage. Mr. Glynne wished the ladies to ride, but they declined.—" Then I beg particu¬ larly/' said he, "that you notice that
stately lady, who is now turning round at the end of the Crescent ; she has on a large red shawl, and three high feathers in her bonnet ; she was the occasion of spoiling a fine day's sport'to sir Simon, of whom I bought this horse ; but I don't know if I ought to tell this story to ladies." " If you doubt, there can be no doubt on our part ; so we'll excuse you," said Miss Chamont. " But it's a better story than his graced watch-key; and sir Simon Thicket, when we met tlie lady in the pump-room yes¬ terday, told it me himself.—.' I suppose,' said he, '- Mrs. Nurseter is come to take the Bath waters, to carry off my spiced gingerbread.' You may suppose I asked his meaning, and I could not forget the lady's person. Ay, look at that chubby boy and girl who- are running up to her. r,, hey are, I am sure, her son and daugh¬ ter; if the rest are like thera, they need physic enough at the present time." The ladies departed, and never heard any more of the story ; but the curiosity
of the French and English generals was aroused, and at the first opportunity Mr. Glynne gratified it ; and very probably^if my reader has been in Somersetshire, he may have heard a partial s or unfair state¬ ment, I will therefore give it him in the words of our young Welsh squire, who had it immediately from the baronet him¬ self.—**I passed the lady in the pump- room ; and as she is a remarkable personage, and I observed the baronet bowed to her,, and smiled to himself I asked him who she was ?—' Mrs. Nurseter,' said he ; 'a neighbour of mine; and, by-the-bye, I was upon that very horse that I have just sold to you, when she brought, me and many others into a strange jeopardy.'— *What/ said I, 'is slie a huntress? and does she endanger all your necks ? I have heard of these female Nimrods, but never had the fortune to meet with them. She rides very heavy, sir Simon ?'— e I know nothmg of her sporting qualifications/ said he; 'our adventure was of a different kind/ I expressed my surprise, and he
proceeded—* She is a very portable, mo¬ therly Avoman, and has a fine large family c€ boys and girls, and they were all at home for the holidays, when the adven¬ ture took place> We both live near the toAvn of Slipton—both deal with the same baker. I had given him orders to make me some hot-spiced hunting gingerbread ; Mrs. Nurseter had given him orders of another kind. It was a fine morning, in the latter end of January : all the young Nurseters praised the gingerbread г it was delightful, charming, pleasant—the best Avay in the world to take physic. Mrs. Nurseter told every-body, and some soon told me, how Mr. Mixaway, the baker, compounded Mrs. Nurseter's physic so ad¬ mirably, that the whole family of the Nurseters Avere in raptures about it. No Avonder, the mystery was полу explained ; the blundering felloAv of a baker had sent my hot-spiced gingerbread to the young Nurseters, and to me, who had liberaUy bestowed the whole to my felknv-sports- røen in the field, he sent Mrs. Nurseteťs
