Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The infernal Quixote: a tale of the day
???
INFERNAL QUIXOTE.
rHÍ ^^ i a "
CHAP. L
ER RI LY rang the bells in the village of Hazleton.
'Twas in the,month of March, ivhen hares run madly—when young maidens think of the coming spring, and old ones rejoice that, as the days are lengthened, the expence of fire and candle decreases—ivhen tradesmen's wives dream of pleasure r and their vol. i. ? husbands
husbands of long journies, toil, trouble, and loss—when the country buck is about to patch up his old hunter, and the city beau to purchase him as a fresh ambling nag for his summer recreation—when old debauchees lament that, the long nights are past, and every gaming-house in St. James's droops its head—when the sons^of Day look for¬ ward with joy, and Night's shamefaced crew backward with remorse :—'twas on the 21st of the month of March, in the vear 1773, after the birth of Christ," when Sol enters 'into the Ram, and the budding season commen¬ ces, that the Rev. Mr. Lockeridge mounted his old grey hunter for the last time that season, and leisurely proceeded up the village in that motion, in which the
the true sportsman delights to go to cover. A loud ba?vling from a cottage door arrested his progress, and the father of a new-born babe ? -equired of his Reve¬ rence to baptize the sickly infant* The divine turned round. He did not ride home to divest himself of his pre¬ sent garb ; he did not put on the go\vn, the cassock, and the band, nor did he put off his spurs, his spencer, or his belt ; but giving his horse to a lad at the door, he entered the house, laid his hunting whip and cap upon the table, and demanded waJter and a prayer- book. Bâ Dr.
Dr. Line, the man-midwife, was in the room. Now Dr. Line was not a little of the Methodist, and beheld these unsanctified emotions with no small portion of dis¬ pleasure. As the young pastor entered the cot¬ tage, the following conversation took place. " Well, my friend,, how is your wife and little one ?" " My wife, Sir, and thank God I is as well as can be expected;" the general favourable answer from the tip* top of Nobility to the very lowest of the mobility, and perhaps the only general sentence
. sentence in use among all ranks and conditions; " but the child is sickly, and we'll thank your Reverence to give 'un a nehme" ít Ahoy?" "Yes, Sir." " Come, give me the prayer-book. Good people, all kneel down." The father brought the Curate a cushion. "No," said he, " give it that gen¬ tleman," pointing to Dr. Line ; "he has more need ofit than me." Then, kneeling down, in a solemn tone he read the proper prayers, till he came to name the child. . ? 3 "4lhat
" What name do you give it?" said the Curate. u My name, Sir," replied the father. "Wilson!" exclaimed the Curate, " I baptize thee, &c. &c." " Lord, Sir ?" said the father, " that's my sirname !" " Yes," replied the Curate, thought¬ fully, t * had I recollected myself sooner, I should have concluded you meant your Christian name ; but you should have given me the name, for though I know your sirname, I am as yet igno¬ rant of the other." (i WiUiam, Sir," said tlie man ; "is it too late now?" " I am not casuist enough to deter¬ mine ; some great man has said it .is." He thought on the famous Mr. Tristram ? Shandy.
Shandy.—" But why should you object to its being as it is ? Wilson is a good name, you are a good man, and 1 hope your son will prove a Wilson Wilson in its best sense." " This mistake, Sir," said Dr. Line, boiving ? ? ??? low, " I don't mean to affix any blame on your Reverence, may perhaps provea lucky omen." " I ám very ? ? ?11 satisfied, Sir," said the father. The Curate concluded the service, took up his cap and whip, and, as he left the cottage, said to the owner—" If you'll send to my lodging, the old ?????? will let you have a bottle of wine for your wife and child, or any thing else that you may want, if I have it.— ? è Good
Good morning, Sir!" to the Doctor ; u good morning, my friend !" to the other : "I hope the child will be well by Sunday, and that you will bring him to Church ; and that you'll never have cause tö repent that his Christian name is Wilson." The pastor of the parish departed. " ?! go toj/ö&r Church next Sunday," said Dr. Line, whose own, by the by, was a large barn, where he sometimes expounded himself ; " and if you want a godfather, 111 willingly stand for him myself." With humble thanks the offer wal #ccq>ted. There
There was something so very unaf¬ fected, so serious, if not sanctified, in the manner of the Curate, that Dr. Line, in spite of his prepossessions, could not fail giving this indirect tribute to his praise " Yet," continued the Doctor, " what a pity 4is your young pastor has not a little more—a little more— decency about him. " " Decency, Sir ! there is not a more .decent man in the parish,, ivhe.ther he be Methodist, or not." " By decency, I mean propriety of behaviour, as it becomes a Minister of the Gospel of Christ !" " Why, as to his saying prayers ivi Hi- out his gown or surplice, and just before ? 5 lie
he is going a hunting, though he had his spurs and the other things on, I" can't see much harm in that, Doctor ; and I am sure he said it so devoutly from his heart, that it did me good to hear him—and a better heart no man in the kingdom has." The Doctor, if not convinced, drop¬ ped his argument. " How long has this gentleman been with you ?" " About three years ; but he lived* in tother parish till lately, where the Duke's Castle is;—-but I've known him from a child. Poor young gentleman 1 he was. disappointed in love, they said, about four years ago, and so soon after S he
he took orders, lives always in thé country, never visits any of the neigh¬ bouring gentlefolks, but spends all his timein reading, hunting, writing, shoot¬ ing, and preaching." " What, does he never go to my Lord's, here ?" "Oh, no! he affronted my Lord soon after he came to the Curacy." "How so?" t ' My Lord's gamekeeper used fre¬ quently to kill a bird or two on a Sunday, and he wrote to my Lord about it, and ? Lord James took huff; and our Par¬ son said he did not care for my Lord more than he did for any of us, when he did not behave properly, and that the gamekeeper should not shoot on Sundays. " ? ? " Why,
" Why, here have I lived all my life in this parish, and never knew tiil to¬ day that this was the gentleman that prevented the gamekeeper from shoot¬ ing. I never spoke to him before to¬ day." " I don't much ivonder at these things, Doctor; vou be one of the Methodists, you know, and you kind of folk don't much love the parsons, though I believe that you be better than all the rest put together ; but then you be always at your books, and looking at the stars : you do seldom speak to any of us, unless it is to do us some good, and give some Doctor's stufi'. " tí But how, neighbour Wilson, did your Curate prevent the man's shooting on Sundays ?" t ' Why,
"Why, first, Sir, he told all the Justices of it at the Quarter Sessions, and informed against him ; and then he took and wrote to the Bishop about it ; and so my Lord grew ashamed of the business, and gave it up." While I am telling the behaviour and conversation of the Curate, of WiUiam Wilson the carpenter, and of Dr. Line the man-midwife of the parish, I have not yet explained the first line of this history, the harbinger of the momen¬ tous records about to ensue—· " Merrily rang the bells in the village of Hazleton."
?И??.
CHAP. IL ** ibURELY these bells will never have done ringing for this son and heir," said Dr. Line. *' Why, Doctor," repUed the other, " I like to hear them ; I fancy to my¬ self it's for my own cliild, and Margery thinks it a good omen to have a son born on the same day, ancl, for what I know, the same hour and minute that my Lady Marauder is brought to bed ; and
and I fancy tliis bell-ringing, though M'e don't pay for it, will do our young one as much good as it does little Lord James." " I want to calculate the nativity of a child on whom Fortune so auspiciously smiles, and this continual peal confuses and prevents me. No doubt he will prove a most wonderful man !—Heir to the Dukedom of Silsbury—born at thevernal equinox, when Nature, heavenly god- * dess, first begins the y ear.—Fine things, neighbour, to set off with!" " Pray, Doctor, which do you think was born first—my child, or his Lord¬ ship's ?" " I really can't say ; they came into the world so nearly together."
" Then,
" inen pray, Doctor, where is the difference to the stars between the chil¬ dren ?" Now Dr. Line did not expect such a question as this : it was a direct attack upon his favourite hobby-horse. Like aman at a loss for an answer, he replied, as ifit was very evident !— ζί Pshaw l à great deal, to-be sure !" "Sir! whv?" " How the------" Dr. Line never swore.—" How, I say, should I be able to explain to you the nature of these things—to you, who don't know Mars from Venus, who never saw the ring of Saturn, or the belt of Jove—to Vou, who are not even acquainted with Ursa Major, who know not a planet from a fixed
fixed star, or a comet from a meteor— to whom the moon is < ------" How much further Dr. Line would have proceeded, and ivhen he would have finished his rhapsody on his neigh¬ bour's ignorance, it is, impossible to say, as the other put a stop to it by pleading guilty to all. " Well, well, Doctor, I beg pardon —- lmsureldidntmeantooffend ; Ithought there might be some notable difference that I might have understood, why my son and his Lordship's, both born at thé same time, should have different for¬ tunes. But if so be they be the same, I thank God for it ; and if not, ivhy I hope God ivill give him grace to behave
behave like a good Christian ; and then, whatever is the fortune of the young Duke that is to be, ive shall have no great need to envy him. " A pure sentiment of religion, however awkwardly delivered, was enough at any time to disarm the displeasure of Dr. Line. * He shook William Wilson cor¬ dially by the hand ; and, the bells having ceased ringing, took up his hat, and hastened homeM r ard. Dr. Line lived the further side of the village from the Church, in a small cot·- tage, neat and plain, and sheltered all around with a little coppice. The whole was his own, and that was about one acre. In
In the midst of arising spot (which, if I thought the majority of my readers were antiquarians, I would have said, with all due remarks, was an ancient tumulus, or burial-place of a British Druid some three thousand years ago), the Doctor had built his house; and about thirty years before the present period, planted the wood around it. Exclusive of an annual income of forty pounds, which he had iii thé funds, this was his whole property. He prac¬ tised indeed as surgeon, apothecary, and man-inidwife ; but as he kept no horse, and was most liberal in his terms, * his gains were very small. His pleasure and his business, his labour and his re¬ creation, his expences and his studies» were
-were all directed to objects. above this earth. The knoivledge of the heavenly bodies, their natures, powers, and influ¬ ences employed lus whole mind : yet this astronomical krowledge ivas only subservient to hh astrological fancies. Dr. Sibley M-as, in his opinion, the most learned man that ever Hved ; Nicholas .Culpepper was the next. Oh ! what ?*?>??1 he not have given (if he had had it) to have read in English (for he knew no other language) the works of Bet- lantius, Pirovanus, Marascallerus, Goclenius, Caietanus, Paracelsus, Jóvi- anus Pontanus, Michael Scot, Chris¬ topher Heydon, and other ivorthies of this kind without number, and now al¬ most without name í
CHAP.
CHAP. ?. X HE Doctor, arrived at home, set to his studies, with a most hearty goodwill. He calculated the hour of the child's birth. He took a view of the heavens at the time, with the positions, influences, and aspects of the different planets; and, by the assistance of White's Ephemeris, which the Doctor annually purchased, he was able to be very exact.
The
QUIXOTE, The horoscope proved to his satisfac¬ tion ; he was perfectly satisfied with his labour, and cast the nativity to a nicety,—Whose nativity? the reader may be inclined to say.—The son of Lord James Marauder, Dr. Line un¬ doubtedly meant ; whether it will answer as well for the son of William Wilaon, the carpenter of Hazleton, who was born at the same hour, the following history will exemplify. But why was the Doctor more desir¬ ous of casting the nativity of Lord James Marauder's son, than he was of the car¬ penter's ?—Did the Doctor expect any payment for it ? No: the Doctor was much too humble
humble a subject to be known at the great house ; and, in defiance of his poverty, he had too much decent pride to be a beggar : besides, a German professor of midwifery had been bespoke from the metropolis, for the purpose of delivering my Lady. A complete, set of wonderful apparatus had assisted at the birth, and young master had arrived in this world with as much preparation and attend¬ ance, as if his mother had been an Eve, and the first of the human species that had procreated in this terrestrial globe. Perhaps then it was the same motive that induced the good people that at¬ tended her Ladyship, also induced our Doctor to calculate her child's nativity —his ostensible consequence in the eyes of the ivorld. Lord
Lord James Marauder was the second son of the late Duke of Silsbury. His elder brother, the present Duke, was unmarried ; and though he had arrived many years at the title, never went to Court, or attempted to signalize himself in any respect as a Peer of the realm. In the eariy part of his life, indeed, he had run through the course of fashion¬ able dissipation ; but finding himself a man of but little consequence in the gay world, and fond of field sports, he had not even visited the metropolis for the last two years ; for the Duke had been brought up in the Roman Catholic faith, in which he still tenaciously abided ;—* without, therefore, looking for other rea- sons, this will account for his continual residence in the country As
As for Lord James, hchad early chang¬ ed to the side of Fortune, was elected a Member of Parliament, and became Colonel of the Militia : of course this conduct did not conciliate the «affections of his brother. Lord James had befoie run aivay with Miss Marauder, the rich Irish heiress; and, according to the will of the lady's father, changed his family name of Kennet for that of Marauder. A treaty of marriage was on foot between the guardians of this lady and his Grace, who thus doubly felt the blow. Lord James had also clan- destindy purchased a small estate and manor in the veiy neighbourhood of his noble brother. Most inveterate then was the hatred of the r Duke against Lord James ; he continually abused him vol. ι. ? in
in his words, and opposed him in his actions ; yet as regularly four days in the week did he employ himself in a morning in a manner most agreeable to the expectant wishes of the other ; that is, — He constantly ventured his neck in afox-chace. Lord James, therefore, every other day, at least, looked out for an express that his Grace had Utken his last gallop ; and generally on the evening of Mon¬ day, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, (the days the Duke hunted), Lord Jernes took his walk up the hill that led to his brother's castle, in hopes of meet¬ ing the messenger with the mournful tidings.—But Lord James Marauder was no arithmatician, or he would have 4 known
Imown that, after all the Duke s bold riding, the odds were most considerably against any serious accident; and here, for the sake of young hunters, that they may not be checked in their sporti by the ??? ard fears of one fall too many, I shall briefly state the odds. In the ßrst place, in the course of a long day's "hunting, it is ten to one in favour of a bold and good rider, well mounted, that he has any accident at ull. Secondly ', supposing he falls, it is right to one that neither he nor^his horse are materially hurt, J gain ¡ it is $iv to one the horse is hurt, and not the rider. ? â Next,
Next, if the rider is hurt, it is twelve to'oneXb&t a bone is broken. And, lastly, it is twenty to one, if a bone is broken, that the wound is mortal. Ergo, 10X8X6X 12X20=115200 : 1X1X1X1X1=1 And 115200=1. - Thus stated in details :— That hc has any fall is 10—to—1 That himself or horse is hurt 80— to—1 That it is the horse, and not himself 480—to—1 That no bone is broken 5760—to—1 That the hurt is not mortal 115200 —to— 1 Therefore,
^ Therefore, out of 1155200 persons ivho go a hunting in a morning, but one ? supposed to end his course that ? ? ??. Fair ladies, to you must the compiler of these papers apologize for these last pages, so incongruous to the develop¬ ment of private history : yet among you are some of thé bold daughters of Nimrod, votaries of Diana in the day-time, and far be it from me to sup¬ pose that ye are not equal votaries in the Even—you, perhaps, will need no apology; and also ye, ivho fear lest the winds of Heaven should visit your faces too roughly, who want not the . course daubing of dame Nature, but delight in the soft touch of Art and Fancy, do not despise and condemn c S this
this calculation :—have ye not fathers, brothers, kinsmen, dear friends, or more, dear lovers who partake of tlm recreation ? raid is it not a satisfaction to you to know how little is the danger to •those you love? But enough of this. J hasten back to my jpoper game, l$ie nativity 4»f youqg Mamudtor» eWeet«ø«i of ILøxé James, grandson of 4be ?bte Duke of Silsbury, and nephew-of the present, .besides a pedigree that might easily be traced to half the crowned heads in Europe. The astrological data Hfrom* which Dr. Line cast the nativity of the child, were—" On Monday, the £lst of March, ¿between the hours of five and #ix, was horn a male chikl, Ä. D. As
* As I, have thus particularized the year, month, day, and eveu hour in which Lady James Marauder produced my young hero to the world ; and as an astrologer, w ho wishes to have a concise view ot îiis future history, may look back to the exact situation of the hea¬ vens at that time, I siiall no further anticipate his life than with just men¬ tioning the preamble to the worthy Doctor's statement ? i( The face of Nature smiles on thee, my boy ; the Planets are propitious ; and Honours, Wealth, and Fame hover around thy cradle. " The Fates have decid d thy line of life ? three divisions, and have given ç 4 to
f o each full fivc-and-twenty revolutions of this earthly planet. The first is due tt> Love; the second Glory claims ; and Power grasps the third." Why I have been so minute iu the birth of the sons of Lord James Marauder and William Wilson, will; in «Tr the course of the following pages, more fully appear. Henceforth the history demands a more rapid description.
CHAP:
GHAP. IV.
A PASS over the days of childhood of the two young men, M'hose births ???^? been so fully described. ? am happy to inform the reader that the respectable Dean Bottom, Dean of the diocese, thought proper to recollect an old College acquaintance in the Curate of the parishes of Hazleton and Castleberry; and through his means o S Mr;
Mr. Lockeridge received a living in the diocese, the valuable Rectory of Wheatland, I could here spin out a fine episode, by following him to India, ?????? he went in pursuit of his first love, Λν?ιο, , I might almost say, had been kidnapped by her relations to that meretricious «oil As fire tries fine gold, ao danger tries our virtues, whether they are real or uot. He found his fair ???, though compelled to accompany a stern father, had resolutely withheld from many a ..-suitor her hand as w*ell as her heart* Her parent was lately deceased, and almost the whde of a small property he had left to her stepmother. Thisyoung lady was preparing to return to England when Mr. * Lockente arrived. They were
were immediately married; and the Rector of Wheatland, after a nina months' voyage, staid but six week* before he prepared to return to his native country, bringing back with him tö Europe a treasure more precious tlian all the riches of Nabobs, NİEİms, and Rajahs. The period of six years had elapsed from young Marauder's and Wilson's birth, when Mr. Lockeridge with his Spouse returned from India. As Rector of Wheatland, he had flbe appointment of a hey to a public gtam* mar-school in his neighbourhood ^ anfl two years after, younsrWîlscmWilsonwaè the lad -ehosta to be ?e object bf his bounty. ci Dr,
Dr. Line lived in statu quo < at hi* favourite spot, where, as he yearly no¬ ticed the growth of his circumambient plantation, did he perceive, at the same» time, that; his circle of the heavens de¬ creased,—"An emblem, " he would say,. " of mortality ;t-wc lose in one thins what m e gain in another." The preferment of Mr. Lockeridge had * not diminished the civility and intimacy which. had strengthened between the Curate and Pr. Line, .from the. naming of young Wilson. It was by the- Doctor's. recommendation* that the boy had been sent to the school. Dr. Line hhnself first, taught Ins godson his ? ? ? ; and from the daily instruction ivhichhegave him at the holidays, ^mighl ?
he not improperly called his philosophi¬ cal tutor. In truth, he learned no great deal at the school, not from any fault in the teachers, but in the scholar him-, self. Latin and Greek he would at any time resign for a lecture on the starry bodies, which concluded with a peep through the telescope ; and he was much more conspicuous at boxing, wrestling, and cricketing, than at ar, oration, com·» position, or versification. His mind was too violent, perhaps too strong, to hear regular trammels. When he arrived at his fifteenth year; Dr. Line and his clerical patron, by absolute dint, of reasoning, prevailed upon him to be more attentive to his classical studies ; and in the two last years -
learned more Greek and Latin fh&n he had (kmt in fill the former sseven. I Cannot help ï s emaïtóng that Di'. Line always condttded his arguments to him to learn Latin andG reek,— t * And yon ivîH be able to read, not only Nicholas Culpepper and Dr. SifcJey, but Bellantitfs, Pirovanus, Marascallerus* Gocknius, Caietanus, Paracelsus, Jovi* anuís Pontanus, Michael Scot, &c. kc, kc. kc. Far diflerent, and with far greater tåa t was the education of yotmg Mu^ fattder conducted. Two private plfe*· icefmts lived in the house. One taught **Λ RÄaerít languages, the othei' the " modern ;
modern ; mot forgetting (what is called) the use of the globes, the mathematics, itnd aH its appurtenances. Daily did Lord JiU^iøS ?#»?? ö+* tbf* ???-???^???-??! of liis son ; imd daily did he -perceive spe* <*imeim of that reaely w4t, bohl nemaite, and argumentative powers which so earij' distinguished the young man. Nor were tbc gymnastic -imd pugilistic isei- iences neglected. The ??& ofOoådtøå and Aggelo, ^if Mendoza and Jòhmscm> mtk many otheri -of i-n-fe-ior note, were 'W^ell k^own m his Lordship's ???????. Veryeady inlÄedklybUng ???????!* shew a bold, haughty, and co*n*mndifi$ spirit ; and though he Avanted not for kbihtKfe, ytet lie always chose his mvn tim-esfor teamingj and tiis own tuiyrcft» Many
QUIXÖT2T* Many boys in* the neighbourhood were frequently sent for to Lord James's* to be his playfellows ; but a lad in the village, who was articled to a petty attorney, that acted as his Lordship's steward, was his chief, though humble companion and favourite· Tliis youth was eight or nine years older than Marauder, was of a sly and subtle disposition, and soon gained the favour of the family at the great house. —He was not only the first to indulge the young heir in all his whims, freaks, and fancies, but was the first to invent Ti^w ones for him. Young Marauder was very fond of trying experiments of some kind cor other,,
TNFEKNAL other, which it is unnecessary to repeats as, like most boyish sports, when left to themselves, they begin and end ia cruelty. Imphell, tlie attorney's clerk, never boggled at any thing the other required; he was the chief instrument of hk wanton mischief, and the tyrant of those boys v/hose ages came between the future Duke's and.his own.. Afr Marauder grew older, ImpheH generally accompanied him on horse¬ back, and was a ready nomenclator to tell him the history of the neighbour·* hood. ,- Among other of the young, hero's amuse-
atmisemmts, 'experiments with gunpow¬ der he particularly delighted in. He was not only a veiy good shot, but with a little mortar he would throw a bomb to such a nicety, that even that high military character, ι .e Duke of Rich¬ mond himsdf, would have been pleased M'ith hb skiiJ. ©nee ? iaid a scheine to ssrve asjen* teel jump to Ws French tu-lor, who had displeased him ; but owing to a mistake, the føain lighted om 1?????, who was t®8sfcÔ «om© sax or eight yards into a, ipo»d of imáev, wMicnxt moving any other injury, so judiciously had 1? young pupil managed his work. ??? 1?)?\1 <?? to tke sgc of one*
4Äi«wmd4wenty, Lord James, by his ison's ptarticular desire, agreed vrith the ■n*f-*fs.N*rTViûTr *t^*è· ι» o*rti-all tm τγ ii rf \r tri tmtff* up' the business to his clerk, the chief part of which was the management of his Lordship s estate. Yet this did ?? prevent ImphelFs attendanceøn the son ?? ?? 'benežkcuor, till Mxrauder wem atøad. ¥onng ?1??? wa» moet m£ his $?& at school ; tuie šimime* koüdays ke ge¬ nerally spent with his ^?????! patron» and the winter ones with his parents, &nd astrological fiiend, at home. ïn their 'fifteenth year, èy a circum* «tance i am about to relate, the youn g men first -became aoquateted ; till that period
period Wilson was totally unknown t<r Mr. Marauder, though the former weU knew the son of Lord James by sight. Young Marauder had given five gui¬ neas to be played for at backsword, in the Whitsun-Week. Wilson happened to he at home, and attended the revel as a spectator. A favourite groonbbf Mn Marauder's was about to carry off the prføe, when Wilson,prevailed on a stout Irishman, who worked for his father, to mount, the stage. At the first blow the Irishman sent his opponent spiwling on the ground ; a dispute instantly arose concerning fair play : Wilson was loud in defence of hk. friend, and leaped upon the stage.. Mr*.
Mr. Marauder, who was present, and -whose word had as yet been law, ordered Tlim off. The son of the ¿arperiter demurred. The embryo Duke indignantly seized ? stick, and with many abusive words threatened him with manual chastise¬ ment on the spot. Wilson replied—" You are surround¬ ed with dependants, Sir, or you should soon be convinced how little I fear you. " '* If you suppose, Sirrah, I want any one to assist me in chastising your inso¬ lence, you are greatly mistaken. Defend yourself: I attack you but with your 4>wn low weapons." " -Come,
" Come, then, and drive me down." Wilson instantly seized a cudgcL Mr. Marauder eoaMdered himself as an adept at the broads\vord ; and con¬ fident of his strength, wm about to attempt tof ulfll his worde,, when Imphell, the attorney, his Lordship's bailing and some other attendants interfered, and ivith difficulty restrained him. * 4 f Sk; he's*beneath your notice," ex- claimed ImpheH^ as trhey all pushed for¬ ward between ?? combatants, The bailiff; a stout man, was in a taoment on the stage. He struck at Wilson with his fist ; while Imphell ivas endÄavsowingto restrain his angry patron. The
The youth turned the blow aside with his cudgel, as he smote the other with great violence on the arm. His father's workman, on whose account the quarrel had commenced, seeing the danger his young master was. in, at this instant caught him in his arms r and, before the rest could make good their attack, leaped off the other side of the stage with him. Tlie bailiff, who was enraged at the blow he had received, was eager to be revenged. Marauder broke from Ifnphell, ancl sprung on the stage ; hut so, mrniyt now interfered, and not a few friends of the carpenter placed themselves before his son, that the baütff was obliged to be satisfied as he was. The difference too between a raw lad of fifteen, and m robust
robust man of forty, prevented tlie combat from proceeding any further. Mr. Marauder himself was very vio¬ lent, and was only prevented by the interference of some gentlemen, who were with him, from being the principal in the affray. Wilson, nearly as haughty, walked off with the Irishman, remarking, in no low key, that it required something more than high birth, education, or abilities to make a gentleman. From this period Mr. Marauder never forgot Wilson, whom he called the car¬ penter's insolent son ; and Wilson, who had before heard a great deal of the abilities
abilities and accomplishments of his Lordship's heir, was not much inclined, from this specimen, to believe the Mdiole to be true. The worthy Dr. Line, ivho, from the concomitant circumstances of their birth, had daiiy, for near fifteen years, expected to see them fly into one another's arms, and become a second Castor and Pollux, ivas most wonderfully astonished when hc heard of the affray. Yet still he an¬ ticipated great things, and again and again reviewed, applauded, and confirmed his original calculations. Happily for the Doctor, a new comet had lately been discovered; and from the inauspicious influence of this, he vol. i. d accounted
accounted for the retrograde motion øf things.
????. V. JL HE malign mists, which the sudden affray, related in the last chapter, had raised, were by no means allayed by Lord James. Urged by his son, in whose temper forgiveness had neither a natural nor artificial growth, he exerted # his influence to injure the father of young Wilson, and to drive him from the village. But
But his Lordship had more of the-will than the power, and, except in taking from the carpenter his own particular work, things remained in nearly the same state. The greater part of the estates in the parish belonged to his brother the Duke, of ivhich William Wilson's house, gar¬ den, and field made a part. The manor, and a small estate, indeed, belonged to Lord James ; and it was the circum¬ stance of his having purchased these privately (I before noticed) which in¬ creased thedivisionbetM'eeitthe brothers. Many a scheme had Lord James devised ivhen he should come to the title—many an alteration and improvc- D 2 ment
ment had he planned. Among the first he had determined to turn out Wilson's family.—This ivas a point in ivhich he had promised his son, whose haughty temper remembered, with increased acri¬ mony, the affront M'hich had been put upon him at the revel. Young Marauder Mas in some respects like his father—in most superior. In abilities, educatbn, and person he left Lord James far behind. Proud of the lineage from whicli ? \ was descended, buoyed up Mİth the great honours daily expected, he saw himself in the first situation in the kingdom, and in every other person, but the Majesty, fancied he beheld an inferior.
To
To recapitulate, in a very few words, the chief motives which occasioned the animosity between the Duke and his brother, will account for the virulence with which it was continued. Lord James Kennet married Elizabeth Marauder, a great heiress, and by her father's will was obliged to take the family name. Once possessed of the wealth for which he married, he changed his religion, and came into Parliament. lie now also bought the manor of Hazleton, where the Duke had two thousand a year, and which his G raee had been trying to purchase from the time he came to the title;—antl what heightened the whole, Lord James, by having embraced the established religion, » 3 became
became possessed of the national advan¬ tages ancl honours his brother, as a Catholic, couid not hold. Exclusive of his seat in Parliament,, he iras Colonel of the Militia; and on the next vacancy, the Lord Lieutenancy of the County was, promised him : yet, after all, his Lordship ivas suspected to be not a whit better Protestant in liis heart, though worldly motives had induced him to recant ids errors. But there ivas stili a reason behind, not generally known, and more grating than all this : Lady James was of a Roman Catholic family ; her father's will requiied that she should raarry one of the same persuasion. Lord James obeyed, and changed after his marriage. The Duke
Duke himself had intended to solicit, , and had spoken to her guardians ; but while his Grace's counsel were examin¬ ing if the property was so gjeat as reported, Lord James, in his bro- ther's name, called on, the lawvers—was satisfied—flew to the lady, and ran off withher himself to Gretna-Green. What the principles of Mr. Marauder were, will most fully appear in the course of these pages. Whatever they were at present, his father seemed per¬ fectly well satisfied with them. One thing was evident, that Lord James's recantation had not grievously offended any of his frieuds (besides the Duke) of the Roman persuasion. Generally a Priest or two of that communion resided n 4 in
in the house, and many of the latter, French emigrants. My Lady, too*, still remained a good Catholic ; and his Lordship kindly lent her the use of his chapel—a strong instance of the liberality of his notions, and that he was not prejudiced to his new faith. In his sixteenth year young Marauder left England to visit France and Italy. Many reasons induced his father to permit his departure at so early an age. When his passions had interfered, Marauder had already shewn himself capable of such violent measures as had justly alarmed his friends. In some cases ail ImpheH's art and ingenuity had scarcely been able to defend his young patron. These acts had been attributed
attributed to high courage, and an un¬ daunted boyish spirit; but a circum¬ stance which happened in his own family, began to make his Lordship think more seriously of the matter. # Sir Gourdy Kirtle, a first cousin of my Lady, had in his sixtieth year broke his vows of bachelorship, and married for love. The blooming daughter of a tenant was the happy bride. They came in the third honey-moon on a visit to Lord James. Lady Kirtle soon consi¬ dered her new cousin with no unfavour¬ able eye ; and in every moment of Sir Gourdy's absence, the youth was not idle in endeavouring to ingratiate himself into the fair lady's favour. A thousand little nameless attentions, which an ? 5 elderlv
eklerly husband, fromr many a cause, will omit, Marauder Mas ever ready to perform. In ivalking, riding, fishing, on land or ivater, her kind cousin attended ; yet M r ith such art did he con¬ duct himseif, that Sir Gourdy had no idea of his danger from a youth of fifteen. His Lordship's suspicions ?;??? ñrst roused from a remark of Lady Marau¬ der, that since the visit of their cousins, her son seemed to have dropped hi$ boyish fancies ; and she hoped the steady conduct and grave counsel of Sir Gourdy would work a perfect reform¬ ation. Lord James, by a* little atten-> tion, soon found that his fears were true, and determined, at all events, to remove his
his son from the fascinating object directly. A plausible excuse for going to town separated them for some days; in tlîe interim Lord James watched so nar¬ rowly, that he discovered a scheme fora private meeting during the winter, v/hich both parties were to spend in town. The knowledge of this induced Lord James to send his son abroad immediately, to whicii the youth, in defiance of his new flame, joyfully con¬ sented. Lord James gave him a commission in the Militia before his departure—a grateful feather in the cap of a youth just entering the paths of manhood. The allowance of his father was most liberal, and his establishment such as d 6 beeame
became the heir of one of the first Dukedoms in England. His Lordship's prudence in sending ?? ? ?? his son at so critical a time was soon justified by the event. In the' meridian of St. James's a lover was not lohg wanting to Lady Kirtle, nor a kind friend to Sir Gourdy to remove the mist from his eyes; and in eleven months and a few odd days after the marriage-knot M r as tied, did the Baronet once more find himself at liberty.
CHAP.
????. VI. .
SEVENTEEN years had now passed by since the birth of the renowned youth, who will make the most conspi¬ cuous figure in these pages, and Lord James was as far from the Dukedom as at the first moment of his father's death ; when on a Monday evening, as he took his usual walk up the hill, he perceived, at a great distance, a horseman riding towards him. The
The mom had been frosty, the fields of course were hard and slippery, most congenial to fractures and broken bones, thougli by no means hard enough to prevent the sports of the field. With redoubled eagerness then he viewed the rider. Nearer and more near as he approach«* ed, ivas he certified in its being the family livery. Lord James anxiously drew out his pocket-glass, and mounted upon a high stone to take a better view. Some fro¬ zen particles yet lay on the top of the stone;—my Lord was heavy; his feet glided fiom beneath him.; his nose saluted
saluted the moist earth ; and his shins, more hapless, encountered the hard and rugged edges of the stone. ■»» The horseman, who indeed was a servant of the Duke's, but had no mes¬ sage for him, laughed, and passed by ivithout further notice. Iiis Lordship arose angry, fretted, disappointed, and hurt. Aragged bruise had torn the flesh ; and by the time Lord James Marauder arrived at home, , his leg had put on so unfavourable an appearance, that it was thought necessary to send for the family surgeon. What is the need of sending for a capital surgeon if he does not exhibit 5 his
his superior skill, but acts according to tlie rules of the most common and illiterate ? and in ivhat respect is a great man a better patient than a poor one, if he does not employ the doctor for a greater length of time ? Medical men should recommend one another, wher¬ ever there 'are assets enough for all. The surgeon, rightly considering these things, thought it advisable to call in the physician ; the physician prescribed for the good of the apothecary ; the apothecary recommended some excellent nurses, &c. &c. &c. In short, what with the doctors, the physic, and the original malady, his Lordship was no longer able to wait for the death of his brother; but having taken
taken five dozen drafts, aperients and astringents, diaphoretics and diuretics, febrifuges and anodynes, according as each became necessary, in eight weeks from the untoward accident, he himself took his departure to the pther world 1 Thus, in his forty-fifth year, ¿id Lord James Marauder receive his summons to leave this earthly state by means of a grazed shin, at the very moment he expected to hear that his brother had departed by a broken neck.
CHAP.
CHAP: VIL Lady james marauder was inconsolable : every prospect of being a Duchess was gone for ever. Mr. Marauder, who was summoned to England upon the occasion, bore his loss with more philosophy—an early prognostic of an elevated and superior mind, which had not in vain imbibed the stoical principle. Amid the infal¬ lible arguments by which he conquered his grief, it did not escape him that he was one step nearer the title. Tho
The chief advantage that had accrued to Lord James from his renouncing his Catholic errors, may be reckoned his seat in the House of Commons ; and this had helped him to some pretty places in his friend the Minister's gift. Mr. Marauder, since his travels, had put on the whole man; and to the former wit and learning of youth, he added reflection, penetration, and judg¬ ment. Asa minor, he was not yet able tobe a candidate for the Borough his father's death had vacated, as wanting a seat, he wanted also the necessary qualifica¬ tion to entitle him to hkfather's honours and advantages. Mr. Marauder, there¬ fore,
fore, sa?v no reason to profess the same tenets or the same conduct ; and very Miseiy considering that the purchase of his honoured uncle's, his Grace of Sils- bury's, life M r as not worth four years, (young Marauder was a most excellent - reckoner as ???11 as reasöner), ????? period must elapse before he could take his seat ; and recollecting also that he might, at any time, be as easily recon- vinced of his errors, after the fall of the Dukedom, he, for the present, openly professed himself a Catholic as soon as the funeral of his father was over.—Lady James had never thought it \vOrth her Avhile to change; and being of Irish birth, and of an old rich Catholic family, had e\*er remained in the religion of her forefathers. The
The son's religious principles, there¬ fore, could not.be otherwise than grate¬ ful to the mother ; but IVfr. Marauder looked further : he considered his pro¬ fession of the same faith as preparatory to a reconciliation M'ith his uncle. All due respect had been paid at Lord James's decease, though the Duke hung back, and could not be said to make any approach on his part. But modesty, which mairy philosophers say is only a species of shame, (and Marauder early in life prided himself on his philosophy), ?? not one of the vices of this young heir. " What is modesty?" he would say. *-—" It is a consciousness of some defect or
or weakness. Is it not proverbial that a villain cannot look you in the face ? and why r„re men ashamed or shy, but under the idea that the people they are addressing, are their betters—or that the actions they are performing, are not altogether right ? This weakness of the mind I feel not ; and what I know to be proper, I will act, with a total indif¬ ference concerning the opinion of others. With these sentiments Mr. Marauder, about a month from the funeral, sent the Duke the tollowing note :—
" My
" My Lord Duke, " Your well-known virtues, "—[if his Grace had a virtue, it was certainly not a cardinal one]—" flatter me with the hope that your nephew will not petition for your pardon in vain. I renounce the errors of my unhappy f ither, and I entreat your Grace not to visit his offences on his innocent son. tí I humbly ?va^t your Grace's per¬ mission to pay my respects in person to so near, sobeloved a relation,"—[Mr. Marauder had never seen the Duke, but at a distance, in his life]—" and I ever shall remain, " My Lord Duke, " Your obedient and dutiful nephew, " JAMES MARAUDER." Mr.
Mr. Marauder, in answer, received the following note, evidently written by another person, but signed by his Grace. " Young Man, " Your fatlier thought proper, by un¬ exampled baseness and treachery, to tear asunder the link which once held us to¬ gether. I see no purpose in uniting it again. You have already alarge and spien¬ ti id fortune, and can want nothing of me: I am getting old, and like not new faces. " I thank you for your civility, and wish you well ; but would advise you to pursue your intentions in life without regarding there is such a person as " Your kinsman, " SILSBURY."
Mr.
Mr. Marauder, not discouraged, ap¬ plied again by his friends ; and what might havebeen the issue I cannot si»y, had it not been for an accident whkh happened soon after. The Duke of Silsbury h*d for titány years kept a woman, who had originally been one *îf his servants. By her he had had eight children. The eldest lad, two years younger than Wilson, went to the same school. The boys ivere fre¬ quently together. Wikon, at the holi¬ days, had been often with him at the Castle ; and the boy ivould come over and stay ivith him at his father's. Some¬ times they ivere permitted to join his Grace in the diace, and sometimes they ivalked out with their guns. vol. i. e Wiison
Wilson going home for a few days, the other went with him ; and in the latter amusement Mr. Marauder, who was likewise sporting, met them. He instantly recollected Wilson, and, walking up, demanded their certificates. In both it was found wanting The young men were summoned before a Justice of the Peace ; and Mr. Marauder, far from thinking who the other was, compelled them both to pay the double penalty, as they were unqua¬ lified, and without a licence. Hoiv great was Mr. Marauder's sur¬ prise, Λν1?6η having laid the information, he
he triumphantly attended the Justice, and found the Duke's old steward there, who paid down the money for both,— and turning to the young heir, gave him a note.
" Whether or not you knew who Harry Overton was, I care not ; your behaviour to young Wilson is, enough to make me rejoice that Mr. Marauder never has, and never shall be noticed by " silsbury," * This circumstance brought Wilson Wilson to his Grace's notice, who, with tlie true spirit of opposition, did many favours to him and his family, that ? 2 it
it, n%ht readi fiis beloved nephew s cars. The Duke pretended to be more and more pleased with the young man ; and ?\ hen Dr. Line and the worthy Clergy¬ man were about f ? continue their pa¬ tronage, by getting him an exhibition, and sending him to the University, his Grace offered t9 take him home to the Castle, and keep him as a companion and instructor for his children. This offer was much too liberal to be refused, as the juuke commenced his patronage by giving him a life-hold property of one imidred md fifty pounds a year-^-a suffi- cieiiey to qualify him for sporting ; as njuch, perhaps* out of reveng« a^aiiast bis nephew, as go©é*wiü towards the «Ither. Here
?? was » -circiiimtanee that par¬ ticularly pleased Dr. Line, who pro¬ gnosticated most wonderful things fiom hesce, and took a journey to his friend Lockeridge's, on purpose to renjark in what an astonishing way the fates of Marauder and Wilson were entwined. "Thoughthe advantages of birth, education, and connections have so eminently exalted the nobte Maratiikr above his twin luminary, see, my friend, how in his eccentric course, like a ôomet, Wilson gmdnally approaches him. Even the sinister actö ©f th-o one turn to the benefit of the other ¿ yet I do not believe before the age of one* and-tiventy that any very great friend¬ ship or intimacy muH take place ; then e S -we
we shall see them, &c. &c. &c. &c. &c. &c." The Doctor was got on his favourite nag, and, withoutany hindrance from the Rector, cantered away at a famous rate. I shall not repeat his speech, as I dislike the method of the historian, who introduces a fortune-teller or a dream to anticipate the wonders of his story. Perhaps I have been too guilty of this fault already, and the least I can do is to stop in time. Wben the Doctor had finished, Mr. Lockeridge replied with a smile-—" Do you suppose our young friend will be abo a Duke ?" " I cannot
u I cannot positively say ; but I wish Mr. Marauder had a sister, and I should have no doubts of Wilson Wilson's mar- lying her. * To clear up all these doubts, I shall now proceed rapidly with my history»
£4
v/IlixJt·
????????????? ?? ^ _ r j . ? ? ,
CHAP. VUL.., ? ... ArrER this unlucky mistake con¬ cerning the sporting, Mr. Marauder set off to London ; but his stay there was very short : for, having looked over his father's affairs, and settled his corre¬ spondence, he thought proper to pay a second visit to the Continent. In his situation at the Duke's, Wilson had continued three years, though with- ' out
«ut any particular occurrence ; acquit¬ ting himsdf in other respects, as well as ? his office ©f tutor, to the perfeet satisfaction of hfe new partion. Neither liad these years been idiy employed as to his own m^rovemenf. ?? Clergyman and Dr. Line saw with pleasure that the seeds of virtue and religion, which they had ña sedôfensîjr planted in his mind, were now produe- hig their true fruits- In defiance of the lowness of his origin, he wrs uni¬ versally respected, and his. society courted by the gentlemen in the neigh¬ bourhood*, His dutiful behaviour to his parents and. his affectionate kindaess to his e o younger
younger brothers and sisters, was so very different from those of humble birth in general, who gêfíforward in the world, that he was the praise and theme of every tongue. At no time did he conduct himself as if he was superior or better than any of them ; he nevçr denied or wished to conceal his origin ; his father was an honest man, " the noblest work of God i" says Mr. Pope; and though only a carpenter, (now, indeed, by the assistance of his son and his own industry, a builder), he gloried in that he was his father. These three years Mr. Marauder was absent from England on his travels. Tired of the restraint he found at home, and having lost aU hopes of profitiug bv
by his attendance on the Duke, he di4 not wish to return to his native country till his minority was nearly passed. After staying, at the beginning of his tour, afew months in France, he lounged at an easy rate through most parts of Italy, seeing every thing worthy his notice, and forming acquaintances among some of the first families. Provided with proper letters of re¬ commendation, he had been the first time introduced into all circles as the undoubted heir of the Dukedom of Silsbury. The great ivorld was thus open before him, and the spirit and talents of theyoung Englishman soon distinguished him ; his gallantry, courage, and con- E ? duct
duct? were frequently put to the ttial; and crowned" him with success and applause. ' Unlike those young men' of fortune ivho have a conductor or leader, com¬ monly called a tutor, to attend them; he in every case acted and judged for himself. A tenacious observer of his own consequence, he condescended sometimes to stoop to the level of an inferior, but never suffered a dependant to presume to exalt himself to his. ' A Sir. Subtile, a Scotch gentleman of family, accompanied him from England, ivhom he always treated ΛνΗίι a polite intimacy, but at no times M 7 ith a grain, of familiarity. Mr;
Bfr. Subtile was a man of letters niore tìiam of native aMlities, and hi» knowledge was rather useful than ferii- Hanf. ?? manners i\^re miM and piau* sible, but his m!n$ restless aüd schis¬ matic. He had been a Fellow and Tutor at Cambridge ; but had been obliged to resign his situáffeto oö account of a» røprudentdiselo&*M?e<sf notions, destruc¬ tive in thár effect, both to the established Church and State* He had ever pre* ferred a wanéeiirig fife, and necessity only constrained-him to be occasionally at Cambridge;, most parts of France and Italy he was very weil acquainted with, and was well versed in their man¬ ners, language, and customs. His inform¬ ation was of great use to Mr. Marauder, whose guardians settled an annuity upon
him for his attendance. He perfectly knew how to conduct himself towards the young heir, who, though he might require and listen to advice, would never bear the least remonstrance. Marauder, at the commencement of his tour, was little better than a boy ; but he threw the trammels of childhood aside, and soon evinced a knowledge of men and manners that astonished every one who became acquainted with him. His father's eleath left him entirely 'at his own disposal; and while he shewed the abilities of youth, he discoveredalso the judgment of age. Neither a dupe to the artifices of the Italian
Italian Syrens, nor caught in the spe¬ cious snares of the titled gamester, he could play around the fire, yet escape from the blaze.. The veterans -of the gay world, and the ladies of the highest fashion beheld him with amazement. A » fair and famous wit said of him, that he surpassed every European nation in their own characteristics. " Young Marauder," exclaimed she at a large conversazione, " excels you all at your own iveapons : he has the levity and gallantry of the French, the pride and hauteur of the Spaniard, tlie conviviality of the German, the craft of the Italian, the revenge of the Por¬ tuguese, the prudence,of the Dutch, and the extravagance and courage of his own
own countrymen—he is bdoved ly ??? sex, and envied by your's Γ I shall not here relate the minutte· occurrenceâ of his travels ; manv cif- eumstanees which tooi place at that period, will occur in the regular course* of these memoirs ;—neither is it neces¬ sary at present to introduce his more particular acquaintance—friends as the world calls them ; ^????? soon intro- duce themselves. öf these, a Mr. Arftoi*, a late ae- quaintance, he was become very intimale with; and a Mr. Fahany, a young Irish¬ man, ivho for abilities, learning, family, and fortune, ivas infeiior to none in that kingdom. This gentleman hè had met i»
in Italy, who liad, with tlie highest politeness, noticed him, awl with whom he was now on terms of the greatest confidence. Upon Marauder's return to England, he spent great part of his time at a Mr. Cloudlev's,, who will be hereafter more regularly aoticed^an acquaintance introduced to him by Mr. Arnon, Mr. Cloudley, Wh© alway $ lived 'm the country, soon became very partial to him, and was tëcver so happy as when Ma¬ rauder fitvoured himself and family wkh his company. In his twenty-firfct year he bade a farewel to the enchanting Italian dames, and
and came to take possession of fhat splendid fortune which he was already entitled to.
■fl" III III III «III IIII lllllll III II—WW r CHAP. IX. JLET me again and again beg pardon of my fair readers for having so long neglected to introduce any of their own sex. I hope to make ample amends by a diaracter or two I shall now offer to their notice. , . In the beginning of the third year that
that Wilson was at the Castle, Mr. Vasaley (a gentleman who lived in the neighbourhood), brought to his house two young ladies, to whom he had been left guardian. A handsome fortune of twenty thou* sand pounds devolved to each, when she came of age. Emily, the eldest, was so perfectly fascinating, that the veriest misanthro¬ pist could not behold her with indiffer- - ence. She was in her twentieth year. Her height was exactly that nice medium of female beauty, which forms a pleas¬ ing symmetry to the small and pointed features of the most lovely face. Her complexion was deUcately fair; her eyes
eves not large, but quicks with a ten- guisliin^ so tness which caugltt the ob¬ server the moment he thought he had eseaped their first penetrating ghinee. Her nosi and foreiiead were models of the Circassian ; her cheeks graced on each side with a captivating dimple, in which the littie god of Love, with hb whole artillery, seemed to.lay reclined. Reader, didst thou ever see that enchant¬ ing jHcture f Mary Queen of Scfcts, pamted by Zucchiro, in tlie possession of F. Timberman, Esq. ? If thou bæst* thon mayst form some idea ftf tlie fea¬ tures of the mote lovely EiriHy. Htr hair, ia native ringlets, luxuriously flowed aroisnd her bosom ; and, to finish the pott-rait, the taper fingers, tbe retimi and polished *rø* tlie smatt foot and finished
finished anule in a moment reminded the enrapt admirer oS the far-famed Medicean Venus. • I would next describe the person of * her lovely sister, Fanny, in M'hich a page Mould be M'ell employed ; but as her thirteenth year was but lately passed, I ??? very well defer it with say'tug, that, though in many respects different, there was a strong likeness between the sisters. At present, if Emily had sat for the picture of Flora, Fanny Mould have made no bad Hebe. __ Wilson, from whom the arrows of the -sportive god had as yet recoiled unhurt, stood like a second Cymon when- hc beheld this Iphigenia. Cupid, 6
Cupid, who lay laughing among the auburn tresses in her neck, saw the opportunity; and before the poor youth could recover from his surprise, let fly his keenest arrow to the very bottom of llic li í*»q rt" In vain the yòung man rallied, and endeavoured to extract the dart—every attempt only rankled the barb thedecper ; « and before he left Mr. Vasaley's house, the soft smiles of the fair maiden, as she sung «♦ - « In the dead of the night when with labour opprelTd, " All mortals enjoy the fweet bleflings of ??(? &c* &c." completely subdued him. The Duke's castle was not much more than
than a mile from Mr. Vasaley s house* Wilson, like most true lovers, first began to despair ; yet, in defiance of his sense, his prudence, and almost of his will, did .his feet every evening lead him towards Mr. Vasaley's. Often has he walked to within a few yards of the dwelling, which contained his beloved object, and seeing no one, hastily turned back again ;—still he took the same path, reasoning and debating with him¬ self, and frequently after four times walking it, has he at last summoned reso¬ lution to enter the house. It cannot be supposed his passion long remained hid from his lovely mistress : every attempt at concealment .only the more exposed him. , When
When he considered her beauty, her accomplishments, her handsome for¬ tune—his own insignificance on the other side, he determined to conquer his fruitless, his presumptuous love. Mr. and Mrs. Vasaley—people of the common fashionable character—soon rallied her upon her conquest ; nor did the young lady despise it. The great respectability of his character, his connections, his own abilities, his person, his manners, ivere such as would never be injured by the lowness of his birth ; but wherever Wilson ivas known, these soon affixed a proper consequence to him. All these too upon acquaintance increased, while the other was all but forgotten. Besides,
Besides, as his origin was a subject of which he was himself never ashamed, so hi vain did others attempt to injure him there. In all companies he spoke (if the course of conversation led him, but never introduced the subject) of his parents with that humility, duty^ and truth, that could never fail to leave aii impression favourable to himself in the friinds of his auditors.—As an instance. Mr. and Mrs. Vasaley, and both the young ladies were present; Mr. Vasaley invited him to dinner the next day. n I am obliged to you, Sir," replied Wilson, " and would with the greatest pleasure accept your invitation, but I have promised my mother to dine With vol. i· f the
the family, as it is my father's birth-day, which happens but once in four years." " How can that be? asked Miss Emily. " He M r as born, Ma'am, on the £9th of February/* " Indeed Î" said Mr. Vasaley; "it is a very remarkable circumstance." " Your fathei, Sir," said Miss Emily, " I presume lives in this neighbour¬ hood ?" " He is a carpenter, Ma'am, in the next village." Miss Emily blushed ; Mr. Wilson did not, but continued - " 'lhe kindness of my friends having brought me up in adifi'eient siluution in life, has made me a very unprofitable son. My father has been
been a most kind parent ;, and had he not ytekied up his interest for what he conceived my profit, I might long before^ this have been of considerable service to him in his business, and save·*! him á&uch trouble in his old age," . "Truly, Sir," said Mr. Vasaley, ι " the satisfaction of seeing you —— " then pausing a little, " noticed by his Grace must overbalance every incon- 4 r enience." " Why, Sir," replied Wilson, smiling, " my father, I believe, would be as happy with me at home ; ray mother's vanity, I confess—— Ladies, you will pardon one of your own sex ;—but I must say no more, or you will accuse nie of satirizing you." " When ??? think," replied Mrs. f ?, Vasaley,
Vasaley, " that you are satirizing us, we will chuse Miss Emily for our cham· pion. " This was uttered with great affected archness : Wilson coloured not a little, but, recovering himself, replied—" Miss Emily, indeed, would turn my satire to praise at any time.** When Wilson had departed, Miss Emily, addressing herself to Mrs. Vasaley, said—" My dear Mrs. Vasaley, surely this Mr. Wilson can never be the son of a common carpenter ?" " 'Tis even so, my dear;—! told you so before." " Oh, I thought you were in joke. Well, whoever he is, he is a gentle¬ man;—·
man ;—yet I can scarcely believe any of you;" But, among all Mr. Vasaley's- house¬ hold, Wilson had not a warmer defender than the beautiful little Fanny; and among the many admirers who already began to court the smiles of Miss Emily, Wilson was ever aided by the good word and kind wishes of the sister^ That urbanity of manners, which was so conspicuous in this young man, pene¬ trated, like the genial warmth of the sun,. into every breast ; that steady upright¬ ness of conduct, which ever applauded M'hat was right in others, and condemned what was wrong, made him appear to all ? â what
what he really was—thefriend of human¬ kind.—No poor man ever thought hím proud, no rich one mean. In whatever company he was present, he never affected to be superior to any one ; and among th-9 greatest men in the kingdom, not the smallest traces of an abject ser¬ vility was to be perceived. In his friendships steady—in his love constant¬ in his whole deportment tnild, resolute, and open to the truth. By nature he was warm and hasty ; and though he laboured to divest himself of these angry ebullitions, yet the dignified glow of offended virtue would frequently burse forth in defiance of every exertion. The rules by which he endeavoured to form hb conduct, were the genuine principles
principles of Christianity, which he would affirm were so plain and simple, that common reason alor^ was necessary to inform us what was right or wrong. A man, such as I have described, whatever disadvantages of birtji he might labour under, could not fail to-be an interesting object to a woman of sense. No fair one could form an ac¬ quaintance without respecting him, and his addresses must at least appear in the light of a compliment. But when the increasing notice M'hich the Duke of Silsbury took of him, is considered, it even gave him a worldly consequence superior to most young tuen* w 4 When,
When he first became aa inmate of the castle, he rarely saw his Grace* Sometimes, when he joined the hounds, the Duke would enter into conversation Λνίί?ι hiin« Every conference satisfied him that Wilson was more worthy of his notice. The Duke made him a pre¬ sent of two hunters, and kept them entirely for his ridmg. If Wilson was absent from a day's sport, the Duke began to miss hhn, and generally to enquire for hinu When any particular, ¿port was expected, Wilson was ev^r mformed ; and perceiving it pleased his patron, he seldom failed to attend. By degrees his Grace saw more and mom of him within the castle. He took pleasure in seeing, and hearing the inb provements of his /children ; and. ? soon
soon found that Wilson was become a. general favourite.. The house-steward was very old and infirm ; Wilson frequently assisted him, and, on his demise (the beginning of the third year), his Grace offered ?? place to the other, which was with gra*» titude accepted. Thus, ?? slow and regular gradations, did his Grace's favour increase ; and by the time Wiison had entered his twenty« first year> it M r as generally known that this young man ivas left one of the trus* tees to his Grace's younger chHdren~ Γ have related these things now that the reader may see ??? so beautiful, so ¥S accom-
accomplished, and rich a young lady as Miss Emily Bellaire, did not spurn at his addresses ; as I wish not to have the dernier resort of theNovelist historian to the almighty power of Love. The first critic of the Augustine age remarked upon poetry— and Novek we know are a fpeeies of poetry. — " Nee Deut snterSt nifi dignus vindice nodos «< InciUerit j·· Which is as much as to say, never let your heroes and heroines play the fool, if they can possibly help it. Therefore it is, that I wish rationally to account for the lovely Miss Emily 3 permit-
for, though the fair lady fed her fond lover's flame with hopes, she could not be said absolutely to have accepted him.. To speak literally, Miss Emily cer¬ tainly gave the young gentleman every encouragement to persevere in his suit ; yet she had neither bonafide (in honour). entered into* any positive engagement to marry him, nor had she dismissed all other pretendeis; No, the fascinating smile was not yet confined* and daily almost, may I say, were human victims offered up at the shrine of her beauty..
r 6 CHAP.
bSSSSSSSSjS
CHAP. Χ. As Miss Emily Bellaire soon became the fashionable object of the men's ad¬ miration, and the ladies' envy, in this part of the country^ it is no matter of wonder that the fame of her beauty should reach the ears of the gallant Marauder, who was just returned from his travels. Mr· Marauder spent the greatest part of
pf his time in town, on his first arrival from abroad, as Lady James was then in London, and afterwards he was at his friend Cloudley s. It v/as very late, therefore, in the summer before he made his appearance at Hazleton. Mr. Marauder's acquaintance with tlie neighbouring gentry was very distant indeed ; he considered them as beings of a lower order» * Immediately on his arrival in England he had been presented at Court by the Earl of Gayden, as the presumptive heir of the Dukedom of Silsbury ; he bad since been introduced to the first Nobility of the kingdom, and was uoav forming bis establibhment on the most fashionable
fashionable scale, as became his splendid fortune and vast expectations. Lady James ???$ at this time in the country, and her dutiful son came dowi> for two days to enquire after her health. In the course of a morning's ride he* met Miss Emilv on horseback, attended by Wilson. A few paces behind were Mr. Vasaley, another gentleman, and the little Fanny. Miss Emily's green blind did not hide her face. Marauder saw in a moment that her beauty had not been magnified. He stopped his horse ???? he came to Mr. Vasaley, and politely bowed. The
The bow was returned, as a bow generally is from a very great man to one who feels himself inferior. Farther than this their acquaintance had not yet commenced ; but as Mr. Marauder stopped his horse, Mr. Vasaley said—" How long, Sir, have we had the honour of your company in the coun¬ try ?" " A few days, Mr. Vasaley t —I pur¬ pose staying some weeks, "—an hasty de¬ termination,—" and have stopped my horse to tell you I hope we shall be better neighbours than I have yet found it in my power to be." "You-do me great honour, Sir; I am extremely happy to hear it, and will have the pleasure of paying my respects to you to-morrow. " " I shall
" I shall be at home all the morningv I hope Mrs. Vasaley is ivell ; I beg my compliments. Good day, Sir." Such ivas the origin of Mr. Marauder's introduction to the family of Mr*. Vasaley. The following day Mr. Vasaley's visit ivas returned. Miss Emily M r as visible,, and her dimples played not in vain. Mr. Marauder smiled most graciously,. and accepted an invitation of Mr*. Vasaley to dine on the third day, Here Wilson ivas, by Mr. Marauder's ?? n desire, introduced to him. Mr. Marauder said—(no one but theip
their common friend, Mr. Vasaley, was- present at the time)—" 1 should bs sorry, Mr. Wilson, that any misunder¬ standing should take place between me and my neighbours. The impetuosity of boys is no excuse for the quarrels of men. I am happy to meet you at my friend, Mr. Vasaley V* Wilson replied—" I with pleasure, Sir, accept your offers of civility, and assure you it is my wish to be on terms of friendship with every human creatura on the face of the earth. " Perhaps this was not the kind of answer to gain the favour of rising greatness ; but Wilson spoke it from his, heart. Mr. Marauder politely bowed, and the gentlemen walked into the other room tothe ladies. This
This beginning of civilities between? two young men, bori under the same planet, with the same influences, did not long escape the ears of Dr, Line. ΝοΛν his predictions began to be fulfilled, and he looked forward M'ith confidence to the completion of them. He borrowed immediately the excise¬ man's horse, and took his usual journey to his clerical friend. Nay, so anxious was he to be the messenger of the good tldings 1 that he is reported to have rode nearly five miles an hour—a speedy rate to which he had been long unused. " Oh Mr. Lockeridge Î" exciabned he, " in these degenerate days, when the noble science of astrology is con- fouuded
founded with the juggles of the magi¬ cian, rejoice with me that my plaiu aud simple calculation has evinced that a knowledge of the heavenly bodies is a sure ami certain rule to judge of the occurrences of this inferior, poor, de¬ pendant spot of earth." He told his tale: Mr. Lockeridge congratulated him, with his usual good¬ nature, on the rising friendship of the young men. "Yes, my dear friend, the hour of maturity is at hand ; thei; fates reach their climax—their destinies, interwoven, verge to the same point—and peace, friendship, and unanimity entwine them together. The
The warm heart of Dr. Line wa^ never checked by his friend with any- cynical remark. CHAR Xt A HECONCILIATION having thu^ taken place between the young gentk-* tnen (if by that universal terra they may be linked together.), they frequently roet at Mr. Vasaley^ The attractive magnet drew them with an irresistible impube» Wilsott
w Wilson had been for some time a ¿eclared admirer» Mr. Marauder did not appear inso ostensible a light. Yet not unmoved did Wilson perceive the attentions of the future Duke. Tlie quick eye of love was alarmed ; he fancied the lovely (damsel too much encouraged his rival* Perhaps the reader will be able to judge more of the ieelings of the parties if I transcribe a love scene, than from athousand remarks :—if they are them¬ selves lovers, I am sure they will; if tliey know not how to love, tliey are eveiy -way .uninterested. One morning, madelicious tête-à-tête with
with his fair mistress—many sweet and tender things had already passed—she said—" Well, Sir, how do you like Mr. Marauder ? dont ??? think him very Agreeable ?" " í am afraid lest Miss Emily should think him too agreeable.'* "Oh, ridiculous! Come, don't •pretend to be jealous. What, you sup* pose every %vell-dressed man to be a most formidable rival ?" "Ah! Emily, how can you accuse tne of needless jealousy? Does Mr. Manauder attempt to conceal the passion you have inspiied him with ? Do I not know by .my own feelhigs what is the object that brings him to Mr. Vasaley's ?" Emily smiled. Wilson continued.—· " Have
* c Have I not, dearest Emily, reason to be alarmed when I consider the po w- erful recommendations with which my rival is armed—when I know my own ««f insignificance ?" Miss Emiiy tried to look grave ì " I am sorry, Mr. Wilson, you should have so bad an opinion of me as to suppose the gifts of Fortune will affect my heart, 'But I believe you'have no very favourable sentiments of women in genera!, and I see no reason why you should exempt me from the list. " " My dearest Emily," taking her hand, " how can you so cruelly tor¬ ment me? On your favour have I built my fondest hopes, and I tremble when
v/hen I see any one attempt to rób lne of my treasure." Emily's looks spoke encouragement î Wiison, with increasing ardour, pro* -ceeded.—" But will my lovely girl pro¬ mise me her favour, will she sanetion my love, will she consent to my wishes, and kindly permit me to speak t£> her guardians, to say I have her approbation to address them—to hasten —— ft u Oh dear me ! irôiat ahurrythe good man is in ! Indeed I can promise no¬ thing. You know we are both children in the eyes of the law. You cannot tell what may happen. Wait patiently, my good friend, " laying her handfamiliariy on his.
Wikon
" Shall I call you cruel or kind:? If you knew, my dearest Emily, how: wretched this suspense makes mej surely ' you would bless me with a more .deter«' minate answer. Let me then speak tó.; your trustees. Why should my belorød girl delay? I know I am unworthy such excellence ; but if you cotdd read " any heart, where every motion, -every: thought ---- -" " I am not to be hurried,, my 'good ~ man : I insist upon it you say not á word to my guardians, unless you meu to forfeit my favour for ever. Is it necessary to have any other approbation than mine ?" ? < y ' 44 No, no, my charming Emilyt'fø&t you alone are the object of my pride ânflh vol. ι. α my
myambitioai. I wish but to hasten over the tedious forms and ceremonies that prevent me from claiming you by a legal ?\%?* Oh glorious moment ! whm the holy bands of matrimony shall give ??? to tliese arms—when I am blessed with a right to protect and defend you f Say, my dearest, loveliest Emily, shall I sweep away the impedi» ments,?" "Not a step further, as yoik« value lae. Good day ! I must begone and dress me. We see- you in the evening ?" •f ???????| thç dial to th« swn.** " Well, good bye !—spareyour similes t&^fiQ-ther time."— -Sq spoke the fair ???&* of ??* ??? was; off ? a rnoi-neiit* W^ibQn
Wilson had not been goneten minutes before Marauder called. Emily ram down, stairs immediately " Here conies my lovely murderess, " exclaimed Mr. Marauder, meeting hen at tlie door, and taking her not-unwif* Ung hand.·**-" Ah ! Emily, how many poor hearts have you broken ? What number Io I stand in your list?*' " Oh!" replied Emily, with a killing smile, " I put you on tbe blank side» among the insensibles*" "No, Emily, if sensibility claims your love, you will put me first on the white side. Only feel my heart, my charming angel ! how it beats to fly to you l' ? % With
With a little coyness on the part of the fair maiden, he pressed her hand to his breast; she,laughing, replied— " Its a wanderer, I believe, and seems ready to be ofiV* "Not so, dear Emily; like a poor ghost, you charm it within the circle of your attractions. It is in vain for me that I think of returning to town— that I seat me calmly in my mother's par¬ lour—that I attempt to read, write, and otherwise employ me : I instantly find I have lost my better part, and as I know you to be the thief, I am come to reclaim it." " Well, take it, and begone 1" "No, I lose it with such pleasure, I would rather make an exchange, if a certain sentimental young gentleman, , whom
Avhom I saw at a distance striding over the fields, has not been beforehand with me." " Ridiculous! Mr, Marauder." " What, is the fluttering thing only bespoke, and not yet departed ?" Emily, whose expressive countenance had before given its zest to every word she uttered, answered but with a look —such a look Ì Marauder, interpreting it in his oivn favour, continued—"Then let me catch İt in my arms, and make sure of it ere it is too late." As he spoke, he caught the tempting object in his arms, and hastily snatched a kiss. ? $ " Upon
" Upon my life, Mr. Marauder, 1 shall leave you!" pretending displea¬ sure by an assumed gravity ; tí you are gettmg rude, Ski" " Can my lovely Emily be surprised I am not insensible when all the world adores her? She called me a stoic just now ; I only wish to convince her I am not so to I r charms." " It is very fortunate we poor simple maidens do not give credit to every word you fine gentlemen utter." "Is it necessary I should speak to declare the la guage of my soul? Do not my looks every moment betray me ? If I called Emily ordinary—if I said her eyes wanted brightness, her features expression, her form the graces, who would know my picture ? Is mý lan* guage
guage to be laconic^ my manner torpid, as if í conversed with her grand¬ mother?" " Nmisensc, Mr. Marauder Ì I shall fly if you do not talk more reasonably." " Charming maid !" continued Ma* rauder, dropping on one knee, and taking again her snowy hand ; ' ς &o, it is not the enchanting face, tlie be¬ witching form that I adore—it is tliat heavenly soul, which every turn of the countenance shews, where the very angels themselves might look with pleasure, and see themselves outshone. Tis this I worship- this day ami night employs my busy mind, and to make myself master of this beloved idol, I would, like the giauts of old, shake the throne of Jove himself." ? 4 " Indeed >
t< Indeed, Mr. Marauder, you are getting very serious/* " Yes, my lovely friend—Oh ! that I might call you by a dearer name !— ï wish to be so. Thus on my knee let me entreat your love. Say, and ease my heart, that no cursed rival deprives me of it. Dearest Emily, dearest, most beloved maid, turn not away !—Oh say 1 am not indifferent to you !" u Why should I answer this smart speech ?" replied Emily, with an arch smile. " You told me before I was to read your looks;—can you not read mine ?'* 14 Yes," retorted Marauder, springn¬ ing up, <( I will, at least, explain them in my own favour, and the sacred kiss of love shall seal my glowing hopes. '* Mr.
Mr. Marauder was as good as* his word. " Really, Sir," exclaimed Emily, trying to pout, < t I shall be very angry ; as you don't know how to behave, I must begone.—Good gracious !" con¬ tinued she, looking at her watch, " it wants but half an hour of dinner-time. —Hark ! there is the first bell l' Emily tripped lightly away. "She is and shall be mine !" said Marauder to himself, looking eagerly after her. t Nothing, perhaps, can be more dull and unmeaning than a love scene literally told :-~it is the language of the ? 5 eyes,
eyes, the pathos of the acting, an in¬ describable je ne fais quoì y which cannot be translated into any one language, but is in reality that uni versal language * of which so much has been said, so little understood. Every love-sick enarøorato, from ffie cbwn that break» the clods, to the smirking courtier that shivers at a breeze—from the dustman of St. Giles's, to the Grand Signior, or still grander Emperor of China, equally understand it It is not then for any information in that universal science cf love that I have repeated the two last scenes ; but that the reader may form in his own mind a clear opinion of each of the gen¬ tlemen in the eyes~-J cannot say heart —of the beauteom Emily. 5 The
Tîie advantages that both lovers had personally and mentally were by no means of a par. That they were in Mr. Marauder's favour, was clearly evident. In manly beauty they might be equal ; yet in a fashionable ease, a suavity blended with a dignity*of manners, a thoughttess gracefulness of action, not omitting the power of dress, Wikon could in no point compare with Üïq other. Again, in affairs of gallantly Marau¬ der had been deeply versed, and ever successful. He might almost have said with Cæsar, upon another occasion·—* " Veni, vidí, vlci!"
G ?
or
or more literally, in Marauder's case, it was —" I came, Iwas seen, I conquer¬ ed ;" but Wilson was a novice in these matters. Wilson too was only able to utta· with confusion the dictates of the heart :—Mr. Marauder, perfectly col¬ lected, spoke from the reflection of the mind. Again, in the knowledge of these sweet things, Miss Emily.was as much superior to Wilson, as she was inferior to Marauder, Labouring under these disadvantages, it is no wonder Wikon made but a slow progress in his amorous siege, though in less than six weeks Marauder made sure of the citadel. CHAP.
CHAP. XIL JT ROM Mr. Marauder's first acquaint¬ ance with Miss Emily, it had been an invariable rule with him to scoff and ridicule Wilson and his principles ; but this was carried on by degrees, till in the end he had completely undermined him in the favour of Miss Emilv. tè Most cautious, indeed, was Marauder in Wilson's presence ; and, in general, hk:
his satire was more in distant allusions than personal remarks. Among many of the topics was religion, which it was evident Wilson highly respected. This was a subject Marauder could treat a thousand ways ; though when Wilson was in company, he took good care not to expose his own principles by giving his opinion too freely : not that he valued the pleasure or displeasure of the other, but the time was not come when he wished to take off the mask. 'S. Marauder seemed to have imbibed aa inveterate dislike against the Ministers of religion.—" Canting hypocrites; sly Priests, who fancy every one to be such, fools as to believe their nonsense ; slaves of prejudice ; fellows who wilfully shut their
their eyes, then say it is da*k," and many such-like common-place terms were frequently uttered by him. Hc brought many books also to Miss Emily, particular passages of which he often marked, and sometimes pointedly read. Among the first was Mrs. Wollstone- craft's Rights of Women. One day having read some pages frora it, he remarked—" Well, my dear Emily, what thmk you of this lady'* notions ?" " I think she is very favourable ta our sex." * * Not ? whit too much so, my dear girl ; m hy should there be any inferi¬ ority in the one sex than the other ? In
In what are we superior to you ? In beauty and wit yon always excel us ; and were your education not so confined, I doubt not you would equally rival us in the most learned studies. Yes, some of your sex have already done it. For classical learning and critical judgment,, a Dacier has been most eminent ; and this ingenious and elegant authoress is herself a strong example." Marauder ran on with such a string of female names, that even Emily began to fancy herself half a Grecian ; so art- folly did he mix the most pernicious doc¬ trines with the most grateful flattery. As Marauder did not openly profess himself the favoured lover of Emily Bellaire,
Bellaire, Wilson was totally ignorant of the progress his rival had made ; and, though sometimes a little jealousy might ruffle his mind, Miss Emily was so guarded before company, that at the very moment when Marauder made sure of his conquest, Wilson also flattered himself with having more interest than ever. The motives, as well as the means, of secrecy between the parties, will fully appear as the history continues. No one, indeed, was so ignorant of the progress Marauder had made as Wilson himself. Mr. and Mrs· Vasaley in part knew it ; but they were too much people of \ the
the world to think there was any hanfc in a little flirting. Once Vasaley mentioned to his wife that he was afraid Emily Bellaire gave Wilson too much encouragement if she really meant to have Mr. Marauder. But Mrs. Vasaley replied—" It would be a very hard thing if a beautiful young woman, before she tied herself for life, might not indulge in a little innocent coquetry. Besides, Miss- Emily s choice might depend at last upon the temper oî the person she chose; and how could she so well know the peculiarities of his temper, if she did not give him some encouragement to continue his suit ?" Many
Many other arguments, equally cogent and reasonable, Mrs. Vasaley produced, and Mr. Vasaley allowed them to be so. Little Fanny, though seven years younger than her sister, was a child of very promising abilities as well as per¬ son, and endowed with aa excellent understanding, undebased by vanity, uncorrupted by flattery. Young as she was, she perceived the insincerity ofher $ister*s behaviour; and being always most partial to Wilson, and no great admirer of Marauder, who sometimes treated her with great freedom, and sometimes great indifference, slie fre¬ quently, in her artless way, mentioned it. She, of course, also had more opportunities
opportunities of seeing her sister's beha¬ viour than any one else. Fanny ?vas about thirteen—an age of childhood to a young female, but by no means an age of ignorance. One day when Marauder had just left Emily, and Fanny had been present the latter part of the time, she said—" Dear me, sister, what ΛνοηΜ Mr. Wilson think, if he knew you heard so kindly all the fine things Mr. Marauder has been speaking ?" " I care very little, Fanny, what Mr. Wilson thinks." 4 " Why surely, Emily, you don't like Mr. Marauder better than Mr. Wilson? and before you knew Mr. MaraudèF, * I thought
1 thought you was in love with Mr. Wilson : you used to say to me he was so sensible, and so handsome, and so good-natured, and so -----" " Pshaw ! Fanny, you will be a child all your life. Can't you see a vast dif¬ ference between the son of a carpenter, and a fine young man that is to be a Duke, and to have all these great estates round the country here ?" Mr. Vasaley's, among others, wat rented of the Duke. " I don't know, Emily, that he is a bit the better for that ; and I am sure I think" there is no more comparison between Mr. Wilson and this fine saucy gentleman, than—-" "I believe,
4i I beheve, Fanny, you are in love with Wilson yourself; you are always so praising him, and so pleased when you see him.*' Fanny coloured Emily continued· u And, to do him justice, he praises you almost as much : you are so sweet a child, amiable a temper, excel¬ lent a disposition—and then he is always bringing you books to tead, I declare, I think, when he comes here, he makes« as much love to you as me." " How can you talkso* Emily? You know it is all for love of you f amé he always calls me hi& little sister. n " Yes, and kbses you br his love of me." Poor
Poor Fanny coloured more than ever. c * Well, he has only to wait,** said Emily, " six or eight years, and youll make him a most excellent wifo. Faith \ ? is too steady and precise for me." " You did'nt say so, sister," replied Fannys recovering herself, " before you knew Mr. Marauder ; and as for kissing, Mr. Marauder is always want¬ ing to kiss mej but I hate him, and he never did and never shall kiss me ; so you may say what you will about me and Mi* Wifeon, but I am certain you don't treat him well." " Ináeed, Fanny, you give yourself great airs," w No, sister, I don't mean to åo so." " Why do you pretend to judge of my
my conduct, and speak so contemptu¬ ously ~>f Mr. Marauder, whom every body says is the most polite, well-bred, fashionable man ? He is ??????' to the Duke of Silsbury, and will some day be Duke himself, whilst Wilson is no better than a head servant." " Yet the Duke likes him better than his nephew, and treats him with more kindness." " For all that, Mr. Marauder willbe Duke at last, and have all the estates besides." " WeU, sister Emily, I only spoke as I thought best for you. Mr. Marauder is always so sly and cunning; and though he raakes me such fine speeches when you are not by, I shall never like him the better for it. " " Why,
** Why, what does he say to you* child?" *f He says how tall and genteel I am, and how much I am like you, and -----" - "Oh he does ! there is great harm in that, to be sure." " And he tries to take hold of me— but he shall not touch me ; and though Mr. Wilson did kiss me, it was when you was by, for he's not so artful and im¬ pudent ; and I think youll be much happier with him. " " I tell you what, Fanny," retorted Emily, very gravely, " you know no¬ thing at all about these matters ; re¬ member, child* you are but justentered. in your, teens, and it's pretty, indeed, that you should pretend to question and instruct your eldest sister. There, go voi. ι. n and
go and read that fine book about the Bible—your favourite's present*—Miss Moore's Sacred Dramas, as he calls them ; that's most proper for a child to do." " It would do you no harm, Emily, to read them, although Mr. Marauder did almse them, and laugh, and call them a pack of Parson's 3tuff 9 . and I hate him for that too." " I tdl you what, Fanny," conclud¬ ed Miss Emily, with the authority of an elder sister, "its very wrong of you to talk in this Way of Mr. Marauder, and pretend to judge of my conduct.. Mind your dolls and your hooks, and don't trouble yourself with things you can't understand. * Sueh
Such were the different opinions of the company at Mr. Vasaley's concerning the two gentlemen.
WËUsaasBSTBsassaÊBsm CHAP. XIIL
İN the sliort space of two months, after their first acquaintance, Mr. Ma¬ rauder completely alienated the affec¬ tions, or at least the inclinations, ot Emily Bellaire from Wilson, and trans¬ ferred them to his own proper person. His ivhole artillery of prayers, vows, h 2 com-
compliments, and flattery had been level¬ led at a weak fortification, where Vanity commanded in chief, and Folly was IMme-Minister. The outworks were already ? ? ??, and the citadel ivas ready to surrender at discretion ;' but Marau¬ der, like a complete General, was not fond of giving too favourable terms. To drop my military metaphor, Mr. Marauder, not doubting of his success, seriously reasoned with himself M'hether he should take Miss Emily for ti zvije or a mistress. Many were the arguments for the last opinion— one only for the first. 1 ' Miss Emily Bellaire, *! he would say to himself, " is most lovdy and beau¬ tiful
tiail— perfections as necessary, perhaps mQre so, in a mistress as a wife.—Yes; but she has twenty thousand pounds. " Emily Bellaire is sharp, ingenious, and accomplished in theroutiueof fashion -—giddy and thoughtless irf the world. Qualities of very little use in a wife?— Yes; but she has twenty thousand pounds. "Emily Bellaire hasnogreat advan¬ tages in her birth, family, or connee- 'tîoas ; her expectations very few, her ac^uâintanceneîther possessed of interest nor consequence. These things are nöt 'v I wanted in a mistress ?—No ; but she has twenty thousand pounds. " Do I want money ?—No. " IM many her, can she be supported wiÄoutit?***No. HS "If
" If she is my mistress, will not her own fortune be sufficient ?-—Yes, in a little time. * e And when I come to the Dukedom, wul tho interest of twenty thousand pounds support the Buohessof Sibbury ? —No, no, no. " What then shali I gain upon the ivhole by matrimony?—Nothing*. " What 4?? I lose by inaking her my mistress ?—Nothmg. "By whidi shall I triumph most successfally over the carpenter's son ?~ Not by matrimony. " By which shall I gain mmt^dat 'm the eyes of the world ?**~Not fey matri¬ mony. " By which shall I be mmt ftee, most independent, and unincumbered ?*—Not by matrimony. " Well,
u Well, then, my lovely Emily, uU- cramped by foolish ties r tliou shalt be mine. If I marry thee, 1 may recent, and cannot change my destiny. , With¬ out matrimony I shall have no need for repentance,« and may change my mind Avhenever I think proper." , Mr. Marauder, having reasoned upon this business, was finally determined by reading tbe will of Mr. Bellaire, Miss £imly% father.
u I teay# to my dear daughters, Emily and Fanny jjieltøke, the whole of my property, which, ?? account of my chil- di$u being hotà females I have invested h 4 in
in the public funds: namely, forty thousand pounds in the Three per Cent. Consols. That is, to each of my daugh¬ ters twenty thousand pounds, &c. &c. •&?. &c."
Mr. Marauder M*as satisfied; and duly consideringthat twenty thousand pounds Three per Cent, stock, greatly weakened the only argument for matrimony, drew his conclusion in a negative on the sub* ject Neither was the ýoting man ignorant of the wonderful arguments of WiUiam Godwin ; but Marauder, though, if it suited his purpose, he would make use of the
the conceit and folly of another, had too much sense to be led by them him¬ self. When he pointed out to Emily, Godwin's wise arguments, that # "itis absurd to expect the inclinations and wishes of two human beings to coincide through any long period of time. To oblige them to act and to live together, is tosubjectthem to some inevitableportion of thwarting, bickering, and uuhappi- ness, "—Marauder laughed at his author ; and when he afterwards read page 499> vol, % —' ' So long as I seek by despotic
h a and
and artificial means to engross % woman to myself, and to prohibit nay neigh¬ bour from proving his superior claim, J amguilty of the most odious selfishness ;" he would exclaim—" Dear ????, I am the most selfish man breathmg I" Yet still the poison, however loathsome it might appear, could not fail, in some degree, to contaminate so young and * inexperienced a mind. To Emiiy Bellâtre, so lovely and ? beautiful, ? was of more consequence that her guardian and his wife were weak, silly, fashionable people, thaa if she had not possessed those personal attractions. What vanity and fashion¬ able folly induced tjie credulous fair- one to believe, Mrs. Vasaley, whose 4 judgpient
countenanced and approved. As for Mr, Vasaley- he might have been a very worthy, good kind of a man, if he had never acted from his own judgment and * abilities; and, instead of being the master of a family, had passed through life without ever possessing a mil of his ??*
h 6 CHAP.
^•■•o umi, ,,ι.ι,π?! f i ιι,ι la gg> , CHAP. XIV. * ** * . » f *' ! 1 í t .plARAUDER, having fully reasoned upon the point of matrimony, next laid out a regular plan to forward his views without it. As he revolved these things inbis ride to Mr. Vasaley's, he remarked-—" I presume it will keep me a few week» longer from possession. Matrimony I might have to-morrow." According to the plan he had adopted, the
the moment he arrived at Mr. Vasaley % Marauder looked unusually grave. As soon as the lovers were alone, Miss Çmily could not fail remarking it After many attempts at an evasion to make the lady more anxious, Marauder produced a lettet, saying-—" Last night I received this cursed epistle ! If I thonght Wilson had been advising his Grajee, I,would blow his brains out." Miss Emily was alarmed, and read—*
11 sir, " I have undoubted intelligence that you are entering into a matrimonial engagement Let me forewarn you—if you
tiful »nd rich, that has not a family and alliance to boast such as the Duke of JUsbnry might expect, you wiii f or,ever forfeit the fevotur uf one already gi i eatly displeased. u six&BURy."
"To shew," exclaimed Marauder^ " my dearest Emily, how I despise the writer, how I love the subject, if she will deign to accept my hand, to-mor¬ row, by the Parson's assistance, we will bid him defiance ! Oh most lovely of your sex 1 there is nothing I would not sacrifice to gain your smiles and favour ! Infamous scrawl ? seizing sud¬ denly
denly the paper, "thus, thus let me tear thee to atoms !" Emily, flattered at his warmth, please with his ardour, strongly protested against so hasty a marriage. Her lover, on the other hand, as eagerly pressed for it, though m ?? general a manner, that had the fair-one unexpectedly consent¬ ed, every arrangement still remained to he settled, and it thousand means were open lo defer it Mr, Marauder mm burst forth into a violent abuse agamst tihe Duke sod Wilson; neither or whom, I neeâ mot inform the scader, knew mo more of ihe letter Ihan Dir, ??'* friend m the Turning
Turning the course of his oratory from satire to praise, Marauder declared* in the most solemn terms, that in every respect he considered a match with his beloved Emily infinitely beyond his expectations. " Pardon roe, lovely girl, if I seem to flatter you :^-you know my sincerity. Such beauty alone deserves the first rank ; but, with the sense, the judg¬ ment, the abilities my dear girl possesses, the first Prince in Europe would be most highly honoured with her hand ; and wh? ta these is added a splendid fortune, such as.falls to my Emily^loti where is the par eat whtr, even in e#14 prudential reasons, would not rejoice in the ?????? for his son? Beliewme that
that cursed writing was all maliee and revenge. Tis true, for I will conceal nothing from'tny Etriily, there areafew estates the Duke has promised tb leave with the title, and which are in hfe own disposal ; and, as the wretch cannot live long, it might, in a worldly light, be better-—*-* No, nothing can be better that would debar me for one moment of the possession of her who is mòre dear - to me than all the titles, honours, ør ???? the whole world cm evier give l n With a deep sigh ? pressed her to hb bosorø. r* *■ Eriiily was ????? afifected; and the tempter perceived that opportunity only was wanting to tmke mtc oi his prey. With
With well-dissembled sorrow* Mr- Marauder affec tbnatdy kissed the pearly drops from her lovely face, and they returned together into the drawing- ïuöïïL Mr. Marauder had dined at Mr. Vasaley's; much company ivas expected in the evening; he therefore seized on a few minutes for tìm foregoing scene, rightly judging Uhat the confusion of β large assembly wns hest adapted to pre¬ vent any regular judgment in the mind of his íair ¿nifitøess. Mr. Marauder was indebted fo Nature ????? ??) *fJfc#rtH»4t*F ???<^?^& ????/??? ■??????????'' ???^?^^^^&??? ?^????? ??\& Art for a judicioui display of it. He aspect,
aspect, aquiline noee, « hold and fidi eye, large mouth, strong m¡4 well limbed, haughty in his usual gait, and very erect. He spoke the living lan¬ guages, particularly French and Italian, fluently ; was well versed in modern literature,- politics, history, and geo* graphy. A constant smile exhilarated his features, whitíU varied to a con- ten t ptuous sueer, or m inawxfitmghhm- dishment, ae the diiFarent ????? pas¬ sions afiected birø» Other particularities of his character have appeared before, aad will more fully expand themselves in Ibe continuation of thb narrative. Mr. Marauder M^asnearly the samfì age as Erøily ; and in a knowledge nf tàe female heart was a most wonderful adept. Kør is it a matterai any sunrise, when we
we consider that his education had been among userieš rf gallantly. f From his yon A too every thing had been subservient to him. His haughty, ambitious soul could never brook re¬ straint from any one. His tutors had not led his mind to wíiat t key thought most proper, but had improved it in those points in which lie thought proper to he instructed, Literature, as it is generally called, he despised. He chiefly prided himself upon that insight he had gained into the passions and foiWes of mankind. ?? never formed an acquaintance, but
Imt Ws first study was to discover h)s weakness andfeîlings; andón these pdnts he seeretìy» constantly attacked iuiu« To Mr. Vasaley he kept up his dig¬ nity; but with occasional condescen¬ sions, made him believe he greatly esteemed him. To Wilson he assumed an air of «pen* ness and ease; ' To Mrs. Vasaley, direct òr indirect flattery was his sote conversatbn ; but to little Fanny,, whom, m a sweet bud of beauty, he could nol feil of remand¬ ing, by all his wiles he could never make himsdf an object of favour. With
With a spirited modesty she damped hi* kindness, and checked his freedom; wlien, atlast, finding all his arts baffled, he affected an indifference which wa§ foreign to his real sentiments. According to the plan Marauder had formed in his own mind, he took every opportunity of insinuating these prin¬ ciples he conceived necessary for his purpose into the mind of the too cre¬ dulous Emily. Flattery ever took the lead in the conversation, and softened the heait for wtmt was to follow. Obe day, to a very strong and expres¬ sive panegyric on the female character, ?$? Emily replied—" The ladie, I am suire, arte very much obliged to you for being so able a defender. " « Not
" Not in the least, my dear girl ; I speak but the simple truth. All men, if they would but confess it, know it so; therefore it is, they have made laws to give man the superiority, and pretend oftentimes to call these laws by the name of religion.—What is matrimony? But a catch to decoy the poor female to the obedience of an insolent man." " Oh ! if y du talk in this way, you'll absolutely frighten me." "No, my dearest Emily, it is only that I love you too well to deceive yo«r f After all the abuse we have given our neighbours, the French they have nobly broken thiough this foolish tie, and generously given to the female that feeedom she so well know» how to nse. w
4t I never was in Franc«, yet I hare always understood that they were the most polite and gallant nation in the would; but I thought now they had killed their King, they were no hetter than savages." Marauder, in the most plausible terms, attributed this infamous act to a few individuals.; and then, in terms the most glowing, pointed out the present method of contracting alliances in that king¬ dom· He did not «Explain to the fair Emily to what an humiliating condition the female sex is now reduced in France— that there. is; not a single act of the Government in which they are considered tU having any rights whatever» He
Ile did not tell her that women were no longer regarded, but %& objects of • sensual pleasure* ' ' ' 4. He did not inform her that they had no voice, no authority, no vote in the meetings, the councils, or any part of the legislature. He did not explain that the beloved rights and privileges which the fair sex claim, as mothers, daughters, wives, sisters, were perishing every day ; that the virtuous woman and tlie prostitute, the wife of the ^Magistrate and the Opera girl were all ranked together in a pes¬ tilential den of degenerating equality. Jfo ; he expatiated on the generous vol. i s I principle
principle of tHe Ft erteli, which made no distinction between the sexes^ which gave equal liberty to both the parties to annul the marriage contract, and.which left the fkir-ohe to her own free-will, unshackled by the arbitrary restraints of > a tyrannical husband. AH this was quite new to Miss Emily; the pleasing side ivas alone exhibited ; and she admired the candour and gene·» rosityof the man who could tell her bold tmths^-VL favourite explanatory term of Mr. Márauden The followi ng sentiment—of that first of Writers, that rational, philosophical, learned, modest, and ingenious of alî human naturals, W r illiam Godwin ·— Was'
INFERNAL QUIXOTE. 171 —was most familiar to Mr. Marauder ; but though Marauder knew better than to quote the sentiment in the wke-matfg mmi words, I cannot refrain from gra* tifying the reader with them, literally taken from his scientific work—" The History of the Intrigues of his own Wife." "Jtis difficult/' says Mr. Godwin, " to recommend any thing to indiscri« minate adoption, contrary to the esta¬ blished rules and prejudices of mankind ; but certainly nothing can be so ridicu·* lous upon the face of İt, or so contrary to the genuine march of sentiment, as to require the overflowings of the soul to, wait upon a ceremony, and that which, wherever delicacy and imagination exist, ι 8 is
is of all things most sacredly private, to blow a trumpet before it, and to record the moment when it is arrived at its climax." When this sentiment, in a less phi- losophical form, came from the tongue of Mr, Marauder, whether there was (what Mr. Godwin just before calls) i( a period of throes and resolute expla¬ nation attendant on the tale, " in any of the love scenes between Miss Emily and the to-be Duke, I cannot say ; for this simple reason, that I am not able, with the whole powers of my mind, to comprehend what the ingenious Philo- sopher Godwin means. Perhaps in a future edition of the memoirs of his wife, ci-devant mistress^ he will favour
the mti-illummati with an explanation after each sentence—if it be possible. *· > With or without (whichever! t wns) " aperiodof throes and resolute explana- ' tion attendant on the tale," Mr. Ma¬ rauder did more than his author; he made himself clearly understood by his fair hearer. Miss Ernily*s learning was chiefjf confined to a knowledge of the French language. Mr. Marauder frequently conversed with her in that tongue—the very language of deceit. Among inany other writings which Marauder recommended and brought for 4 Emily's perusal, were the celebrated ι 3 works
ν Works øf Rousseau. Miss Emily read them with a wonderful avidity and satis* faction, favoured by many marginal nøte» of her attentive tover. Many other original French Novels, such as Voltaire's Tales, Diderots Novels, héátudiously selected; and where the sentiments appeared too strong, he would soften and explain them. The - English writings, except a fetv chosen múrçeam? ????? a fond of satire for Marauder ; he ridiculed their confined notions, their very dread of speaking the truth, their ignorance of the human heart, iheir prejudices in favour of their own country* ' ! fiy conversing With Miss Ernfly rn k * French,
French, under the idea òf improving her in that language, tliey \vere under less restraints in tfie cornpany pf the oblig¬ ing Vasaley and his wife, ? /lio aifected indeed not to be ignorant of so fashion¬ able an aecoinpljslunent, bi|t >vhpse fcnowledge w-as only of the parppf-k^nd. Biit^estaρypftheseneψnotions?hoult}, in ??? degree, alarm his fair convert, he ever spore in tlie ippst rapturous terms of that day wheá* his beloved jlmüy should be advaiK%d to a »juition ? lit^ she was boj ? tQ adoni, and should shisp in the fii^t cit cle» of i^hk)|i as thp Duchess of bilabury. When ÄJÍr. Marauder first made love to Emily Bellaire, there was a boldness, a freedom, an ease in his manners, a t 4 self-
self»conceit and hauteur which were stamped oh his character ; now he was all softness, diffidence, humility—hislov r e was almost,adoration ;—he cautiously avoided what might be termed taking the smallest liberty ; and by the time he had entangled the lovely maid most completely in his toil,^did he appear to be the most humble of her captives. When in company ivith Wilson, this behaviour had more the appearac *e of despondency than success, and proved the best means he could possibly have adopted to deceive all parties. . Miss Emily, of counse, thought her ascendency greater than ever. He easily made herl)elieve that it was her interest that
that prevented his instantly and publicly marrying her. Again and again did he press her to consent—despise the anger of his uncle—swear, in the.most sacred terms, that it wasTor her dear sake alone he did not openly claim het as his wife ; and, generally, he finished a love-scene with the most insinuating, though re* spectful endearments, ajid with vows innumerable, and most solemnly uttered. For however he might think in religious matters, in this case he was by no means deficient in sacred vows and professions; aad with the most enrapt enthusiasm did he call on every power above to attest his vows of everlasting love and constancy, while Miss Emily thought not of the poet's maxim— «* But if he swears, ? 11 certainly deceive you/* - ι 'S Thus
Tbus did Marauder use every agency rf ????*?? and earth that he vms able to employ, to make the fair Emily believe tötat-'his-ïlove -of her was the sole reason for delaying their nuptials : yet, at times, so anxious did he seem for an hasty marriage, m defiance of all ob- ^acjiesj that he «nice waited upon het îwith a licence in his pocket. Whether or not it was a real one fa no matter, as it was never intended to be used. Miss Emily, not to be outdone rø generosity, strenuously insisted against such hasty ^proceedings ; but it pro¬ duced the proper effect wbich Mr, Ma¬ rauder intended—of throwing Miss Emily raore and more off her guard,
?И??.
????. XV.
AT last the period arrived when Marauder was to give the finishing blow to his ingenious strafagerns, when the grand scheme he had so deeply planned was to be put in execution. ? | „ ' *· It was determined that he was to carrv his beloved Emily fo town, and there to be privately married ; But to deceive the Duke and liis party in the country, ι 6 she
she was to elope from Mr. Vasaley's, and to live with Marauder as his mistress tiil after the death of his Grace. Had Emily Bellaire been a poor, por* tionless girl, she probably might have had some doubt of the sincerity of her lover, in defiance of all his fine^peeches ; but so highly had she been buoyed up with her own consequence, her great riches, and so forth, that she entertained not the remotest idea that Marauder considered her in any respect as his inferior. The mean revenge and jealousy of Wilson, she conceived, had misled* the Duke ; and so well woven was the tale, that had she even had any person to apply to as a confidant, most probably she had never discovered the deceit. Still
Still it may be a matter of some sur¬ prise that Wiison came to be so easily deceived ; but it was agreed to, between Mr. Marauder and his fair-one, that she should encourage Wilson's pretences, as a blind to deceive the Duke. Not that the Duke of Silsbury knew or cared the least about *it ; but it an-; swered his dutiful nephew's views to pretend that he did. ì In deceiving Wilson they found littie difficulty, * as Marauder (it has been said) never carried himself as the favour¬ ed lover before company; and, from the very origin of their acquaintance, he always professed himself an admirer.
Marauder
Marauder, too, generally contrived to visit Miss Emily in a morning—a time of the day when his rival was almost always engaged. The Duke's chiklren necessarily required part of his time, and he rarely failed, twice a week àt least, attending his Grace on his hunt¬ ingparties f —th^se avocatiørisof business and pleasure fully occupied his morn¬ ings, Mr. and Míg. Vasaley, mdeed, had some suspicion ; yet Miss Emily disco¬ vered neither to them nor her sister more than she could possibly help. Her guardian arid his fashionable cara sposa perceived with pleasure the prospect of a. connection with a man ;i who, in the course
contase of a few years, would undoubt¬ edly bea Duke ; and, as they had before favoured Wilson's pretensions, they ^vere not so anxious for any communi¬ cations on the subject as they otherwise would have been. They stood in great * awe of Wilson, and were fearful he might suspect thein of double dealing. —So naturally does "Virtue claim the command over low and'cunning spirits; With a secret joy, then, they saw the intimacy increase with a person of Mr. Marauder's family, without know¬ ing to what height it was carried ; and not a little did they pride themselves in that connection, which, by their beau¬ tiful ward's alliance with him, should so greatly increase their own consequence. 5 —And
—And this is the motive that induces parents and guardians, and they who are commonly called friends, so con¬ tinually to prefer lucrative marriages in the persons of their children or wards, even when in their own individual cases they would act very differently. For as the love of self is, alas ! the prevailing motive in all our actions, so it easily accounts for their conduct in this respect. A parent, guardian, or friend mentally reasons in this way ; and for the sake of the argument, we will suppose it is a father in the disposal of his daughter* " What benefit," says he to himself, ." accrues to me by marry mg my child to
to a plain, honest,, good-tempered man, with little consequence or fortune? To be sure, she will have every chance of common happiness ; but it will be 4 entirely confined to herself—it will not influence her family. " Now if I marry her to a man of consequence and riches, however dis¬ agreeable in mind and person, yet the good things of this world that he is pos¬ sessed of, 4 shall in some degree par- îs * " ticipate. ** "Am I fond qf riding in splendid car¬ riages, of being seen in noble company, of receiving that notice which is ever paid to those allied to wealth and honours,—or am I fond of excellent dinners, of fine wines, of, admiration, envy, superiority ? Here I am gratified in
in some, or all of these ; here then I gain a something directly or indirectly ; ami thetí my chikl raay not, after alt, bø unhappy ; and I, at İciist, can say that I have done my part to provide her with those necessary comforts of life all nmn- kind are seeking after. \ ' · , , " In a low and humble marriage I am degraded in the eyes of the world ; by .allying myself to greatness of any kind, I am exalted by it. 'lie world will commend my conduet-*tiot for tlie* nian, but the things; and, in either case, the individual mandões not affect me, and should he prove unpleasant, I can separate myself from him." Such-like arguments, with a hundred othei:, all originating in selfi pass through the
the mind of mankind, and are the great niotives that influence them in those incongruous and preposterous matches which too freauenflv take nlace ; and X *• A kinsfolk, friends, arid acquaintance of the Vasaley-kind will most commonly be met with. Without a judgment that looks for-' ward to something better than the things of thisVorld— unless the consider¬ ation of what is just and right, instead of what is self~agreeab|e and pleasant, * first takes place, the duty of those wlio have the superintendence of young minds will be very badly performed. In these and other cases I am not to think what tlie world concludes right, - * but
but I am to promote those measures that ivill most conduce to virtue, religion, and happiness.
-???????????????
CHAP. XVI. * í HE morning on whicii it was deter¬ mined for Miss Emily to elope with Mr. Marauder to town, her lover called, as he frequently did, at Mr. Vasaley's, to ask the ladies to take aride. Wilson, they knew, was otherwise engaged
t engaged with the Duke, in a part òf the country far distant from their route. Miss Fanny, who was not partial to Mr. Marauder's company, chose to stay at home, but Mr. and Mrs. Vasaley rode out with them. Mrs. Vasaley was a very indifferent horsewoman, and rode slow ; Mr. Ma¬ rauder and the fair lady cantered on before. ' r A chaise and four was in waiting for them at the next market town, and they were off in it immediately they arrived there. Mr, and Mrs, Vasaley, after riding a few
t few miles, returned home, thinking Miss Emily and her bean would soon follow them. The young couple having often done so before, they had not thè small¬ est apprehension from their absences but when dinner-time.arrived, and no Emily appeared, they began to be alarmed. A note from the bold heroine to Mr. Vasaley soon explained the affair. lt ,MY DEAR SIR, *'t have thought proper at last to follow the dictates of my lieart, and to accept the protection of the only man I ever truly loved. Time will explain my motives. If a person means to be happy, they must learn to think and act for themselves.
themselves. The prejudices of a mis¬ judging world I despise* Tell Fanny, as soon as I am settled in my own house, both my dear Mr. Marauder and myself hope she will make it her home, where we shall rejoice also to welcome our kind friends, Mr. and Mrs. Vasaley. " The servant, who brings this, will take the care of my cloaths. Health and happiness tomy dear sister, Mrs. Vasaley, and yourself ! From their beloved " EMILY·" Jir. and Mrs. Vasaley read thé note with many expressions of sonow, but, in truth, with great indifference ; poor little Fanny scarcely said a ivoid, yet felt more ihan can be described. She passed a restless night drownai in tea«, inconsolable
inconsolable for the fate of her sister, fearing the worst, yet ignorant of the extent of her fears. The next evening Wilson called. Fanny sa\v him coming, and, Avitli her eyes streaming with the pearly dew, rushed out of the house to meet him. Overcome ΛνίΛ her sorrow, she drop ped almost lifeless in hb armis. Greatly surprised and concerned at her grief, he, with the affection of a beloved brother, gently enquired the cause, " Oh Mr. Wilson ! that wicked«-----» my poor sister. Yesterday they rode out,
out, and she is ; gpne, away with him to London." w - --«> i*. - t ν - " Your sister, my dearest Fanny/* guessing very easily the person, " car¬ ried off by Mr. .Marauder?—Insolent rascal ! but I will instantly pursue and retake lier. t ,Who had lieto assist him in forcing her away ?" " Mr. Vasaley has received a letter from JEmily. , She, does not appear to have been takçn away against her will." „ Wilson appeared thunderstruck. Pausing t for a few moments, he ex^ <;Uimed-rV Not taken away ^gaiost her Λν?Ι? —Impossible, ????? I For what purpose coukl she elope? If she liad thought proper to accept Mr· Marauder, who could grèvent her ?" vol. i, ? Mr.
Mr. Vasaley now came up, and with very few words gave Wilson Emily's note. Hastily he read it over. Again and again he more clearly perused it " 'Yes, it îs your sister's hand-writ^ ing ; it does not seem forced, or even constrained. Are these her sentiments — * not happy unless we think and act for ourselves ?'—Alas ! I fear if she fol¬ lows that maxim, she never willbe happy. What," turning to Mr. Vasaley, " did none of you know of this ?" Mr« Vasaley made a lame speech, professing
for Mr. Marauder, ?? spoke boldly and elearly concerning ìris vt&t kneeing her intentio» of running away. Wilson, heing unable to get any in¬ sight into this mysterious affalry awl extremely hurt at every part of Miss Emily's conduct, soon took his leave. itanny followed him to thé dobr.— " I atn afraid, Mr. Wilson, you ate displeased with me» Indeed I knew nothmgOf it." *' My dear, niy kind Fäuny, yön a^fe the last person İn the world I tould blame. Do not distress yo^urselÇ my lovely girl. To see you unhappy, will afflict me more than all the rest. I have il % lately
??$ . suspected $ome mystery în your aktiivi ??? ^??? thb evening on pur- gos^te gain/ a foml, answer. This un¬ kind beliÄvJour I cannot Imt feel; yet, believe me, dear Fanny, that Emilys conduct shall never alienate my love a^elaffe<$ion t for yoiM If my good girl at a^iy time ???\^ a friend or adviser, in mc she siiall find ??? that \rill never forsake her." " Thank you, dear Mr. Wilson ; but when shall I see you again ? I have got,A.gnea|t deal to say and to ask you." " Tomorrow, in the afternoon, I will o$ta¿nly be heie ; and l^ope my Fanny ?\\ dry up lier tea*r% far I am afraid her sister does not desove tbem." ? ? ????.
-, ! !■■■ » 14lü
????. XVII. 1 ! ÜETÜRN we to the lovers, who» borne on the soft winds which the sportive deity had raised, flew rapidly away. ' Whether the rumbling ofï a four- wheeled carriage inspirestlrö^nderpas^ «ion, I am not casuist enough to deteti mine; but it certainly is niost ????** lently adapted, in many respects, ft& tliat kinc! of oratdry wliich the ga$ votaries of Cupid excel in. ? 3 Those
Those breaks—pauses—-unfinished* sentences are wonderfully assisted by the irregular motion of the vehicle. The intervals of sighs, aspiration, re¬ spiration, consideration, dubitation, and all of this kind are extremely wdl filled up by the music of those quadruple spheres. Ifc may be called that desideratum of all languages—"A sound that ia an¬ edio to the sense." While it aidsso powerfully the speaker, it is equally efficacious to the hearer. It produces that state of inaction on the mmd which is so necessary to attention» All which whether Mr. Marauder thought or understood is· no matter, but
but he certainly made the very best use of it. After violent professions of everlast¬ ing love and constancy, after a volu¬ bility of praises to his feir companion for that independency of mind which soars beyond the notions of the vulgar, %ηά can break asunder the fetters of preju¬ dice, he lamented the vast numbers of people who were still slaves to the idle opinion of the world. " How few do I find like my beloyed Emily, whose good sense and clear rea^- son can so soon distinguish what is right in defiance of foolish customs, and whosfr minds are strong enough to per¬ form it ! ?. 4» " Among
4t Amongtliose who pretend to teacfe others, scarcely do I know where tofirid one #u black coat," Mr. Marauder's most moderate term for a Clergyman, u that I dare trust the secret of our marriages?. *' Of ail bîgotted wretches
those
should bear we are |>*?? 1^%??*??? if Avereas well that I publicly claimed, and tli^t I should ???? ?1?? sím my /hea¬ venly prize in the open face of the world.·' ■ ■■■-^'.-y i ' At thii mòwéMsmwek went ¡thè pos* tillions ■ whips¿antl itway they rattkdover mm ííé$-iáiê ¿tones. ; The lèirg pause *? um löî*t M Miss ' ???$. Mn Märáuäef j)roètòdea-^ f< ΘΙ1 lfty'-dearøet girl t it iå oh ýout stitength öf Mind I
? 5 rely.
rely. Blest man that I am to have met with such an angel ! The carriage gave a spring. " Perhaps there may be women in the world not much inferior in the human face divine ; it is possible there may be some who pretend to be youi? equal in form and graue ; but I defy the whole ivorld to produce one with so sublime a soul, who has sacrificed every thing to the ??? she thought worthy to be bless¬ ed with her affections." The drivers came to the brow of a steep bill, and dashed down it with such spirit, that they seemed to fly over the soil. Poor
Poor Emüy believed herself a little deity ; and was ready* with· a complete stock of modern philosophy,, to be the victim of anyyicp the r sqphistiyof her* lover might point out. The horses pulling gently up, as they ascended the next rise, Mr. Marauder seized the opportunity, in the softest, tiie kindest, most humble and affec¬ tionate terms, gradually to unfold ; hb intentions, which, as they became more and more, glaring, so was he liimself more and more respectfubin his manner and address., In short, the purport of Mr. Marauder's oratorical flattery was to persuade the fair Emily to live with him, without having recourse to a sham marriage, for a real one was totally outt of the question. ? 6 Yeti
Yet, with alî Mëfaudfer's >??% nis impudence, and plausibility, hë dkl iiot^ openly dare to propòse ä thing of this kind; îïinèh ?? 'did'''He venture ?? smallest hint of it before Ihey set òffi He ΛνίβΙ^ the offer indirectly to coma fedni Miss Emily hërèeliy or, Mtleaát^ to get her in that ftanie òf mind which Wduld preclude all dangerof ar^püláe./ But, after all, in either case he ran no risk; ? if the fair maid insisted oft trie éeVcnrøny of tlieîr mairiage, th% cererrtahyftf tlteít ïhafriagê И???? tåfce place the miraient they came to town. If há could ptevail on Miss Emily tó suppose that thèfê WaB great danger iti trusting the sêcfet of their niaWiá^ tè ? òlle, ánd tó déspíše šuch unmeaning 3 fofrnl,
éuly ftubjetted^lAierøselvm to diecm^ly, h^rfiöUld theft savé hiitlsdf the troublé of ja deception, Which Might pethapá produce some unpleasant circumstances in tìm detection. f.. . It Wâà a löiîg ^tînlé blífotís he c&aid ínspite èutíli vèry îioble ànd ftèé sen^ tirhenta ih hìs faif-öiiê's breast Skillen , the human passions, îjyë assailed them in every shape, and at tótsuéasfediíd. τ ι > ,J » ' * > But I ^rîly belief è rf the ftèêtíh«* thoughts thai passed through the mind &f the' 'foVefy vidím, ere she resigned heiself to" the sacrifice, Vére tó uè clearly
dearly analyzed^ that this consideration ~" I have already gone too far to think of receding," was the .me that finally influenced the decision.. In ancient tirnem Necessity was a famous maker of virtues. Among the* juggles of the" modern Philosophers* and thdr new sdection of virtues, I believe Necessity may again step forward, and put in a bold claim for the far. greater number. "Answer me," she may say,. **'ye spirits of independent heroes in France? Answer me, ye Philosophers, Legislators, and Warriors ? Answer me, all ye who worship the Goddess Reason by mme % but spurn her in spirit ? &y* what
whatt inspired tliat: firmness of mind, that unconquerable greatness of soul r that desperate serenity which poured out the poison,, which graspedvthe dag¬ ger, or which fired the· annihilating. pistol, anil thus, rising above difficulties and sufferings, stamped on your carcases tlie alt-conquering virtue of suicide? *—Was it not Necessity ? " Was it not that which makes the coward fight-—which ma^es the thief. honest—the murderer no assassin ? " Was it not Necessity, the suftenejr and excuser of every vice?" " Å»&ym uh θιβ» #&χβΜ·*ι j"—-say s the old Greek proverb I am not willing any further to particularize
pártibuktiže the fiali of this feeautiáif* youhg Wõmaii*-t-the giddy, the tnCáu- tious Emily Bellaire. The niàchiriátions óf the arch-fiend too well succeeded. As the poor victim. gave a faint and tacit consent—" Dear Marauder, 6n you alone I trust ; for you I give up all that tne world holds dear !" the fell destroyer dropped upon his knee; and, in terms the most solemn and sacred his tongue could utter, he called on the Almighty Deity to Witness his everlasting voWs of truth and constancy ; and imprecated every evil upon his own head, if he betrayed the trust she had so generously reposed ih him. ------**
The
The words passed ?? ? ?? from his lips as the unsubstantial visions of the night ; but they ????? recorded, with an iron pen, on that eternal tablet of brass,. never to be erased or obliterated.
'■ -í
i »rr-*
/ J,
CHAP.
CHAP. XVUL
WHY should I describe the sensa¬ tions of Emily upon the conduct she had pursued,, or relate how little the cool moments of reflection applauded the sacrifices she had made to the gaudy phantom of a. generous disinterestedness? Soon, very soon, did she begin to try not to perceive that the fuel of flattery, which had so liberally supplied her romantic
romantic flame, was now more sparingly bestowed. Time for thought was not wanting., Mr. Marauder, whose whole life was aheady become- a bustle of political intrigue, was necessarily at times long absent from home : most irksome were such moments to the lovely enthusiast· Mr. Marauder s connections, both by birth and fortune, M'ere great and splendid ; and, it may be said, by his talents were become much more so. With great reason was lie considered, by the leading men in power,, as a youth of most promising abilities. That commanding air, that undaunted address,,
address, and determined behaviour, which so eminently distinguished him, M-ere, as it might be, the passport of hi» abilities. Too wise to shew himself as yet of any party, before he liad the means of adding weight to his opinions, he privately and alternately seemed to favour each. The Roman Catholic interest was totally out of the question* as he had professed to embrace these principles fqr no other '?<? than to gain the favour of the Duke ; and his motives in this case had been at canee perceived by the politicians on both sides* ^
His acquaintance» tlierefore, wa$ not confined to any party or set of men., Ministerialists and Aiiti-ministerialistSj Aristocrats, Freethinkers, and Sectaries of »all denonifinatîomit, occasionally fre¬ quented his (table ; and the gentlemen, Λν?ιο had more particularly the honour of knowing him, were soon convinced, that neither religious nor political bigotry Mould ever balk his preferment. Though, his watchful prudence 1??? thus prevented his slaving hhnself to» a pa£ty, before lie had ?? power m full ineans to be ? principal, yet he could not bide'.tbat hwttyr and pride, wluch his high ^bk^ liis datly expect¬ ations flattered?lnm s hje sh^ukå soon sec j^Milkd. ', * ?, , f i \ ti Arriv«dj
Ai*rîved at the end of his twenty-fiVst year, he took upon himsdf thè isofø oommanâ of his own fortunes. The parsimony of his father, and the excellent management of hîs trustees, had increased the sum total to twenty thousand ayeaft. Lady James Marauder departed this life soon after he had run away tvith Emily to toM'rt, and thus left hini in full pos¬ session of the whde. To a nian like Marauder, ? /ho had studied in the stoical school with such success, needless lament¬ ations and sorrow were not even affect¬ ed. A splendid burial and a superb monument were the testimonials to the world both of his sorrow and his great¬ ness* Most
Most of his time he spent in London ; and his house, his establishments, and his table were among the first at the west end of the town. At first he was somewhat at a loss how to introduce Emily to his acquaint¬ ance; but when he considered upon the subject, he saw many advantages accruing to himsdf even from the un¬ pleasantness of her situation. Among the French Emigrants who flocked to this country, Marauder had thought proper to notice «ome, the most conspicuous for tbeir consequence and abilities. Dukes and Nobles of the fitst rank thought
,β tl^ught tbems^ve^ tionour^ #?^ Î11S invitations f a^4 ???/?? fft pu$¡ic$$e f -itvi-thouti any, squeami&hii^^ ?§?? ??* fu^ed the company of la belk ít I¡mly- That there *vere many of the ci-devant inferior Nobility, and even paßore Madames rejugees, who would have refused his favours, is most true ; but they were not the people Mr. Marauder thought worthy his acquaintance. Emily, who ivas much better read in the, French thaai English-writers, found the¡ spçiety qf the lively emigres much to lier taste ; 0 an4 ?& ve-sy soon ??????? a,u accept in ? t^e Volarían philosophy, M'hich a charming Marchioness assisted in explaining to her. * ** Exclusive
Exclusive of the Marchioness and her husband, I shall here mention a few other persons, whom·, at this period, Miss Emily got acquainted Λγί?. ίγ And first, a Mr. Rattle, a young man of about one-and*twenty. He ???? in possession of a handsome independent fortune, by the eleath of an elder bro¬ ther ; was intended, by his friends, for the law, and had been some years an inhabitant of the Temple. Yet, of ^all studies, this he most neglected and detested ; and, from the moment he came of age, vowed he would resign his cham¬ bers, and no longer keep up the appear¬ ance of it. Like Mr. Shandy's creeking door, vol. i. l that
that he had determined to oii for the last ten years of his life, were Mr Rattle's apartments; and, day after day succeeded—Mr. Rattle vowed—to¬ morrow never came, and he was still an inhabitant of the Temple. So great was his antipathv to men of law, that he frequently made himself ridiculous, for fear of being taken for one ; yet the moment he recollected himself, he was the first to ridicule his own prejudices. 0 This prejudice, indeed, was the weaker side of his character, which was most strange and eccentric. In abilities by no means deficient ; in learning' too inconstant to be deep ; quick, hasty, and sanguine, his thoughts and deter- ♦ minations upon a subject came all toge- tlíerl
r tlier. His mind seemed to be an alem¬ bic, in which every thing came out ready analyzed. Never prejudiced on any other subject, as before sard, but the law, he spoke exactly as he thought at the moment, never forming his opi¬ nion by others, ancient or modern. Vulgar errors, like Sir Thomas Brown, M. D. he exploded. ; Whether of men or things, he judged for himself. From the smallest niceties of a person's eon- duct woukl he in a moment give the most decided opi u ion'of him. Hewould positively pronounce an unknown lady to be a fool, because he" had seen a laced frill on her son's shirt ; 'and he has been known to call'a man* the most cruel Wretch on the face of the earth, from L % the
the first view of his horse or his dog. His likes or dislikes were as quickly formed ; and often, as soon as a stran¬ ger's name ivas mentioned, he acted concerning the person, and spoke of liim as if he had been acquainted ivith him for years. As an instance—Mr. Marauder one day asked him if he knew a Mr. Callis, "Who is he?" said Rattle. " The gen tleman that seconded Dick, the bruiser, on a sudden quarrel at Margate." " No ; is he a very young man ?" " I believe not." "Then," concluded. Rattle, "he must be both a fool and a blackguard. " Another
Another time Rattle was desirous of being introduced to Sir Gravely Sapient, the great Naturalist. Unluckily at the time Sir Gravely was peeling a nectarine. Rattle made a most low bow, looked very solemn, and was off before the Baronet could finish his fruit. He told the friend who introduced him, that he was sufficiently satisfied of Sir Gravely Sapiente abilities, and he has never yisited the Naturalist since. When Rattle first came to town, he was to write in the office of an eminent solicitor. Rattle went but once. Hi& guardian called upon him at his cham¬ bers, and enquired the reason he did not continue his attendance ; he answered ~ " He had no opinion of the man ; he L 3 did
did not like his character ; he had every reason to doubt his principles," To his guardians assertions, that the lawyer was a man of respectability, honesty, and so forth, Rattle shook his, head.— t< I never knew an honest lawyer that abused my Lord Kenyon." His guardian was obliged to give up* the point. Rattle was once in the company of the learned Dr. Lexicon. The Doctor spoke ofa superb edition of Aristophanes, that was soon to be pubUshed with notes, &c. &c. &c. "Pray, Doctor," said Rattle, "can you
you inform me of any modern author that equals Aristophanes in these three points,"—The Doctor was all attention. — " for impertinence, indecency, and blasphemy ?" Dr. Lexicon said not another word concerning the work. In polities Rattle was of no party, indiscriminately attacking them all ; rarely a defender of any one, and more rarely of the great. He spoke with a, volubility that nothing could stop, and in a tone nervous and animating. He never took ofl enee at any severe reply that was made him, and therefore in a great degree precluded others from being offended with him. Other par- L 4 ticulars,
ticulars of this eccentric genius will more clearly open themselves in the following pages. Two other .gentlemen, whom Emily met at Mr. Marauder's, table, ????? a< Mr. Arnon and his son. The father about fifty—the son six- and-twenty. The son was lately arrived from America, therefore Mr. Marauder had not, personally, known him long ; but with the father he was very intimate. The free and liberal notions, as he always called them, which Mr. Marau^ der entertained, he was greatly indebted to Mr. Arnon for maturing and giving a form to. Mr.
Mr. Arnon had some knowledge of most of the sciences, was a. cool and wary politician, having been in many of the Courts of Europe ; and he was deeply read in metaphysical writings, and per¬ fectly conversant in the works of Spinoza, Hobbs, Shaftsbury, Hume, Voltaire, Diderot, Alembert^ and the wliole gang of modern sceptics in the¬ English, French, and German languar ges.. He had brought up his son according* to their principles ; and at twelve years qy age would frequently produce hin* among his acquaintance as a young philosopher, (a very clever boy he cer* tainly was), and boasted that the child had nerer looked m a Bible m his life. ?. & At
At this age he was sent to a public jschool, where he remained between three and four years, and then accompanied his father to France, and was present with him at most of the principal scenes at the commencement of the Revolution. Some dreadful circumstances, which particularly came under their own notice, so shocked the son, that he hastily left France, and the father soon after, followed him. The young man had then shewn such promising abilities, joined with such good sense and judgment, that Mr. Arnon immediately entrusted him with a mercantile commission of very con¬ siderable consequence. This the son had
Bad executed greatly to the satisfaction of his father, and, was lately returned* to England. · / ^ ν t f * * * « * .*/ ? w The elder Mr. Arnon was shrewd,, artful, and enterprising ; bold, though considerate; mild, though determined ι , rarely affected by his passions, never swayed against his interest. The·* younger, whose other name was Hamb¬ den, was more learned, but far less» scheming and enterprising; open y brave, undesigning,. friendly, \ generous« In short, it was not the least of the merits * of the father that the other was his son·, At the commencement of the Ame* rican war, Mr, Arnon and a particular friend of his, a* gentleman of large' i* S property.
property in this country, had been sus* pected of holding secret correspondence with the enemy. They had before sig¬ nalized themselves in their writings, and declared their principles. Having received timely notice that Government intended to arrest them, they destroyed all their papers, and left the country. After many hardships they were wrecked on a distant coast. Mr. Arnon 's friend died there ; and having lost his only child by a fever in their passage, he left his whole property in America and in England to Mr. Arnon, and entailed it on the little Hambden. The suspicions agamst the gentlemen Government was not able to £rove. t Mr.
Mr. Arnon remained abroad in different countries till the war was ended, and then returned home, and took possession of his property without any opposition ; and it was to look after the American 0 estates that his son had lately been abroad. The junior Mr. Arnon, whowasmost generally known under the name of Hambden, and whom, to distinguish from his father, we shall so call, was, named in compliment to the deceased friend, in whose company he had left the kingdom, Mr. John Hambden, who boasted himself a regular descendant of the celebrated patriot of that name*
V> ΙλλαΧ»
CHAP. XIX^ « * JTOiR. ARNON rarely gave vent to* those strong democratieal principles for which lie was famous, at Mr. Marauder's* table, as he knew liis young fiiend to* be so decidedly in the aristocratical· interest ; yet they frequently disputed with great civility on the use and nbuse of ti ies, and * so for ih # In deference, ttfo, to the ddeoant* Nobility,
Nobility, M% Arnon often avoided ther subject, though, it must be confessed,» they cared very little aboutthe matter- and, from the conversation of many of them, a stranger might suppose they were of the democratieal party. * On anti-religious subjects Mr. Anion? was not so choice. Mr. Marauder lis¬ tened and joined in the discourse, ? defiance of his having renounced his Protestant errors, and embraced the Roman Catholic faith. * Hambden was not fond of that con* tinual satire his father indulged in ; and Rattle, who dashed at every subject, was sure to oppose them alk It
It røay be proper to remark that Mr. Marauder affected in his house more of the French than English customs ; the ladies, therefore, were partakers of thei* debates» and put in their claim of pet¬ ticoat Philosophers*. Mr. Arnon was one day describing the attack of the Bastile, at whiclv with hi& son, he was present. #k There fell, " cried ne, c f the mighty bulwark of tyranny and superstition V r " Mighty ! indeed l' exclaimed Rattle; " there was not a priest or a prisoner withm the walle, Mr. Arnon, you was never ? a greater error ki your life« The French Government unlike the Spanish, instead of being superstitious, had
had long before this not a grain of religion left ; and so far from being tyrannous, it was the want of what you call tyranny that ? overthrew the State." " What, Sir, do you call lettres de cachet ? What, Sir, will you say con¬ cerning the exorbitant power of the Noblesse ?" " Exorbitant power î Where the devil was it ? Yes, they made a most glorious struggle ! You either must allow that the French Nobles were greater fools than all the scum of the country, which, considering they were all Voltairian philosophers, you'll not very readily grant, or that they had no power at alk As for the lettres de cachet, how many prisoners did you find in durance by them ?'* Mr*.
Mr. Arnon* not being able to enu-* merate many, replied concerning the* Noblesse — ζί That many of the very first abilities joined the popular cause." " Fine abilities ! through grea ten cowardice ί" The Marquis grinned applause. (i What say you," retorted Mr, Arnon, " concerning Fayette?" " That all /? abilities consisted in* twice playing the rogue, and once the fool. The greatest bungler in your whole set ! A private in Cromwell's crew would have made a better henx He hadn't sense enough even to be con¬ sistent ; and I firmly believe, the only reason the French rulers admire him, is oui
out of their enthusiastic love of oppo¬ sition. Dumourier did what Fayette ought to have done. Enough of this fellow. But, Mr. Arnon, is it true that the French dressed up a pretty girl as the Goddess of Reason, and deified her ?" "Most assuredly! and what more worthy of our adoration than a beau¬ tiful woman ?"—Mr. Anion, looking at the ladles, who began to be¬ ki terested in the conversation, and attentively listened, continued—■" Ma¬ dame Montmoro* was the charming representative. Nature pointed out to her disciples how best to worship her. Here was no vague, wandering, uncer¬ tain, blind enthusiasm ; no inanimate
idol
idol was presented us, but a masterpiece* of Nature, a sacred image, enough ta inflame all hearts. Where Philosophy had first informed us, our senses soon convinced us we acted right. We saw,. we were convinced, and we adored." " Did you ever see," said Rattle, ** Dr. Graham's Hygeia, or Goddess of Health ?" " Where?" asked Mr. Arnon. " In this noble metropolis. I have not the smallest doubt that the French borrowed their idea from an English Quack Doctor." The ladies looked displeased. Rattle, »ot observing them, continued— " By the by, Mr. Arnon, the speech the Doctor used to make, was very like your Thapsody, which I also remember was. similar
similar to the one used at Paris. Whe¬ ther the Doctor's regimen and medicines «destroyed his Goddess of Health, I can't say. Your worthies, I know, in spite ofall their love and adoration, chopped off the head of t hár'rational Divinity, poor Madame Montmoro !" The ladies shuddered. Said Hambden—" You must not confound, Rattle, the infamous factions of France with the first noble emanci¬ pators of their country." " Ex pede I I ere ? tem· Do you, Hambden, defend the Goddess of Rea- ·***» I ??? r " No," replied Hambden, with a smile, " unless we take one of the present company for a representative." " And |
" And then," said Rattle, " even 1 ¿shall become an idolator." The conversation wouid have turned to other subjects, had not certain ideas met the mind of Emily, which she could not so easily dismiss. Mr. Marauder had often told his fair victim this pretty story of the Goddess of Reason. lie had dressed the tale tip well. lie had called Emily his Goddess of Reason, but the catastrophe he had ever omitted. He perceived, therefore, thatshe looked very grave ; and he was unwilling to give up the Goddess of Reason so easily as Hambden had. " The
*" The improbable stories which were $okl afterwards," said Mr. Marauder, *" whether true or false, can never in validate the liberal actions of those who profess to wor-ship no other deity than their reason. Instead of unmeaning ceremonies, and needless prayers to a being they neither see nor know any filing about, these men, who to«ik Nature for their guide, paid their obeisance to . »that whieh must delight every man, and warm the breast of the coldest and veriest cynic—the most perfect of Nature's works, a xvoman in the prime of beauty. They worshipped her as Reason exemplified, not as the gaiuly image of an imaginary being." Rattle replied, endeavouring to look grave, and to argue coolly on the subject ; but
but in a moment or two he flew off in the same manner as usual.—"I must spare half my arguments, Mr. Marauder, ????? I consider that you are not, like me, a plain Protestant, an abominator of image and figure-worship altogether. But if the French ?vorshipped their idol as the representative of a certain set of ideas, if they only personified their thoughts, and put them into a practical outside, there wsls something more than knavery in the case—complete Folly» That latter Goddess, too, I believe they have already got with her cap and bells, endeavouring to assume the appearance, as well as the name, of Liberty. But since they areso fond of dressing uptheir fancies into a real form, I recommend to their study an author they don't yet very well understand— Shakespeare. " Observe
" Observe his Midsummer's Nights Dream. — The Grecian Clowns; Bottom, the Weaver ; Quince, the Carpenter ; Snug, the Joiner; Flute, the Bellows- mender; Snout, the Tinker; and Starve¬ ling, the Tailor, would make, I find, excellent French Philosophers. Their personification of a wall, or moonshine, equals at least our Gallic neighbours' reason.—' Some man or other,' says Philosopher Bottom, ζ must presentWall, and let him have some plaster, or softie lime, or some rough-cast about him to signify Wall; and again, one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantborn, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present the person of Moonshine. '- You see, Mr. Marauder, how pat my simile is ? voj,. í. ? " No
" No doubt, Mr. Rattle vow think so ; but I can inform you the French borrowed theirs from the Ancients." " You mean, my dear Sir,-as to that notable exhibition of their's, the deifi- carion of Monsieur Voltaire. These fellows, at the moment they affect to despise religion, are guilty of the grossest idolatry ; an unenlightened set of savages would have been ashamed of it. After having collected together the irisdom of I know not how many cen¬ turies, they glory in a species of know¬ ledge that an heathen three thousand years ago had considered beneatii his notice. That deification, whieh tlie degeneracy of Rome, under the infa¬ tuated tyranny of its Emperors, yielded to, and whicli they copied from the primitive
primitive customs of man ere yet he was civilized, have these pretended sons of Freedom voluntarily bestowed on a conceited poet, wel 1 known as ?,' rank poltroon, a false historian ,und an ignorant sceptic" "You are so violent, Rattle," said JNlr. Marauder, having got off from the Goddess of Reason, and wishing tq con¬ clude the argument, " eo very violent in your opinions, that I cannot possibly dispute with you. Yet this merit you cannot deny the French, of overturning with complete success the old super¬ stition." * 6 Does Mr. Marauder call it super¬ stition T' "I speak," replied Mr. Marauder, affecting indifference, " ntø as a reli¬ gious party, but as an impartial observer." II % <·' If
" If the highwaymen of this country, " continued Rattle, " were to get the upper hand, I presume they would puli down the gibbets, and most probably celebratea fête on Hounslow Heath." " I find, Rattle, I must give up the Herculean task of convincing you. As this argument cannot be very entertain¬ ing to the ladies, give us your opinion of the new play we have all been to see. *
CIIAPJ
????. xx.
A HE conversation now took a turn - more adapted to the fair Emily and her female friends, till from having tho-* roughly canvassed the new play, the aid ones came upon the tapis, Shakes¬ peare of course was mentioned, and universally applauded. Here Mr. Älá* rauder made sure that Rattle would join in his praise, as he had often heard him speak of that great genius in the highest terms of rapture. «3 " Its
" It's all very true, " said Rattle, with a bit of a sigh, " but he spoils all for want of feeling. " Every gentleman and every lady in company attacked Mr. Rattle most severely. He stood the storm very patiently : when it had a little subsided, he continued— " Ah, poor Falstaff! Harry of Mon» mouth woukl never have treated thee as» the Prince of the Drama 1ms made him, " " No, Rattle," saidHambden, taking up the defence of his favourite, " this old cavil shall not avail you· A writer you greatly admire, the ingenious author of an Essay on the Dramatic Character of Sir John, confesses that the punish¬ ment of Falstaff is but poetical justice.** " Morgan
" Morgan spake not from his heart : * he tells us not to complain ; that Sir John is finally given up to shame and dishonour. A verv clear reason this, that there was a cause for complaint, Shakespeare seems to have perceived İt himself; when he makes Fluellen, the Welchman, compare the Prince's conduct to Falstaff, to Alexander's to Clitus ; the excuse afterwards is evidently very bad. But allowing this cursed poetical justice, why was Bardolf to be hanged for steal¬ ing a pix?" "Can the punishment of such a fellow be an excuse for condemning Shakespeare for want of feeling ?"
m 4 "Yes;
4í Yes; after all their jokes on Äis fiery nose^—after making him a compa¬ nion with the Prince, and an object for im wit and ridicule—after confessing him by the voices of all the gang to be the best of the three worthies—poor Bardolf ! for the sake of the old joke, Fluellen says— c One Bardolf if your Majesty knows the man ; his face is all bubnckfes and wfreiks, and knobs, and flames of fife, and his Kps blow at Im nose, and it İs like a coal of fire, some¬ times blue, and sometimes red ; but hit nose is executed, and his fires out*—· On this account the poor fellow is with great indifference fixed upon, in allu~ sion to an old legend, as the most proper person to be hanged for stealing a pix. " Shakespeare draws Bardolf liimself, with
with much more feeling than the Prince when he hears of Falstaff 's death.—' I ΛνοηΜ I were with him, wherever he is, either in Heaven or in Hell V —Had Shakespeare felt this sentiment so well as hfe has placed it in the mouth of a repro· bate, I am well assured he would never" have hanged the poor devil at last* If these Will not satisfy you, I have at least- half a hundred others. There's little poetical justice, I believe, in the deaths ■ of Ophelia, or her poor father ; but as . for the murder of the dutiful, lovely, and innocent Cordelia—let Shakespeare answer for it." Hambden, finding it in vain to argue with so determined an adversary* thought he had better turn the virulence of his . m 5 friend ? ,
friend Rattle s satire to some other sub*- ject. They canvassed, therefore, the merits of the other dramatic favourites, whom Rattle praised or condemned with equal intemperance· " One of the best things in the English'language," said Rattle, "is Steele's Conscious Lovers ; every sen* timent is interesting, and pregnant with religion, honour, and virtue." " AH borroMed !" replied Hambden, who m as determined to attack him in his own ???. " i mean to say it is no better than a decent translation of Terence's Andrian : but what think you of Sheridan's School for Scandal? There's originality
originality for you, \vith genuine wit and humour." " Positively," exclaimed Rattle, ** the ? ? ??? worst thins: in the English bnguage—a disgrace to the nation to have had it acted." Every one of the company laughed niost heartily at Mr. Rattle for his vio¬ lent abuse of so famous a work, each striving ???? should most commend it. " But," concluded Mr. Arnon/ "the astonishing run it has had,is a autrici jnt instance of its merit, " " -Pshaw ! you may as well.argue that way in defence of half the trash upon the town. I say the principle of die School for Scandal is an arttul attack Ai ? against
against all religion and morality. The chief characters, the Brothers, are bor¬ rowed from Tom Jones and Blifield; and its plot is taken from an excellent old Novel called Sidney Biddulph, where a rich old codger, Mr. Warner, comes from abroad, and disguises himself as a poor man, to make trial of his relations, Sir George and Mrs. Arnold. The suc¬ cess is the same as in the play. ζζ The generosity of the hero Charles, isat the expence of his justice—a virtue that seems despised by the author. In short, all that can be said in favour of it is—that open vice is better ------" u Mr. Rattle," said Emily, " I can bear it no longer—you are too bad ; I don't know when I shall forgive you for abusing my favourite play." "If
u If Mrs. Marauder is against me," said Rattle, (for, though it was totally contrary to the principle by which,Mr. Marauder deceived Eniily, she was always called by his name)—" if Mrs. Marauder is against me, I give up the argument ; and as the School for Scandal is so far honoured as to be her favourite, thenceforth declare,agamst all opposers, that it is possessed of Λνιί, honour, and originality." Rattle was one of the warmest admi¬ rers of the fair sex, and Emily's bright eyes had shot him through and through. In truth, the pleasure of seeing her \vas the great inducement that now brought him frequently to Mr. Marauder's table ~a man hewas far from feeling any particular friendship fbr. 3 IVom
From plays the subject descended to players* Mrs. Siddons met with universal approbation. Emily spoke of her in the highest terms ; andi perceiving Rattle was silent, she required his opinion* Rattle hummed and hawed.—" Un¬ doubtedly she was most excellent ; her voice clear; her expression just; hey manners easy and noble; her shriek most inimitable ; and what is superior to every thing, if you see her in one character, you see her in all. Upon my honour, Ma'am, she is a most capital actress." " Of her elder brother no doubt you have full food for satire?" said Mr. Marauder. ? He's,
" He's, without exception, the best improvement upon harsh nature I ever met Mİth in my life." " And what of her younger ?" " Α Λνοικίετίιι? instance of the inßur ence of the family. " " What think you of Mrs. Jordan?" " Any thing but majesty." " Bannister?" "Two very great faults—modesty and good-nature." "How so?" " Both together induce him to act low parts, beneath the scope of his abilities, " "Quick?" " His squeak is most excellent; but we've rather too much ofit." " Mr. Rattle," said Emily, " not a word
. Word more, if sueh are your remarks on the first comic actors that ever trod-¿he.. stage. " "I differ from you, Rattle," said' Mr. Marauder, "in almost every re¬ mark you have made." Marauder, vvho knew Emily's taste, began to canvass their merits in a very different manner, and, with great judg¬ ment, gave them that praise so well : known, so deservedly their due. The ladies retired. Mr. Arnon entered upon more learned subjects ; and, from a neat discourse upon the improvement in the arts and sci¬ ences, he soon came round to his favourite
favourite subject—the praise of the French. " Otieof thek Generalsreeonnoi tered the enemy's camp in an mr-balloon ?■" asked Rattle. " A ridiculous story F' said Mr. Arnon, conceiving Rattle was. ready ta kugh at ? '? "I. dot*bt h£ it ever hap¬ pened.'* 4 í I have heaid from vetyr good au¬ thority ? is true," repikd tlie oilier^ " and I think greatly to his credit, 1% has been the fashion of this country for every fool to laugh at the air-balloon ; but I conceive it to be the best: practrcal exhibition or a bold and useful theory, whicli tlie age can produce*,"
The
The rest of the company knew not whether Rattle ivas* in jest or earnest. He continued — " James Sadler, a pastry cook at Oxford, had the spirit himself to make the bold experiment in the midst of that learned seminary. For an act ivhich reflected honour on his abilities, as well as his courage, ivhat reward did the sons of Apollo bestow? —A few shillings to gratify their cu¬ riosity 1 Had the circumstance took ■ place át Cambridge, probably he had made his fortune ; had it happened in former days, we should have had him among the stars." il And you really mean to commend it ?" said Marauder, sneeringly. " If science is none the worse for courage to put it in practice. " í . u Surely,'*
" Surely," said Mr. Amou, "the French have the first merit in this, ?? well as in the telegraph."—Mr. ????? began to ex u It.— ( * Their superior genius still takes the lead ; but the most noble, most glorious thing this age has pro¬ duced, is the emendation and perfection, I may say, of the calendar by these sons of Freedom." " The offspring of Folly !" exclaimed Rattle, with an air of triumph, " the poorest astronomers in the Julian period, would have called them. Mr. Arnon, I beg of you to point out in what the excellence consists*" Mr. Arnon 's praise had transcended his reason; but he replied—" In the more equal division of the months, and the more equal distribution of time." " When
" When I understood," said Rattle, trying to speak deliberately, " that tliese Philosophers had altered the calen* dar, I naturally presumed that, without regarding party distinctions, accidental circumstances, or their own prejudices, tliey had accommodated it to the seasons of the year, as the different con¬ stellations point tbem out tous; butter niy extreme surprise, and what gives me the most contemptible opinion of thû teamed Nation, all their philosophy* mathematical knowledge, astronomical ivfedom is contained m thié grand point* —that Royalty wa& abolished on the $ Hi of September, therefore their year ? to begin on the next day, the Séd. Again, instead of dividing the months m near as possible according to the moons*
inoons, their months consist of 30 clays each, 10 days to a week, and 3 weeks to a month : now 30 times 12 being only ¡360, Jive days still remain, and these »(which I have no doubt is a very good joke in France) are called the days without breeches/ and so there is an ^end of the Frenchman'syear. If a revo¬ lution should ever take place in Ireland, they may make as great a blunder ; but it is impossible fbr them to evince greater conceit and folly." " What can be more imperfect and irregular than our own year?" asked Mr. Arnon, who, though he knew him¬ self in the wrong, was not willing to •resign the point. "No alteration, " replied Rattle, * * I should have supposed, had not the French
French convinced me otherwise. Aš yet every emendation had heen an im¬ provement upon tiie wisdom of former ages, till-a French astronomer* came* P. F. N. Fahre clEglantine, a player and poet. To this man was the task assigned of altering the calendar—to a
wretch
wretch whose character has been thus ably defined—' A weak critic, a tiifling writer, an ignoiant Philosopher, and an irresolute Atheist'*—-These fellows aie determined to think and act for tiiem¬ selves, and are daily tumbling backward in every virtue and every science. Hambden,"" continued Rattle, u you understand these things ; am I not right in the calendar ?" " It is so seidoin you are, I will not deny it at preseut. Now, in return, let me ask you what you think of their new ??? ? 4í D ------ n tlieir law!" exclaimed Rattle. The company enjoyed his momentary confusion, and the laugh went ???? pletely against liim. Marauder
Marauder particularly enjoyed it, and continued the ??? ? .— " Nay, nay, Rattle, don't be ashamed of your pro¬ fession. What, in France, can equal the glorious uncertainty of the English law ? And then, for our venerable Court of Chancery, cool and deliberate rea* soning supplies the place of hasty decision. Shall I recai to your recol¬ lection your favourite subject—Mr. Hastings's trial ; or does the elegant, ingenious, learned, and intelligible man¬ gier in which the Chancery suits are conducted, meet your approbation bet¬ ter?" " I love my country," replied Rattle warmly, " and therefore I feel for her faults. Ι? give you for answer, Sir, a scrap of paper I tore from a new port¬ manteau,
manteau which came home this morn¬ ing."—He read the paper.—' Behold, ye·Englishmen, the blessings of, an hasty reformation i See î ηοΛν private villains undertake to manage the public good. See! and learn.—The French have, in truth, destroyed the old rusty fetters which had long ceased to gall ; but have they substituted none in their stead? Yes, new and gilded, which rankle to the very bone ! They have in a moment destroyed the tedious for* malities of the law ; and now suspicion, apprehension, and death follow without a word. Slow Justice is gone, and hasty Murder has taken her place. The long catalogue of useless prayers, unmeaning ceremonies, and days of fasting, are gone by ; and, in their place, a still vol. i, n' longer
ìonger catalogue of recorded perjuries, ceremonies—would I could say un¬ meaning /—und days, not of voluntary fasting, indeed, but of wan t and misery.' —I have sent to the trunk-maker's, and hope some day or other to favour you with the remainder." " It is a favour I will very willingly dispense ivith," said Marauder. "Wdl, Rattle," said Hambden, laughing, " I think, indeed, our Eng¬ lish laws shine best by comparison; and if ever I see you my Lord Chan¬ cellor, I shall hope to have our suit determined. " A small estate, which came to Mr. Arnop from bis late friend, was stül disputed r in the Court of Chancery, and to which Hambden referred. Ai I confess,
* * ζ ί confesé," vexetoimed Mr. Arnon, with a sneer, " after all Mr. Rattier arguments, I should prefer justice with¬ out law, to law wilho-iat Castice ; for, as Mr. Pain says—*'* " Do you really mean, my dear Sir," ¡asked Rattle, hastily, " to quote that worthy, respectable writer m earnest ?" Mr. Arnon was ashamedof his intended ^utİK>rity. He knew in what a Con¬ temptible Hght liis soil always considered this great man, and he replied—"There is no need of any quotation to strengthen what I have advanced«—it is an axiom of itself.'* " Flow quickly you resign that man of modesty md veracity Γ replied Rattle, recovering his usual flow of spirits; • 'N 2 " but
" but let me introduce- him tó your notice in an epigram from Martial, which my younger brother sent me fi om Cambridge the other day, and whicii, in my opinion, is very comprehensive and conciuáive. . *< EU niger et nequern, cum sis cognomine ttequam t < t Nigfior esse potes, nequior esse nequis." To Thomas Pain. Both Vict and Pain ambou—for Fai» s thy name j, Thy vicemmws^lam is »fül the «ame·**
CHAP.
e
CHAP. XXL SlNCE Emily's elopement, Mr. and Mrs. Vasaley's family was in no respects a desirable situation for a young girl at the very age of improvement. ■*. Fanny, who had never felt any par¬ tiality for Mr. Vasaley or his spouse," could not but determine it in her own mind that they hadaeted very improperly in their conduct concerning Mr. N 3 Marauder
Marauder and her sister : for. although neither the guardian nor his lady ever suspected that Mr. Marauder would carry their fair ivard aivay, yet they privately encouraged hk 'addresses when they knew she was in a manner engaged to Witeon. ' Mr. Townsend, an elderly man, and an old bachelor their ocheir guardian, was,, of course, informed of the elope* meitt of Miss Emfly. ïfe eaitfe tú Mr* Vasaley's immediately. r _ panny, M r ho had befc?e mentioned it toher friend Wilson* signified her wish to Mr. Townsend tø be in a situation wit-ere she might improve herpelf in thoss accomplishments she had superficially learned
learned at schod, and wiiich she had left, at the death of her mother,- to be a companion for her sister Emily, who, in return, used frequently to talk of instructing her younger sister herself. Mr. Townsend, before his departure, promised to look out for an eligible situation; and in a few weeks wrote word that he had prevailed upon a wídoif lady, near his own residence, to takehis young ward as one øf her family. Wlien Lady Berwick accompanied her husband to his command İn the East Indies, she left her three young daugh¬ ters under the care of her friend, Mrs. Mountford, a Clergyman's Mridow, and the half-sister of Lady Berwick's mother. H"4 This
This* lady had two daughters and a son of her own, which, %rith the three Miss Berwicks, composed the society into Mdiich ???? Bellaire was to be admitted. When the time approached for her departure, Fanny, not without many a tear, prepared to leave the spot. It has been before said how little she liked or respected the Vasaleys; and had the cause of her tears been nicely inves¬ tigated, she would have scarcely been able to have given a good reason even to herself. The truth was, she ?vas unwilling to *eave Wilson—a person she had once expected to be her brother, one who bud
had warmly professed and shewed him¬ self to be her friend—who had directed that excellent genius, for which she had been eariy conspicuous* to proper objects —who, so far from treating her like an ignorant young female, with unmeaning praises and destructive flattery, had assisted her opening mind in the attain¬ ment of true excellence,. a knowledge of virtue, morality, and religion. Fanny, considering Wilson.in this light, and knowing also that he prac- tised himself £hose duties lie recom· mended to others, could not part with such a friend, without feeling a sensation much more interesting than usuaUy accompanies the term*
3 5 She
She had no relations nearer allied to her than the Vasaleys and Mr. Toim- »end. Mrs* Vasaley waa her father's» first cousin ; aad Mr. Townsend stood ht tlie same ctegree of kindred to her mother, Wilson therefore had been ?? ftther* guardian, kinsman, ftiend, every thing dear that her young mind hatl yet felt the want of. Mr. Townsend came to Mr. Vasaley's house the day before Fanny was to leave it, Wilson called in tlie evening to wish her a good journey. Mr. and Mr». Vasaley were in the jføom when he entered. Mr. Townsend ivas acquainted with firm, and weU knew his character; and the Vasaleys, to 3 make
mate up for their fotmer conduct and partiality towards Marauder, had been, most profuse in his praise. 4 After the usual compliments had passed, and he had been seated a few minutes, he asked for Miss Fanny. " Thepoorgirl," said Mr. Townsend, H is ???? sotiôwfu! at leaving her good friends here ; and she was afraid of not seeing you before slie departed*" Fanny entered* Wilson had determined to ask her permission, in the presence of her guar¬ dians, occasionally to write to her, and to beg the favour of her ansM^er ; ýet n G a delicpxy
a delicacy of feeling, he could not account for, a long time prevented himu In vain he reasoned with himself on the subject ; he felt an interest in her fate more than a mere friend can feel, and feared, as if it was a thing of the great¬ est moment, the possibility of a refusal That he loved her otherwise than as a sister he had not the remotest idea, though Emily herself had always per¬ ceived their great partiality for each other. There was a delicacy, a tender¬ ness, a chasteness, an anxiety that daily increased upon him whenever he ad¬ dressed Fanny, and now was more con¬ spicuous than ever it had been before. With Emily, beautif uland fascinating, his
his passions had been interested, and be thought himself deeply in love; but with Fanny his heart was caught, and he >vas ignorant it was even in danger. That a young Philosopher of one- and-twenty should be in love with a pretty child of fourteen, was a paradox he could not conceive possible ; yet Emily, in her giddy laughing way, had often told him so, and Wilson liad as often turned it to a compliment upon herself* The gay Marauder also had been equally affected by the fascinating graces of the mind and person which adornedFanny Bellaire, but not with equal ignorance upon the occasion. From hence a corollary may be drawn,>wiwre correct than any from the long-shaken brain of the
the author of Political Justice—that thè purity of ?? is in proportion to it* ignorance. After many a hem! and many an ahf Wilson found courage to take the oppor¬ tunity of Fanny's calling him her friend Mr. Wilson, to propose the correspond¬ ence.—" Youhavekindly, Miss Fanny, thought proper to honour me with the name of friend; may I, under that name, hope to have the liberty of writing to you, and will you sometimes favour mc with your answer?" Fanny, artless and innocent, had not yet learned to conceal her feelings. She was hurt at the cold and formal manner in which, in her opinion^ ?? simple a favour
in her eyes as she answered— <r I fear, Mr. Wilson, you must think me very ungrateful not to be always happy to hear from you, I am greatly indebted to you for the kindness and friendship you have shewn me ever since I have been here ; and the treatment you have had from our family, has been very un¬ kind in return. I am sure you have been ?? a brother to me ; and one time I was in hopes I might have really called you so." "I am afraid I shall lose my other ward if this is the case," said Mr. Townsendy laughingly. u But, my am* little girl," continued he, taking Fanny by the hand, t( though we have not the happiness to be allied to Mr· * Wibo%
Wilson- I hope you will ahvays consider him as a brother, as I shall a friend of the family ; and, whoever is the happy man that one day or other ,is to be blessed with my Fanny, lie will have reason to thank Mr. Wilson for the care he has taken of you*" Wilson therefore frequently received a letter from his young pupil ; and while he admired the expanding beauties of her mind, he soon began toremark that she grew more and more cautious and reserved in her expressions towards him. Had he read over his own letters with the like attention, he could not have failed to make a similar remark in them»
CHAP.
v MAF» ? A11*
A HE summer after Marauder came of age, Emily passed at Brighton ; and, amid the splendour of beauty and fashion ????? adorned its shores, shone forth'avowedly as the first constellation in every eye, 4 In taste, in style, in elegance, in the richness of equipages and jiress, the chere amies of Princes, Dukes, and Lords were Itft far behind. The
The admiration she excited could Hot but gratify her vanity in the highest degree ; yet, strange as it may appear, she felt sensations which already told her that all was vexation of spirit. The ~ pride of Marauder joyfully received the incense—that pride which waited but for one event to be at its full powers. Early in the winter they returned to town. Marauder was more immersed in a continual bustle than ever: the whole of his affairs was to Emily a secret* As he often came homein the middle of the night, their apartments, though adjoining, were now separate; and she never saw him at his own table, but with a crowd of company. So
So passed the early part of the ivinter, Emily drooping and pming fast aivay'; her health, though visibly impaired, ivas scarcely noticeel by the busy eye of Marauder. The new year began with better aus¬ pices. Our earth had once perfected its annual orb, and thrice, besides, had her sister planet, the pallid Goddess of the Chace, completed her attractive cottrsk around the sal-impregnated fluids of this globe, since the delicious attachment of eongenial minds had commenced between EmüyBeUaire andthe gallant Marauder, when the grand event, the great hinge, as it were, upon which these volumes
volumes turn, so long expected, so ar- dently desired, took place. The Duke of Silsbury, without a fall from his horse, was, to the surprise •of every body, carried off in the midst of a long frost by an apoplectic fit, which the Physicians agreed was occa* sioned by the want of his necessary exercise. An Irish servant, who waited upon Wilson, made a very judicious remark upon this opinion of the learned Doc¬ tors.—" They may talk what they will, Master, upon we Irish blunderers, but, by* Jasus! this is the most complete thing I ever heard in my born days— that his Grace should liave ventured his neck
neck to have insured his life. Faith ! a pretty way of living to run the risk of dying." No sooner was the Duke's death known, than the bailiff or steward of Mr. Marauder set off post to town, Without ceremony he rushed into the room, where his master sat with a few* French Nobility, some English gentry, and the adored Emily. Tlie host turned his head round, sur¬ prised at the rudeness of his servant, who, walking boldly to the table, poured out a glass of wine, and drank—■** Long * hfc to the Duke of Silsbury Γ
Tfte
The young heir, with a joy that burst even the fetters of his pride, caught bis meaning, and applauded the insolent hint • He immediately rang the bell vio» len tiy.—* * Order my carriage and horses this moment !" said he. <( Mr. Grinder, you'll follow me as quick as possible. ¡Ko, you shali accompany me."—Recol¬ lecting himself, hc politely apologized to the company ;—nay,a very nice observer might have thought that he seemed to be a little ashamed of his own intemper¬ ate behaviour, and the gross exultation of his servant ; but his gratified pride «oon smothered it aU, and he hastily took his leave, and departed.
Poor
Poor Emily was like one thunder¬ struck.— " Good night, and sweet dreams to my lovely girl !" %vas the great man's address as he left the room. Instead of hailing her as his lovely Duchess, a term he was formerly very fond of using, he had departed with a familiar nod, such as a superior, highly gratified, bestowson an inferior,·«—" My loveiy girl left a shuddering at her breast that crushed in a moment the airy palaces sue had so arduously reared, and scattered the M'hole fabric at the instant it seemed to be realized. At the first place where they changed horses, the new Duke thought proper to senil· Emily a note by the post, more for the
the sake of giving some vent to his exulting pride, than from any particular love, though he certainly meant it as a hint to check any fond hopes she might have still entertained of participating in the title. The following is the letter.
" Fdr one moment, my charming Emily, ambition took place of love, when I flew this night from your bewitch¬ ing arms to invest myself with the family honours. "I shall be at the Castle early in the morning. Ere you receive this, a certain pretender will have lost his little con¬ sequence, and may provide himself with a situation far more fit as a journeymaa carpenter. " I will try to bring our Fanny back with me to the land of Love, where with
with my Emiiy she shall enjoy its delights. We must make your lovely sister a convert to the religion of Reason and Truth !— Ye Gods î what a glorious idea to be the Priest of such Goddesses Γ " Blest, ever blest, ye free enchant¬ ments of the mind ! Curse, Oh ! curse again and again the rankling fetters, which foolish Parsons and Politicians* rivet upon slaves ten tirnem more foolish* than themselves í " So contrary to natureis compulsion,, tliat were I compelled to love even my Emily, I fear I should be disobedient. " Health, love, and freedom ever attend on the Goddess of my vows!' From her constant adorer, " SILSBURY." ¥©£, ? α Emily
Emily read the note with somewhat more than surprise. She perused it again and again. Something new, some¬ thing more and more unpleasant alarmed her spirits, and chilled her tremblmg heart. A little recovered, she called her new philosophy to her aid, and attempted to reason with herself upon the subject. Could she doubt the honour of the man to whom she had sacrificed every thing? * —Ah ! no. She read the letter once more. Yes, she did doubt it. Long ha I Emily felt the irksomeness of her situ ition ; and the hope that she should soon be instated in her prope
sphere alone supported her spirits. This letter seemed to destroy it all ; and for the first time the mental vision began to open upon the dreary prospect around her. When once secrecy supplies the place of candour in the female breast, the approach of Vice is made easy ;—the words of Deceit prevail—" She forsak- eth the guide of her youth, and forget- teth the covenant of her God;" and ruin, remorse, and repentance range successively through the soul.. »t Let me hasten ίο the castle to intro¬ duce the new Duke.
END OF VOL. !..
