Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The albigenses: a romance
THE ALBIGENSES.
CHAPTER I. --------We cannot disjoin wedlock, 'Tis of heaven's fastening, well may we raise jars, Jealousies, sti ifes, heartburning disagreements, Like a thick scurf o'er life, as did our master Upon that patient miracle. Miudleton's Witches. The bridal of Sir Paladour de la Croix Sanglante and the lady Isabelle was held with a magnificence suitable to the state and wealth of the bride, and the merit and valour of the bridegroom. After the marriage ceremony, performed by the Monk of Mont¬ calm, there was a gorgeous feast; and then the company assembled in the hall of the castle to dance, the bride and bridegroom, according to the custom of the times and of many following, being .the leaders in the VOL. IV. B
ball. The feudal hall presented a rude and grand consistency:—the fire supplied with vast blocks went roaring and blazing up the wide and grateless chimney; the chimney-piece, a noble work of antique art, adorned with rich sculptures in wood of men and animals, de¬ mons and saints, fruits and foliage, heral¬ dic emblems and sentences from Scripture, wrought with rich and fantastic luxuriance of ornament, rose like a monument to the height of thirty feet; its stories (as they might be called), with their"entablatures and flourishments. tapering as they ascended, till the topmost carving almost touched the cor¬ nice of the hall, loaded like it with heavy, .fantastic, but most rich sculpturing in wood, " all made out of the carver's brain." There was not, perhaps, a right angle in the walls -ofthe apartment; but, of its polygon figure, every pannel was either hung with rich ta¬ pestry, or framed of wood so polished and wrought, that the eye turned with dehght from gold and gaudy figures, to repose on the dark hue and strong relief of the alternate compartment.
A " liveried army" of domestics, sta¬ tioned in recesses, held waxen torches, whose light, hke banners in a field, streamed for¬ ward or backward with the movements of the dancers and the impulse with which they swayed the air; and those movements so stately, yet so expressive—the sweeping robes of the ladies, the gentle tread of the knights, the sonorous rustle of the long-depending garments on the inlaid floor, from which the rushes had here and there been swept, min¬ gled with fhe clank of the small spurs which their partners wore even on that occasion, made meet accompaniment to the strains of the minstrels; who leaned from their carved and gilded gallery amid the pillars of the lordly hall, to witness that luxury of motion which they participated while they inspired. And the vast uncurtained window, on whose gorgeous and emblazoned panes the admitted moon shed her full light, tinting them with purple, vermillion, and gold, and then resting in pale and placid glory on some uncoloured pane, seemed to make heaven a joyous wit_ B 2
, ness of that festival: and within the deep re¬ cesses of those AvindoAvs, on high-piled and cost¬ ly cushions, sank beauty, panting from the de¬ licious exercise of the dance; while youthful knights, " all on the wanton rushes laid them down," and pointing to the felicity of Paladour and IsabeUe, did then most effectively plead for the completion of their OAvn : Avhile, through the loAv-arched doors that opened in sundry di¬ rections, Avas often caught, by the Hght of iron cressets, or the flash of torches borne by passing domestics, the sight of the menials of the household dancing in groups, to strains more homely and with steps less graceful/but Avith hearts as light as any in that gay as¬ sembly. The Lord of Courtenaye, seated in his chair of state, Avhispered courteous Avords to every lady as she passed him in the dance. The Monk of Montcalm, seated at a small trivet, furnished with a bason of holy Avater, Avith which he Ava-i to sprinkle the bridal-bed that night, was conning over his night-spells and benisons for the prosperity of the wedded pair : beside him stood the lord's falconer, Avith
a hawk on his wrist, hooded to quell her screams; and the lady Isabelle's huntsman held a pair of snow-white hounds in a leash of gold tissue, broidered with names of the bride and bridegroom; and the aU-licensed fool made jests on the allusion, and shook every beU on his cap in chorus to his oavii drollery, and joyous burthen Avas borne by the laugh of aU the domestics, Avho that night Avere not reproved for their mirth by their lord. He was engaged Avith other thought, for ever as he glanced toAvards the Monk of Montcalm he muttered,—" Thou art the master of a poAverless speU: they whom I rule have forespoken thee already." The bride had danced one round, and Avas seated in her chair of state, arrayed in cloth of silver, and a transparent veil falHng over her lovely broAV, as if to hide her from the gaze of the throng.—" It is she," they said, " for Avhom Sir Paladour de la Croix San¬ glante challenged and overthreAV Simon de Montfort—him whom fifty lances had not shaken in his saddle-seat in the lists that day. It is she for Avhom he undertook and
accomplished the adventure against TAigle sur la Roche, Avho never released prisoner ransomless before."—" And right worthy," cried the knights, " Avas *he of such valour." —" And as worthy," rejoined the ladies, " he of his reivard,'"' As they spoke, Sir Pala¬ dour, taking a torch from one of the atten¬ dants, offered his hand to the lady for ano¬ ther round. " I challenge this fair prisoner," said he, pressing the hand she gave, " by the golden fetters in Avhich I bound it to-day;" and he glanced with gay triumph on the marriage ring.—" That Avere easy," said the simling bride : " biit oh, thou subtle enthraller! Avhere didst thou learn to bind the heart in such fine fetters, that it cannot choose but quit its home to dwell Avith thee, and delight itself to dAvell in such SAveet prison ever?"—" There is no shrine on earth," said the impassioned bridegroom, " Avorthy of gem so rich. To look on thee, to listen to thee, to touch thy hand, are several such delights, that it were Avorth Hfe's dearest peril to Avin but one of them ; but to thinlc aU these, and thyself the
sum of all, are mine, wraps me in too exqui¬ site a trance; and I fear," he added, darting on her eyes, under whose vivid and melting brilliancy her own sunk, " I fear I shall lose all consciousness of my felicity from its very excess.'' At this moment a page approaching touch¬ ed his mantle and whispered some words in his ear.—" Go, boy," he said slightingly, " this is no hour for such importunacy;" and he led the lady as he spoke. The boy drew nearer and put a ring into his hand:—the glow that all that night had made his cheek seem like a living rose, left it in a moment as paie as that of the dead ! He uttered some inarticulate sounds; and then, whispering his bride he would return on the instant, he hurried from the hall. As he crossed the threshold, he flung one unmarked look of agony in the direction where she stood, and disappeared. The lady, who had been em¬ ployed in lifting and arranging her veil for the dance, heard his words; but saw not his expression; and re-seating herself to await his return, began to enter into gay talk with
her attendants. Suddenly she paused-*—" Do I see betAveen sleep and Avaking?" she said, bending forward, " or is that my lord ? Me¬ thinks he looks Avondrous Avan !" Sir Paladour Avas seen leaning against the doorway, looking Hke any thing but a happy bridegroom. The gaiety of the festal Avas noAV on the decline; the cry through the haU Avas, " It Avaxes late—the torches burn to bedward." At the word the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye rose from his chair, and six pages arrayed in white detached themselves from tlie dance, and seized torches to escort the bridegroom. This movement, though it did not disturb the dancers, caused some tumult* and press around the doorway, while all Avaited for the train of ladies avIio were first to escort the bride to her apartment. Sir Paladour stood like a statue amid the bridesmen, amongst whom some pleasantries suited to those coarse but merry times were passing, when Verac exclaimed, " Hold thy torch aloft, boy! By HeaA r en, Sir Paladour, thy cheek is as wan as that of
the dead!"—" And is no cheek here bttt mine pale ?" said Paladour: " methinks thine is pale, too, Verac, and thine, Semonville."' " The torclies burn Avondrous dim," said many voices: the pages trimmed then in vain. A blue paUid light diffused itself through the haU, and the flushed cheek of panting beauty paused from the dance, and the young ruddy aspects of the gazing pages were tinged with that pale and ghastly hue at the same moment; Avhile, amid the vapour, the cressets and lamps Avaned in light like moons in their ecHpse. The dark¬ ness increased, and the Lord of Courtenaye, howeA T er he might hail the signal, called aloud for fresh torches. The order Avas obeyed, but the torches they produced, lighted from those Avhose flame was so strangely coloured, had a tint of the same pale and portentous light. At length the haU Avas cleared ; the only individuals left Avere the Lord of Courtenaye and Thibaud: the former sheAved some impa¬ tience of this officious surveiUance of his vas-
sal—" Why art thou here?" he said.—"Be¬ cause," said the vassal, " I see thine eye is fix¬ ed, and thy step pointed tOAvard thy chamber of crime and darkness; when in such emer¬ gency didst thou say, * Avhy art thou here ?'"— " I lack not thy counsel, nor thy aid," said his Lord: " begone, and trouble me not."—" Thus says a sorcerer to an imp avIio can no longer serAx him," said Thibaud; "yet mark me, lord," and with cold hand and visage pale he approached the Lord of Courtenaye, and grasped his shrinking shoulder—" mark me, we met in mirth and Avine to confer on thy brother's murder------let that pass. I meant not thou shouldst gnash and grin Hke a Avolf at the memory.—Let us not part in sadness : Ave must drain cups to deep pledges ere Ave part," and he fiUed a vast cup to the- brim.—" God rid me of thee, thou insolent knave!" said his lord.—" What sayest thou, Lord of Courtenaye," quoth Thibaud, reefing, but holding the cup straight, " deem'st thou I am carousing to the bridal ?—No; I will name a health in which thou shalt pledge
me in thy soul ------if thou hast one. Here is to the consummation of thy evil purposes!" and he attempted to drain the cup in vain. " Here is," he cried faintly, holding it to his lips, " here is to the fiend and thee !" Then after a deeper draught, " Here—here is to that daughter of Satan that weds the Lord of Courtenaye to-night in the vaults of his castle, and I shall be the bridesman in flamcs, ,, he repeated, draining the cup, " flames in my throat—in my brain—in my heart. Am I not thy meet bridesman, Lord of Courte¬ naye?" and he fell prostrate on the floor, dash¬ ing in his fall the cup far from him. " Insensate, intoxicated brute!" said the Lord of Courtenaye hasting from the hall, " and at such a time!" And as he raised the tapestry which led to the passage communicating with his secret closet, the prostrate wretch, raising his inflamed visage and blood-shot eyes, hke the face of a demon, once more exclaimed, " flames—flames—in throat and brain; but not in soul hke thee, false, fiendish lord!"
The Lord of Courtenaye stayed not to listen to his ravings : he hastened to his se¬ cret chamber, in the spirit of hiin who said "E\il, be thou my good." The terrible implements of the vault had all been re¬ moved thither; there was the necromantic altar-block of stone supporting a seething cauldron, the triangular stone of black mar¬ ble on whose dark and polished surface a light gleamed and disappeared successively as the flame of the cauldron blazed and sank—that flame was of the deepest blue; there was no light in the chamber or closet, but that which issued from the cauldron. The light thus singularl) diffused fell on as singular a group. Three female forms, wi¬ thered, haggard, and decrepid, were gather¬ ed round it. They were the same who had before been assembled in the vault. One of them kneehng, held open a parchment vo¬ lume, on which character were inscribed in red and black alternately. Right opposite, another hag was seated on her hams, her elbows resting on her knees, and her wither-
ed knuckles locked in her jsavs, Avhile her livid eyes and visage were now partially and ghastHly seen by the Hght of the cauldron, and then, as the gleam subsided, lost in darkness. The third, crouching close to the cauldron, flung in some ingredients, and zealously pursued her task of stirring the mixture. She avos placed in such a posi¬ tion AA'ith regard to the light, that her figure Avas indefinable—her action only visible, as her dark arm crossed the flame from time to time. " And thinkest thou," said she Avho pored over the parchment leaA-es —" thinkest thou she AviU fulfil her promise to-night? and that she avUI sheAv to hun that Avhich she hath promised ?"—" Doubt it not," said the other, Avithout unlocking her contact of jaAV and knuckle. " Did she not bring us first acquainted Avith the evd one ? And if aU be true; the Lord of Courtenaye is meeter mate for him than we."—" It glads me," said the inferior agent, Avho stirred the cauldron, " to see our mistress Avhen she is Avrought by
the passions of others, being passionless her¬ self, to do or to promise that which passes earthly power. Then I feel she has a look that may command the fiend—I feel that my master may be rny slave, if I had eye and voice and step like—-—Oh, she is awful in her moment of power!"—" Awful she is," said the other, " but awful though she be, she favours much one whom I remember fair in her youth. I was fair myself—men told me so: but age, and want, and the wish of revenge without the power, have brought me to what I am."—" But who was she ?" said her hearers eagerly.—" Put in more nightshade and wolfsbane, and see that the flame wane not."—" Tell us whom doth our mistress resemble ?"—" Even Marie de Mor¬ temar," said the crone.—" And who was she ?" said the reader of the parchment, dropping the scroll.—" She was a noble, beautiful lady, heiress of Mortemar ; and methinks even yet our pale mistress hath her falcon eye, her glorious port, her thrilling voice; but it fared ill with her.—She was a
heretic; and worse, she would be a preacher —a prophetess—she would be the Virgin of the Albigenses. Her touch healed the sick— her prayer suspended the avalanche in its fall—her word raised the dead. She was one, as I have heard, who could make a heaven, herself being sole goddess; or turn that lieaven to heU. But Io, in the height of her spiritual pride, there came against hei- Count Raymond, then sworn brother to the Lord of Courtenaye, the brother of him whose bests we do, and the Bishop of Tou¬ louse, and they despoiled her of lands and power, and burnt her castles, and made of her people serfs, and misused her in such sort, that she wandered a maniac for a tune, and then was heard of no more."—" And fate too good for her," said she who stirred the cauldron. " Was she not a heretic ? I thank kind stars," she muttered, pur¬ suing her task—" I thank kind stars, for hoHer name must not be uttered here, that witch as I am, I never was heretic, else may these flames I am stirring consume me."
—" And how," said the mocking hag who spoke last,—" how deemest thou thy lot bet¬ ter, being a witcJi ?"—" Because," said the other, in the dreaming darkness of her intox¬ icated existence, " I know not well whether I be witch or no. I am as one between the hving world and that which Hves not.— Sometimes I think all a dream, and other time I think all reality, and often I know not what to think, I was promised wealth, and power, and youth, yet am I poor, and powerless, and withered. I banquet at gay feasts, and wake famished. I see stores of gold, and do the drudgery of a devil for a hard." " Hast thou had no horn's of dark power and fearful pleasure, when we have drained the dup our mistress deals to us, and anointed us with tliat ointment she mixes ?" said her companion, trying to fortify her own incredulity by the extorted confession of the other. " Have we not had brave nights, lugh visions, rare plea¬ sures? Was it a dream that night when we danced round the tree, where hung the bodies of the vassals of the Lord of Courtenaye,
Avhom he slew in his mood for saying that he knew better how to feast the Crusaders, than to lead them; and ever as we danced Ave rent a rag or gnavved a muscle tiil they descended and joined us, the fetters clanking round the fleshless bones making meet time to our mea¬ sure? Who our dark minstrel Avas, thoir sawest thyself." ••* And what Avas that," said the other in fiendish emulation—" Avhat Avas that to the night Ave feasted in the ruined church interdicted for murder long since done, and in which the children of the Count of Tou¬ louse sought sanctuary in vain? I, for thou wast not there, dug with these nails the body of a span-long unchristened brat from tlie grave where the mother, a leman of the Bishop of Toulouse, had smothered it in earth. Flags of the aisle Avere our table, and strange were the dainties heaped on them ; but that Avhich pleased our master best Avas the------Hush ! let us stir the cauldron: the flame Avaxeth 2->ale, and it must be the hue of the rose, ere the charm be perfect. Hark!" she exclaimed, " hark !"' and " hark again !"
was repeated by her companions, as a sound of unutterable horror ascended from the floor on which they stood. " Is it our master ?" said the hags, crouching close to each other. " Who are ye ?" said a feeble voice,—" who are ye, the sound of whose voices I hear above me?" —" We are the daughters of evil!" said the elder hag, " met to do oui* father's will."— 61 And fitter spot ye might not choose," said the voice; " but if ye be human, list to me, though ye may not aid me."—" And who art thou that criest on us so?" said the hags, bending their ears to the floor.—" I am Vidal the minstrel!'' said a feeble voice: " I have been plunged by the craft and crime of the Lord of Courtenaye in this dungeon, because my memory bore traces that are now effaced. Here have they held me in miseiy; but they fed me at least till within the last two days. From thence I have net tasted food, and that 1 should lightly regard ; all I crave is one draught of water! water! and I die content." The hags, from the deepest ex¬ perience of human wretchedness combined with the most craving excitement of the
imagination, were as unmoved by the horrors they heard as by those they were about to prepare, and they would have mocked the gasping petitioner, had not one appeared among them, who in a moment chained up every tongue in terror. It was the Lord of Courtenaye, who enteiing the closet locked the door behind him, and then fiercely turning to the group demanded—"Where is she?" —"She will be here anon," answered the beldames; " and meanwhile we lack no implements for our task."—" To it, then, and sud¬ denly, and successfully," said the Lord of Courtenaye : " or ye shall welter and roar in the cauldron ye are lighting! To your gear and quickly, ye hags. So sure as I fling down this key from my hand," and he dropped it into the seething cauldron, "so surely shall ye never quit your task till it be fulfilled."-*— " She will be here anon—doubt it not," said the terrified hags.—"I neither doubt nor believe, nor think nor feel," said the furious lord: " on with your task! The night wanes, and the fiery arrow is already drawn to the head—the
heavens are dark*—the astrologer reads the stars no more. What Hght I may now catch must flash on me from the abysses of that downward world, of whose entrance ye are meet portresses." Two of the wretched women then Hnked themselves hand in hand, while the third recited aloud from her parch¬ ment. As they hopped.-and'-hobbled their witch-dance round the cauldron, one of them repeated .incessantly, kurr, hurr, hurr, har j\ hus,' hus; at every sound striking her staff stronger on the floor, while her voice rose to a shriek, and the other uttered the imagined potent sounds Dies, dies jesquet' benedoefet, douvima, enitemaus. The arch- witch meanwhile stirred the cauldron, and read fast and loud from that bloody scroU.* Suddenly the blaze of the cauldron tapered upward, gleamed and expired. "ByheU!" said the Lord of Courtenaye, " ye mock me * with some device.'* The hags wearily pursued then* magic dance, and the cauldron blazed
a-rain. " Of Avhat hue must the flame be," said the Lord of Courtenaye, "ere her promise be fulfilled?"— "The hue of the blood-red Avine, or of the warrior's heart-drops," ansAver- ed the witches.—" And know ye not, hags, a speU to make the flame change its hue from that pale infernal blue to crimson ? Hark ye! raise the flame to its right and ruddy hue, or by heU I AviU stir the cauldron Avith your Avithered carcases!" The terrified hags renewed their " toil and trouble:" and the fierce and fiend- Hke visage of the Lord of Courtenaye was bent more eagerly on the blaze. The ' hags crouched breathless beside it. "I have got an ingredient of poAver," said one of them; " but our mistress charged me not to use it, save in her presence."—" Use it noAV," said the Lord of Courtenaye, " plunge it in, or thou thyself shalt plunge in that cauldron !" Thus urged, the Avretched Avoman flung the ingredient with Avliich the mistress of the spell had furnished her into the cauldron. It was a chemical preparation of singular power. The moment it Avas dropped into
the cauldron, the flame sank and aH was darkness for a moment. The next it blazed up to the height of the cehing, caught fierce and instant hold of the rafters, and next of the cloth with which the apartment was hung. And in a few moments every com¬ partment of the chamber was on flame, and the light of the cauldron extinguished in -that of blazing roof, tapestry, and furniture. The first effort of the Lord of Courtenaye was to recover the key which in his passion he had flung into the cauldron. But its contents were boiling Hke molten lead, and with a shriek of agony he withdrew his arm. His next was to call on his wretched associates to assist in extinguishing the flames; but all the materials were combustible, and their thread-bare rags, which they tore off to stifle the flames, burned like tinder in a moment. His last impulse was to rush to the door, and thunder at it with hand and foot, uttering all the time yeHs of fierce ■and fearful agony. The chamber was re¬ mote from the haunt of domestics. He redou-
bled his cries: but, meanwhile, the flames had increased, the tapestry was consumed, the roof was in a flame over their heads, and blazing fragments began to drop on the floor. The cloth that hung before the war¬ rior's portrait, consumed to ashes, crumbled away, and the ,figure painted on copper, and resisting the force of the flames, stood out strongly in the horrid Hght, as if a living and present being glared on the fearful doom of his foe. At this moment, the wretched hags, maddened by the increasing flames, yet re¬ taining some witch-like associations, excited by the crimson blaze, began once more their -ghastly reel about the cauldron, whose over¬ boiling flames caught their garments in a moment. They blazed, yet still they staggered in that wild dance, and shrieked their spells as the fire reached their flesh. Then all at once they seized hold of the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye. Loud as his cries were, they were drowned by louder cries without. A hun¬ dred voices shouted—" Where is the Lord of
Courtenaye ?—Where?" and a hundred foot¬ steps Avere heard above in the stone-paved gaUeries.—" Here—here!" said their lord, Aiiiose horror of his dreadful death overcame his fear of being discovered with such* asso¬ ciates in such employment. " I bum—I burn; —unless aid be given presently. The key is lost—use axe and ci*oav —break ope the door —break ope the door!" he cried, turning his feeble fingers round the massive lock. " Then mischief hath done its masterpiece, and it is heU's very hoHday !"■ exclaimed a voice A\ r ithout. " The Lady IsabeUe' Hes slaughtered in the bridal bed, and none can trace the assassin !"—" What tellest thou me of the Lady IsabeUe!" said the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye : " I teU thee, slave, I burn!" The volumes of smoke now came bursting from beneath the door, and through the apertures of the AvaUs. In a moment crows and axes, and all the implements for forcing a way, were thundering against the door; whUe another party ascending by a stair, the landing-place of which was on* the roof of that closet, tore
it up, with pick-axe and all implements at hand; and others toiled to drag up'the stair vessels of water to pour on the flame. The din was homble: the dying screams of the hags, two of whom were suffocated by the flames, the last dancing and blazing in a pa¬ roxysm of fury-like inebriation, till she fell —the cries of the Lord of Courtenaye, who held fast hold of the door, shrieking at every blow dealt on it^—the clash and batter on the roof of the chamber—the roar of the sup¬ pressed flames—the clamour of the attend¬ ants, made' the scene almost infernal. It was in vain the strength of the vassals was tried on the iron-plated door: blow after blow was dealt in vain. Above, the toil was more successful: the planks were rent asunder, the rafters laid bare, casks of water poured on the flames; and bending through the fractures of the ceiling, they heard their lord exclaim, " Oh, for one drop of the wa¬ ter that I have denied the thirsty mendicant at my castle-gate !—one drop!"—" One drop," echoed a voice which none heard but vol. iv. c
he. The same exclamation was uttered, and at the same moment, by the lord of the cas¬ tle and the victim of the dungeon. At that moment the floor gave way, and went crash¬ ing and blazing into the vaidt below. " Fling down ropes, since the door will not yield," cried a hundred voices, as the shrieking lord clung to the posts of the door, the scorching fragments of the floor being his only standing-place. " Come heaven or hell," said Thibaud, .vhom frantic intoxica¬ tion bent over the shattered roof among the rest, " the Lord of Courtenaye shall not pe¬ rish alone: be his doom what it will, I will partake it." And, spite of the resistance, he dashed himself from the crater, as it might be termed, into the gulph below. The im¬ pulse of his fall shattered and bore down the single plank on which the Lord of Courtenaye stood. They plunged together amid smoke and flame ; but amid both arose another form, whose yell and grasp, hideousness and fierceness, justified the terrible construction put on its appearance. " Out with thy
beads, Monk of Montcalm," cried aU: " save —save him, if thou^ canst f ITie fiend hath risen in flames to seize him !—hoAv he grap¬ ples!—how he writhes '—how he gnashes! — the fiend is stronger ! Holy Mary !— Did ever human eyes see such sight!—The fiend hath him—he plunges him into the flames.—Tell thy beads faster, monk. Holy monk, save his soul, if not his body !—He rises—he shrieks—he sinks—he is lost!" aU exclaimed, as the Lord of Courtenaye disap¬ peared, sinking into that vault of flame and darkness with the ghastly shape that seized him. It was indeed Vidal, the prisoner of the dungeon, Avho, in the agonies of his dying vengeance, as the roof of his prison feU in, had seized on his tyrant lord, and dragged hirn down into the flames, amid which he was himself choking and expiring. The smouldering ruins of the magic cham¬ ber feU fast into that gulph of flame. All present averted their eyes at the sight, and prayed in terror or in deprecation. A sin¬ gle voice thundered through that awful si- c 2
leuce: it exclaimed, " Wlien have my pre¬ dictions failed ? Said I not unto thee, thou shouldest meet my Master and thine this night ?" Those who heard had scarce time to catch the sound, or distinguish the form of the speaker; for many footsteps approach¬ ed, and voices were heard to exclaim—" Foul witchery hath been wrought this night! The body of the lady Isabelle hath disappeared ; the traces of blood are in the chamber, but nowhere can her corse be found. Close all the doors, let every knight in the castle draw his brand, and look that the murderer escape not."
CHAPTER II.
But their way Lies through Uic per|)lc\'d paths of this drear wood. Milton's Coma*.
The Monk of Montcalm had set out on his return to Beaucaire, after doing his errand at the convent of the Paraclete. The danger to be apprehended from the wolves, which infested the forest that lay in his nearest way, induced him to adopt another and more circuitous route, WhUe pursuing it, evening came on—a grey and misty twiUght veiled every object. The way lay through a rocky road that wound among mountains, or ra¬ ther stony hills, bleak and bare. Not a sound broke on the stiUness, save the echo of the solitary passenger's steps from the hoi- lows of the hiU, and the screams of the birds*
which, after a few short circles in the grey and cloudy air, flew back to their retreat among the cliffs. As the evening or rather night advanced, the clouds dispersed, and the scene around became less dreary. The path opened on a plain apparently boundless; it was covered with a soft thick sward, of which the elastic resistance to the tread made the footing de¬ lightful : the wide dome of the horizon was its only limit; the bright stars " came up above the head" of the traveller, and there was just that dubious interval between light and dark¬ ness, that, though shadowy and indistinct, cannot be termed gloomy. So profound was the silence, too, that the monk could dis¬ tinctly hear his own footsteps; there was no otlier §ound, save the whistle of the shepherds shooting across the heath, or a few notes of those simple airs by which they amused the loneliness of their pastoral life, and which, heard thus at night, (the singer too invisible,) had an expression of plaintive and soothing sweetness which they must have wanted by
day: they had the effect not only of cheering the path, but ths spirits, of the good monk. " Perchance," he said, " those sounds, so sim¬ ple and yet sweet, may be caught by a more skilful ear than mine; andj when adorned with courtly words, and set off by soine curious instrument, may yet be heard with dehght in the palaces of princes.* And thus too, perhaps," he added, " the sounds that these poor Albigeois have pre¬ sumed to strike on the mysterious chords of inspiration, when modulated by a truer ear and a finer touch, inay be caught by futu¬ rity, and orie day make music in the ear of heaven." The plain now terminated in one of those thickets through which lie had to make his way, to avoid the dangers of the forest. Here, struggling through the tangled and intricate brakes, the only point of direc-
tion discoverable was a small eminence, sur¬ mounted by Avhat, on reaching it, he disco¬ vered to be a cross of stone. He gained it, and tried to send his feeble sight far into the night. The Hghts that long ere this should have glimmered from the toAvn of Beaucaire, were not visible; the humble spires, of Para¬ clete had ceased to be so long ere tAviHght; and Avhere the sky glowed Avith the blaze of its brightest constellations, their Hghts burned in the direction of the far-distant tOAvers of Courtenaye, so late the seat of beauty, valour, and festivity; noAv dark, deserted, and sug¬ gesting only images of fearful and mysterious calamity. At this moment he saw a light at a small distance, slowly but distinctly ap¬ proaching him. It paused, and then he thought he could distinguish a group of figures; but all Avas dim, shadoAvy, and un¬ certain. The Monk of Montcalm, hoAvever, sure that human beings Avere near, hasted from the eminence to implore their assistance: but, at the first sound of his voice, the Hght
was extinguished and the figures became to¬ tally invisible. He struggled on—he thought he heard the low moanings of one in pain, but suppressing his cries; and, as he at¬ tempted to feel his way with extended hands. something like a human hand touched his; but the touch we*** so cold, that the monk withdrew his from the contact, shuddering as he did so with invincible horror. The en¬ counter seemed, however, io brace his nerves ; for, after having, with dizzy head and un¬ conscious step, forced his way, as he imagin¬ ed, but a few paces onward, he found himself on a spot which must have been a furlong from his last position. Here the brushwood was cleared away—a few dwarf trees only intercepted the view: but these^ stood lone and almost ghastly, waving their boughs in the night-breeze like the arms of skeletons: their pale bark and doddered trunks making themselves visible in the dim light. Amid this scene, cheerless, if not desolate, on a bare platform, stood a tower, large, square, and low. Around this lonely tower were the c 5
fragments ofa shattered wall, amid whose angles (for itwas very irregularly built) Were there- mains of some ruinous outbuildings. The monk paused and looked round him : terror was his first impulse; but his weariness, both mental and bodily, prevaUed, and he was compeUed to seat himself on a fragment of the mined wall, while he trembled at the shelter he sought. It was the tov/er of Hugo, or Hugues,* in whose vicinity the boldest in that country dreaded to be after sunset. The monk was not with¬ out his share of the superstition of the age; Imt the purity of his conscience w r as a balance to the errors of his creed; and he looked on the tower, and thought of its terrible inha¬ bitant, with fear indeed, but unmixed with a sense of danger. As he looked upwards on the.'huge
pile, dimly defined on the troubled sky, a small postern that lay concealed in the darkness Avas cautiously opened, and tAvo figures issuing from . it, approached him. They spoke, but thefr conversation was in whispers, and he could distinguish only one sentence: "It is done! and AA r ere the guer¬ don doubled, I Avould not undertake such task again." They passed on ; and dreary as the speech had been, the monk, felt it.Avas still drearier to, Hsten to their departing tread, and Avatch their figures as they diminished in the darkness. At this moment a light Avas distinctly seen gleaming in a loop-hole of the tower ; and though this. Avas, in the monk's opinion, a very equivocal sign that the. in¬ mates of the tower were beings of his oavu species, he continued to Avatch witli that vague hope that light always suggests in a situation so lonely,. till he saw it gHmmer through a narroAv slit that seemed.on a level with the, postern. If the hand that bears that light be human, thought the monk, rising with difficulty, it Avill not close the
door against me at such an hour. And he struck on it with his staff.—In a few mo¬ ments it was opened slowly, and a figure ap¬ peared at it, bearing a Hght in its hand. It was taU, and enveloped so completely in dark garments, that neither form, sex, nor age was distinguishable. The eyes alone were visi¬ ble ; and though they were bright and large, there was an expression in them that was not calculated to diminish the feeling its singular appearance created. The monk (in a tone that he could not prevent from fal¬ tering) told his distress as a benighted tra¬ veller, and entreated permission to enter, ahnost wishing now it might be denied. The figure appeared to be examining him closely: -at length it repHed, "Enter, if thou wilt/' But these words, pronounced in a voice by which it was still impossible to judge of the speaker's sex, seemed, by the manner in which they were uttered, to imply " Enter if you dare." The monk, anxious for something like a parley with his strange host, asked if he might be permitted to sleep that night
beneath the roof. "Sleep," answered the figure in the same tone, "if thou canst." It closed jthe door, as the monk entered, and, turning, led the way up a winding staircase of stone, rudely constructed, and much dUa- pidated. After ascending a few steps, it led the way through an arch of stone, without a door, into alarge chamber; into the centre of which it advanced, and then stood in silence. The monk looked round him. The apart¬ ment was rude, wild, and desolate; without furniture, and apparently without other inha¬ bitant. The walls were of unhewn stonej and, with the arched ceUing, were blackened by time and smoke. In the huge fire-place some embers were stiH burning on the hearth, shedding on the wide arch above and the rugged waUs ;?;,.: .a , . , ;. ..;•■.:. —-^.««. Amelancholy light, • : * : The gloom of glowing embers."* On one side was a kind of rude wooden conch, on which were spread some dark vest¬ ments; on the other side a heap of the same
seemfed huddled in a dark nook ; on the hearth was placed a large cauldron. These objects Avere scarce discoverable by the dim Hght the figure held, but Avere disclosed from time to time by the red and fitful glow of the fire. The monk had time to notice these objects, for the figure had not yet spoken, but re¬ mained standing in the centre of the room. At length, pressing its hand on its broAV, as if with, an effort at recollection, it muttered, " Yes, he lacks food." Then turning to the monk—" Thou art with one Avho, uncon¬ scious of human wants, sometimes forgets that the children of the dust possess not such exemption." And, pointing to the monk to sit down on a bench of stone, it offered him some fragments of bread and a cup of water.'—The monk declined the food, but drank the Avater, first fortifying himself with an internal ejacu- latory prayer. " Perhaps thou art dainty : I have nought else to offer."—"It is my wonted —in truth, mine only fare," repHed the monk ; " but I am Aveary and o'erworn, and would AvilHngly sleep." The figure sdently pointed.
to a nook in which some straw was spread, and then quitted the apartment, bearing the light with it; while the monk, after praying with more than usual fervency, tried to be¬ take himself to rest. The glare of the fire for a long time prevented him from closing his eyes; and when at length he did so, and w r as sinking into rest, he was roused by a groan, not loud, but perfectly audible, issuing evident¬ ly from some one in the chamber. He half rose on his elbow, and looked round him: it was not repeated, and he tried to compose him¬ self again. But he had scarcely done so, when' a second groan was heard nearer him, as if the person who uttered it was approaching. Giving up aU farther thoughts of rest, the monk now began teUing his beads ear¬ nestly. But, while thus occupied, his eyes involuntaiily closed from weariness; and 'he then thought be perceived the light, that had liitherto shone so strongly through the cham¬ ber, suddenly obscured, so as to be perceptible to his sight, though his eyes were closed. Once more he raised himself, and then saw
distinctly a dark figure standing between him and the fire. Its back Avas turned to him ; but the form Avas visible, and strongly defined on the light. Afler a feAv moments, it gHded away, and Avas lost in the obscurity of the chamber. The monk r.ow arose, and trembHngly but solemnly adjured the A-ision, Avhether a Hving moital or a disembodied spirit, to appear and reveal the cause of its rest¬ lessness and its Availings. There Avas no ansAver, but, as he advanced farther into the apartment, it appeared to him that the hea]) of vestments spread on the couch, which he had before observed, moved sHghtly. " This Hght deceives mine eyes, perchance,*' he said; " yet surely those garments seem so dis¬ posed as if a humau body lay beneath them." The folds heaved palpably as he spoke. With the preternatural courage of fear, he raised part of the drapery, and saAV Avith horror, be¬ neath, the naked bosom of a man, from a Avound in whose side the blood was still flowing. He had not strength to look at the face: he staggered some paces back, and
leaned against the wall for support. At this moment the sound of steps slowly roused him, and the figure he had before beheld again enter¬ ed the chamber, bearing something in its arms. The monk did not venture to quit the spot: he stood contracting his figure and suppressing his breath, while he watched its movements. After some uncertain gestures and vague glances round the chamber, it crouched at length before the fire, and, un¬ folding the burthen it held in its arms, began to drop slowly and singly its contents into the cauldron. These appeared to be herbs ; but there were other ingredients: ahd at length he perceived relics of mortality, bones and parts of a human body, mingling in the mixture. He could no longer doubt the purpose and .employment of the figure; and, trembling lest he should become in some de¬ gree a partaker of the crime by continuing to witness it, he hastened from his conceal¬ ment, and called aloud on the figure to forbear. Slie rose, and turning hastily towards him, dropped the mantle which enfolded her head.
and disclosed the features of a face which, but once beheld, had been forgotten never.— " He had awaken'd at night With the dream of those ghastly eyes."* His first impulse was to gaze on them for a moment with unmingled horror; his next, to fly fromthe place. "Stay me not," he cried, as she appeared attempting to detain him: " withhold me not; I know thee who thou art! Not a word, not a breath, wiU I exchange with thee: I know thee who thou art!"—" Know me!" she replied in a voice in which scorn seemed to be mingled with increduHty.—" I know all!" he exclaimed; ** I know thee, thy crime, and thy despair: cririie that forbids mercy ; despair that shuts out hope."—"Thy words—thy voice," she said, " are like those dreams that sometimes cross the dark sleep of my existence. Now the recoUection rises dimly on me Hke a vision. Dost thou remember the lonely lake, and her who rowed the dark skiff? It was
a strange meeting that—marked by doubtful question and fearfid answer/' " Would I did not remember!" repHed the monk, crossing himself. And he recaUed that night aUuded to in the commencement of our tale, when he liad encountered this female, previously to her meeting with Sir Paladour, and after having done deep penance for the involuntary crime of Hstening to hcr dreadful secret. " Yet stay," she said, detaining him, while she seemed searching her scattered recollections, " yet stay, there is a task to be done, in which thou wilt not scorn to join even with me: there is one whose wound is deep and deadly, and thou must aid me to heal it."—"Wretched woman," cried the monk, who beHeved she spoke of herself, " for such wound as thine there is no balm, no leech, or healing in mortal power."— " And deemest thou it was of a spirit's im¬ mortal wounds I spoke ?" she said, "orsought aid or cure for them from thec? Then were my foUy beyond even ray crime. No—it was of another I spake and, Hght as I hold thine
aid, or that of man, the credulity (which thou woiddst caU faith) of the sufferer de¬ mands the charm of prayer muttered over the ingredients I am preparing for his cure : it may not else be Avrought."—" And darest thou,'' said the monk, shrinking Avith horror from the proposal, " darest thou imagine that I would blend the worship of Heaven Avith the rites of HeH, and mix the breath of profaned and poUuted prayer with the steam that issues from that cauldron of abo¬ mination ? If I pray for thy victim, I pray alone."—" My victim !" cried the female with fierce derision. " Ye are the victims of your own lusts, madness, and crime—victims of your own preparation. And then ye dare to accuse the stars—the elements—the hurt- less operation of inanimate things. Yea, in your insane impotence, ye accuse that Hea¬ ven that renounces and hates ye! My victim!" she repeated; " Avhen was man a victim, but by his own agency ?"—" I heed not thy ravings," rephed the monk, divested of all terror : " if good is to be wrought,
tell me how, or on whom ; but it never can be in conjunction with thee !" ■ A deep groan seemed to echo his words; and now fuUy aroused and emboldened, the monk turned to observe whence it issued. That smaUer heap of coUed-up garments whicli he had noticed before, seemed to stir, and a sound was heard from beneath it that resembled respiration painfuUy suppress¬ ed. He made a movement to approach it. " Hold !" cried the female, seizing his arm, " disturb not the slumberer: Sleep is the image of death. When have mortals rest but in sleep, or in the grave?"—" Talk not to me," said the monk,—"here hath been evil done—a corse Hes in this chamber. I teU thee, wretched woman—if woman thou art—weak as I am, I wiU not quit this spot tiH I know what body Hes beneath that bloody and unblest covering."—" It is a wounded knight," she said; " and I have brought him hither that I may heal him." —" And is it with such ingredients the cure is to be wrought! "What are the foul
contents of yonder cauldron ?"—" Thou knowest not what is mingUng in that potent mixture," she replied, bending her eye on it. " There be hope and anguish, crime and fear; tears wept from the heart, and min¬ gled with its blood; maidens' young vows, and true men's broken hearts."—"Aroint thee, foul witch!" cried the monk, Si adjuro te in no¬ mine /"—" Peace with thy powerless jargon,"' she interrupted; " the adder's ear is not deafer to it than mine. Speak! wilt thou utter a prayer over what I have prepared and pro¬ vided here ? For inyself I ask thee none : those who have nothing to hope, have also nothing to fear/'—" Blaspheme not, wretched w r oman! Holy Heaven, is it possible that aught that once bore thine image can be so utterly fallen!"—" Fallen !" she repeated in an altered tone; "yes, truly thou sayest fallen; —it is not that time has bowed my form, that disease has ravaged my frame, that anguish has withered my heart: this is not to be fallen ;—it is when God hath departed from the soul where he dwelt; when the
cherubim AvithdraAv their plumes from the mercy-seat; Avhen the desecrated temple becomes the den of fiends, the abode of hatred and vengeance! That, that is to be fallen, and that am I!" Moved by her words, the monk Avas attempting to frame his voice into a tone of compassion; Avhen, the tide of her feel¬ ings suddenly recoUing, she burst into a strain of imprecation so vehement, continu¬ ous, and dreadful, that the holy man, beHeving himself in truth in the presence of an evil spirit, and losing all other frars in the thought, rushed from the spot in horror: nor Avas it till he Avas at some distance from the tower that he could coUect his thoughts, and en- deaA r our, by urgent prayer, to banish the re¬ collection of the horrible sounds with Avhich his ears still seemed ringing. r
CHAPTER III. When, Io ! a train profusely gay Comes prankling o'er the^Iace. Parnell. The beams of the morning sun rising in a cloudless sky, and gleaming on the ghttcr- ing frost-Avork of a wintry but smiHng land¬ scape; the crisped earth; the narrowed brook, Avith its Hne -of blue waters gHding lietween two banks of crystal; the cold but reviving and bracing air; the twittering of the birds, waking in their wintry nests amid the leafless branches; and the merry bells ringing in the town of Beaucaire, Avhose spires toAvered and sparkled in the far blue horizon—came welcomely and refresh¬ ingly to the senses of the poor monk, as the morning broke on his advancing progress. The fearful night had passed, and he felt
its dark images disappear before the cheering and inA r igorating influence of that kindliest if not loveliest of* mornings—the bright health¬ ful morning of a genial Avinter-day. . He wound his Avay through the thicket, and after one involuntary reverted glance to¬ wards the dark toAver of Ugo, was entering on the plain, Avhen, from an opposite hill, a gay and splendid train appeared descending, and the contrast between them and the fear¬ ful forms of the past night, made them ap¬ pear like some bright group from fairy-land. A gallant array of knights and men-at-. arms, AveU. accoutred and.mounted, rode round a lady, sumptuously attired, and appearing the. mistress ofthe train: the bells round the necks of the knights' horses, and the bugles* of their attendants, making a merry melody as they rode. Behind them followed a smaller train; and as they reached the foot of the hill the van halted, and the knights, rein¬ ing up their steeds on each side,' left a space in the cen.tre, where the lady sat on her palfrey alone. The party in the rear then advanced, vol. IV. D
and a young female, aHghting from her horse, knelt to the lady, and attempted to kiss her hand, whUe the other, bending from her sad¬ dle, embraced her. A short delay occurred, as a brief and hurried fareweU seemed to pass between the two parties. The former gathering round the lady in the splendid garb, and pushing their horses to speed as they parted in one direction; whue a single knight, with.about a dozen men-at-arms, ap¬ peared to act as the guide and conductor of the other female, who had now remounted her horse, and rode rapidly in the opposite direction. The parties seemed to separate with every token of regard, the knights sa¬ luting by lowering their bannered lances and bending their plumed heads, and the females by waving the ends of their embroidered veils, and kissing their hands tiU they could behold each other no longer. The former party consisted of queen In¬ gelberg, who, with De Vaugelas and Limosin, was pursuing her way to Paris; the latter,
of Sir Amirald and his train, who by the queen's order, and at her own wish, was con¬ ducting Genevieve to Toulouse. On that spot they had parted ; but riot be¬ fore a change, at which she trembled, had taken place in Genevieve's heart and mind. She had rode some days in peace and se¬ curity with queen Ingelberg's party. Ca¬ ressed by the grateful queen, honoured by her courtly attendants, and, most dangerous of aU, loved by one, for whose love she would have forsaken aU but her faith: in this short interval of tranquiUity, the only one her stormy existence had ever known, characters had been developed without the strong exi¬ gency of circumstances, and feelings express¬ ed, that seemed the birth of the heart and the habit, not of the moment,—What noble feeling!—what lofty thought!—what J deep self-devotedness !—what graceful courtesy had not the knights displayed; and queen Ingelberg, who owed her superiority evidently more to her rank than to her inteUectual emi- D 2
nence, how grateful was she! and how re¬ sistless ■.*.:-. In all the graceful gratitude of power J* And their manner—their voices—their lan¬ guage—tlieir whole existence, seemed modu¬ lated on a scale of noble harmony. AU that was lofty—-aU that was refined in Hfe, seemed to be concentrated in the self-devoted va¬ lour of the men—the stately and gentle courtesy of the women. And these were the beings who had been represented to her from infancy as demons of pride, rapacity, and brutality.: and Amirald, too, the beautiful, the brave, the gentle, was he indeed the enemy of Heaven ?-r-She be¬ gan to doubt her creed; then trembHng at her owti aberrations, forced herself to cast a look on her future Hfe—it was one of poverty and toU ; for she had sacredly determined to appropriate the value of the jewels she had received from the queen to the rehef of her sulTering people, and to maintain herself by
her OAvn labours ; and her late existence, ca¬ ressed by royalty and flattered by love, Avas to be a dream—And let it be a dream ! she sighed, Avith a strong effort of internal reso¬ lution : she struggled hard Avith her heart, and strove to fix her eye steadfly on her future prospects, dreary as they Avere. " Would I had never knoAvn them," she said; meaning only him when she said them; for the creed, the home, and the habits of her fathers seemed dark to her mental eye as she forced it to dweU on them : and she tried to expiate the involuntary crime by an inter¬ nal resolve never to suffer gratitude, admi¬ ration, or another feeling (which she Avould not name but could not disavow) to interfere with the claims of her conscience ;—the du¬ ties, the exigencies, the necessities, (and she often repeated the Avord) the necessities of her OAvn destination. Perhaps she Avas not aAvare that this resolution Avas made Avhile her face was averted from that of Sir Ami- raid, for the next moment Avhen she beheld those features gloAving Avith youth, beauty,
and passion, she again felt her heart palpitate and her mind wander. She could not, how¬ ever, decline conversing with her guide and protector, though she knew that the topic of his discourse would put her resolution to the test; and she prepared to listen with averted face and a rigid determination of self-watch¬ fulness and self-possession. The conversation was long, earnest, and animated on the part of Amirald i its tenor may be conjectured from the only reply of Genevieve's that was audible*/—" No, Sir Knight, never !~Sir Knight, never—the des¬ tiny of a noble youth must not be thwarted and debased by a lot so lowly and hapless.— Go on, noble knight, in the career to which thy fate calls thee, and honour and fortune sit on thy lance, save when it is levelled against the helpless and the harmless! For* get me, save when thou meetest one of my people; and then think on me and spare him. Some fair and noble maiden—" but she could not finish this part of the picture; and so, having uttered her resolution with what
strength she might, she said to herself, " Now my heart is at peace—yes, I am 'at peace;" and dropping her veil, wept in sdent agony Avithin its folds. But here she Avas mistaken: endless op¬ portunities occurred during their journey, and Amirald was not a. youth Hkely to lose his suit for lack of importunity \ besides, pleading has a thousand tones, and refusal but one; and Genevieve greAV wearied and ashamed of the poverty and monotony of her sole reply to the endlessly varied and increas¬ ingly eloquent pleadings of her lover : nature, too, seemed to take part against Lier in their progress; for *the spot Avhere they halted to partake of their noon-day meal, seemed formed to soften the heart: it was one of those spots that winter seems deHghted to spare—a grassy path kept fresh and ver¬ durous by overhanging evergreens, termi¬ nated in a rocky inclosure, whose acclivities Avere feathered to thefr very summits Avith every tree and shrub that could yet boast a leafy spray or a tint of green. A narroAv stream feU in sheets of foam from the highest
rocks, and rested in a basin, where its trans-r parent dark-brown water gave back*] as it rer posed, the image of every rock and grassy tuft, and pendent spray that overhung it: around, the rocks were hollowed into cavi¬ ties^ rich with mosses of every hue, and the fantastic' clusters of creeping plants :—their rude forms, sequestered look, and the mysti¬ cal and shifting light that played over them, as the sun gleamed on the water or the wind waved the boughs, suggesting .the;:"iniagS-r ; ■ Intus aquai dulces, vivoque sedilia saxo, Nympharum doinus.*. ■ It '-was here the travellers rested, and seating themselves on the grass, partook Of their repast, ; arid-slaked iheir thirst at the stream as it fell.■""" Thou art resolved, then, that I must be of noble birth," said Amirald, renewing' the topic of their conversation as soon as he could: "Alas! sweet Genevieve, I ain the child of mystery—a foundling, ex¬ posed beneath the walls of the castle of Cour¬ tenaye, and i^'Mori the surly charity of its
-lord. I never knew but one whose destiny, he told me, bore aught of similitude to mine —that darkly-fated knight de la Croix San¬ glante." • Genevieve trembled at the name. " Alas!" cried Amirald, his eyes fast filling with tears at the recollection; " alas! for the noble knight!—the love of brothers was but a faint image of mine for thee, Paladour. A braver knight never laid lance in rest; a truer never pledged faith to a brother-in-arms ; a goodlier never wooed lady in her bower. Woe is me for thee, Paladour! But what a fearful cloud overshadowed thy setting!"—" Fearful indeed," Genevieve murmured, shuddering as she remembered the night of the apparition in the convent of the Paraclete. " Methinks," said Amirald, half reclining on his cloak, which he had spread on the grass, and letting his blue eye fall negligently on the lovely scene around him,—" methinks, when I recall the disastrous fate of tlie brave and lovely, when I think of Paladour, and the, lady Isabelle, the world and all it con- r> 5
tains grow dim to my view. I wonder not that men have fled from it to these sweet and soHtary places. Methinks I could now cut off mine hair;" and he displayed, not uncon¬ sciously, its glossy and redundant clusters; " change my lance for a staff, my chain for a rosary, mine helmet for a cowl, and dweU in yonder cave, a hooded eremite.—No, not an eremite—I would be a peasant—a wool-clad peasant; and thou, sweet Genevieve, by my side, whUe heart and hovel aHke were bright¬ ened by the Hght of thy smile." Genevieve struggled hard to wrest her mind from the contemplation of the picture ; but it would not do: her natural love for rural scenery and rural habits took part with her heart; and she thought she was but ad¬ vocating her own simple tastes, whUe she was unconsciously pleading the cause of a differ¬ ent and a more dangerous chent. She spoke of the spot with an enthusiasm she had never felt before, and there was not an object around, from the blue mountains in the distance, to the redbreast that alit with its slender feet on
the turf to pick the crumbs of tlieir meal, that she did not try to paint to his attention, with aU her simple skill, tiU she discovered that the eyes of Amirald were fixed not on her, but on a superb eagle that was soaring right above their heads and appeared. sta¬ tionary at the proud height he had towered to. " That is a gaUant bird," he exclaimed, screening his dazzled eyes with his hand; " oh, who would hop and peck, a red-breast in the shade, when he might soar an eagle among the clouds ? My heart would burst were I to live amid aU this softness, sloth, and obscurity. Babieca, my gallant steed," he cried to his war-horse, which he had named after the Cid's, and which came for¬ wards snorting and bounding at the sound of his voice,—" Babieca, wouldst thou not re- nounce my recreant weight for dooming thee but in thought to the drudgery of a vile peasant's market-horse •*" The blood rushed to Genevieve's cheek; it overspread even brow and bosom. "So wouldst thou deem thyself dishonoured, Sir
Knight," she cried, " wert thou yoked Avith such humble mate as me; for ever Avouldst thou blush for the shame, for ever reproach her avIio Avas its cause, and its victim." " I should only have to reproach myself," said Amirald, Avhose feelings floAved in rapid and contending tides, "for having risked all for one, avIio had not even a heart to offer in return." Genevieve, Avithout speaking, fixed her eyes on him, till feeling them suffused Avith tears, she withdrew them. " Is this gene¬ rous ? is it noble ?" she said at last with a faltering voice —" is it even kind, Sir Knight?" she added in one stiH,more sub¬ dued, " to crush out from a heart by torture the secret it ought to keep—if it could?"— "And canst thou love, SAveet Genevieve?" said the youth, half-reclining towards her, Avhile his pleading tones and glowing eyes made that moment more dangerous than a thousand hours of reproaches.—" Is it manly, Sir Knight,' to pursue such poor triumph farther ?" said the weeping maiden.— " Nay,
weep not, sweet Genevieve; in sooth I spoke but in jest; I love these scenes, I love aU that is soft, soothing, and lonely: I love these leaves," he cried catching at some from a pendent branch, " for they remind rae of the couch which the gentle heretic once spread for the wounded knight. Put," he added, and then glancing at his accoutre¬ ments, some of which lay gHttering on the turf where he reclined, and pointing to his war- steed, " But" ------" I feel, Sir Knight, what thou wouldst say," she uttered: " here let our conference end; and yet remember, noble, and knight as thou art, that He who made man for hajipiness, and was the best judge of his own work, placed him at his creation not in palace, castle or city—He placed him in a garden, and caUed it Para¬ dise."—" And Paradise would be this spot/' cried the enamoured Amirald, " if—Hark ! what sound was that ? was it the scream of / the eagle ?—no, by Heaven, the breath ofthe trumpet! and lo where an armed band bears up the hiU! Ha! the lilies of France glitter in the van. To horse, feUows ! my helmet,
my gorget, help to don them quickly: it must doubtless be some noble company: fear not, maiden, I AviU be with thee soon." And Sir Amirald rode away at full speed with some of the men-at-arms. Genevieve foHowed him with her eyes, and saw on the summit of a hiU a band of knights and men- at-arms, who, Avith bugles sounded and ban¬ ners displayed, proudly crested the eminence where they stood, seeming the precursors of a more numerous host that was foUowing. A stately form in complete armour appeared the leader of the train; a person in the habit of a monk stood by his side, and Sir Amirald soon rode by the other. Cordial and courtly greeting passed; a brief but earnest conference then took place betAveen the three; at the termination of Avhich, Sir Amirald rode off Avith speed in another di¬ rection, attended by a few followers of the stranger band. Genevieve continued to gaze in the di¬ rection he pursued long after he disappeared, and then Avith an indefinable feeHrig of de-
jection and anxiety turned to look on her few remaining companions. Reading neither intelhgence or comfort in their looks, and not suffering herself to doubt of Amirald's swift return, she remounted her horse, and dropping her veil sat in anxious silence. She was not long left in suspense; a man in tlie habit of a pursuivant, approached fi-om the stranger party, and after exchanging a few words in a tone of authority with her companions, approached her with an air in which licentious freedom was blended with mock courtesy. " Fair damsel, 1 ' said he, " it is the command of the princely leader of yonder band, that I conduct you to him, and that you share the protection of his company." Genevieve, mute from conster¬ nation, made no reply; the man then at¬ tempted to raise her veil, but she held it closely; he then caught her rein and led her a few steps onward. " Sir stranger," she said checking her horse, " whatever claims your leader may have on your obedi¬ ence, I knov-/ none he holds on mine."—-
" He is noble, damsel," said the man haugh¬ tily ; " let that suffice thee."—" If he be noble, let him prove it,'' said Genevieve, " by sheAving aU gentleness to a female left in the guard of a noble knight, Avho hath most suddenly and strangely left her." —" Mass!" said another Avho joined them, " this dainty maiden deems there is but one paramour in the world for her; cheer thee, damsel, shalt have a host anon, men-at-arms and all."—" Curb thy loose tongue," said the other, who saAV Genevieve almost dead at his words, " and let me lead the lady on." " In the name of Heaven, gentle sir," said Genevieve.—" By the mass, a heretic!" cried the other, " or thou Avouldst have called some blessed saint, and never have troubled Heaven for the matter."—" Alas, you seem of gentler speech than this wild man," said Gene\ieve, turning to the first, avIio continued to lead her horse; " in the name of whatever may win your ear, I implore you to tell ine into Avhat hands I have fallen, and where you are leading me."
Her conductor, instead of answering, called to the driver of a horse-litter which ap¬ peared in sight, to halt. '• Ah, ha!" cried the other, as two females, gaudily dressed, alit from it, with evident marks of reluct¬ ance and vexation ; " ah, ah ! my bonni- bells—my laced muttons—descend—dismount —give place—ye must foot it, my pretty docs, unless some merciful man-at-arms or gentle squire of dames, take ye en-croupe" " Vile hhding !—unnurtured slave!" said the incensed females—" is it thus thou talk- est to ladies of our state?" He continued to laugh, and they to rail, while Genevieve .stood amid the rude men and Hcentious wo¬ men like an angel in the presence of fiends. —" Gentle dames," she said, trembling, " in the name of womanhood, plead for me." " Is this the beauty so much prized ?" said one of them, as Genevieve raised her veil to speak.—" This helps not," said her compa¬ nion, lifting her from her horse, and placing her with the female attendant in the Utter.— " One word—but one word," she cried,
forcing back the curtain.—" Am I in the poAver of him they caU the Bishop of Tou¬ louse ?"—The man regarded her A\ r ith a look of compassion for the first time.—" If the Bishop of Toulouse be friend of thine," he said, " would thou wert;" and he closed the door of the Htter. The brief winter day Avas noAv on the Avane. The party, Avho appetired to have halted, merely for refreshment, prepared for departure, and, heedless of the mute despair of Genevieve, and the clamorous grief of her attendant, amid the clash of arms and the sound of trumpets, aU the train rode on, the bannered lilies of France glittering in the van.
CHAPTER IV. When Greeks join'd Greeks then waa the tug of war: The wearied battle sweat, and conquest bled. Lee's Alexander. The man of mighty mind, the Bishop of Toulouse, had not slumbered during the in¬ terval. He had received the intelligence of the escape ofthe queen and Genevieve from his power, while engaged in the aid of his aUy, (as has been mentioned): on the princi¬ ple that made him sometimes foment, and sometimes conciHate the constant feuds of the neighbouring dignitaries and barons— the principle ofa poHtician of old— Divide et bnpera. The first effect of his rage at this intelhgence would have cost the messenger his Hfe, had it not been qualified by other and more welcome tidings that arrived al-
most at the same moment. By his emissa¬ ries in Paris the bishop iearned that king Philip Avas about to dispatch troops and trea¬ sure in the cause of the Crusaders, under the conduct of an unknoAvn leader; and, Avhat Avas of higher importance at that juncture, that Count Raymond, avIio Avas ahvays sa¬ tisfied with sHght advantages and feeble ef¬ forts, had retired to his territorial city of Tou¬ louse, conceiving that he had risked enough for the Albigeois, and was again employing poAverful agency at Rome, to effect his re- conciHation Avith the pope. From other mis¬ sives he learned, that many of the more pcv/*-*- erful barons of Languedoc, whose vassals Avere ofthe new sect, incensed at the slaugh¬ ter and spoH ation of their people, murmured against the severity of the crusade, and Avait¬ ed but a signal to take the abdicated place of Count Raymond. To aH this Avas added the intelligence, that Count Simon de Montfort, to whose pretensions and high-established fame the court of Rome had hitherto conceded every thing, Avas
slowly recovering from his wounds, and would not be able to take the field till the following spring. The bishop instantly raised the siege, and returned to his castle at Beaucaire. There he held a feast; digni¬ taries and nobles thronged to it, and the re¬ sult was all that his ambition could aspire to : to the devout, he suggested the scandal that a mob of heretics, a vile peasantry, should yet defy the power of the nobles, and the thunders of the church, and wander about propagating their vile abuses of religion; to tlie warlike he declaimed on the disgrace the cause of the church must suffer, if they allowed their lances to rust, because Simon de Montfort's wounds were unhealed ; to the rapacious, he promised the plunder of the lands of those barons who secretly favoured the cause of the Albigeois, and to the timid and politic (who were the fewest of the party) he hinted the danger of the powerful lords of Languedoc rising in aid of their distressed vassals, if some strong effort were not made, some powerful blow struck
on the instant. The haU rung with acclama¬ tions ; the bishop seized the moment, " when thefr hearts were jocund and sublime," tc propose himself as their leader. The place of rendezvous was fixed at Nismes; and the next morning's dawn saw the warlike pre¬ late ride, in his own proud element, at the head of fifteen hundred lances, to meet the Crusaders in that city. He had vital reasons for urging matters with the utmost dispatch: he was ignorant of the late reconciHation between PhUip and his queen, and knowing that the troops had marched in consequence of his beHef of her detention, and would be recalled as soon as the truth of her escape was known, he hasted to put himself at their head before that in¬ teUigence had reached king PhiHp, satisfied that he might then defy both the pope and king, when commanding a force that would not lightly desert such a leader. With these hopes and views he hurried on at the head of his train towards Nismes, as he had learned that the troops of King PhUip had marched
in that direction. We mention these circum¬ stances as explanatory of the scenes that foHowed Genevieve's capture, to Avhich we, have now to reconduct our readers. The party traveHed all the evening, and at night-faU arrived at the town of Nismes. Genevieve, uncertain of her destination, felt at last from the sloAver motion of the Htter, and the increasing tumult of A'oices and trampling of horses, that the party had reach¬ ed their place of rendezvous. The Hghts of the town of Nismes began to gHmmer through the curtains of her Htter. Knights and peers, Avith their tumultuous cavalcades, rode aAvay in the search of abode in the town, thinning not imperceptibly to Genevieve's ears the concourse and the noise. Yet she watch¬ ed the parting of every knight and noble Avith his train, as if a friend rode away from her unprotected side. The Htter stiU con¬ tinued to proceed, though the attendants ap¬ peared to be diminished to a few individuals. At ■ length it stopped, and Genevieve, who was assisted to aHght from it, foimd herself
in a place which she could not compare with any other tliat sight or even imagination had ever before presented hcr with. It was a vast area, the ground unequal and frequently encumbered with huge masses of stone, of which some appeared the effect of recent dilapidation, and others were clothed with hoary moss, the growth of centuries. There was no roof; and the moon, "walking in brightness'* above her head, shed her full light on masses of build¬ ing, that, viewed even from the distance where she stood in the centre of the area, seemed to have been the work of antedilu¬ vian giants; arches above arches, supporting ponderous seats of marble, rose to a height that made the "eye giddy; yet, in all thib vast range of edifice there was no vestige oi human habitation. The stars glimmered through the tenantless arches, and the foliage waved lightly to the moon, as the breeze- sighed through this vast and desolate monument of departed power. Genevieve had beheld all that was great, sublime.
and even terrific in nature ; but it was with a new sensation of awe that she gazed round her on this stony desert of man's creation— this huge skeleton, thaV might once have been clothed,with myriads of population.* She would have enquired where she' was ; but the thought of her own fearfid situation rushed on her, and she was sUent. When they had advanced a short space, the man who conducted her, suddenly lower¬ ing his torch, pointed to her to enter a small recess, where was a seat of stone, over which he threw his mantle; and then '■ placing the torch in a nook, made a sign to Her.female attendant to withdraw, whUe he himself re¬ tired. So. utterly subdued were iier spirits, so hopeless was her heart, that she made no attempt to deprecate this ominous move¬ ment, but by clasping her hands iri mute and unheeded supplication. He : soon after returned with' refresh¬ ments, of which he pressed her to partake ;
VOL. IV. E
and she then recovered breath to implore him to tell her in whose hands she was, and for what purpose she had been brought to a place so dreary. The man gazed on her a moment, and, answering only by a laugh that froze her blood, again withdrew. , Starting from her trance of stupefaction, she tried to examine the place, and discover if it afforded even the most desperate means of escape. ' A large aperture in the wall of the recess where she was placed, gave her a view of the area below, on which the moon¬ light fell in full lustre. Under one of the lower arches, a band of armed men were seen carousing by the light of torches, which they had fixed against the walls. Two of distinguished port, and fully armed except their heads, were walking at some distance, and occasionally appeared to issue orders and make inquiries, or interfere to check the rude mirth of the revellers. One of them was evidently the leader of the band they had encountered that day; the other seemed an ancient knight: but, whoever they
might be, they were evidently objects of the deepest reverence to the rest; as, at their Ugh test word, one or other darted forth from beneath the arch, with his flaring torch, seeming to demand thefr pleasure. And Genevieve, amid aU her terrors, could not help admiring the darkly-seen and soHtary grandeur of these forms, moving alone, amid that vast pile, like its former inhabitants re¬ turned to visit earth; whUe the sudden flashes of Hght and involutions of darkness, caused by the gleam and disappearance of the torches, seemed Hke shadows of gigantic spectres foUowing each other, in their ma¬ jestic flight from the deserted ruins. In a short time, the knights, apparently to shun the noise of thefr foUowers, quitted that part of the area, and walked nearer the aperture, within which Genevieve withdrew herself, while every word of their conference came to her distinctly in the stiUness of the night. The younger appeared at first to be re¬ buking the elder, for addressing him by some title that he wished to disclaim.—" Be it as E 2
thou Avilt, ,Sir Knight of the LUies," said the other, Avho happened to be our old friend Sir Aymer—"but what dost thou mean by this masking ? Why art thou thus disguised at the head of a valiant, potent band ?"—" To accompHsh two the dearest purposes I che¬ rish," answered the otlier: " to deceive my father, and ( to confront and confound that proud prelate of Toulouse." " That, children should deceiA r e their pa¬ rents," said Sir Aymer, " is doubtless the law of nature, or of custom, Avhich comes to the same thing. I had that virtue in my youth, but let that pass. Wherefore chafest thou so hotly against the Avarlike prelate?"—" I hate him—hate him deadly," answered the younger speaker, inhaling the air as he spoke, like a reined and impatient steed., " The throne of King Philip is but a toy— an infant's bauble; Avhile its poAver, if not its seat, is shared by his insolent, encroaching Vassals, the Bishop of Toulouse and Count Simon de Montfort. How the proud prelate avUI chafe when lie sees who leads the lances
of ICing PhiHp."—" Men say he rides at the head of two thousand lances himself," an¬ swered Sir Aymer; "and thinkest thou he will lightly yield them to another leader?' 5 — " Lightly or not, he shall yield them," said the other fiercely; " the bull may bellow in his grange, but he will tremble when he hears the lion roar, and feels that he has dared to cross his path."—" Royal whelp," said Sir Aymer, " take heed that thou roar not too loud, ere* thy fangs arid claws be fully grown." The other Avas silent for a moment,' and then said in a voice almost choked with pas¬ sion—" By Heaven, Sir Knight de Chastelroi, thou dost not suffer the privilege my indul¬ gence has allowed thee of being my reprover to go into abeyance."—" Jesters are allowed thefr privilege,' my liege," said Sir Aymer; " aiid perchance the office of a jester and a reprover are always the same; at least they are both alike the subjects of scorn and of neglect. But, meanwhile,'spend not "thy spleen on me, Sir Knight of theXilies; hoard if all up for the Bishop of Toulouse. 11 If J all
report says be true, he Avill have enough io hoard and \ r ent in his turn: aU provocation that thou canst giA r e him is Hght compared Avith that Avhich awaits him"—'* How meanest thou ? " said the other impatiently.—" Even Avhat I say, my liege : report reached me on the way, that Sunon de Montfort himself is on his journey hither, ahd that his warlike dame hath flung plaster and cataplasm, culHs and cordial, at the leech's head, and braced him in iron from head to heel. Some ears haA-e heard his trumpets ; but that must be by Avitchcraft."—" Now, by Heaven! I shoidd Avish to hear them this moment," re¬ phed the interlocutor. " Ha! goes the game there?—then have I to confront the haughty prelate in his pride, and the brutal De Montfort in his borrowed power. The thought stirs my blood. Methinks we re¬ semble three streams that I have seen falling from the mountains, narroAv, feeble, and chafing with their rocky banks; but when they dashed into the valley, and met together conflicting, how loud was their uproar, how
fierce their encounter!—the spray ascending up the sUent rocks from which they fell, and the roar heard and felt among the mountains. which the conflict shook to their bases/'— " It may be a magnificent metaphor," said Sir Aymer; " but in my poor opinion it resembles more what I have seen in a mora¬ lity, when the fool, iniquity, and the devil, after playing their several passions, met at last on the stage, and belaboured each other, to the huge contentment of the audience. A merry, mad world," Sir Aymer added,' half sighing, half whistling apart to himself, " when three bands of the Crusaders meet to destroy the heretics, and then pause first to ask, whether they must not previously knock out each other's brains?"—" But thou wilt stand by me," said the younger knight; " thou wUt doubtless stand by me:'' he spoke doubtingly.—" With heart and brand, with life and limb, my liege,'' answered Sir Aymer; and when he had thus spoken with aU the energy of feudal faith and chivalric loyalty, he added some Hght words, intimat-
ing the faciHty with which females might be won, when the approaching war must make wooers scarce. The other speaker appeared to withdraw from the topic with that disgust which youth feels at the ill-affected foUies of age—" By Heaven," he said, " thou preachest better than a Dominican, for thou dost thoroughly dis¬ taste one of sin and folly. To hear one so old and yet so vicious, is merely a disgust to youth."—" / vicious ? I defy thee," said Sir Aymer, " prove me such, and I will abide thy questioning."—" Darest thou deny that thou canst over-drink even the Abbot of Nor¬ moutier—that most bibulous and misquoting churchman ?"—" The church gives both .ex¬ ample and precept," quoth Sir Aymer: " Some choose the former, and some the latter: for myself, I adopt the example, not the precept, of the church ; and on that quarrel I will tight whUe there is a grape to be pressed in Lan¬ guedoc/'—"That thou Tvilt game-with; a page, ! cheat with a jongleur, and lie with* 'a palmer who pretendeth that he hath been in the land of Armeny?"—" The former was a
churchly vice, the latter a" princely one;?for* I have heard thee forswear thyself at tennis Hke a ------ ; but all simile fails. Proceed;. I have.no doubt to prove myself virtuous at the.last:"— " That thou art a most unconscionable----- ?" —-"Nay, thou art the devil reproving.sin. Whereto tends this goodly masque thou art acting this night? Wherefore art thou .apart from thy train amid these solitary ruins? And what means that damsel inrthe/nook {the beatings of whose lieart I can hear as I walk), whom thou didst bear away to-day l frOm her guide and champion ? Ha, my royal hawjc, thou art about to pounce on thy quarry, and v yet reproving a poor mousing owl Hke me, that am fain to blink for my prey sometimes in a barn."—His companion laughed vehe¬ mently at the reprisal ofthe old-knight, and then swore deeply that nothing pleased him more in the adventure than sending her cham¬ pion on a wud emprize to tilt against a tower inhabited by spirits—" By our Lady of, Notre Dame," he cried, " unless I had that fanatic dotard, that Monk of Montcalm, to aid rne > e5
with his tales of Avitchcraft, and I know not what, I never could have Avon that saucy stripling (who hath not a hair on his cheek, though he presumes to love) to sever from her side."—" Speak not so lightly of spirits and witchcraft, 'speciaUy in this lonely place," said Sir Aymer, crossing himself; " thou art not an infidel! Marry this darkness and loneHness were enough to convert a man." (The train had retired, and a single soHtary torch shed its Hght over the vast extent of the area.)—" Ani in¬ fidel ! I scorn thy words : I am about to con¬ vert an heretic, and when I have taught her her creed, thou shalt confirm her in it."—Sir Aymer laughed again, and then demanded, in a careless tone, if he kneAV the name of the knight Avhom he had robbed of his prize Avith the unconscious help of the Monk of Mont¬ calm.—" Name," repeated the other; "name —methinks they caU him Sh* Amirald." The steps of Sir Aymer were instantly check¬ ed, and his tone altered. " Sir ALmirald," he re¬ peated ; " he Avho feU in our mad encounter Avith the Albigeois headed by Raymond of Toulouse."—" Ay,—feU Hke thee and many others, to rise again."—" He who did good ser-
vice to Queen Ingelberg, pleading in het cause on an occasion thou wottest of."—" He was overpaid by a kiss of the queen's'hand; —a landless, birthless, nameless, nothing— knighted for some mad exploit of chivalry." —*' I heard he saved the Hfe of King PhiHp at the battle of Bo vines," "said Sir Aymer, with increasing emphasis: " Avas that the mad deed of chivalry thou speakest of?"—" And if he did," ansAvered the other, " his exploit, as thou lovest to term it, prevented the croAvn of France from descending on a brow that would have Avorn it better. Deemest thou I owe him deep obligation for such exploit ?" and he dAvelt on the Avord maliciously. " Sir Knight of the Lilies," said Sir Aymer, " since such it is thy pleasure to be caUed, here I pause. I have a fooHsh fondness for that boy, and somehow cannot bear to see him wronged. Were it the loose leman of a common youth; but no, no—I cannot brook this."—" What dost thou, what darest thou mean?" said the ; other in Avrath: "is not the boy a plebeian ?—is not the maiden a heretic ?"—" Plebeian—heretic—what thou
wilt," answered- Sir Aymer; " she is to me as sacred in yonder nook, as an enshrined nun in*her cloister: and I say, Sir Knight of the Lilies, that in her cause, her champion and protector being absent by base fraud— fraud, mark me—I will wield brand against a host!"—" Traitor-knight!" exclaimed the other;," wilt thou turn thy brand against thy ------" " Not for my life!" answered Sir Ay¬ mer, sheathing the sword he had half drawn. "But this I say, that if thou doest young Amirald such deep wrong, never more will Sir Aymer and his fifty faithful lances ride by thy standard—never more will ------ " " Hence, dotard, with thy threats!" said the ether, stamping in fury: " hence with thyself, thy menace, and thy men-at-arms! and in thine absence I will have leisure to weigh which I hold in the greater disdain." He broke from Sir Aymer as he spoke, and in a moment afler Genevieve had the horror to see hirn burst into the recess where she sat, his in¬ flamed visage" and flashing eye betokening that'the late conference had done aught but
assuage the passions that already burned too* fiercely. His first impression was evidently ■ that of awe—the awe that the presence *of perfect beauty inspires ; and he stood before her, now first seen, like one who has broken into a sanctuary to plunder it, and, dazzled hy the glory of the holy ornaments, stands' amazed at his intended sacrilege. Genevieve was the first to recover herself, and assume, at- least, the courage necessary for speaking. " Noble knight," she said tremulously,, "i I thank you for your care of me in my Jour¬ ney, and for my quiet though somewhat' lonely lodgment here; and I crave to know when I may be permitted to rejoin niy party; when my thanks shall be doubled—yea, tre¬ bled?" And in agonizing sincerity she pressed her hands on her bosom.—" Fair maiden," said the youth, gathering courage from her sweet and timid accents, from which he drew ajfavourable but false augury of the pliancy of her character,—" fair maiden, thy thanks are most grateful guerdon ; but, perchance, I may ambition a higher and dearer reward"
—" The thanks of a noble knight shaU be added to mine," said Genevieve, in a voice stiU more earnest, " for the protection vouch¬ safed to his deserted companion."—" His thanks?" repeated the youth, in a tone of high disdain; "his thanks? Yes, he OAves me much, and thou dost AveU to turn me over to him for payment; but I mean in his ab¬ sence to exact it from a fafrer debtor."—" If thou meanest my ransom, Sir Knight," said Genevieve, who struggled with her own con¬ viction to misunderstand hun, " and if thou wilt deign to accept ransom for one of nameless birth, it shaU be paid. I have jeAvels—jewels of price: aU, aU shaU be placed in thine hands, so thou wilt restore me to my friends in safety and honour." And at this moment she Avoidd indeed have Avillingly placed the costly gift of the queen in his hands, on the conditions she named.—" I wiU accept thy ransom," said the youth approaching her, " Avhen thou canst shew me a ruby Avith a tint Hke thy lip, or a diamond with a beam Hke thine
eye; or, would I had not to add, a pearl pale and precious as thy cheek." Her cheek was indeed pale.—" Noble knight," she criedi no longer daring to misunderstand lum, " noble knight, have mercy on me P' and she fell on her face at his feet.—"Mercy on thee!" said the youth, walking a few paces from her, and evidently embaiTassed at her appeal,—" mercy on thee! And what mercy hast thou on me ? Is not each word, each look, each movement, doing the work of many daggers on mine heart ? Maiden, thou hast bowed thyself before me: I bow to thee in my turn ; and, trust me, no com¬ mon suppliant pleads. Pity, and love me." " Oh, Amirald! where art thou ?" cried Ge¬ nevieve, in agony unutterable.—" Amirald again!" said the youtli with fierce impatience: " what, is thy fancy so weak and worthless, dwelling on that boy—that stripling, blush¬ ing and beardless ? Thou for whom, but for thy plebeian birth and accursed creed, the lances of every knight from Nismes to Paris might be shivered, and------" " Oh,
let them be my advocates !" cried Genevieve— " my loAvly birth, my hated creed ; let them plead for me ! I am unAvorthy of thy mean¬ est thought, noble knight: spurn me—dis¬ miss me—crush me to the earth !" 1 " And Amirald," said the youth, pacing the narroAv recess furiously—" Amirald ?— no Sir Amirald:—it is plain Avhence such familiar speeeh hath its rise between an he¬ retic peasant and a belted knight."—"BeHeve that too," said Genevieve; " believe all that is A r ile of me—aU that can make me umvor- thy of thee."—" And if I did," said her companion, " yet hardly can I beHeve^ it," he added, gazing on her pure and palHd beauty : " and if I did, darest thou play the coy one Avith me, when by thine oavii con¬ fession thou hast acted other part Avith that stripling, that boy ?"—" Oh no, no," cried Genevieve in agony; " I Avronged, I beHed him: he is innocent as I am : disregard, dis¬ dain me—but doubt not of the truth and loyalty of Sir Amirald."—" So much zeal for one Avithout name, Avithout descent,
Avithout lineage, and aU under the ?• name of gratitude!" said Use youth, retreating from her Avith a proud step, and measuring her with a prouder eye. " "What, then, canst thou deny, under the name of love, to one Avho wooes thee in the highest title that- ever reached the ear of plebeian damsel ? The fairest dames in France have courted, the distinction thou hast scorned. It is not for me to sue. VUe peasant, thou may'st count amongst the highest honours of thy life, ^that of being the paramour of Lewis the Dauphin of France." At the Avord Genevieve uttered a shriek of/ecstasy. She sprang on her feet, and, tearing the ring from her finger, cried, "Art thou the Dauphin, Prince Le>vis of France? Then am I safe as the daughter of King Philip in a warded tower, with princes for her guard. Thou canst not de¬ stroy the peace and fame of her avIio saved thy mother's life ! The scar is on my breast '—the ring is in thine hand—the proof is in thine heart!" she exclaimed, with increasing
energy, as she saAV Prince LeAvis bend over the ring, Avhich she almost forced into his hand. " Oh, neA r er can the son destroy the preserver of the mother! Approach—touch me noAv, if thou darest!" Then her enthu¬ siasm subsiding, and her habitual feelings of submission to lofty rank recurring—" Oh no, if thou canst -------," she cried sinking on her knees before the Dauphin. Prince Lewis, agitated by many feelings, in silence held the ring to the light afforded by the torch, and examined it closely. The report of his mother's deHverance, and escape by aid of the courage of a female prisoner, had reached him. He had heard also the report, Avhich perhaps touched him nearer, of Sir Amirald being appointed as the protector of a fair heretic, on her progress to join her friends at Toulouse, and had immediately resolved to be a personal judge ofthat beauty Avhose fame Avas so fair; but he had not expected to behold in that fe¬ male the preserver of his mother ; on whom, amid all his Hcentious propensities and fiery
passions, he doted fondly. "It is true," lie said at length, " thou hast given a pledge which shall be nobly redeemed, maiden. Thou art the preserver of our mother; I ac¬ knowledge the ring of queen Ingelberg. Rise; thou art as safe as if thou wert the daughter of PhiHp of France, in a royal castle. Why dost thou tremble ? The faith of a knight, the honour of a prince, are pledged for thy safety. Rise, and receive this hand in pledge that thy honour is valued as mine own." " Princely Dauphin—royal lord," cried Genevieve, writhing in ecstasies of gratitude stUi at his feet, and struggling to kiss the border of his mantle. As he withdrew it, her Hps touched his hand. " Forbear, for¬ bear," said Prince Lewis; " such gratitude is dangerous. Forbear :"—and yet his fingers again sought the caress. "And may I not," he said, "may I not yet gaze on thee, as I should on a* portrait ? may I not gaze on thee as I should on a sacred image?"— K Royal lord," said Genevieve shrinking, " I pray you suffer me to depart: it is easy to form
a generous resolution, but it is most difficult to keep it." —" By Heaven," said Prince Lewis, " I begin to feel the truth of what thou sayest in every vein. Ho, my banner- man, Eustache!" he cried, " where is Sir Aymer? hath he quitted these walls?"—" He walks discontentedly, some few paces hence, iny liege," said Eustache.—" Summon him on the instant! Sir Aymer," he said, as the old knight slowly and reluctantly approach¬ ed—" Sir A}iner, thou hast done the devoir of a loyal friend and true knight in chiding me; and I will do that of a prince in re¬ quital. I hold in my hand," taking Gene¬ vieve's, " a fair pledge for thy fealty; and if thy faith to me depend on tlie safe and honourable usage of this damsel, Sir Aymer and his fifty lances will be at the Dauphin's side again to-morrow. Wilt thou be thy¬ self the jirotector of the maiden ?"—" In faith, my liege," answered the knight, " had I not seen the darne, I niight have under¬ taken such office; but as it is, does your Grace think me marble, or a mum¬ my, that you trust me with a charge that
St. Anthony's temptations were veiy snow¬ balls to." Prince Lewis smiled intemaUy at the success of his stratagem; for he Avell knew when he made the proposal, that Sir Aymer, in his affectation of youthful gal¬ lantry, Avould decHne it. " flow shaU I bestow thee, damsel ?" he said AAith assumed perplexity. "Thine accursed creed forbids thee the shelter of a nunnery, and I know none of my train Avith whom thou mightest be in safe keeping, till the return of young Amirald. Eustache," he cried, giA'ing his bannerman a look Avhich he well understood, " seek out some grave and well-reputed matron in the toAvn, and place the damsel with her till------" " Thanks and blessings," interrupted GenevieA'e, pressing her Hps to the hem of his mantle; then dropping her veil, she gave her hand to her new con¬ ductor. Prince Lewis turned hastdy, like one who Avrests aAvay his mind abruptly from some unpleasant thoughts, and, accosting Sir Aymer, as if he Avished to divert his att en-
tion also, he pointed to Avhere a few streaks of grey in the clouds indicated the approach of morning. "Be those clouds," he said, " that gather so darkly on yonder hiU ?"—" If they be," ansAvered his companion, " they are clouds that avUI burst in thunder soon. In that very Hne is the Bishop of Toulouse marching by credible report; and, as I look, methinks those clouds change their places like the forms of men in motion." As he spoke, the trampling of horses was heard, and Beniard de Vaugelas and Pierre de Limosin Avere seen riding at full speed to¬ Avards them. They checked their steeds Avhen they saAv the Dauphin,—" Tidings my liege, and of high concernment," they cried, aHght- ing from thefr horses. " First, Avelcome, gen¬ tlemen and friends," said Lewis; "and next for your tidings."—" We seek 'your Highness by command of your royal mother," said Vaugelas, " who detached us from her train for the purpose."—" How fares "our dearest mother?" said Lewis.—"Well; and com¬ mends her to yom* Highness: and we have ridden two hours before the dawn, to bring
you tidings that the Bishop of Toulouse is at hand Avith fifteen hundred lances at his back." —" And we are here, prepared to give him Avelcome," replied the Dauphin.—" He hath marched with such speed, that he Avas fain to halt Avith his ovenvearied band on yonder hill—(Prince LeAvis cast a look of defiance and enmity in the direction);—and thy careful mother enjoins thee to beware the meeting with that proud and potent prelate."—" That is a woman's counsel," said the Dauphin. " What is thine, De Limosin ?"—" That your Highness beard and brave the hot churchman in his pride. He is to enter the toAvn by daAvn, to celebrate the mass in the cathedral of Nismes; and then to offer himself as leader of the armies of the church, to the assembled knights and peers."—" Ho, mine armour!" cried LeAvis, starting as from a trance; "mine armour, knave !"—"Your Highness is already armed," said Vaugelas, "as weU by the presence of your faithful knights as by your stoutest - harness."—" I meant not that," said Lewis, vexed at per-
ceiving that his emotion Avas observed; " I meant that this armour Avas too heavy. I must haste to my lodging to change it. Where is Eustache ? but I sent him on other errand. 'This neAvs hath beAvddered me, I think," he added Avith a forced smHc. "Noble knights, gentlemen, friends, may I depend on'your aid .on the morroAv, Avhen Ave meet the proud prelate ?"—" As firmly as ■ on the . brand your Highness leans on," ansivered the knights.^—" I must haste to the toAvn," said Lewis; " I must rouse and summon my noble friends to join me on the morroAv : the mor¬ row ? by Heaven, it is already bright dawn ! There is not a moment to be lost: Sir Aymer, thou wilt Avith us ?"—-" So please you, my Hege," said Sir Aymer, " I have had some¬ what a restless night, and have also a fore¬ boding that to-morroAV wdl be a doubtful if not-a bloody day; and methinks I would wiUingly secure some mortal rest in ' this world, before I am dismissed to my final 0^.'' —" Come then Avith me, De Vaugelas, ancl noble De Limosin ; your spirits are untired:
come with me, and let us try if a son of France or a shaveling churchman hath most influence with hcr noble and puissant chival¬ ry."—" We wait on your highness, and de¬ mand but to be put to the proof," said the knights.—" If I meet Sir Amirald," said.Sir Aymer, "I will bid him haste to your aid,-my liege."—"And when I am king of<France, I will appoint thee to the office of my jester in requital,'' answered Prince Lewis, .* as. he hastened toward the town, whero all that morning he toiled among the - knights. and peers who had followed his standard, exact¬ ing renewed oaths of fidelity, and receiving assurances of it, grounded more on their hatred to the Bishop of Toulouse than on their attachment to the ambitious, voluptuous,- and vindictive Dauphin. In these anxious con¬ ferences two hours passed away,, and the morning sun broke on the city of Nismes.
vol. IV.
p
CHAPTER V. Come one—come all. Yon rock sliall fly From its firm baae as soon as I. Lady qf the Lake. By its eariiest light the Bishop of Toulouse and his train had ridden into the city. Im¬ mediately on his arrival he hasted to the ca¬ thedral to celebrate mass; but as he passed through the aisle, he Avas struck by the sight of a number of knights, who Avere ranged Hke statues on either side, completely armed and with their visors closed; and Avho returned sHght or rather no obeisance to the bishop, as he marched amid a train of nobles and ecclesiastics towards the altar. Their appear¬ ance caught the eye of the bishop as he passed on amid ranks of boAving churchmen and kneeHng knights craA*ing his benediction, which he dispensed AA'ith due solemnity, and
then, as he approached the altar, and pre¬ pared to change his robes for the cere¬ mony, sent his crosier-bearer to demand of the knights why they assumed such hostile and unwonted guise in the church. The knights answered not a word, and kept their visors doAvn. The ceremony began : again a messenger was despatched to require them to depart, if they joined not in external devotion at least, Avhile the holy mysteries were cele¬ brating. The crosier-bearer, Avho deHvered the second message, seemed to himself, as he said, to walk amid the pftlars of a cathedral, so stem, erect, and motionless stood, the figures; and he returned Avith another report of the impenetrable silence of the unknown knights,—The sacred beU Avas rung, and every head and knee was bent to the earth at the sound, but those of the party that filled the aisle. At the conclusion of the cere¬ mony, Avhich the bishop performed with im¬ posing dignity, yet not altogether without some misgivings of heart, he prepared to ad¬ dress the congregation, which Avas composed f2
of his own train of knights and men-at-arms, (mixed with the troops of king PhUip,) from the altar where he stood; that his appeal might want no influence of the spiritual power in aid of the forces of the temporal, with which he felt himself amply furnished. His address, powerful and eloquent, was re¬ ceived, with loud acclamations by his own party; and they were even echoed b> r some of king iPhiHp's troops, with whom the charac¬ ter, of the warlike prelate stood high. The jnute and vi sored figures who filled the aisle of the cathedral were observed to exchange whispers with each other at this latter sound. " For you, noble knights," said the bishop, "though your demeanour hath been somewhat discourteous and full of mystery, though ye have refiised to raise your visors, or to utter speech,* or to join in the rites of holy church, we honour you as the leaders of those troops whom king PhiHp, that faithful son of 'theichurch, hath sent in aid of her cause, now 1 at its utmost perU; and demand of you (and ;such> demand- ye will perchance deign ,to
answer) to know to whose hands ye are com¬ missioned to entrust thern ?—A single knight stepped forward, and stood in the centre of the aisle, confronting the bishop as he stood by the high altar, and without raising his visor or altering his posture, answered, " To the hands of him who led them here."— " And who is he ?"' demanded the bishop.— " Lewis, the dauphin of France," said the knight, raising his visor, while "all the knights of his train at the signal made a similar dis¬ closure ; and the Bishop of Toulouse beheld around him the countenances of many of the noblest and the most hostile • peeis and knights of France. For a moment his presence of mind for¬ sook him. He had beHeved Prince Lewis far distant, waging unsuccessful Avar in Eng¬ land, and wasting his time and troops be¬ fore Dover Castle, in consequence of the reproach of King Philip, who, on the men¬ tion of his sons exploits and successes in England, remarked, he had not yet got its key. Yet Prince Lewis was on the spot confronting him, and at the head of Philip's
troops. * For a moment, we say, his self-pos¬ session forsook him; but in the next he re¬ covered himself, and descending from the steps of the altar, advanced to meet the Dau¬ phin.—" My Hege prince and future sove¬ reign,'' he said with dignity, " we greet you well with the homage of true hearts and strong hands, armed alike in the cause of your royal house and of the church. But wherefore hath your grace come upon us thus 'in disguise ?"—" Lord bishop," said prince Lewis, with somewhat of a grun smile, " men ever go to a doubtful feast masked." The Bishop of Toulouse passed on to greet the knights of Prince Lewis's train; and it was admirable to see the address with which he hailed those whom he deemed the most accessible, and the dignity with which he met the most hostile; while from time to time he bent his ear to a lame and diminutive figure who hobbled beside him, and seemed to* be playing the fool amid the magnificent pa¬ geantry of that ecclesiastical drama. This was no other than Sir Ambrose, (the ci-devant
Deacon Mephibosheth,) who was whispering to hirn inteUigence of which he resolved in this exigency instantly to avail himself: ■ The ceremonial of meeting over, the bishop again retired to the altar, near which Prince Lewis and his train ranged themselves in firm and steady Hne; and exalting his voice, " Nobles. and knights of France," he cried, " I have rendered the duty of a subject to > the son of my Hege lord the king, and I must now ren¬ der it to the son of Him whose minister' I am, and in whose temple I stand. * In'7/w cause we are armed, and his favour alone can bid our banners float in triumph; but shall we dare to hope for that favour if those ban¬ ners are grasped by the hand that caresses an heretic ? Yes, noble peers, ye weU may look amazed! Prince Lewis, who claims the ho¬ nour of leading you, nourishes in his bosom a heretic concubine, and, stained with such mortal sin, is unworthy to fight even among the meanest ranks of the army of the church/' At this charge, the substance of which had been overheard by Sir Ambrose in whis-
pered conversation among Prince Lewis'*? knightsj and had been instantly communi¬ cated to the bishop, who seized on.it as a desperate defence in his extremity—at this charge, a rnurinur was heard among the cru¬ saders,- many of Whom began to cast looks of disdainarid distrust on the Dauphin. Prince Lewis's" soul mshed to his face, not with shame, but ;? with *rage; and, instead of addressing tlie-knightSj he turned fiercely on the bishop •^-■^And is it thou," he cried—" thou who darest to reprove thy prince for lightness F* -d" For tliy foul slanders, prince," said, the brslibp v/ith an insolent affectation of meek- nes$; ''•" thou hast my pity and my prayers. Methinks the fair beauty, the lady Blanche,*.* and the respect thou owest to the royal house of Castile, should recaU thee from wandering in quest of light and lawless love."—-" Insolent and meddling priest!" ex¬ claimed Lewis, maddening at being thus checked arid schooled in the presence of his
nobles* "what hast thou to do With, -thy prince's domestic concerns, or with his royal right? the which he will maintain in spite and in scorn of thee! Judge- lords, ,l?ow lightly this proud churchman will.prize.your honours, when lie dares thus check your sovereign iri the presence of his subjects."^- " Ungrateful as thou art forgetful!" cried the bishop, kindling in his turn—^ is it thus thou speakest of churchmen, to whom thy father owes his throne and Hfe ? Who, at the. battle of Bovines, marshaUed the array, and fought in the van of King Philip's host?—who won the day that else had seen King PhUip throneless? —Guerin, the warHke bishop of Senlis.* Who, on that day; armed only with a mace of iron, (for the holy man would not draw swordj to avoid the guilt of bloodshed,), felled to the earth and made prisoner the stout ,Earl of Salisbury ?—Philip de Dreux, bishop of Beau¬ vais. And is it for thee to scoff at churchmen ? Profane prince, prouder heads and -stouter
F5
hearts thah thine have bowed, and shall bow yet, to their poAver. Remember Henry, empe¬ ror of Germany, doing penance barefoot and in winter at the gates of a pontiff's castle." —*." Where the holy father," interrupted Lewis, " was revelHng wifh the Countess Matilda."—"Out on thee, ribald—reviler! 4 Remember examples nearer home: remember Henry of England, lashed by monks at the tomb ofthe holy Becket;"and his son John kneeHng, but as yesterday, to receive his crown, at the footstool ofthe legate Pandulf."—" Re¬ member thou also," retorted Lewis, " the no¬ ble letter of Eudes, duke of Burgundy, to my father; wherein he counseUed him neither to make peace nor Avar at the command of pope or cardinal; where he swore to aid him with his vassals, treasure and right arm in their spite, and to enter into no treaty with them without his sovereign : remember the answer of King Philip to thy master, pope Innocent, that he OAved his royaume to God and his sword, and thought scorn to hold them by per-
mission of a priest.* If our annals ? hold.such matter as thou hast emoted, (eternal, shame to the churchmen who write them!)their brighter pages show many an example of high resolve and noble defiance to the insolence of priestly power."—" Judge, peers of France," cried the bishop, " how fit is he to lead the armies f,of the church, \*/ho thus insults her .ininister^and defies lier power! Hence, prince Dauphin; waste if thou wUt the troops and .treasures of France in nameless exploits and fruitless con¬ quests on English land; but dream not of lead¬ ing the armies of the faithful. Men mocked at the laxity of King John, when the.deputies of Rouen came to hira to implore succours for the last city that held out for him 4n Nor¬ mandy, and found him playing at chess; and how much seemlier were it that the erusaders should demand where was their leader, .and be answered, ' DaUying in his tent in the arms of a cursed heretic'"—"The hereto shall be burnt," cried Sir Ambrose, (who .had
not forgotten his rancour against the luckless Genevieve;) "sheshaU be burnt with fire."— "nTraitqr-priest!" cried Lewis, losing all self- command, and laying his hand on his sword. —" Impious prince," said the bishop, (while Sir Ambrose retreated behind him,) " is it in the liouse of God that thou assailest his servant ?" The knights interposed, and Prince LeAvis, sheathing his half-drawn SAvord and stamping Avith fury, exclaimed in a choked voice, " Hoav long, my lords of France, will ye see your prince baited by these coAvled and mitred blood¬ hounds? Is there a noble among you—a kniglU —a Frenchman, gentlemen, Avho will fight under other standard, Avhen his sove¬ reign's is displayed ? or join in other cri d'armes, AA'hen the word is Montjole St. Denis?" The last Avords, uttered Avith the utmost power of the Dauphin's voice, Avere echoed by all his train; and even by many of the bishop's, Avho yielded to the feehng of the moment: and the cathedral of Nismes, clois¬ ter, aisle, and* roof, rang to the cry of
Montjok St. Denis! But at this moment, louder than all the acclamations, Avas heard the sound of trumpets blown at a shoit distance, and announcing some distinguished approach. The Bishop of Toulouse instantly recognised the trumpets of the Count de Montfort; for in those days, as it is said, eveiy one of high distinction had a blast or note sounded pecuHar to themselves, and Avhich was Avell known to hearers even at a re¬ mote distance. The bishop's countenance changed; but instantly commanding its ex¬ pression, and adopting the only alternative of Avhich the sudden and desperate emer¬ gency alloAved, he quitted his station by the altar and advanced towards the Dauphin, wisely judging that he could more easily govern the volatile and impetuous Lewis even at the head of an army, than Simon de Montfort alone. As he advanced toAvards the prince, avIio, suspecting the meaning of this sudden movement, kept his hand on his dagger,—" My liege prince," he said, " here let our strife end. I yield me to thy
claim: I transfer mine own to strengthen thme. Let us unite together against this Simon de Montfort, who wiU else prove too powerful for either singly. I v/iU march under the oriflamme of my sovereign, but not beneath the banners of a subject/' Lewis gazed on him for a space, as one would on some fierce animal, which, in the act to spring on and rend him, suddenly crouches at his feet, as dreading his treach¬ ery not less than his fury: " Be it so," he cried at last, like one taken by surprise: " but if thou playest me false!" The bishop answered only by a significant gesture; and whUe this short scene passed, the band of De Montfort came pouring into the cathedral church of Nismes: page, pursuivant, and even herald—such was the royal state in which Simon de Montfort rode—crowded into the aisles, foUowed by the men-at-arms. knights, and peers, who had gathered round his standard; and last appeared De*Mont¬ fort himself. He entered the aisle- slowly and painfuUy, but stUl with an air of con-
scious and habitual superiority: his hair and beard Avere long and neglected; his features, naturally harsh, and noAV squaHd from long illness, had almost a ghastly expression ; and this was increased by the swathes in which his head Avas still bound. He wore his armour, but Avith evident difficulty, as stdl scarce able to bear its weight; and over it, instead of a surcoat, was throv/n a man¬ tle Hned Avith miniver. His gigantic form was boAved by infirmity; but, though .he moved Avith pain, he still tried to move erect, and his hollow voice had abated no¬ thing of its usual haughty tone of command. As he reached the centre of the aisle, and stood leaning on his huge s>vord, and looking round him with a portentous aspect of silent inquiry, he seemed Hke the gigantic spectre of some departed warrior, who had started from the grave in arms as he lay, at the last summons. The Bishop of Toulouse advanced to meet'him ; while Prince LeAvis wiiispered to the knights, by whom he was surrounded, and who had stood in amaze at the sudden ac-
commodation betAveen the hostile prince and prelate. " My lord de Montfort," said the bishop. " vve greet you AveU; and joy to behold that, though no longer able to lead the armies of the church, you come, in your christian zeal, to partake in her councils."—" I come," re¬ pHed De Montfort, rejecting the hand Avhich the bishop extended toAvards him, half in greeting, half in benediction, and supporting himself on his sword, " I come, lord bishop, not to partake of your councils, but to main¬ tain my right—right that hath been Avrested from me in mine involuntary absence, and in the forged and false belief of mine infirmity."— " Forged beHef!" repeated the bishop, cross¬ ing himself, as he retreated in weU-dissembled amaze, and glancing a look of hypocritical compassion around. " Alas! my lords, he trembles as he speaks." " If I tremble, it is with rage, not vveak- hess, injurious prelate," said De Montfort. " But I see thy crafty aim: thou knoAvest mine hot ungoverned humour, and Avouldst urge me to some Avdd speech or fierce act
that might work ine dishonour in the eyes of this fan- assembly."—" An' I do not ere the day be done," said the bishop internaUy, " I will exchange iny mitre for a coxcomb."*— " Fair assembly," cried the Dauphin, * f hotly breaking in on the conference, " and fair ex¬ ample in truth—where proud subjects meet to debate on the rights of princes to lead their own Hege vassals to battle! "Boy!—princely boy! ' said the veteran chief, with hollow voice and tremulous ac¬ tion ■;■ " I saw thee take the noble rank of knight at Compiegne on the feast of Pente¬ cost, 1 from the hand of thy royal father Philip : I heard thee sworn to Camour de Dieu et des dames." "And I am an heretic," said Sir Aymer half audibly, " if his highness fulfil not one part of his vow to the letter."
; " I was thy sponsor," continued De Mont¬ fort, extending his wrinkled hand, " at the font which a true knight holds sacred as that ofhis baptism : and could I deem, when the spur was buckled on thy heel, and the sword first girded on thy stripling's thigh, that thou, my damoiseau, my royal varlet,* wouldst ever draw it in quarrel against thy godfather-in¬ arms?" Prince Lewis, touched by the recoUection, was silent for a moment. The Bishop of Tou¬ louse saw there was not a moment to be lost: " Arid were it so," he cried, "what avails thy tale of Compiegne and feasts of Pentecost? Does that give thee a title to usurp the Dauphin's power, and make thy Hege thy vassal ? "Wliat right dost thou pre¬ tend to in this fair assembly higher than that of other loyal peers of France ?—of me, for in¬ stance, or ofthe nobles who surround us ?"— " What right?" cried De Montfort: "is the question asked in jest or in scorn ? I claim
the command of the armies of the church (as thou well knowest, lord bishop) by com¬ mission from thy master the Pope himself." —" The holy father," said the bishop, " was deceived by false reports, palliating, if not concealing thine infirmity of health, and other causes that render such appointment null."— " Otiur causes!" cried De Montfort, biting his lip to repress his choler: " I claim it by con¬ sent, yea by command, of King Philip of France.''—" He will revoke that consent," said Prince Lewis, " when he knows it preju¬ dicial alike to the interests of the church and the honour of his son."—"I claim it, then, in right of this,'* cried De Mon-fort, striking his gauntleted hand on his sword, the blow making the paved floor of the church ring again: " and if that plea avail not," he added with somewhat a tremor in his voice, " by these, and these, and these ;" and he pointed proudly to the numerous wounds that his armour concealed, but under whose effect he was still evidently suffering. — "Tell also where those wounds were received," said
the bishop tauntingly. " Even in that Avild battle to Avhich thou led'st the chivalry of France in thy pride, and Avhere its flower feU —the victims of thy mad counsel."—" God's malison on thee, tiiou proud prelate !" cried De' Montfort, yielding to his choler; "art thou, too, turned mine enemy ? Ere I came hither men told me the Dauphin and thou Avere AveU nigh hurling your daggers at each other's heads' in deadly wrath, and do ye noAV join together to bait me Avith your in¬ juries and reproaches ?"—" I sought and ob¬ tained the pardon of tlie*holy prelate," said LeAvis somewhat suddenly, " for mine unad¬ vised speech."—"My royal son," said the bishop with more graceful dissimulation, " it Avas Avon ere it Avas asked." De Montfort shook his head, as he vieAved them both Avitli a stern but expressive smile,—"Prince and prelate, crafty as ye are, and crafty ye arc as f the fiend himself, ye do not deceive me : ye cannot by your hoUow truce deceive these lords, who Avere Avitnesses but noAV to your deadly feud, and all but mortal strife. "Peers,
nnd knights of France," he cried, " will you march under divided counsels and unfriendly leaders, or under the sole and faithful guid¬ ance of him, ye once named your Maccabee?" And the voice of the veteran, weakened by infirmity and emotion, faultered again: not so the thousand voices that shouted, " A De Montfort!—a De Montfort!" in answer. • ■ " An' we make not in to the rescue, the field is lost," whispered the bishop to Prince Lewis:—"Out on thee," he thundered aloud, " thou bloody chief! Thy cruelties have stain¬ ed the cause ofthe church, and brought de¬ feat, and disgrace on our arms !*'.— " Dissem¬ bling priest!" cried de Montfort kindHng, "dost thou name cruelty ?—thou, who at the sack of Lavaur didst chaunt the Veni Creator, with thy clergy, to the shrieks of four hundred he¬ retics perishing in the flames !" *—-" Their crime merited such punishm ent," in terposed the bishop ; " but thy cruelties were wanton
as they were needless—the fruits of thy dark and bloody soul. Remember the foul assas¬ sination of the Count of Beziers!—heretic as he was, he was thy prisoner, entrusted to thine honour!"—" The murder of the lady of Lavaur!" cried Lewis, " flung by thine order or thy hand into a pit, and whelmed with stones—the murder of a noble lady, thou stain to chivalry !"—" Thy sworn and solemn truce with the Count de Foix, or¬ dained by the council of Lateran, violated in wanton perfidy!" exclaimed the bishop.— " Nor is thy perfidy less than thy pride !" continued Lewis, " Simon en nom, et roi cn faict. • "—" And thy rapacity surpassing both !" pursued the bishop, giving him no rest: "thou, who didst force the heiress of Bigorre from the arms of her wedded and rightful lord, and compel her to espouse thy son, that ye might seize and share her ample dower!"
At this detail of the weU-known enormi¬ ties of Count Simon, a murmur spread even among his own train; and those Avho had hi¬ therto stood nearest him, began, as in shame, to fall from his side. De Montfort looked round him Avith a wild and vacant glare: his passions, ahvays violent, in this desperate moment of shame and anguish utterly overpowered his reason; a kind of delirium seized him, and unsheath¬ ing his dagger, Avhile he shouted "A De Montfort! a De Montfort!" he rushed to where Prince LeAvis stood. The movement was so rapid and unlooked-for, that the blow, though aimed by the hand ofa madman, might have been fatal, had not a young knight throAvn himself betAveen De Montfort and the Dauphin, and received it himself. It pierced between the joints of the vant- brace to his shoulder, and the blood burst from the wound. At sight of the blood, Aviiich all beHeved to be that of the prince, a cry of consterna¬ tion and horror burst from the Avhole assem-
bly : shouts of " Treason ! treason !'\ and " Ivlake fast the gates!" resounded on every side, and all parties hastened to gather round the Dauphin. In the tumult, the attendants of De Montfort found means to bear him * away, still struggling, but exhausted; and "his liand of knights and followers, unable "to justify the outrage they had witnessed - v with horror, departed to a man. ■ " I will after him on the instant," cried the bishop to Prince Lewis; " and while his blood is warm, I will paint to him his guilt in such horrors as shall make hira deem the ' concession of his claim but hght atonement for such deadly crime."—" Afler him, then. my noble friend," answered the Dauphin, " and St* Denis to speed!" Then as the bishop departed with his train, " False priest!" hc murmured, " I trust thee as I love thee; but where is the youth who preserved ine from the arm of that mad assassin ?" he cried, looking round him.—" Here, my liege," answered a youthful voice; while the speaker,
making low obeisance, and raising his casque, disclosed the features of Sir Amirald, Lewis recoUed as if stung.by an adder: he recovered himself, however, sufficiently to wave the knights who surrounded him to a distance; then in a hurried voice, " How now!" he said, "so soon returned?"—"In most happy time, my Hege, did I return to meet the peril that menaced your grace/'—* f And you found the tower of Hugo empty ?" cried Lewis, though Amirald had not said so.— " As empty," answered the youth with, em¬ phasis, " as your grace's promise of safe con¬ duct and honourable usage for my hapless companion."—" Sir boy," said Lewis, haugh- tUy, " presume not, on the sHght service thou hast rendered us, to deem that we wiU brook such look or language from a sub¬ ject : but I see whence this strange boldness springs—thou lovest this errant damsel thyself. 'Tis weU: and so thou provest thy loyalty as knight, by upbraiding thy prince; and thy faith as Crusader, by dar- VOL. iv. G
ing to love a heretic. Thou wouldst marry her too, I warrant, in thy romance of ho¬ nourable love. Now, by St. Denis, I will keep the damsel in my- custody, were it but to prevent such foul disgrace to the Church's cause. ,:, —" ■ It will be more disho¬ noured, pri ace," replied the youth, " when a, helpless and lonely maiden is the victim of ia Crusader's violence and-wrong." , ■ " Avoid my presence ! v said Lewis, stamp¬ ing, "lest she prove not mine only victim, as thou darest to term it. By Heaven, I am well schooled between a hoary-. ruf¬ fian and a beardless striphng! Hold— stay—eome back," he cried, as the youth, giving him a look that subjects sometimes can give, and princes sometimes must bear, was retiring,—" Come back, I say." Then with a struggle between pride and fear, "I doubt not thou wilt make this mad love of thine an excuse for deserting the cause of thy prince 1 ."— '* No, my liege," answered the youth "with a melancholy firmness ; "my so¬ vereign's forgetting his duty can never ab-
solve his subject. I will fight beneath thy standard with a wrung, but loyal heart; and though in the anguish of my soul I think you a tyrant, and dare tell you so, never wiU I whisper such a sound in another ear, or brook to hear it from another Hp."— " Shame, shame," cried Sir Aymer, who had , ventured to Hnger near, " that such faith should meet" such guerdon ! Call him back, call him back, my liege. How can a son of France bear to be outdone in honour by his liege-man ?" - "^ Royal lord," cried Amirald, returning uncalled, and bending his knee to Lewis, " be' generous, and restore the maiden."— " Prince," said Sir Aymer, with unusual spirit—" prince, be just, and wrong not her who 1 saved thy mother's life." 'Lewis struggled for a moment with his pas¬ sions ; but, though he could conceive, he had not mental strength to reahze their subjec¬ tion, and rending his mantle from the grasp of Sir Aymer, he exclaimed, " No, I cannot —hy Heaven, I cannot resign her!'' and g 2
rushed away.—" Courage yet," cried Sir Aymer: " if she is between heaven and earth, she shall be found; and if found, restored." - -■-Meanwhile Genevieve had been conveyed hy her conductors to 3 detached and se¬ cluded apartment in the lodgings occupied by the .Prince and his immediate attendants, in f the town. Though Lewis resolved to employ only persuasion with his prisoner, -he could-not carry his generosity farther; imt determined, at every risk, to keep-her \ concealed from Sir Amirald. In the mean- *'while he availed himself of every opportu- *■ nity, which the stormy debates of the Cru- saders' allowed him, to visit her,—employing all ? the eloquence of passion and of power, and in violent importunity even prostrat¬ ing himself before her; her beauty, * pu¬ rity, and unprotected helplessness, alternate¬ ly urging and disarming him. These visits ■ were the only interruption to her solitude--.* ' .* j It—was on. the fourth evening, of Jier 1 confinement ? that at a late hour the door
of her apartment was' burst open, and Prince Lewis rushed in; his visage inflamed, and his hair and robes deranged, as ififrom the consequences of a personal struggle. He gazed on her, and then • striking/Jhis forehead with an agonizing i expression ? of self-reproach, he exclaimed: "; Gome ^with me this moment, maiden—-if, indeed,;a?mo¬ ment yet be left thee!"—" And whither must I now go ?" said Genevieve, j as-she rose and stood trembhng beforeiuhim.-i- " -Stay not to ask—stay not to - speak,'-' he Cried; " a moment's delay may cost,,<vthy Hfe !'•'—" My Hfe!" she said, Avith as faint smile—" is that all? Then, Sir knight,< : I quit f not this spot:" but her heart recoil¬ ing as she spoke, " And am I, indeed, to perish, and so soon ?" she said: " and can¬ not even Sir Amirald save me?" : " Sir Amirald save thee—thee Avhom a son of France is unable to rescue even for an hour! exclaimed Lev/is. *.'? Frantic andobstinate girl* hear and believe thy peril and my shame :— I was this night at a feast held; by the
Bishop of Toulouse; afeast of reconcdiation he termed it—aught but that was in his fiendish • thoughts. As Ave sat, tidings came that some of the most potent lords in Languedoc Avere taking arms in defence of their vassals, amongst Avhom the cursed heresy of thy people rages. At t the word, every sword sprang from its sheath, every eye was fixed on me, every tongue hailed me champion cf the Church— the title for which I Avould have forfeited Hfe— for which I hadweU nigh lost it toDe Montfort. But even De Montfort ceded his claim; the bishop employed his only to strengthen mine. I beHeved him aU sincere; but the subtle and bloody prelate had been dealing deeply Avith the Crusaders. He hates thee deadly, maiden, I knoAv not wherefore: he had SAvorn them to a man : I shame to tell thee, their absurd and savage superstition required that I sliould yield thee up to perish ere a knight Avould stand by my banner: they assaUed, they im*- plored, they beset me, inflamed as I Avas Avith .wine, intoxicated with power, and I"------
" Yielded," said Genevieve, fixing on him her' mild dark eyes. " Alas! Sir knight; and'to' honour, to humanity, thou wouldst not yield rae, and to the first caU of mad and selfish ambition I am doomed to be the sacrifice!"— " No, by Heaven, maiden," cried Lewis; " scarce had the mad words passed my Hps when I retracted them: through menace, through injury, through indignity that I blush to have survived, I burst from thefr accursed feast. Two of the faithfulcst of my train still guard the postern, and will make good the passage with their lives, whUe I bear thee tb some safer retreat, where their ruthless and brutal rage shaU be matter of scorn to us. Maiden," he cried, watching her moveless fea¬ tures, fixed in horror at the thought—"maiden, for thee a son of France has forgotten his rank, his lights, himself; and dost thou dare to hesitate who hast nothing to risk ? But thou shalt not be aUowed the choice."—" Prince," said Genevieve, retreating as he approached her,—" prince, thou gavest thine oath but yes-
'terday, in mercy,to my terrors, that I should ^suffer *no,farther violence at thy hands: 1 .^claim; that oath now; and as thou hast pledged ^thihei^imjnp.rtal soul, and valuest the pledge, redeem it, ^and leave 1 me to die/'—*? And jthpUj sp^pung, so fair, so gentle," said Lewis, gazing^pn^her with'mingled feeUngs of admira¬ tion and affony,-—" canst thou .brave-death*— ;supli;4eatlv;asi;they may. prepare for thee?"-r- " It„ wiU be;but a few moments of brief--tor- ture,!'said Genevieve hurriedly; "and then— but afewmoments indeed," she cried—!■? I hear them approaching:" and already a tumultuous band vyas heard suiTounding the apartment which,we have described as detached, andto ^which Prince Lewis s flight had pointed their way. Some ;of them bore torches, and the voice of Sir Ambrose was heard among them fiercely exclaiming, " Let us burn the heretic harlot with fire," as with unappeasable -ran T cpur M against Genevieve he led the intoxicajted nartyi ; ,9n;,. while, some began to hurl ,their torches,,towards,the* roof, too plainly indi- c^ating^tlieii: horrible^urpose/. " Dogs t devils
as they are," cried Prince ' Lewis ■ iii fury, "they dare not do such outrager'-^and he tore open the casement: the flashes of hght came thicker and brighter through it.-—"Oh 1 save me, save me!" cried Genevieve with ah invo¬ luntary shriek bfhoiTor at the prospect ofher fearful doom, " But it must be," she siaicl, the heart's dew of agony bursting froni every pore of her pale brow—*'but it miist be^! Away, for God*s sake, away, lest thou too share my dreadful death!"—-"Saints and angels! arid 'canst thou reject hfe—love—a 'prinice's love,' td embrace a fate so horrible? Thei pos¬ tern* is guarded by our friends: this moment ( I will bear thee through it; but I cannot alone encounter those hounds of hell. "-~* c Arid "I musty said, Genevieve with a ghastly smile: "it will be but a few moments,—a brief agony —better, far better than a life of shariie. Away,' Prince Lewis, save thy royal life; arid if hethou callest Amirald should name nie hereafter, tell him I perished unstained' ancl tfiiei n -^-" Thou shaltf not perish^ criecTLe\vis with his most tremendous oath," Pdrl^ sang G 5
desRois; in thine own despite I AviU saA'e thee." —" Amid those cruel men," cried Genevieve, springing from him, " would I rather fling this frad body, than into arms like thine. I shudder at mine horrible death; but I shudder more at thee."—" They must have the power as weU as the mahgnity of the great fiend, if they daie to oppose me," cried LeAvis rushing from the apartment ; and Avrapping his mantle round his left ann, he flung himself among the assailants. Gene¬ vieve looked from the casement: she sa\v him stagger, sink in the heat and struggle, and home off insensible. The chamber Avas constructed of Avood: the roof was already in a blaze, and the burning fragments of the timber Avere dropping around her. She retreated from them as they feU; but the floor began also to bum, and the shouts or rather yells of her persecutors deepened in her ears. She retreated to thi? centre of the chamber, but the heat there Avas suffocating. She sank on the floor; but start¬ ed from it, as it scorched her. " Oh !" she
cried, as the volumes of smoke roUed towards her—" Oh that they might choke me at once, that this horrid agony might be over! Oh, what those suffer who perish in flames !" she cried, as she attempted to fly from place to place, while the flames gathered strength : but every where the burning touch, the suffo¬ cating smoke repeUed her. Her senses gave way: the last distinct impression she retained was that of sinking into a profound sleep, from which the voice of Amirald tried in vain to arouse her.
; i *■ * , .* A is h -'-. CHAPTER VL ■*->JCi^l* << ' ,-*-.* -j^tu >iCome round me, my thousandb I uai**nlir,, * , i Ossiaw. The report which had reached the Cru- sacfeirs^at the feast held by the Bishop of Toulouse, was true. Some of the most powisrful lords in Languedoc, among whom were" foremost the Counts de Foix and de Comminges, had risen in aid of the Albigeois, and threatened to oppose a formidable bar¬ rier to the progress of the Crusaders. Those two lords had been the intimate friends of the Count of Toidouse : they had even had the courage to accompany him to Rome, and advocate his cause before the Pope; but latterly revolted by his imbecUe and flue- j*f- r * *i tuating character, incensed by the spoHation of Weir territories arid the slaughter of their vassals,'and in fact jealous and trembHng for
their own diminished wealth and power; after dispatching respectful embassies to the Pope, to justify the. measures they declared themselves compelled to, they bade their ban- ■ ners fly, and summoned the Albigeois to seek protection beneath them. The first measure they adopted was to seize on some city, wiiich they proposed to fortify, and coUecting their troops there, to offer shelter to all the Albigeois who Avere disposed to avail them¬ selves of it; thus putting an end to the ] desultory and uneventful warfare which had been hitherto carried on, and assuming a position alike cognizable by friends and enemies. Their standards were soon follow¬ ed by a numerous band of men-at-arms, and by what the historian terms, " une Joule in- croyable" of the Albigeois, who, abandoned { by Count Raymond, sought where they could for safety and for Hfe. These measures were concerted and acted on Avith such expedition, that the inteUigence reached the Crusaders only at the moment of its execution. The place they had fixed on * * > , * ** JiU >s\iVtli*
THE ALBIGENSES. Avas the worst they coidd select—the city of Tarascon. It was in the neighbourhood of Beaucaire, from AA r hich the Bishop of Toulouse could always detach a considerable force against it: it was also commanded by a fortified castle beyond the walls of the toAvn; an edifice spacious enough to contain a host, and strong enough itself to stand a siege the fiercest that that age could lay. The toAvn had been among the first to yield to De Mont¬ fort when he overran the territories of the Count of Toulouse in kis first rapid career of conquest, and was now held for the Cru¬ saders by Lambert de Limons, a brave and experienced warrior; but his garrison was fee¬ ble, the fortifications ofthe town Avere equaUy so, and the houses wholly undefended; for at that period the privilege of having their houses fortified belonged exclusively to the bourgeois of Toulouse and Avignon—a privi¬ lege for which they had often paid suffi¬ ciently dear. This circumstance, perhaps, determined the inauspicious choice of the leaders of this neAV army, beHeving that
Tarascon would be an easy prey', but in tlieir march thither they were fated to encounter circumstances still more inauspicious. They were themselves rigid Catholics—so were the men-at-arms they led. The wandering bands of the; Albigeois collecting from every quarter, and especially from Toulouse, from which the Count's vacillating creed had once more expelled them, were tenacious of the new faith, and fierce and even bloody contest arose on v their progress between the pro¬ tectors and the protected. The leaders could hardly venture to interfere to check this; and when they did, their interference was repelled by a reference to their mutual creed on the part of their followers.—" Dogs of heretics!"- they cried, "we well deserve such reproach for aiding their cause.*' And this was followed not only by increasingly injurious treatment of the Albigeois, but by mutinous murmurs against their leaders. Meanwhile this unhappy people, no less per¬ secuted than persecuting, were perpetually at war among themselves; for every division!
and subdivision of opinion was now developed among..the multitudes that assembled in eyery direction,—emigrants from Beaucaire, Toulouse,, Nismes, and every place sup¬ posed :to bev infected with .heresy; and in the-jinteryals of abuse that they plentifully received•; from, the troops of the Counts de F-oix^and^de ^Comminges, they employed themselves fin as liberally bestowing it. on each'L'other;, and the terms Petro-brusiens, Henriciens,- Catharins, and Patarins, never ceased \ among the unhappy and distracted multitude;, every man upbraiding his com¬ rade, and fellow-sufferer, and then making common "> cause against the catholic troops,' who assailed them in turn, 'and never failed to i* pay the interest >of their debt of sharp words with heavy blows, till the whole band presented the appearance of a mutinous, dis¬ arrayed and disorganized multitude, fiercely hating and assaulting each other, accordingly as words or blows -might .predominate- r< .«* ^The, winter ihad.expired,'and an early:and' favourabletspring had commenced, when this
party, of whose march intelhgence, as w'e have- told, had reached Toulouse, Avas approaching the city of Tarascon; and their leaders, anti¬ cipating a temporary cessation oftheir differ¬ ences on their arrival at this seat of mutual! shelter and defence, urged on their progress ~ Avith the utmost haste. On their approach;* however, to Tarascon, they were struck by^the^ tranquil, defenceless appearance of the city>> and halted for a short consultation.'' Tliey? knew the weU-proved courage andmiHtary' skiH of Lambert de Limons, who held 1 the^ toAvn for the Crusaders, and paused to 'con-* sider whether some danger was not to be'*- dreaded from this singular tranquilHty.^ Tlieir debates Avere broken in upon by the> clamours of ,the men-at-arms, avIio Avere anxious for plunder, and the Albigeois, Avho f were stiU more anxious for food, of which their miHtary companions had appropriated' so large a proportion during their march, that J their situation resembled more that of men be-- sieged by enemies than protected' by friends. The leaders consented to the demand,! rather **
than petition, of their tumultuous army; and dispatched a band of fifty archers, flanked by as' many' men-at-arms—aU of them expert, chosen men—to reconnoitre the approaches of the 1 town.' They returned in safety, but their report was sufficiently mysterious and unsatisfactory ; and Avhenthe Counts de Foix alidade' Comminges put their forces fn mo¬ tion, and approached the toAvn, singular as it was, they found it verified. Not a banner AVaved on the AvaHs—not a warder stood on tower or bartizan—not a horn Avas blown from the gates—the toAvn had no moat, save oh one side, and the gates lay open in silent and portentous invitation. "All that day the army lay before the Avails, but it seemed as a city of the dead. As evening feH, the impetuosity of the troops Avould no longer be restrained: the leaders yielded to it, and the Avhole army burst into the city, folloAved fast by the Albigeois. Streets, houses, churches, scpiare, and citadel, were all empty; nor man nor beast was to be found Avherever they
might turn. The earth returned nothing but ,the sound of their OAvn steps—the air nothing but the echo of their own voices.' There Avas noAV no restraining the .troops; they AA r andered, piflaged, ravaged, and re-?* veUed through every street in Tarascon; and ample booty was there to excite and satiate. their cupidity. Rich garments, household stuff and plate, appeared displayed in osten¬ tatious profusion; and with these the men-at- arms hasted to equip themselves, appearing in their new and multifarious array some-. thing Hke Trinculo and Stephano in their , stolen robes, while the spirit Avhich laid the guttering bait Avas Avaiting to pursue and punish them for the 'trespass. The half- famished Albigeois betook themselves to the provisions that they found spread with equal, and mysterious plenty in the enrpty houses ; and ere night fell, aU had feasted on the viands, and arrayed themselves in the gar¬ ments they found in the deserted city. Meanwhile the Counts de Foix N and Com¬ minges had draAvn ,their immediate band of
knights and gentlemen into the citadel; and stiU not whoUy unsuspicious of some trea¬ chery, they searched every apartment and passage, tiU at length they conceived them¬ selves sufiiciently safe; and, finding rich viands and costly wines in the citadel, they sat down to banquet at their leisure. Their spirits rose as they feasted and drank: they pledged each other deeply; and, in pride of their strange and sudden achieve¬ ment of the possession of the town of Tar¬ ascon, were clasping each other's hands at every pledge, when a trumpet was blown on the sudden, and an armed knight rush¬ ed in almost along with the sound. The Count de Foix and his companion started up at the intrusion, beHeving it to be some knight of their train. The stranger raised his visor, and disclosed a face which both of them remembered to have beheld, but nei¬ ther could clearly recoUect where. " I am to crave your pardon, lords,' said the youthful knight, " for mine in¬ trusion ; and next, to announce tidings of
high concernment!"—" Thy tidings should indeed be of importance to justify such in¬ trusion. Speak, then !" said De Foix, stand¬ ing with his hand on his dagger as he spoke. —" Thine employers have sent but a weak instrument to sound their chaUenge," said Comminges.—" Then hear it to-morrow frora the trumpets of the Crusaders," said the youth, " who ere dawn wiU invest your towers! Such are my tidings; brook them how ye Hst," De Foix and De Comminges started to their feet. " These be stirring tidings in¬ deed !" exclaimed the former. " And where gottest thou them? and what be thy cre¬ dentials—thy pledge ?" -— " My Hfe!" said the youth with proud confidence : " I ha\ T e placed that in your hands; and as ye find me to have spoken the truth, so deal with me. The army of the Crusaders is on its march ; they wiU be beneath your walls to¬ morrow ; and hang me from the highest tur¬ ret of your citadel, if by dawn ye find not my tidings, which I have risked life to bear,
true!"—-" And who art thou that bearest such tidings? and who commissioned thee .to*; bear them : 9% said De Foix.—-" Ay, ask /him that 1'' said De Comminges.-— «« My lords," said tlie young knight, .•? I mustsay that the reception I have met with is lacking, not only in noble courtesy; but in the Wisdom I might seek in chiefs Hke you. Ivbear you tidings of high import---I pledge my -Hfe ' ori their truth—and ye \ seek my name and title? If that be warrantage, I < teU? ye,i peers-of France, that I have right to- tlie cti d'armes;* being a knight banneret, knighted by your Hege sovereign and; mine, .King PhiHp, on tlie field of battle.?: s s^; De Foix and De Comminges whispered to¬ gether^ and looked at him as they whispered. "Wast thou not one of that godless band," said De Foix, " who wore the cross on their breast, but trampled it under their feet ?"— " 1 have transferred it from my breast to my heart," said Ariiirald; " and there I trust it wiU?remain." ■ J i I v '
" And what motive hast thou for such change?" said Dc Foix suspectingly. " We rise in aid of our despoUed vassals, h our ravaged tciritories; but thou, a landless, birthless youth, to aU seeming—what motive hath urged thee to such enterprise?"—"<My lords," said the youth blushing, his youth¬ ful grace and modest mien making strong. contrast with the half-recumbent posture, scowHng brow, and flushed but stern visage of the querist, " my lords, is this nobie Pr¬ is it generous to press on a stranger's private ■ thoughts ? BeHeve it, that the motive must have been powerful that could produce such * change: I wiU say no more/' , ,-•<,> "Jf thine intelligence be true," said De Foix, " thou canst teU us how the Crusaders have marshaUed their array ?"—" De Montfort," replied Amirald, " hath marshaUed them in three bands, in honour of the Holy Tri¬ nity : the Dauphin leads the* centre, the Bishop*of Toulouse the left wing,.and De Montfort himself the right.", De Foix and his companions interchanged looks, as if their
. ^suspicions began to be removed. " But, lords, my tidings are not yet told: a pow¬ erful , aUy, as weU as a fierce enemy, is in ;tthe field—Gount Raymond of Toulouse is .Umarchingi hither.'—'" Sir stranger knight/' . n said De Comminges, " thou taskest our credu- Klity^too fiir.- Know we not that Raymond of (.Toulouse is paying his devotions before the , t doors l of ;every church in his territories— I because he dares not enter them ? and causing nprayers to be said for his reconcUiation with , i; the holy father?"—" And know ye not also ,,the holy, father's answer to his last embassy: i X\Monjils, dcoutcz-moi, aimez Dieu sur tout ^chose, ne prenez jamais, les Mens (Tautrui; ^mais defendez le votre, slyudqtfwi veut vous .Venleverfp and that, on the faith of that mes- l sage, Count Raymond is already at the head ; of a potent army, and making towards .Ta¬ rascon with his utmost speed ?''—" This seems l^e.tiiith/V said De Foix.—" Seems? cried ^Amirald,;. ? Now, by: Heaven, lords, I wiU
no longer brook these Avrongs: trust me, or slay me on the spot!" ■ • > * ir ; De Foix Avas about to return a fierce* an¬ swer,' and De Comminges to interpose,' Avhen a loud tumult was heard at the entrance,'and some of De Foix's attendants nisHe'd f -in, dragging, or rather carrying among theni-the ghastly figure of a man apparently 1 wasted by disease, but who neither offered -"resist¬ ance, nor attempted supplication;' ;/ff 'My lord," they cried, in answer to the questions eagerly hurried on them, "we T founds this 'felloAV concealed in a private passage near thischamber; we have brought him * hither, and perchance lie can teU the cause of this city's strange abandonment, and Avhy, of the thousands that swarmed here but* two days past, he alone was found, arid -found conceal¬ ed. ■»-" Speak, Mow, for thy life !" said De Foix, turning fiercely on the ghastly Avretch, --" My life!—not for that," said the prisoner, with an energy of voice and manner sin¬ gularly contrasted with the squalid debiHty of • his appearance: " but I will speak, and/ ye VOL. IV. H
shall find my words are true as the words of the dying are ever. .Lambert de Limons, the governor of the town, withdrew his garrison from these walls on the report of your approach, and he hath thrown himself into the castle of Tarascon, wluch he pur¬ poses to hold for the Crusaders, whose arrival he expects by to-morrow's dawn."—"This confirms the stranger knight's report," said De Comminges.—" It needed not suck confir¬ mation," said Amirald with some disdain.— '• And the inhabitants of the town ?" said De Foix.— " They dispersed on the garrison's being withdrawn."—"And wherefore didst thou tarry here alone ?'*—" I was unable to follow them; and if I were, it was my wish to stay: my reasons you will know ere long," rephed the prisoner, with an expres¬ sion somewhat sinister.— " Hast thou aught else to disclose ?" said De Foix.—" Tidings that should be welcome to you, noble lords," said the man with a portentous smile : " and yet methinks you will scarce have heart to welcome them when they are fulfilled,"—
" Tell them plainly," said De Foix; " and forbear, if thou canst, that leer that suits so ill the features of a dying Avretch hke thee."—'* Men say," answered the prisoner, "that Raymond of Toulouse is marching hither ; and that the incarnate fiend, in form of a knight in sable armour, fights by his side. However that be, Lambert de Limons thought better, with" his small garrison, to maintain the castle than the town, whose defences were destroyed - when Simon de Montfort won it from the Count of Toulouse.' 1 —"Sir stranger knight," said De Foix eagerly, " we cry you mercy for our unsea¬ sonable mistrust, and gladly accept the prof¬ fered aid of-your arms and counsel." Amirald took the hand of the Count, who accompanied 1 his words with the siutable ac¬ tion, and grasped it with an energy that niade liim feel the; pledge was given for life and death. His finely modulated temper, hke a piece composed by some skilful musician, ad¬ mitted a passing discord for a moment, only to swell and enrich the succeeding harmony. H 2
" Noaa', my lords," he said, " shaU Ave not set forth by to-morrow's daAvn ? A sortie from these toA\ _,rs would at least check the Crusa¬ ders ; and if we succeeded in turning their flanks, perchance by that time the army of Raymond of Toulouse may arrive, and thiL, they wiU be enclosed between two fires. A sortie, noble lords, by the dawn, and I wiU yield to the first lance levelled against me, an' Ave do not vrin the day against De Mont¬ fort and his triple host, were they trebled again."—"Sir stranger knight, thou sayest well," ansAvered De Foix; " but our men-at- arms are now scattered through the toAvn in quest of pillage. We wiU summon them back on the instant: they have, I warrant me, scarce left a meal untasted or a garment untried in the toAvn. They must be recaUed to their standards AA'ithin the hour, and by dawn we charge from these waUs."—" Is it true," said the prisoner, " that your troops have partaken of the food, and clothed themselves with the garments they found within these walls ?" No one heeded him; while the Count de Foix
loudly issued his orders for recalling the men- at-arms from their dispersion through the town. The prisoner then repeated his demand in a hollow A'oice, but Avith an expression of eagerness indescribable. " And dost thou ask, fellow," said De Foix, issuing orders, —" dost thou ask whether men-at-arms avUI seize on # the spoil of a deserted toAvn ; or whether the starved Albigeois will not snatch a meal where he can find it ?"—As he spoke, his back Avas to the prisoner, but he suddenly turned on hearing a wUd and fierce shriek of exultation : —" Then are they death- doomed eveiy man, did each possess the strength of an hundred giants I The town was visited by the plague ; Lambert de Limons withdreAV his garrison in terror; and the in¬ fected and unprotected inhabitants Avandered where they might: but they left behind them pledges of their good-AviU towards their expected guests. Every morsel that ye have tasted is death—every garment that ye have but touched is deadly as mortal poison. Noav rejoice at the speedy succour of Count Ray-
inond. Ha, ha! he will be greeted by your livid corses : or by your spirits parting in torture: and I — I remained alone to tell the enemies of God then* fate, and to die," The breathless silence that follow¬ ed this terrible communication was itself as terrible. It did not, however, continue long. " Die, then ! accursed fiend," cried De Foix with an ungovernable impulse of fury and horror: and he plunged his dagger to the hilt in the body of the prisoner, who fell with¬ out a groan. He fell on his face; but in a few moments, by convulsive exertions, he turn¬ ed himself on. his back as he lay, and tearing open lus garment, pointed to the livid spots on his breast, and, glaring at his murderer with an unutterable smile, expired. Amirald, who like the rest had stood dumb and stupified with horror, now felt a sting of agonizing consciousness thrill through frame and soul, and striking his forehead, and utter¬ ing with a sob qf despair the single word " Genevieve," he rushed from the apartment. On his reaching the citadel that'disastrous
night, he had placed her under the care of his two 'squires (to which his retinue was now diminished) in the antechamber, while he passed on to impart his tidings, and offer his aid to the leaders. There he now found her seated, in a retired nook, with her veil folded round her, silently shrinking from the rude gaze of the armed attendants of the counts, as they hastily traversed ihe chamber. He stood some moments in irresolute agony; but when, at length beholding her young protector again, she rose, and with a sweet and timid confidence extended her arms towards him, he thought his heart would burst: he rushed towards her, and in a brief ancl shuddeiing whisper communicated the tenible inteUigence of their danger. Genevieve for a moment trembled, and re- ' coUed in natural horror ; but in the next she said, in a voice tremulous indeed, but which announced invincible resolution, " Then I wiU seek my poor old father, and we wiU perish together." It was in vain that Amirald, with all the agony of a lover, expostulated,
implored, and finaUy menaced to detain her. tc Thou Avilt not use force," she said with reso¬ lute mildness; " and to naught but force Avill I yield in this thing. Noble knight, gentle friend," she added, " Avithstand me not; I avHI not be counselled." Amirald adjured her by her only chance for safety, to remain in the citadel, as she Avas yet free from infection, haA'ing neither tasted the food nor touched the raiment since her arrival. As he pleaded, some of the more respecta¬ ble of the Albigeois came to soHcit the pro¬ tection of the Counts against tne tyranny and rapacity of the men-at-arms, Avho Avere taking from them their provisions, and otherwise abusing and plundering them. As these men struggled through the tumultuous and in¬ sulting opposition of the men-at-arms Avho crowded the apartment, a voice was heard exclaiming, " Smite me not, I pray thee!. I am old and Wind, and lack a guide to aid me." Genevie\ T e sprang forward at the sound, and in a moment locked her arms round the neck ofthe aged Pierre, and sobbed
in mingled joy and agony on his breast; whUe the old man, recognizing her in the same moment, held her to his heart with a sense of pleasure so oppressive and overpow¬ ering that it was almost converted into pain. The others who fiUed the apartment were unfit spectators of such a scene : they gazed incuriously for a tune, and then began to ut¬ ter coarse jests on the meeting, till Amirald forced his way among them, and fiercely re¬ peUed the rude circle. But such was the tumult and distraction in the citadel of Ta¬ rascon, the tidings of infection spreading fast, that it was only by dint of manual force, seconded by that of his 'squires, that the knight succeeded in securing a smaU and remote chamber in the citadel for Genevieve and the pastor; where he left his attendants to protect them, and hastened back to take part in the troubled and distracted councils of the Counts de Foix and de Comminges during the short remainder of that dreary night. MeanwhUe the pastor and his daughter H 5
sat in their still, remote chamber in a state of pure delight, which not even the sense of near and mortal danger could disturb. The thought made their meeting solemn, but not sad. " And why dost thou quit my side, Genevieve ?" said the old man, extending his arms towards her.-*—" It was to bring the lamp nearer my father."—" But I can feel thee without it."—" But I cannot see you, my father, in tj?is dusky chamber filled with arms. Alas ! how you are changed, my father!"—"Regard it not, my child, but haste to tell me all that hath befallen thee, and how thou hast been restored to me; for my heart forebodes that, surrounded as we are by pesti¬ lence and war, these are the last and only moments in which it will be allowed me to listen to thy voice, and to feel thy hands in mine." Genevieve began her tale, but often paused, palliated, and omitted when the theme was her own danger. But it was observable even to Pierre, that when the name of Sir Amirald mingled in her story, her voice became free,
her language fluent and unhesitating, and her narrative most minute and circumstantial. She told of her deliverance from the flames by him, who, at the risk of his life, had borne her through them ; and then, almost unaided, charged on her persecutors with one arm, while he sustained his senseless burthen in the other. In her narrative she could not but contrast the daring courage and faithful love of Amirald with the selfish and violent passion ofthe Dauphin, who had persecuted her while in his power, and abandoned her to her horri¬ ble fate when he found his interest with the Crusaders was compromised by her presence. " But, oh ! my father, hadst thou seen him— his noble daring, his gentle courage! It woidd be worth a miracle to restore thy sight, were it but to view that form so lovely and noble." —" But, my child," said the old man," it was of thee I wished to hear: what is the comely favour of that youth to me ? Go on, my daugh¬ ter: he guided thee to Toulouse (as thou saidst was thy intendment) in safety and honour?" —" Alas ! yes, my father: but when I arrived
there, all things Avere changed. Our kins- Avoman Merab, Avith Avhom I hoped to so¬ journ,, had- obeyed the neAV injunctions of Count Raymond, and professed the ancient faith: the count himself assisted at mass, and enjoined it on all his subjects during his negotiation Avith the Pope. Our kinswoman Avas a widow Avith many children : she gazed for a space on the gems I offered her to shelter me; but then she looked at her chil¬ dren, and averting her head that she might not see me, pointed to the open door. I Avas then a Avanderer in the streets of Toulouse : and oh ! hoAv I rejoiced to find that the most poAverful feehng of my persecutors Avas their avarice ! But my ransom soon left me poor; for Avhen Sir Amfrald bore me frcm that burning chamber, I left in a cabinet, Avhere I had hid them, the most costly jewels of the queen's gift. It Avas darkling when I sheltered me within the shadoAv of a church Avhere they were, singing mass or vespers. Soon a glare of torches flashed on me Avhere I lay concealed, and I saw the powerful preacher,
the mighty warrior Mattathias, bonv from judgment to the prison, there to abide his doom; for Count Raymond had resolved to sacrifice to the Pope's demands the chief among his once highly-favoured Albigeois. The torches, held by some ghastly wretches, blazed in the front of the procession, and then came Mattathias. He was to be con¬ signed to prison for two days ; and if within that period he did not submit to the ancient faith, he was to be burnt with fire. As he passed me, his stern and ghastly features spoke aught but faith or hope: they had that fixed expression that spoke not spiritual, but physical power ; not the zeal of the martyr, but the strength of the man. " I always judged him /what thou hast spoken him," said Pierre: " and moreover he was the cause of thy banishment from the congrega¬ tion. He rent the last green leaf from the sapless trunk—he quenched the light of the blind. I have tried to forgive him, and I have sometimes thought I had done so ; but I dared not search my heart. Yet fear not
thou, my child; there are none noAV to oppose return. Boanerges is noAV a mighty warrior clad in mail: and Amand----- '' " Oh, what of liim ?" said Genevieve fearfully.—"Didst thou love him, my child, that thou speakest Avith such earnestness ?"—" Alas! no, my father; but Ave sometimes dread more to hear the fate of those Avho hated, than of those who have loved us."—" He Avandered about among us, after thy departure, heavy and silent: a bad and restless spirit seemed to be at Avork within him. On our Avay hither, he disappeared; and no one knoAvs Avhat hath befallen him—no one, methinks, inquired. But tell me, my chdd, the end of the hard-heart¬ ed and hard-fated Mattathias."—"Oh, my father, it Avas fearful. I sought him in his prison, near his last moments, and then the faith for Avhich he had been so zealous failed! He doubted that he had ever beHeved. The soul tried to drop her anchor, but found no bottom; and Avent on drifting her dim and stormy Avay, almost a wreck. He caUed on me to join ihim in prayer and hymns. I sang and
prayed, but he said there Avas no meaning in the sounds : and then to see his fixed ghastly eyes, the cold drops on his forehead, and his strong frame heaving Avith its throes, Hke a moun¬ tain moved by an earthquake ! His pride upheld him, and he died the death of a martyr, but Avithout a martyr's faith or hope. To my dying hour never can I forget his." Pierre shuddered at the awful picture. " But my fears Avere soon aAvakened for my¬ self. My visits to the prison Avere watched; there Avas no safety then in Toulouse for those of our faith ; and again I owed my deHver¬ ance to the care and valour of Sir Amirald. But Avhen I had escaped from the city, and my protector asked where I was about to direct my flight, I looked around me and on him in mute and utter helplessness, for I knew not that spot on earth Avhere I might turn my steps in safety. At length I be¬ thought me of the report that the Albigeois were betaking themselves to this city of Tarascon ; and I said that I woidd repair hither, that' I might share the lot of my
people; and, if they perished, perish with them. As I spoke, his countenance seemed suddenly to glow Avith a Hght from Heaven. * Maiden,' he said, c the faith that can prompt and sustain a woman in trials Hke thine. cannot be heresy, cannot be error. I wiU be thy companion, thy protector, thy friend, the partaker of thy faith, and the champion of thy cause: thy people shaU be my people; and thy God my God.*'--Pierre clasped his hands in ecstasy, and blessed her. " As we journeyed hither/* continued Genevieve, " I endeavoured humbly, as became an unletter¬ ed maiden, to explain to him those glorious truths that form the substance of our purer creed; and was it not wondrous, my father, that from Hps Hke mine he Avould hear those truths which perchance he would have re¬ jected, if expounded to him by the most learned' of our teachers?"—Pierre smiled in silence; for though he set a value sufficiently high on his own controversial powers, he could not help internally admitting that, to a handsome and enamoured youth, the Hps of
female beauty were capable of making things intelligible Avhich Avould be heard with in¬ difference from the voice of masculine ortho¬ doxy. Zealous, hoAvever, for every dogma of his faith, he inquired into the course of argument she had adopted Avith her catechu¬ men, in hope of discovering that the im¬ pression it had made Avas not, as might be expected, partial, temporary, and superficial. —" I knoAV not how it was," said Genevieve in her simpHcity: " I spoke but noAv and then, not long or continuously; and me- tnought nature, and the objects that present¬ ed themselves as Ave journeyed, seemed to take a kincUy and aid ful part Avith me. Once, I remember, when I saAV him smile, (though he suppressed his smile,) at the thought that an unskilled and unlettered peasant, should handle such high themes, I ventured to demand of him Avhether, Avhen lonely and benighted, he had not often been cheered by the Hght glancing from the casement of the cottager; a light denied by the barred though lofty AvindoAvs of a castled
knights and gentlemen into the citadel; and stiU not whoUy unsuspicious of some trea¬ chery, they searched every apartment and passage, tiU at length they conceived them¬ selves sufiiciently safe; and, finding rich viands and costly Avines in the citadel, they sat down to banquet at their leisure. Their spirits rose as they feasted and drank: they pledged each other deeply; and, in pride of their strange and sudden achieve¬ ment of the possession of the town of Tar¬ ascon, were clasping each other's hands at every pledge, Avhen a trumpet was blown on the sudden, and an armed knight rush¬ ed in almost along with the sound. The Count de Foix and his companion started up at the intrusion, beHeving it to be some knight of their train. The stranger raised his visor, and disclosed a face which both of them remembered to have beheld, but nei¬ ther could clearly recoUect where. " I am to cra\ T e your pardon, lords,'' said the youthful knight^ " for mine in¬ trusion ; and next, to announce tidings of
high concernment I"—" Thy tidings should indeed he of importance to justify such in¬ trusion. Speak, then !" said De Foix, stand¬ ing with his hand on his dagger as he spoke, —" Thine employers have sent but a weak instrument to sound their challenge," said Comminges.—" Then hear it to-morrow from the trumpets of the Crusaders," said the youth, " who ere dawn will invest yom' towers! Such are my tidings; brook them how ye hst," De Foix and De Comminges started to their feet. " These be stirring tidings in¬ deed !" exclaimed the former. " And where gottest thou them? and what be thy cre¬ dentials—thy pledge ?'' — " My hfe!" said the youth with proud confidence : " I have placed that in your hands; and as ye find me to have spoken the truth, so deal with me. The army of the Crusaders is on its march ; they will be beneath your walls to¬ morrow ; and hang me from the highest tur¬ ret of your citadel, if by dawn ye find not my tidings, which I have risked life to bear,
young knight's neglect will soon dissolve the fairy pile in which thou, poor dreamer, didst empalace thyself."—" It matters not," said Genevieve with a kind of heroic melancholy. hastily drying her eyes—" it matters not; he bears a good sword to the cause of the Albigeois, and a true heart to their faith. For me, my wanderings are at a close: hither have I come, and come at length to die."— " Not so, my daughter/' said Pierre; " for since I have met thee, methinks the love of life hath rekindled even within rae."—" But I have no wish for life,*' said Genevieve, all her resolution giving way before the keep anguish his last words had excited. '* Oh, my father, I feel and know it is easier to meet death in flames and agony, than to encounter him under the withering aspect of a broken and hopeless heart."—" Genevieve," said the old man solemnly; and he seized the moment of strong emotion, and tried powerfully and successfully to lead her mind back to the sole topic in which his own centered and termi¬ nated ever; and both found the change frr
the better, and themseh'es bettered by the change. The themes on which they spoke gra¬ dually raised them above the sense of mor¬ tal suffering and of mortal fear. They spoke of grief, but they no longer spoke with tears. The daylight broke on thefr sad and holy conference: and thefr exhausted frames alike requiring rest, the pnstor slumbered where he sat; and GeneAaeve, as she was wont in her early days, sat on the ground, and vesting her head on the pastor's knees, slept, resolved not to dream of Amirald.
> *- , CHAPTER VII. The combat deepens. On, ye brave Who.rush to glory, or. the grave ! Wave, Munich! all thy banners wave, - And charge with all thy chivalry ! Campbell. The morning broke on the city of Taras¬ con, and found it in tumult and conster¬ nation. The disunion between the ill-organ¬ ised men-at-arms, and the heretics, whom they reluctantly protected, (but very willingly plundered,) was increased by the report ol* the pestilence being in the town, and all ' was distraction, mutiny, and pillage. De Comminges inclosed himself in the citadel, and refused to hold communion even by letter with De Foix or his retainers, pretending dread of the pestilence; while his
men were pillaging through the town, giving themselves up to all the desperation of sailors in a wreck, Who break open lockers, dress themselves in the officers' clothes, and practise every kind of mad ex¬ travagance on the approach of then' dreadful and inevitable doom. Sickening at all he saw, and hopeless in heart of all that might succeed, Sir Amirald nevertheless rode forth at dawn to reconnoitre the advance of the enemy. As he rode through the streets to the gate of Tarascon, the sounds of distant violence and nproar struck on his ear at eveiy moment, where the fierce followers of the- counts were committing acts of the wildest outrage and hostility. As he reached the;gate, a kerchief was waved to him from a casement. Believing it to be a signal of distress, he reined in liis steed, and'looked' upward - ; and for a moment he saw the heavenly face of Genevieve, as, once more waving her kerchief, she retired from the casement. On the door were inscribed the terrible characters, Domine,- miserere nobis,
THE ALBIGENSES.* and Amirald felt Avith agony unutterable how and Avhere she was employed. For a moment his courage failed: he tried to rouse himself, but in vain; then at the image of tins humble solitary female, at risk of life engaged in duty that she knew to be mor¬ tal, a gush of magnanimity overfloAved his heart; and wlnle (for a moment) he Avept like woman, he felt more than man. " I have seen that heavenly face for the last time," he said with emotion, setting spurs to his steed: he dashed a tear away, ,and rode up the hill that neighboured the Avails of Tarascon, to observe the approach of the enemy. It Avas not yet day, but something like a heavy cloud lay on tlic hills; and ! Sir Amirald, by the increasing Hght, could soon descry a vast body of troops in motion. He rode back to the city on the, instant, and sought /De Foix first, as De Comminges was, he deemed, inaccessible. But close beside the gates he found both the counts at the head of their array, and both at deadly feud. " This is the issue of thy
mad counsel," cried Comminges: " here are we hemmed iri between a foe without the wails, and a pestilence within,"•— "And where be ' thy" men-at-arms to meet the peril?" repHed De Foix^ They/are^&- laging through the town.. This is 'thy foi Poictcviri" * — " Rude lord, say that again, and my men-at-arms shaU charge against thine!"—" At thy peril!" shoiiited the other; white he called to his bariner- man, " Turn thy standard! we march back to the city of Tarascon."—"In Heaven's name, lords," cried Amirald, riding up, " suspend your feud. The enemy hangs Hke a thunder¬ cloud on your hiUs; and here ye stand rend¬ ing each other like two blood-hounds, instead of riishing together at the prey. Look yon¬ der, and see if I speak true!"- De Foix and De Comminges turned theu- bloodshot arid angry -eyes from each other to the view" of theadvancing enemy, who were now indeed, seen' gathering on the hills Hke a storm. y '* .* A term then equivalent io r«»«.*»^.^ VOL. IV. I
They. gazed for a moment on the formidable sight with a kind of stupor, (which was j how¬ ever, whoUy/uririiixed With fear) ; r and .then, slowly drawing; theii" suspended? breath, and lobsing hold of the daggers, which they held half-drawn, they turned on each- other looks of mutual shame'for their paltry and dis¬ graceful broU. ■'.•**. : ■ ! : .' SirAmirald took advantage of this sUent advance to reconciHation,-and again pointed ovLtv the approach of the force, that excited, whUe • it almost - awed him, in lauguage not Unlike that of a mbre powerful poet" than ever;knight troubadour was—-* ! .;.;<: *•■■:""'Their gilt coats shew like dragons' scales—• v . •%.'•-:*• Their march like a.rough. tumblings storm."-^ Their appearance was irideed terrific to' all but eyes accustomed to look on war.' ' •*- r t • The centre of^ the Cmsaders Was led by Prince Lewis in person, and over his head was displayed the oriflamme of France, grasped by the same bold hand that had upheld itin the battle of Bovines; for at this period it was
customary to crown the heir of "France in his father's Hfetime (to insure the succession); and the Dauphin therefore marched to battle in aU the insignia of anticipated royalty. But the array of Prince LeAvis was all loose and disorderly: a number of light females travelled in the midst of his van; and the prince was so attentive to their accommoda¬ tion, that he detached a large body of his troops to the rear, to secure their safety; while he Avas for ever quitting his post to hold talk with the bonnibelles, amid whom his fool danced, laughed, rang his bells, and proclaim¬ ed himself the chief, of, the host, inasmuch as he led them who led their leader. This disarray Avas marked by the keen eye of Sir Amirald, and he hasted to make his advantage of it. The left wing was iedby the Bishop of j Toulouse, Avho, though invincibly ,brave, and profoundly skilful .in tbe tactics of the age, could not be safely entrusted Avith the command of even a portion of an army: his ambitious selfishness ahvays leading him- to some desperate enterprise, by which he might i 2
himself be distinguished, were it at the loss of ten thousand lives: so that, if in a day of assault he stood alone on some tower that was deemed impregnable, and shouted his war- cry in the voice of victory, he cared not if it pealed over the dead bodies of every foUower he had led to slaughter. The position he had taken this day savoured strongly of his cha¬ racter : he led the left wing, which was of course opposed to the right of the city of Tarascon. On that side flowed a branch of tlie Rhone; and there the fortifications were neglected, the inhabitants relying on the protection of the river, and the difficulty of approaching the town. Thither the bishop-was resolved to urge his forces, and make a desperate attempt, careless what befel the centre of the host, or the right wing.(which was led by the Count De Mont¬ fort), provided he could first plant the banner of the Crusaders on the battlements of Ta¬ rascon. The right wing was stiU more inauspiciously generalled for the event of the day. De Montfort was at its head: but
he was no longer the redoubtable De Mont i fort—the resistless champion ofthe armies of the Church. Tlie wounds he had received, which were principaUy in his head, had evidently weakened his powers, whUe they had inflamed his passions. The slightest contradiction maddened him; the most trifling opposition to liis wiU was met by the menace of lance or dagger. He seemed to be under the alternate, or rather mingled influence of delirium and stupor. He issued orders, and revoked them; gave the most absurd commands; seemed conscious of it— but was furious if tliey were disobeyed. Those under his command knew not what to do, or what he would have them do; and aU predicted, by their briefly exchanged looks and whispers, a disastrous event to,the battle, if De Montfort, their former Maccabee, led the light wing that day. On that day, as the historian* informs us, he appeared eminently under the influence ofhis .*■
morbid and portentous habits: he had refused to march without first participating in the sacrament, Avhich he termed seeing his Lord and Saviour, as if he had a presentiment of some mortal event; and Avhen his Avish was compHed with, he seemed rather more "agi¬ tated, and hisAvhole conduct and manner were those of one Avhom our riorthern neighbours Avould call fey, that is, one hurried on by supernatural impulse'to his fate, and not un¬ conscious of the -Impulse himself, He forced on the right Aving rapidly, as if to intercept aU communication betAveen the castle of Tarascon (which lay to the left of the city) and the city itself; thus demonstrating that the post Avas Of some importance by his movement, though the opposed forces Could not yet imagine AAdiy: while the bishop, intent on his purpose, urged on the left wing with stiU greater rapidity, careless hoAv he weakened the main body, provided lie succeeded in seizing on that part ofthe city which he weU knew to be the least defensible. The centre, thus Aveakened by the elongation, or rather total detachment of its
wings, was in still greater confusion ,from the surprise into which Prince Lewis arid the fiery knights around him were thrown,.at see¬ ing a band, whom they had beHeved cooped up and shrinking within their city, inarching fortli in fair array to give them battle before its waUs. " What," cried the Dauphin to the lords that rode- round his standard, *" have these wolves, that we have hunted to their den, ruslied* forth to make prey ofus?"—"Ar'n't likeyour grace," said old Sir Aymer : " those wolves have fangs that wiU snap the stoutest lances in your host."—" I Hke not grey-beards to prate of battle," said the Dauphin , scorn- fuUy reining back his steed, as if to shun the voice* of the unwelcome speaker.—" Nor I," said Sir Aymer on his part,—" nor I, boys, to dream of heading hosts."—" Peace, Sir Aymer, peace!'' cried the standard-bearer, who stood-justly high in the favour ofthe Dauphin: '•* the cloud that is spreading on yon plain hath somewhat overshadowed Prince Lewis's memory, of thy worth."—"And if report says tine," answered Sir Aymer, " the cloud that
is gathering on yon hiUs AviU turn that shadow into night, ere it be noon." And he pointed Avith emphatic gesture to the hills, Avhence a rumour had 1 reached the Crusaders that Raymond of Toulouse was approaching Avith the embodied fiend among his host; nor did the terror of this Avild report, in those ages, at aU impair its authenticity or its effect. " Wlio is that boy ?" said Prince LeA\ r is, proudly turning to his foUowers, " Avho rides careering in their van ? He is neither herald nor pursuivant by his garb. Go thou," to one of his pages, " and ask if he be warder of yon towers: go tell him Ave AviU spare him far¬ ther pains to "guard them AV'.thin in an hour." The page (avIio was an esqiure and of noble birth) boAved to his steed's mane, set spurs, and rode. In "a short space—Avhile Prince LeAvis Avas laughing, between a youthful knight. Avho counselled him to ride on and trample on the host, as peasants tread their vintage, and a fair dame, who was patting the proud neck of his Avar-steed with her Avhite hand,—the page rode back at fuU
speed, but stood silent. " Speak on," said the Dauphin, " without fear, and without offence.'' " My Hege," answered the page, " the youth is somewhat insolent; and saith, if you are fatigued in taking his place of warder of the towers of Tarascon, your brows shall be wiped by his hand in such wise that yon will never have to undergo such toil again.''— " Lords, gentlemen, noble knights, do you hear such message done to a son of France!" cried the fiery Dauphin. " What say you ?"— "On, on, to the fight!" cried a thousand voices; and twice that number of lances were put in rest, and of swords drawn and flash¬ ing round the oriflamme of France. " Send forth the archers and shngers first P cried Sir Aymer, riding up by the Dauphin's side.— " Churlish knight, I di&dain thee and thy counsel P exclaimed Prince Lewis, spurring his steed.—" Upon them, lords—upon them, on the instant!" Sir Aymer laid his hand on the Dauphin's rein ; the fierce Prince smote it with his battle-axe, and the old knight held it up bleeding: " This will not be the last i5
blood I will shed in thy cause to-day, Prince Dauphin," he cried, as he spurred on his steed with'the rest, holding the reins with his bleed¬ ing hand. Sir Amirald marked the confusion of the host, and rode at full speed back to that which was advancing from the city of Ta¬ rascon. The full array of the troops of the Counts de Foix and de Comminges was more for¬ midable than could be apprehended by their adversaries. The intense zeal of the Albi¬ geois had induced them to submit" to the military discipline of their Catholic leaders, (however they might detest their creed,) and the stout peasantry, already well skilled in the use of the bow and sling, were placed in front of the host, thus supplying the materiel of the van of a feudal army, (which always consisted of slingers and archers,) and feehng their experience more than an equivalent for the mihtaiy tact which was supposed the ex¬ clusive possession of feudal vassals. Moreover, there were amongst them many (and Boanerges at their head) whose strong frames and mu=scu-
lar power easUy bore the weight of arms, and wielded the weapons of the practised miHta- rist; their zeal, eagerness, and perseverance supplying .every deficiency of practice and habit. Undeterred by ridicule, unappaUed by novelty, and undaunted by danger— rigiid, cold, but submissive and watchful, they easUy caught the simple tactics of'the age, .their yery creed .supplying a motive which was wanted by the mercenary pelerins and the feudal miHtary vassals, and formed a power¬ ful and formidable addition to the troops who had at first despised their inexperience, and undervalued their aid. , Besides these, \he u troops of De Foix and De Comminges were swelled by the accession of the armed bands of many a powerful lord of Languedoc; and De Foix had (apparently to the foe) doubled the number of knights in his army, by causing every knight to bear two banners; a ruse by which Henry of Winchester, a few years after, won a battle frora the King of France. The battle of the two Counts was thus
arrayed, Avhen Sir Amirald reined up his panting steed by that of De Foix. " My noble lord," said he, " some disorder prevails in the centre of the host. Mark, too," he added, pointing Avith rapid and emphatic gesture, " Iioav fast the wings are marching aAvay! Seize, seize the moment, noble De Foix, valiant Comminges: grant me but fifty men-at-arms to break their battle, and if I do not scatter thefr puny defence of archers and slingers, and lay my hand on the Dauphin's rein ere a foUoAver be lost, may there be not one left to bestride my corse!" —" Thou shalt have them," said De Foix ; "and if thou break their battle, youth, I avUI follow Avith a wedge of men-at-arms that shall spht yon oak of the field tiU it groan and totter." At a signal, fifty men-at-arms were de¬ tached from his train. " Haste, fellows, haste," cried Amirald,—" haste, that Ave may win advantage of the sun and Avind, which the van of Prince LeAvis is marching to gain ! Haste! such advantage Avon the battle-of
Bovines!" He shouted at the top of his voice ; a hundred gathered round him as ,he rode. " By heaven," .cried De Foix, " this boy will*, teach us generalship! On!" he cried: " St. Denis to aid, though thou fightest against his banner ! Spur and speed be the word!"—r" Win thy spurs, boy," said Corii- minges coldly.—" They were won ; in a bloodier field than ever the Count de Com¬ minges fought in," cried the youth, spurring his steed. "Boy! my deeds shaU prove me man to-day !" And as he spoke, he and his band parted like lightning from a cloud. . De Foix and his associate meanwhUe took brief counsel how they might best avail themselves of the obvious disunion that appeared to pre¬ vail among'the host of the Cmsaders. On the sudden—" "WhUe we are talking," cried De Foix, " aU is done: look, noble De Com¬ minges !" His companion threw his eyes in the direction, and saw • : Tlie fiery youth with desperate charge Make for a space an^opening large*— *
and, trampling down the faint resistance ofthe slingers and archers, who had not even time to draAV the short swords with which they -were to support the charge of the chivalry, pe¬ netrate almost to where the knights ofthe royal train surrounded Prince LeAvis, while the oriflamme shook in the standard-bearer'b grasp at the successful temerity of the assault. The assault was indeed successful; but Sir Amirald and h|s band, after their fierce force avos spent, i were repeUed, and recoiled Hke a wave from a rock, retreating in foam and shivers; but raUying for the return even in the retreat. They Avere* nobly upheld:-De Foix and De Comminges gave their steeds the rein,-and, loAvering their heads to shun the sling-stones and anows, they '" charged jwith aU their chivalry" in aid of Sir Ami- raid: half-way*he met them, like a spent swimmer* on a Avave<; "Once more, once more," he gasped, " noble De Foix, noble De Comminges, and the day is ours: the Dau¬ phin's band is aH disarrayed; the wings wander wide."—" Seize the Dauphin, and
the day and the field is ours," cried De Fo.'x, spurring faster. *' What, boy, doth thy mettle fail now?" Amirald's heart burned and bled at the thought of meetings the Crusaders as a foe; but the din of battle had stunned his ears, and the flame of fight was glowing in his eyes: he bowed his head, couched his lance, and spurred fiercely on with the rest. The first essay of Sir Amirald had broken and scattered the centre of the Crusaders; and now, on that broken and scattered array, the furious assault of the confede¬ rate Counts had its fuU effect: they charged, retfred for a moment, wheeled and charged again, leaving at every attack as many corses behind them as blows had been struck. The Crusaders, who at first had al¬ most scorned to exchange blows with their assailants, now began to gather round' the oriflamme, to shield the sacred Hfe of the Prince, leaving their men-at-arms- to*, be slaughtered and trampled down without ire- gard. The Dauphin himself, too i late aware
of the presumption and temerity that always prompted the first movements of the Cm¬ saders, began to throw anxious looks to¬ ward the AA^ngs, now Avandering far and wide. " Where is the Bishop of Toulouse?" cried LeAvis.—" Within the Avails of Tarascon by tlris time," said Sir Aymer, avIio stiU rode near hun, " if steed and steel hold out."— " Prophet of evil!" cried the Dauphin, darting a furious glance at him;—"but Ave shall soon have better tidings : hither rides a knight from the bishop's host."—" My lord the Dauphin!" cried the panting messenger, " the Bishop of Toulouse commends him to you : the holy and vaHant prelate hath Avon the city of Tarascon, and prays you but to send a hundred men-at-arms to aid him to main¬ tain* his post."—" Meet state Ave are in,'" said Lewis chafing, " to lend him aid ! Look thou how the tusks of those boars, De Foix ahd De Comminges, have gored our van! Let the bishop recaU his forces on the in¬ stant, nor dream of his vaunted victory whUe the life ofhis Hege lord is in peril!"—" I
w Ul do your message," said the knight, who fell dead of his wounds as he turned his reins to ride. " Nought but blood and death around us!" cried Lewis: " where is Simon de Montfort ?"—" Far on his way to gain the pass between the castle of Tarascon and the city," said Sir Aymer," lest the former should yield support to the heretics."—" Par le sang des Pois" cried Lewis, gnashing his teeth with fury, " madness seems to have taken possession of aU the host! In the name of all the fiends, how chances it that De Montfort is intercepting aid from a castle, which is held for the Crusaders by the trusty Lambert de Limons ?"—" Perchance it may be necessary to secure it for thine escape, Prince Dauphin," continued Sir Aymer; " 'speciaUy if the close of this day resemble its beginning ?"—" Raven, cease thy croak¬ ing !" cried the Dauphin fiercely. " VaHant knights," he added, " there will be but short trial of your patience. I see aid advancing from yon hill, the forces of Vaugelas and De Limosin. Ride up yon hUl, vaHant
knights, we shaU thence command a bet¬ ter view, and be safe for a whUe from these fierce . assailants! Lord Abbot of Normoutier, (for the abbot had once more been induced to ride at the head of his church vassals with the Crusaders,) ride up! See you not a descending band sweeping Hke a mist.down yon hiUs? And see—and see, a messenger rides fast; he comes with good tidings!"—" Holy St. Benedict," cried the abbot of Normoutier, " did ever messenger of good tidings ride so iU-bested ? He is stuck through with arrows, and can scarce sit his horse."—" Think you so, my lords ?" said the Dauphin to his pant*. ing train, who, most of them wounded, had with difficulty gained the summit of the hiU. There was no time for conjecture: the mes¬ senger, who was a scout of their own, sent out to reconnoitre the advancing aid, re¬ turned stuck with arrows, a score of. archers in fidL pursuit of him, (or, in the language of the chase,* growing to his haunches), but dis¬ persing as his fleet but wounded steed bore
him beyond their reach, while the' loyal vassal, though mortally Avounded, shouted " Sauve qui peut! Raymond of Toulouse is in the field, crying * No quarter;' and the incar¬ nate devil, clad Hke a knight in sable armOiny fights by his side. AU mortal aid is rain. Betake you to shrift, noble knights : for me, my task is done. It is a bioody day; it AviU be a bloodier night!" He feU from his horse as he spoke. He died; and none marked his end. The terrible inteUigence of Gount Ray¬ mond being in the field, the fearful report (credible enough in those days) of the* evil spirit himself being his auxiHary, and the certainty of their being thus enclosed between two hosts,—the troops of De Foix and De Comminges, and those of Count Raymond,— sent a terror to every heart. " Save, save the Dauphin!" was the universal ciy. Lewis Avas not wanting either in generosity or in valour. He dashed something Hke a tear from his eye, and then held a brief council
with the few who were near him in this last exigency. " Sir Aymer, what think'st thou?" he said. ~" Tliat the oriflamme of France was never in such danger since it was blessed by the holy Abbot Luger, on tlie deliverance of thine ancestor Lewis VI." answered the blunt but faithful knight.—" Gaston de Mortigny," said the Dauphin to his standard-bearer, "'what is thy counsel?"--" The same that I gave your highness' father at the battle of Bovines," said the firm knight: " I told King PhiHp, that, wmle the oak stood, the branch should never be rent from its trunk; and, if your grace so please, the branch shaU cleave to the royal sapling this day, as it did to the ancient trunk, let the storm blow as it lists."—" Then let the storm blow as it Hsts '" cried Prince Lewis, tossing his arms with agitated action, Hke the oak in a tempest; and all the knights around him shouted, " Let the storm blow as it lists f and'clash¬ ing their lances against their shields, drowned their redoubled shouts in the martial sound.
THE ALBIGENSES. A dreadful scene Avas going on in another part of the field. The Bishop of Toulouse found the post in the city of Tarascon, that his desperate valour had Avon, untenable. The messengers he had dispatched for aid had either perished, or returned Avith disas¬ trous tidings of the Dauphin being hotly beset in the centre, and demanding succour instead of being able to yield it. The bishop kept his steady and far-seeing eye fixed on the oriflamme. " Gaston de Mortigny holds the standard stdl," he said internaUy ; " the Dauphin is but panic-struck." Meanwhile, he saw and recognized the banners of Count Raymond on the hills; AvhUe De Comminges, at that moment, had detached his powers to assail him as he burst from the Avails of Tarascon, that he could no longer keep, tp heAv his Avay back to the distracted and harassed centre of the host. He paused a moment: the approach of Raymond of Tou¬ louse Avas inevitable—the assault of De Com¬ minges Avas not less so ; and the bishop,-Avip- ing his " mailed,broAV Avith his bloody hand,?
computed calmly that a thousand Hves must be lost, ere he could win the centre of the host., With his voice of thunder he shouted to his foUowers, whom he was about to sacri¬ fice ; with his battle-axe, wielded with resist¬ less might, he.began.to deal death among aU that encountered him. His strokes fell Hke a woodman's—not on oaks that he cleaved, but on twigs that he shred ; and the whole forest of the field went crushing down before him. He stmck De Comminges below his horse's hoofs; he mowed down his train Hke rushes! before a peasant's staff; he trampled on the dying bodies of his own men-at-arms. Yet, stiU there appeared " a great gulph* fixed" between him and the centre, of the host, where, though safety, was doubtful, it; could alone be. won, De Foix, Sir Amirald, and their powers, TaUying after their third saBy to * respire, and to dispatch aid to the-fainting and defeated wing led by De Comminges, pushed' their gored and painting.steeds up a smaU eminence to recon¬ noitred Here they paused for a moment; and
Amirald's kindHng eye rested with involun-; tary admiration on the progress of the Bishop of Toulouse, whUe he "'•Mowed across and made irregular harvest, Defaced the pomp of battle,"* trampHrig an hundred Hves beneath him, and menacing a thousand more by the resistless might that had laid those hundreds low. De Foix, after surveying the - field for a moment, exclaimed, " If Raymond of Tou¬ louse ^be in the field—if Raymond be in'the field—his war-word wiU be Point de qitdrtierl Getr tHee a fresh steed, Sir Amirald, and charge once more. They are marching like the wind' towards the Castle of Tarascon: that betokens disaster arid defeat. ; Throw thyself between them arid the Castle of Tarascon, and leave the day to me." ! '■ • vr Sir Ainirald cast one reluctant.doofc of brave regret on the routed and - prostrate wing of De Comminges, and hastened-to obey the order of De Foix. - ;^a'»f * ?<K r .%& V AU ; the "loyal chivalry of Frarice had
gathered round the Dauphin. He sat on 'his steed for some moments, agitated less by his danger than by that enthusiasm of devoted hearts that his own was too full to answer. He paused—fluctuated—turned * his • eye's^ towards the Castle of Tarascon— 1 cast 1 'tHern- again on the brave band that rallied round 5 him. His foot was half in the 1 '"stirrup 5 to fly—his hand on his sword *to 'fight—when'the Bishop of Toulouse, -dyed J 'in "blood (but not his own) from heel •-4,0 ,k 'helm, spurred the third steed he had 'liestrided "that day by the Dauphin's side. <' J My s lord the Dauphin," he cried, "why this- delay ? Save your royal life; and let th'ose lf of your subjects pay their prince's ransom!" The Prince hesitated. The coun¬ sel of "those- who surrounded him was all various ; and contradictory. " Seek the ram¬ parts ofthe Castle of Tarascon!" cried some, —" Seek no rampart but that of the bodies of thy foes, that these loyal lances shall soon : rear l around thee!"'cried others.— "Cease your" vain tumult, knights!" shouted the
commanding voice of the bishop. ■: "Ray¬ mond of Toulouse is in the field!"—" And men say the incarnate fiend fights beneath his banner!" cried the sole burvivor of the bishop's train.—"An' it be so," cried the Abbot of Normoutier, " it is time for me to quit the field: I marched against mortal men; but I am no match for the devil." —" CoAvard priest! desertest thou thus ?" cried Prince Lewis, as the abbot, Avith his numerous train, turned his reins; his crosier- bearer riding fast in the van.—" Recreant and disloyal churchman ! dost thou fly—and at such a moment?" shouted the Bishop of Toulouse, as the advancing banners of Count Raymond Avaved over the diminished and distracted host of the Crusaders, like the wings of ravens over anticipated cdrses. — "Do pignora certa timendo" quoth the abbot, clapping spurs to his steed; AvhUe all,the church vassals foUoAved fast, the crosier gHttering in the van.—" False priest!" cried the Bishop of Toulouse, " would there Avere a boAv in mine hand, and the arroAv VOL. IV. K
should nail thee to the earth as thou ridest. Prince Dauphin, take counsel for thy life; escape to the Castle of Tarascon. The arrows of Count Raymond's host are already gaUing the flanks of thine. Some strange misadventure hath befallen us to-day. Win but the Castle of Tarascon, and to-mor- ioav ---------" " On to the castle! my best lord," shouted a thousand voices; — and Prince Lewis set on, weU trusting that Simon de Montfort had secured his safe reception there.—" Take my reins," said the despond¬ ing prince to Gaston de Mortigny as he rode ; "I am no longer fit to guide even mine'own steed."—" My prince," said the firm standard- bearer, " mine hand was never wont to sus¬ tain other burthen than that of the oriflamme; and it shall be seA'ered from my body ere it quit its grasp." Voices on voices now shouted, " Haste! my Hege, haste!—the foe perceives our dis¬ array." — " RajTnond of Toulouse presses on our rear!" cried others, thronging fast with their disastrous tidings.
Lewis stood stupefied with shame and despair. Starting at length from his trance, " Take thou this shield," he cried, flinging it to a page; " and take thou this," to ano¬ ther, tearing off his surcoat, emblazoned with the royal HHes and the cross of the Cru¬ saders ; " a fugitive should no longer bear the insignia of a leader!" De Foix marked their disarray. "Ride up!—ride up! Sir Amirald," he cried ; " take two—take two hundred—take three—take aH my choicest men, and throw thyself between the Crusaders and the Castle-'of Tarascon. My devoir,' as brother-in-arms, binds me to rescue De Comminges." They parted each on his desperate enterprize; and that instantaneous parting was like the j erup- tion of distinct flashes of Hghtning from an overcharged cloud. ! AsSir Amirald rode, his eye involuntarily glanced (in spite of the deathful impetuosity of his speed,) on the scenery that ^sur¬ rounded the defile through which he pressed. The banners of Count Raymond surmounted k 2
the distant hills; his van rushed gHttering from thefr summits, and amid their Avindings, the track of the gemmed and gilded crosier, glancing and disappearing as the riders wound up the eminences and descended the decHA-ities, marked the flight of the Abbot of Normoutier. But aii poAA'er of observation was lost, Avhen he hasted to fling him¬ self between the poAver of the Crusaders and the Castle of Tarascon; for at his first approach, the castle, Avhich tUl that mo¬ ment had stood Hke a dark, unexploding volcano, from bartizan and battlement, from every loop and shot-hole, rained down such a shower from boAV and arbalist, that half the boldest that Sir Amirald led lay corses beneath the first discharge, and the second rank who succeeded formed as they feU oniy a rampart for those A\ho foUoAved to . *>cale, and meet the same fate ere they had climbed the dreadful and sHppery ascent of mangled bodies and streaming blood. Lambert de Limons, an expert tactician, had reserved aU his artiUery for the crisis
which he foresaw, and its effect was com¬ plete. It was in vain that Sir Amirald tried to raUy his powers; exclusive of the shot from the loop-holes, that fell like the gigantic hail on the foes of Joshua, fifty cross-bow-men stationed on the bartizan, (like riflemen in modern tactics,) of whom every r one could shoot f< five hundred feet him fro," were ranged there, taking down at their leisure man and Hfe. Sir Arnirald felt his post untenable: he was about ■ to wind his bugle to recaU the few survivors, when an unusual movement among the Cmsaders made him pause. '' ' The Dauphin and the Bishop of Toulouse, with their trains, in taking their determina¬ tion to seek shelter in the Castle of Taras¬ con, had reckoned on their safe arrival there, as the wing of their army led by Simon de Montfort was almost under its towers ; but ere their flight (for such it was) could bear them to the spot, Sir Amirald was there, and Simon de Montfort was already mortally wounded,
All now was tumult and consternation. Dei Montfort, whose fierce spirit predominated even hi death, called for a fresh steed, but vainly attempted to mount him. Mental terrors, hitherto unknown, seemed working together with lus bodily suffering. From the> moment that he had heard the wild report of an evil spirit in the guise of a sable knight riding in aid of Count Raymond, he had exclaimed that it was the spuit of the Count de Beziers, (of whose murder he was more than suspected,) and exclaimed that whenever he attempted to raise his battle-axe, a hand in black armour lay on his arm, and weighed down by its pressure soid and brand. But at the voice of Prince Lewis he seemed madly excited once more, and grasping the arm of his squire, " Thou seest,'' he said, " this gash on my forehead so overflows mine eyes with blood that I can no longer see to guide my reins; place me, I charge thee, faithful Raoul, right before the Dauphin; and on my feet, while they can support me, I will do a warrior's deeds,
or die a warrior's death."—" Stay -not to listen to this madman, my Hege,' T cried..the* Bishop* of Toulouse ; " make for the, castle ere aU be lost/' The. bishop's, action gave full warrant for his tvords; hc spurred right onward towards the barrier, that Sir Ami- raids band presented betwixt him* and the castle: " the iron sleet of arrowy, shower" that had rained from the Castle of Tarascon intermitted on the bishop's approach; ithe garrison, by the direction of Lambert de Limons, sparing their foes, lest they should destroy their friends. Amirald« seized the moment to extend his line between the low¬ ered drawbridge and the approach of the bishop's power. > The bishop paused on his desperate posi¬ tion : the protended lances of Amirald's band were before him. Suddenly forsaking his stirrups, with a hand of iron he twice and thrice plunged his dagger into ! the quivering flanks of liis steed; and the no¬ ble animal, agonizing under the blows, with one spring cleared the lances of the band,
.200 and feU on his haunches amid its centre. .Another stab of the dagger raised him in a -momentathe bishop forsook the reins, and ,wielded; his battle-axe. He had plunged like a rock faUing into the ocean, but the dispersed i waves soon recoiled. Many lay crushed be¬ neath /the>weight of the impulse: others rose; *and* others, who could not rise, grasped with *their* maimed and dying hands at the bishop's reins,[which lay loose on the neck of his steed. •Those hands were severed by the blows of his/ battle-axe, wielded right and left with :a* velocity and force as resistless as theyare indescribable; and the last spring of his mar¬ tyred steed lodged the bishop on the draw¬ bridge of the Castle of Tarascon. " Follow hun—foUow the* vaHant prelate, my liege!" cried the Crusaders. Prince Lewis spurred his steed. c At that moment, a sortie from the Castle pouring over the lowered drawbridge, forced Sir Amirald on, spite of himself, tiU in the tidevof battle his hand was on the Dauphin's rein.': "Base renegade!" cried a .voice,
" lay'st thou hand on thy prince's rein?"*— " What am I now ?" said Lewis, as, stupi¬ fied, he appeared to ask of Amirald'Whether he were prisoner.—" What art thou? -The Dauphin of France still," answered the vbice. —"Leave me to deal with this f Sir Knight Sans-barbe." And his blow, wielded' with' no light hand, made Sir Amirald yield* hold-of the Dauphin's rein, and turn in liis-own de¬ fence. His antagonist, by many evolutions performed with more skUi than force,' biit which proved him master of the strategy-of the age, succeeded in drawing Sir Amirald to some distance from the spot.; Amirald, incensed at being thus deluded, and baffled by one whose hoary beard M'as visible through the bars of his helmet, now struck with such good airii and hearty hand, that the old knight almost breathless exclaimed, ff Hold, sir boy ! By heaven, thou smitest like Guillaume le Charpentie'r,* in the old
K o
Crusades. No marvel thou art silent: thou lackest all thy breath for such blows." Ami- raid answered him in the Avords of an old chivalric song— ■ Un Chevalier, rien doutez pas, Doitferir hault, ct purler bas. —" Say'st thou me so ?" said the old knight, Avhose associations appeared to be awakened, but in no friendly manner, by the sound of his voice. " Then have at thee!" and he dealt a blow at the casque of Amirald (the rivets of which were loosened in the struggle of tlie day) Avith such good-will and steady aim, that it roUed on the ground; and his head Avas exposed to the next blow of his adversary. It descend¬ ed, but Avas paralyzed in its descent as Sir Aymer discovered the features of his former protege, Amirald. Its force Avas, however, such as to lay the young knight pro¬ strate before him. " Strike," said Amirald; " but, as thou art a knight, protect a young k fofgeron would have been " more germane to the matter."
female in yon beleaguered and distressed town, whom thou hast, I believe, bereft of aU ot ] -er protector." Sir Aymer was at the moment beside Amirald, and supporting him on his knee as he lay. " Protect her!" he cried, almost in tears,—" her who hath been thy ruin ? Now, out on her, hilding and harlot! Could she not be content with going to the devil her own heretic way, but she must needs have thee to bear her company ? Look up, my boy, and Hve; and afair course of chivalry and love is yet bright before thee." —" Oh!" said the youth, faintly raising liimself on his arm, while a sickening agony overcame his whole frame,-—" Oh that, instead,of de- famipg the most pure and heavenly being of God's creation, thou wouldst adopt her better creed!" , " Teach me—teU me it!" cried Sir Aymer in the overflowings of his kindly heart, as he bent over his dying, favourite. " But, no, boy; thou mayest spare the labour!" he said half-sighingly, half-Hghtly. " I could resign unintelligible jlogmas and inexpHcable mys-
teries; but I never, never can resign that devotion that worships female saints;— Tib, never for thee, dear boy, (and thou wast very dear to me,) can I give up that dear devotion. Pshaw! change the visage of a Madonna for that of one of thy cowled barbef!" . At this moment a shout from the Cru- saders announced that the Dauphin had reached the castle in safety; and the loyal- hearted knights now took the calm counsel of despair together, Hke the saUors who despatched a boat from their sinking ship to land James the Second on the coast of Scotland, and, as he reached it in safety, gave him three cheers frora the deck of their own devoted vessel. There was but too much cause for their despair. De Foix, who had coUected the routed wing of De Comminges, flung his whole force between the Crusaders and the Castle of Tarascon. The Bishop of Tou¬ louse, by desperate valour, aided by the super¬ human'strength'of his gigantic frame, had
passed the barrier : so had Prince Lewis, by the aid of his loyal, knights. But as Simon de Montfort, Minded with his own blood, and maddened with the agony of his wounds, was led towards the bridge, a quarrel, from a cross-bow aimed at' De Foix, who stood nearer the tower, struck on his head, mingHng the fragments of his Helmet with his brains and blood,—and the Cliampion of the Church was no more I* The body was hurried into the castle by the attend¬ ants." The gap thus made in the battle of the Cmsaders was closed in a moment; but the loss of Simon de Montfort was recalled and remembered for centuries afterwards. There was not a moment now to lament his loss. The powers of Raymond of Tou¬ louse came on apace, the sable knight raging like a whirlwind in its van : De Foix and his hand, blazing Hke a moat of fire between the
Crusaders and the castle, few passed it with life, and fewer stiil who did so survived long. The strife beneath the walls resem¬ bled more the struggle of demons in their native element of fire, than the strife of mortal men. Steed and stirrup, lance and sword, were forsaken: — it was breast to breast—limb to limb —dagger to dagger — heart to heart,—canopied by arrow-flight— darkened by the discharge of war-wolf and catapult. Amid this scene of demoniac horror and madness, it was admirable to see how the strong feeling of religion alone armed its humblest professor in panoply. The Monk of Montcalm, who had fol¬ lowed humbly in the rear of the splendid array of the Abbot of Normoutier, had, on the first intelligence of his defection, thrown himself into the Castle of Tarascon ; and now he stood, amid the flight of five hun¬ dred arrows, to do his holy duty by those who fought and those who fell. Warned of
his danger, but sHghting it, he stationed him¬ self on the bartizan of the great gate that commanded the draAvbridge. From that spot he gave the general benediction to the hundreds that were perishing; and then, exalting his voice and straining his sight, attempted to give absolution to the indivi¬ duals whom he saw claiming it: and, amid the horror and tumult of that mortal fight, many a dying Crusader turned his swim¬ ming eye, and tried to clasp his blood-steep¬ ed hands, and to raise his maimed and shattered limbs, to meet the last blessing, or even to catch the last sight, of the holy Monk of Montcalm! At the first shout, announcing the escape of the Dauphin, Sir Aymer, Avho had led his antagonist from the spot merely to secure his Prince's safety, began, now that that was provided for, to think of his own. " Fare- AveH !" he cried; " and yet it pities my very heart to leave thee thus; though I may be in worse pHght myself, an' I tarry longer. I
jnust needs leave the devil and the heretic together to settle accounts: I will defer the <closing of mine with him while I can :"—antl he^gallopped off. Yet, with a touch of hi.** natural kindliness of heart, returning for a moment, he told Amirald, that if he could reach the cit3 r °f Tarascon, he raight shelter there in safety; as the report of the plagues raging there was a mere ruse, invented by Lambert de Limons, and executed by the malignity of the dying wretch, who was in fact its only victim. ,. As he disappeared, the eyes of Amirald. swimming in mortal sickness, were lifted towards the hills on which the giant form of the sabk knight rode, careering like the master and compeller of the stormy clouds that were gathering fast on their summits. His train came far behind, for not one dared to ascend or descend the precipices abreast of him, nor even on the plain could they match for a moment the supernatural fleetness of his course. Amirald's senses failed him as he gazed on this portentous figure and its
movements; and saw the hiUs dimly mixed in his swimming vision Avith the form that swept along them. When he recovered from his trance, he found himself in a glen, smaU, narrow, and solitary, apart from the battle, but not from its roar, Avhose thunders from time to time startled its lonely echoes. J His first sensation was amazement at. finding him¬ self in a place of comparative safety: he rais¬ ed himself slowly on his elbow Hke one Avho, aAvaking from slumber, sees himself conveyed into an unknoAvn chamber, and Avonders how he was brought there. There AA r as no one to teU him that the sable knight had com¬ manded some of his train, Avho Avere about to nail him to the earth Avhere he lay, to raise and convey him to the nearest place of possible safety. There was, indeed, no one to tell this, or aught else; for Amirald soon per¬ ceived that the glen Avas choked Avith dead bodies up to the bases of the rocks that en¬ closed it. They Avere the bodies of some of De Foix's band; and this pass seemed to have been disputed Avith mortal hostility: every
mau had fallen where he fought, and every man lay on his back as he fell. As Amirald looked round on this death- place of unburied corses, the agonizing thirst excited by his wounds was aggravated by the sound of " gurgling waters near;" and the lonely, gentle sound was a kind of rebuke uttered by Nature to the outrages exercised by man in her holiest quietudes. Amirald tried to raise and drag himself in the direction of the sound. As he crawled over the dead bodies—for he could not move without touching or treading on one—a groan issued beneath his feet: he started—it came from one that yet lived. Amirald, stooping, tried to recognize form or lineament in the breather ; but he was so mangled and crushed by his wounds and fall, that his mother, search¬ ing the field, would not have known her own child. Forgetting the thirst that parched him, Amirald toiled to raise the sufferer, and at length dragged from beneath the weight of incumbent bodies the giant-form of Boa-
nerges. Amirald's short Avarfare under the ban¬ ners of De Foix had made him acquainted with the name and person of the warlike pastor, and with increasing effort he succeed¬ ed at last in placing him Avith his back against a rock. He was dying. Amirald made his Avay to the spring—tasted it—brought back some drops in his cloven shield, and bathed the brow and Hp of the dying man. They refreshed him. " Raise me up," cried Boa¬ nerges, " if thou hast any christian mercy."— " I wiU," said the youth, " if my fading strength can sustain thee ; but I fear thy state is past all hope."—" It is not that," said Boa¬ nerges—" it is not that; but did I not hear, as I fell—or was it a dream in my deadly trance? hath the oppressor ceased ? is Simon de Mont¬ fort dead."—" Simon de Montfort hath pe¬ rished," said Amirald, " and the Crusaders are defeated.^ The powers of De Foix and De Comminges, aided by Raymond of Toulouse, hold the field."—" Raise me higher, higher, good youth," cried the stern Albigeois; " that I may see the slaughter—the slaughter of the
enemies of the Lord, while my dying eyes yet cah behold it.**—■' In the name of God," cried Amirald; shuddering at this posthumous vin¬ dictiveness, " turn your mind to better thoughts. I am not so well versed in thy creed as thou must be ; but does it suggest no other comfort at thy dying hour?" " The everlasting hills take part against them," cried Boanerges: "they reel round and eharge; and their leaders are the storms and the clouds that have so often been the shelter of the Albigeois ; they are weaving winding- sheets for them on the hill-tops. The spirits of those who perished there are coming to greet them, mother and babe; but"—extending his mangled arms towards the Castle of Ta¬ rascon—" Simon de Montfort. hath perished, and envies his victims already." "Alas! alas!" cried Amirald, "think not of such" things now—speak not so fearful¬ ly;" and, in involuntary forgetfulness of his new creed, he held up his cross-handled sword ' i' to'fix'the eyes ofthe dying man on the sym-
bol of redemption. A rigid paUor had over,- spread the face of Boanerges; but at the sight of the cross his eyes kindled, Avith a ghastly light, and Hfting his maimed hand, "Take aAvay the abomination!" he cried: then in a fainter voice, " Nay, let me see it once more; the blade is red Avith Crusaders' blood." He gazed, smiled, and expired. Amirald now felt as if alone on earth : the f last survivor near him lay a corse at his„feet.; He turned his heavy eyes towards the Castle of Tarascon, Avhere the work of death, was; still going on ; for the powers of Count Ray¬ mond werenoAV almost beneath its AvaUs, moAV- ing down by hundreds the remains of the Crusaders, Avho, dispirited by the fate of De Montfort and the flight of the Dauphin and the Bishop of Toulouse, seemed to submit to their fate with the passiveness of sheep pen¬ ned }n a fold to ihe unresisted ravages ofa, band,of wolves. As band after band of Ray-,- mond's army swept along the hills, Amirald raised his voico, and Avaved his bloody scai*f„to> call for aid; as he felt thata knight of De Foix's.
army would meet prompt assistance from the allied band of the Count of Toulouse. The thunder of their speed drowned his feeble appeal: his weakness increased; and he was sinking down half in stupor, half in des¬ pair, to die, when the tones of a heart-re¬ membered voice, uttered in the most piercing distress, roused him in a moment to life and energy. Other bands besides those of Ray¬ mond were traversing the field : among them were some ofthe troops of the Bishop of Tou¬ louse, whom he had led within the very walls of the city in his first wild and unsupported assault, and had left behind him to "fight back their desperate way, or to perish. A few had succeeded in the former attempt; but previously they had encumbered them¬ selves with some rich plunder in the town, and some females distinguished for beauty— and aware of a circuitous direction by which they might reach the postern of the castle, they had skirmished on the skirts ofthe battle, and now, by the shelter of twilight, dispersing in small bands and various directions, were
speeding onwards with their respective plun¬ der. Amid a share rudely divided and fiercely contested was Genevieve, whose beauty made her too precious a prize to be lightly resign¬ ed. As a few, who had parted from the rest, were hurrying with their victim through the solitary glen, (as their least dangerous path,) the sight of Amirald's crest and broken plume caught her eye, and her shriek of "Save me ! for the love of Heaven, save me!" thrilled in his ringing ears. To start to his feet, to wave his broken brand, to rush among the ruffians, and be felled to the earth by their blows, was but the action of a moment. Of all that followed he was unconscious: but his splendid armour marking him as no vulgar prisoner, his body, still senseless, was borne into the Castle of Tarascon, when nightfall rendered the approach to the postern safe; and along with it was borne that of Gene¬ vieve—not senseless, indeed, but silent in despair. - ;
CHAPTER VIII. ■, Come in, and let us banquet royally After this golden day of victory. Shakspeare's Henry Ihr Sixth. - Count Raymond of Toulouse feasted that night in his tent, with aU his warriors, in the pride of victory. Their spirits were elated, and with reason. This was no tri¬ umph by ambuscade over the Crusaders, Hke the first they had obtained;—no desultory skirmish, like that in which the Bishop of Toulouse's troops had been cut off by the Count, when he attempted to intercept the progress of the Albigeois towards Arragon:— they had met the Crusaders in their might, face to race, and in pitched battle had defied and defeated them. MeanwhUe goblets were fiUed and drained to the pledge of " Vive
Toulouse .'" and already, in the imagination of the revellers, the Count was established in his territorial city, and his subjects allow¬ ed the free exercise of their religion. Count Raymond sat and listened; sometimes elated and sometimes depressed, as he heard the boasts of victory lately achieved. He remembered how often he had been thus hailed and greeted by lips that were now cold! „ He dwelt inwardly on a wearying recollection of war, woe, persecution, and vicissitude for twenty years, with gleams of success between, like the brief,, light f'of a sun in a wintry sky, darkness fast follow¬ ing. As he thought thus, he raised the gob¬ let to his Hps and drained it; resolving to forget the past if he could, and to enjoy the present. The debate of the ■■ knights strudk on his ear without exciting his attention, till one of them demanded, " Wherefore did not that sable knight, who had such noble share in »our toil to-day, meet us at the-'feast to¬ night?"—" Who hath seen him but itt battle?" vol. iv. L « i/<*r
said another. " He shuns all human con¬ verse ahd society."—" He never assists at moss, nor utters his prayers apart, hke an Albigeois,/' added another speaker. The mention ofthe sable knights name was Uke "the letting out of water:" report foHow¬ ed report, and whisper whisper. " Though he shuns aU converse," it was said, " he talks often with that iU-favoured page who • ever foUows him,—more hke the imp of a wizard than the attendant of a noble knight. "Who hath ever seen his visor unclos¬ ed," asked an ancient knight, "smce he hath joined our host ?"—" Who would wish to see it?" repHed another: "his casque to-day sustained blows' that would have felled earthly man."—" And the arrows slew right and left," said another, " but pierced not him: they glanced on his mail like chaff flung against the wind."—" And his steed, with five barbed arrows .quivering in its flank, and its sides all gore, made a leap that no mortal steed ever.made, bestrode by mortal rider," added another.
"Count of Toulouse," said the ancient knight, " I would rather lose the fairest field that ever mortal arm struck in, were life the wage and a throne the prize, than win it by evil aid, such as I dread was mar¬ shalled on thy side to-day in the form of that unknown knight." " Noble sir,'' said the Count, with his wonted fluctuation, " you think not so darkly of the stranger ? — and yet, per- chance^——* " Heed him not, noble Count Raymond!" said a youthful knight—" heed not those dreams! I saw nought achieved by this sable knight, as ye call him, beyond mortal prowess." A murmur was heard among the knights. " I say," he continued, raising*.his voice, " the fears of the cravens he dealt with first,distorted him into a fiend; and then they ran away from the fiend their fears had raised." ".Fair lord," said the ancient knight, " may I be heard ?"—" With all good-favour," said L 2
the Count. " ^Vhat is it you would demand. sir knight ?"—" How this nameless knight chanced to lend you the aid of his arm, of which all must allow the might, though many may doubt by whom that might is given?"—"I wiU teU ye,''said Count Ray¬ mond, as if he felt reHef Hke that which con¬ fession gives to a penitent,—" I will teU ye. Hearken, noble gentlemen and friends, aU of you " He leaned with his arms on the table as he spoke, looking thoughtfuUy : the heads of aU within hearing were closely inclined towards him, and many a cheek was pale at the expected tale, which the approach of danger and death that day had tinged only with a fiercer red. " It was on the eyening," said Count Ray¬ mond, " that the sufferings of my oppressed vassals, and the treachery and pride of Rome, had compeUed me once more to take up arms in their defence, and trust their cause and mine once more to heaven :—on
tliat evening I sat sadly in my chamber, having only two of my household Esquires near me, while I revolved in my own troubled and silent thought, how much and vainly I had consulted for the welfare - of my subjects; seeking, I appeal to God, only their good, while I was ever, alas ! unwillingly working them evil. I thought of the wars I had been forced into; the peaces I had been compelled to make ; the concessions to the Holy Father, that had been followed only hy fresh encroachments; and the" re¬ sistance, that had been punished by severer chastisement: and 1 sighed as I heheld my shield once more taken from the wall of my chamber. It waxed late, when 4 a page entered, followed by him ye call the sable knight. He advanced in silence, with the bars of his helmet closed. I commanded to place a seat for him: he declined it, waving his hand, but still in silence. I do vouch, noble friends, though the knight met my greeting courteously, there was some-
thing chilHng in his presence; such as, per¬ chance, yourselves may have felt at times." A responsive shudder among the guests an¬ swered him. " Hc spoke at length," con¬ tinued Raymond. ' Lord Count/ he said, ' thou art about to do battle against thy foes: I offer thee the aid of my lance and sword; perchance thou wilt not find them powerless. But I demand of thee three con¬ ditions, on which my service shaU be duly ten¬ dered :—that thou never demand my name, or ask why my shield bears no cognizance; that thou never require that the bars of my visor be unclosed ; and lastly, that if this arm achieve thee victory, thou wUt grant whatever boon I ask, save thine honour, life, and faith/ I yielded and------" " This we have heard," said the ancient knight. " But, lord of Toulouse, thou hast another tale to teU of this stranger knight, or report wrongs thee and him fouUy?"—" It is true," said Count Raymond; " there is a tale—a pas¬ sage—that did, in a manner, force on me
the fear (the feehng I would say) that our dark associate is formed of other mould than mortal men."—" Reserve the disclosure for a fitter occasion," said a voice close beside Count Raymond's chair. Count Raymond sank back in his seat, but Hfted his eye slowly in the direction Avhence the voice proceeded. The sable knight stood there, unan¬ nounced, unattended even by the ill-fa¬ voured page, his constant companion. At the sound so suddenly heard, many of the knights started on their feet, and unsheath¬ ed their daggers; Avhile others cowered where they sat, and hid their foreheads in their clasped hands for a time. The tent Avas Ht only hy one large lamp, suspended from the roof right over the centre of the table where the guests sat; and during the earnest conversation between them and Count Raymond, the pages had neglected to trim it, so that only a dim and waning light fell on the darkened groupe Avith their
gleaming daggers, and the towering form and ebon-liite mail of the sable knight. " Sir sable knight," said Count Raymond, at length recovering himself, " your appear¬ ance amongst us hath been somewhat sud¬ den, but is not the less welcome: I pray you, sit, and partake of our cheer." The figure in the sable armour shook its head in silence. " Sir - sable knight, I pledge you in a cup of wine: you will not refuse my pledge!" A silent gesture of disinclination was again the only answer. " By my faith, sir knight, this is somewhat discourteous; but if thou wilt neither partake of our feast, nor answer to our fair terms of courtesy, declare, after what manner likes thee best, thy purpose and thy pleasure here." The figure, by si¬ lent but emphatic gestures, signified its wish to speak with him alone. Count Raymond's cheek changed its hue at this invitation; and twenty voices, in eager whispers, murmured, " Go not with him, lord Count, at peril of thy life—or more!" The figure
did not utter a sound, but continued to re¬ peat its gestures Avith such an air of gentle invitation, and such a sorroAvful inclination of the head withal, that Raymond, ashamed of his fears, rose from his seat, and AvithdraAV- /ng the curtain of a recess in the pavilion, entered it, folioAved by the figure, leaving on the minds of his guests an impression of anxious and indefinable awe. For some time not a Avord Avas spoken; nothing could be heard but the rustHng of the mantles of the guests, as they laid doAvn their untasted Avine to gaze on the closed aperture, and then hushed the sound, to Avatch Avhat might issue from it: but not a breath coidd be heard—aU Avithin the pavilion Avas as still as death. To their high-Avrought anxiety the delay seemed protracted, and their very sUence Avas becoming insupportable to themselA--es, Avhen suddenly a deep and prolonged groan burst on their ears, and steps were heard passing from the pavi-_ Hon. There was no restraining them noAV: l 5
they rushed into the recess, where they found only Count Raymond, Avho, after a hurried inquiry into the cause of their intru¬ sion,* and an assurance, in a broken A-oice, of his safety, returned Avith them into the paviHon, and took his seat at the board again. But from that moment the taciturnity of his companion seemed to have possessed him : his goblet stood beside him untouched, and the most earnest and searching in¬ quiries coidd not extort from him a syUable relative to his conference Avith the sable knight. " Press me no farther, lords," he said at length heavUy, " Avith questions a solemn oath forbids me to answer. Mean¬ Avhile beHeve this, that since I Avas man, never Avas I so sore amazed, or in such deep heaviness of spirit: and now methinks it Avaxes late—A fair good rest to aU. Our Avearied and Avounded host forbid us to invest the Castle of Tarascon on to-morrow; but on the following day we wiU march to the assault with aU our forces, and shake
off the gloom 1 which this strange visitation hath inspired. • But, ere we set forth," he added in a deeper tone, " we must purify the host, nor hope to prosper with stained hands, and hearts burthened 'with unatoned guilt. A dark and fearful deed hath been done; and one amongst us must expiate his crime, even the flesh : for the soul, may God absolve it." He retired, and every knight departed silent and thoughtful to his tent. The sable knight had returned to his, where, as usual, he found his page, who never quitted it day or night, awaiting him. This unfortunate youth appeared to hav-a been the victim of some deadly dis¬ temper : his figure was slender, though somewhat awkward ; but his hands, and what could be seen of his face, had the livid and discoloured hue rather of a corse than of a Hving creature. A bandage was over more than half his face, to conceal the loss of an eye, which had been extinguished by the malignity of the disease ; while the other gleamed with a brightness that seemed pre-
terhatural, when-contrasted with the deadly colour ofhis features. His shoulders, too, Avere bent and distorted: and it avus not possible to conceive a more ghastly and revolting form than that ofthe ill-favoured page, Avhose mseparabiHty from his mysterious master was not, jin the minds of those Avho remarked it, a circumstance likely to diminish the impres¬ sion caused by his deformity, profound silence, and total abstraction from aU human com¬ panionship. As the sable knight entered the tent, the page prepared to touch his harp. " For¬ bear !" said the knight: " I am not in the vein. What star is that," he continued, looking upward, " that burns so blight in heaven right above the tent ?"—" Sages caU it Orion;" answered the page.—" Are not the pure lights of heaven," said the knight* speaking to-himself as Avas his Avont—" are they not Aveary of looking on the crimes and sorroAvs of earth ? When will they close their bright eyes, and leave men to do the t
deeds of darkness by the light that best be¬ fits them ?" A pause foUowed, for the page never spoke tiU addressed by his' lord. " From whom didst thou ieam thy starry lore ?" said the knight.—" An ancient monk taught it me, so please you."—" And was it a monk who taught thee to touch thy harp so masterly ?"—" I had another teacher for that/' replied the youth: " a skilful, but a wondrous harsh one—it was grief."—" I be¬ lieve thee, in truth," said the knight; " and, never did the hand of pupil counterfeit that of master so well."—" Mournful as its touch is," said the youth, " it hath sometimes won me back from despair."—" And me from madness!" exclaimed the knight, with one of those stormy bursts of terrible emotion, which now no longer startled his unfortu¬ nate companion. " Try," he added, " try if the speU be lost!" The page obeyed, and accompanied his harp with a voice whose sweet but wild tones had in them nothing earthly— Oh,
- Oh, sweet is the feeling, and sweet the hour, When Fancy, the bounds of existence scorning, Restores to past visions of joy their power, Ancl the twilight of love beams as bright as its morn¬ ing I When day sinks low on its pillar of fire, The sky with amethyst glories is beaming ; Ancl oft, when the light of the soul hath set, Tlie lieart reflects its departed gleaming. But, oh ! how much ofthe mingled and sad Revives with the dreams of the past in the soul! How sweet and bitter from Memory's cup Is the drop that was nectar in Joy's bright bowl! " Cease thy strain—it is aU too Hght,'' said the knight. The page sighed. " And yet ray lord has loved the praise of beauty well."—" Once" said the knight, in a voice that sounded like a groan: " but, I knoAV not how it is, thy song turns ever on the beauty of man—a duU theme—not on that of Avo¬ men, one more suited to thy sex."—" Nor wonder," said the page, Avith sudden anima¬ tion. " From woman beauty is almost de¬ manded; the homely are sHghted and neg¬ lected. In man we seek but strength, per-
chance symmetry ; but when to these is added beauty, we feel gratitude to nature as for an unsought favour : it is, in truth, gra¬ tuitous bounty, and we gaze on it with the same delight that we would on a mountain fertile in roses, or a palace encrusted with gems."—" This is strange speech for one of thy sex to hold," said the knight. The youth was silent. " Cheer thee, my boy!" said the knight, as if answering his silence. " No woman, in the softness ofher sex, could have been a more faithful attendant on a wayward lord than thou hast been on me."— " Oh, my dear master!" cried the page: and, grasping the knight's hand while he knelt*. he pressed his livid hps to it, and bathed it with tears. " I have been a stem master to thee !" said the knight, melting.—" Oh, no ; ever most gentle and most gracious !" — " I have but one task more for thee," said the knight, collecting his voice; " and then"' ------ He paused ; while the page rose, and folding his hands on his bosom, stood reverently be¬ fore him. " As we passed the shrine of
holy St. Martin, on" the otlier side the Rhone," said the knight, in a hurried voice, " I neglected to pay my devotions there. I am a sinful man, and would employ the ori¬ sons of one more pure than myself. Go there, I charge thee, by the dawn, ivhich is now brealdng: four men-at-arms shall be thy guard, and thy path lies wide of the Crusa¬ ders* post. Offer up thy prayers, and tell thy beads there for thy unhappy master; but, at the peril of thy life, return not hither till the sun hath twice risen on yonder hill." The unfortunate page seemed to listen as to'his death's doom. He fell on his knees, apparently in supplication; but at the stamp of the knight's foot he rose trem¬ bling,' and, bursting into an agony of tears, retired. 'The* day was now fully broke, and the knight was slowly, and with head declined, jjacing his ' tent, when a herald of Count Raymond appeared at the entrance. The knight raised his head. " Speak thy lord's message,' and briefly !" he said.—" My lord,"
said the herald, bowing low,—" my lord prays you, Sir sable knight, to pause yet another day on your dreadful pur¬ jiose; and if then—" The knight wav¬ er 1 him off with a gesture of fierce im¬ patience. " Commend me to thy lord," he said; and his better nature struggling within him—" and thank him, good fellow: but tell him, that he look to have a scaffold reared in the centre of his host to-day ; for blood that is flowing now in living veins must stain it ere many hours be past."—" Am I to do no other message to my lord?" said the herald with sad reluctance. The sable knight paus¬ ed. " Tell him," said he at length, " that I pray him to send some holy man to receive my confession, and, ifit be possible, to absolve my soul. Let none else, at the peril of their lives, approach this tent to-day!" The he¬ rald departed. The sable knight's request was not found easy to be complied with: not an ecclesias¬ tic in the host of Count Raymond would undertake the task. But, as the demand had
been so earnestly and solemnly made, the Count despatched a herald Avith a trumpet to the Castle of Tarascon, praying thein within of Christian grace to send some holy man to shrieve a penitent at point to die, and pro¬ mising on his knightly Avord that he should have safe conduct to and from his camp. It Avas late in the evening Avhen the holy man arrived: it Avas the Monk of Montcalm. He Avas conducted immediately to the tent of the sable knight, Avhich had been inacces¬ sible to human foot but his all that day. ■Some hours elapsed, and at their close the monk and his penitent were stiU together; the proud and lofty form of the knight kneel¬ ing at the feet of the pale monk, Avho, in the progress of his confession, (Avith all its in¬ creasing horrors,) sat with upUfled eyes and locked hands as he listened. " She promised," continued the penitent, " that she Avould sheAv my pre-doomed victim on the very night that the sacrifice was to be made; and she asked me for my ring, and swore she Avoidd produce it on that night!
She did : but it was my bridal night!—and the victim Avas to be my bride ! And such were her credentials from heaven or hell, that I beHeved her. She recaUed the very words of my birth- voav —that I Avas SAvorn to sacri¬ fice the last surv r ivor of mine enemy's race !— and that last survivor Avas she Avhose hand'I had clasped at the altar that mora ! I re¬ member rushing into the chamber that night more like a fiend than a bridegroom. There was but one Avay to absolve me of my oath, and yet to shun the impossible crime: I drew my dagger and------" (the monk caught his arm)—" plunged it into mine own bosom ! She saAV it. Deeming me mad, she sprang up and struggled Avith rne for the bloody Aveapon. I tried to inflict another—a mortal Avound ; and in the struggle------" " Hold! hold!" cried the monk, gasping.—" It was not I!—not 11" cried the penitent in a piercing tone of agony: " her OAvn hand dealt the Uoav ! But Avhen I saAV the bosom, so long pictured in my visions, pierced—when I be¬ held the blood floAv, and the body faU—I
rushed from the chamber with the speed and the despair of a fallen spirit hurled from Heaven. My wounds bled fast; I heeded them not, but ran on till I fell exhausted. After that I remember nought. I was for some months, as they told me, and as I had fearful cause to believe, where the unhappy seek to be. The maniac sorceress, Avhatever she was, who had urged me to my horrible fate, watched over my returning health and reason; but it was for her own deadly pur¬ poses, as a witch watches her caldron till the waters seethe and the flames sparkle to her • devilish will. She nursed me, too, in that unhallowed place, the ruined tower of Hugo, and gave me for mine attendant that ill-favoured page who hath furnished such matter of scoff and slander, but who was, in truth, a most gentle and feeling boy. I sent him hence but this morning, that he might not see me perish."—" Go on," said the monk in a tone of singular calmness.— "I have nought more to disclose,' said the penitent, " but this: that when restored to
bodily, not to mental health, I demanded my horse and arms. They were ready for me, as if raised by magic power; for that mys¬ terious being seems always to have Avealth at her will, though not at her use. But when I declared my purpose of joining the Crusaders once more, and added theAvish that the first lance le\ r elled by the foe might find my heart, or the first arrow my brain, she prostrated herself before me, and, Avith such inconceiva¬ ble agonies of suppHcation, implored that I should not draAv brand against Count Ray¬ mond of Toulouse: that, all-careless Avhere I fought, coveting only death, and deeming that I might as soon find it from a Crusader's hand as another's, and reckless AA'here, so it was found, I offered the aid of mine arm to Count Raymond, on condition------" " I knoAV the rest," said the monk, " by true report."—" Then thou knoAvest that I have sought Death in battle—yea, wooed him—but he has not come to me. The arrows missed me as they fleAv ; the SAVords struck against • me as if they Avere rushes: I could not die—
yet I Avill not live:—and I ha\ r e demanded of Count Raymond, as a boon------" " That Avhich he shaU neA'er grant!" said the monk, rising hastily, as some distant recollections roUed like a mist over his soul; Avhile amid them he thought he could trace clear images of past events, for he had been acquainted Avith the Count of Toulouse in liis youth; and the confession he had heard aAvakened the thought of a discovery all but miracuioi —" Holy father, mock not a desperate man !" said the penitent.—" Son," repHed the monk in a solemn,voice, " by thy soul's safety—by thy hopes of Heaven and mercy—by the poAvers of the Church, in whose name I pro¬ nounce thee absolved of aU crime—I, adjure thee to remain here in peace till my return, and banish despair from thy heart the Avhile!" He did, not return : but in a short space Count .Raymond, rushing into the tent, strain¬ ed -in his arms his first-born, " his beautiful, his brave;" and in mingled agonies of con¬ trition and-fondness demanded pardon of his child, while he heaped blessings on his head.
The astonished youth repHed not, but knelt in reverence to receive the blessings so ten¬ derly yet so mysteriously bestowed.—" On me be thy curse, my son!" cried Raymond, when he recovered his voice: " mine be the guilt of tha oav that I madly'bound on thy soul ret a child! Amid the flames of my f castle, amid the murder of thy mo- „*. and thy brothers, I found only thee and my youngest boy surviving; thou, my Pala¬ dour, wast then near five years old, thy bro¬ ther but an infant; amid blood and flames, in my heart's despair, I made thee swear to avenge the slaughter of thy house, even on the last descendant of its enemy's race. Oh, may God absolve me for a sin so deadly. Then taking thee, my eldest boy, in mine arras, Avhile the faithful menial, Avho had saved ye both, folloAved Avith thine infant brother in hers, I sought shelter for the night where I might. Amid the dark hills that surround the castle of Courtenaye we were assailed by ruffians: I fought tiU I feU; though never had mine arm struck with such strength'as
it did for thee, its precious burthen. I reco¬ vered from the trance, into which I had sunk through loss of blood; but I recovered to find myself childless. The attendant had fled, with my infant at the beginning of the fray, and thou hadst Avandered, or been borne away : nor ever did thine unhappy father hear aught of either till this hour. One hope I cherished, till that hope, long deferred, became almost despair. I had, by a preparation taught me by a skilful monk, impressed on the shoulders of each of my sons the mark of an arrow in colours indeHble, trusting that if ever"------- Sir Paladour bared his shoulder, and display¬ ed the mark, and yielding to all the fihal de¬ light of recognition, he threAV himself volun¬ tarily into the arms of his father: then has¬ tily withdrawing himself, " My lord and father," he cried,' " since it is mine honoured fate to caU you so, haste, in the name of Hea¬ ven, and save a worthier'and happier son than I." That Sir Amirald, my noble father, Avho was my brother-in-arms before I kneAV him, my brother in blood on our disastrous pro-
gross to the Castle of Courtenaye, chafed with his heavy armour, threw it off to bathe in a stream we were passing, and I saw his shoulder bear the same mark as mine/'— "And where, where is he now?" cried Ray¬ mond, trembHng in the *new-felt agonies of the'paternal heart. " He fought yesterday beneath the ban¬ ners of De Foix,'/ said Paladour; " and, late in the day, I saw him borne a prisoner into the Castle of Tarascon. Full surely will the Crusaders wreak their vengeance on him as a recreant to their cause, sparing neither for his valour nor his early youth."— " Away ! to horse, to horse! Mine armour--; let my banner fly!'' shouted Raymond. " Gas¬ ton—Bernard—Guy—slaves, why loiter ye now? Thou, Gaston, 1 ' as'they hurried to the tent, " hast a sharp spur : ride, ride, good fel¬ low, for Hfe and death, to the waUs of Taras¬ con, and summon De Foix and De Commin¬ ges", as they are gaUant lords, as they are Christian men, to join us with aU their forces vol. iv. M
beneath the toAvers of the Castle by daAvn. Tell them, they ride in rescue of the noblest knight that ever buckled on harness beneath their banners—my son, iny son!" he ex¬ claimed, bitter tears of agony starting from his eyes. " And thou, fair son," he said, " quit thy fearful purpose, and strike with me in aid of thy brother: thou wilt not rend thy father's heart the very hour thou Avast first folded to it."—" My lord and father," said the youth sadly and fixedly, " I must needs resign^ my purpose, since I may not dishonour by a felon doom the noble house I spring from ; but seek thy happiness from Amirald, not from me. That my soul hath shaken off the burthen of guflt pre¬ doomed and preternatural, I bless heaven and the saints; but Hfe, love, and hope blasted for ever, would even my father wish me to live ?" " Hark!" cried Raymond, " what tumult is this ?—Avho breaks in on us ? Merciful Heaven, Avhat figure is this—and AA r here-
fore ?" As he spoke, a figure darted into the tent, and, with a shriek which mingled joy and agony, clung round Paladour. In the disheveUed dress of a page, mingled with the flowing hair, the panting bosom, asid the thriUing voice of a woman, Raymond saw only an increase of mystery and amazement; but Paladour beheld in the page, whose band¬ age was removed, and whose livid dye had been washed off, his bride, his victim—Isa¬ beUe of Courtenaye. The shock seemed too much for both. After twice enfolding each other—after twice holding each other at short distance, that they might gaze, and drink in recognition at eyes that thirsted for the view—Paladour at length uttered "Thou Hvest:" and as IsabeUe, ex¬ hausted by emotion, sank on her knees, he sank along with her. The Monk of Montcalm, who had accom¬ panied the ill-favoured page to the tent, had ■ been apprized on the way of her story, as on the inteUigence of the intend- m2
cd sacrifice of Paladour she had hastened back from her prescribed pilgrimage, en¬ treated but a moment's interview with him, and pledged her life for the effect of her pre¬ sence. This was communicated by the monk to Raymond; and the blessings of a father Avere breathed on the heads of both. The trumpets of Count Raymond sounded to horse, Avhile the lovers stiU knelt before him. " Oh, Avhat means that fearful sound ?" cried IsabeUe, dinging to Paladour. " Art thou to be thus found and lost in a mo¬ ment ?" X " Fear not, my love," cried Paladour, " the might of many is in my arm, the spirit of an armed host Avithin my breast, since I belield thee. I go no more a desperate reck¬ less man to battle: I clasp a bride, and go to saA'c a brother." " Go then, my lover, my hero, my husband," said IsabeUe, the pride of ,her lordly Hne flushing a cheek long pale:
" let not the trumpet call thee twice!"— " Were it the trump of doom," cried Pala¬ dour, while he hastened to clasp his helmet and gorget the Avhile, " I shoidd not obey the summons, till I have heard Iioav I am thus blest as by miracle."—" It Avill be a tale for our after-Hfe," said Isabelle, "to tell thee 1ioav I was borne insensible from the castle by that evil Avoman, in the sad distraction of the hour Avhen my unhappy kinsman perished. She had many in the castle to work her Avill, and there Avas none to oppose her. Thee, too, whom she found breathless and bleeding in her Avay, she caused to be borne to that dreary toAver thou remem- berest. I have ofien thought there Avas goodness in that fearful Avoman to tend us as she did; but for some dark purpose of her * •own, it Avas suspended or overruled. I reco\ r ered; but only to see thy noble mind a -AATeck, my Paladour; and, with bitterer anguish still, to feel that my presence but thickened the cloud that overshadoAved thy
soul, That fearful being is skilful, as well as Avicked, beyond her species. She taught me to stain my visage, and disgmse and disfigure my form, that I might stdl be near thee without danger to thy tottering reason ; she counselled me to foUow thee in the guise of the hideous and disfeatured being I appeared; and sometimes my harp, and sometimes my voice, had that power for Avhich I bore my degraded state with joy, and Avept in ecstasy when I Avas alone." " But Avhy not sooner recognize me, my beloved, my bride?" " Alas! my love, the sound of woman's name, or woman's love, overshadoAved thy soul Avith deeper darkness. For years would I have Avatched, and Avept, and prayed in my disguise: but now thou knowest me, my Paladour!" she cried, fixing her bright and swimming eyes on him as she spoke. " Know thee!" cried Paladour, clasping her to his bosom, "know thee! Were I to Hve for ages, never coidd I know the
truth of woman's faith, the strength of woman's constancy, the power and the purity of woman's love!" - A herald, as he spoke, appeared at the en¬ trance of the tent, " I go," cried Paladour, nishing forth, while IsabeUe, who had no other favour now to offer, cut off a lock of her long-neglected hair, and waved it towards him as he flung himself on his war-steed. " Set on, my noble father!" cried Paladour, riding by the side of the Count.—" Hold, fair son!" said Raymond; "methinks a messen¬ ger rides towards us. Come ye," he said, as the messenger spurred his wearied steed onward, " come ye from the city of Taras¬ con, from our noble brothers-in-arms De Foix and De Comminges? or come ye from the Castle, where the Crusaders have betaken them?" " I come, my lord, from the city of Tarascon, whence the forces of De Foix and De Comminges are pouring forth fast in aid of the assault. But, noble lord, as I passed
the Castle of Tarascon, there were strange tidings abroad. The Crusaders are said to be dying by hundreds Avithhi the Avails: the gates are thrown open; and aU who can yet escape are flying from it for Hfe!" '* On! my noble friends—set on ! Fellow, I will reward thee AveU; but, hark thee, hast thou no other tidings ?" *• None, iny noble lord; save that, as I rode past the castle, I saw an iron pillar reared on its loftiest turret, and piles of fag¬ gots heaped around it: for, Hve or die, the .Crusaders have sworn to burn their prisoners to ashes ere the sun reach noon." . Count Raymond dashed his spurs into his steed's flank. '• Away! away!'* he cried, li tarry not for De Foix's loitering troops !— tarry not for mortal aid! He burns—the pile is blazing while I speak! Gentlemen, noble knighta, fathers, set on!—on, in the name of God!'" The army was aU in motion as he spoke. " Where is my son Paladour ?'' cried the agitated parent.—" By thy side, my
lord and father."—" Back, back, I charge thee, lest I lose ye both. Thou Avilt not! Well, then, Avin thy brother's Hfe, boy, if thou canst; but in the strife, spare, spare thine oavii as mine!"
At 5
CHAPTER IX. My senses blaze : my last, 1 know, is come, My last ofhours. Ti-* wondrous horrid !—Now My lawless love and boundless power reproach me J . Lhe's Mithridates. The Castle of Tarascon was that day indeed a scene of horror. The Cr-usaders, on their defeat, had thrown themselves within its waUs in distraction, less at the danger that threatened theni from the investing armies. than at the disgrace of their overthrow : Prince Lewis, in suUen despair, had shut himself up in his chamber, and menaced death to any intruder. The Bishop of Tou¬ louse alone preserved his resolution. He ap¬ pointed the foUowing morning for performing the obsequies of the Count de Montfort ; and,
to heighten the solemnity, resolved to cele¬ brate high mass in the chapel of the Castle, inviting the Cmsaders to partake of the holy rite. This an-anged, the bishop, summoning Lambert de Limons, toiled aU day Hke a com¬ mon man in inspecting and strengthening the fortifications of the Castle; and towards evening retired to Avrite letters, and dispatch couriers in every direction to summon in¬ stant aid. While he %vas thus employed, Lambert de Limons loudly murmured against the num¬ ber of prisoners that were Avithin the walls, and demanded, if the attack on the castle Avere turned into a siege, how so many use¬ less mouths Avere. to be fed ? — " We will take order for that," said the bishop, ", Go thou on the instant, and offer the prisoners their choice, either to renounce their heretical faith, or prepare to be dealt Avith as heretics Avhen mass is said to-morroAV."—"My lord," said Lambert reverently, " there be many of the Crusaders prisoners in the town; and
how if the Count de Foix should retaliate, and deal to them such measure as we deal to ours ?"--" If it be so," said the bishop, with a sanctimonious air; " they are sure of heaven, perishing as martyrs in its cause. But, bold Lambert," he added with a smile,> " thou art scarce as wise as brave, or thou wouldst know that the avarice of De Foix and his associate - are ample pledge for the safety of their prisoners. Thev will not lightly sa¬ crifice lives, the least precious of which will be ransomed for a thousand marks of silver; while our sorry prey would be dearly re¬ deemed at a Hard for the whole community." —'J. But how, my lord, if they should ac¬ cept the condition ?"—" 1 trust their obsti¬ nacy for that," said the bishop. " Go, and do my bidding." The Monk of Montcalm, who was present at this conference, stood aghast tiU, startled by the departure of De Limons, he attempt¬ ed^ remonstrate with the bishop. " It is not possible," he said—"'it is riot possible
that you can harbour such horrible purpose! You speak but to terrify these wretched men."—" Thou wUt see that by to-morrow's dawn," replied the bishop, " an' the smoke of the faggots do not dim thine eyes !''— ( * It is not possible!" repeated the monk. " The good God of mercy will not permit such - cruelty to be wrought in his name. -Also, this thing will be sin unto me, seeing I have pledged my faith as a Christian to * the pri¬ soners for their safety." The bishop answeiv ed him in the words of the Abbot of St. De¬ nis, when the king of England pretended ,a scruple of conscience in recognizing Pope Innocent in preference to liis rival Anaclet, " Songez seulement comment vous repondrez a Dieu de vos autres ptches: pour celui-la,je m'en charge /'—" Yet beware what thou doest, lord bishop!'' said the monk, trembHng avith fear, and resentment. " A noble knight, once a \ Crusader, is among thine intended victims, and ------" " He shaU perish first!" said the bishop, wlio burned to wreak his
vengeance on Genevieve through lier lover. " Not aU the lands that Raymond's victory yesterday hath won back for him, should buy that youth's life for an hour!" The monk redoubled his suppHcations.—" Thou hast prayed to marble saints, and they per¬ chance have heard thee," said the bishop; " but now thou hast to deal with one of more impenetrable material than marble or ada¬ mant."—" And they must burn, youth and maiden, warrior and infant!" cried the monk. " Mercy, mercy I dread lord," he cried, falHng at the bishop's feet, whUe tears stream¬ ed down his hoary beard—" mercy., in the name of the AU-merciful I — on thyself, as weU as on thy captives ! Oh, how canst thou caU for mercy who grantest none !"•— '* Debase not thyself in vain !" said the bishop. " Go shrieve the penitent who waits for thee in the camp of Count Raymond!" The monk arose from his knees, and waved his withered arm towards heaven. " I am guiltless of their blood!" he cried: " but
for thee, thou man of cruelty—for so I dare call thee in thy pride—thou who rendest the flock thou shouldst feed, look if thou he not soon repaid as thou hast deserved!" He stood near a casement that looked on the walls of Tarascon as he spoke. " Thou didst send that Sir Ambrose to treat for the ransom of the Crusaders; and, lo! I see a gib¬ bet erected on the bartizan, and they are dragging towards it one who struggles." —" Are they about to hang him ?" said the bishop without raising his eyes from the let¬ ter he was writing.— " On the instant, unless a swift messenger be sent to stop their cruel¬ ty."—" The rope will have done its office ere a messenger could reach them," said the bishop coolly.—" In the name of Heaven, then, let a mass be said for his soul!" cried the monk,—" That were needless too, for without all doubt he will die in his heretic faith," answered the bishop.—" Holy. Hea¬ ven !" cried the poor monk, " can one hear, of the fate of a dying wretch thus unmov-
ed! Noav they have dragged him, to the gibbet! what strength despair can give! He hath burst from them—he grapples with them—noAV they drag him forward on his knees—he clings to the gibbet's foot— they cannot untwine his grasp—the rope is vfourid round his neck."—"Good night, Sir Ambrose," said the bishop Avithout raising his head: " thou hast been somewhat trouble¬ some and useless of late; and I sent thee of an errand where thy foul tongue and fierce tamper have met their meed. Dotard, stand not there wringing thine hands! The herald of Count Raymond ' hath sounded his trumpet twice. Go, and assoil thy living penitent: the dead are past thy cares."—"I go," said the Monk of Mont¬ calm, " and Heaven grant that I may shed around his death-hour that peace Avhich I fear me, bloody prelate, will be denied to thine !"-—" Mauleon," said the bishop (\vith- Out noticing his departure) to one of his mili¬ tary attendants', " thou sawest to-day, as I
passed tlirough the hall of the castle, where the prisoners were assembled ere they were conveyed to the dungeon—thou sawest I fixed mine eyes on a woman who stood amongst them ?" — *' I did, my lord, and understood the signal well."—" How now, thou insolent knave ?—the woman I speak of was neither young nor fair; she was distinguished only by her grey hairs. Go, fetch hcr hither instantly !" In a few moments she stood in his pre¬ sence ; and the bishop made a signal to^ his attendants to quit the chamber. While removing her mantle she gazed fixedly on him, disclosing the visage he expected to behold. " It is thou, then ?" he cried; " but wherefore art thou here ?"—" Wherefore is the vulture ever near the prey ?" replied the female. " I was wandering near the skirts of, the battle yesterday : they took me for an Albigeois,—and I am here."—" And here, then, thy life of mystery is doomed to close: the hand of Heaven hath overtaken
thee at last!"—" Name not Heaven," said the female, " for Avhat hast thou to do with it? It is mirth for the fiends when hypocrites • talk of Heaven."—" Thou canst best tell tidings of thine own associates," said the bishop: " they will, ere long, welcome tlie arrival of one who can teach ev;en them neAV lessons of crime."—" Woe to those who first taught me !" answered the female.—" Out on thee, hag!" cried the prelate: " thy crimes Avere wrought in the mere Avan- tonness of thy depravity! Was it not by thy devices that the Lord of Courtenaye expired in flames, and the Lady IsabeUe and her bride¬ groom perished ?"—" Yet Paladour fought but yesterday beneath the banners of Count Raymond; and Isabelle, in menial habit, sleeps this night at the feet of her husband." —" What sayest thou ?—but thou canst not speak truth !" cried the bishop. " Miserable woman ! as thou hast hope of life, or of mer¬ cy, speak the truth !"—" Hope of life ? bribe the fools Avho value it:—of mercy? who
ever sought it at thy hands ? But I mil speak—not for thy will, but mine own. There were three on earth on whom I had vowed revenge: on two it hath been fulfilled, and - on the third it shall be. Far above the wretched maniac as they stood in state and power, mine hand hath reached them. I knew the vow which was bound on Pala- dour's soul in childhood, and from childhood I watched him. I led him to the Castle of Courtenaye when his age was ripe to fulfil it. I obtained admission there by working on the guilty terrors of the Lord of Courtenaye, and my admission facilitated my purpose." -—" Hold, wretch ! Was all that thou shew¬ edst us in the vaults of the castle that night mere illusion?—"Not all" replied his com¬ panion with a withering smile. ** Paladour beheld the bleeding form of his pale bride; and to thee I displayed the triple crown of flames, which shall ere long, I trust, empale thy burning brows. My spells wrought— the. hour, arrived, the blow was struck."—
" And yet thou sayest Paladour and Isabelle Kve ?"—" I crushed them while they con¬ tended with my purpose; I relented when they became its victims; nor were they ever the objects, but the implements, of mine ha¬ tred : and when the youth purposed to join the Crusaders, I shuddered to add to his ima¬ ginary guiit the burthen of real parricide; for, had he slain Raymond of Toulouse, he would have slain his own father. And now, have I not kept my vow and wreaked my vengeance? The Lord of Courtenaye pe¬ rished in flames and torture ; Raymond was punished by twenty years' privation of his **. m child: there remains but one more victim, and that victim is—thyself!"—" Announce my doom, most potent prophetess ' most sage sorceress!'' cried the bishop, with a disdainful laugh.—" Thou shalt appear in the spirit before the judgment-seat, or ere to-morrow's sun be set-----" — " Maniac' mendicant ■ witching llag! ,, cried the proud prelate in scorn, " whose menaces are despicable as
thyself art loathsome, is it thou who darest to predict my doom ?"—" Nor maniac, men¬ dicant, nor witch," cried the female, her voice sweUing to a tone of fearful power: " it is Marie de Mortemar who speaks thy doom, and defies her own !" She snatched a lamp from the table as she spoke, and stood full before him. " This was the face that men thought fair, till thou didst cover it with dishonour; this was the form that was pure, till thou didst debase it! Oh!" she shrieked, "that I could thus lay bare my soul before thee, it would be the reflection of thine own—despair!" The bishop's blood ran cold in his veins. He retreated some paces; but he tried to overcome his fear by rage. " Vision from the grave!" he exclaimed, "abhorredspectre!. thus hast thou often glared in my dreams; but thou shalt haunt me no longer, waking or slumbering! Ho! Mauleon, Savarif' he, shouted to his pages, stamping, " bear this hag to the dungeon!—No:" he paused;
" she shaU not hold intercourse with agents from earth or hell! Is there a nook in these waUs where she may be kept in safety, and apart from the other prisoners?"—" So please you, my lord, there is one adjacent to this chamber.—"Doth it communicate with any other apartment in the castle?''— "With none, reverend lord, save with the ehapel, which hath been long deserted."— " Bear her thither on the instant! I wHl try whether the foul shape, with which that fiendish spirit is intrusted, be proof against the flames to-morrow!" Marie de Mortemar departed without ut¬ tering a word; but she gave a glance, as she parted, that the bishop, in his pride, shrank from. He stood appaUed for a mo¬ ment; then issuing orders that the pUe should be Ht as mass was said on the morrow, he retired to rest; but not without a previous and minute inspection of the planetary heavens, now in their midnight glory. AU there appeared favourable, as aU on earth
was calm. There was not a sound from the camp of Count Raymond or the city of Tarascon, though the moving of the gHm- mering Hghts in each told of preparation all aHve. The bishop threw himself on his bed, giving orders to the pages, who slept at his feet, to wake him before dawn. The morn¬ ing broke, and preparations were making in different parts of the castle for two very dif¬ ferent celebrations, though the cruel super¬ stition of the age deemed them the same in religious importance and efficacy. The chapel, long neglected, was now, Hke a banished favourite recaUed, arrayed with aU the pomp the time could allow of, by the ecclesiastics of the bishop s train, who weU knew how to direct such preparation. Mean- whUe, an iron stake had been fixed in the massive roof of stone with which the highest turret of the castle^was covered; the prisoners, who were aU Albigeois, verifying to a man the bishop's prediction of their obstinacy, and
announcing their resolution tx> perish in the flames, rather than renounce their faith. ^; "The obsequies of the Count de Montfort, Whose'body, clothed in armour, with a cruci¬ fix placed in the hands, lay on a bier: in the centre of the aisle, were -first performed, the bifehop and'aU the ecclesiastics chaunting the- " Dirige gressus ~meos*- High mass was "then celebrated by the bishop with aU the poriip of the CathoHc ritual; and after the distribution of the consecrated elernents to the c ecclesiastics, the laity approached to "'partake of the bread. Hundreds of armed figures (Prince Lewis and Sir Aymer alOne being absent) crowded round the "• altar; and many a stately head and stubborn knee was bent, and many a gauntleted hand locked in earnest devotion, while the holy rites went.on: In a short time a sHght' con¬ fusion '-* was reriiarked : some who had par¬ taken, 1 •instead of retiring to their seats in: the aisle^remained, as if unable to quit the^spot; some;* who ; itill knelV seemed, after a*- few
efforts to quit thefr posture, to sink stiH lower; while others, Avho had retired a few steps, sat down in the aisle, and resting their drooping heads on their hands, appeared faU- ing into a lethargy. The ecclesiastic who held the patin to the bishop, plucked his robe, as if to mark these extraordinary appearances; but in doing so his countenance assumed a strange . expres¬ sion, and he feU speechless beside the altar. Two who attempted to raise him, continued to bend over him helplessly, as if unable to raise themselves from their mcumbent, pos¬ ture ; and a fourth, dashing the holy element he*bore to the ground, and pointing, to ,it with a look of horror, sank beside them. The symptoms every moment became more unequivocal: those Avho with eyes uplifted in devotion were partaking of the rite, felt them fixed; those Avho had clasped their hands in prayer, felt them stiffening; while loathing sickness or excruciating pain marked the different but fatal character of vol. iv. n
» .* the malady, as it operated on different con¬ stitutions. And tliose Avho had not yet par¬ ticipated, beHeving the groans and vehe¬ ment gestures ofthe sufferers to proceed only from the intenLsity of tlieir devotion, pressed franticly on to the altar, to partake of the sacred enthusiasm the rites had inspired. 1 At this moment the day broke fuHy, and, through ?the many-tinted windoAvs of the chapel, >flung ghastly light on the features of the dying. * At length the terrible conviction burst- ori aU: a cry of horror rang through tlie church, andr the dreadful sounds of ** Poison, poison! the holy elements are poisoned!" echoed on every side, and in eA*ery accent of despair and death. Through dead and dying—the con¬ vulsed, avIio caught his robes in their agonies; and the still conscious, Avho implored his benediction in vain—the Bishop of Tou¬ louse burst his Avay on the first conviction;, and, on reaching his apartment, appHed the strongest antidotes that the skill of the age
could furnish, and with which he had al¬ ways- the precaution to be amply provided. The very first attempts proved their total inefficacy, and the bishop felt " that he must appear in the spirit before the judgment-seat; ere that day's sun was-set." His resolution did not desert him for a moment iii 1 'this dreadful emergency; and subduing all expres¬ sion of the torture that already 'began "to prey Hke a living fire on his vitals, 11 he com¬ manded his attendants instantly -to bring Marie de Mortemar hefore him, stiU -cherish¬ ing the belief congenial to all proud • and powerful minds, that-he bore "a charmed Hfe," and that means, even supernatural, would* yet interpose for its preservation. As Marie* de Mortemar was led into the 1 cham¬ ber, the triumph that sparkled in her eye, and dilated her Avhole form, restored to her Avasted' frame somewhat of the beauty by which it had once been eminently ; 'distin¬ guished. * This identity with her former self made the bishop shudder. Past crimes- arid
horrors seemed present again, as she stood before him. " Fiend," said the bishop raising his livid eyes—" fiend, this is thy work!'*— " Mine," she answered firmly—" mine; and the t las^t act of my life is its most glorious. This, is indeed dying worthy of the cause for - v which alone J have groaned under the bur¬ then of hfe for twenty years. But for thy foolish malice,, that confined me in the neigh- t *, I f * „ *" t*> 4 bourhood of the, chapel, instead of remanding _me to ( t my dungeon, I had never had such t ainple v .power of vengeance: the shaft was jfaimed^at thee, but its flight hath laid many low.' 1 —"Boast of thy crime," said the bishop, " while thou mayest; but a few mo¬ ments, and thou shalt expiate it in flames,." —'?< Better perish in flames, than live to Jje .their fuel for ever and ever," said Marie,de .Mortemar. "Hag, thou liest!" crjed.the .prelate. " I never feared man nor fiend. ^Vherever my disembodied spirit may t wander,, there it will, rule: I shall „be among the spirits of the earth's high lords-—
THE ALBIGENSES. S$)9 the ancient conquerors—thcJse wHo/'like me, conceived purposes too vast for earth, but who will realize them in' other regions ! If the spirit survive death, its power will sur¬ vive also: I shall sit with kings."—"Thou wilt, indeed, sit with the disturbers'of'the earth—the defacers of God's creation !" 3 cried Marie de Mortem ar, fixing her eyes on* his convulsed features; " but where are tHey ?" "Vile hag!" cried the bishop, "Tsent'not for thee to ban and rave! Thou, who knc-w- est the power of that deadly venom, knoWst perhaps its antidote: disclose it, and I will 'exchange thy stake for a throne. I dread not death, but I woidd live till my* sound reached to the earth's limits. ' Give me life, and I will reward thee beyond all thy 1 delirious dreams of vengeance."-*—" Such antidote I have," she cried; " but thou shalt never taste its virtue! Oh, hope not, hope not, man of pride and power/ that tne earth's treasure could win that secret from me! I tell thee, were thy body formed 6Tada- N 3
mant, the drug is so potent, it Avould expel thy spirit from it ere an <hour be past."— " Seize the sorceress, and chain her to the stake!" cried the Bishop ,of Toulouse, col¬ lapsing in mortal sickness. " I aviU see her burned;with mine oavii eyes!"—"There, too, thou art .baffled and deceived!"- cried Marie, " thine ,eyes AviU close in agony ere a faggot can be lit, ere <a flame can be raised! Hark, hark, to, the trumpets of Raymond of Tou¬ louse! His, catapults wiU shake. these waUs ere, the ^vords have parted ftom my Hps! See how '.fast the bands of De rFoix and De, Comminges pour from Tarascon^ . and aU against this distracted castle, fiUediAvith the dying and the dead. Hark," she xried listening-to the screams, of horror and agony that burst from the chapel below, " hark to thy kneU. Thine enemies are around ithee— thine alHes in blood and crime are perishing. Chain me to the stake: burn me.an' ye wiU; but, ere I am in ashes, thou wilt be in flames." The trumpets of Count Raymond were in-
deed heard as she spoke; and the attendanfs,' qiutting hold of her at the sound, rushed to¬ Avards a casement to ascertain the truth *6f Avhat she said. Marie de Mortemar seized the moment of her release: she tore back**a casement that opened on a bartizan ;• for a ' moment she stood there, gazing downAvard--- " I come, I come !" she cried ; then Avaving her arm in the direction of the chapel, from Avhich the cries of horror and death at * that moment redoubled—" FoUow—follow," she cried; " foUow aU of you—he 'waits - for you!" and flinging herself from the c bkrtizan;" her body Avas dashed to atoms on the rockV l terrace. The bishop vieAVed her fate-with less emotion than he heard her tidings 5 . 1 " Look forth," he said, " look forth, and see if her inteUigence be true:—a trumpet seems to ring in mine ears; but whether it be.that of the enemy, or of doom, I know" not—nor reck !" ' - ! ■ ; The attendants looked forth, and beheld all the plain overspread Avith the array of Count*
ALBIGENSES. Raymond, who led the van at' fiiU speed; while the troops of "De Foix and his as¬ sociate * were pouring fast from the city of 'Tarascon, their lances gleaming in the morning sun. " They come!" cried the attendants'; " and who is there to meet theni?—a dying band, and a defenceless ' castle" P'-i-" Am /not here," cried the bishop— ~ ?< am I not here still ? Cravens—coAvards, fetch''mine armour !" and he appHed his frarids to his robes as if bracing on his ar- Wour. Of his four attendants, three fled as he spoke'to make desperate defence: one n alone remained to watch the last moments ofthe mighty prelate, on whose associations the' sound of war operated even amid the agonies of death.' "Charge! charge!" he cried; "we shaU Avin the day yet: can we fad Avith such no¬ ble aid? Thou art with us, Simon de Mont¬ fort—and thou, Enguerrand de Vitiy—aiid "thou, Raymond of Toulouse, restored to the banners thou once foughtest beneath so
s bravely! Why comes that pale Lord of Courtenaye," he cried, his thoughts all /run¬ ning on the dead,—" and that strange bride¬ groom and his bleeding bride? Well, l^t them ride up: Ave are a gallant company. Charge ! charge your lances at their, throats! Hold! who is the leader that waves ye ■ i — j*t**Mjr; on? Ride not up that precipice; see*what yawns below ! He doffs his helmet.) ^See-— see his A*isage! Follow not his beckoning. JEIe plunges—and Ave must plunge ftoo-*- for ever, for ever! Dark spirit, I will grapple with thee !" He feU—and expired., . Meanwhile the castle Avas one Avide scene of consternation, horror, and helplessness. * * # -*../«-•. Lambert de Limons had perished; the men- at-arms had loAvered the draAv-bridge to effect their escape from Avhat they believed, to be diabolical power. The fierce and rapid as- sault of Count Raymond gave no choice and met no opponent: his troops in a moment deluged the castle with a tide of unre-
sisted } victory. The surviving Crusaders made good the postern with their lives,' to secure the safety of Prince Lewis. The Monk, of Montcalm made his way to the chapel,*to shrieve the dying and say masses for the, dead. CoivmVRaymond and Paladour hasted to the turret, where the victims were already, chained to v the stake. Raymond stood exhausted; wliile Paladour, with one strong, grasp,, rent Amirald's chain ; and would have folded his brother to his heart, had not, ,Amirald, bursting from his arms, fir$t struggled to break those of Genevieve/ * * * * * •» t- - * It was but a short space after these events, that IsabeUe of Courtenaye, restored to her honours and Wealth, and reunited to Pala¬ dour, was .twining the dark tresses of Gene¬ vieve, , whom she* termed "dear lady and sister," with the wreaths of pearl that formed ! part of her splendid bridal array. ?
r fhe espousals of Paladour and'Aniirald were held -. in the territorial Castle of Ray¬ mond of Toulouse. The Abbot of Normou¬ tier (though the younger pair were heretical) spoke the nuptial benediction'; and Sir'Ay¬ mer du Chastelroi gave away Genevieve. We pause not to describe the splendour"of the bridal, nor to relate how many vaHarit sons and beautiful daughters sprang 1 from' thbs'e' auspicious nuptials: but AA r e< must rdcord a' circumstance " more germane" to our tale—-' that the, difference of birth and creed Avas never known to disturb the affection that 1 subsisted between the high-born Lady of Courtenaye and the humble bride of Ami- raid, i, Pierre, the pastor, lived honoured and che¬ rished in the Count's palace, long enough to feel the Httle hands of Amirald's and Gene¬ vieve's offspring placed between his—and then departed in peace and hope. His body, as a 1 heretics, was not permitted to lie in conse- v
^crated ground: it was interred . Avithout the waUs of the city of Toulouse, and a plain stone bore this inscription—" Pet rus Vutlen- sis." A few months after his interment, the Monk of Montcalm, returning from a distant pilgrimage, halted near this stone: it Avas tAviHght,—and he asked a passenger to ex¬ plain the characters to him. The passenger told him that the remains of Pierre the pas¬ tor rested beneath the stone on which his staff was struck. "Then, truly," said the monk, " I wiU tell a bead or two, and utter a prayer for him—heretic as he Avas—ere I quit this spot." He knelt as he spoke, and the passenger went his way. The next morning he returned by chance, and saAV the lifeless body of the monk, bent, as if in prayer, on the tomb-stone of the pastor. With his staff he had made shift to inscribe in the dust near him, " Anima mea, cum anima tua, heu mul¬ tum deflende ! pacem eternam conscquatur ;" —thus, in his last moments, testifying his attachment to the pastors character, if not
*277 to his creed. May those of different - faiths, ■ Hke them, imitate their tolerance and em¬ brace their example! "H , ( , i *•> >i . y , i r ff Moi riNis. , itrt)i Jliy ■-• • •*- «v tu.:- ■* ' " ! 1 *.i/f >.s\ Jl ^ s ? * ,1 * r> ffj "* ' ; "fd*; ' > r A ■" '.-'i *i > ' ,> *; - > ■■>,■. in " -it*..' LONDON : PRINTED BY S. AND R. BENTLEY, DORSET-STltELf,
