Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The albigenses: a romance
THE ALBIGENSES.
CHAPTER I. Oh, the Monks of Melrose made good kale, On Fridays when they fasted, They wanted neither beef nor ale, As long as their neighbours lasted. Old Ballad. Neither the deep and cautious silence which the Court of Rome preserved on the subject of the Bishop of Toulouse assuming the title of champion of the Church, and lead¬ ing the army of the Crusaders—the refusal of King PhiHp to aid him with a single man-at- arms, till that title was recognized by the Vatican—nor the desertion of the Crusaders 1 * troops; nor ultimately the defeat he had sus- VOL. III. B
tained in leading the remainder against the forces of Count Raymond, had subdued the invincible spirit of the Bishop. Neglected by the Pope, disclaimed by King Philip, lie resolved to give Ins retreat the air of a ■victory, and consulting both policy and the rude tactics of that excursive war, he was leading the remainder of his forces towards Beaucaire, thus, at once securing a retreat to his own well-fortified castle in the vici¬ nity, intercepting the advance of Count Raymond on other cities in his territory, which were filled with Albigeois, and pre¬ senting an imposing attitude of hostility, while he meditated only his own security. It was on the third evening after his defeat, that the bishop, riding alone, and at some distance from his followers, took out a small table-book in which he had noted down the names of the knights Crusaders. In a hasty tone, he repeated, " Paladour, knight of mystery, departed in quest of the lady Isa¬ belle : let him tilt against the rocks till his lance breaks, and then break his brainless head against them, Amirald!—a page at
the Castle of Courtenaye ; knighted for some mad deed of chivalry, and done to death at his late encounter. Verac and Semonville, fop and churl, parted too on the wild quest of this lady of the lake. By heaven, the age of old romance hath come again! The knights who fought around old Troy were wiser, for they demanded the dowry with the dame, and these would win the dame, though she lacked her dowry. But to my tablet. Sir Aymer, grey-beard and green spirit: most unapt assortment!—but he hath valour and power. The Lord of Courtenaye, coward and murderer known, and sorcerer suspected. I list not to read farther. I am as a chess¬ player, who must marshal my pawns as I may against a fearful array of knight, bishop, and castle—but the king," he added, striking his bold breast, " the king can never be taken." As he spoke, he tore and scattered the leaves of the tablet. " How fares it with my lord?" said a priest, who rode near him^—■" Even as with an ar¬ tist who hath no implements to work withal," replied the bishop.—" And hast thou not B 2
stout bodies and valiant hands to work thy will ?"—■" I want minds? answered the bishop abruptly, '* not such as those about me, minds almost corporeal—so formed by habit and circumstance, that their whole train and course of action seem the residt, not of will, but of necessity. I lack men, whose characters have been forced out by strong emergencies—by rare and high trials —by abrupt and potent cries from suffering society. Let me have no blocks chiselled out by the patient slow-working hand of human toil, and then stuck on pedestals for brute idolatry to bow before. Give me the rude shapeless mass rent from the rock by the light¬ ning and the storm, and bearing wonder and ruin in its career! We have too much of mo¬ nastic impotence and inefficiency: we cloister up our males till eloquence is a capucifiade, and energy turned a book-worm,' feasting on the vile scrolls of fierce and frivolous contro¬ versy, or worm-eaten metaphysics; and our women cloistered too—their persons neglect¬ ed, their costume repulsive; ugly enough even in the embellished pages of a missal,
amid gold and azure and vermilion, but the devil in the conventual garb. Oh! with such men as those I encountered; and such a form as thine, Genevieve, and perhaps "......... He paused,—" But who be they who approach ? I see through the twilight a numerous com¬ pany advancing."—" It is the Abbot of Nor- moutier and his train," answered father Chrysostom, " journeying homeward from the Castle of Courtenaye, where he hath made long sojourn, partly he said for the healing of his wounds. I know the state in which the wealthy abbot rides, and know he must pass this moor to reach the abbey walls, now not two leagues distance. So, please you, my lord, let us pray him for his hospitality to¬ night. There is no place in this wild country that can afford meal or harbour fit for a wolf —or worse, an heretic ; and the lord abbot, though merely a fool, is hospitable withal."— " I tell thee," said the bishop, " I had rather couch on thi? dark moor, than harbour for a night with that murderer of all mean¬ ing, and mere necromancer of the ghosts of departed quotations; none of which obey
his call—say to him so, and quit me of him."—" But, my lord..... " said Chrysostom. —" But me no buts," said the prelate hastily; " I can abide bad fare, and worse lodgment; but debility, or even mediocrity physical or mental, is the object. of mine utter and insurmountable aversion. I had rather be tortured in a hell of devils, than live in a paradise of fools: go, I My, and do my message." . In the mean time, the Abbot of Normou¬ tier had also descried the approach of the JBishop of Toulouse, and sent forward his crosier-bearer to pray his lordship to partake of the humble fare and lodgment of the Abbey of Normoutier that night; and that his invi¬ tation might lack no courtesy, he spurred up his mule and rode towards the bishop to en¬ force it. " If the Bishop of Toulouse," said father Chrysostom to a monk of Normoutier whom he knew, " refuses the proffer of the abbot, his train are like to suffer; for it is held, reverend brother, that the brotherhood of
Normoutier keep not cold Christmas in their superior's absence." " Thou art in the right of it," said the monk. " But," added Chrysostom, " what if the abbot and his guest overtake them in their hour of revel ? such deeds have chanced: how say ye to that ?"—" I say," added the monk, " that we have a trick shall win the abbot to overpass all transgressions as hghtly as we pardon full-handed penitents at Easter. Wot ye that we have two prisoners in the abbey, for one of whom the Abbot of Nor¬ moutier would pawn the richest jewel on the shrine of St. Benedict. Hark, and I will avise thee of their names,"—they were dis¬ closed in a whisper— " We reserve this secret," said the monk, " to appease the wrath of the abbot, should it be kindled against the community, for aught they may have done unbeseeming the sanctity of their order, during his absence. Thou wilt not betray me?"—"Not for the pope's absolution," quoth Chrysostom, riding up, as he spoke, close to the Bishop of Tou¬ louse.
It was at this moment that the abbot's im- , portunity, though enforced by Ms veiy worst quotations, was yielding to the bishop's per¬ tinacious and somewhat haughty refusal, that father Chrysostom whispered, " My lord, I pray you, comply with the abbot's prayer. I shall yield you such reasons as shall afford you large contentment: those whom you wot of are lodged in the Abbey of Normoutier." —" Lord abbot," said the bishop, suddenly softening both mien and voice, " we shall be debtor to your hospitality once more. Turn we, then, towards the abbey. We trust one day, lord abbot, to repay you at our poor Castle of Beaucaire.*' —" Surely, my holy lord," said the abbot, " I shall partake of your cheer right gratefully— velut zllis Cani- dia ajflasset pejor serpentibus atris. —Set on, brethren, towards the abbey; hardly shall we win it ere night, and travelling is now right perilous." And so the abbot rode on beside the bishop, who reined up his war-steed to keep pace with the former's pampered mule: the fiery mettle, free movements, and noble form of the one contrasted with the sleek
body, slow pace, and gorgeous trappings of the other, giving no unsiutable image of the characters and habits of the respective ri¬ ders. It was dark before they reached the Abbey of Normoutier. The long massive pile of building with its towers and spires clustering in the darkness, stood Hke a moun¬ tain on the verge of the heath. No light gleamed from any part of the buUding, save from the windows of the refectory, which appeared aU in a blaze as the traveUers ap¬ proached, and there was a sound of music, which might at a distance seem the chaunt of monks at vespers; but the bishop soon caught the sounds of a glee lustily chaunted by the monks: it was one of that monasti- cal Anacreon, Walter-a-Mapes, beginning as foUoweth:—■ Alihi sit proposltum in tabemS mori, Vimim sit appositum morientis ori Ut dicant cum \enerintaugelorum chori Deus sit propitius huic potatori. " The brotherhood," said the abbot, who had some inward misgivings, " are doubtless em¬ ployed in offering up prayers for the souls of b 5
the Crusaders, who fell on that day of many deaths." As he spoke, his attendants knock¬ ed at the gate, and " the lights, so many and fair, that signal made but now,' 1 disappeared in a moment as by magic. " Smite again," said the abbot, who sat chattering with cold • on his mule, " and smite harder : use dagger- hilts on the gate, if riding-rods avail not to make them hear."—" Sir abbot," said the bishop, smiling, " I pray you, disturb them -not at their holy exercise; perchance a Cru¬ sader's soul is now shivering between pur¬ gatory and paradise."—"I know a Crusader's body is shivering between cold and famine, and that is a more near and touching matter at the present," said the abbot. Meanwhile the knocks were redoubled ; and the porter, who reconnoitred the party through a wicket, rushed back in terror to the community, who had been at high revel, and verified all their fears by announcing the return of the abbot with the Bishop of Toulouse in company. " Hbld him in parley," said the abbot of mis¬ rule, " for a space, if thou canst: we have a device for the nonce to slake his wrath, if it
burned against us as a furnace heated seven times hot. Hold! I wiU go myself. Clear the hall with what speed ye may; while I undergo the challenge of this invader of our royaume of misrule." They had already extinguished the lights, and now made haste to remove the covers and carpets, and the dainties with which they were heaped, into vaiious nooks of the refectory; while he of misrule set forth to gain time by holding the abbot in parley. " Who is it," he asked, in a snuffling and solemn tone, " who knocks so loud and late, disturbing the devotions of a few poor servants of holy St. Benedict ?"— " It is your abbot," answered a quavering but impatient voice, "restored to your prayers and those of the community, which have doubt¬ less wearied Heaven for mine escape from the peril of battle, and the feU and bloody dint of the heretics' clubs in that day when the flower of France and of chivalry perished." — " Thou art a lying and an evil spirit," snuffled the monk, " and art merely sent to tempt us; know we not by sure avisement that our late abbot .... ?"—" Thy
late abbot; I tell thee I am thy present abbot," quoth the impatient dignitary.— " Peace, thou lying spirit!" answered the other. " True men told us that the late Abbot of Normoutier fell in that fierce and fruitless battle that the Crusaders fought with the heretics. Nay, to confound thee, and for thy more assurance, I had it re¬ vealed to me in a dream, that Raymond of Toulouse himself cleft him with his battle- axe from his head (skull, I should say) to his middle. Nay, never groan or make wail; I promise you, men marvelled much at the manner of his death, for in this abbey it was held as a matter of creed, that the abbot's skull would have undergone the dint of the cluli wielded by Ascapart, or the fall of the highest tower of. the Abbey of Normoutier."— " Knave, admit me suddenly," said the in¬ censed abbot, " and I will prove to thee that thy tale is false by strokes across thy pate, such as were never dealt by spirit."—" Lo you now," answered the other, " what a ma¬ licious and fiery spirit have we to deal with! Our abbot in his life-time was deemed a
peaceable, pursy, dignitary as ever slumber¬ ed in staU, and here comes his spirit vaunt¬ ing, daunting, and ranting Hke Termagant, or the twelve peers of France and the knights of the Round Table to boot—an' the other world have taught ye no better manners, speed back and learn them as ye may — our gates are open to no spectre- rampant at this hour."—" I swear to thee, brother Gregoire," said the abbot, " that I am a living and sinful man. Admit me, I pray, or, as a Father hath it, prima node domum claude! Knowest thou me now, for I was ever skiUed in apt quotation ? keep me not chattering here in the cold at the gate of my own abbey."—" Chattering with cold, thou false spirit," said brother Gregoire; " I warrant thee thou art reeking hot from purgatory—foh! I smeU the smeU of sulphur through the wicket. Avaunt, thou unquiet spiiit! masses shall be said for thy repose; depart and trouble us no more."— " Hark thee, reverend brother," said the bishop, who had his own reasons for gaining speedy admittance, " we have certain toys in
our train called war-wolves' catapults, and such names of endearment, the least of which discharged against your doors, would shatter them to dust; wherefore, we pray you to open them with all convenient speed, lest your skulls and feet have a weary way to travel, ere they meet at the resurrection."— " We will consider of your request,' 1 said the monk, who felt the matter was becoming serious; and at this moment it being signified to him that the hall was cleared, the gates were thrown open and the travellers entered. The refectory presented an appearance sufficiently decorous, the carpets had been withdrawn from the tables, and the viands and wine flaggons removed; but there was a strong and rich odour of savoury meats, which accorded as ill with the naked appearance of the apartment, as the flushed visages, reefing obsequiousness, and involuntary titubations of the monks, did with the superinduced de- mureness, in which they clad themselves on the appearance of the abbot and his guest. The fire that blazed on the ample hearth, gave, attestation to the manner in which the
jovial monks had been passing the time dur¬ ing their superior's absence; but the chilled and wearied abbot had drawn close to the fire without noticing the cause of its unusual resplendence and intensity, when another spirit began to move within him, and he ex¬ claimed in answer to the eager inquiries of the monks, which it may be supposed were in the inverse proportion of their real anxiety, " tSuffkit quoad spiritualia? and he sunk into his vast and well cushioned chair, as he spoke. " Nunc quoad tempo- ralia —what does the refectory furnish to please the palate of my lord of Toulouse withal?"—" Alas, lord abbot!'' said Gregoire, whilome abbot of misrule—a monk of some fun and more impudence, and who, much provoked at missing the good cheer the com¬ munity were about to partake of, had in¬ wardly sworn that the abbot and his lordly guest should not taste morsel of it that night —" .Alas, why seek you viands in the refectory of poor monks, who, for their last neuvaine*, have never tasted flesh or white
bread, being engaged in devotion in honour of St. Benedict, for the safe restoration of our worthy abbot ? Ye might as well seek for flesh in a butcher's house on Good Friday: I promise ye, we are no flinchers when St. Benedict is in question. He is marvellously tenacious, and somewhat, as it were, vindic¬ tive;—but let that pass—saints have their faults."—" I doubt it not, brother Gregoire," said the abbot, " and so have monks too— faults of memory, or else how didst thou per¬ form a neuvaine for my restoration, suppos¬ ing me dead ah the while, and denying me entrance to mine own abbey ?"—" I had somehow a misgiving or inward doubt," said the monk, with strong impudence, " or as it were a confirmed assurance, reverend abbot, that thou wouldst never die in battle." —" All's one for that," said the Abbot of Normoutier, " Meseems I have been saved from the perils of the battle to die of hunger within the walls of mine own abbey. I pray thee, set before us what thou canst find in the buttery and cellar; they were left not meanly stored. Where be the fat haunches of red
deer which the vassals of the abbey were wont to bring in at this season ?"—" We devoured them with careful haste," said Gregoire, " lest they should have been seized on by the heretics, led by that arch¬ fiend Raymond of Toulouse. They were then within a two-days' march of the abbey, and it was whispered their appetite for ve¬ nison had not been at all diminished by their faring for many months on cakes of buck-wheat and water from the mountain- rill."—" I doubt it not," said the abbot; " but where be the butts of Malvoisie I left behind me, under the care of the cellarer ?— were they also drunk lest they should fall into the throats of the heretics ?"—" They were drained to the last drop," said Gregoire, " lest the Lord of Courtenaye should have borrowed them to feast the Crusaders on their return from victory—I would say, de¬ feat. Thou knowest, lord abbot, that the niggard would never set a wine-cup on his board at his own cost, whiles he could borrow from a wealthy abbot—we did it all in pure zeal to the holy cause, as thou must judge."
—" Thou impudent and insulting knave!" began the abbot; then checking himself, " I pray you produce what vivers you have, —weary traveUers must digest them as they may." Thus addressed, Gregoire signed to a couple of lay-brothers, and the table was, at the sign, equipped with an earthen pitcher containing some two gaUons of water, a jar of wretched wine, and a couple of loaves, as black and coarse as the Albigeois were said to feed on. " And is this our cheer?" said the abbot, whom a whisper from one of the monks had made au fait of the business; " marry, sorry cheer for one who hath fought his way through men and devils, embodied fiends on earth, and disembodied fiends from beneath, to win his way to the towers of his beloved domicilium? —" Scratches from a few bushes and briars," said the bishop, seating him¬ self down contentedly; for the bishop was one who could at one moment revel in frantic and intoxicating luxury, and the next make mock of those who scorned to partake of the humblest fare. He loved aU the
wild and nen;e extremes of life, and it was scarce more indifferent to him to revel with princes, or famish with peasants. " Scratches from briars and thorns," he re¬ peated, helping himself to the homely fare, as in high disdain of the abbot's fastidiousness. " Say not so, my holy lord," said the abbot, and pursuing his purpose; "lever did man or churchman deal more valorously than did I, the simple Abbot of Normoutier, this night—first, I dealt with the fiends who withstood me in the name of Saint Bunstan, that Saint of England of odorous memory; but I soon found the demon was too cunning to be caught by the nose as in former times. Marry, Saint Bunstan had left him not a cartilage of the nostril to be caught by. At length I invoked Saint Benedict, our founder—(sinful man that I was for delaying to call on him!) and lo, the demon became as docile and obsequious as the page that holds up my lady's foot-cloth." The monks crossed themselves at this detail. " Then Saint Benedict saved your soul at its utmost peril," quoth Gregoire.—" Yea, and
my life into the bargain," said the abbot; "for what said tlie demon whom he subdued? —"I have of late been let loose among the community of Normoutier, and will reveal to thee the secret nooks where I have hidden viands to tempt them;'—and he named them, saying, ' In the north cupboard there be pas¬ ties of venison, and under the table store of game stewed in ambergris, and manchets of the whitest flour, and in that nook hid with carpet ting, bottles of Greekish wine'—where haste and produce them, brethren, if they be there; if not, we prove the Devil a liar, and then shall religion flourish; if they be, then so shall the fame of Saint Benedict flourish. In any case we must be gainers—you by the fame of your founder, and I by a solid refection." The disconsolate monks, at these words, pro¬ duced from nook and cupboard the dainties intimated, protesting all the time that the Devil must have conveyed them there, as the rigour of their neuvalne had banished taste, sight, or thought of such carnal indulgence. "The Devil must then be an excellent
caterer," said tlie bishop, helping /himself largely to the red-deer pasty, and quaffing a draught of wine. " Make him thy providore, lord abbot; and the Bishop of Toulouse shall oftener sup with the Abbot of Normoutier." "Your holy lordship," said the abbot, much incensed, il shall never lack the Devil for a caterer, when such monks as brother Gregoire may be found under the -shelter of holy walls. Hence to your cells, ye lewd and scandalous monks, I will areed you such penance for this — such fasting (marry I wish I knew of worse,) as shall make your bowels croak within you, like frogs in a midsummer marsh." At this moment Gregoire, who happened to stand near the abbot's chair, bent down, as if to hear the denunciation more reve¬ rently, but whispered in the abbot's ear, "Sir abbot, we pray you at this time to pardon our delict, for certes we have tidings that shall give you huge contentment—the damsel you wot of, and another person, are now prisoners in the abbey." The abbot's features relaxed at this in-
telligence; but, still maintaining the appear¬ ance of anger, he enjoined the community, with Gregoire at their head, to depart to their cells suddenly while he meditated on what penance should be devised for them; "and trust me," he said, "it shall be as severe as that menaced by an ancient supe¬ rior to a disorderly community, ' Cum tu pulsas. ego vapuh tantum. in The monks disappeared at this hint, and the bishop and abbot were left with the ec¬ clesiastical attendants of the former, and the few men-at-arms who accompanied the latter, the remainder of his dispersed and scattered forces being still at a distance. The board was nobly furnished, and the dignitaries failed not to do justice to the savoury dishes and well-filled flaggons; but the period for all earthly enjoyments is short, and the abbot, conscious of and dreading deeply the superior intellectual powers of the bishop, trembled for the time when the conventual forms required the dismission of their mutual attendants, and ae should be left alone with his formidable giest. Nath-
less, the abbot made head and ralfied what powers he possessed, which were, indeed, few and feeble, for commencing the dialogue when the bishop and he were left to their wine, the drinking of which the bishop mis¬ chievously prolonged to fulfil the purpose for which alone he had visited the abbey. In the fuU confidence of a rich monastic supper, ample draughts of wine, and that contentful self-sufficiency, that a man, how¬ ever poor in inteUectual store, feels after such an operation, towards a visitor of superior rank; the abbot, expanding his palms to-s wards the cheering blaze of the wood-fire, exclaimed, " My holy lord, lonely as we are left, trust me we sh<dl not lack matter of converse. I have swaUowed many books."—• " Hast thou, lord abbot," said the bishop, " then must I marvel thou hast not burst, for thou hast digested none."—" I wot not what my lord of Toulouse means by gestation," said the abbot, flying for shelter to the reputation of the community; " but I wiU uphold that our community possesseth some¬ what that may charm a lettered ear. What
thinks my lord of those savoury hnes com¬ posed by that brother Gregoh'e, whom I have doomed to sharp penance for his delight?"'— " DeHct, thou wouldst say, sir abbot," said the bishop. "DeHct, or deHght, as thou wilt," said the abbot," in the end they wUl be found the same—but list to the verse composed as it was on the eve of Corpus Christi: a whole verb is declined—no, a noun conjugated— in sooth, I know not but an interjection is conjugated, or conjured, or grammaticaUy dealt with also. Here be the verses, for I am an expert Latinist:— ' Mors mortis morti mortem, nisi morte dedisset, ■ Coelorum nobis janua clausa foret.' Nay, on the performance of the 'Tenebrae,' what was his marvellously witty Venvoy to the proeme he wrote thereon?"—"Poem, thou wouldst say, sir abbot," repHed the bishop.—" That avails not," said the abbot; " hear the distich ;" and he repeated:— ' Non miror tenebras Christo moriente fuisse, Nam semper tenebrae sole cadente fiunt.* "What deemest thou of that?" —"Truly, lord abbot, I deem of the metre and mean-
ing aHke."—" I knew thou wouldst," said the abbot, "and deemest thou our community then lacking in aught that might win the ear of the learned to Hst? " — "I deem it more lacking in hospitaHty," said the bishop rather abruptly, speeding to something "germane to the matter." At the word "hospita¬ Hty," the abbot gazed with vacant and asto¬ nished eye on the board with its vanished viands, but amply furnished flaggons; and repeated " HospitaHty!"— " Yea, lord abbot," said the bishop; " for thinkest thou, musty fragments of jnonkish verse can furnish dessert to a feast Hke thine ? Thou lackest one thing, lord abbot, to make thy viands tasteful to knight or churchman; thou lackest the sole incentive that can give fla¬ vour to costly cates, or zest to racy wine." The abbot raised a vacant lightless eye to the speaker, and fixed it on him, as if unable either to understand him or to withdraw it. " Nay, look not thus, lord abbot," said the pre¬ late, " thou knowest that such incentive may be found within these holy waUs." The abbot flung himself back in his chair, in somewhat VOL. III. c
the attitude in which erst he received the daring proposal of the outlaw. " In the name of Heaven and holy Saint Bennet," he cried, " how didst thou learn that woman, cr aught that bears woman's form, is harboured within the towers of Normoutier?" " Even from thyself, lord abbot; for how else shoidd I have profanely guessed that a female was con¬ cealed in these walls ?" " The Devil must have helped thee to the knowledge,'* said the abbot. " Slander not the DevU," said the bishop, smifing; *' thou hast been indebted to him for a supper already, for his spirits have conjured it from nook and cupboard; and now I summon the same spirits to convey hither on the instant—on the instant I say—r the female heretic Genevieve, who Hes in the south turret of your abbey, and the deacon Mephibosheth, who Hes in a dun¬ geon northward, foul and fetid. Now judge if my spirits be not as apt in conjuring as; thine, sir abbot." As he spoke, " four of his people, with an obedient start," made out in. the direction he indicated; and before the abbot could recover from his amazement,
Genevieve and her feUow-prisoner were led into the refectory. " These be the spirits with which you are haunted," cried the bishop, pointing to the shrinking Genevieve. " But I shaU take such order, lord abbot, for the future, to clear your abbey of these visitants, that thou shalt confess me as expert an ex¬ orcist as Saint Benedict himself." The abbot thus taken in the manner, and seeing denial bootless, lietook himself to de¬ fence. " Surely," he said, " if a breach of monastic rule were ever pardonable, it was in this matter, when the zeal of the brotherhood to convert that female heretic had led them somewhat to strain discipline, by admitting her within the precincts of haUowed waUs. But I wiH myself," he added, " place her amid a sisterhood of nuns hard by, where my dady visits and exhortations"— " Amid a sisterhood of nuns!" repeated the bishop in¬ dignantly to himself: " the mystery of this maiden's high destiny is unknown to thee, fool as thou art; nor couldst thou even con¬ ceive it, were it disclosed to thee. , c 2
The reluctance of the abbot to lose his beautiful prize, began to overcome even his awe of the bishop, as it had before all con* siderations of his character and profession ; r and he began to raise his voice, while dhe bishop, disdainful of opposition, commanded his attendants to prepare for instant depar¬ ture. At this moment, while the deacon. stood in moody silence, the unfortunate maiden, though hopeless of success, made a feeble effort to address her persecutors: " To ask," she said, " why, though guiltless, she was treated as a prisoner, would be to ask in vain; for when did power ever yield reasons for following its own fierce will? Alas!" she continued, " though ye listen not to so mean a suppliant, yet do not yourselves such wrong—debase not lofty station and lordly title, lry bending them to the level of a lowly peasant maiden." Touched by the melody of tones so sweet and low, " that excellent thing in woman," the bishop stood for a moment subdued and silent, when a loud knocking at the gate was followed by the blast of a trumpet. The porter hastened to
the gate, and there was scarce time to re¬ move the prisoners into an adjoining passage, when Sir Ezzefin de Verac and de Semon- viUe, to the no smaU surprise and dissatis¬ faction of the two churchmen, rushed into the refectory. We shall avaU ourselves of the interruption caused by their presence, to relate the means by which Genevieve feU into the hands of the monks of Normoutier.
CHAPTER II. Lady, dost thou not fear to stray, So lone and lovely on the bleak way? Moore, At the exclamation of Genevieve, men¬ tioned in a preceding chapter, the pastor was borne from the cavern by some who felt much for him, and more for the beautiful victim, who stood pale, but resolved, before her piti¬ less judges. It was observed, that she cast one agonizing glance on her grandfather, as he was borne Hke a corse from the cave, and then turned calmly and fearlessly to meet the judgment about to be passed on herself, as if aU her personal sufferings had ceased with that spectacle, and she was prepared to Hsten to what foUowed as if it regarded another; her
Hps were compressed, her hands clasped on her bosom, and her eyes, without being raised or depressed, directed straight onward as if her very eyes could Hsten. So she stood moveless and silent as one capable of the highest resolve, and incapable of being deterred by menace or power from its avowal. Multitudes in the mean while be¬ gan to throng into the cavern; the report had spread ; and the females who had been her companions that eventful morning were among the first. " Woman," said Mattathias, " thou hast heard thy crime urged and proved; if thou canst say aught in denial or disproof, our ears are open ; but utter not a word in paUiation of thy deed, for to such we shaU be deaf as the rock that overarches our heads."—" »Of denial or of paUiation wiU I not utter a word," said Genevieve, " tiU I - know my crime."—" Thy crime, thou female Achan !'* said Boanerges. " Hast thou not saved the Hfe of a Crusader in the face of the maledic¬ tion 1 uttered by the whole congregation with the f idlest, fiercest force of execration ? Bid we not
curse with the curse of Meroz, those who aid¬ ed them by deed or hand, or look, or thought? and who hath dared such deed in defiance of her God and of her church?"—" A woman," answered Genevieve, whose courage rose with the emergency, " but one who defies neither God, nor a church which walks by his will, in doing a deed of mercy and pity. Alas! if fearful times and deadly acts rouse men to hatred and hostility, if blood must be shed, and life be lost, at least leave woman to her natural office and duty, that of tending the sick, and soothing the sufferer. Let the nride of man preserve its privilege to draw blood from hearts, and tears from eyes, but leave to woman her cherished right to stanch the one, and wipe away the other." It was singular that Genevieve, in this emergency, completely forgot that oriental phraseology, which formed the characte¬ ristic language of her community, so that her judges seemed to speak in one tongue, and she to reply in another. " Thou knewest," said Mattathias, " the
wrongs and the sufferings of the faithful; wherefore, when a foe of God and of his people was in thy power, didst thou not deal with him as those holy and' heroic women of old, Jael and Judith, dealt with the enemies of then* faith, and the persecu¬ tors of their people ? so had thy name been famous* among women. But now shalt thou be a by-word and an hissing, an outcast and a scorn."—" Not amongst women," repHed Genevieve; "God, in his justice, commanded the sword to go forth by the hands of his people of old against the abominations of the ancient idolaters. But when did He put a sword into the hands of Christians to smite and to slay those who profess the same faith, who call on the same name? Even now in this day of trouble and rebuke, I am justified in the hearts of mine own sex, and an hour wiH come, when even you shall do me unwiUing justice, and wish in your moment of peril and calamity that you may meet with au enemy Uke me? —" Thou art overbold, woman," said Mattathias, " to defend thine c 5!
evil deed; thou lovest the comely favour of this stranger, and for it, wast wiUing to betray the cause of Heaven and of thy people." As he spoke these words, a light came to Genevieve's eye, and a sudden accession of power to her whole form, that made those who beheld her, gaze as if she had been changed in their sight on the instant. fi Slay me, banish me," she said, " use your power as ye may; but stain not by one suggested thought the fair fame, which to guard, these hands roUed down rocks from your mountains this day, and would have aided to drag them on my own head, ere I would become the vile thing I cannot name. But," she added, a glorious expression settling on her calm brow— " but ye are men, and I forgive you. Ye cannot divine the depth of woman's purity. With you reward is ever the motive: with us motive is ever the reward. But I trouble you," she added, in a subdued voice, the inspiration of the moment fading fast from eye, and cheek, and form. "Now let me hear my sentence, and spare not to speak.
Two pangs bitterer than death have already been undergone, and what yet remains must be unfelt. I have seen my father fainting under sufferings I inflicted; I have heard my fair name doubted by those who know that this morning I made an effort, be¬ yond the natural strength of woman, to preserve it. What I am yet to suffer, tell me suddenly; it can scarce cost me one added pang." " Woman!" thundered Mattathias, pro¬ voked beyond his usual stern ferocity Gf temper by that quiet heroism which women only possess. " Behold, we sentence thee, in our mercy, to an everlasting separation from the Church. Go !■ we cut thee off as a mortified limb, and as a broken branch. Of our food thou shalt never'partake---in our community thou shalt never join—in our prayers thy name shall be forgotten. Go!—wander in the wfiderness, and mayest thou bear with thee the sin of the congre¬ gation !" The unfortunate maiden seemed blood- frozen at these words—-all her courage failed
at once—she cast, for the first time, an appealing look at her judges. " It is not pos¬ sible," she said, " that you will expose a wretched solitary female to the fangs of the wolves and bears, and of what she dreads more than the wild beast in fury and fa¬ mine? If ye have not daughters, ye are the sons of women. It is not possible!" she cried, in a voice of confidence — " It .is not possible!" she continued, her voice fal¬ tering and her courage failing, as she gazed on the stern and lightless visages around her—" It is not possible!" she repeated again, hiding her face, as, her voice failing utterly, she burst into an agony of tears. A murmur, deep and loud, arose among the congregation—tears they had too often wit¬ nessed to affect them much, and to beauty they were from poverty, coldness of consti¬ tution, and habitual hardness of feelings (ren¬ dered hard by their destiny,)almost insensible! but there was something in Genevieve's last appeal that roused all that was manly and feeling in their hearts, and they testified it by that deep murmur, which, like the preluding
hum heard among their mountains,- gave token of the approaching storm. The women, always first in the cause of humanity, commenced the murmur; and the men sustained and prolonged it, till it pealed Hke thunder in the ears of her judges. At the sound, Mattathias only bristled his shaggy brows and com¬ pressed his Hps; but Boanerges, though he would have disdained the show of oppo¬ sition as highly as his assessor, was already softened towards Genevieve; and Arnaud sought to mediate between both: " What though she have wrought folly in Israel," he said, " shall we therefore do a deed that will be sin unto us and to our children ?" Boa¬ nerges pleaded still more earnestly; and Mat¬ tathias, with rigid vehemence, opposed both till their raised voices were drowned in the increasing tumult of the congregation; when the sight of Genevieve's waved arm and part¬ ed Hps produced instant tranquillity among the latter. "Hear me," she said: "I am about to suffer for that for which, though 1 cannot repent, I bear my punishment
unrepiningly. I have read in old story, that the root of freedom in a mighty state had not flourished, were it not nourished at its planting by the blood of a woman. And shall the courage of a Christian maiden vail to that of a heathen matron ? But make not my misfortune a crime, as it must be, if a being so humble and unha2)py kindle a difference between those who acknowledge the same faith, and contend even unto death for it. I am not worth the breath ye waste in my defence: far less worthy am I, that for me the peace of the Church should be disturbed. Let me be cast forth, as unworthy to sojourn with you, while in the wilderness of persecu¬ tion ; but let me still trust that we shall meet on the hither bank of Jordan and rejoice." A murmur of acclamation, which drowned the aggravated voices of dispute between Mattathias and his assessors, was her answer: it awoke the high-toned spirit of Genevieve —and while her voice swelled to the most powerful tone that ever issued from woman's lip, and her eye kindled like that of a war-
rior on the eve of battle, her features were as pale as those of the dead^ and her form had aU the mute and motionless stiUness of a sculptured statue. " My sisters !" she cried, addressing the females, " did I not, this day, save yourselves and your little ones, those youngHngs of your hearts whom ye woidd have nourished with that heart's blood sooner than see them perish?" And the females held up their chddren in verification of her appeal. " Brethren," said Genevieve, turning towards the men, " I have saved your wives and infants this day. Have I no right to demand a service from you in return?" Voices innumerable, male and female, thundered through the cavern, re¬ peating* " Name thy boon, and it shaU be granted !—It shall be granted !" repeated they again and again, tiU the seats of stone on which her judges sat, rocked and rang with the reverberated sounds. " Thou seest how lightly a tumult may be raised by this wo¬ man !" said Mattathias, indignantly.—" And thou shalt see also how Hghtly it may be
apjieased !" repHed Genevieve. " My bre¬ thren and friends!" she continued, raising her voice, " I demand from you instant sub¬ mission to the will of my judges—such sub¬ mission as I myself wiU yield. I go into banishment, according to your sentence," said she, addressing Mattathias ; " and pray you only to allow two aged men to be my guides to the city of Toulouse ; but not so far in¬ debted to years, that they feel their jour¬ ney a burthen; for," she added, with a broken voice, "I ought to feel deeply for the aged:'' then recovering herself—" I have relatives who will, perchance, think no scorn to receive me, though an exile. Some will grant this sHght boon not for my sake, but for the love they bear to their an¬ cient pastor." "Surely I will go with thee," said Ar¬ naud, " and wiU lead thee by a safe and secret path amid the mountains, because of the Crusaders, who stiU gather round the banner of the Bishop of Toulouse ; but the way, maiden, is perilous."—« It matters not," said Genevieve, her voice subsiding into its
habitual tone of mild - firmness: "let my perished body rather waste on the snows of my native mountains, than fester in pampered infamy amid the palaces of those sons of vio¬ lence and vice." Another companion was quickly found, who announced that he knew a more sure, swift and secret path; and spoke in high terms of his skiU and experience in the way. They demanded of her when she would set forth. " This very hour!" said Genevieve; " a resolution that costs us so much should be reaUzed the moment it is formed—the heart may not have strength for a second effort. I am equal to the trial to which I am caUed now; but should I Hnger tiU I saw my father, I should become such a bankrupt in fortitude, that I feel I shmld suppHcate on my knees for a mitigation of my hard doom, and," glancing at Mattathias, " know I should suppHcate in vain." Mattathias, who, as long as any opposition to his will was indicated, felt it only an in¬ centive to adhere to it more rigorously, now that aU opposition had subsided, and his vic¬ tim was submissively preparing to depart, felt
an involuntary relenting. "Damsel,*' said he, " there is one condition on which thy heavy offence may be pardoned, and thou again be reckoned amid the daughters of our people." Genevieve spoke not; but she fixed her eyes on him with an expression that inti¬ mated there was nothing within the range of human patience to endure, that in such a cause she would shrink from. " Yield up to us," said Mattathias, " the name of this Crusader, and the secret place where thou hast hidden him, and- ------" Genevieve waited not for the closing of the period, but, shaking her head, turned slowly to depart. Those around her now pressed her with all the vehemence of most intense importunity, as if they were pleading for themselves, to give up the name and re¬ treat of the Crusader; and their importunity was the more dangerous, as they had indeed every show of reason and of truth to back their argument. Genevieve listened, but yielded not; nor swerved a moment internally (though strong¬ ly beset) from the high purpose of her own
generous heart, 'When she had borne sup¬ plication and remonstrance with the smile of a martyr, she said mildly, as if in gra¬ titude to the pleaders, " Misfortune itself is as the dust of the balance, when weighed against crime. From exile — from death —were death itself to threaten me this hour, would I not purchase deliverance at a price that must make me loathe the life so bought. "Were I even man, I would think it foul scorn to betray a helpless and disarmed enemy. But, holy Heaven!" she added, raising her inspired eyes, " how must they wrong thy workmanship who deem that such heartless treachery coidd be harboured in the breast of woman !" " Then thou persistest to withhold the name and hiding-place of that idolatrous paramour?" said Mattathias with a brutal rage, which the mild sufferance of Genevieve appeared only to excite. Genevieve cast one look on the speaker, and then calmly and silently prepared to take her departure from the cavern. The feelings of the whole assembly, men and
women, seemed to sweU to their throats; and aU and each besought a solemn leave- taking of her, whom they had looked on as almost an inspired being. The women ga¬ thered round her first, bearing their children in their arms; the younger men intermingled with them; the elder stood not aloof, but uttered many blessings, as the victim with slow but firm tread, attended by her aged guides, turned her departing steps from the cavern. To the women, bathed in tears, and the men, who hardly suppressed theirs, she said, calmly: " No tears—no embraces— no, my friends,—no farther struggle! My mortal frame has much to undergo, and aU my strength and courage must be wrought to the utmost to meet it. Spare me your tears; but give me your prayers! I shall have occasion enough for tears when, per¬ chance, I may not have strength to utter a prayer:" and she passed on, with pale cheek but majestic step, tiU she reached the entrance of the cavern. Kjrstep faltered but once, and her recoUection seemed to desert her but
once also, as, striking her slender foot against one of the stones with which the rocky floor of the cavern was strewn, she implored par¬ don ; and then smiling at her error, and tak¬ ing the arm of Amaud, " I must," she said, " ask aid* of my guide sooner than I deemed." —" Wilt thou not see the aged Pierre ere thou partest ?" said Amaud.—" If I saw his grey hairs but once more," said Genevieve, in a voice of deep but suppressed emotion, " we should never part : no force could tear me from him! And yet," she added,—" and yet I would wish to see him once more, were I assured he would not see me!" The mo¬ ment she uttered these words, she clasped her hands on her forehead, and said, with more agitation than she had yet betrayed, " Surely my reason wanders, or I should not have forgot that he cannot see me."—" From his swoon," said the pitying Arnaud, " he hath fallen into a slumber. He is harboured in a nook of this cavern." Although but a slight and imperceptible movement of Ar- naud's finger accompanied these words, Ge-
nevieve seized their meaning with rapid intuition of feeUng. With finger on lip, and noiseless step, she entered the nook where the pastor slumbered. She parted the white hairs that streamed over his forehead; she pressed her lips twice or thrice on his fur¬ rowed brow, and two large silent drops fell from her eyes. With most gentle action, such as would not wake a slumbering babe, she wiped theni off with her veil; and then, rushing from the recess, exclaimed, in a choked voice, "Take me. take me hence, while I have yet the power to go !" At the moment that they reached the entrance of the cavern, a figure, grovelling at. her feet, obstructed her progress, and the well-known voice of Amand exclaimed, " Curse me ere thou goest!" Genevieve paused, as a suspicion of the cause of her sufferings seemed doubtfully to touch on her apprehension; and then, in a voice whose softness was more wounding than many re¬ proaches, " Is it thou ?" she said—" thou, the companion of mine earliest childhood, the very friend of mine habits and of my heart ?
What had I done unto thee, that thou hast dealt with me thus ?" — " Enough!" said Amand, agonizingly—" enough to justify me in the fierce moments of provocation ; but not in this terrible hour of my repentance! I saw thy care of that wounded knight: it sent flames to my brain, and poison into, my blood. In the madness of jealousy I dis¬ closed thy secret to Mattathias, and even urged thy punishment! But it is /," he added, with a yell of agony—" it is / who am .punished! Thou dost not forgive me!— thou canst not!—and, without thy forgive¬ ness, never will I hope for that of Heaven !*' —" Speak not words so fearful," said Gene¬ vieve. " I do forgive thee, Amand. I forgive thee, from my soul; but, as thou valuest thine own, struggle with those spirits, fierce and dark, that have so long troubled thee, and had mastery over it. Farewell!" she added; while he continued silently to writhe at her feet. "Be a son to him to whom thou hast left no other child! and," bending over him, she whispered, " Tend well, the, wounded knight: on thee alone
depends that life it hath cost me so much to save, and thou for that cause wilt cherish it:" and she passed forth. It was not till cer¬ tain that he no longer had to encounter her sight, that Am and raised himself from the earth, and looking wildly after her: " Thou hast at length," he said, " devised a meet punishment for my crime, were it more than the first horrors of my self-accusation painted it. Not the visages of fiends to condemned spirits are so loathsome, so execrable as the face of that youth to me; yet I must see him every day and every hour: she hath doomed me to it, and I will abide her doom. Never did man bear man more deadly-hatred; never shall man render more mortal service !" The pilgrims wound their way slowly through the valley, and ascended one of the eminences which bounded it: on its summit Genevieve paused, but not from wearine&j The sun had risen on the earth, and his beams were reflected from the white tents that lay thickly over hill and valley, like a flock of sheep at rest, as she gazed silently on the ha¬ bitations of her people, who were indeed as
much a separated and peculiar people in the country they inhabited, as the Jews of old were among the nations of the earth. An access of sacred enthusiasm lit up her eye with the glory of a prophetess's, and mantled her form in more than human majesty. " How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob! and thy ta~ bernacles, O Israel!" she cried. " Not listed fields, or kingly courts, 01 cities of palaces and temples, present so glorious an object to mine eyes as the tents of the despised Albigeois. Oh, I leave you—I J go," she said— yet not going —" as our first erring parent went, with many a pausing step and reverted glance, flung fondly back on Paradise—lost Paradise!"
VOL. III. X»
CHAPTER III. ---------------- Sylvis scena coruscis Dcsiipcr, horrentique atrum nemus irominet urnbrfl Fronte sub adversa, scopulis pcndentibus antrum. Virgil. It was yet early day when they set for¬ ward, and their first day's journey was per¬ formed in safety and comparative ease. It led through a forest rich in all the glories of au¬ tumnal colouring, and expanding in the lofty luxuriance of vegetable magnificence; and their path only varied from a deep smooth sward to the crisp and rustling footing of the leaves with which the breeze every moment strewed it. Trees of every species, and now of almost every hue, contrasted their varying shades of purple, orange, and brown, with the everlasting green of the fir, and the darker foliage of the larch and oak, which as yet had disdained to yield one leaf to Autumn ;
and between the rich glades of deepening and interminable green, (which gave at once to the eye exercise the most delicious and re¬ pose the most profound,) the dark boles and intricate fantastic roots were projecting and interlacing with a variety of modulation, that would have mocked the eye to dis- entwine, or the pencil to trace; the dun deer bounding with not ungraceful wfid- ness, and bending their large reverted eyes on the human intruders. These glades sometimes gave gfimpses of the country they had left—the vast faUow field, brown but not uncomely, as it lay richly fringed with the fofiage of the forest scenery. Sometimes a higher view was caught of rocks tapestried from terrace to terrace with vines; and though the glow and the glory <f the vintage were over, and the purple clusters no longer blushed amid the rude granite and dark fofiage, yet their undulations stiU gave a picturesque drapery to the rocks, to be found only in a southern landscape. Amid the most inaccessible cliffs was sometimes wfidly perched a hunter's or a vintager's d 2
cottage, seeming from its roof, aU covered with verdure, Its walls of grassy clods, and its door constructed of blocks of stone in- cHning to each other, more Hke the rude work of nature than the structure of man;— fm'ther and higher stfil were caught glimpses of the Pyrenees, whose infinite varieties of form and feHcities of colouring, while they seemed fit confines for some land of enchant¬ ment, where brighter hues and richer Hghts and finer forms than earth owns are engirdled and embosomed, gave to the traveUers a sen¬ sation of the profoundest anxiety. Yet could they not but gaze in sdent deHght, as, on,the sun's decline, the roseate and purpureal tints shifted from valley to peak; and while the forest below lay plunged in the deepest gloom, the summits of the mountain were stdl flushed with the vivid tints of a summer morn, gradually fading into a rich and som- brous purple, tiU that hue melted slowly into the deep blue of the twiHght heavens, leaving it doubtful to the tranced eve whether it was mountain or sky it gazed on. As night advanced, they arrived at the outskirts of the forest, and began to ascend
the rocks which formed the base of the mountain over which their guide had pro¬ mised to conduct them. The splendor of the forest-scenery (which now lay a dark and tintless mass below) was over, and the perils of their neighbourhood to it began to be an¬ nounced by the cries of the wolves and bears, many of whom, they feared, were harboured in the rocks they were ascending, as the howls were repeated on every side around them with a force and distinctness that seem¬ ed far to exceed those of the most powerful echo. A short and trembHng counril was held, and it was determined to ascend the highest pinnacle of rock they coidd, or even to seek for shelter at a human habita¬ tion, at whatever risk of rejection or hos- tiHty. As with strength renewed by their fears, they toded up the painful ascent, a light Hke a star was seen twinkling at a small distance:—the traveUers instantly turned in its direction—they reached it, not without difficulty, and found it proceeded from a hut built on the summit of a hill. It was con¬ structed of clay, but strengthened with stones. The roof was covered with strong ropes of
dry grass, to which stones were appended to keep them firm, and it was fortified by a wooden door of rude but substantial fabri¬ cation, which seemed firmly barred. The Hght gleamed through a crevice, into which Amaud and the guide looked, but could dis¬ cover nothing within distinctly. Their repeated applications for admission were at length answered by the hoarse voice of a man apparently roused from sleep, and thefr entrance appeared delayed rather by his drowsiness than his reluctance; for, when he understood, at length, that they sought shelter, bolt after bolt was sluggishly with¬ drawn, and the interior was at length dis¬ closed. It was a large, single, desolate room —a heap of dried leaves lay in one comer— a huge shaggy dog in the other, whose coHar, stuck with iron spikes, denoted him a fierce champion against the wolves, and whose red eye and hideous growl kept the travellers trem- bling at the threshold. The being who open¬ ed the door seemed scarcely less savage than his companion: his expression at first seem¬ ed to be marked with appaUing ferocity, but, on examination, there was nothing of human
malignity in it; it was the wildness of animal character untamed, and easily excited by fear or surprise. He admitted them, placed his burning splinter of pine in a crevice, hushed his fierce dog, and threw himself on his bed of leaves, carefully guarding by his position his hoard of chesnuts and goats-milk cheese from discovery. There was a pause on the side of host and guests, till, the former ob¬ serving the travellers produce their slender portion of goat's flesh and poor wine, he testified by a kind of social grin his willing¬ ness to be a partaker, and they were glad to purchase safety and shelter at so cheap a price. A kind of conversation then com¬ menced, which the patois of the mountain shepherd, (for such he was,) and the Jewish phraseology of the guide, rendered at first wholly unintelligible, till Arnaud began to interpret between them. The furniture of the shepherd's head was as scanty as that of his hovel; he told, however, that there were two seasons in the year: the warm when he fed his flocks among the hills, and the cold when he led them to the pastures below, for which,
he said, he was preparing the next day. Kis dog was his oidy companion. His year had one era and one hoHday, when he went to the nearest village to se n his sheep and con¬ fess himself to a priest: this was, as well as they could make out, about Easter. He de¬ scribed the period by the appearance of the stars.—" And has thy simple traffic never been interrupted by wars or rumours of Avars?" said Arnaud. The rustic said, there was one day a tumult in the village, and he drove away his flock in fear. " And dost thou not know the cause of warfare ?" said Arnaud. Tlie man paused, and then said he supposed that one had more sheep than another, and his enemy sought to rob him of them. " They contenc' for flocks of different folds/' said Joshua the guide, referring what was said to the contest between the Albigeois and their foes ; " one for the flock of the true Shepherd, whom they seek to feed in his own pastures, and cause to He down by the stiU waters; the other for the goats of the infernal herdsman whom ------" "They are great fools then." said the man, who thought he had a right to
s;peak now—"they are great fools to fight about sheep and goats, when the latter are nothing to the former either in milk, meat, or wool."—" In the name of heaven," said Ar- naud, who perceived it was in vain to speak in metaphor, " of what faith art thou ? ' v — " Of the faith of our lady of the valley," said the shepherd; " I bow my head and say Ave, as I am taught, when I pass her image, as I do twice a year with my flock. In the spring I crown it with green leaves; and when I re¬ turn in autumn, I pick off the dead ones. She hath been good lady to me, and though I hear of other saints, I care not to change her for the gayest that ever was decked for a holiday; but I fear I shall not have her long, for she is old and much decayed, and then," he said, " I must seek another." The flood-gates of Joshua's wrath ' and eloquence were now opened, and the deluge burst forth with a fury that bore more than a due proportion to its long and forcible sup¬ pression. The shepherd listened for some time to a torrent of words that overwhelmed him with their sonorous fluency and uninterrnpti- d5
ble rapidity, and; even appeared pleased at first with the sound, as a child would be by the powers of a new instrument; but when at length he made out, by dint of Amaud's explanations, that the religion which appeared to him as it did to Arnobius of old, " sbnplex et absolute? had been the cause of wars that had desolated the.fairest provinces of France; that it had marshalled armies with princes and pontiffs at their head; and already cost the lives of thirty thousand men, sacrificed by their own countrymen; that torrents of blood were still flowing, and were still < to flow; and that, moreover, so exquisite had the vsligious sensibility of the one class be¬ come, that they had sentenced to everlasting exile from their community, a female, for the crime of saving the life of one who belonged to the other,—the man at first recoiled, and then by the sudden and strongly-marked change in his countenance, appeared to re¬ gard his companions with horror, as the most wicked wretches on earth. He slunk back to his bed of leaves, eyeing them with a most sinister expression, in which, however, there
was something honest as well as trucu¬ lent,; scarcely hushed Ms growling, ferocious dog; and as the first light of dawn gleamed through the crevice, he unbarred his door, and silently motioned his guests to depart. Genevieve set out on her second day's jour¬ ney with a sad heart and doubtful mind; the difficulties of her progress were likely to in¬ crease at every step. But another weight pressed on her thoughts, whose burthen was doubled by her not daring to communicate it to her companions. The state of the poor unenlightened being they had parted from was, probably, that of thousands of his coun¬ trymen under similar circumstances of intel¬ lectual barrenness and abstraction from hu¬ man society; nay, considering the choked and impeded progress of mental cultivation, and the necessarily tardy diffusion of religious knowledge, seven-tenths of the popidation of Christendom were in the same situation ; and these beings remained insulated and undis¬ turbed, ignorant of the elementary truths of that religion, for whose divisions and sub¬ divisions, shades and penumbras, their coun-
trymen and fellow-Christians were massacring? ravaging, burning* and exterminating within three leagues on every side of them. Her mind for a space swung from its moorings, and she appeared to herself to be daringly voyaging an unfathomable and shoreless ocean of discovery. Strong sense and right feefing soon guided her through those straits and whirlpools, where so many have made shipwreck, and piloted her to the " haven where she would be." She came to the just conclusion, that, however deplorable were the apathy and destitution of the poor shepherd, there must be also an error in causeless re¬ finement and overwrought tenacity, in verbal controversies urged for Hfe and death, while the weightier matters of the law of the Great Master lay neglected and unfulfiUed ; and she believed and hoped that the time might yet be, when CathoHcs and Albigeois alike might resign the distinction of mountain or of tem¬ ple, and worship God, as he requires, " in spirit and in truth." The current of her thoughts was soon checked by the increasing perils of her progress; they had long left
behind them the scenes and even the track of cultivation; the forests with their deer, and even the rocks with the foxes and wild goats, had disappeared; and they began to ascend those hills of everlasting snow, which, perhaps, had never felt the touch of thaw since creation, except where the faUing me¬ teor had flashed, or the Hghtning had smitten. The traveUers now equipped themselves with staves tipped with iron, provided for the purpose, and also with wooden shoes, fur¬ nished with points of the same metal, to secure their perilous footing. They toiled till noon in silent and breathless weariness; and after short rest and refreshment in a ca¬ vern/, whose long-depending icicles deliciously assuaged the fever of their parched throats, they resumed their toil with hope unabated. It was not till towards sunset that Gene¬ vieve and Arnaud began to mark and watch the shade of perplexity and hesitation that from time to time gathered on the face of their guide. They had hitherto spoken but Httle, reserving aU their strength for their task ; but now their unbroken silence, inter-
rupted only by the " snow crunching under their feet*," and the scream of the mountain- birds, began to appear to themselves depress¬ ing and portentous. From time to time he eagerly watched the flight of the birds and the direction of the clouds, which were wafted sometimes below, sometimes above them. He ascended every eminence that presented itself, and then hur¬ ried down in cheerless silence; he examined the peaks and bearings of the mountains with all the jealousy of a navigator observing a new-discovered coast; and-he often removed the snow with the end of his staff, as if to discover some track which he expected to find, but which was effaced or lost. Genevieve and Arnaud observed him in silence; they be¬ gan to be afraid to communicate their fears to each other; and with sick hearts and eyes averted from each other, they followed him after these interruptions in profound silence. As they doubled a kind of mountain-cape, where the path admitted but one at a time,
and the guide preceded, they were startled by a sudden shout of joy, and stniggling on¬ ward, beheld him pointing with rapturous action, to a mountain heaped with snow to the summit, above which rose a dark and massive edifice, that but for its situation would have appeared to the travellers like a pile of rock. The full glory of sunset tinged the mountain from summit to base with shifting hues of rose and purple,—a more ethereal and vivid brightness of azure than ever tiushed a sum¬ mer sky tinted the crisp and nicely-defined crags of ice that projected near its, summit,— and one last gleam of golden light burned on the spires and towers of the antique structure, that, while the travellers still gazed, faded into a sober gray, and, so short is the twilight in those higher regions, in a few moments as¬ sumed the dark and steely blue of an au¬ tumnal evening. " We are safe," exclaimed the guide, clasping his hands in ecstasy: " the track is lost; but while we bear those towers in sight, our path is secure.—Fear not,''—he continued answering the mute enquiry of
his companions' looks:—" Fear not—yonder is the monastery of St. Montanus: there the deluded idolaters have reared an image and set up an high place."—" I pray thee, tell thy tidings more plainly, brother," said Ar¬ naud, " and be not nice to speak the lan¬ guage of Canaan amid peril like ours."— " Yonder towers are tenanted by a commu¬ nity of monks," quoth Joshua; " and surely whatever we may deem of their creed, their works are works of love and mercy,—they dweU by their vow amid eternal storms and unmelted snows, to give aid to belated and perishing wanderers: moreover, at sunset, they Hght up their casements and plant torches on their battlements; so that their dweUing is as a beacon among the mountains, seen very far off. And if we double that cape of snow where the house of the idol stands, ere dawn I shaU have discovered the path which the snow hath effaced, even as the brooks disap¬ pear in summer." As he spoke, he pointed to the towers of the monastery, now blazing like a fairy palace of fire amid the dai&ening .heavens, and sending long flashes of ruddy
light along the tracts of snow, amid which it stood, apparently tremidous from its very brilliancy. Thus assured, his exhaust¬ ed companions toiled to struggle up the pin¬ nacle of the hill opposite the convent, from whence he told them he could make a surer calculation of the direction he was to pursue; but, ere they reached half way, a sound like that described by Dobrizhoffer {nescio quid triste ac surdum sonans,) pealed from the caverns far below their feet, and was echoed by a hurtling in the ah*, which at once warned them of their danger, and an¬ nounced it in the same moment to be as awful as it was inevitable. The wanderers turned their appalled looks to the heavens—they were as yet calm and unclouded—but their very calmness gave a more vivid and fearful display to the atmospheric phenomena pecu¬ liar to those Mty regions: near the horizon countless meteors were traversing the heavens in every direction, with an intensity of bright¬ ness and vitality of motion that seemed to render the skirts of heaven alive with ten thousand fiery couriers ; above, from the con-
trast of the perfect whiteness of the earth, the sky appeared blacker than jet, so that the re¬ lative positions of light and darkness seemed utteily reversed;—the planets appeared with a lustre and magnitude actually terrific,— Jupiter sending out rays* Hke a midnight sun, and the fixed stars burning with an emerald hght, and all surrounded by a lumi¬ nous haze that, wliile it doubled their size and splendour, announced the speedy ap¬ proach of a mountain storm in all its terror and "peril. They had scarce a moment to gaze upward, when a blast, with a snow¬ storm on its wings, swept across the hill with such frightful force, that the travellers were compelled, clasping each other closely, to cling to a crag to avoid being hurled down the precipice. The blast swept on.—" Let us seek the valley," said the guide, when he recovered his breath; " if, peradventure, life may yet be saved." Benumbed with cold and stupified with terror, they began to at-
tempt their downward course, and reached in safety the vaUey that lay between them and the towers and spires of St. Montanus, which, between the darkened heavens and the desert earth, burned like a consteUation. But here dangers equal to those which as¬ sailed them on the mountain (dangers weU known to the traveUers of those regions) awaited them, not without their own full and fearful consciousness. The hollows between these mountains are strewn over with vast blocks of stone detached from the declivities by torrents, by tempests, or by time; be¬ tween these, deep pits of snow are formed, and in the hard frosts that succeed the storms of snow, arches of ice, resembHng bridges in their structure, their apparent dura¬ bility, and their imposing promise of security, present a treacherous facility of passing the hollows and shortening the path, which those who trust to seldom survive to boast of or repeat the experiment. Several have been known rather to descend into the hoUows, and trust themselves to their uncalculated depth, and then struggle up on the other side, the
arches of ice trembling above their heads, than to rely on their frail and perilous support. But nowthewandererswereleftno choice: a severe frost had contracted arch to arch, multiply¬ ing the means of destruction, while it seemed to increase those of safety; and a heavy snow had fallen over them, so that their passage across the valley was alike indistinguishable. precarious, and possibly at theii first step mortal. Here Joshua displayed ail the tact of an experienced guide: he sounded every step with his staff across the ridges, justly calculating, that where the deepest weight of snow lay, there the ice was of thickness com¬ mensurate to the imposed weight. But this mode of wading doubled the difficulty : they were up to their knees at every plunge, and scarcely could they withdraw their chilled and encumbered Hmbs when the stroke of the staff called them to a fresh exertion. " Bear up!" cried the guide; " if we can but cross the valley in safety, the brothers of that merciful order will not refuse admittance to belated and perishing wanderers."—" On, then, if -it must be so," said Arnaud. As he
spoke, his teeth chattered dreadfully, and his paralytic utterance and contracted figure be¬ gan to announce the mortal effects of cold. Genevieve appeared still unaffected by it in so alarming a degree: and it is a singular but well-ascertained fact, that the vitality of females, in the extremity of suffer¬ ings from heat or from cold, far exceeds that of the stronger sex. As they crossed in safety the last ridge of ice that lay at the foot of the ascent to the convent, the long-suspended storm of snow and whirlwind burst forth with aggravated fury, and rushed through the valley with the thunders of a wintry torrent. The travel¬ lers, sinking and clinging fast together, tried to evade its fury; but when they arose, breathless and sheeted with snow from head to foot, they perceived that its strong drift had hid the walls of the convent to the pin¬ nacle of its loftiest spire, and not a gleam of light was longer visible* from their sole bea¬ con amid that trackless ocean of snows. The fabric seemed to have become in a moment a part of the mountain on which it stood; and
they felt that the labour of many hours could alone enable the community to remove the drift with which the storm had heajied their convent from threshold-stone to battlement. In an agony of despair, Joshua flung down his staff*, but suddenly seized it again, and, waving it in a kind of triumph, exclaimed, " Yet, yet there is hope ! So nicely have those men of the storm and the elements calcu¬ lated on their powers, that amid the snow¬ drifts that heap their building to its topmost turret, they know that the blast may be transient and the peril small: and only on occasions of mortal danger, which their ex¬ perience, hourly exercised on the aspect of the elements, enables them to foresee—only on such do they toll the great beU of the convent, which, being heard many a mile, warns the traveUers to foUow the direction by sound which can no longer be traced by sight. Then the convent-gates are thrown open to aU who may be in its neighbourhood, and Raymond of Toidouse, at the head of the Albigeois, might enter unquestioned. The bell hath not yet toUed: safety may yet be won.
There is," he continued, feeling the ground with his staff, while his benumbed and be¬ wildered companions gazed on,—" there is a stair cut through the rock, that winds by a short ascent to---------1 have found it!— I have found it!" he shouted, dashing away the snow with his staff and piked sandals, and springing upwards with the bounding activity of hope. As Genevieve and Arnaud attempted to follow, every bell in the Convent of St. Mon- tanus pealed out in that tremendous tone which announces the last extremity of danger to travellers. The group stood gazing on each other, with visages frozen hke their hearts, and for a moment they seemed to each other like their own spectres, so Hvid was the hue of their utter despair. Joshua was the first to start from this trance of horror: he caught up his staff, and, with an exclamation almost amounting to an oath, asseverated there was still hope of win¬ ning the ascent, and he would peril life on the issue. As he spoke, he darted upwards by the assistance of his pole.
"What is it thou sayest?" said Arnaud: and Genevieve was shocked to feel that he leant on her for support unconsciously, and his face lookeu frightfully contracted. "Cheer thee !" said Genevieve; " our brother hath departed for a space, but he will return with tidings of hope."—"He will," said Arnaud: " hark ! I hear his voice." There was indeed a cry—a human cry, and Arnaud feebly and deliriously echoed it: " Didst thou not hear that voice of hope and Hfe?" Genevieve, shuddering, dared not answer him : she heard the voice, and knew its sounds were aught but those of life or hope. The next moment, the falling body of the guide dashed past them like a dark meteor: he had trusted to a projecting ice- crag for a rock, it sunk under his weight, and he was precipitated into one of those abysses, where it is hoped fife may be extin¬ guished almost before the agonies of disso¬ lution are felt. * e I saw a bird fall from the cliff," said Arnaud, in an increasingly chattering and paralytic tone. " The birds are for the roost,
and the beasts for the lair, and I too am for my rest: lean on me, while I speed to it," he added, leaning on her. Genevieve, who perceived he was no longer conscious of what he said, appeared to comply, but attempted to lead him upwards: his weight dragged her down. " We have had a weary day," he cried: " it is time to take rest, and here is a place where I may repose. Art thou not also incHned to slumber ?" Genevieve, who knew the danger of her fellow-traveller, implored him, while her breath seemed turn¬ ing into icicles as she spoke, to resist his fatal propensity to sleep. His heavy and scarcely intelHgible voice murmured, "I must sleep! awake me soon, and I will aid thee : one hour's sleep is all I ask." As he spoke, he sunk on the snow, making faint signals to her with his frozen hand. " God!" cried the desolate and hopeless female, as her last com¬ panion shrunk away to die. Her lips then closed; and feeling that her only chance of preserving life was exercising aU her remain¬ ing powers, she attempted to walk with all VOL. III. E
the speed her benumbed joints could supply before the mouth of the cave. Her senses wandered, and she imagined she saw a giant in white armour stand mena¬ cing her above. He menaced not in vain ; the next moment two vast arms seemed descend¬ ing from the skies to clasp her; a roar an$ crash foUowed, maddening the mind and stunning the ear. Genevieve tried to utter a prayer—not for Hfe, but for a tranquil spirit to meet her fearful doom. Her frozen Hps refused to utter a sound, the blood seemed congealed at her heart, she feU prostrate and senseless, as an avalanche thundered down from the mountains, and, shattered and dis¬ persed among distant precipices, flung some of its most Hght and feathery flakes as far as the spot where she lay—as the waves that have sunk a gallant ship, throw their foam and spray on the sole gasping mariner that has survived the wreck and gained the shore.
CHAPTER IV. What chance, good lady, hath bereft thee thus ? Milton's Comus. The community of St, Montanus, how¬ ever skilful in calculating the fierceness and duration of the storms which visited that mountainous region, were deceived with re¬ gard to that which " shook their battlements" that night: it was as transient as it was vio¬ lent, and the moment it had passed away, some of the lay-brothers, with that fearless humanity which then and ever will do ho¬ nour to such communities in catholic coun¬ tries, set forth to render aid to such pas¬ sengers as might have been overtaken by the storm. They had discovered the body of Joshua (the guide) in a snow-drift, frightfully mangled by his fall from the precipice, and the blood already frozen on his numerous E2
wounds ; they had found also that of Arnaud,. frozen to death as he sat: and from the peculiar fashion of their garb, and the ab¬ sence of rosary and crucifix, they guessed that the departed sufferers were of the " sect every where spoken against." " They have perished by a colder death than their crime of heresy deserved," observed the sternest of the party. At a short distance they dis¬ covered the almost-lifeless form of Genevieve, and with difficulty raised and disencumbered her of the snow. Her closed eyes and con¬ tracted features gave no indications of that beauty in which she once excelled all " the daughters of woman;" but they could not help noticing her slender and graceful form, though under the disguise of the coarse habit she had assumed for her journey. And she was now in a state that disarmed the fiercest rigour of monasticism, and she fared the better for it. There was in the neighbourhood a female community, under the denomination of Beata?, not precisely under conventual rule, but bound by voluntary vows to exercise deeds of mercy
and charity to pilgrims or passengers in the neighbourhood of their dismal and stormy dwelling. Hither Genevieve, still senseless, was conveyed; and after two days careful tendance on the part of the Beat®, who were unwearied in their work of mercy, her limbs recovered motion, and her mind sanity. She had been insensible during the interval; but when her eyes, almost blinded by the fall of the avalanche, regained their power, she look¬ ed on the humble apartment in which she had been placed by the Beatae, and imagined herself in a cottage of the Albigeois again : the wooden walls, the straw pallet, the un- glazed casement, all recalled to her memory the images- of her early existence. She gazed around her, and saw, in a dark recess of her naiTow chamber, an aged female in a black woollen garment, who seemed by the fre¬ quent inclination of her head towards a figure rudely carved in wood, in a niche of the cham¬ ber, and by often making the sign of the cross, to be engaged in some act of devotion. The slight noise that Genevieve made by raising herself on her pallet, caused the
female instantly to approach her: she bore in one hand a crucifix, and in the other a small vessel of holy-water, and made eager signs to Genevieve to kiss the one, and as¬ perse herself with the other. Genevieve mildly declined the offer.—"Is this, then, thy gratitude to Saint Montanus ?" said the ancient female, with horror in her visage. " I am grateful to God," said Genevieve calmly. " What am I to deem of thy words ?" said the Beata: " art thou an heretic, an Albi- geoise?" — "After the way that men call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers," answered Genevieve, who now felt in whose hands she was, but who at the stake would not have concealed or compromised the truth for life itself. The female instantly retired; and Genevieve, exhausted by this short conference, or rather by the emotion which it had caused, sunk into a doze, in which she saw before her precipices of snow rocked by earthquakes, and bodies faUing from them, when she was startled from her vision, by the touch of a hand colder than ice—it was that of the oldest of
the Beatae, who exercised in this community all the authority of a prioress over nuns. Genevieve, half-awakened, and reverting to her late trial, exclaimed, " I know I am banished: where, and how must I depart?" " Even where thou wilt," said the cold and stern Beata; " but with us thou must tarry no longer: we have done the deed of Chris¬ tian charity in saving thy mortal life, but may not peril our souls in sheltering a heretic beneath these walls :—depart, and leave us. Thou hast strength, though thou renderest not thanks where they be due."—" Holy mother, hear me," said Genevieve, lifting her ■suppHcating hands.—"Not for a word, false heretic," said the Beata, stopping her ears; " I tell thee depart, and trouble us no more: thy strength is restored, arise, and begone !" —"It is not in thy nature, not in thine heart/' said Genevieve, " to thrust forth a helpless wanderer thus. Why was I saved from perishing amid snows, if I must be plunged into them again ?" The Beata paused for a moment; and then said, though with evident reluctance,
— " Hie thee hence to a place I will" point thee to: it is but at sniall distance from our domicile; there shalt thou have an holy man for thy guide to the city of Toulouse, where thine heretic sect loves to abide, and whither I have heard thou wast journeying; a holy pilgrim who goes with other purpose will meet thee there, and be thy safe con¬ duct ; arise, and depart." Genevieve seeing there was no alternative, arose and attired herself: her limbs tottered, and her heart sunk; but she obeyed, and fol¬ lowed the Beata to the entrance of a cave that appeared to have been the residence of some departed anchoret. The Beata pointed to a seat of stone, then to the heavens, and departed, not without a sigh. " Alas !" she murmured, " that so goodly a vessel should be filled with the waters of perdition !" She then retired, leaving with fruitless precau¬ tion a crucifix of lead within the reach of Genevieve, and with humane consideration, a morsel of black bread, and a cup of stone filled with water: of these Genevieve grate¬ fully partook, and then retiring into the re¬ motest part of the cave, awaited the approach
of. the pilgrim. It was twiHght—he came not: it was night—he came not. The night was very dark : the cave, or rather the rocky ceU, where she was seated, grew more gloomy and more cold every moment: it was in vain that she tried to fortify her coiu*age. " It is not possible," she said, and wept; but still the pUgrim came not; and though she stiU repeated " It is not possible," she wept the more. As she raised her eyes after one of these involuntary bursts of tearful weakness, she beheld a strong gleam of light right be¬ fore her, darting its rays through the trees, and, with the mingled instinct of hope and fear, she rose and hastened forward in its direction. Her situation, she felt, could not be more desolate, and Hght itself is always to the unhappy a kind of indefinite security for hope and for comfort. It gleamed from a cavern, and was often obscured by tlie branches of trees; yet she pressed towards it, and as the Beatae had fortunately fixed their residence in a low and sheltered valley, she had no storms to encounter, no precipices* to descend, and no ice-bridges to cross in her
progress. The light burned distinct, full, and bright, guiding and inviting her progress. As she approached slowly and fearfully, a spectacle so wild, singular, and lovely ap¬ peared, that both to the eye and to the ima¬ gination it seemed to reaHze all those tales of spirits of woods, and caves, and mountains, which she was accustomed to hear from her infancy, and which indeed might be teamed ; the physical mythology of persons, who, dweHing amid the most tremendous scenery of.Nature, and witnessing her.most eccentric- phenomena, are glad to shelter their terror under the ascription of such operations to supernatural agency. Genevieve paused on the scene before her, with a doubt whether it was an iUu- sion of the senses, or a deception wrought by other power. The arch of the cave, at the entrance of which she stood, was lofty, but the interior sloped downwards, so as to reduce to strong perspective the group that occupied it, and who were visible from the red light of a wood-fire that burned on the rocky floor, the smoke curfing in short
eddies passing through a natural aperture in the roof. Within, there sat on a seat of stone a lady " beautiful exceedingly," and gorgeously arrayed, two maidens were be¬ side her, and an aged female in extrava¬ gant foppery of habit was rocking herself, with an appearance of extreme agitation, on a stone right opposite the others. As Gene¬ vieve came nearer, she could distinguish the habit, and hear the words of the lady, who seemed by her seat and gesture the sovereign of that singular region. The lady's mantle of velvet floated rich and wide over her seat of stone; her tunic embroidered in gems and gold on the left skirt with the blazon of some noble house indicated her lofty rank; and the coronal of gems that vainly confined the dark locks that descended to her waist. though shrouded by her veil, gave attesta¬ tion to the descent her features and carriage claimed, even amid a place so wild and rude. Her attendants, too, were robed in silk, and bore costly jewels, but seemed to wear them rather as ornaments of servitude, than ap¬ pendages of rank.
Genevieve could discern all this, and, aware of the dress worn by noble females at that period, she hoped for the protection she hardly dared to claim. The sweet sounds of the lady's voice thrilling like most distinct and welcome music in her ears, gave her courage to approach still nearer, though unseen. " What now, my maidens,' 4 said the air vision, " why look ye sad ? In sooth, liberty hath made me so happy, that I could fancy this rude cave mine own bower."— " Look," she added, extending her white arm, *' what lack we here but fantasy to change this cave into a stately chamber? Those rugged and channelled fractures in the roof have something in them that reminds me of the fretted work of my ceiled chamber: a bolder hand hath carved those lines of stone than mortal finger that ever wrought with implement in curious wood;—and for tapestry," she continued, playfully catching at the ivy that hung in fantastic wreaths above her head and around her, " when did clusters of leaves so richly interlace or so verdantly glow in the arras of my bower, as those do here?—and for the smoky light of
torches held by pages, have we not here a rich and ruddy fire that throws its broad light on aU we love to look upon, in this our royaume of secrecy ?" " And on other sights that thou mayest not love to look upon," said one of the damsels.—" What sayest thou?" said the other.—" That I have twice seen a female figure cross the entrance of this wdd rest¬ ing-place/' said the attendant.—" Nay, if it be a female form, it bodes us good," said the lady smiling; " and thou, who wast a mountain maid, shouldst teach me charms to conjure. Come, then, spirit of mountain cr moor, of water or wood; come in female form, and see if I dread thee. Ha!—a spirit indeed," she exclaimed, as Genevieve, en¬ couraged by what she had heard, advanced: " for Avhen did earth own aught so beautiful? Heaven forgive me !" she added, " if I have lightly spoken of names I should have reve¬ renced. Thou art surely too lovely to be harm¬ ful ; yet speak, for thy silent approach awes me."—" A mortal maiden," said Genevieve, " and most unhappy, craves the protection of your presence, noble lady, from the dan-
gers of this deep solitude."—" Why, this is brave," said the lady; " here sit we like fairy queen in this wild forest, to dispense our elfin gifts on spell-struck wanderers and slighted lovers. Approach, damsel, without fear; and perchance thou mayest one day re¬ ceive token of our favour amid scenes better suited to then* inmate than this rude cavern;" and her jn'oud and beautiful smile, as she spoke, ,showed her nothing displeased with Genevieve's prompt recognition of her rank.— " Now to thy tale, damsel; and look it he wild and full of adventure, meet for the scene."—" For Heaven's sake, Madame," said one of the women, " urge not the damsel to speak, the sound of our voices may be heard, and visitors not so harmless pry into our solitude."—" Thou ail witless. wench, with thy fears," said the lady: " if this fire that bums so bright betrays us not, the soft tones of this maiden give no cause for fear; but in sooth, mine escape from peril, far greater than aught that may befall us here, seems to have given me false courage, and I feel as if there were nought
again to dread or to suffer in life."—" Shield us, Marie," said the damsel, " here be steps approaching." They Hstened in painful si¬ lence; the sounds came nearer, and they heard at length a mascuHne voice say, " Thou counseUest weU; let us even tie our mules to this tree, and warm ourselves at ; . yon fire* for, by the mass, I chatter for very f .^. cold." With that, two men in ecclesiastical, m habits entered the cavera, and approached j.. the fire. The apprehensions of the lady and r her attendants seemed somewhat qualified by the garb of the strangers ; but Genevieve, who with horror recognized in them the men from whose violence she had been re¬ scued by Sir Amirald, shrunk close for con¬ cealment behind the lady. The strangers had nothing of the monk about them but the habit—their look was sul¬ len and licentious: they replied briefly and un- couthly to the greeting of the lady, and then drew near the fire, not without casting looks of surprise on the party, whose appearance was so Ul-suited to their situation. In a short time, their regards became concentrated on
Genevieve: they began to exchange looks and to whisper, without attending to the lady, who was expressing, but in somewhat a timid tone. her satisfaction at the presence of two reverend men, whom she prayed to remain with them tiU the return of their absent protector, which was looked for momentarily. " It may not be, lady." said the monk, on whom this hint operated in a manner very different from that the giver intended; " it may not be: our errand requires haste: but we wiH at least diminish your cause of care, for we must have with us one of your fair companions.' 1 Genevieve clung closer at these words—she felt weU the one intimated. " How mean you, reverend men?" said the lady. " Forlorn as I am by most strange accident of all that should suit my birth and state, (of which 1 might vaunt not vainly,) do me not such wrong as to bear away mine attendants. feeble women who can do ye none."—" And is that maiden thine attendant lady?" said one of them, pointing to Genevieve.—" She is under my protection," said the lady, ex¬ tending her mantle over the shrinking form
of Genevieve.—" She is an heretic," said -the monks; " and we have sought her that she may be deHvered over to the secular arm, and burnt with fire as her crime requires."— " Oh, execute your dreadful purpose here," cried Genevieve, " and see if I submit not. My father, mother, and brethren perished in the flames; and prove me, if I have not hereditary courage as weU as hereditary faith. But rend me not from my pro¬ tectress—it is that I dread." The monks advanced. " Cling close to me," exclaimed the lady: pride, fear and anger, chasing each other in rapid alternation of co¬ lour and expression over her beautiful fea¬ tures :—" Said I ding close ? nay touch my mantle's hem, and it shaU be to thee as a knight's broad shield. Unreverend church¬ men," she continued, " do not such deed of violence for shame, if not for mercy. Your purpose cannot be so horrid as you mean. Hold," she cried, as the monks stiU ad¬ vanced, " hold! the noblest maiden in France offers herself in pledge for this damsel, and nobly wiU she redeem her pledge. Trust me,"
she. cried, extending her white arms to¬ wards the men who had now strong hold of their victim.—" Save me, noble lady, save me," cried Genevieve, taking fast but fruitless hold of the lady's robe.—" At your peril! lewd and lawless churchmen, if church¬ men ye be," said the lady. —" Clasp me close¬ ly, damsel; help, my maidens, help!" The united force of slender hands proved but weak against the brutal strength of the monks; and Genevieve, with many a strug¬ gle, but without a scream, was placed before one on his mule, while the other led his up a rocky defile, that, he said, would conduct them soon to the Abbey of Normoutier. '< Judge ye," he said lo his companion, " if the lord abbot wiU not Hghtly overpass our delicts hi his absence, when we have such a prisoner to produce to him." " Speed on," said his com¬ panion ; " we may be glad men if we reach the abbey in safety ; she, from whose side we tore her, is a noble lady by her garb and bearing; and should we be traced, the abbey roof may be in a Hght flame over our heads when the Crusaders have gathered head
again against the heretics." The monks spur¬ red on their mules, and Genevieve was lodged by the next morning in the Abbey of Nor¬ moutier. She was treated with decorum, and even with courtesy, by the community, who had their own reasons for preserving a bonne bouche for their abbot; nor was it tiU after many a day of unmolested solitude that she was discovered, as we have related, by the Bishop of Toulouse. The object of Verac and SemonviUe was to demand what aid the bishop could spare, to assist them in their pursuit of the lady IsabeUe. The prelate promptly accorded their boon, that he might be the sooner rid of their presence ; and a number of his armed attend¬ ants was instantly added to their train, which wheeled from the abbey-gates by dawn. The bishop looked after the knights as they rode, " There go arrows shot into the air," he said internaUy ; "in winning these prisoners, mine hath hit the white." While the abbot, who stood disconsolate at the gate during then* departure, exclaimed sorrowfuUy, " they have drained my ceUars—they have exhausted
my buttery—they have borne away the only Solace left me in such bereavement." He sent a melancholy glance after them as they rode—"But is there not a text to console me: Tu me malis Hesperidum locupletastL There is yet some comfort in apt quotation," he added, repeating it as he retired within the gates of the Abbey of Normoutier.
CHAPTER V. What! hath this suape again appeared to-night? Hamlet. The peril of the Lady Isabelle had indeed apj:>roached its crisis. When the outlaw first made }irey of her, he had no further thought but of enriching himself and his comrades by tlie ransom of the noble and wealthy heiress ; —when he first beheld her, he gazed on her " as a bright peculiar star," above his region, though not his view ; but now the habitual familiarity of seeing and speaking to her had suggested other thoughts and views to a mind ambitious, daring, and amorous. He conceived that the lady might be won to wed him; and his pride, avarice, and passion, were alike f altered by the thought. He knew that the first avowal of his feelings ■ towards the lady had been met by her decla-
ration (seconded by no feeble action), that she would dash herself piecemeal against the waUs of her prison were the insidt repeated; but he felt that his avowal was made in a moment of inebriety. Thenceforth he care¬ fully abstained from the habit, (at least in her presence,) and it was no slight sacrifice. He devoted himself also to the adornment of his person, winch wanted not comeHness; he shaved his beard, and rubbed rich essences into his rugged hair; he arrayed himself in splendid attire, of which he had store; he used baths of wine, and in fine, practised mien and 'haviour in the mirror of his polished shield, which was now employed in no other use. Nor was his care less to make the apart¬ ment of the lady worthy of its inmate : tapes¬ try and gorgeous raiment were pHed in it day after day, and many a plundered castle and piUaged abbey were tributary to the apartment of the captive lady, the lavish and barbaric splendour of which testified the mag¬ nificence and prowess of the robber, but bore smaU witness to his taste. In his new and vain humour of adorning his person, and heaping
the apartment of his captive with gorgeous furniture, the outlaw forgot his usual habit of command over his companions; and Gerand (of whom mention has been made) was rising higher every hour in the estimation of the rude and restless band, who marvelled at the sudden effeminacy of their heretofore daunt¬ less leader. Even his rapacity yielded to his adopted habits, and he forgot that a Crusader and a Knight lay prisoner within his walls, whose ransom at another time would have been the weightiest matter in his thought. Sir Paladour, meanwhile, had cause to con¬ gratulate himself on the forbearance of Ms captor. Perchance the want of a leech, or the sullen neglect of that " sad dog who brought him food to make misfortune live," —or the profound stillness of his prison, (for sometimes the want of all aids to distempera- ture is better than their utmost redundance) contributed to his convalescence more than aid, medicine, or condolement; for so it was, that the knight at the end of some days of delirious misery had leisure to employ his thoughts,on the deliverance of the lady, and
reverted even to the idea of employing that wretched and abhorred being the lycanthrope as an instrument of her safety. It was after an evening passed in such mus¬ ing that Paladour fell into a slumber, and dreamed that he had been contending with a whole army of harnessed knights in the cause of the ladj'Isabelle, and overcame them. His vision went on, and he imagined that after saving the lady against aU odds, he bore her to a wild wood, where a wolf with a human voice com¬ manded him to strike a dagger into her throat. He obeyed as under a supernatural impidse; but the moment he aimed his dagger at his lady's throat, the wolf fastened on his with fang and claw. Ke awoke in horror, and that horror was not diminished as he discovered, by the moon-fight gleaming through the shot- hole, a form hanging over him no less hideous and formidable than that of his dream—it was the lycanthrope, whose eyes fierce and fiery, jaws distended, and white strong teeth fuUy displayed, allowed not a feature to be visible in his countenance, but those which assimi-
lated him to the animal his horrid frenzy personated ; his claws, too, (for so they might be called from their length and sharpness) were extended, and he was just about to dart on his victim as Paladour awoke. A fierce struggle ensued; in the first attack the fangs of the lycanthrope drew blood from the bosom of the knight, and his hideous yell at the sight might have stunned and appalled another antagonist, but his mad bites and desidtory wolfish springs were no match for the adroit vigour of Paladour, who, when the wretch had fastened on his shoulder, tore him off with the loss of blood and flesh, and flung him (as their conflict had dragged them toward the spot) down the aperture from which he had ascended. The body fell: Pa¬ ladour heard the sound; step after step it rolled, a heavy lifeless weight. Paladour reeled backward on his pallet, and found in trance rather than slumber a respite for his overwrought frame and ex¬ hausted spirit, fie had not long lain thus- when the form of that unfortunate being haunted his imagination and his conscience. VOL. III. E
He rose with full purpose to descend into the aperture where the body had been thrown, but in the attempt he staggered and _,»11, and it was more than two days ere he could recover strength for the effort. Meanwhile, all things in that lawless hold were operating in his favour. Adolfo, in his dream of power and voluptuousness, heeded not treating about the ransom of a single cru¬ sader; and his guard, who was deeply impress¬ ed with the terrors of the haunted chamber, scarcely allowed himself time to leave the sorry meal on the floor, and fling the armful of straw for the prisoner's bed, ere he hurried from it and closed the door. Thus Paladour was enabled, as his recovered strength per¬ mitted, to visit the habitation of the maniac. A lamp was left with him every night, as the shortening days of November sent scarce a gleam of light through the loop-hole of his prison, and with this he essayed to visit the vault; feeling something for that miserable being, but feeling more that the knowledge of the passages through the hold of the out¬ law might essentially aid him to work the
rescue of the lady. The staircase of stone, originaUy iU-constructcd, abrupt, and broken, was here so precipitous and interrupted, that the knight was compeUed to hold his lamp aloft in one hand, whde with the other he swung himself, not from step to step, but from height to depth at random. A moan was his only direction as he reached the maniac's vault.—" Approach," said a fee¬ ble voice, " approach, and fear me not:" the maniac was stretched on a bed of stone, like a corse laid on a bier—" approach, and if thou canst remember a prayer, utter it for me.'' The pious knight Lnelt beside him, repeated what prayers he could remember, and holding up the cross on his mantle, urged the dying sinner to fix his sight and soul on that token of salvation.—" With me that avails not now," said the dying man: " come nearer, thou needest now neither dread bite nor blow. I am a fangless wolf—Hst to my last words—they are true. Our Lady and the saints have granted a gleam of light at the close of my dark and stormy day, as I am sane—but stand, I pray thee, opposite to that F 2
dim light, for my jnemory seems to returrr with my reason, and thine image floats be¬ fore me like straws in the vision of a drown¬ ing man. I grasp, but cannot catch it: stand fair and full, that I may view thee, if I can. Now I see thee," he exclaimed. " Thou art Paladour de la Croix Sanglante."—" How knowest thou me ?" said the knight.— " Hush !" said the dying wretch, " list to me while I have breath to speak. I know the secret of thy life, and the fearful unfulfilled doom that hangs over thee. Rememberest thou aught of thy early Hfe ?"—" It was passed in the booth of a mean mechanic in Nismes," said Paladour.—" Is that thy ear¬ liest remembrance?" asked the lycanthrope.— " I have a horrid vision of antedated exist¬ ence," said Paladour, pressing his hands on his throbbing temples, " but recall it, not, or I shall soon be as thou wast."—" But 1 must recall it," said the wretched man. Rememberest thou one who visited the booth of that mean man, and after short con¬ verse held with him thou wast more kindly treated ?—and rememberest thou not the
features of him who wrought thee such good ?—Ah ! no ; thou canst not. Famine, madness, and terror, have done their fearful work on me; but thou hast the glow of youth combined with the matured symmetry of manhood: in thee I recognize the boy I knew at Nismes, and the youth whom I met in afterdays, and furnished with armour of price, and a goodly steed."—" I have deep re¬ collection of those most strange events," said the knight, " but nought of who was the agent in Ihem." —" But I know," said tlie dying man: " it was a female of voice and action such as never left my memory even in madness: it was she who gave me gold to bribe that brutish clown—it was she who gave me gold to purchase steed and ar¬ mour. Years passed on, and I saw her not. I led a lawless, godless life," he added; " but it avails not now to speak of that. Once more I saw her when she set herself to row a boat, to waft thee over some lake ; but ever her word was, ' Mine eye and mine arm are oh him for evil and not for good.'"— " Miserable man!" said Paladour, "and couldst
THE ALBIGENSES. thou confederate with a being such as thou tellest of, against a child ?"—" She gave gold," said the wretch; " in loose riot I spent the gold she gave so lavishly; but it is faUing in molten drops that sear my heart at this my dying hour. I traveUed with a band of pilgrims in this neighbourhood to win pardon for my sins: we were made prisoners by the outlaw. They deemed me wealthy, and, to extort costly ransom, they chained me in a dungeon within chain's-length of a fettered wolf. Mine own dark desperate thoughts, and the howls and boundings of my hideous associate, made me in short space what thou hast seen me—and felt me too," he added with a livid grin : " but now," he added, " I would do, if I could, somewhat of good. Wouldst thou not wish to make thine es¬ cape from this hold of horror ?" The answer burst from Paladour's heart and Hps toge¬ ther—" Shew me but the means of deHver- ance for one dearer than life, and mine shaU be staked for its fulfilment."—" Thou seekest some maiden—some lady—love," said the other:—" but whatever she be, there have
been maidens as fair as she, who have revelled at length with the ruffian-band, and sunk in crime and passion below then' tempters ; and some who have forced their desperate way to death through casement and arrow-slit, or flung them from the battlements. Oh ! how often l have these stony chambers rung to female cries!—and all in vain. But mark me, if thou wouldst win thine escape, as¬ cend that passage through the v/all—that steep and difficult stair that winds through it will lead thee to the terraced rock from which the outlaw nightly watches to see his barks heaving on the ocean; but one warder watches that pass—for from the sea he dreads no assault. But may not a night come when the unmanned barks shall he beating at the foot of the rock, and the warder shall shrink from his post in terror of the wolf-man, whom living they tortured—whom dead they will dread—whose cry, even at midnight, hath startled them at their drunken revels and broken their feverish sleep."—" There may,' 1 said Paladour : " and may Heaven assoil thee of thy sins in requital of the good sei*-*
vice thou mayest render to its most fair and favoured work!"—" Rave not to me of thy love-toys," interrupted the other, " but pledge thy faith as a Cliristian and knight, that thou wilt obtain aU spiritual help for mine imprisoned soul when it is writhing in penal and purging fires."—" I will myself," said Paladour, " tell a bead and say an Ave for thee every night ere I close mine eyes, and I wiU cause masses tc be said for thy soul's re¬ pose by the monks of Normoutier while the abbey stands."—" Enough," said the dying man : " now seek the passage while I can yet point it out to thee: it is now night in this dungeon, and never shaU I see the dawn of another mora." The evening had far advanced when Pala¬ dour began to explore his way, and the out¬ law, according to his wont, prepared to visit his unfortunate prisoner.
CHAPTER VL I ' Oh, Seigneur Dewc should be a gentleman. Perpend my words, Oh Seigneur Dewe ; and mark, Oh, Seigneur Dew, thou dyest on point of fox, Except, Oh Seigneur, thou dost give to me Hgregious ransom. Shakspeare. ■ Her captivity and its attendant persecu¬ tions had hitherto rather irritated than sub¬ dued the lofty spirit of the lady IsabeUe. Accustomed from her very childhood to the homage paid by her own sex to her rank and by the other to her beauty, power had with her become jel habit, and constraint, specially when imposed by an inferior, appeared a con¬ tradiction—an inexpHcable phenomenon in life. In vain did her kneeling and weeping women implore her to soften her looks and language—her pride forbade even the thought; and to behold her, on the outlaw's entrance^ seated in silence, so gorgeously attired, her F 5
beauty even heightened by the flush with which pride and anger dyed her cheek, her eyes averted and her form motionless, one would have imagined she sat there as the judge, not the prisoner of the offender. Twice and thrice, standing uncovered be¬ fore her, he made his unacknowledged obei¬ sance, and addressed to her all that he thought might win the ear of pride and beauty to listen, while her trembling women turned their anxious eyes from one to the other. At length, " Is it the use," he said, " of noble ladies to let their visitor atand before them unnoticed ? Is there nothing that may win word or look from thee ?"— " Such looks," said the lady, slowly unclosing her lips, " as I woidd give, would perchance like thee ill; for words—there is but one theme on which I deign to parley with or listen to thee—my ransom, outlaw. Are not the wealth and wide lands of the Lady of Courtenaye enough to content thy rapacity? And why am I held thy thrall, when I proffer for my liberty what would be deemed ransom not unworthy the daughter of King
PhiHp ?"—"A ransom meet for the daughters of kings," said Adolfo, " might yet be un¬ worthy such priceless beauty as thine."— " Accursed be that fatal beauty," said Isabelle, "that hath betrayed me to the unutterable humihation of this moment! It is enough to rebuke the vanity of mine whole sex. that the praised theme of knights and nobles hath sunk to the mark of an outlaw's lewd and saucy commendations." " And what," said the robber, whose pas¬ sions were as high as her own—"And what are these boasted knights and nobles them¬ selves but outlaws, whom wider power hath led to deeper crimes, and glossed them with an impunity which poorer villainy lacks? What are the records of the far-traced ances¬ try of Courtenaye, but a story of violence and blood, of lands despoiled, towns and castles burned, innocence abused, and foul murders done ? Did not thine own father, lady, besiege and burn the castle of Count Raymond of Toulouse, and massacre his wife and children in cold blood? And did not King' Phihp reward his bloody fact, with the
lands of him he had despoiled ? The blood of De Courtenaye, though mingled with that of Beaurevoir, might have frozen for want in those vaunted veins, had they not won - the wealth of plundered heretics to support their pride ! And did lie not, with that same Raymond (then his brother-in-arms, before he was a fautor of heretics), and with that proud and bloody priest, he of Toulouse, do such shameful wrong' to that noble heretic lady Marie de Mortemar, that the like was never wrought in Christian land before; and when despoiled of all, sent her forth a ma¬ niac and a mendicant ? "Now by Saint Mercury, that paynim Saint of thieves, (I lack a Christian one for" the nonce,) a man were better go to shrift with all the murders on his soul done by my wild band since they harboured here, than with such a tale as one of those ennobled murderers hath to tell the priests who pray trembling beside his dying bed." " Base churl!" said the lady, " thou canst put no difference between the crimes of an excommunicated robber, the enemy of heaven ; and the high deeds of
men who marched beneath banners bless¬ ed by the Head of the Church, and perilled life in the cause of heaven and its holy truth. If their zeal blazed forth too hotly, it is for. God, not man, to areed their doom,—least of all for thee, outcast of both ! But I think scorn to hold further parley with thee. My body thou mayest enthrall, on my sight thou mayest obtrude thyself; but never, till Hea¬ ven's grace or man's valour set me free, shall these lips again be unclosed to thee, save to treat of my ransom !"—And as she spoke she drew her mantle round her, and wrapping her delicate arms in it with a resolute fold, sat in as proud attitude of defiance, as a knight in battle opposed in panoply to a mortal foe. " If thou wilt not answer, thou wilt hear me," said the outlaw :—" nay thou shalt, for I have deeply sworn it! It is not for me who have never bent knee to man (rarely to Heaven)—who have never vailed bonnet to noble, or helmet to foe, to stand curtsying for a lady's grace. Listen, lady: wilt thou do a more glorious act than all thy ancestry can reckon in their lawless lives ?■—
WUt thou save a soul condemned—a body doomed to the fiercest cruelty of the ruthless law?" IsabeUe turned on him a look of amaze, as ignorant of his meaning. " I have wealth," said the boastfid outlaw, " to win my peace with Heaven, I can purchase abso¬ lution for aU my forepast crimes. I have wealth to win the name of noble from King Philip, who seUs knighthoods for gold to aid him in his wars with John of England,—I have wealth, as thou seest, to deck thy cham¬ ber in this lonely tower with such adorn¬ ments as might beseem thy bower in the lordly castle of Courtenaye. I wiU reconcile me to the church—I will avouch me true Hege-man to King PhiHp—I wiU restore ten¬ fold to aU I have wronged or despoiled — I wiU join the Crusaders with true heart and strong arm, and lead my bold- band in their van—I wiU set thee free ransomless—I will do aU and aught thou shalt bid me do—so thou wilt wed me, noble lady." The effect which the last words produced on her to whom they were addressed, struck him dumb. This effect was not to be wondered
at. If even in modern times the union of a noble female with an infamous convict, would be considered an outrage on the feelings and habits of society, what vast allowance must be made for one who, un¬ der the full influence of what might be called the feudal dispensation, regarded pa¬ rity of rank as the indispensable basis of the nuptial compact, and listened to a proffer of marriage from an inferior, (and that inferior infamous, and an outcast from the church,) as she would to the horrid proposal of rcn union between beings of two different species ! Isabelle sprang on her feet—both hands were compressed on her left bosom, as if expecting her heart would burst, and her eyes inflamed and dilated seemed starting from their sock¬ ets. She directed them right onward for some moments, as if they could have pierced her prison-walls; at length she turned them full on the outlaw, and that look said as audi¬ bly as language, "Begone this moment, or stay and see me driven to frenzy!"— The outlaw, with all his atrocious boldness, was daunted at the sight: he rushed from
her apartment, cursing the very pride to which he crouched, and muttering between his closed teeth, (half vow, half imprecation,) that he would never again quit her presence unanswered, and never should she fare in their next parley with impunity. For some moments after his departure, Isabelle stood in the same attitude, a terrific picture of ago¬ nized beauty; her women knelt and wept round her, but she stood as a statue among them: not a word issued from her parted lips, not a breath seemed to pass from them. At length, Dame Marguerite, who had with difficulty constrained herself hitherto, exclaim¬ ed, " Here is a world to see !—marry if they deal thus with high-bora dames, how will it fare with me?"—A wild hysterical laugh burst from the lady Isabelle at these words, which were the first she appeared to hear or distinguish; and this laugh continued so long and so wildly, that the damsels began to tremble for her reason. It was succeeded by a burst of tears copious and agonizing. " No, my poor Marguerite," said the' lady, suddenly checking both laughter and tears,
V though thy treachery hath betrayed me to tins hold of fiends, I will be thy security;" and with an action half-mockful, half-affec¬ tionate, she patted the gray hairs on the gou- vernante's forehead : " and this shall be mine," she added, bursting from the arms of Blanche and Germonda, leaning her forehead against the stone-shaft that divided the window, and gazing downward on the ocean—"this shall be mine." At that moment the distant deep-toned bell of a convent of nuns, near the shore, was rung for vigils, and the sound reached the ears of the unhappy inmates of that godless hold. " For Heaven's sake, Madam," said the dam¬ sels, telling their beads at the sound, " quit the casement: we have'heard that a being of hor¬ rid and nameless nature haunts that preci¬ pice at this fearful hour. Come from the case¬ ment, dear lady." "For that very cause," said Isabelle, " will I abide here. No body less and hideous phantom can shock my senses hke that form:" she stopped as if unable to utter his name. "Perchance," she added, with increasing gloominess, " from unhallowed things might I rather expect aid than from aught that bears
the form of man. Such fearful compact hath been ; and it is in an hour like this that the thoughts of it deeply overshadow a troubled soul." She leaned from the casement as she spoke: it was a calm and lovely night; the moon was at full, not a breeze stirred the waves, that rippled and glittered like those of a small brook at the foot of the inaccessible rock that formed the foundation of their prison. " Oh! that my kinsman, the Lord of Courte¬ naye, who is said to deal with the spirits of earth and of ocean, and unless he is belied with spirits of a darkc* dwelling," cried Isabelle— " Oh, that he had taught me words to com¬ mand the dwellers of those depths below or above: in the space of a few hours one or other must open to receive me."—" Nay. Ma¬ dam," said the trembling damsels, " use not such fearful words : methinks already they have raised a fearful form."—" There is a form," said the lady, bending from the case¬ ment, " but mine eyes are dim. Alas! they were not so," she said, "till tears obscured them. Look forth, Blanche; is there not a moving form on that rock ? The moonlight
iaUs on it fair and fuU."—" It seems tome," said Blanche, shuddering and retreating, " like a sheeted corse in that pale light."—" It seems to me," cried IsabeUe, " Hke a knight in bright armour; but, spirit or body, I wdl speak to it." The figure at this moment stood right be¬ neath the casement with uncovered head, and waved a kind of signal with one arm, while it displayed in the other the favour of the lady IsabeUe, whose sUk and sUver gHttered in the moonh'ght. " Away, lady, away!" cried Blanche, " the figure motions to thee." Isa¬ beUe, meanwhUe, had recognized both the figure and signal. " Save me, Sir Paladour/* she cried, stretching her arms from the case¬ ment, " save me, save me." The figure re¬ treated within the shadow of a buttress of the tower, and, as weU as could be distinguished, pointed to the sky and the ocean. " It waves thee on to some fearful deed ; Olr, lady, look no longer at it," said the trembHng attendant. " If I have Hfe," said IsabeUe, fixing her fuUest powers of vision on the figure, " it is the Knight de la Croix Sanglante, and if he hath life, he brings me safety : nay if it be his dis-
embodied spirit, he comes to give solemn warn¬ ing, and perchance glorious hope."—"Men say, he perished in that wild battle with the heretics," said the damsel,—" He perished not there," whispered a mournful and tremulous voice from the terrace or rather rampart; " would he had !"—" It is his voice," cried Isabelle, " it is the voice of Sir Paladour! Speak; art thou indeed an inmate of this des¬ perate place ? Speak, if thou livest ?"--"I five," answered Paladour, " if he may be said to live who sees the lady of his heart the thrall of a vile outlaw, and himself a helpless and maim¬ ed wretch, that howls in despair at the spot he should guard with hfe,"—" I am safe, I am safe!" cried Isabelle, clasping her hands in ecstasy, " I am safe if it be thou, indeed, Sir knight; I cannot despair while thou art near me."—"Ifthis arm," said Paladour, "ifthis heart that seems bursting from my bosom to¬ wards the grates of thy casement, could sever them, then should thy deliverance be wrought, and in a moment; but the breakers that burst at its foundation may sooner sap it from base to battlement than mortal arm redeem its pri-
boners. Yet, hopeless as is my gaze—worthless as is now my Hfe—here VviU I stand tiUI perish. Against this rock wiU I plant my body, and here shaU the waves dash over me tiU they sweep away my corse!"—" Utter not such mad vow," said IsabeUe, "it were sin to keep it. The out¬ law visits my apartment, and"—" Godless ruf¬ fian," said Paladour, "and doth he dare"—"Oh, heed not whathe dares," cried IsabeUe; "doubt not thou that the daughter of Courtenaye can defy all that he can dare. Away, conceal thyself; bythineoath of chivalryl adjure thee— by thy devotion to thy lady I command thee— risk not for another moment a life so precious to her. If thou canst command a secret pas¬ sage, come to-morrow evening when yon star is as bright in heaven as now, and when its light is seen in the waters of ocean. Be here, and if Isabelle of Courtenaye be Hving, she wiU speak to thee from this casement: if not, be assured her parted spirit wiU bear thy name to Paradise."—" But stay, lady," cried Paladour—" I may not, I dare not," said the lady: " the outlaw will visit me at this time to-morrow night. Bevise for my safety mean-
while, or for my death. Away, my voice once had power in the lordly haUs of Courtenaye: let it not plead in vain in mine hour of dan¬ ger and distress." As she spoke, the knight. throwing himself on his knees, appeared to Ijc making a vow to Heaven for her safety ; and Isabelle, closing the casement, prepared to for¬ tify herself against the terrors of the outlaw's next visit by the recoUection of the presence of Sir Paladour, her vaHant knight and loyal lover.
CHAPTER VII. Oh! spare his life, she cried— Lord Buchan's daughter begs his life, Let her not be denied ! Yorkshire Tragedy. No night was more unfavourable to the purpose of the outlaw's visit. Elated by her interview with Sir Paladour, and the confi¬ dence excited by his presence, the lady no longer refused to answer him. But it was only to return suppHcation by disdain, and me¬ nace by defiance; and scarcely could she re¬ frain from expressing the source of that hope, a hint of which must have been fatal to its fulfilment. Their interview ended in agonies of passion on both sides; and dmost choked by his, Adolfo rushed from his apartment to vent it oii some inferior object. Every thing seemed combined
to exasperate him on that night which was to terminate so eventfully; for in the hall he found Gerand conferring gloomily with some of the band whom the detention of the prisoners without ransom had long ren¬ dered malcontent and mutinous. He glared on them for a space in silence, and the rob¬ bers, who knew him dangerous in his mood, one by one quitted the hall without speaking —Gerand alone remained. Adolfo, seizing a cup of wine that stood on the board, and draining it in a draught, dashed it on the ground, and crushed its sides together with a stamp of his foot He then strode up to Gerand, so close that their inflamed and scowling visages almost touched each other. " And what make ye here," he said " brood¬ ing treason with those damned dogs?"— " Because," said the surly Gerand, "the company of men hkes me better than that of women, or of men whom folly hath un¬ manned!'' " By Heaven, he speaks but truth," said Adolfo, throwing himself on a seat that rocked with his force: " I must be spell-bound —something superhuman, whether of good or
evil, guards her. Was it not that first night I spoke to her of love that a groan which chill¬ ed the blood was heard, and a sound that re¬ sembled the fall of an armed giant ?"—"What, witch-ridden as well as woman-ridden ?" said Gerand, with a sneer: "thou art a proper leader for men who should be without fear—for shame —shake off thy folly, hold the prisoners to ran¬ som without further fond delay. Our coffers need replenishing, the band are finely holpen to jeopard life for those fringes and fooleries thou deckest out thy most uncourtly person withal." — " An' it resembled thine," retorted the other, " the task were hopeless; but what hast thou to do or to dictate in this matter ? She is mine, my prisoner and my prize; won by stratagem never devised in thy dull brain —won in the heart and heat of battle, while thou wast hovering on its skirts. Mine she is, and mine shall be, and I will hold her to ransom or detain her in these walls at mine own pleasure."—" At thine own peril," thun¬ dered the other ; " what! shall we lose our prize because the fool is love-sick ? She is our$ as well as thine; we ventured life for her too,, vol. in. G
though not in vain careering in a battle-field, where, hadst thou been known, crusader and heretic alike would have turned against thee. Nay, never lay hand on your dagger ; I tell thee, that if she be liberated, we will share in her ransom to the last liard, and if she be held in thrall, she shall be mine, and every man's; thine perchance the last."—" Gerand," said the outlaw, his voice dropping from its high and wrathful *key to one unnaturally low and soft —" Gerand, be warned ; I feel the fiend un¬ chaining within me !" " Warn those that fear thee," cried Gerand; " I care not, I, if fifty devils and fifty drivellers like thee were un¬ chained together !" They we^e the last words lie ever spoke ; the dagger of Adolfo was in his heart, and so sudden and deep was the blow, that the body dropped on the floor without a groan. Adolfo paused a moment over his deed of blood. Impenetrable to remorse, perchance he felt something like regret at the murder of one who, though surly and savage in his mood, was the most brave, faithful, and long-tried of his associates—a half-sigh escaped his lips, and looking round
him vacantly, he exclaimed, " Why do ye aU stare at me thus ?" The sUence and loneliness of the haU struck him as he spoke, and he felt that terrible necessity of vehement excitement to which men of desperate- habits feel as fatal and indispensable attachment, as the victims of inebriety to the cup of fever and of poison. He stamped. with his foot, and some of the banditti entered. They had heard the loud voices and the sudden fall, but they were not prepared for the terrible result. They recoded and looked aghast; " Take up that body," yeUed Adolfo, " and bear it to the chamber of the lady. Shrink ye ? by heaven or heU, if ye hope or fear either, the dagger that is yet warm from his heart shaU not lack fife- heat again and soon, if your craven hearts can yield it. Take up that body: ho there, bear a torch and foUow to the. lady's chamber." Terror seemed to have wrought the effect of full submission on these fierce and lawless men. They raised the body; one bore a torch, and the unfortunate prisoners soon heard those heavy steps that announce a weighty load ascending the stair of stone. G 2
The door was instantly barred, and the wo¬ men put aU their strength, as the voice of the outlaw was heard demanding admittance. " The bolt is drawn," answered the lady Isa¬ beUe, " and no hand in this chamber shall undraw it!" One spurn of the muscular ruf¬ fian sent bolt and door in spHnters beforo him into the chamber, while, spite of the shrieks of the females, he commanded tho body of Gerand to be laid at the feet of thv lady IsabeUe, who in the agonies of tortured pride and harassed feelings had no other resource than to hide her head in the bosom of her nearest attendant. "Behold thy work!" cried the outlaw: " there Hes the corpse of one with whom liv¬ ing I have stood twenty years foot to foot, and arm to arm, when nobles and knights. quailed at our very name. Murder is on my soul foi thee ! foul murder, and thou shalt make deep atonement."—" Look," he cried, rudely drag¬ ging her to the casement, " the element* in aU their wrath and power, the passions oi 1 man in their fiercest excitement, rise as sworn against thee, Lo, there an ocean moats thee;
—lo, here a moat of blood !- How deem that thou canst escape or defy me, when I am seated in my empery of embattled rock, the ocean my moat, and trample on the body of my last human foe, as I do thus ?" This moment of horror was fatal to Isa- behVs resolution, and almost to her reason. Half-frantic at the horrid spectacle before her, and at the insults of the outlaw, all prudence forsook her, and she exclaimed, wresting her raised arm from him with all her strength, " False traitor ! there be with¬ in thy walls the means to work my deliver¬ ance!" Dark Hghtning flashed from the outlaw's eye. " By heU ! there is treachery here!" he exclaimed: and he called over rapidly the names of his followers. " No not one of them!" he cried.: "they are faithful!—They saw their great idol hewed down without a murmur! Thou pray est to another saint! that fair-formed youth, that Sir Paladour: fetch him hither on the instant, that he may perish in her sight!" IsabeUe, in vain and late repenting of her temerity, now cried aloud, " No! no! not
him! not him, I swear!" But the order was already obeyed by the wiUing messen¬ gers of the chief; and the lady, coUecting in brief space aU her remaining self-possession, felt that strongly denying aU interest in the life of Sir Paladour was now the only means left of preserving it. She had scarce time for the effort, or, rather, for the resolve to make it, when Paladour was dragged into the chamber. "And is this unarmed and beardless mi¬ nion," shouted the robber-chief, "the champion who must set thee free!—A proper stripHng he for daUiance in a bower. Is this he ? Speak, and confirm his doom!"—" He is in thy power," said IsabeUe, vainly struggHng for indifference of look and voice : " he is in thy power, thou man of blood ; but thou art deceived, if thou deemest I have more inte¬ rest in the Hfe of thy prisoner, than I have ever had in that of the innocent and the stranger." " Strike, outlaw !" said Paladour with un¬ controlled emotion, " and try if thy dagger can pierce so deeply as her words."
" Bring not such deep guilt on your soul," said IsabeUe, trying to plead without betray¬ ing a vital interest in the cause : "murder not in mere wantonness." These words were spo¬ ken feebly and with many pauses, as if she dared not trust herself with her own emo¬ tion ; then on a sudden her form expanded, and her voice burst forth in its loftiest tones: —" No," she cried, " I cannot—I cannot thus basely perjure mine heart!—he is my knight, my champion, and my love! Forgive me, Sir Paladour," she cried, " if my wordshave cost thy noble life; but I can better brook the thought of dying with thee, than of denying the love I bear thee!" " A single life is too mean a price to pay for such blessed hearing," said the grateful and impassioned Paladour: " and these last moments of my brief existence I prize above. centuries of base and common Hfe." " Mean as is the price, it must be paid on the instant!" said the outlaw, unsheath¬ ing his dagger. " O for the arms!" cried the unfortunate youth, vainly grappHng with the niflians who
held him a fixed and obvious mark for their leader's blow;—"O for the aims of which thou hast despoiled me! even those in which I met the giant-force of Simon de Montfort, and bore him down in my career like the rooted oak before the whirlwind ! And now to perish by a felon's blow, with pinioned arms and naked breast!" and the burning drops of agony, which he could not Hft his hands to wipe away, gushed from his eyes. " Rend open his collar and doublet!" cried the outlaw, " that there be no hidden charm or speH concealed in his bosom to blunt my dagger-point." " False robber!" said Paladour, as the order was rudely obeyed, " I never used charm or speH when deaHng with harnessed knight in the lists, or men-at-arms in the field, far less against thee, felon !" At this moment IsabeUe, with a dreadful shriek, flung herself at the feet of the rob¬ ber. " Save him I save him!" she cried : " at the feet of King PhiHp I would not kneel in vain for the life of a felon ; and must I kneel to thee in vain for the Hfe of a noble
knight? Am I not humbled? anrl not wretched enough ? O man ! if man thou art, shew mercy!" The soft touch of her hands sent the blood in tides of fire through the veins of Adolfo: he looked on the proud prostrate beauty half in triumph, half in compassion; his heart softened, and not a tear, but a moisture of mingled sensibility and passion, shaded his dark eyes as they rested en her. "Save him!" repeated she, catching with rapid instinct the sign of the melting mood, " and I will--------" " Thou wilt what ?—speak, speak! The dagger is in mine hand, and thy lover's white bosom," he added, gnashing his teeth as if the words gave him torture in the utterance, " is bared to my blow. What wilt thou do ? —speak!" —" I will—I will—deliberate on thine offer!" cried Isabelle, wringing her hands in ex¬ tremity of almost mortal agony: " demand no more, or, in my desperation, I may be unable even to do that!" At that moment, the blast of a horn, that seemed to come seaward, reached their ears. Isabelle sprang on her feet with a G 5
shriek of joy. " Deceive not thyself, lady," said Adolfo ; " those be the blastc wound by my sea-purveyors, who coast along the shores of Languedoc. Hark and thou wilt hear their signal answered by our warder." Isa¬ belle stood speechless before him, as four blasts were distinctly wound by the warder, who was placed on the turret seaward. " I must see my bold fellows," said the outlaw, " and take count of what they have brought. Forgive me, noble lady, that strong circum¬ stance enforces mine absence," he added, making a low obeisance to the lady, who unconsciously answered it with stiffened joints and features convulsively fixed. "Bear the prisoner to his chamber!" he shouted, recovering his natural tone ; " his life hangs on the lady's lips. Lady, thy resolve must be taken within the hour; look it be taken wisely."—" It is taken already," said she, when the door was closed, and all but her women had departed, " it is taken already, but thou shalt never hear it from my lips." She flung open the casement and looked down on the ocean, tossing in its dark
strength beneath. " My deep and eternal bed !" she said internally, " where ten thou¬ sand wild arms are reaching upward and grasping to receive me; and must I sleep on thee at last, and must I cast myself, with horrid, high-nerved spring, into thy cold and gulphing safety? I had hoped for calm and noble rest: I had deemed that Isabelle of Courtenaye would have slept amid her high ancestry, her effigy carved on her tomb amid praying saints and holy emblems; but now the wave must be my winding-sheet, and the ocean my grave!" As she spoke, Sir Paladour, who had not lost a moment, after being replaced in his prison, in winding up the secret passage, by which he regained the ter¬ raced rock seaward, whereon the casement opened, stood in her view. The night was dark and stormy. "Who stands there?" said the lady, as she held the casement open. —" I and despair," said Paladour, reft of all hope. " O lady, what will betide thee now ?"—" O fear not for me, Sir Paladour," said the noble maiden; " the daughter of
the lordly fine of Courtenaye, the daughter of,an hundred heroes, lacks not the spirit of her lofty race in this her last extremity! The ocean is cold, but it is deep; and my corse shall welter on its waves, ere I become the prey of a godless outlaw. A boon, my love!" she cried. "When my falfing body flashes past thee, utter a prayer for the soid of her who preferred even crime to infamy, and would rather endure added ages of suffering in that future and dreaded world, than undergo one moment's shame in this!" At this moment, the near approach of the boat compeUed Sir Paladour to con¬ ceal himself behind a projecting crag, whence he perceived two men advance from the opposite end of the terrace, both armed with spear and dagger, and one of them bearing a torch : " Ho comrades !" he shout¬ ed to those in the boat, " what bring ye to put in the eagle's beak ?"—" The carcases of four fat beeves," answered one of them, " and a goodly tun of Malvoisie.—Marry, there is a foolish cask of Greek wine, which I hold to be hot and unmeet for our leader, who is of
a fiery humour: come down, and help me to hide it in the nook you wot of"------ "By the mass, and will, with all content," quoth the other, preparing to descend.—" Tarry thou here," he said to his companion, " and should the wolf-fiend appear, 'tis but shooting an ave or a couple of credo's at him, and pro- batum estl as the fat friar of Saint Bernard's was wont to say, it will be aU the better for thy sold, for naught but the fiend liimself could terrify thee into uttering a prayer." The other made no answer till his comrade was out of sight, and then—" Tarry here, and stand shooting credo's at a fiend, who would use no more conscience but to bear me to his den and devour me ! The very warder dare not abide on his turret at this fearful hour—marry, for that he is a craven and a coward, Were I on such vantage post I think scorn to yield the fiend an inch, but being as it is------They dare not report of me either," he said retiring, " seeing I overheard them in the matter of the Greek wine." With joy almost to agony did Paladour
watch the sound of his departing steps. The warder absent from his post—the boat at the bottom of the cliff—were it but possi¬ ble for the lady to gain the terrace, her Hberty was won; from thence to the bottom was a descent safe though irregular. Compelled to conceal himself till the boatmen had toiled up the rock with their burden, he at length saw them disappear, heard a postern gate open and close, and once more placed himself beneath his lady's casement. " Hist, lady," he called, " Heaven has not deserted us—all have departed—a moment is ours—and if thou hast the means of lowering thyself from the casement to where I stand, ere dawn thou shalt be safe from this hold of hor¬ rors." And soon Sir Paladour by the lights within the chamber saw, with strained eyes and throbbing heart, all enrployed and exerting their utmost strength to fasten a strong coil of rope to the stauncheon of the casement. It was done at length, and one of the damsels proposed to try its strength by descending before the lady ven¬ tured. " No/' said Isabelle, " it never shall
be said that the lady of Courtenaye was taught courage by her waiting-damsel." She began to descend, and after a few moments of anxious agony Sir Paladour held her safe in his arms; the rest followed swiftly and safely. The descent to the spot where the boat lay was accomplished without danger, and almost without, difficulty: they reached it—they embarked. Not a word was uttered —scarce a breath drawn ; no whispered con¬ gratulations, or even whispered fears; the danger was too great for fear. Sir Paladour seized the oavs, and for the first time at¬ tempted to ply them. Their splash at once aroused the warder, who was only shrinking within his bartizan. Instantly the warder sounded his horn, till tower and rock, sea, air, and heaven resounded ; and at the blast the tower rang with the hasty tramp of armed feet. Lights gleamed from every loop¬ hole, and in a second torches were gleaming from battlement and bartizan, and their fierce red light discovered to the fugitives Adolfo on the summit of the tower, sur¬ rounded by his band, while each and all,
more to shun the rage of Adolfo than from weU-liking to the cause, hastened from the battlements in pursuit. Then the Hghts flash¬ ed thicker through embrasure and loop-hole, and in a moment a score of arrows from every aperture in the edifice that gave room and mark to the archers, whistled over the bark that bore the fugitives; they fell far beyond them. Paladour pHed the oars faster and faster with his utmost strength. Adolfo, after glancing his eye downward for a moment, approached the bartizan, where the warder still stood sounding his horn. The wretched man saw his doom in this movement, and with his utmost strength he clung to and wound about a pinnacle of the battlement. He seemed growing into the stone, uttering aU the while the most fearful cries. Adolfo, without unclosing his lips, wrested the cHnging and screaming wretch from his hold as a boy would unroot a weed from between stones with his fingers, held him for a moment in the ah', and then dashed him from the summit of the tower into the ocean. The next moment the outlaw had
reached the terrace, and, not fingering on the descent, flung himself by desperate bounds like a chamois from crag to crag, and drop¬ ping alone into the other boat, pHed both oars in pursuit of the fugitives. He had every advantage. His strength was that of a giant—he was armed—his boat was light, and free from aU burden but his own, nor was he unpractised at the use of the oar ; while Paladour, who had never handled one before, rowed a heavy boat with four passen¬ gers, and with strength much enfeebled by his late conflicts. Nevertheless he perse¬ vered, though he knew not, when he reached the shore, which the far-projecting promon¬ tory of I'Aigle sur la Roche made his point of bearing, where he might find shelter for the lady and her women. Meanwhile the outlaw gained fast upon him —the spray tossed up by the dash of his oars feU on the deck of their boat, and the waves had now scarce room for a ripple between. With agonized strength Paladour pHed the oar— they were not a bow-shot from the shore. " Oh! thou wilt perish in this toil," cried
IsabeUe, " and I cannot be saved," Paladour had no longer breath to answer: with a deep and long-drawn respiration he made his ut¬ most effort, and the boat touched the shore. Recovering his breath, " Fly where thou canst, lady," he cried, " while I deal with the pursuer." The outlaw's bark touched the shore the same moment; and Paladour, armed only with the oar which he had caught from the boat, repeated his adjurations to the females to escape. Adolfo, planting his armed foot on the strand, advanced dagger in hand. By matchless dexterity Paladour twice foiled him with the oar at two fierce assaults, while the women made vows to every saint in hea¬ ven. The outlaw's dagger was within an inch of his bosom, when a figure, distinctly visible in the Hght of the torches that still blazed on the battlements, darted forward, and, with a force and speed that seemed more than human, plunged a weapon into his heart. Adolfo fell, battering in his dying agonies the rock with his impotent dagger. Paladour, leaning breathless and panting on the oar, raised his eyes, and beheld in his pre-
server the dreaded form of the maniac. The terror which her presence always inspired seemed almost aggravated by her last daring action, though he owed life to it; and he could not choose but exclaim, " Was that blow dealt indeed by the hand of woman ?" " Well mayest thou ask," she repHed, " when such another had long ago set me free ; but if I lacked courage to repel my wrongs, des¬ pair hath at last nerved me to avenge them. In mine hour of suffering I was Hke that gaudy fainting minion; in mine hour of ven¬ geance I became what thou seest me." Pa¬ ladour gazed on her in awe and horror, as if fearing to ask counsel of her. " Take up that frail burden," she said, " and follow me. I will conduct thee to a cave where thou mayest be unmolested. It is known to few but me; it is a rude retreat, but there at least will be safety for thy companions, and repose for thee." And she began to ascend a rock that wound from the shore, with that firmness and rapidity that marked all her movements. Paladour followed, bearing the lady in his arms; the affrighted women came
last, deeming all that had past a vision, and crossing themselves as they gazed on their fearful guide. As she reached the sum¬ mit, the blaze from the tower threw its red light far on the sea, tinting the dark rocks with a partial gleam, and dimly re¬ vealing, as with a meet funereal light, the outstretched corse of Adolfo. " Eagle of the rock," she exclaimed, " how sudden was thy fall; how low thy bed; how profound thy rest! Hosts might in vain have assailed that eyry which was robbed of its proud in¬ mate by the hand of a woman ! No more shall the land be darkened under thy out¬ spread pinions, no more shalt thou pounce with talon and pierce with beak!—How fiercely but now did corporeal power and excited passions hold mortal strife on that stilly spot?—Shall it lie thus with we?' 1 she cried, " shall I lie so calm when at length my task is wrought, and my struggle overpast. Oh, no ; the passion that has be¬ come the essence of my being will become identified with my disembodied spirit, and I shall still hover over such scenes, and prompt
such purposes, and witness such deeds, unseen perchavice, but not unconscious!" And she hastened on, seeming to pursue the subject in inward mutterings, till they reached the cave. On the floor lay a.heap of dried leaves and implements for kindling a fire, and there were even some rude re¬ freshments spread on a projecting block of stone that seemed to present itself for the purpose in that wild retreat. As Sir Pala¬ dour entered the cave with his burden, the loosened hair and floating garments of the half-senseless Isabelle streamed over his shoulder and swept the floor ; her utter help¬ lessness, contrasted with her costly habit, seemed to strike the imagination of the maniac, " How mockfully," she said, " those trap¬ pings of pride and power glitter on a ihing so fragile, so powerless and yet passionate! I marked her look, when I did the deed. She seemed as if she could hav^ killed with eye, but never with hand; and that jewelled blazonry on her tunic's skirt, 1 ' she cried, touching it, " would that have been a shield
against the talons of the eagle ? The high heraldry of Marie de Mortemar, as nobly at¬ tested and as gloriously engemmed, was no available defence against wrong and outrage." Then suddenly turning to the preparations for the fire, she lighted it, and in a few moments a cheerful flame blazed through the cavern. " Ye are no unexpected guests here," she said, pursuing her task: " this fuel hath been stored for many a day; these coarse viands have been changed every day in hope of vi¬ sitants, for I deemed that the stout heart and valiant arm I summoned to aid, would do its work, and not leave the task to be finished by a woman. Yet on these shores have I wandered day and night to watch the tower. I lacked not the wild converse of the spirits of the storm and the spirits of the sea in my wanderings." She checked herself, as feeling the presence of her trembling list¬ eners. " Now list to my counsel," she cried; " watch well your ruddy fire, for the wolf and bear excepted, (whom the blaze will scare,) I know no visitant ye have to dread. That fairly-painted piece of clay," pointing
scornfully to Isabelle, " lacks repose for the night. Let her for once feel it may be tasted as deeply on a pillow of stone as of down. But, ere the dawn, seek the convent of the Benedictine nuns, whose bell thou mayest have heard toll, even in that godless hold. It b but half a league; the lady's dainty feet must learn to pace that distance. Place her in those walls whose reputed sanctity has defended them from the outlaw during his whole rapacious and bloody career!''—" But," answered Paladour, " I lack both horse and arms, and how may I defend the lady of Courtenaye from violence, should she be assailed again traversing this wild country, an unarmed man her only champion? And will the holy nuns thou tellest us of, find me steed and armour ?"—" Interrupt me not: talk not to me," said the maniac, if such she was; " in my few moments of sane thought I brook not to be questioned or doubted. Take my counsel while yet I can give it; save that fair feeble thing thou dotest on ; place her amid walls thou deemest holy, and ere the following morn, an harness and steed.
such as knight may bear and bestride in the day of battle, shall be thine. Thou doubtest stih, but remember that will is power, and that none capable of forming such purpose as mine ever lacked the means to fulfil it." " Thou seemest like one who would scorn aught of thanks," said Paladour, doubtfully. " yet must I thank thee for my life. ,, -~ " Thank me for Hfe," she repeated, with a shriek of fierce derision, " thou art a right grateful fool to thank me for that which all feel a curse, save when they are employed in making it a curse to others. Forbear, til! thou hast cause to thank me; our gratitude may perchance then be mutual; and now. Sir Paladour, I crave a boon : I must confer with thee for a space apart and alone.—Ha ' shrinkest thou ? feeble and forgetful being: did not the hand that beckons thee forth strike dagger into thy foeman's heart within this hour?"—" 'Tis even true," said Pala¬ dour, musing, " and I must trust, though I must also tremble at thee." As he spoke, she turned away, and ap¬ proached the lady Isabelle where she sat re-
covered from her swoon. She lifted up her veil and gazed on her for some time in sUence,whUe the lady recoiled, but did not dare to resist her. " That visage," she said with emotion," might make a fiend falter in his purpose, but apos¬ tate humanity is more depraved than angelic —their original estate was lower, and lower perchance is their faU: it moves not me!'— she dropt the veil, and beckoning to Paladour who foUowed reluctantly, quitted the cavern. MeanwhUe, the spirits of the lady rose with the consciousness of recovered Hberty: she drank for the first tune water out of a wooden cup, and said, " it Hked her better" than wine from the gemmed goblets at her castle- board : she tasted the rude refreshments, and they pleased her more than crane and pea¬ cock, manchet or marchpane; and she was conversing even gaUy with her damsels, when Genevieve, as has been told, besought her protection, and was almost instantly torn from it. The glow of agitation and anger was stiU on IsabeUe's brow, when Paladour and his companion returned. The countenance of the former was as that of the dead. " It is mere VOL. III. H
weariness," said the lady, touching with her deficate fingers his damp and palHd forehead. " Woidd it were!" said the youth, with a sigh that shook his frame. At that moment she perceived the ring on his finger had disap¬ peared, and remarked its loss—" Would I might never again see it!" said he heavily. The maniac threw a glance into the ca¬ vern, but did not enter. " No," said she; " in her best and brightest days, Marie de Morte¬ mar was never aught Hke thee.—Whither now?" she murmured, as in self-debate — " for my mind begins to darken again! —On to the castle of Courtenaye—to the castle with my best speed. My spells be¬ gin to work, and the spirits to throng with¬ in my circle, and my toil of twenty yeai"s shaU not at length be in vain:"—and with un¬ wearied strength and spirits she pursued all that night her way to the castle, and at day¬ break descried a troop of horsemen led by two knights fiuTy armed, traversing the plain on. which she had just entered. " By Marie," said he who rode foremost, " the very mania¬ cal who did us to wit of the enth raiment of
our lady.—Dame," he continued as she came near, " we have fared forth as thou seest: teU us if we are near the eagle's eyry?"— " Tuxn back," she answered without pausing or looking up—" the eyry is cold, and ti«s eagle's pinions are furled for ever. Laggards that ye are in love and in war, turn back." " By the mass, an thou railest so on me," quoth SemonviUe, " the end of this lance shaU teach better manners to that crazed head of thine!"—" Tush, she is a woman," said Verac.—"All the better," quoth the other; "had it been a man I might have feared him, but thinkest thou I fear a woman?—By the mass, not one that Hves, speciaUy being old and crazed.'' At the last word, the maniac cast a commanding glance of perfect intelligence on him. " The spark," she said, " the last spark that glimmers on the dismantled hearth of the hovel is often brighter than the blaze of castled haUs. I would not change my gleam for thy broad duU light."—" Heed him not," said Verac, " but put us suddenly in possession of thy tale. Hath the outlaw B2
perished ? Hath the lady won her liberty? And is our quest in vain ?"—" All shaU be told in few words," she repHed; " Sir Paladour hath achieved the lady's Hberty. Sir Paladour, mark ye me—he who leveHed the bold and brutal chaUenger of her dowry with the sand that strewed the Hsts, while thou," to Se¬ monville, " wast caught and cast like a wild¬ cat from his throat: and thou," to Verac, " wast flung into the air like a fan of feathers tossed by some gay lady to her damsel.—Sir Paladour hath achieved the lady's freedom— that freedom she wiU soon resign to him.— Haste," she said, teUing rapidly but distinct¬ ly their way; ** haste, or if they be not there, there is a convent near. Yotu' men-at- arms were better employed in the safe-con¬ duct of a noble lady, than in withstanding a wretched maniac on her way.—Haste, or ye will be late to bear Sir Paladour's train at the bridal.''—" The bridal!" echoed both. " Yes," said the maniac, " the bridal, and I too haste to be there. I must be the bride's bower- woman: I must bind her hair and smooth her piUow."—" Thou," said Semonville, .with
inextinguishable laughter—" thou, thou wilt be a meet bower-woman for a noble bride!"— " Thou sayest true," she repHed; " for I alone can bind her hair in a braid no hand can un¬ twine, and smooth her pillow in such wise that never shall she wish to raise her head from it again." " I tell you," she cried with raised voice and awful energy of action and mien, " I will be at that bridal, and they shaU not hereafter talk of bride or bridegroom, but they shall say that—/ was there! Now pursue your course, as I shall mine:"—and she parted from them. " This comes of thy folly;," said Semonville to his companion angrily: " thou must needs tarry on the way to have curious and costly habit3 made, as if the matter lacked not the steel harness rather than the satin doublet; or, as if thou wert sure of the lady's hand* before thou hadst even .achieved her liberty."—" Content thee," said Be Verac, placidly; " were she even now standing at the altar, I would win her away. It is not in woman to resist a fashion so richly fancied."—" In the name of till the
devils," said Semonville, thoroughly provok¬ ed, " what is there to content me, if after sharing in the charges and peril of the enter¬ prise, my reward is to stand by and see thee wedded to the lady in a new doublet of tis¬ sue ?"—" The border shall be overlaid with silver as more congruent," said Verac, scarce hearing him, " and then thou shalt see the lady's fancy made captivate by the garb as much as her person was by the outlaw."--- " This passes," said Semonville, giving up all further expostulation. Then as he rode on in moody deliberation, " I do plainly begin to perceive that I have been made a fool!—but by more saints than I can now remind me of, if the lady doth not wed me incontinently, I will advise her of the charges I have been at in the wooing; such as arms, masquing habits, rich liveries for my train, and other fooleries; and she shall pay me to the last liard, or I would I might never see mine own castle again." " Therein," said he smiling internally, " will I outwit Verac, and all her other wooers, from whom I shall hide my device,
or they would all doubtless be beforehand with me ;'"' and with a kind of sulky joy, he rode in silence.—It was noon when they reached the cavern which the fugitives had not yet quitted, and found Sir Paladour buckling on a suit of armour as black as jet, which with a stately steed of the same hue had been presented to him at break of day, by a person of singular appearance, who had refused to tell either whence he came, or who employed him.—Thus equipped, and with the welcome accession of Verac and Semon- ville's armed followers, the party set on to the castle of Courtenaye.
CHAPTER VIII. The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day, Now spurs the lated traveller apace To gain the timely inn. Macbeth. " It is his living image !" said the Lord of Courtenaye as a few nights after these events he sat in that closet-chamber (to which few but himself had access), and gazed gloomily on a portrait from which the black curtain was jiartially withdrawn. It was thpt of a young and handsome knight in armour, his hand on a sword, his helmet lying on a table beside him—his hair fell in thick ringlets on his shoulders, and on the margent was writ¬ ten—Remond—anno Salvatoris Mundi 1192. " It is his living likeness !—the same trium¬ phant and insulting beauty, the same smile that his father bore when he mocked my im-
potent body and distorted mind, and swore they were alike crooked.—Bid I not fall pro¬ strate at his sight in my castle-hall, as if pierced by a sword ?"—Still gazing on the portrait—" I dared not to beard thee then, when thou wast companion-in-arms to mine elder brother, and I was the broken and sightless branch of the root of Courte¬ naye ! But did I not repay thee ?" he cried, shaking his weak hand at the lifeless portrait. 4t Blood and Hfe were paid down for gibe and jeer, when thou didst join with the heretics, and my fierce brother at my urging left not wife or child, male or maiden, alive within thy walls." His eye, that seemed to threaten the portrait as he spoke, wandered wildly-— ** And yet, and yet—he was within these walls a Hving being ere long." The cloth that covered the door was now hastily withdrawn, and Thibaud rushed in ex¬ claiming, " Tidings, my Lord of Courtenaye, of the lady IsabeUe!"--" Would that the lady Isabelle lay coffined at my feet!" quoth her kinsman; ** her fooHsh beauty hath made my castle the resort of wooers, k and among them H 5
came one fitter to dig it from its foundations than to add one pinnacle to its battlements, unless to place his own blazon there."—" I deemed thou wouldst have been weU pleased to hear of the safety of the lady IsabeUe, said Thibaud suUenly. " The fiend fetch the lady IsabeUe and thee !" said his lord. " Boes it pleasure me to hear that my coffers must be emptied for her ransom ; for such I deem is the sum of thy tidings ? Would the outlaw, or the ocean on which men say his tower is placed, had her in their wildest grasp first J" " She hath been deHvered from thraU," said Thibaud, " by the skiU and prowess of a single knight; and for her ransom men say her dehverer made the outlaw pay it with his blood."—" Good, good," said the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye; " she is deHvered without ransom, and my coffers shaU not be ransacked for the re¬ deeming of a paltry girl. Marry, the gems on her girdle were ransom but too precious for her whole worthless sex! But thou didst speak of a dehverer—who may that be ? who, who ?" and his voice rose to a pitch of scream- ign agony : " say Paladour de la Croix San-
glante, and take thy leave of hfe!"—" Such tidings are told," said Thibaud. " Name but the name of her dehverer," said the Lord of Courtenaye writhing. " Thou hast named him already," said Thibaud ; " it is Sir Paladour de la Croix Sanglante."—With a spring like that of a mountain cat the Lord of Courtenaye darted at the throat of his vassal. The strong- limbed vassal held him at arms' length, and shook him till he quailed. " No force or fury, lord," he said: " the fiend may rise within me too, and his workings be fiercer in this arm than in thine !"—•* My gentle Thibaud," said the cowering lord, " I know thou hast utter¬ ed all this in sport.—Thou dost but mock thy master—say so, I pray thee—say in one word thou hast deceived me, and I will not harm thee." And his soft unnatural voice, his sup¬ plicatory whine, and his ashy visage made fear¬ ful contrast with the fierce and vivid malignity of his eyes as they flashed on Thibaud. " Thou, thou harm me !" said Thibaud, relaxing his hold and bursting into incontrollable laugh¬ ter :—" by heaven, lord, I deceive thee not. A missive of the Bishop of Toulouse bore
hasty tidings this day :—the sum was, the lady IsabeUe hath been disenthralled by that Sir Paladour. They purpose for the castle of Courtenaye; there be also Sir EzzeHn de Verac and the Sieur de Semonville, and they attend that noble lady with a gallant com¬ pany of men-at-arms." — " Curses, curses!" said the frantic lord, tossing his released arms above his head—" curses on them as they go, and when they come ! Go. thou," he cried, " fling me that hoary-headed Har—that tra- ducer of the stars—that blasphemer of the bright Hghts of heaven, before their very eyes into the deepest moat of the castle, and burn me that foul witch!"—" If thou darest!" said a tremendous voice ; and the form of the ma¬ niac stood before him, heaving up a stone of the paved floor, Hke a spectre rising from tlie grave. " I will do thy hests, lord," said Thi¬ baud, " wdlingly ;" and by sundry expressive gestures he intimated in a manner at once froHc and ferocious his good disposition to that feat. The Lord of Courtenaye waved him off with a mixture of impatience and fear, as the
mysterious being slowly and again repeated, " If thou darest! Thou hast the power and evil will, and thy brute instrument lacks no spur to second both; but so doing thou wilt rob thyself of a dear pleasure. Thy chiefest de¬ light is to do evil, thy next to hear evil fore¬ told, and of that my death would bereave thee—slay me now, if thou darest!"—" False hag!" cried the Lord of Courtenaye; " what canst thou predict that may bring comfort to me ? Is not my niece delivered from thraldom by the very arm that I woidd were withered muscle and marrow ? Is he not journeying to my castle with his prize in his proud arms ? and will not his valiant deed (oh, that his arm were forceless and feeble as this!) and will not his goodly favour win her to listen to that nameless suitor?'' " If thou doubtest of my predictments," said the female, " take this at least for truth. Surely as I guided the knight Sir Paladour to thy castle, surely as I led him to the hold where the lady was thrall, surely," she said with dreadful energy of voice and action, " as I struck his foeman to and through the heart; so surely does
the lady IsabeUe love him who wiU bo her bridegroom, and her murderer. Throw ope thy castle gates, welcome him nobly. couch him on sUk and down, affy him to thy cousin, stand smifing at the altar as she weds him, and then—then—Lord of Courtenaye, the meanest vassal of those* wide domains over which thou rulest by tyranny and torture, would not exchange his place that night with the bridegroom of the lady IsabeUe. He shaU be miserable to the fuU extent of his predicted doom; more,. —to the extent of thy most mafignant wish. Thou thyself shalt,—no," she added with a bitter laugh, " I had forgot—thou canst not pity, else had I said, thou woiddst pity that Sir Paladour." It was singular, that the confidence of the unhappy man, who was at once,, her prey and her sport, seemed to increase in proportion to her denunciations of evil. With ears that thirsted* and eyes that Hstened, he caught her last words, denouncing the ter¬ rible doom of Paladour, and he instantly waved Thibaud from the chamber.—" I am
best pleased being absent," said Thibaud: " the sight of that being makes my pores to open, and mine hairs to bristle." He dropped the curtain of the arched door as he spoke, and disappeared ; then, raising it for a moment, " Shouldst thou again change thy humour of hearkening to the foul witch, for one of burning her, I will attend thy lightest summons, lord. The Lord of Courtenaye and the ma¬ niac were left alone. " Woman, or what may I call thee?" said the wretched.man, •' I am driven to extremity; present perils and future shadowed and visionary hor¬ rors, are in my day-thoughts and my night- dreams. By crime my brother won wealth and power; by crime I hold it. I urged him to the slaughter of Count Raymond's family; but who urged the secret death of that^rother, thou knowest not—nor is there living witness. And for my cousin the lady Isabelle, her nurse was over-faithful, else she had never caused this trouble. I should have been undisputed Lord of Cour¬ tenaye and Beaurevoir; and such I may yet be, if thou wilt lend that aid thou hast so oft
promised me."—The maniac bowed her head. (( Give me, then," he said, " to see him— that mighty one—that evil one, at whose disposal, that ancient and forbidden book saith, are all the kingdoms of the world and their glory! Let me but see him, and make mine own dark terms with him: promise me but this."—" Yet pause," she said ; " pause on thy terrible demand ! Wilt thou, indeed. abide by it ? N">ne guilty as thou art need lack the aid of wizardry to call up that spi¬ rit that is ever stirring uncalled within him. Yet, if it be thy will------" she said.—" My will!" repeated the Lord of Courtenaye: " J tell thee, it is the unquenchable thirst of my spirit. The spirit that works within me need> a mightier one to strive with for mastery or subjection. Let me behold, if thou hast such power, my vassal or my chief. 1 spurn at the implements with which I toil. I would behold at once the entrance to that lower world and its dark and potent ruler, such a.< thou hast painted him! Be there not miners. who, while their fellow-labourers wore out their dismal existence in fruitless labour and
lightless gloom, by on 2 well-fortuned stroke sprung a vein and discovered the hidden and fructifying ore? Be there not others of whom men have told, that, amid the hopeless toils of their Hving tomb, they were encoun¬ tered by the mighty watcher of that dark and hidden wealth, and suddenly enriched beyond the dream of those at whose hest they wrought?" Wlide he spoke, his companion listened for the first time with deep attention.— "Go on," she said d "disclose to me-the darkest abysses of mind depraved, an ul¬ cerated heart, and a damning conscience. I have dived deeper than thou canst; for stronger inteUect is but a dreadful pledge for more deep and daring progress into regions of evil unexplored. Go on : speak thy wish, and it shaU be fulfilled ; name the work, and it shaU be wrought!" The wretched man named his fearful pur¬ pose in language too horrible to be repeated. His companion listened with unshrinking form and unaltered visage—mot a muscle in her whole frame or face was contracted or
relaxed. When he ceased at length, her lips severed; her eyes were intensely fixed on him: her form inclined forward, her right arm raised; and. she stood so, that the deaf would have thought she was speaking in¬ tently, though for that space she uttered not a word. At length, in a voice deep and distinct—" Have thy wish!" she said. " By that Power thou befievest in, if thou be- Hevest in aught, on the lady's bridal night thou shalt meet with thy master and mine!" and as she spoke, she passed from the chamber. The Lord of Courtenaye looked after her a moment. " Thou art an agent for mighty mischiefs!" said he; " but I were to blame if I wrought by thee alone. Madness and in¬ tellectual might are contending in thee ; but every engine, mean or mighty, must be strained for this work. SpeUs may be counteracted and reversed, but when faUed the strong hand and ruthless heart ? If I cannot move heaven and earth, I will at least move earth and heU to aid me. Ho! Thibaud," he cried: and the attendant entered.—"Is the fiend
vanished," said he, in that tone at once fami¬ liar and fierce, in which he was wont to' ad¬ dress his wretched lord.—" No sooner does one vanish, than a worse appears," mutter¬ ed the other. Then with a rapid change of look and voice : — " My gentle Thibaud," he said, "I think thou lovest me! "—" Faith, lord, I love me th-^e not!" said Thibaud, indolently applying his finger to his dropping lip.—" I care not how many know my mind. I ever loved peril for its own sake, and the more for its sworn brother, gold; and thou art so wealthy and wicked, that I knew I never should lack either in thy employ: otherwise I love thee no more than a man may love one who hath employed him at idle hours to cut others' throats with firm purpose that his own should, be cut in mere consequence!"— " Thou art pleasant, Thibaud," said his lord, forcing a faint laugh,—" By my soul, lord," said Thibaud," though that is but poor pledge either, I am sadly serious.'' But what is this demon-deed thou art working me to, for I read thy drift in thy averted eyes, and pale lip, better than I could ever learn from
thy words?"—"Arrest him on his path!' 1 said the Lord of Courtenaye, starting from his seat, and whispering with quivering Hps in the bent ear of his vassal though none Hsten- ed, holding him by the coHar of his doublet fast. " Send swift arrow or keen dagger through him ere he arrive ; it will be light task to what thou hast wrought for me I What, my bold Thibaud, doth thy mettle fail?" -—"And on whom is this gentle feat to be done, Lord of Courtenaye ?" said Thibaud with the calm look of an habitual viUain.—" Ask'st thou on whom ?" said his lord, quitting his hold, and stamping on the floor till the chamber rang again : '* On him, thou mock¬ ing knave !—on him, the very echoes of my castle repeat his name, though / cannot,' he added, in a choked voice, and unloosing his collar. "Jt is Sir Paladour," he yelled forth, and flung himself on a bench: then rising, " Here be fifty bezants in this purse," he cried, drawing it from his girdle : "I will double, I will treble, I wiU quadruple," he continued, watching the increasing shades of reluctance in the strong Hnes of Thibaud's
visage.—" Name thy terms!" he exclaimed, dashing his purse on the ground and facing his vassal front to front, his agitated and feeble frame making strong contrast to that of the sinewy and motionless ruffian who stood calmly before him. " On twice and twenty times thine offer," said Thibaud, "would I trample as I do on this;" and he planted his foot on the purse. " What! murder him who I hath saved the honour of thine house—who | hath won at risk of Hfe the Hberty of the lady Isabelle—who held the cause of the Crusaders light weighed against the peril of a noble lady ! But why speak I to thee? they who are viUains by nature not by neces¬ sity, know not that there be degrees in vil- jlainy? Thou didst reach the goal at a • stride, and therefore knowest not how much I yet lack to overtake thee."—"Art thou most surely assured," said the lord (who 3 teased to tempt and dared not threaten) with I a musing air, " that in the slaughter of that i family, all did perish ? might not one have escaped, and may not that one be he?"— " My lord, your brother," said Thibaud, " was
not wont to do his work by halves. Of that doomed household not a soul was spared, from the confessor telling his beads to the page that held the stirrup! chief and vassal, woman and nursling, all, all perished! — Hark !" he cried, " are their spirits come to confirm my tale ?" as a horn was loudly rung, and the creaking of the chains of the drawbridge was followed by the numerous trampling of men and steeds. " By heaven ! lord," said Thibaud, who had rushed out and suddenlv returned, " there is no time for plots and practice: Sir Paladour and the lady are in the court of the castle."—" Curses ! curses!" cried the desperate wretch in utter despair: " Oh that they were weltering in its moat! oh that its towers would fall and crush them ! oh for a curse that would poison the air they draw, and blast them as they enter!" " Now," said Thibaud internally, " may the Devil lash himself with his own tail, for very spite to see himself outdone in fraud and fiendish simulation. Hark to the welcome he gives them."—"Welcome! welcome! fair niece, and thrice welcome, thou valiant knight her
deliverer," he exclaimed as the lady Isa¬ belle, her beautiful cheek somewhat paler from her late peril and fatigue, knelt to re¬ ceive the benison of her false kinsman: and Sir Paladour and the knights her escorts, with a gallant train of attendants, thronged the hall into which he had rushed to receive her.
CHAPTER IX. It is enough to make one afraid, if one did not know there are no wolves in England. Charlotte Smith's Rural Walks. We must now pursue the course of the Bishop of Toulouse, who some space before this event had set forth.with his prisoners towards his episcopal palace or castle in the neighbourhood of Beaucaire, and felt the cap¬ tives he bore with him as " arrows in the hand of the giant." His palace at Toulouse he had long de¬ serted as situate in a city which was then the head-quarters of the Albigenses, and fortified his episcopal residence at Beaucaire till it rather resembled the strong hold of a maraud¬ ing baron than the abode of a peaceful ecclesi¬ astic. Genevieve, who knew as little of her conductors as of her destination, felt however
some faint hope, some shadow of consolation, from the presence of the deacon her fellow prisoner. This consolation, however, she was not fated to enjoy. The deacon, dejected and abashed at her presence, decHned intercourse with her, but his spirits rekindling at some taunts from the bishop's train, he rejoined with such acrimonious energy and fluent vi¬ rulence, that they were fain to menace the gag, to insure his silence during the remain¬ der of the journey. " Thou teUest strange news," said the bi¬ shop to his cross-bearer, " if the noblest and wealthiest heiress in France be to wed a birthless landless knight.—And what is this thou tellest of the overthrow of Adolfo, the bold outlaw ?''—" Marry, it is merely truth," said the cross-bearer ; " and men say that the Abbot of Normoutier and his, are fain to keep Lent at Michaelmas for the same." The bi¬ shop mused —■" What!" he continued, starting from his reverie in a mood of trivial jealousy, "and that "withered ascetic the Monk of Montcalm to wed them! I ever held that VOL. Hi. I
lady IsabeHe a peevish reHgionist, and a fautorer of those heretics." " How far to Beaucaire ?" he cried, exalt¬ ing his voice. The cross-bearer named the number of leagues. " But is there no shorter way ?" said the prelate impatiently.—" There is," said the attendant; " but it is unsafe, by reason of the troops of wolves, whom the timeless sharpness of this keen and early autumn hath driven from the mountains, and who, finding on the wasted lands of the Albigeois no prey, have descended to the forests, and seize on many men."—" Tush, fool!" said the bishop, " are we not armed, and enough to meet them were every fallen leaf on the wood-path to be changed into a wolf?—set on without delay!" The cross-bearer, knowing expostulation vain, announced the'bishop's purpose to his train, who prepared to foHow. It was in the short twiHght of an autumnal evening when they entered the vast forest that then neighboured the city of Beaucaire. The au¬ tumn had from its commencement been^ unusually severe; the mountains were already
covered with snow; and even in that milder region a keen frost crisped the wood-path, that, thickly strewn with leaves, wound be¬ neath the bare branches of the forest-trees. There was a moon; but that only ,made the nakedness of the dismantled trees more visible and dreary. As they entered on their way, there was heard a fearful and distant sound. ■'* Heardest thou that ?" said the cross-bearer, emboldened by his fears; " it is the howl of wolves." — " It is the echoed tramp of our horses' feet," said the bishop, as he rode headmost of his com¬ pany. Genevieve, who rode behind a man- at-arms, felt her peril, and offered up a silent prayer. They had scarce entered the wood, when the mingled roar and yell of some savage conflict reached their ears; and soon they saw a bear fastened on by many wolves, who, spite of his resistance, dragged him off, and by their howl testified their triumph over their victim. The cry. of a human voice was heard the next moment, and a saddled horse without a rider was seen at some dis- I 2
tance flying like the wind, with some thirty wolves in pursuit) two of them growing to his haunches. • " Speed on," said the bishop to his train, " there is a glade between these fo¬ rest-trees where the moon-light falls full and fair; fight always scares these savage animals, and we shall speed safely." The party pressed on towards the glade, which was shadowed deeply by the trees, and by grassy knolls that rose behind them; but, as they advanced, they saw a vast troop of wolves descending from the hills, and appa¬ rently delaying their attack,- and waiting for a reinforcement from others. They formed themselves in a regular body, and, without rushing forward, kept their ground, uttering hideous howlings, such as that the best riders in the Bishop of Toulouse's train could scarce rein their steeds, who were maddened with fear at those horrid sounds. " We must even turn back,'* said the cross- bearer, who had climbed a tree, " there be thousands of those fierce savages rushing on us. It is like a sea in a storm, where every wave
is afive and howfing to engulph us<— so they come, and their numbers increase as I look on them; and I dare look no longer," he cried, dropping his hold of the tree—" God send us safe from this fearful peril!"—" If we must turn back," said the bishop, who always heard such a proposal with reluctance------" Turn back and ye are lost!" cried a voice that seemed to issue from the air: " another band of wolves is gathering in the rear. Help me down from this tree, with the lady to whom I have been a fruitless guide; and I wiU, per¬ chance, show that which may profit you." The bishop's train looking up perceived that the voice issued from one seated amid the branches of a tree with a female, mask¬ ed and covered with the coarse mantle and hood of a peasant. They assisted him to de¬ scend, with the female, who showed much re¬ luctance to avail herself of their aid. " Sir traveller? said the man (who proved himself a mountaineer by his accent) bowing to the bishop, " I have often crossed these wild wood-paths before—yea and the wfidest mountains of Languedoc, but never did I
know such deep and deadly peril from those fierce beasts as threatens us now. My com¬ rade hath already perished: my horse and the lady's mule are tied for safety to yon elm; and we cHmbed the tree for shelter."—" How may we best meet them?" said the bishop calmly.—" Light the fire that some traveHers have left the embers of, strewed round that broad oak," said the mountaineer; " fire will scare them, and their fear will win you time." At the word the fire was struck, the dry leaves and broken branches heaped on it, and in two minutes a fierce and flaring moat of fire blazed round the party. "Dismount," said the bishop; " place the women and horses in the centre, while we meet them with lance and arrow."—"By your favour, sir travel¬ ler," said the peasant, well skilled to wage such warfare, " that were weak poHcy : they hunger more for horse-flesh than for man; send two or three of your steeds adrift, and mark if you be not the safer." The bishop gave the sign, and some of the men-at-arms dismounted, and attempted t& urge their horses over that barrier of flame,
opposed to which stood their fierce and yeU- ing enemies. The wretched animals,, con¬ scious of their danger, crouched on their very haunches, and, with bursting nostril, reverted eye, pointed ear, and agonized neigh- ings, testified their horror. By the bishop r 's command lance and dagger-point were ap¬ plied; and at length the tortured animals dashed through the flames, and fled like wind into the forest. The event verified the mountaineer's prediction : a vast body .of wolves pursued them ; theii cries were soon heard, mixed with the. howls of those who mangled and devoured them almost in their riders' sight. But stiU the main body pressed on, and even dashed through the fire, howHng as they felt it, less from pain, than from fero¬ city. The bishop's train always received the front rank on their lances, while the archers, standing above, rained down an incessapt shower of arrows on the rear. It was in vain —for fifty that feU, hundreds foUowed; those hundreds seemed to be succeeded by thousands. The yell and the spring, the im¬ pulse, and the fierceness, and the number
seemed exhaustiess, and the howl of the dying seemed only a signal to caU on the living; tUl the bishop, afighting from his steed in fury, dashed the burning branches among them as they rushed on, and then trampling on the flames that scorched him through his arinour, hewed down to right and left with his battle-axe the maimed and howl¬ ing fugitives- At this moment the spectacle was horrible: the dark and bloody forms of the animals, bounding through the flames—the yeUs of the dying and wounded, who in their agonies .bit fiercely at each other—the flashes of the fire, the gleaming of the lances, and the cries of the fierce savages that kept the ear in heU, were almost maddening. The bishop with his train rode on over dying and dead, hewing and stabbing, and flinging burning brands among the advancing troop, tiU the mangled dead lay beneath their horses' feet; and the survivors slunk howfing to the mountains. The trembling women in the mean while had clung close to the shelter of the tree, round which the fire was kindled, but not
even the extreme of terror had extorted a word or sound from that masked lady.— " Fellow," said the bishop, as he rode back, " thou hast done us service, and we will requite thee; thou shalt ride in our train to Beaucaire, if such be the intendment of thy journey." The man was profuse in his ex¬ pressions of gratitude, which, delivered in the mountain patois, were peculiarly offen¬ sive to the ears of the bishop.—" Good fellow, forbear," he said, " would that thy silent companion were as fluent as thou, and better intelligible: she hath not thanked us yet."—" Noble sir," said the mountaineer, proud of a prolonged conference with one whose bearing and train attested hie rank,— " Noble sir, it is her wont: for four days that we have been her guides, she never uttered a word but to urge us to speed. It was but this evening she willed us to cross the forest at all perilj wherein my comrade lost life; and when we ascended the tree for safety, it was all against her will, for ever her word was—Speed on, speed on. But though she paved our way I 5
with gold every league ------"—" What sayest thou?" said the bishop hastily.—"Even mere truth, noble sir," said the mountaineer. "I am a made man for Hfe by her guer¬ don."—" She is not of thy state then, fel¬ low ? " said the bishop.—" Alas! no, my lord," said the guide; " her smaU hands, and deficate voice, would soon teU that secret; besides, there were armed knights, and ------"—"She bears the coarse mantle of a peasant," said the bishop.—" She hath costly garments beneath them," answered the mountaineer. The bishop lost not a moment in ap¬ proaching the lady, and intimating in cour¬ teous language the pleasure he had felt in rescuing her from her recent danger, and the hope of hearing himself rewarded by the expression of her satisfaction. Thus urged, the lady, without removing her mask, uttered her thanks as briefly as she might; and, as it struck Genevieve, who stood close beside her for protection, not only in a fo¬ reign but feigned accent. " We wiU give you the further protection of our company,
if ye intend for Beaucaire," said the bishop. —" Oh no, no,—we do not," said the lady, speaking in her alarm at this proposal in her natural voice. The bishop paused a moment, and then bending his eye on her, " Madame," said he, in a voice in which ce¬ remonious respect was blended with fixed re¬ solution, "please you to unmask."—The lady's agitation increased; she did not comply with his demand, but, pressing her hand on her bosom for a few moments in agonized sUence, she sunk on the earth in a swoon. Her mask was removed for air, and Genevieve then caught a gHmpse of a face evidently past the bloom of youth, but stiU exquisitely fair; her small and deHcate features at¬ tested her rank, of which, in those days, such a distinction Avas deemed decisive, but her snowy skin and flaxen hair, proved her no daughter of swarthy Gaul; and though her eyes were closed, one would have sworn, from the veins in th*i Hds, that the orbs be¬ neath were the brightest blue. The bishop gazed intently on her face with stern and triumphant pleasure. " Why this is chance's
masterpiece," he exclaimed. " Tend her with gentleness, and when she is refreshed, place her on mine own palfrey, and set on to Beaucaire." The unfortunate lady, as she recovered,, heard his last words, and seemed about to essay to move him; then relinquishing the effort with a groan of despair, she reclined her head on the shoul¬ der of Genevieve. In the tumult of re¬ mounting their horses which followed, a moment occurred in which the two females were left unobserved and alone; and this moment the lady seized to place a costly jewel in the hand of Genevieve, which she pressed with significant earnestness. Ge¬ nevieve, who understood this action as a pledge of confidence, or perchance a means of liberation, returned the pressure ; but the next moment they were lifted on their horses by the bishop's followers, and pursuing their route without further peril or adventure, reached Beaucaire by the dawn.
CHAPTER X. -—I shall be King as heretofore. Where ? With Baal, Nimrod, and Semiramis, Sole in Assyria, or with them elsewhere. Sardanapalus. Genevieve, though bom in a city, had been from her infancy a mountain girl, one Hving amid the freedom and feHcity of nature, save when barred from both by the tyranny of man. She had but a very faint and shadowy recoUection of the horrors of the subterranean retreat from Carcassonne, by which her infant Hfe had been preserved. But the image of a city thus mingled with her earHest associations, had left nothing but impressions of darkness, constraint and terror; these impressions were,' perhaps, rather strengthened than effaced, when she
first beheld the pomp and wretchedness of an ancient feudal city. It was surrounded by waUs, and had strong gates flanked by tow¬ ers, on the battlements of which stood warders who wound their horns to alarm the town tiU they discovered the advanced standard of the bishop of Toulouse, and then they de¬ scended to open the gates, whose creak and jar sounded like the entrance into a prison. The bishop pressed onward, and his train foUowed. He had previously advertised them to mention that two female heretics had been seized on, and were to be conveyed to his residence for examination, to shun the indecorum which then attached to females being seen in the company of a noble ec¬ clesiastic. As they entered the city, its singular fea¬ tures developed themselves. There was no¬ thing like a regular street, and the first houses that appeared, were removed at a great distance from the walls, evidently to avoid the consequences of a siege which must first fall on them. The unoccupied space between these houses and the waU, was fiUed with lepers
and lazars, writhing in all the contortions of diversified misery, and festering in the rising hght of the sun, which gleamed so gloriously on the array of the bishop, who gave his beni-* son as he passed, while his purse-bearer scat¬ tered handfuls of coin among them, for which the maimed and loathsome wretches fought fiercely in his sight. Farther on there was some appearance of a city: several houses were built close to each other, but with such marked contempt of all rules of civic architec¬ ture, that the gable ends of most faced the street, making uncouth angles with the fronts of others which were turned towards it; their abutments jutting out far into the road (for it could scarcely be called a street;) their win¬ dows sometimes projecting forth in a balcony form, sometimes contracted to a single pane stuck in a most unnoticed comer; their high and sloping roofs here and there defended by a bartizan; their chimneys rising in clustered shafts hke the pillars of a cathedral, and, Hke them, girdled in at various stages or stories with uncouth ornaments sculptured in stone, and sometimes with inscriptions from holy writ;
a battlement of stone cresting every roof, and loop-holes in the lower apartments in place of windows: aU these testified the strength and the peril of a feudal city. These clusters of houses were buUt close to a church; perhaps for the convenience of worship, or from a belief in the supposed sanctity of the vicinage, or, more probably, to fly to for shelter in the event of a siege. As the bishop and his captives passed on, they perceived the monks at the doors of their con¬ vents distributing food to the mendicants, and artists and tradesmen preparing for the business of the day, their shops projecting far into the street, being furnished with an awn¬ ing for the protection of the goods which were exposed as in a booth. Over these were sus¬ pended some painting corresponding to the sig?is formerly used by tradesmen, but they contained nothing emblematic of their trade ; —they were the portraits of their patron saints. The usual passengers of the streets of a feudal city now began to appear; a fair
mincing dame going to matins, a leper sofi- citing her charity—a pardoner whose loud vaunts of his godly gear were insufficient to draw the attention of passengers from the display of rich and curious wares exhibited by an itinerant pedlar from Italy—a poor widow going on pilgrimage to the shrine of St. Benedict in the abbey of Normoutier, for the recovery of an only son-, accompanied by two others, whom a wealthy citizen, who had committed murder, had hired to perform this penance for him. A troubadour and his mis¬ tress, seated in a latticed balcony, were singing the praises of the nightingale, so often mention¬ ed in the songs of the Provencal bards; and a Httle farther, on the closely-barred door of a gloomy house was traced the terrific inscrip¬ tion, Domine miserere ?ws, indicating it had been the abode of plague. Ar- they reached an irregular inclosure near the centre of the city (its place publique) the groupes became more numerous, diversified and characteristic. A number of young men, armed and mount¬ ed, were practising the martial exercise of throwing the javefin; on a raised platform
a groupe of priests were exorcising with vari¬ ous ceremonies a woman who pretended to be possessed, but who, though apparently con¬ vulsed at the display of the Si. Suaire, or holy handkerchief, chatted and laughed at the in¬ tervals of the exorcism with some jolly young palmers who stood by. A band of monks, with tapers in their hands, which burned dimly in the increasing Hght of day, were con¬ veying the host to the death-chamber of a wealthy citizen; and hard by, some mendicants were raising the dead body of one of their companions from the dunghill where he had perished from want.. One feature in the aspect of the city was strikingly characteristic of the age: there were no pubHc buildings but churches; no courts, no edifices for the discharge of busi¬ ness or the distribution of justice: at that period the haUs of barons in the country, and the ailes of churches in the city, were the only scenes of either. It was also observable, that every house was in a state of defence, according to the means of the inhabitant;— those of the lower classes sc?"ce having a
window, and the door never facing the street; those of the middling orders having loop-holes, as has been mentioned, in place of windows in the lower - stories, while the upper were ascendible only by a stair on the outside, which, Hke a drawbridge, could be raised at pleasure; while the dwelHngs occupied by the wealthier citizens were crested with bat¬ tlement and bartizan Hke a baron's castle. Such was then the structure of a feudal city, possessing a fortified castle for its de¬ fence, and churches to fly to in the last resort for shelter or for sanctuary, but which often proved ineffectual for either. Yet this wild and barbaric picture of life had something of interest and of picturesque in it that the uni¬ formity of civiHzed life possesses not:—a men¬ dicant in rags is a better subject for a painter than a modern court lady in plumes and train; and such relative comparison may a feudal city bear to a modem one with its paraUel rows of houses and rectangular squares; its perfect safety, comfort, regula¬ rity, and insipidity. Genevieve as she rode through the streets,
felt the contrast between her former existence and her present destination swell her heart almost to suffocation. She had never before been conscious of beholding a city. " And this is the habitation of men ?" she said internally; "close and choaked, feve: ish and dungeon-like; wh6se houses on every side the mark or resistance rage. Alas! can beings so crushed and crowded together, so tortured by the indul¬ gence or the infliction of evil passions, and so surrounded by the works of their own hands, that no thought but that of human power can touch their minds, be meet worshippers of him who dwelleth not in temples made with hands ? Oh," she thought, " for the aerial magnificence of the mountain! Oh s for the rush of a hundred streams murmuring in deep and stilly burthen to the voice of the congre¬ gation ! Oh, for that canopy of heaven, pure, blue and glittering with thousand stars, that beheld, and in beholding seemed to smile on us! Alas, to this what is all human art—all human grandeur ! Men rear piles of stone, but the eternal mountains, the fabrics of deity,
laugh them to scorn. They paint their roofs, and hang them with Hghts; but when did they emulate the blue of the firmament, iUu- mined by smaU twinkh'ng stars, or the dark- ess of the storm, broken by the arrowy lash of the lightning ? And men may utter measured sounds taught by art in their narrow walls, and toss censers of fragrance under painted roofs; but is the sound so solemn as when the choral song of my people arises at midnight on the mountain, and is echoed from the vaUey, tiU cHff and crag are vocal with the harmonies of heaven, and plant and flower vibrate to their echo, and the incense of devoted hearts ascendeth richly as the evening sacrifice? Oh, might I dweU for ever in the gigantic palaces of creation, sha¬ dowed as I sleep by the forest, and luUed by the torrent, the primeval mountains for the waUs of my dweUing, and the broad clear heaven for its roof, whue every thing around me told not of man but God, and self was annihilated as I contemplated the deity in the immensity of his works! " And this is a city!" she said, as the
bishop's train arrived at the palace-gate. The draw-bridge was lowered, the prisoners en¬ tered the court-yard, and beheld a castle equalhng in strength and magnificence any of the royal residences of King PhiHp; but as they traversed the court there was also to be seen the carcan, or signorial standard, an iron pillar with its full furniture of chains and col¬ lars ; and this emblem of despotism and cruelty, contrasted with the taste and splen¬ dour of the entrance, bore no unapt sirnilitude to the character of their possessor. His at¬ tendants now gathered round him to learn how they should dispose of the prisoners.— " For the masked lady," said the bishop, in a strong distinct voice, that seemed meant to reach the lady's ear, " Let her be treated with all nobleness, suited to her rank: for the he¬ retic maiden, let her be lodged meetly, and look that she want no tendance; but whence is that tumult among my train ?'*—" My holy lord," said one of them, dragging for¬ ward the unfortunate deacon, "is it your pleasure that we hang him presently from the carcan, or plunge him into the moat < of
your castle ?"—" At your peril, knaves !" said the prelate. "Unbind him on the instant. The deacon Mephibosheth shaU this day dine with the bishop of Toulouse."—" I loath aU dainty meats," said the deacon. " I wiU put a knife to my throat ere I taste of them. Thy precious balms shaU not break mine head."—" Put a gag in his mouth," quoth the bishop ; " he wiU speak sense anon, when the beU rings the dinner-hour." The prisoners were then borne to their dif¬ ferent apartments in that spacious mansion ; the lady, removing her mask, having thrown one glance of agonizing suppHcation on Ge¬ nevieve, which was as expressively returned before they were separated. The bishop no sooner entered his castle, than, insensible to the fatigue of his journey, he began dictating letters to the pope, and the kings of Arragon and France, over the latter of whom he knew he had in his last prisoner an hold irresistible. There were also letters from these potentates, which had arrived in his absence, the contents of which were more favourable to liis views than for-
merly. The pope seemed to incline to his appointment as head of the crusaders; but so guarded and doubtful was his tone, that the letter was capable of any construction. The king of Arragon was more explicit: he ex¬ pressly assented to the bishop's requirements, and declared that the Albigeois should neither find shelter nor passage through his dominions. There was one letter, the contents of which contracted his brows as he read it;—it was from Simon de Montfort, announcing his im¬ proving health, and his purpose of leading the crusaders against the heretics in the following spring. In reading and replying to these let¬ ters, and writing others to all whom he could command or persuade to collect their forces, and assail Count Raymond of Toulouse, while still encumbered with the helpless train of the wives and children of the Albigenses, the bishop was instantly occupied, and so in¬ tently, that the priest, who attended to say mass as usual on the prelate's arrival, after standing in his robes unnoticed for eight hours, fell on the ground from fatigue, and then first recalled to the bishop's occupied
mind the idea that any one was present but himself. Three days elapsed, during which Gene¬ vieve passed a life of unmolested loneliness. A female attendant brought her food, accom¬ panied hev when she walked in the gardens of the castle, and treated her not only with decorum, but with deference; but to any thing like an attempt to concifiate her confi¬ dence, or solicit her aid, she opposed an im¬ penetrable silence. It was on the evening of the third day, as Genevieve was preparing to retire to rest, this woman appeared with a sumptuous habit in her hand, which she re¬ quired- her to put on, and foHow her to the presence of the bishop. Genevieve, who felt that resistance was vain, compHed, tiU she perceived that the magnificent dress she was to wear exposed more of her person than was ever visible be¬ fore, and then, though knowing herself in the power of her attendant, made with her eyes a silent appeal to her.—" Fold thy veil, or clasp thy white arms over it," said the shameless female; " the bishop, it is said, VOL. III. K
prizeth most veiled beauty; but whether it be that of nuns or of heretics, thou shalt shortly know." She then was led through many a spacious j^assage and gallery, till the con¬ ductress, raising a curtain, pointed to her to enter, and retired. However from habit an admirer of the sole magnificence of na¬ ture, Genevieve was ibr once compelled to an involuntary admission of the magnificence of art, as she passed into that gorgeous cham¬ ber. The bishop, who had been a crusader in the East as well as in the West, had brought from the oriental world all the taste for splendour and magnificence that then, even more than now, characterised the style of their buildings and then* furniture; and this apartment, the usual scene of his licen¬ tious pleasures, was a model of eastern lux¬ ury, painted .faithfully from an imagination as retentive of gorgeous imagery as it was awake to every glowing incentive to indul¬ gence. The chamber, of noble dimensions and perfectly rectangular, was hung quite round with the richest crimson silk, its bor-
ders wrought in gold and coloured silk, with amatory passages from the poetry of the Troubadours, in Arabic characters, eo that the costume of the drapery was strictly pre¬ served, and Alia il Alia wrought in gold at every corner served to connect the cyphers of the other inscriptions. Never on the gfided and gemmed waUs of that voluptuous Alhambra did passion, poetry, and devotion, mingle in such mystified union. Nor was the border bedecked with less costly and curious flourishings, than in that singular temple of amorous devotion. Just whore those rich hangings reached within three feet of the floor, the piles of embroidered cushions, heaped round the chamber, met them at that height, and being of the same rich material and broidery, seemed like a continuation of them—a silken couch spread under a silken canopy ;—and aU round that room of luxury were vases of pastdes and perfumes burning faintly, but sending forth an odorous and in¬ ebriating scent, weU calculated for its luxu¬ rious atmosphere; and between were vases of materials unknown in Europe, fiUed with K 2
the rich flowers of the East—the tulip, the Persian ranunculus, and many other glowing daughters of oriental gardens, that -blushed and burned for the first time in European air. The floor was strewed six inches high with costly carpeting, part of the warlike prelate's eastern spoil. In the centre of the floor was placed a table occupied by a cu¬ riously-wrought silver frame of filigree, and surrounded by seats so constructed as to har¬ monize with the oriental co&tume of the apartment, and yet preserve the accommo¬ dation required at the meeting of European guests. A fretted lamp of silver swung over the luxurious table, diffusing light and odour at every vibration; and in each corner of the msignificent chamber a naked negro slave, well represented in black marble, with one knee bowed on the golden pedestal that sup¬ ported the figure, and one arm folded on the breast, held in the other a vast waxen torch, whose light blazed gloriously on the banquet- room. The turban, spurs, chibouque, and shield of polished metal, won in fierce combat
from a Saracenic chief by the bishop, were displayed on the rich ottoman as appropriate furniture, rather than a trophy of triumph; and right opposite to these sparkling memo¬ rials, the latticed window, tinted in its lower j)anes with gorgeous colouring and distorted figures, admitted in its upper, traversed by many a branch of intricately wrought stone, the full glory of moonlight. The ceiling, flatted according to the rules of oriental architecture, was also, according to its taste, gorgeously painted with a representation of Jerusalem; the bright colours, and vivid dis¬ tinctness, and animated grouping of the pic¬ ture, making strong contrast with the rich and gloomy grandeur of the crimson drapery below. There was Mount Gihon to the south, with its two fountains, upper and lower; and right opposite, Mount Calvary, which the painter (a Jew) had veiled in a deep shadow. The walls of the Holy City rose high; but above them sparkled in glorious colouring the palace of Herod, and far above that, the mighty pile of
the temple on Mount Moriah, like a rock of alabaster, its domes like globes of pure sil¬ ver, and its pinnacles glittering like the stars in heaven. Northward of the city the brook Kedion trembled in its course, as if it felt the footsteps of a passing God; Siloa glowed mildly in the moonlight, as if rejoicing in his presence; and Mount Olivet rose dimly in the perspective, her dark trees mingling with the horizon; while far above, the firmament burned with all the deep azure and living gold of Syria's nights, and to the eye it seemed as if even yet— ----------------- silence still Watched on the towers of Zion's hil!. Into such a chamber was Genevieve intro¬ duced ; and, appalled by its very magnificence, she hesitated, till summoned by the command¬ ing voice of the bishop, to approach. She at¬ tempted to obey him, but, ere she did so, with instinctive feeling she drew her gaudy and tissued veil over her bosom, and then with hands clasped closely on it, slowly ad¬ vanced. " Approach, maiden," said the bi¬ shop, casting a triumphant eye on the mag-
nificence around him, and motioning his trembling companion to a seat.—" Thou seest I am not of the mind of that warlike prelate, he of Germany, who, when he had built a strong castle, and was demanded,of the men- at-arms he had placed in it, how they might subsist, answered, ' Doth it not command four roads ?' I am not wholly of such mar¬ tial mood. If we have lairs of stone and shrouds of the bloody sod for foes, we have also seats ol down and robes of price for beauty. Why dost thou linger, maiden? thou seemest like one bewildered.*' " I am be¬ wildered and dazzled," said Genevieve, slowly seating herself on the farthest couch, and often pressing her hands on her eyes and re¬ moving them again as she gazed round her. The bishop enjoyed her amazement; " Look round thee, maiden," he said, " is not this a fitter bower for beauty than the squalid hovel, the wooden couch, and the bed of earth ? Doth not each thing on earth seek meet and fair companionship ? and were not bowers like these formed for beauty, and beauty formed alone for bowers like these ? '*
- The splendour—the perfumes—the gorgeous banquet, seemed even to herself to act like intoxication on Genevieve; she felt like one desperate. " And dost thou think," she said, " that the peasant maiden hath not luxuries too? oh! that a wish could bring before mine eyes the pure, cool, quiet light that hung round me like a garment in the cottages of iny people !—compared with this unhallowed glory I behold, it was like the fire kindled by the breath of the Lord, contrasted Avith the stifling and abhorred censers of Nadab and Abihu. I hare indeed slept on straw in a hovel of clay, but, when my hymn and prayer were done, I had nightingales to sing me to rest, and if I awoke I saw the bright lights of heaven through my uncurtained casement ; and the scent of flowers richer from the heavy dew awoke me even before the sun. Can thy palace boast such minstrels or such harbingers of waking? here all is palled, tasteless, and stupifying—earth, hea¬ ven, and air, are shut out. One such night in a peasant's hut would convert thee—if not to his creed, at least to the conviction that a
peasant may have luxuries thou wottest not of, and a peasant know rest thou ^anst never enjoy."—" Never till I couch with thee, sweet Genevieve," said the bishop, seizing her hand. With a faint shriek she strug¬ gled in vain to withdraw it from his iron grasp, while he led or rather di'agged her towards a plate of polished metal which reflected her form as perfectly as the most pellucid mirror. " Behold," he cried, gazing on the form and semblance with wonder and delight, " behold thyself—is that a form to slumber in a peasant's shed, and talk of flowers, and stars, and birds, like pining minstrels to love-sick damsels ? No; surely as that prophetic eye of old rested on Saul, whose stately form overtopped the host, so surely does mine, resting on thee, presage that thou art one who wilt cause changes that shall be remembered on earth when the tales of the Jewish fabulist and of that after-faith, whose thread-worn train I seem to uphold (to conceal my smiles beneath it), shall he alike forgotten." As he spoke, Genevieve beheld, for the first
time, her form reflected as from a mirror; her pale majestic beauty, her lofty stature, her perfect symmetry, amply and magnificently displayed in the splendid dress she was com¬ pelled to wear, flashed on her eyes Hke a fine painting, and consciously and unconsciously at once she felt and saw she was the most perfect human form that earth had ever pro¬ duced or beheld: the colour in her cheek, which was always like that in the beU of a hyacinth, deepened into crimson as she avert¬ ed her eyes. The bishop again misconstrued their expression—" And for what," he said, " were such rare glories bestowed on the hu¬ man form, and wherefore do we gaze on them with deHght so intense and vivid ? Nay, think not, maiden, that it is on the transient graces of a form finer than Hmner ever traced or poet dreamed of, that I fix my prophetic glance: fairer than all the daughters of men as thou art, thy outward frame is but the cas- jket of an enclosed gem which I am gifted to behold, and destined to display to a wondering world: look once more on thyself, and ask thee, was the spirit that kindles through that
transparent veil of loveliest humanity formed to bend to the base drudgery of a cottage, to seethe the peasant's pot, and spread rushes for his foul and sordid lair?—'twere scorn, yea foul sin. to think so :—it was formed to sparkle in palaces, to control the councils of the wise* and direct the arm of the mighty; to ride the rulers of the earth, and bow to thy will those at whose word their species bow down Uke the reeds of the marsh" to the wind in his wintry sweep." He paused., but Gene¬ vieve, scared and oppressed, was silent, and he went on.—" List, maiden, and 1 will tell thee of what will make thine eye flash, and thy bosom throb in proud sympathy with mine own. " The vast system of which I am no feeble or inert engine, hastes to the con¬ summation of its working—the conquest of the world. That old and mighty Rome, of whom pedants prate, subdued but the meaner part of man—his body; but our Rome en¬ slaves the mind—that mind, which, once en¬ slaved, leaves nothing for opposition or for defeat. Look round thee—a peevish dotard
in his seven-throned palace tramples with his palsied foot on the necks of the crowned kings of earth, from the shores of the Orcades to the cliffs of Calpe. He stamps with it, and their blood, their treasures, and their vassals are poured on Asia, making the eastern world tremble to its centre : for ours is the power that not only binds the spirit but makes it clasp its chain; ours are the powers of the world to come; all that is potent in life, all that is mysterious in futurity, the fears, the hopes, the hearts of mankind, all are ours; and shall we not wield the weapon their cre¬ dulity has put into our hands for our own behoof?"-—Genevieve gazed aghast, and he proceeded more rapidly;—" All knowledge is ours—to the laity the book is closed—the key is lost—every avenue to science, every loop¬ hole through which light might wander, is barred up or sternly sentinelled; the tomes of ancient wisdom are buried in monkish libra¬ ries, unfolded, save by daring hands like mine. Under the old tyrants of the earth, the de¬ cree of a senate might desolate a province, and
the frolic of an emperor consume a city; but when did it chain up the arm of man, or wi¬ ther his soul within him, fil*e a papal inter¬ dict, at whose reported sound the bridegroom drops the hand of his betrothed, the mourner quits the unburied corse, and the priest flies from the altar? I teU thee, maiden, the eagles of Ancient Rome would be blasted if they dared to grasp the thunder that is now wield- ed by the hand of every busy legate." He paused, and Genevieve, though trem¬ bling, ventured to answer.—" Alas for those," she said, " who twine, serpent-like, I'ound the tree of knowledge, neglecting the tree of life ! Thou hast sought," she added, " to dazzle me by the display of that vast and uncurtained fabric, of which thou art a piUar of strength; but I behold nought in it save a monument of the power, the craft, and the crime of man." —" Maiden," answered the prelate, " where power is, there can be no crime, or none that men will dare to call so. Does not the will of the ruler mark the bounds of good and evil throughout life ? The murder of a parent, or
the marriage of a sister, have been the habits even of regulated life; and when aU power is consigned to one hand, and mankind take their law from one lip, shall not that be good which we enjoin, and that only be evil which we denounce? Then we shall be as gods, knowing good and evil, yea creating it by the breath of our mouth. Already are not murder and assassination, rebellion and de¬ thronement, the canonized virtues of our calendar ? and needest thou farther proof of our omnipotence ? We have holy sins, and may we not have unhallowed virtues ? The voice of Becket stiU warns the sovereigns of earth from his enshrined grave, and the blood of Chateauneuf hath been the signal for shedding torrents of thy people's. Nay, let thine eyes gaze not in horror, but in convic¬ tion, on the view I unfold to thee: expand thy thought to receive the glorious stranger/ Omnipotent on earth as we must be, wilt thou not share with us that, which having, we shall leave heaven to the dreamer of the cloister, or the famine-wrung and theoriz-
ing heretic; the crowned idiots we rule shall have their tinsel sceptres; the warlike savages we need, shall have the chase, the battle, and the crusade; the peasant his scourge and his fetter; and for us, ours shall be all knowledge, all power, all enjoyment. Yea, if there be yet unknown regions in this ample globe, where the eagle of Old Rome never dared to spread her pinions, or flesh her beak, even there I behold with no erring vision the cross floating above unnamed fanes, and emblems of faith unknown, and, wherever the voice of man is heard, its language shall yet be Domhuts Deus noster Papa." And as he spoke, such was the preter¬ natural dilation of his figure, and the awful pealing of his voice, that he seemed as one who " in spirit saw rich Mexico, the seat of Montezume." But Genevieve was now beyond fear ; de¬ pravity revolted more than splendour could inebriate, or power appal her, and every word that the speaker imagined would exalt
him above her veneration, was fast sinking him below her very scorn. " Thou hast led me," she said, in a low but firm voice, " to an eminence from whence I look down scared indeed, but not bewildered ; but who hath led thee thither ? Is it not He who hath boasted that his are the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them? and wilt thou receive them as his gift, and fall down and worship him for them ? Infatuate, desperate exchanger, pause on the price, and count the cost."—" An¬ other of thy hovel-bred whimsies!" said the prelate, quaffing a goblet of wine, and sinking on his couch, that he might view her as she stood with more luxury of leisure: " what know we of that mysterious, and perchance unreal, being thou hast named, but that he is powerful ? That he is miserable and malignant it imports not; man is miser¬ able and malignant too, without the dignity of the fallen angelic chief. What he can menace, I defy ; what he can bestow, I can myself acquire, and share with him un-
thanking. Not from him proceed the dis¬ eases that erode the frame, or the anguish that wi'ings the heart, and still less the power to escape from either; both are from man— at once his own tormentor and physician. What wonders are wrought by the increasing progress of art, that laughs to scorn alike the miracles of saints and the plagues of the fiend ! Are not aU the lying legends that moulder in our cloisters, of sight restored, health reco¬ vered, yea, extinguished Hfe revived, become the mere daily operations of a sorry leech, who would no more share the praise with demon or demi-god than he would the Hards he earns by his craft ? The air we breathe, the herbs we tread on, the springs that bubble unnoted in our ears, are full of the secret power of renewing the decayed organ, of bracing the pithless Hmb—full, perhaps, of the power of rejuvenescence—of immor¬ tality. List, maiden, for I fable not—the march of mind hath begun; and though we wiU not, because we may not check its progress, we wiU at least fix its direction, and mark all its discoveries and all its
triumphs for our own. Then shall the dream of him who sees the wealth of worlds distilHng in one rich drop from his alembic— the hopes of him who watches the airless and buried lamp to kindle from its light the spark of extinct vitality; yea, all the aspirations destined to prove and to make man not lower than the angels—all shall be fulfilled; and with senses ever flourishing, with an undy¬ ing capacity of enjoyment, and life sponta¬ neously renewed, we shall count disease the infirmity of fools, and death the refuge of the coward; while we make earth an heaven, and convert a frail and painful existence into enjoyment and immortality." The sound of his voice had long died away, ere Genevieve could answer him: com¬ passion and horror struggled at her heart, and forbade, for a space, all words. At lengthl " Mighty and miserable man !*' she exclaimed, " and this is then thy creed, and this is thy hope ?—false, below the detection of the mean¬ est mind—wicked, beyond the seduction of the most depraved. What progress per¬ mitted knowledge may make in alleviating
the outward evils of human destiny, I know not; but never can it avail against those on which his everlasting state must hang- Can it remove one evil passion from his heart? has it subdued one in thine ? Wouldst thou not still be a groveling worm, the slave of sensuality and sin ? Thou— thou ambitious!— I tell thee, godless priest—dishonoured noble ! the meanest of my people who couches on the earth this night, rests him in a nobler hope, and rises with loftier aspirations than thine. Were even thine impious dream realized, and thy life of blind and brutal fruition pro¬ tracted till dissolution were a mercy to its loathing satiety, the meanest order of disem¬ bodied spirits might drop a tear of angelic pity on thy forfeited glory, and sigh over thee, * How art thou fallen from heaven,. O Lucifer, son of the morning!'" She had instant reason to repent her teme¬ rity ; fury, and another expression more dread¬ ful, began to kindle in the bishop's eyes, " And is this," he said, " is this the language of a slave to her master ? But my folly merits such meed; the scorn in which thou holdest
distant feHcities, teaches me weU not to slight the present." As he approached her, Gene¬ vieve hopelessly shrieked—" How now!" cried the bishop, as one of the curtains was raised and a figure appeared at it;—" how now !— what boldness Hcenses thine intrusion?"—" So please you, my lord," said the speaker, without advancing, " a band of some twenty knights, f illy accoutred with a body of men-at-arms, are riding at full speed toward the castle: we know not their purpose; they have neither sounded trumpet nor sent herald; but their bearing seems right hostile."—" We looked for this," said the bishop, rising with the air of one habituated to the most startfing tran¬ sitions from voluptuousness to peril. " Look that the wardens be on their posts, and that a double band of archers fine the battlements and loopholes of the first gate: raise the portcullia of the second gate, we will hold parley with them from the platform there." And as he spoke he departed, leaving Gene¬ vieve alone, dazzled and appalled by aU she had seen or heard. She sat alone amid that solitary grandeur, gazing on the walls and on
her gorgeous attire. A sense of guUt and de¬ gradation mingled itself with her view of the voluptuous apartments and of her own ap¬ pearance :—she knew she was not the loose companion of that great and wicked man ; but ?he felt that she looked Hke such,
CHAPTER XI. If but one poor straw yc burn, Or do our towers so much molest To scare a swallow from his nest, St. Mary, but we '11 light a brand, Shall warm your hearths in Cumberland. Sir Walter Scott. Meanwhile the bishop had gained the upper gate of his castle, and the warders, starting from their seats of stone hollowed in its walls, held torches while the port¬ cullis was raised; and many attendants, ecclesiastical and military, crowded the arched way behind, their torches flinging an umbered hght on its narrow entrance of grey stone and its ribbed arches. In the front, and in strong contrast to the smoky glare of the torches, and the dark masses on which it fell, stood the Bishop of Tou¬ louse, magnificently arrayed as just risen from a banquet; his crosier-bearer on one
side, and on the other his standard-bearer, displaying the broad banner, embroidered with the motto of the crusaders in wrought gold, Dieu et fEglise. The bishop's castle was fortified with unusual strength; from the gate which opened on the drawbridge, a flight of stone steps cut in the solid rock, led to a second and higher gate, Avhich opened on the court-yard, whose level was far above that of the moat; each of these gates was defended by a strong portcullis, and the first by a strong barbican and bar¬ riers beside. A band of knights appeared at the same moment riding close to the barbican, having a stout train of men-at- arms in their rear, and seeming to demand parley. " Who and what are ye ? '' said the bishop. " Knights as ye seem by your guise, though not by your courtesy, who ride in hostile wise so near the holy and peace¬ ful habitation of a churchman." At these words a herald was about to apply his ban¬ nered trumpet to his mouth, when the foremost knight struck down his arm, and pricking forward, reined up his steed in
the van ; and rising in his stirrups, shook his mailed hand at the bishop for a mo¬ ment without speaking; then extended it right onward as if menacing the castle. " Speak," said the bishop, " if any in yon train can speak ; I answer no dumb de¬ fiance.—Say who ye are, and wherefore come ye ? "—" False priest ! disloyal prelate !" said the knight, whom rage alone had be¬ reft of speech. " Full well thou knowest who we are, and wherefore we are come. Thou holdest a prisoner within thy godless walls, for whom the royaume of King Phihp were but meet ransom. Thou wottest whom we mean. Deliver her suddenly and ran- somless, or thy proudest turret shall kiss foundation-stone ere the morn;—darest thou deny that such is here ?"—" And admit she be," said the prelate, " she hath sought shel¬ ter here, and here shall she abide, till the royal mandate of King Philip claim her, not the light summons of nameless wan¬ derers."—" Thou liest in the throat, priest!" said another knight, " but we will not parley. in words with thee, we will suddenly return
in stronger force, and see if thy towers then hold not softer parley with our catapults and arbafists." — " Advance a war-wolf against these towers," said the bishop, " in the perfect calmness of resolved crime, " and that very hour the deepest moat of my castle shall be measured, by a weight that shaU never be raised till the day of judgment."—" Thou darest not such out¬ rage," said the knights, " in the face of Europe, of Christentye, of chivalry—thou darest not. We defy thee."—" Defy not me, ye triflers—boys who ride forth with a lady's favour for your casque, and a sonnet for your cuirass! What I dare to say, I dare act, and avouch with sword and lance," said the warlike prelate. " And I say to thee, Bernard de Vaugelas, and to thee, Pierre de Limosin, for I know ye both, as weU by your cognizances as by your saucy bearing, that I lack not royal warrant for word and deed. Ye shall have the proof anon! On the distant hdls I see a royal courier, and he beareth him right onward to this castle."—"Thou VOL. III. L
shalt never be the wiser of his counsels," said the knights: " we will slay that false courier with our lances ere he arrive; right well we know the errand he rides on."— "Recreant and disloyal knights," said the prelate, " no marvel that ye thus insult the church in the person of her highest dignitary, when' ye dare defiance to the missives of your liege lord the king : but look to the end !''— " Lawless kings and godless priests merit such meed," cried the knights, as they wheeled round in fierce career to intercept tlie courier. At the bishop's order signals were hoisted from the warder's tower to in¬ struct the courier the path he was to pursue. The messenger, after checking his course for a moment, appeared to understand and obey the signals, and turned in another direction. Meanwhile the knights pricked up the hill, and soon reined their steeds on its summit, cresting it, as they stood, like a battlement of iron ; while their men-at-arms, though sorely galled by the archers' shot that flew fast and heavy from the bishop's towers, gathered close to the drawbridge, so as to cut off the
possibUity of the messenger s arrival. The unfortunate courier saw his mortal peril, ride where he might; but he was not unprovided for the emergency : he attached his letters to an arrow, and, drawing the bow with his utmost strength, he shot towards the castle with good aim, and the arrow feU near the bishop's feet, at the same moment that the hapless bearer expired under the lances of the knights. The bishop in triumph held up the letters during this dreadful scene, and im¬ mediately quitting his situation, the port- culHs was lowered. The knights, after vent¬ ing their rage in as many curses as must have made ample matter for their next con¬ fession, withdrew with their train into an adjacent wood, not caring to abide in the town, lest their commerce with some of the bishop's domestics, touching their secret ad¬ mission into the castle, shoidd be suspected. MeanwhUe Genevieve, left so unexpectedly alone, and unobserved, had lost no time in profiting by the opportunity. She had no¬ ticed with quick observation, that the com¬ partments of that splendid chamber were L 2
filled with curtains in strict conformity to its oriental costume ; and she conceived that through one of these she might have easier and less discoverable access to the other apartments of the castle, than through doors hollowed in walls of stone. Soon after the departure of the bisho]), she raised one of the curtains, and found herself in a long vaulted passage, lit at the extremity by the flame that arose from an iron cresset. She advanced with trembling steps towards the light. It burned before an arched door that closed the extremity of the passage. She paused in deep disappointment, when the sobs of an agonized spirit were heard issuing from the apartment; and instantly forgetting her own dangers and terrors, she ventured to raise the latch of the door, and to enter. It opened on another magnificent chamber, but inferior to that she had just quitted. It seemed as if one were painted by the burning fingers of luxury and passion for the welcome of their favourites: the other, as if arrayed by the gorgeous but cold hand of ceremony for the reception of its guests.
AU was chaste and splendid : a fretted lamp of silver shed its light on silken tapestry, wrought with the exploits of the Spanish knights against the Saracens ; and at the upper end of the chamber lay a lady under a silken canopy, her >. eil cast over her head, and apparently lost in grief. So Hght was the tread, so soft the approach of Gene¬ vieve, that she stood before the lady for some moments unseen as unheard, till the latter, flinging off her veil, gazed round her suddenly. The form of the beautiful Gene¬ vieve, gorgeously arrayed, gleamed before her like a vision. At the first view the lady uttered a faint shriek ; then recognizing her, she instantly assumed the conscious dignity of " high habitual state;" for without bowing her head, or extending her arm, " I know thee now," she said; "thou art she with whom I journeyed here, and to whom I intrusted a gem of price to win thy secrecy if thou knew¬ est me, or thy aid if thou knewest me not: but I see," she said, casting a haughty glance on Genevieve's glittering habit, and then on her own tunic of dark blue velvet, sprinkled in silver
with the lilies of France—" I see how it hath fared with thee : thy gay habit prpclaims thee already the victim and the.scoffof thy brutal enthraller. Why comest thou here to insult that misery, perchance, thy fatal beauty hath caused ?"—" Lady," said Genevieve, offering her again the gem, " as pure as this gem sparkles, so pure is the hand that offers it to thine. Dare I else stand before thee? Dare I claim the sanctity of my sex, or feel that which I do this moment---that in thy presence I am safe, were I what thou deemest me ? "—" Thou art wise as well as fair, damsel," said the lady, half risingfrom her couch : "to what lofty descent am I to ascribe speech so gentle and thoughts so noble ?"— " Alas!" said Genevieve, " humble birth and most unhappy lot were but worthless com¬ mendations to thy favour—I must win it by better deservings: by happy chance I have discovered the means of reaching this apart¬ ment unobserved; aid me to pursue those means, and if, as I deem, thou art with me a reluctant inmate here, we may yet devise for our liberation."—" May the saints aid thee
in the purpose they have inspired !" said the lady fervently; " and now I bethink me, chance hath also favoured me. My chief at¬ tendant was once of the deluded heretics men call the Albigenses: she was borne pri¬ soner here, and became (by means I cannot tell) the loose companion of the godless bishop; —from thence she sunk into a menial, and now half her wretched existence is passed in carousal and vUe degradation—half in weep¬ ing her former state: yet such fast-cHnging hold hath she of her early errors, that when I bow to the cross, she ever quits my cham¬ ber, though it be aU the whUe to hold loose talk with the pages in the antichamber. Such, alas! is the tenacity with which we cling to creeds, and the ease with which we resign principles!"—Genevieve sighed and shuddered at this portrait, as she reflected that the unhaj^py original had once professed the same pure faith, and, perhaps, possessed the same unsuUied conscience, as her own.— " Thlo wiU give us unobserved occasions of meeting," continued the lady: " but art thou not anxious, maiden," she said, " to know to
whom thou hast proffered thy services ?"— "Alas! noble lady," said Genevieve, " is it not enough that it is a woman, and oppressed ? Trust me, no image touches mine heart more pitifully, save"—she said, while her eyes filled fast with tears, " save it were, perchance, that of a very aged man—deserted, solitary, and blind."—" I know not what thou mean¬ est, damsel," said the lady, who appeared to be occupied by her own sufferings exclusive¬ ly^ and even in suffering to feel that superi¬ ority of rank which she dared not avow, and yet wished to be instinctively understood. " Perchance thy zeal will not slack," she said more proudly, " at the recognition of its ob¬ ject. I am Ingelberg the queen, and wife of PhiHp Augustus."—Genevieve instantly sunk to the floor, and kissed the hem of her sove¬ reign's garment: " and how," she said, raising her eyes, " how did I, C peasant damsel, dare to murmur at my fate, when the royal lady of the land is held enthralled by her false vas¬ sals ? Madame," she continued, " where is the faith and power of thy royal spouse—-of thy children—of thy nobles ? why is a help-
less maiden the sole attendant on the wife of King Philip, and the sovereign of France ? Oh God ! forgive me, that till now I thought suffering the sworn-brother of humble birth alone !" "Amen to thy prayer!" said the queen, smil¬ ing through her tears ; " for surely the thought favoured much of ignorance. From that sad and splendid hour, when I sat by the side of Philip, the crowned queen of France, till this, never did I place my head on a pillow in peace, or raise it in hope. King Philip loved all womankind but me, and I bore his early wanderings without a murmur; but as my children grew up*," (her voice was chok¬ ed,) " my loving and loyal son, Prince Lewis, was urged by my wrongs to brave his father, dagger in hand, while yet a boy. Oh, what a sight for a mother and a queen to witness ! But now King Phihp, neglecting the crusades against Saracen or heretic, is given wholly to
the' love of the fair Agnes of Moravia: she hath borne him children; and for her sake was I to have been poisoned, that she might have reigned queen of France. Wherefore, holding my Hfe to be merely periUed, unless I put the broad seas between my lord the King and me, it was my purpose to escape to the King of Denmark, my brother; and there enshroud me in the habit of a nun; for, trust me, maiden," gracefully placing her hand on the bright locks of Genevieve, " if peace ever settles on a brow that was once as fair as thine, it wiU be when wrapt in a veil, not when bound by the diadem of France !" "But, my liege lady," said Genevieve, " were there not nobles and knights to assert the rights of the queen ? Are they not now thundering at the gates of this palace of crime and tyranny ?" " And who are they ?" said the queen in a melancholy accent ?—" Even knights and ti oubadours, Alas! maiden, that I must initiate thee into the crimes and voluptuous¬ ness of these times ! These men, who pride themselves on composing some disjointed
sonnets as harsh as the hymns of the Albi- genses, ever select some beauty or noble dame for the subject ;■—some of them have even dared to make ??ie the subject of their songs: and it is to this I owe that they are now wasting their threats against these im¬ pregnable towers. They deem a mistress as indispensable to a troubabour, as a saint to a religionist. And if I owe my deliverance to them, it will be to a spirit of romantic and licentious gallantry, not to the devoir which true knights should pay, by their vow, to a persecuted female, and a deserted queen." —" Now go," said Ingelberg, " ere thine at¬ tendant surprise thee; and remember me, maiden, in thine orisons." Genevieve again kissed the hem of her sovereign's robe, and regained her own cham¬ ber without observation.
CHAPTER XII.
Sleep you, or wake you, lady bright? Now is the fittest time for flight. Castle Spectre. The next morning, Genevieve had scarce time to collect her thoughts on the important event of the preceding night, when the pas¬ sage leading to her „ chamber rang with the tread of armed feet; and the bishop, har¬ nessed all but his head, stood before her, a page bearing his lance and helmet. " Damsel," he said, " an hasty summons calls me hence. I speed to aid the Abbot of St. Etienne, to siege and spoil the castle of the Lord of Ventadour, who hath borne away the abbot's leman, and denies to hold her to ransom. Such aid may I demand from the
abbot at mine own need ; and harness was never buckled on bolder breast, nor lance set in rest by more warlike hand, than those of that mettled churchman. Pity and shame it is that he sporteth away life amid lemans and ladies, instead of raUying in the van of the Crusaders! Were not a woman the cause, never would he have lifted spear against the Lord of Ventadour, though he had burned the abbey over his head. A peaceful chua'chman, and an orderly!" "What churchmen?" thought Genevieve, as she stood sdently before him, offering mute and internal thanksgiving for his absence on any terms, as feeling herself free from per¬ secution and peril worse than death for that period at least. She was about to add, " I thought your intendment was against the heretics;" but she checked herself, conceiv¬ ing that she might learn more from the bishop's communications than from her own inquiries. " Nay, seat thee, damsel," said the prelate : " why should trembling beauty stand ser¬ vilely before one who hath ever been beauty's
vowed slave ? Can aught be done to pleasure thee in my absence ? Speak and command me." " If my lord would listen to the prayer of his handmaid," said Genevieve, ."let me be permitted to walk more frequently in the gardens of the castle." The bishop's brow contracted. "Oh!" said Genevieve, clasp¬ ing her hands, " let not my lord be angry,—I dream uot of hberty or of hope. But let me breathe the pure air of heaven, see the distant mountains above the walls of my gar¬ den-prison ; see the work of God's hands, not of man's, once more, and weep in freedom,— grant me but this. Alas ! here," she conti¬ nued, "the rich and heavy odours of these perfumed chambers are like the steams of intoxication, magic, and sin."—" Order shall be taken for it," said the bishop, softened by her supplicating earnestness. " But well didst thou term thine hope of escape from hence a dream ; for in mine absence will rule a sterner master of this wild household than I have been, an austere priest now, though once a preacher of thy heretic creed."—Gene-
vieve, accustomed to vicissitudes, heard him without betraying any emotion. " Wouldst thou know who is the master of my house¬ hold in mine absence ? It is thy former asso¬ ciate, even the deacon, Mephibosheth : was not such his Jewish name ?"—Genevieve, who feared that her answer might provoke him, was silent, till reading in his eye that her silence displeased, she uttered what she felt in three short words,—" Is it possible?"—" Possible !" retorted the prelate, " all things are possible to him who grasps with one hand the sword of earthly power, and holds in the other that visionary key that inilocks the portals of the world to come. Maiden, be wise ! obey the lesson that the wise deacon hath set thee ; and, look thou be in more tractable mood on ray return."—"And by what means," said Genevieve timidly, " hath such sudden conversion been wrought ?"— " By means proportioned to their end!" said the bishop. " Give me man, not brute matter to deal with, and I will baffle the boast of that antique dreamer, who said, ' Give me where I may stand, and I will move the
world.* There be weights some may not raise with levers, and others can balance with a straw. Slight engineers were we, unless we knew what load was to be drawn with wain-ropes, and what with a thread! They had fasted and penanced the worthy deacon in the abbey of Normoutier, till he was a mere skeleton. I wrought by other means: I caused the deacon not to fast, but to dine with me. The controversy was hot, and so were the viands; the strife rose high, but higher mantled the goblets; and the man who would have contended at the stake for his faith, resigned it for a mess of pottage. swallowed councils and confections in the same mouthful, and digested the celibacy of priests by the help of an eringo pie. What! shall I lose a convert for lack of saffron* in his condiment, or hurl fathers, fire and faggot at one who is best convinced by marchpane and malvoisie ?"—" And canst thou rely on
the sincerity of such converts ?" said Gene¬ vieve.—" For their sincerity, I reck not of it!" said the prelate; " but on their thence¬ forth close-hnked fealty to me do I most surely reckon. Their crime hath placed a gulph between them and mankind; their former fellows dread and hate, their new associates doubt and despise them. In such a state they can become important only by crime; therefore by that they distinguish themselves, and are flagitious by the fixed necessity of their situation. The habit of doubting, too, ends for the most part in in¬ fidelity : then are they meet for any task that power and guilt may enjoin them. Oh ! for a ruthless despiteous deed, appoint me ever your cold-hearted infidel, not your burning bigot: the latter may exalt crimes into virtues, but the former holds virtues very crimes; he loathes those habits he cannot participate in, those hopes he cannot aspire to, the forfeited bless¬ ings of the birthright he has sold : and there¬ fore will he labour to prove, that they who trust in them are fools; that their virtue is hypocrisy, their religion a name, and their
hope a lie."—Alas ! thought Genevieve sadly, that such high gifts of physical power and mental might should be bestowed on one like thee, who wieldest them only against the Power that gave them ! " What thinkest thou of my convertite ? " said the bishop, with haughty irony.—" May Heaven have mercy on him!" said the maiden. -7-" If thou disbelievest what I tell thee," said the bishop, " wilt thou believe thy senses?" And he stamped with his armed foot, and at the sound the quondam deacon, Mephibosheth, in frill clerical habit, advanced between two priests of the bishop's house¬ hold, all three chaunting with as much vigour and vociferation as St. Augustin of yore, when he approached the Saxon king, with the cross in the van, and the priests in the rear singing litanies. " Suffer me," said the bishop, " suffer me, fair lady, to present to thee our chap¬ lain and secretary—even Sir Ambrose, a reverend priest of the grave and godly house¬ hold of the Bishop of Toulouse. Come on, Sir priest; speak for thy function. Expound
to this fair heretic the texts that concern this matter of thy conversion." At the word, Sir Ambrose advanced, and forthwith commenced a predication, so long and loud, urging with such inverted tenacity all the most popular topics of a Catholic con- troversiaHst, and breathing so hotly the spirit of proselytism to his new creed, that Gene¬ vieve, after raising her appeaHng eyes to the bishop and preacher, at length, saddened and sickened at heart by this horrid prostitution, burst into an involuntary flood of tears. The bishop, though he despised tears, could not behold those of beauty unmoved, and he dis¬ missed the deacon. " See now," he said, " by what threads weights may be drawn. That man would have bit out his tongue and spit at me at the stake, yet hath he melted before the fires Ht in my kitchen. I hold your true infalfibifity Hes not in a conclave, but in a council of your sapient and savoury cooks, and Sir Ambrose deems the doctrine orthodox."— " I ever held him a slave to sensual appetite, and a boaster," answered Genevieve.—" And
for those who are slaves to mental appetites," said the bishop, " it is as easy to find fetters— or snares:—ambition—pride—even rapacity —they be glorious guilts that boast themselves —faults that men share with the mightiest of earth's lords ; perchance, if all that is written in thy forbidden volume be true, with the highest order of angelic beings: but sensuality, the low and loathsome working of a carnal spirit, proves it not my power to discover such an agent, and to make him work my will ?"—" There be those who, I yet think. would resist all that thou couldst offer—and thy power is mighty; all thou couldst menace —and thy wrath is deadly," said the maiden. —" Name them," quoth the bishop, glancing over his tablets. " I have names here written down. Mattathias, a brutal warrior; Boa¬ nerges, a powerful preacher. The saints speed me through this catalogue of names, assumed from then- Jewish theology!—Why, maid¬ en, I tell thee," he said, laughing at the list, " as lightly as I won the deacon Mephibosheth to become my chaplain—it is but after a few hours of torture or of luxury, as we have to
deal with strong or with relaxed habits, to put a lance into the hands of the mighty, or a text into the mouths of the eloquent, and thy Mattathias and Boanerges shall severally volley their arrows or their curses against what side I choose to point. The one I could win by the glory of riding a knight in the crusading army—the other by the hope of out-thunder¬ ing all its trumpets in proclaiming the miracle of his conversion."—" It may be so," said Genevieve, trembling at her own temerity, " it may be so: but there are yet two names unwritten in thy book of seduction and death."—" And which be they," said the bi¬ shop.—" Those," said Genevieve, " of a blind, poor, and aged man, who would spurn at the proffer of all visible creation, being as one who sees the Invisible^ and prizes that vision alone; and of a despised and enthralled maiden, who sets all claim of glorious ancestry below the boast of inheriting his faith, his fortitude—and if Heaven so wills, his suffer¬ ings."—The bishop's trumpets sounded to horse as she spoke, and he started on his feet at the summons, snatching his helmet and
lance from his page. He paused a moment, and flung back one wild and flashing glance on Genevieve. " Maiden," he said, " by hea¬ ven I leave thee with reluctance, though that trumpet summons me to the fearful game, which I love as laggards love their chess and draughts. Thy voice would wake a warrior's soul within him more deeply than all the trumpets of a royal host, were they thunder¬ ing around the oriflamme of France. But every word thou speakest rivets the chains of thy destiny more fixedly. Thou must be ours," he said with reverted glance. " Thou must be mine? as he flung his helmet on his head; and the streaming plumes floating far backward at the motion, he strode from the chamber, leaving Genevieve relieved by his absence, but dreading that after that absence worse was to be feared from his return. For three following days her existence was as wretched as prescriptive and monotonous existence always must be. In the afternoon she was permitted, and even enjoined, to walk in the garden ; for the bishop was as jealous of the beauty of a selected favourite, as a
florist would be of the stripes of a tulip, or the tint of a hyacinth. But never did she quit her chamber, or take her guarded walk, save watched by two sentinels, who crossed her path at every step: her only hours of indul¬ gence were those passed with the imprisoned queen, whose apartment she gained every night by means of the passage through the oriental chamber, without detection or even suspicion. They sat together—vept whole they talked of hope, and hoped more fer¬ vidly while they wept:—then parted with mutual assurances of happier prospects on the morrow; and met with the melancholy smUe that announced the augury vain: and whde the last day's disappointment wrung their hearts, prepared for the renewal of the pang by talking of the hope that to-morrow would " bring forth." It was on the fourth evening that Gene¬ vieve, raising with slow and timid touch the latch of the royal apartment, beheld queen In¬ gelberg standing right opposite to it, her form irradiated, and buoyant with hope and joy. " Tidings," she cried, ere Genevieve could
weU enter the apartment, " tidings of hope ! Bernard de Vaugelas and Pierre de Limosin are riding near the waUs of the castle. I have strained mine eyes from the casement the live-long day, to watch them as they rode. I saw them careering at the head of a troop of men-at-arms ; and so aptly did they coun¬ terfeit in their action the surprisal of a castle by a secret passage, and the deliverance of an imprisoned lady, that while I beheld them I deemed myself at Hberty again: and for my better assurance, the streamers of their lances were aU of green, the cherished colour of hope ; the very same their scarves were of in the Hsts of the castle of Plessy, when their sonnets were first sung, and their lances shi¬ vered, in honour of the fair queen of France. But why speak I of this to thee, who art ignorant of the gaUantries of a court, as," she added with a sigh, " thou art innocent of its crimes ?" Yet a reminiscence of former splendour and gaiety mingled obviously with the regret which Ingelberg seemed to bestow on the eiTors and the perils of courtly exist¬ ence. "Now aid me, damsel," said the queen
with renewed spirits, " to place this lamp in the casement; for well as I might judge by their signals, they required me to leave the casement ope, and place a lamp withal, in token that I understood and approved their purpose." Genevieve obeyed ; and then seated herself at the casement, trembling with hope, solici¬ tude, and doubt. The queen never ceased to utter vivacious and rapturous exclamations. Genevieve was deeply silent. The one whose habits had been (with some interruptions) those of command and pleasure, felt that she breathed once more in the lofty elements of her native atmosphere: to the other, joy was so rare a visitor, that when it came it was slowly recognized and timidly welcomed. The night was calm, the lamp burned with a steady light, and the stillness of high expectancy in that lonely apartment was singularly contrasted with the sounds of revelry that rose from the hall below, where the loose household of the bishop were feasting. They had not long sat thus, when the VOL. III. M
queen asked her, did she not hear a sound approaching'? " Of a surety do I, royal lady," said Genevieve; her senses bearing joyful testimony to the hopes of Ingelberg: each interpreted the augury according to their different associations. "It is Hke the floating of a knight's bannerol," said the queen. —" Methinks," said Genevieve, " ii is like the fluttering flight of a wearied bird :" and as she spoke, a pigeon flew through the open casement: then, scared by the light of the lamp, it flut¬ tered round the chamber, and at last rested on the bosom of Genevieve ; while the queen, who understood this mode of communication better than her companion, soon detached an epistle, elaborately tied and curiously per¬ fumed, from the wing of the wearied bird: its superscription was—" To her who, in yield¬ ing the title of Queen of France, hath won that of Queen of aU loyal hearts and stout lances:" and the first Hnes of the epistle corresponded with 'such induction, for they began —" Let aU loyal lovers utter vows to their Lady Venus and the blessed Saint
Martin, whose eve devout Christians are now about to celebrate, and they shall find their prayers answered." " Alas !" said the anxious Ingelberg, " how mockful in our hour of wretchedness is that jargon of profane gallantry to the ear of a prisoner Ustening for the hope of her dis- enthralment; it is worse than the language of France sounded in mine ear when I first heard it: and mine eyes so ache, and mine hands so tremble!" she cried in tears, letting the letter fall; " and I have no one to read to me the purpose couched in the fine fooleries of their poetical and courtlike affectedness." " If it please the queen's grace, I skill to read/' said Genevieve timidly.—" Thou !" said the queen in amaze : " then thou hast deceived me, and surely art of noble birth, or else" (she added, pausing and recoiling)—" an heretic!"—"Does it avail," said Genevieve humbly, " what she may be, who, in the hour of extremity, can render true service to her sovereign ?"—" Read on, then," said the queen, "sith it must be; but overpass those flourishings and gaudy illuminations of M 2
the scroll, and come plainly to the text? — " The purport is," said - Genevieve, with difficulty disentangling the meaning from the intricate meshes of amorous phraseology in which it ^ r as involved, " that thy deli¬ verers are this night conferring with one who hath promised them secret entrance into the castle; that they hold his promise stronger than his power; they dare not communi¬ cate more, lest messenger and message both be intercepted; but they will thee, royal lady, if thou receivest this letter, to return and superscribe it —' courage to loyalty, and hope to beaut}-.' Such is the letter," said Genevieve, blushing as she perused it. " And how, oh! how," said Ingelberg, im¬ patiently wringing her hands, " can I return answer to them, being bereft of the writ¬ ing materials I bore about me till I was conveyed hither ?"—" Madame," said Gene¬ vieve, fertile in resources, " despond not yet. I ?>ear a bodkin in mine hair that can make "deep impression, and from those four wax torches that burn so fair in the corners of rour chamber, may we not glean enough to
cover the paper withal, and trace on them the Unes thy deliverers seek ?"—" Do as thou wilt," said the queen, " for 1 give myself to thee solely, whatever thou mayest be. I am so lost betwixt fear and joy, that I could not now dictate, or write a fine." Genevieve expeditiously and dexterously prepared the paper, traced the required characters on it, and then, with the queen's assistance, fasten¬ ing it by a silken thread, dismissed the bird of good augury on its flight. They then placed themselves once more close to the casement to await his return, each employed, though in different ways, in soliciting that aid, without which this desperate enterprise seemed impracticable; Genevieve, in silent internal prayer, and the queen in making a vow of a pix and chahce of pure gold to the church of Saint Olave, the patron of Den¬ mark; but this situation, at once agitating and sedentary, soon became intolerable to both, and with all allowance for the miscal¬ culation of the progress of time, (unavoidable under such circumstances,) the delay of the' bird's return, now protracted for hours, be-
gan to justify the terrors that seized them. Genevieve subdued the consciousness of hers in attempts to soothe the queen ; but Ingel¬ berg gave way to her fears, her repinings, and her impatience, with the vehemence of one long accustomed to consider even time her vassal, and to believe that mortal powers and agents, when employed in her service, should suddenly be invested with the might of super¬ natural ones. " Ah!" said she sadly. " why did I trust a deceitful troubadour ?' 7 and her memory suggested to her an ancient song, in which a disappointed retainer of one of them complains of their fickleness, arrogance, and levity; " they will promise any thing, but it is vanity, not truth, that prompts their boastings, and they would rather make themes for their own vaunting and perishable verses, than-be recorded in the true histories of renowned knights. They will promise to ladies their liberty, to the?r brothers in arms the aid of lance and sword, to minstrels libe¬ rality, and to the saints jewels and robes of price ; but their promises are false as vows
made in wine, or love professed by a noble for a plebeian maiden :—who boasts and de¬ ceives like a false troubadour?" " Surely, royal lady," said Genevieve, " the knights wiH redeem their pledge; and even now something interposes between mine eyes and that star on which they have been fixed so long." " It is a passing cloud," said the queen.—"But I hear the fluttering of wings."— " It is the sighing of the breeze," answered In¬ gelberg ; but as she spoke the faithful mes¬ senger once more arrived, and the letter he bore contained intelligence beyond the ima¬ ginings of hope—their deliverance was to be unfailingly accomplished on the following night by means which the writer had not time to explain, but which precluded the possibUity of disappointment or of disco¬ very ; and they had prudently delayed this communication, tiU, by the extinguished lights they judged that aU the inmates of the castle were retired to rest. " Bid I not tell thee so?" cried the queen, offering her hand to the humble kiss of Genevieve, her despondency
all forgotten,-" did I not say it from the fi rst ?__.Why woiddst thou disqiuet me with thy fears? Ah!" she cried, in the spirit of the age, " ah! who is it that loves and fights like the vaHant troubadour ?"
CHAPTER XIII,
The owls on the battlements cry, Hollow winds they do murmur around, Saying, Mary, prepare you to die— My blood it runs cold at the sound. Queen Mary's Lamentation*. From a troubled and melancholy dream, Genevieve awoke at dawn, with a confused consciousness of something inrportant to be done or expected soon; even when her re¬ collection returned, she felt like one stunned by the magnitude and indefinite extent of some vast and suddenly disclosed prospect. She could scarce comprehend her situation, —a heretic—the thrall of a godless liber¬ tine—the queen of France herself a pri¬ soner in the same towers—their deliverers knights, and troubadours, men valiant, loyal, m 5
(in the amorous language of the day,) but licentious, and, perchance, presuming on the success of their enterprise. With joy inex¬ pressible she greeted the moment aUowed for her brief exercise in the garden of the castle; for she felt that the agitation of her mind had extended to her frame ; and that rapid and restless motion of the latter would be something like a balance to the painful impidses of the trembfing dweller within. In the garden she almost forgot her terrors ; the day was unusually lovely; there was a tender and vernal blue in the sky, a fresh mUdness in the air, and a lingering glow of autumnal flowers, that transported the imagination, almost to the bright auspicious season that foUows winter. There was a piUared arcade which the bishop had caused to be constructed to the south of the garden. Here, as Gene¬ vieve sat musing, in apparent slumber, on her situation of peril, and her hope of Hberty, her sentinels, who had hitherto. walked at a surly distance from her, now chanced to pass nearer; and she heard one of them
say," She sleeps, thou need'st not whisper;— I tell thee it must be done to-night."— " What must be done?" said his companion, " for hitherto thou hast spoken thy purpose darkly."—" The queen must be removed this night," said the other. " Here have been missives from the bishop, who, amid the thunders of the siege, found leisure to receive and answer the letters of King Philip, touching the matter of the queen's thral¬ dom, and to send the order thou wottest of, and which must be suddenly obeyed."'— " What cause hath the bishop to bear the queen such deadly hatred?" asked the other. " Tush, thou art a fool," said Hugues, " and knoivest naught of state-policies; 'tis not the bishop's hatred, but King Philip's love she must me. So madly doteth he on the fair Agnes of Moravia, that he would bestow the choicest gem in his royal crown to make away queen Ingelberg. By lucky chance, in her flight she was captived by our far- reaching lord, who hath made her sudden and sure removal the condition of obtain¬ ing men and treasures for the crusade. Ami
such is the King's dotage, that he hath yielded to aU that hath been reqiured of him, and would have done so were King John of England thundering at the gates of Paris."—"The queen then dies to-night?" said the companion with something Hke a reluctance of natural hojror as he spoke. Genevieve's blood froze as she awaited the answer, yet still she preserved the appearance of sleep. " Deemest thou the bishop an un- poficied ass Hke thyself?" said Hugues, "no! he will have her conveyed in the deep sleep, into which the drug he hath sent me, shaU cast her, to that vault beneath her chamber which many have been known to enter but none to return from. Yet his purpose aims not at her Hfe: that will he preserve with jealous care, that, should King PhiHp deny him future aid. he may in a .moment annul his adulterous marriage, by producing Queen Ingelberg afive.''—" But being whoUy in his power," said the other, " what needs there that sleepy drug thou minglest in her cup to-night?"—"To hinder cries heard, or resist¬ ance made/' answered Hugues. " Fools would
hold question till the day of doom ! hear thou thy task; the rather keep the household from wandering near her chamber; say such is the bishop's command: look that the door to the vaulted passage be open, that she may he borne thither without noise or delay, and at midnight expect me bearing a royal bur¬ then in my arms, and winning a royal guer¬ don by the deed."—" It is vengeance cold," said the other, who seemed but indifferently affected to the undertaking :—" it is vengeance cold ! Would the lady would awake!"—Gene¬ vieve, amid all her horror, had self-posses¬ sion enough not to " awake " too soon ; and when she at, length appeared to do so, it demanded her utmost efforts to conceal the discovery she had made, and the feelings with which it had inspired her. Though her eyes were averted, she dreaded that her tottering step and involuntary shudder would betray her horror of the assassins. At length she gained her apartment, and sat down in soli¬ tude and despair. The dreadful fate of the unfortunate Queen on the very eve of liberation, and
with that fate her own involved—every way the prospect was horrible and hopeless ; her mind succumbed beneath it, and she sat for a time in fearful stupefaction. But long accus¬ tomed to demands for instant mental exertion, and never relaxed by the habit of indulgence even in grief, she struggled to rally her scattered and distracted faculties. Her first thought was for the safety of the queen ; but how was it possible to gain her apartment till after the hour of supper? and at that hour the deadly drug was to be drunk, and she must see her no more. One sole means suggested itself of obtain¬ ing an interview previous to the fatal hour of supper, and, feeble and almost hopeless as it was, she lost not a moment in attempting to employ it. She had observed that Hugues. who sometimes brought her meals, lingered secretly to hear the solitary hymn which she sung at their conclusion. She had often discovered, that while at her devotions, which always commenced and con¬ cluded with a hymn, he was gently pacing the adjacent gallery—and, as a stronger marie
of his sensibiHty of music, he had even pre¬ sented her with a smaU lute, obviously with a view to his own increased indulgence, though he said it was to soothe her solitude. To this resource, slender as it was, she now betook herself, and to propitiate him as far as her limited powers enabled her, she forbore to sing hymns, and tasked her memory for some antique Provencal baUads, which she had heard in her chUdhood. The spell wrought, he lingered and Hstened. Her voice, ever sweet and plaintive, now, under tlie influence of deep emotion, poured forth such rich and troubled tones that the wretch, with nerves of iron and heart of stone, after long reluctant struggle with a power too mighty for him, at length cursed himself, yielded to it, and " He wept—he wept." Moore. In a few moments after he entered the cham¬ ber, and while placing preparations for her solitary meal, said somewhat sHghtly in praise of her voice.—" Alas!" said Genevieve, assay¬ ing her simple art, " thou canst not judge of it. I am a bird that never could sing encaged,
were every bar of it gold : and to thraldom now is added lonefiness. Had I but a compa¬ nion, I think I could make music that would be pleasant to thine ear."—" Thou shalt sup in the haU to-night," said Hugues, after a pause, " though I peril my place for it, so thou wdt sing sweet songs that I love, and be as the other damsels of the household.''—" Oh. no, no," said Genevieve, shrinking, " it is not that I aim at------ look," she said, with an ago¬ nizing effort at playfulness, pointing to the cages with which her chamber was hung— " look where many birds are gathered, they sing not: they chirp and wander; but where two are paired," pointing to a cage of doves. " there they make sweet melody;—list to them as thou lovest music, and by that sweet charm let me see the imprisoned lady to-night. Oh. never did mountain bird, suUen and drooping on her perch alone, warble forth more bfithely when restored to a dear mate than wiU I, if by thee I may win the sight of that sad lady. Say me not nay," she cried, with vehement sincerity and unforced tears—" to-night I must see her, for mv mind is wondrous sad
and heavy."—" To-night thou must if ever/' thought Hugues;" to-morrow she may change her gaoler for a ruder one, and her chamber for a long and lightless prison." Genevieve, who understood his horrid mean¬ ing but too well, sick at heart, replied not. Hugues stood pausing on her request: he knew his victim sure, and pondered how to purchase his indulgence at the cheapest price. " If she should betray me," said Hugues, sul¬ lenly, compressing his under-lip with his fin¬ gers. " Deemest thou me such a fool," said Genevieve, with increased fervour, "as to mar my last solace by mine own seJf-harming treachery?"—" Thou speakest wisely, damsel," said Hugues ; " it were indeed thy self- harm ; but," he exclaimed, turning suddenly, and fixing his dark and piercing eyes on her, " but Avhence is this marvellous impor- tunacy, damsel, and so sudden too, that thou must visit that lady to-night ?"—" Because," said Genevieve, " I have been haunted of late with fearful dreams: I have dreamed of the loss of a friend."—" Of what friend ? " said Hugues, eyeing her more closely. " I have
dreamed,'' said Genevieve, weeping unre¬ strainedly, " that evU was about to befaU—" " Whom, damsel ? "—" Mine aged father," said Genevieve ; and her tears flowed faster, whde her nice conscience checked her at the word. " Now for that word, damsel," said Hugues, clasping her smaU fingers in his coarse hand, " for that word thou hast won. I am a reckless wretch ; but that is the priest's concern who wiU hear my last con¬ fession. I have a mother—a wrinkled crone, who weeps and rads and swears, an' I leave not the bishop's service, I am but a lost man : yet stiU I trow she loves me weU. Diy thino eyes, maiden: thou shalt see this lady: expect me at the twiHght." The interval between his departure and return was, to Genevieve, " Hke a phan- tasma or a hideous dream." Reflection wa* impossible : the very resources of imagination faded; nor did even a vision of bright im¬ possibilities, such as often visits us in our moments of darkest desperation, flash upon her mind. She sat almost unconscious till the gathering shades of evening reminded her
that the hour was come : the steps of Hugues were heard in the passage the hght he bore gleamed through the crevices of the door ; it was opened, and he beckoned her with cau¬ tious gesture to follow him.
CHAPTER XIV. Yes, I am come to do mine office on thee j Thy life is wretched, and my stroke is sure. Miss Baillie. On reaching the apartment, Hugues lifted the tapestry that covered the door, and dropping it again instantly, Genevieve found herself alone with the queen. She stood there as she entered, unable to quit the spot, to raise her eyes, or to utter a sound. The chamber was nearly dark, nor did either at first seem to distinguish the other. " Oh!" said Ingelberg, who appeared to start from broken sleep, " I have had such fearful visions. Wearied with thought, I tried to sleep; Virgin Mother forefend that mine e) r es should ever again close if they must see forms so terrible! I dreamed that I saw our friends riding all in the dim twilight, by the banks of a river, and that they ever motioned
me to join them, still beckoning through the shade and riding on. Oh, how I toiled to follow; but heaps of armour, broken and bloody,-lay all before and around, me ; and still as I removed the massive pieces, heavier and heavier fell in my way; at length, I won the brink of the river, but there was neither bridge nor ford, and I stood bewildered and calling on them, when a little bark, rowed by an infant, set out from the opposite shore. I entered it, and oh! how powerless seemed the stroke of his oar in my dream, and how often the cross-set currents drove us back ere we reached the centre of the stream. At length we gained it; when, his form grew bigger—his eyes were fixed on me— a fierce and fiendish laugh rung in mine ears—it was Hugues.—And then——but why standest thou so sadly dumb and motionless? Speak, I pray thee, maiden; amid the gloom of the chamber thou iookest like some dim spectre.—Speak, 1 command thee, speak," she cried in the quick loud voice of fear, Genevieve, in brief and broken words, com¬ municated her dreadful tidings, she scarce
knew how; and the queen with one pierc¬ ing shriek dashed herself on the floor in utter despair, Genevieve sunk on her knees beside her, and, though hopeless, tried to speak of hope!—"Hope!" exclaimed Ingel¬ berg, in a voice that chilled her blood.— " Hope! " she repeated, madly playing with the rushes with which the floor was strewed. Then, rising slowly, and her eyes vacantly but intently surveying every object in the chamber, till at length they rested on Genevieve,—" Yes, I will hope," she cried, falling on her neck, " for there is something in thy presence, maiden, that forbids de¬ spair."—" And even now, is it not as by a miracle I om in thy presence, and with the permission of him who guards thee?" pur¬ sued Genevieve eagerly, catching at a topic of comfort. " Is not this a prosperous au¬ gury, and proof, that a true earnest zeal contends with all possible things, yea, with those that seem impossible, and overcomes them? May not something as wondrous interpose yet for thy deliverance ?—And even now a thought visits me,. wild but
most hopeful. Now do I turn prophetess in thy cavise, queen, and presage most truly, that if we may but reach the vault undis¬ covered ---------"—" The vault! " exclaimed Ingelberg, recoiHng with horror ; " art thou mad, or wouldst thou drive me mad by such horrid mention ? Is not that the place whi¬ ther they are to bear me; the dungeon of mine eternal captivity? Were I but once to enter its dark round, hope, reason, life would all desert me together."—"J-Iear me, royal lady, hear thy poor vassal speak only this once," cried Genevieve, zea¬ lously, " and then resolve even as thou wilt. Is not that the very direction in which thy deliverers must come ?—and what if we meet them there? Is it not also a place of safety and of concealment ? for who would search for thee there ? Trust me, oh queen, in this thing," she continued, trcm- bfing with energy; " yield to tlie strong im¬ pulse which rules me: for since I have spoken, a light is on my mind, that, I do full truly feel, comes not from any earthly, or darker than earthly power, but from tli&t—"
" Hush!" cried the queen, stopping her ears. " speak not thou of holy things—thou pray- est not to holy saints."—" I pray to One mightier than they," said Genevieve, " even their Maker and mine—the Creator, not the creature."—" Hush!" interrupted the -queen; " for, however fairly thy words are ordered. it were deep sin to Hsten to them. Speak to me rather of this hope thou seemest to point to."—" We will not speak of it now; it Hes aU shapeless and imperfect in my thoughts," said Genevieve, as the hope, at first so bright, rose in faded colours to her after¬ thought ; " but in its furtherance I pray thee. royal lady, to meet this Hugues to-night with smiles and cheerful favour; give him ah courteous entertainment, and seem to do him honour; cause him that he sit at the board with thee, and that he drink much wine; this will give me time to look. stead¬ fastly a.id definitely on that which is now dimly unfolding' itself to the mind's eye. Nor must he? she added, " see" thee thus with dishevelled hair, and robes aU deranged. Will the queen permit so humble an hand-
maid ?" and Hghting the lamp that hung from the roof, she approached, whUe Ingel¬ berg silently let down her long hair, whose profusion of pale gold locks covered the chair as she sat. As she proceeded in her task with trembHng and silent dexterity, " It is not alone in sleep we dream," said Ingelberg; " but now methought I was in my royal castle of Plessy ; and thou, the most favoured of my damsels, wast braiding my hair with pearls. Tell me, may not this be yet? Thou wilt not answer ? Dost thou then envy thy queen the last smile that may ever visit her Up ?" and as she spoke, though talking of smUes, she burst into an agony of tears.—" For Heaven's sake, madame, be more calm!" cried Genevieve: " alas! you wiH have much need of calm dissembled looks anon."—" Doubt me not," said the queen, recovering herself, with a faint effort at cheer¬ fulness; " thou knowest I have "right to a double share of dissimulation, as a woman and a courtier, and thou shalt see I wiU not forfeit my privUege," As she spoke, steps were heard approaching; and the voice of VOL. 111. N
Hugues sounded from an antichamber, where some pages were playing dice, and some wo¬ men dancing loosely to the sound of the ghit- tern.—" Go hence,"' he said ; " the queen is ill at ease, and must not be disturbed; and look that ye approach not these chambers again all this night." Ingelberg's blood ran cold at the sound, whose meaning she knew too well. A few moments after Hugues en¬ tered with preparations for supper, dismissing the pages at the door. Full of the terrible event of the night, the unfortunate females observed the most trifling circumstances at¬ tendant on this preparation with anxious and watchful attention, Hugues, entering alone, placed two silver dishes on the board, and afterwards two goblets on a trivet adjacent, with a vase of water, the eyes of the females following him at every movement; the queen's too intently, those of Genevieve cast down, shaded by her long dark eye-lashes, but equally observant. When he had finished his preparation, he stood opposite to the queen in respectful silence, waiting for the signal to carve the meal. And now Gene-
vieve was astonished at that conventional self- possession which is pecufiar to the inmates of a court: amid aU her agitation, imbecifity, and terror, the queen addressed herself to Hugues with a mixture of condescension and dignity that enhanced each other; and none but a court-practised eye could discover, under the bland and beautiful smile that se¬ vered her lips, the anguish that stiffened her other features almost into convulsion. " We thank our gentle gaoler," said the queen, " for the solace he hath afforded us in the society of this maiden, and wiU do him meet requitement when in our royal palace, where we shaU smde at our enthralment to this proud prelate here, as we would at a vision of captivity that had haunted us in our dreams. Meanwhile, receive such re¬ quitement as we can give ; sit at our board, and partake the meal with thy sovereign: and thou, maiden, sit too; we will it."— " Alas! madame," said Genevieve, feebly supporting her part in the drama the wretch¬ ed queen was forcing herself to act, " alas! N 2
madame, demean not your royal rank by sucfr a guest."—"Sit; we command thee," said the queen, while' Genevieve obeyed with undissembled awe of reluctance. Hugues glanced his dark eyes from the queen to her companion, as if he would read their souls ; then finally, with an expression resembling that of a beast of prey who is sure of his vic¬ tim,' and suffers it to sport out its space of misery without the possibility of avoiding its termination, he availed himself of the queen's permission, seated himself at the, table, and, having no invincible aversion to rich viands, exquisite wines, and the presence' of beau¬ tiful women, he soon became the most joy¬ ous of the party. His own intense devotion during the meal rendered him fortunately regardless of the slender and tasteless homage of his companions; and the wine, which the queen repeatedly urged him to drink, did not assist to quicken his powers of observa¬ tion, farther than related to the unintermit- ting repletion of his ample goblet. > In¬ gelberg, meanwhile, though apparently from time to time she touched her goblet with
her lips, took care never to imbibe a drop of its contents. At the end of the meal, while Hugues was removing the dishes, ( whose burthen had been lightened emi¬ nently by his exertions,) the queen exclaimed, " Alas! how different is this our gloomy meal in a prison, from those in our palaces and castles, where ladies danced, and troubadours sung, at the waving of queen Ingelberg's hand."—" Madame," said Hugues, whose spirits were not less exalted by wine than by the supposed condescension of the queen, (for even in the temporary superiority given by crime or accident, vulgar minds always feel their inferiority, and bow to the grace of the victim they prepare to sacrifice,) " Madame, it is a proverb in my country, that those who go forth to hear the song of the nightingale, return well pleased with the note of the thrush or the hnnet; and if it please your grace, I will essay my sim¬ ple skill."—" It pleaseth us well," said the queen; and raising the untouched goblet to her lips, she said, " We drink to the 1 strain of the thrush, since we may not hear
that of the nightingale." There needed no more to excite Hugues, who, possessing a mellow though untutored voice, pantomimic humour, great self-confidence, and above all, the inebriation inspired by female beauty and applause, began with the " Parrot? by Arnaud de Carcasse, a whim¬ sical licentious ballad, sufficiently popular then, and ending with repeating in a kind of recitative, and with much action, the novel of Peter Vidal; perhaps the' most poetical and chivalric of all tlie productions of the troubadours. The queen, whose associations were easily excited, and whom neither terror nor peril could deafen against the voice of music and the force of dramatic action, applauded loudly; though sometimes, when her eye fell on the calm agony of Genevieve's expression, she sighed deeply, and, affecting to wipe the tears of laughter, felt they sprang from another source that almost froze them as they fell. Recovering her¬ self, she cried, " Gramercy, fellow; thou hast pleased us well; and we would not willingly, during our short and enforced sojourn, here,
exchange thee for any other gaoler the walls of thy proud master hold.''—" Royal dame," said Hugues emboldened by wine, and the malignity of his conscious power bursting forth uncontrolled,—"royal dame, with all due humility, I do believe thou wilt have reason—(I say it without self-flattery)—to regret, when some sudden chance may cause thee to exchange thy present warder for another." The queen, who comprehended the full meaning of these words, fell backwards in her chair. Genevieve saw and felt the peril of the moment: " Trust me, madame," she died, " thy warder loves music, however rudely touched or chanted : he hath lingered to hear my rude song, and would, if your grace so please, I might sing it again!''— Hugues, elated beyond himself, exclaimed, " An* if the queen will crown her grace to me to-night, she will demand of that damsel a single song."—" Sing, then, damsel, we com¬ mand thee," said the queen: whom a glance from Genevieve had taught to give the air of command to an act of necessity. " So please you," said Genevieve, trembling at the teme-
rity of her experiment, " I have Httle skin to sing, but, if Hugues wiU fetch from my chamber the lute he hath lent me, I wiU essay mine utmost to please the royal ear." Hugues with delight accepted the commis¬ sion, and departed instantly. The queen and Genevieve were left alone. " We ha» - e a moment aUowed us : examine the goblet, royal lady," cried Genevieve. The queen shook her head. "Thou-knowest not,*' she said, " the deep and deadly potency of the draughts that they caU soporific. I bear about me a charmed ring—a mighty test of what is sanative or mortal."—"Apply the test, apply it without delay," cried Gene¬ vieve. The queen drew a ring from her finger,—" if," she said, " in this goblet there be ingredients intended for mischievous or mortal purpose, the metal wiU change its hue, as I touch it with this gem." She ap¬ pHed the ring, and the metal of the goblet darkened aU above the surface of the spark¬ ling wine. The queen feU back in speech¬ less horror, faintly uttering, " Twice have I thus saved my hunted life : but now—-" "And
now shall it again be saved!" cried Gene¬ vieve with zeal that made her ! tremble at her own word and act—"I will exchange the goblets. He is inflamed with much wine, and will not note the change: urge him 1 by some playful challenge to drain the goblet on his return; and for the rest------" The steps of Hugues were heard: he entered, and delivered the instrument to Genevieve, with the flushed and tri¬ umphant air of one who was at once the master of his crin. s and of his pleasures. "Thou hast ma,red it in the carrying," said Genevieve, preluding on it to catch his attention: " the strings are all discord¬ ant." The exchange of the goblets had been made in his absence, and the queen, seemingly jealous of his attention to the symphony, exclaimed—"With all thy boast of loyalty to the liege lady of France, I will wage this turquoise ring to the glass button in thy cap, that thou wilt not quaff thy goblet at a draught to her sudden deliverance from thraldom!"—"Will your highness do ! me rea¬ son ?" replied Hugues, with inflamed'visage XT *
and broken articulation. " Oh ! deeply, to such a pledge: doubt me not," said the queen, slowly raising the goblet to her lips.— " Then is thy turquoise but a lost tirrquoise, liege lady," cried Hugues; "for I hold him a coystrel and a craven, who would not drink to a fail* queen's pledge, till his brains turned like the vanes on an abbey tower, and rung like all its bells to boot!" and as he spoke,, he seized his goblet and sunk on his knees, the queen bending on him looks fixed with horror for the event; while Genevieve, long accustomed to the suppression of emotion, testified hers only by deathly paleness and suspended respiration. But Hugues was now be3 r ond all thought of suspicion; he raised the goblet to his lips, and drained it at a draught. The hollow sound from the cup mark¬ ed the engulphing of the last drop: and he remained convulsed, without the power to replace the cup on the table, or to rise from his knees though he made many efforts to do so, accompanied with a ghastly laugh of impotent self-derision. Failing finally, he rer
mained before them a moment on his sinking knees; his flushed features making fearful contrast with the stony fixedness of his eyes ; then, so potent and profound was the effect of the mithridate, compounded by the most skilful chemist of that age, that he sunk back on his knees, his head reclining against the adjacent chair, still sensible, but wholly powerless. The queen, alike overcome by scenes of terror, whether she was agent or spectatress, fell back in her chair powerless as her perse¬ cutor ; and Genevieve, after vain attempts td rouse her, felt that hers must be the dreadful task to take the keys from the living and struggling corse, who, though he expanded his arms, groaned deeply, and gazed on her with his glassy lifeless eyes, in full conscious¬ ness of her purpose, had not the power to prevent it. It was a task less terrible, but more difficult, to rouse the queen; and it was only by displaying the keys before her eyes, that Genevieve awoke her to a kind of stupified recollection'. her lips opened, but not a feature in her face moved;
yet she spoke with a kind of rigid dignity, half the result of paralysis, half of remem¬ bered associations. She struck the keys as they swung in Genevievs's hand. " I know thee who thou art," she said; " thou art my gaoler—thou comest to lead me to another dungeon—but I must follow thee.'' And to the astonishment of Generieve, with moveless features, and unmeaning but unerring steps, she rose and walked to the door of the apartment. Genevieve in this last exigency avail¬ ed herself of an iUusion, which, though frightful to behold in its effects, she felt it necessary to encourage—the safety of the queen of France was in the hands of a female peasant. She caught up the lamp and keys, and passed quickly from the chamber, Ingel¬ berg following her in a state of preternatural excitement. The precautions taken by Hugues for a different purpose, had removed aU the attendants to a distance; even he who was to have assisted in conveying the queen to her prison had not arrived, as the success of Genevieve's enterprise had anticipated the hour of his appointment.
They descended the stairs unmolested and unobserved, and Genevieve then perceiving a low and open door, that seemed to lead to the subterranean passages of the castle, en¬ tered it with the feeling of one who has in her desperate course neither guide nor choice. She was right in her conjecture; it opened on an inclined plane, which they traversed for some time till it led them to a flight of stone.steps, of which their feeble light shewed them neither the termination nor direction. Genevieve, after a brief pause, began to de¬ scend: the utmost caution was now ne¬ cessary ; the steps were broken and unequal, often interrupted by masses of stone that seemed to have fallen from the arched roof above. The roof itself, framed of unhewn stone, was in many places so low she could hardly crawl beneath it, drawing her com¬ panion with cautious gentleness along; and the torch, their only resource, struggling with the subterranean damp and vapours, threw out its flame far behind them, its sparks hissing on the dank footing as they de¬ scended.
On the shaken mind of the queen, the darkness, the sohtude, and the slow progress operated, however, favourably: she recovered her reason, and recognized her companion; .but it was only to add to the distress of the burdened and helpless Genevieve. BeHeving herself at a sufficient distance to complain in safety, she poured out her feeHngs without constraint, and never spoke but to harass her assistant with enquiries she coidd not an¬ swer, lamentations she could not soothe, and teiTors she dared not herself bear the steady view of. For the latter there appeared but too much reason: the descent seemed endless, for Genevieve knew not it. penetrated even below the moat of the castle. It did end, however; and the wanderers beheld at its foot a level path, but one that seemed of darkness impenetrable and interminable. They, nevertheless, advanced; when they shortly found their escape checked by a sheet of dark water, that, as it gleamed dimly in the light of their dying torch, seemed in¬ deed like the gloomy stream sailed over " by that grim ferryman the poets speak of,"—
As they approached, however, it appeared to be a coUection formed by the perpetual drop¬ pings from the ai*jh above. They waded through it, and at the end of their progress found themselves in an apartment, long, nar¬ row, and lofty, formed, like the passages, of rugged stone, and traversed crosswise by a low wall or screen which opened in the centre, and whose top was fortified with strong point¬ ed iron spikes. Genevieve pushed it open, and when they had thus gained the interior division of the dungeon, she eagerly appHed the key she had taken from Hugues to a lock she per¬ ceived on the inside of the screen. It turned in the massive wards—instinctively she lock¬ ed and double locked it, and then placing her torch in an iron socket, she paused for a mo¬ ment's breath and courage to enable her to examine this chamber of death. In the com¬ partment they were in, her eye rested on no¬ thing but four low doors of iron which she doubted not led to remoter prisons, where the victims of the bishop's passions or power were conveyed never to return afive. She tried them aU—all were fast secured. Mute and
almost hopeless, she sunk back on a rude stone bench, above which the torch was suspended, and gazed around her, while the queen lay helplessly on her bosom weeping like a child. It is at such a moment that every effaced or forgotten woe and terror presses back on ' the mind; and memory, with cruel and busy treachery, brings up all the past in aid of pre¬ sent calamity. She thought of that night of the subterranean escape from Carcassone, whose traces of terror were the first that had been inscribed on her infant memory. She recalled the madding multitude ghastly with famine—the midnight shrieks—the plunge —the dark and perilous procession—the heat, the crush, the press, the struggle for life— for life, when children trod over their fallen parents, and mothers left their infants! She clasped her hands over her temples to pre¬ serve her reason, but loosed them in a mo¬ ment, and bent eagerly forward. The sup¬ pressed but busy hum of many voices reached her ear from one of the doors, to which a key seemed to be applying. She listened—it was no delusion, her companion heard it too. " We
are betrayed," cried Ingelberg, with a shriek that made the vaults re-echo, " We are pur¬ sued—we are lost: God and St. Olave aid us in this extremity!"—" Hush, hush, for Hea¬ ven's sake!" cried Genevieve, trembling with ecstasy, as she recognized the unforgotten tones of Amirald amid the increasing murmur. An unknown voice was then heard loudly exclaiming, "By Heaven! lords, ye do.me wrong: this is the door, and if the key fail, what hinders that ye break down the door with what weapons ye have?" . " Tliis passage leads right onward to the queen's chamber and ------ " " She is here—she is here !" cried Genevieve.—" Oh !'' she cried, " as ye are true men, as ye are valiant knights, force, force the door, the life of a royal queen is in peril."—" In the name of Heaven," cried the voice of Amirald, " by what chance ?"— " Seek not to know—stay not to ask," cried Genevieve, "bring axe and lever and force the door on the instant—the life of the queen hangs on a moment." At, the word, twenty battle-axes began to/ring like thunder on the door, while the
attendants put all their strength to the task, sawing, away the bolts, and thrusting'their lance-points between the crevicesj to loosen and widen the apertures. The din was enough. to " stun the living and waken the dead ;" but louder still were heard the exult¬ ing shrieks and agonizing vows of Ingelberg to every saint in heaven, but chiefly to St. Olave, for protection and deliverance. There was need of them now; for at this moment Sir Ambrose, at the head of half the house¬ hold, furnished with arms and torches, rush¬ ed in at the opposite end of the vault. The noise at the door, and the sight of the queen and Genevieve gave him in a moment to understand all that he had to fear; and his rage was increased almost to distraction, when he found that the iron screen, which Genevieve had locked on the inside,, formed an impenetrable barrier be¬ tween him and his - victims. While some ran hastily for instruments to force it, and others followed them to shan his fury, the priest fiercely required some of the attend¬ ants to clear the screen at a bound and seize
on the prisoners. The most active, hoping an ample reward, instantly obeyed him. He cleared the screen \ but his feet slipping on the damp pavement, he fell, and breaking his leg, lay writhing impotently, and shaking his hand at his intended victims. Another, undeterred by this mischance, made the attempt; but his mantle catching in one of the spikes dragged him back on it, and he hung there till lifted off, bleeding and lace¬ rated, by his companions. The door began to give way. " Draw thy bow," said the priest in fury to an archer who stood by him, " and send me an arrow through yon fugitive on the instant!"—" I am not used to draw a bow against women!" answered the man sullenly. —" Slave and dog!" cried the furious priest, *' do as thou art commanded, or I will have thee hung from the highest tower of the castle for the vultures to devour thy flesh, and the hooded crows to peck out thine eyes—alive—villain ! —alive!" The man slowly and reluctantly fitted the arrow to the string. "Whom must I aim
at?" said he: " there be two of them, and foul wrong it were if the innocent should suffer." " I am Ingelberg, the queen of France!" cried Genevieve, presenting herself to the mark of the assailant. As she spoke, the arrow quivered in her side, and she fell. bathed in blood, at the feet of Ingelberg.
CHAPTER XV.
Come, go with nie. I will bestow thee straight Among a sisterhood of holy nuns. Romeo and Juliet. The first beginnings of recovered con¬ sciousness were, to Genevieve, accompanied by exquisite pain and a gloomy confusion of ideas. As her fleeting senses returned, she perceived herself to be in a kind of fitter, which however did not move ; she felt also that her wound had been bound up ; and after some vain and painful efforts to re¬ collect how she hcd been wounded, or why she was thus confined, she slowly drew back the curtain of the litter, and attempted to revive her dim perceptions by the sight of surrounding objects. The night-breeze thus * admitted, though it chilled her frame, re¬ stored her faculties, and she began to com-
prehend her situation, which, though one of comparative safety, seemed stiU full of " doubt and dread." The night was rough and stormy; masses of hiurying rack were driven fast across the moon, which, emerging from time to time, shed her full brief Hght on the group that surrounded the litter. Queen Ingelberg was in the centre, mounted on a noble steed, which she managed with a skiU and spirit, that was more the result of habitual, than of native courage. She was surrounded by a band of armed knights on their war- steeds; and their steely forms now gleam¬ ing out in the broad moonlight, and now enveloped in darkness, gave a shadowy and spectre-like hue to their figures and move¬ ments. The bishop's castle, like a huge pile of rock, stood darkling in the distance; but the lights that flashed fast through every loop-hole, the torches in the court that threw their sheets of vivid and abrupt Hght on the rnassive towers, and the increasing tramp and din within the walls, as the men-at-arms rushed to the sally-port, proved that the
alarm had been given, and that the fugitives must owe their safety to speedy measures. They appeared to be holding eager and anxious consultation. " Take counsel for the wounded maiden first," were the first words that reached the ears of Genevieve; (it was the voice of Ingelberg.) " Take coun¬ sel, I say, first for the wounded maiden: if to you we owe our liberty, to her we first owed our life." Touched and melted by this grateful magnanimity, Genevieve drew the curtain wholly aside, and exerting her utmost strength, cried, "Set forward, noble knights, without delay: leave—leave me here. What is the life of a peasant damsel, weighed against the safety of a crowned queen ? "—" We are, indeed, crown¬ ed queen," said Ingelberg, riding to her side. " But thou, methinks, wast born one. Now by the soul of Waldemar, and the bones of blessed St. Olave, we stir not from this spot, till thy safety be cared for."—-" Your grace lacks swift counsel in this strait," said Bernard de Vaugelas, who rode close beside iter rein. " An 5 if I may guess by the sound
within yon towers, short space will be al¬ lowed to give or take it."—" What if we ride through the streets of Beaucaire,, and raise the townsmen in aid of the queen of France," said Pierre de Limosin. " 'TwiU be the first time in their lives the rascailte were ever honoured by the summons of a knight, or the suit of a lady."—" The bishop woidd strait despoil the town of its privi¬ leges," said Vaugelas, " if one of his vile burghers wielded a biU, or shook a rusty tar¬ get on our side."—" There is a convent," said a voice which thriUed through every fibre of Genevieve's frame, " a sisterhood of holy nuns not far distant: there may her Grace take sanctuary, were the foul fiend chafing at the grate."—" To sanctuary then a' God's name, and with what speed ye may !" quoth de Vaugelas, closing the rivets of his helmet. " Hardly may De Limosin and, myself, with our train, stem the torrent that wiU soon pour from yon. barbican."—"Alas!" cried the queen, dropping her reins, "must my safety again be purchased at a price so dear ? Hear me, Bernard de Vaugelas, if
as a queen I can no longer command, as a lady and most distressed I will not plead in vain to a loyal knight."—-" My Hege lady," said Vaugelas with the proud gallantry of chivahy, " honour your slave in your most generous thought so far as to believe him one who is not content alone to shiver a lance, or trill the lay of a wanton troubadour: no, on this spot to-night he will leave bloody proof that the sovereign of his heart was also the lady of his Hfe."—"I cannot fashion to set my words in such fair orderi" said the less polished Be' Limosin, couching his lance, " but, royal dame, I too can die? Their train gathered round the devoted knights. " Ah, Coeur d'Acier !ah, Bel-et-brave!" cried the queen vainly addressing each by the nom de caresse she had bestowed on them in days of chivalric splendour and regal festivity--- " did ye riot swear to me on the faith of knighthood, that ye would 1 refuse me no boon demanded in those names ?"---" Sir Amirald," said Be Vaugelas, in a low voice, r - fi by 'thy lady's ! love, and as thou wouldst have" the benison of thy saint in thy mortal hour, con- vol ni. o
vey the queen to safety: hark! they are lowering the drawbridge."—" FareweU, my liege !" crfed De Limosin, " one tear for my tomb, and one mass for my soul, is aU thy loyal lover now can crave.'*—" No tears for me, my sovereign dame!" said the courtly Vau¬ gelas :',' my soul would be sad in pai'adise, if I thought my lady wept."—" Farewell, ye priceless friends!'' cried the queen in tears, as she turned her reins to ride :—" alas ! the dark stream that I saw in my vision, was it to foretell me this ?" - The train set forward at the command of Vaugelas, and in the pain produced by the motion of the rudely constructed litter, Genevieve soon lost aU consciousness, and with itaU the perils of her flight and the tumult of the conflict,' whose sounds of terror, pursued them for miles beyond the walls of the castle, where the safety of the queen, was fiercely contended for by Vaugelas andJiimosin., - r >( - • ;,, -By the Hght of the grey dawn,,the fugi¬ tives found themselves in a narrow valley of considerable extent, bearing the same propor-
tion to a champaign landscape, that a long gallery or passage does to the more spacious and splendid apartments of the mansion, yet not without its grace as well as its utility. A smaU stream wandered through it; its high precipitous banks of stone, like proud neighbours, overshadowing and almost con¬ cealing it; between their fissures many a tree was bending its branches, and interlacing its knotted roots—the boughs of some almost met over the narrow stream, and those of others closed around the low roofs of a smaU reH- gious edifice dindy seen at the, extremity of the valley. The objects thus gradually and partially developed partook of the character of the Hght by which they vere beheld ;—all was quiet, sombrous, and stiU. The travellers urged on their .weary steeds; and following with difficulty .a track, rather than a path, that winding sometimes among rocks, and sometimes through water, was always so overshadowed by the branches of the tro^s, that';the riders < were compelled to bend to their horses' manes to pass through them, at o 2
length they approached the building as the last toll of a faint bell summoned its inmates to matins. The building itself, simple almost to mean¬ ness, and nearly hidden among trees and rocks, gave no unapt image of an eremite amid his shades and solitude, humble, lonely, and sequestered. The unusual summons of a bugle at their peaceful gates brought, not only the jportress, but the abbess to the portal; the former held a feeble taper—for it was still twilight; the figure of the latter appeared faintly in the rear. " Shelter and sanctuary, holy mother, for a forlorn wanderer!" cried Ingelberg, ''for one who flies in peril through the land of which she is the queen."' —" And thou shalt have it, royal daughter!" said the abbess, flinging her veil over the head of the queen with a solemn air of pro¬ tection, "were all the Icings in Christentye thundering at this feeble gate for entrance. 'Enter in safety and peace; and, for thou knowest," she added viewing Ingelberg's escort, '«the strict rule of our order forbids the approach of man nearer than our grate,
yonder knight with his train may harbour in a near hamlet." As she spoke, Sir Amirald had alighted and knelt to the queen, who ex¬ tended to him her hand to kiss—"Pardon, my sovereign lady f he cried: "my duty is' fulfilled, and my task finished here. I left a pledge beneath the towers of the Bishop of Toulouse, and must redeem it or give life in exchange."—" I know thy meaning," said In¬ gelberg; "and wilt thou, then, for some fantas¬ tic toys of honour, desert thy queen and thy duty ? Are thy life, and the commands of thy liege lady, of such light avail that a romantic scruple can outweigh them both ?"—" By a true knight, royal dame;" said Amirald, c< his hfe is ever held cheap, when poised with a lady's commands; but both are underpriced when weighed with that which alone gives to life its value, or to a lady's commands the right to be obeyed—even his honour:" and as he spoke he flung himself on his war-steed. "Ami the Queen of France?" cried Ingelberg; " am I she at whose lightest word the brands of a thousand knights have leaped, as alive, from their sheaths, and who now am denied
boon by one?"—"Betain him—Oh,detain him .yet, sovereign lady," cried Genevieve. At the weU-remembered voice Amirald rode round to the Htter, and withdrawing the cur¬ tain, gazed on her for a moment—" Now were my dishonour complete," he cried, " were it beheld not only by the sovereign of my life, but the lady of my love;" and as he spoke, he hotly pursued his way back to the castle of JBeaucaire.
CHAPTER XVI.
What means this tumult in a Vestal's veins? Pope- j Though Genevieve's wound, on examina¬ tion, proved so slight that it was obvious the archer had purposely consulted her safety while he gave it, the tenderness of the queen would not suffer her for some days to quit her cell or her pallet. This interval she passed almost in utter solitude; for Ingelberg, ex¬ hausted by fatigue and emotion, remained in her apartment; and the nuns, when they had discovered that their guest was a heretic, (from her possessing neither cross nor rosaiy and making no use of holy water) took care to remain no longer near her than was neces¬ sary for dressing her wound and supplying her with food. This solitude was as delicious
to her as it was dangerous. Even amid suf¬ fering and peril the images of both had been effaced by the parting exclamation of Ami- raid ; and now, in the stfllness and repose of her cell, her mental eye rested with unwearied luxury of gaze on the bright scenes of its in¬ ternal and new-found world of feHcity. From the moment that she had felt that compassion for a wounded and deserted youth was rapidly exchanging for a sensation new, indefinable, and tumultuous, she guarded her heart against his image with a vigilance and firm¬ ness that suffered itself neither to be surprised nor seduced into admitting its approach for a moment. The insurmountable inequalities of rank and ofreHgion, of station and habit, help¬ ed to sustain her fortitude, and aid her in the discipfine of her heart; and though she could not make it cease to feel without making it cease to beat, yet so closely was its secret guarded that the only indications of its existence were an increasing indifference to all that had in¬ terested her before, and sometimes a sigh, for which she condemned herself the moment it was breathed. But Amirald's proclaiming her with his own Hps the lady of his love (a term
much more significant in those days than ours) had now alike banished doubt and constraint; and though she deemed the obstacles to hap¬ piness or even to hope, as impracticable as ever, yet still by the deep delusions of pas¬ sion, all felicity seemed comprehended in the consciousness of its mere existence; and the image of him she loved seemed suffi¬ cient for the occupation of hbr heart dur¬ ing the whole period of after-life. " Years hence," she thought, " those who see me shall say, ' Why does that pale maiden sigh when she sees a noble knight ride past ?' but none shall be able to answer." It was on the third evening after her ar¬ rival at the convent that the queen and Ge¬ nevieve joined the nuns at the hour of supper. In the refectory and itb furniture, as well as in the appearance of the group that occu¬ pied it, there was a tone of severity exceed¬ ing the usual rigour of conventual discipline, and which displayed a striking contrast to the gorgeous garments of the queen and her companion. The walls were of stone; a stone bench, extending the length of one of them, formed a seat ; a coarse tabic,
an iron lamp suspended from the ceiling, and. a massive and grotesquely carved chair, with a wooden footstool, resigned by the abbess to the queen, formed aU the furniture. As the rules of the community prohibited even the sight of meat at their board, the queen's re¬ past was fish, an egg, and honey; and her beverage water. Grenevieve partook of its remains, while the food of the abbess and nuns was roots which they had themselves reared and prepared ; and they partook spa¬ ringly of the pure element with which the coarse cup of wood in the centre of the table was filled. The sUent meal concluded, the nuns retired, and the queen began to con¬ verse in a low voice with the abbess. The countenance and expression of the latter ri¬ veted Genevieve's eyes as she stood reve¬ rently behind the chair of the queen. The visages of the poor nuns had exhibited nothing beyond gloom and apathy, graduated accord¬ ing to the various lengths of their experience of a conventual existence, and the variety of temperaments on which that experience had to operate; but the features of the ab-
bess wore that singular character of the 'ex¬ pression of youth mingled with the lines of sge, which marks countenances where gi'ief has been anticipating the work of time. The lustre of her full dark eye was unim¬ paired, and the noble regularity of her pro¬ file still possessed and proclaimed the high intellectual character associated with that class of features; but her cheeks were wan and hollow; and as a few locks (which she hastily replaced) strayed from beneath her frontlet or her veil, the grey far outnumber¬ ed the black hairs—once blacker than die raven's plume. Genevieve gazed intently on her most interesting aspect, while the queen continued conversing rather to than with her, and the abbess telling her beads the while, listened with the air of one whose miM was wandering far both from her companion and her occupation. "Yes, my reverend mo¬ ther," said the queen, "it was within these walls I was confined by order of King Phi¬ lip,* while the cruel and unfounded process
for our divorce was carried on, spite of the authority of the Pope and the menaces of my brother, king Canute of Denmark; and here, in place of a stem monastic gaoler, I met one who, amid the chiU of a cloister, had yet a pang for insulted royalty and a tear for in¬ jured love." —" It was ray duty," said the abbess: " hattd ignara mali? she added, with a painful smUe: then checking her«elf, " I forgot that I had abjured aU my profaner studies."—" And reverend mother," said the queen, "deem you not that, when certain agents have been employed in the ordering of matters fairly and fortunately to our wish, and such agents again surround us, bearing in the time and all other circumstance of their ap¬ pearing a meet .proportion to their former re¬ lation, that it is a kind of augury—a betoken¬ ing—How shaU I term it?—-mine heart feels the meaning, though my lips can frame no word for it." The abbess repHed " that it might be so; but that it was dangerous to buUd too close analogies on the mysterious and far- reaching dispensations of Providence."—" Here are we," said the queen, explaining herself bv facts, " under the very roof where we
first tasted the offices of sisterly and Christian love: and hither were we led in safety by that Sir Amirald, to whom, at the time of which we speak, we owed our honour and our crown as by a miracle!"—" A miracle !" re¬ peated the abbess, raising her eyes.—«.* It seemed no less," said the queen* ; " for when the pleadings for my divorce were held before the Pope's legate, under the roof of the Bishop of Paris, and the advocates of the king urged their reasons with such force and sharpness, that when the crier proclaimed 1 let the queen's advocates come forth,' none appeared in answer, then stepped there forth an unknown youth in our cause, who or¬ dered his reasons with such sententious and weighty wisdom, and a gravity so learned and modest withal, that the king himself, as one amazed, put a stop to the pleadings, and we were saved from disgrace and defeat, at least on that day; but when the king caused search to be made for the advo-
cate, no man knew aught of him, nor did Ave till lately learn that it was this Sir Amirald, who, though he thought no scorn to take on him the office of advocate for a distressed queen, yet would not have it known, as less befitting a knight than a cowled churchman or coifed son of peace; but—-mercy of Heaven! whence was that din?" she exclaimed;—" one at the portal seeks entrance."—" No horn hangs at our peaceful gates," replied the abbess; and as she spoke the ancient portress appeared. "An armed knight is at the gate," said she, " seek¬ ing to speak with the queen."—" What is his name ?"—" I know not, madame."—" His cognizance?" demanded the queen.—" Alas■■!•' said the poor recluse, " he looked so bright arid terrible in his armour, that I hasted away; but his voice was hke that of the young knight who rode beside your highness that mora."—" Sir Amirald !"cried the queen exultingly. "Now by the soul of Walde¬ mar*, there be hopes;" and hurrying Gene-
viev.e along with her, they presented them¬ selves at the grate \ and never in the wide luxury of a veranda'd casement did beauty look so interesting as through the rude and narrow grate of a convent. The hardness of the frame augments while it contrasts the loveliness of the portraits which it encloses. Sir Amirald dismounted, and kneeling on one knee, gracefully doffed his casque to salute the queen, while his eyes were fixed on Ge¬ nevieve alone. " Now, thou truant knight,'' said Ingelberg, " how darest thou venture into the presence of a queen thou hast so lately disobeyed and deserted ? w —" So please you, royal dame," said Amirald, the brightest suffusion of joy dyeing his cheek and brow with vermilion; '* the tidings I bear embolden me to press into your presence, were my fact even more heinous."—" Now, Heaven ! if it be thy will—Bernard de Vaugelas and''------ " Are living men, and still bear stout heart and strong lance for the service of the queen." Ingelberg with devout gratitude began to tell her beads: " And better thus employed," she cried, " than in causing masses to be said for
their souls. But haste thee and tell me."— i( They were made prisoners by the bishop's men ; and being lodged in the same tower, and waited on by one who had been about your highness's person during your thraldom, and who feared that the bishop on his return would take his life, he contrived a means of escape on condition he might accompany them; and now have they reached the vicinage without discovery or pursuit, purporting to join you to-morrow in your meditated flight, should you still," he added, with a peculiar expression, " mean to pursue it."—" To¬ night, to-night," cried the impatient queen; u this very night will I set forth. The bishop may pursue—king Philip may discover my course; a lost hour is perchance the loss ol liberty—of------" Your grace does not lack their aid to win your liberty,"' said Amirald, his countenance assuming increasing resplen¬ dency of colour and expression; st it is achieved already. The remonstrances of the Holy Father, and the repinings of Agnes oi Moravia, have changed the heart of king Philij;:—he waits to welcome you again as
his spouse and queen. The pope for this concession legitimates the children of Agnes. AU is at peace between the Louvre and the Vatican; and your faithful knights, instead of aiding the flight of a fugitive, wiU now grace the progress of a glorious queen, returning to dwell among princes and palaces."—" It is too much happiness," said the queen faintly, whde, giving him her hand through the grate to kiss, she leaned back' exhausted on the shoulder of Genevieve : then suddenly re¬ lapsing into susjficion and fear—those habitual guests that do not soon forbear the mansion they have begun to inhabit—" And how,' J hhe cried, " does this suit the tidings we have heard, that our son prince Lewis is leading a strong force in aid of the Crusaders, whUst king Phdip never advanced mark or man be¬ fore in the cause ? And must it not be on the sad condition that I shaU be the thraU of the Bishop of Toulouse?"—"By aUthe saints - r by aU and aught that knight or Christian may swear by," said Amirald, his features on fire with the earnestness of that conviction he felt, and, feeling, impressed on his hearer, "the
tidings I bear are mere truth. Ask Bernard de Vaugelas else. Prince Lewis at the head of a strong band wiH not Hghtly be won to quit his post. Nay, royal dame, image to thyself a vaHant prince at the head of a host he was panting to lead,—woidd he be checked in his course of chivalry and conquest by the long-sus¬ pended, and often-contradicted commands of the King of France?"—" Thou persuadest me to hope even against hope !" said the queen, "and I wuT beHeve thee. Now, whom," she cried, in the natural effusion of a bene¬ ficent heart, " whom shaU I make happy ? Kingdoms would I give at this moment, were kingdoms in my gift! By the rights of our recovered queendom we wiU not leave this spot, tiU thou, loyal knight, and thou, loving (hansel, have asked and won a boon worthy of a sovereign to bestow."—" Sovereigns can bestow honour," said Amirald, faltering and blushing, " but love alone can give feHcity.*' —"Ha! goes it there," said the queen smiling¬ ly ; '* Why god-a-mercy, boy, thou must have a Beiie-amie before thou hast a beard. I
think thy Hps be as smooth as those of any lady in our court. WeU, when we win to Paris, if' this lady Guinever of thine refuse the in¬ tercession of a queen, we wiU deem her lack¬ ing in courtesy."—" She is not there," Ami- raid was about to say, while his eyes fixed on Genevieve were pleading still more elo¬ quently ; but the queen, too happy to heed him, had turned to her favourite. " For thee," she said, placing her hand on the brow of Genevieve—" for thee we wiU shape out a noble fortune. Thou shalt with us to the court; thy matchless beauty shaH lack no aid of rich attire, and ample dower ; and the proudest noble in king PhiHp's palace shaU not think scorn to mate with the peasant maiden who saved the queen of France."— " Oh, not to the court, my sovereign," repHed Genevieve, with deep but respectful firmness: —" not to the court, if it please the queen ? I should deem it foul shame, if, while my people eat the bread and drank the water of affliction, I were dweUing in palaces. I should be a mournful, iU-placed, abused thing! Never—oh, never will I revel on dainties,
whUe they dig the earth for roots or eat the grass of the field! Never wiU I be robed in sinful and superfluous luxury, whUe they shiver in cold and nakedness ! Never will I couch on down, whUe their bed is the rock ; and that pale sightless old man," she said, with increasing emotion, " I should hear his voice amid the music of a royal bower: whde I paced through palaces, he would tell me he lacked a guide in the desert. Oh, pardon, royal dame, if my words offend ! but never—never—" and the agonizing tears of recollection burst forth and choked her voice, Ingelberg was affected for a moment, then struggling with feeHngs which her faith con¬ demned—" We have sworn deeply,'* she said, "that we wiU not hence till thou hast asked a boon ; nor may the oath be forfeited! Speak then, maiden, and re¬ member it is not easy to task the gratitude of a friend, or the power of a sovereign."— " Royal lady," said Genevieve, kneeHng and kissing her robe, " since He, in whose hand are the hearts of kings, turned thine husband's towards thee again, oh! win him to deal
gently with his suffering subjects. Trust me, my Hege, hearts more loyal beat not in Hving bosoms; hands more bold never wielded lance in fields of battle. Let our liege but yield us the grace to wor¬ ship Him in whom we trust after the dic¬ tates of our conscience and of his; word, Uid then shall our sovereign see, aU through fair Languedoc, every man sitting under his vine and his olive, fearing God and ho¬ nouring the King." Queen Ingelberg shook her head—" Thou proposest hard matter, maiden," she said; " but, though it cost' the king's displeasure, I wiU not fad to redeem my word. We will send holy priests, not armed knights, to convert thine erring peo¬ ple; and oh, that thou mayest be the first- fruits of that milder mission!—and now," she added cheerfuUy, " the queen hath a boon to ask of thee. Wear this for my sake," she said, detaching a carkanet of jewels from her neck, and fastening it round that, of Genevieve: " Now beshrew thee and thy peevish .heresy, that wiU not let thee visit the .court, were it but to show how-weU- $
carkanet suits thy white and graceful neck. I ask it not as a boon," she added more se¬ riously, " that thou wilt wear this ring of smaU price," putting it on her finger; " it is marked with my name, and thou wilt prize it, not as the gift of the queen, but as the memorial of Ingelberg." At sight of the costly ornament of gems, Genevieve burst into tran sports of grateful joy, and the queen drew back disappointed and displeased. " If we are to learn that thou prizest such toys," she said, " we can enrich thee, peasant, beyond thy wishes, yea thy very dreams."—"Koyaidame,'' said Genevieve, while a proud but modest suffusion dyed her cheek, " when thy vassal dies, those who are beside her corse shaU find this treasured ring next her heart; but for these jewels— their price is yet more precious to me. It shaU procure a guide for him from whom cruel men have rent both his eyes and his child, whose aid made him half forget their loss : yea, on thy¬ self, queen, shaU the gift be visited in bless¬ ings. It shaU extort pra}rers for thee from many a bleeding and many a broken heart.
They shaU contend with and prevail against the cries that arise hourly to the throne of God against our slayers and persecutors. For me," she added, repressing her enthu¬ siasm, " foul shame it were, if, while youth and health remain, I sought subsistence from the bounty that the weak and aged lack. The labour of her own hands shaU clothe the peasant maiden with garments meet for her, and God wiU give her food.'' " Alas!" exclaimed the queen, kiss¬ ing her forehead with a sudden impulse of admiring love—" Alas ! that thou wilt be an heretic: but/ 5 she added, " in this thy self-forgetfulness, order must be taken for thee: whither wilt thou go, and what is thy purpose ?" Genevieve expressed her humble wish to seek shelter with some relatives in Toulous*e; "And if I must weary my Hege for a boon," she added, " let me have a safeguard thither, that I may meet no' hindrance or wrong."—" Sir Amirald himself, with a chosen band of men-at-arms (maugre aU the crosses on their breasts), shall be thy guide, thou false heretic," said the queen, playfully entwining her fingers in Gene-
vieve's dark luxuriant ringlets as shf spoke:~* WiU such guard content thee?' Trembling at the words, Genevieve felt about to say "Aught of peril but his pre¬ sence ;" bit she checked herself, half .from awe - of the presence in which she stood, half l from an internal yielding, which she condemned while she submitted to it; and murmured, " It must be as the queen and the noble knight shaU wiU it."—"As the noble knight shaU wiU it? as the queen commands," said Ingelberg resuming rapidly the language of royalty. " Sir Amirald, we command thee to guard this fair damsel where she listeth; but look that thou con¬ cert her by the way," she added smiUng. "And now meseems that errand is not all unwelcome: there was a gleam on thy features like summer Hghtning, as I spoke." The young lover bowed to hide his blushes from the queen. " For thee, Amirald," said Ingelberg, " we will ourself be the builder of thy fortunes: trust our royal word, and wei.wiil' give thee solemn pledge forats re¬ demption. * Bie, maiden, to the abbess;- and
ask from her that priceless relique we con¬ signed to her care the night her walls first sheltered us." Genevieve soon returned with the abbess, who placed the relique, inclosed in a small box of silver, in the hands of the queen, and then dropping her veil at the sight of a man before the grate, stood apart. " Take this relique," said the queen, attaching it to a chain of gold: " it holds the holy dust gathered from the bones of the Protomartyr,, who perished at Jerusalem tinder the hands of his fierce and bloody countrymen. Why lin- gerest thou ? Seekest thou aught more from us ? "—" Beyond all that pilgrim or palmer ever bore from holy land," said the young knight, blushing as he knelt, " would I prize the silken band that binds yon maiden's hair."—*' A silken band! " said the queen, u nay, we will give with that a lock of the silken hair it entwines." Genevieve did not presume to resist, while the queen with her own hands cut off a lock of hair as rich as ever crowned the head of regal beauty. " Now," said the queen, YOL. III. p
*' yield him thy white hand to kiss." Gene¬ vieve retreated. " The noble knight," she said, " must not profane his lips on the hand of a peasant maiden."—" When hath he kissed a fairer in a royal bower?" said Ingelberg, seizing her hand, and offering it through the grate to Amirald. At this moment the abbess wrapped her veil around her, and retired. The movement was un¬ observed by the rest; the queen triumphed in the interchanged pledges of valour and beautv, which revived all the associations of her former chivalric and courtly existence. The young knight trembled as he kissed the white hand extended to him, as if it were rather accorded to the command of the queen, than the act of the possessor; and a new and nameless sensation trembled through the pure frame of Genevieve, when she felt the soft lip of Amirald, for the first time, touch and press her hand. " We are wearied," said the queen, reclining on the shoulder of Genevieve; " we are wearied," laughing and wiping away her tears, " with
excess of happiness; we w HI retire to our cell, and pass the night in orisons to the saints for our present feHcity and our future hopes. And oh," she said, " oh that thou couldst share them !"
i> 2
CHAPTER XVII. Oh ye dead 1 Oh ye dead I whom we know by the hgiu ye give From your cold gleaming eyes, though je move like those that live. « • • * * It is true* it is true, we are shadows cold and wan, i It is true, it is true, the friends that we loied are gone. Moore's Irish Melodies. Genevieve's full heart felt its need of orisons too; she trembled at the perils of her situation, though it seemed now to embrace all that was delightful to hope, or flattering to love. The increasing tumult of her heart began to terrify her, and she resolved to com¬ mune with it in solitude, and, if she could, to bid it be still. After attending the queen to her oratory, Genevieve, with that impulse caught from her early habits, which prompted her ever to
pour forth her prayers, when she could, amid the liberty of nature and the light of heaven, hasted to the garden of the convent. The enclosure so caUed was of as simple and austere a character as the fabric to which it belonged; no flowers were cultivated there; it contained only vegetables for the food of the recluses, and vulnerary or sanative herbs for the use of the sick and maimed whom they tended; one broad and grassy walk extended its entire length, fined on either side by taU pines, whose branches, al¬ most meeting above, gave to the passenger the idea of traversing a cloister. At the end of this walk a hoarse and shallow stream interrupted by its sole sound the deep re¬ pose of the scene, its waters darkened by the shade of the trees ; on the bank was a rude seat formed of the trunk of a faUen tree, a similar block bore a human akull, and on the surface of the wood these words had been carved by the abbess, " hue virgo veni, v'u'go moesta veni — hie umbra?, fontes, pax.'" The gloom, quiet, and repose of this spot, over which the darkening shades of an
autumnal twilight began to gather, were grateful to the harassed spirit of Genevieve : she moved- slowly and in silence among the trees, -with eyes upturned, watching the decreasing light as it gleamed between their branches; and it was not till she reached the termination of the walk, that she per- wived the abbess seated and gazing upwards* While the tears came slowly down her pale 'clieok. Genevieve was retreating, with?.a timifl apology for her intrusion, when*the abbess caught her arm, and with silent'em¬ phatic gesture detained iter. Genevieve, cou- ' Scions of the difference of their creeds, and fearful of some proof of fruitless zeal,' Was again attempting to retire, when theabboss, ''pointing to her cell, signified her wish'that 'Genevieve should follow her thither; <&he obeyed, and on their entering it, the abbess Hosed the door, and gazed on her forborne *irtoinerits in silence; at length, "Thou 'love^t," she said. Genevieve was silent,— The abbess pointed emphatically to her 'own jtale' cheek and wasted figure, ** Behold," sfic said, " the fate of her who loves-'' And
THE ALBIGENSES. '3J9 in the long and melancholy conversation that followed, she eloquently painted the progress of that'disastrous passion which bestowed on 'its victims immortality and wretchedness. s At, its close she read to Genevieve, part iof a letter she had been writi*ig, and of which every: page was blotted with her tears; ■■■ i *>f*.' -i 4 Beum tcstem invoco, si Augustus uni- versum piwsidens mundum, •, matrimonii;(ho- nore dignaretur, totumquc mihi orbem ,con- firmaret in -porpotno pnesidendum* charius jirtilii' rtc■ dignius videretur, tmi did arnica,* iqiuim- illius i imperatrix.'— " Go, maidep," 15she.; saidi after reading these words,, " ,au(i ,when ; thou,;too weepest thy hopeless love;, >:roniember the abbess Kloise, and the convent s iof;the i Paraclete." She closed the scroll, and ishe and her hearer remained mute for spme moments, the one from remembered, the other from . existing associations. They started irmtually at a sound seldom heard within those walls till of late, a knocking at .the gate-; the ancient portress tottered into the .■t
chamber. "Who is he that would seek us T* -~" He calls himself the Monk of Montcalm," said the portress, " and he saith he hath 5 '" . t „ il !.!' i ( heavy tidings to utter. —" He is a gracious and a holy man, said the abbess; " say we wiU see him on the instant.'™" Stay thee, maiden, she added to Genevieve as the sandals of the aged monk were heard in the passage to the apartment of the abbess. His pale, ascetic, almost spiritualized form appear¬ ed at the low and narrow door of the chamber. The abbess rose as the portress held a dim light'beneath the pointed arch of the'door, and tlie conventual salutation of Benedwite and Pax vobiscum passed between them. t r jit - $ ''Reverend mother," said the monk, " I am x . . . °lv* the bearer of tidings which, even in these times of woe and fear, lack paraUel."—" Such tidings," said the abbess, " ever visit the abode of grhl -the messenger knows his way, and chooses his fittest soiourn. But what are thy tidings, holy monk ?—It were a mournful pleasure if an exhausted source could feel its stiearns Cow once more. I fear me there was but one hand tnat could touch their spring--
" V >\i '*:■>-■■■ ' '' ■>■■.■■ ■■■■■■;: ••::? :•■■;' ir\'[l" .VjUii'i-V.h and, that—opened them once, and r then .they closed for ever."—" Reverend dame," said, the monk, hasting . to deliver his mission, " I <:J/0."VJ>"T v : /■: ■: ' '■ ''-•■■ ( ■ ':^ -"• f •' ~'H I Fi fl'1' V7,?)(! have journeyed to tell thee that, on to-mor- -y/f YiT- ;- '.-*■■■•)<■■■■: ■'/-:■"'.- ..'.':'■ ,'■;.,::■ •/■.•Mi .s; i"m7,°- row's niffht the monks of holy St. John .of Beaucaire will sma: a mass in the church of ^•1} i:q ;>■-' -■■';■. -.' . ■ ..■■■■■: i . : - ;---;-r ,a:.'l>jJ;fn Paraclete, for the soul of the lady Isabelle of r .Courtenaye, who was murdered on her b'ricial niffht by a hand unknown;—but'not," he added, " unsuspected." , . ' The, abbess Eloise sat silent and horroi;- ('njb i; i!J.!): -.....=■■■"•■ :••■• :--.i'ii;.s -ki i ; struck at .the tidings. " Where was the bridegroom,? ' she said at length. The monk crossed himself, and shuddered.—" Her ,un- /tfrjJli i-ri:v ; v.j-.-: ■ ■.-•v.-.-.. ^->-v cle— r ner .kinsmen—her wooers
.Off.!]
,-ier .kinsmen—her wooers?" repeated UUi.1 rrii!- '- n "; ; ' ; '- :: ' ■■'■:■;■'. : -:rt .l>-r:'.v!'fvi!7!.'" Jbilo^e. The monk prepared,to answer; and as he stood before the abbess, who was seated and had placed the lamp far behind her, •/llj ?!>'■/ .•:'■■'■. •■ ■■■ ■. r •;• " -' .f: ; ;.:,'!■!!>•' so that, only her features and . form ' were visible in dark profile, while the hght fell full piV the pale features, naked feet, and withered hands of the ascetic, which were clasped on the" staff he leant .on—the dark drapery that slirbuded his form, all invisible in'that aim light—they appeared to Genevieve like a p 5
being from the world of spirits, disclosing its secrets 10 a summoning prophetess. " The dark and bloody house of Courtenaye," he » said, " hath achieved its dark and bloody destiny :—its wars and wrongs and ravages have met their fearful consummation. Thou knowest, reverend mother, the crimes of that house of blood, and thou mayest, perchance, have heard the dark prophecy of that Marie de Mortemar, who had undergone such wrong from them and their brothers in arms, as Christian land never witnessed, and Christian tongue cannot utter."—" I have heard report," said the abbess, " that the fiery arrow should pierce through the towers of Courtenaye, but I knew not, or regarded the import of these dark words."—" They have been fulfilled," said the monk. " The arrow hath prostrated the castle to its foun¬ dation-stone. There was not a noble maid in all France wooed far and near like the lady of Courtenaye: but she rejected all in the pride of her beauty, till among the Crusaders there arrived at her castle a stranger, whom
"glante. No one knew his birth, his Idndred, or descent; but there went a hushed and \ mysterious whisper through the castle that he was 1 that visionary being—that spectre bridegroom, who came to fulfil the fearful prophecy. If he were such, never did Satan, since his fall, clothe himself more like an angel of Hght. I need not teU thee of the glorious beauty of that faultless form," he said; " such image should never visit the fancy of a holy recluse."—" Thou needest not," said the ab¬ bess ; then averting her head, she murmured, —" Such vision too oft haunts her dreams."— " There was somewhat superhuman," said the monk, " not only in his form, but in his deeds.—With more than mortal might he confronted the Count de Montfort in the Hsts in rescue of the lady IsabeUe's lands and person from the claim of King PhiHp—with more than mortal might he contended in that fierce and fruitless battle which the crusading knights fought with the army of the Count of - Toulouse, at the mad instigation of Simon de Montfort—with more than mortal arm did he strive with the bold outlaw named L'Aigle
silHa'Roehel ,;j The attendants of the lady said'that an uneaillily figure aided him there and struck a' dagger into the outlaw's heart. How*it chanced I cannot tell: the tale wa^> rife in the mouths of the vassals when the. lady returned in safety; and she would prove* her love to*him who had saved her from bdthj and would wed him and make him. lord- of, her wide lands and countless dower.- The, Lftrd'of Courtenaye consented. I joined their hands, but I swear to thee, reverend mother* as I uttered the holy words of the sacrament of-marriage, I deemed that I joined the-hand o~f a marble statue to that of the bride; and never from statue or portrait glared - eyes -so fixed and lifeless as those of Sir Paladour. And, on the bridal night, when some late revellers still loitered in the hall, there' was heard,a cry like that once heard in Egypt on her night of doom. At the voice of that cry the revellers started from their feast, and hasted to the nuptial chamber ; but death had, been already there—the bride lay a corse on the bridal bed, her bosom streaming with blood. Xo mortal weapon was in that chamber of
death. The bridegroom had departed, ,and ere the cry of horror had 'well ceased, ^cries louder and louder issued from a lower, apart¬ ment, from the closed door of which flames < and shrieks came bursting forth together. We hastened thither, and there was, a scene such as never was wrought by those profane i players in their painted passions and ; tragical horrors. Smoke and sparks issued Urom the door/of the chamber, and its wretchedj in-- mate 1 was shrieking that he burned!—lie burned!—it was known on what. task , he was »employed; and that those who imiy not be named within these walls were his associates in his unutterable work. The door, was fast—the key lost—men wrought with axe and crow, and the roof and ceiling was broken up, and water poured on the flames ; but below as the waters hissed and sunk on the .embers of the burning chamber, mine eyes beheld all the awful implements of that dread and accursed work—the inverted cross, the seething cauldron, the triangular stone with its ghastly central gleam, , magic- wrought, and magic-bright, and blazing, 'mid
all that conflagration: the abused relics of the dead, skuU and bone disposed in mockery, flames of every colour, and the horrid crisped lumps of ashes, which had been but a few mo¬ ments past the agents in that work. Whether the flames that consumed them burst from the unholy ingredients of then* employ, or were kindled by the dark and fiery spirits who are mantled in them in their unfathom¬ able dweUings of torment and of flame, it were alike impossible to teU and fearful to conjecture." The monk paused; he dared not teU that he himself had seen a hellish form spring from beneath, seize the Lord of Courtenaye, and plunge him yelling amid the flames that closed round them both for ever. At the end of this awful communication, the abbess, the monk, • and Genevieve, re¬ mained in deep silence. There is a species of hoiTor attached to certain narratives, which, while it repels beHcf. forces convic¬ tion. In such divided state of mind, though from various causes, sat the party for one fearful and silent hour. " Holy monk," said
the abbess, at length breaking silence, " wilt thou not partake of such humble refectioni as our cloister can offer?"—" I have tasted bread and water thrice this day," said the pale ascetic skeleton; " more than enough for a mortal frame, that would not be bowed down by carnal heaviness and panrpered sloth. The spirit's burthen is enough;, let us not add to it the weight of earthly indul¬ gence to damp the pinion, whose overbur- thened flight will never soar heaven-ward." —" There may be a heavier burthen on its wings," sighed the abbess, as the monk re¬ tired to pace his way to the monastery of Beaucaire. " Now part we," she said to Genevieve.—" Nay, let me watch with thee, reverend lady," said Genevieve; " though I must not mingle prayer with thee, per¬ chance mine aspirations may not pollute the incense of the sacrifice?"—" It may not be so," said Eloise. " Order must be taken in the convent for the celebration of this bridal hymn—this sepulchral dirge, I would say. Alas!" she added, raising her eyes with an expression of wUd and profound melancholy,
" how many wanderine thoughts beset me!'' -m'f! .^ani'i .:S>I/)J'.' 'Vt-lP. . : ; ; a ;; -,;; .,.■;.! wi... —tlien suddenly, as talking; to herself, " She died blessedly by the hand of him she loved, -r-a single, deep-dealt blow.-T-Shb had, not to^linger for the,heart-gnawing, cold, slow, sedentary murderer, Grief." "'.'.] .As she spoke, she summoned a lay- sister, to give order for the ceremony of :.>r! : iu:.'9l'i ^^,- :,,<■■ ..■>';;■-:■■.: ;.■.■.■ ;■• v;;7. y ; Jh the niffht, and Genevieve retired to her ufnVAyP->Vi.:;r- ./• ' . ;-■■■ ;■■■.■-■. '-;'-- £. in cell. She felt her need of profound rest to .prepare her for her early setting, forth with ,. the queen on her journey, but she knew not that, an exhausted frame and "ah' ly-yiynp-j ..:, # :s.,-' -.\ = .,..:,'> :.■• . ~i^^\> U:<\ excited mind are the most inveterate foes to ..W0iJ.U( <:,j l -'i-^y-- i', '':,•■.'■. ■..-... .■.■- .!.-:<,? ;kLI that rest which both require. She prayed i)OLl-j£:Sl ;■■;::} ii : ." :>.^..\' r -!.■ : . --i i.-^v/f .■*/.« ^rtrj fervently, and slept soon, but not without seeing, amid her devotions, and even after she had closed her eyes, the pale form of the victim-bride in every corner of her narrow •■)fici ..'•••'';'-. 1 L" J ':;. >•' ^'•■' ' ■•';'■■ ^"' i'i'-i> ?'A chamber. The visions that thus disturbed her, wakme; thoughts held increased power over her slumbers, and in her dreams' she r.i. b'jifjrr.rr.!..!;.-.' ;.>/.■-:>! -.*.*. ^ * t ~.- -: ■■■"-■jvs+Yi/iK.-'i thought ( she was traversing a dark . and dreary mountain-path, at the extremity of which a hght was twinkling. 11ns melan¬ choly reminiscence of her former existence
seemed like a renewal of it, and she wept as she had done in her infant wanderings, wea¬ riness, and peril. Suddenly she was alone— all her companions appeared to have left her. She dreamed that she approached tlie light alone—it gleamed from a hole in a'hovel.' She asked for admittance, and a hoarse voice answered, " We are watching our dead." She was at last admitted, and saw the corse of a man extended on a bed, and a woman' watching beside it, whose face was concealed. In a short time the woman retired, and 'the corse rose upright, not at once, or suddenly, but slowly and dehberately. It rose, quitted 1 the bed, and beckoned Genevieve to follow. She followed in her dream, till they reached a church-yard, where the ghastly figure beckoned her onwards; she shuddered, and retreated ; at that moment, he half unfoldeij his shroud, as if in token of invitation. She retreated faster; and the scene suddenly changed to a splendid hall, such as her late conversations with the queen had painted in vivid colours on her imagination. The board was spread with dainties, and surrounded tiy
-nobles'and beauties gorgeously attired;;; At •theShead iof the > board sat, Sir Amirald, and beside him'Awas = placed an empty chair. He looked <pale and abstracted; but in a moment, as jhe beheld- Genevieve, his features were -'flushed-with the glow of passion and'joy, r and-he5Sprang -forward to lead> her to /the ■ vacant ^eat.---At that moment j her late feiir- Mcompanion appeared close by her sidej-and seized her hand; exclaiming, " Since f youi will -ttotfcomevto meet me, I have come;toimeet i: ydu.^~-As thei vision spoke, the shroud ^dis¬ appeared from its form and features, i and ;she ^beheld'the corse, for so it seemed, of Amand. ^The-tbuchofhis hand at first seemed to burn -ilifce fire—then it became colder than ricei-- >She ; shrieked and awoke. It was' llot for -some time that she recovered her recoUec- " tion, and when she did, the objects by >vhich Ishe was surrounded made her almost doubt the; evidence of her senses. She foundi her¬ self in?an apartment of the convent: lai'ger 'than ^she : had yet beheld ; > some rude j figures 'df- 1 stone/: ranged in; niches along the walls, ' and'>some-'stiU> ruder ^attempts at ornament
in the roof, were dimly descried by the ; light of two torches of black wax, that burned be¬ fore a painting obscure and hardly-seen; .-op¬ posite to her was a hearse, with small black banners at each corner, and covered with a pall of black, on which was wrought a silver crucifix. Her eyes at length rested on .an altar, from which the usual decorations^ of flowers, vases, and embroidery were removed, and which displayed only a crucifix of* woodas black as ebony. After gazing long on -these objects; her perceptions begaj\ to return, ,<and •she comprehended her situation. She was dn the church of the Paraclete, furnished >ds •it was for the masses to be said for the soul of*the lady Isabelle; and she at. once icori- ceived that she must have wandered there in her sleep, a habit which the broken and fearful slumbers of her childhood had in¬ duced, and which had probably been renew¬ ed by the terror and intensity of the images that' had troubled her dreams that j. night. She arose, and looked round.her*, but,<no longer with terror. A profound melancholy, mingled with grief and awe, pervaded;her
heart as she beheld these memorials of faded loveHness and prostrate pride. From the conversation of Eloise and the monk she bad learned, that the " lady of the cave," whom she encountered in her sofitary wan¬ derings,/ and whose beauty and splen¬ did garb had, amid such a scene, made her appear Hke a queen of Faerie, was that lady IsabeUe, v> hose surpassing beauty she had beheld—whose obsequies she how witnessed. " And art thou she ? " Gene¬ vieve exclaimed,—" art thou she who didst pass aU the daughters of men in beauty; who sattest in thy pride of life so far above ine 1 , that I deemed it almost an insult to grasp thy garments hem; yet to-night I might,'un- chidden, touch thy shroud ? Oh' how glori¬ ous wast thou in thy loveHness ! Yet thou liast perished; and I love to linger on the image of what thou wast—so beautiful, proud, and yet gentle:—there \\ as a trembfing loveHness about thee in thy haughtiest me-6ci and* moment; and when thou seemedst to .offer protection to me, it was as if th6u seemedst to suppHeate for thy c elf." J Her eye's
again were fastened on the- hearse withes banners and blazon. , She* ishuddered ^and murmured—" And what avails this>pageantry of death? and oh, what availed tlie pageantry of<thy bridal, when nobles heldi thy- rein <and their daughters bore thy train?:*. Andnthait being, not of this world, flashing the Hght of his, demon-eyes on thee, and fixing in thy bosom the fangs of murder !" .. / ! >,;i ir>o Vi ^he,cast back one involuntary., glance on t^c.hearse as she retired—a spectacles was thej.'e that nailed her to the spot where /she sjipQc^ and froze the blood in her veins.'~-The figure,pf the departed stood-by the hearse, in f form, stature, attitude as in-life;* but not in, hue ( or f expression resembling aughfcthatds nijOrtal :--rit was folded in a shroud:—rwhat seemed-, its arms were clasped; across -'its t>osom; and, though the face was visible, £he colourless aid moveless features broughtito the memory of Genevieve such recollection, of ^he, fi living as her image wrought in marble ,would. , Beauty was ■ there; but it ,< was t a ^eauty, "not f of this world"—-the^eyes aldne"^ seemed, j gleaming«with intense and isuperna-
tural ■ light; but they appeared fixed like lamps in sockets of stone. So she stood, pale in immoirtal beauty—blending the associations of divided worlds, bearing the character of all that is sad in the present, all that is awful' in the future. Genevieve's first impulse was to fly : but her feet seemed rooted like those of the apparition ; and she stood struggling but unable to move, as sufferers feel under the influence of the night-mare. Then came slowly on her that unutterable sensation which those feel who believe themselves in the presence of an inhabitant of the other world—a sensation which almost assimilates them to the awful being on whom rhey gaze, in rigidity, coldness, and immobility. The hair of her flesh stood up— every pore tingled with distinct vitality—her eyes became, to her own perception, glazed, though she re¬ tained the full power of vision ; the next mo¬ ment they were dilated beyond her power of closing them; the figure appeared expanding in dimensions and advancing cm her. The murmur that at first crept through her cold eai*, increased to the rushing; of many wa-
ters—the air became tremulous with a purple light; her abortive attempt to shriek felt like hands grasping her throat. The paroxysm of horror suspended her faculties—her whole body contracted, and she fell senseless.on the pavement. , , .
i i END OF THE THIRD VOLUME. , }
LONDON: 1'KIMH) Ji\ h. AM) U. HtNTUA', DOnSKl STHCLT.
