Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The albigenses: a romance
THE ALBIGENSES.
CHAPTER I. Oh, ransom, ransom, do not hide mine eyes. Shakspeare. We have told in a preceding chapter, if the reader should happen to remember it, that Sir Amirald on hearing the cries of a female hastened to her rescue. The knight and his steed were indeed wearied wander¬ ing among the hiUs without shelter or food, when they appeared suddenly stirred at the summons, as if the high impulses of chivalry operated simultaneously on both, the knight applying his spurs, and the steed quickening his pace at the signal, ex¬ haustion and weariness forgotten at the appeal. VOL. II. B
To understand the cause of the knight's career, Avhich he pursued at fuU gaUop among the rocky defiles at the risk of his Ufe, Ave must retrograde a feAv steps, and return to the scene that passed in the cave of the Albigeois on the night Ave have before described. Genevieve had sat supporting her grandfather's head on her knees, after carefuUy spreading under his chilled Umbs her mantle of AvooUen cloth, and gazed on a fissure of the cavern through Avhich the moonlight streamed, and felt as she gazed the deep Avish to solemnize her feeUngs, and abstract them if possible from anxious and troubled Aiews of her earthly destination— the soUcitudes for that " frail and feverish being," Avhich though forced on her by ne¬ cessity, her pure heart felt it Uke a crime to dweU on in her hours of lonely reflection. The preceding scene had touched her mUd but acute perceptions deeply. " And here," she said to herself, "even here, Avhere a number of persecuted beings are assembled
together to worship God,—even here dis¬ sension and discord are reigning; and those who are weak against the strong are making themselves weaker by division amongst them¬ selves !" She mused, then turning to that' holy beam which glowed brightly on fragment and fissure, and tinted even the small crags and any foliage with a sdvery and visionary light, she murmured, " Oh that I had wings Uke a dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest!"—" Genevieve, Genevieve," whispered a voice at this moment, low but audible. She Ustened, but perceived not from w r hence it came. The sound was re¬ peated, and a figure like that she had first seen passed before the aperture, dimming the moonlight as it crossed its beams, and a voice again caUed on the name of Genevieve. She remembered the ghastly figure which had visibly crossed the entrance of the cavern that disastrous night, and she heard the voice again whisper, " Genevieve." She Ustened b2
"with a feeUng that wandered between vision and reality; her imagination took part Avith her senses, enfeebled by famine and fatigue —she saw aU objects falsely, and exaggerated as through a mist: she half beheved it might be an intimation from no earthly voice, and gently laying the head of the pastor on her folded mantle, and rising Avith cramped and shivering Umbs, she tried to gain the entrance of the cavern. It was a venturous progress among those Avho slept, and whom she feared to aAvake, more than to disobey the impulse under Avhich she advanced. Her gentle steps trod among men sunk in suUen but stdl Avatchful slumber, who murcnured the Avar-Avord in their dreams, and Avho at the lightest sound that reached their sleeping senses Avould have started to.arms or to prayer: she trod still more gently, her fairy foot scarce touching earth, when she approached where mothers lay with their infants— them she most feared to disturb. Her light step, her slender form,
her quiet soUcitudc, won her way for her unnoticed and unmolested; she reached the entrance of the cavern, and a human figure covered with blood stood there to greet her. She shrunk back for a moment, then clasping her hands over her eyes, stood to listen with that deep habitual feeling of self-possession vvhich early misfortune had taught her. " Yon know nie not, then," said the figure bathed in blood, " you know me not." It was the voice of Amand, the young Albigeois, who had always been deemed timid even to coward¬ ice, who had never wielded a club, or joined the sorties of the young peasants in the course of his life before. Mild, indolent, and con¬ templative, he had attended with reverence the assemblies of the Albigeois, and listened with profound attention to the exhortations of the Barbes; but neither the devout nor the warlike of the community seemed to consider hiin worthy of farther notice, than for the former to wonder that one so reve¬ rent and attentive had never aspired to give
"the Avord of exhortation," and the latter to remark his increasing stature, and marvel that he never wielded "the SAvord of the Lord against the mighty:"—the men thought of him as nothing, and the women as w r orse than nothing. " And is it thus I see thee, and none but thee ?"—" Thou wouldst, then, have seen other than ""me ?" said. Amand, Avith a peculiar expression; " yet for thy sake am I thus. I Avas deemed a coAvard—I have proved I am not: behold I am covered Avith blood!" " I never thought—" said Genevieve, not knoAving Avhat to say ; " but to see thee thus covered Avith blood is horrid to mine eyes : we have Avandered, Avept, and prayed toge¬ ther—and I knoAv not Iioav this new aspect of thine in Avar terrifies me. Was it thou I beheld to-night, as thou didst darkly seem to cross the entrance of the cavern ?"— He Avas sUent: "And Avhy didst thou dis¬ appear on the instant?" " I shrunk Aviien I beheld thee, Genevieve : I had madly hoped to die in thy sight, but,
Avhcn I saAV thee, the love of Hfe stirred in me again." "But Avhy art thou here so late, and Avherefore here at aU ?" said Genevieve. "Thy Avounds need tending, and thou hast nought of hope or comfort to teU."—" If my Avounds lack tendance, I ask thee not to be my leech," said Amand impatiently: " if I have nought of hope or comfort to tell, I have that to teU Avhich is of import to thee— if I have breath to utter it. Thy beauty, Genevieve ------" "Mine!" exclaimed the startled girl, shrinking as from the charge of crime, " mine! and is this the moment thou hast chosen for topic so Hght and vain ?" " FareAveU, fareAveU," said Amand, rushing from her; "thou art displeased Avith me; but I shall perish to-morrow, and let that be remembered as a palliation, if my Avords have offended thee this night." " Nay stay, Amand, stay, I pray thee," said the trembling girl, "and tell me, I
charge thee by our common creed, if I have aught to dread, exceeding the trials my peo¬ ple are exposed to." " Thou wishest then to hear of the fame of thy beauty, while thou affectest to shrink from its mention," said Amand, with an expression which was but too weU suited to his harsh but marked and expressive fea¬ tures : "then hear. AATien we encountered with those children of the Anakim, for such they seemed in stature, force, and power— with the sons of Belial, for such they are, luxurious and loose—when they cut us down like the grass of the field, and trampled on us as the peasant treads on the weeds of his path—what was the war-cry of one ?—' Saint Genevieve of the Albigeois f '—Oh, Gene¬ vieve, we have been children together— we have been nurtured in the same fiith, and trod the mountain, and breathed the breeze, and sung and prayed, and smiled and wept together—oh, pledge me then thy faith, Genevieve, that (if it so should chance)
the fame and praise of thy fair beauty, the courtly talk of goodly and gallant knights, and, above all, the profane and flattering gallantry of him men caU the Abbot of Nor¬ moutier, wiU not, Avill not, turn thine heart, or thy faith, or thy brain." "Is thy brain turned," said the maiden, "that thou askest such question? What know I of thy knights and thine abbot ? and which of those sons of pride would deign a glance to the peasant maiden ?" "Oh, Genevieve!" said the youth, Avith agonizing earnestness, "thou knoAvest not what thou sayest: they might not descend to persuade; but (his voice became not louder, but more intense and emphatic iii its tones) thy youth, thy innocence, thy elo¬ quence, heaven-taught, and uttered in tones that breathe of Heaven, Avould vainly plead against that enemy thou ever bearest about thee." " Is it mine evd heart of unbelief?" said Genevieve. " What other enemy have I ?" B 5
" I speak of thy beauty," said Amand: " that is thine enemy—thy sole, thy worst; for which of the daughters of men can vie with thee in beauty, and who woidd be a more acceptable prize and prey to the ruth¬ less knights and Ucentious churchmen who caU themselves Crusaders ?" The unhappy girl stood confounded at this intimation of a danger, to w r hich her uncon¬ sciousness of or indifference to her own ex¬ terior, combined perhaps with the hourly exi¬ gencies of a life of peril and suffering, had hitherto rendered her insensible. She stood silent for some time; and then raising her eyes, fixed them on Amand with an expres¬ sion of appeal the most piteous and piercing. " Yes," said her companion, answering her looks, " I came to shew thee at once thy danger and thy safety:—there is a retreat.—" He was much agitated, and his voice be¬ came inarticulate. fC But wherefore,'* said Genevieve, gazing timidly around her on scenery she beheld for
the first time—" wherefore hast thou led me so far from the cave ?" " It was lest we might disturb the sleep- el's," said Amand. " I wiU go no farther," answered she: " speak what thou hast to teU here, or ra¬ ther let me return to my retreat and hear it there." " Thy father Ues stretched near the en¬ trance, and thou knowest the lightest whis¬ per were enough to break his slumbers," re¬ plied Amand. Genevieve paused, prepared to Usten, but resolved not to advance; and he described in a confused manner a retreat among the hills that surrounded them, known only to himself, and tenanted by an Albigeois family, who Uved in unmolested tranquility, practis¬ ing their worship unsuspected, amid soHtudes unviolated by the cruelty, unknown even by the jealousy, of persecution. " And thither I wiU bear thee ere dawn," he continued, speaking rapidly; " and let priest, or peer, or
12 THE ALBIGENSES. fiend in league with them, trace thee if he can." There was sometliing pictorial, hoUow, and fallacious in the style of his description that had more than once struck Genevieve in the course of it, rapidly as it was deUvered. She suppressed her doubt, however; but hastened to terminate their conference, " Thine offer is vain," she said: " I accept of no retreat that does not also shelter my father;" and she turned towards the cavern. " Thou shalt not choose'" said Amand, fiercely: " thinkest thou I came hither to taUc? In the depths of the wild woods, in the caves of the mountains, in the clifts of the rocks, woidd I rather see thee stretched at my side and perishing with 'famine, than behold thee the paramour of a glorious Crusader. Amid the mountains thou wast born, and amid the mountains, please Heaven! thou shalt perish, though such is not thy wish." As he spake, he had raised her in his arms and carried her to some distance.
Genevieve struggled gently for a time, scarce beUeving such violence was intended her; at length she made her strongest effort, and attempted, but vainly, to extricate her- SPlf. " AVhy didst thou not suffer me to depart?" cried Amand, overcoming her struggles: " why didst thou not suffer me to flee, when I woidd have done so ? My conscience smote me—I fled; but thy voice recaUed me, and thou must abide the result of thine own wild will." Genevieve struggled more vehemently, and with increased terror; but her strength was no match for that of Amand, who, though timid and feeble, displayed on this occasion a force with which female strength con¬ tended in vain. He had borne her up a rocky steep, and, scarce drawing breath, was preparing to ascend another, when from behind a projecting angle of the rocky path two men suddenly started forth, part of their armed figures gleaming in the setting
moonlight, and part sliroiided by their dark houplands. AAlthout speaking a word, they struck Amand to the earth; and then seizing on Genevieve, they enfolded her in one of their long dark cloaks, and attempted to stifle her cries by drawing it closely round her whUe they bore her on between them. There was no need for the attempt—her terror suppressed aU outcry; and it was not tiU they had borae her to some distance, that she coUected the feeble force of her suppress¬ ed voice to implore for mercy. " Mercy!" said one of the captors; " what mercy de- servest thou, who canst not pay a Uard for thy ransom, and has cost us more tod than if we w r ere to bear a nun from a cloister?" —" BefaU what may," said the other, " she will be no unacceptable prize to one of the Crusaders who are feasting at the Castle of Courtenaye." At these words Genevieve uttered a shriek so loudly that her companions, with¬ out mercy or hesitation, threatened to stifle
it by the most ruthless means if she dared to utter it again. The cry, however, had reached other ears. As Genevieve was hurried on, half-stifled, half-dead with terror, she heard distinctly a voice (though its feminine tones seemed to give but Uttle hope of defence) exclaim, " Hold, caitiffs! miscreants! whither are ye bearing that burthen betAA'-een ye?"— " It is a corse Ave are. bearing to be in¬ terred, the due rites being first said over it by the Abbot of Normoutier," quoth one of the bearers.—" It is a prede taken from the heretics, Avhich we want the blessing of some holy man to consecrate to the use of Holy Church," said the other: and as they spoke both in the same breath, and in the same moment, the stranger, Avhoever he was, had no hesitation in beUeving both accounts false. " Mercy ! for the love of Heaven," exclaim¬ ed Genevieve, in a struggling and stifled voice, Avhich, faint as it was, seemed to thriU
through the ears of her champion by the answer he made on the instant. "Is it a corse ye bear ? set it down on the spot, or, by Mary's might, that abbot ye name wiU have to sing a mass over your hilding corses, instead of that ye pretend to bear." The men returned no answer; but the next moment Genevieve (whom her captors had flung on the ground) heard blows dealt about so heavily and heartily, that she scarce could beUeve they were bestowed by an arm that appertained to one whose voice was so soft and feminine. Those blows, so lustily dealt, decided the point in less than two minutes; but ere those had elapsed, Genevieve, though stunned by the shock and fall, had- disentangled herself from the folds of the houpland, and tried to gaze around; and by the light of the stars (more vivid than moonUght in other regions,) she beheld the slender figure of a youth contending, and not in vain, with two muscular ruffians. He was - armed, and his antagonists soon betook them-
selves to flight, exclaiming it was sooth that the devil always helped his friends, nor could they hope better meed for dealing with a heretic Albigeoise. Genevieve rose from the earth, on which she had sunk in gratitude, and stood before her young preserver without the power of speech. He had, indeed, saved her from the outrage of ruffians; but she knew the habits of that lawiess age too w r eU to deern her danger less in the hands of a youthful knight, gene¬ rous and valiant as he had proved himself in her cause. Through her instinctive sense of her danger, quickened by the hints of Amand, as well as by her late peril, she folded her man¬ tle about her, so as to shroud both her face and person, and stood trembling in irresolute and ungracious silence. Her champion seemed as embarrassed as herself; he was fatigued by the struggle, and he mused how he might address a shape so silent, and apparently unconscious of the service he had just rendered her.
" Is it indeed a corse that I have rescued ?" said he, at length approaching her; and his young and gentle tones inspmng her with confidence, she ventured to answer, " It is one who woidd ere this have wished she were a corse, were it not for thy valour, sir knight." ** Fair saint," said the youth, addressing her in the strain of the age—" fair saint, draw the curtain of thy shrine, that I may see and worship." " Your devotion, sir knight, would be ill bestowed," said Genevieve, timidly. " By the favour of our Lady, I have saved thee from some danger," said the youth; " and may I not be guerdoned by a glimpse of thy fair form, a glance of thine eye, a touch of thine hand, or perchance of thy red lip, in requital ?" Genevieve felt her danger equal at least to her obligation ; but she took her resolution in a moment. " Yes, with all, sir knight," she answered,
unfolding her mantle ; " and with more than all—for here are not only eye, and hand, and Hp; but fame and honour, body's safety, and soul's price, entrusted to thee. I am a pea¬ sant maiden, an Albigeoise: the child of those against whom thy faith and thine arms are pointed aUke; for weU I guess thou art a Crusader. I am in thy power; but feel, therefore, that as thou art noble, I am safe." There was a trembUng majesty in her form and accents as she spake, an appeal ivithout poAver, a fear that commanded, that made her 3 r oung preserver feel all that can melt and agitate a youthful heart, whose chords for the first time vibrate to the de¬ licious touch of a claim for pity and pro¬ tection. Yet, comparing her voice and man¬ ner Avith the purport of her Avords, the young Crusader could scarce conquer his incredulity. " And is this the daughter of an heretic and peasant?" he said; *' yet her tones have no smatch of her birth, nor do her reasons lack
aught of w r hat clear and noble spirits might utter in hap like hers:—Damsel," he added, " thou art safe with me; he Avho perilled life for thy safety Avould not lightly endan¬ ger that wiiich thou nobly valuest more than life, and wiiich he who has saved it prizes above his OAvn." And this Avas spoken with the eloquent blush and earnest grace of truth; so that Genevieve, sinking with fatigue and agitated feelings, no longer decUned the suji- port of the arm which he tendered with as high courtesy as ever he had to titled beauty. *•' Thou an trembUng, damsel," said Amirald, with anxious gentleness.—" I tremble, but my fears are not for myself," answered the maiden.—" Thou art near one of the wretched retreats of my persecuted people, and should they find thee here------" " Would they not be grateful for thy safety at least ?" said the knight.—" I cannot answer for their grati¬ tude ; but I can avcU answer for thy danger," said the maiden.—" Leave me, I pray thee: thy noble life is perilled while thou tarcyest;
leave me to wander back alone." " Not at the peril of a thousand Uves, were they mine," cried Amirald, as he marked the faltering step and sinking voice of Genevieve; and Ufting her on his steed, he led her gently on in the direction her parting steps had indicated. In the effort, the wounds, till then unfelt, that he had received in his conflict with the ruffians, burst forth, and the blood gushed through his armour. " I will perish, I will perish on this spot," cried Genevieve, " or I will wander back as I may, ere I witness such a sight again. Oh that I might," she cried, the habitual reverence for rank overcoming her other feeUngs, as one whose community was at war with the established state of society— (i Oh that I might with mine own hands heal those wounds, and wash them with my tears, and tend thern by the hour, while stooping frame and bended knee, care and prayer, watched over the work. Oh that I
were but worthy to be thy handmaid, noble knight!" Touched more deeply by the mellow and melting tenderness of the peasant maiden's voice, than by his own sense of actual pain, the young knight once more attempted to raise her in his arms. Genevieve resisted, but in vain, and was at length compelled to submit to accept his assistance. AVhile Ami- raid sustained her slender weight, and while she endured to be so sustained, each murnuu> ed to themselves—Amirald perhaps audibly, " Is there, then, such noble and gentle affection in an Albigeoise, such lofty thought, combined with language so gentle?"—and Genevieve internally, " and is there such honour in a Cmsader, that he risks life for the safety of a despised daughter of my people ?" They had not advanced far, when a certam whistle was heard, accompanied by watch-words, or rather signals, to which the ears of Genevieve were well accustomed. " Depart," cried Genevieve eagerly; " I hear
the feet of my people approaching—they are, perchance, in quest of me."—" I wiU depart," said Amirald, bending his proud knee to the earth, while he kissed the hand of his lovely burthen. " I wiU depart, maiden, though I know not where this night to couch my head; but rather would I deal with a host of ruffians Uke those who seized thee, than touch a hair of the head of thy people who seek thee and who love thee. Maiden, under no Crusader's corslet beats an heart so fuU of pity towards an heretic as mine to thee. Oh that thou wert a daughter ofthe true Church! what then would be lacking to thy glorious quaUties and gentle haviour ?" He parted:—" Oh," cried Genevieve, " that thou wert an Albigeois—■ but for their bonds I" 'The restless agony of Pierre, who had felt his daughter's absence on awaking from his broken slumber, had caused some of them to set forth at whatever risk in pursuit of her. By them she was found, and the joy of meet¬ ing forbade aU enquiry with regard to her
short absence; or, perhaps, the habits ofthe Albigeois, accustomed to strong vicissitudes, anticipated all enquiries hy the consciousness that another might occur before the cause of the preceding one could be explained.
CHAPTER II. Here Presbyter}' with Episcopacy Holds such a fight it would amaze you. Here free-will holds a fierce dispute With reprobation absolute. Anonvmous. The Crusaders hourly now expected the return of the Monk of Montcalm with the answer of the Albigeois, and the bishop proudly anticipated another triumph of that eloquence which had hitherto been deemed irresistible;—aheady he saw in perspective the reputation of St. Dominic himself, the first preacher and inquisitor, shrinking into insignificance, and the memory of the ill-fated Chateauneuf compromised in the glory of that powerful appeal that was to convert the Al¬ bigeois to the Catholic creed, and place a new gem in his expected tiara. vol. ir. c
It was certainly a rare and perilous policy on the part of the Church of Rome, to commit men who, however individually powerful in intellect, and possessed of all the learning of that age, relied for the effect of their sermons rather on prescription, than on the interest of novelty, the cogency of argument, or, perhaps, the omnipotence of truth—with men who drew their credentials from Scripture, and urged them with an energy, feeling, and con¬ viction, " as having authority." The preachers of the former class (now for the first time urged to exertion in that important depart¬ ment) seemed to offer to their thirsty hearers stinted draughts from a medicated cup ; the latter pointed with the air and voice of in¬ spiration to the " integrosfontes:" they shouted aloud, " Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." Such, however, had been the mode adopted (and perhaps no better presented itself then) on the first disastrous mission of Pierre de Chateauneuf, partly from the pride of power,
Avhich Avoidd not be outdone in the novel mode of competition adopted by the anta¬ gonist, and partly from the consciousness of superior inteUectual attainment (then con¬ ceived to be the exclusive property of the ecclesiastics, though in truth it Avas but thinly and inadequately diffused among their Jvast body). ! But the Church of Rome, then in tlie plenitude of her poAver, could not, or Avould not, admit the conviction, that the supre¬ macy of her establishment rooted, even at that remote period, for ages, and supported, aided, and embeUished by aU that Avas tlien 'powerful in human eloquence, profound in human learning, exciting in human interests, and touching in human passions, could fail before the preaching of a few iUiterate pea- sants, Avho drew their theology from a for¬ bidden book, and their inspiration from Na¬ ture and from heaven; that the glorious galley—the " gaUant ship," Avhich had AA r ea- thered a thousand storms and assaults, Avas c2
to strike sail to a carvel, Avhen she Avas noAv safe and proud in harbour. The experiment, however, had faded, and the missionary Chateauneuf had been the victim. But the court of Rome had at pre¬ sent another object:—the grasping ambition of the Bishop of Toulouse, AA r hose heart, eye, and almost hand were already on the tiara, had not escaped their notice. His intrigues Avith the various sovereigns of Europe they had been apprised of, by the emissaries they employed at their courts; moreoA r er, his cor¬ respondence Avith the Emperor of Germany, and the Kings of Arragon and England, had been intercepted, and though the cypher in Avhich they were written baffled aU the in¬ genuity of the Vatican, Avith that of its most expert secretaries, stiU his peculiar hand was recognized; and the circumstance of such a correspondence existing Avas enough to aAvaken suspicions and apprehensions stUl more formidable. FinaUy, his putting him¬ self at the head of the Crusaders, next to
Count Simon de Montfort, seemed, in fact, to be putting himself in place of the Pope himself in France, whde the well-good under¬ standing, as it was termed in the language of that age, between him and the boisterous and brutal De Montfort, was considered as a kind of sinister omen, and strengthened the supposition that he might avail himself of his influence over his rude coadjutor to win his own secret way, and work his own powerful •wiU. It was, therefore, at this juncture that the court of Rome availed itself of its usual tem¬ porizing policy, and through the legate, who stood responsible for aU measures, employed as its commissioned mediator the Monk of Mont¬ calm, whose well-accredited sanctity of cha¬ racter and purity of Ufe stood between the rotten poUtics of the Vatican, and the vigorous and vital spirit that animated the community ofthe Albigeois—like the priest of old between the Uving and the dead—to negotiate between the contending parties. To the infinite dis-
appointment of the Pope and the conclave, they found they had selected a man the last on earth to be trusted with such a mission. They thought they had secured every point; the known sanctity of Jiis character rendered him a most respectable agent; the humUity of his station, and his spiritual-mindedness made him also an .unsuspected object to the Bishop of, Toulouse, who kneAV as well as any cardi¬ nal inthe conclave, that the Monk of Montcalm Avould not resign his hermitage for the tiara. Thus they imagined that they had provided a poAverful antagonist (for the sanctity of the poor monk far outAveighed the dignity of the prelate, even in the estimation of the most worldly,) under the guise of one apparently the most feeble and inefficient; and that aU their procrastinating poUcy (meant chiefly to diminish the power and mortify the ambition of the Bishop of Toulouse) might be laid safely on the shoulders of the legate, Avho, supporting his assumed and constrained part, affected a profound reverence for the sanctified
character and inspired counsels of the Monk of Montcalm. Thus the whole poUtics of the ecclesiastical world, (and poUtics were at that period al¬ most exclusively confined to ecclesiastics,) Uke an inverted cone, rested on a point, a dimi¬ nutive and almost invisible part of the mighty mass it sustained; but the wisdom of the Vatican was here completely outreached, even by the very simpUcity of the instrument it deigned to employ. - The man whom they justly deemed humble, abstracted, and unearthly, was, nevertheless, one who went head and heart straight for¬ ward to the truth and the right of whatever cause he was engaged in. Had they em¬ ployed the most profound diplomatist of the age, who was sworn in secret to confound or counteract their counsels, they could not have fared worse than they did from the instrument employed. An honest upright man is the worst implement that ever de¬ signing and corrupt hands meddled with, to work their foul and secret purpose.
The Monk of Montcalm was a strict and conscientious Catholic, but he had a Christian feeUng for the sufferings of the Albigeois; and " innocent of the knowledge " that he was played off as a pis (tiler in the desperate game that was fighting between the Vatican and the Bishop of Toulouse, he tra- veUed from Rome to the Castle of Courte¬ naye, and from thence to the neighbouring retreat of the Albigeois, from which, as we have related, he was now returning; grieved aUke by the pride of one party and the ob¬ stinacy of the other, but rejoiced that he hod at least effected one peaceful meeting be¬ tween them. Thus, his integrity of pur¬ pose, benevolence of heart, and true hea- venly-mindedness, (which was aU counted by the Vatican as weakness that would perplex and protract the negotiation ad libitum Papa,) instead of having the effect they had hoped from his imputed ignorance and diplomatic ■inefficiency, produced exactly the contrary effect of making the adverse parties under-
stand the terms on which they stood; and of effecting, by indefatigable activity and immaculate veracity, the arrangement of a meeting between the Crusaders and the Al¬ bigeois—a meeting within a few hours, which the council at Rome hoped might have heen delayed for as many months.—And thus the Monk of Montcalm proved all unconsciously the triumph of plain strong sense, profound religious feehng, and fervent intense philanthropy, over all the compli¬ cated counsels, jarring interests, and fiercely opposed passions of Rome and of those she employed, and dreaded and distrusted most when she found their agency most necessary. The Monk of Montcalm was expected to return on the day after the combat, (the storm of the preceding evening having, pro¬ bably, delayed his arrival then), for, though advanced in years, he was known to per¬ form his journeys with the punctuahty of a foot-post. All that day a cloud hung over the Castle of Courtenaye. The storm c 5
of the preceding night had passed aAvay, but dark vapours still rested on the hills, thick drops of rain beat heavUy against the case¬ ment, and blasts came roaring doAvn the Avide chimney, driving forth the blaze of the Avood-fire before it, that shrunk and failed again as it retired. The fierce excitement of the age kneAV no graduated intervals of quiet and useful occupation, between the extremes of gloomy sloth or perilous extremity. The guests Avere, therefore, iU-prepared for a day of duU and in-door tranquility. To add to its dulness, the lady Isabelle (perhaps to shun the sight of De Montfort) Avas engaged in the devotions she had promised to her patron- saint, if her champion Avas successful in the lists. During the day the knights and no¬ bles stalked through the vast haU, yawned heavily, played a game at draughts droAVsily, glanced at the high windows, which, though they admitted light, excluded all prospect, and, internally cursing the slow and doubtful counsels of the Vatican, made vows for the
speedy return of the Monk of Montcalm. Verac and SemonviUe, who were the only individuals in the Castle acquainted with the midnight visit of the others to the vault, assumed faces of importance vainly hiding in-epressible curiosity. They winked, nod¬ ded, and looked mysteriously at each other; but their curiosity Avas doomed to be both insatiable and unsated. They threw themselves eagerly in the Avay of those Avho, the preceding night, obeyed the summons of the Lord of Courtenaye, or rather their oavii Avild AviU and dark feeUngs, and Avhispered enquiries with aU the secrecy of anticipated confidence, but they could only obtain from Sir Paladour a brief, obscure, and agitated, reply. The rest Avere totaUy silent. No mode of questioning or hinting, direct or indirect, no circuitous approaches of Verac, or barefaced questions of Semonville, could extort more. The enquirers stood abashed, repelled, and defeated. Tlie Bishop of Toulouse (Avhom neither
dare accost) Avas playing chess with the Count de Montfort, and dictating between the moves to his Latin secretary, who was seated at a small table beside him, a letter to the Pope, (the contents of Avhich he had no fear of his antagonist, or, indeed, any other in the hall understanding.) ToAvards noon or someAvhat later, as they were about to spread for dinner, the bishop in the same breath cried "Checkmate," though De Montfort Avas reckoned the most skilful player of the age, dictated a few final lines in Latin to the secretary, concluded the letter with an hieroglyphic, written Avith his own hand, sealed it with his own proper signet, ordered the messenger, who re¬ ceived it on his knees, to ride for life, and rose to w r atch for the Monk of Montcalm, Avhose speed was delayed, as Ave have said, alike by his persisting to travel on foot, and by the storm of the preceding day. It was on the close of this weary day, that the monk, indeed, anived at the Castle of
Courtenaye. He bore tidings that the heretics were grateful for the legate's mes¬ sage, and accepted the offer of meeting the Crusaders and hearing the bishop's exhorta¬ tion, provided the party came unarmed. " Alas !" said the holy man, " Beziers and Carcassonne are stiU fresh in their memo¬ ries."—"And so is the martyr Chateauneuf in ours," said the bishop. The tables were now spreading for the feast, and the Crusaders, coUecting round them, anticipated joyously the three great epochs of chivalric life—a feast, a procession, and preaching (a novelty then to CathoUcs)—and perchance, highly as they deemed of the eloquence of the Bishop of Toulouse—a battle after all. Duiing the tumult of the haU, the monk was about to retire, when the bishop stayed him, after murmuring to himself, " Had I had emissaries among these heretics—had I sounded their shoals, for they have no depths, I sliould ere this—but no matter—I will ere long. There be men among them that may
be. tempted, there be women that may be melted. I wiU have those about me Avho AviU watch the bait most Ukely to catch, or the net best tAvined to entangle;—no, I avUI watch myself: some bright eye, some commanding feature, some tOAvering sta¬ ture among their women—that aviU be rare among peasants—that avUI not do; —then, some keen visage, eager face, loud tones, and prompt ambition of an unnoted spirit; yea, that Avere better to deal Avith. Your peasantry ever abound in those when their Avits are whetted on the touchstone of Scripture, as they caU it; and their usurped authority giveth them a kind of right of rading against the power they Avould be fain to share. If I should- meet, but tAvo such— a woman fair and ambitious, a man sensual. avaricious, or gluttonc i, a slave to those ap¬ petites they boast of subduing—then were the game as surely in my hand as if I Avere to encounter my lord De Montfort again at chess. Bishops, castles, and knights, were
vain against me—I Avould checkmate with my paAvns; but Ave must hold question Avith this Monk of Montcalm." The croAvd gave Avay as the bishop ad¬ vanced ; and it Avas a striking sight to mark the meeting between the magnificent prelate and the humble monk, who seemed like the embodied representatives of this world and the future. The pale ascetic moved timidly and slowly amid the splendid and tumultuous group ofthe Crusaders, (Avhose demeanour still breathed of Avar, though they Avore the dress of peace,) like an humble fishing-bark amid a fleet of proud and gilded gaUies, tacking every mo¬ ment, as if dreading to be sunk by then* move¬ ments, or crushed between their sides. Yet such, even in that rude age, Avas the impres¬ sion made by sanctity of manners, integrity of purpose, and benevolence of heart, that many a lofty head Avas bent to sue for his benediction; and many a proud breast, en¬ folded in silk and silver, panted for the peace
that was enshrined in a heart covered only by the sorry weeds of an eremite. When the Monk of Montcalm came in presence of the bishop, where he stood in the splendour of his episcopal vestments, sur¬ rounded bv attendants, and indeed with an air that woidd have given grandeur to the humblest state, he bow r ed low r as to superior station, but with undazzled eye, and meekly craved his blessing. " Holy monk, we rather ask your's," said the bishop, who never failed on due occasion to give his dignity the grace of condescension. The eremite stretched forth his withered hand as the bishop bowed his mitred front; and then the conference was about to com¬ mence. At the first sentence, ** Die La tine, qumo, frater reverendisaime," said the bi¬ shop. " c Nequeo, episcope sanctisxime," an¬ swered the monk with some diffidence. " Abmnt mi hi et facundia et facilitat." The bishop gave a signal to his attendants, who retired to a respectful distance.
The conference lasted but for a few mo¬ ments, for what had the speakers in common ? The monk told aU he knew—the bishop learned all he wished ; and the former, whose dim sight was aching with the splendour of lights and gorgeous pageantry, craved per¬ mission to withdraw to his shed in the base- court of the Castle, conformably to his vow, never to sleep but under the roof of monastic walls or of his own lonely tenement. The bishop looked after him for a space, and then triumphantly murmured, (for his greatest triumphs were, always internal) — " So, Rome hath enmeshed herself again in her own web; be it so. And so they thought that this poor ascetic would so per¬ plex and obscure their matters with the heretics, that they might daUy and delay at their list, and play King against Champion of the Church, and the Champion against the Bishop of Toulouse, as it suited their cold and temporizing policy; and now they are quitted as they deserve. This dolt-
headed monk hath gone straight-forward in the path of his office; the controversy is ad¬ justed in a twinkUng; and I, whom they dread (yes. I know they dread me," said the prelate, muttering stiU Jow T er, and compress¬ ing his Ups to conceal a proud involuntary smile,) "am, by their bungUng poUtics, the accredited mediator between two parties, of whom it were hard to say which hates me deadliest. By Heaven J had they intrusted their cause to me, I coidd have protracted it for twenty years, save that it were too long to wait for the tiara. I would have fought battles with them; and were they lost, I would have recourse to treaties; and if they were broken, I would have fought bat¬ tles again. No matter: they have wrought their own decay. To-morrow I must speak with these heretics, and let their mountain- echoes look to it; for though I envy not the martyrdom of that Chateauneuf, I will not leave a rock that shaU not thunder back eloquence louder and more potent than ever
he uttered, and force these heretics that love the mountains to caU on them to cover them, but to escape from its sound." " My lord museth," said one of the at¬ tendants, avIio, like the rest, was standing at a distance. The sound instantly struck the bishop's ear, Avhose senses Avere remarkably acute; and as the Lord of Courtenaye approached Avith courteous speech to unite him to the banquet, Avhich was noAV spread, he ansAvered Avith the coUected air of one on whom im¬ portant business presses:—"My lord, you knoAv that to-morroAV it is the Holy Father's AviU Ave encounter these heretics, not with Aveapons, but with words. I have need of many orisons to-night, to pray the Saints to enable me to, sustain the burthen the avUI of our Holy Father hath imposed on these poor shoulders. I crave an interest in your prayers, my good lord, though a layman's— and bid you a fair good rest this night." " A fair good rest, my holy lord," an-
sAvered De Courtenaye, mechanically repeat¬ ing the words, and bowing low to the bishop as he quitted the haU; then turning towards the tables, he muttered, " Proud, dark, and daring hypocrite, thou talk of orisons! such rest be to thee as thou wishest me in thy secret heart! Thy dreams avUI be of that vision displayed to thee in the vault last night; thy pride conceals it, but thy heart believes; and mine must be—no matter what! The feast is spread—the fools are smiling—and I—Oh God—must smfie too !'* " So please you, my lord—" said the se¬ neschal, approaching. " I knoAv what thou Av r ouldst say. I am coming. May not a man smfie in his own haU, but thou must Avatch his mirth? I wiU break thy wand OA'er thy pate if thou m arrest ray mirth thus again !—Sit, noble guests! and now, lord abbot, pledge me in this cup of muscadine, and teU me how thou thinkest these heretics AviU meet the reasons of my lord of Toulouse to-morroAv."
The abbot answered the pledge duly. But his thoughts on the event of the foUow¬ ing day we are unable to record, save that report says they were somewhat inarticulate, and altogether unintelligible.
\
CHAPTER III. Pollio must sure to penitence excite, For see hia hand howsmooth, his gown how bright; Pioud of the periods Icvell'd against pride, Dodsley's Collection. The next morning, at the close of the month of September 1216, at an early hour, the cavalcade set out from the Castle of Courtenaye. The lord of the castle had taken care that his OAvn appointment should be sufficiently gorgeous; and to increase its splendour, he required that the lady Isa¬ beUe, Avith her female attendants, should accompany him,—a request with Avhich she compUed the more readily, as knoAving that every female of rank in the vicinity proposed to join in the procession. The Bishop of Toulouse, his embroidered A^estments resplen-
dent with gold and gems arranged so as to represent the cross-keys, the insignia of his rank; his noble steed almost hid beneath his gorgeous caparisons, but evincing by his impatient prancings and curvettings a spirit that the rider gracefuUy and ma¬ jestically restrained—his cross-bearer and other attendants, habited as splendidly and imposingly as their profession and - station allowed, surrounding or following; the mag¬ nificent standard of the Crusaders, blazing aloof in the morning-sun like the banner of a king, waving before him:—the bishop, I say, rode in the van, " in shape and gesture proudly eminent," and seeming indeed fit to ead the van of an army of kings. ' The Abbot of Normoutier, with scarce less pomp, but far less dignity, followed in the rear. Next in this magnificent march eame the horse-Utters of the Lord of Courtenaye, the, lady Isabelle with her attendants, and a train of noble females, whom devotion, curi¬ osity, or the wish to display their sumptuous habits a-id furniture, had collected on that
day. Around them rode nobles and knights, their armour exchanged for weeds of peace, and their squires and attendants bearing their pensiles and bannerols as the indication of rank, not the announcement of hostility. The Utter in which the lady Isabelle rode was as gorgeous as that which Margaret of Valois described with such ostentatious ac¬ curacy more than three centuries afterwards. The cushions were of velvet embroidered; flourishings in gold, and curious paintings of the sufferings of Saints, diversified its carved and gilded pannels; and the Lord of Courtenaye, looking back from his seat, saw with dehghted vanity the arms of the house of Courtenaye blazoned on every smaU flag that rose from the corners of the litter, Uke the pinnacles of a church- battlement, or the minarets of an Oriental mosque; for the morning, though in autumn, was so calm, that every decorative pendant stood as still, and gleamed as fair, as if a breeze were never to stir its folds again. Around this and other splendid Utters, the
Crusaders and attendant peers and knights of France made, as they rode, their proud steeds caracole, sometimes throwing them almost on their haunches, to shew how skilfully and difficultly the rider kept his seat; and oftener, as they rode close by the Utters kissing their ungloved hands, causing them to make cer¬ tain capricio's, which drew first a faint shriek and then a smile from the fair spectators; nor did such action fad to display to full advan¬ tage the mantles of cloth of gold, the chains set with gems, the barrets sparkling with jewels and bending under the weight of plu¬ mage, now disclosed and now concealed by the banners waved over them by the squires and men-at-arms. Amid the cavalcade rode Sir Paladour, without squire, banner-man, or attendant, distinguished only by a form that ranked him among the first and fairest of the sons of men, the report of former valour weU- accredited by the recent glory of that com¬ bat in which he had encountered the giant- VOL. II. D
champion of the Church, and rescued the noblest heiress in France from thraldom of person, will, and wealth. Formed in that per¬ fect mould which antiquity chose for that of her gods, yet with that exquisite symmetry, alike obvious in the robe of silk or the elastic coat of mail, Sir Paladour rode near the litter of the lady Isabelle; and not all the flutter of emblazoned banners, the gorgeous array of attendants, ecclesiastical, civil, or martial, the long parade of caparisoned steeds and sumptuous Utters, nor the glow and gUtter of their proud riders, coidd prevent the lady from often waving her white hand from her Utter to Sir Paladour,—nor him, though many heads bowed at the signal, from understanding to whom that mark of dis¬ tinction was addressed. But his proud steed felt the impulse that the rider scarce dared own; for at once he felt the spur and the rein, and his fiercest bounds at the unwonted manege were scarce so high and wild as the throbbings of Paladour's heart.
The place of meeting fixed on. was a vast plain surrounded by hiUs, in the neighbour¬ hood of the Castle, and in the tenitories of Courtenaye. The eminences that enclosed this plain were covered with spectators, many hours previous to the arrival of the slow- travelUng cavalcade of the Crusaders: hun¬ dreds, and even.thousands, had risen at mid¬ night to be in time for the spectacle, and before dawn their dimly-defined forms were seen moving in shadowy masses, like mist on the hiU-tops which commanded the plain. They were arranged, in spite of tlieir im¬ mense and increasing multitudes, in amply- accommodated rows, and were " at large though without number," tiU, as the sun arose, it seemed as if one vast sheet of human vegetation covered the hills with a land of spontaneous efflorescence. There they sat, stiU and patient, forming to themselves mag¬ nificent ideas of the spectacle they were to witness; and a few hours after dawn their most ambitious anticipations were realized, 1)2
as the van of the long procession of the Crusaders appeared, gleaming in gold on the summit of a richly-w r ooded hiU, like the sun rising in his glory. The plain on which the parties were to meet seemed, indeed, Uke an apt and ample theatre for the splendid and eventful drama that was to be acted on it: it was almost square, and bounded on two of its sides by rocks of dark granite, hewed by the hand of Nature into a resemblance of terraces, and crowded to their very pinnacles by thousands who " sent their souls into their eyes." The remaining sides were as opposite in their character and scenery as in their posi¬ tion. The march of the Crusaders wound by an easy path down hiUs, feathered from their base to their summit with the larch, the pine, and the picturesque ash-tree, with its hoary trunk and leaves of the Ughtest green; and on the rich sward that clothed its declivities, flowers were glowing and scents were breathing, and aU that is grand
and lovely in Nature Avas effusing its bounty and its beauty. As the pageant first rose on the summit of the hiU, the voices of thou¬ sands of spectators pealing in thunder from the rocks on Avhich their dark and crowded masses rested, (like the clouds from whence the thunder issues) sent forth a shout of min¬ gled triumph on their appearance and appro¬ bation of their cause; and its echoes continued to roll round the hills long after the lips of the acclaimers Avere closed, as if the spirits of the mountains had caught up the sound, and swelled and prolonged it with the poAvers of more than mortal intonation. And noAv between the trees, Avith their dark trunks and leaves of vivid green slightly discoloured by the tints of autumn, the proud array of the Crusaders came glancing nearer; and every moment Avere more distinctly seen the gleams of gHttering mantles, of steeds ca¬ parisoned in embroidery, of floating plumage and gemmed banners, and they gorgeously em¬ blazoned with all the rich and fantastic pro-
fusion of heraldic devices; the group noAv emerging from the greemvood shade, noAv concealed by a thick cluster of ancient trees, noAv gleaming gaily out on a spot of green¬ sward, and n oav at length pouring the fuU glory of their march in all the splendour of broad sun-light on the open plain, Avhose sur¬ rounding scenery Avith all its magnificence of Nature, seemed but an appendage to the dignity Avho Avere born to be her lords. As the great standard floated into the vaUey, the multitudes, that covered the hiUs, made the holy sign Avith the solemn ardour of rapturous devotion. The Bishop of Tou¬ louse caught the signal, and made a sign to the ecclesiastical attendants to raise in cho¬ rus the psalm " Quare fremuerunt gentes ?" The melody, or chaunt, adapted to these words Avas so simple and monotonous, that it was easily caught and repeated by those to Avhose ears it Avas Avafted, and thousands on thousands of voices, above, below, and around, in ascending circles thundered "Quare
j
fremuerent gentes ?" tiU the very mountains seemed vocal from base to summit; and Nature and the elements appeared inspired and voiceful in the spontaneous eloquence of musical devotion. Right opposite to the richly-clothed and verdurous hill from Avhich the Crusaders had descended, rose a naked rock, bare, save that here and there it Avas dotted with a feAv firs, the steriUty of the soil denying any otlier produce even under the sunny skies of Lan¬ guedoc. There Avas no path doAvn its rude sides; the passenger had to make his perilous Avay from crag to crag, sloAvly and ungrace¬ fully, . Nothing in inanimate nature was ever more dreary, comfortless, and unloA r ely; and nothing in animated nature seemed better suited to the cheerless scene, than the group of the Albigeois, Avho, clad in the grey AVooUen garments Avorn by the peasantry (and some of them in sheep-skins), slowly and painfuUy Avound their Avay doAvn the dan¬ gerous declivities of the hiU. The group
consisted of the delegates of tlie Albigeois, and was chiefly composed of their preachers, Mattathias and the chief of their military leaders having been disabled in their late conflict. Pierre the pastor was in their van; and from long habit and fond associations believing himself unable to walk without the aid of his grand-daughter, he was supported by Genevieve. - This sole appearance of an humble female, consecrated by duty and sus¬ tained by motive alone, heightened instead of destroying the delicacy among so many per¬ sons of the other sex, though of her own community, and silently enhanced the respeqt it claimed. As the party advanced into the plain,, sing¬ ing the psalm " In exitu Israel," there was no applause, no echoed thunders of the moun¬ tains: violence was indeed forbidden, but disdain and hatred were strongly expressed in the profound silence that attended their progress; and J the feeble and ill-modulated strain, supported by tuneless tenors and.hoarse bases, contrasted with the choral magnificence
of the Crusaders' hymn, to Avhich the very air bore burthen, struck the ear as powerfuUy as their a]3peai*ance did the eye; their squaUd garments, coarse visages, and uncouth pro¬ cession, stood in helpless opposition to aU that Nature coidd boast of loveUness, or earth could display of magnificence. The combat seemed fought and lost al¬ ready in the eyes of the spectators: it Avas singular, too, though accidental, that the sun had been pouring the fuU brightness of his moming-rays (in a glorious September morn) on the path by Avhich the Crusaders had descended, Avhile the bleak and sterile rock down which the Albigeois wound their painful Avay threw its shadoAV far and deep AvestAvard, darkening their progress as they Avent, so that their feet seemed Uterally to " stumble on the dark mountains," and Nature herself to give evil omen, and take up " a taunting proverb against them." Undismayed (or at least appearing so), the humble party descended into the vaUey; but D 5
not the coarse hood and thick folds of the woollen mantle which Genevieve drew closely round her, could conceal a form that united the spiritualized graces of a Madonna with the physical perfection of a classic statue. Her eyes were cast down, but there was a light from beneath their veined Uds; her step vvas slow and her head dejected; but there was a natural majesty, an ah of more than mortal purity and calmness diffused about her, as if, in the language of the poet, Na¬ ture had said of her, " she shaU be a lady of my own." The Albigeois had descended to the plain, but stood at a respectfid distance from the band of the Crusaders, feudal feefings stiU operating strongly on their associations: they felt it Uke a crime to approach the presence of " the earth's high lords" tiU summoned. During the interval the Bishop of Toulouse prepared to celebrate mass under the superb shade of a silken pavilion. There was no lack of implements for that imposing cere-
mony; vases, tapers, flowers, incense, bow¬ ing acolytes, and aU the ritual pomp which. attends its celebration under the " high em- bowed" roof of a cathedral. The Albigeois, while what they termed the abomination of the mass was going oh, stiffly averted their heads, and prayed earnestly, but internaUy, so as not to disturb the ceremony, to be de¬ livered from the snare thereof, adding, " Sure¬ ly in vain is the snare spread in the sight of any bird." The ceremony over, the Bishop of Tou¬ louse prepared to address the heretics. The bishop was deemed the ablest controversiahst ofthe age; and so perhaps he might be—for it is a curious and undoubted fact, that in¬ fidels always make the best controversiaUsts. The zeal of a believer may carry him too far, or his humility may withhold him too much; but the infidel has neither zeal to mislead, nor humiHty to check him: no lan¬ guage can shock, no objections alarm him. The appalUng terms in which doubts and ob-
jections are clothed, compel the believer to stop his ears, instead of answering them— he shuts out the cries of violated reUgion, instead of flying to her rescue. The curiosity that first tempted the infidel to enquire ancl to doubt, conducts hun fearlessly on ; Avlule the believer pauses from reverence, and dares not folloAV his antagonist to the perilous spot to which he chaUenp-es him. In a Avord, the beUever Avalks the dark and intricate maze of controversy Uke a rich r and, therefore, a jealous and timid passenger: the infidel ranges about like a needy assassin; he may gain something, pride at least, by success, and he has certainly nothing to lose. The bishop had this advantage (if it can be reckoned one), and moreover the bishop possessed eloquence to delude, learning to confound, genius to dazzle, and dignity to awe, the proudest assembly of his day. In his discourse, or rather his address, to the Albigeois, he had tact enough to dis¬ cover thatAvith these children of the moun-
tain and the mist,' beings whose lives were passed amid the fiercest conflicts of the elements of Nature, and the struggles of human passion, with which the former have, perhaps, an undefined, and as yet unanalysed aUiance ; beings, who lived for many months of their comfortless year on ice-clad summits, or in snow-heaped vaUeys, plunging amid precipices of frozen snow to save their sheep, and returning on their chilly path to hear the word of exhortation or of prayer from a half-clad pastor in a hovel, that tottered with the storm, or more frequently without even that frail shelter, amid the acclivities of rocks, the roar of many waters, and the thunders of heaven :—that with such, it was expedient to adopt other than the usual tone of contro¬ versy in that fierce and stormy age; he made, therefore, ample allowance in his address for these physical contingencies. He knew and felt that men so brought up, v/ere likely to be rigid in their notions, and tenacious of their creeds, that the sternness of their physical
existence extended itself to then' moral; that such persons are almost invincible by argu¬ ment—for the spleen they feel against Nature evaporates in revilements against those Avho have obtained the means to soften her dis¬ pensations. The rigour of their faith is truly a reflection of the rigour of their des¬ tiny; and Hberty (whether poUtical or re¬ ligious, the most rigid of all things)- has always been the offspring of mountains and storms, and life uncivdized and unhappy—of beings exasperated by Avant, fierce from constraint, declaiming against luxury tiU they enjoyed it, struggUng against poAver tiU they obtained it, and impatient of authority or domination, tiU they could exercise it on those who had inflicted it on them. " Such hath been the origin of all revolu¬ tions," thought the Bishop of Toulouse : " the aggrieved poor retort on the tyrannical rich ; they become aggressors in their turn, and repay with heavy interest their debt of wrong and injury; but this—this matter hinging on words merely, may be checked
by Avords, in Avhich I am not to seek; and then I may direct this torrent that threatens to overwhelm us into a safe and quiet channel, yea, turn it into a golden stream whose Avaves shaU pay tribute to the treasury of the Vatican." Thus thought the bishop d?iring mass, and the same feeling (if he ever felt) appeared to predominate in his address to the Albi¬ geois. He touched on aU points of contro¬ versy, as matters in Avhich aU would agree, Avere their principles duly examined, and hinted that ample accommodation would be granted by the Church to scrupulous and delicate consciences. Lightly and gracefuUy he trod over the ignes supposito cineri doloso of the controversy. Transubstantiation, the mass, confession, image-worship, were aU passed over Avith superficial and temporizing mention; for the bishop knew that on these points his> antagonists Avere armed in com¬ plete mad; but he hoped, and not unreason¬ ably,, to send an arroAV through the joints of their armour, that would penetrate the
champions' hearts if it did not touch on their convictions. The Albigeois, Avith whom, as with aU France, the character of the bishop stood high for learning and eloquence, were obvi¬ ously struck by the mUdness of his address, and the dexterous lenity with Avhich he passed over, or treated as unimportant, cer¬ tain points which they expected Avould have been insisted on as indispensable. There Avas a kind of vacUlation, a reluctant dis¬ position to listen, beginning to betray itself among them. Pierre, from his bHndness, Avas unable to discover this, but Boanerges and the deacon Avere beginning to exchange looks of doubt and alarm: the bishop saw liis advantage and pressed his point, address¬ ing himself powerfully and exclusively to their feeHngs. " Come back," he exclaimed, at the close of his appeal; "come back, ye Avanderers, to the bosom of your long suffering mother : ye have wounded, ye have wronged, her, but she is your mother stiU. The bosom
yet bleeding Avith the bloAvs you have dealt is expanded this moment to receive and to embrace you; the arms you have tried to lop off are extended to invite you to peace and to felicity. " The visible presence of the Deity amid these his most stupendous works calls on you for solemn deliberation and salutary choice. He hath shaken mountains mightier than those \vhich lower and darken around you; and Avill you in your pride be more inflexible than thzy? He Hath made the streams to gush from rocks more hard and sterile than those from Avhich you descended; and AviU your hearts be less penetrable than they ? AU Nature, animated and inanimate, is pleading with you; see this plain over- spread with the mighty of the earth, the nobles of the land : with sheathed SAvord and hands held out in peace they supplicate you to have mercy on your oavii souls. Behold those hills covered to their summits with thousands of the faithful: they implore you by their presence to turn from the error of
your way and live. Behold," he cried, " beings above the heights of the utmost hills. Yon vast congregation is but a sha¬ dow of that which w r atches you from above. There be patriarchs and prophets, apostles and martyrs, saints and spirits in paradise; and the seraphim in ascending circles of glory, order above order, up to the hierarchy of the bright archangels who stand nearest to the throne of God and tremble at their own exaltation: all that glorious company are pleading for you, to you, this moment. My¬ riads on myriads, from glorified mortals to the first order of created beings ; angels who kept their first estate: such are your wit¬ nesses, your advocates. They bend from their intercession—they look down on you: they say, for you we burned and bled—for you were we stretched on the rack and chained to the stake; by the vast woight of our merits we have inclined the eternal scales in your behalf, till the accusing angel himself resigned his office." Here a murmur began to arise among a
band of the Albigeois, to whose ears the sound of merit was an abomination. "And even above that glorious circle," resumed the Bishop, " high beyond the high¬ est, and bright above the brightest, the Mother of God herself appears, as in the vision of the mystic book, clothed with the sun, and the moon beneath her feet, and in her arms the form of him Avho created both." And as he spoke the bishop fervent¬ ly kissed the gorgeous crucifix that was ap¬ pended from his shoulders. The murmur among the Albigeois in¬ creased. The bishop watched and waited tiU the murmur subsided: he aUoAved the Avave to dash in full force, and saded in triumph on its recoiling surge. " Spurn not the cross," he cried, " for the sake of him Avho hung thereon! If ye boast your love to him, if ye treasure in your hearts every word he uttered, every precept he enjoined, every ordinance he appointed, scorn not those who haUow Avith their Hps and their hearts the
memorial of him whom both are hound to love. You cherish his faith in your hearts ; we press its symbol to our Ups. Is it pos¬ sible we can shew inwardly or outwardly too much devotion to Him to whom both look alike for salvation ? Shall men differ for modes, when the spirit and the system is the same?—and even in those modes, have not saints agreed v/ith us? Can we not reckon against your feeble, and unauthorized, and recent examples, our saints, our ancho¬ rets, our eremites, our holy men wiiose me¬ mory hath been embalmed from age to age, and in the period of twelve hundred years have kept the odour of that memory undiminish¬ ed? We point your steps to that bright track: behold who have preceded you; see how their path is gemmed and studded, not with crowns and coronals of this earth, not with tiaras and mitres. Have you wept ? — so have they. Have you suffered ?—so have they. Have you bled ?.—their blood was first shed for you. There are the palms of mar-
tyrs,—branches of living emerald; the tears of saints turned to diamonds that paved their way to Heaven as they shed them; the blood of martyrs, whose every drop is now a ruby in their celestial coronals. There be the treasures unexhausted, inexhaustible, of their accumulated merits, which the Church throws open to you, overlaying the way of your return with the gems and gold of the sanctuary of Heaven." He paused: the Albigeois stood attentive and reverent—but there was neither movement nor answer amid their assembly, and this silence was evidently neither that of convic¬ tion nor even of hesitation, " God!" ex¬ claimed the bishop, (for an infidel can some¬ times work himself into the semblance of an enthusiast by the assistance of his 2^assions,) " if there be fifty righteous in that heretical Sodom—thirty, ten, nay one, let them come forth." Not a foot was advanced—not a voice was heard among the vast ,multitude.
Pierre, the pastor, alone tottered forth, supported by Genevieve, and stood almost opposite to the bishop. " SUence hath ansAvered thee," said t>rj- sightless pastor. He turned solemnly to¬ wards the congregation. They stood mute and motionless as the dead. The bUnd old man appeared to hear this sUence: he dreAv a furroAV Avith his staff in the sands of the plain, between his congre¬ gation and the band of the Crusaders. " Pass it who AviU!" he exclaimed: he listened Avith hearing rendered more acute by the priva¬ tion of the organs of sight: no sound of voice or step Avas heard. He shook his Avhite and streaming hair in triumph. "Silence hath answered thee," he repeated. " There is not one amongst us, from the stoutest that can wield a club, to the timid maiden on whom I lean, who wiU sell their birthright unto thee! We are poor, and afflicted, and despised; but every man in our host is a Joshua, and every woman a Miriam!" In his emotion, he dropped his staff, which
Genevieve stooped to recover. In the action, her mantle and hood, partially displaced, dis¬ closed a gUmpse of her form and countenance: her long dark hah almost touched the ground, and there Avas a light of holy triumph in her eye and on her features, that gave them for a moment a character almost unearthly. It Avas but for a moment! She hastily replaced her mantle, folded herself in it, and stood Uke a veiled statue by the pastor. Short as Avas the interval, the bishop had seen her, and that was enough in his thoughts to decide her destiny. He stood for a space sdeut, his eyes stiU fixed on her shrouded figure; but instantly recovering himself, he pursued his address to the Albigeois; but his tone Avas noAV changed from the conciUatory and expostulative to the minatory and com¬ manding. " Unhappy men !" he thundered, " ye have sealed your doom—sealed it in both Avorlds: the book of life was unfolded to you that ye might write your names on its page, and Paradise would have smiled as you traced them. Ye have shut that book;
and now another volume is opened, and on its burning leaves I see your doom inscribed, " Death ! death temporal and eternal!"—and thousands of. voices from vale, and rock, and mountain, chorussed the denunciation, " Death ! death ! temporal and eternal death to the heretics!" Tlie pastor attempted to speak, but his voice w r as drowned by the powerful tones of Boanerges, struggUng forth amid the shouts of the multitude.. " AVe are not care¬ ful," he cried, addressing the Bishop of Tou¬ louse, " to answer thee farther in this matter. Thou mayest doom our bodies to torture, and our lives to the sword; but every soul, as it parts from its ruined tabernacle, shaU sweU the cry that issues against ye from beneath the footstool of the judge, ' How long, Lord! how long!'" Language so unusual produced for some time an amazed silence on the part of the Crusaders ; and the deacon, with virulent per¬ tinacity, took up the word, which he could not help seasoning with occasional references
to his favourite propensity. " Antl who art thou," he cried to the astonished Prelate, "that scatterest the fold of the Lord, and pushest them with shoulder and side from the fat pastures wherein they should dwell safely? Thou hast thyself eat of the fat and dmnk of the sweet, I warrant me; yea, thy food hath been of the kidneys of wheat and the fat of fat rams, and thy drink of the vine of Sibmah and the vintage of Elealeh;— and comest thou here to scare the chosen people who wander in the wilderness, and are fain to feed on manna, whUe thou wast feasting amid the flesh-pots of Egypt ?" The bishop fixed his stern and steady gaze on the speaker without answering; but his cross-bearer, who noted his lord's expres¬ sion, said to himself, " That heretic's doom is sealed." But all other sounds were now lost amid the indignant clamour of the Cru¬ saders, who, scorning to be thus baited by their vassalry, rode fiercely round the pavi¬ lion, under whose silken awning the Bishop oC Toulouse still stood. VOL. IL E
Loudest was heard the voice of Simon de Montfort, who, spurring before them aU, ex¬ claimed, " Come we here to be rent by these swine, my lords ? Call you this a confe¬ rence, where your overmuch patience, is an¬ swered by the blunt and bitter rudeness of villain peasants? A conference, I trow!!! with thee (to Pierre), bUnd of soul as bUnd of sight, or with that skin-clad ambassador" (pointing to Boanerges, who was arrayed in skins with the wool unshorn), " who seems to have come deputed by a sort of goats, that have lent him their best robes to grace their grave commission withal." "Misproud lord!" retorted the preacher, " it would better become thee to cast thine eyes on the vain attire of thine arch-priest, wiio arrays himself in scarlet and gold, and precious stone, the livery of that Babylonian harlot whose seat is on the seven lulls that. totter while I speak — better to cast thy be¬ clouded eyes on him, and ask thyself whether he or I most resemble those who * wandered
about in sheep-skins and in goat-skins—of Avhom the Avorld Avas not worthy.'" " The foul fiend ha' ine!" exclaimed De Montfort, foaming with fury;—" an' if there ivere lance in my hand, I Avould not nail thee to the earth as thou standest, vile peasant! My lord of Toulouse, let us but charge among these dogs ivith our riding- rods, and they ivill flee as the slaves in old story, that my chaplain teUs of, fled from their masters at the sound of the lash." " Foul shame and scorn it Avere," said Paladour, interposing, " to assail unarmed and helpless men in the hour of truce." "And darest thou oppose thy green AA'it and unfledged valour against me in this matter?" said the fierce lord, reining up his steed by Sir Paladour, and bending his stern aspect on him. " For green Avit we youth must be content to bear a gibe from our seniors," said Sir Aymer ; " but men deemed his valour Avell- fledged in the plumage of De Montfort's crest E 2
what time it swepL the dust in the tourney lists of the Castle of Courtenaye.'' " Oh, peace !—for shame, if not for Hea¬ ven's sake, peace!" cried the Monk of Mont¬ calm:—"rein in the fierceness of your vain¬ ly incensed spirits, lest the enemy you de¬ spise laugh you to scorn." " Here break Ave off," said the Bishop of Toulouse, rising Avith dignity. " The long- suffering patience of the Church hath been trampled on, her tender mercies rejected and despised; and for you (for I am not unskiUed in those Jewish phrases in Avhich ye deUght) —for you, Avho have AA r hetted the SAvord that is to smite you in pieces—Avho have hewn out with your OAvn hands from the mountain the stone that is to fall and crush you— for you, after this last hour of insulted mercy, every implement of mor¬ tal might shaU be let loose against you; and sliould they fail—but they avlU not fail—the thunders of the Church's curse, outroaring the thunders of the hiUs where yo seek for shelter, shall pursue you, to blast,
wither, and exterminate you, till your name perish from off the face of the earth. Blessed shall he be Avhose Aveapon is but tinged witli your blood, and thrice blessed shall he be whose hands reek Avith it. As it is Avrit- ten, ' Thy foot shall be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogs may be red through the same.'" As he spoke, the Crusaders prepared to depart; and the sound of their movement as those Avho rode reined up their steeds, ancl those avIio had dismounted sprung on theirs, signing to their attendants, who on foot or on horse hastened forward to stand by the reins of their respective lords, was, in the language and in the ears of the Albigeois, like the sound of many waters. " Hear, mighty lords," cried Pierre, " hear yet a word. Suffer us but to depart, at least the women and the Uttle ones: suffer them at least to depart in safety into the mountains of the CeA r ennes, or the region of Arragon. Spare the Uves of wretched pea¬ sants; send us forth into the Avilderness
lacking all things but God and his word— and if we perish, we perish: wherefore sliould you set yourselves in array, and make your battle strong against men, amid thou¬ sands of whom there is not one who skills to drawthe sword, or fight with spear and shield?" At this appeal the Monk of Montcalm held up his locked hands with an air of suppUcation to the Bishop of Toulouse. Tlie prelate waved hun off indignantly with one arm, while he extended tlie other to¬ wards the Albigeois. "What!" he cried, "shall,ye be suffered to go forth like the locusts in that mystic vision of him who saw the apocalypse in Patmos, to shed your poison over the face, of all the earth ? Behold," he added, pausing, and holding forth his robe; " behold I turn once more like the ambassadors of old, to proffer peace or war, safety or destruction. —Choose, while yet a moment for choice.— Choose." The Albigeois, as one man, averted their heads, and with one voice called on Heaven ;
and the pastor Avith a faint exclamation be¬ tAveen triumph and thanksgiving, feU quite exhausted into the arms of Genevieve. The Bishop of Toulouse cast a terrible look on tlie devoted band; " The volume is closed— tlie door is shut—the day is past," he cried; "your blood be on your oavh heads:—to- morroAV ye die."
CHAPTER IV. My steed shall ride through ranks sa rude, As through the moorland fern ; Then ne'er let the gentle Norman blood Grow cold for highland kern. The Antiquary. The carousal at the Castle that night was deep and late. The Crusaders felt like men who had but to lift an arm on the morrow, whose sole and single blow was sufficient to sweep the Albigeois from the face of the earth. The cups were pledged and drained to the destruction of heretics. The Monk of Montcalm alone was absent; he had retired with a grieved heart to his shed in the courts of the Castle, and passed the night in prayer. De Montfort, whose spirit, ferocious as it was martial, kindled aUke at the
thoughts of a slaughter or a battle, was in tumultuous spirits, and rudely proposed that the lady Isabelle should accompany them to what he caUed the heretic-hunt on the morrow. "You shall hold me excused, lord of Montfort," said the lady shrinking at the motion. —" Nay, lady," said Sir Aymer, "he not so fond to say us nay— what, art thou not an Atalanta, a huntress, one of Dian's nymphs ? I warrant me, thou lovest to ride through the green w r ood with a merlin on thy wrist, or to wander on the banks of the merry Garonne, to fly thy spar- hawk at a pigeon, or mark thy falcon stoop at a partridge."—"Tush," cried De Mont¬ fort, "thou talkest of sport for my lady's waiting-damsels. I warrant, she better loves to spur her palfrey through glade and brake, when the huntsman winds a mort, and the stag holds out his throat to her fair hand, and the raven perching near flutters and croaks tiU the quarry is broke." "Never, trust me," said the lady, the tears almost coming to her beautiful eyes, e 5
which Paladour had never thought more beautiful, " if it pitied not my very heart to see liis plight, and I chid myself for the delight I had taken in that cruel sport."— " WeU then, to please thee, they shaU not be stags, but a sort of foxes,^ that Ave shall deem Ave hunt to-morrow," said De Montfort— '•' foul, filthy vermin. We avUI place thee on a hill, whence thou shalt see us untappice the sly maHgn beasts, smoke them out of their earth-holes, and chase them over the country with their young, till not one of the foul vermin be left to poison the land." " Not one—not one be left aUve," Avas the universal shout of the Crusaders. "Ado- lescentulos cum puellis, senes cum infantibus, as the Psalmist hath it," chaunted the Abbot of Normoutier.—" Alas," said the lady, shud¬ dering, "in times of peril, such sights must be; but must women's eyes be forced to look on them ?"—" Marry must they," persevered De Montfort. "As you woidd wish for short shrift and Hght penance next confession-day.
My lord of Toulouse, you wiU yield this fair back-sUder such weighty reasons." — "Fair niece," interposed the Lord of Courtenaye, " you wiU do us pleasure in hearkening to the bishop's reasons."—" I trust, noble lady," the bishop was commencing, when one of the menials hastily entering the haU put into his hands a torn and bloody scroll. " How now, knave!" said the Lord of Courtenaye, " be these thy manners to thrust a vihuinous and filthy scroll into the hands of my lord of Toulouse?" The bishop did not mark bun: his countenance changed as his eyes fell on the disfigured paper. " AA 7 hat hath changed your favour, lord bishop ?" said De Montfort. " Read," answered the bishop, putting the paper into his hands. It contained only the word " Beware!" written in blood, and but freshly traced. AVhile De Montfort with some difficulty decyphered the word, the domestic answered the enquiries of the bishop. He said that he
had followed in the train of the Crusaders that day; and that returning late he had fallen over something that lay in his path: a groan convinced him it was a Uving being, but one avIio had not long to live. The un¬ fortunate man Avas unable to teU the name of Ids murderer; but he collected his dying- strength to adjure him by gestures to convey the scroll, marked Avith his oivn blood, to the Bishop of Toulouse; and, AvhUe he was speak¬ ing, expired. The relator had no more to disclose, and the bishop mused in sUence. " A toy, a device, on my Hfe, a very foolish and insufficient toy!" cried De Montfort, strik¬ ing doAvn the scroU Avith the hilt of his dag¬ ger : "I avUI Avage," he continued, raising his voice—" I wiU Avage the broad lands of De Montfort against the peak of l'Aigle sur la Roche—a noble's having 'gainst an outlaAv's hold, that, leaving the body of our battle to fence these towers, Avithout man-at-arms, squire, or page, I and the knights-crusaders alone AviU encounter the heretics, and not
leave one to tell the tidings within the bounds of fair Languedoc or ere the sun be high to¬ morrow !" This wild proposal was received with as wild acclamation by the knights, who began to be inflamed with the wine they had drunk, and by the hope of distinguishing themselves in the eyes of lady Isabelle. The bishop, who only might controul the frantic purpose of De Montfort, was still mus¬ ing, heedless of what passed; and Sir Aymer alone had the sense to see the danger and folly of the motion, and the courage to op¬ pose it. " Why, how now, mad lords!" he said, " where is your wisdom ?—where is your discretion ?—nay, where is your valour? Sith true valour setteth not more by the peril it risks, than by the glory that gives to peril its sweetness and its price. Be ye such peevish and unskilled chess-players, that ye will hazard Knight, Bishop, and Castle, against a file of beggarly pawns? Are ye avised what men they be against whom ye thrust yourselves in such raw and unpre-
pared fashion ? By the mass! they fight from behind a bare crag, as it Avere a Avarded toAver ;—then they have a Avhoreson, viUain- ous trick of rolling down stones from the heights on visitors that come not in a fashion to please them ; and they avUI send you over a thicket certain damnable conA r incing touches Avith arroAvs that Avill find out every crevice in your armour. An' yc come not back stuck all over with darts, Hke so many Saint Sebastians, or battered Hke cocks Avith cud¬ gels at Shrovetide, say there is neither truth, Avisdom, nor manhood in Sir Aymer." And so ending his free, honest speech, the knight sat doAvn. His blunt rebuke was lost in the tumult of voices scoffing and shouting; and scarcely could the knights be withheld, by the moA r er of the mad enterprise himself, from rushing out to undertake it thai mo¬ ment. " Forbear !" said De Montfort, exalting his voice—" forbear Avhile I marshal the caval¬ cade for the chase to-morrow. The lady IsabeUe and her damsels, most Hke the hun-
tress-goddess and her nymphs, shall be seat¬ ed on a hiU to vieAv us Avind and nin down the prey. My lord abbot and the reverend brethren of Normoutier shaU be placed to chaunt litanies for us on the broAV of a mountain—" " Hoav far distant ?" interrupted the abbot. " On a peak of the Pyrenees, an' thou wilt," said De Montfort, angrily. " Nay, I speak not in respect of fear; but, the more distant the vieAv of a battle, the clearer stiU it ahvays proved to my sight, as it w r ere," repUed the abbot. " I promise you I shaU be the first to bear glad tidings from the mountains; and now I bethink me,—is there not an instance for it ?" " Quam spcciosa sunt vestigia," Avhispered the cross-bearer. " Mass and well said !" quoth the abbot: " it was a joyous hunting-song that; but all those carnal toys have clean sUpped from my memory." " And Ave," pursued De Montfort, shouting vvith fierce deUght—" Ave keen hunters Avill
unearth these foxes that spoil the vineyard of the Church, and chase them over the country like Samsons, with firebrands at their tails. For thee, young Paladour, do thy devoir as thou didst on the day of tourney * and bethink thee, it is a lighter task to lay the heads of a thou¬ sand heretics in the dust, than to make De Montfort's bend to his saddle-bow."—" By Heaven, lord," said the generous Paladour, " I have little heart for wasteful and un¬ resisted slaughter. It yields me no joy to ride over a field of wretched peasantry, as I would over the fern of a moor, and lop head and limb as lightly as a peasant-boy mows down thistles with his staff. Trust me, when the poor knaves clasp my knees or footcloth with their unarmed hands, and sue for life, I am fain to avert my head, that I may not see the blows I deal." A murmur of derision rose among the guests at these words, which closed the de¬ bate ; and it now only remained for the knights each to choose a brother-in-arms for the encounter, who might succour them when
assailed, or defend them if wounded, as they had deprived themselves of the wonted at¬ tendance of their squires and pages. Pala¬ dour named Sir Amirald. " That young knight is a stranger to these walls, methinks," remarked De Mont¬ fort. " He is no stranger to any spot where peril may be braved or honour won," an¬ swered Paladour. " Indeed it troubles me much," said the Lord of Courtenaye, replying to De Mont¬ fort :—" know you the cause, valiant Sir Paladour?" and trembling as he spoke, he attempted to raise his eyes to the young knight, but dropped them instantly. The free and pronrpt reply of Sir Paladour that he was ignorant of the cause, abated his apprehensions for a moment; but he was heard to murmur to himself, " This hawk but canceliers*; he will pounce anon." AVhile this was passing, De A^erac and * A term in falconry, meaning that the bird hovers over its prey before it descends on it.
SemonviUe held a Avhispered sort of discon¬ tented conversation in a recessed AvindoAV, Avhere they had AvithdraAvn themselves from the carousers. " Thou seest hoAv Ughtly Ave are held," said the latter resentfiiUy; "none but this Sir Paladour to be named as the peer of De Montfort—none but Sir Paladour to lead the lady forth off the haU, and kiss his fingers Avith apish courtesy as she mounts her palfrey."—" I ever deemed lightly of that lady's discretion, since she dispraised my habit that Avas so curiously Avrought ivith------" " I have seen it," said the other, who justly dreaded this exordium—" it was, indeed, of a rare and singular fashion."— " Thou hast a marveUous subtle judgment," said his gratified associate; " and of a truth I love thee; and Avilt thou but join thy wit to mine, I will confide to thee a plot that shaU pluck the feather vanity from this jay of a Paladour, and enforce my lady to turn the vane of her incUnations to whatsoever point the breath of our choice may vary to." " Sometimes I think I have but a small Avit," replied his friend; " but Avhen I hear
of a plot, I promise you I rise hugely in mine OAvn conceit. Any churl, thou know¬ est, may guide himself by his vile common sense, and plod on in the straight-forward path that leads to the thing he needeth; but it is plots, schemes, quaint devices, and delicate fine stratagems that sheAV the wit of man; and truly I Avas ahvays AviUing to be in a plot, though I never could devise either to frame one, or, indeed, to get out of one when devised by another." " I wiU disclose to thee a fine-Avitted, deep- reaching trick of invention, requiring valour Avithal," said De Verac.—" I pray thee then disclose it in level terms," repUed the other, " and not as if thou wast rehearsing a trou¬ badour's song, or reading out of a book of riddles." " Thou hast read in the adventures of that Avandering knight, Sir Eneas of Troy, pain¬ fuUy penned by the great magician Virgil."— " By my grandame's soul, I never read Une or letter in the book thou namest."—" Sayest thou me so? andhow chanced that, Sir knight?" " Mass, I knoAV not; except that I never Avas
taught to read."—" A reason not to be im¬ pugned; Ust, then, and mark: tliere were in the train of this Sir Eneas two young knights, by name Nisus and Euryalus, sworn bro¬ thers; the one wore the favours of Queen Hecuba of Troy, the other tliose of the most royal lady, the Princess Cassandra her daughter, and both had vowed to do some high emprize in honour of their ladies. I wiU now describe their arms, devices, equip¬ ments, and caparisons."—" Time will serve for that," said SemonviUe hastily, "when thou hast found the end of thy tale."—■" The camp of Sir Eneas being besieged by a host of godless and malicious pagans, what does me young Sir Nisus and his comrade, but sally forth by night among them, cut off their heads as they slept, and cany back their arms and spoils to their own camp, wiiere they were received with all manner of honours, as shouts, music, and other delights, and royally feasted by Sir Eneas in his tent, under a canopy wrought by Queen Dido, his leman." " Marry, a pleasant figment; but wiiere lleth
THE ALBIGENSES. the plot?" said the literal De SemonvUle. " Askest thou? 'What hinders that we two saUy forth under cover of night, kill and disperse the heretics, and trundle their heads before us, like so many tennis-baUs, to the Castle-gate, where if my lady look not lovingly on our valour, and Sir Paladour sheAv not beside us like a hoUday peasant's tin brooch to the topaz in my barret of tissue, say I am neither politic nor vaUant." SemomiUe, who Avas as rashly brave as he Avas duU and Avayward, received the motion with eager deUght;—" And for our more assurance of safety, and because avc AviU not be Avandering aU night through mire and moor, I AviU borrow the squire of this Sir Paladour, under show of helping to furbish mine armour for the morroAV. Men say he hath marvellous skfil in the perplexed paths Avith Avhich this region aboundeth." " It is colourable; it is semblable," said De Verac with a nod of assent.—" Thus shaU his vain courtesy (for he refuseth nothing gently sought) work his annoyance and de-
feat."—" But," whispered Semonville anx¬ iously, " how shall we make escape?—the craven lord of the Castle hath the drawbridge raised, and the keys of all the gates from barbican to postem brought to him, ere he sleeps."—" J have a plot too for that, which I will shew thee if thou wilt come to my chamber—slack not to borrow Sir Paladour's squire, and follow me." The boon was aslced with dogged reserve, and granted by Paladour with graceful cour¬ tesy ; and the pair then retired to prepare for their sally from the Castle before midnight. T? * # * #■ The lady Isabelle sat late within her chamber that night. She had determined on accompanying the Crusaders on the morrow, lest her farther refusal might expose her to the suspicion of heterodoxy (a charge which her conscience could not altogether disclaim, for pity in that age was heretodoxy, if felt for heretics); and she prolonged her orisons late, supplicating alternately for
the safety of the Crusaders, and the deli¬ verance of the devoted Albigeois. To¬ wards midnight she was disturbed by the sound of soinetliing heavy dropping into the court, and then of steps traversing it hastily. She opened the casement of her oratory, and looked out. The moon had risen; but the tower in which her chamber lay threw its vast shadow across the court, conceahng those who trod it with speed and in dark¬ ness. They were De A^erac, Semonville, and the attendant, with a damsel of her train. This female, who had been lightly won by the gorgeous habits and courtly language of Verac, had prevailed on her brother, the solitary warder of a neglected tower in the outer w r all of the Castle, to assist them in escaping from a casement of it, ancl faciU- tating their passage over the in oat, which vvas there nearly dry. As the lady gazed forth, another casement opened at some dis¬ tance ; and she paused for a space, irresolute whether to address a figure that appeared indistinctly at it. " AVho is it ?" at length
she said, " who watches at this late hour ?" —" It is your beauty's servant and ever- wakeful meditator," answered the voice of Paladour. " Did you hear steps or see figures cross the court of the Castle ?" asked tha lady. " I did, noble lady: they were doubtless menials whom 'tendance on the banquet held late, and who are hastening to their lodgings." " Alas ! Sir knight, hie you to your couch," said the Lady: " to-morrow will be a day of toil, if not of peril, and you must needs lack rest." " I may not rest, noble lady: my heart is heavy with many evd bodements, and my brain is possessed with thick and gloomy fantasies. I have wrestled with, but cannot overcome them: a vague and shapeless pre¬ sage of some undefined disaster keeps me waking. Lady, for the love of Heaven, quit not these towers to-morrow !" " I fear my uncle's chiding, the blunt scoffs of that rude lord De Montfort, and the solemn anger of the bishop, more than
aught of peril in to-morrow r 's encounter," answered the lady. " And now a fair good rest, Sir Paladour: I might be Ughtly held, were I to prolong this conference at such late hour. The best thoughts of the night, and the Ughtest slumbers, be about your piUow !" " Farewell, bright saint!—and may the pure spirits that minister to virgins' dreams, w r eave thine of such hues and texture as glow r in the visions of sleeping saints, who part dreaming of Paradise—to wake in Heaven !"
yoL. ii.
F
CHAPTER V. ---------When my hours Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives Of me for jests;—but now, i'II set my teeth, And send to darkness all that stop me. Shakspeare's Antony and Cleopatra. That night Avas to the Albigeois one of unmixed consternation and horror. The delegates returned vvith their answer of desolation. The devoted people saw their doom approach without the possibihty of averting or retarding it; not a resource was left. If they attempted to pass into Aragon, or to seek the Cevennes, the army of the Crusaders interposed itself. Amid the rocks and mountains where they now wandered, they must shortly perish by famine. Beziers and Carcassone were in ruins. Their friends in Toulouse Avere unable to protect them, could they even reach that city in safety; and
the possibility of aid being supplied by Count Raymond had never occurred to them, for they were ignorant of his arrival in France. They saw " they were in evil plight." Some of the more enterprising leaders and enthu¬ siastic preachers, among whom were Matta¬ thias and Boanerges, suggested the idea of resistance; and even exhorted them to " re¬ sist unto blood." But this proposal to an unarmed multi¬ tude, half of whom were women and chil¬ dren, only added to despondence the con¬ viction of its helplessness. And after an evening of gloomy deliberation, they em¬ braced with sore reluctance the last feeble chance of safety: this was, to separate into small tUstinct parties, and pursue various di¬ rections, some seeking shelter in the moun¬ tains, and some going towards Toulouse, that thus detached and divided, without aiipear- ance of union or resistance, they might afford less cause either for cupidity or hostility; " and thus," said Pierre, " if Edom and the armed men with him come and smite one v 2
band, peradventure the other may escape, and a remnant yet be saved." But this melancholy resolution, wliich necessarily involved the separation of the robust from the feeble, of parents from chil¬ dren, and of husbands from wives, reqiured strength from above to support the victims in the moment of its execution. AVith fainting hearts and wearied spirits they implored that it might be deferred till dawn, and that this, the last night of tlieir earthly intercourse, might be passed in prayer. Fearful of being molested in their devo¬ tions by some of the fierce and licentious train of the Crusaders, who still loitered in scattered bands on the plain, they removed some dis¬ tance to a spot whose deep and secret soli¬ tude had often afforded them concealment, and from whence their " songs of the night" had often arisen, heard only by the ear of Heaven. It was night when they entered the rocky defile which led to a spot that seemed the oratory of Nature. The narrow path sud-
denly opened into an area, enclosed on every side by vast masses of rock; these masses projected as they ascended, so that, though the space below could contain the Avhole multitude, the precipices, almost meeting above, disclosed but a small portion of the heavens, whose brightly-tAvinkHng stars alone proved to the eye it could be visible there. These appeared intensely vivid, as if seen from the bottom of a AveU. The projections of the rocks, intercepting rain and deAv, had precluded aU vegetation, ex¬ cept Avhere a few AvUd ash-trees twined their knotted fantastic roots among the fissures. One or two dark. riUs tinkled down the sides of the rock, and meeting in a broAvn and stiUy pool at the bottom, seemed to rest there; then struggUng on, forced their way, Avith a hoarse and troubled murmur, through the defile by Avhich the Avanderers entered the vaUey. Here the Albigeois assembled for the last time, to all human conjecture. In this last hour of danger, the innumerable differences that had distracted them in hours
of comparative safety, and vvhich, in the exaggerations of their zeal, had often ap¬ peared as important as the vital doctrines of Christianity, now appeared Ughter than vanity itself. The endless divisions and subdivi¬ sions of restless and unappeasable polemics, the doubtful gloss, the minute distinction, the metaphysical subtlety, the A'erbai nicety — labour as profitless as the attempt to divide an unit, or discover parts in a point— were aU forgotten. And Avith one voice and one heart the congregation called on their ancient pastor to offer up his prayers with and for them, peradventure for the last time. In this hour of extremity not only were systems compromised, but aU distinction of characters was absorbed, as bodies lose their varieties of colour on the approach of night. The petulant acrimony of the deacon, the stern enthusiasm of Boanerges, the fanatic fury of Mattathias. were all subdued, aU si¬ lenced, and the pure faith and meek hoUness ofthe aged Pierce rose Uke the ark triumph-
ant over the wwes, under whose prevailing Avaters the tops of the highest mountains A\ r ere covered. ToAvards midnight the A r oice of Pierre ceased, from his exhausted strength; and the Avhole multitude prayed in silence with their faces to the earth. Such Avas their absorp¬ tion of spirit and intensity of devotion, that a shriek from one of the females was unheard, tiU its repetition made those who were near her demand the cause. Apart from the rest, she said she had heard an arroAV Avhistle past her, and seen it lodge among some bushes at the entrance of the defile. Some, upon hastening to the spot, found the arrow stiU quivering there, and exclaimed in terror they were betrayed, and the signal was given for the work of slaughter. Pierre checked the alarm by pointing out to them that the arrow Avas purposely sent in a direction where it could do no mischief; and he ventured even to intimate his hopes that it might rather be the effort of a friend to wam them, than of a foe to molest them.
A few moments of agonizing expectation passed, Avhile this hope Avas to be confirmed or defeated:—they Avere soon over. A second aiTOAv came wiiizzing past them in the same direction, and those who Avatched its flight saw a scroU attached to it. An hundred hands Avere instantly employed in searching for this missile, whose friendly purport Avas no longer matter of doubt, even to the most desponding. It Avas found and unfolded, a Ught was quickly struck, and it was singular that amid this poor and illiterate multitude, there Avere more to be found avIio possessed the rare acquirement of being able to read, than in the Castle of the Lord of Courte¬ naye—so intense had been their zeal for ob¬ taining the knowledge of Scripture. The superscription was "To the Church which is in the wilderness." And Boanerges, to whom it Avas given to be read, recognized the hand-Avriting of a chaplain of the Count of Toulouse; a man zealously attached to the cause of the Albigeois, and no less so to the Jewish phraseology, by which the more
enthusiastic of that day delighted to distin¬ guish themselves. It contained the following words: " Whereas ye are as men appointed unto death, and as prisoners in the hold where there is no water, and because many dogs have come about you, and fat hulls of Basan close you in on every side; therefore now look up and lift up your heads, for your deliverance draweth nigh, for behold he whom men call Raymond, even the lord of Toulouse, hath con¬ fronted the man of sin, which is antichrist, whose palace standeth on the seven hills. And lo, he hath passed over from the South, and cometh up to the help of the Lord against the mighty, even as Barak, the son of Abinoam, came up from Kedesh Naphthali with ten thousand men at his feet, all of them mighty men of valour, men who draw the sword. And because ye have sent afore¬ time messengers to him saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants, but come unto us and help us, that we perish not; therefore now be strong and of good courage, for, as f 5
the Lord Uveth, before the morning be spread upon the mountains, your help shaU be swift and sure, and though ye mourn Avith a very great mourning, like the mourning of Hada- drimmon in the valley of Megiddo, yet a Uttle Avhile and your name shaU be no longer Bochim,* but your name shaU be caUed Maher- shalal-hash-baz,f because of the prey and of the spoil which the Lord shaU give you of your enemies round about. And behold I. even I, have sent a SAvift messenger (wiiose running is as the running of Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, Avho overran Cushi by the Avay of the plain, in the matter of Absalom,) and I have straitly charged him saying, make no long tarrying or delaying, and it shaU be if the men, the children of Belial compass thee round about, that thou shalt make fast the letters to a SAvift arrow, and"—Here the manuscript Avas torn, and nothing but the signature was legible. "Written in the tenth day of the sixth month, even the
* Weeping. \ Haste to the spo>K—swift to the prey.
month September, by me Zerubbabel, whom men caU Bertrand de Var." The effect produced on the assembly by the perusal of this letter was in its expression as single as it Avas profound: with one accord they threw themselves Avith their faces on the earth in a mute agony of solemn gra¬ titude; and the thanksgiving for a deUverance almost miraculous rose from their hearts alone. There Avas noAv but one voice and one re¬ solution among the whole multitude; with renewed strength and rekindled courage they prepared to penetrate further among the hiUs in the direction Avhere they might expect the approaching army of the Count of Toulouse, the van of which they hoped to meet before the dawn of morning, and under whose flank they might find protection during the awful day, for whose event they pleaded solemnly to the God of battles. In the elevation of sudden hope, Mattathias and some of the more warUke, even proposed to set forth and encounter the band, Avho, from the latter part
of the letter, it was plain had intercepted the messenger; and this proposal, though rash and untimely, was so eagerly embraced, that Pierre forbore his fruitless opposition, and about fifty, armed with clubs and arrows, set out on the expedition, accompanied by Boan¬ erges and the deacon, who, with a sudden ihapse of valour, joined them, exclaiming, that the " lame should take the prey." The rest commenced their progress into the moun¬ tains, and for some time hope supplying them with supernatural strength, the most dejected forgot their fears, and the feeblest their weak¬ ness. But it was soon found that physical obstacles long continued are an overmatch for the power of imagination, however excited. The strongest and most resolute had departed with Mattathias, and the midtitude who were journeying onward consisted chiefly of those who were feeblest in sex and in age, in all the lassitude of weariness, and inanition. •' With her child of yesterday The mother went, and she whose hour was come Fell by tlie way side." Southey's Roderkf;.
The accUvities of the mountains seemed to become more arduous, and the mist that enveloped their summits seemed to darken as they ajiproaciied them; many sat down in a mortal stupor, from Avhich no poAver could wake them; and many, w r ho stiU retained their inteUect, Avith all the earnestness of suppliants implored that they might Ue down and die. It Avas then that their aged pastor, and the ministering angel at his side, coUected the last remains of their strength and spirits to sustain those Avhom hope and life Avere fast deserting. To those Avho were yet rational, he suggested the hope of deliverance; to the desponding, the consolations of religion: for every fear he had a word of aUeviation—for every complainer a topic of comfort. He che¬ rished every purpose of exertion; he fanned every spark of hope; and even Avhen the lamp Avas gone out, he could supply it from the rich abundance Avith Avhich faith had lighted his OAvn It Avas a rare and holy sight to see ■> the weakest in sex and in years—an ancient man and a youthful maiden—concentrate in
themselves aU the physical energy that coidd command success, with all the mental for¬ titude that defies despair. Thus sustained and excited, the sufferers prepared for their last effort—it was made in profound sUence; every one reserved his breath for the straggle—not a A\ r ord was heard of fear or of hope, of comfort or of murmur. The effort was made—tlie summit Avas won—the mist that covered the tops of the mountain roUed slowly down its sides into the vaUey, AAiiere it lay Hke an ocean. A Une of golden light fleckered the opposite horizon: it broadened—it brightened, till the sun burst forth in glory on the hdls far east¬ ward, and his first level rays glanced brightly on the broad banners and fair and wide¬ spread array of the army of Count Raymond of Toulouse. The shout uttered by the Albigeois at this sight, resembled that sent forth by the crew of a vessel just going to pieces when day reveals to them a friendly shore, and boats
putting off to their assistance: it was a mix¬ ture of joy and desperation. The shouts that greeted them, on the other hand, were like those that hail the numbed and sunken- hearted mariner, inspiring hope and promising security, AU that they had dwelt on with anxious hope for many days, aU that had sustained their spirits with distant and visionary com¬ fort, was now realized in almost as many hours. To distribute nourishment, raiment, and cheering felicitations of safety and augu¬ ries of success, to assist those who were stiU able to reach the van of Count Raymond's army, and to encircle the hill with a band of archers for the protection of those who were not—to do all that the approach of danger would permit to be done, and say all that haste would suffer them to say, may easily be imagined as the prompt and joyful office of their friends. Among multitudes thus singularly thrown together, there were many recognitions as
singular—mothers and daughters in the pas¬ tor's band recognized long-divided relatives in those Avho approached to welcome and protect them; and in the host of Raymond many a vizor Avas raised to gaze on coun¬ tenances that seemed to them Uke those seen in a dream; and many a mailed arm strained in its clasp a form never expected to be em¬ braced on this side the grave. But these en¬ dearments were short and mournful: clouded by the recoUection of past calamity, and in¬ terrupted by the preparation for approaching danger. It Avas not till the pastor had seen the feeblest of his flock suppUed Avith tlie means of rest and refreshment, and the others con¬ tent Avith the promise of them, that he began to sink under the fatigue that had already exhausted bodies far more vigorous and minds of more unyielding texture. Unable to de¬ scend the hill or cross the valley, he prepared to take the only repose the place afforded, by resting his head on the knees of GenevieA r e, w r ho had seated herself on the ground beside
him, and whose white small fingers, clasped on his forehead, made delicate contrast to its deep furrows, dark hue, and dishevelled hoariness. Conscious of his exhausted strength, he re¬ plied • to the importunities of Arnaud, and Genevieve's mute pressure of his hand, only by a faint smile, and a whisper, that that spot must be his Pisgah, since he was un¬ able to enter into, or even (he. added with a meek sigh) behold the land of rest from its summit. The enquiries of Arnaud, however, soon discovered a sojourn less comfortless; and he hasted back with the intelhgence, that if Pierre could summon strength enough to descend the declivity of the hill but a few paces, there was a cave, which had been inhabited by an eremite not long deceased, where he woidd be sheltered at least from the chill breeze of the mountains, and might rest on the bed of leaves its last inhabitant had left there. Supported by Genevieve and Arnaud, he struggled to make the attempt; and Genevieve, as they slowly approached
the spot, struck by its character of shade, seclusion, and quiet, mentaUy Avished for such a retreat from the " sound of the trum¬ pet and the alarm of Avar," where her pure existence might be passed in devotion, and sustained only by the herbs of the field and the stream that trickled fi-om the rock. The hermitage was a caA*e scooped by the hand of Nature out of the rock; art had added one or tw r o cavities for containing the crucifix and lied of its soUtarv inhabitant: to form these had been his only earthly employment. The entrance to the-cave w r as shaded by some firs and pines; a small stream had worn its way down the upper cliff, and feU into a stone basin just at the entrance; aboA r e it rose a nide crucifix, formed out of the rock, but now clustered over Avith moss and ivy, so as to be almost indistinguishable: a few mossy branches of fir, once triangularly disposed, indicated a rude attempt at a belfry; but there was now neither heU nor hand to toU it i Genevieve, in spite of her creed, thought hoAv holy and refreshing amid these
wilds, Avithout track or tenant, its sound must once have been to the Avandering travel¬ ler amid the shades of evening, or the wake¬ ful reUgieux to whose ear it came aniid the stillness of night. The door of Avood stiU remained Avith its bolt and staple, apparently intended as a defence against the Avolves or bears : its inmate Avas probably above the fears as AveU as the wishes that depend on, or are connected with, the agency of man. Here the pastor Avas conveyed, and here some of the more Aveak and Aveary were col¬ lected to congratulate and to partake of his retreat. GeneAieve had hardly spread the bed of withered leaA r es, and assisted the pastor to stretch his chilled and painful Umbs on them, when a tumult of voices was heard Avithout; and aU hurried to the entrance to catch the sounds. Every ear Avas hoav as aAvake to the tidings of success, as they had been but a feAv hours before to the murmurs of despon¬ dency. In this case they were not mistaken. The party of Mattathias and Boanerges
had surprised and led caj)tive those Avho had been the means of scaring the mes¬ senger of Count Raymond's chaplain from approaching the retreat of the Albigeois ; and Avere noAv returning with their prize, disputing the whole way how they were to dispose of them. The captives were no other than the hap¬ less adventurers De Verac, Semonville, and their ill-chosen guide, the squire of Sir Pala¬ dour, Avho still retained his boast of knoiving every mountain-path and forest track in Languedoc, and his habit of leading astray every one who trusted to his guidance. Long before they approached the cave, the shriU voice of Deacon Mephibosheth was heard exclaiming, " They shaU be for a prey. and a spoil, even as Shalman spoiled Beth- arbel in the day of battle : her infants were dashed in pieces, and her women AA r ith child ripped up." The dogged and mortified tones of Semon¬ ville were heard in reply :—" Thou Uest, foul knave! I am no infant; I would
thou wouldst knoAV it; and if thou rippest me up for a Avoman AAdth child, thou art no better than a notorious liar, and I A\ r ill hang thee for it an' there be laAV in aU Christentye, or Languedoc, Avhich comes nearer to the matter." The affectedly effeminate accents of Verac were then heard exclaiming, " Good knaves! good scoundrels ! most Avorthy and absolute rascals! I pray you throttle me an 1 you wiU ; but let it be Avith aught but your greasy fingers: a lady's garter will servg^if such commodity may be found here. Goo\l goat- bearded apostle (to Boanerges), preach to thy hirsute brethren; thou shouldst have a feUoAV- feeUng for my mustachios. I Avarrant me noAV thou hast no crisping tongs to countervail the damage they have undergone Avithal. Good felloAV! good selvaggio! most dulcified and depilated Orson (to Mattathias), if thou Avilt needs be near me, at least restore me my pouncet-box, that I die not the death of the unsaA'oury." All this time the deacon was draAving tighter the cords Avhich bound the
hands of the luckless knight. " I thank thee, gentle squire, for the courtesy bestowed on my wrists; extend it so far, I pray thee, as not to profane with thy plebeian touch the tissue sleeve which-----God's nads, and aU other petty oaths !" he exclaimed with unrestrain¬ ed vexation, as one of the rudest of the party, thinking he talked too fast and moved too slow, gave him a thrust ait derriere — " God's nads ! the villain hath not only made incision in my flesh, but hath rent my garn- bazon, quilted with thread of gold and lilac, in a most delicate and unnameable part. A\ r hat, BucoUcan Sylvan! de?mest thou art goading.an ox to tiUage, or------- ?" " Lead them on !*' said the stern voice of Mattathias, " that w r e may hew them to pieces before the Lord in Gilgal." " There is no such place in France, thou wordy feUow," said SemonviUe, sturddy; " and I would I might be hanged ere I con¬ sent to be hewed in pieces for any man's pleasure in outlandish parts ; never trust me else : so look to it, thou wert best
" I pray thee, let us first examine them," said Boanerges; " it may be that Ave may gather something out of them." Arnaud joined in this petition, which he enforced by strong reasons ; and Mattathias, though refusing to be convinced by either, leaned on his club at a cUstance, and groAvled a suUen assent. The party v/ere then ushered into the cave. Pierre Avas plunged into that profound sleep Avhich no tumult could disturb; and Genevievo cast her eyes on the band only to see if Amand Avere yet aUve, and among them. MeanwhUe others of the party were exa¬ mining the splendid armour and ornaments which they had lost no time in despoiUng their prisoners of. Mattathias Avas attempt¬ ing to adapt to his giant limbs the corslet and cuisses of the slender De Verac; and Boanerges was exclaiming that the richly inlaid vant-brace should be made plates of gold for the coverings of the altar. " And Avhat hast thou won ?" said Arnaud to the deacon: " I trow thou hast not been slack in the matter of the spoil."
" Of a verity it is a kid," repUed the dea¬ con ; " even a kid of the goats, which the men, the sons of BeUal, have roasted with fire, and woidd is it were have eaten very exceedingly; but now behold it shaU lie on mine own platter, and be carved with mine own knife, and be unto me as a kid." Arnaud now commenced his examination of the prisoners. " Sir Cmsader;" said he to De A r erac, " your goodly mien and armour of price show you to be of high Uneage." —" This is the only selvaggio who hath spoken to the purpose yet," said De Verac. —" AATierefore, if you deal truly with us in this matter, and teU us the numbers, purpose, and array of the Crusaders, we wiU hold you to ransom; but an' ye wiU not, know that your Ufe is merely jeoparded; and who is he that shaU deUver you out of our hands ?" " Here 's a goodly catechising!" quoth the knight, in high disdain: " shaU tissue be bound to answer frieze, and the jeweUed bar¬ ret courtesy to the wooUen cap. I teU thee, vUe churl, I scorn to parley with thee, wast
thou robed in goat-skins with the hair out¬ ward." " Why, thou thing of velvet and feathers !" exclaimed Mattathias, fiercely, " thou mere fardel of an ItaUan pedlar, an' thou art not conformable, I wiU be myself thy tailor, and take measure of thee with this club, in such sort that thou shalt think the devd is broke loose:—thy doublet shall be slashed after a fashion of mine own devising;—the trunk pinked, not with needles, but with lances and arrows;—thy vest shaU be seamed from coUar to girdle by a curious two-handed sword;—and thy skin left hanging in slips about thee, Uke the points that truss thy hose withal." " Send a thousand arrows through me, base churls!" said the gaUant-minded cox¬ comb, " even the whole ammunition of your rascaiUe band, and then despair to hear aught from me but the defiance and disdain I utter now." Here he attempted once more to fling himself into a graceful attitude; but feeUng VOL, II. G
the pressure of the cords, exclaimed in the double anguish of pain and mortified vanity, " Curse thee, peasant! undo me these cords : their damnable ligatures wiU not let me eA r en die Uke a gentleman." " Thou hast come to us, Uke Agag, deU- cately, and like Agag shalt thou perish," said the fierce warrior, raising his club. " Oh, spare him !" cried Genevieve — " spare the gaUant knight!—alas, for pity ! Must he die for valour and good faith ?" "I do perceive," said Verac to himself, " that this heretic damsel hath. a glimmering —as it were, a smaU Ught of discretion." Mattathias suspended his blow, not at her entreaty, but at the uproar in another part of. the cave, Avhere a siimlar conference be¬ tween Boanerges and SemonviUe Avas just arriving at a similar conclusion. " Dolt-headed and unnurtured lord!" said the indignant preacher, " a club may con¬ vince thy skull; but it vvere vain boasting to say it could beat thy brains out- J ' " There's a jest!" said the Uteral De
Semonville; " as if a man's brains were to be found any where but in his skull, I trow; —but all's one for that. You have despoiled me of mine armour, and pinioned me here, as men truss a capon for my lady's trencher; and if you beat my brains out, I would you would know I ever valued them the least of my possessings. Here's goodly handling of a noble by a villain peasant!" " Better than thy meed, thou railing Rabshakeh f retorted the preacher : " what usage had we met at thy hands, had we fallen into them? AVhen did thou and thy godless companions spare the life of an Albigeois ?" " And reason good," quoth the knight. " Why, thou puzzle-headed knave! is there no difference atween us ? Are not we sons of Holy Church, and ye vile heretics, whom we are licensed to slay, abolish, and demolish when need serves, and on lawful occasions ? What! hast no sense?—canst not make a difference ? with a pestilence to thee !" Another pleading shriek from Genevieve g a
withheld the arm of Boanerges. " Oh, harm him not!" she cried; " shed not the blood of the helpless and the prisoner!" " Mass!" said De Verac: " the Ught of the damsel's discretion is marveUously in the wane, when she pleads for such an ass as De Semon AiUe." " Maiden," said Mattathias, " thou hast no part in this mattei. Befits it thee to mix in the councU of the saints, or the deeds of waniors ? Did Said's daughter strive with the prophet when he smote the Amalekite ?" " Alas, no!" said GeneAieve, timidly re¬ treating ; " but she saved the life of David, when Said sent men to slay him." "We w T aste thne," said Arnaud, "with these foolish knights,"—(" I kneAV they Avould call me a fool," said SemonviUe: " it is passing strange how aU men find out that, as if I had ever told them of it.")—" They knoAv not the deUverance that hath been wrought for us: take them forth and let them behold the armies of the faithful covering the mountains, and then they AviU
gladly ransom life and safety at the price we name," The prisoners were then rudely thrust to the entrance of the cave and bid to lift up their eyes and behold. " Look forth," said Mattathias, " look forth, behold Israel is come up by tribes unto the battle, and the Canaanite shall perish out of the land," "Look forth," repeated Boanerges, "for behold the mountains are covered with cha¬ riots and with horses of fire, Uke that vision ofEUjahinDothan." The prisoners beheld the fuU array of the army of Count Raymond. " Woe, woe to you, clear and gallant spirits," cried De Verac, in the anguish of sudden convic¬ tion ; " ye have perilled your lives and honour in vain. Some hundred armed knights against a host, and led by Raymond of Toulouse! Oh, for the men at arms that are slumbering within the fatal towers of Courtenaye !"—" What sayest thou ? " said Arnaud. " It boots not to ask," said Matta-
thias, Avho drank-in the unguarded exclama^ tion Avith ear and soul; " stiU less may it boot delaying: saddle me a SAvift horse that I may suddenly bear the tidings to Count Raymond, Thou wilt go Avith me, brother Boanerges?"—" Of a surety I AviU," ansAvered he:—"such tidings must not cool' by the way."—"I AviU also go Avith you," said Arnaud, seizing on the horse of SemonviUe; " peradventure ye have taken up this matter unadvisedly." Mattathias returned no ansAver, and the party Avere setting off at full speed Avhen the deacon, who had discussed his kid, seized the stirrup of Mattathias, exclaiming, "And who is to guard the prisoners?"—" Thou, if thou wilt/' said Mattathias, flinging him off: " Avhat, are they not bound, and hath not the door of the cave a bolt and staple ? Away to thy ward, Sir deacon, and I pray thee surfeit not thy prisoners by a too plentiful share of thy prize "—and he gaUoped off. "I Avarrant thee for that," said the dea¬ con, looking after them: "they shaU not have
a morsel to comfort their hearts—not a morsel. In, in; ye have heard your sentence, ye erring knights; look for no refreshment but the sweet word in season, which shall be administered to you abundantly." " Spare us thy cursed chattering," said De Verac, " and we will hold all privation Ught." " I would I had the golden legend here," said SemonviUe, "or, indeed, any book of riddles; I never skiUed to read, but my old tutor, who was a Benedictine monk, made me com¬ mit many of them to memory, and methinks to knock a hard text or a I"envoy about his head, woidd give me a huge deUght." " In, in, I say," cried the deacon, in aU the pride of authority: "ye wiU not linger thus at the gates of Lucifer."—"How should we," said De Verac, "seeing we shaU have so apt a porter as thou art ? By the mass, this cursed door was made for the entrance only of shaveling hermits or hooded peasants. Nay, there be uses in calamity—had I my plumed cap of maintenance on, I must be fain to enter on aU fours."
CHAPTER VI. I keep good meat at home, knave ;— * * * * * Yes, Sir, 1 will not fail you all next week. » Beaumont and Fletcher's Women Pleased. It was Avith terror that Genevieve saAV the prisoners committed to such a hold and such a warder. They Avere both in the full vigour of their strength, their friends Avere perhaps ap¬ proaching even if they were unable to Uberate themselves, and their only guards Avere the aged and feeble Pierre, a young maiden, ancl the deacon, who, exclusive of his infirmity, was nev r er suspected of carrying his courage to any dangerous extremity. From the dis¬ consolate demeanour of the knights there Avas not, indeed, much to be apprehended. They sat gloomily doAvn on a rude bench
. of stone, where theu- bound arms, drooping heads, and dos-a-dos position, made each resemble the figure of the tristis captivus in arcu in an old Roman triumph. " So here we are," said De Verac dolefully, "like a pair of birds trussed for these can¬ nibals. Men say, the filthy knaves stick not to eat horse-flesh, and even ass-flesh; what then may'st thou expect, De Semonville?" —" If they devour me," said his companion, " never trust me an' I do not make shift to stick in their throats, let them take it how they will."—" Instead of lying at peace on thy blazoned monument in effigy, thy feet resting on a greyhound, thy shield by thy side, and thy hands joined in a fashion as if thou wert praying, heralds blazoning thy 'scutcheon, priests singing mass, clerks pen¬ ning goodly epitaphs" ------ "There thou touchest me," said Semon¬ ville, ahnost weeping; " instead of all this, to be wambling about in the guts of a filthy Albi¬ geois, Hke a frog in a marsh! Would that the
first morsel of me might choke them, or may I never -see mine own castle again!"—"Not a morsel,"'not a single moi'sel," repeated the deacon, entering the cave after securing the door inside and out with the best of his care. "Curse thee, slave!" said De A^erac/to wiiom the cupidity of his jailor had suggested a faint hope of deliverance: " Curse thee ! dost thou think such mechanical morsels vvere ever in¬ tended for the food of a noble or knight ?" —"Slander not my kid," said the deacon, " whose flavour, of a verity, w*as as deUcious as if he had descended from the goats of Ne- baioth, or the flocks of Kedar." " Now if I could get this fool to join me," said De Verac ; then raising his voice, " why, thou eldest child of famine and apparent heir of mere emptiness! thou who hast slept in a warren that thou mightest have visions of vermin ; and hast given thanks over a second course of flies i who hast surfeited at the mere smeU of a cook-shop, and lain drunk two days from winding a pipe of Malvoisie,
at the distance of a league ! I teU thee thou wouldst fall into a trance at the bare mention of the viands our sumpter-mule carried but last night."—" Of a surety the good creatures should not be disregarded," said the deacon, who hearkened with his very mouth ; " and now that I think on't, what might your stores contain ? " " If I could but make this fool understand me now!" said De Verac: "rememberest thou, Semonville, the delicious contents of our" ------ " Mine," said De Semonville, " held a piece of marchpane, an agnus, and a charm for the tooth-ache."—"Thoudreamest orravest," said Verac; "there was a huge nook of pasty, some half-dozen pheasants and part¬ ridge ------ "—" Were they red-legged ?" inter¬ rupted the deacon:—"As my lady's fool in his new hosen," said De Verac:—"a vast conger with a mane like a war-steed, and a stur¬ geon that the kings fishmonger rode on up the Seine to Paris, as there was no boat large enough to hold him." —" May this be
true ?" said Mephibosheth.—" Have faith in it, I tell thee, thou unconvinced deacon," answered Verac; "otherwise perish in unbe¬ lief, and be damned, Uke a heretic as thou art, to everlasting hunger." Semonville, who saw the turn matters were taking, had the sense to hold his tongue. "And may I hope to find these curious viands thou teUest of?"—"Thou wilt find them, that is, if thou make speed; otherwise the Crusaders, or some of thy own vile brethren, will taste of dainty fare ere long."—"I will gird up my loins, and that suddenly," said the dea¬ con, with much trepidation : " foul shame and sin it were if any of the weaker brethren fell into a gin and a snare because of the savoury meats of the wicked. Surely for them to taste of the accursed thing in any wise, were exceeding sinful—it were abo¬ minable, and not good."— " Peradventure the mule may have strayed a mile or twain into the forest," said Verac ; " in such case thou wilt not be slack to follow it."—"Tell me not of miles," said the deacon., •* my feet
are as harts' feet, and as a young roe's upon the mountains." Genevieve, whose terrors increased every moment, now at last feebly and fearfully attempted to detain him. " Can it be," she cried, " that thou art about to depart and desert us in this strait ? Alas! how wiU you answer for your charge, left in the hands of a feeble maiden and a weak old man?" —"Woman," answered the deacon, "why troublest thou me ? Are they not bound, and hath not the door a bolt ? I tell- thee, in¬ asmuch as lyeth in me, shaU the weaker brethren be saved from the snare, even though I devoured the viands myself; yea, aU of them, or hid them secretly beneath in the earth."—" The fiend fly away with thee for a dissembUng glutton!" said Verac, as the deacon departed ;—" and thou," to Semon¬ viUe, " couldst not aid me by a word to uphold his humour of luxury ?**—" By holy Mary," answered the other, "thou didst utter forth such enormous Ues about a sturgeon riding on th? king of France and I
know not what, that at first I deemed thou wast crazed; and I promise thee I never much affected lies, except they were told in the way of honesty, as Ues should always be." —" Hush!—and to our task." The last sound of the deacon's halting steps was no sooner heard, than the knights began to apply the ropes with which their hands were bound to a sharp projection of the rock that was near them, and to try and cut them by the friction. For some time their industry was more painfid than profitable, and their hands were stripped of skin and streamed with blood before a single rope gave way. At length knot after knot yielded, and the ropes be¬ gan to hang in shreds about their wrists. Genevieve saw it, and comprehended the extremity of her danger; but terror, instead of paralyzing her strong mind, only stimu¬ lated it, and the very approach of peril sug¬ gested to her the means of escaping from it, and making a friend of the exigency. . Amand, whose romanceful wanderings had made him acquainted with every cave in the
hiUs of Languedoc, had availed himself of his short stay to point out to her that in case of danger tliere was a funnel or nar¬ row passage winding upward through the rock right over where the hermit had Ught- ed his fire of dried leaves. She now turned her eyes on it, and prepared to speak: " Noble knights," said she, in a faltering voice, " I see your purpose, and vain were it for a feeble maiden to say she could resist it. It is easy to cut the ropes that bind you, and easier to break through that shattered door ; but as you value your lives, risk them not in such desperate purpose." " AVhat says the heretic damsel ?" asked Semonville, tugging hard at his manacles.— " By heaven, I know not," said Verac, " but never did I hear such a sdvery and lute- toned voice breathe from plebeian Ups: I am rapt in Ustening, and am in sooth as one—" " Heed not now what thou art as" said the other, " but what thou art indeed:—say on, damsel;—the devil himself must have knit this knot."—" I say," said
Genevieve, her courage rising Avith her fears, " tliat a thousand lances AviU be aimed at the breast of him who dares present it at that threshold; and should you by miracle escape to the hills, ten thousand arrows, from bows that never faded, v^iU pursue your flight, and naU you to the earth. There are, indeed, means of safe and secret escape, but they are knoAvn to me alone; nor AviU I seU the knoA'/- indge for nought." " SIioav us the means, i^d thou shalt find us no niggards for the m. ice," quoth SemonviUe.—" I do note some lineaments of likeUhood in the damsel," said Verac; "some touches of love's pencil, toys of Cytherea, and odd remnants of the Graces; that is, an' her hood Avere better set, and her loose exorbitant locks Avere submissive to the hot rebuke and tortuous discipUne of the silver tongs."—"Oh, heed not me," said Genevieve, tremblingly eager to Avithdraw their attention from herself—"think of your vaUant Uves, your precious moments: there is a path by Avhich you may win the summit of the hiU, beyond the reach of fleet arrow or
keen eye; and if I point it out to you, what shaU be my guerdon ?"—" I avUI straightAvay betake myself to it, to prove I am not un¬ thankful," said SemomiUe; " and, moreover, I AviU fill thy hood Avith bezants—that is, Avhen thy people restore me that they have robbed me of."—" Noble knight, I ask no gold," said the maiden timidly.—" Tush, I kneAV she would 'sdeign thy proffer," said Verac; "thou art fitter to treat for thy ransom with a greedy peasant or gold-griping Jew, than Avith a damsel in the vanity of her rustical comeUness. I teU thee, maid, thou shalt have a mantle guarded Avith vair, a tunic of broidery, and a hood of such quaint and exceUent fashion, that all the female heretics of thy party shaU be com r erted, and say their prayers in Latin, in scecula saculorum, to the utter demolition of heresy !" GeneAieve's look of humble but expressive rejection showed that this gorgeous proffer Avas as little valued as the other. " In the name of all the devils," said SemonviUe, " what wouldst thou have, or Avhat art thou?—for
woman thou canst not be, unmoved as thou art by gold or gay attire. So may Marie aid me, if thou be not some spirit of the woods or fairy of the mountains. Look to it, De Verac; she wiU ask of us anon a drop of blood, or a lock of hair, or something that wiU merely cost our perdition."—■" Oh no, no!" cried Genevieve, "mistrust me not: I wiU sud¬ denly point out your, way, and ask but for my meed," uncovering the venerable head of the sleeping Pierre, " that when ye see a head so white as this, or meet a lone and lowly maiden like me, ye wiU do no despite to the feeble, no dishonour to helpless woman." " This passes!" said SemonviUe; the phrase by which he always expressed his sense of whatever exceeded the range of his faculties, or the expansion of his sensibiUty. " Fair nymph of the cave," said the more gentle De Verac, " most poUshed sylvan, and indeed faithful heretic, doubtless thou art the daughter of a CathoUc, and as such my orisons shaU be breathed for thee to our lady Venus and saint Cupid."
" Breathe orisons for thyself the rather," said SemonviUe, to Avhom Genevieve had indicated the way, and who had begun to ascend, " for the way seems perilous, dark, and rugged." De Verac foUowed, and his voice was soon heard exclaiming, in plain¬ tive accents, as his di'apery suffered in the rude ascent—" Saints and angels, Aviiat a rent! mercy, good crag—gently, thou vd- lain briar. By Heaven! the very rocks here are turned heretic, and deUght to pierce the raiment of the faithful. I shaU seem in this ragged attire Uke an ape that had run aAvay from a gleeman, and ran AvUd through the countiy with his scarlet slops dangUng about him." " By the mass, I am stuck," quoth Semon¬ viUe, with a groan. " Go up." " I cannot." " Come doAvn." " I cannot." <" Then let me pass thee, and gain the entrance," said the more adroit Verac; and,
as he spoke, he sprang upwards, and at one light and vigorous bound reached the aper¬ ture. —" AA'Tiat dost thou shout for," cried SemonviUe, " thou traitor knight and false bro¬ ther-in-arms, as if aU the devils in hell were in thy throat ?"—" The Crusaders," shouted Verac, forgetting their peril in the enthusiasm caused by their gaUant appearance—" the Crusaders: they wind doAvn the mountain Uke a stream of gold. The great standard of the cross nods and blazes to the noon-day sun: wave aU youi* banners, shout your bat¬ tle-word, couch your lances, noble knights, valiant Crusaders— Dieu et C Eg Use." SemonviUe had now toUed to the entrance, and stood gazing on that gaUant sight in despair. " Now Christ them sain and save!" he cried; " for Uving men they never wiU win back to the towers of Courtenaye this night:—now hie thee on, A r erac, I wiU not lie slack to foUow:—perchance we may warn— " " AA r e at least can perish with them," cried A 7 erac, bounding from the hill-top Uke a falcon from his stoop.
Him foUow r ed the Sieur de SemonviUe, Avishing, at every stumble he made, De Mont¬ fort and liis mad counsel at the devil. " Safe!'' cried GeneAieve, as she heard the distant voices, and looked on her parent; " safe! thou from death, and I, perchance, from Avorse."
CHAPTER VII. To turn the rein were sin and shame,— . To fight vvere wondrous peril: What would ye do novv, Roland Cheyr.e, Were ye Glenallan's Earl ? The Antiquary. Mattathias and his party lost no time in making their Avay to the presence of Count Raymond. As they passed along, they Avere loudly greeted by the men-at-arms, whose fair array and increasing numbers augment¬ ed their confidence, and Avhose greeting they did not faU to rejmy by hints that they bore tidings of much moment, such as justified their utmost diligence of speed. They had soon passed the vanguard, and Avere con¬ ducted into the presence of the leader of the host. Count Raymond of Toulouse Avas
seated on his war-steed, in complete armour from head to foot, in expectation of imme¬ diate action; he had neither caused his tent to be pitched, nor even dismounted, since break of day. He was surrounded by knights, aU, like him, armed for action, and by preachers and pastors who were vehemently exhorting him to go up against Ramoth-Gilead, and pre¬ vail against it; and to whom he Ustened with the constraint of one who, weary of the im¬ portunities of a faction, stiU feels their influence indispensable. His demeanour was noble and martial; but when he spake, his hesitating voice, broken sentences, and undecided man¬ ner, verified the fickle, pUant, and iiTesolute character wliich historians have generaUy ascribed to him. On his brow might be seen traces of past calamities, of recent trials, and of dangers momentarily expected; and he looked, in truth, Uke one weary of playing the arduous part assigned him in Ufe, but sadly resolved to sustain it with dignity to the close. In early youth he had been a zealous persecutor of the heretics, and sworn friend
to the brother of the Lord of Courtenaye, the father of the lady IsabeUe, their un¬ changeable enemy: he afterwards became the patron of the Albigeois, and then commenced a scene of feudal hostiUty between the former friends, which ended in the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye surprising one of the castles of Count Raymond, and slaughtering his wife and infant children; for this he was rewarded by the King of France with that vast accession of tenitoiy which made the lady Isabelle the richest as weU as noblest heiress in the land; and for this Count Raymond had deeply sworn against the house of Courtenaye a vengeance he had never yet heen em¬ powered to wreak. The rest of his life par¬ took of that vaciUating character which had marked its commencement—now making the most abject submissions to the Pope, and now heading an army against the Crusaders —now indignantly opposing the superstitions and the domination of the Church of Rome, —now revolted by the enthusiasm and daring pretensions of the Albigeois:—such was Ray-
mond of Toulouse, firm alone in his pur¬ pose of vengeance against the house of Cour¬ tenaye; yet was he not v/ithout noble and gentle quaUties: he possessed valour, and had often proved it; and he had a heart suscep¬ tible of strong affections, for he had never ceased, to mourn for the wife of his bosom and the chUdren of his youth. He received Mattathias and his party cour¬ teously, and forgot not even to enquire after the pastor Pierre, on the ineffaceable image of whose simpUcity and sanctity of character his AA^earied thoughts reposed delightedly for a moment; but Av r hen, in the progress of their communication, they stated that by the in¬ telligence of theu- prisoners the lives of his enemies were that day in his hand; and Boanerges added (more than he knew) that doubtless the Lord of Courtenaye and his household were among that devoted band, Count Raymond started in his seat and dreAv his sword; and his horse rearing at the sudden impulse of his rider, gave to the beholders the idea of an equestrian statue bounding VOL. II. H
into life by the poAver of magic. Count Ray¬ mond rose upright in his stirrups; his eyes flashed through the bars of his helmet, and, AA'aving his bright SAvord abov T e his head, he voAved to God not to quit the field that day AvhUe a drop of the felon blood of De Cour¬ tenaye remained unshed on the earth. Waving brands and banners afloat, and shouts that rent the air, haUed this declara¬ tion ; and none Avas louder in acclamation than Mattathias, avIio dashed about his club and yeUcd in an ecstasy of ferocious enthu¬ siasm. " Let us fall upon them !" he cried, " and overtake them; neither turn again till Ave have destroyed them: let their car¬ cases be as the dust of the plain, and their blood lie Uke deAv on the vaUey." " Bring forth my banner !" shouted Count Raymond: " sound aU your trumpets, and lift your battle-cry Uke thunder among the mountains !— Dieu ct VEvangilc I —Ave will rush upon them Uke the avalanche fi-om the precipice, and bury them wiiere they stand!"
" Hold ! and hear me—even me!" ex¬ claimed Boanerges, grasping the reins of the 2)lunging and fiery steed—" hear me, I say, that thou quench not the light of Israel." And as he stood checking the horse and his rider in their might, his head and feet naked, his beard and hairy garments streaming in the wind, while Raymond looked down on him with impatience and doubt, he was no mean image of an ancient prophet, a Mi- caiah, or a Jeremiah, withstanding a king of Israel as he made himself ready for battle. " Hath not the Lord delivered them into thy hand ? and shall a hah of the head of the meanest of iny lord's servants faU to the ground this day because of them ? Tany till they are inclosed in the vaUey, where they thought to slay the flock with the shepherd: is it not a place of marshes and springs of water, where the feet of their horses shaU stumble and be snared? And when they Ue before thee Uke a wild bull in a net, then shoot out thine an'ows and h2
consume them. Behold I, even I," he cried, exalting liis aAvful voice—" I say unto this people, as Moses said unto the children of Israel Avhen the Egyptians pursued after them, ' Stand stiU and see the salvation of the Lord this day.'" " Thy counsel pleaseth me weU," said Count Raymond, (as the last counsel he heard Avas ahvays sure to do). " I Avould not," he added, muttering to himself, " that felon lord had even a chance of flight to saA r e his forfeit life," The situation of the ground w r as indeed eminently favourable to the mode of Avar- fare suggested: hiUs aboA^e hiUs in endless undulation, some shrouded in mist, some sheltered by Avood, afforded a thousand points of concealment to the army of the Albigeois, who had possessed themselves of their summits. At the foot of that Avhere Count Raymond and his knights were post¬ ed, Avas a narroAV and rocky vaUey, intersect¬ ed Avith many streams, and closed at the extremity by a perpendicular mass of rock.
Here the Albigeois hoped that the Crusaders might direct their course, as the spot closely resembled that where they had retreated the preceding night ;*—nor were they deceived in their expectations. The band of knights, after riding for some space diffusedly, as men in search of pastime^, began to approach the vaUey. With that infatuation which seemed to rule aU their counsels and movements that day, they de¬ termined, in the very wantonness of their assured success, to feast under the shelter of some rocks during the heat of the day, and play at chess for the Uves of the heretics, Uke Benhadad of yore carousing in his pavi- 'Hon while his enemies were arraying their battle against him. Tents and tables were quickly spread by the attendants ofthe Abbot of Normoutier and of the lady IsabeUe ; and this delay gave time to the forces of Count Raymond to possess themselves of every van¬ tage-post and point of assault, also to refresh themselves, being weary as men who had marched aU night.
The mountains had cast their shadows deep and broad into the vaUey, when the Crusaders, after placing the lady IsabeUe and her attendants on a wooded knoU, and taking their leave with the joyous gestures and shouts of men who were parting to a feast, began to enter the val¬ ley. A disposition had been effectuaUy made for their reception. Every summit of the surrounding hiUs was covered with parties of the Albigeois, screened by thickets or clumps of trees; even the low sides of that rocky vaUey were hung, wherever the shel¬ ter of a crag w r as interposed, with archers and sUngers. A few of the fugitive Albi¬ geois were posted conspicuously on the heights, as if they had just made their escape, so far as to tempt pursuit, by ap¬ pearing to point out where the rest were concealed. The Crusaders rushed in a wild, tumultu¬ ous train into the vaUey, descrying a few fugitives on the rocks that enclosed it, and believing the rest had shrunk amid its ca-
verns and cHffs; disregarding the fractured rocks that formed its bed, and the streams that divided them, and amid Avhich their horses Avere noAv up to their haunches, now struggUng for a precarious footing amid the stony paths, till they had almost reached its extremity, Avithout discovering an individual, and their progress Avas checked liy that per¬ pendicular mass of rock, against Avhich the foremost rider ahnost dashed the chevron of his barded steed before he perceived it was an unscaleable barrier. The Albigeois Avatched their prey in si¬ lence: not an archer drew his boAV—not a sHnger raised his arm—till the last knight had rode into the defile. Then from hill, and cUff, and crag—from every thicket, bush, and almost bough—from front and rear— from flank to flank—doAvn rained the arrow- shower, thicker than the mountain-rain; and fast came mingled-the sHng-stones, like hail in a mountain storm: and every shaft had its mark—and every stone left its dint—and the Avhole assault seemed dealt by invisible
hands; for not a shout, war-cry, or word issued from the assailants. The Crusaders, entangled and disarrayed, still were undismayed, believing this a mere desultory attack of the fugitives—the flight of a few spent arrows. All, however, agreed on the immediate expediency of quitting the defile; and with a wild and derisive, but still joyous shout, they attempted to regain the entrance^ and recover the height from which they had descended. It was easier to quit than to regain it. Their array broken— their armour useless—their noble steeds gall¬ ed, wounded, tormented by the broken and rocky ground; backing, facing, rearing, ahd charging on each other—plumes rent—ban¬ ners torn—shield clashing with shield—hous¬ ings dyed in blood:—what' a different group did they present from that which, but a few moments past, had rushed like a stream into the valley, flooding its rocky banks to their height with a rich tide of gorgeous chivalry! Meanwhile the archers and slingers gave them not a moment's respite; and when they had
at length struggled out of the vaUey, the men-at-arms came rushing from the hills oh every side Uke mountain torrents. "We are betrayed!" said Sir Paladour, riding up to De Montfort:" there needs SAvift counsel in this strait. Let some one be des¬ patched to the Castle of Courtenaye, who may show of our perilous estate, ahd sum¬ mon the men-at-arms to our aid without delay." " I AviU do your message fuU gladly," said the Abbot of Normoutier, who rode up pant¬ ing with fatigue and fear. "In evil hour did I ever ride;with armed knights," " Haste then, lord abbot," said Paladour: " and as thou goest, I charge thee seek the lady IsabeUe, and convey her in safety to the castle; and teU her that her knight------" " Nay, I wiU be no bearer of love-token or tidings," said the abbot, darting his spurs into his steed: " is this a time for such fooleries?" "Craven priest!" said De Montfort, who saw only this action: " is it thus thou flyest ? H o
Here comes a churchman of another mettle," as the Bishop of Toulouse rode up to them. " How now, my lord of Montfort ?" cried the bishop: "how deem you now of the warning of last night ? Do you still hold it a shallow and inefficient toy? That * Beware P had we marked it in time, had saved this day the noblest blood in France from wash¬ ing the feet of base churls." " My lord of Toulouse," said De Mont¬ fort, " I would at this season that you woidd thnist me through with your lance in eaniest rather than with your bitter taunts in jest; for I perceive that I have this day brought evil on the vaUantest knights in Chiistendom; whereof, I make a vow to Christ's Mother, it repenteth me sore, so that my heart is nigh to burst mine harness for shame and agony of spirit." " Now foul befaU the tongue that re¬ proaches thee in an hour like this, noble De Montfort!" said the generous Paladour; " for surely it was the noble heat of a tme
valour that lighted the flame that must con¬ sume us this day. So may my soul see Para¬ dise, as it pants not to part in nobler company than thine!" De Montfort Avrung his hand in proud agony, AvhUe a tear was seen to start through the bars of his helmet. AVith that Sir Aymer, his armour hacked and pierced, his face disfigured by a frightful Avound Avhich laid his jaAv bare, fleAV past them Uke a flash of lightning, borne aAvay by his steed, whom he could no longer rein, and Avho Avas maddening with the pain of two arrows that quivered in his bloody flank. As the knight passed Uke a spectre, he shook his hand, streaming with blood, at De Montfort, and exclaiming, " Lo! the issue of your mad counsel!" was bome from their sight. This spectacle opened the mouths of the Crusaders, who uoav came gathering round De Montfort. " Thou the champion of the Church!" cried one; " lo, into what plight thou hast brought her champions!"—" Doff thy helmet for shame," said another, " and
borrow a coxcomb."—" Is this the noble chase," cried a third, "thou A r auntedst of? Methinks the quarry stands at fearful bay." De Montfort, as they thus assaUed him, turned from one to the other AA'ith the fury of a baited bidl on the dogs that are tearing him; then fiercely exclaiming, " I can bear your reproaches, but not mine oavu !" he tore the standard of the Cross from the bearer, and rushing right forward on the adA T ancing body of the Albigeois, flung it with aU his force among them, and plunged desperately after it. He sunk Hke a diver into the ocean ; and a fearful space elapsed before the plume of his helmet was again visible. " The standard of the Cross in peril!" cried Paladour: " no, by good Heaven! whUe an arm is left to win it. AVho dreads shame more than death, foUow me!" The spirit of the Crusaders rekindled as he spoke, and aU prepared to foUoAV him. Paladour paused as he put his lance in rest, and addressing Amirald, " Dear knight and brother," he said, " we haste to our last
field: valour itself is fiiiitless here. Should it he my fate to fall first, stay not to bestride me; but bear this token, dipped in my blood, to the lady Isabelle^ and say to her, he who wore it prized it more than life, and felt nought so bitter in death as the'pang with which he resigned it." " Courage! valiant knight and brother!" answered Amirald: " we shall yet see many a field; and the peril of this day shall be a theme for mirth in many a winter evening's talk;—but shoidd it fall otherwise, I will be a loyal messenger to the lady of thy love." As he spoke, a stone from a sling, as if aimed by the arm of a giant, smote him on the head, shattering the cheeks of his strong helmet,~-and he rolled in blood beneath his horse's feet. ; The flight of the Abbot of Normoutier, with his ecclesiastical attendants, was not unnoticed by a party who were stationed on an adjacent eminence. " Draw, Mattathias! — draw thy bow !" cried Boanerges. " There speeds a missive
to the lord of Courtenaye; and if he reach the castle ere the shadoAVs faU, the children of BeUal Avill come up against us as the sand of the sea-shore for midtitude, and Israel shaU be SAvaUowed up quick of his enemies before the sun goes down." " Send not an arrow after him," said the milder Arnaud; " he is a churchman, and of noble blood." The strong arrqw of Mattathias whistled past him as he spoke; it passed through the body of the abbot's cross-bearer, who fell dead on the earth, the splendid ensign pro¬ strated beside him. " Another !" cried Boanerges—" a fleeter, and a surer, Lo where he flies with the rags of Rome fluttering around him. Speed to tlie South, false priest, and bid thy lord the Pope send forth his vassals the kings of earth to thine aid." Another arroAV flew from the ready boAv of Mattathias, Avho stamped and ground his teeth for ver} rage as another of the attend¬ ants lay leveUed beside the abbot's rein ; who
grasping the mane of his steed, and striking his spurs to the rowel-head, gaUoped on with¬ out a mortuary prayer for his followers* souls. " When have I seen thee fad thus ?" said Boanerges. " Did not a man draw a bow at a venture and smite the king of Israel through the joints of the harness that he died ?" In the fury of disappointment Mattathias bent his bow, and aimed an arrow at the air; it flew not erring. At that moment the maddening steed of Sir Aymer bore his rider like lightning in the course the abbot had taken. The shaft struck the shoulder of Sir Aymer, whose horse feU dead under him as he rode. The old knight sunk stunned on the earth. AVith a feeble hand he unlaced his battered helmet to gasp for air, and stretch¬ ed forth the other weakly, as if to feel for his dead steed; the hand at last rested on the bloody and heaving flank, and he withdrew it. "Mad knights—a mad enterprise—a mad world"—murmured Sir Aymer;—" ond to perish thus !—done to death by vile pea¬ sants : it had been better—no matter now.
—And is this death?" he said, in a state be¬ tAveen delirium and that tendency to deep reflection Avhich the approach of death pro¬ duces in the hardest and Ughtest minds;— " the^ huge mountains dance around me Uke atoms; it is time for me to die wiien aU Nature is departing." A short' trance" over¬ whelmed his senses; he recovered from it in spasms of deadly sickness. " Would I could shape a prayer, or weave my mind into a saintly frame! It is wondrous how Ughtly I deem noAv of that matter of controversy for which I have been perilUng life all my days, and at length have lost it. I shall soon know aU—more than man can teU. The battle wanes," he murmured, as his senses failed;—" I hear no shout, no clash¬ ing of arms. Is the field lost? Courage!"— his voice growing fainter;" Sir Aymer, to the rescue!—but it grows dark;—be sure you Avake me by dawn;—Ave must fight again." A heavy trance feU on him as he struggled to rise—in vain. ' '
The desperate valour of the Crusaders had " Avith many an inroad gored" the array of the enemy, and spread such panic, that for a space around them the field was for a mo¬ ment cleared—the men-at-arms retreating on every side, and Count Raymond and his knights, sure ultimately of the field, fighting far aloof. The Bishop of Toulouse had from the first conceived the hope of effecting his escape from this desperate field, neither from cowardice nor indifference tc the event, but from that ambitious selfishness that made him rate his OAvn safety at a price above that of half his species; and he noAv attempted to reaUze it by the exertion of a strength and courage more than human : he clave his vvay right onAvard, every stroke of his bat¬ tle-axe laying a foeman prostrate; while' his war-steed, weU trained to bite Avith tooth and trample Avith hoof, tore and trod out the smaU remains of Ufe in those who feU—so the rider and horse passed on like the pale steed and him avIio bestrides it, having commission to
slay, themselves invulnerable. But De Mont¬ fort and Enguerrand de Vitry, his brother in armsi dealt round their blow r s Avith bUnd and reckless fury, making havoc of others without thought of their OAvn safety : now unhorsed and fighting on foot—noAV mounted again and discharging bloAvs to right and left, the very Avind of Avhose impulse Avas enough to fell a man of ordinary strength; their plumes and pennons appearing in the stream of fight Uke sads of gaUant barks vainly contending Avith the might of a thousand waves. But ever Sir Paladour rode round the prostrate body of Amirald, whom there vvas neither squire nor page to bear from the field; and when the foe, daunted, retired to a distance, he spur¬ red his steed, and, AvheeUng in short and fiery circles, moAved down all within the reach of his sword, and then returned to guard the body of his friend, defending both Avith his shield from the shower of an*ows that feU around them, and rested not. It was towards night, the shadoAVs of
which Avere deepened by the darkness of the surrounding hiUs, Avhen De Montfort and his companion, Aviping then* broAvs with their bloody gauntlets, sat down amid a heap of maimed trunks and severed Umbs, as two Avearicd Avoodmen sit down after the toils of the day amid the trunks and branches of a forest of feUed trees, and looked round them to spy for succour Avhile Ught yet remained in the sky. The towering form of the Bishop of Toulouse Avas still seen dimly on the verge of battle smiting Avith unabated force, but far distant from them. They saAV Paladour also; but, could even shout or bugle-sound reach him where he stood, they kneAV him too strict an observer of the laws of chivalry to quit the body of his brother in arms. Of the other knights, aU Avere slain, or had deserted the field. They saAv not where De Verac and SemonviUe, Avho had easdy found steeds and armour on the field, stiU shouted their war-cry, though too late for all but danger and death, and still did the devoir of gaUant
knights in such guise as inight weU redeem the foppery of the one and the suUen dulness of the other. There was a form they had beheld before, but knew not who he might be: it was a knight in black armour, who had late in the battle joined them ahd done vaUant deeds;—but he seemed to fly from one part of the field to the other. with a speed that prevented their either demanding his name or deriving hope from his succour. The arrows now feU in a slackened shoAver, the shouts came more distant, and this sin¬ gular figure became more conspicuous from the increased desertion of the field. " There come no succours from the Castle of Courtenaye," said Enguerrand De Vitry, turning his dim eyes sadly westAvard :—" the lord abbot hath been slain or taken, and we are left alone — to perish. The shadoAVs lengthen as our term of hope and life Avaxes shorter." " Enguerrand De Vitry," said De Mont¬ fort, " thou knowest I am not superstitious ;
and how I have borne me this day in the bloodiest field I think knight hath ever fought in, thou knowest well, and wilt report at need; but, I tell thee, I cannot shake off the heavy presage that weighs down my spirits when I behold yon knight in black armour; I deem him of no earthly frame or mould. Be confirmed that our death's-day is come, and that he comes a messenger from Heaven or hell to tell us so." Enguerrand endeavoured to cheer his friend; but at this moment the black knight rode by them hke a storm, his horse's feet scattering splintered armour and lopped limbs like leaves in a gale; and he shouted, " Linger ye here while your task is unfinished,—your destiny unfulfilled ? Follow !—follow me!" De Montfort braced his helmet and grasp¬ ed his lance once more at these words ; ahd his companion could see by the twilight that the flushed and sanguine hue of his counte¬ nance was exchanged for an ashy paleness; he had but short time for observation.
Count Raymond and his knights came rushing from the hiUs like a flood, and sur¬ rounded them on every side. Enguerrand was the first to fall, and De Montfort after a few desperate blows, eveiy one of which cost the Ufe of an assaUant, was struck from his horse, under whose feet he fell so tram¬ pled and defaced, that the Albigeois vainly sought to recognize his body among the slain. Sir Paladour remained last on the field; for De Verac and SemonviUe, deeming aU lost, had taken flight in hope of succouring the lady IsabeUe. He looked around him, and saw no one Uving on the field but him¬ self. The short twiUght was past; the bright stars came forth above his head; the moun¬ tains, with their sharp and ridged Unes, stood strongly defined in the deep dark blue of an autumnal sky. The night-breeze that fanned his burning forehead congealed the blood on his wounds, whose pain became intense; and the sound of a thousand streams, that seemed to his fevered perceptions flowing near him, excited a sensation of thirst almost intolerable.
It Avas at this moment that his ear was struck by a singular sound,—it Avas the voice of an idiot, a fool of the Lord of Cour¬ tenaye, less than half-Avitted, but shreAvd, gibing, and affectionate withal, Avhom neither persuasions nor bloAvs could drive back from accompanying the Crusaders that 'disastrous day. When all Avas over, he sat hun down on the summit of an eminence, and began singing a kind of triumphant song Avith the most lugubrious aspect imaginable: the Avords were— De Montfort shall come from the hills above And carry all before him— This song of an idiot, heard amid the aAvful stiUness of departed battle, heard Avhere the vaUant, the mighty, the eloquent, and the beautiful Avere dumb, had a strange meaning and poAver; but Paladour was no longer able to feel; a deep stupor began to creep over him. The last sensation he had Avas that of trying to fall so as to hide the body of Amirald, and even in death protect it from spoUation and indignity. The pre-
caution faded; the soUed and broken armour of Paladour offered no temptation to the plunderers, Avho noAV began to traverse the field, Avhile Amirald's, who had faUen early in the strife, Avas stUl fresh and resplendent. The senseless bodies of the youths Avere soon torn asunder. The idiot died that night, and his dying song vibrated on the ear of Sir Aymer, who Avas awaking from his deep and death-Uke trance. " Ha, ha," said the old knight, rousing Avith his constitutional laugh, " there be greater fools bore than thou.—I marvel that my squire comes not to arm me. God's mother! have I slept aU this whUe, and never drew brand whUe there was battle so near me ? Methought I rode Avith Cru¬ saders in my dream.—How cold the morning sun is!" he muttered shivering, as the moon rose in pale and midnight glory over that bloody field, and the echoes of the hiUs re¬ sounded with the hymns of the triumphant Albigeois. These "watchers of the night" seemed to take up their song of rejoicing along with the host of Heaven, with those
who have " neither speech nor language, but whose voices are heard among them;" like them they lifted up their voices all that night from hiU to hiU; and whUe the rich sounds rolled into the dim and stiUed vaUeys, a pure heart and ear might almost have deemed them the faint and far-descending echo of the in¬ audible harmonies of heaven.
vol. 11.
1
CHAPTER VIII. Blount and Fitz-Eustace rested still, With Lady Clare upon the hill, On which (for far the day was spent) The western sun-heams now were bent. Marmion. The lady IsabeUe Avith her attendants had been placed by the Crusaders on an eminence Avhen they set out on that disastrous enterprise, and she had waved her hand and scarf to them as long as Sir Paladour re¬ mained in sight. Though compeUed to ac¬ company them, she shrank from the sight of slaughter, and ordered her attendants to spread her awning or tent on the side of the mil opposite that by which the knights had descended. Here reclined on cushions, Avhich her dam¬ sels spread on the grass, she lay Ustening to tales of the Crusaders, among whose praises the maidens who knew hoAV to soothe their
lady's ear, forgot not to reckon highest those of Sir Paladour. Her only attendants were Marguerite, Blanche, and Germonda, two pages, the driver of her horse-Utter, and tlie Monk of Montcahn, whom the Abbot of Normoutier, when inflamed with wine, had vainly pressed to join in the assault. The dame and damsels were stretched at the feet of the lady; the pages and driver were ever and anon climbing to the summit of the hUl, to look forth on the field; the Monk of Montcalm stood apart and told liis beads till even-song, and then knelt and prayed fer¬ vently at a distance. Thus, beneath the silk¬ en awning there was a rich foreground of lux¬ urious and reposing beauty; the picturesque habits and eager gestures of the young pages gave character and Ufe to the group; and the thin ascetic form, the pale uplifted eye, and dark garments of the monk, as he knelt beneath the branches of a mighty pine, lent a dark and solemn contrast to the picture. Evening came on, and the lady at length consented to the petition of her damsels, and i 2
dismissed Germonda to the summit of the hUl for tidings which the pages had faded to bring. It has been already told how aU communica¬ tion had been cut off by Count Raymond's army. It is, therefore, no man-el that the first in¬ timation of her danger the lady receiA*ed Avas from the cries of her attendant. " Holy hea¬ ven !" she cried, " the heretics are increased to tenfold their former number. They are pour¬ ing from hiU and mountain like a flood."— "Thine eyes are bedazzled by the setting sun," said the lady, half raising herself from her cushions of silk; " screen them Avith thy hand, ahd tell me Avhat thou seest."—"I see thou¬ sands and tens of thousands pouring doAvn on the Crusaders." — " And were they hundreds of thousands," said the noble maiden, " they will cower Uke a flock of sparcows Avhen the falcon is abroad. Is not Sir Paladour in the field? How fight they, and Avhat arms do they bear?"—" Alas," said the damsel, wring¬ ing her hands, " they fight not with clubs and arrows; but Avith spear and sword, like armed men; and, as I may guess by plume and ban-
ner, no churl or peasant leads them on, but nobles and knights expert in war." "Thou ravest,", said the lady. "Woidd they not ere this have sent us tidings, if aught thou teUest of had befaUen ? Look forth again."—" There comes one Avho seems to bear tidings by his speed," said the damsel. The lady IsabeUe started from her seat, and leant over the broAV of the hiU, straining neck and eye to catch a view of the approaching horseman, from Avhose bearing and speed she and her companions dreAv such auguiies as the distance and the windings of the hills aUowed of. The horseman was the Abbot of Normoutier, who had escaped the arrows of Mattathias, and lain perdu amid a thicket tiU he deemed he could reach the toAvers of Courtenaye in safety. " It is the Abbot of Normoutier who rides with good tidings," said Germonda.—" He rides not like the bearer of good tidings," said Blanche; " he seems rather the worn and Avearied courier of a discomfited host and a disastrous day."—"What tidings, lord abbot?"
aU exclaimed, as he checked his rein on the summit of the hiU. " To flight!—to flight!" gasped the abbot;—" fly, lady !—all is lost! the hope of chivalry and of Christendom hath perished on yonder field. One hundred and fifty thousand Albigeois — I counted them eveiy man—have either dropt from the clouds or ascended from heU, and tossed us about like so many tennis-balls over these cursed hills. Valour was a mock, and stout-deaUng but cftll^-play against such numbers. If ever there was a Uon in a cope and cowl, as such did I bear me this day ; but'aU would not serve. One Sir Paladour would have had me qmt the field to bear a love-message, or some such idle toy; but, I promise you, when I laid hand to brand, my fingers forgot it had ever a sheath." —" Where fights Sir Pala¬ dour?" cried IsabeUe, starting as from a trance at the name ;—" where is De Mont¬ fort ?—where Sir Aymer ?—Avhat are Verac and SemonviUe doing ? — where is the noble cavalcade that heralded me at noon to this fatal spot ?—wiiere is Paladour ?—oh that
he had come to my aid instead!" ------ " Alas, good youth !" said the abbot;—" he bore himself braA r ely, very indifferently brave;— then a sort of clubs came clattering on his helmet, and, as near as I could guess, some hundred arroAvs or so pierced through his mail where Ave stood together; he said no more but * Commend me to the lady Isabelle;' and there he lay : I bestrode him—but what availed mortal valour ?"—" What indeed I" said the lady IsabeUe, with a sudden and fearful calmness of tone—"what avaded it Avhen Paladour feU ?" " Lady, betake thee to flight," said the abbot, terrified at her looks;—" if thou Avin the towers of Courtenaye ere night, thou Avilt be glad Avoman*; for the soul of Sir Paladour, trust me, it is half-way to pur¬ gatory ere this, and that it halt not there long avUI be owing to the prayers I put up as I rode." " Hie, noble lady, at thy utmost speed !"
* " Glad woman" is a phrase of that age.
cried the Monk of Montcahn; " the heretics prevail; the cry of ' Dieu et CEvangile /' comes loud on the wind."—(The pages and tlie maidens gathered round the lady.)— " Men say the devil, in the likeness of Count Raymond, is in the field," quoth the abbot; " for myself, I value him not a straw; I bear holy reUcs about me." As he spoke, the horses were taken from the litter, and the lady IsabeUe placed on the fleetest by her pages. "Ride up—ride up!" said the abbot; " ride up, damsels, by your lady's rein; me¬ thinks she looks wondrous wan, and skiUs not to manage her palfrey."—" Dear lady and mistress !" cried the attendants, " what aU you, and wherefore do you not betake yourself to flight ?" -- " Nothing," said the lady ;—"I ail nothing:" and a fearful stupor pervading her, she added faintly, " Lead me —guide me even where you will;—I know not what I say—I reck not whither I go." At this moment the sharp whizzing of a score of arrows was heard at the foot of the hiU, and the shout of * Dieu et CEvangile /'
made the abbot set spurs to his horse, and the lady's attendants to hurry her off Avith what speed they might. Germonda and Blanche, springing on their steeds, Avere not slow to folloAV; AvhUe dame Marguerite, Avho alone had been neglected in this hunied arrangement, Avith a spring and talons like those of a Avild cat, darted herself, en croupe, behind the Abbot of Normoutier as he gal¬ loped along, and clung close as a vice to the body of horse and rider. The consternation of the abbot, who imagined that the whole host of Count Raymond Avere seizing on him, au derriere* was beyond aU power of descrip¬ tion. Demosthenes himself never shouted £wyp£i in a louder voice than the abbot con¬ tinued to exclaim, gaUoping aU the' AvhUe, " Hold me to ransom!—a bishop's ransom !—- a king's! — it shaU be paid;—three thousand crowns of gold—the saints shaU melt—altar- plate, pix, and chaUce—cope, ring, and mitre —abbey-lands and costly missals—six thou¬ sand crowns !—on the faith of a churchman —eight thousand!—gripe not so hard! the i 5
crowns are to be Avrung out of my purse, not mine intestines."—" Does the lord abbot deem so hardly of a fan* friend ?" said the mincing voice of dame Marguerite.—" Fair friend!" quoth the abbot, then first venturing a glance over his shoulder: " fair fiend !—fair succuba I —fair night-mare!—why cUngest thou to me, vUe hag ? An' I had not thought thou wast a host of devils risen from heU to seize me, I am no true churchman !" —" Uncourtly abbot!" said the lady.—"I teU thee/' said the abbot, interrupting her, " thou or I must quit hold ; and when it comes to a question between me and thee in a case of mortal peril, it demands no skiU to find the issue: I teU thee, I wiU stick by my steed."—" And I will stick by thee," said the dame, fastening her fangs closer than ever. This movement renewed the abbot's delirium, and he shouted aloud: " Holy Saints ! save and succour me! but this time — this time only, I entreat! —and if ever I draw brand for Holy Church again, take me at my w r ord, and let me be spitted on the anow of an Albigeois, and
served up for Count Raymond's cannibal supper." So saying, he struck spurs more deeply into his steed, who, mad with his double burthen, galloped on furiously; whde dame Marguerite, at each succussion, rose Uke a tennis-baU from the croup, and sunk again with a motion, of which the celerity bore no imaginable proportion to the grace or satisfaction of the performer. In the end, the gouvernante's pertinacity proved more than a match for the abbot's horsemanship : he was left prostrate on the earth; whde the dame gaUoped on seule, with the air of a " dam¬ sel met in forest wide by knight of Lbgres or of Lyones." The abbot, sore dismayed and much ag¬ grieved in aU his members, was encountered about an hour after by the Monk of Mont¬ calm, who was pacing his way to the Castle of Courtenaye. "Alas! and art thou here, lord abbot ?" said the monk.—" Alas, and I am !" quoth the abbot. " I trusted thou hadst been at the Castle of Courtenaye by this."— " So I had trusted myself," said the abbot;
" but thou seest how matters are. A certain fury, or goblin, sent by those heretics, who deal with the devil, and who owed me dou¬ ble spite for the valour I had shewed in the Church's cause to-day, hath maltreated me as thou seest, ■ and rode away on my horse in a flame of fire. I am bereft of the use of my Umbs, and am clean spoUed for farther deeds of chivalry."—" Nay, it is not so iU with thee, I trust," said the monk, raising him ; and in the effort the abbot a23peared suddenly re¬ stored to the use of all his Umbs, and eagerly proposed seeking the castle with the aid ofthe monk's arm. " And how," said he, gazing— " how didst thou escape, when churchmen were crippled of their Umbs, and knights and nobles laid low, by the hands of peasants ?— What spell dost thou bear about thee?"— " None," said the monk, " but our Lady's grace, and a conscience void of offence. I felt that the most ruthless of those called heretics would not murder one who had been a messenger of peace betwixt you both, and whose spoil would not prove a peasant's ran-
som. I - had nought to lose on earth: in Heaven my hope and hold was, above their reach or thought."—" I teU thee what," said the abbot, as he paced softly, leaning on the monk's arm, towards the castle, " all that thou talkest of—thy not being summoned to heavy and high trials, Uke me, is merely ow¬ ing to thy lack of faith— c Quos Deus amat, eos castigate Hadst thou been favoured Uke me with abundance of that precious grace, thou wouldst have had like me abundant exercise for it; wherefore I counsel thee, out of mere Christian love and brotherly zeal, to redouble thy macerations and abstinences, thy penances and pilgrimages, and, moreover, abate and chastise thy exorbitant spiritual pride, and so thou mayest be favoured with the chance of a crown of martyrdom from the hand of some heretic, which I, thy supe¬ rior in rank and sanctity, was so near receiv¬ ing this day." The humble monk Ustened, and then suggested the necessity of expedi¬ tion in their progress. " I teU thee," quoth the abbot, " when I am occupied in giving
ghostly counsel, I would not wag a jot the faster, were the bell ringing for matins."— " But I hear horsemen oh the path behind us."—" That alters the case," said the abbot. " As thou hast no dread of Crusader or here¬ tic, encounter them boldly; do thy devoir, as I urged the gallant knights to-day; while I esconce me behind this thicket, to assist thee with my prayers, which, having forgot in my overmuch valour to-day, it were foul sin to neglect any longer, when such op¬ portunity offers." The patient monk stood confounded when the horsemen, riding up, proved to be two wearied and wounded knights. They were Verac and Semonville, who, on horses they had caught, were seek¬ ing their way to the castle. The monk proffered to guide them; and the abbot, as soon as he recognized their voices, sprang nimbly on the croup of the foremost, and, himself taking the guidance of the party, they made what speed they could for the towers of Courtenaye. In the mean while the lady Isabelle and her
attendants had ridden fast and far, dame Marguerite ramping and galloping in the van, like Burger's Leonora, tiU a clump of chesnuts stopped their course ; from Avhich a knight in black armour rode forth with courteous de¬ meanour, and, accosting the lady IsabeUe, prayed her to pause. " I bear a message from Sir Paladour," he said, " to the Lady of Courtenaye, if she rides in this company." " Sir knight," said the lady, suddenly rous¬ ing herself, " say you that Sir Paladour lives, and that you are the bearer of tidings from him?" " True, noble lady: if you AviU vouchsafe me the hearing." The lady IsabeUe reined up her palfrey; and the noble air of graceful confidence with which she prepared to listen might have dis¬ armed the heart of mal-intent and treachery itself. " Mark how she hears the deeds of that Sir Paramount!" quoth Germonda.—" See hoAv she bends in courtesy to the mes¬ sage the stranger bears," replied Blanche.—
" My velvet tire to a heretic's woollen hood, if this Paladour yet quarters not his neAV- woi arms with the noblest heiress in France." —"'Nothing but the gemmed bracelet from her wrist as the guerdon of such tidings."-'— " Methinks he bows in return Avith an nn- courtly favour," said her companion. The nice ear and fine tact of the lady Isa¬ beUe had discovered in the stranger-knight some touches of a rude unnurtured manner: he was profuse of poUshed language, but seemed to be speaking a conned lesson. But his credentials were not to be disputed: he bore the ring and dagger of Sir Paladour as his tokens. He assured the lady that Sir Paladour Uved, though sorely wounded; and sent to implore her, by those pledges, to escape by a secret path (known only to the dark knight) from the pursuit of the Albigeois, who, flushed by victor}-, were in full chase of the noble heiress of Courtenaye, whom at best they would hold at a queen's ransom, and who might, perchance, dread worse deal¬ ing at their hands.
The message Avas so rapidly deUvered, that the lady IsabeUe could scarce compre¬ hend her danger. She hesitated. " Lose not a moment!" said the black knight, seiz¬ ing her rein. " For Sir Paladour's sake !— for your OAvn !—amid the Avounds that fester in his breast to-night, there is not one so */& >nizing as his fear for thy safety." * v The castle is near," said the lady, point¬ ing to its toAvers. " But the cursed heretics have intercepted that course!" cried the knight; " and think, lady, Avhat may be thy fate if thou faU into their hands! I know the safe and secret path by Avhich thou mayest Avin the castle, Avithout risk from thy pursuers; it lies doAvn this glen ;—suffer me to guide thee." And, Avithout waiting for permission, he seized the lady's rein. They gaUoped down a steep and rocky descent, the strong arm of the knight some¬ times grasping the rein, sometimes holding the lady on her seat: the damsels foUoAved. At the bottom of this descent Avas a thick grove
of firs. The short tAviUght Avas over, and the moon, now risen, threw her cold white gleams on the rock they were descending; whUe the dark deU at the bottom received and returned not a gleam, and the trees and their foUage seemed to form one mass of solid and impenetrable darkness. The lady paused, " I am safe in the guidance of Sir Paladour's friend?" said she, trembling. The dark knight made no ansAver but by seizing the rein of the lady's steed, whom he dragged at fuU gaUop tiU they entered the dell; then applying a bugle-horn to his Ups, and wind¬ ing a low and cautious blast, many men in vizards and dark houplands appeared from among the trees and surrounded the party. The dark knight, seizing the lady IsabeUe, placed her on his own steed. She neither shrieked nor resisted, for she had sAvooned. Hei* damsels uttered loud outcries; but these were soon hushed by the menaces of the band, and by the rapidity Avith which they were hurried on, and which soon deprived them of all poAver of expostulation. Dame Mar-
guerite Avas treated with less ceremony; the feUow to whose care she was committed fling¬ ing her across his horse, and gaUoping at speed to keep up with the party that preceded him, tiU the domains of Courtenaye Avere left far behind, and the drear prospect of a tract of ban*en sands and the waves of the Medi¬ terranean beating on them, bounded the vieAv of the fugitives by daAvn.
CHAPTER IX. And there are twenty weak and wearied posts. Shakspeare's Henry the Fourth. The first tidings of the defeat of the Cru¬ saders were borne to the Castle of Courtenaye the foUowing night by Sir Aymer. The lord of the castle was in his haU inspecting the splendid banquet, the warders on the tower strained their eyes through the twiUght to catch a glimpse of the expected messenger, and the men-at-arms and miUtary retainers, fretting Uke caged Uons, strode about the courts wild for intelhgence, and swearing, had they been there, the news had not slum¬ bered on its way. The slow and solitary tramp of a single rider was heard. Tlie drawbridge went down with clash and jar;
and beneath the raised portcullis, the fierce visages and warlike garb of the men-at-arms, flared out in the torch-light, borne by the crowding attendants. " What tidings?" cried a hundred voices. A single knight rode in like a spectre through the court till he reached the hall; there dismounting and clanking up to the deis, he sat moodily down, and flinging back his helmet, and disclosing his ghastly wounds, he answered, " Such as ye see, such as ye might expect. Sixty knights to charge six thousand men with that devil from hell, Raymond of Toulouse, at their head. Said I not so ? What tidings?—Such as this torn jaw and bloody harness tell. De Montfort is down —Enguerrand de Vitry by this bestrides a corse—the Crusaders are cut off to a man. Amirald's lance will never more be laid in rest, and, by God's mother ! all is stark nought.— You have my tidings. Now let me have a chi- rurgeon,or astoup of wine, Icare not how soon —the wine first, ere the rascal leech forbid it, and to qualify as it were the mountain dew I have been fain to swallow to-night, sorely
to the prejudice of mine orthodox lungs, which never imbibed such a heretic draught before." As the knight thus harangued, casting his eyes round the deserted hall, he inquired for its lord. On the first intelligence of the de¬ feat of the Crusaders, the Lord of Courtenaye in an agony of terror had secured himself in the highest tower of the castle, there sur¬ rounded by Thiband the astrologer, and a few menials. He gave and revoked orders, con¬ sulted and cursed the stars in the same breath, and finaUy would have shut the gates of the castle against the Crusaders, had it not been hinted to him that the first intimation of such hostiUty or repugnance might be fatal to him¬ self. The repeated sounds ofthe horn, while the knight's wounds were dressing in a cham¬ ber apart, gave intimation of the escape and arrival of more of the Crusaders, and no re¬ monstrances could prevent Sir Aymer from hastening to join them. " I teU thee," said he to the man of medicine, who represented the danger of farther exertion,—" I teU thee most learned leech, thou hast turned me into a
muming Avith thy salves and bandages already, and if I may not eat and drink, inter me quick at once—preach not to me of cuUises and con¬ fections!—go cure chickens of the pip, and compound a charm for the tooth-ache, and find out the natural cause why we are cold Avhen it freezes; but think not to cure me with aught but a draught of Malvoisie, and a stir¬ ring tale to wash it down,—that's your true probatum est." On descending to the haU, however, he found only the Abbot of Nor¬ moutier. " How, lord abbot," he cried, " are Ave the only survivors of this mad adventure?" —" There be also the Bishop of Toulouse, and the knights De Verac, Semonville, and Sir Paladour; but the bishop hath caUed for writ¬ ing materials and shut himself up with a priest, meaning to send missives to Rome without delay." " Then would I not stand in his report as De Montfort wiU, for the title of champion of the church," said the knight. " De Verac and SemonviUe have hied them to their chambers."—"I conceive thee—where
the one will find solace in counting over his feathers, and fringes, and the other in cuffing his lacquey tiU his valour be redeemed in his own opinion." " Marry, thou guessest weU; they are con¬ firmed in their resolve to pursue and redeem the lady IsabeUe, who hath disappeared none knows- how, save that the story that a spirit must be her bridegroom, hath gained much ground—I heard it long ago; but De Verac hath, in truth, returned to provide fair array on the quest, and SemonviUe to cuff his squire for misleading on their way:—for Sir Paladour (who rode here for aid to bear the body of Amirald from the field,)—when he heard that the lady Isabelle hath not yet been heard of, he made a vow that he woidd never return without tidings of her, and rode sadly away, scorning counsel or aidance, though such was the plight of steed and rider that I fear he wiU not Ughtly redeem his pledge." " Now, by the faith and fame of chivalry, done Uke an enamoured knight and a valor¬ ous !—And the lady IsabeUe not heard of?—
this storm IjIoavs from aU points. Ah, gaUant Paladour' thou hadst not gone alone on thy perilous quest, had Amirald's foot held the stirrup stiU—Amirald," cried the veteran, his stout heart melting within him, and the tears faUing fast over his hoary beard—" Amirald, brave and gentle boy, Avhose heart Avas as bold as thy favour Avas gracious, a blight came on a goodly spring Avhen thou wast laid Ioav — these Avhite hairs had been a fitter crop for the grave than thy bright locks of youth— Avould God I had died for thee, Amirald, my son !" " Worthy knight," said the abbot, " you have indeed cause to moum for that youth— and the rather, as at your advanced years the loss must needs be irreparable; youth soon supplies its losses, but this misfortune hath befallen you when your body is enfeebled, your in.teUectuals Aveakened, your valour de¬ clining, your—" " Beshrew thee for a comforter," interrupted the knight. " AVhat, talkest thou of age ? aU mine ancestors Avere grey in their youth, and VOL. II. K
your Avhoreson rheum is a AdUainous decayer of the teeth, and Avrinkles come a man knoAvs not hoAv or Avhy; but, bating these, what trace, - Avhat feature, Avhat semblable proof of age canst thou quote in me? But I see how it is even Avith thee, thy understanding must be marvellously beclouded, or thou hadst ■ not talked so long Avithout a remnant of false Latin vilely applied. But Avhat uproar have we here? does HeU keep hoUday, or are the Albigeois broke loose again?" The tumult arose from a difference between Verac and SemonviUe, who were each carry¬ ing matters to an extremity that threatened a dissolution of then brothership in arms, as hasty and motiveless as its commencement. ! On the intelhgence that Sir Paladour had set forth, spite of his r wounds and weariness, in quest of the lady IsabeUe, they had instantly adopted a similar resolutionj being no wise deficient in courage, or in that amorous devo¬ tion Avhich w r as the character ofthe age; nor in that spirit of emulation with a distinguished rival, Avhich is the character of every age.
But though they agreed in-their object, : they- differed widely-about-the means of-pursuing it; jSemonvillerinsistingj'OU'setting forth in¬ stantly,, .after first -giving j due correction to Paladour's squire,- who had led^ them' astray on their path—and Verac," with equal- tena¬ city, refusing .Ito join i in. the expedition till certain costly garments- he possessed,' were well.secured-.in his mails and sure to follow him as he f ventured forth -in quest of the lady—" for," as- he internally said,-" the fair¬ est lady on earth. may take - her^ chance for thraldom or liberation ere Iappear before her but in tattire^worthy of myself.?' «»T-he noise of their .conflict- had already reached the hall; where Sir Aymer: and the Abbot'-of-'Normou¬ tier, the. former in .spite of-medical prohibit tion;, and the latter:in defiance ■ of ecclesiasti¬ cal rule, were, amid! their differences on other points,, completely agreed in draining every flaggon on the board, when the'parties rushed before them; with an^appeal for their counsel —Semonville dragging in the false guide (as he termed him), and Verac calling all the K2
saints to witness, that never was lady deli¬ vered to her own satisfaction, to that of her champion and of Christendom at large, unless he were suitably arrayed for the enterprise. The decision of those to whom they ap¬ pealed, was suspended by the sound of a numerous train, unannounced by horn or herald, approaching the hall. This party had arrived late, no trumpet was blown in their van, no name or style proclaimed by har¬ binger ; the w r arders hesitated whether to lower the drawbridge, and demanded whom they were to admit ? " The corse of Simon de Montfort," exclaimed a female voice; " lower your drawbridge on the instant— the palace of King PhiUp might be proud to receive such guest." The drawbridge was lowered, the train admitted, and the Countess de Montfort, who had arrived too late for the conflict of the Crusaders, but had instantly set forth to seek for her husband's body, ap¬ peared preceding the Utter on which the body of the champion of the Church, " gored with many a ghastly wound," was extended.—
Verac and SemonviUe, as she entered the hall, compromised their dispute, and Avhis¬ pered apart. Sir Aymer and the abbot rose (the latter Avith some difficulty) at the pre¬ sence ofthe noble, martial-minded widow. She boAved not, nor looked towards them, Avhile they stood Uke statues. The body of Count Simon de Montfort was extended on a table. The lady approached, and in deep and speech¬ less anguish flung her arms on his chest—a faint respiration foUoAved—Jane de Montfort started from the body in triumph-^-" He Uves —he Uves," she cried; " go, bear the. tidings to the Bishop of Toulouse, (I knoAV his pur¬ pose AveU)—teU him that De Montfort Uves— the champion of the Church! and that his wifewiU wear corslet and poise brand herself, =ere prince or prelate rob him of his title."
' CHAPTER X. --------- Arviragus, Thou hadst no sister near the bloody field, Whose sorrowing search, led by yon orb of night. Might find thy body, wash with tears thy wounds. Mason's Caractacus. Count Raymond was not intoxicated with a victory, which he perceived to be owing solely to the temerity of < the vanquished. He -was aware also, that-the first intelligence of •the defeat of De.Montfort * and -the -knights .would bring down'* the formidable force' of their men-at-arms, on the Albigeois—^-a' force which, even without efficient leaders or skilful. arrangement, threatened peril to the victo¬ rious part} r . Rejecting, therefore, the furious counsel of Mattathias, Boanerges, and their party, who, inebriated with success, urged
him to pursue his course even' to the utter¬ most,- and half promised that the sun should stand stiU on Gibeah, and the moon in the vaUey of Ajalon, till the Lord had given his enemies into his hand, he issued his orders that the whole band should set forth towards * the kingdom of Arragon, on his way towards which, he was in hopes of being joined by powerful succour from Toulouse. This order Avas sufficiently grievous to the men-at-arms, Avho had by forced marches and desperate efforts, arrived at their present post; and stiU more so to those they came to reHeve. But both Avere sustained and recruited by a day's interval of refreshment and repose; by the confidence of victory; and by that hope of ultimate success, Avhich, extravagant in itself, had that day received appropriate nurture from an event that completely de¬ feated sober calculation, and laid the floAver of chivalry at the mercy of the clubs and arrows of a scorned and excommunicated peasantry. The submission to this order, though
strictly enforced, Avas marked Avith more humanity than the manners of that age ge¬ nerally admitted; the feeble and aged Avere to depart first, under a strong escort, and seek shelter Avith their protectors among the mountains; Avhile the army of Count Ray¬ mond covered their retreat, and presented at the same time a formidable front to the ene¬ my, Avhose pursuit Avas momently expected. Among the first to submit to this order, though the least able to obey it, Avere Pierre and his grandaughter. Their progress lay through the field of the late slaughter, still strewed Avith the bodies of the Crusaders; and the diversity of the ground, every where broken by rocks, shaded by thickets, or in¬ tersected by streams, only rendered the spectacle of the carnage more terrible. To vieAv a vast plain heajjed with Corses, to see at once this ocean of the dead, and prepare to wade through, is, perhaps, a less fearful object to the imagination, than to totter along amid darkness and doubt, uncertain whether the next cavern does not echo the groan of
the dying, whether the shade of trees' you approach does not wave over the dead, or the stream you tremble to cross is not tinged with the blood of the corse that Ues pale and stark on its margin. Such vvere the feefings of Genevieve as, shuddering, she entered this vaUey of the shadow of death. Pierre, un¬ able to walk, was supported in the arms of two of his flock; Genevieve foUowed, up¬ held by Amand, who trembled more than she did, but from a different cause. The path lay in darkness before them, but, as they passed a thick cluster of chesnuts, a light suddenly burst on their eyes'. Count Ray¬ mond stood there in complete armour, dis¬ missing his brief war-council; the torches held by his pages, gleamed alternately on the dark foliage of the trees and his polished cuirass and cuisses that shone Uke sdver: round him stood dark forms, and darker visages, tinted by the torch-light, with the glow of fierce passions, and the glare of stern purposes; contrasting the pale and timid group that advanced trembUng k5
at their intrusion, though commanded by duty. ..- r .-- ■ ..;-,, • :■. ='7 " Who passes there?" said the count, Avith the quick and eager A r oice,, of ; one.to whom suspicion and-anxiety bad; become habitual. The attendants. pointed out-.to-him Pierce and GeneAieve. ../-..- -, - , --, ; i'— " I know that A-oice," said Pierce, " though I must. never .behold the Ups that utter it, in this. Ufe." - ....-.....:•.- Count Rapnond recognized the sound, and caught in his maUed grasp the withered hand of the ancient;pastor. "This hand pointed my. Avay to life," r ,he cried, as he asked hi^ benediction. • f _ ■>..,.. Of aU:,the barbes or, teachers of the Albi¬ geois, Count Raymond had confidence in Pierce alone, inspired- and justified by the: unearthly purity and, apostoUc simplicity of* his spirit, character, and,.views;: and the expression of this confidence was rendered. more affecting by recent danger, and solemn from the circumstances of their meeting and the mute-fareweU,which closed it.
" IsraeUte in whom, indeed, is no guile," murmured Count Raymond, rejoining his band; " I have seen thee, perchance, for the last time, but when shaU I behold thy Uke?" Thus honoured and greeted, the ancient man was borne on, and when they had wound their way through the defile, so fatal to the Crusaders, the preceding day, Genevieve, dis¬ missing Amand, prepared 1 to follow Pierre and his. attendants. Their path was now less obstructed" by corses and broken armour, but often Gene¬ vieve shrunk from these objects which their loneUness rendered more ghastly; and she was alarmed by the distant and increasing tumult, which she- guessed to proceed from the men-at-arms - issuing from the Castle of Courtenaye, whose war-cries, calUng on their faUen lords, rang wild and 'wide among the dark hills. As grasping at the branches of the larch and fir, and the crags amid "whose fissures they sprang, they toded up- their arduous way, a sudden blaze of light flashed on
them, and Genevieve, giving a sign to their guides to pause, gazed fearfully round her for the cause, and at a Httle distance beheld, under the shade of a gigantic ash-tree, a sad and noble sight. It ^as a woman, mag¬ nificently habited, who sat on the ground with the body of a warrior stretched on her knees. His helmet, gorget, and vant- brace, were off, so that all the Uneaments of death were visible in his palUd but stiU ferocious aspect. Two priests stood by, who appeared too much terrified to pray; there were female attendants, who seemed to suppress their grief from reverence for the lady; and pages in silence held the torches, whose Ught, falling on the dark grey trunk of the ash-tree, gave a kind of ghastly back¬ ground to the figures of the group. The lady sat gazing on the body; her hands were clasped on her forehead, and the jeweUed bracelets with which her arms were bound, discovered her rank; her face was as pale as that of the warrior, and the silence of her
despair seemed to have awed her attendants into silence also. "And is it thou?" she said at last, in a voice hoarse and broken—"this livid, cold, helpless thing—is this Simon de Montfort?" —and something between a shriek and a laugh burst from her lips. The women, seeming to take this as a signal, broke into lamentations. " Hush," she said, " weep for women or for babes ; the warrior and the noble must have the death-groan of a thousand for his dirge." The priests then seemed to whisper con¬ solation, or offer masses for the dead; she shook her head. " I knew thy bold spirit well," she exclaimed, addressing the corse, " and if it retains aught of its former strain, it would joy less in Paradise for a hundred masses than for one war-cry thundered in battle. No, my husband—mine no more—for the tears of women and the prayers of priests, the blood of a thousand churls shall fall for every noble drop of thine, and thy tomb shall be the bravest warrior ever slept in—the bones
of a thousand enemies, So swears the widow of De Montfort, and Christendom shaU see her oath fulfiUed." Awe-struck by what she saw and heard, Genevieve attempted to hasten on, when the sound of a low and feeble moaning caught her ear; and near, this spot she, beheld an Albigeoise supporting her son, a dying youth, on her knees;, she, top, was seated j on the earth; but there were. no attendants, no torches, no gems blazing around, the figure. of despair and passion. The. mother, wiped with her kerchief, from, time to time, the blood and froth that gathered on the Ups of her son, and often .pressed- her^s. to them with a brief agony she checked, to catch, the hope which the sufferer tried to .breathe,, or to whisper it when that breath .was suspended by pain. Her words betokened more anxiety about the immortal than the mortal ,part; she spoke, while yet she had hopes of being heard, of the blessed frame in which a believer should depart; she even, with choked ,voice and bursting heart, reminded him that for-
giveness of wrongs was the first requisite of that frame. ■'•!" "• ' : '........ "IU-fare the battle-axe of the Bishop of Toulouse !'* murmured- ; the youth ; f "' <f itf 5 was that which laid ; nie low."^^" Is it thus th l 6u' forgivest, 'my child?" said" the inotheri—"I could forgive them aU—but' bereaving' thee of me : canst thou forgive them tfiat?" : —" I must!" said : the mother;^-" Then,' I can," said the boy. • - . - A few moments after, by the motion of his Ups (though he could : not articulate" dis¬ tinctly) and the tossing of his weak limbs," the mother believed : he might' wish to Say something, which she : bent in vain to hear; ; "Thou wouldst" : say somewhat,"' said she very slowly.* Speaking with'much difficulty : and' many intervals, the sufferer uttered:-^ " I—^have—given you—sometimes—pain."— "Never tiU now," said the wretched mother, pressing a corse in Jier arms—" never, tiU this moment!"- "■ ■ ■•-'•- ■ ' ■ ■ • Genevieve was rushing towards her, w r hen her guides, assuming authority in their
turn, pointed out her way, and urged her vehemently to pursue it. She submitted when she looked at her grandfather; but she could not help exclaiming, " O that my corse may be bedewed with the tears of affection, not with the blood of vengeance!" As she spoke, she attempted to hurry on, till, her feet striking against a piece of armour, she fell; and when she rose with difficulty, perceived that her guides were at a distance, and that she had fallen near the body of a Crusader. The pale Ught feU fuU on the object, on which she could not help gazing with more than emotion. The plunderers had already rent away casque and breast-plate; the rest of the splendid armour announced the rank of the faUen warrior; but Genevieve w r as less struck by these than by the pale features and redundant hair of a youth of eighteen: his forehead was marked by a deep wound, and his white bosom was deeply gored by another. As Genevieve gazed on him, a choked and convulsive breathing announced that life
was not yet quite extinct. Genevieve bent over him involuntarily: the sigh was repeated more audibly; and grasping at the hope of preserving one human Ufe from the event of that bloody day, she had even the te¬ merity to implore one who approached her, to assist in removing the Avounded knight to the shelter of some tree or cave, " where at least," she said, " the mountain-winds would not blow so unpiteously on his un- tended wounds." The man, who had only returned to ask why she loitered, sternly refused her request, and demanded would she seek him to aid a CathoUc, a " persecu¬ tor and injurious ?" " Alas !" said the maiden, " he has no mother to hold his dying head— no noble widow to watch his corse. In the name of Him who is mercy, let us be mer¬ ciful !—aid me to bear him but where he may die unpierced by the chill wind, and unrent by the wolf and the bear! Alas, for pity!— in these bloody times the voice of war bids men hate each other; but centuries agone
there Avas a voice, that .said, ' hove one another,' and to that voice I. rather yield hie."" " I doubt thou, dost," said the speaker Aviiose v T oice 'betrayed Amand. "And is it thus, GeneAieve, I find thee employed ?" "And how earnest thou here ?"„said the startled Genevieve. "Because I left father and mother to fol¬ low thee," said the youth, bursting into an agony of indignant grief:" and would I had died ere I met.thee thus!—the corse of a foe is dearer to thee than the life of a friend." " L answer thee not!" said Genevieve. proud in the purity, of her heart: "thou hast refused liie thine aid, and I need not thy reproaches." " Reproaches! No, Genevieve !—nor shalt thou bear the reproach of the congregation through me! The secret of thy wishing to aid one of the accursed shaU be kept as it Avere my own; though, were it told, it Avould
be a sin against thee and thy father's house to cut them off for ever." •■'■' "Do in that as thou AvUt," said the maiden, who felt this promise somewhat like a threat: " for ine, I am' hot a Jael to smite, but a Mi- chal to aid in the time of peril and of escape. And Aveak as niine"hands are, they may, in bearing 'this mangled frame to shelter, "do more acce])table deed than the hands of those who laid : ' it low this' day." So saying, Avith hei* utmost strength she attempted t'o raise the wounded knight. A cry of pain, and an increased convulsion of the Umbs, indicated that she gave only agony,'but gave not relief. • Amand could not see her straining her slender ''arms';-and sighing as she resigned her helpless burthen Avithout some touch' of* feeUng; 'but "when at the movement the bloodagain "gasft- ed frorh ; thei'wbuhds' of the tortured youth, Amand- forgot all' : his jealous feelings, and springing to hei* assistance, the body, Avith his added- strength, Avas lJ bome to a cave, Avhere the yoiihg and graceful form lay pil-
lowed on stone as on a monument, and the thick clusters of the clematis and ivy hung bowering over it, Uke banners over a grave. So said Amand, with perchance a sneer at the obsequies of chivalry, which he had been taught to hate and disdain. "And how," he asked, " wilt thou reward me for this toil?"—^"With my prayers," answered the maiden, whose heart was lightened by this deed of mercy.—" Nay, a CathoUc Reata could pay me with her prayers."— " Then, with my love."—" Ah, but thou lovest Heaven, the pastor—all but me."— " Then with my hand."—" Thy hand!" cried Amand.—" Yes, my hand," said Genevieve, with forced and mournful gaiety ; " and give me thine in return to aid me to cUmb this steep; in sooth I cannot, without thy assist¬ ance—and it is to follow my father—and I am very weary. Nay," she added, straining her exhausted spirits to soothe his suUen mood— " Nay, frown not, Amand; woidd,knight of chivalry refuse such favour from his lady ?— and wilt thou reject mine ?" He assisted
her in silence to ascend the steep; but the pressure Avith which he Avrung her hand when she reached the summit, and the look he cast on her, visible even amid the dark¬ ness from its fierce intensity of expression, made her tremble. She kneAV not Avhat she had to fear—but stiU she feared.
CHAPTER XI. ■* ---------What if it lead you to the cliff, And there assume some other horrible fotm. That may deprive your sovereignty of reason. Hamlet. Sib Paladour set fonvard on his despe¬ rate search, mal-content and fuU of troubled thoughts. At the castle, or from the bands whom he occasionally met, he could obtain no information but that the lady Isabelle had been carried off by some unknoAvn vio¬ lence; and the Abbot of Normoutier, Avho inight have been enabled to give a more par¬ ticular account, he had not seen or conferred Avith. To prick forth alone, Avithout guide or direction, in pursuit of a lady borne off by violence, was in the very spirit of the age, and,
if it had not, woidd still have been congenial to his daring spirit; but now he felt im¬ pelled to it by a wish to escape from a revi¬ siting of those disastrous presages, whieh never faded to be awakened by the recur¬ rence of recent misfortune. Riding on, without path or hope, he found himself, towards midnight, on the verge of a heath, whose bounds were lost in darkness; and here, linknowing either region or track, he threw the reins on the neck of his weary horse, and, reckless whither he was borne, sat wrapt in his own dark musings. " Fate wiU no longer be mistaken!" Thus his thoughts ran. " She deals with me in ora¬ cles no longer. Evil befaUs all around me, —and the flight of so many arrows shows at whom they are aimbd. The lady of my love is the prey of Violence!—the friend of my soul v falls beside me in battle ! ' This scat¬ tering of the leaves foreteUs speedy autumn. AVould that the blast were come, and the despoUed tree were b r owed to earth before it!" —"Many a tree iri falling crushes the'feller?'
said a voice distinctly near him, " and woe to him who lays axe, to the root of that for wdiich Heaven is whetting its own. Fear not, Sir Paladour, thou hast seen the goodUest of the forest strewed Uke willows around thee to-day, but the blast that shaU level thy stately stem, is brooding yet in the treasury of heaven's ow r n heaped and hoarded wrath." Sir Paladour caught up his reins; the steed too, as if by instinct, started and stood sweat- ing and pawing-the earth. A form stood near him in shapeless darkness/ but the sounds that issued from it rang in' the ears of the knight, as those of a voice too well remembered. At any period to have en¬ countered such greeting at midnight and in sohtude, would require weU-strung nerves. At that in which Paladour Uved, it de¬ manded courage almost superhuman. And in this peculiar instance, pecuUar resolution was indeed necessary, for he recognized in that dark figure her who had piloted him over the lake, and whom he had aftenvards encountered on a more fearful night, in the
vaults of the Castle of Courtenaye. The remembrance of the terrors of that night held him dumb, nor did the figure appear to wish to renew the topic, potent as it was: thus a singular silence was observed between them by a kind of mental and unexpressed compact on the subject of their last meeting, (it Avas, indeed, never discussed tiU a much later period,) and each seemed to prepare only for the present encounter. The knight crossed himself, and repeated his credo and ave before he ventured to look round. "Thou didst not tremble thus to-day," said the shape, approaching and almost lay¬ ing its hand on his rein. " Why tremblest thou at the voice of a being Uke thyself? "— '* Mortal I scarce beUeve thee," said the knight, "for when did aught mortal touch me with fear such as I now feel?"—"Yet mortal I am," answered the voice, "for I suffer, and I come to announce suffering. Lackest thou other proof of my being one of thy own wretched race ? FUng aU your Avarn- YOL. II. L
ings,, voices of the dead, cries heard in the stdl night, or whispers from the tomb, aU that terror has taught, or creduUty beUeved, in one scale, and weigh it against the denunci¬ atory voice of the Uving, who announces woe and can verify the announcement, and see how the scale incUnes." " In the name of. aU that is sacred," said the knight, in whose ears the voice of his, strange pilot over the lake became more and more distinct, "whence comest thou, and where art thou sped?"—"Whence I come," answered the voice, "I know not; whither I go, I reck not. But for. thee, Paladour, I can teU whence thou comest, and.whither thou speedest Thou comest from a feast where thou wast at once, viand and caterer; the, feast of war, where fools are food; where.Ufe is lavished we know not why, and eternity risked we care not wherefore. Thou comest from fighting against the fools who make pleasure a crime, in the cause of those more desperate fools
Avho make crime their pleasure. Thou comest from that mart of deadly traffic, where deeds are given in security for words, and he Avho beUeves he knows not what, signs the bond of his bUnd creed with his blood, and dreams that the Almighty will ratify the contract and repay the loss. From such spot thou comest, and thou art hastening where the frail idol of thy earth-bound heart is held by a stronger arm, and kept in cage where thy beak may be blunted, and her gay plumage soil¬ ed, ere its wires be broken, and the bird be free." The knight, overpoAvered and appaUed as he was by her words, caught in the last a hope to which the very fibres of his heart clung; yet, dreading aUke to provoke or at¬ tempt to soothe one Avhose maUgnity seemed so unappeasable, and fearing that his be¬ traying soUcitude would be the very means of its defeat, he tried to speak Avith evasive caution. L 2
" Thou hast truly said why I am here, now teU me as truly wherefore thou art ? "— "To serve thee, to serve thee, doubtless," she answered; "Oh, wherefore else do I Uve." she repeated with a frantic laugh, " but to be thy slave and work out thy pur¬ poses at the risk of these miserable remains of .withered life and rained inteUect ? I teU thee, Paladour, I can point thee to the very spot where the lady of thy love was borne this night." The knight shrunk back in horror at the thought that the fate of the lady IsabeUe was in the power or even the knowledge of such a being. The female mistook the cause of his emotion. "And shrinkest thou, Sir knight of the bloody cross ? Craven knight! could not one stamp of my foot have overset the bark when I rowed thee on thy way to the Castle of Courtenaye ? Coidd not one breath ofmy Hps bring around thee the heretic warriors, who wander yet on the verge of this heath, and. would count thee an acceptable sacrifice to
their vengeance, and caU it an offering to the Lord ? "—" Cease, accursed hag !" cried the knight; "into the hands of heretics them¬ selves Avoidd I faU, rather than into thine."— " Choose thy next guide thyself," said the shape, turning from him. " Nay, hold, hold!" as she rushed away, "hold and turn," he shouted; " I yield me to thy guidance, sIioav me but the path where she hath been bome, the hold where she is constrained—the one I wUl pursue at my life's dearest peril; the other, were it guarded by fiends, I avUI assaU, were my soul's safety on the issue."— " Life and soul!" said the figure, returning, "a goodly risk, and manftdly periUed;"and she strode on with a step rapid, yet Ught and firm. They were in a sandy morass, Avhere his guide, who kneAV the track, bounded from one tenable spot to another with incredible celerity, whUe the Avearied and heavily en¬ cumbered steed flounced from moss to mire, and from stone to turf, embanassing himself and his rider.
" Alight," said the figure, "andJeave'thy steed here; he shaU be tended. What! afraid again ? and of a woman ? and yet deep reason hast thou to dread Avoman," she said, speaking to herself; " and deeper stiU hath woman to dread thee; yet fear hot her who partakes neither of the weakness of her sex, nor the brutal strength of thine, w r ho. has ceased to hope, or fear, or feel; who has no remaining Unk to bind her to life, save that Avhich throbs Avith pain—who knows not that she Uves but when she feels she suffers." —" I understand not thy Avords, nor dare to scan then* meaning," said the knight alight¬ ing ; " but it never shaU be said that fiend, in the form of woman or man, repulsed Pala¬ dour from peril or adventure. To our dear Lord's grace and Maiy's might I commit me in this strait; but I had rather foUow the faUen banner of the' Cross in ten such fields as were lost this dread and disastrous day, than guide like thee, save in such cause." . As he spoke, the female began ascending a cUff, that suddenly rose amid the swamp,
with a speed and strength almost miraculous; and the knight, though weU nigh exhausted, and encumbered with his heavy armour, followed with a vigour and celerity which he owed partly to a frame that united the most knitted muscular strength with boyish Ughtness, and partly to an excitement which strung his nerves with preternatural energy. The female, who saw him almost overtake her in the wild bounds and desperate grasp- ings of a track known but to herself, and where no step but his would have dared to foUow, seemed from time to time to look back on him with a kind of reluctant admiration. " And must it be so?" she mut¬ tered to herself, " so fairly fashioned-— so clear and bold a spirit!—See how he bounds from crag to crag—how he grasps at a tuft of withered grass, and, now that it fails, springs upward with the whole strength of his gaUant frame! That was the arm that struck the giant De Montfort to the earth in the Usts—that was the foot that held its stir¬ rup last in the bloody field—that was the
ample chest from which thundered the Avar- cry of La Croix Sanglante, Avhen prouder voices Avere hushed, and more boastful tongues Ave're cold. Welcome, welcome!" she exclaimed, as if priding in her victim, Avho had toUed to the summit of the cliff; then suddenly turn¬ ing on him, " Noav dash thyself beloAV—leave thy body in ten thousand fragments to be snatched by the vultures, and commit thy soul to heaven! Thou shudderest, but be warned, (I warn thee in mercy,) and foUoAV me no farther." " I ever deemed thee a fiend, and thine is a fiend's counsel," said the knight, as he stood on the steep, dizzy Avith toU, famine, and fatigue; " but Avhither wouldst thou indeed lead me?"—" To thy wish, fool," said the female: " noAV judge if I give thee not kind counsel to perish rather. She who points a sudden and desperate death to the sufferer, perchance shows liim mercy; but she Avho guides thee to thy Avish, guides thee to wretch¬ edness, so bitter, so inevitable, so deadly, that —knit not thy broAV, or handle thy brand—
thou hast aheady determined* One moment's pause of feeUng came over my heart—one moment of reflection Avas aUowed thee —both abused, both lost, there remains but this— tioav foUow me," and she plunged from the summit of the crag, Uke an eagle from its eyry. The knight foUoAved more sloAvly, yet reached the plain ahnost at the same moment; it Avas a waste extent of sand interrupted sometimes by rocks, over Avhich the female seemed to gUde, ever beckoning her Avearied associate to foUow. It was now near morning; a pale grey light gleamed on a range of headlands and promontories, broken by deep and sinuous bays fuU of sands heaped up to a formidable height, and so curved, that the point one seemed to touch with the eye, required a mUe's toU to reach. The distant thunder of the breaking surge was heard, but so faintly, that the knight heard distinctly the hissing of the sands under his maUed feet; and this sound so calm and monotonous formed almost a fearful contrast to the deep sUence of his guide. Suddenly, his companion springing l5
on a ledge of rock which rose in their way, and motioning to him to foUow, extended her arm towards an object faintly seen in the hazy Hght, and exclaimed, " There is l'Aigle sur la Roche, the hold of that fierce outlaw Avho keeps thy lady in thraU." Paladour, straining his sight, could scarce discover a mass of rock that projected far into the sea, and seemed to be terminated land-ward by a morass, thus forming nearly a peninsula. On its summit arose something of Avhich the eye could scarce ascertain whether it were edifice or rock pUed on rock, so mueh did its massive and perpendicular structure seem Hke a part of the cUff it was perched on. Its aspect was so dreary and formidable, that the knight, as he withdrew his eyes from that unassailable hold, and turned them on his own soHtary and unaided person, could not prevent a heavy sigh of despondency bursting from his bosom. " Yes, yonder is l'Aigle sur la Roche," said his guide, as if answering his thoughts; " and when thou canst win the eagle to drop the
lamb he has pounced on, stUl despair to rescue the prey from the fangs of the outlaw; and when thou hast caused the Alps to rock to their foundations, then dream of making a pinnacle faU from the battlements of yon tower."—" Then," said the knight, with re¬ kindled eye, " are those walls doomed to ruin as sure as the light of heaven's sun is rising on them this hour! for never yet did aught perilous or desperate invite me to the en¬ counter unfoiled; nor need I higher assur¬ ance of victory, than to hear that mj/ foe is invincible." At this moment, as he fixed his eagle eyes on the tower, at which already they .seemed to take fatal aim, something was seen moving on the summit of" the reck, which the dis¬ tance prevented their distinguishing as human forms; but the next moment the blast of a horn that woke the thousand echoes of the shore, suggested to Paladour the thought, that perhaps at that moment, the lady and her attendants were entering the hold of the outlaw. They were, indeed, the prisoners
Avhom Adolfo and his band had seized the preceding day, and whom they were noAv conveying to their fastness. From the moment of her recovery from the SAVOon into Avhich her terror had thrown her, tbe lady IsabeUe had in vain suppHcated to know in Avhose power she Avas, or Avhither she Avas to be borne; her entreaties, aided by the louder cries of her attendants, were heard" in silence, and the horsemen pursued their course at fuU speed, treating'their prisoners, however, with aU the gentleness their situa¬ tion rendered possible. ToAvards midnight, coneeMng themselves beyond the reach of pursuit, they slackened their pace, and at length halted in a vaUey, Avhere, spreading their mantles on the ground, and assisting their prisoners to aHght,' they invited them Avith no uneourteous gestures to partake of the refreshments with Avhich they Avere spread. This Avas the only interruption to theu* jour¬ ney, tiU by dawn they reached the tower of l'Aigle sur la Roche. After passing the gate, they Avere conducted into a rude haU, without
Avindows or any Ught, except through a narrow" sUt near the door. The waUs were of un- heAvn stone, and the floor Avas flagged in com¬ partments to resemble a chess-board. On this some of the band were stretched arid playing, as the party entered: their oaths and vocife¬ rations Avere hushed in a moment; they rose and retired respectfuUy, and the lady and her attendants remained alone with their captors, Avho stood in sUence round them, Avithout either removing their masks, or throwing off their mantles. It seemed as if they knew not hoAv to deal Avith their prisoners, while the latter stood trembling, not knowing what danger they were to deprecate first, or to whom they were to make their appeal. The lady IsabeUe alone struggled to resume that air of insulted dignity, of Avhich fatigue and terror had almost deprived her. Accustomed to command, she considered the expression as equal to the habit, and the assumption of it did for a moment aAve the rude and lawless men who sunounded her. At this .moment, dame Marguerite, Avho had coUected her
breath, advanced, and with grimaces that seemed to the lady to indicate insanity, wel¬ comed her to her castle, lamented the hard¬ ships of her rapid journey, and assured her that her reception should be worthy of the noble knight, her bridegroom, who ------Here dame Marguerite, on a sign from the prin¬ cipal of the band, was borne in a moment from the hall; while after a pause he ad¬ vanced with an air of embarrassment, and, pointing towards a narrow door at the extre¬ mity of the hall, seemed to intimate his wish that she should ascend a staircase of stone on which it opened. The lady, who saw she could not choose but obey, east a look of agony round her, but, perceiving that her damsels were permitted to follow, began to ascend, declining all proffer of assistance from the dark knight, which the steepness of the stair seemed to require, while its narrowness rendered the ascent of more than one at a tune impossible. Thus, with steps whose falterings she tried to conceal, and with a heart whose tremblings she scorned to betray,
the noble beauty, wrapt in her veil, ascended the stairs in sdence, rejecting aU aid, but ever casting a watchful Avistful look on her damsels, Avho foUowed close behind. The tower of l'Aigle sur la Roche, bmlt by a predatory baron of the preceding cen¬ tury, rose eight stories from the rock in which its foundations were sunk, and Avhich was impregnable to any mode of assault known in those days. Each story contained a large square apartment roofed and floored with stone, and furnished with smaU recesses, hol¬ lowed in the solid waUs, of various shapes, some whoUy dark, some lighted only by a loop-hole. The apartment on the ground-floor was a kind of guard-room; that above it, a rude banquet-room; the recesses, or niches rather in both, serving the banditti for the purpose of sleeping in. The upper apart¬ ments were occupied as armouries or store¬ rooms for plunder; but the topmost had been formerly fitted up Avith some care for the fa¬ vourite of the lawless man who built the tower, and was the only apartment in the whole
structure that could boast of a window, or rather casement, whose stancheon of stoi.e and shattered panes seemed rather to teU of the comfort and elegance it was intended once to bestow, than to afford either now. AU these apartments communicated by a spiral staircase of stone, whose only level landing-place opened on this apartment, while a few ascending steps led to a bartizan, from whence the piercing eye of the outlaw could discern (it was said for miles) his prey, land and sea, and arm his band or man his bark to seize whatever spoil either element might afford. It was to this apartment the lady Isabelle ascended, and it was evident that.it had been" furnished for her reception with a kind of rude and hasty splendour. Tapestry was hung on the walls by wooden pegs stuck between the interstices of the stones, but in many places those walls of ragged stone were totaUy bare. A vast wood-fire blazed on the hearth, and a lamp, suspended by a soiled and tarnished chain from the raftered roof, hung swinging to and fro as if but 're-
cently placed there. The bed, with its sdken canopy, was Avorthy the chamber of a jjrincess, but there Avas an incongruity, a Avant of ap¬ pointment in the chamber, Avhich, Avith aU its coarse and lavish display of splendour, reminded its unfortunate visitor too strongly of the AveU-regulated magnificence of her boAver in the Castle of Courtenaye. The damsels, too, .shuddered Avhen they observed there Avas not in the apartment, either a vessel for holy water, a crucifix, or an image of the Virgin. . The outlaAv, after pointing ihe lady to a .bench coA r ered with tapestry, and placing before" her a trivet covered Avith refreshments and. costly wines, and by ges¬ tures inviting her to partake of them, retired. - The lady IsabeUe, who had continued speechless from terror, indignation, and .the nameless dread of Avhat their expression might expose her to, if she opened her Hps, sat in sUence for some moments after he had departed; then rising, as with an instinctiA-e movement, she approached the casement, and flinging it open, gazed Avith fearful earnestness
on the prospect below. The tower here rose perpendicularly from the rock; two hundred feet below its foundations the waves of the Mediterranean were beating the rock, which, rushing out into a promontory, increased the agitation of the waves, that roared like ex¬ hausted thunder at its base, and tortured by the crags and cavities, tossed their spray, like the bound of sea-monsters, to a terrific height on the terraces into which the rock had been hewn for the accommodation of the outlaw's men. The lady IsabeUe looked down in dizzy terror on a sight she had never before beheld, an inscaleable rock, and the ocean in fury foaming at its base. She closed the casement, and, turning from it, advanced a few steps into the apartment. She spoke not, but despair was in her features. Her damsels, who had watched her looks, now flung them¬ selves at her feet, and grasping her robes, as if for protection, burst into those wild ex¬ pressions of grief, which reverence for their lady, and hope derived from her, had hitherto suppressed.
The noble maiden, at this sight, felt her long-sustained courage and high-wrought spirit fail, and, after vainly pressing her hands on her bosom, as if to aid her painful respira¬ tion, she burst into an agony of tears.
CHAPTER XII. 1 will marry her, sir, at your request; and though there be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease it on more acquaintance. Shakspeare's Merry Wives of Windsor. In the mean time, the other apartments in the tower Avere filled Avith their various occupants, aU intent on their own pursuits. The bandits had retired to calculate on the princely ransom of the heiress—Adolfo to drink with his comrade—and dame Margue¬ rite had been at an early period of her arri¬ val borne off to another apartment by one of the band, to whom Adolfo had given a sign. This apartment Avas no better than one of the recesses Ave have before mentioned; its form was that of an acute angle, of Avhich the vertex ended in a loop-hole not more than six
inches wide, but being bevilled inwards, the immense thickness of the wall aUowed it to effuse more Ught through the recess than its narrow aperture promised, but that light fell only on rugged waUs, a stone bench, and an ifi-carved image, which was once intended for a crucifix. On this stone-bench was dame Marguerite seated perforce, and pour¬ ing forth loud reproaches against her uneour¬ teous conductor. " My lord," said the ban¬ dit, who had his lesson, " requires that aU this be received and understood as the testi¬ mony of his infinite respect for the virtuous and discreet Marguerite." " Respect me no respects!" cried the gou- vernante: " respect hath flung me across a horse, as a miUer's boy would a sack of flour —respect hath shaken mine entrails to a jeUy —respect hath dislocated every joint in my frame—respect hath rent my veil and head¬ gear to rags—respect hath torn my tunic and skirt in a fashion shameful and piteous to behold—respect hath thrust me into no better than a dog-hole;—and then comes respect to
hope tliat aU is to my liking:—the foul fiend fly aAvay Avith such respect! I have been treated with civU rudeness once and again, and have borne, yea, and made civU return, Avhen there Avas no offence done but such*as gentlewomen might and ought to bear with in civiUty; but thy respect, knave, I cannot aAvay Avith."—" Perchance aU was done in curious deUcacy, to prevent the suspicions of the lady IsabeUe, who might be jealous of service done to one who so far excels her in beauty."—" She was indeed strangely jealous of me," said dame Marguerite, propitiated by this homage to her incredible foUy; "and had I not deemed that seeing me preferred by a young and vaUant knight would have been a wholesome lesson to her vanity, I had never encountered such trial. Many, the issue has cost me more than her for whose behoof it was undergone: this is what Ave get by aiming at the good of others. But, mercy of Heaven! what place is this they have borne us to? Where be the fair at¬ tendance, the noble knight, the love-suit, and
the gallants waiting ? Meseems, this is more like a robber's hold than a knight's castle— more Uke Avhat I have fearftdly heard men teU of l'Aigle sur la Roche, or some haunt of bandits."—" Nothing can escape thy pene¬ tration, sage Marguerite,'' said the robber; " thou art indeed in the fastness of that out¬ law, Avhom courtesy forbids me to name, ter¬ rible as the sound must be to ears feminine." The scream uttered by the wretched Avoman at this disclosure certainly pierced the rob¬ ber's ears, but had not the same effect on his feeUngs, for he Ustened Avith perfect sang¬ froid to the exclamations that foUowed. " What! am I betrayed ?" shrieked Mar¬ guerite. " Did not this Judas appear among the train of the Abbot of Normoutier?— did he not win mine ear Avith a tale of a noble knight who loved and would make me his bride ?—did he not say that he would the lady IsabeUe might be there to witness the bridal?—and did I not do him to Avit how she might be seized when her attend¬ ants Avere away but yesterday, Avhen the
Crusaders went on their mad course ? And is this the reward of my faithfulness and loyal deaUng? Where is the castle to re¬ ceive me ? — where is the bridegroom to welcome me? — where is the promise that the lady Isabelle should bow herself before me ? An' it had not been to chastise her vanity, as it were, thou hadst never seen me here."—" The chastisement may not be thrown away,. though it hath missed the lady IsabeUe for the present," said the rob¬ ber : " in the mean time be not discomfited, amiable Marguerite; for, I swear to thee, thou shalt meet thy promised bridegroom to-night, though it be in the wails of l'Aigle sur la Roche."—" Nay, if I am to meet him to-night," said the gouvernante, " that molU- fies. But, now that I think on it, I am and will be discomfited; I have had nought to breakfast. Send me suddenly a manchet and a cup of pigment, and let the lady Isabelle, or one of her lazy damsels, attend to arrange my coif and veil; else look to it, knave ;—and, dost thou hear ? teU the knight, my lover, to
cause some tapestry to clothe these walls and cover this unsightly bench of stone ; for of a truth, since my so speedy journey, this seat feels like aught but a bed of roses." The answer of the robber was interrupted by three blasts of a horn, wound at short inter¬ vals. Starting at the sound, he hastened to the hall, where Adolfo was, leaving Margue¬ rite to dream of tapestry, pigment, a new coif and tunic, and the lady gazing with envy at her bridal magnificence. The outlaw was carousing in the hall, or guard-room, with Gerand, the second in com- manrl, a sullen and ferocious character, but desperately brave ; and both were revelling in the pride of success and the wantonness of rude luxury. "A health," shouted Adolfo, " to the brain that devised, and the hand that wrought, the boldest emprize that ever crowned an outlaw!—a health to the eagle who holds in his talons a prey that makes him indeed the king of birds ! Now pledge me deeply, Gerand! I have a glorious vision of the huge coffers of the Lord of vol. il M
Courtenaye yaAvning Uke opening graves, and yielding up to a joyfril resurrection some thousands of bezants and golden crow r ns that have slumbered there for centuries." " Thy rashness had Av^eU nigh lost ns the sight of that beatific vision " muttered Ge¬ rand. " AVhat a plague hadst thou to do to thmst thyself amid the Crusaders and the heretics, like some fantastic knight of adven¬ ture in a troubadour's song, and set lance in rest when thou shouldst have laid spur to flank. An' thy foolish humour of valour Avere not near maning the game and missmg the prize, I Avould I might never rob pilgiim again !'* " By St. Dennis of France!" answered the outlaw, " I went with purpose to have secured the lady first;—but when I heard the war-cry shouted and the bugles wound, and saw the banners stream and the knights charge, I could not choose but share the feast to which I had such noble invitation; and hadst thou tasted of it, thou wouldst
have maiweUed Iioav one in harness could quit it so soon." " This A r alour of thine at times leaves thee no better than a common man," said Gerand suUenly. " AA 7 hen the lady and train Avere home hither, thou stoodest before them abased and mute, like one Avho kneAV not Avhether thou wast their prisoner, or they thy thraU, as I am a tme man !" " Say rather, as thou art a false knave!" " AU's one for that. I Avas about to ask thee Avhether Ave Avere not best to convey them to their castle back again." " By the mass ! and if thou hadst, at that moment I A\ r ould have said, ' Many, Avith all my heart!' I am not one to blench for the threats of man or the tears of Avoman;—but when I saAv that noble lady, standing so beautiful and pale and helpless, amid a band of rude, lawless knaves like thee, I stood before her like a chidden urchin, and felt that tug at my heart-string Avhich I am a fool to tell thee of, Avho couldst as soon con thy breviary as give utterance to one gentle thought." 31 2
" Here be fit time and place for gentle thoughts!" said Gerand, as the blast of the horn made both spring to their feet and grasp their daggers instinctively, and the robber who had just left Marguerite, rushed into the hall. " How now!—thy tidings, knave ?" " A band of jnlgrims, wealthily laden as I guess—for they travel slowly, and have arm¬ ed men in their company—are about to cross the morass," said the robber. " We will take order that the weight of their baggage do not sink them. Now, honour to the Saints ! they bring us ever oui- best visitors. A pestilence on those peevish Albigeois! Did their cursed heresy prevail, there would not be a pilgrimage in the Jrmd to pay toll to the warders of our lonely tower. Fie on them ! I say. AAliere be our masks and mantles ? Summon our men ! These pilgrims have fuU wine-bags to be pressed, and boxes of costly reUques, and, perchance, purses of bezants. Foul shame it were if the holy men laboured under their
weight long, Avhile quick hands Avere near to lighten them. St. Dennis so speed me in this essay, as I will dedicate on his altar four wax-candles, each of bigness enough to be the pillar of a church ! Ever most generous Saint! send me a company of jolly pilgrims, and it shaU go hard if thy altars be not the brightest in every church in France. And for the rest, so help me Heaven ! I AviU clear off all next Easter with the Abbot of Nor¬ moutier." " These be thy gentle thoughts," said Ge¬ rand with a suUen sneer. The outlaw laughed: " I warred with knights yesterday : do thou engage with pilgrims to-day:—each to his destiny." —" But not to his choice," said Gerand gloomily, as he masked himself. The outlaAv Avas foUowing, Avhen the mes¬ senger grasped his arm. " The prisoner Avithin," said he, " hath become outrageous. She says, she AviU be Avedded to-night."— " Then Aved her thyself!" said Adolfo, fling¬ ing him off, " and rid me of her and thee." —" Wed her!" quoth the robber; " I Avould
sooner hang her, Avithered succuba !"—" Then Jiang her, an' thou wUt, so thou molest me uot."—" Many and Avill; from the highest pinnacle of thy tower thou shalt see her like a kite nafied to a peasant's barn, and her kir- tle floating Uke a banner, on thy return."— " Hark thee, knave," said the outlaw, flinging back his houpland, and fixing the fuU force of Ins commanding eye on the speaker, " I wiU have no cruelty. She is a fool, and treache¬ rous; but though thou mayest mock, thou shalt not abuse her;—she is a worthless fringe on the garment which I kiss Avith my heart's Ups. I yield her to thy sport, but not thy barbarity; and for the rest, on thy Ufe med¬ dle not vyith the female prisoners."—" Ay," said the robber, when he Avas out of hearing, " by his OAvn good-wiU he would never have any one meddle with the female prisoners but himself." The lady IsabeUe, from her casement, saw the brigands depart, and clasped her hands in a short moment of ecstasy; and she even augured weU from the frequent demands for
aid from the tower. Troop after troop pour¬ ed out; while the tower rang, from base to summit, with the hasty step of those who rushed to seize their arms, and made the port and drawbridge ring with their steel-shod steps. The conflict seemed a dangerous one; and it was late in the twilight of that even¬ ing that the horn was blown, and faintly answered by the wearied party who wound their way up the rock. The iron voice of the outlaw r was heard through the eight sto¬ ries of the tower by ears quickened by terror. " Fling the pilgrims into the dungeon;. let them see if their beads will ransom them! Bear the wounded knight to safe tendance: give me a draught of wine : an' he were not a Crusader, I would fling him from the sum¬ mit of this rock, wounded as he is. We will hold him to ransom, and he shall pay in gold for every drop of blood he hath cost us to¬ day : but for his mad aid, we had won that band of pilgrims for saying { Stand !' A cup of wine, knaves! and stick a torch in yon niche of the hall, that I may do myself right
when I am pledged to myself alone, and ye are howHng over your paltry hurts, like maim¬ ed curs in a peasant's cottage. But look to the wounded knight, I charge ye. He bore him bravely. I would not see him suffer wrong for twice the value of this day's booty." The wounded knight (who was no other than Paladour) was borne insensible in the arms of two of the robbers, who, stiU smart¬ ing under the wounds he had dealt with no sparing hand, were not in the mood to treat their charge too gently. . " Where have ye left the prisoner ?" said Gerand, who saw them descending the stair by the Ught of a torch Bertran (one of them) earned. " Where best beseems his valour to be," said Bertran. "He fought to-day like a devil, and we have bestowed him where he will have devils enough to fight with,—in that dark chamber where the fiend is heard to yeU so fearfuUy at night. Being a Crusader, he is doubtless armed with a spell or relique, or such godly gear as will
prevent the fiend, and save us from being tormented before our time."—" Tarry, and lend me thine arm, knave," said Gerand: " my Avounds begin to ache, and I am not in the mood for the fierce revel that Adolfo is to win courage to accost the lady with. He hath sworn he wiU treat with her for her ransom to-night."—" Hasten back," said Ber¬ tran to his comrade, " and I wiU treat thee with a scene of mirth worth aU the feats of a jongleur, or the moraUties played bythe priests at Easter." His companion soon joined him, and they proceeded together to dame Mar¬ guerite's ceU, Avho saw with deUght the gleam as it appeared through the many crevices of her door. " Noble lady,—for so we must call you now," said Bertran, with a low obei¬ sance,—" we come to conduct you to the pre¬ sence of your noble and enamoured knight." —■" In good time," said the dame; " for here have I sat aU day, like an oavI in the hole of a ruined waU, with no companion save the Avind whistHng through the loop-hole—no couch save this seat, that would mortify the M 5
limbs of a hermit—no food but a sorry loaf and a pitcher of sour wine,—with sundry other lacks that a gentlewoman cannot sig¬ nify. Truly this knight of thine had needs be valiant and loving, to make amends for all I havebome for his sake."—-" Thou wilt find him all that troubadours sing and maidens dream of, and, moreover, impatient to clasp thee to his bosom."—" Nay, I will not be so fiercely handled," said the dame.—" I doubt thou wilt," said the other outlaw.— " He is, perchance, very young, then," said * Marguerite, simpering.—" Thou wouldst not credit me if I said how young," said Bertram —" He was but three when he was caught/ quoth the other.—" Caught!" echoed Mar¬ guerite.—" Alas ! noble lady," said Bertran, "vinking at his comrade, " he is, like thyself, a captive : two years hath he been the thrall of Adolfo, who now repents him that he hath held him so long prisoner, and will shortly set him free ransomless."—"Nay, for that matter," said the dame, " an imprisoned knight hath a rich charm for the fancy of a
maiden like me, who always loved a ro- maunt better than her breviary; andj as long as he is a thraU, there is less fear of his escaping from me. But, faithful squire, you have never painted to me the goodly favour of your knight."—" Marry, for his looks," said Bertran, stroking his chin, " there be those who like them not; but, nevertheless, he hath somewhat, methinks— I know not how, as it were, to phrase it— somewhat that strangely resembles thine own favour, noble lady."—" Then he is not alto¬ gether uncomely," said the dame, spreading her hand before her face.—" Every whit as comely as thou art," answered the other.— " And he is of an ancient noble stock, thou tellest me ?" said the dame.—" Nay, of the most ancient family in France:—men say his ancestors were lords of mountain and plain ere the forefathers of King Philip were known; and that aU our nobility were the sons of yesterday, compared to his high and unknown descent."—" Young, noble, and enamoured—and a prisoner !■—lead me to him.
and I wiU yield what solace an afflicted maiden can give," said Marguerite.—" Yet how shaU I present myself to him, my tunic rent, my coif disaiTanged, my hair disordered, my—" " Trust me, noble lady," said Ber¬ tran, " he would better Uke thee all disar¬ rayed."—" You make me blush," murmured Marguerite.—" That would be a task to defy the devU," said the comrade.—" Hoav mean¬ est thou?" said the dame.—" He means," quoth Bertran, Avinking again at his comrade, " that the deAil himself could not raise a blush on a cheek Uke thine, unconscious of aught but the glow of maiden pudency."— So saying, Bertran supported one arm, while his comrade lighting a splinter of pine at the torch, caught the other, and led the dame, nothing loth, through a paved passage, near the centre of which was a circular aperture covered by a stone, about the size of that through Avhich the Cardinal de Guise was thrust into a dungeon, and afterwards mur¬ dered, and which a modern traveUer declares to be no larger than that of a hole in the
pathways of London for admitting coals. The party, as they approached the brink of this precipice, might have presented a group for a Gothic Hogarth.. The fierce Ught that gleamed from the spUntered pine, feU on the figures of the robbers, who were half-armed, their steel-caps and breast-plates clasped, but in coats of buff leather; and between them minced the dainty form of dame Marguerite, her head-gear aside; the ringlets, that should have shaded her forehead, streaming on her shoulder, and her whole costume tout-a-tort. " Here rest we," said Bertran, stopping at the circular stone, " Here waits thy bride¬ groom."—" Wiiere ?" exclaimed Marguerite.— " Even where I stand," said the robber; " and here thou must descend to meet his embraces."—" How, in the name of aU the devils, am I to descend," quoth the initated gouvernante, " through a hole that would not admit a weasel ?"—" Noble lady, thou dost cruel wrong to thy slight form in saying so," said Bertran; " divest thee of thy super¬ fluous trappings, and thou mayest defy a score
of Aveasels."—" Spare my veil," cried Mar¬ guerite.—" It might be rent by the craggy stones of the vault," said Bertran.—" But ray kirtle and tunic—nay, this is going too far."—" Thy knight wiU love thee best so disarrayed."—" But my skirt ?"—" And hoAv couldst thou with that monstrous skirt, hung round with pouncet-box, fan, and Cod knoAvs what fooleries, make thy Avay to thy ena¬ moured knight down suchanan-OAvpassage?— doff them altogether."—" Nay, ye have doffed me of them already, but wherefore those ropes ? I will not be bound."—" Ay, bound for ever to thy knight by these ropes, which thou shalt henceforth call silken cords, that form the steps of thy ladder of ambition and desire:—hoAv should else thy taper Avaist and slender limbs be visible to thy knight, who howls and maddens in his apartment beloAV to grasp thee?"—■" Bind me, then, if it must be," said Marguerite, as, winding the rope round her Avaist, they lowered her through the aperture, and then heaving up the flags on both sides of the hole, held the pine-torch far
downwards to watch her reception from her noble lover. The unfortunate Marguerite found herself in a vault of narrow dimensions, of which the faint gleam of Ught from above enabled her only to descry a portion ; judging, however, that a noble and enamoured knight lay cap¬ tive in the dungeon, she prepared to address him:— " The light of beauty, it is said, can ir¬ radiate the darkest prison, and I have heard troubadours sing that the gleam of their lady's eyes could pierce even the dungeon's darkness, in which knights were held captive by cruel Saracens; how much more then, noble though enthraUed knight"—a hideous howl, or rather yeU, here burst on her ears.— " Take not thy captivity so to heart, noble prisoner; here is one who wiU turn thy thraU to pleasure—thy chains to—Oh, God! how his eyes glare—this is no knight—how his yeU appals me—it is—it is a demon"—as a wolf that was kept in the dungeon for the purpose of terrifying the prisoners, or perhaps
for a more honible one, sprang at her as far as his chain aUowed hhn. The shrieks of Marguerite actuaUy drowned the yeU of the savage. " Take me up ! take me up !" she screamed, " or ye shaU be hung from the highest battlement of your toAver."—" Nay, is it thus thou flyest from thy bridegroom?" cried the banditti, laughing at her tenors; and they continued to repeat in succession,— " Consider his ancient descent—his youth— his resemblance to thyself—his wish to clasp thee to his bosom—his captivity," till Mar¬ guerite, mad with terror, made a desperate spring to catch at the hole of the vault, and, on theu* raising her from it, darted instinc¬ tively toAvards the staircase ; and half-dressed as she was, lost not a step, or suffered one scream to overtake another, tiU she had reached the door of the lady IsabeUe's apart¬ ment.
CHAPTER XIII. He threw her on a milk-white steed, An' himsel' lap up behind her; An' they are awa' to th' Highland hills, An' her friends they canna' find her. Old Ballad. Those screams, which might have awak¬ ened the dead, broke the deep trance of one who was almost so. Paladour had been sa¬ vagely flung on the stone-floor of one of the chambers of the tower by the bandits. The wound he had received in his encounter with the robbers had stunned him; it was dex- trously directed at the fracture in his helmet, which the clubs of the Albigeois had left the preceding day. Our knight was no hero of the troubadour's songs, who could fight three days and nights in his stirrups, sans intermis¬ sion, and undergo wounds without pain in suffering, or difficulty in healing—he was mortal both in frame and feeling.
He had toded among the Crusaders hi sweat and blood, diuing the day of Avhich the Albigeois had reaped the bloody har¬ vest—his night had been one of travel, ten'or, and weariness. He had joined at daAvn the pdgrims Avho Avere assailed by the band of Adolfo, against Avhom his lance had been driven Avith resistless force, tiU, yielding to lassitude, his arm began to droop, and, his armour pointing him out as a prey to the robbers, he was borne to l'Aigle sur la Roche, and, in a state between swoon and sleep, lay apparently senseless tiU awakened by the shrieks of dame Margue¬ rite. Then a dim vision roUed over his clouded senses—he thought himself among the Crusaders, and struggled to shout his war-cry, " La Croix sanglante !" Then came on that horrid feeUng of obtuse pain that men experience between sleeping and waking, Avhen they begin to know that they are to awake in pain, to the recoUection of suffering that has been endured, or the anticipation of suffering that is to commence.—Then
the distinct recoUection of his having been engaged in a Avild adventure for a party of pilgrims—of his being struck doAvn—he knew not by Avhom, and bome he knew not where.—Last, as if to soothe him into the beUef that aU had been a dream, came the bright image of the lady IsabeUe, " smoothing the darkness of his Adsion tiU it smiled;" when the wild screams of dame Marguerite burst on his ears. He started up; then beUeving it one of those sounds which might be heard by night and day with Httle notice in an outlaAv's hold, he tried with the tossing agony of one in pain to turn to rest. Another ciy reached his ears. The sound last heard was, apparently, one that never issued from human lungs ; it was the howl of a Avild animal. The chamber in Avhich Paladour lay, was one Avhich seemed, like the rest, to occupy the square of the tower ; but beside the stair Avhich communi¬ cated Avith all the apartments, there Avere others holloAved in the depth of the AvaU,
which, in many simUar tow r ers, bear testi¬ mony not only to the masonic skiU with which they must have been constnicted in so rude an age, but to the patience Avith Aviiich the gigantic race of fomier days must have submitted to modes of entering doors, and threading stairs, that would have puzzled modern dw r arfs. The howi—it was no human sound—was repeated. Paladour started up, and gazed round his chamber. The AvaUs Avere of unhewn stone, the floor was broken, the ceiling rudely vaulted; one door visible to his bewUdered eye straightly closed on the outside, no means appearing of opening it to the possessor of the apartment; but the moonUght gleaming brightly through a stone aperture baned with iron, feU on a niche, in Avhich there appeared a pointed arch formed in the AvaU, and origin aUy intended for the construction of another door, where none, hoAvever, Avas inserted, and in Avhose shadow stood a shapeless form, that grinned
and nodded at the knight some time before his weakened sight could descry it. " Art thou man, or fiend ?" said Paladour at last. " I have, methinks, dealt with both ; but thy shape, and the sound thou utterest, defeat conjecture."—" I am neither," said the figure, " though oft I deem I am the latter. TeU me now the deeds and motions of your fiend, what be his appetites, the food he loves, the foul thoughts he dwells on, the hours at which his howl is heard piercing human ears and thriUing human hearts."-— "I know not how to answer such fearful questioning," said the knight. " Then I will answer it for thee," said the figure. "My loved hour is night, my food is torn from the grave;" and he held in his hand what seemed horrible confirmation of what he uttered; " and my voice thou hast heard before,—it hath made the boldest hearts in this tower of guilt quake to their core, and the murderer grasp at his unsheathed weapon in his dream—wouldst thou hear it again ?"
And by a strong exertion of his chest and dilation of his mouth, he seemed prepared to utter another of those fierce howls which Paladour had heard before. " Thou 'It drive me mad," .said the knight, stopping his ears; " in the name of aU the devils, Avhat art thou ?"—" Mad," repeated the figure eagerly, as if grasping at the interpreting sound; " Mad, ay! that is it: I am a mad wolf;" and with hideous grimaces and wdd leaps he bounded towards Paladour. The wounded knight had no defence to make; yet he half rose from his couch of stone as if to grapple Avith the fearful being who approached him, when the latter suddenly stopped and ex¬ claimed, "Do you not see I am a wolf?— look, examine me." A strong gleam of moonlight darting through the aperture, dis¬ closed the form of the horrible querist. It was that of a .human being, low and coarsely formed; his beard and hair almost concealed his countenance; something like a wolf's skin was Avrapt about him, and his
hand held too evidently the proof of his de¬ moniac cppetite. The knight sunk shuddering back on his couch. It Avas evidently a man in the most homd paroxysm of lycanthropy, a distemper noAV unknown, but AveH authenticated to have existed at a far later period than that of our tale. " Examine me," said the unhappy wretch; " I teU thee I am a wolf. Trust not my human skin—the hairs grow inward*, and I am aAvolf Avithin—a man outward only. Slay me, and thouwdt be satisfied of the truth. The hairs grow inAvard—the Avolfish coat is within — the Avolfish heart is within—the wolfish fangs are Avithin;—yet, stiU, here is the food, and I cannot gnaAv it as a Avolf should:"—and he made the execrable morsel again visible. "■ Sir Avolf," said Paladour, gathering strength and courage for this fearful encoun-
ter, and suddenly conceiving a hope that inspired and augmented both, " dare you shew me your den ?"—" That wiU I, gladly," said the lunatic ; " there be choice morsels there on which thou mayest feed, and howl between at the moon, that throws her greedy beams through the iron grate." Paladour, shuddering, attempted to rise from his couch and follow his fearful guide, as the latter hobbled and capered before him with hideous imitation of the paces of a wolf. On a sudden he placed his back to the wall, and uttered a howl that made the hair of the knight stand on end. "And wherefore is that horrid cry ?" he exclaimed, stopping his ears.—" It is to scare other wolves from my den," said his companion; " for, wot ye, there be many in the clifts of this steepy rock:" —and he pointed to the various stories of the tower (for they were now on the stair) with a distinctness that shewed, though his intel¬ lect was destroyed, his observation and me¬ mory were unimpaired. Paladour, though unacquainted with the
honors of the haunted chamber, into Avhich he had been purposely flung by the bandits, began to conceive that the dreadful secret of this wretch's lycanthropy was closely kept and employed as an engine of terror by the chief; he also conceived that this unhappy being was probably conversant Avith aU the secret passages of the toAver ; and from these circumstances he derived new hope and heart, having such a fearless spirit that he would have foUowed the fiend himself to the rescue of the lady IsabeUe. Weak and wounded as he was, he leaned against the waU, and, sum¬ moning a quick apprehension and invincible spirit to his aid, he demanded, in terms suit¬ ed to the perverted capacity of his miserable companion, whether these wolves did not sometimes prey on lambs, and whether there w r ere not some prisoners of that harmless breed immured in the tower ? " Thou wottest avcU of the Avolves that tenant here," said the wretched being. " I heard lambs bleat far—far above me this night;"—and he pointed Avith strong gesture VOL. II. N
to the upper story, thus designating the pri¬ son of the lady IsabeUe. "But what of them ? there be morsels below to feast the palate of a prince. Come with me and feed." « So wiU I," said the knight, " an' thou first show r me the lambs that were seized to¬ day, and are held in this fastness." A wild laugh burst from the maniac as he pointed, with frantic gestures, upward and downward the stair. " There," he howled, " is food for thee and me. AA 7 Ut thou come and feast? Above and yonder is another feast prepared. AVot ye, here w r e are all wolves; and some feast on the dead, and some on the Uving. AATiich will ye feed on ? —choose ye." Paladour saw the necessity of humour¬ ing the wretched being, and, though he recoded at the effort, repUed:—" Sir w r olf, thou hast doubtless a grudging towards the choice morsels in thy den. I wiU not con¬ tend with thee for them: thy fangs and claws might soon make me repent my dar¬ ing." Here the WTetch shivered and mowed
with horrid delight. " Now, sir wolf, show me but where the prey Ues wiiich hath faUen into other clutches, and I will not disturb thy repast." The cunning, rabid appetite, and eager malignity of intelligence displayed in the features of the Iycanthrope at this moment defy aU power of description. He was evi¬ dently proud of his secret, anxious to betray it, feaiful of being imposed on, and longing te partake' of his own fearful food undis¬ turbed. After a short pause, obeying the most powerful of these impulses, and glancing a downward look on his den, he motioned to the knight to foUow' him, and trotted with his horrid ambiguity of motion up the dark and narrow stair. The knight foUowed. His fearful guide paused suddenly, and made a motion to Paladour to follow his example, whUe he thrust his face through a crevice between the stones of the waU, and withdrew it in a moment. Paladour appUed himself to the crevice, and saw an object which made him gaze with soul and eye ; nor could N 2
he withdraw^ what might be caUed the grasp of sight, till the wretched being muttered to lum, " Thou hast thy prey!—may I feed on mine undisturbed ?" " Accursed brute !" said the knight, " feed on what thou wilt; howl where thou mayest; —but begone !" With a faint howd the Iycanthrope dis¬ appeared down the stair. The knight re¬ mained rivetted to the spot. The crevice between the stones of the wall, in a place w r here they w r ere unshrouded by tapestry, gave him a full view of the interior of the apartment: it was that to which the lady IsabeUe had been conducted, and which we have described as furnished with all the rude magnificence that a robber's hold could afford. The group witMn might have indeed fixed a less anxious gaze than that of Paladour. The lady IsabeUe sat on a low seat covered with tapestry; her splendid habit was de¬ ranged, and her fine hair floated on her shoulders, and, descending far lower, seemed to supply the place of her silver-tissued veil
that lay in a heap beside her. Pride and tercor, anger and suppUcation, passed across her beautiful features, like storm and sun¬ shine over a landscape in autumn ; but pride predominated stiU: there was a trembling dignity about her, that seemed intended rather to impress the idea of poAver than to be conscious of it herself; her cheek was as pale as that of the dead, but her eyes Avere burning with a light, that even fearfully contrasted that paleness. A Uttle behind her stood her dam¬ sels, trembUng as much at their lady's emo¬ tion as at the cause of it, towards which their eyes, like hers, were directed, and grasping the folds of her mantle, with an attitude that seemed as if they sought at once to give and receive protection. In a comer of the apartment stood the figure of the outlaw, in an attitude between defiance and alarm, his features inflamed with intoxi¬ cation and fierce passions, yet awed by the sight of beauty in despair, and struggUng to hide from himself and her that he trembled
before his own viciim, and that victim in his power. It seemed that the lady, by her broken respiration, had but just ceased speaking, but had been unheard amid the screams of Marguerite; louder than those rose the voice of the incensed outlaw.— " Haughty lady," he cried, " remember thou art in the talons of the eagle, who never pounced on prey that he resigned."—" Slave and viUain," said the incensed beauty, trem¬ bUng with passion and terror; " such another word, and these walls that enclose me shaU prove my grave. Thank Heaven they are hard enough to dash this sUght frame into atoms before thy very sight!" A laugh of rude derision burst from the outlaw; but his inflamed eyes menaced more than scorn, and he seemed advancing to fulfil their threat. The damsels shrieked. At this moment, a slight but determined movement of the lady IsabeUe (who half-started from her seat), her compressed Ups, and the fixed and fearful bending of her eye on the walls of her prison, made the bold outlaw shrink
before her. At the same moment, a sound was heard that seemed Uke a groan heaved from the bosom of a giant; it was foUowed by a shock that made the strong walls ring. It proceeded from Paladour, who, maddened by the sight of danger he could not avert, and of indignity he could not avenge, uttered a groan of agony, and feU in the full weight of his heavy annour on the spot where he stood.
t
!
CHAPTER XIV. Marry, Sir, sometimes he i9 n kind of puritan. Oh! ifl thought thai, I'd heat him like a dog. SitAtcsi'iSAttu's Twelfth Night. Ouii wandering tale now returns to the Deacon Mephibosheth, wlio had set out in pursuit of the dainties promised by De Verac, which were as apocryphal as Sancho Panza's islands and earldoms. For a weary day did the deacon pursue this scentless track, leaving literally no stone unturned to find the partridge, pasty, and marchpane, promised hiin in those deceitful visions. Often and high did he rear his nostril, ex¬ pecting ever and anon to be treated witli that delicious flavour which Avas to exhale from the viands to which his imagination attached such luxury of enjoyment. " Jour-
neying with this intent," the deacon was alike surprised and disappointed, when, at the cio s se of evening, he found himself bewildered amid a labyrinth of rocky hills and glens, which drove hiin from the thoughts of his expected repast, to the more immediate consideration of how he miglit effect his return to his party. At this moment, wliich, considering the state of the country, might have proved a trying one to a man of more metal thau the deacon Mephibosheth, his ears were greeted by the sound of the feet of mules or horses, and that of human voices, and still more- by the conviction that, from the slowness of their pae^, and the tranquillity of their tones, the travellers were men of peace. A fevv moments after, emerging from behind a hill, rode forth two men on mules and one on horseback, who seemed debating of their way, and who. agreed finally to refer it to the first traveller they might meet. The deacon caught the names of the places as they spoke, and along with tliein a know¬ ledge both of where he himself was, and of n 5
his capacity of being their guide.—" Quern quceritis, adsum," said he, suddenly appear¬ ing : " I know the place you wot of, and wiU guide you thither, on weU assurance of my safe conduct, it being parcel mine own way." —"This guide must be trustworthy, foras¬ much as he gi'eeteth us in Latin," said one of them.—" Do as thou hast said, brother, with speed, for the night is closing in."—"Nay, take me with you," quoth the deacon, " the labourer is worthy of his hire. I have fasted aU day in this desert, and lack refreshment, such as, doubtless, those ample bags are stored with;"—for this part of their equipment had not escaped his observation.—" Marry, thou hast guessed right, nor shalt thou lack other guerdon so thou keeji touch with us," said the foremost rider.—" Touch not, taste not, handle not," said the deacon ; then suddenly checking himself, he assisted the speaker to empty the contents of a bag or waUet that lay on the shoulders of liis mule, on which he fastened with infinite eagerness, the riders halting the while, and the conversation being
strangely divided between their enquiries and the deacon's late .reminiscences and present occupation. "And how far, sayest thou, must we fare, ere we reach ------?" " A red- legged partridge," muttered the deacon, dis¬ cussing a capon, which his imagination was comparing with the deUcious viands promised by Verac. " He hears me not," said the horseman; then raising his voice, "Many mountain streams cross us in our way?"—"A tun of Malvoisie," said the deacon, devoutly apply¬ ing himself to - a leathern bottle, but still dreaming of Verac's golden promises.—" And who the devil is to guide us across them?" said the querist: — "A conger-eel," quoth the deacon.—"He is stark wode," said an¬ other rider.—" He swam up the Seine to Paris on the back of the king's fishmonger, or how was it?" said the deacon. "Ah, I re¬ member me now, it was aU si device of Satan's to lure me into the snares < of tlie enemy, but I have defied him and prevaUed; and lo, here is spread for me a table in- the wUder- ness."
So saying, he dispatched the capon, a huge cheese, and the contents of the lea¬ thern bottle, and then rising with aU the speed his lameness permitted, demanded the bones of the former, and the skin of the latter. " Even AA-ear them thyself as trophies of thy victory," said one of the riders, " for never did knight on foughten field earn them more hardly, or merit them mor*;."—■" Sayest thou me so ?" said the deacon, disposing them in different parts of liis garb, " then shaU not they or thy counsel be cast aAvay. And noAV, sir traveUer, I am for you, over heath or holm. glen or rock; through mountain mist, or fog of the valley."—" AA r e have a mad guide to¬ Avards," said the traveUer, draAving up his rein ; " but how Avilt thou, being on foot, keep pace with our mules, slow-paced as they be?"—"AU's one for that," said the deacon. " the path to home lacks hah" its length to the foot that treads it, and I shaU, perchance, quit you on the way with some spiritual dainties for your temporal refection."—" lie
is a pardoner," Avhispered one of the/party.— " Rather a pilgrim, who hath been foundered, Avandering from shrine to shrine," rephed his companion. —" Whoever he be," said the third, " he hath promised us safe guidance, and it is time Ave put him to the proof—the sim is far behind the hiUs, and the Avay uncer¬ tain, if not perilous." The deacon, as he halted beside his neAV asso¬ ciates, had fuU leisure to note their appearance, for the inequaUties and deviations of the track made him, spite of his infirmity, a match in speed Avith the best mounted of the party. The tAvo Avho rode on mides Avere Avrapped in houplands, Avhich hung on the flanks of their beasts, but under their hoods might be seen the folds of a monk's coavI : the third, who was a horseman, seemed to have nothing ec¬ clesiastical about him, save in the peaceable- ness of his demeanour. He Avore a dark cas¬ sock, and a short cloak, Avith a cap of cloth on his head, but he managed his horse with the air and spirit of one used to long journeys arid rough encounters Avith Avild roads, and
the animal that bore him over them:—this ,Avas no other than the celebrated Guillaume de Rusbriquis, Avhose travels into Tartary Avere then the theme of aU tongues*, and whose adventures prove that there are no aeras in savage life, as at the distance of cen¬ turies it.presents just the same picture ofthe caprice, insolence, coAvardice, and vaciUation that may be found in Lord Macartney's and Lord Amherst's recent embassies to China, or Cox's residentship in the Burmhan empire. With these companions did the deacon set on, though we avUI do him the justice to say that he abhorred the monk's cowl as he Avould the deAdl's hoof, and therefore by no means suspected of what company he was the associate:—" And noAV I pray you, sir stranger," said one of them, "resume your tale of foreign lands; methinks, AvhUe I hear you, I am presently there myself, which, in faith, I had rather be by proxy than presence,
lacking the courage to travel, and the skiU to read. The passages Avhich befeU me," saidRus- briquis, " at the court of the Tartar king, I have aHeady told."—"What king saidstthou?" interrupted the deacon.—" I said the king of Tartary."-—" Out on thee for an impostor!" cried Mephibosheth, " thinkest thou to put the change upon us Avith tales and tricks of Ind and the Antipodes ? We have heard of a king of England, a king of Aragon, nay of kings of Northern countries, whose names our language knoAvs not; but who hath ever heard of that outlandish king thou namest.?"-—• " Peace, and let him proceed, thou bold fel¬ low," said the monk; " I uphold that there is a king of Tartary."—" It is a figment," said the deacon, " sheAv me such a place as Tartary inthe Scriptures."—"On leaving* the king," said the traveUer, " I was had into the chief temple, Avhere the priests were doing service to their idols: these were smaU figures of men and Avomen sorely smutched by reason of the
lamps that bum there continuaUy; before them hung pieces of scarlet cloth, to Avhich were fastened waxen effigies of various parts of the body, offered by those whom the idols were said to have healed, being evd-disposed in their Umbs. Some of these poor heathens Avere bowing themselves before the figures of the idols to the ground, while the priests Avent on chanting, or rather moaning, in slow ca¬ dence, their idolatrous Uturgy; but Avhat they said I know not, nor, perchance, would it have weU Uked Christian ears to hear them. Some also Avere making voavs for the recovery of those Avho Avere sick, or the return of the absent, offering money, flowers, or gums to the idols; the priests instructing them how- to make these offerings, keeping the money themselves, and carefully presenting the smoke to the idols, the siUy laics counting them benefactors for the same, and much extoUingthe goodness of these priests." The monks crossed themselves at this ac¬ count, which had a very different effect on
the deacon.—" Noav loud thou Hesti sir tra¬ veUer," said he, " loud thou. Hest, as I told thee at first; thou dost bear us in hand with tales of Tartarus or Tartar^. and lo! thou teUest of Avhat may be seen in eveiy ido¬ latrous steeple-house in France at this day." " Hoav! Avhat meanest thou?—Avhat sayest thou ?" said the three eager voices of the tra¬ veUers, in a kind of unison trio.—" I say that I wiU testify against your abominations," quoth Mephibosheth: "need we go to Tartary, or hoAv callest thou it, to Avitness Avhat thou teUest us of? have ye not in your churches muttering priests, a chanted mass, rags and reUques, voavs, pilgrims, penances, and proces¬ sions; censers Avith incense, and vessels of flowers, and offerings of silver, and offerings of gold, which ye ke?p for yourselves, giving the smoke of youi* tapers and the smeU of in¬ cense to your idols on the high places ?—And is this idolatry among the paynim folk, and la- tria and dulia when practised by monks and friars?"—" In the name of aU the devhV'
cried the monks, " whom have Ave got for a guide?"—" A guide in trutli," said Mephi¬ bosheth, " not a guide over mountain and moor, but a guide that avUI make the crooked straight, and cause that your feet stumble not on the dark mountains:—I am one that am raised up to testify against an idolatrous generation ; I am as one appointed to remove the high places, and to cut down the groves, and to break in pieces the brazen serpent, and caU it Nehushtan. At the voice of my crying, Bel shall boAv down, Nebo shaU stoop, and men shaU cast the idols of sUver and the idols of gold, which they made to worship, to the moles and to the bats." Here the monks crossed themselves in hor¬ ror, and Mephibosheth, Avho had an exceUent memory, took adA r antage of their sUence to repeat the forty-fourth chapter of Isaiah from beginning to end, Avithout missing a word by the Avay. This gave them time to recover from their amazement, and the first use they made of their hands, after they had recovered
from their uplifted position, was to seize on the deacon, whom they held fast, without, however, being determined as to the mode in which they would express their gratitude for his exhortation. —" What means this, my masters ?" cried Mephibosheth, vainly strug¬ gUng with them; " why do ye lay hands on me; wiU ye rend my raiment ? will ye slay me?"—" Thou hast, indeed, spoken matters that shr-dd be answered with thy life," said one ofthe monks. "By the faith ofmy order!" said the other, " he is either an incarnate fiend, or an heretic, and in either case must be dealt with: if the one, by a cunning exor¬ cist ; if the other, by those means which the legate weU handled in his Ser mo de litereticis comburendis." —"And is this my guerdon for your safe guidance ?" quoth the unfortunate deacon; "ami thus quitted for leading you by the right path where your footsteps sUpt not ?"—" Many art thou," said Rusbriquis, who was assisting to tie his hands, " and it is but doing reason and fair quittance withal.
Thou hast been their guide in carnal things, and they wiU be thy guides in things spi¬ ritual ; so foUow, Sir Catechumen, with what stomach you may, for yonder are the towers of the abbey of Normoutier ;" and the travel¬ lers indeed drew near that stately pde of which the monks were inmates.—" Stomach!" murmured the deacon intemaUy, " alas! I have foUowed my stomach but too far!—Ah, Mephibosheth, Mephibosheth, thy god hath been thy beUy, and a devil of a god he is likely to prove; better hadst thou fared gnawing a fragment of goat's-milk cheese, though it were hard enough to spUt thy teet!. in spUnters, and quaffing whey, though sourer than all vinegar, than to have gone after their feast of fat things, and desired their dainty meats. Oh! for a mess of pottage and a draught of water as it were in safety, or per¬ chance a savoury quarter of a kid of the goats, or peradventure, portion of a staUed ox, or store] of feathered fowis ! The Lord rebuke that prating, vapouring gaUant, with his apo-
cryphal conger and legendary venison, thus to send me a whoring after the flesh-pots of Egypt, when I might have fed on manna in the wilderness!—Behold now I am brought into captivity, and led unto the death." They were now at the gate, on which they smote with their riding rods, and, to the en¬ quiry of the porter, " AVho knocked so late ?" replied, " Open quickly, for we are brothers Austin and Hilary, with the traveUer the fa¬ mous Rusbriquis, and a prisoner, of whom we know not weU whether he be heretic or only devil incarnate."—" If he be heretic," quoth the porter, whose voice announced him very drunk—" if he be heretic, I wiU not undraw a bolt for him—many if he be devU, he is dearly welcome, for we have chosen an abbot of mis¬ rule, the revels are held in the chapter-room; and we lack a devd for the nonce."—" Truce vvith thy foolery," said the monk; " we bring thee wine from Beaucaire." No taUsman could sooner have opened the doors of an en¬ chanted palace in romance, than these few
words did the gate of the abbey; and the monks, hurrying Rusbriquis and the deacon along with them through a cloister that ran round three sides of the outer court, flung open the doors of the spacious chapter-room, which the brotherhood, in that cold season, preferred as the scene of their revels to the vast refectoiy, where, erewhile, had feasted the band of the Crusaders. As the doors were flung open, a sight burst on the eyes of the astonished deacon that made him for a mo¬ ment imagine himself a Daniel summoned to the idolatrous feast of Belshazzar. In the absence of the Abbot of Normoutier the brotherhood had agreed to hold a species of revel, then not inadmissible within conven¬ tual walls, had elected their abbot of misrule, dispatched missives in search of lemans and costly wines; andthe relaxed character ofthe abbot gave them Uttle cause of fear that their froUc, however it might pass the bounds of decorum, would transgress the Umits ofhis patience. The scene disclosed by the open-
ing doors surpasses aU power of description. In this monastic masquerade some had as¬ sumed the habits of classical, others of scrip¬ tural personages, and all appeared preparing for a dance, however dissonant their characters or unassociating their costumes might be. They were aU arcayed in dresses Avhich, whether appropriate or not, were Avildly fan¬ tastical, and even exaggerated into a kind of frantic extravagance, and the faces of most of these reveUers Avere covered Avith gdt vi¬ zors, Avhich, conceaUng aU resemblance to the human countenance, diffused a strange and horrid glitter over their featureless faces; their language, too, Avas a squeak or gibier, and their dialogue, carried on rather by- gestures than by Avords, seemed a kind of dia¬ bolical short-hand. Torches, held by the lay- brothers, who laughed, hoAvever, too heartdy at this metamorphosis to hold them quite straight, shed a red and smoky Ught on the wild group of these clerical masqueraders; and in a corner others Avere holding back the
dogs belonging to the abbey, Avho, terrified at the strange appearances around them, would have floAvn at them unless Avithheld, and Avhose ceaseless barking made a kind of con¬ cert with the general uproar of this monastical festival—their eager eyes, pointed heads, and the stretched arms, and the encouraging voices of their young exciters, making no bad back¬ ground to the painting. " Now Heaven pro¬ tect me!" said the unfortunate deacon, " that these fiends tear me not in pieces !—alas ! I am finely holpen." The abbot of misrule, who Avas distinguished by his tinsel mitre, crosier, and ring, and a superior portion of extravagance and absurdity in his vestments and gestures, demanded of the traveUers who they Avere that sought admittance to the solemn rites he Avas about to celebrate. " Two poor monks of the order of St. Benedict," answered the ecclesiastics, ,k who return from pUgrimage to the shrine of St. Bacchus of Beaucaire ;" and they produced the weU-fified skins that testified the success of their mis¬ sion.—" ReUcs of value in truth," said the
abbot, " and that shaU be meetly enshrined ere long," as he stroked his ample paunch at sight of the Avine ; " and Avhom bring you to this our cloister of misrule?" " I am GuiUaume de Rusbriquis, the famed traveller," said Rus¬ briquis, entering into the spirit of the revel; " I have journeyed from pole to pole —have help¬ ed the sun to go on horseback in the east, and held his stirrup Avhen he aUghted in the Avest—have been shipwrecked in the frozen ocean, and anchored on the back of a kraken, deeming it to be the main land. Marry, if ye doubt the truth I teU, here is my feUoAv- traveUer," pointing to Mephibosheth, " avIio came by this halt in his gait from sojourn¬ ing overlong in the land of Antipodes, and whoUy forgetting to Avalk on his feet."—" He speaks brave matter," quoth the abbot, " and must needs be a traveUer by his lying; —and thou who standest shivering and groaning there, art thou what he deliyers thee ?"— " I am one," said the deacon, " Avho am led captive into a strange land, and sit doAvn to weep by the waters of Babylon."—" There vol. it. o
thou Hest," said the abbot, " for there is not a drop' of the waters of Babylon in the abbey or its neighbourhood: Ave knoAV no such strange Avines—take heed, feUoAV, for I do grievously suspect thee, from thy speech, to be as it Avere an Albigeois, in Avhich case there Avere no more words but to hang thee; yet, that thou mayest perceive we are a merciful lord abbot, dance a-round with us, and it shall be thy purgation."—" Surely I wUl not dance," quoth the deacon, whose courage rose Avith opposition; "it is an abomination more befitting the daughter ofthe harlot Herodias than a deacon of the holy congregation. AU dancing is eA r il, very evU, exceedingly evU, and not good—but to dance in the tents of Kedar and the tabernacles of the idola¬ ters, to be set up on high among the un¬ godly, and dance in the high places, were an utter abomination:—wherefore I. say, Down with the filthy squeaking of pipes, and the lewd jarring of crowds*, and—"—" So please
you, my lord abbot," said one of the monks, " let us droAvn this peevish felloAv's noise, and cause him to dance Avith us :—your true sour heretic (and your lordship perceives he is no better, though I shame to name such vermin before your lordship) needs no other martyr¬ dom than the sight of free honest mirth."— " Thou sayest w^eU," said the abbot; " he shall dance and die the death of the spleenful:—for the rest, let such of the nine Avorthies as be sober, lead forth Deborah, Judith, and Queen Dido—the three chUdren in the furnace shall dance with Nebuchadnezzar to make up their old grudge—Susanna shall pace with one of the elders, and the Goddess of Chastity with the other—ourself, the Abbot of Misnde, will lead the lady of loose-deUght, Avith her paint¬ ings and her pouncings, her mincings and her mockings—and the heretic shaU dance Avith the devU, and there is a company meetly sorted. Strike up, my masters."—Here the hapless Mephibosheth Avas seized on by a hi¬ deous figure enveloped in a black garment, with cloven feet of flame colour, a tail that ti 2
swept the ground, a mask equipped Avith " eyes that gloAv and fangs that grin," and a huge pair of horns starting from the forehead. AU his struggles avafied nothmg witli his frightful partner : he Avas di'agged into the circle, compeUed to perform numerous pirou¬ ettes, Avhich were more remarkable for velo¬ city than grace, and if he relaxed for a mo¬ ment in his exertions, a SAvinge of his partner's taU, a kick of his cloven foot, or a blow Avith his homs, set him prancing again Avith pain and terror tiU his strength Avas exhausted, aiid he feU to the ground. At this moment the cook was seen entering the haU, attended by the lay-brothers groaning under the heavy dishes they bore, and shouting in unison the monastic chorus— Caput apri defero, Reddens Jaudei Domino} Qui estis in convivio, Plaudite cum cantico. The revellers instantly surcounded the tables, covered with delicious fare, and flaggons of the choicest wines; and doAvn sat pagan gods,
Christian martyrs, devfis and angels, promis¬ cuously. Susanna pledged the elders, whde they could undergo her chaUenge—Queen Dido did reason to St. Dennis for France, in potations deeper than those Virgil describes her indulging in when she feasted JEneas—the three children in the furnace prayed to sit near Niobe—and Moses and Satan, observing they Avere the only persons of the drama who were accommodated with horns, agreed to sit together, and, to the vast amusement of the group, instead of carving, tore up a pasty that vvas before them with their horns. " Fast and furious" waxed their mirth, till in a pause of laughter that had threatened to be inextinguishable, one of the party demand¬ ed whence that groan had issued ? " It is a sigh breathed from a hole in a vessel of clay," quoth the disconsolate deacon, who sat pant¬ ing on the floor after his involuntary exercise, and wistfully gazing on the feasters.—" Yea, and a lame broken vessel,'' said Rusbriquis— " And an empty vessel, I trow," rejoined the abbot,—" how sayest thou, heretic?"—" Itis
even so," said the deacon; " and I pray you, since I am become a by-word and mock, let me eat a morsel of savoury meat, and drink a cup of wine, lest I become like them that go down to the pit."—"By the mass, weU prayed and in good season," said the mock abbot: " thou hast been as Daniel in the den of lions, but now thou shalt be as Daniel in the palace of the king of Babylon, and shalt think scorn of the water and pulse thou fed- dest on in thy peevish mood, and raw per¬ verse nonage." The deacon hesitated not to accept the permission, and in a moment the humour of tormenting their prisoner was ex¬ changed for one of feasting him: his trencher w r as filled with the choicest morsels, and his cup oft and mischievously replenished Avith Avines, of whose poAver he vvas as ignorant as of their flavour. The persecution thus disguised had its fuU effect; the good wine " did its good office soon," and the revellers with triumph per¬ ceived the increasing intoxication of the sul¬ len heretic, Avho, preaching betAveen every
mouthful, and hiccuping betAveen every word, presented a spectacle of maudUn gravity, un¬ couth hUarity, zeal truly Avithout knowledge, and eloquence Avithout the power of speech.— " Thou wUt chant a roundelay, or a hymn to the Lady Venus noAV ?" asked Rusbriquis.— " Yea, that I will, to be conformable," quoth the deacon: " any thing in conformity, and to do reason."—" And thou wilt dance a round with us, if need be?" asked the abbot.— " Surely I wUl dance," said Mephibosheth, " that is, in the way of comfort to the Aveak; I wiU dance, yea, dance very exceedingly—so that it shaU be said hereafter, his dancing is as the dancing of Mephibosheth the deacon, for he danceth furiously;—but only in theAvay of comfort, mark ye me — otherwise not a grice, though fat buUs of Basan closed me in on every side." " And thou wilt whisper a love-tale in a fair leman's ear ?" said another . " Why, there it is," said the deacon, Avith an ineffable leer, " I yield it that thou hast me there; I was always the lovingest soul, and could skfil of music in my youth ; but aAvay
with these vanities !—Hold, fellow ! I meant not the trencher and cupfull of new wine— Tell not me of fair women: if thou wilt pledge me in a cup of wine, so,—if not, would all the women in the land kept their own coun¬ sel and were sober—As for me, tears have been my meat day and night''—and he burst into a violent fit of drunken grief, which was drowned in the shouts of laughter that rose on every side. AU gathered round him assail¬ ing him with invitations to eat, to drink, to dance, to sing 5 in the same moment, while others called as loudly on him to preach, that they might be converted by his doctrine : then their passions changing, they began to revile him; curses and foul terms were heard on every side, and those who were distant began to throw fragments of the feast at him. This moment completed the distraction of the un¬ fortunate deacon !—his senses reeled, his per¬ ceptions became confused, he saw false co¬ lours, and mistook one object for another— he answered the curses with a vacant laugh, and reviled those who still jested with him.
At length his habitual reminiscences, strug¬ gling with this temporary dehrium, he snatch¬ ed the huge knife from the hand of the sewer, and exclaiming,- " I will break down the carved work thereof with axes and ham¬ mers," began to demoUsh the figures of the saints with which the abbot's chair of state was richly and beautifully wrought. In a twinkUng, St. Lucia once more lost both her eyes, the head of St. Dennis dropped from under his arm, where he was carrying it; and the Abbot of Misrule himself narrowly escaped a blow that clove his mitre in twain—" Bel, bow down; Nebo, stoop, I say," shouted Mephibosheth, redoubUng his blows, *' for I am he who will bring the idols low, and will purge this house of Baal, and make it a draught- house unto this day;" and at the same mo¬ ment, with unlucky dexterity, he flung two massive goblets at the painted windows, which missing not their mark, left the gor¬ geous and costly compartments in shivers. The horror with which the monks beheld an act they deemed sacrilege, kept them at
first motionless; but, recovering themselves, they rushed on the deacon, and holding him fast, looked round them in an impotence of rage, that knew not how to vent itself—" Ac¬ cursed wretch !" said the abbot, who first found breath, " vile heretic, and worse than an infidel! what have thine excommunicated hands done ?—but thou shalt die the death." The deacon, but half recovered from his delirium, gazed with lightless eye and vacant face around him, " How will the abbot chafe when he sees the spoils of his goodly seat," cried he of Misrule, holding his cloven mitre with both hands,—" and the defeature of those glorious windows, the pride of the houses of God in ali Languedoc," rejoined the monks. " This it is," said Rusbriquis, " to seek to tame a wolf, and have your fingers bitten off for your guerdon."—" To death with him !" cried a hundred voices at once, amid which the abbot's was heard loudest; and the only question was now what punishment was adequate to his crime. The mode of deaUng with heretics was summary as it was cruel
then: it was suggested to fling the wretched Mephibosheth into the enormous fire that burned on the hearth, and which might have consumed Goliath, while two or more held a huge bar of iron across the aperture, lowering or heightening it to prevent his escape, while his tortures admitted of the possibility of his making the attempt. This horrid proposal was negatived only by the abbot's remarking that the screams of the victim would disturb them at their revel.—" Let his tongue be first plucked out," said one of the monks.—" And how shall we purify the chamber — this chamber royal in our palace of misrule, from the noisome smell of burning bones!" said the abbot—" foh ! we do amerce thee in a cup of wine, for giving such unsavoury counsel to thy liege." —" Let him be flung from the highest tower of the abbey, and let the hogs feed on his carcase as it lies i' the court," said another.—" Tlie night is over cold to stand shivering on the battlements of the abbey tower," objected the abbot; " and he who rises betimes to see the hogs at breakfast,
breaks the first law of our realm of misrule, which sets forth that all its loyal subjects must bo a-bed at noon, and a-foot at mid¬ night ; wherefore, niy censure is, (hat we hang up the heretic curia sedente: —yon grim¬ ly-cawed visage that frowns from the ribbed arch of I hi 4 door shall serve for gallows; his partner iu the dunce shall howl him a black santis for shrift; and with so many knaves in the convent, it were hard if a rope wore lacking for the nonce." This sentence was received with acclama¬ tion, probably because it promised the enjoy¬ ment or witnessing the prisoners death with¬ out quitting their seats ; and the rope was pro¬ vided, flung over -lho giant-visage that pro¬ jected with an ominous frown over the arch of the door, and held strongly on the other side by two brawny lay-brothers, before the hapless deacon understood for whom this fearful note of preparation was sounded.— "Wherefore am f led unlo death?" he cried vvith n ghastly gaze; " look to it, and mark- well what you do, for my blood will be re-
quired at your hand."—" Is the rope well plait¬ ed?" said the abbot; " look that ye put forth all your strength, and wince not for his stnig- glcs."—" Hold yet for a space," said the dea¬ con, " for a moment, hold'!—yc have mademc drunk with dcav wine; ye have caused me to speak unadvisedly with my lips—cut ine not off in my transgression; grant me a space to cry for mercy; destroy not soul and body, spare nie for a moment." His lips grew hor¬ ridly white, and he wrung his damp hands.— " The confessor wc have appointed thee,'' said the abbot, beckoning to the hideous figure that personated the devil," will rightly handle the texts concerning thy departure, and expound to thee the promise of thy soon encounter with him. Wherefore delay ye to Unit the rope?"—" It is knit and cast," an¬ swered the hoarse but jocular voices of the executioners, 'fhe doomed wretch, flinging himself on hh knees, and .seeming to grow to the paved floor (for no force could rend hiin from it for a space), poured forth in his despair all the dreadful denunciations against
blood-shedding contained in the Jewish law, accompanied with strong additions of his own.—" Cursed be the men of blood!" he cried, " cursed be theu* wrath! for it is cruel —may the avenger of blood overtake them while his wrath is wann, and may the city of refuge be far from their path ! Cursed be they with the primal, curse, the curse of the first sinner out of Paradise, who was a murderer ! Cursed be their morning, for its breath is groaning, and cursed be their evening, for its dew is blood! Cursed be the earth that shakes beneath them, and cursed the heaven that frown? on them!'" " Depart, cursing and accursed," said the abbot, " and con over thy blasphemies with him from whom thou hast learned them." The rope was twined round the neck of the victim, the executioners pulled with their full strength, placing each one his foot against the clustered pillars of the door.— Some of the revellers had the cruelty to hold a torch full in the face of the victim. There was a slight convulsion, a brief tremor, a
gush of perspiration that dyed face, neck, and hands of a Uvid hue; the next moment the rope broke, and the deacon fell on ihe floor apparently lifeless. He was raised instantly, and there was a kind of sportful stiife among the assistants. - " He is dead," said one ; " he is not dead," was the reply. " How can he be dead when the rope has scarce left a mark on his neck ? Can mere imaginings work so strongly, or hath the rope done its office sooner or: him as an heretic ?"—" Ye know nought," said Rusbriquis, "< of the flittings of life in extremity, toward and fro¬ ward, like a flame hovering on and off the wick of a lamp;—and still less wot ye how habituated savours wiU cause the vanished soul to return to her dwelling like a bird to its spray, when Umed with such sweet poison—for a proof," applying the savour of a richly-composed dish to the nostrils of the deacon, whose associations immediately testified the power of the luscious condi¬ ment and the sagacity of the traveller. He .sneezed, opened his eyes, and extended liis
hand towards the dish as if instinctively.— " Look that the rope be stronger, and that ye ply it well," said the abbot; " this heretic fox shall yield us sport at another chace."—" Lord abbot," said Rusbriquis, who, if not more hu¬ mane, was at least more considerate, " may not this feUow, who seems a leader in this pes¬ tilent heresy, deUver some secrets tcuching them that may prove a ransom for his worth¬ less Ufe ? Men say that Raymond of Tou¬ louse is again in France, and that the Crusa¬ ders have fled before him."—" Thy counsel is good," said the mock abbot, " such report hath reached us, and I would give my mitre lo hear how our joUy abbot hath fared in the en¬ counter : perchance his mitre hath been found of as brittle matter as ours—Speak, fellow, for thy life, and divulge to us what thou knowest ?" This injunction was repeated several times to the stupefied deacon before he could hear or s f nderstand it; but when he did, in that agony, of mind which makes the pretenders to religion set a frantic and exaggerated value on
that Ufe which it was their habit to speak of with lofty disregard, he eagerly offered to dis¬ close important matter, if his were spared. " Important matter," said the abbot, " we list not to hear; our royaume of misrule piizes but two commodities — old winus and youth¬ ful paramours:—touching the former we count thee iU-provided, for, perchance, thou hast never tiU this night tasted it;—for the latter, thou may'st win mercy by being our pur¬ veyor—speak for ransom of thy Ufe: knowest thou a heretic damsel worthy of a church¬ man's love?" " In all the land," said Mephi¬ bosheth, " there is no woman so fair as Genevieve, the daughter of Pierre the pastor —of all the daughters of men tliere is none to compare with her for comeUness and wis¬ dom, for gracious favour and goodly gifts."— " And canst thou win this priceless deinoi- seUe, to share our reign of Misrule with us ?" said the abbot.—" Of a truth," gasped the dea¬ con,—" the women and the weak ones jour¬ ney in the van, and it may be that I may lead, if life be spared, where they can be
found, and, peradventure, led away into cap¬ tivity even as the Syrians went out by com¬ panies, and took away a little damsel who waited on Naaman's wife."—" She shall mini¬ ster to Naaman, not his wife," quoth the ab¬ bot ; " and on such condition do we spare thy life ; but mark me, heretic, that life depends on its fulfilment.—Doth thy accursed creed allow of an oath to bind thee withal ?"—The unfortunate wretch uttered an oath the most tremendous and inviolable, and in so doing fell prostrate and exhausted again at the feet of the abbot. His swoon did not interrupt their festivity long, but several days elapsed before the fever that was the consequence of the terror, agony, and excitement of the unfortunate deacon, enabled him to undertake the accomplishment of his promise, by leading a band of monks in the direction he had indicated.
CHAPTER XV. Thou tree of covert and of rest, For this young bird that is distrust; Amid thy branches safe he lay, And he was free to sport and play, While falcons were abroad for prey. Wordsworth. The danger to which the unprotected females of the Albigenses were exposed, from this meditated assault, was tenfold in¬ creased by circumstances that had since occurred without then- knowledge, or even that of their persecutors. The Bishop of Toulouse seized, with prompt hand and watchful eye, the moment when the hope¬ less state of Count de Montfort, (who stiU lay at the castle of Courtenaye in a state of stu¬ por, his wounds healing, but his faculties and physical power totally annihilated,) and the dispersion of the Crusaders, in the equaUy hopeless pursuit of the lady IsabeUe, left a
powerful disposable force of men-at-arms in his hands ;—the Countess de Montfort, her¬ self, compromising her jealousy of her hus¬ band's honour in her zeal for the cause, and giAing up the command of those she led to the bishop, whUe Sir Aymer promised his aid the moment he was able to bear his armour, and sit his war-saddle (and his influence Avas too extensive to be despised), and the vassals of de Courtenaye were armed, and impa¬ tient for action. He seized, moreover, the opportunity to direct and dispose of this force, by representing to the court of Rome that the cause had been ruined in France by the mad¬ ness of the champion of the Church, and the ascetic apathy and inoperative neutraUty of the monk of Montcalm; that the reins dropt so suddenly, by an unskilful and desperate hand, must instantly be seized by a powerful and active one, or the race would be run and the goal won by the antagonist. He prayed forgiveness of the holy father for his over-confidence in the measure of putting himself at the head of what remained of the
crusading army in Languedoc, in terms that rather courted praise for his courage, than pardon for his temerity; and ere it was possible that his couriers could have reached the Vatican, the bishop had placed him¬ self at the head of all the men-at-arms, who still sojourned in the castle of Courte¬ naye, or its neighbourhood, and set forth against the retreating army of Count Ray¬ mond of Toulouse. Such were the terrors that impended over the heretics : but of these they were as yet ignorant. On the night fol¬ lowing that of the further retreat of the Al¬ bigeois into the fastnesses of the mountains, Genevieve, with trembUng heart and limbs, after the pastor had composed himself to rest, nought the cave where the wounded Crusader lay. The path was so intricate and tangled that she had less to fear pursuit or detection than the possibility of retracing her steps again; and to have seen her slender form and delicate Umbs as she struggled through en¬ twining weeds, matted brushwood, and inter¬ laced and slowly disparting branches of trees,
and then tremulously placed her slender foot on the stony path which often betrayed it, one might have imagined her a banished oread or dryad tremblingly haunting the scene of her former sylvan existence. Through all obstructions, however, her slender form and resolute wiU made way : she reached the cave—he raised the thick foUage of wild ivy and clematis that embowered its entrance—she entered, but there was no one there—no trace even of the wounded knight, no fragment of armour or shred of scarf or plume showed he had ever been an inmate there. She paused for a moment in amaze¬ ment not unmixed with tercor, and both were increased by observing the entrance of the cave darkened by tlie figure of a man who ap¬ proached her—it was Amand. He did not speak, but he gazed on her intently, and a smde which she trembled at, severed his Ups for a moment—" What hast thou done ?" she said fearfuUy.—" Oh! what hast thou done with the wounded knight ?~Where have you borne him—or is he indeed yet aUve?"—
" Canst thou misdeem of me as that voice would imply?" said Amand, with impassioned reproachfulness—" I cannot behold aught pi¬ tied by thee that I do not pity, or aided by thee that I would not aid. Last night I Un- gered behind thee to bear the wounded knight to fitter shelter ;—I puUed the leaves for his bed, and bound his wounds, and spread my own garment over him where he Ues;—but, oh ! Genevieve, I felt two hearts in my bosom. I could," he added,." even whde I bore his body in mine arms, have dashed it against the rock, when I thought of the look with which thou didst gaze on it last night."— " Alas !" said the maiden, shrinking from his vehemence, " teU me, at least, where you have borne him, that I may myself minister to him —men tend not men with that gentleness that women can—nor do ye bear those thousand waywardnesses which break from a spirit galled with the body's sufferings ; nor know ye to invent and apply those petty cares and nameless comforts that are to the suf¬ ferer more than the drugs of many skiUed
leeches."—" I doubt not thou wilt be a tender nurse," said Amand sullenly ; " but are there none to be tended among thine own people, that thou seekesl to minister to an alien and idolater." " If I tend the afflicted of mine own peo¬ ple," answered Genevieve, " what do I more than others? but if I bind up the wounds of the enemy of my faith and my life, that faith alone can supply the motive—or the reward.' 1 " Thou deceivest thine own heart, Genevieve," said the youth, shaking his head; " but though thou canst not deceive me, thou canst over¬ come by thy pleadings. Better were it for man never to contend in words with woman, for she will prevail by that sweet wilfulness that makes reason a mock to itself; so I will lead thee where lies this wounded knight, and, oh! may he inflict on his leech no hurt more deadly than those thou canst heal!" He beckoned her to foUow him as he spoke, and Genevieve foUowed trembUng, anxious and silent, to a deeper recess in the woody ,glen than she had hitherto explored. " Why
dost thou pause?' said Amand abruptly as they reached its darkest part; "the object of thy care is here,"—he flung back the boughs that closed: and she found that Amand had not ex¬ aggerated his good offices. He had removed him to a deserted hut, such as the shepherds in mountainous regions erect during the summer season, and leave on the approach of autumn, when they "drive the flocks lower into the valleys: it was concealed from the Albigenses by the approach being thickly matted with brushwood and weeds, and was provided Avithin with a heap of dried leaves, and a AvooUen garment. Stretched on these lay the body of the young knight; and Genevieve saw with gratitude, that the long and clustering hair had been cut away from his forehead, and that the wound he had received was such as to cause deep stupefaction without peril either to life or reason: that on his bosom caused stiU less alarm, for Genevieve was mistress of aU the vulnerary medicaments of the age, and, presaging hopefully of his reco¬ very, she applied salves and bandages to both, VOL. II. v
(the patient giving no signs of existence save faint tossings and low mutterings), and then implored of Amand to conduct her to the same spot every night, till the wounded youth Avas restored to his strength. " Genevieve, thou triest me too hardly," said the young Albigeois, sternly; "I have done more than man hath ever done—I have borne more than man—more than I can bear; I have seen thee, AA r hen I parted to mortal fight, tearless— I have seen thee Aveep over mine enemy and thine."—" It is so SAveet to save an enemy's life," murmured Genevieve.—" An enemy's, indeed!" said the jealous youth. "If the pale and pleading beauty of those Hght locks and pearl-Uke skin Avon thine eye, even Avhen he lay as one dead before thee, how Avill they seem when he appears before thee in aU the loA r eHness of Hfe, blushing with gratitude and blessing his preserver? Then, deluded maiden !—then wiU his enmity prove most perilous and most deadly!" Genevieve, alarmed by his agitation, but Avholly unconscious of its cause, averted her
head in silence; her pure heart suggested to her but one motive for her compassion, and she was unable even to comprehend those Avhich were alluded to by Amand. Her gesture Avas mistaken by him: he ima¬ gined she Avas dweUing in cherishing silence over the picture he had diuvvn, and he pas¬ sionately exclaimed, " This is the last night I wiU visit this spot vvith thee!"—" Then I must visit it alone," said the maiden.—" And wilt thou dare to visit it alone?" said Amand. —" I dare do aught but neglect a Ufe left to my sole tendance:—if thou canst desert me, I AviU Avin my Avay as I may; yet thou wilt regret thou wast not here to aid me with thy better strength, and, perchance, to smooth that rugged path to my bleeding feet."— " And wouldst thou wish, Avouldst thou suffer me to be present at thy meeting with this— : stranger?" cried Amand, his jealousy hah' dictating, half forbidding the question.— " Alas ! did I not solicit it ?" said Genevieve, in the simplicity of her heart. Amand made no ansAver but by twining her arm in his r 2
and, as he led her away, muttering between his closed teeth, " Thou most tormenting, delicious being! thy simplicity sometimes showing like subtlest art, and thy sole art being true simpUcity—thou canst do aught and aU thou wilt with me, making me slave to my very victim,—and," glancing back at the spot they Avere quitting,—" perchance a victim to my very slave!" From this period, the visits of Genevieve to the Avounded knight were unremitting; and her care Avas at length rewarded by see¬ ing him in safety, though unable either to recognize or thank her. Every evening it was her task to conceal part of the provisions, which, from the liberaUty Avith which ,they were uoav supplied, could be done Avithout detection—to prepare her simple materials for dressing and binding his wounds—then, as twiUght was fading into night, to steal forth to his retreat, Avatching every sound, and shrinking from every object, till she gained the spot,.and, Avith broken respiration and palpitating heart, sunk on the floor be¬ side her patient; then to apply the food to
his Ups, to chafe his numbed Umbs, to at¬ tempt to add ease to his posture and comfort to his retreat, repaid her for all danger and weariness, till the few moments that she could aUot to her visit had elapsed, and she hasted to return, trembUng, but glowing; anxious, but elated. The contemplation of this visit became a dream of delightsome anticipations nil day, and its performance the cherished solace of the evening. That delicious picture of secret contem¬ plation—that "joy of its own Avhich the heart knoweth and a stranger doth not inter¬ meddle with"—that hidden treasure which we retire to contemplate and sum in secret with a miser's joy and a miser's jealousy—is above ■all the enjoyments that ever were generalized by participation, or weakened by diffusion. Could mortal eye have Iidield them, they Avould have presented a sight Uke that de¬ scribed in lines of mystical and magic beauty, * # * * *■ Where youne Adonis oft reposes, Waxing well ofhis deep wound In slumber soft,—and on the ground Sadly sits th* Assyrian queen:—
Avhile Amand stood the sullen, jealous sen¬ tinel of these moments, ever Avarning Gene¬ vieve that they had elapsed almost from their commencement — ever menacing her Avith the consequences during their hurried return, and often Avithholding his aid from her faltering steps, in jealous Avaywardness of spirit. MeanwhUe, tiie damp confinement, and want of aU accommodation suited to his state, delayed the perfect recovery of the knight long beyond the time that his youth and vigour promised, and in spite of the skiU and assiduity of the leech; and it was not till the fourteenth evening of her visits that her patient seemed to evince some touch of con¬ sciousness, and feebly to attempt to discover and thank his visitor. That night an au¬ tumnal blast had strewed her path ankle-deep Avith leaves, Avhich heavy rains had com r erted into mire; the roof of branches had been torn off the hut, and Genevieve trembled as she approached it, lest the storm should have disturbed the sufferer. To her astonishment she found him Avith both faculties and speech
restored, and anxious to be led forth into the light even of the froAvning and stormy hea¬ ven, murmuring, as he tossed on his bed of leaves, that nothing could restore his health but the free open ah* of heaven. " And thou shalt breathe it, if mine arm have power to support thee," said Genevieve. —" Is it the touch of mortal or spirit that I feel pressing my burning U~oav with such deUcious coolness ?" answered the knight; "it feels Uke a Avreath of fresh flowers around mine head."—" Angels do not now visit the desert," said Genevieve, " as they did in the days of holy men of old : our sins have banished those heavenly visitants;— it is a mortal who supports thee."—" If I may judge by the clear music of thy voice, and the silky softness of thy touch," said the youth, " doubtless one of a noble race."— " Of the very humblest of fallen mortality," ansAvered Genevieve, Avith a firm sadness: " a peasant maiden;' one to whom a noble knight Avould blush to owe a courtesy, and a Crusader would think it foul scorn to be in-
debted, even for life." She spoke with deep emotion; fov, by the stronger Ught, as they approached the rude aperture that served for door, she recognized in the w f ounded knight the youth who had preserved her the night she had been seized on, and she anticipated the effect wiiich the disclosure of her birth and refigion must have on a knight and a Cmsader. " I understand thee," said the knight: " thou art of that unhappy faith which ------" " Which teaches me, wherever good can be wrought, or mercy shown, not to pause to ask who is my neighbour," said Genevieve, forgetting that this scriptural al¬ lusion was probably lost on the hearer.— " Thy faith, whether true or false,'* said the knight, smiling faintly, " owes me somewhat, even the preservation of a fair female heretic from the assault of ruffians, who menaced not, in truth, her Ufe, but might have left her nought to prize in the Ufe they spared. Mine arm," he added, reclining on the sup¬ port of Genevieve, w r ho proffered it more tenderly than ever—" mine arm was stronger
then ; yet still, I think, it could fell to earth .aught that approached with touch of macu- lation that holy beauty."—"Dost thou re¬ member her?" said Genevieve, in a voice scarce audible; " could a peasant damsel fling such spell over the memory of a noble ■knight and a Crusader ?"—" On my bed of leaves," said the youth, " that vision was with me. Oh, so lofty was her demeanour—so sweet and thrilling her voice—so purified and earth-abstracted the whole saintly vision, that I have sometimes thought an angel had descended among the heretics and worn her form, to win them back to heaven ! Now, mock me if thou wilt, damsel; but in my wanderings I have. often thought that a voice like her's breathed in my ears — that a hand like her's smoothed my bed of leaves—that she was with me in my lonely wretchedness."---" She was with thee, she is with thee, she thanks, she blesses her preserver, but never, never can she repay him." And, as she spoke, Genevieve threw back the hood that had hitherto concealed r 5
her features, and the fuU glory of that face to which earth had. given its noblest modu¬ lation, and heaven its hoUest character and expression, burst on the eyes of Amirald, He gazed on them intently for a moment, then clasping his hands, attempted to bend his knee in the attitude of worship, but his strength failed in the effort, and he feU pro¬ strate at her feet. Terrified at this pro¬ stration, which she ascribed to his weak¬ ness, Genevieve was attempting to raise him, when the 1 voice and eager gestures of Amand, who was rapidly descending from a hfil, an¬ nounced to her that not a moment vvas to be lost. Genevieve, accustomed to these pulses of terror, caught the hand extended to her, and casting one look of regret behind her, followed Amand, tiU her faiUng steps and broken respiration made him pause from compassion, which she had not breath to soUcit. " There is danger and disaster in thy speed," said his panting companion at length, " nor dare I ask what it is this fear¬ ful haste announces."—" Men say that the
Bishop of Toulouse approaches with a mighty host," said Amand hastily, " and messengers have come from Count Raymond, command¬ ing that the women and the children be sent farther into the mountains till this evd be overpast; and half I rejoice," he added in a voice of constrained passion, " at these hasty and fearful tidings, for now must thou see this stranger no more, nor shaU mine eyes waste in their sockets beholding your meet¬ ings ; ere morning, distance and deserts will be between you."—" But that will not de¬ prive him of thy aid ?" said Genevieve: "Now know I of an assured surety, that thou wilt not desert him, for never was good deed coupled with oeM but it seemed lovelier in the eye of the brave."—"' Thy flattering words win me not," said Amand obdurately; " I fear the wrath of the congregation because of him. Shall I become an Achan and a troubler of the camp for this stranger, because his favour is fairer than mine? Knowest thou not, that they who aid our enemies in any wise are cursed with a
curse ?"—" It is vain for man to curse what God hath blessed," said the maiden; " there is a prior and unwritten law of love and mercy in thy heait, Amand, which thou mayest neglect but canst not efface; what is enjoined in that law ? how readest thou ?"— " I see how it fares with thee," said Amand, his eyes flashing with a fire visible even in the increasing darkness of twilight—" I see how it fares with thee; thdu hast loved strangers, and after them wilt thou go. Neither distance nor danger, impassable paths nor the terrors of night, the prayers of thy friend nor the wrath of thy people, can avail to withhold thee from forsaking the guide of thy youth, and forgetting the covenant of thy God." Affrighted at his violence, and wounded by his reproaches, Genevieve forbore to plead, and at this moment the murmurs of many voices in various accents of alarm, grief, and anxiety, announced to her fresh cause for concentrating her resolution, and banishing all cares but those of meeting the present
emergency. It was a night of tumult, terror, and distress to the unfortunate Albigenses, the feeble arid female part of whom "were preparing, on the approach of night, and amid the stormy gloom of autumn, to pene¬ trate farther into the mountain fastnesses, and seek amid the haunts of the wolf and the bear, that shelter which was denied them in the abodes of man. Their progress, how¬ ever, was checked by another messenger from Count Raymond, requiring that all the males capable of bearing arms shotild immediately repair to his camp, as tlie forces of the Cru¬ saders, headed by the Bishop of Toulouse, were fast approaching, and threatened to in¬ tercept all communication between him and the advanced body of the Albigenses, This order, with which it was indispensable in the present exigency to comply, completed the despair of the unfortunate women, as it de¬ prived them not only of guides and protec¬ tors in the " howling wilderness" they were about to traverse, but of those to whom they were entwined bv every tie of nature and of
passion: husbands took brief and sad leave of wives, and parents of chUdren, com¬ mitting them to Him, whom they invoked to be their pUlar of fiame in the desert; and the cries of warUke preparation and solemn in¬ tercession were heard on every side, mingled Avith the AvaiHngs of unappeasable mothers, and the ceaseless moan of scared and Avearied infancy. Amid the tumult, Amand invented a thousand causes of delay (for which his courage was not overpraised), till his topical knowledge, eminently serviceable amid scenes like these, where Avild and perilous exigen¬ cies were to be encountered only by as Avild and perUous expedients, had enabled him to recognize a spot where his adventurous step had often scaled alone, and Avhere no force of man could reach those who had obtained access to it. It Avas a peipendicular rock Avhich closed the extremity of the gorge or ravine, which they had reached in their dismal progress: it Avas ascendible only on one side by a stony path broken by many interruptions; and this path, Avhich avouik!
like a natural stair to the summit, was so overshadoAved by boAvery plants of laurel, and genistum, and weedy tufts of lavender, and thyme, and ivy, that tapestried aU the rock, as to be invisible to aU eyes but those of the restless pursuer of Nature into her deepest loneliness. On the summit there Avas a level space of considerable extent, in front of which the rock rose like a parapet or the battlements of a castle, and above towered another clothed with fir and pine, its summit presenting a chance of escape or shelter even to those to whom this fortress, hewed by Nature's OAvn hand, should prove not impregnable. The moment Amand pointed out this retreat, Genevieve im¬ plored him no longer to delay hasting to join the forces of Count Raymond. Amand viewed her Avith a doubtful eye and a bitter smile, and then hastened Avith the utmost exertions of his strength, and the most fearless risk of his OAvn safety, to con¬ duct her companions to the summit. Gene¬ vieve was last; as he aided her to ascend, he
whispered; " One Avord, only one word Avith thee."—" Aid the feeble and those who need thee," said Genevieve, trying to ascend with¬ out his assistance.—" Thou shalt hear me," said the impetuous boy, grasping her arm.— " WeU, then I must," repUed the maiden trembling; " but what is it thou woiddst say?"—" For thee," said Amand, in a choked and agonizing voice, " for thee have I peiiUed life, soul, and Avhat I value more, thank thy new creed of chivalry for the lore."—" I un¬ derstand not thy Avords," said the affrighted maiden.—" Understand this, then," repUed Amand; " I have perilled my Ufe to find shelter for thee, for what step but mine could have scaled this rock ? I have perilled my soul, for I have concealed thy backsliding from the congregation, who Avould have burnt thee with fire had they knoAvn that thy pity had watched over a Crusader; and I have perUled more than both, for I have been as a coward in the eyes of men and of Avomen, to find a place of safety and shelter for thee; and mine eyes are opened and I see
that valour is all that women 'prize in man, and, in yielding me a coward, and one that shrunk froin the battle, I have done that for which thou owest me dear recompense." —"Thy words bewilder me," said the maiden: " an evil and troubled spirit seems to speak from within thee; I pray let me ascend this steep."—" Not a grice till I have named my recompense. I am going to perish in the desperate battle, from which thy late remorse cannot save me : for aU I have done, for aU I shall yet do, if action be available in this Ufe, or intercession effectual in the other, grant me but this—-promise that thou wdt visit that stranger no more."—" Surely I will not promise it," said Genevieve, " for in so doing, I should sin against mine own soul." As she spoke, Amand seized her arm, and hurried her up to the summit of that terrassed rock, without speaking a word or remitting his speed for a moment. Genevieve stood at last on the summit, panting and tottering as he released her— " Thou wilt not promise ?" he repeated in a
voice" scarce articulate; " Genevieve, I and the stranger are on a precipice—one of us must ?>& flung from it to save the other— shaU it be I, or thy minion ?—choose whUe a moment's choice is aUowed thee." The blast of a horn, floating far on the hills, w r as heard as he spoke; it was the signal for departure: aU the fires of heU seemed to blaze in his visage. as exclaiming, " Thou wilt not speak, then the choice is mine," he darted from the cUff. and was lost to her sight in a moment. This moment w r as one of exquisite anguish to Ge¬ nevieve : she began, for the first time, to fear that she had earned her gratitude to the Crusader too far; and her imagination tor¬ mented her with the fear, that this gratitude might be exposing him to dangers greater than those she had saved him from; but her feel¬ ings, never habituated to dweU on self, found speedv and ample employment in soothing the ten-ors and hushing the murmurs of her hapless companions. No situation could in¬ deed be more desolate than theirs: perched like hunted birds on a bare rock, wiiich,
though it afforded concealment, gave no shelter; deprived of their guides and. pro¬ tectors, uncertain how long their absence might continue; and trembling lest the event of another hour might make it eternal, these unhappy women had stiU an aggravation of their sufferings—the want of that excitation that had now become the habit of their exist¬ ence, the food and fuel of their hearts—the want of the prolonged evening exhortation, the choral hymn, the enthusiastic anticipa¬ tions of their final triumph, and, not less wel¬ come, the denunciations of prophetic ven¬ geance against their enemies; the agony of prayer, the simultaneous spreading out of hands, as if to.take heaven by storm; the accordant murmur of a thousand voices, Uke the rush of mighty waters; the pause more awful than that human thunder in its loudest bursts—the want, in effect, of aU that forms to weak but susceptible and highly-excited minds, what may be called the drama of de- " votion, and stands in place of the usual em¬ ployments and relaxations of life, which the
enthusiast is compeUed by his creed to re¬ sign. The want of this pressed sore oh the wearied and dejected spirits of the helpless women. It was at this moment that Genevieve. who had often been accustomed to give the word of exhortation in the absence of the Barbes, and always to lead the hymn, in which her voice, whether in suppUcation or in praise, seemed to " sing at heaven's gate,'" suggested to her companions the seasonable- ness of fervent prayer. She reminded them of the night when Paid and SUas prayed and sung praises in a dungeon; and during the holy conflict, every man's chains were loosened; they acquiesced, and the holy maiden burst into a spontaneous effusion, that was in truth more Uke the outpouring of the spirit on the handmaids, than words uttered by " mortal mixture of earth's mould;" but among her trembling and heartless auditory, there wa? no voice, nor any that answered: one was intent on hushing a wearied infant, anothei on tending a sick one, many were shivering
AA'ith cold, and aU Avith terror; some Avere stupified into dumbness and apathy, and those Avho could yet feel or speak, felt or uttered but one Avish, " Would God it were morning." With such a congregation, a Miriam must haA-e failed; she might strike the chords of inspiration, but there Avas no daughter of Israel to foUoAV her in the song. She sung, they found .10 comfort in her song; She pray'd to strengthen them, they were not strong. Montgomery. Repulsed, but not Avearied, she turned to the children, and soothing some by caresses, and calming aU by the tones of a voice Avhose speech Avas music, she succeeded in diffusing a momentary tranquillity among the most querulous; the Avearied children at last slept; their mothers slept also. Genevieve seized this moment to examine what possible defence their present dreary position offered: she saAV that the rock, a natural breast-Avork, rose as high as the battlements of a castle in front of the terrace they occupied; and she observed that several of the stones Avhich formed this
])arapet were loose, many of them having fallen from the cUff above; and others being re¬ tained in their place only by the weeds that mantled between the apertures, and the clay and sand which rains had swept from the upper cliff and lodged in the numerous inter¬ stices, and might therefore prove a means of defence, or at least of desperate menace, should they be assailed from below. AA^iUe thus occupied, her failure in that eloquence of consolation and inspiration of prayer, which had so often soothed and elevated the congre¬ gation to whom, in .men moments, her face was as the face of an angel, struck her with melancholy force; and she shed a few tears less for the loss of her powers, than for the privation that loss must cause to others. " Perhaps," said she, " it is a just rebuke to my spiritual pride; I. who sought to be a mother in Israel, must learn to be mute and helpless: but Thou who canst give waters in the wilderness, though thou hast dried up this brook, thou canst cause the stones of these rocks to cry out, the floods of the
vaUeys to clap their hands, the trees of these mighty forests to break forth into singing, and the very stars in their course, though they have neither speech nor language, to cause a voice to be heard among them." Thoughts like these, solemn as the hour and pure as its Ught, began to visit her soul; her meditations lie- came more intense, her thoughts more ele¬ vated—she gazed upAA^ards, and.Avondered at her fears and Aveakness. Before the power whose visible agency surrounded her on every side, aU other power shrunk into nought; l>efore the thoughts that */Ued her soul, all other thoughts or cares seemed a profanation and vanity; one bright gleam of consolation rose on her after another, as stars arise in the night, tiU her Avhole sOul gloAved within her, and her mind became as resplendent Avith internal Ught, as the midnight heaven was with the numerous glory of aU the stellar fires. In this holy frame, amid peril and pri¬ vation, in a desert, and at midnight, she sunk into a slumber that seemed Uke a continua¬ tion of the rapt and trance-like mood that
had preceded it—the same visions hovered in it, and she felt, as she reviewed their images. like a traveUer who looks on the same land¬ scape in sunshine and in twilight. From this slumber she started with the feeUng of one never accustomed to rest long, or to awake in safety, and perceived her companions al¬ ready roused. It was day-light, but a heavy mist hung on the mountains, and lay like an ocean in the valleys; sounds of steps were heard approaching, but the thickness of the vapour rendered those sounds obtuse and confused, while it prevented the possibility oi their discovering who were approaching. All. however, agreed in encouraging each othei' tn believe they were friends; while each con¬ cealed in her heart "a fear that contradicted her expressions; but when the mist yielded gradually to the increasing light, the figure^ of the deacon and of a few others mounted du mules, and wrapped in long cloaks, appeared at the foot of the precipice.
CHAPTER XVI. Woe worth, woe worth ye, Jock my man, I paid ye well veer fee, Why ])u' ye out the ground-wa' stanc, Lets in the reek to me. Ye paid me well my hire, Ladye, Ye paid me well my fee, But now I 'm Edom of Gordon's man, And L maun do or dee. Edom of Gordon. Genevieve gazed on the former with amazement, as he eagerly recognized her, and testified by uncouth gestures his plea¬ sure at the interview. "If the mountain mists, or the spirits who are said to raise and rule them, have not abused my sight," said she, " thou art Mephibosheth the deacon."— "Of a truth am I damsel?" said the deacon, d I pray thee to teU me how I may cUmb vol. it. Q
up to thy place of strength, Avhich is unto thee as the high hiUs to the goats, that so I may speak words of counsel and of comfort unto thee." " Thine absence hath been so long, and its cause so strange," said Genevieve, "that I would rather first hear Avhat thou hast to teU, and Avhether thou comest as friend or foe,"—" Surely, as a friend," said the deacon, " and, ' as a brother is born for adversity,' so come I to wam thee of peril thou mayest best avert by submission, not by defiance; for, behold, the man whom they caU the Bishop of Toulouse, is come up against ye, and he vaunteth of his strength and of his mighty deeds, and he saith of Beziers and Carcassonne and aU fenced cities Ayhere the brethren fought and perished, ' Where are the gods of Hamatfi and Ar- phad, and of Sepharvaim ?'" " Thou dost AveU," answered Genevieve, with holy indignation^ "to borroAv thy menace from the mouth of that idolatrous king, Avho
in his arrogancy, threatened not man but heaven. Remember also the answer given to him, and take it for mine—to Him who inspired that answer of old, to Him who can inspire it even now, I refer thee—even Him Avho in one night turned the host into dead corses, and caused him to perish in the house of his idol gods, and by the hands of those Avhose parricide, Avhile it punished his guilt, filled up the measure of their own: but for thee—for thee, Mephibosheth, Avhose lips should have kept knoAvledge, Avho should have been a stay to the weak, a shelter to the Aveary—how shaU I read thy words aright, or believe, indeed, it is thou who utterest them?" — "Even as thou wUt," said the deacon—"yet to thee they are words of truth and of safety. Can the rock afford thee shelter, or can it give thee food ? WUt thou abide there tUl thou famish, tiU the vultures peck at thee and the bears howl round thee, and thou faint for lack of Avater ? Behold, a city of refuge is open to Q 2
thee—even the Abbey of Normoutier, where thou shalt eat of the fat and drink of the sweet., and whither I, even I, am come to lead thee. AVherefore should women deUght in the sound of the trumpet and the alarm of war?" " Mephibosheth," said the maiden, " I ever held thee earthly and sensual, but now do I deem thee devilish ; for surely, unless it be a minister of the evil one who is permitted to assume thy form, thou speakest words which befit none but liis servant. Wast thou a master in Israel, and is such thy counsel to the daughters of the captivity ?"—" Where is the confidence wherein thou trustest," said the deacon, abashed and incensed at the firmness of a woman contrasted with his own apostacy and vaciUation : " I tell thee, those Avho have built their nest in a rock, have l>een humbled to the dust, and shalt thou be deUvered ? The mighty and the eloquent have been abashed and put to sUence—a Moses hath erred with his Ups, an Aaron hath yielded to the sin of the congregation, and
shaU a Miriam alone strike her timbrel and sound praises to her OAvn constancy and cou¬ rage? Daughter of pride, come down and sit in the dust: thou shalt be like one of us— thou shalt be Aveak as Ave are. Boav, ere the golden sceptre is changed for the rod of iron." "It shaU crush me in pieces first," an¬ swered the maiden; " even on the timid ears and fading hearts of women, thy base eloquence of fear hath failed of its poAver. From their hold ofthe rock, from Avhere they battle Avith the eagle for his eyry, and Avith the fox for his den, women defy and despise thee. But oh, Mephibosheth, what depth of scorn must she feel, Avhat bitterness of re¬ proach should she utter, Avho rememberest .what thou once wast! Is it thou Avho comest to snatch aAvay the support of Aaron and Hur from the uplifted arms of the prophet, even though thine OAvn being depends on their being upheld ? to make the Avheels of our chariot drive heavUy, when thou shouldst lay thine utmost strength to the load ? —to trouble the host, when thou thyself shouldest
be first to show the lamp and bloAv the trumpet, and shout, * The sword of the Lord and of Gideon.'" The deacon shrunk before the voice, the attitude, the inspired beauty, and the sacred eloquence of the young prophetess; for such she appeared. " The truth is Avith her," said he, retreat¬ ing among his companions; " and I cannot contend AA'ith or prevaU against it." " On again," said one of the monks of Normoutier: " or Ave Avill goad thee on AA'ith our spurs and riding-rods to the assault."— " On, on," repeated the rest, " and seek how Ave may climb to this den Avhere the heretic wolf hath hid his mate and her young. An' thou lure not down that bird of the rock, whose note is so much braver than her plumage, and teach her other song ere long, thou art but a lost deacon." Thus urged, the unfortunate deacon once more approached the rock, at the foot of which the monks Avere exploring the traces of that concealed path Avhich Ave have before
described. " Hear, ye Avretched women," cried Mephibosheth, " deliver up this damsel to us, Avith the young maidens of your com¬ pany, and Ave AviU depart ; but if ye AviU not, Ave avUI heap up the Ung and the dry heath, the fir-tree and the pine-tree together, and cause the flame thereof, and the smoke thereof, to go up even to your hiding-place, that ye be consumed and perish." At these Avords, GeneAieve looked round on her com¬ panions, her features radiant with the Ught of pure perfect confidence. AVith horror, she perceived there Avas no animating ansAver of a corresponding expression. The dejected and dismayed women looked on then* chil¬ dren and then on each other doubtfuUy. " Are ye mothers?" cried Genevieve : "do ye clasp chddren to your bosoms, and those chUdren daughters, and can ye hesitate ? Oh, fling me rather from the spot Avhere I stand, a crushed and breathless mass of honor at their feet, than even think for a moment on the alternative. Your crime will not be so great, and my suffering wiU be far, far less.
But ye do not think of it— ye cannot," she cried, raising her voice. " No—tempter—no; aU here are women, women in soul as in sex; and to those who have either soul or sex, such crime Avere impossible and unnatural!" The Avomen excited by her appeal, testi¬ fied the revulsion of their feeUngs by a shriU and piercing scream of defiance. " What, are there none but women in that nook," cried the loose monk, Avho had acted the Abbot of misrule, " and stand Ave at the foot of the nest, to hear the hen-birds crow in our mere defiance ; up, up and seize them where they stand. Thou, deacon of the damned, ordained by Beelzebub himself, shalt climb first, and look thou show some tricks of thy old vocation in skipping from rock to rock like a chamois; we shall be nothing slack to foUow, and leave these tough hens not a yoimgUng to cackle or ruffle for." As he spake, the monk made good his word, springing at hazard up the precipice, fol- loAved by his companions, dragging the wretched deacon along with them.
The monks were vigorous" and active: they calculated every step of their perilous , ascent Avith steady eye, sprung with. light foot, and grasped with firm hand, AvhUe the deacon, after one or two premonitory suspen¬ sions over a crag, where his companions held him half in mischief, half in mockery, bounded upwards witli a speed that justified his persecutors in urging him to it, and dis¬ played an excess of grotesque activity in the eflbrt, at once ludicrous and terrific. Genevieve saw their progress with terror that concentrated her resolution. " Hear me," she cried, " hear me at peril of your lives! Look up at these masses of rock, so mighty that their fall must crush the chUdren of the Anakim; so Ughtly poised as to yield to the touch of the feeblest woman. Ad¬ vance but another step, and as He Uveth in whose might I trust, and in whose spirit I speak, they shall crush your bodies into frag¬ ments, that the vulture shaU utter a famished . shriek as she passes by them."—" Hear me," .cried the gasping deacon, " thou Zipporah; o 5
thou AthaUah ! Art thou unsexed; wdt thou be zealous unto slaying ?"—" Unsexed men make women forget their sex also,'' cried Genevieve: " when the protector turns the oppressor, the unprotected forget aught but their safety; and thou shalt feel, that woman in the cause of her faith and her honour is mightier than man assaiUng them/'—" Of a veritv I wiU not advance," said the deacon : " was not Abimelech, that mighty man of valour, slain under the tower of Thebez, by a stone cast by a woman?"—" On, thou losel!" cried the monks: " thou mightest as weU heave the Abbey of Normoutier from its foundation with thy Httle finger, as the slender arms of that damsel lift those rocks from their base." They ascended, and came near. " Now God aid me in mine extre¬ mity !" said Genevieve, applying herself to her task: " your blood be on your own heads,'' she cried; while the united strength of her companions, joined with hers, shook, loosened, and finaUy detached, the vast masses of stone, which, bounding, smoking, and rattUng from
crag to crag, dragging with them a forest of crashed boughs and brushwood, and sending before them a cataract of spUntered rocks, and fragments of stone, trees, and clay, thun¬ dered into the vaUey, and sent their echoes far and wide among the mountains. With dizzy honor, Genevieve gazed on the doAvn- ward progress of the ruin, and beheld, almost with a sensation of joy, the monks escape with miraculous dexterity the fate that threatened them, and stand trembUng beside the course of that stony torcent as it flashed and thundered through the ravine. They had brief space to congratulate them¬ selves on their safety, for at this moment another danger menaced them. A large body of the Albigeois appeared on the summit of the opposite hiU, and the tenified females caught an omen of hope and safety from their speedy return. To shout in joyful uni¬ son with their cry, to dart into the vaUey, and send a score of arrows after the fugitive assailants, who pUed spur and riding-rod amain, was the work of a feAv minutes; and
as they sped through the vaUey, their eager gestures and increasing shouts testified they had been the witnesses, and were the intelli¬ gencers of some welcome event. The tidings they brought were as joyful as they were im¬ portant. The Bishop of Toulouse had, indeed, put himself at the head of the remains of the erusading army, but the military followers of the fallen Crusaders had deserted almost universally, as was the custom of the age, when they were no longer commanded by their individual leaders; every man making his best speed t© gain the territory or castle of his faUen or wounded lord, and leaving the bishop to meet the Count of Toulouse at the head of troops flushed with recent vic¬ tory, with a band of unorganized and disar¬ rayed vassals, instead of men-at-arms. King Philip besides, who on the throne of France trembled at the power, character, and views of the ambitious prelate, refused to recog¬ nize him as champion of the Church in place of Simon de Montfort, till his title was ad¬ mitted by the court of Rome. * The missives
from Rome Avere hourly expected, but the bishop not brooking the delay, and hoping to awe both the King of France and the Pope by the promptitude of his movements, and the rapidity of his success, had forced his diminished army through the mountain passes, and encountered so severe a check from the advanced troops of Count Raymond, that he Avas compeUed to retreat again to¬ wards his episcopal castle and city of Beau¬ caire, and tbere await aid from the Cru¬ saders. The Avay was thus left free for the movement of the females and children to¬ wards Arragon; but the Count had, in the mean time, been apprised that the King of Arcagon had been excited to strong hostiUty against the Albigeois, by the missiA T es of the bishop; and stimulated by the exhortations of the preachers who outnumbered and out¬ voiced the military men of his host, he entertained the hope of again becoming the lord of his native tenitories, establishing the heresy, as it Avas termed, Avithin the walls of Toulouse, and rebuUding Carcassonne and Beziers.
To effect this work, the preachers, amongst Avhom the foremost were Mattathias and Boanerges, assured him a day of fast and supplication was necessary;" and to this, after their more favourable intelhgence had been communicated, the party came to summon and conduct the females, Avhom it Avas no longer necessary to keep at a distance from the main body. According to the habits of the community, a summons to a solemn act of humiUation and fasting was deemed, even by the females, like an invitation to a festival. Not Deborah uttering her inspired song to a host of triumphant Avarriors, not Judith caUing the elders of BethuHa to the gate to witness the event of her daring deed, felt more pride than, these females, lately so persecuted and bewUdered, Avhen they heard of the solemn assembly Avhich they were about to join under the protection of their relatives, and in the security of brief tran¬ quility. Genevieve alone, who retained in a memory
rendered more faithful by the energy of her character, and the intensity of her feelings even when a child, the images of the horrors of Beziers and Carcassonne, shuddered at the thought of the desperate effort to establish the rights of the Count of Toulouse, and the exercise of the persecuted faith in his ter¬ ritorial city; and Avhde she joined the train Avhich noAV wound slowly and in safety down the precipice, foreseeing nothing but danger arising from courage, and calamity over¬ taking success, she wished " for the wings of a dove that she might flee away and be at rest." She felt, as all that are deeply reU- gious must feel, that its exercise should be calm and tranqud, a " communing with the heart and in the chamber," and a " being stiU;" nor Avas she a Uttle disturbed at the thought of being produced as the heroine of her party, for an effort which her habitual timidity made her almost consider as a crime, uoav that her spirits had subsided, and her mind had lost the high tone it Avas strung to in that emergency.
The hints of this had already reached her; and when, with tlic acclamations of aU the females, Arnaud placed her on his mule, while two men-at-arms of Count Raymond rode beside her, and Amand purposely en¬ tangled his hand in her rein that he might _be near her, she shrunk from their hold, and whispered her wish to Arnaud. " It shall not be so," said Arnaud, in answer, " why art thou disquieted, damsel ? Behold the women shaU go before thee with songs and with dances, and they shaU praise thee Avith the praise of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, because thou hast smitten the enemy by the hand of a woman; also the old man thy father, behold he is yet alive, and he shaU bless thee with many blessings, because thou hast been strong and very courageous for the truth, passing the strength of woman." " Then I shaU be blessed," said Genevieve; " for I say to thee, reverend Arnaud, that one blessing from lips that tremble with affec¬ tion—from lips that perchance may be closed
ere they utter another, were to me worth the shout of the congregation, even of a very great multitude." Amand, who had not spoken tiU then, but walked patiently beside her rein, said eagerly but whisperingly to her, " Haste then, if thou w r ouldst have his blessing."—" AVhat mean¬ est thou?" said Genevieve.— "Nothing: I mean nothing— I am nothing, nothmg in thy eyes; but, reverend Arnaud, art thou sure that the damsel wiU, indeed, be greeted with a blessing, even the blessing of Pierre the pastor ?" He spoke in a tone that made Genevieve tremble and Arnaud regard him with a look of consternation. "If it be so," he added, gnashing his teeth, "may I be ac¬ cursed—but that I am already ! Go, go," he continued flinging back the rein, " go and see what blessing awaits thee: go and see if even Pierre will bless thee."
CHAPTER XVII. A sentence ; come, prepare! Merchant of Venice. They journeyed aU that day in safety; and about its close, their vvay, winding round a rock, suddenly disclosed to Genevieve and her companions a view of the vaUey where the Albigeois had assembled on what they termed their holy convocation, and which the preachers named the VaUey of Jehoshaphat. It was now evening, and the shadows of the mountains had struck far into the vaUey, shedding the gloom of twilight over the dark and mingled groups who w T ere assembled un¬ der its shadows. The solemn exercise, which had commenced with dayUght, was stiU car¬ ried on: those who had breath and perse-
verance for the task Avere stiU pursuing it y and those who had not could yet add their gasping Hallelujah, or their faint So be it, to the petition Avhich they could no longer hear. The valley Avhere the Albigeois were assembled was one intersected by a narrow stream, increased by many rfils from the surrounding mountains. Some spots in the valley were clothed Avith rich verdure and vegetation even in Autumn; many more were desolate and bare : the stony and bro¬ ken path that wandered through the vaUey vvas sometimes obstructed by water, some¬ times by broken branches of trees, and oftener by fragments of rocks that had faUen from the hills above;—but wherever a spot was to be found where two or three might gather to¬ gether, there were the pastors, or Barbes, exhorting and praying; the congregation bearing audible response, and frequently lead¬ ing the devotions they should have foUowed. The teachers were as diversified as their re¬ spective groups of listeners : the veterans of Count Raymond's army, who Avere of the
newly-adopted creed, enforcing it on their hearers with aU 'ihe authority of established preachers, yet sometimes finding that autho¬ rity shaken or questioned by some young champion in the lists of theology. Thus amid the centre of one group was to be seen a mailed warrior, his helm and visor doffed, his grey beard floating over liis armed chest, his hand on a parchment scroll containing the New Testament, explaining it to a group of hearers ; whde all his aUusions and analo¬ gies, according to his own construction, weir drawn from the Jewish Scriptures;—wiiile a beardless youth, cased in arms, would, hold deep controversy with him, tiU the distracted audience knew not how to decide between the young Daniel come to judgment, and the masters in Israel, who were charged with not knowing these things. In another group the Barbes were seen with their woollen gar¬ ments, their hoods resembling those of monks and their long beards: these were more dog¬ matical and imperative than their lay coad¬ jutors. They hushed every murmur, permit-
ted no voices to be heard but their own, and by their powerful intonation, eager gesture, and denunciatory vehemence, seemed to exer¬ cise as absolute authority over their congre¬ gation as the poAver wliich ihey denounced and execrated could have aspired to in its utmost ambition of spiritual domination. The visages of aU these men were marked vvith the strongest Unes of fanaticism and miUtary enthusiasm combined. Cowi and hel¬ met, Avhen Avithdrawn, showed the same deep and stern character: some Avere distinguished by religious austerity, others by martial fero¬ city; but all bore the traces of long and severe suffering—all announced wounds ofthe heart or of the brain—all spoke of that hope defer¬ red Aviiich maketh the heart sick, or that ter¬ rible reminiscence of evil inflicted, which seeks or feels no relief but from the power of redoubling the infliction on others. Among them were many Avhose faces Avere marked vvith a character of deep reflection and indo¬ mitable resolution: not one of them Avho Avas not, from hour to hour, prepared for the loss
of mortal Ufe, and engaged as frequently in the most awful questions relating to future existence. Hovering thus, as it Avere, be¬ tween the Uving and the dead, they seemed to look on their earthly tenure Avitli scorn; and to the future they had famiUarized them¬ selves by the intense and solemn exercise of aU their faculties and feeUngs on " those mys¬ teries Avhich Heaven AviU not have man to knoAv." So " under the shade they Avalked ; noAv solemn stood." These groups Avere scat¬ tered promiscuously Avherever they might find space; but far above them there was an ample auditory. The Albigeois, to the number of thousands, croAvded the hiUs that enclosed this vaUey: they sat in patient sUence, catch¬ ing from time to time the sequel of a prayer, or a denunciation, and echoing it in voices that, numerous and distant, added an aAvful solemnity to their close; and above them stiU were seen the tents of the army of the Count of Toulouse, hanging Uke flakes of snow on the tops of the hiUs; AvhUe low and dim in the vaUey burned the lights that
glimmered from the cavern, where the elders of the congregation had met to debate on the projected expedition to the city of Toulouse, and to bless or ban it, according to their va¬ rious views and feeUngs, whose influence was permitted an operation which had hitherto produced but diversity, dissension, and hos¬ tiUty. Of this, Genevieve had not as yet been a Avitness; and the glorious sight which the first view of thousands of people worship¬ ping amid rock and mountain, under the ca¬ nopy of Heaven, and by the Ught of the rising stars, which glow like suns amid those moun¬ tain regions—the peaUng answer of the thou¬ sand voices to a single prayer—the choral hymn that woke the echo of a mountain " seated in hearing of a hundred streams"— the glorious and innocent pomp of this pri¬ mitive worship, in a temple of which earth formed the foundation, the eternal moun¬ tains the waUs, and Heaven the roof,—struck on the high-toned mind of Genevieve, and she could not help exclaiming: " Such, such was Israel once, ere God descended to dwell in
temples made by hands—even when He was fitly worshipped in his primeval and heaven- domed shrine in the wilderness—when the sands of Arabia were pressed by the knees of six hundred thousand worshippers, and her rocks echoed nightly to the songs that made them vocal with the name of the Holy One of Israel. My God, leave to thy people the Heaven, which is thy throne, to appeal to; and the earth, which is thy footstool, to kneel on; and we will not envy the glories of the Temple, where thy presence descend¬ ed in fire on the altar, and thy voice was heard between the trembhng wings of the cherubim!" As she spoke, Arnaud led her to the en¬ trance of the cave, where the Barbes, with some of the military leaders, were engaged in prayer, interrupted by eager dispute about the movements of the host. Barbe and chief were fiercely at work: text and war-cry were levelled at each other, as when " arrows clove arrows in the air, and darkened all the sky,"—" Nay, let me rest here," said Gene-
vieve, glancing a look into the cave, " of a truth I am wearied and sore-worn; and I feel somewhat like a presage of evil hanging at my heart, that I can neither define nor banish."^—" Genevieve," said a voice low and close to her, " go no further—enter not the cave." The voice was Amand's; but so al¬ tered by some powerful emotion, that she was compelled to look stedfastly on the speaker before she could recognize the voice. " And wherefore not ?" said Genevieve. He repeated the interdiction in a voice still more agitated, broken, and terrific; " Go no fur¬ ther—enter not," and unable to articulate the word " there," he pointed, with action alarm¬ ing from its violence, to the cave. Genevieve rose in terror; and Amand, mistaking this movement for a resolve to enter, grasped her arm and repeated, " Go not, I command!— no, I implore thee, unless thou wouldst hear that which will transfix thee where thou standest •" and he rushed away; yet, before he was out of sight, turned again, and by an vol. n. R
attitude of deprecation the most vehement, seemed silently to beseech her not to go; he then disappeared. " Is the youth insane, or is he distempered with strong wine ?" said Arnaud, gazing after him. " Alas ! no," said Genevieve; " an evil and unhappy spirit troubles him, and prompts him to utter he knoAvs not Avhat." The sounds of contention fierce and loud that had issued from the interior noAV suddenly ceased, and a deep voice w r as heard speaking alone, " Yet tarry, maiden," he continued, seeing she was about, to advance, " peradventure there are things spoken AAithin Avhich may be heard only by the ears of the chief of the congrega¬ tion, and in a councU of war, or deep debate on mysteries, the presence of a maiden Avere unseemly and unnecessary: tarry a while that I may go in;" and he left her. Arnaud returned in a feAv moments, his countenance was very pale, and averted from her. He took her hand without seeming to knoAvthat he held it, and attempted hastily to draAv her away.
"Wherefore is this?" said Genevieve, "surely I wiU enter, for v/hat evil can befaU me*—if Pierre be there ?" Arnaud beheld her for'a moment 'with an aspect, in Avhich doubt, re¬ gret, and pity Avere struggUng, and then drop¬ ping her hand departed Avithout speaking. Genevieve, thus left alone, after a momen¬ tary pause, approached the interior of the cave. She did not enter, but stood leaning on ' a crag of the rock, which concealed her from the vieAv of those Avithin. They consisted of Mattathias, Boanerges, and some of the.more fierce and zealous both of the pastors -and chiefs;—Pierre was also there, seated on 'a block of stone, himself appearing turned' to stone also; his clasped hands resting on the top of a staff, and his sightless eyes turned towards heaven. Mattathias and all the rest Avere standing: he was silent, but he appeared, from his pecuUar and tenible expression both of face and attitude, to have been * uttering some tremendous imprecation as' he stood. The rest were gazing on him silent also; but u 2
amid the horror that marked every pallid- visage with a deeper shade, a stem satisfac¬ tion was visible. The barbes threw back then* cowls, and the warriors leaned on their swords, aU fixing their stern and eager looks on him. ! Mattathias had been disclosing to them the crime of Genevieve, of which he had been •. informed through a channel that may be .- guessed at. He Avas now Avinding up'' the i period of his denunciation against his victim, while she .herself was involuntarily and invi¬ sibly the witness of her own condemnation.— From, vybat she had heard, she understood , > what had been aheady said, and perhaps ' already determined; and as if she had been present and pleading among them, she gazed on every iron visage and cold fixed eye; but read no relenting in them: she clasped her hands and recoiled. The next moment Mattathias, though Avith a reluctant pause, announced death to be the punishment.^-! Death—death—repeated many voices, But
some of those voices echoed the word in horror — some pronounced it in the mere agitation of the moment—some in doubt of what they heard, some in direct question, but not one in vengeance,—save that of Matta¬ thias. The stern zealot repeated the sound.— " And she must die, then; she must die!— must she die ?" repeated Pierre, dropping his staff, and rolUng his lightless eyes round the assembly, as if trying to examine their coun- " tenances by the long-lost power of vision. ' " By the law," said Mattathias, " such ought; to die."—"By what law?" asked the trembUng parent; " by a law long abrogated—the law of the Jews. I appeal to Christians~I' ap¬ peal to men—to fathers, and to mothers!— Speak, for I cannot see you—Oh, strike not the staff from the hand of the decrepid; quench not the sole Ught of the bUnd! Must my child die ?"—" Yea, and thy hand should be first upon her," cried Mattathias, " for malediction > and for death;" and he seized the arm of the ancient man, whose exhausted frame fell senseless at his touch.
" Oh! not his-~not Ms!"; cried Genevieve, as she rushed into the cave, and prostrated herself beside the pastor
END OF THE SECOND VOLUHIEJ
rniNTED BY:S.-VVNDJR..BEN.TLEY, DORSET*STRRF.T:
