Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The milesian chief: a romance
THE MILESIAN· CHAP. I. Go tlien^ thou setting star ; take from these eye?, These eyes, that, if (hoy see thee, wiP. be wishing ; Oh 1 take those languishing, pale fires away, And leave me to the wide, dark den of death. Lee, ARMIDA could not sleep : a feverish doze was every moment broken by a dream of terror ; and once she was so strongly impressed with the idea of some one being in the room, that she sprung from the bed, and seating herself beside the fire, tried to banish the phantoms that vol. in, ?
still seemed gathering in the darker re¬ cesses of the room. These visions soon faded away, but she could not dismiss the idea that some one was near the room, for from time to time a distinct and measured foot-fall seemed to cross the passage which led to the apartment. This circumstance, though little surprising in a house in¬ habited by armed men, surrounded by danger, yet aggravated by night, fear, and solitude, wrought upon her feelings so powerfully, that at length forcing herself to the door, she threw it open, and cast a terrified glance be¬ yond it. A figure stood at the extremity of the passage, which retired at her approach. Her dim eyes did not at first discover Connal, but when she did, shrinking back, she faintly exclaimed, " Ah ! why are you here ?" " I dreaded," said Connal, turning from her» " I dreaded that ia this wild
abode something might disturb your rest; and I have watched here that neither «ound or step might approach your room." " I have no fears," said Armida; " you may retire, if that was your purpose." " Oh, no ! it was not: it was for a last look—a last sound—a last thought of you. I stood here that I might say to my heart, I have been near her for the last time. I wish that I could wither on this spot, thinking mylast thought of you. And sure the happy Wandesford would not deny me this : Oh, no ? If he could witness this bitter moment, he would triumph ; triumph not less that you were his,« than that you are lost tO ??." " I am not the wife of Wandesford," said Armida, collecting all her strength to utter these words;" but I forget I am speaking to the lover of Gabri¬ elia." " You are not the vyifiä of Wandes- »3
ford !" cried Connal, rushing to her feet, and grasping her hand, which in spite of her struggles he pressed to bis lips and bosom ; but the next moment he released it, and bowing his burning forehead al¬ most to tbe ground, be exclaimed, " but to-morrow you will be his : you are going to meet him, and I must conduct you." " Where, where is Gabriella," said Ar¬ mida, indignantly repelling him, "where is she, to witness tbis scene ? " " Gabriella !" repeated Connal, in amazement ; " go to her, go to her ; like me she may be deceived ; but she will «ot like me be broken-hearted. She was not deceived. What delusion is this : she is in safety, restored to her home, under the protection of her family/' " Did you forsake her so soon then, 3 * taid Armida, with indignant anguish, ** so young, so beautiful, so devoted. Alas ! what had Ito expect." Connals burning cheek was visible
even in the shade. f f Do not force mc," he said, with a generous blush, " to expose the weakness of a woman : her passion, her infatuation, call it what you will, led her to follow me. I restored her uncom- pelled ; I led her home ; I left her un¬ der her own roof, with a heart touched by gratitude, but incapable of love/' Armida stood for some moments silent and stunned ; at last desperately break¬ ing from him, " Why was I told this !" she cried, " I was less wretched when I believed you false/* " Believed mc false ! Alas ! tvas it necessary to believe be false to make, you renounce me ? I thought you had only confirmed the sentence of the world; that you had deserted one who was already deserted by all mankind. I thought you had awoke from the blessed dream we once dreamed together, and given your hand to the object who offer¬ ed you the luxuries of life and fortune." " Did you think thus of me?" said Ar- *3
mida, with mournful triumph, " then t have more to forgive than you, Connal. I would have followed you fo this wild and lawless spot, to the deserts of Ame¬ rica * what do I say ! I was following yon through darkness and danger ; in the hour of terror and infamy I was follow¬ ing you, alone, and at midnight, without gnide and without hope. But I heard you had another companion : I met you with her on the heath, and, in despair, I gave myself to Wandesford." "And yet you loved me, Armida?" cried Connal, grasping her hands, and fixing on her his eyes, that burned with love and despair. " Alas! had I not loved you more than life, I had never given myself to Wan¬ desford: it was only when I ceased to value life that I consented to become his." " Yet still you loved me, Armida ?" repeated Connal. Armida reclined her drooping head on his shoulder. " I am
no longer the outcast of society—I am no longer a rebel," be cried, clasping her to his throbbing heart. " I am the proudest, the first of men. Armida lov* ed me in my hour of ruin. Oh ! trem* ble not, my love ! the world sees us not. I may cast these hopeless arms around you—I may bold you to this condemned heart : the world will not know tbat the first of her sex, in this dark hour, wept in the arms ofa ruined man." Locked in his arms, Armida wished for death : " Let us part, and die," she said, and broke from his arms ; " destiny has forbid us happiness, and life does not at least deny us dignity : let us part Hke those who have deserved a better fate." " And must those who loved as we did part as we have parted ? How ofteu have we separated in tears ! and shall not our last parting be kinder ? How often have I held you to a heart of agony ! and shall I not once clasp you to it in b4
passion ? Armida, cast one last, dying gleam on my dark fate, that I may re¬ member its light when the night has gathered round me ; that I may say to myself, when I lie on the earth, that must be my bed and grave—I touched her hand, and feel it still : I heard her voice, and its sound is with me now." Blinâeâ with her tears, Armida tried to reach the door, and faintly repelling him with her hand, she said, " I need no parting struggle—no last agony to finish the breaking of ray heart;" and as she spoke, believing her dying hour not distant, and not wishing him to wit¬ ness its horrors, she closed the door, and sunk on the ground. Terrified as well as wounded by this movement, Connal supplicated, he de¬ manded, he even attempted to force ad¬ mittance. Armida heard his impetuous intreaties : she heard him plead with tbat energy of passion, whose fierceness and fondoess at once melt and alarm: she
trembled at her situation : but when he said, indignantly, " Do you fear me, Ar¬ mida?" and sbe heard tbe slight door shake at his touch. She rose, and collecting all her strength, threw it open,—" No, I do not fear you ; but I love you ! I am iu your power : now enter, if you dare." Connal, awed as with the presence of an angel, sunk on his knees : he did not speak : with silent devotion he embraced the walls : he kissed the ground which her steps had touched : he deluged vvith tears the spot on whicli she had wept. " Farewel !" he uttered, with that sound which strikes Hke a knell on the heart that has loved. " Farewel !" echoed Armida, with a passion that proved her fears forgot. " Farewel !" thcy both said, exteuding their arms as if to seek other's forms through the darkness with wbich their eyes struggled in vain, " Farewel for ever !" ? 5
Armida, as long as she heard his re¬ tiring steps, stood ; and when they ceas¬ ed, she tottered to a seat, aud remained there frozen and senseless, her hands locked in each other, her eyes fixed, though unconsciously, on the spot where she had seen him go, till an indistinct noise forced her to perception, though not to recollection of either place or per¬ son—it was the servant and Rosine, who were preparing for their departure : she looked on them, but without distinguish¬ ing any thing. They placed her in the carriage, and it proceeded rapidly, but she did not utter a word, or even ima¬ gine where they were conveying her. The rapid motion, the tiunuit of the servants, and the chill air, restored her to recollection : she gazed round her, but the sight of her own servants accom¬ panying the carriage at once made her feel she was returning to the castle, and shuddering, she relapsed again iuto si¬ lence.
The carriage was attended by a band of Connals troops, but from the state of tbe country they were unable to take the direct road ; and though the castle was not twenty miles distant, the winding route tbey pursued, and the state ofthe roads, rendered it impossible for them to reach it that evening. Their journey often led them over precipices, where the spirited horses could hardly be held with a man at the head of each. The inclemency of the weather increased, and the heavy snow-showers, at times, hnl from them the dangers they encountered, and at times shut them out from the view of ail assistance. At length, as they as¬ cended a steep hill, from whieh the wind, raging with unresisting fury, swept the snow as fast as it fell, the terrified and panting horses fell back ; and the driver, halfblind with the storm, and ig¬ norant of the road, losii.g all command of them, the carriage rolled backward to the very edge. Rosine shrieked with ter-
ror, but Armida did not utter a word· r * On such a spot," sbe thought, "he once saved my life : but is it worth pre¬ serving now!" The troop gallopped forward; but Connal, though he had kept in the Fear all day, was now the foremost, and while the rest only terri¬ fied the horses by the tumult they made, be checked the progress of their danger, by applying his shoulder fo the wheel ; nor did he quit it, though lacerated to the bone, tili the animals became steady. He then hurried round, and throwing open tbe door of the carriage, implored them to alight while the horses were led down the hill, whose precipitantness defied the skill of the driver. Rosine ea¬ gerly quitted the carriage; but Armida, trembling at his sight, though undismay¬ ed by her danger, averted her head, and remained in her seat. Connal, forgetting all constraint, supplicated her in agony to quit it : she continued inflexibly si¬ lent, and to Rosine's serious intreaties
she faintly answered, " I feel no danger while I remain here." Connal then car¬ ried Rosine in his arms down the hill, while dis men, almost at the hazard of their lives, led the carriage down the precipice. Then, when he was at a dis* tance, Armida leaned forward for a mo¬ ment, and her imagination, always ex¬ alted by his presence, felt a kind of me¬ lancholy pleasure even in her present danger. The wild attitudes of the band, their courage, aud that hardihood that seems peculiar to the natives of a gloomy cli¬ mate, and far below, the noble figure of Connal struggling with the storm, half iost in it, yet seeming almost to command it ; his mantle floating on the blast, the plumes of his military helmet rent, and scattering on it like colours in a battle. But when she saw, as her danger eu- c r eased, bis firm step faltering on the cliif, his look so often thrown back, his loud and eager charges to the men,
lost in the blast that pealed Hke thunder on the hill, yet retaining all the feeling that inspired them; and at length hi» resigning Rosine the moment she wai safe, and flying to her side, while his wounded arm tracked every step on the snow with blood, she lost all self-coin-* mand ; and as he approached, and she saw his lacerated arm, which he had not even bound, for the first time she scream¬ ed aloud with terror. Connalj who beHeved that this emotion of fear was caused by his presence, not his wound, which he had hardly felt, gave her a look of despair, and throwing himself m* his horse disappeared in a moment. But bis parting look, his parting figure, as be proudly raised his head, and, drawing up the reins, urged his noble horse to its full speed, though on the edge of a precipice, as if he meant to hound into the air, and contend in his passion with the angry elements, revived past recollections in Armida's heart, and
she attempted to tell him the real cause cf her terrM ; but her voice could no longer reach him—he was gone. " Wbat avail» It ? " said sbe, borrowing false resolution from his absence. " If vve must part, let there be no more of these struggles, that take away all dig¬ nity from my heart, without diminishing its despair." Rosine then re-entered the carriage, and uuder her impressions of recent danger, she could not help asking Armi¬ da how she could venture down that dreadful descent in a carriage. " What had I to risk ?" said Armida, desperately ; " what have I to fear on earth but one object ? Do you know that the sensation of his being near me, the bare imagination that I may see him again, almost deprives me of reason ? Let me not waste the remains of strength he has left me : let me not be unworthy of this hero in my last hours." Rosine wept at these words, but she
reverenced the kind of frantic dignity with which they were uttered, and she wept in silence. At the close of the day the storm sub¬ sided ; and the sun, breaking for a mo¬ ment through the heavy snow-clouds, shed its full glory on the ruined abbey, which appeared on the summit of a hill they were approaching. The flakes of snow, falling thinner and thinner, appear¬ ed to kindle in the rays that shone through them ; and the great east win¬ dow, in a blaze with the setting Hght, seemed the portal to a fairy palace of fire. But all was dark before thcy arrived ; and they were lifted out ofthe carriage, chilled, and half dead with fatigue and cold. As the servants supported them through the great aisle, a mortal cold¬ ness seized on the heart of Armida; and the terrified looks of her servants, who believed they had been brought to this dreary place for the most fatal purpose,
and who, as they tottered along, expect¬ ed death from behind every massive pil¬ lar, deprived them even of the power of asking the extent of their terrors. The dark gothic chamber into which tbey were conducted, its stillness, its solitude, and the dim blue lights that scarcely burned in it, made tbem appear to each other like spirits meeting in a vault. There were but two habitable rooms in this ancient structure; one was prepared for Armida and Rosine, fhe other was given up to their attendant«. Conual and his band passed the night under the cloister, exposed to the incle¬ mency of the elements, to defend the re¬ pose of those who suspected them of murder. Connal, determined they should not even have an opportunity of commu¬ nicating disaffection to Armida's* servants, kept them without any other shelter than the cloister the whole night, and that they might have no room for murmur« ing, he had no other himself.
As long as Armida had a sensation that he was near, she was not without a hope (which she dared not confess to herself) that some remote contingency, something improbable, or even preter¬ natural, might prevent their final separa¬ tion ; and this hope, which we find such difficulty in avowing, or even analyzing to ourselves, is yet that of all others which we find it the most difficult to re¬ sign. Since her refusal to quit the carriage, Connal had not approached her, nor had he once appeared since her arrival. All was still as the moments that precede death. She felt that the last bour was arrived, and the strength that feebly and fitfully had supported her till then now utterly failed : she sunk on the ground, and repeatedly exclaiming—" It is the last ! it is fhe last hour !" seemed insensible of every thing but the image these words conveyed. • Rosine in vain exhausted every topic of fortitude or consolation; with bope
all fortitude had fled, and she listened like one who had no longer any excuse for not yielding to despair. They had not been long together, when one of their servants entering, mentioned that they were to leave the abbey inthe morning, and that he had been furnished with a protection by the captain, in the event of their meeting with any of the rebels, which was scarcely probable at so short a distance from the castle. The man could not contain his joy at the idea of being in safety once more ; but be mixed it with loud eulogiums on the mild and generous treatment tbey had received from O'Morven. " It is well," said Rosine, who felt the sufferings of Armida at these words. *' It is well : leave us : we shail be ready in the morning/* - The man then went away, after con¬ gratulating his lady on the prospect of beiog soon at Montelare Castle in safety.
and in the company of Wandesford. Ar¬ mida faintly bowed her head ; but from the moment of tbis ill-timed visit her agitation terribly encreased. She attempted to listen to the words if comfort uttered by Rosine, butshecouLİ not understand them. She tried to col¬ lect her ideas, buc the effort made their derangement only plainer to herself: she endeavoured to converse, but she could not utter a coherent sentence. At length, snatching up a pencil, she began writing with rapidity ; but her trembling hands, and her fixed and burning eyes, seemed to announce her almost unconscious of what she was doing. With difficulty she traced the following lines :— " The parting hour is come, that hour which the hearts of those who love have tried to represent by the image of death. There is a great d i flere ncc, though I bave no longer strength to describe it. Deatb presents an image of repose, but
, I have years of existence still before me— a dreadful existence, without motion, and without feeling. " The parting hour is come ! I would if possible tell the world what 1 have suf¬ fered ; I would make it tremble at what 1 feel. Oh ! that I could pour on this paper some of the thoughts of fire that are consuming my heart! I have read much, I have thought much ; but I have not at this moment a single word to ex¬ press the last agony !· ------ I try to write, but 1 cannot put together one distinct sentence. I try to speak, but I utter only frightful and inarticulate cries.— Even Rosine does not understand me. Despair like mine terrifies even friend¬ ship away. u I feel as if 1 had never loved him till this moment. " Alas ! it is impossible to die of grief: how often have I had lately a tightness of breath, a fever of heart, that seemed to promise me swift relief: but youth and
nature ??? against me: I am not yet twenty-three years old ; how much of the desert of life yet remains to be trod, and alone. " Rosine, firm and tender friend, you never spared my errors, you never flatter¬ ed my passions, but you never condemn¬ ed my heart : you will meet him again in life, when I am in my grave. Oh ! tell him not that my mind was destroyed ; that my heart was broken ; tell him that I smiled——but he will not believe you. " A rebel ! a rebel ! Alas ! the laws will not distinguish between crimes and characters ; they will not pause to say, in this man we condemn the first of hu¬ man beings : and at a distance I shall live : I shall hear of his danger ; I shall hear of his death : I shall die at a dis¬ tance from him. " I think if I was held to his heart once more ; if I saw his eyes fixed on me for the last time ; if I heard him ut*
ter what is at the bottom of my heart, but what I can never express, the bitter¬ ness of that moment would be such that I must be shortly out of pain. " My despair does at last drive me to think of death : alas ! is it come to this. I was called young, beautiful, and emi« nent ; and must I end my course by self- murder ? Connal I Connal ! you who have made me what I am, take the wretched forfeit of the life v/hich you have stripped even of hope : b it not better tbat I should die by your hands than mv own!" ***** She attempted to add some words to these, but her eves seemed to burn in * hi their sockets Hke coals of fire ; and the characters on ih e paper seemed illu¬ minated with burning sulphur, ShecloscuV her eyes, and pressed her forehead tightly with both her hands, but stili she saw the walls of the room, tbe hills she had crossed that day, and the wild couate-
nances of the rebels, swimming before ber in floods of fire, " Where is the snow ?" said she in delirium. " There was snow there when ï saw them last: bring it again, to quench these flames." When she uttered these words, recol¬ lecting herself, and shocked at the de¬ rangement they betrayed, she tried to rise, and reach the casement for air. Rosine with difficulty supported her to it, and threw it open. It was midnight ; a bright full moon shed a solemn glory on the nigbt. Heaven, burning with ten thousand stars, seemed the dark con¬ cave of a mine of diamonds :, every thing grand, motionless, and lovely, seemed t * contrast that fever of despair that was consuming the wretched Armida, She turned her eyes to the earth to find some¬ thing congenial to misery there. Below the casement there was a large enclosure: it was the cemetry of the abbey. They could distinguish the dark tomb-stones
among the snow, the crosses that marked the graves of the order, aod tbe leafless branches under whose shade the owners had mused on the view of their final ha¬ bitation. The sight struck Armida to the heart» " Every thing/' said she, " speaks the same iesson to me. Tbis is no casual omen. Nature and passion alike an¬ nounce my death. These all died in peace," said she, solemnly waving her arms over the dead : " they had suffer¬ ings, for they were mortal ; but they re¬ posed them and their hopes in the bosom that never rejected one, or betrayed the ^her—the bosom of Deity. Oh, how different is the fate of the votaries of this world and of the next ! How wretched did they appear in the eyes of men : their food coarse, their bed the ground, their employment prayer. Who would outwardly have compared their lot with mine ? Yet their life was peace¬ ful, and their end blessed. I lived only VOL. ?. €
to the world, and with a happier fate I might have embellished it ; and the world has left me to die of a broken heart/' Awful as these reflections were, they seemed to calm her : she was no longer convulsed : she no longer trembled : sbe leaned on Rosi i lent and absorbed. Starting at a sound near them, they turned and saw Connal. He was tra¬ versing the room unconscious there was any one there. Armida shrunk at his eight; and Rosine, terrified at its conse¬ quences, said, " Why are you here ?" " I knew not where I was," said Con¬ nal, starting as from a trance, " Since I saw her for the last time, I know not where I am, or what I do : I wander about like a condemned spirit—I be¬ Heved, I thought something pressed on my mind about your departure, but it is gone, and I cannot recall it. " Rosine, now unable to speak, implored him by signs to leave the room. He
retired ; but in a few minutes bc return¬ ed again, and coming no further than the door, threw himself against it, gaz¬ ing on Armida. He did not speak—his heart-broken look left no room for words. " Ah !" said Rosine, " why is this ? Have you no mercv ?" " Despair has left me none. I cannot give what 1 have never been shewn/' said Connal, in a voice hol¬ low and broken with agony. " I call Heaven, and I call my worst foe to wit¬ ness, 1 have borne all trials of fortune iike a man, but this requires more than man can be or bear. " I will indulge human feelings ; it cannot make me more wretched : while she is here í will be here. Armida, will you banish me ? Wiil you deny me your sight the last hour I ever can behold you ?" \ nuid a sunk from Rosine*« arms to
the ground. "You will kill her," cried Rosine, kneeling on the ground beside her. " Were we to perish in each other's arms," said Connal, rushing to her, " at this moment, I would clasp her thus. Armida, ray love ! Heaven denies us eve¬ ry thing but this luxury of despair, and we will enjoy it, even to madness enjoy : we will make the happy tremble. Oh, how wretches revel I—You cannot speak, my love ! but this silence is sweeter than all the eloquence you once possessed ; and those pale lips, those closed eyes, that form that seems to fade at my touch, ob, they are dearer to me than all the pride of beauty in which I first beheld you : thus pale, cold, dying, come to this desolate heart : it is not too much to ask, to behold you as you are now/' Armida faintly repelled him, and fix¬ ing on him a look of death, " If you can speak/' said she, gasping, " a word of
iron, a word that will destroy us both, speak it, and let us die together." "We will not die together!" said Connal, mournfully. He bore her in his arms to the casement, and pointed to the distant hills : " There is the grave of your love, he will not die a felon's death ; on those lone hills will be my grave : one brave man will stand by me—one brave man will survive me long enough to dig with his sword the earth that isr to cover me, perhaps to moisten it with a tear, before he falls beside me : bue you, you will live in luxury and fame: yet spare one tear to him whose dying thougbt will be on you, or give it now." " Oh, God !" cried the wretched Ar¬ mida, " that even Gabriella was with you ! Alas ! you will want a woman's breast to lean on, a woman's heart to feel for you at that hour." At that moment a sound which struck on the hearts of both was beard from c3
below. The old bard, who had accom¬ panied O'Morven, and who remembered that the remains of some of the family were deposited in the burial-ground, had wandered out to feel for the graves where they lay. Armida saw him totter over the ground : she saw him sink on a grave ; and she heard again those omi¬ nous chords he struck the night she met him on the heath. How different from the brilliant tones which awoke her ear¬ ly sensibility, and inspired her youthful talent ! *' Ah !" said she, shrinking at the sound, te my former friends nre all turned against me. Music, that I once culti* vated ; music, that 1 once was said to embellish ; music is now beeome the summoner of death to me !" As she spoke, her cold hands lost their hold of Connal, and her eves became fixed. The distracted Connal, kneeling before her, implored for a word, a look of life. " I can no longer see you," said Ar-
mida, sinking from his arms to the ground ; " and though I stretch out my hands, they wander about, without being able to reach you." " God ! this is too much for man. Armida ! answer !—Will you be mine ? I speak in despair; I have nothing to offer or to promise : will you be the companion of a rebel, in a desert, amid war, and want, and danger ?" Armida, with an impulse like fate, threw herself into his arms. He clasp¬ ed her to his heart.
? i
CHAP. II. Is this the region, this the soil, die climc^ Said then the lost Arch-angc!. Miltox> A DREABFtJL calm succeeded this storm of passion. Armida, exhausted by emotion, did not quit her couch: herser- vants were dismissed. Connals band re¬ tired, and he himself, absent all day, only appeared in the evening, in a state that shewed he almost hazarded life to behold her for a moment, and to depart. Rosine, unable to desert Armida in this moment of desolation, passed her sad time in traversing the cloisters of the abbey, or listening to the blast tbat swept through them at night. On the tenth evening, as she sat re¬ volving the danger of their retreat, being
discovered by Lady Montelare, and scarce knowing whether to wish or to fear it, she beheld tbe man who had been left in the abbey, as an attendant, under the casement : he beckoned to her, and she leaned forward. "There is no light on the Galway hills," said he, "nor no Hght from the old tower on the lough ; nor all along the bog, I see no light ; and you must set off to-night." " What do you mean ?" said Rosine, " and where are we to go ?" "The captain told me," said the man, ít that if his party were near, they would Hght fires on the hills ; but if not, there was no safety for you ; and you must go with all speed to the camp, for the king's troops would come and take you else." Rosine, though terrified at the thought of seeking shelter in a rebel camp, could uot yet forsake Armida, and she hasten¬ ed to apprize her of the necessity of their cã
immediate departure. Sbe bad been al¬ most insensible that day, but the terror of falling: into the hands of Wandesford seemed to operate Hke an electric shock on her frame : she rose, and though her limbs could scarce support her, was, in a few minutes, ready to be gone. There was no time to be lost, and, with tbe man for their conductor, they sat off before day-light for tbe camp. They travelled in silence for some hours, and as the pale light of a winter's morning broke on the mountain road they were ascending the horses suddenly became restive, and plunged witb so much violence, that Rosine, though now almost insensible of inferior dangers, inquired what was the matter, "The horses are frightened," said the man. " And what is it that frightens them ? " said Rosine. " There was a man hung in chains for murder in the last rebellion," said
the man, " and his skeleton is swinging on the gibbet, in every blast of wind; and I can't get the horses past it." The seat shook with Armida's con¬ vulsive shudder ; and Rosine forbore all further inquiries. The horses at length became manage¬ able, and, as the day-light broke, they saw around them a scene of wildness and desolation, such as seemed an apt intro* duction to the retreat of an outlawed chief« The track led through a narrow glen, broken by masses of stone, grey with moss, through which a red, swol¬ len, wintry stream struggled for a pas¬ sage. Mountains, half lost in mist, bounded the view on every side : a few ruinous huts appeared on their crags, which resounded with the scream of birds, the heralds of solitude and fa¬ mine ; and the heath and the fern wav¬ ed in that rank and dreary luxuriance that proclaims cultivation forgot, and life extinct.
The track, at length winding round one of the stony hills that broke the glen, disclosed a wide moor, on the side of a mountain, impracticable in the winter from the morass by which it was sur¬ rounded. It was covered to the summit with huts of clay, indistinguishable in their colour from the brown soil on which they itood. The crowds, with wild attitudes, and hurried motions, the arms scattered in confusion every where, and an indis¬ tinct kind of military tumult, iuformed them they were arrived at the rebel camp; and dreary as their late solitude appear¬ ed, they could at that moment have shrunk back to it with delight. The carriage entered the camp, and Connal did not appear. As they advanced, respect seemed to overcome curiosity : the men stood apart, and the women re¬ tired into the huts, holding back their children from gazing on the travellers. The camp consisted of a number of huts,
built of sods and clay, covered with moss, and strengthened with stones which were gathered on the mountain. From these rude abode3 the rage of winter had of¬ ten driven them into the caverns at it» base ; and several holes in the ground, from which smoke was rising, shewed a number of these subterraneous retreats were inhabited still. Half way up the mountain stood a dismantled stone building, which appear¬ ed to have been a hunting lodge : here they stopt, and a woman appeared to re¬ ceive them. Armida looked fearfully around for Connal, but she did not dare to mention his name. " Where is your captain ?" said Rosine, at length. " He has been absent these four days," said the woman, " on an expedition, to intercept some artillery." Rosine eagerly interrupted her to in¬ quire when he was expected. " There has been no express since he went/' said the woman, [ ζ and we hear
so many reports that we never believe any thing till we see him alive: but if he arrives to-day, he must ride forty miles since this morning, for he is in the neighbourhood of Gort by this time: but we were ordered to prepare for your reception," she continued, " and I hope there has been nothing in it to displease you/' " No, nothmg !" said Armida, wav¬ ing her hand for the woman to retire. " Ah ! my lady," said the woman, looking at her with compassion, " ifyou are so cast down at first, wbat will be¬ come of you, or how will you bear what you must see in this place ?" She then went away, and Armida, who felt sick at heart, placed herself at the window for air ; but she was soon com¬ pelled to withdraw, for the camp was already filled with the report of an high born beauty, of English birth, and im¬ mense wealth, having followed the for¬ tunes of their leader, and such numbers
assembled, by stealth, to gaze on her, that tbe sentinels were compelled to dis¬ perse them. No one but their female attendant ap¬ proached them during the day ; but this solitude onlv gave Armida leisure to feei her situation more intensely, and neither the superiority of her mind, northe ener¬ gy of her passion, were proof against its terrors, now that the trial had arriv¬ ed. From the scenes of her early life to thosc she was novv plunged in, the tran¬ sition was too abrupt, the contrast too shocking : she could not speak, and Ro¬ sine dared not : they sat silent, each wishing for the presence of Connal ; Ar¬ mida, because ¡she felt it a vindication, and Rosine, because she knew it a pro¬ tection. It was evening, when the echoes of the mountain rung with a horu, and at a distance they d isco verd a horseman on the heath, advancing at full gallop : his
band, far behind him, in vain urged their wearied horses to keep up with him. The blasts ofthe born redoubled, and the camp was all tumult and exultation at the return of their leader and his party. Waiting neither for praise nor congra¬ tulation, he left his hand to tell their tale, and flinging himself from his horse, which fell at the door when be alighted, was iu Armida's presence in a moment. She tried to rise, but her limbs failed her, and extending her arms to him, she sunk again on the seat. Connal, who was rushing forward, paused ; but his figure in this attitude of suspended emotion, the glow of anguish and fondness that suf¬ fused his features, and tbe flash of ago¬ ny that darted from his eyes as he gazed on her, awoke all the energy of her feel¬ ing, and amid weakness and terror she tried to greet him with one of those smiles that was the offspring of happier hours. This smile tore every nerve of
Connals heart, and rushing to her feet, and hiding his face, " Is it thus !" he ex* claimed, " is it thus I behold you !" " I have been ill," said Armida, bend¬ ing over him, " butit was only in your absence : I am well already, since I have seen you." Connal, mournfully raising his head, and gazing on her through eyes dim with grief and love, tried to answer the smile that gleamed from her faded features, but his own were convulsed vvith the ef¬ fort, and he turned to Rosine for relief. " And you are here, my inestimable friend !" he cried, kissing the hand she offered to him. " Yes," said Rosine, " I have restor¬ ed her to you, and now I resign my* charge : Oh, Connal ! be worthy of its inestimable value." " I am not ! I cannot,be ! '* said Con¬ nal, tortured with the various emotions of his proud and passionate heart : " I feel I am no longer a man of honour, or
a lover : I am a sel fish, desperate wretch ; and, Hke the first apostate, lhave drawn down an angel iu my fall." Trembling at his agitation, Armida attempted to sooth bim, and her effort, though almost inarticulate, succeeded. Alarmed by the faintness of her tones, he repressed his emotion, and kneeling at her feet, he gazed at her silently. It was then when she looked at him and saw his dark cheek, his matted hair, and his features, from which the glow of meeting had fied, and left them dewed with toil, and racked with care, she re¬ proached herself for the fatigue and dan¬ ger to which she had exposed him. " Ah !" said she, " what fatigue you must have undergone for this meeting I what a distance you have traversed since the morning ! I saw your horse fall the moment you alighted from him." " It was the first moment I bad done so for eight-and-forty hours. Theshort sleep I snatched was on the saddle ; and
one hand was on the bridle while I fed myself with the other." " And will you not take some rest— some refreshment now ?'* said Armida^ tenderly. " \cs, thus, for ever if I could, " re¬ plied Connal, extending himself at her feet, and pressing her hand to his beating bosom. At that moment the horn sound¬ ed, and Connal, starting from the ground, hurried on his military cloak. " It is the horn for tbe evening watcb," he cried. " And will you go without a mo¬ ments repose ?" said Armida. <c I hardly knovv the meaning of the word/* said Connal, with astern smile of military pride, " Ah ! you are bleeding too," cried Armida, almost shrieking as his parting hair shewed a recent scar. " A trifle—a scratch I received from the sabre of one of those Hessians we met this morning—the speed with which
I rode has made it bleed again ; I did not feel it till this moment." " Will· you not stay to have it dressed at least?" said Armida. " I must first inquire if my men have taken care of theirs; if they havet Ishall not feel mine." He turned, andvgazing on her with agonizing tenderness, added, " Yes, I shall feel for ever that precious fear that has healed and embalmed it." The guard was now assembled, the sentinels changed, but from respect to Armida, fhey were removed to a distance from her habitation ; one only, spreading his cloak on the heath, lay down beneath her window ; it was Connal, exhausted as he was by toil and danger : her pre¬ sence, and the thoughts it suggested, prevented him from closing his eyes. The fugitives were as little disposed to rest, nor for some time after they were left to themselves had either courage to speak. At length Armida, with an ef¬ fort almost convulsive, said :
" I need not ask what you think, Ro¬ sine ; your looks have already condemned me; yet fear not to speak to me—tell me all you think and feel for me. Ah ! how long will it be before I agaiu shall hear the voice of a friend ?" " My dear Armida, I do not condemn, I do not even presume to advise ; my fa¬ culties are only equal to common emer¬ gencies : for the terrible conflicts I have witnessed, I have neither counsel nor experience ; perhaps you have done best in following the dictates of your own heart : yet let me implore you, trust it no longer with your present situation, but avail yourself of the first legal oppor¬ tunity to become the wife of Connal. I know my importunity will be aided by his." The deep crimson that flushed Armida's pallid cheek, her hurry to avert it, and her ineffectual.attempts to answer tbis appeal, proved bow deeply ebe felt it.
Rosine then approaching her, added with solemn tenderness : " As I must now leave you, my dear Armida, as I have remained with you till it is no longer possible or safe for me to remain, let my last words sink into your heart. Connal is devoted to you : that he has been criminal may perhaps be the result of accident; whether he will be so depends on you : employ, I conjure you, every power his passion gives you to withdraw him from this guilty and fatal association ; urge him to supplicate the mercy of Government for himself and his deluded followers, and I may yet see you restored to felicity and honour." The total desolation of her situation struck Hke death on the heart of Ar¬ mida, but neither her pride nor her affection would permit her to supplicate Rosine for another moment's delay, and she hastened to speak of Connal, that she might not betray ber emotion.
*' Ah !" said she, " it was only with the hope you suggest that I followed hiin to these extremities, but since I have arrived, it has almost abandoned me; even in the hour when he first beheld me, when I had not yet lost all my original brightness, his mind was fixed upon this fearful purpose. What have I to expect now ? my mind and figure are alike im¬ paired. Art and nature have both de¬ serted me; and such is the diffidence with which misfortune and his superior mind have inspired me, that in his pre¬ sence I often feel at a loss for the most common expressions. I am a true wo¬ man—the man whom 1 love awes me, and my former confidence in my powers is gone." " And to whom have those powers been sacrificed?" said Rosine, with energy. " But for him you would still have been triumphing in their conscious¬ ness: by that very plea, the strongest that can be urged with a man who has a
heart, plead with him, and you must prevail : assail him with your weakness, and you will be resistless. He only re¬ quires a voice to warn, a tear to melt htm. ï would stake my life his present defalk cation is neither that of feeling or of principle. He has been seduced by art, or ensnared by treachery, or impelled by violence." " He has indeed," said Connal, sud¬ denly appearing before them. " Forgive rae, my love, for this abruptness : the guard are now absent on a patrole, and when they return I must not be seen near this sacred retreat : this is the only mo¬ ment I can seize to vindicate my conduct. I have indeed, Rosine, been 4f a man more sinned against than sinning, ,, He paused to arrange his thoughts, and tben finding the effort vain, said abruptly :— * c Imagine all that pride, solitude, and enthusiasm, can make of a young romantic mind, and you have imagined mine.
" You know my grandfather took me while an infant from my wretched pa¬ rents; their want made them willing to resign me. I do not accuse them, for they knew nothing of his purpose, of which lhave been since the victim. " I was too young to understand my grandfather's character then. Implaca¬ ble from pride, fierce from want, and intoxicated by solitary grandeur, and the loyal homage of his remaining followers, he shut himself up iu the old tower on his ancient demesne, and listened to thù tales of his bards and tbe songs ofhis har¬ pers, who told him he was (he sovereign of the western isles. "He Hstened to them, and brooded over his pride and his misfortunes till madness began to ferment in his mind ; and he conceived the frantic idea of wresting Ireland from the English hand. When I was brought to the tower, I was too young to perceive the clouds of frenzy that were gathering over his VOL, III. n
mind ; bnt the flashes of genius and courage that broke through them in his brighter hours awed and delighted me. " The life I led was rapidly lifting my mind to the wild, cloudy, preternatural level of his. My hours were passed in climbing precipices, in wandering on heaths, in watching the gathering storm, in listening to the roar of the ocean in its strength. " I was the child of mist and storm, of wandering and loneliness, of pride and melancholy. "At night, seated in the halt at my grandfather's feet, I listened to the harp and the legend till I believed them true as inspiration, and my heart burned and beat for the time " ere the emerald gem of the western world was set in the crown of a stranger." " I becama devoted to ray grandfather with a love f passing that of woman/ with a mingled feeling of anguish, pity, and veneration, that tortured, while it
exalted the heart. Ho seemed to me the first of men ; there was no comparison between him and any other of his species. My whole range of existence included only ?? and his vassals; and what a difference was there between them : he ¿eemed to me like tbe ??? se of some de¬ parted power; his followers Hke the slaves who watch with melancholy ho¬ mage round his tomb ; and I felt as if I Imd the talisman whose charm might bid that mighty dust awake and live. " Had that man bid me turn roy sword against my own life I would have done it: he required me to turn it against my country, and I obeyed. You tremble, my love ; ah ! you must steel your nerves, Armida, ifyou would listen to my tale« " I was a young Hannibal, sworn to enmity on the altar of my country. My devotion to this object became as frantic and hopeless as my grandfather's. But, oh, God ! what struggles, whaî convul- D 2
, sions of mind awaited me, when the pro¬ gress of years and of knowledge dispelled the illusion that possessed me. " I found, when my brain cooled, that it was impossible for Ireland to subsist as an independent country ; impossible for her to exist without dependance on the continental powers, or a connexion with England. " In the * first goadings of conviction, I would have blessed the man, who, by one friendly blow, had ended the contest within me. *< I thought on the desperation of the enterprise ; I determined to ??????? it; I thought of fhe ties that bound me to the brave men who had embraced it, and I determined to stand by them to the last. " I kuew I was leading them Hke sheep to the slaughter, yet 1 had now led them so far, that none could bring tlien back, and it seemed worse to desert thai even to sacrifice them. I reproached
myself for temerity ; I accused myself of cowardice; till worn by struggling in the toils of conscience and purpose, I sat gloomily down, and resolved to lead them where none would survive to reproach me, or I should not survive to hear them. " It was in this hour of desolation I beheld you, Armida : even at this mo¬ ment how my heart overflows with pas¬ sion and joy when I think of tbat bour, in which the world seemed new-born again to me, in which a bope of life I was almost indignant at stole into my heart. " I gazed, and believed tbere was no danger, and then I gazed till I forgot all danger. I thought you the proudest of women. My heart, steeled against you., and the infinite distance between us, made me believe I could behold you with chill admiration like a picture, and de¬ part without emotion : but when I had once advanced, I had no power to re¬ treat. Often I blessed your pride for
driving me from you ; but when I saw you again I wondered how I could think you proud. Often I parted from you ^vith rooted scorn and haired, and when I returned I hated myself for having felt' it, I felt it was madness to meet you, to be near you ; and then with that jea¬ lousy of happiness which the miserable feel, I said to myself—To the man that must die, it matters not if he loves to gaze ou the last lovely ray of Hght that gleams on bis dungeon wall. " Increasing anguish forced reflexiou on me. I fled from your sight : I wan¬ dered out and saw you in solitude. I read, and your picture was on the page. At the moment I was about to rush into fight, that I might die aud forget you, 1 discovered that I was not indifferent to you. " Tiii that moment I believed it im* possible to struggle with roy destiny, but from the time I felt you were interested in it all things seemed possible. Do you
remember the eventful night we met at Lady Kilcarrick's ? I had resolved to disclose all that night, yet I shrank from the thought of confessing myself a rebel : I tried, by a tale of my banishment to America, to discover how you would bear the views of exile, and shame, and ruin that awaited me. " Oh ! the rapture and agony of my heart at the discovery, that even amid exile, shame, and ruin, you would not forsake me. " That very night I flew to the cavern, where the band, novv grown mutinous for action, nightly assembled. I was deter¬ mined to break the bonds that held me, though my men should plant their pikes in my breast. " I called them round me, and, con¬ scious of a new mind within me, address¬ ed them as I never had before. I know not what I said, but I remember having a flow and force of thought, an energy of persuasion, beyond what man perhaps n 4
ever yet possessed. I exhibited the mad¬ ness and atrocity of our enterprise; I acknowledged my crime in deluding them tojóin it. I adjured them to disperse, to surrender their arms ; and if, as I fear¬ ed, some suspicion of our design existed, to confess it, to throw themielves on the mercy of government, and make me their hostage or their sacrifice. ** Whether they had long before been driven to think of this I know not ; but all listened with patience, and some with conviction, and I am persuaded I should have led every man that night a loyal subject from the cavern of rebellion, when at tliat moment Wandcsford, who had traced my footsteps from the castle, and discovered the passage to the cave, appeared standing among us. A hun¬ dred pikes were turned against him in a moment, ? threw myself before him, and* swore thcy should cut their way through rae. But for me, he had never survived to betray us, nor had I been an outlaw now.
Ff I could not bear to see a man who was sanctified in my eyes by being your lover thus murdered in secret, and my proud heart longed that the world might judge by our future lives which of us deserved you best, " When I had saved his life, I drew him apart— f Wandesford/ I said, f you have the truth. These men were rebels: they are no longer so. You have wit¬ nessed their repentance, their resolution to implare the mercy of government. I ask nothing from your gratitude ; but I demand from you as a soldier aud a man that you will be the first to intercede for them. ' " He complied : he pledged his ho¬ nour for his compliance. His honour !— villain!—that very day he rode to Galway ; informed the magistrates that t rebellion was about to break out; and brought a detachment of his own regi¬ ment, to burn the tower, and drag my grandfather to the gibbet. d 5
" Armida, you remember that night of horror. I met you on the heath : I told you we were destroyed by treachery : the tower had been invested by soldiers that evening. They saw I was prepared for defence, and called on me to surren¬ der. I told them the only terms on which I would surrender: I demanded that my grandfather, against whom no treasonable fact could be proved, should remain unmolested ; that my adherents, who were willing to throw themselves on the mercy of government, should be spared. I offered to give up the arms which were deposited in the tower : I offered myself to follow them to prison, to death, if the laws of my country con¬ demned me to death, provided his person and habitation, and those of my followers were spared. No terms would be accept¬ ed ; no proposal would be listened to : the language ofthe answer was literally— € Come out and be hanged, or stay in and be burned/ Seeing us, however, better
prepared than they expected, they rettred for a reinforcement. " I saw you on the heath : I rushed out to bid you fly from me, and returned to perish with my grandfather. The band in the mean time had gathered in our defence, disposed as they were to submission and to peace. Their Mile¬ sian blood was burning at the thougbt of their aged chief and his grandson perish¬ ing like felons. I adjured, I commanded them to be gone and provide for their own safety in vain. They rose around me in numbers I could neither repel or manage; and when the soldiers re¬ turned we were in a condition to resist their assault. " While I and a few more poured an incessant fire from the narrow casements, my grandfather was conveyed away by some of his ancient followers, and by the time I hoped he was safe in the moun¬ tains, we gave up the old tower to the flame», and rushed from it among the
assailants. The madness of our dashing thus upon their bayonets scattered them for a moment, and we retreated to the mountains : but every inch of ground was fought with our faces to our pursuers, and not a step but what was bought by the Hfe of one of my brave band. I will say I saw Wandesford fight bravely that night ; he fought like a common soldier, but we could not meet. As night came on, the pursuit abated : tlie pursuers liad suffered as well as we, and the few c f us that survived reached the mountain by midnight. " Here we rested, in solitude, safety, and despair. The heath was our camp, the sky our tent, the elements our sup¬ port, and life our only possession. When wc had sunk on the earth for rest, and looked up to heaven for hope, we bad ex¬ hausted every resource. " Ob, Armida ! judge ofthe anguish and indignant regret of him who has led out a brave band only to perish, and who
feels ¡n their suffering silence the condem¬ nation of his rashness ! " When I looked round, and saw them faint, scattered, and sore, their wounded limbs sti tie ning in the cold air, I could have thrown myself at Wandesford'« feet to beg mercy for them. But when my eye fell on rny grandfather, who exhaust¬ ed lay in my arms, his only shelter from the earth, my heart swelled again, and I swore beiore he exchanged that cold bed for a dungeon the grave should be mine. t( Wandcsford/ I mentally and solemn¬ ly said, * Wandesford, you have done this ; the blood of those that have perish ed will be on your head: you drove these men back at the moment they knocked at the gate of mercy : you forced to crime a child agonizing for a parents grey nairs. In tbe eye ofhim who reads the heart through darkness and suffering, I am innocent.' " We subsisted for some time at men driven to desperation must subsist.
While we were still learning to grapple with famine and winter, the guard one evening found a boy, who was supposed to have îost his way on the mountains. Struck witb «something mysterious in his appearance, they brought him to my hut. He implored me to dismiss them, and then throwing himself into my arms, acknowledged he was Gabriella. I still tremble when I think of that moment. Hardship I defy; danger I love; death itself I have encountered and braved; but a woman, fond and beautiful, kneel¬ ing and weeping ; and to me, ignorant of women and their wiles ; a man un sooth¬ ed, unsolicited, unloved. " In vain I represented the danger, the horror of our situation : she told me her passion had enabled her to defy them ;: and I knew it had. " I then confessed the impossibility of my ever returning her passion, were my views even more prosperous. I avowed the passion of my owa heart ; I boasted
of it, in hopes to wound her pride, and banish her infatuation. How shall I obtain pardon from my love's offended delicacy. She offered to hold the second place in my affections ; to be mine on any terms. " I shrunk from her shocked and repelled ; she followed ; she knelt to me, half.intreating, half extorting compli¬ ance. Tbe brilliant and tremendous contrast of passion and vice that her beauty displayed almost shook my reso¬ lution : my heart was untouched, but my senses were* dazzled. At that moment, though hopeless of ever again beholding you, I repeated the name of 'Armida; I felt as if the talisman of my heart was touched, and my guardian genius appear¬ ed before me in your image. I tore myself from her, to commune with my own heart and be still. " When I returned, I found her calm, and apparently resigned : she lis» tened, she appeared convinced. X could
not expose her weakness to the band, for sbe had resumed her female dress, and at the risk of my lifc 1 led her back thai night to her own mansion. " You saw me on the heath that night, Armida : ah ! that you had heard me too! " The winter passed in fortifying our mountain retreat. Nature, as if to ac¬ knowledge the claims of her ancient Lord, threw round us an impassable fence of heath and lake, of mountain and moor, and invested us with storms that bid defiance to all assailants. We pass¬ ed the winter in safety, stern and cold : we were unmolested like the savage in his den. Man dreaded to approach us : the attack of an enemy would have been almost welcome. " It was at this period that Wandcs¬ ford, on his Journeymen into the hands of some of ?? nien whom he had be¬ trayed.—Oh! never will I forgive the meanness or the malignity ofthe wretch
who sheltered himself under the tii le ofyour husband ; or my own credulous precipitation for affording him that bhelter, * " I would not have assassinated him, hut I would have called on him as a man mortally injured, and would have urged, have forced him to defend his claims to honour aud to you, with his life. " The next day another party informed me that two females had been made prisoners: my heart was so full of you that tbe sound of two female prisoners struck on my ear without producing an idea except that of hastening to promise them safety and protection. Armida, I beheld you, " We must now, my love/' he added, with a trembling voice, " take such counsel together as tho^e wbo arc in ex¬ tremity must take. The emergency forces me to be plain and brief: while I speak, t
perhaps your enlarged mind, perhaps the inspiration of love, may suggest some bright augury in this gloomy hour. " I have informed both magistrates and officers of the cause that had compelled me to assume the name and arms of a rebel. I have offered to submit, to take my trial at the bar of my country, and prove I am not voluntarily a traitor to it, provided my grandfather is spared, and the unhappy men who follow me be for¬ given. " At first there seemed a disposition to treat me with lenity, but latterly I think I have read the spirit of Wandes¬ ford in tbe answers. " I have written again to the com¬ manding officer of the district, and I have addressed him less as an officer than as a man. " I have told him of my sufferings, and my wrongs ; of my resources and my desperation. I have stated my hu«
mility, my wish to expiate my offence by a public trial : and I have warned him with solemnity not to drive to ex¬ tremity a man on whose word the lives of many wait. " For every drop of blood that has fallen in this frantic cause my own heart has dropped another, but if I am driven to despair, the west w ill be de¬ luged with blood. " What answer this last appeal may receive I know not, but should it be implacable I am nof less bereft of hope. I have maintained, by a chain of posts, a communication with the sea-shore—from this it will not be more than a march of two days. A passage thence to one of the islands is easy, and there we can defy all assault from the roughness of the waves and the rockings of the shore, fill some vessels reach us, and the waves of the Atlantic that moat my paternal isles,
bear their exiled possessor ^and his fol¬ lowers to America." He paused, and looked timidly up at Armida, trembling at his teme¬ rity. " Ah !" said Armida, while her beau¬ tiful features melted with tenderness, and gleamed with hope, "can you doubt my following you wherever peace and security may be found, when I have not hesitated to follow you even here." In the quickened lustre of her lover's eyes, ia his broken respiration, Armida read her answer ; but tbis silent elo¬ quence was interrupted by the senti¬ nels announcing the arrival of an ex¬ press, "I must go," cried Connal, starting from her feet : " ah ! while here, I forget not only the duties, but the cares of human ity." Anxiously and vainly the fugitives
waited for his return, or for some in¬ telligence at this momentous crisis. No messenger arrived, and towards morn¬ ing, exhausted, they retired to rest. ·
CHAP. III. AuMiDA sunk into a profound sleep, and fancy, more propitious to her than fortune, visited her dreams with images «f Connal. She thouglit «he was in Italy again, surrounded by a splendid assembly ; she was singing to them when Connal en¬ tered. The company seemed to view him with astonishment, and she broke off her song to resign her harp to him. He touched it, and every chord was instantly broken ; and a melancholy murmur succeeded those brilliant and commanding tones which the moment before she seemed to be drawing from it. The scene then changed to those romantic shores where she first beheld him.
He wandered before her at a distance, which, though apparently small, she could never overtake : sometimes he stood on a rock, which she tainly tried to ascend ; sometimes on the brink of a stream, across which he beckoned her, but which it was impossible for her to pass: yet, soothed by his image, her slumber was delicious, and she wept with that luxurious sense of grief that insleep appears to bring the recollection of many years, and unite the present and the past, the living and the dead, in its visionary associations. It was late in the evening, when awak¬ ing, she leaned forward, and saw Rosine and the woman, who was weepmg, sit¬ ting at the side of her couch ; and her feelings, quick iu the discovery of evil, suggested no favourable omen from their looks. She started from her pallet, and in¬ quired the cause. ' f My dear Armida/' said Rosine^
" there is no time to preface what wë must tell. Connals last appeal has been rejected ! he has been told to expect nothing but the utmost severity. The camp has broken up—they are all on their march to the sea-coast, and Connal waits with the last detachment to guard vou hence," As she spoke, the woman burst into an agony of tears and exclamations, and Rosine, incensed at her adding to the terrors of the moment, turned to her vvith a look of anger. " It is not for myself," said she, sob¬ bing, " it is for O'Morven !—oh ! none but an angel from Heaven ever looked or stood as he did when the news came ; and we were all to fly for our lives. Oh ! such a cry as went up from the camp—the men raving, and the women and children screaming and crying ; and to see him commanding and comforting them ali in a breath ; working and la¬ bouring among the lowest of them, and
cheering them with his own blessed voice, that creatures that were hardly able to crawl out of their huts, and were forced to set off, with two or three chil¬ der along with them, and not so much as a sod of turf in their hands : still they bid God bless him as they went, and now and then he'd seem to wipe his fore- head with his hand, but it was his eyes he wiped, to see them. Oh ! God will not desert him in his hour of need, for he never yet made such another creature in the world " "Rosine/' said Armida·, "dismiss» ihis woman, and assist me, for the last time : you must not be a partaker of this dreadful journey. í havo no right to drag you any further—an escort shall at¬ tend you from tbis place to your uncle's. You know I have interest here," she added, with a painful smile. " Ah ! my dear Armida/* said Ro- hlne, no louger restraining her tears, (C you must iudeed dismiss me ? for I VOL. ill. E
feel, that though I might die in this situation, it is impossible I could live in itiong." " Judge then the effect of this exalted character on my heart," said Armida, with solemn feeling. " I was reared in luxury, such as few of my sex have known, yet at this moment there is no prospect connected with his fate that has terrors for roe. Judge me not by these trembling hands, or these broken ac¬ cents," said she, as Rosine was assisting her. " Judge me by tbe unshrinking resolution with which 1 follow his peri¬ lous flight." She then looked for a moment on her splendid travelling dress, which had been prepared for the English journey— " Ah t* said she, " this splendour is not for a fugitive !" and she was going fo take off tbe ornaments tbat fastened it, when, feeling that Connal might be wounded by this appearance of self-neg¬ lect, she desisted.
" When are we to set out ?" said she, after a pause. €t Not till midnight/' said Rosine, " for Connal and his party will remain till last on the mountain, and light fires to deceive the troops that he believes to be hovering near him, and our departure will be delayed till tben, that he may protect us himself." " It yet wants two hours of that time," said Armida, " and before we part, seek, I entreat you, an opportunity of making one more appeal to his heart on my be¬ half. I tremble at the thought of thus wandering alone, the unlicensed com¬ panion of the mím I love. While you were with me, I felt your presence a protection, but ofthat a few hours must now deprive me. "Ah ! let us be united, let me have but a sanctioned claim to encounter danger and distress with him, and what is there I will shrink from ?—No woman had ever less distrust of her lover, or less E 2
dread of the world, Alas ! my present situation is a proof that I have no object in tbe world but himself; but there is an unknown danger before me that deters even me. The world may say she loved unfortunately, but let it not say she loved unworthily." Rosine, her heart glowing at senti¬ ments so congenial to her own, hastened out amid the tumult and darkness in search of Connal, yet when she found herself on the heath, amid armed men, and flying women, in all the rude con¬ fusion of a rebel army, she dreaded that amid juch circumstances the distracted mind orConnal could scarce have leisure to listen, or feel the appeal she was about to make. Of the stragglers who were loitering about she invaio inquired for him ; their terror scarce permitted them to hear or answer, and though at a distance on the heath, sbe saw some bodies of men preparing to march, among whom their leader probably was.
Their wild and martial appearance. combined with the darkness, the clamour, the crowd, the cries of various distress, and the sound of military command, deterred her from approaching them ; and though ashamed of her fears, she was returning, when near the building that had served thera for an abode she saw a man extended on the ground, by the light of a fire tbat had been just kindled, and whose blaze was reflected in his polished pike that be had struck into the earth beside it. Sbe approached to inquire for Connal, the man raised his head, and she disco¬ vered the object of her search. The deep expression of thoughtful woe in his coun¬ tenance as she beheld it banished at first the thoughts with which she had sought him, and she only said, as he silently raised his eyes to her : " Your mind is heavy, dear Connal« with the anticipation of some danger." e 3
<f No, my dear Rosine, danger is al¬ most too near for anticipation, yet I was not thinking of danger : every precaution tbat the human mind, my mind at least, could suggest for the security of this midnight march bm been taken : the «vent is not within the reach even of thought, and the event must be left to that Power who sometimes interferes for the unfortunate : my toils, my struggles, tny blood are for my men, but my thoughts, in this hour of solitude, are ?? own." " Do I intrude then ?° said Rosine, timidly retiring:— " I would not for ■worlds increase the burthen of this heavy hour." ° No, no : the sound of your friendly roiee is refreshing to me; don't go from me, Rosine : I have been a hero all day/' he added with a sad smile. " Let me, for » few moments at least, bea man, or less." As ? spoke, a tear, or something like
it, seemed to fall on his cheek, and Ro¬ sine, terrified at the omen, exclaimed : " Oh, then there must be danger." rf These never fell for danger yet/* eaid Connal, wiping away the drops, while hi? eyes flashed with all their proud lustre once more : " the parting of soul and body could not wring one from me; but, Rosine, to see the first of women following me in this hopeless extremity, divested of all she has been accustomed to, surrounded by every thing she is abhorrent from—to see her thus, and be compelled to smile on her in my despair, this makes me as far below her in resolution this moment as I must for ever be in desert/' Rosine attempted consolation, but her own gloomy apprehensions checked her, and she was silent. " Would to Heaven," said Connal, yielding to the bitterness of his feelings, " she had never beheld mc—better she had been united to Wandcsford, to any je 4
one whose happier lot would have pre¬ served her from the evils of mine ; bet¬ ter than thus to sully the brightness of her mind among desperate men and des¬ perate deeds : why did I ever raise my eyes to her ? selfish, savage, remorseless that I was, to tear those flowers of para¬ dise from their bed, only to see tbem wither beside me on this heath of blood." " And here she would rather wither, here slie would rather die," said Rosine, "than live in palaces with Wandesford." " And she shall not/* cried Connal, starting from the ground, c< she shail not, ifall tbe might tbat ever was in the arm of man, if all the energies of a mortal mind can save her. Forgive me, Ro¬ sine, for my coward despondency ; my mind is wrung with many cares, and I knovv not what I said. Oh, who can despair of the aid of heaven, wben its visible angel, stronger than a host, is ou our side/' At this moment of tenderness Rosine
anxiously urged the appeal which, in the fluctuations of Connals mind, she had almost forgotten ; and she represented the distress of Armida at being yet with¬ out a legal claim to partake his destiny, and she intreated him by their immediate union to relieve her feelings from a bur¬ then which pressed on them more heavily than all the evils that menaced her. Connal paused for a moment, and then he said in a tone of stern decision : " Never, never, Rosine ! never shall it be said by her proud family, or bya false world, that O'Morven stole the daughter of Lord Montelare, and forced her, in an hour of danger and distress, to ac¬ cept the condemned hand of a leader of banditti. I am not worthy of her ; I am an outlaw : in the struggle I am engaged in if I perish, I perish, and the remembrance of roy misfortunes with¬ out my shame will remain to her. But, if by one lion-bound I break through my toils, and scatter those blood-houuds E 5
that beset and bait me now on every side, then, in the face of the world, and in honour, will I woo and wed her, and then, the man who moves but his finger against her does not hold life at a moment's value." Rosine knew it was in vain with Con¬ nal to oppose a resolution derived from feeling high-strained and romantic as it was, and she then besought him at least to visit Armida before their departure, and support her resolution by his pre¬ sence. " And will she admit me ?" said Connal : ^duringthis dreadful day 1 feared nothing but her sight, and though I lay down beneath these walls, I did not dare to enter them." But at Rosine's intreaties he followed her, till at the door of Armida's apart¬ ment, hiding his face with bis hands, he shrunk back, and did not enter till he Iieard Armida's voice inquiring for him.
There was no light in the room : the gleams of a rising moon broke feebly through the dismantled windows : Ar¬ mida, pale, but collected, sat on her humble couch. He rushed in, and clasped her in his arms : there was not a word spoken, Rosine's audible sobs were the only sounds heard for an hour. During that time Connal often pressed his love to his heart, and often tried to whisper conso¬ lation to her, but his words were inar¬ ticulate; though, from the tones of his voice, Armida derived more solace than from the utmost eloquence of pas¬ sion. At length two men entering tbe room announced tbat they were ready to at¬ tend Rosine on her journey. Armina, starting from Connals arms, then clutig round Rosine. " Best and first of friends/' she cried, iu agony, " never, never forget your Armida. Remember that iu a happier
destiny she loved and cherished you. How little did I then think I should need vour compassion, that I should even solicit your prayers ! yet bestow them pn me, Rosine, for you are good and religious, and those that love Hea¬ ven alone Heaven will love." (( The blessing of Heaven," cried the sobbing Rosine, "and mine be ever with yon. Oh ! Armida, in any other situation, no duty, no force should ever, ever have divided us ; and even now a word would make me stay. May the greatness of your heart meet its'recom¬ pense ! Ah ! to me it seems as if no object on earth was at this moment worthy of you. Connal, Connal, what a responsibility is your's !" They wept in silent sorrow on each other's bosoms, till Armida, extending her arms to Connal, exclaimed : " I have now nothing left on earth but you—but I wish for nothing more/* Connal received her in bis arms, and
while with one he held her to his heart, the other, raised to Heaven, attested his solemn appeal : <f And when this fails you, may Hea¬ ven and its hope fail me ! " Rosine, tearing herself from them, turned to her conductors, and she ob¬ served that Connal, with feeling pre¬ caution, had selected men who had for¬ merly been tenants to her uncle, and to whom she was personally known. She trusted herself to them with con¬ fidence, or at least seemed to do so, from compassion to Armida ; and waving her hand, with the faint and temporary tri¬ umph of affection over grief, she broke from them; while her boding heart whispered that she now beheld those whom alone she loved on earth for tbe last time. AVhen Connal believed her at a dis¬ tance, and that Armida's feelings would not be harassed by again beholding ??,
be raised her, and gently, but firmly, led ber from the apartment. It was now midnight : fires were blazing on the heath, and their broad and flaring light was reflected from so many fierce, dark visages, and wild figures, half lost in the obscurity of night, that Armida at first started back from a picture wilder than even her imagination had presented. The men bowed with submission as she approached, and though shuddering at their sight, she tried to assume some self-command, and return their homage by a motion of graceful dignity, which raised their admiration almost to a rude murmur of applause. Connal, who had thrown his arm around her as he supported her tottering steps from the building, removed it when be saw the men, and led her forward with a majestic deference that inspired its own feeling in all who beheld her.
The way thcy had to traverse was im¬ passable to any vehicle : Connal placed her on his horse, and tben motioning to a young man of the most prepossessing ap¬ pearance to attend ber, hurried through the ranks to see if alt was ready. The men were all impatient to begone, and after a few words to support their re¬ solution, the sound of "March" burst from his lips in thunder, and was echoed from rank io rank till the very spirit of it seemed roused to catch and return the sound. The next moment he was at her side, and she now for the first time since her arrival remarked the change in his ap¬ pearance. He had thrown off the Irish dress, and wore a cavalry uniform of green, but still retained the mantle and the braided sandals ofhis former habit: his neck was uncovered, but for the thick curls that sometimes broke from beneath his heavy helmet : his cheek was pale with toil and thought, but his large re-
fulgent eye, gleaming with the mingled lustre of pride and grief, was almost too bright to encounter : and as he approach¬ ed Armida, the regal dignity ofhis figure, mixed with the pride of the avowed leader of a host, filled her with a spirit like his own, and she said to herself. Ah ! no wonder such a man aspires to govern, whom nature herself seems to have marked, like Saul, for empire." The march began, the fires that were every where blazing on fhe mountain shewed distinctly tbe arms and move¬ ments ofthe men wbo were near her, and though there was nothing like tbe regu¬ larity of disciplined troops, either in their weapons or array, yet their stature, strength, and a gloomy resolution that seemed borrowed from their leader, made Armida shudder at the idea of such men being encountered. Far below, tbe great body of the rebel army was iu motion, in dim and tumultuous obscurity, and but when a pike or a standard flashed out iu
the Hght, as the wind waved the broad and spreading volumes of flame down¬ ward on the declivities of the mountain, the whole band seemed like a cloud roll¬ ing from its summit to ifs base. There was no sound but the heavy tramp of numerous feet on the dry heath, and the quick and eager voices that called out to avoid the precipices in their de¬ scent, except when old Cormac, who still marched by Connals side,, under tlie im¬ pulse of enthusiasm, which neither age nor fear could quell, struck a martial chord on his harp, and then sighing at its lonely hollow tones sunk into silence. Connal did not speak, and he even seemed disturbed when the wind waved Armi¬ da's veil, and displayed her figure for a moment to the gaze of the men : his heart swelled witb agony at the thought of the high-born Armida thus being seen by the eyes of rebel peasantry, the pub¬ lic companions of their leader : and he would not speak, lest the sound of her
voice in answer should reach their ears. They had now quitted the mountain, and entered on the moor^ that lay waste and wide at its base : the night was to¬ tally dark, tjie flres on the distant moun¬ tain twinkled like stars, and dreary and inauspicious as their light» Armida beheld their decay with a reluctant eye ; when *he viewed the dim heath before her, and the figures that passing over it seemed like a shadowy host on the confínes of the world of darkness. The silence, the darkness, and the mid¬ night march of thie invisible army, which »he felt around her on every eide, with¬ out being able to distinguish them, filled her with a kind of visionary dejection; and almost appalled ather situation, shesaid:-» 41 This is not like the march of an army» Can the Fpirits of these men bc sustained without music, or any of the pride and circumstance of war: to me they appear Jike spirits moving to the land where all things are forgotten.".
" The burthen of their cause sit» heavy on tbem," said Connal, with deep and agitated feeiing. " If they were victorious this moment, what would vic¬ tory bring to rebels ?—the desolation of their native land, the curses of their countrymen. Ah ! it is a different tbing to march to battle with the imagined shouts of posterity ringing in your ears, and to go forward with danger urging you behind, and infamy shrouding your prospects. No, let the trumpet sound for soldiers : rebels march with a baiter round their necks." " Why did you leave your mountain retreat," said Armida, struck with these gloomy words, " if you march only to destruction? There we were safe." I could not hazard an engagement,'* said Connal : " flight alone remained to us : and wby should I conceal the truth, you were the cause of tbat fiight, or in our wild mountain fortress we would
have stood or fallen, till none remained, either to beg for tbe mercy, or to swell the triumph of our enemies." " And was I the cause of your re¬ moval ?*' said Armida, agitated alike by his tenderness and his gloom. " Theu my presence has increased your sufierings and your dangers. Ah ! shall we ever reach the isles in safety ?" " Wc will, my love, we will : had dan¬ ger been on tbe way, we should have met it already : all the loose and straggling adventurers of our band, with the womeu and children, set forward this morning ; for if left behind I knew they would never overtake, and had the enemy been near, the report would already have reached us through them." The dreadful thought that they had per¬ haps perished and could now neither warn nor join their friends crossed Armida's - mind, but she gave it no utterance, and her own increasing danger banished all
visionary fears, for they had now entered on a morass, through which but one narrow track led, and those who missed it were immersed to their knees; and their clamours and struggles, increased by the darkness ofthe night, and mixed with the cries of many «who sunk to rise no more, filled Armida vvith horror. Connal, again compelled to quit her, consigned her to the care of the young man, whom he called Brennan, and hur¬ ried among his band, where his voice and presence, operating with his orders, produced instant tranquillity, and the suf¬ ferers struggled on without a murmur when thev beheld their chief on foot, ex- posed to the same difficulties with the meanest of them, by his personal strength rescuing many, and by his patience sup¬ porting alt. On his return to Armida he felt with his hands for the track, and then lifting her off the horse, and giving tbe reins to Brennan, bore her along in his arms ; but the moment he
withdrew the tumult was renewed, and some of the men coming up, complained loudly of the difficulties of the way, and proposed that the band should remain where they were till the morning broke. * ' Fool ! " said Connal, " go back and tell them that O'Morven gives orders, but docs not receive them. " The men retired, but in a short time returned, declaring that it was impossible for the men to continue their march through a track where they sunk up to tiieir ankles at every «tep. Connal made no answer, but stooping down he unbraced his sandals, and threw them at a distance from him. " Go," said he, raising his proud figure, " go and tell the cowards that seni you that you «aw O'Morven march barefoot on the ground they are afraid of." Themen retired in silence, and in a few moments a loud shout of applause tes¬ tified their confidence in their leader, and they moved patiently onward.
After a march of four hours, the morning breaking faintly, shewed about a mile off the faint grey outlines of the mountain, the first of a chain, beyond which lay the shores of the Atlantic: a loud and joyful shout burst from tbe rebels when they beheld it, and thir sound, savage and terrific as it was, re¬ stored the spirits of Armida, and already she imagined herself in the safe obscurity ofthe islands. "As they advanced, Connal drawing aside Brennan, pointed out to him some object on the brow of the mountain. " It is only the mist of the morning," said Brennan ; " it is dispersing already ; I see ? moving down the side of the mountain." Connal then shewed it to another, who also affirmed it to be a cloud. " It is a cloud," said Connal, fixing is eye on it, " tliat will burst in thunder *rc long." Às the light grew stronger, they cotild
discern a multitude of people descending from the mountain, with speed and terror in their motions, and they soon recog¬ nized them to be their companions, who had preceded them in their march the day before : appalled at the sight, the re¬ bels stopt in confusion, but Connal know¬ ing their present situation was the worst they could encounter danger in, urged them forward, and tbe first fugitives soon reached them with outcries of ter¬ ror, which Connal could not silence til] they had spread consternation througii every'heart but his own. Tbey de scribed their sufferings in passing tlu morass the preceding day, the number! that had perished, and the numbers tha were perishing on the mountain fron fatigue and want of food ; and they added that when dispirited and exhausted the* reached the mountain, they learned tha a numerous body of soldiers were sta tioned there, to intercept and drive then back on another party, who. by thi
time were in possession of the canip. Connal listened without a sign of dismay, and inquired if they had seen any of the soldiers whotn they fled from ; all denied they had, except one man, who persisted in saying he had seen them march along the ridge of an opposite mountain. Connal, in the hope that this was but the creation of fear, immediately ordered his men to march up the mountain, as he knew that any eminence they might gain would be a better point of resistance, even if an enemy were to meet them. Tbe straggling and unarmed peasantry, with the women and children who had composed the first party, were then thrown into the rear, and tbey began to ascend the mountain. The few huts on it had been deserted by the inhabitants the night before, on the arrival of the former party of rebels, and they met with no one who could tell them whether safety or danger awaited there progress. Half way up the ascent there was awide vol. in. f
and level heath, and here, while they baited to recover breath and to recon¬ noitre, a body of military appeared sud¬ denly emerging from a heathy rock that bounded it, and forming themselves ra¬ pidly into a line on ifs summit. All doubt was now over : an engage¬ ment was inevitable, and Connal, drawing up bis exhausted and scattered ranks into what order he could, prepared for it ; but first, with an agonized heart, he looked round to see what shelter the heath afforded for Armida. There was a cottage at some distance, constructed like most of those on the Galway moun¬ tains, of sods propped by the aid of the large mountain-stones that formed its only substantial wall : tbere he desired Bren* nan to conduct her, and the wretched women, whose fathers, brothers, and hus¬ bands were about to be engaged, feeling something like protection from her pre¬ sence, crowded round her. The horror of her situation had taken from her all
power of reflection or resistance; she would have staid with Connal, but she tried in vain to collect the former energies of her mind in this hour, and the ghastly smile with which she tried to illuminate her features spoke despair, not reso¬ lution. When fhey reached the cottage, she sunk on the ground, and as Brennan hurried back to the field, with locked Iiands and breathless agony of expression, ??? seemed to utter some request for which speech was denied her. Brennan broke from her, and the women, forget¬ ting their own sufferings in the distress of one to whom they looked as to some superior being, gathered round her with Unavailing consolation. Yet she tried to answer them with movements tbat expressed gratitude, till the tremendous sound of the firing pro¬ ducing a universal cry of horror among her companions, stunned every sense, and clasping her hands closely round her 4
bead, she tried if possible fo shut them out " but the sounds that her imagination suggested were still more horrible, and she fried to catch amid fhe actual sounds some that intimated comfort. The cottage was crowded wifh women who were all bewailing with Irish voci¬ feration the danger of their relatives, but their complaints were unintelligible to her, till a tall, pale, thin figure, wrapped in a long mantle, stalked into the hut, and sat down by Armida, repeating in inward and heart-broken tones, " My murdered jewel !" and thisexclamation in¬ cessantly and monotonously repeated with¬ out any change of word or accent struck on Armida's heart more painfully than ¿11 ftie cries of horror and grief uttered by the rest. " My murdered jewel ! look at him í " she continued, and opening her mantle, saw a boy of three years old dying in her arms. The women, who had still some com
passion for Armida, gathered round to prevent her seeing the dying agonies of the child. " Let her look at him," said the wo¬ man, " she will think Httle of her own grief when she sees mine." "What can be done for him?" said Armida : " what is he dying of ?" " Hunger/' said the mother, raising her eyes, and fixing them with a ghastly look on Armida. " Hunger ! and so am I, but I don'l feel it; there are many as bad as her," said one of the women. " There is none as bad as me," re¬ peated the sufferer, " for this was all I had left. I lost my father and my two brothers, and no one heard me raise my voice. The father of this child dropt down before me, yet still I went on with the men, but now I can go on no longer· Oh, God!" she cried, with a sudden shriek of agony, "I wouldsellbimtoany of
the soldiers that would give a morsel of food." At that moment the child, in a dying convulsion, caught hold of a part of Ar¬ mida's habit. " He is alive again !" said the mother, " he's playing, see be's playing with her," The child carried it to his mouth, and attempted to gnaw it, " Merciful Heaven ! is there no food ? is there nothing to save its life?" cried Armida. The child, attracted by the sound of her voice, feebb stretched out his arhis to her. The women about her would have dissuaded her from taking it. 41 Ah ! " said she, " every thing unfor¬ tunate seems to know, and cling to me :" and again she inquired were there no means of preserving it. And this salu¬ tary exertion of humanity saved her some moments of reflection on her own misery. One ofthe women said there was milk in
a cabin at søme distance, but no one would venture out for fear of meeting the men. " I will go," said Annida: " if they are men, I have nothing tø lear from them." " Angel of glory ! will you go ?" said the woman, holding her with a delirious laugh. The woman endeavoured to prevent her, but Armida, whose courage was wound by horror to a pitch above nature, quitted the hut with the chiid in her arms. Not an individual of either party was visible through the cloud of smoke that covered the heath, and which was only broke for a moment by the gleaming of the rebels' pike», and this preserved her courage. At a Httle distance there was a hut, ¡nto which, hardly now knowing for what, she entered, A wounded roan was stretched on the ground; he had been left by his companions, aad was trying F 4
to reach a drink they had placed near him. Armida, kneeling beside him, in- treated for a Httle. " Take it," said fhe dying man, who thought she was petitioning for herself; " it may do you good, it can do me none—I am gone." " It is for this infant," said Armida. "God bless you ! God bless you!'* said fhe rebel, " that can think of a poor child af such a time as this :" then slowly raising his glazed and sunken eyes to her face, he recognized her, and uttered a groan. " Oh ! King of Heaven I—is it you ? is there no better place than this hovel for you now ?" " Oh Ì talk not of me," said Armida : " how is O'Morven ? is he wounded ? is hein danger ?" "O'Morven," said the man, whose senses were departing : " O'Morven, 1 can fight for you no more ! you have had he lives of my three brave boys; and
now you have mine—and I can give yoa no more." His eyes closed, and though his lips moved, it was with the convulsions of death. A momentary trance saved Armida the horror of seeing his last struggles. When she recovered, she was unconscious of her situation, but she felt that if she staid beside the dead body her reason would soon forsake her, and she tried to rise from the ground. Her little charge was too at rest ; the effort it had made to swallow the nourish¬ ment had put an end to its pangs, and the infant and the warrior lay silently toge¬ ther. She had a vague idea that she would disturb their ????, and she glided from the hut with the Hght step of mad¬ ness, and wandered over the heath with¬ out thinking of returning to the cottage. The whole scene of war was now before her : the firing had ceased. Connal, on leading his mento meet the enemy, discovered that they were ?? an 9 5
eminence, and between thern lay a deep and narrow glen, through which àmoun- i ni n efrpam ran at r neredi no* wifh the stones that were scattered on its bed. He led bis men along the ridge ofthe glen, in the vain hope of discovering some place where they were less exposed to the assault of the enemy, or had a chance of compelling them to an immediate engagement. But in the mean time, the close and well-di¬ rected fire of the soldiers thinned his ranks at every step, while they, only armed with pikes, possessing but few muskets, and ill acquainted with the use of those, were little more than an unre¬ sisting mark for the fire of the disciplined troops. Cbnnal saw bis best and bravest men fall on every side, without eitlier resist¬ ance or defence, and who now felt it impossible,to retreat, as tbe other party were already in sight at the extremity of the heath, conceived and executed in a moment one of those desperate
ideas which great minds seem to have the privilege of extracting safety from, Hedid not communicate it to a being near him, not even to Brennan - r whose resolution and courage he hau die highest senti¬ ments; he trusted alone for its effect to the force of action, and throwing himself from his horse, with bis sword alone in his hand, rushed into the chasm, and wading knee-deep through the water, began to ascend the opposite side, with a hundred balls whistling round his head. The boldest of his men stood ap¬ palled at this desperate step, and except Brennan not one dared to follow him, till they saw him engaged hand to hand, grappling for Hfe with a serjeant, a man of gigantic strength and stature, who had rushed from the ranks in the hope of dashing him down the precipice: then, with one dreadful shout, the wholeparty plunged into the glen, aud for a moment it appeared to Armida as if the earth had swallowed them up. Wading, climbing,
hanging to the rocks with one hand and brandishing their pikes with the other, multitudes falling or hurled down, still multitudes struggled up the precipitous side of the glen : their extended pikes now repelled their assailants, whose fire passed over their heads. Connal, after dashing his antagonist down the rocks, was the fir«t to reach the summit. The contest was now fierce and dreadful beyond all example of ordinary conflicts; it was a struggle for life, manto roan, and hand to hand, decided by mere personal strength and courage,almost with¬ out weapons : they fought with hand, foot, and head, grappling each other's throats, and feeling thai if even an inch of ground was lost, Hfe was gone. Bodily strength and mere despair at length obtained the victory. The ghastly wounds and resistless thrust of the pikes in this close engage¬ ment broke the ranks of the infantry, and the rebels, after a tremendous contest, remained masters of the field. The in-
fautry ware supported by a strong party of cavalry, whose object was after the ????? were broken by the discharge of musketry to charge aniong them, and do their usual execution with the sword, Connal perceived them approaching, and remembering the event of the engage¬ ment in 119S, in which the Lords O'Neil and Mouutjoy fell, drew up his wounded and scattered ranks in as close order as the broken ground admitted, and received the charge upon tbeir extended pikes : these the cavalry, after every effort of skill and courage was exhausted, found it i ie possible to penetrate, and at length retired. The party who were advancing on the opposite side of the heath saw the for¬ tune of the day, and after hovering some time in a hostile attitude on the field, retreated also. Connal and his men, gasping from a struggle for Hfe, almost distrusting the evidence of their eyes, looked round the heath, and saw not an
enemy remaining. Armida, from an emi¬ nence, beheld all this : inthe general and wide-raging horror ofthe scene she had lost all discrimination ; she heard the firing without shrinking, and saw wounds and death without feeling ready to die herself at the sight. İler crushed and close-drawn heart had room but for one thought—the event—the dreadful event; life or death : she was scarce conscious of drawing a breath till the wild but animating shouts ofthe rebels announced their victory. Connal, the moment he was secure of it, rushed through the glen again, and mounting his horse, galloped over the heath in quest of her. The cottage where he had left her was filled with the wounded, and he felt fear for the first time that day when he found she was not there. She saw him first, but in a moment he was at her feet ; and all war- stained, darkened, and toil-worn as he was, lie appeared more than human : the
flush of passion, the pride of victory, the concentrated lustre of the warrior and the lover, of every soft and sublime emo¬ tion that irradiate—humanity made her think herself with all her sacrifices un¬ worthy such a being. "Are you alive?" he cried; "have you your reason amid the horror I have plunged you into ?" " Ah !" cried Armida, astonished to behold the man trembling at her feet who a moment past was dealing and en¬ countering death at every step, " is it possible amid such scenes you ean thiuk of me?" " Think of you !" he cried, straining her to his heart : " if there was energy in my thoughts, if there was force in my arm to-day, it was only when I thought of you." Brennan and some of the principal rebels then came up with tfie intelligence that their scouts had discovered the route of the defeated army: they had traced
them to a course opposite to that which fhe rebels intended to pursue, whose passage to the sea was now unobstructed ; and there was a village at the distance of about a mile where they might halt and procure refreshments on their march. A short council was then held, and Connal, struggling with a wish to allow Armida a short respite, and the convic¬ tion that it was necessary for his men immediately to reach the shore, did not himself venture to speak, while his elo¬ quent eyes turned on her spoke all the soHcitude ofhis heart. Tha rebels, after a shorô debate, deter- mineato pass that day in the village ; if food was to be found there, to leave a number of their party to attend their sick and wounded in the cottages scat* tered on the heath, and pursue their march towards the shore at tbe close of night. They then set forward, and Ar¬ mida, when she saw Connal panting from. the recent fight, snd bleeding with un^
hound wounds, march by her side with firm step, and eyes illuminated with tenderness, almost felt it a crime to be conscious of either weakness or terror. Their journey was protracted by Connals taking a remote route that he might spare Armida the dreadful sight of the field strewn with the dead and the dying; and they did not reach the village till evening. The people at fir^t fled at their ap¬ proach, and the few who were left in the cottages received them as men who came to murder and to spoil, for the neighbourhood was remarkable for loy¬ alty, and had raised for the protection of the country a corps of yeoman cavalry, from whose vigilance the rebels had often suffered iu their excursions: they were prepared for the worst therefore, when they heard that the military were de¬ feated, and the rebels on their march to* wards them : and Connal, who knew from the sanguinary spirit of outlaws flushed
with unexpected victory, that their fears were but too just, was compelled to exert all that personal force and awe which is the substitute for discipline among such a band, to check their ag¬ gressions. While every limb reeked with toil, and smarted with wounds, neglectful of refreshment or rest, he rode from house to house to appease the terrors and protect the property of the inmates, and save them not only from violence but from insult. Provisions were liberally supplied, and Connal, intent only on the wants of his men, forgot his own, till all he could procure to satisfy thera was bread and water—of these he was par¬ taking, stretched on the ground, when Brennan came up. " Is tbis your food, captain ?" " It is/' said Connal, smiling. " The meanest man in the army would have thought it hard fare after such a day," said Brennan. i f And I should blush/' said ConrraJ,
" if the meanest man in my army could bear privations better tban his leader." "Ah! captain, you are fit to command better men, and in a better cause." " I might have been," said Connal, mentally, and a tear started in his eye, but he turned from his companion as he wiped it away. The march was renewed at niffht: their course again lay over the trackless moor and ihe barren mountain, and though the wildness of the scenery at times dismayed Armida, yet its deep solitude, flattering tbe mind with the image of impenetrable security, soothed and appeased her. It was about mid¬ night, that after winding down the side of a mountain, they suddenly plunged into a glen, whose depth, and darkness, and hollow echoes, made them feel as if tiieir progress was checked by an im¬ mersion into a vault. The beetling rocks that seemed to meet above their heads ; the moonlight faintly tinting their crags.,
and sometimes darting through a rift a gleam that chequered the glen ; the red, hoarse stream tbat raved through it, broken and tormented by masses of stone that seemed to have tumbled from the precipices above, filled even the rudest mind there with reluctant awe. As they advanced, Armida cast her eyes upwards ; the arching precipices above scarce gave room for the twinkling of a single star, and the numerous trampling of so mauy feet, compressed and deepened in their passage through the chasm, seemed to her like the roar of distant cannon. The horrors of that morning rushed on her imagination ; her heart sickened with fear, and she forbore to express it only because she knew the heart of Connal beat still stronger than her own with ap¬ prehension for her safety ; even he felt the thrill of the place, and though wrapt iu meditation, spoke merely to disperse the silence. Armida answered that she might not appear insensible of his kindness, but
her fears rendered her almost unconsci¬ ous of what she was saying. After a few broken sentences uttered at random by each, they relapsed into silence: Connal then forcing himself to speak, mentioned something abruptly of the skirmish that morning. " Good heaven !" cried Armida, start¬ ing at the name ; " do you call that dreadful conflict a skirmish ?" "Ah!" said Connal, the tear trem¬ bling in his eye, " I beg in vain to fami¬ liarize you to what my own mind revolts from? Pardon me, my love; it was a bloody day, but you are safe/' As he spoke, they suddenly emerged from the chasm, and the ocean and its moonlight shores burst on their view. The rebels uttered a wild and tremen¬ dous shout of joy as the hope of safety appeared, and this sound, rising on the perfect stillness of night, and the solitude of nature, was the most awful Armida had ever heard. They paused for a
moment, uncertain of the direction thev were to take, till tbe guides advanced. " Wbat a night!" exclaimed Connal ; " the spirit scarce seems to move on the surface ofthe waters." "Ah!" said Armida, viewing the blue, deep concave, " I never beheld such a sky without imagining there was io its bosom some place of rest for me, some elysium isle in that ocean of light; far and deep, where the souls ofthe hap¬ py watted to receive me/' " This is the last time I shall traverse these shores then," said Connal, gazing round him : " It is the last time I shall 'tread this ground, and say this is my native land; and I have wandered here free as the winds, without a crime and without a care. I would not have believed a prophet that had told mc that I should tread them what I am now," " But tbere are other lands, and climates more bright and benign," said Armida, whose imagination already was
in Italy : " in that land of the sun where I passed my youth, the land of flowers and harmony, where rivers, whose mur¬ mur is music, flow through her garden- plains, there alone can we be happy." " I never can be happy out of Ireland/' cried Connal: "I love her grey and showery sky; I love her gloom: it is native to me : her misty heath, her bleak shore, the sullen song of her storms, and her caves, and her ocean, are in unison with the chords of my soul. The glare of Italy is an insult to the exile : it reflects no image of the country his aching eyes are strained to recall/* Armida trembled at the difference of their characters, and at the little hope she had of entire iufluence over a mind so national, yet she could not resign her own sentiments, and she ventured to say: " A country that excites no recollec¬ tions can have no power over the mind, but from its weakness : the tomb of
Achilles inspired Alexander with the con¬ quest of the east, and amid the ruins of Rome Gibbon conceived the idea of the history of its falling empire." " And I too have recollections," ex¬ claimed Connal : " on tbis spot my ancestors were princes, and tiieir de¬ scendant has not where to lay his head." The boat that conveyed them to the isle glided rapidly along a calm and moonlight sea: the air was fresh, the night heavenly ; and Armida contrasting her present situation with the horror and danger of the morning, would have dis¬ solved into visions of hope, but for the inquietude of Connal: leaning far over the stern, he fixed his eyes on the shore they were quitting. " Farewel, my country: he who is banished from you would resign for an acre of that barren rock the fairest pos¬ sessions of earth : he would shed his heart's best blood for the meanest ofyour children.—Oh ! that his lot had been to
have died for you rather than have fought against you/* "Ah!" said Armida, mentally, "his country was his first love, and from iuch a heart its early impressions never can be effaced : his country will also be hii last." She did not speak, but by the light of the moon Connal saw the tear that trembled in her eye. " Armida, there are moments when I could almost plunge a sword into my heart to give relief to its intolerable swellings : love, grief, and disdain of my fate, are tearing it to pieces. Alas ! amid all my crimes, spare me at least that of causing you a tear ; my misfor¬ tunes may sometimei wring one from you, but from this moment my passions shall be as hushed before you as this calm aud blessed night."
vol. ai.
e
Fragments of Armida's letters to Rosine, during her stai/ in the isles. " My past existence has often appear¬ ed Hke a dream to me, but my present one still more resembles it : I am not visionary ; real sufferings have rather diminished my imagination ; yet there are many moments in the day when I find it hard to credit my own existence. Con¬ nal ¿? gone, and I have lived three months in an island in the Atlantic, with one female servant, whose solitary figure makes no more impression on roe than the rocks I see from my but. " He is gone on a wild bope ; but to the desperate, only desperate things can give hope. He was informed that a per¬ son ofthe first consequence had expressed the highestadmiration ofhis character, and declared he would personally undertake to procure his and his followers' pardons, if he would come to Dublin aud throw
himself on the mercy of governmtnt. He went, deriving a hope from the great¬ ness of his own mind,which I fear that of no other will j ustify. The rebels are dis¬ persed through the isles, I believe un¬ molested by any attacks, as their enemies probably wait till the severity of winter compels them to visit the shore; but pf the living world I know nothing." * * * * * * * * " I have uo hope of hearing from you, and little of these Hues ever reaching you ; yet I write all day, for my thoughts flow calmly in the deep silence around me, and to write fo you is no interrup¬ tion of that quiet indolence that I feel invading every faculty. " How breathless is the solitude on . every side ; nature seems to haye formed it on the sabbath after the creation ; the winds and waters are all that remind me of existence, and even they seem only like tbe echo of the similar sounds inthe living world : this apparent extremity of Cr ?
the creation seems like the extremity of life ; they who have reached it appear to feel as if death was past, and there was nothing more to do or to suffer. " On the eastern side of the island, the rock rising nearly an hundred perpendi¬ cular feet, is hollowed into a spacious bay : the sands are dry for a quarter of a mile up to my habitation, on a smooth ascent in its very centre : the projections of the rocks at each extremity shut out every thing from my view but the sea ; I some¬ times hear its waves, but their sound is deep and soothing, "Of what avail are my talents here·— of what avail would the most splendid talents on earth be here—here is neither emulation or praise, neither admirer nor listener : if I spoke the language of my former character I could not even be understood. Deatb, tbat deprives us of the benefit of its lessons, by taking away the opportunity of their exercise, cannot give us iuch a lesson of self-knowledge
as this deep solitude can give. Here the soul feels the difference between her na¬ tural and artificial demand·: crowds., flattery, splendour, all are gone, and I would not give a single sigh to recall them : but what should I be, if deprived of the image of Connal. " My rnind receives that image as the smooth ocean before me does that of the moon: nothing agitates the surface, nothing interrupts the brightness, and my heart cannot admit another sentiment, but that which penetrates all its recesse», which occupies all its energies. " In my solitary retreat Connal visited me every day, and the sound of his oars was the only measure of day or night. He never spoke to me of his present dan¬ gers, or future fears: the hour was de¬ voted to passion, though the name of iove was never on his lips—I saw him safe, and what had I more to ask : I was jea* lous ofthe felicity ofthat hour ; I dreaded to disturb it by a question tbat might have g2
torn the veil his presence always threw over ray imagination. I could observe on his approach the influence bis fierce associates, and the daily struggles of ais outlaw's life, were producing on him. When he arrived, his eye flashed, his step was a march, and his curled and thrilling Hp seemed just to bave uttered tbe sounds of command: but while he staid, he gra¬ dually softened, fill eyen I dreaded that my influence might be opposing his des¬ tiny, and unfitting him for the struggles to which it summoned him. " Once I exerted the remains of my ta¬ lents for him, I even took some pains to arrange my long dishevelled hair, lest he should think I neglected any thing oi which he was fhe possessor ; but theie efforts appeared to torture his sensibility more than the most hopeless negligence. When he heard me sing, and saw my hair arranged as it had formerly been, the tears trembled in his eyes, his voice was broken with agony : ( Ah, God !'hc cried,
* were those tones modulated to the echoes of these barren rocks ; were those ringlets formed to stream on this rude blast ; are those songs to be wasted on the ear of a rebel ! ' He rushed from me, and wandered alone ou the rocks till be was calm : after that evening I received him with smiles, but without effolt. Passion has destroyed my ambition to please. I think too much of him to think of myself: a common attachment excites our vanity, a great one destroys it—the planet that is nearest the sun is absorbed in its light." * * * * % ast 3t "What vicissitudes have I undergone ! my mind can scarcely comprehend, though roy life has contained them, and will per¬ haps more. Have I ever, amid all those vicissitudes, known happiness? Yes. I know it now. Whiie I was sur- rounded by every gift of nature and for¬ tune, I was tortured by a restless aspira¬ tion after some unknown object of feli¬ city: now, attended by every privation, ? 4
ï feel a source of internal enjoyment springing up within my heart Hke a foun¬ tain of life, and giving a vernal freshness to ifs hopes and desires : formerly, amid luxury and pomp, life hung heavy on my spirits ; it seemed too long to me in early youth : now I dread that Hfe will be too short, that 5ome disaster will tear from me the opportunity of expressing a pas¬ sion for which eternity seems only com¬ mensurate: the first, the noblest of hu¬ man hearts is mine; and had I been taught in my earlier days to pray, hourly would I pray fhat I might be worthy of him ia the trials to which destiny has called liim/ ******* " Rosine, I recall my former words : do I talk of happiness, while his life is hourly at stake: the purer human felicity ap¬ pears the more exquisite its precarious- Bess, the greater its danger: is it a proof of the vengeance or the mercy of heaven tbat our happiness should be thus so woven with misery, that the alternate
shades can scarce be distinguished? I know not whether I most love or fear ; yet sometimes so mingled are my emoti¬ ons, that the fear is delightful, and the love a torment. Rosine, I will avow the secret that at this moment weighs on my heart: tbe languor that oppresses me I yield to, because I think it prevents me from penetrating into the terrors of my fate." " In my present awful situation, suspend¬ ed between life and death, and ooly await¬ ing intelligence from Connal to know whether the hut in which I am writing is to be my prison or my grave, you may wonder tbat personal danger does not alone occupy my thoughts. I do not think ofit—the past has been aU suffer¬ ing—the future is inscrutable. Wby should I exhaust my remaining strength in penetrating that which human wisdom can never pierce : the future is alike in¬ scrutable to all—to all alike it is proba¬ ti 5
?? pregnant withevil. A storm of mis¬ fortune may to-night blast those who are at ease in their possessions, who as little thought of evil awaiting them as the proud daughter of Lord Montelare : thus I try to harden myself, and the effort sometimes succeeds." ******** "Often I think that such are his talents and virtues, that their weight will drag down the scale against a country's force and wrongs, and heaven, even by a mira¬ cle, will justify its favourite on earth: but much oftener a feel a boding, an inward and unuttered prophecy of a heart inspired by grief, that murmurs talent and virtue are in vain, and heaven has determined mankind shall receive the example ofhis sufferings, not his virtues." " This dejection which I sufier at times lias nothing terrible in it : wbat we suffer for love always possesses a charm : the martyr of passion, Hke that of religion, cau smile at bis own sacrifice»
"lam sometimes astonished at my own ¿crenity, and at the strength of constitu¬ tion 1 have attained, amid habits so oppo¬ site to my former life : but why should I uot be tranquil ? I have around and within mc every image of peace and security. Heaven, the ocean, the moon, and the image of Connal : even death, accompa¬ nied by such images, loses his terrors; he seems like one who promises me to con¬ duct a wanderer to friends, from whom a mist divides her, and whom she will lose no nore. Strange magic of passion, that can convert this ghastly spectre into a benignant vision ! but a soul like mine, devoured with love, regards death with out consternation ; death alone can give it that promise of perfect and perennial security which Hfe denies, and of whicli tbe want makes life more terrible than death to the souls of those who love/' ******** " I have wandered for hours to-night on the shore ; I who shrunk from this
climate when I visited it first« What ? night ! not a ripple on tlie waves, not α breeze on the shore, not a cloud in the heaven. The rocks, tinted by the bright moon, rose like a wall of silver round me, and gave all the security, without the terrors, of an enchanted habitation. I traced the steps of Connal on the very spot where we wandered the night be¬ fore his departure : neither of us spoke. To the world we would have appeared like two indifferent persons, but never were our hearts so full of each other. Divine and intuitive communication t it is thus spirits perhaps converse in heaven, and passion even here can give us the image of their purity, their dignity, and their abstraction." " I would wander still, but my com¬ panion is chilled and weary. Perhaps this strength of constitution is accorded me to meet some trial that approaches, and will demand it. " ?1?? ! I have already felt the differ-
ence between cultivation and strength of mind. The former is the gift of luxury, the latter of misfortune. The former I possessed before I knew him, but the latter can only be learned in its highest elevation by being the companion of Con¬ nal. It must be midnight now by the stars. Farewel, Rosine ! the daughter of Lord Montelare is retiring to her bed of rushes, happier than when silken curtains shaded her repose in palaces." ** * * * *»'** But Armida had a source of inquietude which she had no means of making known to Rodine. Since Connal's absence, Bren¬ nan had been employed to bring provision to her retreat ; and his visits had latterly become so frequent, that if was obvious this was but an excuse for them. This young man, possessing the courage of an Irishman, and manners above his rank, had still more recommended himself to Connal by advantages of education,
which none of his associates possessed, He was the nephew ofa priest, who had given him all tbe learning that could bc procured in a remote country ; but his education, by extending his resources, had only increased his vices, while it euabled him to conceal them. Ambitious, bloody, and revengeful, he hated Connal, to whom he appeared devoted, and only watched for the moment when either as¬ sassination or revolt would remove the only obstruction to his assuming the command ofthe rebels himself. But from the moment he bebeld Armida, all his passions had been concen¬ tred into one: and hatred for Connal, and a daring love for Armida, felt like the same sensation in his breast. During his frequent visits, Armida felt his superiority to the men whom she had seen with Connal; she even con¬ descended to converse with him when he spoke of Conual, and felt some
pleasure in the presence of an intelligent man who appeared attached to the object of her devotion. Once she thought as she gave him a letter for Rosine that he pressed the hand she held out to him ; but her pride and her indifference made her insensible to his looks, and when he was gone tbe image that for ever occupied her heart left it no room to dwell on him. A few days after, as'she was thanking him for some trifling attention, he sud¬ denlv seized her hand and kissed it : astonished and incensed, Armida, who ascribed this insult to intoxication, turned from hiin without even deigning to ex¬ press her resentment. The next day, when he again visited the isle, she expected to have seen him humbled, and prepared to deprecate her anger ; but on the contrary, he appeared before her without confusion, and gazed on her with looks that seemed to have derived boldness from his late offence. He spoke frequently to the woman., «nd
tried every topic that he thought might extort a word from Armida; but she never opened her Hps, or raised her eyes from the ground during his stay ; and this silence, which would have awed a less presumptuous man, by wounding his pride, only inflamed his passions the more. She passed most of her evenings wan¬ dering on the shore, and the beauty and calmness of that night had detained her till the moon sunk behind the rocks : she was turning to her solitary retreat, when a shadow appeared to cross her path; she started, and it retired; but tbe next moment advanced again, and she discovered it was Brennan. He stopt and implored her to listen to him, but the tone in wbich be spoke proved that he was determined not u> be refused. Trem¬ bling with fear and indignation, Armida attempted to pass him, but he now actu¬ ally detained her, and feeling his power too much either to defy or reproach him, ihe stood with averted ^yes, and roflexi-
?? silent. But neither her silence nor her look now deterred Brennan from the most frantic expressions of passion, not without intimations of her desolate situa· tion, and of Connal 's absence. Conscious that this was too true, Armida struggled with her pride, anger, and disgust, and though almost convulsed with the effort, she attempted to speak to him, but the swelling of her proud heart denied her utterance, and again she tried to break from him in silence. " I see my presence is horrible to you/' said Brennan, indignantly,without retiring. " The presence of a friend of O'Mor¬ ven ought to have no terror for me," said Armida, forcing herself to speak, though her flesh quivered with rage and horror at the thought ofsuch a parley. But alt her feelings were lost in terror, when Brennan, stamping with the fury and imprecations of a demon, swore he was Connal 's lutter and eternal enemy. Ter¬ rified atthis menace,she humbled herself eveu to iutrcat him to be calm.
" Tell me not of calmness," cried the unhappy wretch, "can a madman be calm ? can one who has suspended life, reason, every thing on a single trial, be calm while the cause is pleading ? I love, I am guilty, I ara frantic, do not exaspe¬ rate me, do not plunge mc deeper in crimes ; you will destroy us both ; smile on me, ufter one kind word, and you will save me from perdition," " Wretch !" cried Armida, unable to repress her passion, " go offer to your mates the passion with which you dare to prophane the ear of the daughter of Lord Montelare." " Ah ! ah ! ah V' cried Brennan^ burstinginto a horrid laugh; and retreat¬ ing to some distance, he viewed her with the most savage contempt—" The daugh¬ ter of Lord Montelare ! Are you in your father's castle again, with all the world at your feet flattering you ? Brennan was a po»«· labourer then, that hardly dared to raise his eyes to you as you passed ; yet even then 1 darsd to love you, and
now I dare to tell you so : What should binder me ? What are you now ? the wandering companion ofa rebel, a vaga¬ bond, a felon. The wretched women that follow the band are not so fallen as you, for they follow husbands and chil¬ dren from duty; you followed a stranger from passion : and is it you that frown on me; you, whose character is gone, who have renounced society, forsaken your friends, forfeited your rank ? Your prond father, if he could speak from his grave, vvould disclaim you ; you would be abandoned alike by the living and the dead." " Oh, Connal ! Connal !" cried Armida, while the burning tears of passion, iu spite of all her pride, burst forth, "vvhat can gou give to compensate for this moment ?" The wretched victim of hh passions beheld her tears, and disarmed, in a moment he knelt at her feet, implored her pardon, wept with the passion of a child, but still mingled a kind of im-
passioned ferocity with his humiliation that proved the violence and mutability of his agitated character. Armida, un¬ able to speak, indignantly waved him to begone. Brennan rose from his knee», and slowly and sullenly retired. " You give me no hope then," said he, in a hollow voice : " you renounce me, you force me to -—oh, God, what will you makerne! Take care, for God's sake, for your own sake, I implore you for the last time : you do not know what you are doing." " Begone!" replied Armida, "death can have no sufferings Hke tbis degra¬ dation." " Do you know whom you tempt?" said he, advancing, and furiously grasp¬ ing her arm : " do you know whom you tempt ?—-a devil, a very devil, one who would rather bear you to hell with him than see you in heaven with O'Morven." " Ah, wretch Í" cried Armida, shriek¬ ing with horror, " release me, and cease
your horrible imprecations." But her terror only increased his fury, and kneel¬ ing on the ground, he poured out the most dreadful curves against Connal, and against himself, if he failed in his pur- posée of vengeance against him. " Oh!" said Armida, whose courage rose at his very name : " oh ! that he were near you, those words would be your last." Brennan started from the ground at this threat, and the pride of conscious courage, exalted by his passions, gave his figure for a moment an air of diabo¬ lical greatness, " And do you think/' he cried, (f I do not knovv my danger ? Oh ! I know itali. The man that injures O'Morven has no liope of lifc, but the man who has been spurned by you has no wish to live." He tben rushed from her, and Armida, though almost frantic with terror, tried to reach her habitation ; but a moment after she saw him pursuing her. He did
not approach near, but she could distin- guish his menacing attitude, as he cried— (t I do not mean to terrify you, but if you should hear -— " Armida, afraid to provoke him by flight, stood, and then coming close/to her, he repeated, ' r if yon should hear-----" He shook his hand, his voice was choaked, and the horrid giin with which he gazed at her, and tin; struggle of forced derision, with the ??? agonizing passions, made Armida trem¬ ble, as if she beheld a fiend. Even aftoi he left her, so disturbed vvere her facul¬ ties, that several times sho sought in vain for the entrance to her retreat, and vvlien at length she reached it, she resigned all thoughtsof retiring to rest, and prevailed on her attendant to sit up with her tiii morning. Brenuan did not appear the next, oi six following days : her spirits graduali; became tranquil, and though she neve ventured 10 wander alone on the shor* after that dreaded evening, its scene oui.
appeared to her imagination Hke a hor¬ rible dream. At length, oppressed by this solitude, she turned to her compa¬ nion for relief. The memory of this woman, like all the Irish, was stored with tales of superstition ; and their ef¬ fect, combined with the scenery around her, interested Armida's imagination, and once tbat she was in a mood to hear " Sad stories chanced in the times of old/' she inquired of Connals grand¬ father, vvho she understood accompanied the rebels in their march, but whom she had never seen either on the mountain or in the isles. " And well for you, my lady, you did not," said the womau, " for he hates you mortally, and would be the death of you, if ever you met." " Hates mc ! vvould be the death of mei" cried Armida, astonished at the beings with whom she had become con¬ versant. " Oh, yes, rny lady, as mad as he is
he knows that O'Morven is in love with the daughter of Lord Montelare, and he thinks that all his misfortunes are owing to your family, and in bis rage he some¬ times thinks that if he could shed your biood, all the charm would be broken, and he would be restored to his rights again; and it was all O'Morven could do to keep him from you on the mountain ; and on that dreadful inarch where so many perished he was running about with a naked sword in quest of you, and thought, if he could reach you, the day was our's." " Is he deranged, then?" said Armida, witb horror at the danger to which she had been unconsciously exposed, "Oh, yes, my lady, ever since the night his tower was b j rned : what with hardship, and grief, and wandering, his senses are quite gone, and he thinks no¬ thing but the life of one of your family could restore hira to his reason. And «ometimes be takes you for Queen EU-
zabeth, who he says was tbe first cause of the Protestant heresy, and says you came over from Italy to invade his coun¬ try, and take his lands and castle from him; for he mixes up things so in his madness : and sometimes he will wander about at nigbt, crying to them to bring him back to bis castle, or to tell him who took away bis understanding from him, that it would break your heart. Many a time I have heard him till myself has been as mad as him almost, listening to him. Sometimes for quietness they will let bim go where he likes, and then he will run as fast as ever he can totter, thinking he will reach his castle again : then he falls down quite spent, and says it goes from him faster than he can follow." " Ah, Connal, how many trials you have," said Armida, sadly. " Christ save us ! What's that Í" said the woman, starting : they were both si- leut. " Did not you hear a noise, my VOL. III. H
lady ?" she repeated, lifting her pale face to Armida. " 1 thought I did," said Annida, sick¬ ening with her fear«, They listened again, aiid muid dis¬ tinctly hear footsteps retiring hom t!^ door ofthe cottage, For nearlv itu houi they did not venture to speak, watchmg for its rep* titio»: il did not return, and they were beginning to recover their fcar^ wben a human groan, dibtant but audíbh', burst on their ???». Half dead with b r ror and superstition, the woinnti decUunl her belief tbat old O'Moi ven ???? dead, aod his spirit was come to vii» it them for having spoken of bim. " I fear the living more than the dead," iuid Armida. Again their terror wa« mocked by ano¬ ther interval, and Armida, recollecting then visionary ??? v er« a t ion, was willing to ????? tbe noises tbey bad beard tb imagination strongly excited ; but wlriH
she tried to encourage her companion in this belief, a shriek from the latter made her turn suddenly, and &b« beheld Bren¬ nan, who had entered unheard by either. He was standing behind the table on whicb Armida leant : the wretched lights that burned on it scarcely ihowed his figure. His arim were folded, bi* hat drawn over bin eye«; hut what could b*ï bCtiii ofhis couuteuaiu was agitated and dork. Ho neither «(Mike, nor raised his rye* to tbem, tili the woman exclaimed : " W hat brings you here at thi* hour ? " " l ?? com« for your lady/' said Hicu- uau, without looking at h<»r. " purine?" repeated Armida. " Yc», madam; O'Morven hae re¬ turned : he ? at tbe other bide of the isle waiting iet you in a boat, md neut me to bring yo * tu hun " " I don't bt lieve a word of it/' said tbe woman; "don't t·«, with him, my ??, he comee fur no y ood at tbis hour/' ** Sbe muit go with uie/' i«ad ??????* η 2
" She shall not," said the woman, her courage rising with her fears. Brennan, with an oath, and a look of fury, bid her hold her tongue. " I won't hold my tongue ; there's vil¬ lainy going on. Don't be afraid, my lady," she continued, turning to Armida, who, pale as death, tried in vain to speak to either of them : " if O'Morven be here, why did'nt he come for her him¬ self?" Brennan was silent for some time, and then he said the tide was rough on the shore, and the boat could only be rowed to the other side of the island. " And why could not he leave the boat there, and come to her himself?" With another execration, Brennan told her his business was not with her, and again urged Armida to come with him. " If she goes with you, so will I every step of the way," said the woman, re¬ solutely. Brennan, provoked to tbe utmost, look*
ed as if he would fell her to the earth, and Armida, trembling lest she should witness some outrage, rushed between them, declaring she was ready to go. " You may go, or stay, as you please,'* said Brennan, sullenly ; " but you must determine soon, for O'Morven is waiting, and I dare delay no longer." " And I'll go with her, be it where it will," said the woman : " I'll not be trusting to the like of you for a guide at this hour." Armida by signs intreated her not to provoke him further, but the poor crea¬ ture was so agitated by her fears, that when she attempted to go with them, she screamed out that she saw the devil be¬ hind Brennan, and clung to Armida in an agony of horror. " Will you stay to listen to this mad¬ woman, or come to O'Morven?" said Brennan. Armida tried to pacify her, for she wished for her presence, but in vain» u3
She was now as resolute not to go as,she was before to go, and Armida was com¬ pelled to leave the cottage with Brennan only. He walked on rapidly without speaking, and when she inquired about Connal, returned such incoherent an¬ swers, that she cea ;. ì io question him. They ascended the rocks, which rose be¬ hind Armida's habitation, by a winding path: the moon shone in full glory on the wide heath before tbem, and they traversed it with such speed tbat Armida was compelled to pause for breath. Brennan waited for her with impa¬ tience at some distance, and the deep sighs he heaved appeared to proceed from emotion rather than fatigue. When they proceeded, the path suddenly descended into a glen, so dark, rugged, and nar¬ row, that Armida was compelled to hold his arm for safety ; but this appeal to his protection did not appear to move him. He supported her, but he did not speak, nor did the hand he extended to her
tremble. As the path sunk deeper, and the glen grew darker, Armida cast her eves for a moment on the rocks, whose summits were yet tinged by the moon : it sunk behind them, and she felt as if she had beheld it for the last time. When they were in complete darkness, Brennan began to speak, but the sound of his voice had something in it so strange and terrifying, that Armida wished she could either observe his expression, or compel his silence. " Thi& is a dismal place/ 3 said he. There was no answer, and he continued— " A place that men seem to have agreed w r as fit for crimes, and to make as hor¬ rible to the imagination as it is to the senses." " Are we far from where O'Morven is?" said Armida. "Not very far," replied Brennan; " but we have many a dreary spot to traverse first." u 4
" Then let us make no delay/' said Armida, already panting for breath from fatigue. Brennan stopped. " Here/' ?'ud he, " a holy man was murdered—a man who had lived here in solitude and sanctity for half a century : he lived in a cave in this glen, and some villains, who were smugglers on the coast, murdered him, lest he should betray them. But he had no passions, no crimes/* he added, after a long pause ; " he was fit to die." Armida pressed on with so much speed that she hardly heard him, till hestopped her again. " Have you no chill, no shudder," he cried, " passing this spot ? Here a mo¬ ther murdered her child—her natural child ! She came to do penance amid this wild place for her offence, and she lost lier reason, it was believed. Her cbild was found dead here, and she was tear¬ ing up the ground with her hands for a
grave. When they asked her for whorn it was, she laughed, and said it was for her child." " Cease, cease those horrible details," said Armida ; " at this hour, and in such a place, tbey are too much for me." " Do you deprecate murder, and mis¬ chief, and horror then, gentle lady?" said Brennan, in a voice of artificial softness : " why do you cause it then ? Why do you ?" he repeated, bending over, and almost whispering in that low, constrained, horrible voice, that tries to blend irony with an expression of the fiercest malignity. " Lead me to O'Morven," said Ar¬ mida, trying in vain to speak with reso¬ lution, " or lead me back again/* " Nof. so fast, fair lady ; we are not through the glen yet ; we must pass the ruitied hut where a son murdered his own father: it has been deserted ever since, except by the damned «piríts that howl there at midnight, Shall we join thera ? h5
My voice is tuned for such a song : I am not fit to talk of love in a lady's ear." Armida, finding? expostulation vain, and dreading to urge bini to frenzy, for¬ bore to speak, and tremblingly pursued her way, while his passion appeared to spend itself in execrations. At length the way became so rugged, he was al¬ most compelled to carry her; but only anxious to end this dismal journey, she submitted to any thing that would ex¬ pedite it, but when he had h fted her across a small brook, he stopped again, and pointing to it— " Look at that spot/' he cried ; " mark it well. I told you this place was marked for murder: it is enough to stir bad thoughts in the heart. Why did you come here ? In fhat very stream, shallow as it looks, a man drowned a woman that refused him : he could not live without her, and he determined she should not live without him. Aye, look at it well : there was the very spot where her swoln
corse was found. She was fair in her life-time, but how did sbe look then—as white as you do now," and he held her towards the water. She was now convinced that her death was certain, and sinking on her knees, she attempted to plead for life. fÇ What is it you fear?" said Breiman; "Have you ever done me an injury? Have you ever spumed me when I knelt to you ? Oh ! never, never." And he laughed with the wildness of a demon. Then checking himself, with a convulsive effort, he snatched her from the ground : his voice suddenly changed to a tone of calm decision—" Your journey is ended/ he cried. **" O'Morven is m yonder cave," and he led her towards something like a chasm 'vu the rock, from which the stream they had crossed was dashing. Her faculties were benumbed, and stag¬ gering with horror, she followed him to¬ ward** the entrance : the passage was to¬ tally dark, and as he drew ber on» be
perceived, by the weight that sunk into his arms, she was ii sensible. When her reason returned, she perceived she was in a cavern. A fire burning on the ground filled it with so thick a smoke that at first she eould not distinguish any thing. At length, by the light of a wretched taper that twinkled in a kind of niche, she discovered a heap of straw and rushes spread beneath it, on which something lay extended. Brennan stood beside it, appearing to watch what lay there, and be had placed Armida on the ground, as if careless of her recovery or lifc. There was not a word spoken, and Armida, scarcely conscious where she was, had no power to break the silence. At length a rustling was heard in the straw, and the figure of an aged man, ghastly and gigantic, slowly raiseo! itself from the ground. He addressed sonic words to Brennan in Irish, and tbere was a kind of energy and grandeur in his very debility, tbat made Armida, in spite
of her disturbed faculties, feel she was in the presence of the grandfather of Connal. They conversed in Irish for some time, till Brennan, determined to make her feel all the horrors of her si¬ tuation, said aloud in English : " I have brought your enemy : she is in your hands, and if she escapes, the fortunes ofyour house are fallen for ever." The old man turned to Armida. As he viewed her his eyes blazed with mad¬ ness, and their fiery and delirious bright¬ ness, contrasted with the ashy paleness of his face and his emaciated features, al¬ most gave the idea of demoniac posses¬ sion inflating and agitating a dead body. " Traitress !" he exclaimed, though speaking English vvith difficulty ; " trai¬ tress ! you are iu my power at last : you shall at laet feel it. I know you well, though you assume that appearance of youth and beauty to deceive me. You are the Queen of England: the false daughter of the beret icHenry. You have dispossess-
ed me of my rightful dominion :—I am a prince, a« you are, though I am chained down in this cave. See the fetters wiih which yon have loaded me," he cried, tearing up h and fu! s ofthe straw on which he lay : " I lie here in misery and fa¬ mine, while you and your father revel in roy castle : but now I will have my re¬ venge. Why did you ever injure me?" he continued, gazing on her, (i You might have left me f ? rule in my barren isles. I had a grandson too, a brave youth : he died defending me ; but your father shall not boast, while O'Morven goes childless to his grave." Armida, during the ravings, remem¬ bered the story of his derangement, which she had heard fhat night, and now saw that tbe purpose for which Brennan had forced her there was death aggravated by the horrors of perishing under the hands ofa lunatic. She cast an imploring look on Brrn- nan ; bnt darting at ber a glance of
deadly malignity, he again addressed O'Morven in Irish, and seemed to stimu¬ late his exhausted passions to ref enge. The wretched maniac started up, and with the mingled impotence and fury of madness, he tore the straw from his bed, dashed itat Armida, grinned with horrible fury, and then fell back exhausted, with an idiot laugh. Brennan, then provoked to more thau the frenzy of madness, caught Armida in his arms, and dragged her towards him. She neither shrieked nor struggled, but sinking from his arms, she raised her eyes to him with an expression that might have disarmed the fury of a savage ; but his heart was adamant : he knew he had hazarded too much to escape from Con¬ nals vengeance, and his only wish was that his victim should perish amid hor¬ rors that would satisfy his vindictive heart for the disdain with which she had treated him. Twice the old man, grasping the bay-
onet which Brennan forced into his hand, aimed it at Armida's breast : with the v rage of a monster he then attempted to tear off the thin covering of her bosom. Wresting at the «ime moment the weapon from the trembling hand ofthe maniac, Armida pleaded no longer for life ; she implored only to perish in Connals pre¬ sence. At that moment a blow, as if from the arm of a giant, struck Brenuan to the earth. Armida, almost doubtful of life, turned and felt herself clasped in the arms of Connal. Sbe would have inquired, she would have knelt, she would have clung to him ; but tbere was no time for it now, for, shaking her off", he was com¬ pelled to meet Brennan, who had started from the grouqd, and rushed ou him with the bayonet in his hand. A momentary trance fell on Armida; but she immediately revived to all the terrors of their rencounter.
Connal had wrested the bayonet from hiin, and they then closed in mortal struggle. Armida had lately seen many sights of horror, but nothing ever like this, where all the passions and strength ofthe combatants were strained to the utmost point in this tug; for life. Their bands fastened in each other's throats ; their nostrils spouting blood, from the force of their gripe ; their eyes starting from their sockets with the fierceness of their struggle : they groaned, they panted, they rocked, they writhed : the ground was indented with the stamping of their feet : the fire was trampled out by their attempts to drag each other into it. Brennan fought with almost superna¬ tural rage and strength ; but the strength of Connal, though almost exhausted by receist toil aud fatigue, was far more than his ; and after remaining limb locked in limb, and their heads buried in each other's bosoms, Conual suddenly extri-
cated himscif from this dreadfui embrace, and collecting aH his strength for tbe re¬ coil, dashed his adversary on the ground, The cavern groaned with tbe shock, ami Brennan lay ^??^?????, Pauling from his toil, a faint smile breaking through his sickening and dis¬ tracted features, Connal then turned to Armida, and wheu he reached htr, he was couipelled to throw his harassed fraine un the ground beside her. Sbe was pale ami silent : he spoke to her, but ehe did not kuow him : he folded her in his arms, but she was insensible of the pressure. As he still hung over her with assurances of saiety, be perceived her bosom was stained with the blood that issued from bis own, and he then for the first time felt the wounds he bad received from the bayonet b t fore he coukl force it from Bienuau. Dreading tbat bis presence in this state was the cause of her terror, he roso and went in search of water to wash the
blood away : but at the least motion he made to quit her, she gave a piercing scream, and clung to him, though she shewed no sensibility of his presence when he stayed. Bewildered, faint, and sick, he again threw himself beside her, and watched her countenance for a gleam of reason. Her ejes wildly traversed the cave, as if in pursuit of some invisible object : at length thcy rested on Brennan, who lay ap¬ parently lifeless ; and her looks mddcnly became fixed, ?? if by fascination, ? that object, f Coimai observe 1 him too, though witbout any apprehension that he could be formidable in tliat state. At length Îîo uttc red a faint moan, and his limbs qui¬ vered with a couvuUi\e motion, Connal believed the last struggles wen; ap¬ proaching, and he spread his arm beiore Armida, to save her from the sight ; but sbe still continued to guxe on him with that iuteuseuess with which we would
view a tiger crouching in the act to spring on us. The dying wretch dragged himself along the ground for a few inches like a worm, and appeared to be catching at something he could not reach. Connal attempted to rise; but Armida's screams again detained him, and he was compelled to watch this frightful scene in silence. Brennan still continued to crawl along : one arm was broken by his fall, and bc could only move on the other side. He felt with one hand about the ground, and so fixed was his purpose, that when he laid hold of one of the burning brands, he felt its flaming point with his hand before he could relinquish it, for bis sight was gone. Connal, unable to endure this sight, approached him to see if life could be preserved, or would soon be extinguished ; but before he reached him, the desperate
creature had got hold of the bayonet, and as Connal bent over him, he pointed it towards him, as a dying scorpion darts out its sting. Connal retreated, and Brennan, with a shriek of torture, plunged it into his own heart. Tlie cry of tbe maniac, who had re¬ mained insensible during the conflict, but who now started from his bed, mingled with Brennaits dying groan, was too horrible, and Connal collected his re¬ maining strength to bear Armida from the cave, and wben he had reached the entrance, perceived the men who attended him, but wbom he had far outstripped« hastening to his assistance«
CHAP. IV. Yes—I do think that you might pardon him, And neither heaven or man grieve at the mercy, Shakespeare. When Connal formed the desperate project of seeking safety among his ene¬ mies, he felt it necessary to provide for his personal security by a disguise, as he had to traverse the whole of Connaught from west to east, before he could reach the borders of Leinster, on his progress to Dublin. He assumed the dress of an Irish peasant to conceal his remarkable figure; and in the great rug coat and slouched bat, theproud form ofthe rebel chief was distinguished only in stature and motion from the meanest of his countrymen : but unpractised in dissimu¬ lation, be betrayed an inconsistency tbat might have exposed him in the noble imal on whieh he was mounted, and
the proud grace and skill with which he managed him. On the evening of the first day he reached Eyrecourt: hehad been all day without food, and afraid to approach the town, he lingered in the neighbourhood until it was dark, and then drew near to a cluster of cabins, in¬ different to the bard fare and miserable beds they promised : in the first he en* tered .a corse lay on the bed, and a num* ber of peasants, as usual at a wake, were singing, drinking, and dancing in the cottage, regardless of the despair of the widow, or her children, who were weeping round her, conscious that their last far¬ thing had been expended in doing honour to his remains by riot and drunkenness. Shocked at this scene, which he had too often witnessed, Connal turned to a ca¬ bin at some distance : he knocked at the door, and asked if a traveller and his horse could be accommodated for the night. "Come in/' said an elderly man, who
was sitting over the embers of a turf fire, his hands locked in each other : he did not rise when Connal entered, nor utter a word of welcome in answer to his graceful salutation: he pointed to a bench, and after gazing for a moment on Connals figure, which, even reclining, spread across their narro w hearth, relapsed into his former posture : opposite to him was an elderly woman : her apron was thrown over her face, but her loud sobs spoke an agonizing heart. Connal, weary, drenched with rain, and without food all day, felt himself more chilled by this reception than by all bis privations : there was nothing of the cordiality, the open and friendly glow of kindness that communicates its warmth to the meanest stranger that enters an Irish cabin, " That is a hard seat," said the man after a long silence, " but we bave no better to offer you." " I have bad no better for many
months/' said Connal, " and never wished for it." " It must be your bed too," said the man, " ifyou lie here : we have had no bed since yesterday." " lam sorry for it, for your sake," said Connal ; " at my age, the ground is a bed soft enough." The man looked at him closely, as if he was contrasting the language of poverty with the voice and look of the man who uttered it, but could find no connexion between them. The humble sweetness of Connals voice, combined with his lofty figure, seemed first to perplex, and then to inte¬ rest him ; and at length he said to his wife, " is not there a potatoe left in the house to give the gentleman ?" " No, we have not had one since yes¬ terday you know," said the woman. " Good heaven," cried Connal, start¬ ing from his scat, " what is the cause of vol. πι. ι
this distress ? have I increased it, can I relieve it?" " No, God only can relieve us," said the man. " May he relieve you then!" said Con¬ nal, fervently; " but far be it from a stran¬ ger like me to intrude on you—I will be gone." " No, do not go," said the woman ; iC I love to look at you : he was not so tall or so strong as you : now that I look at you, he was nothing like you at all, but still thesight of you puts me in mind of him," and she again wept bitterly. Connal knew not how to console her, and he stood irresolutely. " A re you from G alway ? " said the man. " I am," answered Connal, " Do you hear any thing ofthe rebels there ?" said the man in a broken voice. " Oh ! do not ask, do not ask him," cried his wife ; " my heart will not bear it, my heart will break if I hear ?? boy isin danger/'
" This poor woman and I had a son," said the man : " we were in a good way, and had land near Galway, under Lord Montelare, ifyou knew him, he that had the beautiful daughter that ran off after O'Morven the rebel : oh ! my heavy curse, and the curse of my heart-broken wife there, and the curse of my whole seed and breed be on him for a rebel, as he is. We were doing well, and though the boy was idle now and then, he was fond of his mother and me, and we thought of nothing but ending our days in the same cabin wdth him and his, when the rebel¬ lion broke out, and nothing would serve him but he must go after O'Morven. Oh, Tim, Tim, that was not the way your mother and I brought you up, to roam about vvith robbers and rebels, aud come to the gallows at last: and so when í found he was gone, I did not care to ütay where every one was telling me o£ my child's shame, and if he ever came to be hung iu my sight, I thought that my ι 2
grief would make me wicked, and fly in the face of God, and never see him in this worhl or the next ; and so, though no one ever gave me trouble or searched the house, or took me up, I went away from the place for good and all ; but I could not go far from him neither, and so I came and took ground here; but somehow, though every thing went right with me before, every thing goes wrong since my trouble came on me : I have no heart to work; my hand is out ifi try to do any thing ; the place about me is cursed I think ; so I fell from one distress to ano¬ ther, this poor woman and I, and yester¬ day our bed was sold, and today some¬ thing else, and I do not care what goes next. 1 wonld not care if they would take and throw me into the river there, for I have such a sickness at my heart, that I could not hinder a child from kill¬ ing me ifit woukl." tf Stop, Jem, stop," said the woman, Vf do uot trouble the gentleman any more ;
see how he hides his face—he cannot help us, and we need not trouble hilft with our grief." Connal started from his seat ; he drag¬ ged his dishevelled hair over his eyes to hide the bursting tear: ie No, no," be eried, pacing the cabin with agitated steps, " go on—if there be any thing more bitter, more piercing, tell it all : I deserve—I deserve it." The man and his wife exchanged looks as if they beHeved their gutst deranged : " What is it disturbs you, young man/* said tbe woman, " what are you think¬ ing of?" *· I am thinking what a heart O'Mor¬ ven has to-night," said Connal. "Oh, never name him!" cried the man, who believed that the stranger like himself had been a sufferer by the disturb¬ ances : (t never name him—God's curse light on him and his for ever and ever," " Oh, do not curse him !" cried Con¬ nal ; " a broken-hearted father's curse it i3
heavy, and he is so wretched, he needs no malediction to make him more so." " Aye, so they say," said the man, hfl»Hl« ??????????? htm lt.. l 4?.?|??? jtuiuij wtiitjitÎtitiJiiiIig Uliu, UUI. I ciiï ??? by the 'wildness of his looks ; " they say he was forced to what he did, but it is all the same to us, and those he ruins." " But do not curse him," repeated Connal, ·* do not, good man : say you forgive him : say so, I implore you." " Well, God forgive him, and bless him too," said the man, " I do not care, I have not the heart to hate any one, or fo curse any one ; I have not strength for it, for neither I nor my poor woman have tasted food to-day/' Connal eagerly produced thè scanty sum he had reserved for his travelling expences, and desired the man to buy tome food : he went out, and returned speedily with provisions, but sick with famine and grief, neither he nor his wife could swallow a morsel, until Connals vehement solicitations reminding them of
the attentions of their lost child, they sat down to eat, and pressed Connal to join them. " I thank you, I feel no want of food," * said Connal. They redoubled their importunities. " By heaven, I will not touch a morsel under your roof," "You look pale," said the vvomain; " I believe you have not tasted food tu£ day more than ourselves." " No, nor cannot now," said Con* na). " Do, do, take a morsel," aaid both of them rising : " if it was O'Morven him¬ self we could not see him fasting under our roof." " And if it was," said Connal, gently waving them from him, " he would be a villain if he complied." " Ah !" said the woman, u it is easy to see you are not what you seem—the dirt and wretchedness of creatures like us is not fit for you—those limbs of your's i4
have been used to a softer bed than vr« «an give you." " I desire no better than the floor of this cabin," said Connal, " if you will aliow me to stretch myself on it." "Allow you !" cried the woman, de¬ lighted at tbe plenty he poured on them "aye, and think ourselves blessed with such a creature under our roof" * f Cease, cease; you know not what you •ay," said Connal : " I am no blessing to any roof/' and then recollecting thi danger to which this unguarded language exposed bim, he stopt. " Ah ! you are too mild, too heavenly looking, to have any tbing to do with this bloody business," she exclaimed: " would to heaven that O'Morven had a heart Hke you—I see it in your eyes,"she cried ; " you never were the deith¡of a human creature—you never seduced a child from bis parents to ruin him/ 7 " God bless—God bless you I torture »e no møt**" cried Connal, " I aux
weary, I cannot speak to you as I ought : if I have said nny thing to offend you, forgive me, and let me rest." The poor people, grateful for his bounty, would now have given up their wooden seat for his accommodation, but he declined any bed but the floor, and stretching himself on it, appeared to sleep that he might escape their importunity. " Ah !" said the poor Woman, " our's are not the only heavy hearts that O'Mor¬ ven has caused lo-oight." " True, true," murmured Connal, " hé has a thousand crimes, and but one Hfe io offer for them all—would that the atonement was offered ! " His host was soon asleep, but Connal could not close bis eyes. Determined not to quit the place without making some reparation to these unhappy parents, he in vain racked his thoughts for what fortune had denied him : the Httle money he had was already expended on them : nothing remained but to dispose of his ι 5
horse, and this, though by delaying hh journey, probably exposed his life, hú resolved on. Some regret for losing thia noble animal who had so often borne him through danger lingered in his heart, but he said, mentally, " Let me be grateful to Heaven, that amid the thousands in¬ volved in my ruin it is in my power to relieve one at least." Before day-light he arose, and gnawed by hunger, saw ivith the keenest appetite the remains of themeal he had purchased for them the night before ; but determined to famish sooner than eat the bread of those lie had injured, he left it untouched, and having fed his horse, rode out ? quest of a purchaser. At some disiance he met a man, to whom he offered him. " That horse is above my price/' said the man, " but at that house yonder you'll be apt to get your money for him. ^Squire Shaughnessy does nót care what price he gives for a horse/' Connal rode towards the house, and as
he approached the gate saw the piers were covered with proclamations offering a reward for his apprehension. He hesi¬ tated for a moment, but on reading the description of his person, and glancing a look at his disguise, he believed bewas sufficiently safe, and recollected that a¿ he had been seen in the road, a precipitate retreat might expose him to suspicion. He entered the gate as one ofthe grooms was galloping down the avenue : he stopt. " Young man, what do you value that horse at?" " I am come with an intention to sell him to your master," said Connal, " but I have not yet fixed on his price." " lll tell you wbat it is," said tbe fellow, familiarly : " sell him to me, and I'll give you a liandsome price, and some¬ thing to drink besides/' Connal smiled, and declined his offer. " You are devilish high/' said the groom : " what, I suppose you are above
taking any thing in tbe morning, are you ?" " God knows, no one wants it more," iaid Connal, wiping tlie cold dew from bis forehead, " but I do not drink in tha morning, friend," Tbe man renewed bis offer. " I can easily see, my friend," said Connal, " that you wish to purchase this borse f ? sell him at an advanced price to your master, or some one else, but as I am the owner of the animal, I intend to have the benefit of the sale myself." t( You the owner," said tbe groom ; * f a likely story indeed, that a fellow like you should have such a horse ; lam süre you stole him." Connals arm trembled to strike the fellow to the ground, but determined not to quarrel, he calmly rode on. The groom placed himself in his way. " You can't see my master," said he ; " he is not used tp speak to inch vaga«
bonds as you ; I suppose you ara coroe from the rebels in the mountains." " ? g° od friend," said Ctínnal, coolly, " let me advise you to be gone; as weak as I am, I could pitch you over that Walt with one arm. I have no mind to quarrel, but ifyou force me to correct your insolence, the consequence will be more unpleasant to you than me," The man made no answer but by aim¬ ing a blow at Connal with his whip. Connal threw himself off bii horse, and seizing the fellow with one arm, flung htm toa distance, at whichhe lay breath¬ less, and then mounting again, rode to the house. He had scarce declared his business, when the groom followed with loud com- plaints, and being a favoured servant soon obtained access to bis master, after darting a look of fury at Connal as he passed bim in the hall. Tbe 'squire came out witb rage in hi»
countenance: "What is tbis you have dared to do to my servant ?" " What I would do again," said Con¬ nal, " if he gave the same provocation/* " Do you know, fellow, 1 am a magis¬ trate, and can commit you for this of¬ fence ?" " I do not know that you could» and I am sure you ought not/' said Connal, " when you hear that I bore from him more tban ever I bore from man, and in punishing him only defended myself." " Please your honour," said the man, " he came behind me and knocked me down without my ever saying a word to him : but if I had you out of his honour's presence I'd make you remember me as long as you lived." " You !" said Connal, his spirit rising at this menial insolence. " Oh ! it would be but pastime to roe to deal with you and all your fellows at once : come on, the strong¬ est of you, come all together, and weak
with weariness and want as I am, I'll toss you as boys do marbles." The men retreated, but the master came forward. " You are an extraordinary man/' said he, viewing him with surprise, " to come into my house, and brave me and my ser¬ vants in this manner." " I do not want to contend with you or any man," said Connal, vexed at this interruption : " I came to know if you would purchase a horse from me, a noble animal, that I cannot a if ord to keep : your servant met me; he was insolent, and I punished him ; unprovoked, I would not injure a worm, and even now I had rather I had borne tbat fellow's rudeness than stand Hke a public Gladiator in your hall, displaying my strength on your menials/' The gentleman observed bim still more closely, and tben desired to seethe horse. He ν as struck with its beauty, and Con¬ nal at bis request mounted ; and» attached
to his horse, aod conscious fhat this was the last time he ever would employ this faithful servants he displayed his strength, grace, and fleetness with a pride that made fhe spectators esclami. " He alone is fit to possess such an animal," As be dismounted, glowing with exer¬ cise, but breathless with fatigue, the eye of the master was rivetted on him, and he said, witb apparent negligence, " You are a good active rider ; I have no ob¬ jection to take you as roy groom." Tbe colour deepened on Connals cheek, but a moment restored his self- possession, and he said, " I wish— yes, I wish to heaven I were your groom, or the meanest labourer on your grounds— but I cannot——." The other pa-used, and then fixing his· eyes on bim, said, sternly, " I make no doubt you bave stolen that horse; I sball apprehend and eonfine you till you can produce satisfactory evidence to your character."
H You shall kill me first/* said Connal, almost ready to betray himself: " I have been insulted, but I will not bc injured. I know the laws of my country, and he that advances but a step fo deprive me of my liberty holds his life cheap." The other smiled, and beckoned him to a distance : " I know you," he whis¬ pered : " I tried you, and have found out who you are ; go, begone—don't mention your name to me: I am a magistrate. and must do my duty ifi am compelled. Here is the value of your borse ; do uot employ it against your country: leave tbis place. You are a brave man, and J pity you/* " Generous man !" murmured Connal, 4 * I may live to thank you." He gave one look and one sigh as his faithful horse was led away to his new master, and tlien hurried to the cottage witb his prize* The old roan was still asleep ; his wife had gone out. Connal seized the op¬ portunity of enclosing. tbe money in a
serap of paper he found in the cabin, in tbe inside of which he scrawled with a wretched pen, " Pray for O'Morven : he never wished to injure mortal : if hig persuasions can restore your son to you again, you shall see him soon ; till then he never shall handle a pike, or load a musket for me. ,> He then hastily par¬ took of the fragments of their humble meal, and depositing the money under the old man's head, quitted Eyrecourt on foot. Apprised by his late adventure of his danger, he avoided the high road/ but pursued his way with such expedition that he reached Tuli amore that night. It was late; he dreaded to ask admit¬ tance at a cottage : he had no money to procure it elsewhere. " This then/' said he, throwing himself on the bank of the canal, and leaning his head against one of the posts round which the ropes are coiled, " this then must be roy pillow to-night ; but my poor host will be able
to purchase fhe bed for himself and bis aged wife they wanted last night. I wish I could look in on them through their cabin roof tbis moment. I dare not enter their door : the unfortunate are compelled to shrink from the good they do as tbey would from a crime." A person who belonged to the packet- boat noticing bim, came up : " Do you want accommodation for the night, young man ?" said he. " I do indeed," said Connal, with an involuntary sigh. " I can shew you the way to tbe ho¬ tel," said the man. " I have no money," said Connal, after a short pause. The man shrunk baek from him: "And what brings you here then ?" said he. " If you can show me auy place I can occupy with less offence I am ready to remove to it," said Connal. The man went away, and after loitering for some time, come back witb a sus-
* picions look : " But I see you keep near the luggage-boats," said he. " And what then?" replied Connal, looking at him with amazement. " Why only that if you have no dis¬ honest intentions/' said the man, moving fo a distance, " that you may as well move to another place, that's all/' Connal started up : this hst insult wag too much for him : the man in some terror retreated. Connal could have ea¬ sily overtaken him, but anger with him was the hectic ofa moment. " Merciful Heaven !" he cried, " is there some crime branded in my face, that every where I meet with insult and suspicion ? yes, I feel there is ; all eyes can read the erime of poverty, nor is there one that makes man shrink from man ?? soon." The sight of this man suggested fo him that the canal boat was the swiftest and safest conveyance to Dublin, as he would be exposed only to the passengers, whose number mutt be less than tbat of tbe
persons he might meet on the road. He inquired therefore for f ! e boat that was next to sail, and introducing himself to the captain, asked if he would be per¬ mitted to work for his passage. " It is not the custom," said the cap. tain, "but if you will attend the pas¬ sengers after they have dined ------" " I will undertake no menial office/' said Connal, retiring : " ifyou have any employment for me on the deck, you will find me capable ofit/' " You seem a strong able fellow," said the captain : " I don't care if I let you come, but you must not refuse to do what you are asked." " I have already told you what I will or will not do," said Connal : " if I re¬ fuse it is not my fault, but your's :" and he returned to his cold bed on the bank till the boat sailed at four inthe morning. This was the most intolerable part ef his whole journey: the dignity ofhis figure at first impressed his associates
with a degree of awe that made them shrink from him ; but in a short time his mildness, his humility, and the readiness with which he undertook even the meanest tasks, encouraged them to treat him with a familiarity, which, though he retreated from, he could npt repel. At length, sinking into a corner of the deck, he quietly plied his humble task, and smilen* occasionally at the terrifying tales re¬ peated by the passengers, who were talking to each other of the rebel chief O'Morven. " How much easier is it," thought Connal, " to be the hero of a moment, to wind up the heart to its utmost pitch of suffering and of strength, and bid it rest, than to wear life away in these petty struggles, that corrode the strength as the Alps were mined away by vinegar, and leave us without consolation or dignity." He was startled by the sound ofthe bell that announced the arrival pf the
boat at the harbour of Portobcllo, and he saw the spires of Dublin for the first time rising to his view» The bank was crowded with the relations and friends of the passengers, who all hurried on deck. On every side Connal heard the exclama¬ tions of joy and the tumult of meeting. He descended alone : no voice greeted him, no hand was extended to welcome him : he was thrust aside by the haste of friends to meet each other : carriage after carriage rolled away with their happy burdens, and he was left alone at the entrance of a city where he knew neither a street nor an individual. There was one person in Dublin to whom he was recommended, but whom he had never seen, and starting at length from his melancholy reverie, he inquired of the first person that passed him the way to Francis-street. The person unluckily was one who imagined there was humour in deceiving a stranger, and Connal wan¬ dered about in pursuit of the direction
till be arrived in a part of Dublin where the way to Francis-street was almost un¬ known. As he crossed Dame-street to Fownet-street, he was suddenly involved in a crowd of whom so many were fe* males, that he could not extricate himself without an effort of strength he would not employ, and delicately attentive to women, he assisted and protected thc*o who were near him, tili he found himscif involuntarily drawn into the theatre. He now attempted to return, but a well-dressed female, who was separated from her party, intreated his protection with so much earnestness that he could not withdraw it, and the next moment the rush of the crowd forced them both into the box-lobby. Disturbed and alarm¬ ed at the publicity of this situation, Connal could not desert his terrified companion, and at her solicitation he accompanied her to the box, where she waited till her party could join her. In the crowd aad tumult she bad hardly till
now beheld her protector; and her amaze¬ ment vvhen the regal dignity of his figure was displayed, and the pensive charm of his beautiful features developed itself in the iuquiries he made after her alarm, was augmented by the contrast between fhat and his rustic appearance. lu a short time her party arrived, to u hom she mentioned the services she had received from the stranger ; but the air 1 <if constraint with which thcy thanked him at once opened his eye io tho impropriety ofhis appearing in tho dressofan Irish peasant in the boxes of a theatre ; and blushing as he slightly bowed to their thanks, he attempted to retire. It was Catalani 's benefit : at that mo¬ ment she appeared on the stage, and the first notes she uttered rivetted him to the -pot. Armida's exquisito tones, and that lecuUar style that belonged only to those two singers of all he had ever heard, rose with painful sweetness to his recollection, and overpowered by VOL. in. ?
his sensations, he leaned against the box door. " He has certainly heard Italian music before," said the lady whom he had attended. "Impossible!" repeated the person she addressed ; " where could a fellow of that appearance have heard Italian music?" " Oh ! but observe his eye : whai sensibility ! how brilliantly tremulous l· its light ! vvhat a figure ! yet how un conscious of the exquisite grace of tin attitude he has assumed !" " Grace !" repeated the other, " hov can yon apply the term to the figure of; young Hercules: he looks able to suppor the pillars of the house, if it were fallin; about us." " What a subject for a painter !" sai the admiring female, " Yes, if he meant fo sketch tbe lead< ofa banditti," said her companion. Connal starting at these last word
the only ones he had heard, hurried out of the box. As he tried to make his way through the crowd in the passage, he was suddenly encountered by a spectacle that made him hope his senses were false— Gabriella leaning on the arm of Des¬ mond : they appeared to have just enter¬ ed, and were hurrying tó one of the up¬ per boxes. Speechless with amazement, he gazed after them. Immersed in the crowd, neither of ihem saw him : he followed thera, and ignorant of the house, wandered about for some time till he found himseif in a box exactly opposite to that in which they Mere seated : he had now leisure to observe them. It was indeed Desmond ! but what a ehange ; his youthful figure already appeured wasting with vice and dissipation: the bloom of innocence had fled from his (heek, and was succeeded by that deep and feverish flush'that bespeaks the pas* tions and the conscience alternately accu¬ sing each other ; and his eye, that once ? 3
had the calmness, the brightness, and the tint of a summer heaven, now gleamed with the wild and sullen fire of anger, vice, and shame. Gabriella was little altered, but there was even more boldness in her look and more freedom hi her man¬ ner than ever, and in spite of his igno¬ rance of the manner of a town, he could observe by the appearance of the women around her, and the manner in which she was viewed by the men, that she had sunk to the lowest level of female degra¬ dation. While he revolved a thousand plans how to extricate Desmond from tbe ruin in which he was visibly plunged, his ear was caught by the conversation of two persons behind him. " I pity that young man," said one of them, pointing to Desmond, "beyond all povver of expression ; he is scarce beyond the age of boyhood, yet his career will probably be as short as it is shameful and miserable. He is of an ancient family in
the west : he was in an English regiment, commanded by Colonel Wandesford, and distinguished himself abroad ; but that girl you see with him escaped from her family and friends to put herself under his protection, and though he assured her he was irrevocably engaged, she wrought so strongly on his vanity or his sensibility, that he yielded, and she became his avow¬ ed mistress. She has destroyed his health and his peace : he has assured her he does not love, and will not marry her, yet he suffers ber to hang on him like a spell. She has followed him to Cork, to Lime¬ rick, and now to Dublin, but their re» sources must soon fail, for he will be deprived of his commission for his mis¬ conduct, and then nothing remains for him but a pistol, or for her, but a brothel." " Oh, Desmond !" murmured Connal, gazing on him with eyes dim with tears ; *' is that indeed the brother I loved, I reared, I watched, I prayed for, I re-
signed myself almost without a murmur io the peril and shame of my destiny, while I hoped your's would be brighi and honourable. You, whose name I hoped would shed light on the darkness bf mine ; you, who I thought would build my tomb, and stand by it in grief and honour, the defender of your brother's dust." '* But wby don't he join his regiment?" said one of the strangers. " It is on service against the rebels." " She would hot permit him/' said the other; " besides, the disturbance is quite over : the leader was hung tlie other day at Galway assizes. It was strange that his name was totally unknown in Dublin, though at one time there were serious ap¬ prehensions entertained from his courage and conduct : he was said to be of an ancient Milesian family, but so obscure, that no öne ever learned who he was. It is not impossible but he might be a rela¬ tion of ihat unhappy boy : all the Mile-
sian families are connected. How dread* ful if they had ever met in the field !" At these words Connal rushed out in an agony, which, had it been observed, must have .betrayed him. For the re¬ mainder of the night he wandered about the house, almost unconscious where he was. He wished to save Desmond, and the information he had just received tbat he was unknown in Dublin gave him some faint hope of its possibility ; but the thought that accompanied it had wrung his heart beyond its power to bear. The entertainment was over, and he was agam borne on by the crow r d : he again saw Desmond and Gabriella at a distance, and pursued them till he saw them enter a house in Grafton Street. He hesitated whether to follow them or not: he dreaded Desmond's impetuosity, now aggravated by conscious error, and passions habitually inflamed : he dreaded that he himself, in that moment of agita- &4
tion, was not master of all his passions. lie knew that Desmond might bear re¬ monstrances, but not reproaches; and exhausted as he was, he continued to traverse the streets till he believed he had attained sufficient forbearance for the interview. He then knocked gently at the door, and the moment it was opened, passed the servant, and rushed up stairs. Through an open door be saw Desmond alone, stretched on a sofa : on a table before him, by the half-extinguished candles, he saw wine, a broken glass, and a pistol. He sprung into the room, and bolted the door. Desmond started up, and involuntarily seized the pistol : had it been presented to his breast that moment, Connal could not have bid him hold : emotion had taken away all power of utterance from htm, but a single glance shewed Desmond the countenance of his brother, melting with affection, amid the struggles of grief, anguish, and amazement. The first movement of the
impetuous Desmond was to attempt some outrage on himself, and he glanced with horrible wildness round the room for some instrument of destruction. As Con¬ nal, fearing more for his brother than himself, wrested the pistol from his hand : " I will not live," cried Desmond, writhing from his grasp : " I will not. Stay and witness my death if you will. I will not survive tbis night," And he struggled with such fury, that Connal, whose strength was defeated by his feelings, found be was unable to con¬ tend wiih him, and suddenly relinquish¬ ing his hold, burst into tears. Frantic as he was, Desmond was restored to sen¬ sibility by this sight. " And you weep for me," he cried, with penitent horror : "you, from whom misfortune never could wring a tear.— Oh ! Connal, this is too much for me— even for me: if you have any mercy,
revile me, trample on me; but not another tear, ifyou do not mean I should destroy myself." And his own burst forth with a vehe¬ mence that he in vain tried to smother, by dashing himself on the sofa, and burying his deluged face in his hands. "Ah ! my poor Desmond," said Con¬ nal, " if your own reproaches thus con¬ vulse your heart, how could I bear to add mine to them/' "For what purpose the« did you come here?" said Desmond, trying to harden his heart against his brother, that he might rid himself of his pre¬ sence, " What brought you to me ?" For a moment Connal was startled by this question, but recollecting what he had heard at the theatre, he recovered himself, and replied : u I hope to save you from destruc¬ tion." "Me!^ repeated Desmond, with a
frightful laugh: "Oh! return then, you come too iate; character, ht altli, peace, honour, destroyed, wbat can be saved?" " A li" replied Connal, vvitb ouvinc- ing energy, " ail ; if by the fixed virtue of one resolution, you break from the chains that bind you in tbis do ,geon of corruption, and rise a man, and free/' " Ob ! she hung about me so !" cried the fluctuating Desmond. " My passions were so inflamed by disappointment !" " Speak not of tbe past," said Conual ; " a retrospect to evil generativ leads to a relapse : you must renounce her this night, tbis moment." " Would you, could you sacrifice a woman that declared that she adored you ? Oh ! Connal, it is so sweet to be loved, and oue who renounced her family, her rank, to follow you." " Would I!" repeated Connal, while a proud blush burned on his cheek: "I will venture to say you have never beard
a precept from me, Desmond, that I have shrunk from adding my example to. Would I—I did : this very woman, who adores you; persecuted me with the most shameful solicitations." Desmond's fiery cheek and indignant glances shewed how deeply this intel¬ ligence wounded him, and he sullenly murmured : " My superior in every thing ! and did I accept of a rejected wanton." " Nay, Desmond, ask yourself if at this moment your vanity is not more injured than your sensibility: at this moment you are hurt not because you loved her, but because she did not love you : is such an object worth the sacri¬ fice you have made to her?" Desmond struggled with conviction a few moments, and then said impetuously : " I am a wretch, the very slave of passion and vice : I am not fit to think for, myself—speak, determine for me,
Connal, tell me what I am to do, and if death be the consequence, the task will be mòre welcome." " Subdue these passions, Desmond, or they will destroy you : at this moment your very reparation borders on error: the path you are to pursue lies broad and plain before you : return to your duty, return to your regiment ; employ your¬ self in the business of your profession : perhaps it will soon call you to trials tbat will demand your utmost strength to bear." " And you would have me appear in the degraded light I must among my brother officers agaiu ?" " I would have ynu go before further misconduct renders it impossible for you to appear at all. Yes, I would have you join them, though 1 were convinced that mine would be the first breast against which your sword would be pointed." And in the warmth and swell uf his feelings, he was upon the point of dis-
closing the whole of his situation to Des¬ mond, b u« be was interrupted by the im¬ petuous gratitude of his brother, who, grasping his hand, ??? almost kneeling to him in ibe sudden change ofhis feel¬ ings, oppres cd ar.d even tortured with praises the man whom a few moments before he tried to drive from his sight. ' f You have indeed saved me from destruction," he cried : "this wretched woman, for whom my infatuation drove me almost to defy you in her cause, see how she has used me : this letter, which I found on her table to-night, was to have been delivered to me to-morrow." Connal read, and shuddered at the depravity vvhich dictated it : it informed Desmond, that weary of his society, she had fixed on another protector; that pleasure was her object, and pleasure was only to be found in variety: it concluded with expressing how little regret she felt at quitting a man who had never \o\ed her, mid had insulted her by affecting compassion for her, while he
was only the dupe of his own vanity, and her determination to make him the object of her pleasure. In this at least Gabriella had acted with sincerity : if she had ever felt an attachment of the heart it was for Con¬ nal : the strength of his mind and his devotion to Armida had enabled him to break from her fascination, but she had broken through all constraint in follow¬ ing him: her character was injured, and her passions were stimulated, and she looked round not for love or happiness, but for the most attractive object she could discover. In perfection of form Connal could be rivalled only by his brother, and the youth and pass i ous of Desmond gave her hopes of success, which were but too fatally verified.— But with Desmond she was not happy ; his conscience and his heart reproached him : the image of Endymion haunted him for ever, and while compasión and a false sense of honour would have in*
duced him even to feacrifice life for Ga¬ briella, he would much more willingly have resigned it to escape from his sub¬ jection to her. This however was ter¬ minated by herself, and in spite of his wounded pride, Desmond felt all the joy ofa captive on his liberation. "Aud this letter," said Connal, " you were reading as I came : but how came this pistol here ? " Desmond turned away, and Connal shuddered. " Ask no more questions," said Des¬ mond : " you saved my life." A long silence followed : the clock struck four: the candles were just ex¬ tinguishing, and the grey morning light was seen breaking through the win¬ dows. " Where do you sleep, Connal ?" said Desmond. " I will not sleep to-night, or to-day," said Connal, " till I have seen you quit this place. I have arrived in Dublin
but to-di'y, but I believe I have a lodg¬ ing in Francis Street. Come with me and I will resign my bed, if I have one, to you." Desmond rose and followed him with a submission that proved he had resigned all self-government, anil was only anxious to be relieved from all further thought for himself. Corina!, soothed by the hope of restoring him to happiness, employed every topic of consolation during their walk, and his fraternal admonitions, so mild in wisdom, so rich in affection, healed the lacerated but generous heart of Desmond, while they probed its wounds even to the bottom. They were admitted in Francis Street, where they found the family already up, and Connal, unwilling that his brother, an officer in the king's service, should be seen with him, whose real situation was but too well known to those about them, detain¬ ed him in a private room till the moment he was to quit Dublin. Again the affec-
tionate heart of Desmond burst into ao agony of gratitude, and Connal in vain tried to suppress the emotions that his natural but ardent expressions excited* As the moment of departure arrived, the reflection of their next meeting, and the prophetic words of the stranger, pressed with intolerable weight on his heart : he traversed the room in gloomy silence. " When shall we meet again?" said Desmond. " Heaven knows, heaven alone knows/' said Connal ; " where we shall meet again," " Wherever it may be/' replied Des¬ mond, " it vvill be consecrated bv the presence of the best of brothers and the first of men." " Cease, cease," said Connal, turning from him : " Desmond, when we praise man, we know not what we do: if an hour should arrive, that would see me as much sunk in the eye of mankind, as I am now raised in your partial imagina*
tion ; if you should hear thatl was guilty, fallen, punished—" " Impossible! Impossible !" said Des¬ mond, kindling into rage though his brother was his own accuser. " Nothing is impossible," cried Con¬ nal, almost losing bis self-possession at this unlimited confidence ; then recollect¬ ing himself, he more calmly said— "Should such an hour arrive, remember that even then I bad a heart for a brother." They then separated. Connal listened to his parting steps, and twice his hand was on the lock ofthe doorto call bim back and tell him all ; but he said to himself: " Heaven may yet interpose to save me, and is this a time to try him with fresh wounds, bleeding as he is at every pore/' The moment Desmond was gone he summoned his host, and inquired the direction and proper mode of addressing the distinguished personage whose in— fluencehe had hazarded so much to solicit. " Ah !" said the man, " it is too late :
be has resigned his situation, and quitted Ireland, and he has been succeeded by one in whose hands none but your enemies would wish you." This intelligence almost overthrew Connal : his very soul seemed sickened with sufferings and disappointments. He did not speak ; but the silent working of his. features betrayed more agony than many words. " And I have then quitted my post, left my men without a leader, deserted Armida :—oh, God ! deserted her in a barren isle, amid banditti—all iu vain." The thought of Desmond, and of this disastrous journey being the means of saving him, at last broke on his mind, and his swoln heart seemed to respire for a moment. " If my sufferings are made the instru¬ ments of blessings to others/' he thought, " heaven, let roe not repine. How Httle good can be done, and how much evil is here to atone for."
He was turning away without uttering a word, when the man who had been a tenant ofhis grandfather, and felt all the attachment of ad Irish follower to the fa¬ mily, followed bim, and inquired where he was going. " In truth, my friend/' said Connal, with au agonizing smile, " I hardly know myself:—(believe back to my men, to pe¬ rish with them ; all other hope alniost is denied me now : though my offence was involuntary, it has been pursued too far, and aggravated too much to afford a prospect of mercy. He who takes up arms against his country, let his cause be what it will, had better have turned thera against his own breast." " In the uame of heaven/' said the man, " stay and rest this one day here :—~ you are safe in tbis house: there is not a man in Dublin tbat knows you but my¬ self, and if they did, I pray it may fall into ruins over my head if it refused to shelter the grandson of \VK^rven/'
" The grandson of O'Morven will not purchase shelter by the ruin of him who gives it," said Connal, a faint gleam of his native pride breaking through grief and wretchedness. " I will be gone tbis moment. I do feel there is that weight of ill-fortune laid on me, tbat wherever I am I must bring evil and danger on those around me,—Let me begone : I am strong and well :—this Herculean frame was not given me for nothing : it has been al- ready well tried, and is likely to bear more before it is laid at rest." The man then importuned him with such urgency of distress and aifection to stay but a few hours, that Connal iolt almost subdued, " I believe I must/' said he, press¬ ing his burning forehead vvith his hand, in which a thousand pulses seemed beat¬ ing: " I believe I must yield to this weakness for once." He then threw himself on the bed, the first he bad lain on for many months,
and intense fatigue operating with this rare indulgence, procured him a long and tranquil sleep. It was evening when he awoke, and, reproaching himself for the delay, he rose hastily» and after a slight refreshment, which the importunity of his host forced on him, he was hurrying away, wben the recollection of his utter destitution oc¬ curred to him, and returning, with a cheek dyed in crimson, he was compelled to borrow a small sum for his journey, which, however, he scrupulously limited to the mere demands of necossitv. He then set out, though it was now night* determined that nothing should delay his progress. As he passed the corner of the street be was assailed by a cluster of unfortunate women, from whom he fou nil it impossi¬ ble to cxtruatc himself w, thout a force he was unwilling to use. lie evaded them for-some time, till ticht ned by their coarse importunities, lie was compeUed
to break from them by main strength. One still continued to follow him with solicitations which he blushed to hear from a female, and at length caught bold ofhis arm, and attempted to detain hira with a smile of invitation ; but tbe poor wretch's features were so ghastly with famine that her smile was like the yawn of a sepulchre. Shuddering with pity and horror, he attempted gently to disengage himself, as shegtili hung on his arm ï but her weakness was such that at the el ight effort he made she fell on the pavement. Unspeakably ihocked, he turned to raise and assist her. " It was hunger, not wickedness/ said the wretched woman, lifting bei long matted hair from her famished face and as she rose, slowly her eyes wcr< fixed on him, She screamed, and shrani from his arms : u O'Morven, is it you and may I die in your sight at last !" Again be raised and viewed her closely —it was Mary, the girl whom Waudes
ford had seduced, and whom Connal well remembered in her days of youth aud in¬ nocence. Struck with her sight, which recalled so many early associations, his heart melted within him, and the daring leader ofthe rebels wept over a perishing pros¬ titute. r ' Ah ! I know you better than you know me," said M**.ry : " I am altered iince we first sa.v each other, though you are not." " Yes, yes, I do knovv you," said Con¬ nal, eagerly : " what can I do for you ?'* " Keep me from dying iu the streets to-night/' said the miserable woman, iC for die I must, and so must my poor child, for I cai/t get bread for it eveu by wickedness/' " lt shall not perish,"sai(J Connal, for¬ getting hii o^ n dcbtitutiou« " Do you know that it is Waudesford's child ?" said Mary, looking at him, as if vol. ui. t
she feared that name would revolt his hu¬ manity. " I care not whose it may be," said Connal ; " it must not perish if I can save it." u I have a wretched garret in Bride- street," said Mary, after a long pause of weakness : " if I could reach it, and see that child once in your arms I should die in peace." He attempted to support her there ; but exhausted by famine, sbe was unable fo proceed, and Connal, fearing she would perish in his arms, rushed into a public- house that was still open, to demand some assistance for her. A man followed him to where she was leaning against the corner of the house ; but when he saw her rags, her squalid face, and the filth with which she was covered from her fall, with a savage oath he bid Conmd take'care of his strumpet himself
* f She is not mine," said Connal, with an earnest simplicity that only extorted a laugh from the ruffian. Connal, struggling with his resentment, implored him at least for some refresh¬ ment for the starving sufferer. " I will bring her something if you will pay for it," said the man ; " but she shall not enter my house, to bring shame on it." He went, and returned with some wretched wine, which he refused to let her taste till he was paid for it; and Connal in vain broke in on his narrow stock, but she was unable to swallow it when he had purchased it. " The sight of }ou does me more good than wine: that can't save me now/' said Mary.—" I wish I had life enough in me to tell you how I came here ; but my breath is going fast, and the earth will lie heavier on me for yout thinking bad of me after I am gone." " Do not exhaust yourself," said Con- i,2
nal, tenderly ; " I will think every thing you would wish me." " It is too late to speak kindly to me now," said she, kissing the hand that supported lier with her cold lips. * ç I am going fast ;—but the wretched way you found me in was not my own doing :— Colonel Wandcsford found out how I told Lord Montclare's daughter all about him, and he had ?? taken up, and threatened my life, so that I was forced to take my oath on the sacrament I would go to Dublin, and never trouble him more : so I came, and misfortune follow¬ ed me. I don't know how I have lived latterly ; but to-night I got desperate ; hearing the child cry, anu looking at the hungry walls, 1 rau out to get a morselfor it auy way, aad I met you : it was a blessed meeting, for though I roust die, my child will not." " Ιέ shall noti it shall not!" cried Connal, melt inj; w ith compassion, "while I can earn a morsel for it/'
A gleam of passion trembled ίη her dying eyes :— " The beautiful daughter of Lord Montelare never loved you more than 1 did, but she deserved you better." " Speak no more," said Connal, start¬ ing at the name : " you exhaust your strength. Try if you can reach your lodging now." She attempted to obey him, but in vain, and he was obliged to bear her in hit arms fo her miserable mansion. The child was asleep on some straw. Connal hurried out, after laying the mo¬ ther beside it, for food for them both ; but every place was now shut, and after traversing every street he knew, he was compelled to return, and sit beside tht bed of death. She knew him still, and when, throwing himself on the ground beside her, hs took her damp, convulsed hand, she struggled to smile on him, 'and when be l3
removed her dishevelled ha ? and wiped the cold drops from her forehead, her lips moved to thank him, though the power of speech was gone. Connal had witnessed and encountered death where it had stared him in the face, and been dealt to his naked breast, blow after blow, till he wondered at his own safety, and he wislied himself in such a scene again, while compelled to watch this slow and painful gradation of life. Her last effort was to clasp her hands to¬ gether in supplication, and then try to extend them to her child, whom she thus committed to his care with the dumb elo¬ quence of deatb. Connal, whose attention toher had nojt remitted for a moment, now turned to the child, and gazed on it, believing it asleep. " This is my enemy's child," he said : "if I Jove it, it must be because my heart is not devoid of humanity. I was not formed for the scenes of violence
THE MILESIAN. 3&3 into which I have been forced:—oh> î that the streams, for waut of whicb my heart has been so long withered, may onco more be ßermitted to flow in their natu· ral channels, that I may live to those whom I love and am loved by." Yielding to the emotions that over· flowed his heart, he stooped to kiss the infant as it lay : he was struck by the coldness of its touch. He raised it in his arms : it was dead : it had slept its life away, and lay at rest beside its mother. The people of fhe bouse soon entered, to strip the bodies of their miserable clothing, and the room of ?^? thing it contained, except the straw on which they lay. Connal was then left alone wifh the corses, and unable to leave their remains without ons witness to save them from indecent neglect, he continued to lean against the bare walls till a coffin, pro· vided by the parish, was procured, and be expended the remainder of bis scanty l4
stock to bribe one attendant to follow them to the grave. It was night when he commenced his journey. The fate of Mary had taken from him all thought of bis own, and he set out without reflecting how a journey of upwards of a hundred and twenty miles could be performed by an indivi¬ dual destitute of the means of procuring a single meal. As he entered on the circular road, he observed a horseman, who appeared tobe waiting for some passenger: he rode a few paces forward, and then retired to the side of the road. Connal advanced without fear or care : the horseman placed himself full in his way, and bend¬ ing from his horse, said-—" You are tho man I wanted ; I knqw you by your figure : no man like you has been on this road.—Delany, of Francis-street, sent me here to watch for you, and give you this, and this : he knew you would not take them from himself:" and as ha
spoke, dismounting, he put a purse into Connals hand, threw the reins of his horse over his arm, and springing over a low wali, disappeared in a moment. Connal, thus unexpectedly delivered from difficulties with which it was almost impossible to contend, pursued his journey witb resolutions to indemnify, by any sa¬ crifices that nature could spare, the ge¬ nerous man who had thus contributed to his safety. He proceeded with such expedition that on the second night he reached Loughrea, and dark as his prospects were, Armida's look, her smile, broke like a beam of Hght on his heart, and ho felt it was impossible for those wbo love to despair, though nothing but the ob¬ ject was left to them in life. As he rode slowly along the border of the lake, a delicious calm breathed itself into his soul; the enthusiasm of love made all things seem possible ; a dream of future happiness wandered over his heart ; and l5
bis late stormy existence seemed to dis¬ perse before its light. As he turned into tbe dreary road that leads to Gort, he heard the report of a pistol close to him, and tbe ball, whizzing in his ear, passed through his hat, within two inches of the brain. He started, but was instantly compelled to exert all his strength to manage bis terrified horse, and, while drawing up the reins, was dashed from his seat by a blow that seemed given by a flail* He fell, and while trying to disentangle himself from the reins, three men rushed on him at once : two fastened on him as be lay, ap¬ parently with intent to strangle him, With convulsive strength he rose, tore limself from their gripe, and dashed one of thera to the ground with a force that left him senseless; but, while grappling with the other, be felt himself several times wounded in tbe back by the third. Despairing of life, he determined at least to sell it at the price of one of bis mur-
derer 's, and turning on the man behind him, with whom, though on one knee, he was almost on a level in height, he tore the instrument frem his hand: it was a case-knife, and the edge, as he wrenched it away, gashed his own al¬ most to the bone, but he yet retained strength enough to plunge it twice into the ruffian's side. He fell with a groan, which thrilled Connal with horror, for he had never yet shed the blood of a fellow-creature in a personal conflict. There was but one now to be dealt with, for one lay breathless, and the other apparently dead. As Connal, stag¬ gering with horrof and loss of blood, approached him, the wretch threw him¬ self on his knees, and supplicated for * mercy, though Conual was unarmed. At tbat moment the light of the moon, as it rose over the Lake of Loughrea, fell on bis face, and Connal beheld one of his own men. Twice with a trembling hand he wiped ? w ay the cloud of mist and
blood that hung over his eyes, and even when close to the man, he was unable fo ask him fbe cause of this attempt, but gazed on him with eyes that doubted their own evidence, " Spare my life, spare ray life l* cried the wretch, in an agony of terror ; " I had an oath I could not break : I had an oath to take your life." " To take my life ! " repeated Connal : " I twice saved your's: I remember you well." " Oh ! I am a dying man/' cried the murderer, writhing on the ground in tor¬ ture : " I feel I have broken a limb in fhat struggle I had with you ; I did not think you were so strong, or I never would have attempted it." " You might have known it well," said Connal ; " for twice but for me you would have perished the night wc march¬ ed from the mountain. Little did I think f ? have seen your hand aimed against my life, to whom you owed your own/'
" Oh, Christ, I shall die !" cried the suffere* , screaming with bodily and men¬ tal anguish : " I shall die, and my soul must go to hell. I have no priest, and there is a curse on my soul if I did not do what I swore, and I have no priest." " You have a God," said Connal, solemnly pointing to heaven. "Oh ! don't talk to me of heaven," said the wretch ; " so much the worse for me if there is. Help me to some cabin if j ou can: I knew you would be mer¬ ciful, so I did not care what happened, and that was what made me more ready to take your li r e." " You shall not be disappointed in the mercy you expected," said Connal, " though never was one more unworthy of it." He then pursued, and caught his horse, and attempted to place fhe man on it, but the ieast movement ofthe animal was such intolerable pain to bim, that Conoul
\
was compelled to lift him in his arms, and proceed on foot with him to the next cabin. A boy was then sent to the town for assistance : a military surgeon was brought, and Connal, insensible of dan¬ ger when humanity invoked him, per¬ formed offices about the patient which the people of the cabin shrunk from : he held, soothed, and sustained him, while the fracture was examined, and the dress¬ ings prepared ; and such was the impa¬ tience of the sufferer, tbat but for Con¬ nals presence he would have refused to permit tb* surgeon to set or dfcs* it. " You «we your life to this gentle¬ man," said the surgeon ; " but for his assistance mine would have been una¬ vailing." The man groaned, and hid his face : the surgeon then rising, glanced his eye on Connal, whose figure had struck bim on his first entrance ; aud observing his pale countenance, and hair matted with
blood, he exclaimed with astonishment at his neglect of himself, and begged to examine his wounds. " They are not worth attention, sir/* said Connal : " a few scratches that I got defending my servant from the ruf¬ fians who attacked us," But as he spoke, the deadly sickness that he felt, and tbe cold drops with which his face was bedewed, made bim feel the necessity of yielding to his friendly importunities ; and when he submitted to be undressed, the deluge of blood that still issued from his wounds, and drenched the hands ofthe surgeon, filled him with mingled horror and admiration. " Good God !" said he, " is it possible that man could bear what you must have borne without a murmur ?" " I was occupied by my attendance on that poor object," said Connal, " and scarce felt I was wounded, till my clothes ted in blood."
" He ought to be a valuable servant to such a master/' said the surgeon. Connal sighed, and at that moment the thought of this man's ingratitude was the only wound he felt. He liberally re¬ warded the surgeon, and the moment he retired, returned to the road to discover if any traces of the other two assassins remained. There was uo appearance of them : some marks of blood were on the road, and the knife with which he had been wounded. The man, who had been only stunned, recovered, and findiug his companion dead, had flung his body into the lake, and fled. Connal, after exa¬ mining every adjacent spot by the moon, was compelled to return ίο the cabin, and to his astonishment it was deserted. Symptoms of fever, the dread of the common Irish, had appeared on the suf¬ ferer with such violence, and his ravings were so horrible, that every individual fled from the danger, and not one would
remain with him but the man against whose life his arm had just been lifted. All day Connal listened to his ravings, and held him on his bed of straw : at night, when he sunk into a sleep, he went out in search of medicine and ne¬ cessaries which he determined to admi¬ nister himself, for he remembered the inquiring looks ofthe surgeon, and dread¬ ed that this unhappy man was doomed to be the means of his destruction, cither by his crimes or bis sufferings. But this close confinement, the infected air, the anguish of his wounds, and the agitation of his mind, at length subdued him, and he felt the same fire burning in his veins with which those of his companiop were scorched. Still not daring to quit the cabin, for fear of the delirious cries of the sick mau betraying him to an acci¬ dental passenger, he continued to aggra¬ vate his complaint by want of air, re¬ freshment, and the damp of the cabin floor, on which he lay, and at length was
only sustained by the hope that his com* panion wouhl recover in time to bestow on him some of the care which had pre¬ served his own e s istence. The very day that his aching limbs refused to support him any longer, and the cabin seemed on fire to his burning eyes, his compauion recovered his strength and reason suffi¬ ciently to be able to give himself that assistance that Connal could give no longer. He disclosed the state to which the care of bim had reduced him, and though he shuddered at being compelled to entrust his life to the man who had so lately attempted it, there was no alter¬ native, and he had a faint hope, that, though devoid of principle, he was not dead to gratitude and humanity. The effort he made to speak increasing the confusion and pain of his head almost intolerably, he hastened, while his intel¬ lects remained, to inquire the cause of the attack made on him by men whom ha had never injured.
" You thought so," said the men, " but there were sometljat hated you, only because they could find no fault with you ; a captain of rebels ought to have more ofthe devil in him than you had." " And who prompted you to take roy life," said Connal, " for I cannot yet be¬ lieve it was your own design,'* " It was Brennan," said the man after a long pause." " Brennan !—gracious heaven ! the man whom of all the band I trusted and valued most," * r Yes : but he fell in love with the lady that followed you: Lord Mont¬ clare's daughter, and he knew that he never could gain her while you Hved, and »o he swore us to murder you." From that moment, a burning fren2y raged in Connals brain: not a gleam of reason remained, the horrors of Armida's fate fell like a mass of burning iron on biro, and crushed by its fiery torture, every faculty and every feeling lay pros-
trate within him. The intense heat of that summer prolonged his sufferings,, and for three months he was lost ia alter¬ nate paroxysms of stupor and delirium : when he recovered, not the sHghtest trace of former events returned to his mind, nor was there any thing around him to recall them : he found himself stretched on a bed, in a room he had never seen before : an old man was sitting on the foot of the bed with his back to liim: Connal sat up, and looking round, uttered a few words of reason : the old man turned, and sinking on his knees, the sudden burst of joy and devotion with which he welcomed this glimpse of sanity almost extinguished it : " Don't you know me ?" he cried, kneeling beside Connal, and kissing his white emaciated hand : " I am the man you passed the night with in Eyrecourt, that you saved from dying of hunger : this is my bed, and my house that I bought with the money you gave me : there was a blessing in it, and every
thing hag prospered and throve with me since: and don4 you know me then after ail ? sure there is not a stone in the wall but wha í ought to know you, as ifyou were their owner.'* tc I believe í recollect you/' said Con- nal, "but ) ou must forgive me, for my memory is much üb aken." <f Oh, blessed be the hour," said the man without heeding him, ' f thatl was benighted, and lost my way coming from Loughrea, and groped about till I got into a hole of a cabin where they had left you tied down on a lock of straw, with nothing hutan empty pitcher beside you— I made no nnre of lifting you up in my arm?, and putting you across the car, no more than if you were a child, and brought you home to your own house here, for your own it is, and here I have kept you safe v. ithout a soul knowing it, while all the country was in an uproar about you : that villain that was with you, the devil receive his soul, though
you spared his life, and watched him in his fever, until you caught it yourself, the very minute he saw you on your back without a soul to help or stand by you, lie went and gave information to a ma¬ gistrate, and you were not a minute out of the cabin before he himself led them there iu pursuit of you, and ever since they have been scouring the country day and night for you, while you could not so much as lift a'hand to bless yourself." " Ob, I remember it all .'"said Connal, starting from the bed, " and I must be gone this moment." The entreaties of the old man and his wife, who even knelt to him, were now in vain—the image of Armida, deserted— Armida in the.power of Brennan revived all the fierceness of frenzy without its delirium, and it was not till when at¬ tempting to break from them, he fell prostrate en the floor, that he became conscious ofhis situation : but not even # ihis could detain bim for an hour, the
irritation of his mind producing an arti¬ ficial strength. He tore himself from their distracted prayers, and pursuing his journey with supernatural speed, seemed to overcome danger by desperation alone. No one encountered him as he rode; fate appeared to reserve him for this struggle, and be airived in the very moment no arm but his could have saved her.
END OF vol, III.
U. ÇhAíOLK, Printer, W«U-Mrcct, Looéou»
