Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The wild Irish boy
THE
WILD IRISH BOY.
Lady Montrcvor s Story. ^\.LL Biography, I believe, should be¬ gin with a moral sentence. I am afraid the moral sentence will come in of itself at the conclusion of mine; besides to confess a truth, the first (of the kind) I ever told in my life, I know not a single moral maxim of which my life would be an exemplification, except by the rule of contraries ; so, as the clown says in Barbarossa, " For want of Pro¬ logue I will tell my Storv." I cannot imagine what I was originally intended for; certainly not for a woman of fashiv n ; for to the best of my recollec- VOL. Ill· в
tion, I had an heart once. One of the belles of Louis the fourteenth's court said, that she could not remember re¬ taining her heart, or something else, after she was seven years old. I think I was about sixteen when I first peeped into the world, and saw—what d'ye think I saw?—a man. You need not stare, my dear, he was really a man; not the creature of his taylor and the women; not a man by courtesy, but in bis own right. There was-—what I had better not think of now. W T hen the thought of that man floats over my mind, I seem to myself like Lucifer hovering on the outskirts of light, and healing his scars with the distant air of Heaven. I had better speak of him no more ; if I do, these starts of passion will disfigure my story, as they have done my life. But wdiat in passion is so horridly insupportable as love and re¬ morse.
When I came out ; as they say, at six¬ teen, the men said that I had twice the beauty, and the women that I had twice the bel air ; and all the world allowed that 1 had ten times the vanity of any daughter of fashion in London. I agreed perfectly with them all, and did not know with which of my attributes I was most flattered. About this time half a dozen sicklv brothers and cousins died, and I became the heiress of immense wealth, though the title was extinct, for want of a fool of a different sex. Then everv body found out that I had ten times the beauty, &c. &c\ &c. that I had before; and for fear of being in¬ consistent I increased my vanity in the same proportion. Yet with all this, I was not destitute of all good, though what it was, 1 can hardly now re¬ member. í believe it was rather a capacity of good, an improvable spot in the waste
lands of vanity, that no one thought it worth their while to look after. But, my dear, I might as justly describe my former self by my present self to you, as exhibit the beauties of a country through which an earthquake had passed. I find I must return to this man (whose name shall never pass my lips.) When we were actually children, I had given him a promise in writ¬ ing, in that strong form which pas¬ sion never learned of the law, to marry him, and none but him. All this was done according to the best precedents of ro¬ mance, on some moonlight night or morn¬ ing, under a branch where two pigeons were very pert and amorous. I try to make you smile, my dear, but you will weep without an eflfort. This memorial he kept, he said, as a pledge of affection ; I said, as a constraint on my feelings. I had now a greater number of ad¬ mirers than of any thing else, except
follies. My levee was absolutely a shop of coronets, stars, and ribbands» all the pretty things were marked with the same price— my fortune. But in the corner was a small parcel of pre¬ tensions, including only every virtue of the human heart, of which the price was myself Yes, I owe it to my former self, to say I loved that man ; but it was with a woman's love, a vain selfish love, that delighted in the homage it knew not how to appreciate or to deserve, and pleased itself with the prostration of an heart whose conquest it valued more than its virtues. Oh, I was a creature vain, volatile, presumptuous, I was un¬ worthy of a noble heart's love Ì It was my pride, my despicable pride, that first took the alarm ; he was the only man that addressed me without д title. I blushed that he should hold an influence over me, that I thought I dis¬ covered a knowledge of in every one n 3
who appioachcd mc (though bi> honour¬ able love had kept it a* secret a^ delicacy or vanity could wish); and foolishly I ascribed what was a natural deference for a supcnor character, to the restraints of this invidious taibman. Oh, I was a weak intoxicated wretch, unworthy of Ьь generous love ! Do not imagine, im dear, that all this exclamation is unintentional, I am fluttering in my nairativc, like a fascinated bird, over the very jaws of ruin, and these short uneasy sallies suspend me for a moment longer. But whv need I be long in relating, what was but too soon in doing. Among the crowd, who " bowed and talked of love," your father was one. You know your father, my dear, bis exterior I mean—thev who can sec the ** mind in the \4age.' ,% need not look furthei than his. Such as he was, with all the graces of a man of the faunon, and ien times the intellect of one, I fixed on him
as a proper instrument to execute all the devices of my piidc, and jealousy, and van"*v. I disclosed to him (indelicate and unprincipled) the M^cict of my en¬ gagement, and commlviioned him to request that the paper which contained it might be icstored to nu\ Wretch that I was î The act 1 dared not be ouiltv of myself, I added tenfold the guilt of meanness and indelicacy to, bv em- ploying another to do it. It is the na¬ ture of women (and their curse) to com¬ promise between evils, not from a consi¬ deration of their magnitude, but of their distance. I could bear the thought of his distress, his resentment, but I vaud not bear the single glance of his dark eye, had my request been personal, I can scarce analyse my motives now-, but I believe them to haw ht en not quite so bad as your eyes have pronounced them. I thought if I could get that paper, my Knowledge of my own feelings would be lì î-
clearer, I should be a better judge whe¬ ther I really loved, and if I did, my love would have more merit as well as sin- ceritv, I had a faint hope that in the ve¬ hemence of passion he would refuse it, and my vanity was gratified by the hope. At the bottom of my heart lay the selfish thought of a few vears more of lihertv without a bar, and pleasure without a monitor. Your father accepted the commission with an eagerness that might have undeceived me. The time of ne¬ gotiation, which I passed in vicissitudes of hope and fear, of reproach and con¬ gratulation, was soon over. On the first mention that I had disclosed the secret of our engagement, to an envoy, he sur¬ rendered the paper without uttering a sentence, I passed a short interval burn¬ ing with impatience, and shame, and re¬ sentment, and hope. 1 expected an ex¬ planation, I prepared an apology, I ac-
cased, I soothed» I vindicated, and I pleaded. No part of my life had before been so restless and miserable î yet such has been every part that has followed, that I wish it had lasted for ever. The interval was not long; the next morning I was informed he had quitted England. for ever. Such was the intoxication of my vanity, I could not believe it.— Such was now the conviction of my passion, I dared not believe it. My heart misgave me. When in a few hours after I saw your father—saw him with that cruel smile мЫсЬ I vet see. and which vou mav see anv day in Fuselľs picture of the serpent and Eve—I asked him with a faultering voice (for guilt ab ways, bumbles) for the paper. He showed it to me at a safe distance, talked of his happiness, my condescen¬ sion, i4c. &c. I was stunned. He had not the mercy to let me doubt long. He let me read the paper. The form was strong and valid, but ro name was e\ в 5
pressed in the engagement, 1 was bound to whoever had possession of the paper. My signat ui с was not plainer than my ruin, I know I should have resisted: 1 know I should have done an} thing, but what I did —but shame and impor¬ tunity ami disgrace at the first opening of life terrified mc. AW this would not have done but for some remains of proud and womanish resentment, at the desertion of a man who left mc without the honor of a vindication, or the tenderness of a farewell. I can dwell upon this terrible period no longer. There is,, perhaps, no pain like retracing steps to evil, which might have been shunned when they were first entered on, and of which the repetition ad<U the novelty of recent pain to the gnawings of inveterate гепголсГ * f' must dismiss this—I was frightened and flattered and beset. In a few weeks, I was a briile— a peeress— чя wretch í —- Nor could all the glare and tumult of ι my other distinctions prevent my feeling
ehe last, I believe theie is nothing morc decisive of the chuiaetcr than a cum le¬ ti on of certain and permanent mi>ery. it mubt make us either saints or elevils. 1 had too much humilitv for the former—* and 4) I became what 1 am. I cannot describe to you the facility \vith which I aeloptcel au v rca^oniníi that my pas-don·* Miggcsted to me. I knew ihat I was voung, anel weal t hv, aml beautiful, and witty, and the woiid told me that to be so was to be happy. Now 1 felt I was inferable, but Ntill 1 believed the world, and resolved to be as happy as the envy of society, and the abuse of my advantages coulel makerne. Oh there is no telling the spirit of >plcnctic gaiety, and romantic wickedness with which eme fastens on the world, dctcrmincei to lake all İt can give, hut ilei ing that peace it cannot give—I elid all that a bride anel a peeress could do to dazzle c\ en one and myself. Lady Wcsthampton's equipage,
and entertainments, and diamond hoop, and court-hoop were talked of, till praise or envy could say no more. All this did va*tlv well ior three or four winters : at last I began to be weary of folly, then I tried vice. Do not start, my dear, " Can women then no way but backward fall У' Do not you think gambling vice—don't you think extravagance vice—don't you call neglect of my health, my peace, my reputation, my children, myself vice? Such is the morbid taste which we ac¬ quire from the habits of the world, that actually nothing but what has the haut gout of vicious extra\aganee will go down with us, I led an horrid life ; horrid even to m j self!—my talents, my capacity for better things, my powers of being useful, or being happy, I pnjued myself upon martyring to tasteless wick¬ edness; like Cleopatra dissolving the pearl in vinegar, they gave a kind of lavish and fantastic rirhntss to the draught;
but it was as umavonrv as ever. Besides my very pretensions to supreme fashion were often doubtful. I bad sometimes too much feeling for a fashionable dasher—too much religion for a wit— too much conscience for a gambler. A thousand and a thousand times, like a truant boy, I measured the distance I bad strayed, and wished myself back at any price. But there was no hand to guide me—not even an eye to encourage me. Had any one good creature but looked me steadily in the face with an expression of pity, I am sure it would have broke my heart or mended it. What do you think, my dear?—in my despair I attempt¬ ed to extort something like happi ness troni your father : It was despair indeed ! Since I have mentioned your father, I will tell you a little of bis vices in place of my own. Never man com¬ menced life with such advantages, rank, wealth, talent, spirit* The picture had
but one shade; he was a mere voiup- tu-u\—nothing nwie. Pleasure was bis system ; but he was conscious of his great pouci'N and he imagined that he could enjoy all species of pleasure in rotation, that gross and refined pleasures \>ouid follow each other in amicable suc¬ cession, uithont cucioaching on their respective claims and capacities. Never was ih«. re a greater error, lie that sa¬ cı İİİlcs the night to intemperance, will not, t annot in the morning have an eye fur nature, or un head for study. The breath of heaven will not sn ell wocMii^iy to the feverish wretch; the very lati¬ tude which is the conscepicnce of eü^:~ pation will compel u* te> ^eek íer luar anel obvious pleasures toıclİt ve ib wca¡i- ness, it will îi(;t leave us the actis iîy that is necessary for remote, or the deli¬ cacy of oigan that is requisite for rctincd enjoyment. This í have experienced myself; so
has your father, lie found that the gaieties of the night left him unfit for any thing but a repetition of them on tlu following night ; so he slept away ah the interval, pour passer le temps. With talents the most original and dis¬ tinguished, he became a mere gourmand ; because the pleasure of eating may be enjoyed more easily than any other. He is now a Co mms, who has \о>Л his wand, and is chiven from his palace of enchantment, but grasps the cup still. A few yeais ago, a most extraor¬ dinary party rose in the fashionable world; they were a number of pc Ac who found it easier to кшцЬ than to think, and therefore lauirhed at everv thing, and never thought at all. Laugh. iun, frolic, were the watch-words of tins society ; and terrible, indeed, to sen>e and feeling, and modesty it was, when the watch- w ords were given. Ileally they resembled more a party in
masquerade, burlesquing rank by the most egregious mixture of buffoonery- more like the court inTom Thumb—than characters in real life. The first time I ever was among them, I actually blushed (as the famous Magdalen picture was said to weep) au bouts de doigts. How¬ ever, my motto was never to be out¬ done ; and I accommodated myself to their style of conception and language, with such facility, that the whole society declared, Lady Westhampton was more novel, more poignant, more recherche than any professor of the style. I went home, with my head aching, and my heart too, at my proficiency. Such things as I have heard—such things as I have said ; some of them I could not understand, some I would not under¬ stand, but the worst of all were those I did understand. I will tell yeu a circumstance about those people, for it is in some measure
connected with my own history. Fun was their object; but the triumph was complete, when they could abase or cor¬ rupt what was really good, and worthy, and eminent. There was a voung cler* gyman of some abilities, and some worth, but whose vanity certainly ex¬ ceeded both, who had got one of the first lectureships in London. His va¬ nity, however, was w r ell directed ; it sti¬ mulated him to professional excellence; he was an eloquent preacher, aid as fond of his own homilies, as the archbishop in Gil Bias was of his. The quizzical society fixed on him as an excellent subject. I will not say I was wicked or weak enough, but I was vain enough, ('which is often worse than either, by its consequences) to be drawn into this plot, by the praise of my ta¬ lents for conducting it. The very vice I was tempted to expose, I betrayed most egregiously myself in the attempt;
so much was I dcgiaded, from want of proper objects to direct my ambition or my powers, that the laugh of fools had a power to bribe or to fiightcn mc into any thing. A party of us went one even¬ ing, looking as grave as lurking mis¬ chief could, to hear him preach. He soon discovered us ; and wretched in¬ deed was our joy at finding that we had the power of making a man of taicnts faulter and hesitate, from his fear or his desiie of our suffrages. According to plan, we redoubled our attention, and threw such staring admiration into our faces, that the poor man became abso¬ lutely ridiculous : he dashed on, deck¬ arn* out his garbled declamation with ill- remembered scraps from other sermons, and torn limbs of metaphors, and simi- lics and illustrations that " wondered how the devil they came there." His tones became absolute screams, and his gestures those of a maniac. livery sen-
tence was echoed by our party, with "roans of contrition, something like those with which the Vicar of Wake¬ field's sermon in jail was received» and by which they contrived to stifle their laughter ; but I topped my part, for, standing up, with a composure of face that cost me no little pain, I delibe¬ rately took notes of passages which more resembled cross-readings, or the svbilline leaves in a storm, than the sen- tences of a sermon. 1 am sure all the congregation were undeceived, but the poor man himself descended from the pulpit, with the air of Paul descending the Mars Hill. There we thought the farce ended; and, like Falstaff, we re¬ solved it should he laughter for a month, that we had made a worthy man ridicu- ious, and di>turbed a devout congrega¬ tion. Cut what was my astonishment a few nights after, at seeing myself ьо* licited by a billion of bows, to look to
wards a little spruce figure in black, whom, when I had put up my glass, I hardly recollected to be the preacher our party had quizzed. I could scarce be¬ lieve my eyes : it was at Lady D — —'s, one of the most dashing houses in Lon¬ don. I actually took the trouble of in¬ quiring how he could have got in, and learned, that since the night of our fro¬ lick, the man had been so intoxicated by the belief of our praise and admira¬ tion, and particularly of mine, that, with indefatigable pains he had insinu¬ ated himself into a company where he understood he would meet me, and en¬ joy the applauses of his eloquence from my own lips. Tor a moment I pitied the man ; but the party had him in their talons, and they would not release him either for pity or shame. He was put down to play at the table with me, his partner was a companion (an humble one in piinciple as well as fortune) of
Lady D^ —— *s; her cuc was to lose f which she performed with an impatience that was capitally acted. But the looks, the gestures, the toute of the little par¬ son, was so outre, his compliments so bizarre, and his toute so hyperbolical, that I could hardly command myself enough to win. At length, his repeated losses roused him from his trance of de* light; he endeavoured to play with judg¬ ment, but judgment he diti not possess. When the last game was concluded, like all the rest, he tremulously asked the rate we had been playing ; his partner informed him, and obliged him at the same time with the exact account of his losses; it was probably about a fourth of his salary : the creature, with agony in his face, confessed he had nvt so much about him. I was about to request he would account м itli me; but my partner, with vulgar rapacity, required from him all the money lie had, which still left a
terrible balance, and to be informed of his address. They pillaged him to his last shilling! Oh, 1 was ыск of their horrid fun İ I pitied rhc unfortunate man, and with more painful conviction I pitied mvself. It did not end there, the poor man was unwilling to leave his monev with- outan effort: the employment he had engaged in from vanity, he pursued from avarice; in the vain and desperate fight of ignorance against skill and ra¬ pacity, he frequented the card-table night after night. His talent?, his duties were neglected ; from an exemplary pastor, he became a gambler, a pigeon, and; as a man of fashion, a caricature. His friends lamented, his parish com¬ plained, and the quizzing society laughed. At last. Lady D ------ran one morning into my room, in high spirits. Our little parson (as she called him) was blown
completely. He had lost at her house, the night before, a large sum, for which he had offered a draft, that, on exami¬ nation, had strong marks of forgery ; marks that had been veiified by his distraction Ín gi\ing it. " He is blown completely/' said sh'% actually laughing with joy, " we shall have another Dodd meditating in jail, with a gallows in perspective/' I listened to her with horror, which I could not make her feel. But whatever were her notions of hu- j inanity or of juftiee, her notions of the value of 350/. were perfectly accurate, and she actually persisted in her inten¬ tions of exposing to prosecution the wretch she had betrayed, till shocked and terrified both at her and mvself, I gave her the value of the draft my¬ self, and bribed her to forego the frolic of a legal murder. The gratitude of this woman was equal to her humanitv; j '-is soon as she was in possession of the
money, she whispered every where that Lady Westhamptoiťs reasons for quash¬ ing the business of the forged draft were more than the dictates of compas¬ sion. I confess this and other circum¬ stances, such as will occur in the life of a woman of fashion, made me start, and would have made me think, had I dared to be alone for a moment. But what could I do? I had gone too far to recede. And what could I have gained by receding? I had no home,no husband, no happiness—nothing for a retiring heart to throw itself back on. Lord W - ' ■■", whose only spring of life or motion was a search for pleasure, pro¬ posed, about this time, a tour through France and Italy. It was fashionable for the English nobility to make tours at that time. Do not imagine we ex¬ pected any pleasure from each other's society; but he was still vain of his wife's wit and beauty ; and I was still
afraid of the eclat of an external separa¬ tion ; my peace was gone for ever, but my name was unsullied. As I am going to tell you horrid things that happened» when I did go, I will first tell you some¬ thing that happened before I went. I * wrote an earnest and forcible letter to the clergyman, I mentioned to you, in which I neither spared lus errors nor my own. I absolutely insisted on his quit¬ ting London, and London habits; and that obedience might not be implicit, I procured him a valuable living, at a dis¬ tance from Portman-squarc and all its works, where I am told to this day he continues an example, that human virtue may recover from wounds appa¬ rently mortal, merely by change of* air. The night after this business was finished, I think I recollect having slept without laudanum, which I had been in the habit of using some time. vol. in, с
We went to Italy, with a splendid suite. You look as if you wanted to know something about the Italians ; positively I will tell you nothing, because my in¬ tention is rrt to deprave you but to in¬ struct. The conviction, that an invo¬ luntary insight into their character sug¬ gested to nv\ was, that if there existed on earth national religion, morals, or good sense, they cxbtcd only in Eng¬ land. Intrigue—intrigue is the entire occupation of the Italians, body and soul By the constitution, men are ex¬ cluded from politics, and women from literature, by their education, in most instances ; so they make love, as chil¬ dren do mischief; not from passion, but idleness. The inside of an Italian is exactly like the inside of an Italian church—a mixture of tawdry devotion, and childish ceremony, and antic gesture, where gal¬ lantry and religion chase each other over
the scene, anel cupids and cherubs, and Venus and Madonas. dance along in great harmony and confusion. I actually was frightened at discover¬ ing where I was, for the reputation of gallantry is not enough. In London I could hide my coward fears of decency and shame, under an affected defiance of both, that succeeded vastly well. I talked so like a woman of fashion, and a libertine, that every one was satisfied 1 had said enough, if not too much, to piove my claims; but the Italians go deeper :-—Oh, they arc an horrid peo¬ ple! Yet, such was my infatuation, such was my inability to be any thing but the creatine of ílattery and fajdon, that I went to the very brink of the preci¬ pice; aml, w hen 1 gicw мек with hor¬ ror and giddiness instead of retreating from the danger, I shut my eyes on it; and all this to please or to pain a set of hemgs uho*e piabe or envy made them
alike contemptible to me. There was at Home a very mysterious and useful cha¬ racter, the Countess В ------; she kept с -ne of the most splendid palaces in Rome, no on** knew how; but if you saw the crou aere, you would imagine that all Rome was pledged to dis¬ cover it Her entertainments were somewhat .singular: she always introduced some person in a fantastic habit, some jug¬ gler, or wizard, or wandering Jew; every thing was immediately abandoned, to witness his exhibitions ; they were gene* rally performed in a dark or shaded room, and consisted of some extraordi¬ nary deceptions of light, and disguises of persons, that were amazingly clever, they said. In short, his experiments made all the men very happy, and the ladies very wise. This woman had persecuted me with politeness since my arrival in Rome. I was warned of the
danger of her conversazione ; so I re¬ solved to go, to prove how inferior Koman wit and courage were to mine. Her apartments were crouded by all the nobility of Home : at the usual hour the conjurer appeared, as an Armenian ped¬ lar ; we all crouded intoa small room, and I began to wish, with Falstaff, that it were bed-time, and all well. Some beautiful transparencies were displayed, and while we were all gazing at them, he announced an experiment, for which he said it was necessary the room should be darkened. I fixed my eyes on the door—the lights were extinguished in a moment, I am sure by some chemical preparation, İt was so sudden. But the .scene that followed—scream¬ ing with horror, antl cursing my own folly and madness, I extricated myself from I know not whom, and strııoıderi through the darkness, till 1 felt the hang¬ ings of a window. I did not know but с 3
it was an attic one, but death was pre¬ ferable to what I dreaded, and I flung myself from it; it was on a ground floor, und I found myself in a garden, tlnough which I fled like a fawn, with¬ out knowing where flight would lead me. 1 thought I heard steps ; I rushed into a bower through the trellis of which I actually forced myself, and got into the garden of au adjacent palace. if .Madre di Dio !" said a voice which I knew to be Lady Delphina Orberry 's, who was then married to an Italian Duca, íe Who is that?"—I had never seen her twice before, yet I actually em¬ braced her, and implored her to protect me with the cowardice of real innocence. She led me to the palace, making a won¬ derful mystery of my concealment, and assuring me that if the Countess Б ------ was acquainted with my flying from, or exposing the orgies of her house, I could not reckon on my personal safety
in any part of Italy, for her taste in poisons was as ingenious as her taste in gallantry. í was terrified, you may guess how much, from the sequel of the storv. The duchess was determined not to let m v íjra ti tude waste itself in ac* knowledgments. There was a tall, thin, pale, sentimental boy at Rome, who, be¬ tween religion and love, was actually mad : every thing in the Italian charac¬ ter is blended with superstition. This spiritual Pygmalion had fallen desperate¬ ly in love with a statue of S. Veronica, which he said made such returns to his passion as no statue ever made before— it was, indeed, a beautiful ligure. Ilad he stuck to the marble, all would have been vastly well, and no ill consequences could have accrued to the saint's répu¬ tation or his own ; but unluckily, on my arrival in Home, inventing or believ¬ ing some resemblance between us, he took it into his good Catholic head, that с 4
I was the saint in person, come from heaven or hell, to reward his pious gal- lantrv. Actually, while the host was passing through the streets of Kome, and ail the devout Italians were on their knees, he fd\ on his before my coach, which stopped as usual for the proces» .sion, and addressed me in a prayer that was certainly pleine ď onction. He was an interesting boy, with daik, melan¬ choly eyes, and a shade of such mild re¬ ligious dejection over his face, that his etour derieš would rather make you weep than smile. With this unhappy boy the duchess had actually fallen in love. She loved him, she assured me, ten thousand times more than she did her Santa Pa¬ drone, and I believed her. At first I tried to laugh at her ro¬ mantic folly; but I soon found that the passions of an Italian were not to be laughed at. At last, when I had listened to her
vehement professions till I was quite weary, and a little frightened, she made me a proposal, on my compliance with which, she said, she rested the proof of gratitude for my preservation. Horrid wretch ! How fear had humbled me to listen to her. I was to array my¬ self in the costume of Veronica, and ap¬ pear in a chapel belonging to a convent, where his confessor, whom she had bribed, was to conduct him. Here I was to play my saintly part, and wave him, by inviting gestures, to a dark re¬ cess, where I was to be supposed to fol¬ low him, but where the duchess was to be concealed in my place. When I had recovered my breath, of which raffe and shame had deprived me, I answered her with as much energy of affronted honor and feeling, as if the folly which had put me in her power, had not rendered them impotent to me. She interrupted me with violence, and kissing a cross с 5
Sé TIIE VÎU> HtlSB вот. tìMit hung on her «eck;\ swore, ìrìtH Ae . virulence of a Catholìè, ond an ludan by marriage, that l>cforc night ^he . w>uW inform the countess of my flight , from ber conversione» aml before the : next, I \vouW probahly he á corse ì ihat , I owctl my Ше Ь her believing that I vrtnt away irom her party, as. otttcrs * w^Ht^mú that vshe W4>uld not preserve my secret for nothing. : Oh> dread[for ever, \ Athanasia, the consequences òf that daring^ levity, that ^ haxards the appearance of evil, from the consciousness of its being w mòre than ^. iheappearancCx a eomciousness impossb bie to communicate to others, or to trust to in ourselves, The dread of labe díame will lead any one to merit every in^putattqn of the true. With an heart as chaste as any saint in Rome, St Vero- ^ nica not exempted, i was compelled to be the pander of a vice I loath«!, and , - the imp of a soreerc^ whom I abhorrøt ,
V^ con>j)clleft aclvmUy m terror tif my life, for wint evil at that moment couitl. ; tave beťn so terrible to nwa^death? "Π»ϊο 11 ч η« parts of my narrative, my dtar, that ^ must not be told, or even imagined ; ^ye^ ; it mu$t have .turned thè brain of a gooil . Protestatoti to have scenMué gfi<te iroùì among thè , draçerks of the altar» my %ht vestment floaung likela clovni arouml n>e, »ml mv head wreathed with pht^phoňc jradU, Avhïch, in my fear^ of poı^îeal or dľviôejustice» I thought a thousand tim^ Avould Ы clwugctl into pure element lor «iv ^sike; in short, the wtele business was randacta! yitíí tìrn« Fetish art, and l^gan^wìcketlneàs. As soon 3»^ I could Г descended, атГ im¬ plored die confessor ţo take me away Лк«яй a p%cc which 1 thought xi^as, falling , ow my head« Oi\ our "passage, which . wt^unaocountabfylong, myecde^iasUc . became v^tly more s&irkwt than,.I ; ^ г ^ ч —" " СО с * . . . -
, enţdd iriìh ribut Yŕfiat cottM he think Ä. . me? WftvS not he justined in thinking the worst of me? ^ / \ : Feel for my situation, or ralher dio ì^ feel fel· ;itç fort do deserve ii JBy herovro . fc\ ity> an English \\чтшп ? р1ЧЬе first rank, and of spotless character, ^üpas plaeetl in tlie solitary power of a ruffian* who, pos-» scssing tl)e confidence of guilt> thought nothing else could be. withheld fiom J»n\ livas almost ¿aad wìtb horror Ir— Witìv the strength of phrenay» J broke from Ыт> land ran along passages of which I knew not. whetW they fcd ţeţ the dungeons of the inquisition or not, provided I escaped, 4 Àt last I fpund my¬ self in д dark, narrow» vaulted reeess ^ one dim fomp burned in it» which shewed me taintilý^ ъ с^сЩк^азйа dark figure kneeling before itJ \ Blind; with terror and flight, I grasped it, and abjured it . to save me /from α horrid shame and
. í rufo*' The figure turncx, гоипв^ -thé light of the lump fell on its free !'—— How aha» I go on!"-— -i v Athnnasi*, \rho fflt «II her mother \ vas about to say, sunk from her chair ; almost at her feet, and gr^spctl her hand, o . ' with the other Lady Montrcvor hid her Jaee for a moment - . . ^ It was he himself said .die, i» a, broken усяее— ^^ it \ras he whose name * ï never shall mention. How or \Лу he was there» 1 knew not; hut Γ hung on him as if he had dropt from heaven^ for my preservation. He did not know me , at first—I do not wondeť at it ť when he | ^Ц I wisltcd to sink into the earth» .. He had risen, in surprize—and I bad fallen from my hold ; uusuppor ted» I ièü Л6 the ground—I spread my hands be¬ fele my faceti wished him bliml—I wished the lamp extinguished—1 wished : myself on the vings of a whirtvrimU-—^ . An h^Éurt-striking pause foltoved. He :
raided mc — hediagged mc to the lamp— he traversed íny featuies, with a ga/c of hoïKîrand incicdidity. líc released mc, and a ga ui I fell, for I was not able to stand: it was the hour and the power of conviction- it came over my heart with a force proportioned to its long, unna¬ tural suspension. It is a dreadful task 1 > leim, ni oik' moment, what ) ou aie, when }cars ha\e Ik en expended in the efioit to hide írom yourself that \ery tiling. In that one moment I ft It nv\- self a lost cieature, whom folly had чшк as low as vice—whom wretchedness had made as despciate as depravity. Other convictions were with mc—our early bonis of innocent love, our hopes of better things than tithcr of us had seen or done; for l liad heard that he had become a man of unhappy, wild ha¬ bits—our remembrance of each other when — Ladv Montrevor's voice uttcily failed
her, and she bent upon her daughter's neck, and wept. " lie stood at a dis¬ tance from me, and í could luar him muttering to himself at intervals—* can it be?' Yes, v/id Î, it is—it is. \our------- í could not stand, but 1 tried to follow him on my knets—my pride was gone, I humbled myseif like a child, and vepr, as I do now. Hea" me, hear me—I ,\m miserable, very ni'Ner^ble, but I am not guilty ; my heart is broke almost. l)--.t not changed. I know \ou—1 кмисп/чт you well. 1 humbled myself to bim í pouied out m\ heait to Idm—I told him all; how despair of happiness had dii\cn meto desperate wa\ s ; howl luul become from folly and perveited ambi¬ tion, the involuntary, the shuddering pai taker of vices Γ loathed. î told him why I was there. Letore n. y wietched tale was do::c, he knelt and wept beside ire; but oh, his burning teais ! they were not such a-
fell on me, л\Ьсп fust, in the energy of young passion, they rushed into his eyes, while he looked on me. How thin and wan he was î î felt, from his being in that place, that his character had changed as well a> his person. I knew it from hi.s language : he tried to talk like a saint, but still lie wept like a man. I felt the bursts of passion that shook him, as if they would rend him in pieces. I would have shortened this scene ; but who will blame me for listening as lonsr as I could, to the voice I was to hear for the last 'rime ? He spoke much of him¬ self and of me. He said I had made him a wild, hopeless being; that he was not mad, but at times he felt his mind was changed ; that, in the wreck of his passions, he had fallen into unhappy courses, but he would not reproach me : he was restored to the bosom of the true church. But when he talked of me— when he adjured me, like him, to aban-
don the world and its vanities, when he spoke of our yet meeting where neither tears nor passion would staiu the meeting —a flood of agony drowned his voice— and I—Athanasia, let go my hand—you are in tear* yourself, leave me for some time; and remember for your comfort,'* said she, trying to smile through her anguish, " that all this was twentv vears ago—that he is dead since, and I am buried" It was some days before Lady M ——* renewed her story, for after am exertion she usually passed a long interval in those heavy dozes, which the habitual use of laudanum will produce; and from which she only awoke to call for it. At length Athanasia was summoned one evening; for tili the evening Lady M ------ was never perfectly awake. " 1 do not know, my dear," said she to Athanasia, as she was dressing, " what effect my narrative may have on vou; but with
me * it murders sleep/ So I have sent for you, to try whether my waking or sleeping d:cams arc most disagreeable; with mc in this deep loneliness, the re¬ view of these t !i: egs L· like the recollec¬ tion of a dream, I got home without any more per¬ secution ; and for some time I thought I should be fieed from persecution for ever ; for I was seized with а vio¬ lent nerveus fever. The tragedy of the <ť Fruits of a single Error/' was followed by the farce of the " Doc¬ tor ami Apothecary."' They sent for a vast number of nurses and physicians, to whom 1 took careno/ to tell mv com- plaint ; ло they found employment in taking their fees, which amused them, and síuessiníľ. what it was, which amused me; but w halever were the consequences of this masquerade to me, they were worse to our unfortunate victim, who no .sooner discovered the deception, than he -tabbed himself to the heart, in the pre*
sence of the riuehess. Tbc business was however hushed up, as none were ac¬ quainted m iib its reality, except the duchess, the pričat, and the saint. After this, }ou may believe, I found the air of Rome did not agree with mc. 1 re¬ turned to England, bringing back with me, after an absence of four years, a per¬ son polished with all the art of beauty, a mind stored with all the glaces, ou piquant, on scd u issante, ou naive—and an heart corroded by despair. Oh, it was weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable. No cieature could believe, that with the life I led, and the efforts 1 made, and the laborious confusion I contrived to keep \ψ about me, that I was actually dying of а broken heart—the slowest as well as the most certain of deaths. Oh, the depth of settled gloom to which the most mercurial spirit will sink, when unsupported by conscience and reflexion. I was the miserable (/arlini of laughing hundreds and thousands. You have
read of Carlini, who kept all Paris- laughing, and half-dying with dejec¬ tion himself, was advised by a physician, who did not know bis person, to go sec Carlini, as a cure for his hypochon¬ dria. I was the miserable Carlini of laughing hundreds and thousands. —But why did I persist in this tra¬ gical mirth ?—What could I do, my dear?—Besides, to confess the truth, tho", like Pandora's coffer, every good thing appeared to have escaped from my touch, vanity still remained behind to console me. I had no husband, no children to live to—but I had vanity, I had no »friends, no worthy applause to exert myself for ; but I had vanitv, I had not even the fresh and nimble spirit of youth—the emulation, or the curi¬ osity, or the jeunesse de l'esprit, that renders folly sweet and graceful ; but I had vanity, vanity, vanity! After all, I do not recollect that I became so de¬ sperate and hopeless, till I heard of his
death; then I felt as if all restraint, or cause for restraint was removed; fori often have seen his eye fixed on me, when half the world w T as between us. Whatever follies I was guilty of, the w oriti gave me abundant credit for, and for a thousand vices beside, that I never was, never could be guilty of. Never was woman abused as I have been. Why did not I resist, dye say ? Why, my dear, I laughed at the malice, and, I did not dislike the eclat; but when mv own children joined the cry, then my resolu¬ tion or my patience failed for a moment ; but my pride upheld me—I laughed on— hid my wounded spirit under an assump¬ tion of mirth, that made all its wounds ache again ; and submitted rather to the imputation of vice, than the mean¬ ness of pleading for reputation to my own children. Such children !—I gave them every advantage, brought them out, almost from the nursery : I have
put on their rouge and pearl-powder with my own hands. I was as much above the jealousy of mothers as I was above any ground of jealousy ; for now I may avow a superiority that can offend them no more. All was in vain—they were mere fashionables—they had no hearts— that I could pardon ; but they had no justice, no candour, no principle—that I never can. I will relate to vou, Atha- nasia, the circumstances that preceded their matches, and you shall pronounce if ever a fashionable mother was more contented to abdicate in favour of her successors than I have been. You know your eldest shier, Lady Castle Wycomb, is married to the first political character, perhaps, in Europe. I have to uive you his domestic charac- ter: —He was, I admit, my professed ad¬ mirer for many years before he married Delphina—it was not then supposed he evtr would marry. No people could un*
ders tand each other better, we had both read Kochefoucault, and the world, lie professed to admire me, because I was a fashionable beauty, to whom some politi¬ cal influence was ascribed. I professed to admit his admiration; because—-be¬ cause he was the premier. But I knew in my -»oul that man delighted not him, nor woman either. He had neither feeling nor admiration for anv one but himself; and he knew also that pour ľ affaire d'amour, S. Francis's wife of snow wouiii have been as accessible as Lady Westhampton with all her coque¬ try ; so the world and we agreed per¬ fectly well about the affair. We stopped on the brink, the world said we had crossed the Rubicon—the world was de¬ lighted with the ^caudal, and we were delighted with the reputation of it. I think Louis the XIV. confessed that no man coniti be a g км t man to his valet de chambre --Lord Castle Wy—
has verified it, though he understands and manages the resources and revenues of the wealthiest nation on earth. He is such an ideot in domestic affairs, such a dupe to peculating servants, and au whole army of placemen out of place, and men of business, who have no busi¬ ness on earth, whom like the sorcerers i u tales, he is obliged to find employment for, lest they should tear him in pieces, that actually nothing but his privileges have preserved him from a jail for life. The character is not an uncommon one, but I never saw so staking an example of it. Latterly, however, one reptile like Aaron's rod, has swallowed up all the other reptiles. A confident subtle fellow, whom nobody knew, who had latterly become his charge d affaires, or rather charge sur ses affaires, had driven away every one else from him, and been ad¬ mitted to his table, his interest ; nay, to
a share in his political confidence and consequence. So much had his fear or his gratitude to this person prevailed, that he actually went the length of a quarrel with the first families, because they did not treat him with respect. At last, this creature took a whim to sit in parliament—Could you guess the rea- vson? lie bad received some slight at the premier's table, from a baronet of an ancient family, whose ancestors bad been the representatives of a ccitaiu shire, since the first invention of shires by- king Alfred, for ought 1 know. No¬ thing could satisfy his spleen but oust¬ ing the old representative, and bearding all his ancestry to their grim faces, in the very Town-hall, where their pictures had hung since the conquest. Lut the difficulty was how to deal m ith the proud and attached electors, who had ;dwa\svotcd in favor of one biuiily. Lord Westhampton happened to vor. m. j)
have extensive interest there, which hi¬ therto had been always employed for the baronet. But now Lord Castle-Wy* comb in behalf of his candidate, suppli¬ cated, and promised, and bribed ; and Lord West— always accessible on the score of interest, consented to with¬ draw his voters ; and in order to iden¬ tify the interest of the family, Lord C. W. proposed his friend Mr. Mason, in form, as a candidate for my eldest daughter's hand. I confess I w T as amazed at his presump¬ tion; so, I believe, was Lord Westhamp¬ ton ! but a detail of the immense wealth and numerous appointments that the creature had engrossed, together with the additional promise of a brilliant di- plomatic appointment for our eldest son, then Lord Montrevor, prevailed with my money-loving Lord, who inclined to these profitable arrangements—' 4 with sweet, reluctant, amorous delay."
Nothing now remained but to win the Lady; for my part, I had laughed through the whole transaction, and I now laughed more than ever, at the idea of the reception of the proposal from Delphina, high-born, and proud, and passionate as she was. To my astonish¬ ment, she yielded in a moment; but în a manner sufficiently in character; for she intimated to Mr. Mason, that she would dispense with his presence, till it was ac¬ tually necessary, or rather metaphori¬ cally unnecessary, as they were then not to be twain, but one flesh. You will wonder if I did not cease to laugh now, when I saw my daughter to marry, without passion, or even respect, or any thing, but a rage for expence, without bounds, and levity without controul; lor the wretch whom she could thus despise, she must also not hesitate to abuse. Why, my dear, I could do no- thing; I dared not advise or appeal to D 2
her; my own conduct had deprived me of any demand on her confidence, or any authority over her conduct.—Mine to her had been merely that careless in¬ dulgence by which I tried to conceal or palliate my, perhaps, criminal indiffer¬ ence to her, and to every tinim* else. We were sisters in dress, in habits, in conversation, in mutual independence, in every thing but confidence and a flec¬ tion. But had 1 been even disposed to play La bonne mere with Delphina, I would have been alone on the stage.-— She is a woman of a proud and hard heart, and her principles are as bad, as she had a right to conclude mine to be from the exterior she saw. Λ dreadful confession has escaped me; but from it, you must observe, that I dared not advise my own child. All things, therefore, were going on in the usual train of fash iona lde mar¬ riages ; that is, the lawyers were contriv-
in« 1 how to settle a va>t deal of money on the lady; and the lady was contriv¬ ing how to spend ten tiznes the sum be¬ fore it was in her possession. One «lay as Delphina and I were passing through Bond Street, in m ν baroche, we were stopped by a croud collecting round something wc could not see. At length out of the midst of the mob rushed a man, very much frightened, and after hiin a woman, hi«* and ui»lv enough to frighten any man. The man was Mr. Mason, the woman was—his wedded wife, .she said, who had heard of his do¬ ings in the wilds of Cumberland ; where he bacì coniined her, she said, on twenty pounds a year, with his large family of small children, while he revelled with nubles iu London, like a vile perjured wretch as he was, she said. ín shoit, it is impossible to tell all she said and Ming; for it was actual recitative, with a vei\ full accompaniment fioni half a о л
dozen squalid brats, that hung around her, pretty much in the costume and tones of Sc\lla's brood, that you have read of; while he, poor man î surveyed his familv with the same loving looks of recognition, with which Milton describes Satan ogling Death, wL ι first intro¬ duced to him by Sin, as his child.— Here, you may suppose, I was disposed to laugh again ; but the truth is, I was frightened almost as much as poor Ma¬ son : the woman looked able to eat us, baroche and all; and I had no wish to tempt the fate of Tom Thumb ith a red co\v r . We drove home as fast as possi¬ ble.—Lord W. had heard all ; so lawyers met, and referees were appointed; prosecu¬ tion and pistols were talked of; and good Mrs. Mason, with her family, had taken undisputed possession of her husband's splendid house, in South-Audley Street. I confess, this affair (of which the truth soon appeared to be exactly what
good Mrs. Mason and the children had represented so strongly in Bond Street) did not surprize mc much. I knew him to be a mean low-born creature, who had crept into affluence, by practising on the obvious weaknesses of a great mind; a rat who had gnawed out his burrough in the hold of a great vessel, and then compassed the world in safety. That such a man should be married in the early part of his life was not improbable, that he should be married to a being like himself, was very probable ; and that he should desert and banish her, and be a villain in the hour of his affluence, was the most likely thing in the world. In the mean time, the election was just beginning—Lord Westhampton was to withdraw all his interest from Mason, and was posting down to take the field in person against him. Delphina was in distress between rage and shame . like a mask I have seen between half-tragic Ό 4
? hìkÌ half-cotnic; and I was detemnnetl . ta send out stx\ hwndretl tickets, for а / masked ball ; contradict tho whole story»; aml treble/my quantity of rouge» rthat " ho tİK*xxght mftrnv might alter my elitek^ whUc í was lyinjî to thé whole xvory ;—when oue morning, as I ; was coming from the Queen's drawing-room, , vhcre I thought it necessary to be jrøt at that tirae> 1 üvas surprised to see ΙλπΙ Gastle-Wycomb 4 s chariot at my door, wc alit at the 4 same moment—he follow*, ed me % unhidden, up stairs* . 1 entered one of tiie drawing-rooms hajfrangry r ha№amascd ; for all the family included him in the insult they had lately received« Л¥5е we aÏ6»e : — He tfddrcssetl nie in the nìtfòt earnest manner—rimnlored me to save ^ him from confusbn aud disap¬ pointment indescribable—swore that he would make any tenns and concession to Lord Westhampton, and if his interest in —-—shire tras not withdrawn from his
İnende* That splenetic little, devila v \ said he^ *' røsists upon .that horough-^ nothing will else satisfy him, but ţo gall , that foolish old hirpne 1 1 I Je is undone if 4 > iottl WV influence ii Withdratcn^ Ягедп 1 him ; and I aia ululone if he is tlisap·^ pointed. İle has threatened me this ^ morning in tiie most insolent niannen I cannot conceive or rtsist the ìntìuence hehasoTer\roei I cannot do without him ! lie knows it, and insults nie. Dear Lady W 4 1 tbrqw myself on your merey v dc\^se, suggest something to pacify Loni ч \Fľand your ¿laughter·** I actually was; touched hy ids per¬ plexity and disti^ss—to see the man xyho ruled the councils of Europe, crouching to the whims or an insolent dqiendànt. I tired to rouse him % irony—he did not feel it. ? Л$ to Lord W> said Ц ·* I hnow he would no.t Jong continue implacable, №ùW the lady be app(ìàcd«f ч * Aye,\ íny Lord^there^ thè гиЫ >? — ,\
u And can you imagine nothing to sa¬ tisfy—to sooth her."—" Really," said I, still ludicrously, " I know of nothing, unless your Lordship proposes for her yourself." He struck his forehead— " The luckiest expedient/'—I could not believe him serious, I requested him to consult his feelings.—-" Oh ľ' said he im¬ patiently, " It is a matter of perfect indif¬ ference to me." " How infinitely flatter¬ ing!" said I. "You mistake me, ma belle Comtesse," said he, resuming the courtier. I was very willing to mistake him ; for my eyes were dazzled by the auspicious brilliancy of Delphinac pro¬ spect. I accepted his apology, promised to submit his proposal to my daughter; and to prevent Lord Wcsthampton's con¬ tradicting the instructions, he had given his tenantry in behalf of Mr. Mason :—" Then every thing is arrang¬ ed," said he, " how happy I am in hav¬ ing a fair ally, a lovely minister !"
I assured him that my expedition was prompted by my wish to get rid of my hoop ; for I still doubted the seriousness of the whole business, I still mingled some badinage in my condolence— " Every thing then is arranged," said he, but pausing, and trying to look tender— " Mais mon cœur," ------1 laughed, and shuddered—" Oh/' said I, still speaking in French, for fear of the servants— íť An affair of the heart with you was always a sinecure affair."' He was hurry¬ ing away, when struck by his last words, and foreseeing consequences more than I ever foresaw before—I called him back. u My Lord," s; id I, " though you are a statesman, and I am a fashionable belle, the present moment requires can¬ dour. You have been my professed ad¬ mirer—you are about to be my daughter's husband ; the world has said more of our connection than-it ought ; and, per¬ haps, of our separation it will say less r> 6
than it ought; but, you know me; and you know that to vanity I have made large sacrifices, to vice never the smallest, Bereft, perhaps, through my own folly, of my natural protectors and natural confidence, I must appeal to you. Let neither vanity nor jealousy betray you to insult your wife, by slandering me and yourself Remember from henceforth. I am your mother; let me, like Ninon, convert an admirer into a son, though not with the same conse¬ quence^" lie promised with the air of a man who is thinking of other things than a woman's feelings ; and I was pieced with even this security, for be¬ ing not exposed to horrid infamy. in the mean time much was to be done —I dispatched an express to Lord W——, who was tuning with an election party at Richmond, írom which he intended to set forward t h ,t night. I sent a foot¬ man with my ο λ a chariot for Delphina,
who was at the exhibition. I gave him anote, which 1 desired should be gi\eu her beť veen the leaves of a catalogue. Every thing succeedc. as 1 couhl \\ bh. Delohina hunied home, delighted vuth her new prospects—Lord W —, mauere ilam, pie and 13urguudy, set oii that night for------shire, to recai his iibtı lie¬ rions to his agent, and arrived time enough to prevent a single man of his from polling for the independent mem¬ ber—while I hurried to my diesMng- room, not to throw off my hoop, but to draw up a bond of mauiage between Lord Castle-Wycomb and Dtlphina, under a penalty of 40,000/. on the failure, winch I presented to him in my hoop, and fairly locked the door till he had signed it. Now was the time for a coup de main. The story of good Mrs. Mason was unluckily as public as her appeal au peuple was. I went that night to the
opera, and laughed so well at the report of my daughter being married to Mr. Mason, that the people began actually to distrust their senses, and wondered with each oilier at so improbable a story, which the good souls had been propa¬ gating themselves, with more veracity than they imagined. To those to whom I was compelled, like Falstaff, to give a reason, I whispered, confidentially, that it w T as an election manoeuvre. I had no more idea annexed to the phrase than they had, yet they all went away, flat¬ tered by the disclosure, to improve it in their différent proportions of faith and knowledge. Thus ƒ did all—the idea was mine—the execution was mine—the success was mine; and the first conju¬ gal speech of Lady Castle-Wycomb to her Lord, was, that she was acquainted with the whole story of the locking-up business ; and insisted that I never should be invited into her house, except
when all the world was there, and I mHit be a figure in her rooms. This Lord Castle-Wy— repeated to me, —for the Mike, I suppose of repeating his answer, which was spirited enough, for the ghost of a departed lover in the purgatory of Wedlock to make, that he was shocked at the proposal, and never would consent to it. Of Lady C. W. however, it is but justice to mention, that she delivered her lord from his de¬ grading subjection to Mason, who is never admitted within his doors. As to the care of his property, she has taken ail that upon herself, and I am told is very successful in removing any reason for care upon the subject—so much fur mv G oneri 11. Now for our second daughter :—- Lady Invermay is, if possible, still lovelier and more worthless than her sister : — her extreme coldness, her haughty insensibility, her utter want of any thing that could touch or enchain
, thefeelînşp, repelled every one that ap* jproachcd her, Theyga*ed on the sta* ; tue, left it on its pedèstri; ànd Avàlkètl амгдуЛ Thé. «nmiàner-atkr Iiidy. ÍX tf. wàs maffved* Г passed at Sir W· P.\: it was the mo$t ridiexdons ţhîiijj in na· turc-^a party of cognoscenti—no crea¬ ture was to be adinittetl that had not Ычщ a member, of tiie Amili— imthrog was to lie spoken at meals bnt Italian·*— no sound hut of Italian melody vraş to he breathetl àt the concerts;.the house itself was d>nstrncted after thè model of the villant Arcolono, wtew^iortlrèjio- nor of antiquity, they found a glaced window. All this ctRtiil he Ъоп^е э but. there was no bearing our little, lyings virtuoso host. lie was enough to raise or lay the spirits of Mende« Pinto» or Sir John Mandeyille: No one had seen any thing that had not seen an eruption of Vesuvius, and such eruption as he had witnessed, no tow& had ever scţfn;
As. he saVat his table vomitmg oui monn* tţte of fiw> aml ecìw of hva* 1«? re*. inîndèd xw dT. ti|ŕ; dWrtV of old fo· nvmcc> fèa$l<»g ¿he ;kiiighb ai 1 btìt t»bfe with \ţW Jîcs of en^hvintuunL . But in tîıc mUfet of ató our taitu *udi stupidity, wh«n we %ere just beginning - tev wish forja tittle English and common .sense, there dakhed iu upon u& a vrild . vpuwg Highland nobkman r à nephew of . SirWs» \rhoviolated Yirtu, WKtcharined the heart J*y evwy word aud look and motion ; it was Ins delight to ctmfound and torment his Ancle, to dlsntmvnt the endless cavalry of statues that blocked up hb gardens» aud throw himself at full length Upon the flirusy Etruscan seats» and haug his hunting cap on the ¿pires of the ehrystal candelabra, lib did not take the smallest notice of Lady Invermay, as she was soon, tu be, but evipry thing else Ttraa driven away Д>у an tvcnmcHt uv* ^чцмг. Д black marble
figure arrived from Puzzoii, purchased by Sir ^V/s agent there, about which there were as many disputes as about Dr. Scribtcrus's shield, or Mambrino'S helmet, or any other antique, useless, and ugly, and inestimable. Sir W. in¬ sisted that it was the Syrian Venus, and had all the foreign academies about his ears. I assured him it must be the witch Canidia, or one of the hideous mourners at an ancient funeral ; and Lord Inver¬ ni ay taking the hint, swore it was the picture of the old woman who led the funeral cry at the interment of his uncle, the Laird of Kilcarron, and died of drinking spirits, in honor of the solem¬ nity. This almost drove Sir W. mad: to strike us dumb, he determined to have a public Apotheosis of his deified statue:—-he set apart a small cabinet for lier temple, filled it with heads and legs and wings of eastern deities; erected an altar, so perfectly constructed on ancient
principles, that it was impossible for the unhappy divinity to чг, stand, or kneel on it ; and persuaded the ladies to offi¬ ciate round the figure, in the attitudes of sacri lice, dans le costume ľ orient; we were all to present flowers or gems or shells ; or, if we had nothing worst*, our own figures. Ail this was suificiently nouvelle and recherche; but with true childish gaudiness of taste, Sir W. determined to invest his statue in a spangled robe and cestus, and begged of me to adjust this doleful masquerad¬ ing dress ; after which the figure looked so like the little swarthv Ladv of Loretto, that I assured Sir W. that he would be fined for keeping an unlicensed chapel. On the evening before the fete, I bad just led a large party into the cabinet, to adjust the flowers from which the dra¬ pery of the nich was to be suspended ; when, stretched on a «opha, quite un* conscious of anv divinitv but Moţ
pheus, we saw Lord Invermay fast asleep, lie had been out with an hunt¬ ing pai ty all day ; came home fatigued, and, as u^ual, took his repose on the first sopha he met. The glow of health was on his cheeks, which were temptingly ¡shaded by his ruddy hair. He looked charmingly for a votarist in the Temple of Venus, consulting her by dreams. As he lay, half sunk among the roses with which the sopha was strewn, a peer, who had read Pope's Homer, observed he only wanted a Juno, to represent Jupi¬ ter asleep on Mount Ida, which poured forth flowers to refresh his slumbers. Fond of the praise of my graceful atti¬ tudes, and graceful confluence, I placed myself at the sopha, suspended one arm over his face, and bowed myself in an attitude which extorted "charming! — grace-contour Γ fi om every one that knew how to speak virtu and French. Lord iv, drawing the ce.stus from the
poor little hla' k dc vu of a goddess, de¬ clared, that í was mort- iM>ith\ of it ; and besides it was the сомиич of the character I represented, who had bor¬ rowed it for the occasion. As he was folding ît around me, I perceived, by the undulation of Lord 1п\чгп.;\\ lip, that he was awake, and preparing to catch me in his arms. 1 started from the sopha, just time enough to prevent him, and ran laughing out of the cabi¬ net, leaving the cestus behind me; this he caught on my flight; and, in a very pietty ehivahie llouiish, kissed it as a pledge of discovery, and swore by it, that he would follow and recognize bv ît, the fugitive owner, a part of whose dress he believed it to he. All this was told, and laughed at as a jest, by every one but me. 1 caught an idea from it, which I developed that very evening. \ our sister had been on a vUit dunng the adventure, of which I took care not
to inform her, but proposed tbat we should exhibit the attitudes which we were to assume in the sacrifice the next day ; and commenced by displaying one that tore me a veil worth seventy gui-» neas. Several followed-—some laughing, and some so serious, that every one laughed but themselves. Sir W. was in raptures—he started—gesticulated— screamed with applause. " Haise the arm—plant the foot—(a little more en prof le) —now you are quite a fury—de¬ lightful. Now extend this coffee-pot in your right hand, and you are converted into a ministering Hebe." In the midst of his cognoscenti agonies, I glided aw ay with your sister to the ca¬ binet; threw the drapery and cestus of the statue ever her ; and, without mention¬ ing my motive, entreated her to float in among them, in one of the attitudes of Parisot, in tiie famous pas de shawl, which was quite the rage at that time .
she obeyed, for she had a reliance on my taste. I followed her, when she en¬ tered in the trophies which Lord Inver¬ may had sworn to recognize. livery eye was directed to him ; he felt the ap¬ peal—it was not difficult to address some badinage to a beautiful woman. He sprang forward, and addressed her in a flow of such sudden and animated gal¬ lantry, that she actually blushed and looked interesting : I believe he felt her to be so at that moment ; and whether it was this impulse, or the difficulty of retreating, after ьо ardent an approach, or a restraint something like obligation, from the presence of numbers ; and the remembrance of the language into which he had been surprized before them, or the consideration that he must marry some time, ami miiriitas well iinirrv then as any other, or all these causis com¬ bined; but from that evening ht pursued her with the most assiduous attention,
entreated leave to follow us to Lord C. W."î>, where wc passed the remainder of the summer, and in autumn your sister became Lady Invermay, from the success of a finesse, which, light anel fantastic as it is, was as successful as the heavy manœuvres of a whole winter campaign in Lon elon. There were tuo tolerable things said on the occasion : the peer, who had read Homer, observed, that we need no longer be at a loss for the dcnominatiem of the statue, as the event had proved lier to be the Juno Pronuba. The other* alluding to Laely I.\s entre into the sa¬ loon, that eventful evening, observed, that her dancing master or mistress must have been a consummate artist, as they haei taught her to step into a inarquisate and 'JOJ)00/. a year a pied. Now to tell you of the good tilings that were done as well as said, in conscipiencc of this event. 1 have heard of some people
whose sensibility was so exquisite, that they could not endure the idea oť an obligation, but Lady Invermay carried this to a most fastidious excess ; for she appealed, by her conduct since her mar¬ riage, to consider the obligation it had conferred, as the most mortal injury. I will not tell vou —I cannot bear to think oť— the many trivial, goading pro- \oeations, by which a weak mind may ^ting a generous one almobt to distrac¬ tion. I cannot bear to tell the paltry, female stories of rival parties, and rival equipages ; and woundings of silence, and the eye, that are invisible and mor¬ tal. Oh, let me die by any poison but the sei pent-tooth of a thankless child İ — let me be damned with any thing but the faint praise of civil haticd. I will say no more of myself; my feel¬ ings are peipetually breaking in on my narrative. Of your sifter Bellamy I need not^peak; she has behaved to me with VOL. ! Π, К
uniform decency, and I am content that she ťt shall dwell in decencies for ever/" Thus was I living, if this could be called life. My talents, my feelings, my time, my happiness, lost ! and lost without ac¬ count; and, what was worse, without en¬ joyment. Every day, like Lady Townly's last 5001., was gone after the other; every hour was passed in misery; yet of no day could I tell why it had been thus passed. No abuse was ever so wilful, no wretchedness ever so criminal. True I knew no one happier than myself, and many that looked up to me as the hap¬ piest of human beings; but it is a wretch¬ ed mind that can be fed by the envy ot others. It was no mitigation to my contempt of myself, that I was able to contemn all the rest of the world. At this time the event occurred, oť which you deserve to have some account; an event which would have driven half the fashionable women in the world to
madness: it had even a more extraordi¬ nary effect on me, it drove me to reflec- tion. It is a long and horrid story; I will try to abridge İt for your benefit, or my own. It appeared that your father, who succeeded to the title and estates of his cousin the late Earl of Westhampton, who died suddenly, was apprized that his cou¬ sin had been married to an obscure and low-born woman, who was unacquainted with the real rank of her husband, who bore him a son, and who died unconscious that she had brought an heir to the house of Westhampton ; the Earl .limself died before be had acknowledged his son, and the few witnesses of whom vour father could obtain any information were silenced by what has the power ofmaking all mankind silent or eloquent as it pleases. The heir himself was sent to Scotland, to Ireland, to the Indies, East and West, to every country from whose г '2
bourn no traveller returns* lie survived every hardship, he struggled through evervdiØiculty. He was possessed of some documents, and some intimations remem¬ bered from childhood ; he was conscious of something not congenial to the mean and laborious life he was condemned to, and he contrived to make a friend and confidant wherever he could make an ac¬ quaintance. In the mean time, the num¬ ber of confidants that your father made, for other reasons, was increasing every year; the care of the absentee became every moment more difficult and more expensive; those who were employed, communicated it to others whom thev employed; the douceurs became more exorbitant, and the secret less safe: in the four last years the sums laid out in the care of this unfortunate young manV safety, by the extortion of agents, amounted to upwards of 30,000/., as ap¬ peared before a committee of the lloutf
of Lords appointed to examine the busi¬ ness. In this, miseiablc strife of fraud, oppression, and fruitless waste of princi¬ ple and money—in these horrors of se¬ cret iniquity—in this abjectness of me¬ nial collusion, had your father lived since the period of our marriage. A little af¬ ter your sister Bellamy's marriage, the whole matter was discovered; the unfor¬ tunate exile found means to reach En£- land, where a suspicion of his existence and pretensions had long been diffused. lie applied to eminent lawyers, prepared a petition to the King, lodged in the verge of the Court, and took every means that promised success, or what was equal to it—publicity. Such was your father's infatuation, that till a committee had ac¬ tually been appointed to examine the af¬ fair, he could not be persuaded of his danger : the ruin then was sudden and dreadful ! I was totally ignorant of our circumstances till then—they weie in the L ,>
most desperate state î It was aggravated by a report that Lord W —— had lost his peerage, and consequently his privi¬ leges; and on the night wc escaped from London, eight executions were in the house in Curzon Street, and his person was threatened with an arrest. When we had leisure to look stedfastlv on our ruin, the Irish estates, the title of Mon¬ trevor, anti about 4000/. a year, were all that remained of an establishment once adequate to the support of princes. We were fallen! fallen! fallen! Yet I was de¬ termined to fall like myself. I had been the Cleopatra of the revels for many loose and worthless years, I was now to be the Cleopatra whose departure was to throw dignity upon a clouded life. Lord W— was so perfectly convinced of my having been utterly innocent even of the knowledge of the persecution prac¬ tised on him, that he offered me out of his recovered property the jointure stipa-
lated in my marriage settlement, with the title of Dowager of Westhampton. I rejected it. I resolved to banish myself to a country I dreaded, with an husband I despised, to extort admiration from a world that had refused me justice. No matter; I was born for ail miration, and admiration I was determined to have : my mind was perverted, my peace Mas lost, but my pride was unbent and mi bounded. I will not repeat the inter¬ view I had with your father. The glim¬ merings of human feeling flashed out on both sides: he was melted at my mag¬ nanimity, at his finding me to be what he could hardly believe to exist, and I was melted at his discovering it so late. I believe I shed tears, or something like it, but I will tell no more now, though I think I have been treated harshly. I am not begging for mercy (said she, burst- big into tears), but 1 think I have been treated harshly. But, Oh! (said she, E 4
rising hastily, and striking her forehead violently) when I think oť my time, my powers, my heart—of the things which I might have done—of the life I ouditto have lived ; when I think ofthat first and hestof men murdered, actually murdered by me—a murder on my soul—it is a wonder that I waste existence between the dozings of laudanum and despair!" —Such was the story of the victim of fashion. At the end of this melancholy narra¬ tive, to conceal my feelings, I snatched up the English papers which the servants had just brought in ; I was glad of the . pretext to call Athanasia's attention from me. They were all in a blaze with Lord and Lady Montrevor's return, and the marriage of Lord and Lady Weshampton, and the joy and triumph of so many no¬ ble families, and of all the fashionable world. Paragraph-Xevill himself, in the " Winter in London," never exhibited
Mich a chifd'auvrc in splendor and in¬ terest ; the whole pride, pomp, and cir¬ cumstance of the progress from Ireland, their traversing roads with six horses, and Ibu r out-riders, and a chariot with four for her Ladyship's female attendants her Ladyship's travelling costume of scarlet and gold (exactly similar to that which the Irish papers announced as the Du- che^s of B— df— nľs, wb.cn her Lord ar¬ ii ved in Ireland to assume the vice-regal honorA no other guest being admitted while they staid two daj s in Dublin at the splendid hotel in Sackvillc Street, which was once the mansion of the Mar¬ quis of Sli go ; their declining the urgent request of His Exe — U— псу and İler (îracethe Duchess of R — ehm — d topass one day at tbc Phrenix Lodge before they quitted Ireland; and, four da\safter,theu triumphal eutiy into London,where unfor¬ tunately a slight cold ahc consequence, we hope, of tra\ elling merci)) at present
prevents her Ladyship from receiving the congratulations of the fashionable world, on an event which has restored to it un¬ usual splendor and felicity. After this. the account of the nuptials of Lord and Lady Westhampton was like a train to the nucleus of this blazing meteor : her Ladyship must have felt some disap¬ pointment at the bridal jewels, and veil, and blushes, being compressed into a pa¬ ragraph of about ten lines, while her mo¬ ther's triumph blazed in every column of the lvivspaper, and regular bulletins an¬ nounced the importance of her health to the fashionable world. While we Mere perusing these pompous paragraphs, the servant who had been em¬ ployed to shut up hip lordship's closet, as we inhabited but a few rooms of the spa¬ cious mansion, canie in with a paper which had been found there, and which lie beg¬ ged pardon lorsupposing of consequence. 1 looked at it to discover ifit was. Atha-
nasia and I were not a little amused at finding it to he a copy of the paragraphs, with a thousand inteilineations and emen¬ dations, partly in his lordship's hand, partly in his valeťs (with whom it ap¬ peared he had been consulting, for the last week, to fíame this pompous intelli- îivnee), which describcu everv stavre of their progress before they set out, and their reception in London, while they were in another country. Such was the weak and ostentatious mind of the hus¬ band of Lady M. ; of the man who had destroyed he¡ happiness and perverted her mind, and upon the rums of the first of female characters erected his toy-shop V glitterintv vanities, and insisted that she must appear happy at the exchange With a mind burning with /he papion of distinction, and deteimnu/i to fop^t joy and anguish alike in the sluiggk-s oi public life, í set out for Ln^iand, and carried with me a spuit a- anient, and í в
hardly better versed in the science of life than that with which I had com¬ menced my winter in London. After a journey performed with the ease with which people of opulence usually travel in England and Ireland, we arrived in London on the 4th of December, 180— ; and immediately entered into a splendid suite of apartments in a new street at the fashionable extremity of the tow n, which had been prepared for us by Lord M. The arrangement made at Afontrevor House was, that we were to have passed our time in London at a house which Lord M. had taken in Berkeley Square; on his arrival, however, he found, or fan¬ cied the furniture so defective, that he accepted Lord Castle-Wy comb's propo¬ sal to remove to his house in the same square, till ki every thing had been ar¬ ranged in Hope's style in the new man- hion/ 4 Л note was therefore dispatched to us, intimating the new arrangement
which w r as only to continue a few weeks, as the first artists in London were cm- ploying their utmost expedition İn filling the new house with all the wonders of a fairy palace. It was late when we ar¬ rived. Athanasia was languid and wearv : the chimney-piece was crowded with in¬ vitations for k ' to-morrow, and to-mor¬ row, and to-morrow" from every branch of the family in expectation of our ar¬ rival, and as far as the branches which were lit as wc entered the room, threw then· light, İt only fell on titles. There was an invitation to a family dinner in Berkeley Square for the very day of our arrival : Athanasia, throwing herself on the sopha, requested me to go: tk No, my love, I will not lca\eyou to-night; besides it is too late, ami they will think my intrusion at this hour a blunder of supper for dinner; my first c.vsay shall , not be so characteristic/' " Oh notat alb you will be quite in time; they are ama/-
ingly late at Lord Castle-Wycomb's, you will make me happy by going," u I should rather if I could, make you happy by staying, let me stay (and I threw my¬ self on the sopha beside her,) and do something to amuse you." t: No," said she, with one of her smiles of languor о and sweetness, u vou shall «ό and do something to amuse me: vou shall brina* а note to Madame, who is of course at Berkeley Square, and tell her I am dying of fatigue, or dying to see her, whichever she pleases to believe, and she can return in the carriage, and sit with me till vou come home, and don't hurry yourself to return early." I had no wish, no intention to go out, but I dreaded to appear suspi¬ cious of her conduct or lier companions; I promised to go, and while I was dress¬ ing, she gave me a note for Madame ; it was a twisted one. 1 wa* struck by thi* expedient of secresy, ami thought of it, till I found myself in Lord Custle-Wy*
comb's spacious hall ; I gave the note to one of the servants, and hastened to the dinner-room, where I understood the company had just assembled. To mc, accustomed even to the splendor of Mon¬ trevor House, the effect of the present scene was actually dazzling. Lord Castle Wycomb lived more splendidly than all the rest of the ministry, distinguished as they were for convivial splendor. Lady M. had appeared in full dress rarely and capriciously when in Ireland, and as¬ sumed a fantastic mixture in her costume to mislead the starers; but here the full splendor of a winter in London, in the costume both of dress and entertainment, burst on my eves that ached with their glare. Lord Castle-Wycomb, in respect or in curiosity, rose at my entrance, and displayed in my reception a condescend- İng dignity that he was somewhat sur¬ prized to find 1 had expected, and was accustomed to; a general circulation of
bows, aml a muttei ed repetition of name?» and an immediate application of glasses followed round a company of about twenty prisons. I was at length seated between two ladies, whom by their in¬ quiries for Mrs. Bethel, not by the man¬ ner of them, I discovered to be two of her sisters. I conceived it necessary to make some apology for the lateness of my appearance, of w hieb í felt the awkaul- ness had piobably increased the general scrutiny, I was answered by Lord Castle» W. slightly touching his glass, and slightly bowing* to me, as an intimation that he wished to take wine with me. I was accustomed to the fashionable abbrevia¬ tions in manner, and bowed as slightly in return. u We have quite exploded apologies/' said the dashing Lady of the mansion, who was one of my neighbours, "alíthat is now passe ; we have intro duced in its place a facility that does every thing it pleases without giving of
fence, and lets every thing be done with¬ out taking any/' I congratulated the system on having so eloquent a definer, and ventured, as I spoke, to raise my eves where more lovely and luxuriar. t than ever, Lady Montrcvor was seated opposite me in all the glare of exagge¬ rated spirits, and all the pride of gratified ambition; amid splendor and dissipation, quite at home, and too much at home, she shone out the queen of pomp and pleasure, with whose wit no one could contend, and whose bcautv no one could emulate. She was emversiní? with a gentleman whom she immediately named to me particularly as Mr. Bellamy, and then resumed her conversation ; vet from that moment her manner became inter¬ rupted— I thought she remembered Ire¬ land—1 thought she remembered Mr. Corbett. The dinner, interi npted only by occasional introductions to my new ι datives, who appealed to think u the
honor of taking wine with me," surii cient notice of the connexion, [Kbscd away like any other dinner, at which she was present, in gazing at her. My eyes ached with her lustre, and my heart with lier levity. When the ladies re¬ tired, she passed my chair ; 1 waited for a word, for a look ; I had at lea^t the latter, but it was one which perhaps I had been better without. The conversation after dinner was lo¬ cal and desultory—politics were not even alluded to. I have observed, in my in¬ tercourse with distinguished political men, that, except when engaged in ac¬ tual details of business, they speak rarely and guardedly on the subject. The company seem to act parts in conversa¬ tion, which were assumed for the occa¬ sion. Mr. Bellamy, Lord Invermay, and some other young men, who were fashionable loungeis, calculated the chances of an important expedition, of
which intelligence was expected every dav. Lord M. with his usual tirade of feeling, begged them not to mention the subject, as the anxiety he felt on his >on, Colonel Montolieu's account, who was emıamd in it, rendered it in- suppoitablv distressing. Lord Castle- Wycomb, and one or two political cha¬ racters, talked with rapture of Catalan!, and with gravity of a sale at Tattersalľs. When wc ascended to the drawing- rooms, I was dazzled with a new scene of splendour: about one hundred per¬ sons, of both sexes, were dispersed through a suit of rooms, whose walls piesented views such as the windows of the palace of an Egyptian Bey, open¬ ing on the surrounding country, might give, if that view could include all the wonders of Upper and Lower Egypt. The Nile drew his in i sch tv train anions: the colossal ruins of the greatest em¬ pire of the world. The paintings were
divided into compartments, by obelisks. iusenbed with hicroi»iyphicks; the lights were ilisper^ed by bronxc sphinxes, the corners of the seats, and the cornices of the d ι aperies, were moulded into sphinxes—-sphinxes supported the pedi¬ ments of the chimney-pieces; and sphinxes formed the handles of the splendid vases that embellished it. Kot- zebue was never more assailed with re¬ presentations of this unclassical figure, in the French theatre, where he com¬ plains they formed or destroyed the en¬ tire decorations of the fabric. I was soon sated with gazing at every object but one ; she was plaving, and winning with a nonchalance that appeared to provoke her antagonists more than her success. She rose from the table-™ *' What have you been doing, Lady M. 1 ' said one of the party—" Winning, my loicl. winning; Lady λί. always wins," fiaid the dowager, who was fanuing liei-
self vehemently. " Losing, my lord, losing—my time. I mean, for 1 «should have been at. the opera half an hour ago. I have not been there yet, and I proposed going with Mrs. Bellamy's party. I have bai dis had time to win a few guineas as you see. Mr. Bethel, will you come? We «diali have room for you in Mrs. B.'s box ; and as it is not to be uncommonly brilliant, you will lose less spectacle by not going to the pit." As we passed Lad\ Castle-Wycomb's chair, she intimateti her wkdi that I should return to a petit souper. In the anti-chamber, a large party were assembled for the opera. Lady M. ma¬ noeuvred with her usual skill, and we went together in her chariot. A long silence followed. ' k At length wc are in London,"' »aid Lady M. " and I am re¬ peating. ; son regime/ as has been said or sum)·. Now to avoid thinking of mv- self, let us talk of you, í have spoken
a vast deal of you to Lord Castle-Wy- comb ; amid all the recent changes he has kept his place, and his consequence. I really believe him to have some respect for my opinion. He does not look on m с as a weak woman. 1 have made some impression on him, by my representation of von r talents. The remainder must depend upon yourself; but never com¬ mit yourself to Lore! Castle-Wycomb : make use of him, but let him never make use of you : he is a mere statesman ; the inscription on Lewis the Fifteenth's statue, might be placed on his, if ever they build a statue to him, or hang him in effigy, which is much more probable, and equally useful, in point of noto¬ riety— ' sans foi, sans loi, et sans en¬ trailles* Exhibit whatever you possess of talent, but forbear to exhibit \our information, if you have any. Make yourself important to him by a display of powvrs chicli lie will finti it his in-
terest to produce ; but when once pro¬ duced, or introduced, let their exercise and direction be determined by your own principles: let him ilatter himself that be is bearing a É wren upon an eagle's wing/ till he finds that, i you have soar¬ ed above him/ The present ministry want talents, I do not mean iu them¬ selves, but in others : they require men of ardent minds, and ambitious activity, such as yours was, when you imagined the reformation of Lady Montrevor pos¬ sible/' She sighed, as she spoke; and of all she had said, only the impression of the siüfh remained. I was astonished, and almost entranced at my entrance into the most superb thea¬ tre, probably in Europe. By the judicious regulation relative to the dress of the com- pan v, at least the male part, we are ^aved the disgust of seeing the splendor of the hou.sc contrasted and polluted by the plebeian appearance that is admitted at
the theatres, where men of rank lounge into the boxes, and in the lobbies, in the slovenly costume of the livery stable. I listened to the iir&t singer of lier ow n, or perhaps any other age, with as much delightful attention as the per¬ petual pratt lement of the party allowed me to enjoy. It was ludicrous to ob¬ serve the caprices of fashion in the group. Mrs. lidiamy, who, her mother infoi med me, possessed hereditary taste and performance in music, affected a total insensibility of the most exquisite pleasures of sound ; and, during the perfoi mance, drew- a lace handkerchief, that was appended to the ringlet on the crown of the head, over her ears and neck, as the morning papers had an¬ nounced " the fashionable chin-stay as¬ sumed by our elegantes, in consequence of the prevailing sore throats," While the rest of the party, who were totally indifferent to music, were in raptures
and perpetually interrupted their plea¬ sure by applause, at the commencement of a da capo, or the midst of a cadence. n These are the people/' whispered Lady M.—" whose breath forms the fa¬ shionable atmosphere in which 1 live, poisonous as it is. All this is physically true, for you know Azote forms a prin¬ cipal part of the air w r e breathe, and what is worse, it is morally true, as I can prove by my present perverted ex¬ igence. Take warning by me, Mr. Бе- *hel—beware of false and dangerous no- о foriety—beware of such men as those around us, as L*wd Koschamp, and Sir J. Orberry; and beware of such women as his wife/"— £ς Ь Sir John married ? ,% — " Yes, he is married to a sister of Lord Castle- WveomlA ; she was formerly married loan Italian Duca; she was in Italy, when I was there; she is a finished pupil of the Italian school. Her husband and she live i u lhe most comfoi table V')i, Hi, i?
manner possible ; he never visits her, ex¬ cept to extort money from her, a kind of tax upon gallantry, which the libe¬ rality or the fear of her friends supplies her with ; and in the mean time takes care that no actual ill usage allows her a pretext for a divorce, as that must conclude the traffic of profit and dis¬ grace/'—" Is such depravity possible?" —" Look at her, and you'll not believe it, or forget it all :—she is just coming into the opposite box." I looked and beheld a female apparently not twenty, attired with the simplicity of a vestal, hardly a tinge of rouge on her cheek ; her dark-brown ringlets disclosing her white, serene forehead, and arranged iu a tuft on her fine formed head, whose bend made it resemble an antique bust of Attention. An air of shrinking, and timid, and playful innocence, pervading her whole frame, seemed to contend with the polished ease and elegance of fashion.,
which she could assume in a moment. There was no glare, no flutter in her manner : she appeared anxious to be left to the music, and to herself; and the naive and childish attitudes bv allien she diversified her deep attention, and musical enthusiasm, exactlv touched on the barriers between nature and grace. It was a relief to look on this object, m ben the mental and bodily eye alike теге dazzled with the too brilliant and beautiful Lady Montrevor. íť î am quite wretched I came here to-night," said Lady M. " I beg par¬ don, Mr. Bctheb but I must request you to lend me your cars or your eyes, for the remainder of the night, if they have done waiting on Lady Delphina Orberry. I cannot think of being seen here by her and her party to-night, or any night but Saturday : this is not the night for me —my forces are not col¬ lected yet—Lord and Lady Westhamp- F 2
ton are not returned from burying their bridal blushes at their villa in Kent: when they return, which will be to-mor¬ row, I believe, we will charge at the head of all the family forces, and plant our standard in the very centre of the pit, by all the laws of fashionable war¬ fare, where its memory will glitter long after I have ceased to glitter. At present, have the goodness to put me into my carriage, and then do with yourself what¬ ever you or Lady Delphina Orberry may please, for the remainder of the night." Determined to convince her of the disengaged state of my feelings, I in¬ formed her of my intention to sup at Lady Castle-Wycomb's. " N'import,'* said she: " when I lost the power of ex¬ ample, I lost the power of advice.'' I was about to answer this painful lan¬ guage of perverted feeling, when we were obstructed by two male figures who stood apparently without any purpose,
tiirectly in our way. They were Lord Roschamp and Sir John. They imme- diatelv assailed us with execrations of the opera—it was the most infernal lounge in the world—nothing but the ballet tolerable. No, damme, the fa¬ mously knowing night here, Bethel, was the bishop's night: гее were the per¬ formers, and they the spectators-— damme, but we gave them a most fa¬ mous exhibition : the instruments never gave so pleasant a sound to my ears as when they all went crashing together, mixed with the lights, and the squalls of the performers/*---" Mr. B. I must get into the carriage, before Lord 11. thrice t slavs the slain.*"—" But was not your Ladyship most infernally an- noved bv this unmeaning kiud of horrid screaming, that they have here--not like English at all, damme/"-" Yes, and whenever I am infernally annoved. I always try to make my escape, yen see, F li
as sooi as possible." *' Bethel, my fa¬ mous fellow, I shall certainly call on you to-morrow : 1 mean to show you some· thing of a more knowing lounge than the opera— -ΙΊ1 put you up to Bond Street, and a lounge in the betting rooms at New Market—and all that, damme. I'll certainly be with you to-morrow, Be- thcl, damme. There is nothing I like so much as putting up a fresh one to a knowing touch. Heh— Orberry, I think weil have Bethel one of us." They both laughed, and we passed on. At that moment I was amost impelled to forbid their visit : something betweenfalse politeness and false shame prevented me. Among the croud of loungers, a lady, who appeared to be retiring, passed us. H Who is that—she's a damned know- iim* fuñiré." said Lord R. who still lounged near us. " That, upon my soul, I believe—upon my soul I do not know——Yes,by heavens it is my wife—
yes, thaťs my wife, Lady Delphina Or¬ berry." A slight bow of recognition passed between the fashionable husband and wife. " If she is approaching, I will not retreat," said Lady M.-~" To conceal the want of forces by courage, is one of the first manoeuvres of gene¬ ralship" We paused, and the haughty bend, and striking attitude of Lady Montrevor, were again contrasted with the simple and dilliden t grace of Lady D, Orberry, that seemed to " blush at its own praise." *' Drive to Berkley Square------1 am so little one of г^ yet, that I have a mind to play le bon mari, and go home to Mrs. Bethel."-------" Since I have re¬ moved you from Lady Delphinac sphere, I am not afraid of the attractions of any other; but have the goodness to accompany me as far as Berkley Square." tť How can you speak thus to me — you who know------who know"—— f4
" Yes, I know you to be an enthusiast, one who feels too much, and who con¬ ceals nothing he feels : I saw your eyes-— I saw your soul to-night. You must acquire a little more addréssè—an in¬ tercourse with the most worthless must teach it to you; people, by appearing to hide their feelings, get the credit of hav¬ ing something to hide. In life you may meet few characters, but you will find every one wears a mask selon le costume. Apropos of both masks and characters, Lady Delphinac .berry is a Messalina in the habit of a vestal ; she is a dange¬ rous, a dreadful woman ; she is the only enemy 1 ever had, and her enmity is not half so dangerous as her love. Oh, my Lord, beware of that, it is a mon¬ ater that doth mock the meat i t feeds on." We were in Berkley Square, as she spoke, where splendor and luxury, and exquisite wines, and music, protracted the supper till a late hour in the morn¬ ing. On my return, Athanasia was
nslecp. Madame Hahľs novel of Del¬ phine was underber pillow, and her eye¬ lids, even in sleep, were stained with the tears which a false sensibility had ex¬ cited by its perusal. We were lingering over a late break- fast the next morning, and Athanasia was inquiring about her sisters, and whether I thought anv of them as beautiful as their mother; ami I was endeavouring to answer her evasively, when a curricle, in which, no way dis¬ tinguishable from each other, Lord Roschamp and his groom were seated, with two out-riders, stopt at the door, and the next moment his lordship was m the drawing-room, sans apologie. " Mis, Bethel, I'm delighted to see von in Lou- don—upon my soul you look enehant- mgly—want a little of Lady M's rouge though : never saw her look so famously 1 lovely as last night ; she's quite the rage. | again*—quite the knowing thing to know ! F 5
Ì
her now. AU London is at Lady Castle- Wycomb's door, since that nervous cold she had, or said she had, on her arrival : upon my soul, 1 believe she has a patent for beauty-—she ought to have liad her daughters names included. Come, Be¬ thel, we're just in time, half past three is the hour for Bond Street. Damme, you'll be most amazingly astonished ; you, who were never up to any thing of the kind before." I told him Mrs. Be¬ thel was an invalid, and I did not wish to leave her : I had at least no wish to accompany him. " Not leave your wife—damme, you'll both be in every caricature shop in London. How do yru like that curricle? It's-amazingly knowing built. Come, I see you are devilish shy about your dress; but no matter for that: you can be up to a cur¬ ricle, if you are not up to a pavement- lounge. Γ lì whirl you to all my people of business, and you'll be a devilish knowing figure to-morrow ; only tie a
silk handkerchief about your neck, and just let the neck of your shirt appear above it, and muffle yourself up in a greatcoat; for, damme, if the building of that coat is not quite scandalous/* I still resisted, though such a Ciceroni as Lord R. was the very thing for a fa¬ shionable lounger ; but Athanasia telling me that her people of business would oc¬ cupy her whole moi ning, and that she woulel probably take whatever carriage might call on her to La Tour's, who ne¬ ver went out to auy one, I hesitated, and Lord IL dragged me away, after in¬ formino- Mrs. Bethel, that if she did the knowing thing, she would never employ any but male artists about her person : maie milliners, male dress-makers, toute It rage, as your fashionable mother and all vour fashionable sisters can tell you." in a few minutes I was whirled, accoul- ing to promise, to all the people of busi¬ ness, who were employed by fashiona- г 6
bles : the complete equipment of a Bond Street lounger was bespoke; Lord R. was particularly attentive to the con¬ struction of the hat, twentv of which he examined, and at last selected a ik knowing slouch ;" but hesitated a great while, as the importance of the cause demanded, between the surtouťs being furnished with velvet cuffs and facings, or with a deep border of fur round the perpendicular collar and the wrists; the artist declaring, that the latter was much more expensive and elegant, seemed to determine him, and the fur was bespe>ke. ' Now," said Lord R. li we must bespeak a full dress, as it is ι ni possi ble to be * un honnête homme,* without sometimes going to those infer¬ nal parties which our women of fashion give.' I told him I had brought all I probably should want with me. " Heh —damme, that's a good one—brought your wardrobe from Dublin : sell it to
an old clothes-man, then, my fine fel¬ low. Do vou imagine that such a cos- turne as your's last nigl· uld do for a fashionable party?—yoi< istcoat three inches too long, when a waistcoat is hardly more than three inches in all : — the buttons at the knees of your biecchcs so straight and lateral, instead of being almost across the knee ; and the strings tied at the side, instead of nearly in the front; and the coat with that shoit waist and high collar, instead of button¬ ing below your waistcoat, and fitting on your shoulders like a woman's shawl" I asked was it possible he had time to reconnoitre my appearance so distinctly during the short interval of our meeting the preceding night? íť Time! —Ob, damme, time enough, I have nothing else to do with mv time. And along with vour wardrobe, I suppose you have brought the family equipage from the Castle, and mean to petrify' us in Hyde
Park, with those famous old cattle yoii had in Ireland." I pleaded guilty.— " Good heavens, could you endure to let your wife drive in such a caravan to her sifter's doors, or clash with their splendid carriages in Bond Street ! By heavens, they are a famously knowing set, quite up to every thing—no wo¬ men live in a more dashing style; and now that they are re-inforced by their mother, who i?> an host of fashion and beauty in herself, \ou will look damned insignificant among them, unless you have every thing in the most knowing ¿•tyle. I'll shew you to the first coach- makerV in London—has all the biith- day busings: and, Oh!—damme, I sec vou could not nave done without ше at all. This \uh too like a scene which I had once before acted with Deîoraİne on another stage, and which had ended so tragically. However, I considered that "i was now in London, that te have a
carriage was necessary, and to have a fashionable one equally so; at all events I determined Athanasia should not have cause to repine at the splendor of her sisters. We were now in Bond Street, which is as inferior to Dame Street, its corresponding street in Dublin, in re¬ gularity and splendor and spaciousness, as it is superior to it, or any other I could imagine, in the concourse of busi¬ ness and passengers, and the tumult and magnificence of the equipage. Twice we passed Lady Castle Wycomb's car¬ nage, which appeared to ha\e no other purpose there than to display its fashion¬ able mistress, whose rouge was visible through all the fou; of a wiutrv evening in Lundon in Bond Street. Another ligure sat back in the carriage, applying a glass to the objects as they passed, in an attitude of fashionable vacancy. Loni li, who was manoeuvring with his utmost skill, through the blockade of vehicles of
every description, now exclaiming that he saw Oi berry on the pavement, that it was choaked up with the loungers, and just the time, and just the party to charge anions: them—' ; I make it a principle never to take the lounge in lîond Street, with Ic^s or more than three"—jumped from the curricle; I fol¬ lowed his example, and placed between him ami Sir John Oiberry, found my¬ self enclosed in a crowd, to which all crowds I had ever encountered in Dub¬ blin, were trifling. ilv a lady crostini»* from her carriage to a shop, before which several carriages were entangled by their wheels, we were at length stopped on the edge of a pavement close to a eoronetted equipage, which the driver was vainly attempting to conduct into the mill current ihat was in motion. The carriage was particularly low, 1 looked up, and found my head in con¬ tact with Ladv Castle-WvcornbV She »г \л
laughed—" Almost cast away in the htorm of Bond Street," said she. " He has got an experienced pilot at least," said Lady M. who was in the carriage. Ashamed of this trifling, I would have passed on ; but Lord R, assuring me it was quite the knowing thing to lounge beside a fashionable equipage, detained me by the arm, while he continued a whispering conversation with her lady¬ ship, his arm resting on the window. " I have just been with Mrs. Bethel," said Ladv С — i£ She looks vastly interesting. She has promised todine at Berkley Square, 1 hope we shall have the pleasure of intro¬ ducing you to your new relations, Lord and Lady Westhampton ; they have just arrived in London ; if your pilot steers well, I hope wc shall see you abontseven." I bowed, for I was anxious to do some¬ thing beside louuLiing in Bond St» eet. it was near live o'clock before 1 cx- tnrated mv<clf from my companion*». ì
entered the drawing room, and found Athanasia immersed in finery, which the whole morning had been spent in examining and purchasing : " Will you be angry with me for all this extrava¬ gance?" said Athanasia, who was adjust¬ ing an enormous lace veil before the glass. " No, my love, it reconciles me to my own, 1 have been importuned to the purchase of a thousand superfluities myself." " How good, how indulgent you are,"' said she, approaching with a sudden impulse of softness, ťí I ought to love you—How I ought to love you Γ " Love me, my darling, ;'or any reason but that you ought to love mc." " Is love voluntar)' ? You bho* M not teach me so." <l Why not ?" ť * Because vou appear to me to talk quite out of charac¬ ter.—All the husbands I read of, are stern, ligid beings, with nothing but lessons of duty in their mouths, and all the horrors of it in their faces and lives ;
but you—you have a sad and gentle carelessness about you, as if you did not care for me, and did not care to shew it ; and still you are so kiud and indulgent; if I bad not married you, I must have loved you Г' " The practice of love is alwavs sweeter than its meta- phsics," said I, kissing her. For her blandishments had obtained an influence over me, which a married man often feels to be superior to that obtained by merit or affection. Her spirits revived, and she amused me during our progress to Berkley Square, with the singular cha¬ racter of Lord Westhampton ; and Lady Castle-Wycombe singular skill in ma¬ naging him in her negotiations for Miss Montolieu. Lord W. was, in the language of the fashionable world, quite a savage and a bore; tbat is, he was utterly averse from its manners and habits, ludicrously jealous of bis station and responsibility, as a peer; and as ignorant of the part c'~
life to which his lecent rank had intro¬ duced him, as a being who had been only intimate with its utter reverse, and passed the prime of life amid hardship and vulgaritv. — ИоицЬ as he was, Ladv С. however, and her sister, saw his " Visage in his wealth ;" all the Mon¬ trevor family had made a point of visit¬ ing and noticing him, to exculpate them¬ selves from a consciousness, or a share in the persecution he had undergone from their father. The man was capti¬ vated and flattered by the attention of polished and beautiful women ; but he recoiled from their dissipation, and loud¬ ly repioached their immodesty. Every one, therefore, who could sacrifice their feci ings to the hopes of a coronet, and í2J,()00/. a year, tried to accommodate themselves to the unaccommodating taste of the Kail. In this struggle, how¬ ever, Miss Montolieu instructed and encouraged by her sister, was fairly
triumphant. She encountered a large party of fashionables, where he was pre¬ sent, with her robe up to her throat, and lier sleeves down to her elbows. She pre/erred going to hear Incledou and Mountain, the verv week that all the fashionables in London were dying with rapture, at the Opera where Catalani had made her first appearance; and she fed and caressed an enormous New¬ foundland dog, which any other female would have fled from ; and which his Lordship always introduced into com¬ pany, together with a story of its hav¬ ing saved his life.—When some years ago, " being a little in liquor, d'ye sec, and walking the decks, with my weather eye almost closed up, I soused ovei board, and should have gone to the bottom as plump as lead, but ior Neptune here."* The contest was soon decideţi be¬ tween art and pcrsevciance, and sim¬ plicity an·! security. Lend West hamp-
ton proposed for Miss M —; but qua¬ lified his proposal by a very extraor¬ dinary impulse of humanity; li for damme/ 4 said he, " but I think I owe the poor girl something, after depriving her of her rank ami fortune, anel leav¬ ing her dependant, as one may say, upon her sister and your Lordship." Lady C. however, was to be indemnified for the damage of her furniture, and the in¬ juries done to her fashionable reputation, by the intrusion of his Lordship anel Neptune into her drawing-rooms, by Lady W\s. opening a faro-bank, on her marriage, in Soho Sejuare, in the profits of which, her managing ladyship ex- pectcel largely to participate : " For," said she to Athanasia, " Lord Castle- Wycomb, who is the oeldest creature in the world, and will never gise up some particular points, has declared, that con¬ sidering his public station, &c. &c &c. he never can cenisi n t to my keeping а
faro-table in Berkley Square; so to avoid his diplomatic tirade, I have got Lady W. in consideration of the assistance I afforded her establishment, to make her Lord consent to her keeping a faro-bank ; and we are so much together, it's just the same thing. Now you must not tell my mother of all this ; for though she is quite the rage now with her wit and her beauty ; yet she never was up to any thing of that kind. She never was completely one of us—there was always something fastidious and shirking aboat her, when things came to a point ; she appeared to have joined us more from vanity than inclination." At seven o'clock, we were again greeted by the same splendid circle in Berkley Square, and the task of bowing round it was hardly concluded, when Lord and Lady Westhampton were au nou need. Lord W's appearance was exactly adapted to his character; his exterior was thatof a
Commodore Trunnion ; but unlike the commodore, he hated his professional element, and never fpoke of his former hardships, but with sincere and honest aversion. Lady W. paid her compli¬ ments with uneasy expedition, and ap¬ peared anxious that her Lord and Nep¬ tune should he seated as soon as possi¬ ble. Lord and Lady M. had not yet quitted their dressing-rooms, and as they liad not yet seen Lord and Lady W. it was necessary to renew the ceremony ot intioduction on their entrance. Lady M. entered first, and received her new relative with a dignity that proved a complete command of her ludicrous feelings. Lord M. approached, and Lord W. who expected that the man who had persecuted and injured him, would feel some degree of dJííidence at his siirht. was so disconcerted and asto- nished at the courtly facility with which the unblushing peer approached him.
that hastily withdrawing his hand, and exclaiming, <fc Oh ! damme, this is too bad!" he seated himself again in visi¬ ble displeasure. Laely M. who wished to spare her daughter's feelings, or to disguise her own laughter, lamented her cold, which had prevented the pleasure *he had purposed herself, Sec. Sec. Lorel \\\ who had transferred his attention from Lord M. to her Ladyship, muttered audibly—" A glorious vessel, by hea¬ vens ! but mounts Trench colours like all the rest." Dinner was announced, and Lord W. after recommending his dog to the care of his servant, determined to distinguish himself by some signal act of politesse; and rushing into the circle, seized hold of Luly M's. hand, anel leel her down with a perfect unconsciousness of the violation of etiquette, while Lord С shrugging his shoulders in the back ground, presented bis hand to the voung Countess ; and ar¬ vo к. иг. о
rivein the dmner-rooûbonlytîoiteımugk to : s¿ th*iacomgibfé l/wrd W* í«àted al¬ most it the bead of the tabfc, be^dehis beautiful mpther-iû^law, and enquiring %bal she сЬоде, before any (mèbiìtbi№ sçffw seated, Úú seeing: a iiumber.of ladies àppitMtch, however^ he quitted Ыз station, and placing himself beside me at the bwer end of the table, did aa much - honw to th« jPteach maxim öf ** JPIsoe &x Dan&" as the first hrcedbg would have done more happily,™He sat next mk at Uble, and I was abundantly amused by the mixture of matter ivith (dmost) madness in his Gonversatìoii^« u Now, w said he, u youmu&tnotbesur- prised at my talking to you quite pleasant «ad affable; for though I am a lord, and you a commoner, yet as we aie tao* thers4nJaw, we should be quite easy aia fnendly d>e ¿ee^»not that you should be cast down at being, a com* monet^seeing, as how^*so is many ^ a
шап ;. «nd so I V«s mystìlf oncc^ thank% to my smiKogaod bowing iticnd there— (Lord M.)—but what of that, yon see; t am all aippòg, loris aud ladies nowr^ and jay wììR^^ìny Lady W^ there as bright» and as gay as any of them ; fot: wl\at I say is this—an«! í U stielt t&^tlie manim, tk*t peers «tíd peeresses, and all that belongs tò theni > should bè quite different from thè rest of the world, and have every thing about them grand and handsome^ but nothing ¿mean* orlight, or trifliog about their conduct d^e ste· For why, it is just as if it was at sea in itu engagement whexe every one ttbeys the signal vessel and acts according to, the instructions issued from that, ¿infcss it be for sheering off,, or the like ^of that, which a seaman neW likes to uhey ¿ hut he must though ^ for as I was saying, at 5ca> every thing depends upon distino lions of ranks, and so it must at land ; * and. if Ü№ higher officers desert their 1 0 S * / '
duty—if enir peers talk and act too like asses ; and our peeresses go stark naked, what is to become of the vessel— damme ?" I assen teel to his observa¬ tions ; but remarked, that society ought to expect more distinguished benefits from its higher ranks, than merely an example of dress. t£ Let me tell you, Mr.— whaťs your name ?-— that dress is a great thing—it has a great effect upon society ; for why, they can only see your outside—-they cannot follow you into your closets and your drawing-rooms— they only see you in public ; and it has a great effect upon yourself Damme, when I first came to be an officer, I felt that my uniform was a check upon me, and that ľd be ashamed to get drunk, orto use any light language in it, d'ye see---A man requires to be reminded of those things ; and the best way to re¬ mind him is by his appearance ; because, d'ye see, it is the readiest"—" Would
your Lordship," said Lord С " because I am a knight of the garter, insist upon my always appearing in the full robes of the order ?"—Why, if your Lordship always feels that you are one, there would be no occasion certainly ; but damme, if I know that man on earth who never re¬ quires to remember himself."—- 11 Lord W. the honor of wine with you."— "Why, my lord, as to that. I do like a good glass, when men are all sitting quietly and sociably together; but as for all this drinking, I do not understand or take to İt at all, because I think dinner ra¬ ther a time for eating, dye see ; however, if I must take wine, П1 take it with some of those ladies yonder; because a peer ought always t>o shew attention to the la¬ dies ; and 1 do not like the present fashion of speaking to them, and pushing them about, with no more respect than if they were cabin boys. Now you must tell me, for I have taken something of a liking С 3
to you, though you have such a fair- weather face—you must tell me some¬ thing about those ladies, for though they are all my wife's sisters, damme, if I'd know one from another, under those înasks of paint that they wear. Who is that pale, mild, pretty looking creature, with her hair all done in that fantastic manner?*' I told him that was M.s. Bethel, and the next Mrs. Bellamy, Lady Invermay, Lady Cas t le- Wycomb : my eyes fell last on Lady Montrevor, but I did not utter her name. " By heavens, they all just look like a parcel of ac¬ tresses ; only them one would pity, be¬ cause they cannot help themselves ; they must do it for bread, and if they get it by making themselves spectacles, why it is the town is to blame, for encouraging them to go naked, with only a bit of gilt paper on them here and there. Why, now I ask you, Mr. Bethel, for that I find is your name, do you think it ií·
decent or proper, or the like of that, for an English peeress, ami the mother of a large family—and, damme, she can't be young neither—by heavens her timbers must be pretty well seasoned, to go without a rag on but that glittering gauze, in which there is nothing like comfort or decency, and her bosom anel arms perfectly naked ? For those orna¬ ments on them she wears for pride, and not for use, dye see; and that sparkling trumpery, just on the crown of her hcaei, like a queen in a play ; and those ring¬ lets dangling from it, just like a girl of fifteen; anel as beautiful and glorious a sight as she is, anel damme, if ever I saw such another, except the launch of a man of war ; yet, somehow, if she was rigged more like a woman of high rank, anel a wedded wife, and a mother—aye, anel a grandmother too, I would like her better, and she would like herself hetter; for. d'\c mind, when she is not čí 4
speaking and putting out all her features on a cruize for admiration, there is some¬ thing like melancholy in them. Damme, now, if I drink wine with one of them, except my Lady Westhampton, when it comes to my turn." Disgusted with his strictures, or with the object he had chosen, I turned away, and for the remainder of the time, endeavour¬ ed to extort something like conversation from Mrs. Bellamy, who sat next me. I imputed her silence and languor to pride -—it was the offspring of better feelings. Bellamy, with powers to distinguish him¬ self in society, and with a strong affec¬ tion for his wife and child, was a gamb¬ ler, an hopeless and incurable gambler : his unhappy wife had ceased to remon¬ strate, but she had not ceased to feel. With bitterness of heart, she saw herself blazing in precarious splendor, and re¬ flected that it might in a moment be ex¬ changed for the gloom of a prison. The
hte change in the ministry, in depriving him of his seat iu parliament, had de¬ prived him of his only security against the most dreadful consequences of his infatuation. As these circumstances of misery developed themselves slowly, I could hardly believe myself surrounded by the first characters in the first king¬ dom in tlie world ; blazing in splendor, and feasting with luxury ; I could hardly conceive, that the magnificence I be¬ held could be allied with actual misery. I can give no other name to the situa* tion of the Bellamy's, or to the situa- tion of the Marquis and Marchioness of invermay, who were literally living on an allowance that hardly amounted to a fifth of their great but involved income ; an allowance made by an agent to whom their almost ruined affairs had been trusted, and who had undertaken to re¬ trieve them only on the condition of confining the careless peer and his dissi· ci 5
pated wife, to an allowance; who sup¬ plied the deficiencies of their income, by contracting debts so enormous, that the recovery of their affairs could only besuc- cecded by fresh involvements. Lord and Lady С since their marriage, twice on the eve of actual bankruptcy, now saw it again approaching, without a possibility of prevention; and the speculation on Miss M/s marriage with Lord W. and the ex¬ pedient of the pharo-bank, to be opened at Westhampton-house, were all that re¬ trieved the sinking spirits of her lady¬ ship, or of her numerous and fashionable, and importunate creditors. Such was the situation of this fashion¬ able family, of whom Lord Montrevor, whose selfishness had always preserved him' from involvements, was by far the least distressed, and who now looked round upon his daughters married splen¬ didly in the language of the world, and his sons distinguished by professional
talent and eminence, without ,a single sensation but thatof gratified vanity, and luxury determined to sate itself with re¬ newed oppoitunities of indulgence. The ladies had hardly retired, when Lorel AV., eager to display his consequence to his political relations, began to inform them how he proposed qualifying himself for the arduous duty of a Patrician senator. u For, my Lord," adelressiug himself to Lord C. " damme if I understand what is meant by calling us pillars of the State, when we lend no support to it; so d'ye ace I consented to pass the last week in all the follies of a new-married man, such as driving about the country in my new carriage with my Lady W., not sitting upon the box or dicky, or whatever you call it, being as how I think that quite scandalous aud improper, for a peeress I mean ; for damme if ever I saw a poor sailor's wife, going down mayhap to see her sick husband in an hospital, and with g 6
no better seat than the outside of v a stage coach, if I did not pity her from my soul in bad weather and the like of that; but to see a peeress going about in that extravagant manner is quite out of cha¬ racter—so. I and my Lady W. sat in the same carriage always, and went about the country with the windows down, and the like, which was very pleasant for one week. But it is my intention, now that I am a peer, and to sit in debate upon the welfare of this greit nation, to qualify myself a little, being as how my youth was past in quite another kind of way, as some of its here know, and the cause of it, but no more of that ; so d'ye see I mean to get a great parcel of books to¬ gether that wise men have written upon the constitution, such as my Lord Coke's and Blackstone's, and the like, and a work which some Frenchman* wrote
upon the British Constitution, which, damme, I don't sec how any Fi enchinan could pretend to understand ! and Vìi read these over day and night, till I have got the sense of them d'ye see into my head: and ГП get some clever linguai io teach me Latin, and my lady ь to teach me French, fof, by Heavens! I'd knock down any French monseer that came near me with his damn'd jabber, though now that I am a peer it is necessary to have a little of it.*' Mr. Bellamy and Lord Invermay, by this time, had in vain applied their handkerchiefs to their mouths to sup¬ press their laughter, but Lord M. de¬ termined to conciliate his rugged son- in-law by a coup d'essai, intreated him to proceed with his plan, and com¬ mended every part of it with the most painful politeness. " Why then, damme, if I say another word, for I know a joke's a joke, as well as cer a landsman or courtier among you; and
if ye all think it so damn'd ridiculous for a man among his friends to acknowledge the defects of his education, and to think himself responsible d ye see for the duties of his high station, why then, though the laugh is on your side, the sense mayhap is on mine.'' By this time Lord Caştle-Wycomb, who sat next me, depressing his voice, had made some trifling observations on the state of the weather when I was in Ireland—the weather intro¬ duced the pioduce of the land, the agri¬ culture, the state of the peasantry, and the difference between their condition and that of the similar class in England. lie constructed the cornei sation so, tl at his part of \f was merely inquhy, and mine detail. I saw Ы*, purpose, but I for¬ got my caution, or Lud y M's. 1 was ambitious to shew him that Irishmen were not I he degradi d beings that England has a right of concluding from their scandalous desertion of their duties
and their country; I was ambitious to shew him an Irishman was not destitute of information, or dead to national feel¬ ing and spirit. I spoke of Ireland, her depressed trade, her neglected populace, her renegade nobility, her dissipated, and careless, and un national gentry, I spoke of the country as deteriorated by a religion, which, in eveiy country where it had prevailed, had extinguished all spirit, but the spirit of superstition—a religion alike unfavorable to moralitv, industry, and improvement—a religion, wliich by establishing an internal piinci- ple of operation superior to law or govern¬ ment, must be intrinsically and invinci¬ bly hostile to law and government, and compounding for the duties of a divine system by a prescription of its forms, destroyed the very essenr^ls of religion. I spoke of the first and forest countries in Europe destitute of cultivation, and degraded in their national spirit and cha-
racter by its influence—a lesson which had not yet maele us wise. I spoke of Ireland peculiarly suffering from its in* fhienee, because in other countries it was connected with the government, and therefoie taught subordination to it; in Ireland it was not avowedly but invete- rately at war with the civil establish¬ ment, and must remain so till it had as¬ similated it to itself. I spoke of the curse anel reproach of Ireland being the want of national education, a want which must alu ays remain, while the priests of that religion in many countries anathema¬ tize those who send their children to Protestant schools, and those to whom they are sent; yet are utteiiy averse to any system of national education them¬ selves, anel indeeel in general incapable of framing or executing one; so that the chilei ren of the peasantry are sent by hundreds to an hovel where some setual id wretch, for a miserable pittance, teaches
them to mangle the English language without religious instruction, or selection of books, or any species of discipline or order, literary or moral. I spoke of mi¬ nisters being so immersed in the details and officials of business, as to neglect, not unfrequently, its principle and ob¬ ject; that Ireland was not a country to he civilized by temporizing concessions, and partial provisions: that nothing could insure her safety or welfare, but diminishing the power that lacerated and convulsed lier entrails, or establishing it altogether; that that power was ambiti¬ ous and would not easily be satisfied, was strong and could not be easily resisted; that the influence that contended with it, and hoped to contend successfully, must be directed to the minds, not the persons or properties of its professors; that the bitter policy was equally illegal and un¬ successful, as oppression only tends to heighten the merit of suffering, or the
dignity of ic^i.tai.' e, abd a \oi>sc a,,d coheient ma-^ m«'\ be ciushtd into í aution by \ t lu trent pies-me* t ho t tl·,» who hopi d io diminish the evils of í¡, land liniat begin In diminishing the ihunce of the Ronvd) piicsts on t 1 minds of the pcfmle. by piocuiing tht/ independent support, and not sufici ni- mutual confidence to be strengthened 1*\ mutual sen-ices, must facilitate the d,* fusion of know ledge (an event always ui. favorable to that lelîgion) by the pu motion of national education ; and lu in some manner, íestiainino; the dcseitio of the countrv bv its hi«her ordeis, i: some mcasuie piocuie a balance to tli ' ììloated iú\d o venteen ing majoiity л\ hic always i^^cecded us in population, ai u now thieateued to equal us inopuhiu Mid power. I ti α ed without any h( ' tation the i'icreasing magnitude of tin e\iK by which my unhappy country ^^ »n'i'iborne to the fata' measure of t' \
Cnion —a measure which hati diminished ber population, impoverished her metro¬ polis, depressed her internal business (in the single article of printing I instanced the fac l of the Dublin press now being Kept open only by pamphlets and news¬ papers), and above all, by encouraging, and in a manner rendering necessaiy, the non-residence of her nobility, had com¬ pletely suspended the great and be¬ ginning work of national humanisation, bv removing those on whom it must de- pend equally for its principle and its operation. I observed that this fatal mcasuie could not probably be now re¬ called, but miirht certainlv be alleviated, I was proceeding to speak to the point of its having been attended with all the evils that had been foreseen» but not one •»f the advantages which had been pro- 'nised, viz. the equalization of commercial md other privileges, which had not hern "buiined; the importation of English
improvements and English natives, ubici had not been obtained; and perfect se¬ curity from internal commotion anel dan¬ ger, which had not been obtained— inas- much as on the 23d of July, 1803, a troop of rebels marched within half l furlong of the Castle of Dublin, the seat of a military governor. I was proceed¬ ing to speak to these anel other poin К when I was checked by the total silence. with which my observations were re ceived, and by the reflexion that then they coulel expect no better reception— I bowed and was silent. I am by no means giving the lan- £гшше which I used on this occasion — í am se n .si hie it was much more ani¬ mated and picturesque, and such a· probably to leave no unfavorable im¬ pression of the mind of him who ut- teied it—1 have only retained t lie- substance of uhat I said. After a lew atempts at desultory conversation, the party sepaiatcd; a& we retired, Lord С
who never appeared in her ladyship's drawing- roo m in the evenings, drew me a-ide, and, after a few favorable expies- violis, requested that 1 would favor him v»ilh my company at breakfast in his apartment the following morning, as the pressure of business occupied every other part of his day. The assembly in the tira w ing-room .vas unusually numerous anel splendid : Lady Castle-Wycomb was fashionable, Laely M. was still more so; but, superior to all other attractions, the high play wliich distinguished Lady CYs assem¬ blies, ensured them a brilliant anel tu¬ multuous croud, whenever her doors неге openeel. The business of the ni^ht had begun, when 1 cntcicd the drawing- moms : every face was cloudy with deli¬ beration, and that mixture of hope and -ear, m ith which every gambler com menees the contest. The few loungers. who were unemplo) eel at first, were soon tempted, by the ardor of the scene, to
engage in bets ; success or disappoint¬ ment alternately iuduced them to aug¬ ment these from trifles to sums which made rouleaus disappear in a moment ; and in a short time the betters were as ardent and as clamorous as the players. At one of the highest tables, stimulated with all the passions of the place, ani¬ mated with success, and increasing the vexation of the losers, by the perfect, but laborious ease of her manner, and triumph of her wit, Lady M. burst on my eyes, as I entered—I withdrew them. I knew at that moment she was as mi¬ serable as she was dazzling, stifling the struggles of her mind, and the re¬ proaches of her heart, in the intoxica¬ tions of vanity, to which wretchedness had d t iven her, and from which aug¬ mented wretchedness could not drive her away. Nc^er had the world such a vic¬ tim — ï knew her heart—1 knew its prin¬ ciples, its pride, its agony at the very
moment when every feature was radiant with apparent joy and splendor almost beyond human brightness. I wished for Mr. Corbett — I wished for some one with an an<ieľs office, and an aniixTs power to call back this unhappy woman from a course into which the want of do¬ mestic happiness and early stability bad driven her, and in which she still persist¬ ed from pride and despair; but who could have read pride ami despair in those angel-features, warm with artificial beauty, and sparkling with artificial iov! I knew not the cause of her pecu¬ liar gaiety of triumph tlr f niirht, till í learnt from Lord Invermay, who was л klud of fashionable diable boiteux to nie, m we lounged through the rooms, that her unsuccessful adversaries were the Duchess of----------and the liées, an enormous fig'iie enveloped in scarlet vel¬ vet a d Ьь i g \. ith diamonds, whose ill-luck aud boiserons complaints ludi-
crously contrasted the airy triumph ot her opponent. I looked round for Atha¬ nasia, she had retired to the apartment of Mudarne, I was vexed at this dereliction of herself — I was elevated by the splendor around mc—I wished her to partake of it, and to be seen to partake of it, instead of wasting her hours in the society of a woman whose principles appeared to have poisoned her mind, and whose conversa¬ tion generally left her bathed in the tear·* of a vitiated sensibility. I took the worst way possible of concealing my vexation—I accepted a proposal of Mr, Bellamy's to engage in a game at piquet at the corner of a vacant card-table; from which, just as supper was an¬ nounced, I rose a winner of seventy gui¬ neas, which appeared to be paid with much less pain than it was received ; the stake, however, my antagonist had named himself At supper the party was increas¬ ed by the addition of Lady Delphina
Orberry, and her party, from the Opera. They were in raptures; but the slight and discriminating praises of Lady Del¬ phina, ushered by a diffident apology, and breathed in tones of languid melody, made a deeper impression on me than almost the sounds they praised. From the moment of her entrance Lady M. redoubled her efforts to delight and to dazzle: Lady Delphina retreated from the contest, but, like the Parthian, was mo>>t dangerous in retreat. Her soft, se¬ ducing manner, her timid silence, her melting whimpers, and her warm and de¬ licate applause of the wit and talents which the whole room echoed with ap¬ plauses of, almost divided the victory. I could not believe her the dreadful, the dangerous woman Lady M. had said she was—she was seated next mc. " How ex¬ quisitely beautiful she is, more beautiful than ever I think; by what happy ex¬ emption has she escaped the haggard look vol. in. u
of dissipation, which has even stole ovei her daughters' lovely faces. Exquisite- sensibility, I perceive, is the greatest enemy to beauty. Poor Lady M.—I am glad she has forgot—or forgot to feel— the melancholy events at the early part of her life : they would have destroyed any one but her, Then she succeeded so well, in getting those appointments foi her sons, and marrying her daughters, no sacrifices could be too great for such services to her family. Then she is ai ways so successful at play—so brilliant, and always seems so happy. í rea Ih think lier more lovely to-night, than when I first saw her twenty years past at Rome. If you wish to see her as she was then, and judge from the comparison, 1 have a picture of her, by an Italian ar¬ tist, at my house in South Audley Street: come and see it, and I am convinced you will be of my opinion. She was rathei thinner, and did not wear quite so much
louge and pearl-powder; but whatever she wears becomes her. Will vou come and see the picture to-morrow ?" This was addressed to me with that soft sim¬ plicity of manner that made every thing Lady Delphina said and did, naive and unsuspicious and casual. Week followed week hi careless dissi¬ pation—no day differed from another, except such diversity as fashionable in¬ dolence admits. My mornings were ge¬ nerally passed with Lord C. W. who dis¬ missed me with such praises of my talents and spirit, as were even then offensive to me; declared that I must distinguish myself; that we icanted such men ; that my ideas only required a little more ma¬ turity, and my feelings a little more re¬ gulation, &c. &c. and then fixed me for some fashionable party of dissipation, the following night. From the ministerial and political din¬ ners, I perceived I was studiously ex- U 2
eluded—the exclusion was no mortifica¬ tion to me : with the pride of a man conscious of untried capacity, I wished not ίο seek, but to be sought for.— I wished them to think me an Henry Prince of Wales, tiil they saw me in the field. The mornings were passed after leaving Lord C. W. in resolutions to de¬ vote some hours to study, or in search of some distinguished characters in litera¬ ture or in public life ; resolutions perpe¬ tually broke by a summons, or rather a subpoena, to some exhibition, where I could see nothing but the rouged cheeks and haggard eyes of the gamesters of the preceding night; or a fashionable lecture, where I could hear nothing but the prattlemcnt of the listeners ; or a sale, where, too often urged by the im¬ pulse of the place, I engaged in a spe¬ cies of auction-gambling, which specu¬ lates on the ambition of your adversary till you find yourself incumbered by «
profusion of articles which you do not want, purchased for a sum you cannot spare 1 . Bond Street occupied the re¬ mainder of the day, till it was time to dress for a dinner at one of my fashion¬ able brothers-in-law, and the evenings subsided into tiie gloomy silence of de¬ liberate gaming. Fatal as tins mode of life was to my peace and principles, the infatua¬ tion of its splendour and luxury was resistless. I lived among fashion and beauty; among those who had always the power of stimulating my senses, if not of gratifying the mind ; but both powers were so uniteti in Lady M. ; she had so much the art of giving variety and poignancy to the insipidity of fa¬ shion; and making even caprice and va¬ nity nouvelle and recherche: she was still so brilliant in crouds and so inter¬ esting in solitude to mc, who knew what solitude must be to her, that no hour h 3
seemed eveu mispent, on its retrospects that had been spent with her. ft was now fashionable for all who ad¬ uni ed wít, or its reputation, to attenti herr/e- jiune hi Berktic) Square; that is, crowd to her dressing-room, from twelve till three; apply Nour glass, when any distinguished face entered the room ; disarrange the new publications that were scattered on the pier-tables and chimney-piece, with¬ out perusing them ; press into the circle that surrounded her ; tell the trifles of the day, in a whisper, or catch some half- heard, and not half-understood, bon mot of her Ladyship's, whose repetition gave you the credit of having been at the ruelle of the modern Aspasia. Lady C W. actually neglected, in her own apartment, was at length obliged to join forces ; and, by her \ olubility and dashing manner, effect something like a dh ¿sion in hei own favor; but Lady C, \Y. had resouices of notoiietv, to which Lad> M. never could have stooped. Her beau-
rifui villa, near Brighton, the designs for decorating which had been furnished by the pencil of a noble amateur, was still unfinished ; the designs enveloped in a superb port-folio, had lain on her dress¬ ing-room table, till every one was weary of gazing at them, and her ladyship was weary of being asked when the whole charming thing would be finished r' — Lord С had actually interdicted all fur- ther operations of the artists at Brigh¬ ton. It was in vain that her ladyship remonstrated, and intreated ; and, at length, swore in very audible terms, she would be revenged. No brain but a fe¬ male's could have devised such a re¬ venue. Lord C. like many others who have no children, was somewhat impatient of his misfortune, to which the slight* est allusion offended him irretrievable. Her ladyship, like many other fashion¬ able wives, had professed her>clf ex¬ tremely happy at the exemption from a и 4
state of perd and suffering, and con- finement ; but now she assumed quite another language—deplored her misfor¬ tune and his lordship's, in language of the most delicate snief; declared there could be no felicitv in life, without chil- dren; and to console herself for the pri¬ vation, fitted up an elegant baby-nur¬ sery within her dressing-room, decorated a fashionable hammock, with sattin fur¬ niture, and placed in it, half-buiied in lace, an enormous wax baby ; while all the ornaments of this fanciful nursery were heightened by groups of genii strewing poppies, classic deities watch¬ ing the slumbers of infancy, &c. &c. from the emblematic pencil of Hope. Her fiieuds were aH admitted into the apartment—compelled to commend her taste, and to pity her misfortune ; and to make the ridicule insupportable, a fe¬ male attendant, with the infant in her arms, accompanied her ladyship in the
carriage in the Park, Bond Street, &c. Lord С was distracted ; her ladyship was perfectly calm : he forbad the car¬ riages leaving the stable, when her lady¬ ship ordered them for her poupe t . Her ladyship went in her friend, the Rees's barouche. At length a kind of pacific negotiation commenced between them, the conditions of which no one was ac¬ quainted with ; but the result í learned too soon. While this etourderie lasted, the ef¬ fect was very perceptible on the loung¬ ers in Lady M/s dressing-room : every creature tie w to the nursery, except the sçavans, whose faces were point¬ ed out to me by Mr. Bellamy, a man in whom the fatal rage of gaming, though it had destroyed the habit of better things, had neither destroyed their power nor their taste. " That young man with the striking appearance and dishe¬ velled hair," said he, " is the celebrated writer, who produces epic poems, as others h 5
would sonnets. I am sure his appear- ance here is quite involuntary and irk¬ some, for no man ever had a more de¬ mocratic mind ; but its democracy was not vulgar or atrocious ; his attachment to it was rather an attachment to a sound than a system : a sound to which he an¬ nexed an ardent but confused meaning, and of which he has, probably by this time, discovered the emptiness and fal¬ lacy.*'—" 1 have read his poems," said I, " to me they strongly bear the marks of a mind forced and flattered into an eailv maturity ; aman who versified be- fore he had read or thought, and who still continues to versifv, without often calling on either reading or thought for assistance. He certainly possesses ima¬ gination, but never was imagination less purified by taste ; his embellishments are grotesque and laboured, and voluminous: they strike by exaggeration, and do noi shine, but glare. His sentiments are gc-
nerally pure, but it is prosaic and con - mon-place morality, in the bloated and uneasy garb of a veisified homily. His descriptions and manners are certainly pure; and perhaps no other praise can be compared to that which S — th — y has deserved, of having given to the public, in early youth, a mass of pages, from which modesty would not wish to ex¬ punge a single line : were I the gentle¬ man's friend, 1 would wish him to alter his line of study. His appears to be a mind that has adopted its habits of read¬ ing too much from a fantastic and mis¬ guided choice. I believe his literary education has had no restraint, and no adviser. His mind, if I may judge from his fiotes, appears to be inveterate!)' depraved, by a course of reading which has starved his understanding, and fed his fancy with the most morbid food. The legends of superstition, antient and mo¬ dem ; the gleanings of monkish fabu- II Ü
lists; the researches of mystic science; the wonders of the invisible world, how¬ ever related, or however attested, ail that ' fables yet have feigned, or fear con¬ ceived, Gorgons, and hydras, and chime¬ ras dire/ appear to constitute all the re¬ sources of his library, and of his mind ; and so desirous is he of accumulating the shades of horror on us, that he min¬ gles the mythology of different ages and nations; introduees the vampire-tales of Hungary and Greece, into Arabia; and arms the wizard on the banks of the Euphrates, with the hand of glory, one of the darkest fictions of Western su¬ perstition. Every part of h*s writings has assumed the complexion ^>f a som- brous and melancholy mind, darkened almost to despondency, by peculiar ha¬ bits of reading. When he is merry, he tells us the story of Cornelius Agrippa and his bloody b©ok : when he is grave, he rehearses a legend from Matthew Pa-
ris ι when he gives political instruction, it is by the vision of the Maid of Or¬ leans; a vision such as never floated be¬ fore ť the eye, in a fine phrenzy rolling ;' a vision compounded of the murky fumes of querulous democracy, and shape¬ less delirium ; and when he gives mora¬ lity, it is the quaint and garnished, and sententious wisdom of the East, so mixed and beat out with fan tao tic decorations, that it resembks an illuminated page of the Alcoran—a line of plain and ordi¬ nary sense hid among the iloui ishings and foliages of tasteless blazonry. No part of this writer's works offends me so much as his style—1 mean that garru¬ lous and drivelling simplicity of manner, by which he and his contemporaries are distinguished. Nothing can be more unfortunate than a struggle for ease —a giant walking on his hands and knees, does not resemble an infant; he loses his own part and powers, and gains no-
thing by the loss—except ridicule. The labour for magnificence generally at¬ tains its object—the labour of simplicity always defeats it. His subject and his style make bis works resemble a spectre dressed out by a child—its very horrors have something weak and ludicrous in them : his mind is a thesaurus terror um —be dwells for ever in the * Domdaniel caverns under the bed of ocean/ I wish he would remember, that, at no period of life is it too late to begin to read, or tbat he would at least read, and-allow me to prescribe his studies, bermene begins to write again." A figure very different from the last, now entered — a young man of diminutive stature, but an intelligent countenance, anil a most easv and fe- l' licitone addiess. (i I rènr," said Bel¬ lamy, " you can hardly bestow the praise of purity, on the productions of your countryman, Anacreon M —re."— " I fear," &aid I, <¿ the want of that
praise excludes him from more. The merit of a writer must be in some mea¬ sure connected with that of his subject ; and the subjects that writer has chosen, are such as exclude all praise but that of brilliant levity of sentiment, and exqui¬ site versification. By what evil genius his choice was directed, I cannot con¬ ceive, but í lament its i niku nee has heen equally unfortunate for poetry, and for himself. He was formed to enlarge her territories and her honors; but, like Vasco, his expedition has terminated in being thrown away on the Nland of Love. A dull writer defeats the mis¬ chief of his own depravity ; but the pointed and polished shafts of M —re, like those of his favourite deity, tingle in the blood, with delicious irritation; and convey sweet— sweet poison, through the most bľlmy and seductive medium. I speak oí him with real sorrow : he might have done much, he has done no-
thing, but what I hope he will yet wish undone. Xo writer I have evei read, possesseel so much the power of pic¬ turesque, anel living description of na¬ ture ; or of luscious, and yet lively and uncloying harmony of sound. He is a wiiter of whose powers the world (or perhaps himself) can no more form a just estimate, than we could of Pope, from his paraphrase on the first Psalm, or of Homer, if we had read no more than his Loves of Venus and Anchises. Before the wreath of his fancy haei well bloom¬ ed, he hung their blushing honors on the image of the Garden God. I fear no other power will now receive his vows— It is possible to injure the mind's eye, as well as the bodily, by a constant con¬ templation of one object : the object that M —re has contemplated, must of itself give an obliquity to the intellectual sight. He has talked and written of love, or of what he imagined to be love^
till I fear he can no longer write on any thini?; else. His ideas, which like those of every writer, must, in some measure, be supplied from external sources, do not appear to me to be drawn from sources either deep or various. I am afraid, like ids own Lit ŕ '% he has only read what he pleased, as well as written what he plea¬ sed. If his reacting has been extensive, the power of assimilation which his mind possesses must be amazingly strong. It is a perfect fountain of salmacis, what¬ ever enters it becomes voluptuous and debilitated. His language, which at first presents an endless and unwearying range of diversified elegance, if closely examined, betrays repetition artfully con¬ cealed, like the boundaries of the gar¬ dens of the Serail, it escapes the eye un¬ der a fence of roses/ It is painful to speak with severity of a man whose suavity of manner and fa¬ cility of information, and easy dissipa-
tion of lire, present a kind of innocent and infantine luxury. But we should remember that the levities of a man aie vices in an author. No man need publish the frolics of his intemperance, or expose the nudities of his indulgence. While Alcibíades riots in the recesses of his luxury, the injury is only done to him¬ self; but when he sallies out to outrage sanctity, the offence becomes serious and cognizable* For a man possessing so many powers of giving deligh' between whose lips and whose pc .rmony seems to have divided hei existence, eminently skilled in pleasing those whom all are proud to please, capable of effect¬ ing the rare union of sentiment with sound, of being the poet of the senses, and the minstrel of the heart ; for such a man theie mi; oe, theie must be a thousand excuses, if he sinks into the softnesses around him ; but for the at¬ tempt to communicate what he must
have felt the injuries of himself, for the attempt to add seduction to pleasure, anel teach impurity a new system of sen¬ timental logic, to add an impulse to the lapse of vitious feeling, and modulate the death dance of vice with the harmony of a lyre strung by heaven ; for this—there is—there can be no excuse, even at the bar of literature"; and if he carries the cause to an higher rourt, I doubt still more tremblingly his acquittal there." As I spoke, Bellamy pointed out to me the most distinguished novelist of the day. He was at some distance examin¬ ing one of the morning papers, of which every column was filled with the political dinners, and fashionable fetes of our no¬ bility ; anecdotes or hints of private history, of marriages in speculation, anel divorces in practice, with an interesting detail of fashionable arrivals in town, and expectations of fashionable arrivals. lhe splendor of Lady Montrevor's arri-
val ; and the picasuie over the world of fashion distiugubheri every paragraph explicitly or implicitly. * 4 Those are the sources," whimpered Bellamy, u from which the vitious taste of our fashionable novel-readers has compelled this writer to draw his materials. lie certainly pos¬ sesses feeling, and some power of com¬ municating those feelings. Without any knowledge of the modes of composition, or the benefit, I believe, of a regular education, bebas certaiidy the power of representing and exciting the stronger passions in no trivial degree. But these and all bis powers, whatever thev might 1 «w О be, he is compelled to sacrifice to that preposterous appetite for the garbage ot fashionable anecdote, which our novel readeis demand ; and with which our novel w /iters, if professional, are com¬ pelled to comply. His first novel, which was founded on a popular play, and re~ oresenr.s the ι ui u of a f celin ц- and ai-
dent boy by the arts of a courtezan, is more fit for any library than a circulating · libraiy. I mean it possèdes strong power of exciting the ice lings, but lew details of fashionable life. His snecef ding woi kí», however, have gradually ыпо in the scale of composition, and lisen in that of reputation. His last novel which is a melancholy melange of extracts from morning pap' rs, information ex¬ tracted from the menials of noble fa¬ milies, and hints from manuscript histo¬ ries—the paltry legends of obscuritv and spleen--His last nos el has gone through numberless edition-^ completely satisfied the curiosity of novel readers, v' and mine, after the first ten pages : yet such are the men whom we compel to neglect the cultivation of their talents, anil the attainment of just and perma¬ nent reputation, for the important task of supplying the defective conjectures oí a newspaper about a fashionable involve-
ment, and a fashionable marriage; ano a sparing our loungers the trouble of yawn¬ ing away the interval between breakfast and the lounge in Bond Street.'' I spoke of the deplorable deficiency of English novels, and of the difficulty of (indini; one which combined a faith- ful representation of life, with just modes of reasoning, and a forcible inculcation of gootl principles. " The difficulty is certainly great," said Bellamy, '* but to the honor of your country, I think an Irish female writer has overcome that dif¬ ficulty."— I joined with him in his warmest commendations of Miss Edge- worth's Belinda, " which for a strong and masterly delineation of the passions, which yet never over-step ' the modesty of natine, for a blaze ot colloquiai wit, heightened by fashion, and minai by taste, and roi a stiong. loc-», and cir cuimtantia! dttidj of lile, a i . j-.cscntation of the greater effect ofhk - d need by
partial causes, and the inikience of the lesser passions, and casual incidents af¬ fecting the temper, and the conduct, more than novellists allow- us to suppose, for the preservation of the false unique—for these features of character and mind, I do not hesitate to pronounce Belinda a work that has never been equalled, and, perhaps, never w r itl be equalled ; for it requires in the author habits of study, and habits of acquaintance with life, an intimacy with the stronger passions, and an observation of the minuter shades of manner, which, perhaps, natine and edu¬ cation never combined to unite in any female, but the writer of Belinda."— This was Bellamy's speech, and my sen¬ timent. Lady M. with true diplomatie facility, hati adtiressed every one in the circle, told Mr. S — th— y, that he pos- messed iu his vivai imagination, a more powerful ¿pell, than ali the sorcerers in the caverns oí 4 Domdan iel, whispered
M — re, that his compositions were al¬ most enough to make her renounce the true Italian faith, and turn an English heretic, in her musical principles ; and told the novelist, that if to paint insanity was one of the highest privileges of ta¬ lent, she could not think too highly ot his, after reading the ravings of the Somnambulist, in his Spi —nd — d M—s — ry, and the horrid, real picture of domestic insanity in the short speci- men of the " Ilethermgton in his W — nt — r in L —nd— η/*— when a note was delivered to her Ladyship from Lord M. who was at the King's levee. Hei ladyship in her triumph read it to the company : government had just received information of the complete success of the British forces in the recent expedi¬ tion ; the details were of the most fa¬ vourable nature, and Col. Moutolieu, who had eminently distinguished him¬ self on the occasion ; was hourly expected
with the official dispatches. The affec¬ tionate energy of Lady M.'s triumph was contagious, the congratulations were loud and sincere, and the national joy was said to be augmented by its being owed to a family distinguished by their rank and talents and triumph. Lady M. with a step that seemed to dis¬ dain the earth, approached where we were leading the note, that had been lian d ed mund the circle. i( All this joy is very delightful, and very oppressive, it has ac¬ tually overcome me.--- I want breath— I want air—Did not they sacri lice to ííood Fortune in the open air formerly, AÍ4 S. ? I shall make no trilling sacrifice ai quitting this circle," (She bowed —) *' My chariot is at the door," said Bellamy, you can avoid the delay of ordering }our own." * f No chariot for mc, but t tiiumphal one. Mr. Bethel, î think 1 н'е your phaeton ; ΙΊ1 go in /V, and take )uu with me, as the ancient conquerors ^ Oh, πι, I
took some one to remind them of their humanity" The last words were mark¬ ed by strong and painful emphasis. As I drove her to the Park, we were every moment detained by groups of fa¬ shionables, who were endeavouring to ex* cite their vapid spirits, by an assumed so¬ licitude about our success, and magnify their consequence, by addressing the mother of the hero of the day in public. The streets were unusually crowded. When we got out of them, Lady M, who had been all life and animation dur» ing our progress, suddenl} 7 became si¬ lent, and sighing heavily, let her arms fall üke a person quite exhausted ; her atti¬ tudes, her language, her air of pride and joy disappeared at once. I enquired was she unwell ? for such was the facility and spirit with which she player her artificial character, that at times it deceived even mc. <c Yes—perfectly so; but may I not drop the mask for a moment, and
with you—What a morning, and what a night, and what a past week, and what a past life ; and yet I dare not pause, not even to think, forthat is the most ex¬ quisite misery of all!"-—" Misery?"— *· Yes ; do you think Splendid Misery only the title of a novel ? It is the m- scription of real life, fashionable life.—I cannot go on this way,'tis impossible, 'tis distracting. I thought when I was ab- ччН, of these things as the most impor¬ tant in the world, their presence has un¬ deceived me. To see Lady Delphina, -and the Rees, and the Duchess, and the rest, or rather to be seen by them again, was only the triumph of a moment, if it was a triumph at all. Some of them have too much address to allow my triumph over them ; and some of them too much insensibility to afford me any at all.- — When I was absent, I only thought of them, now that I am among them, I can wily think of myself. They who climb a pioeipice only *ee the object before them ; ι °
when they have reached the summit, they have leisure to tremble for them¬ selves. But it is all in vain, let me trem¬ ble or fall, there is no hand to save me. Lord M. will not release me, if I had courage to wish for release. It was in the Bond, that if I returned to London, I should live or die*in London. He will not remit the penalty. I will never beg his mercy ; be knows his power, and let hira use it." " I do not understand this painful and mysterious language." " No matter, I have no wish that you should ; yet you might understand me well enough to know, that reputation true or false was the idol to which I have sacri¬ ficed every thing, to which I am sacri¬ ficing myself—Can you understand the pride that loves to stand on the very edge of the precipice, to tread the pre- cise barrier-line bet úeen safety and dan¬ ger, without one false step ?—Can you understand that to such pride the bare suspicion of one false step would be
worse than death ? and that suspicion the meanest and most depraved wretch may blast us with. Am I intelligible enough when I tell you of an husband who in¬ dulged, who impelled his wife to the brink of shame, and would have impel¬ led her further, if she would have gone ; merely because judging from his own mind, he believed mutualconfidence could only be produced by mutual guilt, and he wished to have a security for her si¬ lence on the subject of his vices, and her concurrence in all his schemes of wickedness and folly; and when, at length, he found her sensibihty of even false shame more exquisite than he could have believed it was of true, compound¬ ing for the absence of real power, by erecting a false and tyrannical one, and goading her by the terrors of imputed guilt to every step; because he knows that to her the baie imputation is more in¬ supportable than the reality to another, 1 ' ι 3
My blood boiled at this infamous cm city ; I urged her to defy him, to fol¬ low the path her natural principles and high spirit pointed out to her, and suf¬ fer no false and vicious impulse to drive her from it.—" Defy Lord M.—Ah ! you know nothing of him or of me. It is his wish, it is his object to devise some means of separation from me. I hate and dread and despise him. I have long long done so ; but I hate and dread public infamy still more—He knows it—-The levities to which his neglect, or his art tİ rove me; the painful struggles of a shackled mind, those levities might, í know, be magnified and misrepresented into something that would bear a con¬ struction in any court oii earth. lit knows it too—and with this sword sus- pended over my head, I sit at the fea^t in pride and agony, depending on tlu mere v of one who has no mercy—no principle—no motive to spare me, but
the capi ice which may have ceased while I am/leprecating it." My heart bled for her, for that high and fatal feeling of vanity, which had been the cause of all her misery, and which menaced still more. Her mind wanting nothing of actual rectitude, but the courage to avow its choice and pur¬ suit of it, had lost the merit of clan¬ destine virtue, and hazarded the shame of artificial depravity. I tried to speak, but my words were lost. I was myself plunging into the involvements of dissi¬ pation—-I was myself beginning to feel its restless unhappiness.—I could not con¬ sole her.—" Would you believe/ 5 said she, after a pause, " that of the earnest* ness with which I pressed your removal to London, the real motive was my va¬ nity. I wished you to see me here---I am suiììcieutlv punched — vou have seen me here, and seen me miserable. The Jutai ardor with which I entered on my ι 4
fictitious character, has actually made it a real one ; mental defects may be ac¬ quired like bodily ones, by mockery. Vanity is with me a kind of galvanic principle of existence, that produces the motions of life, after its spirit is gone. I am sufficiently punished by these mo¬ ments of wretchedness and truth. I am not at ease enough for further hypocrisy — I care not how much lam degraded in your eyes, and my own—I care not if all the world knew how wretched I am this moment; but they never shall know it—they woulel ascribe it to guilt In justice to myself, I must bea dissembler— I must conceal my anguish—I must smile on the rack, or they will not believe me innocent!—-I wish I was dead !—I wish I liad tlie courage of innocence to die, or even the courage of despair. Loni Montrevor, I dare say, will supply me with that ere long. Beyond the day that my name is exposed to public shame, I
\
will not live! My life set out with the murder, the actual murder of the best of bťings, it will probably end with an ex¬ piatory sacrifice to his memory." í was chilled with horror: her voice became inarticulate-—tears of agony and despair forced themsehes through the veil which she had drawn over her.--- %i Let us return, you are agitated, and so am L—too much so to say all I feel of grief, and honor, and love for you. I uould die, by heaven, I would die to give you relief, or vindication ! Compose yourself; Ict us return—laudanum is a dreadful resource ; but it will at least stimulate your spirits, and banish this dreadful despondency. 1 '—" No—no—I i-ec, 1 feel an excitement much more strong approaching. I see Lady Del¬ phina Orberry's barouche, and its owner, so " drive on, my merry men ail ; for why, my foe beholds my fate, the Or¬ berry sees mc fall." No, that she never fhal! !-—turn your horses heads-· I ага î 5
quite well—quite composed-— c'est mon foible, or my strength rather. Is tht rouge washed off my face ? Or does this veil conceal it ? They must not see Lady Montrevor's mind or face either in their natural colours " We passed, and Lady Delphina ex- pressed her pleasure at the event ot the day, and the Colonel's distin¬ guished share in it, in tones that no common ear could have distinguished from those of affectionate sincerity.— Aswepaited, Lady Delphinac footman followed me with his Lady's compli¬ ments, that she had learned " Ah, quanto Г anima" that her harp was in perfect order, and she would be at home at nine in the evening. I was discon¬ certed, surprized—I did not understand the ad d resse of this intimation, which was in fact, intended more for Lady Montrevor than for me. Lady M. took advantage of my silence, " Mr. Bethels compliments wait on her Ladyship, he ac-
companies me to the theatre this even¬ ing. 5 ' We were both silent for a mo¬ ment " I wished to speak to you about this, but from modesty, or some other cause, I always begin to speak of my¬ self; now in the case of Lady Delphina, or her heart plaintiff, and Mr. Bethel, or his blushes defendant/'—Allow me to ask, don t you go constantly to South Audley Street ?-— £1 I do go frequently."—- v - And \ou receive notes of invitation, sealed with the impression, ve manquez pas de venire." u That is, that must be, I mean, accidental ?" il And you hear her Ladyship sing ? I know her harp is al¬ ways in perfect order for Ah quanto Γ anima y or any tender air !" "I have heard her sing with almost as much plea¬ sure as I have heard you/' " And not more erudition r' 1 iv Less/* iX On either part?** " On either part." u But that was not the ease when you listened to her Ladyship speaking— or felt ber speak-
ing ? for she can speak with her eyes— la lingua ď amore" " If she does, it is unintelligible to me/' " And what forms the attraction that draws you every evening, as I am credibly informed by my knowledge of the human counte¬ nance, to South Audley Street ?" "The extreme simplicity of her manners, her exquisite taste in music; in every thing. Iler aversion to crowds, and m v aversion to them, and the mild and refreshing lig'ht that seems to be effused from her person and manner, so balmy to my sight seared asit is with the glare of fashion/* " You can accuse yourself of no other motive ľ"' 1 l( The lazr" said I, laughing, 4i does not compela man to accuse him¬ self/' " To leave this keen encounter of our wits, or our follies, let me again warn you of Lady Delphina. Beware of any woman who will not be satisfied zvit h admiration ; who wishes to excite a softer, a deeper feeling, particularly when that woman has no feelings knows
no passion, but the horrid passion of the senses, and would sacrifice to that all mankind, as she has sacrificed herself! Beware of her—drive round the Square. I have one word more to say to you— it relates to one, who should be a more interesting object to either of us than Lady Delphina Orberry—I speak of your wife. My knowledge of the human heart never deceived me, except when 1 thought I knew my own. Athanasia has an heart—a gentle, fond, feminine heart—it loves you—can you break it? " I would sooner stab my own; by all that is sacred, I love Athanasia, love her more than she believes 1 can, more than I believed I could—love her amid dejec· tion and melancholy, of which I cannot discover the cause. I feel I coulel be a elomestic, coulel be a happy man, could Athanasia assume the appearance of á happy wife. I will say nothing of the * ""satility of human feelings, or of the
ease with winch the heart resigns its first and favorite impressions; but I can be¬ lieve, from experience, that the mental eye may be dazzled at first by a blaze of beauty and maniere-~may believe that it has lost all power of admitting any other object, and yet may afterwards repose with pleasure on the softer shades of domestic mildness, and female suavity, anil feci its powers recover, and feel them filled and gratified by their nev/ exercise/' " The allusion is verv charm in 2: and philosophical; but all philosophy must be established by expeiiment—and now pour faire ľ experiment — don't go to-night to Lady iJelj/una Orberry. " But po¬ liteness—commo:» politeness------" " Ob, common politeness every one is equal to, and above. To-night the Koyai Family go to the Theatre; this great intelligence will of course fill the house: John Bull loves to shew his joy in public. We
must be there, as we have more than a public feeling to gratify— all our family ought to be there; I assure you the spec¬ tacle will be amazingly striking, you should on no account miss it, exclusive of the satisfaction of doing the right thing —an inducement on which I may lay particular stress, for as I never ex¬ perienced it in my life, my recommenda¬ tion must be totally unbiassed. Now let me run in, and call to Dennet for fresh rouge and fresh spirits as soon as possi¬ ble, before I am compelled to hear o? make any more speeches— scion ľocca* ¿ion" J handed her from the phaeton, and she glided into the hall with the grace of an Ariel. I could not feel the glow of pride, as a number of loungers stopped to see the fashionable Lady Montrevor, as I assisted her from the phaeton, but it was succeeded by a sting of anguish, when I recollected that the
beautiful hand whose touch made me so proud, had but a few moments past been in vain employed to wipe away tears of the bitterest agony. At night, however, Lady Montre¬ vor's triumph was complete; the house was crowded; the Royal Family ap¬ peared in high spirits, and were greet¬ ed with the loudest acclamations of national joy and loyalty. Occasional addresses, music and scenery hastily sketched, but appropriate and animating, diversified the entertainment; and every one who had a military or naval relative engaged in the expedition, felt their con¬ sequence increased and their pleasure magnified. But the applauses were al¬ most inextinguishable when Lord Mon¬ trevor led in his lady, all radiance, and triumph, and beauty ! Not a trace of the morning's agony in her features; her rouge, and her diamonds, and the splen¬ did animation of her whole form literally making the eye shrink from the lustre ;
and when rising at the performance of the appropriate music, they returned the loud applauses of the audience with the graceful humility of pride, and cast¬ ing their eyes around them saw every box sparkling with the relatives of their numerous and splendid family, who had all assembled to claim their share of the public pride and joy, who would not have repeated the favorite exclamation of all around them—** Lord and Lady Montrevor are the happiest pair in the world/' The crowd was so great, that in going out, our party (by far the most numer¬ ous) completely obstructed the lobby, after the departure of the Royal Family ; the rest, with an occasional impulse of respect, fell back, and the long proces¬ sion of the mother and sisters and rela« tives of the hero of the day moved on i u pride and splendor, such as even to wit¬ ness was, in some measure, to partake
Athanasia, fatigued with the tumult of the night, had proposed going home, but just as the cry of " Lady invermay 'j. carriage stops the way*' announced thai ours was yet at a distance, she fainted in my arms : Lady Invermay insisted on her going into her carriage, and I fol¬ lowed in my solicitude for her recovery At Lady Invermay 's a large party had assembled to sup, but a few moments re¬ mained for play; those moments, how¬ ever, were protracted to hours, by the in¬ creasing interest of the pursuit. I had sat down to picquet with Bellamy, intox¬ icated with the spirit of the evening, and careless of success, I returned home about five in the morning completely sobered by the loss of twelve hundred guineas. I always had a taste for dissipation, it recurred to me strong! ν now 7 : the insi- pidity of fashionable life can only be rendered tolerable by the stimulation ot high play. I struggled in vain with the
infatuation—my feelings had become the slaves of my senses. I felt I was gradu¬ ally relinquishing the distinctions of pub¬ lic life for its splendor and luxury. I cursed my voluptuous debility, and de¬ termined when I rose the next day about two, to compel Lord Castle-Wycomb to an explicit declaration of his intentions towards me; to inform him that my ob¬ ject in public life was not profit but dis¬ tinction, and that distinction in England was easily attainable by every man who could write. I left Athanasia still in bed ; but as I crossed Berkeley Square it occurred to me, that Lord Castle-Wycomb was en¬ gaged with the Cabinet Ministers just at that hour, in consequenceof the recent in¬ telligence: and that in the interval some apology was owing to Lady Delphina Orberry, for the neglect of the preceding evening. As I approached her door. Lord .Montrevor's chariot drove from it;
who was in it I could not discover, but I was tolerably certain it could not be Lady Mon trevo r. I knew Lord M. was a man of gallantry, I heard Lady Del¬ phina was a woman of gallantry—J could hardly have credited the evidence of my senses had they told me so. Her sim¬ plicity, her gentleness, the sigh with which she regtetted the absence of pure and delicate pleasures, and the resources she possessed for exciting even apathy, and diversifying solitude—resources dis¬ played without ambition, and exerted without effort (resources so unlike those of Lady Montrevor, whose painful and restless brilliancy left the strained and dazzieel listener wearv, and exhausted herself to despondency that was recruit¬ ed with laudanum); all this must have pleased the man for whom such powei> were exerted — all this had made me think or feel, perhaps, with such a wo¬ man love might divest solitude of weari- neais, and existence of pain.
Lady Delphina was not at home, she had just gone out in the barouche. I was beginning to distrust the intelligence, when the servant (depressing his voice) informed me that his lady had directed İlim, if I called, to inform me that bhe was at Madame La Tour's, her milliner's, in Tavistock Street Utterly ignorant of the peculiar intelligence of this mes* sage; and believing my apology could as well be made at Madame La Tour's as in South Audley Street, I proceeded there. I saw several male and female loungers in toe shop: Istrollet! into the splendid ware-room — Lady Delphina \vas not there; I was unwilling to enquire for her —I was unwilling to have the appearance of a fashionable triller, who dangled pa¬ tiently after fashionable females to their milieuers : une jolie fillette, with her black hair arranged à l'Egyptienne, saw my perplexity, and whispered me that Lady
Delphina was in the boudoir of the back drawing-room. I ascended the stairs, and entered a room which seemed to have been formed and furnished by the wish of voluptuous indolence. By the windows which, dark¬ ened by draperies and blinds, cast a dim, but not religious light, I hardly perceived Lady Delphina extended on a sopha, whose rich and vivid crimson contrasted the slender form that reclined on it, and defined its exquisite contour more ex¬ quisitely. Her not rising, compelled me to approach her: while I made some indistinct apology for the neglect of the preceding night—" It is I who should apologize," said she, fixing her dark swimming eyes on me, " for the trouble I have given you in coming here; but though the world envies me the pleasure I enjoy in your society, I cannot yet pre¬ vail on myself to relinquish it. They teaze me so about vour visits in South
Λ ud ley Street, that I wished—1 was com¬ pelled to make some sacrifice—I would make any, rather than resign your so¬ ciety; so, with true female selfishness, I sacrificed your case to my indulgence, and brought you here. Here we shall be unobserved—uninterrupted—alone. 1 ' She cast down her eyes—I tried to withdraw mine: the emotion I felt, I could assign no reason for. Not only Lady Delphinac costume, her manner, her language had always been those of a vested to me. I said, indistinctly, (i I ^vas too much ho¬ nored by her considering me of such consequence; that the pleasure of her society I enjoyed so rarely — so inno¬ cently—I could hardly believe it could be a subject of censure, though it might, it must be, a subject of envy." No human being ever spoke, ever looked more sillily, " You don't know the ma¬ lignity of the world—my unfortunate situation—" and she paused—" But I
am speaking to one who does not, wLu ought not, to feel for me more than com¬ mon compassion/' " You have appeal¬ ed to me ever, and now, an object of de¬ light, not of compassion/' Have I, in¬ deed ?—indeed, an object of delight !— it is a dangerous happiness to hear you say so—but repeat it again, and I must forget the danger/' " What danger can there be in feeling, in avowing that your taste, your sensibility, your touching manner, something that I feel at this mo¬ ment, though I cannot express it, must make you an object of delight to all who see, who hear you/' " To all" said she. in a melancholy tone : " it has been my misfortune that I have been an object of admiration to all, when it was my wish to be loved* but by опеУ I faultered out, still adverting to her worthless husband, " the wish was enough to have formed such a one." "Was it?" said she, half rising from the sopha; " Ah no, I mis
undeistand you, or you will misunder¬ stand me : í f the wish is enough to make me beloved, why am I not loved at this moment ?" " 1 do not, I cannot under¬ stand you; I am ignoiant and young, at least among women and the world ; I feci your attı actions, í respect your sor- ' n\s, what can I do more?" £i Don't a>k me —I might give an answer dan¬ gerous tor us both—no, not tor you, \ou aie safe and indifferent, and innocent —vou aie armed in a celestial pano.dw 1 am a weak, feeble, artless woman ; it be¬ comes your sex to be atern and inflexible, and ouis to be' submissive. I will sub¬ mit. I must. Vet if I could think ihat m\ haid fue would he pitied by you; " it\ou would iOimtuut^ think of ** one ^)io never told lier love/' or if she told, supplicated your pai don for your hav¬ ing made her wretched - supplicated it ttith a broken and cont lite beai t; au Vart that pu fei ied pas.-non to dignity and VOJ . π ï. is
peace, and broke, without a murmur, for the preference—if I could think this—my last tears would not be so bitter as these." Bathed in tears, she sunk on the sofa; I could have sunk into the earth. 1 knelt beside her. I told her, my voice trembling with agony, I could not love» " I do not ask your love, I asked only for your pity. You have no pity—go, and leave me." " I cannot go; I cannot leave you—thus at least" She started up, with horror in her face. " Sir John's voice. He is on the stairs. I was mad to forget it. lie has a cher e amie in some part of the house. He will certainly come in. I am undone ! I am undone ! " Half distracted, I was rushing out. " Have mercy on mc," said she, clinging to me wildly, " let him not see you—only let him not see you. Go into this closet, and if he comes in he will possibly take no notice of me, as usual" I past a few moments of agony in shame and fear,
heightened by the feeling that I had not deserved them. Of all evils, accidental ones, the ills of ill-luck are the most insupportable. 1 heard a murmur of voices; in a few moments it ceased. I ventured out; the boudoir was empty. I rushed home, cursing La Tour and Sir John, and my¬ self, and every one but Lady Delphi¬ na, whom I pitied but could not accuse. As 1 approached home I saw, at the win¬ dow, Athanasia, and other female figures, standing to survey a splendid equipage, finished in the first style by Godsall, which had just roiled to the door in all the pomp of modern luxury. My losses the preceding night rushed on my me¬ mory. Godsall must be paid immediately. I entered the drawing room, little dis- posed to be elated by the praises which Lady Castle-Wycomb, and Lady West¬ hampton, who had called on Athanasia, were bestowing on the taste and magnili- К. .Mí
cence of her new equipage. H But, Mr. Bethel, you are just in time to terminate a dispute between Athanasia and me, which í am sure you will in my favor. 1 have been telling her, that in consequence of Lord and Lady Montrevor, and Colo- nel Montoìieifs ieturniug, and Lady Westh amp ton's marriage, and all those distinguished circumstances, our famih will appear, on the birth-day, in the most brilliant manner, and it will be absolutely outre if she is the only absentee, except Ida, who is in the nursery. You could not take a more favorable opportunity to be presented. I am to present Lady Westhampton, on her marriage, as the change of titles would render it rather awkward for her mother to perform the office; but she can present you, you know. Our family will almost form a circle in themselves, probably the mo.- 1 brilliant in the thawing room; and it i- the only place I ever wish to encomi tu a family-circle in, for one is reconciled ť»
the stupidity by the splendor. I see Mr. Bethel thinks just as I do, so well save him the trouble of speaking; so come this moment to La Tours, and look over all her finery; she is the court-milliner, and has an immensity of taste. ГИ take you, or you shall take nie in your new car¬ riage. That hammer-cloth would be quite superb, if it had the embroidered coronets on the sides/* I had no power to stop Lady Castle- Wycomb, whose language was as rapid as her ideas. In the short interval of her appeal to me I had argued with the bad logic of perverted feeling, that Mrs. Bethel ou^ht to íľo to the draw ing room, if all her family went; that the increasing expences of one winter in London might be retrieved by the economy of a summer in Ireland, &e. Я*с. As I attended the sisters to their carriage Lady Westhampton reminded mc it was her first night that winter, and к 3
that she expected to see Mrs. Bethel anu me at Soho Square. " I fear I shall re¬ new Lady Cas tie-Wycomb's horrors of a family-circle by appearing there. " " Oh wherever there is faro, I am insensible to every thing else. Drive to Sloane Street, and as you are returning stop at my jew¬ eller's. You will of course want jewels, Airs. Bethel, at least you will want to look at them." They flew away anel I flew up stairs to write to Debraine for immediate re¬ mittances, when Lord Roschamp, who had been looking for me all through Bond Street, lounged into the room, and after extending himself on the so¬ pha, started up and dragged me to a sale, extorting my approbation the whole way for his exquisite taste in my new horses, whose choice I had unfor* matelv committed to him, i( for damme now, the thing is this, there is not a groom, or jockey, or rascal of that kind in London, that knows the points of a horse better
than I do." I assented to avoid increas¬ ing a violent head-ache by contention. The sale, and the debate on it, which was adjusted in a fashionable coffee-house, detained us till it was too late to dine anywhere but at Lord Roschamp s, where I went with the party " nothing loth." I wished to forget myself, and there was wine enough to make me forget myseif and every thing else. I was restored to perfect recollection by a note which was put into my hands immediately after dinner; the contents were brief. " I am the most unhappy of women, not on my own account, but yours; come to me this moment. I hardly have power to sign my name. Delphina О ---------." I did not heed the laugh which the direction in a female hand, and the precipitation with which I quitted the room, excited. I reached South-Audley Street in a moment. Ladv Delphina was in her dressing room, anu к 4
in tears. u What have I done/* said she, wringing ber hands, " oh, what have 1 done!*' " What have von done, tell nu\ tell me, I beg, only spare me this ex cla* mati n, these tears, and I will bear to lis¬ ten to any thing, to every thing."' " I will tell you, but don't terrify me by that pale and breathless wildness; that hollow voice. I too can bear any thing, any thing, but to see you so wretched—so frantic-looking." She clung round me, but I was in¬ sensible of her touch, of her embrace, of every thins: but her storv. tť I will not speak, I will not utter a word till vou have drank this Mine." I swallowed it; I swallowed another glass. I sunk upon the sofa ; she stood before me. ct We were seen to-day. Sir John came into the room. You were concealed, but you had left your hat on the sola, I saw him take it up, and examine it." She took up the hat which had dropt on the floor. ťí Yes, your name is in it, we arc undone,
He was here this evening, after he had drank him.self into brutal courage. He menaced me with public infamy; I de¬ fied him. He menaced you; then I trembled. He saw it, and left me.'' I groaned in the bitterne?» of my heart ; Idashed myself on the sofa, and tried, with my handkerchief, to stifle the passion that almost choaked me. Infamy, at the fi r fi opening of life, of married life, incurred without the guilt, or the solace of pas¬ sion, and extending its ruin over my prin¬ ciples, my affections, my fortune, my character. I did not love Lady Delphi¬ na, but I felt at that moment how I loved Athanasia. I felt that the intelligence would perhaps break her heart. I felt it had stabbed mine to its inmost recesses of honor and affection. I felt all the shame of youth, and all the abandonment of the stranger to life and to vice. I felt all the guilt of the man, and all the an¬ guish of the husband.
My despair terrified Lady Delphina; she dried her own tears. " There is one hope, but one hope for us. He is the most mean, the most sordid wretch ; he has no principle of resentment or revenge." " If he has," said I, starting up, " I am ready to vindicate myself either to his justice or his vengeance. I will meet him to-night——this mo¬ ment. I will wiite to tell him so. All that man can do to justify himself to man, I will do. I will stake my honor, if lie will. If he will, I will stake my ex¬ istence to prove my innocence. Vou know it; you know my innocence." u I know it; I know my own; but what will that avail. No declarations will satisfy hinr, anel he dreads danger too much to seek satisfaction at the hazard of your life or his own. It is not Moloch, but Mammon he worships. I believe—I am convinced he might be bribed to silence." " Oh, then let me bribe him. He shall have all, and more than I can afford, let
liim but spare my youth and my name. It was not to run this course of infamy I came to England." Tears of hot and bitter agony ran over my cheeks while I thought of the wife, whose peace my apostacy would destroy, and of the child whom it would impoverish before it saw T the light. " Can you, indeed; can you, without incon¬ venience, produce a sum that would satisfy him, before delay provokes him to augment his extortions." " I have but four hundred guineas in the woild. He shall have them to-uiüdıt/* " And an о hundred more from me. I can bear any distress but yours. Five hundred gui¬ neas would, I am convinced, bribe him to conceal a murder/' Her magnanimity, her disinterested and animated kindness melted me. I implored her to let me write to Ireland, to apply in anv other direction. I had no doubt of procuring the money. I would feel
no distress in parting with it. She smi¬ led with melancholy dignity. " What и your peace, your honor, to an hundred guineas." u A world, in purchase for a friend, is gain." " I must lose no' time in getting the money. I shall bring it back to you in a moment. Do you con¬ duct the whole business silently, and se¬ cretly, and safely. I shall not be a mo- ment going home and returning/' I kis¬ sed the hand she held out to me as I rushed from the room, and thought her eyes reproached me for parting so coldly I returned, after depositing the money with her. I asked the servants vacantly for Mrs. B. " My lady is at Lady West¬ hampton's, Sir—she went about an hour ago—at eleven o'clock/' A thought rush¬ ed upon me, with the recollection of the engagement. I composed my dishevelled hair and dress, and throwing myself into a carriage, drove to Lady Wcsthampton's. The glare of the rooms, and the tumult of the company, stimulated my harassed
benses to something like recollection. In the principal room nothing was to be heard but the jargon of the faro-tabic, diversified only by the clamorous suc¬ cess of Lady Castle-Wycomb, who trans¬ ferred rouleau after rouleau, from her dear unlucky friend the Rees to herself; and the gay wit of Lady Montrevor, whom neither success nor ill luck t ver terrupted in the display of that noncha¬ lance to which it was her triumph Xo bend an agonized mind. I did not join the groupe. With the provisional reserve of a determined gam¬ bler, I determined only to hazard, with an hope of success, and to play only a Gfame I understood. As I lounged through the rooms with a face that (as ΐ caught a glimpse) seemed to hold little alliance with the carelessness of my attitude, 1 met Bellamy, whom a discovery of my propensity to high play, had drawn more frequently to the family parties. We sat down—supper was an™
nounccd—wc continued to play, frcsli candles were brought—the company se¬ parated—we continued to play—pushing away the refreshments that were offered to us, and deprecating all intrusion,— Athanasia, who refused to £>o honu without me, threw herself on a sopha, in an adjoining room; and, after waiting nearly an hour, fainted, from fatigue, and perhaps anxiety and alarm. Bel¬ lamy's politeness or humanity would not Sítíler him to protract the game any longer. I rose a winner of two thousand fi*e hundred guineas. Lady Westhamp¬ ton, who had sat with Athanasia, from compassion orcuriosity, congratulated my success and her own, in having the eclat of her enteitauimcnts established bv the report of such a sum being lost at them. I past a night of restless agony— degraded in my own eyes, and loath¬ ing m)'beif, 1 execrat etl gaming, a- tiie vilest of vices, and myself as tlu vilest of gamesters. I thought of the
distress of Bellamy, and of the derelic¬ tion of my own feelings. * It was not for this' -a thousand times I began to ьау to myself, and left the sentence un¬ finished. I was only reconciled to my¬ self by the most solemn resolutions to extricate mvself from the embarrass- ments in which I was plunged—bribe my persecutors to silence, by the local appli¬ cation of the money I had won ; and then bribe my own feelings by its resti¬ tution, when Γ had retrieved my present derangement. My heart clung to the images of domestic peace and love. I thought of retiring with Athanaòia, soft, and lovely, and innocent, as she yet was, from the convulsive and delirious struggles of dissipation; and forgetting, in the softness of solitude, the passions that had fevered me to madness, «luring my winter in Dublin and my w intevin London. I entered her dressing-room, (where we breakfasted) with a ílushed face and aching head. I made some apologies
for the fatigue------the distress of t ¡r preceding night. u I was only terri¬ fied by the terrible solicitude you ap¬ peared to shew. You know, my love, I never presumed to dictate to your amuse¬ ments, but had I the two thousand fiu hundred guineas, I would have inven them to banish the gloom that was set¬ tled on your countenance, last night, tr have brought back one of the smiles that vou left in Ireland/'—" If I left mv smiles there, my heart accompanied you."—"Did it," said she, catching ami kissing the hand that w T as extended to her. " You should not say those soft. fond tilings to me too often, you see hov/ foolish they make me."— ťt They make you bewitching, lovely. By heaven, Г love you more than language can tell — your softness, your timidity, your fond and feminine nature has wound itself into mine, by a thousand delicate fibres. How happy I would be—how happy I will he. if mv love banishes this reserve------ thi 4
Л know not what to call it, that veils her from mc and herself, and gives her¬ self to speak the language of love, as well as to feel its meaning. Do you love mc, Athanasia?" She had half risen, I folded my arms round her, her head sunk gently on my shoulder. " You will never know how well ------till when— till {ill 1 am dead." I attempted to reason oi¬ to trille away a dejection which 1 be¬ lieved was only the consequence of her .situation. " No," said she, in a voice whose firmness resembled that of her mother—- " No—no power can deceive me, I shall live but a few months longer ; but while I live, (suddenly chane-imr her manner) ГП reconcile vou ост * v to my departure—I'll make you wish for it hv my extravagance. Your two thou- sand five hundred guineas must be trans¬ muted by fashionable alchemy, into hoops and trimmings, and diamonds, and birth-dav iincrv, in a few hours; so icive them to mc, and give me a ki>>,
wliich ent re nous I would rather hav than all the rest, if we were out of tlu circle/' — u My love, I have not paid fur your new carriage and horses yet/*-- *' Oh, give them the four hundred gui- ncas you have in your secretaire, and that will pacify them, till after the birth- day."—" I have not the four hundred gui¬ neas to give them."— íť No ! Where are they ?"—" Upon my soul I don't know. I rose and turned from the tabic with unrestrained vexation. " Gone, 1 believe—Why do you ever ask a gamb¬ ler how or where money goes ?"—" Wh} do I ask the most generous, the most in- % dulgent of men, how he pleases to db pose of his money !" said she, rising, and following me, and winding her milky arms about me. I was touched to the soul; her kindness, her confidence, like a fine instrument, cut more keenly and deeply than the bluntest reproaches, i returned her caresses with vehemence, I
told her the two thousand guineas were her's—all I had was heťs, and an heart whose worthlessness almost made mc weep, while I told her, all was her's. " Here's grandeur coming to interrupt happiness, as it always does, 1 ' said she, pointing to an enormous hoop that was introduced into the room, as she spoke, and spread by two assistants on an arm¬ chair. I gave the money to her, ail but live hundred guineas, wliich I purposed to give the coach-makei;: there was yet a debt unpaid, whose recollection filled me with anguish and shame: the one hundred guineas which I owed to Lady Delphina Orberry—to my heart—to my honor, but one resource remained. I hurried to Berkeley Square ; it was be¬ tween three and four, ami Lord Kos- ehamp's phaeton parading before the win¬ dows, announced that the ladies were preparing for their morning lounge. The folding doors were open, and as I sprung
np the stairs, I saw Lady Castle-Wy¬ comb, Lord Rose hanì p, and some о the» fashionables, in the drawing-room ; her ladyship was declaring she was actually broke, by her ill success at faro, the pre- cedingnight, (the luck had turned so hor¬ ridly against her, and then bid Lord Ros- champ not forget to make her call at -—V for the diamond tiara) as she was adjust- ing her veil at the glass. Lady M. wa> not in the drawing-room—-the group had not seen me—-I passed on to her dress¬ ing-room— Bennet was arranging a su¬ perb vase of gold fish on a stand ; and her ladyship, attired for an excursion. was ju4 dismissing the person from whom she had bought them. " Mr. Bethel, ad¬ mire my gold fish ; or, at least, admire tlh price I have inven for them. Prettv crea- tures— -I'll discard all other favorites fror.: henceforth, and love nothing but von-·· and myself: neither fashion nor caprice shall ever banihh you from my boudoir- even - ' I r air i) i tse! f may he fixed by gol J.'
She perceived I wished to speak to her, for my eyes were tli rec ted—not to the gold fish, but to her. Bennet, I believe you have touched a torpe¬ do, instead of a gold fish—how can vou be so long arranging that vase г" Bennet, after vindicating herself from tediousness, in a speech twice as long as the period of the offence, disappeared. li Can vou let me have an hundred «v' guineas immediately?"---" With plea¬ sure---1 have had an immense run of luck lately." She checked herself as if lier delicacy forbad her to advert to mine. She took a note for the amount from her secretaire ; as she handed it to me, she threw up her veil, and fixed her eyes on me. I had never seen such an expression in them but once before. I actually started, " I know the mean- in ir. of all this—it /v something relating to Lady Delphina—she is directly or in¬ directly the cause of////*/*—" My own
folly, my own culpable, ideot-folly, has been the cause of it." ťt I would inquire deeper-- Л would probe you to the quick, but for this," as she gave me the note, " the creditor is not allowed to employ torture, by the laws of England."— ť * Don't torture me by your goodness— your undeserved goodness. In my pre¬ sent state of feeling, that is the peine forte et dure to me." As I spoke, I va¬ cantly traced some characters on the back of a note that lay on the table, with the pen she had just endorsed the note with. " We will not put you to the trouble of oral confession/' said she, looking over me. " Your pen, I see, can 4 the lover" s wish, without the blush, impart.'" My eye followed her's—it was not without " the blush" that I per¬ ceived I had written the word " Del- pijina/' I threw the note into the fire. <c What would I give that her ladyship could see you-·-but, seriously, don't be
THE WILD IRISH BOY. £15 angry with yourself, or the pen, which I see you are about to throw into the fire, it is not the first time a goose has smed the state, you know."—" You distract me by your badinage. I had rather have advice than an hundred—than a thou¬ sand guineas, this moment."—" If you want advice, delay not a moment, from diffidence or indolence, or ny other want of reason to take it"—" I have no friend—no director. Hammond and his wife quitted England a week before I arrived in it. His father's death brought him to Ireland."—" Lord Roschamp is waiting in his phaeton for your ladyship," said Bennet, half-entering. " I'll wait on his lordship in a moment : you see I have but a moment to s? л: to you—shun Lady Delphina ; disengage yourself from her at any price that you or I can afford. Doif t, like the Sicilian diver, lose your¬ self for ever, by plunging into the gulph aftei your gold"
I accompanied her down—" You go in Lord Roochamp's phaeton."—" Yes, I ^o on with his lordship, ami the rest, for a short time—a very short time longer. I have written to Mr. Corbett—I will leave London—I will leave every thing, to ftnd myself, and happiness —if / can. Tell no one. Wait till after the birth-day, and you will wonder ; and wonder you know is involuntary praise." The word praise seemed to operate by instinctive as¬ sociation on her ideas, and she gave her hand to Lord Re)schamp, and sprung into the phaeton, with the step of June), when she ascended her car, after borrowing the cestus. I lingered in Berkeley Square, deba¬ ting the safety of presenting the one hundred guineas in person. I recollected that it might perhaps miscarry, if com¬ mitted to an envelope; I recollected the coldness with which her parting look had reproached me ; I determined
to leave her, at least, with tenderness and respect : she had deserved tender¬ ness and respect at least from me. I went to South Audley Street, and passed the day in contending with the tender magnanimity of Lady Delphina; who, when she found herself vanquished in argument, and compelled to accept the one hundred guineas, flew to her harp, and lapt me in elysium, by sounds that brought with them oblivion of all pain. When I recovered my recollection, I rose to retire. " You must not go away now," said Lady Delphina, " the streets are still full of carriages going to dinner¬ parties ; at least, stay till you will no longer be observed : the dangerous—dan¬ gerous indulgence of your presence, I would purchase at the expence of any danger but yourV There was some¬ thing so flattering in this secresy—some¬ thing so confidential in this repose of her fame and happiness in mine, that I vol. iir. L
could not resist her request. The thought of Athanasia, pale, dejected, deserted, came to my mind, bringing so much pain, that I tried to banish it. I dined with Lady Delphina : she had a thousand expedients to divest solitude of depression; the most impassioned works of poesy and love, were heaped on the gilded book-shelves; her harp was always tuned, and her port-folio, filled with ani¬ mated and popular sketches, was always in sight A volume of Hayley's metri¬ cal plays lay on the sopha, beside Lady Delphina ; she took it up, and repeated the first lines of the Tragedy —" Let ar¬ dent friendship be the bond between us ; but, oh, subdue this inauspicious love, and chase it from thy breast." I will not repeat the pause which fol¬ lowed this sentence, or the conversation which followed the pause. I left Lady Del¬ phina in no error, which the representa¬ tion of strong and simple feeling could re-
move. I told her of my domestic habits— of my wish for domestic happiness ; I told her of the habits, or impulses rather, by which she saw me urged—-being merely the parasite plants, whose clinging was hostile to the native growth of my heart. I told her of my lovely, innocent wife, of the exquisite and vernal wreaths of fancy and feeling, that she had scattered in my path, and hung round my heart. I told her of her talents, which only re¬ quired devclopement, to- be flattered into perfection ; of her situation, which open¬ ed the sources of a new gush of hope and pleasure to my feelings. She did not complain—she did not remonstrate— she knew her strength, she only wept ; and, to a woman's tears what can be re¬ plied ? She asked me had I never loved ? I told her í had known all the wild and wayward, and exquisite wan¬ derings of that unspeakable feeling; that I hoped now to know its balm—its com« τ О J j а«
fort—its soothing and domestic softness ; that the storm that had flashed a fitful and perilous brightness on my heait, had passed by, and the still and fertilizing shower that followed, fell like dew upon it, softening its soil, and healing its scars. She asked me had I no mercy forthose who felt as I did?—then she told me she desired no mercy. Still she wept, and only wept. I left her in agony; yeti left her. Atha¬ nasia had, as usual, when alone, sent for Madame, to dine withher ; theeveninghad been exhausted in novel reading, or novel conversation : her sickly struggle to smile, when I entered, depressed me more than the dejection it attempted to bide. 1 was weary and dispirited, was it a wonder I ran to the first engagement I recollected, in such a state of feeling; and that in such a state of feeling, 1 was too care¬ less of any thing but the forgetfulness I sought; and that from that, not even
immense losses awoke me? The morning roused me to such misery, that, unable to bear Athanasia's innocent and dis¬ tracting smiles, I again rushed to Lady Delphinac, and again was soothed by her softness, and animated by her end¬ less and exquisite resources. The day I passed in indolent and vo¬ luptuous melancholy, (in sighings over better things neglected,and tiie habit and power of evil ones increasing) was a proud and important one to England. Coi.Aion- tolieu arrived, with the official dispatches, confirming the success of the expedi¬ tion, and displaying the details in which hisown courage and capacity were so emi- neutlv distinguished. I tore mvself from South Audley Street, about ten: Lady Delphina, мЬо was invited to Bokeley Square, suggested the propriety of our not entering together ; and 1 drove in her chariot round the square, before I followed, or attempted to follow her, L 3
through the crouded hall and corridor of Lord C. W.'s. Even there, the croud and the tumult were such, as almost to obstruct the entrance ; and the number of strangers who were admitted to see a grand transparency, on the staircase window, respecting the action in which Colonel Montolieu had distinguished himself, completely filled the space to the drawing-room doors. Colonel Mon¬ tolieu, w ho had been at St. James's, in the morning, and received in the most distinguished manner, by their Majes¬ ties, had revuriicd to dine at Beikley Square, where the whole world of fa¬ shion were assembled to greet his appear¬ ance—it was fashionable to applaud bril¬ liant actions; and the triflers of the day, unable to understand or appreciate the importance of the detail they importuned for, hung round the fashionable hero, with acclamation and wonder. In the principal room, the circle formed round
him, defied all attempts to penetrate* His words, his looks, his whispers were conveyed by instant gestures, from those who were nearest him, to those for whom not the most painful posture of attention could procure a glimpse of his figure. Lady Montrevor, hanging on the arm of her darling son, seemed to have " forgot herself to rapture:" her loud and animated praise frequently in¬ terrupting his narrative; and her wit and her beauty, elevated by pride and joy, almost to " excess of light :*'—" I hang upon your arm, George, like smiling victory" Those who could hear her, re¬ peated all she said ; and those who could not, at least comforted themselves by re¬ peating the magnificence of her appropri¬ ate dress, of sea-green crape, draped with bunches of silver-weed anei water- blies : her hair arranged under a naval coronet of emeralds, and the comb from which her long and mermaid-ringlets floated on L 4
her white bosom, rising into a sparkling shell of diamonds. I saw all this splendor, with the in difference of one whose î^İght was " daz¬ zled and spent," with perpetual glare; but not with indifference did I see the hero of the day, and reflect, that I was wasting in thraldom to a woman, and to my senses, the powers that might have raised me to an eminence like his own, that eminent night. ■ I wished I had been permitted to enter, as I proposed, a private soldier into his regiment, and take the chance of life or death. I wished I had never been recalled to enervating wealth, and in¬ glorious indulgence. My temper was embittered by self-contempt and dissa¬ tisfaction. I was impatient of the croud, and of their foolish face of praise. I was negligent—I was almost harsh to m ν companion, but it was in vain : from the moment 1 entered, Lady Delphina had fastened on me, aud nothing could
release me from m ν vassalage. She had the happy art of attaining her object, by appearing to have attained it- The croud had compelled her to take my arm for protection, and she led me through with the most merciless display of my com¬ plete subjection ; and such was her gen¬ tleness, that, when I struggled in vain to disengage myself from her, it only made me reproach my own brutality ; and such was her address, in laughing at the caprice of fortune, or of accident, be¬ ing allowed to elevate a man into a de- mi-god, and the folly of the fashion¬ ables, who praised without the power or the sentiment of admiration, that I was almost reconciled to her, and to îmsclf. She drew mc into another room, ubere the heat was less oppressive---here t he- naval devices, with which the floor had been chalked, were effaced bv the feet of the dancers ; here all around me was levity --- í did feel it less oppressive.
They had commenced with country-dan¬ ces, but in compliment to some German officers who had accompanied Colonel Montolieu, and to the Imperial Embas¬ sador, who was present, they were ex¬ changed for waltzs, in which the ladies were instructed by their foreign partners. The first object I saw was Athanasia floating: rounel the room with a striking figure, in the attitude which Werter de¬ scribes as the most exquisite and danger¬ ous that can be assumed; her dejection, her situation forgot in the intoxication of motion and music. No human being could have conjectured, from our mutual attitudes, and mutual disengagement, that we ever had hearts, or that those hearts had ever felt for each other one emotion. She was in the arms, literally in the arms of a stranger; anda stranger was hanging on mine. " liow interesting she looks," said Lady Delphina, whose talent and whose pleasure was praise. I
could not look at her. I cursed the per¬ versions of fashion in silent bitterness of spirit. " Are these changes from dejec¬ tion to extravagant spirits frequent?"— " I—I believe so—I have not observed." t( No,—true—observation is certainly not your forte." " What do you mean? " Nothing, or, as Elvira says, " I like resolution, and I am resolved you shall not know." u Know what?" *' What all the world knows. Oh, what am I saying; instead of an Elvira I am playing Marplot." " And you want to make me play the Suspicious Husband!" said I, with a suddenness that startled her and myself. " How unjust, how cruel you are ! but I was formed to bend to cruelty and injustice. On the contrary I implied that the changes in Mrs. Bethel's disposi¬ tion proceeded merely from a nervous cause. I am sure of İt, from their fre¬ quency. I myself could never believe them to arise from any other." " Nor I, ι 6
I never could—I never will—never, by Heaven, never/' " Suppress your voice and your emotions, I entreat. I am very unhappy to have been the cause. But I am not the cause. There must be some¬ thing more. What is it that disturbs you this evening?" " I don't know. I am disturbed. I am unhappy. You have mentioned this several times. I know- not what you mean. I have no wish to know. My feelings are too irritable, too painful to be trifled with." " Oh, but I am a trifler, and you must forgive me. I should haveremembered, that trifles are to the jealous, confirmations strong." I was going to assure her seriously of the pain these perpetual allusions gave me, when Lord Roschamp, who had been laughing at the dancers, strolled up to us: " Damme, Bethel, you are famously up to fashionable life I see; the outset of his winter in London, Lady Delphina, began with his declaring he meaned to sit with
Mrs. Bethel all his morninsrs; and now, unless they meet at some fashionable par¬ ty, by Heaven they never meet at all. morning" or ni<jht: and when thev do, it is only to display to each other some dashing lounger with whom they stroll round the rooms, nod to each other, and meet and part selon au dernier gout" I was relieved from this attack by Lord Wcsthampton's loudly declaring, that it was a shame and a si u for men to be con¬ gratulated on not knowing their own na¬ tural wives and husbands; that ior his part, if Lady Westhampton should take it into her head to nod it at him, because they went toa fashionable party, it would be the last she should go to with his con¬ sent; as to our meeting that wav, like strangers, that is impossible, for we al¬ ways go together in the same carriage, and I take care that we shall come home at the same time." Lord Roschamp laugh¬ ed vociferously, and Lord Westhampton
as vociferously argued. I might have been amused by this characteristic dis¬ pute, but Bellamy at that moment came up with an invitation to play, which I knew was his only object in being there, and which my late success had left me no power of refusing. I followed him to one of the less frequented rooms. Lady Delphina still hung on my arm. We ¿at down. " The usual rate," said I, cut¬ ting for the deal, " I presume." " Half- crowns, if vou please/' said Bellamy. The usual rate was five guineas a ira me, and a bet which varied silon ľoccasion. " Are you serious, Bellamy? u Perfectly serious; you'll oblige me by pla) ing half- crowns." " I shall certainly oblige you." We played, and he lost a tiifle I com¬ prehended his motive. He believed him¬ self to be in a run of ill-luck, and de¬ termined to exhaust it on trifling losses. I was confirmed in înv opinion when, on supper being announced, he told me he
would expect me in the same place, but not at the same rate, when it was over. ťt Montolieu," said he, " is fond of dan- cing, it will be renewed for him after sup- pen When he is tired of thrice slaying his slain, for all the fashionables in Lon¬ don, we can then be here unnoticed and undisturbed." I led Lady Delphina from the room. " If you are going to play after supper, put me into a chair, or any thing that will take me away from seeing your agitation." On the staircase the croud compelled us to stop. Colonel Montolieu, who was laughing with all the vivacity of a soldier, after peril is over, desired to be introduced to me, and a slight form of recognition took place. At that moment, stung by the sight of Athanasia handina: on the arm of her partner, and conversing with him in French, I hurried on with Lady Delphina. A grove of dowager's plumes concealed me from Montolieu' s sight. He thought
I had passed on. 1 heard him say some¬ thing to Lord invermay, who stood next him, about a striking figure. " But what is his character, or has he any character at all?" '* He is a young man of distin¬ guished talents, but cursedly dissipated, like all his countrymen, always intangled with the women; you see the Orberry is hanging on him now, and he'll find it in¬ fernally hard to shake her off" " Sir John will instruct him; I know no man who gets rid of all his incumbrances bet¬ ter, debts, Wife, all." A loud laugh fol¬ lowed, í hesitated for a moment whether I should turn or not. My feelings were aggravated by Lady Montrevor's passing me at that moment with a look of re¬ proachful indifference, if such an expres¬ sion can be imagined. She was repelled by the croud. " George, I must learn of you how to advance, my courage entirely iails; the command of this expedition must be committed to you, or to Mr.
Bethel. Mr. Bethel hves to expose him- ¿r(f to danger." Vexed and goaded, I demanded the reason of this delay, and was told by some panting dowagtis, that the servants found some difficulty in re¬ moving the crouds who had been admit¬ ted to see the illuminations on the stair¬ case, and the transparency which termi¬ nated the perspective of lights on the cor¬ ridor, and that some stiagglcrs still in¬ sisted on being permitted to see Colonel Montolieu and the company as they de¬ scended to the supper-room. At this moment something like an impulse was given to our progress, but as we reached the landing-place, I observed a figure, who was evidently one of the intruders, sta¬ tioned in a corner, muffled in a dai к coat, and observing the company composedly. î passed him without further observation, but recollecting that Lady Mon t revor had disengaged her hand from Lord Ros- ^b-iwp,. I turned and offered her mine.
^ : "Attend tojr<>«r«^ */<?*>Mr, ВеШЛ ?> I passed on, but in the next moment * scream of horror and agony made ine turn suddenly, and, rushing; back, I saw Lady Montrevor smk on the stepă, and Uitßgurt dart through the croud, and disappear in a moment All «ow was confusion and tenon ; Fart of úle coni* рапу collected round lady Montreur, part in vain pursued tibe stranger. The tumult was terrible—the screams of af¬ fright from those who had witnessed .this,strange transaction, and of inquiry firom those wlio had not, and the general struggle of distress ànd impoirtiìnìty and ignorance rendered Lady MonUrevoťs re¬ covery impossible, while she continued exposetl. to it I relinquished Lady Delphinac hand—I rushed through the crowd, andv raising Lady Alontrevor in щу aims, hore her back to one of the de^ sertcd drawiug-rooms, which ¡n a ino- meut was again crowded with inquirers.
.itim Water and esscDces w^re nov applied : she opened her eyes—they were fixed ; and hollow; the deadly whiteness of her bloodless forehead and øeck terribly con- tiasted the rouge on her cheeks, and the ornaments that glittered on her corse-like figure* "Wheream ΙΓΛ said she, jn V Ы1о\у voice—? and where b *c? w She uttered sotne uninteUigibte words, and closed her eyes again» The croud «gşaıı gathered round her, with various con· jectures: the German readers declared she must haye ieen à spectre, and shjad* dered at their own voices, as they threw their eyes round the apadona room» where the half-extinguished lights burn¬ ed dimly, and the sudden.change of scene and employment produced a forci¬ ble change of feeling, The voices ap¿ peared to restore her to recollection ; she immediately assumed that command over herself which nothing but the absence of reason could divest her of for à moment:
requested that Bennet might be called to attend her; entreated the company to return to the supper-room, and not think so much of the trivial effects of heat and fatigue and pleasure. " After all," said she, *' 1 have a better constitution than the Grecian who died of joy the day his son was crowned as a conqueror : you may tell George I only swooned : Ma¬ dame Ilecamier and I will divide the glory of entertaining company by re¬ tiring to bed." She attempted to lise, as she spoke ; her mind was stronger than her frame — she could not even stand—she leaned upon me—I entreated lier to retire, and Bennet joined in my intreaties, with a something like a trem¬ bling consciousness I had never seen her assume before—she was obliged to vield. I carried her in my arms to her dressing room, and she fainted again while I placed her on the sopha. lîennet insisted on being left alone with her lady, and
" allowed to manage her lady quite alone." I was retiring, when Athanasia entered, who, among the crowd in the supper-room, had heard indistinctly her mother's indisposition; and now rushing in, declared her resolution not to quit her, and hung over and soothed and sup¬ ported her with an officious tenderness, such as none but a female knows how to display, and such as a lovely female be¬ comes a thousand times more lovely from displaying. The thought of her mystery, her re¬ serve, her coldness to me, was exqui¬ sitely painful to my heart at that mo¬ ment: what would I have given to have felt one other cool soft hands pressed on my burning forehead at that moment, or to have tasted one of the kisses that she wasted with fond grief on her mother's lifeless hands. The remainder of the night doubled the losses of the preceding—I gave my note to Bellamy for a sum I can-
not now bear to tell of, and hurried home to find a letter from Deloraine, assuring me that he could not get ano¬ ther shilling from the tenants; that the lands were set much above their value, &c. &c. I had just flung it into the fire as Athanasia returned from Berkeley Square — " Athanasia, I must have the 2000 guineas I gave you." She ñxed her eyes on me for a moment, and then, without speaking a word, took up one of the branches and went to her dressing- room—I followed her, she opened her secretaire, and took out the bills. " I wish 1 could tell you, my love, the plea¬ sure it gives me to return them : I take an omen favorable to our happiness from it : may I hope you don't wish we should go to St James's, or remain in London, or plunge ourselves deeper in these involvements fashionable and pe¬ cuniary." I did not speak. " Tell me, my love, is this the price of our departure
—are we to return to Ireland, are we to be happy ?" I sighed heavily—" Coultf you be happy in Ireland ? 1 thought you detested Ireland/' " I am at least mi¬ serable here," said she, clasping her hands with sudden violence. She threw herself on me — " Take me from this place if you love me, if you love your¬ self—here I am not, I never can be hap¬ py—take me to your heart, shield me, shelter me, fold me, hide me in it—from myself------from every thing but the thought of you—Oh ! I could tell you every titing at this moment/' She sobbed with vehemence. I knew the enthusias¬ tic state of her feelings—I believed she had nothing to relate but the confessions of exasperated feeling—»mv own were dreadfully irritated—I was not able to hear every thing at that nument. I told her to spare herself and me—to seek her mother's confidence—her affection, her strength of mind will be of equal use to
you. íť Oh 1 I cannot encounter her— her wit oppresses, and her despair terri¬ fies me : 1 could hear her talk for ever of herself, but I cannot bear to talk to her of myself/' I hardlv heard the last words : as she spoke she was closing her secretaire, but so slowly that I saw a packet of letters in Deloraine's hand lying among the papers in it. Again she presseel me to apply the money to the payment of my debts, and not incur any new ones by compelling her to appear at St. James's. All my better feelings had yielded in the struggle of vanity :------ " You shall go to Court—you shall ap¬ pear in nothing inferior to your sisters. This is our first and last winter in Lon¬ don; but while it continues, you shall shine a star of the first brilliancy, if not the first magnitude. We shall soon cease to struggle against our circumstances, and our feelings-; but in the mean time do not contend with me, I cannot beai
it now—I am harrassed, wretched, spent —do not oppress me with your caresses —do not distract me with your tears/' She forbore to oppress or to distract me; but the night was one of unmixed dis¬ traction. Every character around me seemed to be rising on the ruins of mine. Athanasia's softness increased with my feveiibh initation and self-reproach ; and her dignified resignation with my despi¬ cable subjection to reluctant depravity. She soothed, she palliated, she flattered the very vices of my temper and senti¬ ments, assured me the splendor of her appearance should be equal to my ex¬ pectations, my wishes—" And La Tour can easily wait for her bill till your next remittances from Ireland/' Determined to lose nothing of the grace of a favor, she gave orders wliile at breakfast, in my healing, for her dress¬ makers, milliners, &c. to attend her im¬ mediately; }et so painful was the mild vol. т. и
atruggkròf b^fedmgs, Abat \шаШ to . bear «by οψη> I hurried to B«kdey Squwo, the moibent breakfast Has over. Nore of the ftmi^r irere ytt wiWe^-I trisbed to вее only one, From Beimet; whom 1 inet oà àie staiieaae» I karaed that her Lady had passed a dreadfut night, ша 1й?аа тегу fflj but núňg to drees, and go to tihft Queeu's drawing- гоош« M For you know» Mr. Bethd, ray lady never yields to any thing but when there is nobody x to seeder/* 1 hurried to her dr^ng-roòTO.cyad sent in a request to see ÌKàràs soon as she rose, Ια a few minutes she was in the dressingw rown leamng on Bennet, who placed her cmasc^ha^andiinaioedÄteiyb^ahto^ just the dressing-table, « Oh, I have pas¬ sed a dreadful night ! >v said Lady Мол- trţvor, ^Athanasia, who hung over me like a ministering angel, told me y ou knew all roy terrible story, when I ex· pressed my fairs that you bid Tward
: sme t tøg ia my ftvbŕgs. Υοα *neë elt «к* Willys W ; ш ЫЬ Bight—him wb^th I bt Beved . 4èàd t^c« ţw«nţr уеаге4-9Ь<Л| I 4o v firow my «wil, Wievö dead ; «ad оошс ftom Ac dwi to roe, ^,)^meï^i*--r ; èt Oh; Wì^ th^ bort« dic№^ you : \vetéd^yri'li(jrm;Tè^ Sh» shook her bead ìitórédùlowly.^^ I do not expect to t>c bdfettá ¿ bat I know, I fidi *m rig^t in the fke^ turd in ib consequences toà—Whetr Ctesandht predicts evil ;¿nly «¿ liebelt ^hë may be heTtevëJ; OI4 ^o t^wer eotìd shake me aìri «ii shaken ^*tl¿s infctøent, but a t^wer aboye 4 humanity ! M : 1 retepatd witblier as Well as the distinction of my mind aHowetl me^ I told Ьегч^ the pro¬ bability of resemblance, of mistake» of sudden confusion, of anything btit the ЪогпЫе laiicy that had Ы^еп possesion of her nuuil " You balance ргоЪаЬь ììtìea fike НщЛЛ s^á Ае : ; " ^ I aia :
not like Hume, a sceptic." To turn the current of her thoughts, I spoke of Mr· Corbett. I inquired what had been the language of his answer to her letter?-— u Your earnestness," said she, with a forced smile, ".puts me in mind of the French physician, who wrote on his pre¬ scription, ' to be taken immediately, as the patient has but a few hours to live.'— I will try the prescription however—it is the air of Ireland—I will live there, if I am to live any where ; and if I am not, I can learn to die there. But in the mean time, I must try to live out the birth-day, for the sake of those who love me, and those who hate me.—I am, forced to hide the agony of my mind alike from both on their accounts, or my own." She rose as she spoke, and moved slowly to the dressing table, and looking at herself in the glass, said with a pain¬ ful smile, " Bennet, some more rouge before I attempt to dress, I need not
look like a corseci." In my solicitude for her, I'had almost forgot the purport of my visit; " Here are your one hun¬ dred guineas, Lady Montrevor* and one hundred thousand thanks for them."— " One hundred thousand thanks is ex¬ orbitant interest;" said she smiling, " so to appease my conscience, you shall keep the principal till------" " I will not, I cannot—these involvements are hateful to me—»I cannot bear to owe any thing- even to you !" " Not to Lady Delphina Orberry !" " Oh, no, no—nothing but common politeness, common gratitude." ** Take care, if you incur any penalty there, it will certainly be levied 'as near tiie heart as possible.*—I am trouble¬ some, I fear, and í hope mistaken ; but while I remain in this world, I must con¬ tinue to feel for you, and Athanasia." 41 You are—you always have been an angel!" " So I have been always told, but í never believed it, till Mr. Corbett m 3
told røe.l was intended for one. But unless you wish to sec f augels in ma¬ chines/ you had better make your escape as soon as possible; for I see Bennet is dying to put on my hoop, and I declare, at this moment, I would rather put on Ileguluss—though mine is certainly fitter for a general—purple velvet and gold laurels included." Of the time that passed between this and the eventful birth-day, I have no recollection, but from the wildest vicisi¬ tudes of triumph and despair. With the false reasoning of a mind depraved by its infatuation, I dctermireJ to try the fortune of gaming—-I was plunged in debts, which I had no means of dis¬ charging, and impelled to contract more, by the vanity that when I had com¬ menced a course, forbad me to retreat, Play presented itself no longer as a re* source of amusement, or of dissipation , but as a means of relief, certain and sud-
den if I succeeded—that I might lose, I did not suffer myself to think.. í was " settled, and bound up to j terrible feat/ 5 During this frightful interval, I could not bear to glance at my own face—I could not bear to meet the mild anguish of Athanasias. She saw my determination, she did not dare to re- monstrate 3 but she did not dare to en¬ courage me. She accompanied me to the dreadful orgies in which my nights were wasted, with a countenance which seemed to say, " this must terminate itself, and must terminate soon/' I frequent¬ ed the faro-table, to which the sudden and marvellous importunity of Lady Castle- Wycomb and her sister was not my in¬ ducement: i t was suggested only asa more obvious source of rapid aggrandizement. The event was what might be expected: in a few davs 1 was on the brink of ruin: and heard Athanasia, in obedience to me, giving orders for her birth-day m 4
splendor, as if I heard the voices of a dream. The birth-day arrived ; glitter and tu¬ mult had no effect on my harrassed senses now, but to disgust them ; but this occasion was marked by a kind of splendid absurdity, such, as though I observed it but little then, made an im¬ pression, I find, on my memory. The equipages, and dresses, and paraphernalia of the day were prepared at the distance of some weeks ; but one part of the pre¬ paration it was necessary to secure but a few hours before the occasion, and al¬ most impossible to secure within that time. Ail the fashionables in London were determined to have their heads dressed by one artist; and this artist, though he dressed the court-heads a merveille, could not dress every fashion¬ able head in London, in the few hours that intervened between the time of a fashion¬ able breakfast, and the time for the draw¬ ing-room.—Lady Montrevor, and Lady
Castle-Wycomb, by being inmates of the same mansion, had some chance for be¬ ing touched (for he never did more) by the plastic hand of this creator of fashion. And Athanasia went before nine in the morning to Berkley Square, in a chair, that she might, if possible- avail herself of the distinction of his at¬ tendance en passant. I did not go—1 had no ambition to sparkle only as the satellite of the proud Montolieu family; though everv one who would claim the most remote relationship, was proud of recognizing it, on the day that Lady Montrevor, radiant with undiminished beauty, and augmented triumph, intro¬ duceţi her fifth married daughter, (three of whom were peeresses) to Majesty; and Lord Montrevor saw tvery eye tixed on, and heard every tongue ardent in acclamations of his gallant son, from whose chariot the horses were taken, as he returned nom St. James's; and he m 5
and his father, stunned with applause and exultation, were drawn by the crowd back to Berkeley Square. I had placed myself in the anti-chamber, merely to avoid the suspicion of an invidious care¬ lessness. I had expected little from the spectacle, but weariness and confusion ; Τ confess I was disappointed, as all would wish to be^—The sight was such as com¬ pletely to abstract me from myself, and my wretchedness. The effect of the per¬ petual glare of foil, and rouge, and dia- monds, was, after some time, rather pain¬ ful ; but when I beheld, and I did be¬ hold it, the animating spirit of loyalty and affection, with which the nobles of England poured the high tribute of their splendor, and the dignity around the throne of their venerable sovereign—— When I saw them, as the storm darkened, and the sky lowered, displaying the vast resources of their wealth, their spirit, and their attachment; their *' proud sub-
mission ;"' their dignified dependance — not bating in the hour of peril one jot, even of the external and casual forms of safety and prosperity, and flashing back, on the tinsel trappings of a plebeian usurper, the habitual and hereditary magnificence of a court of native no¬ bility—When I reflected that the splen¬ did crowd 1 saw, were not like the cour¬ tiers of St. Cloud, the ephemeral :pro- ductions of a political convulsion, whose effect had been to make all that was great contemptible, and all that was con-' tempt i ble great ; a race of beings nursed in vice and vulgarity, all elevated by crimes, or criminal in elevation ; drunk with sudden vicissitude, and trembling with precarious grandeur;, that they were, with a few exceptions, an high-descend¬ ed, and high-principled people, jealous of* honors, which, if they had not acquired, they supported nobly, and strongly at¬ tached to a constitution, and country, to m (>
which their attachment was neither ve¬ nal, nor fugitive; a people who'yet loved their king, and worshipped their God ; a people who, with many vices, were yet the first on the earth in national virtues ; who, amid the convulsions of the world, had stood unshaken ; had retained their honor, their independence, their govern¬ ment, and their religion ; and now by this public display of their magnificence, and their attachment, proved to their Sovereign, and to their countrymen, the unexhausted resources, and spirit of the English Patricians. When I reflected on this, the spectacle filled me with thoughts that reconciled me to all its tu¬ mult, and its levity ; that elated me with confidence, with exultation, with pride; b t, however gratified my feelings were, my eyes grew weary of the glitter of hoops, and the nodding of plumes. As I returned home, I observed a mean- looking man> pacing up and down be-
fore the door, as if waiting for me; my heart sickened—I felt, at that moment, the agony of a debtor, lie approached me, and said, " Mr. Bethel, I presume, I have been waiting for you, Sir. Can I speak to you, for a few minutes, alone r " We entered the drawing-room.—His ad¬ dress, which was that of a man not un¬ used to the courtesies of genteel life, ex¬ cited my curiosity, and 1 had no appre¬ hensions from his manner. ťí We are quite alone, Sir, I presume, and you are quite at leisure to hear me." I bowed. " My business is peculiarly interesting to us both ; and, when it is known, you will, probably, think with me." " Very pro¬ bably ; but in the mean time, may 1 beg to know your name ? It occurs to me, that no business can be very interesting to mc at this moment ; but, perhaps, you may undeceive me." " My name, Sir," said he, rising, with a look of import¬ ance, (t had, formerly, more consequence
attached to it than at present, but even yet it has not altogether lost all distinc- tion, all consequence. My name, Sir, is Mason."' The name did not excite my recollec¬ tion in the slightest degree. " Have the goodness, Mr. Mason, to proceed/' — ť< Sir, Г am unwilling to proceed without some explanation—some sort of preface, as it were. Gentlemen, I know, young gentlemen particular^, are very tena¬ cious of their feelings, very jealous of any thing that seems to question their delicacy—or their fastidiousness. Now. if they can be prevailed on to ey amine, to weigh matters a little, they will probably ñnd, that their attachment is in general more to names of things, tiran to things themselves, and that the value of things is always permanent, and the value of names fictitious and transitory." I ad¬ mitted the truth of the preface, in hopes of hearing some consequence deduced
from it. Yöu are a friend Sir, an inti¬ mate friend, a very intimate friend of Lord Castle-Wycomb's: the world says you possess his lordship's confidence emi¬ nently, and are eniinently deserving of it, and of every notice—every distinc* tion in his lordship's power to bestow."-* " Upon my soul, Sir, the world does me a vast deal of honor and injustice. I am allied to Lord Castle-Wycomb, and very often in his society, but I cannot ilatter myself with having made the slightest progress in hts intimate confi¬ dence. I am apt to believe Lord Castle- Wycomb's confidence is not so easily ac¬ quired."-— <c Nor is it worth acquiring," said the man in a kind of whispered ve¬ hemence. " Sir, he tleceives you, the whole world, and himself; by a false opi¬ nion of a consequence be does not possess. Sir, his consequence is almost extinguish¬ ed with the present ministry ! —almost entirely extinguished ! — They have тс·
tained him in their train, but not in their confidence, or their employment !---he fills iris place no longer-—he is gradually diminishing in influence, and in intel¬ lect too, sir!—his health is destroyed, and they only wait his first indisposition, to hint to him, his dismission from busi¬ ness, in the civil form of the necessity of taking care of his health/'—" Per¬ mit me to observe, that I think all this intelligence rather more interesting to Lord Castle-Wycomb than to me/'— " Sir, pardon me, my first object was to assure you, to convince you, of Lord Castle-Wycomb's utter insignificance at the present juncture ; a conviction, per¬ haps, hard to produce in a mind like your\s—a mind, so constantly, I may say, in contact with his, and seeing his splendor, and hearing his imposing lan¬ guage, and all that/'—" Suppose that object gained, Mr. Mason, for expedition sake, and proceed to the next."—" Ah,
Sir, I doubt it is not gained, from that slighting manner; yet, if you knew who was speaking to you, I believe you would listen with rather more consideration. Sir, I have been much in Lord Castlc- Wycomb's confidence : I am now quite on the other side ; and, if his conse¬ quence has declined, mine, I assure you, has increased very much, since the ex¬ change/' * I now at once recollected the Mason mentioned by Lady Montrevor, in the history of Lord Castle-Wycomb s mar- riaste with her daughter: the recollée- tion did not much augment my cor¬ diality towards him. " Sir," said the man, u it grieves—it shocks me, to see a young man like you, on your very first en¬ trance, í may say, into life, hoodwinked, and led patiently by Lord С Your fine talents and situation, and all that, made the victims of a bigot ted opinion of his influence and power, and good disposi¬ tions towards λ ou." I assured him he
had entirely mistaken my principles and feelings, political and private. " Sir, 1 shall be happy to find I am mistaken; but I must first convince you of your mistake. Sir, I will convince vou that Lord Castle-Wycomb is the bitterest enemy you have—the enemy of your principles, your character, your fortunes, that he would reduce you to beggary, to idiotcy if he could, merely that he might render you as a dupe, more sub¬ servient ; and as a drudge, more labori¬ ous. Sir, he is a man who would sacri¬ fice the whole world, to retain the conse¬ quence which he feels shaken under him at this moment."— u Vour language, Mr. M. is somewhat extraordinary—I have no exaggerated confidence in the regard of Lord Castle-Wycomb, but what mo¬ tive can he have for such enmity as you ascribe to him."— " Sir, I am not a man to use extraordinary and unsupported language-™-! come prepared with proof* :
but, Sir, it is reasonable to expect, that when a man runs the risk I do, he should expect something more than mere con¬ viction for his pains : he is entitled, in my opinion, to claim some service in re¬ turn, some little consideration—not pe¬ cuniary, I mean, for that would be mer¬ cenary, but something that proves one has not thrown away the pains that have been taken for another."---** When I know the service you are to render mc, Mr. M. it will be time to consider what compensation I am to make for it/'— " Well, Sir, that is fairly said ; and, now to the proof. Älay I ask, Sir, without any offence, are you not in the habit of high and frequent play at the houses of Lady Westhampton and Lady Castle- Wycomb ?"—" Have the goodness, Sir, to inform me, when and where tiiis cate¬ chising is to end/'---" No offence, Sir—* dear Sir, no offence in the world is in- ί ended, know your friends, Sir;—and il
you would know your enemies, read this letter—this letter in my hand, Sir; pardon me, Sir, in my hand—I'll hole! it as near as you like." The letter was in Lord Castle-Wycomb's hand : it was addressed to his lady : a great part of it was reproach contained in a variety of allusions I did not understand : the latter part related to me. It was as follows : " I am sensible we may both injure each other, by open war. I am, there¬ fore for a treaty of alliance on political (that is the best) principles. You have provoked me, and I have not been defi¬ cient in retaliation, but these things are better forgotten, at least we need not renew them. I know what you insist upon as the guarantee of every treaty, but / have no money to give you—of my own, I mean. That wild irishman, who married your sister, and came to London to be ruined, may. be useful to us both :
but he must be tamed first: he is exactly the man I want for Irish affairs, ani¬ mated and popular, and with some de¬ gree of information ; but he is exactly the man who would use ail those powers against us, if we employed them now. He has got his head and his heart too, filled with all the stuff that many young mens' heads and hearts are usually filled with, for the sins of their employers. It would be of use to me to bring forward this bold, dashing, fresh character in my traces, but I must break him first—no¬ thing breaks a man so much as pecu¬ niary involvement. His property is a greater obstruction to my object, than his principles, as I am fond of believing. If I have any knowledge of his charac¬ ter, he is easily dissipated, and easily duped by women. I resign him to you ; bring him to your parlies—to your E. (). tables, and make han useful there. Throw Bellamy in his way, they are just fit to
rum each other. Even; if he vrhas, he mil be dissipated—thoroughly, mvete* lately dissipated ; and desápation is a!« mostassUoQţ a security fot ptùmcy of рщнфеъ as роуеНуч I resign him entirely to you> which, remember I would do on no other condition» for it ta a pity to ruin so fine a young man, if it was not for our mutuai advantagev I resign him toy<m; tiie villa shall, be finished» you slmlt give the masked hall after thè birth- night* if you resign the infernal ронрет mtrf i tefitrmtm^-If hot—ws^open wan M There was a vast deal umre« * I had teaď enough r tipo ınuch> för it was now too laté. The whole pkn had succeeded. I was rained, t turned to Mason, and col¬ lected breath enough to tell hhn it wast . now too late—that!thanked him fer his service-^but its only use ^as how to teach me reveığe« since it could not teach me saftty, 4 . He followed me withľ^rcu- 4 . tainta upon arguments as ! strode up and
down the room breathless with iszony and díame. I remember notlung of what he . said Wt: the object ; it ľWi» eyídfcntíy teŕ ; make me, like himself, the hackneyed agent of the opposite side». u You have ground to stand oii, Sir, that will shake the pound ander his ftet : yon can now expose hira asa mean plotter with dissi- pated women to subdue ^ roan of tålenb and spirits to bis object ,э As he spoke v a wild thought struck me; 1 turnea on - him; ^Ilow did you obuin possession of thatfetter Г lie startet Ϊ back; /'Sir, that is a question you must not ask, at least I must not answer; but be assured it came into my hands with the full con¬ sent of Lady Castte^ Wycombe Î .was rushing to Berkeley Square» when Masou caughťme by the arm— 4t U this there- turn you make for the service 1 have doneypu> to expose me and yourself only to new dertskm and further injury. Is tins your gnàitude?** fl A?hàt^tìàd^
what return do you expect? I know not what you can ask, or mean/' I can hardly bring myself to detail his answer. I will not at least detail his pre¬ faces and preparations. The object was simply this: that I should avail myself of my frequent access to Lord Castle-Wy- comb's closet, to possess myself, or rather possess Mr. Mason, of some papers relative to the late election for M — dell — sex, in which Lord Castle-Wycomb was suspect¬ ed of having given private documents to some of the constituents, utterly di tit rent from his public sentiments, on the choice of the member. It was an unfortunate time for this infamous proposal; the con¬ spiracy against my character had aioused all its pride. Mr. Mason made а л cry ra¬ pid and disorderly rctieat, anel I hurried to Berkeley Square. My recollection had entirely forsaken me, till I saw it all tumultuous with carriages and chairs, and Lady Castle-Wycomb and Lady West-
hanipton alighting from theirs at the same moment. Encumbered by their hoops, 1 was compelled to offer my assistance to them, and followed them into the drawing room (where the whole party were to re¬ assemble on theţi*· return from court) with a kind of vacant misery of mind, such as follows a sudden and incredible shock of the feelings. I answered the badinage of the ladies, who were in high spirits, with levity as loud as their own, yet my heart was almost bursting with the struggle it underwent. More brilliant tritlers ar¬ rived, intoxicated with the splendor of the day, and I trifled with them till Lady Montrevor and Athanasia arrived in my magnificent unpaiel-for carriage. I heard Lady Montrevor's voice, as Bellamy, who had arrived at the same moment, handed her to the drawing-room. " Oh, Mr. Bellamy, î am actually dying of pleasure and fatigue, and attar of roses. Never was anything so gracious and so nattering vol, π ι. N
as my reception. I never beheld any¬ thing like the splendor and croud of the circle. Go, and assist Mrs. Bethel, who is sinking under her hoop, or her terrors: I am a veteran vou know, and accustom- ed to this unwieldy armour. I assure you it did prodigious execution to-day." She entered the drawing-room with a flush of triumph and animation, and beau¬ ty and pride, that to me, who knew " all was false and hollow, that her spirits were as much worn for the occasion as the rouge that lit her features with all the freshness of youth, to me gave a pang oí love aud despair, such as for a moment made me forget myself for her. But hei spirits were as much under her command as any part of the preparation of the day, " Well, Mrs. Bethel, you are now initiated in the mysteries of the drawing-room, of which, like all others, the only secret lies in the courage that determines to find it out Really the spectacle was quite formi-
dable to a novice. Old Clytus may talk as be pleases of Greeks, but when " Hoops join hoops, then is the tug of war/ 1 When they abolish them at court all the amusement of the occasion will dis¬ appear. Nothing diverts mc so much as an helpless figure, stuck in the center of its own finery, and managing an unma¬ nageable circumference of drapery with artless melancholy and pains. Did you see the Duchess, Lady Westhampton, treading on her own train, and beliti riff every one else's pardon? And the tío wa¬ ger—/' "Oh, spare me/ 1 said Athanasia, ťí I am sure all this tirade is aimed against me, and my artless melancholy. I am sure I acquitted myself most shockingly/' 4i Pardon me, my dear, nothing could acquit themselves better than you and vour nast witieme-wreaths: I actually would have praised you before, if I had rime to spare from my own praises." t£ I wish to heaven/' said Lady Castle-Wy- v t>
comb, u we could send our hoops to court, as we send our tickets, to visit for us, and let them stand in our places there." " And some of them would stand much better than their owners, that look like spirits conjured into a magic circle, and obliged to answer certain interrogatories by the operation of the white or black rod. Now, Mrs. Bethel, observe I am not alluding to you. Hoops, not wearers, as the political people say—measures, not men, are the objects of my animadver¬ sions. You acquitted yourself most charmingly,with a diffidence, a simplicity, si touchante, si naive, that I could see by the princesses charming eyes, they were all delighted with you. Then, in your simplicity, you did not mistake the first lord of the bedchamber for Majesty, when 1 presented your ticket to him, nor did you tum your back on the presence; or commit any of the etour derieš of a stran¬ ger to courts and their ways.
But were not you delighted and amazed? Lady Castle-Wycomb, did you ever see so vsplendid a circle?—actually I believe one of my feathers is broke—I don't won¬ der at it— u dire was the noise of conflict, over head the feathery hiss of nodding plumes in waving volites flew, and flying vaulted either host with down." u The occasion has made you quite a poet, Lady Montrevor!" " Yes, my lord, a poet- laureat. I wish to heaven there was a poet appointed to describe the splendors of a birth day—it would be no very troublesome office; a pure description," you know, might " hold the place of sense." It is a melancholy consideration how many spangles will be tarnished, and how many flowers fade, and crape petti¬ coats grow yellow, and foliages grow heaven knows what colour or colours, that might look for ever green in soup;, aid glitter in our dreams of past splendor *« be n we air* buried in the country, or
in Ireland. Oh, Heavens! here are the croud actually drawing Colonel Monto- lieu s carriage. Throw up all the bashes, and let us see and he seen.'* í would neither see nor be seen. I hur¬ ried from the room, followed by Lady C W. who deserted the spectacle of her brother's triumph, to remind me it was her night, and she expected the pleasure of seeing me in Berkeley Square. I told her, in a voice of false composure, that I should certainly wait on her, it was my firm intention ; and hurried away to hitle myself from the hateful tumult of the «lay, and think while but a few hours re¬ mained to think or act. As í traversed the streets, shunning those that echoed with triumph of the Montolieifs, and the tumuli kA' Hii& tu¬ multuous dav, mv thoughts аЬтЫ hur- lied me to distraction. Lord Castle - Wycomb was a man agaméi, whom 1 could exhibit no îesentment, that wuul·*
not injure mvself more than him. He was in power, and an habitual invalid— reproaches would never reach him, anel he would not fight. He Mould shelter himself, under his privileges, from all per¬ secution; and of my accusation, what proof coulel I bring while the letter re¬ mained in Mason's hands? Against his depraved wife what coulel be said or done ? I was injured without a possibility of retaliation, anel ruined without an hope of redress : one paragraph oť that infer¬ nai letter astonished mc while I recol¬ lected it. It ran thus—" If my sister, Lady Delphina Orb^iry, wende! make our alliance a triple one, we should make sure of our object with greater expedi¬ tion; but a woman who sacrifices so largely to her vanity or her passions, is not a hate instrument to be employed b v us at least; she has her own designs on him, and if she succeeds, her success N 4
will benefit us ; if she fails, we shall at least not be committed in her failure" This passage seemed to acquit Lady Delphina of joining their conspiracy, but it hinted a deeper one of her own formation. í liad not a friend on earth at that moment but Lady Montrevor. Nothing ever interfered with the views of her clear and powerful mind, but the fatal passion whose influence had only extended to herself. She had no failings of understanding or feeling toothers.— J determined to consult her, and abide implicitly by her advice. My heart was wrung to its inmost nerves ! For myself, I felt at that moment the awakened pride of my character;— my consciousness of abused powers, my contempt of the infamous management that had been practised on me by the collusion of po¬ litical fraud and rapacious depravity, could have supported me to struggle through, and to spurn the difficulties in
which they had plunged mel —but my wife — my heart bled ! How could «she abide------how could / see her abide the pelting of the storm that darkened lound us ? I felt, with intolerable compunc¬ tion, that the enmity of the whole world could not have injured us, had not my folly, my vanity, my infatuation con¬ spired to spread and to close the snares of iniquity! My feelings were intolera¬ ble! —it was a relief to escape from them by hurrying to Berkley Square. I was there at an early hour. The par¬ ty who were to make their appearance on their return from the drawing-ioom, and who principally consisted of thos-c who had gone there, was of course un¬ usually splendid, and unusually late.—- Latly Cast le- Wycomb's vanity had fixed on a night when the magnificence of the court-dresses would heighten the eclat of her entertainment; and had requested all with whom she was intimate not to N 5
take the trouble of throwing off theii hoops and ornaments, as they would meet very few, and all would be in the same costume with them. The servant* were only lighting the tripods on the stairs " Arc any of the ladies returned from St. James's? 1 ' " No, Sir; they arc not expected to return this hour/' " Has Lady Montrevor returned r" 4 u No, Sir/* 1 turned away, weary and disappointed. The night was clear and beautiful, the cold pure air refreshed my burning eves and forehead, I dismissed the carriage, and determined to walk round the square till some one arrived : in a few minutes 1 saw a chariot stop at Lord Castle-Wy- eomi/s ; aud a glittering figure, in a court-dress, descend from it. By the dis¬ tant light of the flambevmx, I thought the fi ци re had some resemblance to Lady Montrevor's. 1 was in that state of mind which believes the firsi object it sees to be that it wishes to see, I followed the
lady to the drawing-room, and there dis¬ covered Lady Delphina Orberry, who not at all flattered by her reception at Court, fiom a Queen, whose purity of manners adds diiniitv to her dignified nation, bad retreated as soon as possible to Berkley Square, where she was to pass the night. " Oh, Mr. Bethel, 1 am re¬ joiced to see you—and to see you alone. The hope of it was all that impelled me to this encounter. I have no longer spirit for a croud—and 1 wish to spare you the pain of deserting me in the midst of one as you did the other nigh» — Don't be afraid" (she saw mc about to speak) " 1 have no intention, no motive to reproach you : you are happy in the bosom of domestic felicity arul honor 1 could not disturb } ou —1 ha\e no wi&h to do it. It will not at least oifend you that 1 wish for your happiness;—1 know 1 have no power to contribute to it by more than wishes/ 1 " I have no spuit- n 6'
to encounter your satire, Lady Delphina; and no heart to thank, to reward vour kindness—if you are kind/ 7 " Oh, you do yourself injustice—you knew how to reward my kindness well,—my weakness, my wretchedness I would say—when yon exposed it to the bitterest enemy I have on earth-—when you told Lady Montre¬ vor of your triumph over the weak, fond fool—weak and foolish that 1 was—and fond, too fond/* She was in tears: — I vindicated my¬ self by the most solemn and vehement asseverations ; 1 assured her that Lady Montrevor had her intelligence from her- seifas soon------ d was proceeding— 1 ' Oh, Heavens! how cruel men ci?n be. How else came her signatuie, her hateful name, on the note you gave me? ilere it is¬ tak e it back : aye, you may read, you may kiss the name if you will—J know bow you love it—-M. I). J. Montrevor—- a is as plain as my shame—my folly '
but take it back, Sir. Sir John, provoked by the discovery of my weakness, has refused it, has refused any compromise jar the prosecution. I would have consulted -—I would have advised —but your cold, contemptuous, cruel manner las deprived ше ofall feeling, but for myself/' It is a mockery to talk of feelings at home horrible moments in my agony I fell at her feet-- Л besought, 1 implored for relief, for re fu ire—I promised any eoneession, any sacrifice, any thmg, and every thing in the power of man, or be¬ yond it—-I threw myselfon her resources, on her mercy, utterly and unreservedly. 4 · Oh spare me/ said she, " the sight of \ our distraction, for it makes mc incapa¬ ble of thought. You know not what an heart vou have abused, what a spirit ha» been sacrificed to your love, and your hatred. 1 am not deficient in resources, but the horrors of this moment have only left me one to suirgcst. To one uho
loves as I do, in spite of contempt and cruelty, nothing can be terrible ; oh that y< u felt as I did, willing to leave this horrid country, and go somewhere where solitude would be soothed by love, and love would be unbroken by shame or per>ecution of cruel, worldly minds.''--- 1 was silent, for I was stunned. *' Oh come with me, and we shall be happy," said she, risin sr, and hanging on m v shoulder, ' ť I have enough for us in some delightful retreat in a safe ami delightful country, where no cruel, formal minds shall dictate to us our modes of happi¬ ness—where if the world despises us, we shall despise the world with so much more reason, so much more conviction of its worthlessness." She still hung on me; but she saw my eyes fixed on n point-—she saw the big, cold drops on my forehead—she heard me murmur in a^onv—* r Great God, is h come to this '"—·' Oh. I see my pro-
posai, and myself, are horrible to you; but thev cannot be more horrible than this despair is to me. líe calm, be composed, and I will say no more—not another word— let the world, the infamous unfeeling world, and my unfeeling infamous hus¬ band act as they wilt," iC And, is there no other resource—no other refuge : Is there no hope—no redemption for me—■ for Athanasia"-------Oh, G—d ! — Oh, God!" " Hush !« -A re y ou a man? - — Have you reason ? There is : Money—money will purchase any thing; it will bribe even my horrid tyiant to silence: all things are possible, if you have money, I will undertake--! will negotiate."— sí I have nothing, absolutely nothing; ï am plunged in debts, and have not the means of extricating myself, if ï mortgaged every 'dere I am worth. The disposal of a large estate takes too much time for my persecutors to wait. I could raise money, by ruining my unborn
child ; but I will first consume in a dungeon—let him coin my blood for drachmas ; I have nothing else to give," 1 wept with the weak agony of a child. " This is dreadful î and vou suffer thus, and you persist and rejoice in suffering thus, for one who is niching in your arms, m ith the dreams of another love, and you spurn one who--". " What is it }on mean?—What would you have me think?' " That you are the most in¬ servible of mankind, in every thing—that you either are cursed, or blessed with a total blindness, in respect toyour wife; or that by a mutual happy act of amnesty, you both agree to forget—she, that she has too beautiful a mother ; or you, that you have too zealous a friend." " I hear your words, and hardly hear them ; they have no meaning· in my ears. 1 anı stunned and giddy ; if you have any thing to propose, do it quickly, while I am able to comprehend vfeu ; for mv l «У' »,
brain--my eyes, seem bursting out in flames." " Trv your chance.....your chance this one night—only this one night ; if Fortune has not favored you of late, she will relent to-night I know of nothing that can extricate us from our present misery, but money ; double your rates, and triple, and quadruple your bets. Bellamy, or Lord Invermay, or Lord Roschamp, will play with you for any thing. This is a night of in¬ toxication and joy ; all may be well in a few hours, and we may laugh at perse¬ cution.—Hush ! Hark ! they are com¬ ing—I hear carriages at the door—they must not see you with this dishevelled hair, and flushed cheek. It will kill your affectionate wife, or mother-in-law, I would say, to see you ; run down the back stairs, wait till they have come up, and then enter through the hall. I will stand here, and spread my hoop before the door/'
There was but a moment left for tak¬ ing her advice.—The horrors of that night never will quit my memory, if I lived a thousand years. I quitted Berke¬ ley Square, at five in the morning, a beg¬ gar.—I leaned my burning head on Athanasia's neck, when 1 got into the carriage; she did not shed a tear; she did not utter a reproach. When she thought my despair had exhausted it¬ self, she said, in a voice of soft, youth¬ ful, tender firmness—:" When my love has repressed the keenness of his too ex¬ quisite feelings, he will, perhaps, pro¬ nounce this the happiest period of his life; we have nothing left to love or cherish, but each other ; and if the trappings of which wc яге divested, were an obstruc¬ tion to the ease and simplicity of love, how shall we resrret their removal '/' о Her reproaches woulel have been more toleiable-—I threw myself on the bed in frantic, unmanly grief She had no
strength to contend with me ; she was apparently intent on something that was passing in her own mind. As I lay ex¬ tended on the bed, stifling my groans, I saw her through the dressing-room door, go to her secretaire, take out a number of letters, which she tore and burned, and then write, apparently a short note, with many pauses of thought. When she had finished, she came to me again, and again hung over me. I was insensible to reason, I would have been irritated by the clamour of consolation ; but the touch of her cold, soft cheek, on my burning hands, and the dew of her silent tears, and the gentle unftlt wind¬ ing of her fairy arms within mine, were like balm to my body and mind ; but these moments of undeserved softness and consolation, could not continue long, i was compelled to ri^e, and look my ruin in my face. The morning pre- -ented me with hilb to the amount of
thousands; and recollections of debh for more than thousands. I looked on them with a fixed and empty eye; í heard Athanasia s voice ; I started up and traversed the room in agony. Had I never known her, or her worth, it liad been a mercy to me. 1 wished to banish all human feelings from my heart ; I wished to be as wild as my fortune at that moment, to have no hope, or re¬ source, or tie-—Nothing to hold me to life or reason ; and to know her only amid miserv and ruin, to her mild and steady virtues, beaming out on the dark¬ ness that gathered round me, and show¬ ing itsextent, and its blackness—to know that she loved me when I was no longer worthy to be loved ; that / loved her, wlen I could no longer maintain her !!! How could my reason survive that mo¬ ment ; it could not survive much longer. I had no resource, but the disposal of my property, the impoverishment, the
alienation of my child. I had but this, this only to interpose between myself and a prison; between Athanasia and д. prison. At that moment, I had no power to propose either alternative, I deter¬ mined to adopt neither, without the consent of my injured wife; but the ap¬ plication for consent, that killing ex* posure of our ruined state, that full, un* feeling detail of our utter destitution, I dared not, I could not, at that moment, have undertaken for worlds. With the natural compromise of misery, I resolved to defer it, at least, for a few hours, and with the natural vitality of hope, I tried to believe, that in those few hours some- thing might intervene to prevent it. I could not in those few .hours, con¬ fine myself to home, to the reproaches of Athanasia's soothings, *o the wound¬ ings of her sight— I rushed out. How shall I disclose the workings of a ele- spair in g mind.—*I wished when I quitted
the house, that I might never behold hei again; that she might be at peace beforr I returned to tell her she was ruined.-— I rushed out—I hurried through the streets, without knowing where I was going ; without intending to go any where. The business of ine preceding night, it was necessary to disclose to Lady Delphina Orberry ; — but to her house I elreaded to go, as I would dread to enter the den of scorpions. it was the latter end of Januarv, a chill and drizzling shower had fallen all day, I was Mcnched and insensible of it; tht only sensation I experienced, was a kind of blind impatience, to escape from all places of concourse. I had almost reached the end of Sloane Street, when a carnage, which I had not noticed, stopt close to the pavement, and a voice called to me. To any voice that called to me, in a tone of feeling, I would have turned at that moment ; for I panted fo-·
relief and refuge. I knew not what 1 was doing till I felt myself seated in a carriage, beside Lady Delphina, my bo¬ dily weariness was great, almost as great as my mental emotions. I fell back in the carriage; I felt her applying her handkerchief to my damp, pallid fore¬ head. I felt her cool, soft touch on my cheek ; I could not resist ; Г could not repel the soothing tones in which she spoke; they were like music------ melancholy music to my ear,------ She brought me to South Audley Street; I passed that day (a dreadful day) with her. I Mill not tell of our long, and broken conferences; of the varied and opposite passions that tore my mind ; of the ad¬ dress with which she combated my wildest bursts of emotion, and insinu¬ ated, ut saf e intervals, the poison of her consolation, of her advice. When ï told lier, in a voice of agony, I was milled—
when I repeated it, till like the sorceress in " Thalaba/* tť my voice was a shape¬ less yell,'* she again whispered the pro¬ posal, of—Escape from England, from wretchedness, from ruin ! When she saw me rushing into frenzy at the hint, she again deprecated my despair, bewailed her own rashness, exhorted me to stay and bear as / might, the proud compas¬ sion of the Montolieu's, the worldly feeling, and hackneyed Comedie Larmoy¬ ante, that Lord Montrevor would play ; the cold, politic triumph of her brother. " The glittering Lady Montrevor," said she, ťí will distinguish your fate by a brilliant sentence ; or, perhaps, a brilliant tear; and the world will applaud her wit, or her sensibility ; no matter which, to her, provided they applaud. —And your little sentimental angel of a wife will, for once, be obliged to defraud her feel¬ ings of a tear to bestow on vulgar dis¬ tress." "My wife!*" —I groaned invo-
íuntarily, it w r as an ill-omened sound for the effect it was intended to produce. I gave way to all the vehemence, and all the anguish of my feelings. I cursed myself, and commiserated Athanasia with that bitter and compunctious pity, that could w r eep blood over the ruins it has caused, and cannot repair. She wept too—her tears were nothing lo me—I felt only my own despair— ik Oh heavens, 0 said she, or sobbed in a struggling and inward tone, as if absorb¬ ed in her own thoughts— > u Oh heaven*, was ever man so cruel—lie has no heart * -let any power, if the powers of mercy have not all renounced me, look down and judge between us this moment—see how he weeps for her to my face—for her who is wasting and cold in his arms with passion for another—-before mt\ me w ho would followhim--wiut do í ^ay?---who have supplicated to follow him, ruined atheis, thmngh the world." If 1 did vo»., m о
not understand this dark language I felt it. I was in that state, to which a new source of misery is even a relief. I de¬ manded an explanation of her words. She would again have involved herself in allusion and mystery ; but it was too late, I was too desperate for suspence or circumlocution. I compelled her to a long, distinct, consistent narrative. My blood ran cold, yet I listened till I had heard it all. No suspicions of the narrator*s veracity could throw a shadow of relief over my mind; they were cir¬ cumstances she had no concern in, which she could not fabricate, which she could not have contributed to. When all was told, I asked for proofs, in a voice whose firmness startled myself. She paused a moment, but she was soon collected : <ť Since," said she rising, " I have com¬ mitted myself by this disclosure to one who has no feeling for me, or for himself, if he neglects it, I must not be asked for
proofs in vain ; if you have courage for confirmations strong, I have told you they are deposited in Mrs. B.'s secre¬ taire; mine and hers were made by the ?ame artist, I believe the same key will open them both, probably, if you try, you will succeed" (she well knew I must) you know we have high authority for inter¬ cepted correspondence." She gave a small key into my hand as .she spoke; I took it vacantly, I gazed on it for a moment, without the slightest consciousness of its use. She saw my eye fixed in a kind of wild stupor, she knew the way to ronze me: a this is the mo¬ ment,"' said she, looking at her watch, u this, or never; Mrs. B. is at a party, some ball or concert, I heard her talk of it; you will perhaps have no other oppor¬ tunity, if you neglect this, and if you think it worth the trial, why neglect it?" I had not noticed the lateness of the hour. It is a false observation, that to о 3
tlie miserable time appears universally slow; there is a species of misery to which it appears to acquire an incredible pieci- pitation. I hurried from South-Andley Street ; it was near eleven o'clock when 1 quitted it ; it never occurred to me that Athanasia might be at home. When I reached the drawing-room, she was alone, and reading. In the confusion which I felt at her sight, I traced some¬ thing like the consciousness and the pu¬ nishment of detected meanness; but I was now in the habit of struggling with my better feelings, yet I could not col¬ lect ni} self to conceal my surprize at see¬ ing her at home. I said something in¬ articulately about her (ngagement. "I knew," said she with that gentle firm¬ ness, whose language was now like dag¬ gers to me, "it was your wish that I should appear abroad jbst at this time t and I therefore determined in go ; but from ¿torne cause I felt myself so agitated,
that Doctor I). told me I must not ven* ture into a crowd. íle did not know the picasuie he was procuring me; yet í had a presage (said she stretching out her white slender arms to me') that vou m/ woulel not pass this whole night abroad." Ì could not resist, yet 1 could not yield to her. I bent to her, but it was with averted head : I dared not let her see mv face. Suddenly I turnee! to her, I clasped her with agony, with violence; I gazed on her with dry, and burning eyes. í held her for a moment, and re¬ leased her with a pang, which if I ever feel again, it will be surely tiie prøage of absolution. She attempted to follow me. " Ko, my love, not now; your softness is too much for me; I am not well, I ana not happy/' My voice failed. I willed eve ry thing else might fail me at that hitler moment. " AW then/' said she, and she clung to me, not with the cloy- o 3
ing and fulsome blandishments that weary instead of soothing, but with the chaste monitory pleadings of conjugal fondness, the u sweet remembrancers" of mutual joy and sorrow. It was this memorable night that I ob¬ tained a just and comparative knowledge of Athanasia's character, that made it ap¬ pear superior to any I had ever known or imagined. How different was the pine breath that played over my parched, and pallid cheeks, from the feverous sighs of passion exhaled by one whose name and image were at that moment hateful to me ; the latter breathing all the voluptuous de» spair of guilty passion, the former able to u chase all sadness but despair." IIou different was the bland and bal m -drop¬ ping lip, that gave such touching effect to its lessons of love, from that which only talked of the indulgence, or the desperation of guilt. I mentally com pared Athauasia with all of her sex wh»·
had ever attracted me. Lady Montrevor, by far the most brilliant and fascinating both to the senses and the mind, I felt was formed to be admired; the seductive and infatuating Lady Delphina was formed to be desired, but Athanasia was formed to be loved. I yielded to her spells of softness with the melancholy pleasure of one who has to travel a long, dark way, yet lingers as he goes to gaze on the fairy lights that cheer while they cheat him by their " blear il- lusion/* I never knew the powers of her mind till this night, they were valions, they were exquisite. She told me with a >mile, that was not one of her plaintive smiles, that she was determined to try if lier harp retained the virtue of charming away the evil spirit ; and seating herself at it, began adapting some passages from the is lay of the last minstrel,"' which she had ben reading, to a wild extempo¬ raneous melody which she excelled in πι¬ ο 4
venting. From the praises of her music she led me to the praises of the subject, She pointed out the passages ofthat most beautiful poem she had heard me admire, M'ith a kind oí' doubtful appeal that al¬ most interested me. 1 nas ns iìhng to for¬ tret myself. I \ iclded to her with a me- lancholy joy that struggled to catch one weak and wintrv beam of clad ness before die night set in. Supper made its appearar.ee at a laic hour, ui wc thought it early; it was the first domestic night ï had passed since mv maniate. <k Weil/* said Athanasia, as she quitted her harp to approach the table, " if fortune denies us other luxu¬ ries, wc can, at least, have the feast of music, and the flow of song.*' lhe deli¬ cacy of this reference to fortune, where she might have accused another agent, I felt in every nerve. I acquired some command of myself—our supper was al¬ most chearful. As she rose, she said, w ith
a smile, " I pitied poor Julia de Rou- bigne in her retirement, when her proud father tore away the little wreath with which she had decorated his supper. My love is not of his mind. He will not tear away the little ornaments of fancy or taste which I have reserved to embellish our table—when—when it is spread in so¬ litude and indigence, like Rouhigne's." This was too much: she ought to have been less an angel, in m ere ν to me. I begged of her to spare me; to spare her¬ self; to reflect that her physician had re¬ commended repose. " And you have exerted voursciť verv mach, too much, to-night, my love." u I have exerted mvself verv much, not too much, if I have- amused you, (she was retiring; she turned suddenly, ami said, with a face glowing with expro.sion) do you know í was piqued to exert myself to prove to you, that when you retire from the world, it will be with one not destitute of the γό¬ ο 5
sources that make retirement supporta¬ ble." I caught her in щу arms. I for¬ got every thing at that moment—every object but herself. I banished all that was past. I would not think of what was to come. The medicines her physician had pre¬ scribed to compose her soon produced their effect. To me—to sleep was impos¬ sible. My restlessness was even increased by her tranquillity. At this moment the recollection of the key, and of Lady Del¬ phinac narrative, rushed on my mind: for a moment I repelled it. It returned to me with resistless impulse. Something like a confused notion of justice to Atha¬ nasia prompted the investigation; some¬ thing like a desire; a confidence of her vindication, palhated the meanness of a clandestine scrutiny. The words " cold and wasting in your arms with passion for another," rung in my ears. I felt that I must be satisfied. I felt that my mi-
sery would be insupportable ¡f I received conviction of what I could not name to myself; and I felt that suspicion would be almost worse than conviction. I rose» She was still asleep—I went to her dres¬ sing room—I applied the key—it opened the secretaire in a moment. My hands recoiled as I touched the papers which I knew were not mine. I forced mvself to examine them—there were some frag¬ ments of letters in Deloraine's hand : they probably belonged to those I had seen her tear the preceding night. Among them lay a letter recently written, addres¬ sed to Debraine; it was unsealed. I opened it—it was the writing of Athana¬ sia— İt was dated the preceding night. During my perusal of the first lines I felt some revoltings at the act I was engaged in, but they were quickly swallowed up by other feelings. I will make no com¬ ments on this letter—I will state it exact¬ ly as it occurs to my memory. о в
To E. Deloraine, Esq. Moglena Castle, Galway, Ireland. u I MEAN not to assail you with re¬ proaches, for to you I owe it, that my eyes are at length opened : the work was gradual, but it is at length completed. Never did woman escape from such ruin; never did woman escape by such means from such ruin. When I look back and reflect that a few months—what do I say —a few days back I was a miserable, per¬ verted being, seduced by the jargon oí sentiment, and sacriiicinir my hest feelings and affections to a fabe pernicious pi in- ciple which I dared not examine, yet thought it a duty not to resist, and trying to assume a wild \irtue fiom the sacri¬ fice. When I recollect myself, and so lately, the pupil of false sentiment, and ali ко и orks; dying to be the heroine of amad and wicked tale of a Rousseau, of a Gothe, of a Wolstonecraft; dying to
convert imao-inarv duties into real, and real into imaginary ones; when I recol- lect this, how can I be but grateful to the hand that led me to the verv brink of the precipice, though its intention was to dash me from it, since it was there that I recovered my reason and my sight? Yes, Sir, you have led me blind and infatuated through many a maze of delusive feeling, and you might, perhaps, 'have led me on till the power to pause or to retreat was utterly lost to me, had you not, b}' too precipitate a disclosure of your own views, awoke for ever those of \<utr victim. 1 he reign of niKe feeling is over. Alive, and trembling at my new existence, 1 re* view my pastand present self, and shud¬ der to think what I mm'ht have been, and triumph to think what 1 ma\ yet he— what 1 may be, for mypresnit feelings want confirmation ami exuvke. To the winnings of romantic delirium has suc¬ ceeded a determined dischaigc of duties·,
to which my heart has long promptéit me, had I not struggled with its dictates —struggled to mistake them. Lest the smallest suspicion should remain on your mind that I am deceiving mvself or vou, in this representation oft he change of my feelings, I most solemnly assure vou I never loved you: I never loved man but him whom misfortune has endeared to ine; whom I never knew how much I loved, till urged to desert and dishonor him. The wild attachment, which I de¬ ceived myself and you in suffering* you to believe you had inspired me with, was the unhappy offspring of many unhappy causes—of a neglected mind, an insidi¬ ous and fatal companion—an artful man —a dangerous course of study-—and the wanderings of an untutored mind, too prone to passion and to melancholy ; too fond of exalting fantastic sufferings, and believing it ought to be unhappy, be¬ cause the subjects it loved to read of
were unhappy. Accept my solemn de¬ claration that my heart is my husband's; İt ever was—it evershall be his. I never knew I loved him, till now—but it is not too late. When I compare his heart and character with those of him who would alienate me from him, my own is torn with shame and pride and love. In the agonies of my íirst conflict, on the disco¬ very of your unworthiness, or my own, I believed I had not long to live. I now wish to have my life protracted, that it may (for I flatter it yet may) be devoted to the happiness of his. Write to me no more, Sir, it is in vain; your miserable agent is dismissed, I will see her no more; I will hear no more from you. I have banished all my French books. I have destroyed all your letters. I would re¬ quest you to destroy those you have re¬ ceived from me, but I would be sorry to be thought to possess interest enough to make a request from you : perhaps it may
humble me, and reform you, that the) should be left with λ on as evidences of a .j mind ictrieved from folly befoie folly was daikencel into púit. I will spare Mr. Bethel the knowledge of \our un- ГУ ι' worthiness, for I vMi to spare him pain, Perhaps my lenity may be erroneous, Ì trust you will not prove tt so. I am, Sir, &c. Sec. See. Α'ΠΙΛΝ ASIA Bltiill. Sneh was the letter: I have said before I will make no comments on it. I am as littleable ίο mike auy comment on the feeling*, v. ith which I perused it. i had no time for feeling; t Mat gu-h of deliciou« emotion wliich ovciilous the beai t on the к neu «d of í ífcvtion, nnd the vindi¬ cation of \ in tie. b.ad hnrdly xisited mine, when I u .s diktin bed by a footstep ap¬ pro:^ hing - I turned round —Athanasia had π en, and stood *:t the dit^ing-room door. Slit .aw mv employment. ;>ui v a-
hending forward with an expression that ran пслег bc desci i bed, and песет for- •,o1tcn. I did not move—neither of us ^poke. This strange scene continued in -- ¡ence for more than a moment. She re¬ nted vithout speaking a word. 1 re¬ mained—all the enthusiasm of my joy, j joy that made me for a moment forget all misery, extinguished by a conscious¬ ness of meanness, of jealous and officious meanness, that abased me to the dust. It was near an hour before I could drag nyself into the next room—she was asleep. My heart sunk within me when I was compelled the next morning to meet her injured, unrcbukingeye. She never hint¬ ed at the subject, or shewed the least constraint in her manner; but I was now so w ell acquainted with the strength of her mind, that this did not deceive me v. ith regai d either to her knowledge or her feeling on the late subject. We both nemed to tedk studiously ou imbibèrent w'
topics; nor do I ever recollect having talked more, and understood less of what I was saying, than that wayward morn- ing. To the distraction of my thoughts but- one relief presented itself, to consult Lady Montrevor, from whom I now felt as if I was to expect every thing; foi there is a weaiiness in wretchedness, that imposes an artificial debility on the mind, and makes it impatient to devolve its burden on another. As I hurried to Berkeley Sejuare, I formed a resolution to make one desperate effort for the hap¬ piness which I seemed hitherto to have trifled so worthlessly away. With my views of Athanasia's exquisite mind and character, my hopes of happiness, howe¬ ver remote, or however undeserved, rose strongly and sangui nely—as sanguine as my first dreams of pleasure. I deter¬ mined to extricate myself from all pecu¬ niary embarrassments—from London —
fiom Lady Delphina, at any price; and to fly with Athanasia from the witheiing atmosphere of vice, as the only chance of safety or of happiness People often defeat their own inten¬ tions, by the policy which they employ in compassing them. Athanasia and I, concealing our separate intentions of con¬ sulting Lady AL, met in her dressing- room, and counteracted each other's ob¬ ject. It would have been indeed impos¬ sible, under any circumstances, to have procured a long audience of Lady Mon¬ trcvor. Castle-Wycomb house was in a tumult of preparation, that occupied every room. The grand fancy ball, which was to celebrate all the distinguished events that had lately occurred in t Sic Montolieu family, was to take place the following night. All the company were to bein character, but without masks; and all that taste or fashion, or wealth, could hvumulate, was summoned to liiu bul-
hant festival. The first artists in Lon¬ don were employed to lend all the witchery of light, and drapery, and dra¬ matic picturing, to the decorations. It was the fashionable lounge of the dav, to examine the prepa bit ions, bestow praise, and hint improvement; and Lady M., to whose taste everv thins? was submitted, after stimulating her harassed spirits with laudanum, walked through the rooms, a second Aspasia, dispensing the oracles of taste and fashion, and hiding the corro» sions of her mind, under applause and admiration. I found her surrounded by a group of fashionables, to whom she was explaining the intended eifect of a deception in the oersoretive of the adia- cent room, which w<i> intended to repre¬ sent the Temple of the Sun, the splendid theatre of Peruvian worship. Colonel Montoliru was laughing, with all the open vivacity of his character, at the fashion¬ able rage for borrowing all the cuibcìibh-
ments of our drapery, and apartments, and fetes, from the recent local scenery of some national victory. i£ It is very well, hitherto," said he, laughing-—— '* Lgypt and South America certainly furnish enough of picturesque objects, but what the devil will )ou do, if our next successful expedition should be to the (Jape of Good Ilopť, for instance? Will you fill all vour iwcn -> with sketches of squab Dutch villas und Hottentots iu natural bronze, capei mg among them — Mais coutume ett t tut.*' —" At Íi4bt," >4iid Lady M. 4Í if you give us m» other decorations, yon will take care wc shall be supplied with laurels." —"Oh," said she, ruining, and olbciving that Atha¬ nasia and 1 had entered at d dieren t times, and apparently with dilli rent par¬ ties, u quite a fashionable pah, I pi oust — 1 behevc the only /¿/¿-fashionable pair, at this moment in the room, u e Manco Capac aud his wife, if we may judge
from their attitude/' She continued, fixing the attention of the u hole groupe of triflers, on the figures of the great Peruvian legislators, at the extremity of the room, and turning her full, dark eyes on Athanasia and me, with some¬ thing like mingled fondness and reproach at the same moment. The group gradually dispersed through the apartments, gazing at novelties, but one straggler remained near us. " My dear Lady Georgina," said Lady M.— " Can you think of no colour for theMan- tle of Manco Capac but yellow. 1 know all you would say about his affinity to the sun, &c. Sec. Sec. But you know all the colours that Ovid gives to the palace of his : un ; and whv should the South American sun be less brilliant/'—" I really do not know/' said the simple Lady Georgina, stunned, as Lady M. meant she should be, with this tirade, u but 1 am sure vour ladvship has the best taste
in the world/—** Oh, my dear, don't talk of taste, every one knows that your taste is equal to your understanding«- almost ; and you will do me the greatest favor in the world, by just glancing at the figure again ; and the light it is placed in, and giving me your opinion, which I assure you will he decisive, as it ought to be." Lady Georgina, delighted with her commission, tripped away. Lady M. walked rapidly into a .small cabinet: I followed her—her back was turned to me, but by the sudden motion of her arms, I could perceive she was clasping them on her breast, with the strongest expression of agony and devotion. í approached her-—she did not turn.--- <r What an employment, ,n said she, appa¬ rently to herself, " for a dying woman !" i repeated the word " dying," with asto¬ nishment. I could not follow such rapid transitions of mimi as this most unhappy
woman was accustomed to undergo, :; the struggle between her feelings and her habits. " Yes, I know, I feel I have not long to live : I cannot be deceived in my present presages—the laws of tlu invisible world are not repealed foi mockery/*---" Good heaven ! what can you mean by this terrible language ?''--- ,f I mean/' said she, in an hollow but calm voice, " that í am dying, certainly dying: scepticism cannot re>ist the warn¬ ing that has been sent to me---\\ hetho in wrath or tneicy, í know --oh, í know not !" She threw up her e\ es to heaven with an expression of appealing agony, that terrified and exalted me. '* Twice," she continued, turning to me, " twice since have 1 seen the figuie of that man who has been dead these twenty years-·- laugh, if you will, but í must tremble. till 1 know the truth ; and then, perhaps others will tremble for me—tu ice/' said she, sitting down, and suppressing hn
voice, u I have seen him, and in the same place, and in the same form : I knew him well : he stood firmly on the ground —-he gazed steadily on me." She put her hand before her eyes, as if to banish the horrible vision. I urged the distracted state of her nerves—I urged the effects of laudanum, and the dreadful quantities she was accustomed to take. She shook her head incre¬ dulously. ťí No, no—I know the state of my nerves—I know the state of my mind. I have been accustomed to a kiud of artificial and delirious strength, which has rather disposed me to ridi¬ cule these things, than to yield ridicu¬ lously to them ; but you are not stupi- iied with laudanum. 1 adjure you togo to Berncr's Street 1 '—(here she gave me a most particular description of the place, and the person she believed îdıehad scen) " if vou see anv thiiiir like that form, wliich I have certainly seen——but no, İt vol, m. p
is impossible—he cannot be alive; and, if he were, of what use could it be to mc ? —no human being can now be of any use to me, nor I to them, except ŕ to point a moral, or——no, not adorn a tale. 7 Oh, that Mr. Corbett were near me now: he might do something; but him I hardly reckon human. Oh, that I were the meanest of his Лоск, that sat at his feet, and listened to him humbly, and lived and died in the bliss of igno¬ rance, instead of the glittering, misera¬ ble Lady Montrevor. All my powers only incresse my self-condemnation.— What powers have I possessed, and what a life have I lived ? I am no Catholic-— I cannot c dying, put on the weeds of Dominick, or in Franciscan think to pass disguised'-—the disguise will not even pass with myself/' She threw her head on the arm of the sopha, and ap¬ peared plunged in dreadful thought. I listened with deep emotion to thn
genuine and convulsive burst of despair! the awful lesson of bumbled pride and abused distinctions before me, filled mc with sensations that banished all recollec¬ tions of myself. I spoke something of comfort— of better hopes—-of happier prospects; but the neglect of my own reproached and silenced me. She started up—" Are they coming }—-they must not see me this way. Remember, I conjure, my request—the request of a dying wo¬ man; and——1 would have said a word about poor Athanasia, but I bave not îiine to say a word, or even think a thought, about myself— tant mieux, où tant piò'. '· I hardly know—I hardly know wliich" (said she, assuming her character with almost magical expedi¬ tion, as Lady Georgina glided into the mom) il I haidly know which to prefer for this cabinet; orange drapery to cor¬ respond with the antiques in the cornice --or dark green, as the chimney-piece
is of verde-antico. I believe we musi consult Hope—-his work is lying on the secretaire in the next room/' She passed on with the light step of a grace.---" But b it possible you could think of nothing since, Lady Georgina?" No, indeed/' said Lady Georgina, with the most sim¬ ple earnestness. u Oh then, speak w ith- out thinking—it will do just as well I dare say; I assure you it is what lam trying to do ?t this moment—with the worst success in the world." There appeared little reason for this last compiaint; for at this moment the rest of the loungers came up, and Lady Montrevor was all herself again. The voice of flattery, and ofcrow r ds, seemed to operate upon her most awful paroxysms of feeling, as if by instinct ; and through her mask of rouge and pearl-powder, no thought infirm could be seen " to alter her cheek." She wandered through the rooms, pouring out all the appropriati
informations from all the waiters on the subject, from Ulloa to Robertson inclu¬ sive; till looking at her watch, in the midst of a glittering sentence, she recol¬ lected a private auction of emigre toys, the property of Madame la Duchesse de ----------, which " she would not miss for the world/' and hurried away as fast as possible, uttering the word—remember, as she passed me. It was now near four o'clock : the com¬ mission of Lady M. including a new sub¬ ject of interest (for she, and every thing relating to her, were still but too interest¬ ing to me), I determined to execute im¬ mediately: í wished to be engaged in something that would banish for a mo¬ ment self -solicitude and self-reproach. I traversed Berners Street till it was almost dark, without seeing any object like that which Lady M. had described. I was quitting it, when I was detained by a carriage driving close to the pavement ; r 3
*Ц$ед«с1 to ^t«rt ^¿t дпу ^И but ΐο^ ^Mét^i ЦгэдйГ ùt *> ırıomçnt í ;I ïwin^Hm >ê№ ^гш|[«г wndowj лйааг jwrv«tiţ3 wit х lite ^TOXÌOU5ltO cÒTirçtl ^çoly^töf « Ihan. w& Sbe talked *nd bughwl with > giw bov wtwn^nt I hmve brèi j Ьц1 , thcöQ írentb 3toy$ цте ^ V^aiäfal—tb^y wrtitalyhtvet^arţ^^i^iw^to*^«' f«$fe-fftd ît^ai«ţy refill ore^pwtíç^ taíy Wtea ròte, taa no other bv$& of ш- TO>TftJjty> Yw irift^Oodfap ml щу «- \ ^tótktìa^** <^«d Л^ trudwiTowuig » > dmwiny «yò to lhe fottìo? of the «τ- Şmist.' Aed yixt wU nwrfèr^ таогс l«i\f I ,то«ад mate them, nfter «И вау lf^M»bşţ wghl^tW^wtóíol^bwaÈetí -HRüt wily ι 1 ,tot is©rtìty>OT« N h№^-
' -- ^ ' » * - ,, ^,\ » * ■* ч^^ * *ч ^ч ч % ч ч ^ ; ^ tab irijtD згмзн вот· ^ ч ^3îa "-* h^ínglo3tit IwyCT^U^^Ä^^ ; ,Ша|: oF her tïwbtiuç tojrnT |пМ№гО without thìt*ÌQS of the ^/^^ efe«* , ^JÄToOÍtV?wÝhEo Ävmj« ^ìwb forth prt^roH3toane7j>lwoTi,V AN thÎ3 timçJbitT quick «y^ xpus mduç* 9om«Űdti$ Γιΐφ itíq^hy Ь íny fw, whkh «llW^kty í\hI iwt b»8 c TOtiwïi ¿Що to tidk OiW^jv* и Л¥^ср^т1»Ш||1с^ 1тщ of, with th^t^acç bf дЫ^се? — atte* - 4 nity I might ЬеБОД y«ö N in Ьт^ if I áW not >TH>w yoxi irere дщтгЫ— *to J^ftf^ ¿ШЫ yi>\ì kww." « If «*w»ct^ ^W ï t Λ1 be *i* cvWen^i «f low» vJ»t slafl I * còwlwlç of ťh^ atírtç of з^ог Ы^з1пр^ , brøt? Ι ЬейЫуол! sçıy huif «в bmTţjgo* th«t jbw îmi bwtjosx \т\ъ to te «t \hc u\ìQth^ uíäI hxiny Ья1^9 «d*rjww Soti jon iii « <H*rctHm qXuţv opfmift ïo ^th¿r— thií Is 5UTtíy\ «ot ti»; jı%y tb ^kjçy Sţ{V№e> « <&* jçs| ît i* ^ ,
way:- —a woman's way is always odd, and perverse, and uncommon, you know- Since I have nothing to do but to go to Berkley Square, I am determined to do that u nothing in so strange a style," as will amaze the majority, and divert the rest of the world, according to the po¬ etical computation. So now smile, on pain of being incontinently classed among the unlearned." I was disposed to do any thing but smile at that moment. " Have you forgot?" said I, in a serious tone:—" Oh, no; but you have forgot, or mistaken, your com¬ mission. I sent you out to meet a ghost, and instead of that, you are personating a ghost yourself. What, not a simper ;— I believe I must whisper the charm, or charms of Lady Delphina Orberry to raise one." " Not if } T ou wish to make me smile" " Oh, smiles are of a tliou- sand casts, you know; for instance, the one which, with all my art, í have called
up from the depths of your countenance, is the offspring of surprize and contempt," ,( No, — but your spirits astonish me; and there is a secret in them, and your situation, which I am unable to pene¬ trate." " Wonderful !—then, not to de¬ mand from you—what no man possesses —knowledge Of the female character— au jonde— —without conducting the spark of conviction through a long chain of ar¬ gument, I will flash it upon you at once —I am a woman! —When you recover yourself, bid my coachman drive on." '' Where shall I bit! him go?" ťí I— I actually don't recollect—-philosophy you see drives every thing else out of the head—and while vou stand there like li the ghost of Beati ice in the Monk, I can do nothing but gaze in silence de νια parte ; —so, walk about a hundred yards, and return, and by that I will forget you, and remember myseif, I hope."—- Half laughing at the whimsical injunc* ν 5
tion, I obeyed ; but before I bad moved halfa hundred vards, I heard the coach drive away rapidly. I knew that Lady M. would laugh all this away with her usual gay facility, but I could not pai t with her so ; there was something of convulsive and delirious ц -aietv that ter- rifled, contrasted with what I knew of her real despondency. 1 followed the car¬ riage with all my speed; the lamps weie now lit—I pursued it with my eye, and after some obscure windings, I saw it ¡»top at the door of a small private house. No suspicion till that moment had ever shadowed my mind. Lady M. ap¬ peared to me, by her extraordinary en¬ dow ments, and extraordinary vanity, raised quite above the petty characters, and objects of her sex, either in the Egaremens de Cœur ou de ľ Esprit. She was raised by ambition to a i painful pre¬ eminence/ which she maintained with¬ out weakness, or sympathy, an eminence
of distinction, and pride, and solitary suf¬ fering. Her passions, like all the rest, were completely under the controul of her pride; a bitter and melancholy greatness was all she desired or possessed ; and though sometimes " tears, such as angels weep, burst forth,' 1 at the ίς loss of lier original briahtness ;"* yet in gene- ial she seemed to think, <l to leign was worth ambition ;" though among fallen anel inferior natures, At this moment, something like a suspicion oí' a pai t of her character being altogether human, crosbcel my mind, as I saw her folding her pelisbC about her, and with her hand¬ kerchief to her face, enter the house, after speaking a few words to her sei¬ va tit, who, immediately with the car¬ nage disappeared. I approached the house; it was a mean, obscure house, and after much examination, I hardly recollected it (by the assistance of the number and an i' 6
emblematic scroll over the door) to be the residence of a person, who was a pro¬ fessed astrologer, and against whose mar¬ vellous pretensions, I had heard Lady M. point all the powers of her ridicule and wit, in a crowded assembly, a few days past I was actually overcome by this last melancholy proof of the * over¬ throw of a noble mind.'—To this cause, this last retreat of a trembling, and ago¬ nizing mind, pushed from its grasp of hope, or reason, I ascribed her late super¬ stitious terrors, and struggles of miser¬ able gaiety, to hide a weakness, which she herself felt was contemptible and de¬ grading while she bowed to it; but I had now scarce time to think for myself, for Athanasia. The resolution I had formed of tearing myself, by one despe¬ rate eifort of strength, from the toils that beset me; and of retreating with my invaluable partner into rest and hap¬ piness, delighted me with its rich and
exquisite imagery ; but in determining the event, I had overlooked the means— distress, actual distress, was rapidly ap¬ proaching. I had no means of paying the enormous debts I had contracted— of some of them I expected the payment to be exacted in that very week—I had not a single weapon, a single expedient to oppose the misery of actual and pre¬ sent beggary. As I grasped my almost empty purse, in a kind of vacant atronv, i felt Lady Delphinac key in my hand ; at that mo¬ ment, I felt the superiority which the enthusiasm of excellence and affection can give above all local advantages.— · At that moment, 1 felt myself in tiie pos¬ session of Athauasia rich, though ahnost pennyless; and happy, though assaulted by every shape of wretchedness, 1 could not resist the triumph, with which the re¬ collection of the key supplied me. 1 went to Lady Delphina, with her key in my hand,
I told her of the tempted innocence; the purified virtue of Athanasia, ten thousand times more precious, in my eyes, than if it had never been tried and found per¬ fect. I told her of my tiiumph and my shame ; I told her of my intentions, im¬ mediately to extricate mvself from my ptcuniiMV, and all other embarrassments ; and retiiing to cultivate the happiness over which I had hitherto slumbered with a eliminai negligence, that neither deserved, nor enjoyed it. 1 spoke with energy--with entiiusiasm; my affections were again excited, they flowed from the deep sources of love, and gratitude, and admiration; and their ilow was full and rapid, and unresisted. She did not attempt to resist it—she listened with astonishing composure ; and then calmly asked me, by what means I purposed to extricate myself from my pecuniary, and other embarrassments ? I was silent—-I knew of no means upon earth, at that
moment. My resolution appeared to me to wear all the vigour of action. I be¬ lieved it actually done, when it was once determined,- -She perceived my confu¬ sion. i( The happiness I must never know, I will, at least, facilitate," 1 said she, in tones that had lost their vibra¬ tion to my heart, " you must not injure your expected family, or alarm your wife, or commit yourself, by dealing with professed money - lenders, who always double the distress they affect to relieve. Apply to a Jew, I advise; í would iu- treat, but that I have lost all power of iutreaty ; I am contented to lose it, if I may yet be of service to you ; the ordi¬ nary, unsuspected service of friendship ; common, worldly good-will—is» that too much?"—"No, no— i shall always re¬ member your kindness, your name, your image, with, perhaps, too much softncbs ; too much pleasure—gi atitude, I would >ay; but this is no time for the indul-
gence of such feelings. The honor, the principles of a man, an husband—call upon me to tear myself from these in¬ famous involvements. When I have sa¬ tisfied honor, I may then indulge feel¬ ing— till then, my only feelings arc agony and impatience. The method you propose is safe, I believe, though I know but little of these matters ; but Jews, if I am not misinformed, require not only an exorbitant interest, but an exorbi¬ tant premium— í have no ready money. 1 ' " But I have, give me your bond for the premium, which I will advance; and to- nhrht, you shall be freed from all your embarrassments." Tbat night, I received from a Jew, whom Lady Delphina summoned, asum adequate to the entire discharge of all mv debts, at the head of which was a douceur of one thousand guineas to the infamous Sir John, on the receipt of which, she promised to procure from
him, a written obligation to decline the prosecution—An obligation, by which, in the hurry of my joy, I did not dis¬ cover no man could legally be bound. All was concluded, I made an exact statement of my debts, and received the money from the Jew, who departed gra¬ tified with the enormous usury of the premium ; for the amount of which, I gave my bond to Lady Delphina, who was now my sole creditor. Happiness now seemed no longer a vision. With the natural luxury of mind, that suggests refinements in pleasures, I determined not to disclose my purposes, or my hopes, to Athanasia, till I had realised them, by a complete li heration from the involvements of debt and dis¬ sipation ; till I could clasp her to a heart that had not a care but for her ; and—- but I am telling my dreams. On mv ar¬ rival home, I found Athanasia was a- broad : I knew that^me of the fancy*
gioupes were to meet that night, at Ladv Westhampton's, to rehearse their atti¬ tudes, drajiery, costume, See. 1 repaired there, at a late hour, in high spirits- all was frolick and festivity. I mingled in the madness of the hour, and forgot, in the long-absent luxury of joy, nry en¬ mity to Lord Castle-Wvcomb, and even my detestation of Deloraine. They had all exhibited the utmost range of their fancy aud gaiety ; the prospect of the following night had re¬ vived the recollection of a masquerade some years ago, at which Lady Λί. had distinguished herself, in the character of lloxalana, in the Sultan. She was im¬ portuned to exhibit some passages from it again ; and, in high spirits complied, on condition of Loi d Westhamptoiťs personating the Sultan. Nothing could cxcccei the esprit, the maniere ìiarce ci bizarre of the seraglio coquet, except the awkward and rueful silence of the
Sultan, who, swathed in shawls, and tur- baned with the handkerchiefs of his fair tormentor, sat sullenly on the sopha, afraid of ridicule, whether he stirred, or spoke, or remained mute and passive.·— Shocked as ï was at this levity of de¬ spair in Lady M. it was yet impossible to resist the fascination of her wit and gaietv. I was dazzled, like all the rest of the world, by a brilliancy, that sometimes dazzled even herself. In the course of the evening, I was pressed to play, by some spiritless loungers, whom nothing but inmiinir. could excite.—I refused steadily ; I believe, audibly ; for from that moment Lady M's spirits seemed to redouble, and .she played her part, I thought, with more natural gaiety. When the scene was o\cr, and a s, îeet party, who bari been invited to sup, were in raptures of admiration at Lady M/s u delightful powers*'— 1 approached her, for a moment unobserved, and whbper*
cd, " I am too much interested for.y<o'. to be decerned by all this—I am impa¬ tient to speak to you alone—I have uev plans, new hopes, and in those of hap¬ piness — you must be included."--------- " Well—well—don't talk of hapmucss to-night. I am in high spirits, and any mention of any thing so remote, would only depress them."—* e But, why this per¬ petual sacrifice of yourself to— " " Oh î they who live to please, must please to live. So, lay aside that oracular face, if you mean that I should consult it ; if you mean to impose on my understand¬ ing, begin to impose on my senses." " Impose on your understanding г* 1 — <£ Yts ; is it not imposition to talk of happiness to mc Ϋ —Well, I will listen to your plans of happiness, and laugh at them, all for your encouragement ; for if a smile imply satisfaction, a plus lorte." " "four belief of my facility in hvi n g Haltend with such approbation
must be very great/' " Oh no; there is no flattery too pianante for a theorist: If I dropped asleep during your plans, I would undertake to persuade you, it was only that I might dream of them, un- disturbed." u Can vou be serious for a moment?*' l{ For the present, I dare not. Come to my dressing - room to¬ morrow night, the crowd will be too great to suspect any thing serious in our retiring, and well try what can be done; perhaps, by that time, all further neces¬ sity for acting a part, whether gay or se¬ rious, will be at an end. In the mean time, however, we are remaining too long behind the scenes/* She rose from the sopha as she spoke, she saw something more than common interest, or common intelligence in my face. She dreaded the di^coveix of her weakness, and weakness she m \ r could hear to betray ; she wished to destroy the dľcct of what she had been savins* \ùth
references to her superstitious terrors, and fixing her dark eyes on me, as if she meant to J 'asci y iato me—" Confess now, that the ctourdenc.s of the morning and evening ba\ e amazed you, if they ha\e not made you smile ; perhaps, the con¬ fession would be as bad a compliment to my understanding as your own; for tw true no-meaning puzzles more than wit/' I knew, she said this to efface my belief of her hawnir. any meaning in the finesses of the morning, or the allu¬ sions of the e\ ening. I could not bear to insult her with the knowledge of her weakness, anel í suffered her to believe that I was deceived. The oiipper was uncommonly brilliant. Lady M. was in unusual spirits : and though none of her daughteis could contend with her in beauty, or grace, or oprit ; yet the assemblage of so many lovely women, sparkling in all the luxury • Ί modern costume, and all the brilliancy
of modem waniere, presented a coup- d'œil too gratif) ing to the senses. Xo human power could at that moment have discovered, under such an exterior, the passions that were tearing every heart— no one could have believed at that mo¬ ment, the despair of the bright leader of the fashionable host, or the degeneracy of her glittering, fallen train—the very means that had supplied this splendid tete, would have disclosed a shocking history, had they been known. Lady Castle-Wycomb, as í afterwards learned, had levied the most enormous exactions on Lady Westhampton, since ber marriage, partly to indemnify hei- self for the speculation on her man tage, and partly on threatening to disclose to her Lord, certain little inaccuracies of conduct, into which her sister had been betrayed wliile under her fashionable piotection, ¡md f ìiò Invilitile ел ample.
Lady W. weary of extortion and op¬ pression, threatened to retaliate; and hinted, that certain particulars, in her knowledge, would probably be as ac¬ ceptable to Lord Cast le- Wycomb.------ i£ There, my dear, you are quite mista¬ ken ;" said her sister, with perfect non¬ chalance. <f Lord C. W. and I have come to a treaty offensive and defensive, as other powers do, by mutual good un¬ derstanding; you can tell him nothing more than he knows, or believes he knows, which is the same thing; and he is determined to 4 bear his faculties so meekly', that he will be * as one who knowelh nothing.' Now, you must be sensible it is quite a différent case with Lord Westhampton ; he has got some old-fashioned principles, that if once touched properly, would bristle up till he became л perfect porcupine in a pas¬ sion, ¡n one word, he has so much lovt ior у',ч, Οι fur Liïiiself, that I am con-
vinced he would almost kill you in a paroxysm of jealousy, if it was once fairly or foully excited. So you see, my dear, you need not contend with me—I have fairly the Vantage ground—I must have money for this fete ; nothing else will do—for it or me. I am completely a cypher in my own house, since Lady M's arrival. I shall get rid of her with all convenient expedition ; but in the mean time, it will be delightful to out¬ shine her on the spot I will shine in your gold, my dear, if you please, and 1 am sure you must be gratified by the preference," Again Lady W. assured her that she had advanced all the money she had re- ceived from her Lord ; that his wealth and generosity, though great, were not boundless, and that she had no excuses for further extortions. — *< Besides, I )w my supplies must always be insuf¬ ficient, while you play and lose so despe» vol. ju. q
rately, and double your debts by borrow¬ ing from your creditors. Do you ima¬ gine I can ever enable you to repay Mrs. Itees, the sum you borrowed from her ?" " Oh, I am quite easy about that ; for she has allowed me to pay her more than the legal interest ; and if she reclaims the principal, I can threaten to prosecute, instead of paying it·" " Gracious hea¬ ven í who could suggest so villainous a scheme !" " Oh, it was Mason, put me up to that, and every thing else in the way of business. He is extremely clever and useful, and"—" And, who is Mason?" " Oh, you must know Afason Γ said Lady C. in visible confusion, " He that ivas my Lord's assistant, or I don't know what; but what matter about Mason, I must have money : I am a bankrupt in every thing ; in health, in fortune, in happiness.—Happiness I never knew, or knew it only in distinction : I must en¬ joy it, therefore, while I can purchase it,
or you for tne.— Bethels business turned out badly—he declines playing, though while we liad him, we made a good deal of him f — I apprehend Lady Delphina put him on his gu&r4 ; and if so, by all thaťs good, I will make her remember it as long as she lives, which cannot be very long ; for she is consuming with her oxvn vices. You see, Pandora, I am the devil, when provoked! better not urge me—-and I am half-mad already; that insolent wretch refuses to let the orna¬ ments for my tabic out of his shop, till half the money is paid ; and here I am wasting my time, when you could raise three times the sum, for me, on your diamond necklace/'---" My necklace S— 1 never will part with my diamonds- raise money on your own." "So I did, my dear, some months ago ; and yet, you see, what a glittering figure I continue to make/' Laxly \V 7 csthampton wept, wrung her α 2
hands, cursed all the ways of fashionable life, deplored her being resigned to the example and influence of her sister. " Distinction, distinction, a splendid set¬ tlement, was all I have ever heard from my infancy as the object of desire: I am a miserable example of the consequences. I am united to a man I never can love, and tyrannized over and robbed by a woman who committed me to vice that she might establish a power over me. Every day I make some new sacrifice of my principles, or my feelings. I know I shall fall into infamy. I know I am un¬ done, for I have every thing to impel me to destruction, and nothing, nothing, no happiness, no honor, no strength of mind to preserve myself/' " My dear, I actu¬ ally have not leisure to see you play out this comedie larmoyant, but to convince you that I wish to do everything equita¬ ble, be assured that the Rees is included in my subsidizing plan, I am determined
to make un coup d'essai to-morrow night. í have read in the Life of Charters, I think, of his winning three thousand gui¬ neas by placing his antagonist with her back to a glass, which I am determined to try, at least, to-morrow night. The Rees, I know, will soon get tired of her character, and long for a game: I will indulge her. If I lose I can only owe it, you know, and if I win, it shall be thou¬ sands and ten thousands for your comfort* my dear, as 7. hope it will. Oh, you must be gone with that dreadful red face, I hear people coming up stairs; they must not meet you all in tears—run into that closet—no, not into that—not into that, oh, for heaven's sake ! not there." It was too late. Lady Westhampton, intent only on escaping, ran into the first retreat that presented itself, and in that retreat was couched—Mr. Mason ! The event of this business was a full explanation between the sisters. Lady a :i
Castle-Wycornb, desperately involved in her circumstances, had called on Mason, her ci-devant elect, for pecuniary assist¬ ance; she knew his habits of business, and she knew his hatred to Lord Castle* Wycomb for his dismission of him. Ma- bon, a man of the most rancorous dispo¬ sition, assisted her only that be might ac¬ quire a power over her, of which he made such an use as completely to revenge himself on the husband, by the infamy of the wife. Lady Castle-Wycomb, on the discovery, consented to remit her de¬ mands on her sister, on condition she would undertake the Kees at the masque¬ rade, according to the looking-glass scheme, half of the profits of which she was contented to allow her; u for you must be sensible tbat it will be betterand more unsuspicious for mc to appear quite disengaged on the occasion/' The giddy Lady Westhampton, an x i ous to relieve her own great losses, and
rejoiced at being permitted to retain her diamonds, consented; and Lady Castle- Wycomb, determined to sacrifice even her avarice to her rage at the discovery, dispatched an anonymous note to Mr. Rees, requesting him to observe the situ¬ ation in which his lady would be placed the folioivin g night by the art of a certain dissipated peeress, who would engage her at piquet at the masquerade, merely with a view of plundering her by a most frau¬ dulent finesse. Having dispatched this note, by an unsuspected channel, she bur* ried to her sister's, where the brilliant festivity, that illuminated every mind and countenance, effectually concealed the depravity that raged in many an heart, and the misery that corroded all. As we returned from this splendid Pan¬ demonium in our carriage^ Athanasia, who had partaken more than usual of the gaieté of the night, became profoundly silent—1 took her hand; I pressed it to Q 4
my heart. I longed to tell her that heart was burning with wishes for her happi¬ ness, with resolutions to make her happy. But till it was relieved from all its sordid misery, till I had discharged everv debt, anei regained perfect bodily and mental freedom, I determined not to speak of my purposes, for their mention must have in¬ cluded the mention of the means; and my intanglcments with Lady Delphina were the last subject I could bring myself to speak, or think of. She gave me her hand coldly, but in a few minutes, appa¬ rently dissolved by recollections, her head sunk on my shoulder, and she wept. I believed them the tears of pardon and iove. 1 would not break the sacred si¬ lence of her feelings, my heart melted in visions of joy. The following day I devoted entirely to business. I discharged every debt í owed, reserving only a sum sufficient to support my establishment till the next
remittances from Ireland, to which I pur- posed to return on receiving them. The delirious dreams of ambition and pleasure were over. My winter in Dublin, and my winter in London, my folly and my madness, rose to my thoughts like the visions of a fever. I fixed my whole soul on that " sober certainty of waking bliss/' which I resolved to seek İn the arms, the heart of my Athanasia. The night arrived. I returned fatigued and happy to dine with Bellamy, who had assembled a large male party, who were to accompany us, at night, to the masquerade. Colonel Montolieu, who dmed with us, assured us, that even his dressing-room had been put into requisi¬ tion for the fete, and as he conceived dinner would be quite out of the question at Berkley Square, he came where he knew he would not be compelled to dine on pa¬ per hangings, and wash down ins tlinner with the contents of a jar of od-colours. q 5
I had still a jealousy of meeting Atha¬ nasia. I knew she was to dine at Lady Invermay's, in whose groupe she went, and I ordered the domino, which I in¬ tended to wear, to Bellamy's at nine o'clock. It was near eleven when we reached Berkley-Square. The concourse and tumult impeded all approach for an hour; but those who entered were repaid by a blaze of such splendor as had never before been witnessed. The hall and stair-case were filled with the most ex¬ quisite imitations of the vegetable pro¬ ductions of South America, among which lights half-concealed glimmered, as if through the foliage of groves. The prin¬ cipal stair-case terminated in a spacious gallery, which extending the whole front of the house exhibited the Temple of the Sun, in all the magnificence of Peruvian worship, as Peruvian magnificence has been represented by dramatists and ro¬ mancers. Pillars, in imitated green mar·
ble, wreathed with gold and ruby foliage, supported a roof whose cornice was form¬ ed of volumes of golden exhalations tinged with amber, and rose, and purple, to represent the approach of day. The centre of the roof represented the rites of Peruvian worship, bloodless, simple, con¬ sisting principally of offerings of fruits and flowers, which were represented with the most ado win« luxury of colou ring. and exuberance of disposition. The op¬ posite extremities of the cieling repre¬ sented the sun rising over the summit of a mountain, which blushed with all the glories of the dawn, and sinking into bis western bed of waters, where a long track of vivid light contrasted the rich dark green of ocean, and the brilliant and fan¬ tastic forms that were sporting in his set¬ ting ray, and showing " their waved coats dropt with gold/' In the recesses formed by the pillars, painting conducted the eye through α 6*
long, artificial perspectives, filled with priests and virgins of the sun ; inferior altars supported vases of flowers, or of lights, from which perfumes steamed like incense ; but, at the upper end of the temple, a splendid, transparent veil, glittering with representations of the vi¬ vifying influence of the sun, in animal and vegetable life, the productions of the earth, and the imaginary forms of the elements, was suspended from the del¬ ing to the floor, while a rich and radiant glow of transparent light, emanating through it, intimated the presence of the great object of Western idolatry. Beyond this, two other spacious apart¬ ments, or ranges of apartments, though less splendid, solicited, by the variety and exquisite taste of their decorations. The first (of which the cieling was tinged with the glowing and cloudless blue that some regions of that climate see stretch¬ ed over their heads, and whose walls
were divided into compartments, by plantains, their trunks wreathed with flowers, and their branches alive with the burnished tints, and airy forms of the beautiful birds of the climate) was decorated with paintings representing the most striking passages oť Perusvian his¬ tory ; the first interview of the unfortu¬ nate Ataliba with the Spanish troops; the magnificence of his train and proces¬ sion ; the car enamelled with pearl and diamond, and glowing wth the luxuriant plumage of his country, from which he was dragged by the hands of the Spanish soldiers. In another part of the room, the paintings represented the modem state of South America, views of the country and sketches of the inhabitants, in all the varieties of the mingled, the native, and the Spanish costume. The next apartment carried the spec¬ tator to another world—a world of hor¬ rors î — ЛИ the awakened rage of the cli-
mate, whose beauties blushed in the ad* jacent regions of pleasure, were pour- trayed here. The mountain, the vol¬ cano, the rage of the tempest, the deso¬ lation of the earthquake—here torrents of lava, and clouds of fire burned through the blackness with intense and sulphurous glare ; and here the ruins of Lima, the capital of Peru, tottering on the gulph that yawned below its founda¬ tions, presented the mingled and terrible convulsions of art and nature—-the as¬ pect of the earth, and the works of man. The dim light that played on these ob¬ jects was supplied by transparencies of the various fires with which the terrible picture glowed, and the cieling was filled with a gigantic figure, who throned amid storms, lightnings, and meteors, accord¬ ing to the description in Campbell's well known poem, " looked from his throne of clouds o'er half the world." The splendor of the apartments, if
possible, was exceeded by that of the brilliant groups who filled them : nearly seven hundred persons of distinguished fashion, in all the captivating and fantas¬ tic luxury of masquerade costume, glit¬ tered in the apartments, Among them were easily distinguished Lady Castle- Wycomb, in the gorgeous character of High Priestess of the Sun ; a character which she said she preferred, as it " re¬ quired a great deal to look, and nothing to say." Lord Invermay, his lady, and Athanasia, formed a very striking group as the " Ladye of Branksome, Lord Cranstoun, and the fair Margaret" in the Lay of the last Minstrel ; they had persuaded Sir John Orberry to accom¬ pany them, as the " Goblin Page/ 1 He needed but little to disfigure him in cha¬ racter. But all eyes were daz2İed, and all hearts captivated, by the blaze of at¬ traction and sensibility exhibited by the still too beautiful Lady Montrevor, in
the costume of the celebrated " La Va¬ liere, as she appears in the picture of the Orleans Gallery, in the act of re¬ nouncing all the splendors of luxury, and all the blandishments of the world, " which she loved too well." My heart throbbed with long forgot¬ ten sensations, and my eyes failed, as I gazed on her; but at this moment, my attention was arrested, by the languish- ment of two dark, soft, eloquent eyes fixed on me. In the habit of a Spanish gipsy, Lady Delphina Orbcrry had con¬ sulted all the touching· beauty, and all the bland, and play Ful witcheries of manner, by which she was distinguished. I yielded to the allurements of the scene —I remembered that this was to be my last night of pleasure—I wandered with her round the circle—-she hung on my arm, and í suffered m\self' to be amused by the address with which she blended ber fictitious with her real character.
' r Oh, Cavalier, what would the lady of your love give for the looks which you have bestowed on that beautiful figure/" pointing to Lady M. " I would be sorry, if the lady of my love were jealous of looks that mean only admiration."-— u Oh, Cavalier, contend not with me in knowledge of the meaning of looks—-I know what they mean too well—admira¬ tion never fixed such burning looks on its object yet/'—" Do you speak from your own feelings, or those of your pro¬ fession ?"— " From both."—" Then be assured, that they both deceive you-—to deceive is your profession*--to deceive, I am afraid, is your nature ; at least to throw over life, those delicious decep¬ tions, which we lament only when they cease. Be not displeased with me then, enchantress, if I warn you against exer¬ cising those deceptions on your own feel¬ ings, which it is your sport or your wrath.
to practise on others. If I warn you that admiration may exist without love, and love itself without distinguished ad¬ miration. "'—" Oh, Cavalier, that eye, and that lip, are always at variance- — never did a lip of rose, and an eye of dark, brilliant iire, talk such opposite language. Which shall I read ?."—" Nei¬ ther—read my heart."—" What does it say î"-— " That I am the happy, happy husband of a lovely, a beloved angel- wife, and"———·" And the lover, the happy, happy lover of her angel-mother" —-" Away, you tempt me beyond my pa¬ tience—beyond all patience : no fiction can excuse this license."—" But truth may.' 1 — íŕ Gracious heaven!—What can you mcan?" 1 --" What can you mean, by this silly, pedantic language?—Was this the language you learned to speak at Montrevor house?—Ah, no—gallant and gay, tu -— ~$ proud alcove, the bower of
wanton— and love î Shall I fill up the blanks ?" —" No, leave it a blank for ever, for your own sake,"—" Ha, ha, ha î —how you are altered—quite a Janus, with two faces : an old, frozen, forbidden, moral one ; and another, such another as you gazed at the beautiful Lady M. with just now. Ila, ha, ha—a most ť delicate mon¬ ster, with two voices*—one for a mistress, the other for a friend; but remember, this privilege of simony in gallantry— this privilege of erring with such gross impunity, and preaching to inferior of¬ fenders, is not in the bond." She burst from me ; it was no place to indulge the passions with which she bad tilled me— filled me almost to madness. At that moment, I was born away by the croud to the vokano-room : amid the tumult of voices, and of mv ou n ffciinirs —a strange, wild, mournful sound, made itself be beard. A figure approached— tall and majestic, in the ancient ín* L * *
habit : he bore in his hand an harp; constructed according to the model of that of Brian Boree, полу in the Univer¬ sity Museum of Dublin ; it was from this he drew the melancholy, expressive tones, which, together with his remark¬ able figure, had drawn numbers around him. The moment I saw him, I was struck with his resemblance to the figure who had addressed Lady M. on the staircase, during a crowded assembly, some nights past : but I had no time for conjectures, for at this moment Lady M., who had exchanged her costume, for that of " Glorvina, in tne J Vild Irish Girl" floated with a glittering train round her into the room, flashing around her beauty and her wit with lavish ease; she was in the midst of a ludicrous descrip¬ tion of the natural productions of the country from which she said she was just arrived, when she and the Irish minstrel exactly met in the circle. Lady Delphi-
na was close to me at that moments <r i " must retire," she whispered, " for here " comes a tempest of provocation/' I hardly heard her, for just then the crowd, struck by a strange similarity in the ha¬ bits of the strangerand Lady Montrevor, had withdrawn on each side, and left them almost together. The stranger stopped, and fixed his eyes on Lady Mon¬ trevor; I saw hers fixed with a kind of wildness on him ; he mingled in the crowd, she appeared to me sinking as I once be¬ fore saw her, I rushed to her, she grasp¬ ed my arm, her command of herself was so great that she neither screamed nor spoke; through the mask of her paint no emotion could be traced, but the cold dews of fear forced themselves through all her rouge and stood trembling in ghastly drops on her forehead and cheeks. What shall I do ?*' I said, " Who is this ? what shall I do for vou or him?" " Follow him, oh follow him/' she whispered in a
manner which she had the presence of mind to give the appearance of masque¬ rade gibier to, " follow him, if he be alive, but he cannot live for me." It was in vain that I Ы un ted with un- relenting violence through crowds of sul¬ tanas, chimney-sweepers, angels, and devils ; in every room I pursued, in every groupe I sought him, in vain. The crowd and heat were now almost intolerable, and the levity around only exaggerated the dis¬ traction of my mind. I kne\v T not what to think, he seemed indeed to be a creature of the elements, that could appear and dis¬ appear at his pleasure. I still less knew what to tell Lady M. I dreaded to terri¬ fy her by silence, I dreaded to terrify her by telling her what Ï knew, or did not know of the stranger. As I still wandered through the throng, a strong hand grasped mine, I turned round, it was the stranger: " You ap¬ pear, bir, to he a friend of Lady Mon- tievorV* bud »e, "am I to think so
of you, or an admirer only; I believe the number of the latter, has rather ex¬ ceeded that of the former." " Inform me first, Sir, what am I to think of you, your appearance"— —" No matter for my appearance, and no matter for your opinion of me. If you are her friend, give her this note, if you are not, hover round her still, and feed her with the sweet poison of flattery, till she dies of it; but tell her withal, that let her paint an inch thick, to this favor bhe must come:" he pointed to his own furrowed and sallow cheek and disappeared. As I still held the note, and pon¬ dered on this wild message, it struck me that I had heard the tones of that voice once before, but where or when had vanished from my memory, I had to " fight all my battles о er again," to regain the place where I bad left Lady 3VL who always possessing address enough to liide the vicissitudes of feeling: under the pretence of local caprice, had thrown
herself on a sopha, and was declaring she was " quite wearied, délaissée, ennuyée, unable to utter another word, orbe amu¬ sed even by the folly of others." " And are you equally incapable of being amu¬ sed by wit?" said Bellamy, who was lounging near her, " if you are not, come with me in quest of the Irish pea¬ sant ; he said some amazingly good things/' u Oh quite incapable,'' said she, affecting to yawn violently; "in an ex¬ hausted receiver you know, a feather and gold are equally light, or to apply, equally heavy. Oh Mr. Bethel, you could not get me a glass of ice, or if you did I suppose you t hazced it with a look—you appear dreadfully heated-—do try, Bellamy, to get me 5 orne t hing, and do not be frozen iu the attempt."---Bellamy laughed and attempted to obey her. u Now that J have sent him away to elo a thing impos¬ sible/' said she, * f for heavens sake tell me nil in a word, have you ьсеп him.
have you spoken to him, has he—*" ? íť He has given me this note, for you. í am as anxious as you can be, that you should read it; could you now retire for a few moments to your dressing room 1 *? i4 1 can, and do you follow me, in a few mo¬ ments after/' As I fallowed her, I observed Lady Delphina near the door, in close conver¬ sation with a tall iiguic in a Spanish habit whom I immediately discovered to be Lord Montrcvor. I hurried to La¬ dy M's dressing room—she was traversing the room with rapid ste'ps, her form al¬ most ethereal with joy. ki He is alive-*- he i* alive—he loves mc still/' She fell upon a scat, her voice faltered, the hand which she spread before her face trembled, " loves mc, worthless, degraded, pervert¬ ed a* I am, with nothing left, nothing left of my former self, but an heart that never forgot him, ami virtue— cntire- *' n í . I II. R
I took the note which she held out to me ; she walked to the glass, she survey¬ ed her gay, fantastic dress, her delicious form scarce veiled by the transparent drapery of luxurious nakedness, her cos¬ tume sparkling with the fanciful regalia of the western princess ; her whole ap¬ pearance a combination of glittering le¬ vity, and voluptuous magnificence; the glow of feeling out-blushed all her rouge. " What a figure do I present——what a figure for one who might have been so different a figure in this world, or out of it—who might have been an honoured, an happy wife,------ a mother ! ——What am I now r —and yet he loves me still—and yet I will struggle to be something worthy of his love, worthy of myself."—"This is the moment, the very moment I have wished—I have prayed for ; be yourself—dare to be your¬ self, and you must beali that is good and happy; the present opportunity seems of-
fered by heaven for your happiness, for the happiness of us all. I am going to Ireland; come with us, with Athanasia who loves you, with me who—*come with ns, any excuse will serve the world, and Lord M, ; you want no excuse for visit¬ ing your daughter—we will, we must be happy I" I related as briefly as I could, the cir¬ cumstances that had occurred in the few preceding days. I dwelt on my extrica¬ tion from distress, from involvement, from Lady Delphina. I told her of the infamous conduct of Lord C. and the villain Debraine —conduct I noxv could neither resent nor punish—but which—« ъЬе interrupted me— " As to Lord C. í always believed him, and told you i be¬ lieved him to be a mere political chanu - ter, who, in playing his cards, would take care to deal all the honors to himself, yet 1 thought your talents might strike him r аъ to Debraine, ƒ always thought him a к Q
villain, but as I had no reason for think¬ ing so, except physiognomy or caprice, 1 did not wish to teach your mind " the needful vice of suspicion/' She eagerly inquired by what means I had extricated myself-—I informed her—she shook her head-·-" it must not be, to that woman you must owe nothing; ifall I can sup¬ ply you with can discharge your debt to her, you shall not be a debtor beyond to¬ morrow. I will have no further occasion for expenccs—for such expences—it is to be hoped." I congratulated--! consoled—I tried to confirm her:—-" Oh. my dear friend! I will confer to jou, that if I did not almost thi. к it to·* late, I would suffer myself to dream again of hope and of happiness. I was formed to be a do* mestic creature, If any thing could give me streikt h oi mmd to resist the fatal infatuation that has almost destroy¬ ed me—the infatuation of vanitv and
despair—it would be the thought of yet acquiring, the thought of deserviag that man's approbation. His approbation— observe, I mean nothing more. I should forfeit it—I should forfeit my own, if I could think of anv thing else. There is* a date for passion-—but there is, thank Heaven! no date for virtue or for hap¬ piness. But am I not mad, or doting, to talk of virtue and happiness? I who ha\c lived such a life—-who am İiviuır such a life. What a li «-ure / shall be. çoinír to a selıooİ of reform !---and what a figure in a school/' Again she looked at herself hi the glass, with a struggle of melancholy va- , 'л\ .—-'* But what a wretch I am to talk :hii4 I who have made such sacrifices to a world í despised---to a world that h.:s destroyed me, almost ! I who have saciiiiccd m\ self to it, now to hesitate to sacrifice it for myself--—for more than к 5
myself—for more than I have ever known or beer* of myself.------Ah ! I see you smile :—is it a smile of encouragement ? Oh, tell me what you think of me?—-tell me not what the world will think or say. Can 1 ever, ever emerge?—Will the pure air of retirement, of peace, of happiness, breathe its balm to heal the scar of these corrosive fires'—-or is it your mal dû pay s that deceives us both ?----- She sunk again on the sofa; how love¬ ly, how interesting she looked at that moment—My utterance was impeded—I scarcely articulated. Her beauty, her despair, an air of wild and melancholy grandeur, of hope contending against hope, darkened her face with a kind or sad brightness. " I never, never thought you u less than arch-angel ruined/' but now, I hope—I am convinced—I would pledge my existence, you will yet be all that woman can be of excellent—a,s you have always been all—too much all of
lovely"—" Allons donc, à Γ Ireland, you know, it is the Island of Saints, so we shall be quite in character, by being out of all human character. I protest I only fear wc shall be too perfect; so lest I should rise too rapidly in my own esti¬ mation, I will go talk nonsense to all the world for another hour—once more let's " mock the midnight bell/* Oh, my dear Ormsby, dont despise me for this levity— it is not levity—a glow of natural feeling pervades my whole heart and soul, and ¿i' I don't laugh, I must certainly cry/' At this moment she looked $o lovely that I involuntarily kissed the hand she extended to me. We were quitting the room, when the door was suddenly thrown open, and Lord Montrevor entered. I had a glimpse of another figure that glided down the passage-it was Lady Delphina. My mind was at that mo¬ ment so occupied by the new world of happiness that had burst on it, that I no- e 4
t iced neither his entrance, nor his looks, but silently relinquishing Lady Montre¬ vor's hand, I flew to the gallery to pour my intelligence, and my hope, and my joy, into the bosom of Athanasia. I could no longer conceal them ; there was no longer any reason for concealing them. Lady Montrevor had promissed to liqui¬ date my debt to Lady Delphina, and to accompany us to Ireland. What intelli¬ gence for Athanasia. How my heait swelled and panted with its treasure. The gallery was almost deserted; the company hadcrowded to the supper rooms, impatient for the display of a new blaze of luxury and splendor. In the adjacent rooms were only a few gamesters, cling¬ ing to the tables, from u hieb no tempta¬ tion could solicit them; among these I observed, in a private room, Lady West¬ hampton and the devoted Hees in proper attitudes. Mr. Rees was near them, with a look of angry vigilance, which I did
not understand then. In vain I searched for Athanasia everywhere. On the stair- case I met Lady Invermay and her party. I enquired for Mrs, Bethel Lady In¬ vermay believed she was gone: she had complained of the crowd, and quitted her party at an early hour. \ r exed and dis¬ appointed, I forced my way through the crowd on Hie staircase, and throwing my¬ self into the first carriage I saw, hurried: home. u Has your Lady returned yet;" No, was the answer. I continued to tra¬ verse the room, itnpatieatly—the clock struck five, and six and seven. Amazed, and almost terrified, I hurried back to. Berkley-Square. The crowd had not yet entirely dispersed; but in their appear¬ ance, and the broken expressions 1 heard, I caught some extraordinary intimations. I rushed into the house; it was now broad day-light; the half· extinguished lamps burnt faintly, and the dim discoloured ornaments bore a melancholy look. As I к 5
hurried through the deserted rooms, a voice of agony struck my ear, it uttered a long, deep, continued cry of distress. I recollected the voice to be Lady West¬ hampton. I threw open the door of a small room in which refreshments had been distributed. By a single light which burnt dimly, I could scarcely see this young victim of fashionable seduction stretched on the ground, at the foot of a sopha, from which she had sunk in ap¬ parent weakness, drenched, absorbed in tears, her splendid ornaments strewing the floor around her—I approached; I attempted to raise her. " Oh, I am un¬ done I undone 1 /' she exclaimed, in de¬ spair, " let me go, let medie, let me sink into the earth—lam undone forever!" Hardly could I obtain from her a cohe- rent answer; still I importuned her, for I felt there was something impending; at last I understood the dreadful commo-
tion that had followed on my quitting Berkley-Square in pursuit of Athanasia.. Lady W. according to the plan of her depraved sister, had been observed by Mr. Rees in the whole process of de¬ frauding his wife of 8000 guineas; and in the moment that she was risine: from the table in triumph, he charged her with the fraud, before a number of wit¬ nesses whom he had aflembled and sta¬ tioned in proper places. Naturally weak, and timid from detected guilt, Lady W. at once confessed the fraud, and restored the money : this was not enough for Hees, who saw his power, and wished to use it, to break off the ruinous connec¬ tion between his wife and Ladv Castle- Wveornb. He talked loud, and threat- ened prosecution ; and what was worse, a complahit to her iord, Terrified to agony, Lady W. threw the whole blame on her sister; who, she asserted, was the fabricator of the whole mystery of ini· - б
quity—who had driven her to involun¬ tary vice—who bad undone her, by all the influence of example and compul¬ sion. The tumult now became general:— Lady C\ was condemned and vilified by ail; Lady Westhampton accused, and Kces menaced her; and Mrs. Ilecs, safe in her husband's resentment being trans¬ ferred to another object, now poured out her "secret memoirs/* with a fluency and viruknee that shocked as much as the depravity it related. But in the midst of all this burst of condemnation, it was discovered that Lady Castle-Wy¬ comb was far beyond its reach: at the first «jratherinir. of the storm, she had fore- seen her danger, and yielding at once to tear, despair, and depraved inclination, fled from her house with Mason, who was disguised among the attendants, to await the events of the night. " But on me, on me all the burthen of shame and
suffering has fallen," franticly sobbeel the victim of fashion; " mylord, distracted with passion at my disgrace, swears he M'ill confine me for life, in his old ruinous castle in Leicestershire. I am to be dragged away this very hour !—He has gone to order the carriages—I expect him every moment—and oh! such is his fury, I am sure he will destroy me before we have completed our dreadful jour¬ ney Γ Again she sunk on the floor, in con¬ vulsions of agony, and cursed the c<»m- pulsive misery into which she had been dragged by fashionable example. " But, Mr. Bethel," said she, recovering her voice, and staring wileliy at me," is it possible you are here r —you, whom my father found, in such shocking circum¬ stances, in my mother's dressing-room ľ' She laughed, fearfully. " I am not alone in the shame and misery of this night—- you arc destroyed for ever. Lord M. has
declared his intention of separating from her, and prosecuting you, and declares that he has long suspected the whole af¬ fair, and has witnesses to prove it ex¬ isted long before he ault ted Ireland." # # * # ####### I recovered my senst - : I flew r to Lady Montrevor s apartment. no power could withhold, or delay me. In the presence -—iu the despite of men and devils, I de¬ termined to vindicate her with a force and truth, that should write conviction as with the lightning's point, upon every human heart # # # Bennet was weeping before the dooF. " You must not pass!—begone!—you have undone yourself—you have undone us all for ever" I pushed her away, M'ith no gen¬ tle hand. Lady M. heard the tumult- She demanded—" Who was there?" I felt myself unable to utter my own name, but she knew the sound of my voice,
" The door is locked— vou must not en- ter here—you must not enter now ! I applied my shoulder to the door—it be¬ gan to yield. *' Hold !" I heard her scream, in a voice of passion and com¬ mand—" the laudanum is in my hand f — another movement to enter, and I swal¬ low it." I fell on my knees at the door —I adjured, I appealed, I supplicated. " It is too late," said she, in a dreadful voice. " I am driven to this—I acquit you— I know r myself innocent, but I will not outlive public shame : he threatens with it—the monster threatens me with it, who knows my innocence—and with my own son-in-law ! But he is determin¬ ed on my destruction î —my destruction be on his head î Remember I am driven to this !—escape from that sorceress, if you can : it is her influence over the most weak and wicked of men, that pushes me on self murder !" I heard no more — I burst into the
room—I tore the laudanum from her hand—convulsions followed. I remem¬ ber nothing distinctiv, but that I saved her life. Lord Montrevor and Colonel Montolieu entered—I remember nothing distinctly—all was rage and madness— and menace and execration ! The last thing I remember seeing, w r as Lady M, apparently lifeless in the arms, and Col. Montolieu kneeling to his father, not to destroy his mother, himself, and his chil¬ dren, by an accusation be knew to be false and infamous—then all recollection forsook me ! * * * * * * When I recovered it, í was in a prison. —Slowly my faculties returned. I de¬ manded at whose suit I was arrested. I had discharged every debt I was ac¬ quainted with the morning of the fatal night. í was informed it was at Lady Delphina Orberry's, for the money dut on my bond. I demanded, zekere was my wife ? Oh, howl longed for her bauds
to bind my burning forehead. I was presented, after some delay, that seemed suggested by humanity, with a letter which was dated the day of the masque¬ rade—the hand was Athanasia's. #####♦ " You will never see me more. I write but to supplicate your forgiveness— your forgiveness for an error, of whicii the discovery is to me intolerable; for which, though only mental, though al¬ most involuntary, í will do penance in everlasting banishment. Oh you, whom 1 have loved with a love passing that of women, never again can I bear to meet your sweet, generous, killing smile, your soothings, of which the angel tones would be daggers to mc. Forgive mc, only forgive me, and í wili live and díe in peace—if possible, While I believed you ignorant of rny weakness, of my guilt, for there is guilt of the mind, 1 hid the anguish of m\ heait, and tried ta
believe that it was my duty to amend my errors without confessing them, that it was enough if I restored you the full and faithful homage of my heart, without humbling myself to say how that heart— no, how my senses had wandered. But you have discovered all, and never will I bear to meet you after the discovery. Remember what I was —a weak, ignorant girl, without education, without example but of vice and folly, left to form my ideas from the vilest of books, aided by the poisonous conversation of the vilest of companions.—Remember that those books taught me, that to yield to senti¬ ment wa*)almost a virtue; and that com¬ panion represented it equally as the habit of the world and the duty of romance. I was left to devise my own romance, and in what a tragedy has it terminated ! I never loved Debraine, yet I was taught to be heve that I ought to have a lover and an husband ; Γ would have sought
both in you, but what heroine was ever happy with an husband !—When, at last, my heart grew sick of disguise, and my senses of imposition (for v/ho could love Deloraine who was wedded to you) I was told of the duty of fidelity, of the despair and death of the unhappy object of my cruelty, &c. Thus was I led on to act as if I really loved a man who was totally indifferent to me, and was indifferent to an husband whom I adored.—Remem¬ ber, that though I trod the path of folly with my conductors, I retreated, I broke from them for ever when they would have led me into guilt. Remember, i had no monitor, no assistant, no confi¬ dant, no aid but Heaven and my love for you—that will console me in the so¬ litude to which I have devoted myself; ihat will prompt my last prayer for you. The misery, which the struggles of the last months has caused me, has worn .»way my health —I İme not long to live»
My poor infant stirs within me from the agony in which I write this;—if it lives r it shrdl he sent to you, and you will weep for me when you see it :—if it dies, let it be laid in its mother's grave. On my knees, with my last breath, I in lore your forgiveness. Kemem ber, m of¬ fence was but mental, and remember how it has been expiated—how I have lost ali I ever truly loved on this earth—my mother and you. Л. Bethel/' My pale and blasted rose**** i t was I who threw your sweets a way!—Over their withering fragrance, so rich in death, I shed the last human drops I believed my eyes would ever shed * * * " Can you, will you persist in this dreadful obstinacy r I know my love, my life are of no consequence to you; but
think of your own—you will die of despair and shame if the prosecution goes on : Lord M. has summoned the most able lawyers, he has procured, he says, the most infallible witnesses.------Oh think of such a trial, such an exposure! can you outlive the thoughts of it, can you outlive the fact itself? and it tints 1 1 must happen—if you will not sign this paper :~^- it confesses — what every one already knows—your unfortunate attachment to Ladv M. Lord M. empowers me to sav if you will sign this acknowledgment, und admit all it implies, he will stop all the proceedings—why will you hesitate? not from consideration of the migrate- ful woman who has betrayed and aban¬ doned you—she has fled from Berkley Square—no one knows where—gone with some other paramour,—and left you here to encounter all the shame and misery that should have fallen on lier own head. 4 '
" I adjure you," said I, speaking for the first time for some hours, " to tell me the truth. Has Lady Montrevor escaped from England r—will she not stand the event of the prosecution r ,? —" By all that is true and holy!"— and Lady Delphina kissed the cross that hung on her breast. Again she importuned, she suplicated, she adjured me to save myself:— t£ her you cannot injure by the declaration, her character is decided by her flight, no one can believe her in¬ nocent—you may yet save yourself; I plead, I supplicate to you for yourself; I know your proud impetuous spirit,—it will leave your frame breathless the day you hear your infamy proclaimed.—Lord M. has the whole world on his side: what can you do in prison against him?" ----- *' Who put me there?" -----1—" I did, to prevent Lady Montrevor seducing you to accompany her flight*"— u Seducing me to actumpany her flight ! -merciful
Heaven !— Heaven who knows her pu- rity!—-But I appeal no more.—Will this declaration free me, free me fully and finally from all further importunity?"·— " Yes -cruel that vou are!—it will—it shall free you from all fm ther—impor¬ tunity."—I fell upon my knees, and in the solemn language of conviction and agony called Heaven to witness m ν belief of Lady Montrcvor's perfect purity, and my consciousness of my own.—I resigned myself to that power which seemed re¬ solved to " make a spectacle, a tale of me;" but I impbied its mercy for her, if she yet existed, with anguish that spoke herinnocent to Heaven and Earth.—----- Lady Delphina rushed from me in despair. # ♦*##**## In a few hours she entered again.—Our dreadful conference lasted four hours.— I am forbid " to tell all the secrets of my prison house ¡"—-Eut tlie tale that was
unfolded deprived me of breath, of reason, of feeling.—I staggered from her—She held me with her cold hand—" You must forgive me now, for * * * * # # She was in the agonies of death—" You have driven me todespair—to death—Yet I forgive you—Oh if you feel a spark of mortal passion, let this sight disarm it ? I have destroyed you, but I have re- venged you—your destroyer is come to die at your feet—If I have sacrificed you to my wild passion, I have also sacrificed myself. That form, which I see every moment more dimlv, was the cause of all-—From the moment I saw you, I determined you should be mine—no man ever had resisted me but you—I knew no restraints when øiy passions are engaged—I never did know any—1 believed nothing but dis- tiess could subdue your pride, or your re¬ luctance« Yon were too fond of your
wife to be fond of dissipation for dissi¬ pation sake. I found that nothinj but your ruin could make you mine—despair. and nothing but despair could drive you into my arms. ï urged your ruin, for I had determined you should be mine» I extorted money íVom you by way of bribing Sir John. Sir John never knew joti \ibiad me. I drove you to the gaming-table to supply your losses—then I was sure of vou. But I dreaded the in- ilucncc of your wife—I dreaded the in¬ fluence of Lady M. whose knowledge oi life was dangerous to my [dans, as dan¬ gerous as her true affection for vou. Lu- happy woman î vqually my enemy from love and hatred —she was ill-fated to con¬ tend with me— Τ have desttoyed her. I Ľr miserable lord J had an arrangement wirb many j uar» aga i renewed jt that I might command her fate and yourV. Vou never suspected that ] was Lord ΑίΛ amie— his friend ; no. I was his bitterest eneme vol. π ι,
ί u>cd him as he deserved—as a tool, and now 1 have thrown him away for ever. Is all the mystery of my conduct now ex¬ plained r I became your creditor that you might be mine. All I was worth upon earth I would have given for you. I com¬ pelled Lord M. to give up his wife, and menace you with a prosecution to terrify you into my arms. I promised to go to the continent with him. Wretched man 1 he has been wretchedly rewarded for his officious fidelity in vice— iii vice of ano¬ ther's. I never would have gone with him. lie set out, persuaded I would fol¬ low. On the íirst stage he overtook his fugitive daughter and her paramour Mason. The spirits о; habits of a man were not wbuily extinguished in him, infamous as he was. He challenged Mason— befell. Mason escaped. Lady Castle-Wycomb is in a private mad-house. Oh ! it is a dayof типу deaths ; he is dead, and I am dying. When I found nothing could shake your
Te-solution, nothing could stimulait 1 your passions, nothing could henil \our prin¬ ciples, I fled from you in the despair of fruitless rencntanco. 1 had scattered do struction round me : 1 had rumod all that opposed mc, and still I was a weak rmd blasted agent. 1 had driven Lady AL to distraction : that proud and powerful muu! I had crushed and humbled — I had killed, actually killed her wretched hibband, by torturing her sensibility. I liad banished your innocent wife. Oh ! her pale, wasU d form will be the first that will greet me in wo>\ I had done all this, and dono all in vain, t could neither allure, nor compel you to —for you I had done all, and in solitude and in a prison you 'grasped misery to your heart, and pushed me fiom you, ï had no other choice; I had but one child—-a daughter — the daughter of a man whom I knew abroad. I sent her to ber father's relations in Ireland, í elnrqed them nuver to bit her know me. If she л 2
never knew a mother's affection, I re¬ solved she fchould nevtr know a mother s vices. I wished not to destroy more than myself. I îvtoïved to ilv to Ireland, and bury myself with her ш a nunnery: my life had left me no other choice. This, this la>t n fuge was denied mc—she is no more—Llmaale St. Clair is dead—she died for love. Read those letters—ah, no, read nothing now but my dim and dying *'*-'?s, and say can νου fori» ive me ?'* * * u Soothed bv your for- цлчпе>я, sibtuined by your arms—But, • «h! where am Ì going? Oh', hold mc up tu look at you once more/* # * # # * * I fell upon the body, while speech re- «.allied to me. 1 prajoJ that I might be soon cold like it. But while 1 yet hung o\er it, it grew livid, bloated: the maiks of poison appeared, my senses wandered Hga'ui ■*#*#*
4 "¥. л * sr * In this state I imr-t hiw r«Miťiiu«d several months. 1 have not the -hţ;ht^i reeollocliou *#i imv event. *»r alunat anv serration during tint period ťS'Hpi л funt and ^1(4'{)у uii'v^in ^< at something like attempts made to disturb mí* from tmie to time, hut by wh-nu or f»>r w'liat purpose. 1 had not reason emui.;!i ín discover οι to incjuirc. When m\ íVtJuc* rrtuniid, jt was contrary to all oxu, rîaï -пн, ^ud. I beii* w\ all analogy : xl.rs wimuad cum- phlol\ without we^kík's-. and own with¬ out confusion of \dv<\<, lho ii;-*t t^-.ťnct impression made on mv s- :i-ts was that ot' a voice reading prayer—a soft and ^îcinn voice—a w'dl-known vt'ic«· —:ho \ч»:<:о of Λ1ι\ Corbrtt« it a* ltd on my mind h ко an omen tur good, f sat up sofdy (1 was in bed) like one who fears to Ы\ ak aspeli in enchantment. My motions were so quiet, they did not rtaeh rim ears c f the person ; I had leisure to look around ше. s ¿i
it was evening, but a mild light breaking* through the half-drawn curtains, showed me a spacious and elegant apartment, and Mr. Corbett, whose figure I now saw dis¬ tinctly, kneeling near the bed, with his back turned to me, I called to him. My voice was feeble and broken, and wild : it sounded strangely to my own cars, yet in a moment he discovered it to be the voice of sanity and reason. His own was inarticulate with joy. I poured out a thousand questions and exclamations, i le would have delayed answering them; he would have enjoyed composure; but he perceived that in the present state of my eel ings, it would be more dangerous to contend with than to gratify them, líc was proceeding with a slow and jealous caution, when a door half opened disclosed a well-known figure·—it retreated—1 called to it— u Sybilla, Sybilla, my sister, can you think your sight would injure you?" She approached me with fears of joy and
timidity. " Though I have no longer a title to the name of sister, no sister ever, ever felt more joy at a brother restored." 7 " Not my sister—is this a dream ? 'f it bo, it is peopled with such delightful shapes, I would it could last for ever.'" ^ It is no dream,' 1 said Mr. Corbett, " she is no longer your sister; but if you have lost a sister, vou have found a father. y I cannot detail the gradual and trembling process of this discovery. In a few hours I was clasped to the bosom of a real father. He was the stianoci' of the solitary tower in the west of Ireland ; he was the Irish peasant of the masquerade ; he was the lover of Lady Montrevor, w ho now, with her hand clasped in his, leaned on my shoulder while he hung over me, and Sybilla and Hammond saw us dimly through the tears which yet they did not seek f wipe awav, and the heavenly· minded Corbett called upon us in a tone of tempered monition, to repress the tu*
mult of human feeling, and consecrate our happiness by gratitude and praise. Many days elapsed before 1 could hear or comprehend the tale of wonders they told me. My father, attached in early life to Lady Montrevor, and repelled from her by the error of her pride, or his own, suffered his despair to deprave his mind and habits; he gave up professional dis¬ tinctions : he gave up all that could make life happy or honorable, lie wandered over the continent a reckless, unhappy libertine, stimulating his senses by tem¬ porary connexions, and trying to forget the aspirations of a lofty mind in the blandishments. In this state he formed a connexion with my unhappy mother, who had been brought to Avignon by an English gentleman with whom she lived— and, deserted there, sought a refuge from dejection or poverty in an arrangement with my father. This continued for some months, till learning that his younger
brother, (Mr. Bethel,) with whom he bad no connexion, had arrived in Avignon, he abruptly left that place, leaving Miss Per¬ cival, with whose situation he was unac¬ quainted, pregnant with me. She was too attractive, and too anxious to attract, to remain loim neţrlcctcd : she threw herself in Mr Bcthcľs wav, became his mistress ; and believing it would con¬ firm her influence or her establishment, in¬ formed him shortly after their connection, that she was likely to make him a father. 1 was the offspring of the elder brother. though supposed (by all but my mother) to be the son of Mr. Bethel; and so striking was my resemblance to my real parent, that Lady Montrevor, who re« membered him too wc 11, at one of mv fhv>t interviews with her, drew ше into the recess, that she might gaze on me without disturbance, and feed her melancholy mind with the recalled imagery of early hope. This resemblance, the cause of her first S 5
and distinguished partiality for me, was the cause in me of a too flattering error of which the consequences have long since ceased. During his feverish and unhappy career of libertinism, mv father was seized at Rome with a violent fever. He was a Catholic ; the agonies of conscience smote him on what he believed to be Ins dying bed; the priests, by whom he was sur¬ rounded, knew how to employ this as an instrument to subdue and debilitate their catechumen. The " faitcz penitence," of the Romish ritual was substituted for the intellectual and moral amelioration that should have restored him to mental sanity and rational happiness. He became a lay brother in a convent in Rome, and here Lady Montrevor, flying from the dreadful consequences of her dissipated madness, met him, as she then believed to meet no more. Another fever followed the shock of this interview, and the intel-
„ ľigence of his death (which was expected every moment) followed her to England. On his recovery,he found the place where he had last beheld her insupportable to his sight and feelings, and learning that a countryman of his was about togo to Ireland, attached himself to him as a religious corn· panion, and resided for years with him iu the West of Ireland, without making him¬ self known to his brother, the Chieftain De Lacy, or, (when he rarely ventured abroad) being himself known amid the ravages of a ruined constitution, and a broken mind. When the person with whom he lived at length died, he succeeded to the small property he had died possessed of, disposed of the house and grounds, and confining himself to a ruinous building that stood on part of it, occupied his time and hi* revenue in acts of the most laborious bene¬ ficence. He lived in total solitude, anel this solitude was deepened into total sc- sò
elusion, when Lady Montrcvor with her lord and familv arrived in Ireland, and iu his neighbourhood. This was the cause of his abstraction, his silence, his dark and hurried appearance. Ite wished not to be known to cither of his brothers, to the С hicftaiu he knew ho could srive no happiness, and to Mr. Bethel, he believed he could teach no repentance : and Lady Montrcvor he believed equally beyond the reach of both. Yet when his brother's life was threatened, he hastened to save him, and to impel me to save him, but disappeared as soon as his purpose was eflccted, to escape discovery. As he was about to eniov some tran» quillity on our removal from Ireland, he was ouc night disturbed iu his solitary residence by my unhappy mother who came to implore bis forgiveness, and to die. She informed him that he bad a son, that that son was the supposed child of
his younger brother Bethel, and that the falsity which she had at first fabricated for her own advantage, she had afterwards kept from fear, from the difficulty of dis¬ covering his real parent, and from the ex¬ perimental spirit of the new philosophy which taught that parental affection being merely a mechanical and desultory impulse might be as easily transferred as an attach- ment to anv other fluctuating and inciden- tal possession. She had been afterwards occupied too much by her own concerns to think of her children, Masseau, whom she had robbed us to follow, with the usual levity and wickedness of a Frenchman. bad plundered, abused, and deserted her. On the verge of death, to which her connexion with him had reduced her, she had collected her declining strength to crawl to my father's mclancholv retreat, and tell him that I was his son ; and that I was, as she had learned during her short residence in London, on the brink of
ruin, which nothing but hig interference could prevent. The affections of nature poured into my father's heart again, lie confessed after¬ wards to me that he had beheld me during this inter-regnum of human feeling with interest such as he never thought he could again feel for an human being, lie now discovered that I was his son. He was impelled for my sake, and for his own, to make some inquiries into the state of tiie property, whose rapid dilapidation my mother had apprised him just before her death. The inquiry terminated in a dis¬ covery of Deloraine's (my agent) real cha¬ racter and views; ofthat inveterate and im¬ paci lied enmity which had so often nearly terminated my existence ; and which at length, had ended in the terrible dissolution of his own. He discovered Deloraine's having endeavoured to suggest to me a line of conduct the most offensive to my uncle, his having impelled me to decline
the duel, of wliich the effects ho knew (and hoped) would be my utter alienation from his property and bis affections, of his afterwards having employed a ruffian to strangle my uncle, in consequence of some indications of his returning affections, a danger from which my unexpected inter¬ ference rescued him ν of his endeavouring to seduce the affections of Athauasia through the medium of the wretched gouvernante, who bad been formerly his mistress; his successful attempts to poison my mind and constitution by the seduction of dissipated habits; his last effort to alienate my uuele from me, by procuring his arrests ior debts which he had impelled me to contract ; and of his finally de ranging the affairs I bad committed to bis inspection, in consequenceof which I was on the verge of ruin. My father felt there was no time to be lost in the recognition of his son and of his claims, lie ironie»
diately called on Mr. Corbett, whose cha¬ racter and abilities he venerated, to observe the movements of the enemy in Ireland, while he himself hastened to London ta snatch me from destruction. In London he lived for some time con¬ cealed, hesitating in the natural suspense of feeling on the mode of discovering himself. At this period he was recognized by Lady Mon tre vor, in Berkeley-square, on the ni^ht when, mindi ηε· with the crowd, who were admitted to д -aze at the decorations of the night, he had fingered to gaze on her ; she knew him. lier re¬ collection gave a throb of wild and dan¬ gerous joy to his heart, He forgot the purpose he had come for to enjoy it again, On the dreadful night of the masquerade he made himself known to her. Oh ! that terrible period, when Lady Mon- revort, goaded to agony by her infamous husband, was only preserved from suicide
by the reflection that there was one arm extended to protect her—that there was one heart which beat for her still. She threw herself in despair into the arms of her first love, and implored him to hide her in the solitude of his retreat from the world and from herself for ever. To a mind like her's, powerful and perverted, nothing appears so striking as a plan of monastic seclusion, and gloomy penitence. Such was the plan that she had formed in the distraction of her thoughts, wild and great, like all the rest. My father, yielding to his religion or his passion, resolved to place her iti Ire¬ land in some retreat, and then return to vindicate me and her. But in the mean time, Hammond, on the first intelligence of my situation, had hastened from Ire¬ land, and appearing in his professional character in Court, had exposed the bribed witnesses and mis-stated facts of
the prosecutor to such contempt and ab* horrence, that Lord Montrevor's retreat with Lady Deiphina was anticipated by the necessity of flying from the infamy that had almost endangered his life as he returned from hearing a complete verdict given for the defendant. His dreadful fate has been already re- lated. My father and Lady Montrcvor were met on their journey by Mr. Corbe tt, who was hastening from Ireland, with the terrible account of Deloraine's death, who, dreading the discovery with which his dis¬ appointed influence over Athanasia threat¬ ened him, had shot himself; and in the short interval of approaching dissolution, (for his death was not immediate,) con¬ fessed his persecution of mc to Mr. Cor- bett ; and disclosed to him the retreat of Athanasia, which the post-mark of her final letter to him had informed him of. He adjured Mr. Corbett to hasten anei
repair the evils he had donc m; and while he was vet stružline: to relate them all, died in the agonies of immature death* and involuntary penitence. Mr. ( orbctt, feeble with age, and sha¬ ken by the horrors he had witnessed, has¬ tened nevertheless to fulfil.the great duty imposed on him. In his progress to Lon¬ don be met rny father and Lady Mon¬ trcvor, with whose purpose he was soon acquainted, and with whom he reasoned so powerfully on the inutility of that re¬ pentance which consisted in gloomy and secluded virtue, and the danger of con¬ founding the dictates of religion with the impulses of human passion, and sacrificing with unhallowed fire on the altar of refor¬ mation, that they returned with a resolu¬ tion of final separation; he determining on the termination of the trial, to return to Leland, and she, though she abjured ail future connexion with her infamous
husband, resolving to sec the beloved of her youth no morei From this state of unhappy heroism, they were extricated by the death of Lord Montrevor. The exiles from hap¬ piness and from themselves, returned to each other's arms, and felt that no period of life was too late for felicity. Their minds were no longer distorted by un¬ happy passion, their talents no longer abused by opposite perversions, their feel* ings and their happiness no longer sub¬ verted by the necessity of artificial display on one side, and a gloomy interment on the other. My melancholy state was the only obstruction to their happiness, and this last obstruction was removed by the restoration of mv reason. It was to more I/ than reason ; to health, to tranquillity, to affection, to friends, to fortune, (for my father had rectified the artificial derange¬ ment which the unfortunate .Debraine
had introduced into my affdrs.) " And when we return to Ireland," said my fa¬ ther, on concluding his narrative, which had occupied some days, " and when once more in the castle of your ancestors, you are surrounded by me, by Lady M. by Hammond, and Sybilla, and Mr. Corbett, will you have a wish ungratified, a recess in your heart unoccupied ?" X could not speak, the thought of my angel-wife filled me with love and agony ; they had never mentioned her name ; I had not dared to utter it. I grasped my father's hand ; I held it to mv heart. lie felt how it beat ; he felt it was dangerous to trifle with its struggles. He was bo- ginning to speak, when a sound, sweeter than the first whisper of happiness, struck my ear; it was the voice of an infant. 1 did not wait to speak—to think—to ask a question—I started up—-a door half- opened—a figure appeared at it—It was Athanasia, with my child in her arms !
She would have knelt, but I sunk beside her : I tasted the kisses of my wife and my babe í Let those who cannot feel mv felicity, attempt to describe it.
the end»
Viinien by J. 0, iítwíck, Alderes te Stuet.
